DANIELS WEEKS.

AN INTERPRETATION of part of the Prophecy of DANIEL:

BY JOSEPH MEDE, late Fellow of Christ's College in CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1643.

DANIELS WEEKS.
THE Weeks of Daniel are a Divine Chronology of the Time which the Sanctuary,
with the Legal Service, should continue, when it should be restored after the
Captivity of Babylon. During which time, also the City of Jerusalem it self
should be re-inhabited, and the walls thereof rebuilded; and some Lxij. weeks
after that began to be, should Messiah the Redeemer be anointed, yea, and cut
off and rejected of his own: For which, when the whole Lxx. weeks (the time
allotted) should expire, their Sanctuary and City should again be razed, and
their Commonwealth utterly dissolved.

Verse. 24. Cap. 9. Seventy weeks are allotted for thy people, and for thy Holy
City, to finish transgression, and make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to
fulfill vision and prophecy; and to anoint the MOST HOLY.
SEventy Weeks are determined or allotted:] That is, The Holy City shall again
be restored, and Lxx. weeks of years are allotted and limited for the
continuance thereof, and thy people with it: and that for this end, that during
the standing thereof, the Messiah, according to vision and prophecy, may come
to expiate sin, and be anointed in his Kingdom.

The word (...) here translated determined or allotted signifies properly to be
cut, or cut out, and so may seem to imply such a sense, as if the Angel had
said to Daniel, Howsoever your bondage and Captivity under the Gentiles shall
not altogether cease, until that succession of Kingdoms, which I before
showed thee, be quite finished: yet shall God for the accomplishing his promise
concerning the Messiah, as it were cut out of that long term and certain
limited Time, during which, the Captivity of Judah and Jerusalem being
interrupted, the Holy City and Commonwealth in some measure shall again be
restored, and so continue till Lxx. Weeks of years be finished.

Here I distinguish the beginning of the Times of the Holy City from the
beginning of Jerusalem: For the Holy City is so called of the Temple as the
principal part; and therefore the Time of the restitution thereof, to be
reckoned from the Time the Temple was builded. But by Jerusalem is understood
(as appears in the next verse) the external buildings and walls of the City,
which were not restored, till some time after the Temple and Sanctuary was
finished.

As for the impletion, all are now agreed, That the Beginning of these Weeks is
to be reckoned from some Restoring, either of the Temple; and that in the
second, third, or sixth year of the Reign of some Darius; or of the City in
the seventh or twentieth year of some Artaxerxes, Kings of Persia. But it
cannot be from Darius the first surnamed Hystaspis; for then they would come
out long before the Birth of Christ. Nor from the first Artaxerxes surnamed
Longimanus, for he was an hinderer of the work of the Temple, and forbad the
building thereof, Ezra cap. verse. 11. ad finem. Nor from the second Artaxerxes
surnamed Mnemon: for so they would far overreach the Destruction of Jerusalem.
Therefore it remains that they be counted from Darius the second, surnamed
Nothus; in the second year of whose reign the work of the Temple, after a long
interruption, began to revive. Ezr. 4. v. 24. Hag. c. 1. and 2. Zachar. c. 1.
etc. and in the sixth year of his reign was finished, Ezra 6. ver. 15.

Secondly, these Lxx. Weeks are the time allotted for the continuance of the
Holy City, and therefore must they last, as long as it lasted, and end with the
end thereof: but this cannot be, unless we fix their Epoch in the beginning
of Darius Nothus. Ergo.

Which in the event is most true. For from the third year of Darius Nothus,
when the work of the Temple (by the incitement of Haggai and Zachary renewed
the year before) was now confirmed by a new Edict from the King to be finished,
unto the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, are exactly 490 years, that is,
Lxx. Weeks of years fully complete.

Artaxerxes Longimanus died (says Diodorus li. 11.) Olymp. 88. 4. that is --
An. Olympiadico 352 Men's. Novembri, or thereabout, for Winter was entered.
Thucyd. lib. 4. Ergo Xerxes (who reigned next after him one year (ex eod.)
dying -- An. Olympiadico. 353 Men's. Nov. Sogdianus also who succeeded Xerxes
reigning but seven Months. Anno Olymp. eodem. M. Maio. Darius Nothus his Ann^.
1. begins -- Annus 2. Anno Olympiad. 354. M. Maio. Annus 3. Anno Olympiad. 355
M. Maio.

In this third year of the King, and at the end of this Olympiadicall year,
in the beginning of August (as may be supposed) came forth the Edict of Darius,
some ten months after Zorobabel and Ieshua had begun to renew the work the
year before, Hag. 1. 14, 15. And so much time (half thereof being Winter) may
well be allowed for their enemies, to hear of the work, to go see and do their
best to hinder it, when they could not, to write and send unto the King, the
searching of the Rolls, and obtaining a new Edict.

The Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, I take as granted Anno Olymp. 845.
finiente, 846. ineunte. The Edict of Darius, as is showed Anno Olymp. 345.
finiente, 356. ineunte. Distantia 490 490

The Account by years of Nabonassar ex Canone Ptolomaei Astronomico.
The last year, or year of Neroes death (June 9.) in Ptolomies Canon answers
to An. 815. Nabonass. Ergo, the year of Ierusalems Desolation (2. years after)
is concurrent with -- An. 817. Nabonass. finiendus in Augusto. The first of
Darius Nothus, in Canone Ptolomaei, answers An. 325. Nabonass. Ergo, the third
year of Darius, is concurrent with -- An. 327. Nabonass. Ordiendus a Decembri
praecedent. Differentia 490

Notwithstanding all this, The Temple was now finished in 4. years, which
argues it was well forwarded before, and much I suppose in the days of liberty
under Darius Hystaspis: For I take him to be that Darius mentioned Ezra 4. 5.
and never to have hindered the building, but permitted the Jews to go on as
their poverty would suffer them, which was but slowly
I had rather begin the Account from the sixth year of Darius, in the Month
Adar, when the Temple was quite finished (for then it first began to continue,
and not till then) although the Destruction of Jerusalem will then fall out
three years and an half sooner, namely, when the last week is but half run out.
And what if it do? The Angel, as I conceive, tells us so much in the last verse,
when he says, That in the midst of a Week the Sacrifice and Oblation should
cease, and the City be made desolate. But how will the Prophecy be made good,
if the Seventieth Week be not complete? I answer, It should be observed (though
it uses not to be) that the Angel reckons not by single years, but by Weeks.
If he had said, there should be 490. years to the Excidium of Jerusalem, then
indeed to make good the prediction, the City and Sanctuary must have been
destroyed the last year. But when he says, there shall be Lxx. Weeks allotted
for the continuance of the Holy City, it is enough if it be made desolate in
the seventieth week: For if those who reckon by years, when the year designed
answers the event, will not stand upon the compleatnesse of months and days;
nor those who reckon any thing by days, upon the compleatnesse of hours and
minutes: no more in the Angels reckoning here by weeks, if so the number of the
weeks be complete, are the parts of a week to be exacted.

The time of the Destruction of Jerusalem, as before -- An. Olymp. 845 Men's. 6.
August. If the third of Darius began about May or June, Anno Olymp. 355. then
the sixth year of his reign begins in May or June, An. 358. But the latter part
thereof in February or Adar, when the Temple was finished, falls in -- An.
Olymp. 359. Men's. 12. Feb. or Adar. Distantia Anni 486 Men's. 6. That is just 69
Weeks and an half

The Account by years of Nabonassar.
The time of the Destruction of Jerusalem, as before -- An. 817 Nabonass. M. 6.
If the third year of Darius Nothus, were for the first and greatest part
concurrent with An. 327. Nab. as is before showed; then his sixth year (in like
manner for the first and greatest part) must concur with An. 330. But the head
of the Nabonassarean year, being then about the 5. of December. the latter end of
this sixth year in Adar or Feb. will fall in -- An. 331 Nabonass. M. 12.
Distantia Anni 486 Menses 6.

Verse 25. Also know and understand, that from the going forth of the
Commandment to cause to Return and to Build Jerusalem, unto MESSIAH the PRINCE,
shall be sevens of Weeks; even threescore and two Weeks; the Street shall be
built again and the Wall, even in a strait of times.
FRom the going out of the Commandment] I take not this Epoch to be that of
the whole Lxx. Weeks, but a second Root of another, and lesser period of time
comprehended in them; whose Beginning was to be after the Lxx. were begun, and
the end before they should be ended. The Root of this second Computation is
described to be a time when two things should be done: A Commandment should go
forth both to cause to Return and also to Build, not the Temple (for that
should be done before) nor some few houses only, but the whole Area or Street
and the Walls of Jerusalem, which should then be re-edified, though in a strait
of Times; that is, it should be such a time, when a Commission to cause the
people to return and re-inhabite, should be seconded with another, to build the
Wall of Jerusalem, and the Plot within the Wall. For by (...) here, I
understand properly that circuit bounding out the limits of the City, whereon
the Wall was builded, and anciently used to be marked out with a Plough earing
a furrow round about. By (...), which implies a broad place, I understand the
Area, or Plot of ground within, whereon the houses were to be builded. From
such an Epoch, and a Commission thus characterized as ye have heard, must this
second computation be reckoned.

Unto MESSIAH the PRINCE] that is, unto (...), Luke 23. 2. Mark 15. 32. or
(...), as the Angel styles him, Luke 2. 11. There is no exposition, no
interpretation of any passage in this Prophecy could seem so harsh, but I would
be content to admit it, rather then yield that by MESSIAH the PRINCE here
named, should be meant any other then CHRIST our LORD and Redeemer. For I am
persuaded that the Church of Israel in the Gospel (and from them the Apostles
took it) had no other place of Scripture, whence they did or could ascribe the
name of Christ and Messiah unto him they looked for, but only from this of
Daniel. For there is no other Prophecy in all the Old Testament besides this,
where that Name is directly given him, but only by way of type.

Shall be sevens of weeks, even Lxij. weeks] The numerall word (...) I have
here translated distributively, understanding by (...) Hebdomadae septenae,
that is, many seven Weeks, or as our English handsomely expresses, Sevens of
Weeks: the sense to be as if the Angel had said, As the whole time limited for
the continuance of the Holy City from the first beginning to the last ending,
consists of many Sevens of Weeks, viz. Lxx. Weeks: So from this after- Epoch
here mentioned unto MESSIAH, should be likewise Sevens of Weeks, (plures
septenniorum hebdomades) even Sixty two Weeks of years. For as in Lxx. are ten
Sevens of Weeks; so in Lxij. are ix. times seven wanting one, and that little
want makes no matter, there being eight whole sevens besides in that number,
and you shall see in that which follows, examples of the like. The Hebrews want
those numbers which the Grammarians call Distributive or Divisive, Terni,
quaterni, quini, seni, septeni, etc. which they most what supply by repetition,
as (...) septem septem, but not always, as may appear 2 Samuel 18. 4. And all
the people came out (...) ad centum and millia. i. centeni and milleni, by
hundreds and by thousands. 1 Kings 18. 4. Obadiah hid the Prophets of the LORD
(...) quinquaginta viros in spelunca, id est, quinquagenos, by fifty in a Cave.
Genesis 6. 19. Of all flesh thou shall bring into the Ark (...) duo, i. bina,
Twoes; and therefore afterward c. 7. ver. 9. it is doubled (...) two and two:
yet of clean Beasts whereof he was to take seven, there is an odd one. To
these I add Ezra 1. v. 9, etc. This is the number of the vessels (to wit, of
the House of the LORD which Cyrus by the hand of Mithredath numbered unto
Sheshbazzar Prince of Judah) thirty Chargers of gold, a thousand Chargers of
silver, twenty nine knives: thirty Basins of gold: silver Basins of a second
sort, four hundred and ten, and other vessels (...) (not mill, a thousand,
but millena (Tremel. per millia) Thousands, to wit, almost three thousand
wanting but one hundred. Otherwise if we translate it as a Cardinal number [a
thousand] the sum will far exceed the Parts. For it follows in the next
words, All the Vessels of gold and of silver were 5400. But unless the last
number be taken divisive, the particulars 30 1000 29 30 410 1000 2499

make but 2500. wanting one. Nor do I see how this difficulty would otherwise
be solved.

Now whether these examples be sufficient to make probable the Translation
which I have given, I will not affirm; let others judge. I propound it to the
consideration of the learned, who can do it, without whose approbation I shall
not satisfy my self. Yet thus much I am sure of; that if this (...), which we
are wont to translate seven weeks, could be well bestowed, the chiefest
difficulty were taken from this Prophecy. For the Threescore and two Weeks
alone counted from the Epoch here named, so well befits the distance from
thence to CHRIST, that the event seems to argue, that they should be there
fixed, and not reckoned from any other Beginning.

Moreover that (...) should be a general expression of what in the Lxij. Weeks
is after more particularly determined, may seem probable for these reasons. 1.
Because the Angel ascribes no proper event unto them; but having presently
named the Lxij. Weeks, makes no farther reckoning of those other, but follows
and dwells upon these only, as though the other were implied and contained in
them. 2. Those who count them for Xlix. years, and continue the Lxij. Weeks
from the end of them to make up Lxix. Weeks in all, can give no sufficient
reason why they should be thus separated and divided asunder. For that which
the followers of Funccius, (who reckon from Artaxerxes Longiman.) assign to be
done in seven Weeks of years (to wit, that during all that time Jerusalem with
the rest of the Cities of Judah were building and repairing) is grounded
neither upon Scripture, nor other Story, but pure and mere conjecture. Scaliger
finds (Nehem. cap. 13. 6.) That Nehemiah returned again to Artaxerxes his
Court, in the 32. year of his reign, and thence supposes that the building of
the City, about which he was sent, was finished but the year before, and that
to be the determination of those seven Weeks; there being then 49. years
expired from the time the Lxx. began at the Building of the Temple under Darius
Nothus. But to make this good, he is fain to raise the Epoch of the Lxx. so
high in the reign of Darius, that they end before the destruction of Jerusalem.
Besides, he seems not to be aware, that these seven Weeks are by the Text to be
counted from a time, when a Commission came out to cause to return and to build
Jerusalem, and not from the time of building the Temple. Nor does it follow,
Nehemiah staid so long there, therefore the City was till then in building:
Nay, what if the Text rightly construed, imports not that Nehemiah in the 32.
year of Artaxerxes returned to the Court; but rather that obtaining new leave
of the King, he came then to Jerusalem the second time, whence he had been long
absent? For the particle (...) Cap. 13. ver. 6. seems not to be taken
rationally for [Quia] but discretively for (...) id est, [Sed, But] as Ezra 4.
3. 2 Samuel 16. 18. Genesis 4. 8. and so that Text of Nehemiah to be read after this
sense, And in all this time (says he) I was not there; But in the 32. year of
Artaxerxes, etc. I came to the King, that is, into his presence, to ask new
leave; which after a little waiting he obtained. Nor is it very credible, that
the time he first set the King, cap. 2. ver. 6. should be twelve years.

If therefore (...) be granted to be a general expression of what the Lxij.
Weeks more particularly determine, the way whereby it may be translated to such
a sense is as I have before represented: yet is it not the only one; I can add
two ways more: as first this, (...) seven uses, we know, to be taken
indefinitely for plurimi, multoties, etc. Thus (...) would without any anomaly
or novelty at all, signify indefinitely [Many Weeks] if it might seem
probable, that in a passage of reckoning by definite numbers, some numerall
word may be taken indefinitely. The sense would be all one with that I have
followed. viz. As the whole time limited for the continuance of the Holy City
consisted of many Weeks, even Lxx. Weeks: So also this lesser period contained
therein, from the Epoch mentioned unto MESSIAH, shall be a time of Many Weeks,
even Lxij. Weeks. Another way, were it not somewhat harsh, might be this. The
Hebrew Nouns of Cardinal numbers do sometimes substantivare, signifying their
numbers in abstracto, like those Greek Numeralls, Monas, Dyas, Trias, Tetras,
Hebdomas. So Genesis cap. 7. 10. cap. 8. 12. we have (...) and (...), i. hebdomas
dierum. Exodus 34. 29. (...), Decas verborum, Decalogus. Genesis 17. 12. (...),
Filus ogdoadis dierum. Joshua 14. 2. (...), Novenarius or Enneas tribuum. If
they be Substantives in statu constructo, were they not, or may they not be so
in absoluto? In the third Chapter and 29. ver. of Damel (...) in absoluto,
seems to be a Substantive having an Adjective joined with it, (...),
Wheresoever besides in Scripture Seven weeks are mentioned the words are (...)
or (...)
which we translate [one seven times.] If this therefore may be admitted, (...)
in our Text of Daniel will sound per Ellipsin conjunctionis Hebdomades and
Hebdomas, Weeks and a Week, the sense being all one with the former, saving
that one Week is implied as singular from the rest, which may be that which the
Angel afterward mentions ver. 27. If it were pointed (...), as by the
consonants it might be, there would be no great question but it might be
translated Weeks and a Week.

But if (...), must needs import some limited time of 49. years; I would rather
choose to count the Lxij. Weeks from the same Epoch with them under Artaxerxes
Mnemon, then from the end of them, and yet leave as probable a conjecture to be
made of what was done in them, as those who follow Funccius from the other
Artaxerxes, do use to give.

I have sometimes considered, whether, if it be translated seven Weeks, those
seven Weeks might not be applied as rotundus numerus to those Fifty and two
days, Nehem. 6. 15. where it is said, So the Wall was finished in the 25. day
of the Month Elul in fifty two days; somewhat more indeed then seven Weeks,
yet short of seven and an half, and so not regarded in account by Weeks. If
this could be, then the reason of the Angels division of weeks into 7. and 62.
would be because of diverse kinds of Weeks understood; the first of days,
wherein the Wall of Jerusalem should be finished: the second of years, from
thence unto the Messiah. If it seem impossible or unlikely that the Wall of the
City should be repaired in so short a time, and therefore those words,
(according to Iunius) to be meant of setting up the doors and bars only: I
could say first, that the Wall was not new builded from the foundations, but
repaired upon the old ruins. Secondly, the speedy dispatch thereof was taken
for a wonder, even by the Jews Enemies, who thereupon (says the Text)
perceived it was the hand of their God: So that, were there no worse scruple
then this, it were easily answered; nor would examples That renowned Palace and
Court of Nebuchadnezzar, within which were those Pensiles Horti, was finished
(says Josephus) in fifteen days. Antiq. Judaic. li. 10. c. 11. in the Latin
c. 13.
be wanting to parallel with it, such as might make it seem at least possible.
As that strange and speedy building of the Walls of Athens by Themistocles,
after that Xerxes had demolished them, reported by Diodor. Sic. lib. 11. Yea,
to come more near to the thing in question, Josephus lib. 6. c. 13. De Bell.
Iud. tells us, That Titus, dividing the work amongst his Army, begirt Jerusalem
in three days space, with a Wall of thirty nine Furlongs, and thirteen
Bulwarks to hinder the Jews excursions from within, and all relief from
without. What the materials were, I know not, but he says it was a thing
beyond all belief, and might have seemed to be a work of some Months. But
leaving this digression, let us see the computation and impletion of our Lxij.
Weeks.

The Computation and impletion of the Lxij. Weeks.
FRom the seventh year of Artaxerxes Mnemon, when Ezra had Commission to cause
to Return and carry with him, as many of the Jews as would to Jerusalem, Ezra
c. 7. ver. 7. and 13. And from the twentieth year of the same Artaxerxes, when
Nehemiah obtained leave to build Jerusalem the City of his Fathers Sepulchers,
Nehem. 2. From both these Commissions, though thirteen years distant the one
from the other, are by divine disposition unto MESSIAH the PRINCE threescore
and two Weeks, from the first of Solar, from the latter, of Lunar years. For
Lxij. weeks, or 434. Lunar years, are less then so many Solar, as much as is
between the seventh, and twentieth of Artaxerxes: which admirable concordance I
cannot impute to chance; but ascribe to divine providence, so ordering it of
purpose, that these two Epocha's and Commissions, To cause to Return, and, To
build Jerusalem, might be as one and the same. And as the Lunar year is
contained within the Solar, and by it ordered and directed; so is the Period
here from Nehemiahs Commission to Build the City, contained and reduced to that
from Ezraes Commission to cause the people to return.

In the last of these Weeks according to prediction was Christ our Lord
anointed. In the beginning whereof exactly, between the first and second
Passover after his Baptism, (when his Harbinger John had now finished his
Message, and was cast in Prison (a time precisely and purposely noted in the
Evangelicall Story) he first began to preach in Galilee the Gospel of the
Kingdom, ordained his Apostles, and proclaimed himself to be the MESSIAH.
After John was put in Prison, says Mark 1. 14. Jesus come into Galilee,
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and saying, (...), The time is
fulfilled, (i. the last week of the sixty two weeks is come) and the Kingdom
of God is at hand. Wherefore I would take that John 3. from the 13. ver. to the
21. to be the Evangelists own words interposed, and not the words of Christ to
Nicodemus.
From that time (says Matthew, c. 4. 17.) Jesus began to preach, and to say,
Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand. This was that day whereof Christ
himself said at Nazareth, that that Scripture was fulfilled: The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor,
etc. and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, Luke 4. This the time and
place whence S. Peter reckoned the beginning of Christ's Prophecy in his Sermon
to Cornelius: That word (says he) which was published throughout all Judea,
and began from Galilee after the Baptism which John preached, etc. Acts 10. 37.

In the third year of this Week (two years and an half after he began his
Prophecy, and three years and an half after his Baptism) being made our
Priest, he offered himself upon the Cross a Sacrifice for sin, was dead,
buried, and rose again: Then ascended up into heaven to be installed, and to
sit at the right hand of God from thenceforth to reign until he has put all
his Enemies under his feet. But you will say, This was all performed four years
before the 434. years (which is sixty two Weeks of years) were expired: I
answer as before: The Angel reckons not by single years, but by Weeks, the
last whereof should be Messiahs Week, as we have showed it to have been. If the
Angel had said, There shall be 434. years unto MESSIAH, then to make good the
prediction MESSIAH must have been anointed the last year. But when he says,
There shall be Sixty two Weeks unto MESSIAH; it is sufficient he was anointed
the last Week. But how this Week will at length be complete, we shall see in
the next verse. But first let us demonstrate our Computation.

Ezra's Commission.
Darius Nothus died (says Diodor. lib. 13.) in the same year, but a little
while after the Composition of the Peloponesian war, (which was in May) Olymp.
93. 4. that is An. Olymp.372. finiente. Ergo, The first of Artaxerxes begins
about August, and concurres with -- Anno Olymp. 373. The seventh of Artaxerxes
with -- Anno Olymp. 379.

N. B. If Artaxerxes had began before August, the number or date of his reign
must have altered either in or between the first and fifth Month, but they are
both of one year, Ezra 7. as also the first and the ninth, Nehem. c. 1. c. 2.

Christ's Prophecy.
Christ our Lord was Baptized Anno Olympiadico 805. ineunte, about the Feast of
Expiations, in the seventh Month Tisri, six Months after John began to baptize,
and in that year natural and political, which began in the 15. of Tiberius
toward ending, but was the 16. when he was baptized. For John, I suppose,
began to preach and baptize in the first Month Nisan, (when the Summer was
before him, and not when the Winter was to enter) in the 15. year of Tiberius
which ended August following. Now John's imprisonment was a year after the
Baptism of Christ, namely, between the first and second Passover after it, as
is clear and evident by the Evangelical Story, John c. 2. 23. c. 3. 22. and
Chap. 4. The Beginning therefore of Christ's Prophecy, which began at the
imprisonment of John, Mark 1. 14. was Anno Olympiad. 806. about the end (I
suppose) of the same Month Tisri, or September.

The beginning of Christ's Prophecy An. Olymp.806. Men's. 7. The Time of Ezra's
Commission An. Olymp. 379. Men's. 7. Differentia An. 427.M. o. 61. weeks
co^pleat

From hence Men's. 7. begins the last week: wherefore the Passion of Christ, at
the Passoever, Men's. 1. firmly fixed by Chronologicall Characters in the 19. of
Tiberius, Anno Olymp. 808. Aerae Christian. 33. (that is agreeable to the
received Tradition but three year and an half after his Baptism) will fall to
be in the third year of the week; which is wholly to be complete, Ann. Aerae
Christ. 37. when the 813. Anno Olymp. shall be begun and current in September.

Verse 26. And after the threescore and two Weeks shall MESSIAH be cut off, and
[they] none of his: Wherefore the Princes people to come shall destroy the
City, and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto
the end of War desolations are determined.
ANd after the threescore and two Weeks shall, etc.] That is, when the
Threescore and two Weeks aforesaid shall expire, and be fully complete, (for so
the word [after] supposes they must be) MESSIAH shall be cut off, not only
from the living, by the death he should suffer upon the Cross (for that was a
little before) but from being any longer the King and Priest of that People,
they refusing him to be theirs, and he casting off them from being His, which
is the meaning of the words following (...), And they none of his: For (...) is
to be understood, that so the conjunction Vau may couple similia tempora,
(...), Et non erit ei populus ejus, or (...), And they shall be none of His.
And for the Verb (...), that it signifies not only a cutting off from life,
but also from reigning as a King, or from being a Priest; See for the first, 1
Kings c. 2. ver. 4. and chap. 9. ver. 5. 2 Chronicles chapter 7. ver. 16. Ier. 33. 17.
(...), etc. There shall not be cut off to David a man to sit upon the throne of
the House of Israel: All which have reference to 2 Samuel c. 7. ver. 16. For the
second, cutting off from the Priesthood, 1 Samuel 2. 33. to Eli, And the man of
thine whom I shall not cut off from mine Altar. Ier. 33. 18. Neither of the
Priests, the Levites (...) shall a man be cut off before me, to offer burnt
offerings, etc. and to do Sacrifice continually.

The Computation and Impletion.
From the seventh year of Artaxerxes Mnemon, at the time of the Commission
granted to Ezra, (Anno Olympiadico 379. as is already showed) unto the fourth
year after Christ's Ascension (Anno Olymp. 813. Aerae Christianae Dionysiacae
37.) are Lxij. weeks of years, or 434. years fully complete and expired. The
next year after, was Christ divorced and cut off from the Jews, and they (...)
cast off from being His people; which may appear thus:

Christ suffered upon the Cross, Anno Aerae Christian. 33.
rose from the dead, I begin and end these years in Tisri, or September. that so
they may agree with that time of the Commission granted to Ezra, which I before
supposed to have been about that month
and ascended into heaven. The Holy Ghost descended at Pentecost, 3000.
converted, more added; the Apostles forbidden, but cease not to preach Jesus
Christ. So this year ends about September.

The number of Disciples much increased: Anno Aerae Christian. 34.
Deacons chosen, and Steven one of them, Act. 6. 1, 2, 3, etc.

Steven does great wonders and miracles. Anno Aerae Christian. 35.
The Word of God, and the number of Disciples increases so, that a great
company of the Priests were obedient unto the Faith. The Elders and people
rage, and about the end of the year was Steven martyred, Acts c. 6. ver. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11. cap. 7. ver. 1. ad finem.

Great persecution against the Church at Jerusalem. Anno Aerae Christian. 36.
Saul makes havoc, Acts c. 8. whereupon the Disciples were scattered through
the Regions of Judea and Samaria, every where preaching the Gospel, ver. 4, 5.
Of whose success the Apostles being informed, send Peter and John to Samaria,
to lay hands on the new converts, ver. 14. which done, and by the way preaching
the Gospel in the villages of Samaria, they returned again to Jerusalem. ibid.

Those which were scattered upon the persecution of Steven, Anno Aerae
Christian. 37.
proceed further, and traveled as far as Phoenice, Cyprus and Antioch
(having by the way preached the Gospel to the Jews at Damascus (how came they
there else?) Cap. 11. Which Saul hearing of, gets letters thither, to bring
those he should find there of that way unto Jerusalem. But in his journey
himself was miraculously converted and baptized, etc. Peter in the mean time
was gone again from Jerusalem by Lydda unto Ioppa, where he remained all this
year at the house of Simon the Tanner.

The next year after (Anno Aerae Christianae 38. Anno Olympiadico 813.)
according as was foretold, That after threescore and two Weeks were ended,
MESSIAH should be cut off, and they none of his) when Christ had now one whole
Week of years tendered himself unto his own people, and they not only refused
him, but first by crucifying the Lord himself, and after that by persecuting
his Messengers sent unto them, had made themselves unworthy of everlasting
life: Peter was taught by vision, that the Gospel of the Kingdom should be
preached unto the Gentiles, and accordingly sent to preach it to Cornelius a
Centurion of the Italian band, Acts 10. And here begins the Epoch of the
Rejection of Israel, and the Calling of the Gentiles, which S. Paul speaks so
much of Romans 11.

True it is, the cutting off of Christ by death was before the last week was
complete; but the cutting him off from being King and Priest of the Jews was
not until after it was ended. Or if this cutting off here mentioned may not be
extended to any other cutting off then by Death; yet the other part of the
copulative sense, (...) [And they shall be none of His] was not fulfilled
until the whole Week was ended.

Wherefore the PRINCES to come, etc.] (...), Populus MESSIAE venturus, i.
futurus. The People that should be the people of Messiah the Prince, when
Israel was rejected; so the Hebrews call seculum futurum, (...); whence Mark
10. ver. 13. Luke 18. 30. (...). Ephesians. 2. 7. (...). According to which notion,
Apoc. 1. 4. (...). Vid. Psalm. 71. 18. Esaias 27. 6. Esaias 44. 7. (...), Vulgat.
ventura and quae futura sunt. Thus I construe the Text, and understand by
Populus principis futurus, the people of the Roman Empire, where Christ was
principally to have his Church and Kingdom, whilst Israel should be rejected.
Cornelius therefore the first Gentile converted was a Roman Centurion. S.
Paul, who is called the Apostle of the Gentiles, went not beyond the bounds of
the Empire. This was that (...) whereof Christ said, Matthew. 24. That before the
Destruction of Jerusalem, the Gospel should be preached (...), as Augustus is
said Luke 2. 1. to have taxed, (...), according as the Romans themselves used
to call it Imperium Orbis Terrarum, etc. Antichrist, who was to sit in the
Temple or Church of Christ, sits in the midst of this Empire: whence it
appears, that the Church, which Christ should have, whilst.
after Israel disclaimed him, should chiefly be in it. This People therefore,
which was in Isreal's stead to be the People of Messiah the Prince, should
destroy the City and Sanctuary with such a Destruction as should like a Flood
overwhelme the whole Nation, and as an unresistible torrent, break down and
wash all away before it. All which we know they did.

And unto the end of War Desolations are determined] That is, until the end
of the Fourth Kingdom of the Gentiles, whose last period is that Time times
and half a Time, whereof it is said Dan. 7. ver. 21, 22, 25. That Antichrist
the eyed and mouthed Horn should make War with the Saints, and prevail against
them, and they shall be given into his hand until a Time and Times and half a
Time: Until the end of this War the Jewish Desolations are determined. But of
this more in the next.

Verse 27. Nevertheless he shall confirm a covenant with Many one week: and
in half a week, being Or, making desolation, he, etc.
a Desolater he shall cause the Sacrifice and oblation to cease, and that being
over a wing of Abominations, and until the final time, (even that which is
determined) it shall continue upon the desolate.
HEre the Angel tells us what should be be done in the last Week, both of the
first Computation, and of the second, that is, the last of the Lxx. and the
last of the Lxij. And of this first, as coming first in time.

Nevertheless (says he) he shall confirm a Covenant with Many one Week] That
is, though the Body of the Jewish Nation should be cast off, end be (...), None
of the people of the MESSIAH, yet for one whole week he should offer himself
unto them, and gather many of them into the Covenant of the Gospel: and this
Week was the last Week of the Threescore and two Weeks, which, as I showed
before, was wholly spent in preaching to those of the Circumcision. This
therefore is, as it were, a Prolepsis, lest Daniel might think that none of his
people should enter into the Covenant under Messiah. These Many therefore are
that Remnant whereof S. Paul speaks Romans 11. That, though Israel were cast off,
yet was there A Remnant according to the election of grace; and therefore he
limits the hardness happened unto Israel, by (...), as not being universal.

And in half a Week, being a Desolator, he shall cause the Sacrifice and
offering to cease] A Desolater, (...), a word which otherwise much troubles
the Translator; but being thus made a suppositum or Nominative case to the verb
(...), (which has no other near it) it both much clears the sense, and retains
its propriety of signification. Nor is the Postposition of the Nominative case
to the verb against the use of the tongue; nor the trajection here so great,
but the Latin will admit the same order of the words, viz. Et abolebit
sacrificium and munus, atque erit super alam abominationum Desolator: Or, Et
abolebit sacrificium, and munus, qui erit super alam abominationum, Desolator.
Howsoever the Translation be, this week the Angel now speaks of, is the last of
the Seventy which should be but half run out, when the Temple and City should
be destroyed, and the legal service made to cease. For if we reckon (as I
think we should) the Seventy Weeks from the sixth year of Darius Nothus (when
the Temple was finished) the Destruction thereof by Titus will fall out (as is
showed) in the midst of the last Week, the whole half thereof, from the
beginning till then, having bin spent in warlike preparations and exploits,
which ended with the burning and desolation both of City and Sanctuary.

Of those who end the Seventieth Week completely with the Destruction of
Jerusalem, some seem so to understand this first part of the verse, as if the
one Week here mentioned were the last of the Seventy, and the confirmation of
the Covenant to be therein, to respect only the first half thereof, wherein
Christ made good his Covenant of preservation to the believing Jews, namely,
(as I would explain it) by sending Cestius Gallus President of Syria, in the
middle or fourth year of the last Week, about seven days to environ Jerusalem
with an Army, for to be that sign and watchword mentioned in the Gospel of the
near approaching Desolation thereof, Luke 21. 20. that so those which were in
Judea being warned, might flee into the Mountains (of Arabia Petraea to Pella)
and deliver themselves from those days of vengeance and wrath upon their
people. And in the other half of the Week which remained, he should cause the
sacrifice and offering to cease by sending Vespasian with that second and
fatal Army which should bring those woeful and vengefull Desolations upon them.

As for the phrase of Confirming a Covenant (if the rest suited well) it would
be no straining to interpret it, to be meant of preservation and exemption from
a common calamity: For we have the like speech Genesis 6. 17, 18. where God having
said to Noah, that he would destroy by the Flood every thing that breathed upon
the earth; adds, But with thee will I establish my Covenant, and thou shall
come into the Ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons wives with
thee, etc. Thus much of the Week and Half Week: But for the Desolater who
should cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease, whether and how it may be
applied to Messiah himself, or otherwise construed, we shall better understand
when the next is expounded.

And that [being] over a wing of Abominations] (...), I think literally
rendered, as was the former. If any man would also have the order of the words
precisely kept, and therefore (...), i. Desolater to keep his station here, as
in the Hebrew, he may render the words thus, He shall cause the sacrifice and
oblation to cease, (...), And [commanding] over a Wing of Abominations [be] a
Desolater or make Desolation; The sense is yet the same: Or thus, And over a
Wing of Abominations [shall he be] who makes Desolation: All of them requiring
nothing else, but that so common Ellipsis of the Verb Substantive, which in
some expressions of this language is perpetual. Now for the construing and
expounding this and the rest which remains of this verse, I have always in
mine eye that part of the Prophecy of our Savior in the Gospel, Mat. 24. Mark
13. where he so expressly referres to this of Daniel, with an unwonted caveat
not to pass it over slightly, Let him (says he) that reads, understand:
which admonition, as it implies the special need we have of our Saviors Key
to unlock it; so it may seem to intimate that neither the Lxx. before, nor the
ordinary construction of their Rebbies then, had hit the meaning of this
Scripture. Wherefore S. Luke relates not here (as Matthew. and Mark do) our
Saviors words verbatim, but exegetically; of set purpose (so I am persuaded)
expounding this place of Daniel, as will appear by that which follows.

Over a Wing of Abominations] Auth. op. imperf. in Mat. hom. 49. initio hanc
expositionem ad Petrum refert. Hoc and Petrus, inquit, apud Clementem exponit.
That is, An Army of Idolatrous Gentiles. Even the self same which S. Luke
says Chap. 21. Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles; who also
expounds Wing by Armies, putting in stead of those words of our Savior, [
When ye shall see the Abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, stand in the holy place] these, When ye shall see Jerusalem compassed
with Armies; and in both it follows, Then let them which be in Iudaea flee into
the mountains. The word (...) Wing is of the Verb (...), (but once found in the
Hebrew Scripture) which signifies according to the Chaldee and Arabic, To
gather together: besides, in the Arabic, circundare, to environ or compass
about; Both significations suit well to an Army, and the latter, that which
beleaguers and begirts a City or Fort besieged. Had S. Luke any reference to
this, when he speaks of Jerusalem compassed with an army? The metaphor also of
a Wing leanes most this way, whether we consider their figure and motion being
stretched out, or their posture when Birds of rapine sit couring over their
prey. I will not say, the Roman Eagle was here aimed at, though (...), is
used, not only for Ala, a Wing, but for Alatum and Volatile, a Foul or Winged
Creature. It is sufficient that neither the nature nor name of a Wing is
strange or unaccustomed to an Army. But how (will you say) will an Army of
Abominations be made an Army of Gentiles? I answer, The Scripture in many
places calls Idols by the name of Abominations, that is, (...): So the
Egyptian Idols, Exodus 8. ver. 26, etc. are called, The Abomination of the
Egyptians. Ezekiel. 7. 20. The Jews are said to have made the Images of their
Abominations, (...), (Ier. 7. 20. to have set up (...)) that is, their Idols in
the House of the Lord. So 2 Kings 23. Ashtaroth is called (...), the
Abomination of the Sidonians, Cemosh (...), the Abomination of the Moabites;
but M^lcom (...), the Abomination of the Children of Ammon. Wherefore 1 Kings
11. 5, 7. (...) is by the Seventy thrice Translated (...).

This being a thing manifest, we are to observe further, That the Scripture
uses also to express and imply under the names of the Gods, the Nations
themselves which worshipped them. The Lord threatened to scatter Israel among
the Nations, and that there they should serve other Gods day and night, Gods,
the works of men's hands, wood and stone, and which neither they nor their
Fathers had known: That is, they should serve them not religiously, but
politically, in as much as they were to become Slaves and Vassals to Idolatrous
Nations, even such Idolaters, as neither they nor their Fathers had ever heard
of. Let it also be considered whether that of David, 1 Samuel 26. 19. be not to
be expounded after the same Trope: They have (says he) driven me out this day
from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve other Gods; i.
they have driven me to serve a Nation of another Religion. Yea, Ezra 9. 14.
fitly to our purpose, The Strangers with whom the people of Israel had
contracted affinity, are called expressly (...), The people of Abominations,
which the Seventy render (...), The people of the Lands, that is, Gentiles. And
where we read in the first verse, The people of Israel, etc. have not
separated themselves from the people of the Lands according to their
Abominations, etc. It is the same phrase with that of Moses, Cattle after
their kind, creeping things after their kind: That is, the several kinds of
cattle and of creeping things: so the people of the Lands according to their
Abominations is, the several kinds of Idolaters of the Lands about them. And
thus we have showed, that (...), the Wing of Abominations, is as much as (...),
an Army of people of Abominations, That is, of Gentiles and Worshippers of
Idols.

But who is this Desolater, or Maker of Desolations, who should command over
this Wing of Abominations, and bring these Gentiles against the Holy City? The
words in the Original stand indifferent to be applied either to the Roman
General, or Messiah; but I could not render them so indifferently: For if I
render them, And in half a Week a Desolater shall cause the sacrifice and
offering to cease, and that (being) over a Wing of Abominations, Or, Over a
Wing of Abominations (shall he be) who makes desolation; This Desolater would
then seem to be some other then Messiah, that is the Roman General: But
render them as I do, And making desolation, or being a Desolater, He shall
cause the sacrifice and offering to cease, and that, etc. Or, He shall cause
the sacrifice and offering to cease, and [commanding] over a Wing of
Abominations, be a Desolater: either way of these, they will have reference to
MESSIAH the Prince, who is the Person meant in the words immediately before,
[He shall confirm a Covenant with many one Week.] And this I most incline to,
that so the Person spoken of may be the same throughout, and a reason also
appear of that additament, That this Desolater should be over an Army of
Abominations: For if a Foreign General were only meant, what needed this
Addition? what other Army could such a one lead, but Gentiles? But that Messiah
himself should command over an Army of Idolaters, this needed a special
intimation.

And surely the Roman Army, though an Army of Abominations, was in this
service the Army of Messiah: So the Parable aiming at this Prophecy tells us
Mat. 22. 7. When the King heard how spitefully they entreated his Messengers
who came to tell them, the Wedding whereunto they had been bidden, was ready:
He was wroth (says the Text) and sent forth HIS Armies and destroyed those
Murderers, and burnt up their City. Whence it is, that the coming of this
desolating Army of the Romans is called the coming of Christ, James 5. Weep
and howl ye rich men (he writes to Jews) for the miseries that shall come upon
you; for you have heaped up goods for the last days; That is, (according to
Oecumenius) when the end of your State is a coming and the Romans shall spoil
you of all: which is expressed in the eighth verse by Christ's coming; Be ye
patient (says he) until the coming of the Lord, (he speaks to the believing
Jews whom the rest persecuted) and in the next, Stablish your hearts for the
coming of the Lord draws nigh; He means (says Oecumenius) (...) So he
takes that of John, If I will that he stay till* I come, that is (says he)
(...), till the Destruction of Jerusalem. And proves that this coming of
Christ is (...), Excidium Hierosolymorum, by that of Malachi Cap. 3. Behold,
the Lord shall come, and who shall abide the day of his coming? And thus would
I understand that Heb. 10. 37. For yet a little while and He that shall come
will come, and will not tarry. Messiah therefore himself seems to be that
Desolater here meant, who should command over an Army of Abominations, when he
came to destroy the City and the Sanctuary.

Thus it appears our Saviors citation in the Gospel is not of the very words
of Daniel in this passage, but of the sense only summarily expressed; and that
(...), is to be expounded (...), The Abomination, or Abominable Army, over
which he should be, who should make desolation. As for the Seventy, or
whosoever else (for S. Hierome doubts) translated this Book, if their
Translation here were originally as we now have it, and not translated thither
out of our Saviors words in the Gospel, they seem to have accommodated the
place, though of unlike construction and circumstance of sense, unto two other
places, Chap. 11. 31. Chap. 12. 11. where some such kind of Abomination is
mentioned, and likewise the participles, (...): But in all three of them, not
well understanding what subject these participles included, they contented
themselves only to express by (...), or (...), a general relation of
desolation in the abstract, which might be diversely interpretable, otherwise it
is not possible by any alteration of the points to express their Translation
verbatim out of this place, unless (...) were in statu constructo, as it is
not.

And until the final time (even that which is determined) it shall continue
upon the desolate] Here I have chosen to translate the verb (...) continue, as
the Targum renders it, Ier. c. 7. 19. etc. 42. 18. and the Vulgar here
perseverabit, as a metaphorical signification taken from a continued pouring
of water. It is the Feminine Gender, and therefore to be referred to a Feminine
suppositum, which I take to be (...), Ala: This wing of Abominations, that is
metonymice the Desolation wrought by it, or foreign possession brought in by it,
should continue upon the Desolate, until the final time which was determined
should be accomplished. Or those Gentile people of the Roman Empire, by whom
Jerusalem was destroyed, should continue their dominion and possession either
of the place or desolate inhabitants once thereof, until that final time be
accomplished. Whether this or that suits best; the meaning in S. Lukes language
is thus expressed, The Jews shall be carried captive over all Nations, and
Jerusalem trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled: That is, (as was said before) until the Monarchies of the Gentiles
should be finished. For these Times of the Gentiles are that last period of the
fourth Kingdom prophesied Dan. 7.
of a Time Times and half a Time; at the end whereof the Angel swears unto
Daniel, ca. 12. 7 That God should accomplish to scatter the power of the Holy
People. This is that Fullness of the Gentiles, which being come, S. Paul tells
us, The Deliverers shall come out of Sion, and all Israel shall be saved. And
the Angel in the Apoc. 10. 6. renews the same oath to S. John, which he swear
before to Daniel, That when these Times (N.B.) should end and be no longer, the
mystery of God should be finished, as he had declared to his servants the
Prophets. Amen.

Appendix.
ALthough I think, that preciseness of days is not to be much stood upon,
when the events and their times do in the whole answer to Prediction: yet have
I been so curious as to enquire, whether the Desolation of City and Sanctuary
(to be in the middle of the seventieth Week) were fulfilled to a very day or
not? And as I think, I have so found it, very near, if not altogether.

For Anno Iudaico 3344. Aerae mundi Scaligerianae 3533. (the year the Temple
was finished) Neomenia Tisri, according to the Jews Calender, fell upon the 9.
of September Calendarii Iuliani, Feria 1. Cyclo Solis 12. Litera Dominic. G.

Ergo Neomenia Adar was Febr. 4. Fer. 2. Cyclo Solis 13. Lit. Dominic. F. So
the 3. of Adar (the day whereon the Temple was finished, Ez. 6. 15.) will be
the 6. of February. From whence to the 8. of August, (whereon the Temple was
fired, and two days after consumed) are exclusive 182. days, that is, half a
year ad unguem.

But this year (according to the Judaicall Calender) was Annus Embolimaeus, and
so had two Adars; which of them the Scripture means, is doubtful. But the
Neomenia of the second Adar was March 5. Feria 4. So the 3. day of this Adar
was the 7. of March: From whence to the 8. of September. (the day whereon the
City was fired) are exclusive 184. days, which is a day or two too much. But
it is more then probable that the Jewish Calender was not in Darius his time so
exact, nor the Moons motion so well known, but the New Moon might sometimes
anticipate the beginning of their Months a day or two.

Howsoever those who begin their reckoning from the 2. year of Darius, as
Scaliger does, cannot from the 24. day of the 6. Month (Sept. 16) (which the
Prophet Haggai names (cap. 1. v. ult.) for the day whereon the work began) show
their complete Seventy Weeks so exactly terminated upon any event remarkable
during the whole time of the War. For as for the destruction of Jerusalem it
self, they come not near by whole years.

Of the opinion of Funcius.
FVncius his computation of the Lxx. weeks from the seventh of Artaxerxes
Longimanus (whence to Christ's Passion he finds just 490. years) has three
great and unavoidable inconveniences.

1. That it ends the 70. Weeks (which by the text were allotted for the Holy
City) long before the times of the holy City were fulfilled.

2. That this Artaxerxes might not be Artaxerxes the Hinderer of the Building
of the Temple, but that second Artaxerxes that gave Commission to Ezra and
Nehemiah, they are fain to bestow the names of Ahasuerus and Artaxerxes
mentioned Ezra 4. upon Cambyses and the counterfeit Tanioxarces or Smerdis
(whom others call Sphendates) the Magus, without any ground in Scripture or
profane History; nay, against probability. For if Ahasuerus be Cambyses (as by
order he should be) and Artaxerxes be Smerdis the Magus, how will that
business in the days of Artaxerxes, Ezra 4. 7. befit the 7. Months reign of
Smerdis? Or if preposterously (as some will have it) Ahasuerus be that Smerdis,
what needed the Holy Ghost so precisely to mention the Beginning (...) Ezra 4.
6.
of his reign, if he reigned but seven Months in all? Secondly, Neither
Cambyses nor Smerdis can be Ahasuerus: For Ahasuerus, Esther 3. 7. (and why
should we feign any other Ahasuerus of Persia then the Scripture describes,
and so diligently distinguishes from Ahasuerus the Mede, as if there had been
then no other? Esth. 1. 1.) reigned at least twelve years, whereas Cambyses
reigned but seven years, and Smerdis but so many months.

3. They cannot show how 69. Weeks, or 62. Weeks added to 7. Weeks, (for they
have no other way) are determined upon Messiah the Prince; since they out-reach
his Nativity, and end 7. years before his Passion (which was in the 19.) and
therefore 3. years at least before John's Baptism, which was in the 15. of
Tiberius. Wherefore neither beginning nor ending, neither part nor whole of the
sixtieth and ninth Week can point us out any time of the manifestation of
Messiah.

FINIS.

