ERRATA.
Page 20. l. 28. r. propositions, p. 26. l. 13. r. importunings, p. 29. l. 11.
r. understands not and p. 31. l. 12. r. the event, p. 33. l. 27. r. whither H.
S. p. 36. l. 22. r. insensati.

MEDICE CVRA TEIPSVM! OR THE Apothecaries Plea In some short and Modest
ANIMADVERSIONS, Upon a late Tract Entitled A short view of the Frauds and
Abuses of the Apothecaries, AND The only Remedy by Physicians making their own
Medicines, By Christopher Merret Doctor in Physic, etc.

From a Real Well-wisher to both Societies.

Terent. Tantumne est ab re tua otii tibi, Aliena ut cures? --

LONDON, Printed for W. Miller, at the Gilded Acorn in S. Paul's Churchyard,
near the little North-door. 1671.

Some short and modest Animadversions, upon a Tract of Doctor Merrett's,
Entitled, A short view of the Frauds and Abuses of Apothecaries, with the
Only Remedy, etc.
Tandem Aliquando.
AFter the Revolution of some Months past, wherein the world may have taken
notice of several invective and provoking Language, vented by the Author to the
disesteem and contempt of Apothecaries in general, with intention to invade the
profession, and to destroy the very being of a Corporation of the City of
London, which has for many years been constituted, and approved of: by whose
good Laws and industry the whole Series of Pharmacy since their constitution
has been improved to as high and laudable a pitch, as in any foreign Nation
or Republic whatsoever. It seems now notwithstanding that the Apothecaries not
having much concerned themselves as to their public Vindication from those
many and scandalous aspersions in all this time, but (like a Company of stout
valiant men, that I may use Tully's Ironical Language in his Orat. in Catilin.
Nos autem viri fortes satisfacere Reip. videmur, si. --) have satisfied
themselves to acquiesce in modest silence; which has made the Criminator
proceed still to insult over them, willing to make the world believe that their
silence speaks them really guilty. The consideration hereof has prevailed with
me now at last, though an unfit person, and contrary to my Genius, yet being a
real well-wisher to both the Societies of Physic and Pharmacy, to endeavor to
vindicate the cause of the Apothecaries (though not at all commissionated by
them) and to evidence to the World, that all is not Gospel, which the
Criminator has alleged. And though possibly I may be called Ignorant-fellow,
and Illiterate-fool for my pains, (and indeed I pretend not higher) nor do I
expect less from the Criminator, Nolo altum sapere: yet Children and Fools
often times speak truth (if our English proverb be true, which I shall
endeavor to make good.) Therefore that I may according to that small capacity
I have shoot that Fools bolt of mine in some measure to clear the Company from
those aspersions unjustly charged upon them, I shall adventure upon it, not
willing to deliver any thing which may give any just offense to either Society,
but rather (if it be not too much presumption in me to hope to bring about) to
create a right understanding betwixt them, but -- Haud equidem tali me dignor
honor.

It Is true, I am no Philosopher, nor yet pretender to Learning, and therefore
(impar congressus,) and more cannot be expected from me at best, than truth and
plain English.

In Order to this ensuing Vindication I do seriously and really declare.

1. That it is not in my thoughts to vindicate any private person, member of
the Company of Apothecaries, in any unlawful action, or uncivil deportment
toward any of that Honorable Society of the College of Physicians.

2. Nor shall I go about to countenance any members of that Corporation to take
upon them the practice of Physic, but to advise them rather to keep within
their lawful bounds, and to mind their own business, and employment, which they
have been, or at least should have been, bred up to, and versed in; Quam
quisque norit artem, in ea se exerceat, and in ea versetur. Let them not act
beyond what reason and the known Laws of the Land will bear them out in;
Tractent Fabrilia Fabri; And let them not entrench upon the Physicians
profession, but in all lawful ways, so far as becomes them, be subservient to
them in all their rational commands and prescripts.

3. Neither shall I plead for such as are dishonest or negligent in their own
profession. I doubt not, but that the Company of Apothecaries will be vigilant
and industrious to find out, and discover all such persons, ut poenas luant
debitas, to punish such according to their merits, as far as their power will
extend.

4. Nor shall I presume in the least (long long absit!) to derogate from, or
lessen the authority, or pre-eminence of that Honorable Society of the College
of Physicians, which they may justly claim over the Apothecaries, grounded upon
the foundation of Law, Equity and Reason. And so much I presume has ever been
and will be acknowledged by the Company, who are as unwilling to entrench upon,
or infringe, any of the just Rights and Privileges of that Honorable Society,
as they are willing and ready and obliged to preserve their own: and are ready
to hearken to any expedient for the reconciling the unhappy differences betwixt
the two Societies. I hope it will not lie at their doors (as I hear some of the
chief of them say) if there be not a happy concurrence; faxit Deus!

Having therefore now declared, what I shall decline in these following lines,
I shall take the boldness to make it my business as well to do the Honorable
Society of Physicians right, as to vindicate the Company of Apothecaries and
the honest members thereof from those Criminations of the Worthy Doctor, and to
invalidate his Allegations and Arguments, together with his Only Remedy. And
this I shall endeavor to do by offering some Short and Modest Animadversions
upon them, or at least upon such of them, as are most material for the world to
take notice of. And then sub Judice Lis est Let all Judicious sober persons
judge where the mistake lies.

There came forth in Print some Months since a severe Treatise Entitled A
short View, etc. as in the Title Page -- Wherein the Author has not only been
so free with th'Apothecaries, as to call them Illiterate fellows, liars,
dishonest, pitiful fellows, pitiful Ignorant souls, praters and what not: but
also has taken upon him to asperse most of his own profession, who are in the
general, persons of known Integrity, Learning, Sobriety and honor; some of
them he entitles, unworthy Physicians, covetous, wanting parts; necessitous
persons; as appears in his fourteenth page of his first Edition. Others he
accuses of Laziness, Ignorance, want of will to do good for the sick: page 68.
of his second Edition. Nor is it the first time that the Worthy Doctor has
vented his displeasure against some of the most Eminent Fellows of the
College, though contrary to his expectation and intention, nor much to his own
advantage, or their detriment. But why worthy Doctor so angry at your
Colleagues? Why so censorious upon such of them as do not comply with your
design that they must be admonished? Have they need of such a Monitor? In good
time Domine Doctor, Eone Imprudentiae ventum est? a little more prudence in my
opinion might have done you no hurt. And therefore as a Learned Doctor in
Physic and a Colleague has heartily, yet modestly expressed himself lately to
the like purpose. I would not have you think, says he, I am now justifying
every member of our Society in every thing. We are not (perhaps) all prudent
and good natured men. I conceive that to be the sense, and perhaps more of that
Colleague, as also I doubt not but that he speaks the sense of the rest of the
Honorable Society in the same particular, to whom the Criminator is
sufficiently known with his deportment.

But these things are but preliminary. I shall now according to promise make
some Modest Animadversions in order as I find them, that require answering.

First, in his frontispice, or title page, I take notice of these ensuing
words, A short view of the Frauds and Abuses of the Apothecaries etc. and of
the Only Remedy thereof by Physicians making their own Medicines. I fear Worthy
Doctor that the English proverb may here be verisied, that The Remedy will
prove worse than the disease, and I hope I shall make it appear. Next in the
same title page in the close of it, the Worthy Doctor quotes an ancient Distich
in Medicastros, against Mountebanks, Fingunt se Medicos omnes, Idiota prophanus,
Nutrix, et Tonsor, Pharmacopaeus, Anus.


Which Distich he has perverted, and Metamorphos'd the persons, shussling in
Nutrix and Pharmacopaeus into the pentameter in stead of Judaeus, and histrio,
which two former are not found in The Original. Consult Lobel in his Prooemium
to his Animadversions upon Rondeletius his Officina Pharmaceutica Dedicated to
the College of the Physicians of London, and Printed Anno 1605. The Original
there quoted, is, Fingit se Medicum quisquis, Idiota Profanus,
Judaeus, Monachus, Histrio, Rasor, Anus.


But that is not all, for he has caused Pharmacepoeus to be Printed Typis
distinctis in another Character, in a Capital Letter, as if he had a design
digito monstrare, to point him out for his Capital enemy, and the rest to stand
by pro forma tantum. Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbas, which in plain
English is comprehended in this Distich, Crows, and Rooks have ^^eve to fly,
But the poor Pigeons they must die.


Durus est hic sermo! A hard censure from the quondam Censor! but what remedy?
statutum est; Cir. Orat. in Catiliu.
notat and designat oculis ad caedem unumquemque nostrum, may the poor Potecary
say, as that Eloquent Cicero in his Orat. in Catilin.

Next to the frontispice, the first page of the matter marked page 5. Page 5.
Occurres the Worthy Doctor's Apologetical Preface in order to his Noble
atcheivements, and his taking a new trade upon him.

Doubtless it will seem strange to most men, D. M.
that after thirty years not unsuccessful practice in this great City, I should
now at last forbear sending my bills to Apothecaries.

I shall not undertake or presume to put any estimate upon the Worthy Doctors
proficiency in his thirty years practice, neither how successful or
unsuccessful he has been in all this time (it is above my Sphere to
determine;) but shall rather refer the Reader to something lately published by
an intelligent knowing person of the same faculty, who is able to make right
judgment in the case, and it is totidem verbis;

If we might take an estimate of his parts from his writings, 't was manifest
he might better employ his time in studying the Method of Physic than in
Composing of Medicaments: that after thirty years practice 'twas evident he
understood not the Rudiments of that Noble Science, nor could state a case
therein.

But I pass that, not willing to recriminate, or retaliate, but modestly and
calmly to endeavor to vindicate the Apothecaries from the Worthy Doctor's
uncivil and unkind reflections.

In the next page he proceeds to Apologize for himself, Page 6.
telling you what a public spirited man he is, and that he has no other
design but the good of his Country men, and to do Mankind good by restoing his
profession to it is ancient and deserved honor.

But Quid verba audio cum facta videam? To what purpose do I hear words,
against actions that are point blank to the contrary? It Is in plain terms no
more than Verba dare, which is in plain English no less than to deceive and
delude.

-- Sed famam extendere factis
Hoc virtutis opus. --
And that he may put the better gloss upon the sharpness of his writings, he
would make you believe he does but speak the Common language of all Physicians,
wherein certainly the College of Physicians are very little beholding to him,
and certainly he deserves to be called to a Red rationem.

In the next place he tells you of a book that came forth from an Inquisitive
person the year before upon the same Subject, which because the Company of
Apothecaries have not given answer to, he takes it pro concesso, that their
silence has rendered it Authentic. But why, from an Inquisitive person? Cum
vides velatam, quid inquiris in rem absconditam? but I conceive the Worthy
Doctor put him upon this Inquisition intending to make use of him as his
Prodromus, but it seems he came short, as he intimates, and was not Satyrist
enough as the Worthy Doctor conceived, and therefore himself will undertake to
make it up, and to strike the nail home to the head. So that I shall wave to
return any answer to that, nor did the Company of Apothecaries think it
convenient to answer it, unwilling to engage in any quarrel of that nature
without further provocations; conceiving that any sober person might easily
discover the scope and drift of it. And besides it is probable that the
Inquisitive person being but a young Doctor, or at that time no Doctor but a
Student in Physic, might not speak so much his own sense as the sense of some
such Suborner, who might be willing to make use of him to break the Ice, like
as it is in the story of the Ape, that made use of the young Catling's foot to
pull the roasted Chestnut out of the sire, not willing to burn his own Paw.
Besides this Inquisitive person did it as himself acknowledges currenti calamo
in haste, and though the person be an Ingenious Learned man, yet we know the
old proverb, Canis festinans -- I wish he had taken the advice of some more
considerate, sober, and Judicious person before the publishing: I believe it
might have turned to a better account.

The Worthy Doctor goes on, hoping to prove that these abuses complained of, as
he says, by all sorts of persons, arise from this only cause that Physicians
make not their own Medicines, Exitus acta probat. -- still he proceeds. --

But before I descend to particulars I shall first lay down this Proposition,
Page 7.
their own confession, and in their own Language, viz. That they may be the
veryest knaves in England. Because they may put in bad Ingredients, and more or
less, or substitute one thing for another; and all this without being detected,
and consequently not to be punished -- Quid inde? What does the Doctor infer
from hence? How does this advance your cause? Novimus and qui te -- If the
Doctor takes the Knave Apothecaries trade upon him; this puts in bad
Ingredients, and the Doctor may put in worse with less suspicion of being
detected, having no supervisor; he may say as Cato once, when he had got the
Sword in his own hands, and no body with him, Sum mei Juris; he may be his own
Carver. Whereas the Knave Apothecary has not only servants whose eyes are
still upon him, but Censors of the College, and Wardens of the Company to
search and call to account; so that for fear, if not for conscience, he may
prove the honester man. Turpe est Doctori --

Hoc supposito, that the Doctor has more opportunity to be as bad, or worse,
than the Knave Apothecary, what hinders then according to his own inference
that it may not as clearly follow, that whatsoever deceit covetous wits can
invent, may at least be suspected to be used by the Good Doctor? If there be
not the same reason for the one, as for the other let the world judge. And by
the same consequence what great reason I pray will there be for any future
Allegations of the Doctors to gain belief? And here it seems he has done with
the possibility of an Apothecaries being the veryest Knave in England, and I
also have given my thoughts in plain English of the probability of the Doctors
outstripping the Knave Apothecary, by reason of his better opportunity, and
less fear of being detected.

Most men wonder that this Corporation being but of few years standing, Page 8.
etc.

Hoc nihil ad Rhombum! This is plain enough to be a piece of pure Envy, Invidus
alterius rebus --

Next in order he ranks up the frauds by them committed, as,

1. They use Medicines quite contrary to the prescription. 2. They falsify the
grand Compositions of the London Dispensatory, and put them not to open view --
I believe there may be some such persons, that may be so dishonest as to use
these indirect ways, and are so crafty by their subterfuges as to evade the
searches both of the College and the Company of Apothecaries, who are
Authorized to that end; but what is this to purpose? grant it to be so! shall
the whole Profession with the honest Professors thereof suffer therefore? and
their good Name Trade and Lively hood, shall they be taken away because there
are Knaves of the same Profession? Nay I conceive rather that honest men ought
to be the more valued, and the Corporation, which do their endeavor by all the
best meansthey can to discover any such frauds, and to punish the Authors,
ought to be never the less esteemed.

So also for the Sophistication of Chemical Oils, which he seems in the general
to charge upon the Chemists. I shall in brief let him know that there be many
Apothecaries destil them themselves and make all their Chemical preparations,
which are in use. And the Company is now inter aedificandum a preparing a
Laboratory as I am informed, that such as have not conveniences at home to
prepare such things, may have them faithfully prepared there, where care will
be taken of the honest and faithful preparing of them.

6. Page 12.
Many of the London Apothecaries, and most of the Country Apothecaries buy of
the Whole sale-men, who do some of them confess they cannot sell their
Medicines honestly made, at so low rates as they do, which implies that such do
not make them honestly.

This is something Doctor that you say, that I shall not oppose you in. But
what does this concern such as make all their Compositions themselves, or buy
them at least of such Retail Apothecaries as they know to make them faithfully,
and trust not to the Whole-saleshops at all? and such I conceive are most
Apothecaries who have any considerable employment. If any do otherwise, I plead
not for them; though I doubt not but there may be some Wholesale Apothecaries
honest men, and such as make good Medicines faithfully, Caveat Emptor! Let the
Country Apothecary, or any other that are enforced to make use of them
endeavor to pick out the honestest, though not the cheapest!

As to his following Criminations the seventh and eighth I pass, as not worth
the Answering, Page 13.
and to the ninth, I shall say no more, but Risum teneatis amici, who can
forbear laughing at the Seedman and the Worthy Doctors man? But, Quid domini
facient, audent cum talia fures?

If the Doctors man be so bold as to bring such ridioulous tales home to his
Master, what will not the Worthy Doctor himself do to encourage him further and
to make it good?

10. Page 14.
By reason that more frauds may be committed by the Apothecaries than by any
other Trade, and by supposition that gain will tempt most men -- I say that
this seems to be the cause, why they have two Supervisors set over them more
than any other Company.

To this I answer, that if gain will tempt most men to dishonest actions,
especially when they may act undiscovered, the Worthy Doctor is a man, and a
man that loves gain as appears, and why may not he more easily be tempted to
dishonest actions? especially when he may act alone, having turned the Knave
Apothecary off, and having no Supervisors set over him, neither Censors of the
College, nor Master and Wardens of the Apothecaries to detect him. This Auri
Sacra fames -- the Golden-fees I fear may tempt such a man, -- quid non
mortalia cogit --?

The next thing is the enlarging and multiplying their Bills and Medicines,
Page 14.
and this is comprehended in nine Criminations. To the first eight I have not
much to say. The College have power by their Charter to punish such as are
guilty in that kind; nor does this concern the Company, who approve not of any
such actions, nor do they own them, being not warrantable, nor justifiable.

As to the ninth, Page 15.
But their principal art of all is to cry up, and bring in to Patients such
unworthy Physicians, who through Covetousness do, or through meanness of parts
or want must, comply with the Apothecaries interest. Page 15. of the first
Edition.

To this I reply, that it is no marvel that the Apothecaries are so Criminated,
when Physicians allowed of by the College shall be so calumniated by him; and
besides to rise up to that pitch of Envy, as to deny them so much as good
Language from the Apothecary: they must not (forsooth) be called Good
Physicians. Now these Physicians whom this Gentleman so much decryes are either
Fellows of the College, or Candidates; however, such as are approved of by the
College: otherwise I presume the Criminator would not have concealed it. But
however they are Physicians, and called Good Physicians, and yet higher by
some, as the Doctor intimates and stomachs at, Good Apothecaries Physicians.
Why Doctor? You may possibly have as large and high Encomiums conferred on you,
as any of them have. A Physician, nay a Good Physician, a great Philosopher or
a great pretender to it, a Learned Physician. Nay since there is a title that
the Doctor seems to bear himself high upon, One of the Fellows of the College
of Physicians London, and thereupon may think himself undervalued to have his
Juniors (which, happily, are no Fellows of the College) to be so courted with
Good language, and to outbeard him that has been a long time Fellow, therefore
it is not denied, that he may not be baulked of his due merit; nay it is evident
enough and without dispute that he is and has been a long time a Fellow of the
College, and possibly a Good Fellow too; for he has done many good offices
for the College interest; a Good Steward when time was; and therefore why he
should be debarred of any Good Epithete, I see no reason, (...). But under
favor Good Doctor, you are a little too bitter against your Colleagues,
enlarging your subsequent discourse to their disparagement, and vilifying, in
Language not beseeming a fellow of so honorable a Society, those of your own
faculty.

To advance the prices you shall hardly ever see a bill without Bezoar or Pearl
in it to make people think them very chargeable: Page 18.
whereas sometimes there is not above a grain or two of those dear Ingredients
in it.] This does not sonare Collegam Londinensem, it does not sound as if it
should come from the Pen of a Fellow of the College; the more understanding
Colleagues prescribing familiarly in a Cordial Julep one hundred or an 100 and
twenty grains of Pearl for such Patients as are able to pay for it.

And further Learned Zwelfer (who was bred an Apothecary as appears in his
Preface to his Animadversions upon Augustan, whom the good Doctor is pleased to
mention elsewhere with a great deal of honor as he well deserves in many things
I dare not say in every thing,) in his Animadv. in Confect. Aromat. Class. 11.
tells us totidem verbis; vidi non semel integras drachmas lapidis bezoar and
perlarum orientalium pro dosi insigni cum emolumento egrotantibus porrectas
esse -- I have seen and that not once, says he, whole drammes (which is sixty
grains) of Bezoar stone, and Oriental Pearls for a dose given with very good or
signal success. And therefore the Criminator might very well have spared this
Advance and salved his Credit: but we will allow him his grains. It seems by
this that he is seldom called to any consultation with such of his Ancient
Colleagues, who understand the Materia Medica a little better.

By reason of the Dear Bills of Apothecaries many and deterred from going to
the Physician, Page 19.
and run to common Mountebanks.

The Worthy Doctor is still clamouring against the Dear Bills of Apothecaries.
This bait he thinks will take best, because every body in common prudence would
be as saving as they may. And I cannot say but that it is commendable so to be;
but Incidet in Scyllam qui -- The patient that goes from the Apothecary to this
good Doctor for his Medicines or Physic, thinking to save by it, will
certainly, as we say, leap out of the frying pan into the fire. Nevertheless I
shall not go about to excuse any Apothecary, that shall in his prices set
higher rates, than equity and conscience will allow, as that person that made
the Patient pay twenty four shillings for twenty four ordinary Pills, as Doctor
C. T. intimates (but such a one is but e millibus unus; I have no plea for him,
or any such.) Only thus far I shall plead for such Apothecaries, as make use
of the best Ingredients, and make their Compositions faithfully, and dispense
Physicians Bills conscientiously, and in order to perform their trust are
willing to be at any charge though extraordinary, and not to stand so much upon
the dearness, as upon the goodness and soundness of the Ingredients, though
possibly they may cost three or four times as much as others more frugal and
less conscientious do buy for; I say then I desire to be satisfied, whether
such an Apothecary (and such to my knowledge there be) may not with a safe
conscience allow himself the liberty of a competent proportionable gain, and
the Patient, all things considered, no whit injured by it. Est modus in rebus
-- Sit modosecundum aequum and bonum! for to buy dear and sell cheap is not the
way to make the pot boil, as we say. But there is a sort of people in the
world, hat pretend to be wise, but understand not to disinguish betwixt things
and things, being out of their cognizance, and element, who, so they may buy
cheap, care not what they be served with, or how they are abused and cheated.
Penny wise -- But we have an English Proverb, A Lark is worth a Kite, which
may as soon be verified in th'Apothecaries Profession as in any; both to the
Buyer and Seller. And I must tell you thus much in plain terms, that an honest
Apothecary that sells dear, many times gets less by much than some others that
sell cheap. And besides a Learned Doctor in Physic, The Accomplished
Physician, though he has not been wanting to contribute in his Lash to the
aspersing of the Company as well as of Lex talionis, yet has in this point
been so candid and impartial, Page 76. as to let the World know, Ac. Ph. Page 76.
that the honest Apothecary (for he grants there be some such) is not only to
be considered, and paid barely for his Medicines, and Materials which are
exhibited, but also to have some allowance for such things as he provides in
readiness in his Shop for Patients, though they be not made use of, but being
exolete or decayed is forced to throw them out of doors, or into the fire: As
also to have some consideration for attendance extraordinary, which many times
is expected from the Patient, and that at unseasonable hours, partly to be
satisfied in some scruples of Regimen, or possibly to give account to the
Physician, when he is not at leisure to visit the Patient himself.

And further, They that have occasion to make use of Lawyers, and Counselors,
and Sollicitors, about their Estates, think it not prudence to starve their
cause; and if so, then for life, and health (for non est vivere, sed valere
vita) what will not a man give? I speak this as to the concerns of the Patient
as well to Physicians, as Apothecaries, that when they have faithfully
performed their trust and duty as they ought to do, they deserve as much
encouragement from them that had occasion to make use of them, as any members
in a Commonwealth whatsoever. And it will be no imprudence for the Patients (
bona si sua norint, if they did but really weigh their own interest) to
consider it, and not to think to be too great husbands, as we say, to either of
them in their gratifications. But I speak this only of such Patients as are of
ability to do it. As for the poorer and meaner sort secundum magis aut minus, I
doubt not that either Physician or Apothecary, honest, conscientious, and
expert in their several Professions, do or will want bowels to extend their
Charity, or will be remiss in their bestowing their pains gratis, when there is
occasion. Page 19.
The Worthy Doctor proceeds -- S. Augustine heartily in his book of Confessions
declares, that through Covetousness he repeated a course of Physic without
consulting the Physician, who had before cured him of the same disease, to his
great charge, danger of life, and Offense against God.] Whether S. Augustine be
quoted as this Worthy Doctor alleges may be questioned; because all that he
says is not looked upon to be Gospel; but grant it were; What? How comes this
change about? Is Saul also among the Prophets? I could not conceive that this
Doctor had any time or leisure to consult S. Augustine because of his double
diligence and employment in his two professions; but this I am confident of,
that S. Augustine never taught him any such Monopolizing way, as he has entered
upon. But the Grand Criminator alleged Scripture we know to whom; and for this
the Worthy Doctor may have his Liberty to quote S. Augustine. Nevertheless, I
cannot say, that I judge it reasonable, that an Apothecary should repeat a
whole course of Physic, prescribed formerly by a Physician, without his
knowledge or direction, if the Physician be inter vivos, and may be had, and
consulted; though sometimes possibly a Patient may be very importunate out of
frugality to save Fees, and their importunity might possibly prevail with the
Apothecary against a man's own inclination. But there may be many alterations in
the case. And therefore what ever disaster should happen upon it (as often it
does or may) the Apothecary is certainly upon the safer and surer ground, when
he has a Physician's prescript for his Warrant to justify his actings. And
this I suppose all honest and prudent Apothecaries must and will acknowledge.

Next he comes to neglects and mistakes. Page 19.
] And can the Patient conceive, that this Criminator, giving himself the
liberty he uses to do, can quit himself better, or can or will take better
order for the preventing such mistakes, than an able, conscientious and sober
Apothecary can or will do?

As for that which relates to any disrespect, Page 20.
or uncivil deportment or unbeseeming language of any particular member,
whereby the Honorable Society of Physicians might be scandalized and offended,
the Company of Apothecaries do disown, and disallow any such actings, nor were
they ever instigators or promoters of such, nor will be; And therefore I hope
it ought not to be cast in their dish by the Good Doctor.

Another manifest sign of their endeavor to usurp our practice is their absurd
calling the sick their Patients, Page 26.
etc.] Here Is a straw the good Doctor stumbles at; quid adfert? quid aufert?
sic fuit ab initio, and so it will be donec Orcus ab Acheronte animas
dimiserit. Patients will be Patients to Physicians, and to Apothecaries; and
you must give the Patients the Lie, if you allow it not, for they will call
themselves so. Nor is it more, than Clients are Clients to Counselors, and
Attourneys, and Sollicitors without any regret of the Counselors or detracting
from them, that ever I could hear of. But the good Doctor must Monopolize, and
catch at a very shadow, though he should lose the substance.

As to the Remedy and the Only and proper Remedy, Page 27.
that Physicians make their own Medicines -- It being the desire of most
persons and the censure of all wise men. --

The Good Doctor takes here a great deal of liberty: but where the contrary is
so obvious to the world, me thinks he ought not in prudence to hyperbolize to
such a height. It is the desire of most men;] the Good Doctor could wish it
were so, and so he may be in part excused. Facile credimus, quod volumus: but
he knows in his Conscience that there are a hundred Negatives for one
Affirmative. 2. That it is the censure of all wise men.] Wise men may possibly
sometimes be mistaken; Nemo omnibus horis sapit; but nequicquam sapit qui sibi
non sapit, was the opinion of Alexander the Great, and our English Proverb is
never out of date. Some men are wise, some overwise, and some otherwise.

Chirurgions will not trust them to make External Remedies.] Page 28.
Qui nescit dissimulare nesoit vivere. Now he Collogues the Chirurgions, at
whom he has also an aching tooth, could he have but a fit opportunity, or the
least power, to do them a mischief.

He will avoid the trouble put upon him by the Apothecaries Ignorance in not
understanding it, Page 31.
who use to come to the Doctor to be informed.

I shall not need to go far for an answer to the Good Doctor's convenience of
being freed from such trouble. -- It is in prompiu from a Learned Person of his
own faculty in these words, Physicians are mortal men, Ac. Ph. Page 61.
and may (and often have) in a debauched humor prescribe improper Medicines, and
most Improportionate Doses which an Apothecary by the experience of his Trade
may discover, and repair for a rectification the next Morning, when the cloud
is over with him. But in case the Patient be to take that Improper Medicine, or
Improportionate Dose the same night, whilst the Doctor is upon that merry pin
(I will not say Debauched), then the Ignorant Apothecary may prove the wiser
man for that night by consulting some other sober Physician in that point, and
thereby preventing some mischief that might ensue; therefore it is prudence for
the Patient to make choice (as near as he can) of such a Physician, who may tam
vespertinis, quam matutinis horis sapere; and who may not think it a trouble to
be repaired unto in such a Case; Nescis quid serus vesper vehat. It may be too
late to wait till next Morning. Multa cadunt inter -- And I must tell you,
says the same Author, some lives have been saved by such kind of Informations,
and yet no dishonor to the Physician. But the Good D. M. would be quit of the
trouble of hearing any more of his Bill or of any mistakes in it, preferring
his own ease before the life of his Patient. And all this notwithstanding for
the good of the Patient, and to do Mankind and his Country men good. Credat
Judaeus apella. Believe him who list.

With this suits the relation of the same Author of that Physician that
prescribed three drams of Laudanum Opiatum for a dose, which another Physician
more considerate changed into three grains: and was there not reason then, Good
Doctor, that an Apothecary (though but ordinarily versed in Pharmacy) should
repair to the Dram-Doctor, and rather give him a little trouble, than by
exhibiting the prescript to be guilty of sending the Patient to the River
Lethe, by giving him almost ^ Dram too much? by which means he would not have
been able the next morning to tell who hurt him.

Another mischief in sending Bills to the Apothecaries is, Page 33.
that though the Apothecaries be honest (and who can tell which of them is so?)

Certainly Good Doctor there are some honest persons among them. Is there no
such thing in rerum natura? then let them be discarded root and branch! But
what if it be made to appear that there are many Apothecaries, who may for
honesty (without any arrogance be it spoken) stand in Competition with this
great Philosopher? and that the Good Doctor's question may be easily resolved,
that he shall not need his brother Diogenes his Lanthorn at noon day to find
such a man?

But the Good Doctor however either cannot, or will not tell where to find such
a one: Nay, he will rather endeavor to make him turn Knave, and dishonest, aut
Inveniam aut faciam, if he be not so already; and this he does by proclaiming
the dearness of their Bills, and making the World believe that their Apothecary
stuff costs them little or nothing, and so may be sold for a Song; all clear
gains! Whereas if himself come to the ordering of them, he will take care
according to his promise to avoid the use of Chargeable things and in stead of
them to use cheaper: he shall not need to trouble himself, as he intimates,
with Bezoar, Pearls, Sapphyrs, Emeralds, Ambergriese, Gold, etc. Ad quid
perditio haec? these will not turn to account, he will not cast Pearls before
Swine. Or if he should chance to use Pearls, etc. he will put in one grain, or
two at most for an hundred, as was formerly demonstrated from his own
confession. But some men have their grains of allowance, and this Good Doctor
his hundred; So it is an hundred to one but the Doctor is mistaken in the right
and proportional dose of these dear Ingredients, and may possibly be willing
enough to be so mistaken lucri gratia for the Patients gewds, and to do Mankind
good.

But his charge is, that he commits the care of dispencing of Medicines to his
servants, whilst he is visiting abroad, or at his recreations.] And I pray Good
Doctor who takes care of dispencing your Medicines all the other part of the
day besides that half hour that you allot your self for that business? Some
Novice that was never bred up to it, whilst you are visiting, or taking your
recreations, or indulging your genius; and then how far the Patients may be
more accommodated, and not run more hazard to the danger of their lives, may
easily be judged.

And now the Good Doctor is come to the Advantages that will come to the
Patient by physicians making their own Medicines, and thereof you may expect
great matters. Parturiunt montes.

As for the Patients, Page 33.
they may hereby save most of the great Charges of Apothecaries Bills. Nay
afterward in the same Narrative he tells them, the whole charge of the
Apothecaries Bills will be saved, for he will take nothing for his Medicines,
he will give the Apothecaries stuff gratis.] But all this with a Salvo, they
must come off with handsome Saucy Fees: Otherwise I pray how will this hold
water? How do ye think that this Good Doctor must live in that handsome
equipage, grand port garb, and attendance, etc. which he tells you are
necessary concomitants to his Profession, and promises himself (doubtless) to
be Master of? This is a Paradox indeed, and will need an Oedipus to unriddle,
and it is past my skill, Davus sum, non Oedipus. But I crave pardon, I see the
Good Doctor has his Expedient for it at hand, as he is pleased to communicate
it, page 37. he will cure the Patient by Well ordering only, without any
remedies at all, or but very few, and those inconsiderable. and Page 36. He may
avoid all pompous, useless, chargeable Medicines of the shops, and substitute
in their places cheaper: he may very well lay aside the precious stones,
Sapphyrs, Emeralds, etc. the high priced Magistrals, as he calls them (he means
I suppose Magisteries) of Coral and Pearl, as also Unicorns horn and Bezoar,
and he may also spare the charges of Leaf-gold for gilding of Pills,
Electuaries, etc. Nay further to make good his assertion of the Patients
advantage in saving charges by giving them their Medicines gratis, and to make
it out how he can afford to take nothing for them, Page 37.
he proceeds, he shall have little use of Conserves, Syrups, Lohochs, etc. and
amongst other expedients to frugalize his new trade, he shall not need to use
so large Compositions, consisting of such confused and contrary Ingredients;
and will find good reason to lay aside those unintelligible and unreasonable
Compositions of Mithridate, Treacle, and the so much magnified Treacle water.]
Now then I am reasonably well satisfied with this expedient of the Good
Doctors, which convinces me that he may afford to give his Apothecary stuff
into the bargain, for he will either give little, or nothing, or else nothing
to purpose; he will feed them at most, but with a bit and a knock of any dear
remedies (I perceive that by him,) even those from whom he expects competent
Fees; Nay he makes no bones of it, even to rob the Ospittle as we say. The poor
man's Physic Mithridate, and Treacle he would fain cry down; Where then is
this Good Doctor's Charity?

Now as to his so much Vilipending the Grand Compositions of Mithridate and
Treacle -- so much magnified and cried up by most Learned Physicians Ancient
and Modern, I have a word to mind the Doctor of, before those be laid aside.
Possibly in those Compositions of Mithridate and Treacle I will not say but
that something might be amended and corrected, and possibly some more analogous
and proper substitutes in the room of such Ingredients, as were neither in our
fathers days, nor are yet in ours to be had, and tautologies and repetitions of
the same Ingredients in one Composition rectified, as Learned Zwelfer has well
observed, and done that particular to our hand in part. I shall not pretend to
make any Apology for them, neither to Magnify, or Vilify them, but shall
leave that to the censure of the Honorable Society of the College of
Physicians as the only and most proper Judges in such a case. And whether the
Compositions, or the Good Doctor be more unintelligible, or unreasonable, let
such intelligent and reasonable persons judge. And besides Good Doctor, under
favor, till better and more proper and intelligible remedies can be thought
on, and directed in lieu of them, I conceive it may not be so seasonable to
decry them. Neither may I pass over those two famous Physicians of Rome,
Damocrates and Andromachus, to whom Pompey the Great communicated the Original
description of Mithridate, after his great Victory over Mithridates himself the
first Inventor, who himself was a Learned man, and able to express himself in
two and twenty several Idioms, as it is reported of him; these Physicians I say
did put such an estimate upon this Composition, that one without much
alteration, the other with the addition of Vipers and some other small
addition, entitled themselves to it. The former preserving the honor of the
first Inventor named it Mithridatium Damocratis. The other altering the name
because of his addition of Vipers, which the Greeks call (...) calls it
Theriaca Andromachi. And besides these most of all the Renowned Physicians that
have been extant ever since, have expressed their high esteem of them, as
Galen, Avicen, Wecker, Renodaeus, Bauderon, etc. Nay Bartholomaeus Maranta, a
famous Physician of Naples, who undertook to write a Commentary upon Trevcle,
and Mithr. in his Prooemium Authoris, after his Dedicatory Epistle to
Ferdinandus Imperatus, an expert, and most Ingenious Apothecary of Naples,
tells us, that he was wont to compare the two Antidotes of Treacle and
Mithridate to the two strong Heroes or Champions Hercules and Theseus, Who,
says he, propounded to themselves, and acted nothing else, but that they might
clear the world from many things pernicious to mankind; and what else do these
two famous Antidotes perform, but that mankind thereby may be freed from the
bitings of venomous Serpents, and from the malice and tyranny of diseases? And
this dedication of his was in Anno 1570. One hundred years since, which does
evidence in some degree, that the Apothecaries profession is not so Novel, as
the Good Doctor would have it. But to come home to our selves concerning these
things that the Good Doctor would lay aside, they having been so much made use
of, and that with good success to poor people, who are neither able to give the
Doctor a Fee, or to pay the Apothecary, and considering that so much good has
been done with them by Charitable Ladies and Gentlewomen in the Countries to
their poor Neighborhood, where other or better remedies are not to be had, I
do not a little hesitate at the conceit of this Good Doctor. Besides all this,
A teneris assuescere multum est, It will not be an easy matter or a task of a
few days to bring the Common People off from their good opinion of such
remedies as they have been long accustomed to, and have found benefit from. But
this I confess is ultra crepidam; under the Rose, and above my sphere, or the
sphere of the Company of Apothecaries to meddle with: but is left to the
judgment of the Learned College (as I hinted before) to determine, who are
best able, and have power to make what alterations they shall think fit either
in this, or in any other Composition, contained in their Pharmacopoea, or
Dispensatory, for the public good.

But Quid moror? the Doctor goes on, and applying himself to those of his own
faculty, page 39. Who do or are like to comply with him, advises them to
consider, Page 39.
and they will find what a vast encouragement they have to improve their
knowledge so far, that they shall not only be able to leave Mankind destitute
of no remedy Nature did ever produce (high Language!) but he tells you over and
above, page 44. that he will be able to lay open a whole Ocean for new
discoveries. Eloquere ut videam Domine Doctor! (Admiranda canit.) What? no less
than a whole Ocean for new discoveries! Certainly the Good Doctor has got the
Philosophers Stone, or is Master of the Universal Medicine, or some other great
Arcanum; and then what is there that he is not able to compass both by Sea and
Land? Nay further, if that will not be sufficient, he will not be circumscribed
to sublunaries, but may go higher yet. Virg. Ecl.
Ipse vel e Coelo potis est deducere Lunam, he will be able by his Chanting
even to bring the Moon down from Heaven. Page 40.


When Dispensatories were first made the Apothecaries were really Physicians
Servants -- ] And so by Consequence the Good Doctor Intitles himself Master.
Yet under favor of this great Master in Philosophy, A Servant is not always
obliged Jurare in Verba Magistri. Some circumstances there may be, that may
give check to that rule; Aliis non been imperat, qui sibi imperare nescit, he
that cannot govern himself, and his own passions, how unfit is it for such a
man to claim the title of Master? or to expect that because (...), Ipse dixit,
there should be no questioning of Authentic to quiequid in buccam --

Greater respect will be given to such Physicians, Page 41.
and their Honor doubled, which every Physician looks principally at.

I believe and am confident that the Doctor is much mistaken in that point
also: Honest Men, and Conscientious Physicians look more principally at the
curing their Patients, than doubling their Honor. Honesty is the truest
Honor, maugre all that the Good Doctor would infer to the contrary.

He will gain and keep to himself Patients, Page 44.
who have diseales they are unwilling should be known by Apothecaries and their
boys, etc.

I shall not say in answer to this, that the Doctor may herein be styled a
Mountebank, as himself styles the Apothecaries: but if he do but Print his
Bills, and make his man post them up in several places of note, signifying his
name, and where his lodging is, and the hours of the day when he may be spoke
with, and the diseases that he cures with such privacy as Mounte-banks use to
do, he may I presume have as much practice as the best of them all.

The Doctor goes on still and tells you, Page 47.
that the great interest that Apothecaries have in families will decay for
their petty officiousnesses (which Physicians have put them upon;) These will
be taught Nurses, and the Assistants, etc.] Now the Good Doctor has altered
the scene. What! Is the Doctor wheeled about to collogue Nurses that in his
Frontispice has shuffled in Nutrix and Pharmacopoeus into his Distich amongst
the tribe of Mountebanks, which are not found in the Original, as I hinted
before in my Animadversion upon it? But any tooth (good Barber!) Rather than he
will not unroost the Apothecary, he will set up the Nurses Cock a hoop, and
choose them for his mates, but this is not so prudently done; si non Cast,
saltem Caute, Good Doctor. But there is a sort of persons that need to have
good Memories; I perceive the Docter had forgot his Title Page. Nevertheless,
as for the great Interest that Apothecaries have in families for their petty
Officiousnesses (as the good Doctor calls it) which Physicians have put them
upon, his hopes are, that that will decay by this his new Project (though his
Expedient be but weak, and such as rellishes more of passion, and self
interest.) Yet thus much I must ingeniously acknowledge, that Apothecaries may
in the main be better employed at home in their own shops in looking after the
preparations of Medicines for the Patients, and do them as good if not better
service in their shops, than at their Lodgings, by visiting, and might thereby
save a considerable charge in keeping fewer Servants. But some are partly
enforced to it to preserve their acquaintance, which otherwise might possibly
be taken from them by the Physician, if they should not sometimes appear; and
besides some Patients will think themselves slighted, and neglected, if they
should wholly absent themselves. And therefore, if the good Doctor can find out
a Medium by any honest Expedient, or by taking more care of the Patient himself
to excuse the Apothecary this trouble, he may do a good piece of service both
to Patient and Apothecary.

He proceeds on as to the reasonableness of making his own Medicines to support
himself, Page 48.
and to have the pre-eminence above those Ignorant persons, that would incroach
-- ] See how hard a matter it is to pass one Paragraph without aspersing the
Apothecary! Then he comes to tell you of the great charge, study, and labor,
before he can arrive at any benefit from it. That he must take the Chargeable
degrees of Bachelor, Master of Arts, Bachelor in Physic, and his expenses in
the University, his Library habit, more free way of living in a suitable house,
attendance, greater taxes, etc. Insomuch that he spends more before he comes to
practice than will set up (perhaps) a dozen Apothecaries in a way of
Livelihood, and, besides, great sums before he can put himself in a fitting
Equipage.] Vnde, unde precor! non been convenient: Whence comes the Good Doctor
to be Master of these Great Sums, come they out of the Clouds? enough to set
up (perhaps) a dozen Apothecaries; Si Coelum ruerit, forsan -- If the sky
falls, we may (perhaps) catch larks; But what Apothecaries shops does he mean?
He means such I presume as he intends to furnish for his Patients; He tells you
the Physician needs not to make use of any chargeable things, etc. As he
intimates in his former expedients, and so I Will grant him to speak truth in
this particular.

He tells you that in the Plague time the Apothecaries took upon them the whole
practice of Physic. Page 51.
] I pray Good Doctor how came it to pass, that you had not your share in it?
Must poor Patients suffer and perish without help, because the Good Doctor
durst not appear, or stay by it? Was here a public spirit? a design to do
Mankind good, or rather a self Interest? Where was the good Doctor's Charity?
Proximus egomet mihi; It begun at home, and there it continues, whatever he may
pretend; he is not over diffusive or prodigal of it abroad.

After some digression the Good Doctor comes now to caiole the Ladies, Page 63.
whom formerly he had entitled the Credulous Sex, believing creatures, and so
now will endeavor to make that use of them to believe all to be truth which
comes out of his mouth; but I presume they will be wary, and take heed whom
they trust, and remember how their great Grandame Eve was deceived, and by
whom, even by the Grand Criminator.

The Good Doctor seems to answer an Objection, Page 64.
that the great expense of time in preparing Medicines will keep them from this
course; and his answer is, that a Physician needs not to spend much more than
half an hour in a day one with another on this work, and may faster dispense
them, than Apothecaries to Hospitals, who in an afternoon can provide for an
hundred or two hundred sick persons, and carry them, and dispose them, etc.

Now how this humor of vapouring should suit with his extraordinary care of
preparing Medicines for the Good of his Patients, I am to seek.

But possibly the Good Doctor may think I speak without book, and therefore may
sooth himself up in his imaginary confidence, what he can do in that half hour.
I shall therefore herein refer him to that gentleman of his own faculty,
Accompl. Ph. who in his Page 54, 55, etc. Has heartily recited the
Inconveniences and Impossibilities of it, -- which are too large for me to
insert here, though they be worth the perusing.

But grant that such a thing might be done in so short a time (which is a thing
absolutely impossible for the Worthy Doctor to compass) does he purpose to cure
his Patients as they do in Hospitals, and Alms houses? this will male audire.
Such Patients as you desire, Good Doctor, will not be willing to part with
their Fees for an Hospital Cure.

Another Objection which the Doctor seems to answer is, that the Apothecaries
rail at this course which is undertaken by this Good Doctor, and say it will
undo them. His answer to this is that if needs one or other must be ruined,
it is more reasonable that the Apothecary should suffer than the Physician -- ]
To this I reply, that if there be a necessity that one or other must be ruined,
then certainly it is but consonant to reason and impartial Justice suum cuique
tribuere, (that the Saddle may be set upon the right horse) that the first
Machinator of the designed mischief and Artifice be the person fittest to
suffer. -- Nec enim lex justior ulla est, quam necis artifices art perire sua.
There will not need any great inquisition about the person entitled to it:
neither can the Apothecary say, Coram quem quaeritis adsum. But however I hope
that there may be some Medium of Reconciliation whereby neither one or other
may be ruined, We must forget and forgive; For when we have done all by
Criminating and Recriminating, bonas horas male collocando, 't will come to
this point at last; as Aeneas to his Father Anchises, Quo res cunque cadent
unum and commune periclum, Virgil Aeneid. 2.

Vna salus ambobus erit.


Both Societies are Embarked in one Bottom, so as if one sink, the other is not
like to expect much safety. And there may be some people possibly in the world,
so ill natured, that whilst we are at this feud and difference amongst our
selves, may clap their hands and cry, Eja Socrates, eja Xantippe, fight dog,
fight bear; Therefore under favor I conceive, it will be the great joint
interest of both Societies to preserve and maintain each others welfare in
their several respective Capacities, -- Alterius sic
altera poscit opem --


For in sum that the Physician of himself without the assistance of the
Apothecary should pretend to the compounding, and administering of Medicines to
the Patient, or that the Apothecary of his own head, in any case of danger or
difficulty, should dare to undertake the Cure of the Patient without consulting
the Physician, I conceive that nor one nor other of them does therein discharge
the duty incumbent upon them; neither can they expect, in any probability, much
good success, which otherwise by their joint compliance they might, Vt quae non
prosint singula, juncta juvent.

Then he proceeds yet further and tells you, Page 65.
that the Apothecaries will undo all the Chemists in London, and possibly ruin
the Corporation of Destillers of strong waters, Drougists, and what not?] To
which I answer, That the Good Doctor, because he fears all his former Chaff
will not catch old Birds, nor that by all his Chanting he shall be able to
deceive sober discreet persons, will therefore Vlterius progredi, he will call
in for more help, he will omnem movere lapidem, leave no stone unturned, that
may make for the ruining of the Apothecaries. In order to which now he calls in
for further assistance Chemists, Strong watermen, Drougists, and tells them a
tale of a Tub, thinking thereby to make his own tale good, and to bring an
Odium upon the Company, but let his own turn be served, and then he will tell
them another tale also. And then if he can Polyphemus like, of whom the Poets,
Antro suo includere, get them into his clutches, all the favor that they may
expect from him, is no other, than what Ulysses should have found, or could
hope for from that Cyclops, who having devoured several of his Companions
reserved him for his last bit. But foelix quem faciunt --

Now he comes to threaten those Gentlemen of Page 6^
his own faculty, who do not comply with him in his design (for he finds yet
but a small appearance of Compliers) and tells them (contrary to all good
manners, and ingenuity) that, Nothing but laziness, ignorance or want of will
to do good for the sick, can hinder them from complying.] I shall not presume
to say much to this (having given some small hint of it in the beginning) but
that (whatever these Gentlemen, not willing to discover the nakedness and
rudeness of their Colleague, think fit de industria to pass by) I must persuade
my self, that if that eloquent Orator Cicero had been alive and to plead for
those aspersed Colleagues in such a case, he would not have stuck to say, Non
feram, non patiar, non sinam, as once to Catiline. But yet the Good Doctor
presses home toward the close with his menacing his Colleagues, viz. But those
Physicians, that for reasons cannot, nor will not take this course, are to be
admonished (delphinem natare docebit.) to do here as the Physicians did in
France, for the good of the people, viz. to tell the Patients the prices of
their Medicines, and to write their Bills in English etc.] Cui bono? What will
the Good Doctor gain by that? Manum de tabula -- Hands off Good Doctor! Not too
much upon that string, if you love your own interest. But let me mind the
Doctor of what one of the Learned Physicians of France, Renodaeus, advises,
in his Institut. Pharmaceut. lib. 4. cap. 3 de arcan. celand. whereto relation
may be had. But what cares the Good Doctor for all that? Rather than not be
revenged on the Philistin Apothecary, he will be as valiant as Sampson, and do
his utmost to pull the fabric down upon his own head, as well as upon his
enemies, and to sacrifice his own life in the ruins. Brave, Heroic, Roman
valor! What cares he for his life, so he may but do his Countrymen and
Mankind good, and withal be revenged on the uncircumsised Apothecary, the
Common Enemy, as he terms him, for the loss of his Eyes? And indeed the Good
Doctor may possibly be oculis (vel saltem mente) captus, he has taken his mark
so much amiss, and may find hereafter by experience, that when he undertook
this task, of Raking, as he calls it, into the faults of Apothecaries, he took
a wrong Sow by the Ear, as we use to say in plain English.

As for any Arcanum of the Physicians own preparation, I conceive the Company
have not to object against it, if it be not prepared and made use of de
industria to confine the Patient to his own Apothecary, or to divert the
Patient from such an Apothecary as he desires; Nor can I believe that any
ingenious Apothecary entrusted with such an Arcanum will require much profit
from any other brother Apothecary, that may have occasion to make use of it.
However I am not of the opinion that a Physician is, or can be, obliged to make
use of any such Apothecary, as he finds just exceptions against, and can make
it appear by falsifying his prescript, or other manifest neglect, but rather
conceive that the Physicians liberty may possibly reduce such an Apothecary to
his duty and make him honest. For how can the Physician expect, that (though
himself prescribe the best and most proper Remedies, that upon mature
consideration he can) if the Apothecary be not honest and conscientious, as
well as able, to make use of such Ingredients as are sound, and carefully
prepared, or for lucre use such things as are exolete, or decayed, how can (I
say) the Physician expect any good success out of such a shop for his Patients
recovery. But such declining of an Apothecary I suppose the Physician ought to
have good grounds for, and to have withal the Patients assent in it, if the
Apothecary be one, whom the Patients themselves make choice of. And as for the
high Language that some others have used against the Apothecaries, if their
intentions be only to restrain the Apothecaries from the Professed customary
practicing of Physic, which some of them seem to intimate, I shall not be
willing to take cognizance of it. But yet good Language provokes not; and soft
fire makes sweet Malt, as we say, Flectitur obsequio curvatus ab arbore ramus.

Nor can I judge it reasonable that an Apothecary, who is entrusted with any
Arcanum from a Physician, should to the prejudice of the Inventor communicate
this without his consent to any other person, and thereby become a failer of
trust, which amongst the rest is one of the Crimes laid to his charge.

And now having with what modest, calm and plain English I could, endeavored
to vindicate the aspersed Company, I intended to have struck off; but that I
find some other Pamphlets of the Good Doctor's flying abroad, amongst which I
observe that his reply to H.S. casts more dirt upon the Company of
Apothecaries, which I shall endeavor to wipe off in a word or two before I
leave him. The Good Doctor would fain make the world believe, that the Company
of Apothecaries combined with H.S. to asperse the Royal Society.

Now he is upon a new Stratageme, on purpose to create new Enemies to the
Company. If he cannot compass his ends one way he will try another; Sinon-like,
of whom it is reported in order to the bringing in of the Trojan Horse, that he
was, -- In utrumque paratus, Virg. Aeneid. 2.

Seu versare dolos, sen --


But we have an English Proverb concerning such Persons as are never quiet, but
itching still to prosecute new Ambages, and crafty insinuations whereby to
traduce their honest Neighbors, viz. That they have as many tricks as a
Dancing Horse, -- Hoc mihi juris
Cum venia dabitis. Horat. l. 1. Sat. 4.
--


(pardon my homely expression.) And then the ardent advice of Laocoon may not
be unseasonable, -- Equo ne credit Teucri.

For I can assure those Gentlemen that the Good Doctor is wholly mistaken in
that point. Haud incerta cano; I speak not by conjecture, but knowingly, as we
say. Quid Romae faciam? Mentiri nescio. And if these bare words will not gain
belief, then that which is reported of that Sinon, that astute, subtle Greek,
that he should utter, as the eloquent Poet has it, ficto pectore, the
Vindicator, this silly Ignorant soul, as the Doctor is pleased to style him,
speaks in the simplicity and integrity of his heart, -- Nec quamvis miserum
fortuna Sinonem
Finxit, vanum etiam Mendacemque Improba finget.


Though his condition were never so despicable, the world shall not be able to
tax, or implead him of venting any untruths, such as in his conscience he is
convinced to be so, nor was it ever his ill fortune to be counted a Liar,
though the Good Doctor has concluded the whole Tribe so to be. But this his
faithful asseveration, he hopes, may be sufficient to any Candid and Ingenious
Person, to wipe off that Calumny of the Doctor's, and to clear the Company of
Apothecaries, from any such Combination against the Royal Society.

But to proceed a little further; Something else I find in that Reply of the
Good Doctor's, which he quotes out of Horace, to render the Apothecaries still
more vile. Projecta vilior alga, he is in the Doctor's account. I find them,
says he, ranked with the basest of men; Ambubaiarum Collegia, Pharmacopolae.

Ambubaiarum, that is a hard Word (Good Doctor,) Page 63.
able to puzzle a man that is not book-learn'd, as the Doctor tells them he is
able to do. But let that pass, I Will venture at it. But first (Doctor) let us
lose none of our good Company. Solamen miseris --. What are the rest which
follow in the next verse, Horat. 1 Sermon. Sat. 2.
Mendici, Mimae, Balatrones --

For we are all Neighbors, Beggars, Bawds and Balatroones. And if so, then let
me mind the Good Doctor, Tunc tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet.

When your Neighbors house is on fire, then Medice Cura teipsum, it is high
time to look to your own, and to take care of your own affairs, Good Doctor. If
the Apothecary march in the Van, then it is but reason that some other Person
should have the honor to bring up the Rere, and what person more fit for that
than such a one, who propter balatum and vaniloquentiam, for his bawling and
chanting may be justly entitled to it? The Good Doctor seconds the Satirical
Poet with a passage out of the famous and most eloquent Orator Cicero pro A.
Cluentio, who made mention of a Pharmacopola Circumforaneus, who poisoned a
Citizens wife of Rome, and ran away: but he was no Roman. Yet let me tell the
Doctor thus much, by his Good favor, that neither the Pharmacopolae mentioned
by Horace, nor yet the Pharmacopola Circumforaneus mentioned by Cicero, which
he also quotes here, can in any rational man's apprehension be construed to be
Pharmacopoeus, the shop-Apothecary, but rather some Common Mountebanks, that
made it their Trades circumforare, to go from one good Market Town to another,
and there to mount the Stage to deceive the people, si populus vult decipi; Nor
possibly may they be without their Troops of Pipers and Fiddlers and Tinkers
Trulls and Gypsies to follow the Camp, such as the Good Doctor has ranked with
them in the Van. Further, Cicero says, But he was no Roman, and by
consequence, or in all probability, no Apothecary, which acted that Venesical
Moeris's part upon a Citizen's wife of Rome. But, Has herbas, Virg. Eclog. 8
atque haec Ponto mihi lecta Venena
Ipse dedit Moeris. --


Further I observe, that the Good Doctor, in one of his late pieces, beggs
pardon of all Learned men, especially those of his own Art, that he has
condescended so low, as to cope with such unworthy Adversaries, hoping that his
Zeal for his Profession may excuse him.] (I wish he were not a greater Zealot
for kindling Coals! I suppose the fire might have been extinguished before
this, had it not been for his bellows.) It Is true, Aquila non captat Muscas,
nec capit Elephantus mures. The Eagle soars aloft, and catches not at flies,
and this high-flown Doctor thinks it a great disparagement and much below him
to contend with such contemptible adversaries, the spawn and refuse of all. But
Good Doctor, Nec sum adeo informis. -- Nec omnium dierum Pharmacopoeis
occiderunt Soles. They are no such despicable creatures as this Doctor would
make them. I am sure they are not so reputed in Foreign parts, nor have been
so charactered abroad; they are numbered there amongst the Chief Magistrates and
Citizens, as Bartholomaeus Maranta, that Learned and Famous Physician of
Naples, in his Dedication of his Commentary of Theriaca and Mithridate to
Ferdinandus Imperatus then Apothecary of the same place (which I hinted before)
witnesses. So also Learned Schroeder, before his Pharmacopoeia Medico-Chymica
(than which there is not, I conceive, a more Polite and Candid piece extant
upon that Subject,) I say, this Physician (who was Archiater, Physician in
Chief to the Republic of Franckford) did not disdain to consecrate (as he
terms it,) that his piece to the Apothecaries of that place, whom he is
pleased to mention nominatim, and to style them in the front of an Epistle to
them before his book, not dishonourably. I could name others of the same
nature, as Petrus Vffenbachius one other of the Chief Physicians of Franckford,
in his Prooemium to the publication of Renodoeus's Dispensatory, and
Quercetan's; with some others, but I pass them.

But it is probable the Good Doctor did not think any body durst be so Bold and
Saucy, as to question any thing that came from him, being A Fellow of the
College (for he bears himself up still upon that foundation, as page 31. of
his Reply to H. S. where he says, All civil men of the faculty would have
thought, a Fellow of the College his affirmation had been sufficient enough
against a practicing Apothecary without putting the Case at all.] A Complete
piece of Justice! Great Pompey like with his high Language in the Senate House,
Plutarch.
Si solum pede pulsavero, plenam exercitibus totam reddam Italiam. So the Good
Doctor if he do but stamp on the ground with his foot, nay, if he do but say
the word, it is argument enough (nemine contradicente) to silence the poor
Potecary, and to have a whole Army of Physicians at his beck. And what I pray,
notwithstanding his grandiloquy in the Senate House, was that Great Pompey's
end? After his utter defeat at the Pharsalian battle, flying into Egypt to
Ptolemy for refuge, Mortui non mordent, put an end to his days. But he tells
you, Examples enough may be shown physicians so doing. I believe, Good Doctor,
you forget your self, and therein asperse the Honorable College, who have
more Candor and Ingenuity in them than to assume any such unlimited power,
which no law does, or can allow. And I fear you will be at a loss to produce
any one such Example; and if you should be able to produce it, I must take the
boldness to tell you, that it would prove little better than Apocrypha at best:
Take therefore in answer to yours, One Example, for all, out of Sacred
Authentic Record, which will hold water, when yours shall not, and it is this.
If the Idumean Prince (for so it appears in Sacred Writ that he was the
greatest man in all the East) thought it a Crime of a high nature, and such as
might bring a just Judgment from heaven upon him, to despise the cause of his
Manservant, Job 31.13.
or his Maidservant, when they had any difference, or contended with him, what
will this Good Doctor, or those few that comply with him (who are some degrees
lower than Princes) do, when God shall rise up? and when he visits what will
they answer him? Did not he that made one in the womb make the other? and did
not one fashion them both in the womb? And as one of the Greek heathen Poets,
Aratus, could not but affirm, (...). For we are also his offspring. Lay this
seriously to heart good Doctor, Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere
Divos. Virg. Aeueid. 6.


And therefore 'twas a Good Caution, that a Gentleman of your own faculty
gives; Acc. Phy. Page 88.
That Physicians should not usurp any Authority, or Majestic Commands over the
Apothecary, other than of prescribing, directing and informing what is
necessary for the good of the Patient, and consequently to esteem them as free
Tradesmen. Indeed some such healing Language as this might happily conduce to
some right understanding, but to Rant and Chant, as this Good Doctor has done,
and for ought I can gather will do in insinitum, what may we expect, or what
may we not expect rather? For we still see new Hydra's heads pullulating from
the same stock: therefore we desire to know, in what Olympiad, or in what year
of our Lord we may hope for an end of the Good Doctor's abusive language.
Quousque tandem abutere --? (As that Eloquent Cicero, Or at. in Catil.) Quo te
Moeri pedes? Whither will the Good Doctor run? It is high time I conceive,
(Good Doctor) to sit down and be reconciled.

Jam satis terris nivis, atque dirae
Grandinis --
but he is at liberty.

As to the Good Doctors being pleased in his late piece to make himself merry
in putting the Wittall and Cuckold so facetiously upon the Apothecaries, I
shall not give either him, or my self any trouble to answer, but shall leave it
to the Learned Pen of some Good Apothecaries Physician, as he terms them,
(whose joint concern it is) and who may better know how to treat the Doctor,
but all in some convenient time. In the interim let the good Doctor enjoy
himself in that his mirth. For which his piece of Merry Drollery I wish him a
Merry New Year, and that is all the harm I wish him.

I shall conclude this my discourse with a passage out of that Learned, and
famous Physician of Paris, Renodoeus, in his Institut. Phamaceutic. Lib. 2.
Cap. 2. De praeparat. differentiis. Where having treated of several Chemical
preparations he proceeds thus. Verum relictis, etc. But leaving the Chemical
preparations, which it is often better to know, than to try, or experiment, let
us pursue the wonted preparations of Medicines, and the wholesome Remedies of
the princes of Physicians, which every body may with security and without fear
of danger make use of for the expelling of diseases, and the preserving of
health. Of which sort are such as are daily, openly, and before all men's eyes
prepared by the Apothecaries: and are either for present occasion, or for some
longer time kept in their shops. For of these as the necessity of the exigent
occasion requires, the Physician one while makes choice of these Remedies,
another while of those, and how much, and how prepared may be convenient for
the driving away of this or that disease, he prescribes. Non vero parat, neque
praebet. But he prepares them not, nor administers them to the Patient, but the
trusty and honest Apothecary, who is therefore called the Physicians Hand. He
proceeds on. For so (says he) it is safer for a man to commit his health and
life to two than to one single person, Who whilst he alone prescribes,
prepares, and administers the Medicines, as he has the power of life and death
in his own hands, so he often kills, and yet is unpunished. Which thing seeing
it is so Impious, or Wicked, the Apothecary must of necessity be instituted or
appointed, who may after the accustomed manner prepare Medicines, and keep them
for future uses, as well as for present occasions.

Whether then these few and modest Animadversions of the Vindicator may not be
construed to speak truth and plain English, according to the promise of the
Author, and whether the Apothecary, who is not the Prescriber, be not the more
fit and safe person to be entrusted to prepare and administer what is
prescribed, than the Physician who is the Prescriber himself, and by
consequence, whether the Good Doctor's Only Remedy may turn to any good
account, he humbly submits to the judgment of the Ingenious, and Impartial
Reader.

Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli. FINIS.

