A Chronologicall History of the KINGS of FRANCE By the Sieur de Mezeray.

Translated by John Bulteel Gent.



A General Chronological HISTORY OF FRANCE, Beginning before the Reign of King
PHARAMOND, And ending with the Reign of King HENRY the Fourth:

Containing both the Civil and the Ecclesiastical Transactions of that Kingdom.

By the Sieur DE MEZERAY, Historiographer of France.

Translated by John Bulteel, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Thomas Basset, Samuel Lowndes, Christopher
Wilkinson, William Cademan, and Jacob Tonson. 1683.

TO THE Most Illustrious Prince JAMES Duke of York, etc.
SIR,
WHen this Chronicle of France thus confidently intrudes under Your Royal
Highnesses Roof, it arrogates no other Pretense for so bold an Approach, but
that they are Crowned Heads that make it; And there it is, that these Royal
Strangers, the Kings of France, may find the Hospitality of an English Court,
and by gaining an Access to a Goodness and Greatness so equally Illustrious,
obtain not only Your favorable Reception, but also Your Royal Protection. The
History of their Reigns is a noble Subject, and the Compiler of it, so
Judicious an Author, that if the Ingenious are believed, (...) may be Ranked
amongst the most Eminent Historians. Were I Master of such a Pen, I might
adventure to mention Your Royal Highnesses just Praise, a Theme too lofty for
my grovelling Quill, though perhaps it were but a needless Task, since the loud
Cannon has Proclaimed Your Valor sufficiently on the Sea, as Your Prudent
Administration of the Government in Scotland has evidenced Your Excellent
Conduct at Land, while Your more familiar Virtues are attested by all that ever
had the Honor to Reside within the Verge of the Court, or have been placed in
the Sunshine of Your Favor, the smallest Ray whereof would satisfy my
greatest Ambition: But having no Title to such a Blessing in the least, I may
wish, but cannot hope ever to attain it. Wherefore I shall only beg Your Royal
Highnesses Pardon for this Zealous Presumption, and descend to my own Place,
contented to be owned at Your Feet,

Your Royal Highnesses Most humble and most Devoted Servant, John Bulteel.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
YOU have in this Volume the History of the Kings of France traced up so high
to the very Nonage of Empire, even to the obscurest Annals of Time; like the
Head of Nile from the Mountains of the Moon: as far upwards* as even the
faintest Light from Record, or almost Fable could lead: and from thence derived
down through the whole Succession of their Kings, even to the end of the Reign
of Henry IV. in the year 1610. a descent of LXII Crowned Heads.

This History upon Crossing the Narrow Seas, and Traveling into England,
assumes the Habit of the Country it Visits, and comes dressed a Britain.

But to satisfy the Reader to what Original Hand we owe this Excellent
Labored Piece, the Author is the famous Mezeray of France, a Person living to
this very day: and to manifest all his Qualities and Perfections that might
render him to the World both a faithful and an accurate Historian; In the first
place, he is a Gentleman of that Birth, and Fortunes, that he Writes not the
Lives of Kings for his Bread from Kings, not like too many of those unhappy
Chroniclers, whose humble Station under that servile Fate Dependence, makes
them too often rather play the Panegyrists then the Historians, whilst Truth
from such Discovers is too often warpt into So^thing and Flattery.

Secondly, Though by (...), yet he values himself upon the honor of an
Historian, not an Enthusiast; he consults not the Conclave when he Characters
the King; nor Shadens or Brightens the Diadem in favor of the Miter, a fault
too common in the World; but with that Indifference, yet Boldness withal,
that is requisite to render the Truth naked; he Writes like a Gentleman, not a
Bigot.

And thirdly, Not to offend in another as gross, or grosser fault then all
these, an Error amongst too many Chronologers, viz. the Flattery of his Native
Country; he Paints not beyond the Life, but makes Vprightness and Impartiality
the Standards he moves by, and Writes the Annals of France, for the Reading of
Christendom.

And for his Personal Knowledge, Learning, and Parts, he has the Universal Fame
of all Men to be highly the best of all his Countrymen, that ever wrote on this
Subject. With these Advantages and Accomplishments in so Renowned an Author,
this Piece appears in England. For 'its for these only Charms that the
Translator of this Book could not see so much Excellence confined to its own
Native Country and the bounds of Home, and forbear stepping out for its
Interpreter, to make it visit the World abroad.

What Esteem it may find, time only will produce, but that it may want nothing
to render it acceptable, the Translator has labored to do Justice to so
deserving an Original, and has rendered it so Englisht, as may obtain an
Entertainment abroad answerable to its Reception at home. The success of which
lies wholly in the Approbation of all ingenious Readers, in whose good Hands, I
leave it to its own good Fortune.

Farewell.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE General History OF FRANCE.
THE Romans gave the Name of Gaul to that Extent of Lands, which lies between
the Alps and the Pireneans, the Mediterranean, the Ocean, and the Rhine: at
present, excepting the Low Countries, and some others, which for the most part,
hold of the German Empire, It is named France, from the name of the French, who
subdued it under their Power. Julius Caesar had completed the Conquest of it
about 48 years before the Birth of JESUS CHRIST; So that when the French had
perfectly settled themselves, it had been almost Five Ages under the Laws of
that Empire.

Now without reckoning those Countries the Gauls had Conquered between the
Alps, from those Mountains, to the little River of Rubicon Pisatello*
and which was named Gallia Cisalpina, in respect of the Romans: It was divided
first by Augustus, into Four Parts, Gallia Narbon^ensis, which they named
Province, because they had (...) first, and reduced it into a Province; Gallia
Aquitania, Gallia Celtica, and Gallia Belgica: To these three last they gave
the name of Gallia Comata; and when they said absolutely Gaul, they understood
the Celtica. Then by succession of Time, and under diverse Emperors, it was
again divided into Seventeen Provinces, that is Five Viennensis, of which
number was the Narbonneusis Prima and Secunda; Three Aquitani; Five
Lugdunensis, if we comprehend the Sequani; Four Belgicae, whereof Two were
called Germanic^e, because some German People had inhabited there for a long
time; and Two Belgic^e, properly so called.

Each of these Provinces had its Metropolis, viz. the Five Viennoises, Vienne,
Narbone, Aix, Tarentai^e, and Embrun; the Three Aquitains, Bourges, Bourdeaux,
and Saulse: the Five Lyonnoi^es, Lions, Rouen, Tours, Sens, and Besanson; the
Two Germanick, Ments and Colen; the Two Belgic, Treves and Rheims,

Under these Seventeen Metropolitans, there were above an hundred Cities and
Towns that were the Chief of the rest, in which the Church did afterward place
their Episcopal Sees: Under these Cities, there were yet a greater number of
other Towns, which they called Oppida; they reckoned Twelve hundred, which were
Walled in when the Romans conquered Gaul; but they broke down the Enclosures of
most of them, or let them run to ruin.

As for the Government of these Seventeen Provinces, six of them were
Consulary, and Eleven were under Presidents, sent by the Emperor. Constantine
the Great placed Counts in the Cities, and Dukes in some of the Frontier Towns:
their Laws were according to the Roman Rights, only withal, as I believe, some
Municipal Customs they had preserved. They were little vexed with the Soldiers,
because the Legions, even to a great part of the Fourth Age, lived in good
order, and besides, there were hardly any but in the Frontier Provinces: But
the Country being Good and Rich, and the People extremely submissive, they
were laden with all sorts of Exactions; so that their plenty begot their
misery, and their Obedience aggravated their Oppression.

An. 330. When Constantine the Great divided the Office of Praefectus Praetorio
into Four, Gaul had one, who had Three vicars under him, one in Gaul it self,
one in Spain, and one in Great Britain: the First that held this Office, was
the Father of Saint Ambrose, bearing the same Name as his Son; This Prefect
ordinarily resided in the City of Treves; which for that reason was the Capital
of Gaul, till having been four times Sacked by the Barbarians; the Emperor
Honorius would needs transfer this Prerogative to the City of Arles, which was
afterward dismembered, and cut off from Vienne, and became the Eighteenth
Metropolis.

From Augustus to Galienus, the Peace of these Provinces was not disturbed, but
only by two Revolts* that of Sacrouir and Florus, in the 23 year of JESUS
CHRIST, and that of Civilis Tutor, and Classicus, much more dangerous in An.
70. After the death of the Emperor Decius, the Barbarians began to torment them
by frequent Incursions. The first hundred years there were none but the French
and the Almans that made any on this side the Rhine; but afterward the
mischief increased by the Devastations, and horrible irruptions of the Vandals,
the Alains, Burgundians, Sueves, Visigoths and Huns, which never ended, but by
the ruin of the Western Empire*

As to the Original of the French, the common opinion is, that they are
naturally Germans, and that France is a Name, which in their Language,
signifies Fre^, or as others say, Wild, and Untameable. Indeed the Authors of
the Third and Fourth Age, by the Name of Germans, do almost ever understand or
mean, the French. For the time wherein they first began to appear, it was
exactly two years after the great Decius* in Mesia, which happened in the year
254. by the Goths, and other People of Scythia; the Goths had not begun to make
themselves known, till about Twelve years before, when they came out of their
own Country, (which was the Scythia Europ^ea, between Pontus Euxinus and the
Tanais) to ravage the Provinces of the Empire: they were divided into
Ostrogoths and Visigoths, which is to say, according to some, Eastern-Goths,
and Western-Goths.

After that Defeat, all the Enclosures of the Roman Empire being broken down,
and laid open on that side, a Torrent of all sorts of Barbarians rouled in upon
them, of whom till then no mention had been made; For this reason therefore
amongst others, and likewise because the French had much of the Manners and
Customs of the Scythians, (as to use Bows and Arrows, exercising themselves in
Hawking, and having many Dukes or Cans) one may conjecture that they are
originally Scythians. But it is not possible, and it (...) no purpose to tell
certainly of what part, because the Scythians were all Vagabon^s, and would now
be in one place, and in a very short time after, would be removed two or three
hundred Leagues from their former Habitation.

An. 256. under the Empire of Gallus and Volusian, when they passed the Rhine
near Mentz, and that Aurelian, who was then but Tribune of a Legion, slew 700
of them in a rencounter, and took 300 Prisoners, who were sold by Outcry*

After this first irruption, nigh 180 years passed before they conquered, or
obtained, by request from the Romans, some Lands in Gaul* viz. in the Countries
of Colen, Tongres, Country of Liege* a Kempen in Brabant.
and some neighboring Territory, which happened about the year 416* There had
some Bands of them lodged themselves in a Toxandria, in the days of Julian the
Apostate, toward the year 358* but it is not known whether they were suffered
to take root there.

During those two Ages, they continued their Incursions with various success,
always retiring into Germany with their Plunder; they possessed the most part
of the Lands which lie between the Mein and the Rhine, the Weser and the Ocean,
sometimes more, sometimes less, extended according as they were stronger or
weaker, and were pressed upon by other Nations, especially by the Almans, from
toward the Mein, and the Saxons from the Seaside.

These last coming from the Country, named at this present, Holstein, seized
upon Frisia, and the Maritime Countries on this side the Elbe: then as the
French inhabited Gaul more and more, they in equal proportions got the most
part of those Lands, which they had held beyond the Rhine.

The French Nation was divided into several People, the Frisii great and East
Frisia*
North Holland.
little, Zealand.
Salii, Bishopric of Munster.
Bructeri, Bish. of Osnabrug.
A^grivari, Duchy of Westphalia.
Chamavi, Hesse.
Sicambri, and g Catti; they had besides, as I believe, many more of their
Alliance, and several also under their Dominion.

Oftentimes the Romans went to attaque them in their Woods, and in their Fens,
and thought two or three times to have destroyed them, particularly Constantine
the Great, but they always sprung up again.

They had several Chiefs, or Commanders, Kings, Princes, Dukes, or Generals,
who had no absolute Authority, but in time of War.

Sometimes they became stipendaries to the Romans, sometimes their Subjects,
but as soon as times changed* and they found any opporunity to plunder, they
held themselves no longer obliged by former Treaties. It is for this reason the
Authors of those times accused them of Levity, of Leasing, and Treachery. But
on the other hand it is confessed, that they were the most warlike of all the
Barbarians, of great Humanity, Hospitality, and a People that had a great deal
of Wit and Sense. Very often they had some that served the Empire, and others
at the same time that made War against them. We find many of them in all those
times that were raised to the Dignities of Consul, Patrician, Master of the
Militia, Great Treasurer, and the like; insomuch as they Governed in the Courts
of many Emperors, Theodosius's, in that of Honorius, and in Valentinian's the
III. Emp. Arcadius and Honorius in their 5th year, 406.


The last day of the year 406. the Alains, and the Vandals, bringing along with
them the Burgundians, the Sueves, and diverse other barbarous People, passed the
Rhine, and made an irruption in Gaul, the most terrible that had been ever
known.

Some conjecture it was at this time that they Massacred St. Ursula, and her
Glorious Train, which have been called the Eleven thousand Virgins, though in
the Tombs, said to belong to those Martyrs, were found the Bones of Men and
Children; there are three or four different opinions on this Matter, but
neither of them without such difficulties attending, as are not to be solved.

Emp. Honorius, and Theodosius II. Son of Arcadius, 408. in May.
Those Barbarians having ravaged all Germania Prima, and Belgica Secunda, fell
upon Aquitain. In the year 409. some numbers of the Vandals and Sueves marched
from thence into Spain; Two years after the rest being affrighted upon the
coming of Ataulphus, King of the Visigoths out of Italy, took the same course,
and followed them. However, there were some Alains still remaining in Dauphine,
and about the River Loire, who had Kings amongst them for above Threescore
years; but in the end, they submitted to the Dominion of the Visigoths, and the
Burgundians.

Vandals and the Sueeves possessed Galicia; the Silingi and Betica; and the
Alani, part of Lusitania, of Provence, and Carthagenia: Sixteen years
afterward, the Vandals passed over into Africa; but in the mean while, Vallia,
King of the Visigoths, who fought for the Romans, utterly rooted out the
Silingi, and weakened the Alani so much, that being unable to subsist alone,
they put themselves under Gunderic, King of the Vandals. The Suevi maintained
themselves almost two Ages in Spain. In fine, their Kingdom was likewise
extinguished by Leuvilgildus, King of the Visigoths, in the year 588.

All these Barbarians were divided in several Parties, or Bands, and had each
their Chief, running about and scowring the Countries without intermission; so
that at the same instant there were several of the same People in Places far
distant from one another, and of contrary Interests.

Ann. 408. Stilicon, who was accused for bringing them in, is Massacred, by
order of Honorius. Alaric, King of the Visigoths his good friend, to revenge
his Death, besieged the City of Rome three times, and the last time he takes it
by Treachery, the 20th day of August, in the year 410. About the end of the
same year he dies in Calabria, near Cosentia, while he was making himself ready
to go into Africa. Ataulphus his Cousin succeeded him; and Married Placid ia,
Sister to the Emperor Honorius, whom he had taken in Rome.

Ann. 412. Ataulphus goes into Gallia Narbonnensis, and takes Narbonna; he
remained there but Three years. The Count and Patrician Constantius, who was
since Emperor, and Married his Widow Placidia, compelled him t^ go into
Spain, where he Barcelonna, about the Month of September, Ann. 415. They
elected Sigeric in his stead, and served him after the same manner within Seven
days. Vallia his Successor was recalled into Gaul by Constantius, who gave him
Aquitania Secunda, with some Cities of the neighboring Provinces, amongst
others Thoulouse, where Ann. 419. But he dyed in a few Months afterward, and
Theodoric succeeded him. Under this King and under Evaric or Euric, the
Visigoths made themselves Masters of all the Three Aquitani, and the Two
Narbonnensis.

Church.
Hitherto very few of the French had received the Light of the Gospel, they yet
Gauls were most of them Christians unless it were such as dwelt in places less
accessible, as the Mountainous, Woody, and Boggy Countries; or in the Germanick
or Belgic Territories, which were perpetually infested by the incursions of
the Barbarians. The Faith had been Preached to them by some Disciples of the
Apostles, and even from the Second Age, or Century, diverse Churches established
amongst the Gauls, at least in the Narbonnensis, and Lugdunnensis Prima. Under
the Emperor Decius, about the year 250. there were diverse Holy Preachers sent
from Rome, who planted other Churches in several parts; as Saturninus at
Thoulouse, Gatian at Tours, Denis at Paris, Austremonius at Clermont, and
Martial at Limoges. The persecutions of the Heathen Emperors had sorely shaken
them: Constantine re-assured them, afterward the incursions of the Barbarians
again destroys them, especially those in Germania, and Belgica, and the Arian
Heresy much troubled those in Aquitania: Clowis restores them, and endowed
them plentifully.

In the fourth Age, the Gallican Church produced a great number of Holy
Bishops; above all, Hilary, Bishop of Poitiers, an invincible Defender of the
Holy Trinity; Maximin and Paulin de Treves, who maintained the same Cause, and
at the same time with him, the Great St. Martin of Tours, parallel to the
Apostles. Liboire du Man's, Severinus of Colen, Victricius of Rouen, all four
contemporaries, Servais de Tongres, elder by some years, and Exuperius de
Toulouse, who lived yet in 405.

About the middle of the same Age, many of those that had Devoted themselves to
God, came from toward Italy, to inhabit in the Islands of Provence, and the
Viennensian Mountains; as likewise a while afterward, great numbers flocked
out from Ireland, and took up their stations in the Forests of the Lyonnoises
and the Belgicks. Their example, and a Zeal to that Holy Profession, drew many
People, either to come into their Monasteries, or dwell in Solitude; but still
under the Conduct of the Bishops, and the Discipline of the Canons. Of these
there were principally Four sorts; such as lived in Community, those were
called Cenobites; such as having formerly lived so, retired into Solitude,
aspiring to a greater perfection, these were the Hermits, or Anchorits; such as
associated in small companies, of three or four in a knot, without any
Superior, or any certain Rule; and such as wandered all about the Country, on
pretense of visiting Holy Places, and finding out such Persons as were most
advanced in Piety. There were some also that strictly confined themselves to a
Cell, either within some City, or in the Desert, they were called Incluses, or
Recluses; all lived by the labor of their Hands, and most of them gave what
they got to the Poor, though in the greatest strictness, they were not obliged
to renounce their Wealth; nor were they excluded from enjoying it, in case they
returned again to the World: but such a return was indeed, looked upon as a
kind of a desertion.

Councils being extreme necessary to preserve the Purity of the Faith, and
Ecclesiastical Discipline; there were several held in Gaul, An. 314. The
Emperor Constantine caused one to be Assembled at Arles, where there were
Deputies from all the Western Provinces, to determine the Disputes of the
Donatists in Africa. There was one at Colen in 346. which condemned Euphratas
the Bishop of that City, who denied the Divinity of Jesus Christ; One at Arles,
in 353. One at Beziers in 356. One at Paris An. 362. All three for the business
of the Arians; The two first were favorable to them against S. Athanasius; the
Third condemned them. One at Valence, in the year 374. about Discipline. One at
Bourdeaux in 385. to whom Priscllians Cause having been referred by the Emperor
Gratian, that Heretic perceiving clearly he was going to be condemned,
appealed to the Tyrant Maximus, but it was to his great misfortune. One at
Treves the year following, where Bishop Itacus was accused for having contrary
to the Spirit of the Church, prosecuted Priscillian and his Abettors to the
death: his Party, or Cabal, caused his bloody proceedings to be approved, which
notwithstanding, were condemned by the most Conscientious Bishops. One at
Turin, An. 397. Upon the desires of the Gallican Bishops, to compose the
differences about Proculus de Marseille, and that of the Bishop of Arles and
Vienne. Proculus pretended to Ordain Bishops in some of the Churches in
Provence, which had been dismembered from his, or himself had instituted; they
allowed him that Honor for himself only: the Bishops of Arles and Vienna
disputed the Right of Metropolitain, it was divided between them by provision.
This Cause having been transferred to the Holy Chair, and judged variously, by
three or four several Popes, was determined by Symmachus, Ann. 513. who
conformably to the Sentence of Leo, adjudged to Vienne, only the Bishoprics of
Valence, Tarentaise, Geneva, and Grenoble, and all the rest to Arles.

Our Margent not allowing room enough to set down all the Popes without
encumbrance, it was thought necessary to place them in the Page with the Kings,
in the same Reigns wherein they sat in the Holy Chair. Though for those of
this Fourth Age; it seems more fit to range them here to the time of Pharamond.
Silvester I. therefore held the Chair from the 1 of February, An. 314. till the
last of December, in the year 336. In the time of his Pope-ship, Constantine
the Great was Converted to the Faith; and the Holy Nicean Council was
Assembled, An. 324. Marcus Governed from the 16th of January following, to the
7th of October of the same year. Julius the I. from the 27th of the same Month,
to the 13th of April, of the year 352. Liberius, from the 8th of May to the 3
of September, in the year 367. Damasius, from the 15th of that Month, to the
11th of December, An. 384. In 381. was the Council of Constantinople. Siricius
was Pope from the 12th of January to the 24th of February, An. 398. Anastasius,
from the 14th of March of the same year, till about the end of April, An. 402.
Innocent I. from the 14th of May, to the 28th of July, in the year 417. And
Zosimus, from the 18th of August, to the 26th of December, An. 418.

The First Race.
Pharamond, King I.
POPES,
BONIFACE in December 418. S. almost Five years. CELESTINE I. The 3 of Nov.
423. S. 8 years 5 Months, whereof Five years in this Reign.
Armoric^e, or Maritime People, (who were those of the coast of Flanders,
Picardy, Normandy, and Bretagne) which happened toward the end of the year 412,
The French King being joined with them, occupied that part of Germania Secunda,
named Ripuaria, and the People Ripuarians* or Ribarols. The Romans by Treaty,
or otherwise, left them the free Possession thereof; and it was a little after
this that Pharamond began to Reign.

Emperor Honorius in his 18th. and Theodosizs 11. in his 5th.
We find in the Historians of those times, that the French had had several
Kings before him, I do not speak of those of the Monk Hunibaud, they being as
Fabulous as the Author; But we find toward the year 288. Genebaud and Atec,
who came to Treves to Demand a Peace of Maximian, An. 307. Ascaric and
Rhadag^ise, whom Constantine took in War, and whom he exposed to wild Beasts,
as a punishment, for that having given their Faith to Constantius his Father,
they had nevertheless taken up Arms again. In the year 374. one Mellobaudes,
who being Grand Master of the Militia, and Count of the Palace to the Emperor
Gratian, flew and vanquished Macrian King of the Almans, and did the Empire
many other Services. About the year 378. one Richemer, who had the like Office
under Gratian, as Mellobaudes. An. 382. One Priam, or Priarius, whom some will
have to be the Father or Grandfather of Pharamond. In the year 397. Marcomir
and Sunnon, Brothers, the first of which, Stilicon banished into Tuscany, and
caused the other to be Massacred by his own People, when he attempted to stir
to Revenge the exile of his Brother. And An. 414, or 415. One Theodemer, Son of
Richemer, who was Beheaded with his Mother Ascila, for having attempted against
the Empire.

Nevertheless, common Opinion has ever begun to reckon the Kings of France
from Pharamond, whether because the preceding ones had never had any fixed
abode in Gaul, or because he re-established the Royalty amongst the French In
effect, it seems the Romans had in some manner subjugated this Nation; and
after the Treatment they had shown to Marcomir, and Sunnon, and Theodemer, they
would no longer suffer them to have any Kings.

Emp. Theodosius 11. and Valentinian Son of Constantius and Placidia, Sister to
Honorius, 423. in August. Reigned 29 years, 6 Months.
418. very remarkable for a great Eclipse of the Sun. It may be doubted,
whether Pharamond be a proper Name, or whether it be only an Epithet, which
signifies, that he was as it were, the Father, and the Stock of the French
Nation: For Pharamond in the German Language, imports Mouth of Generations.

For the manner of the inauguration of the French Kings, the Lords, or Chief
Heads having Elected them, or at least approving them, set them up on a great
Shield or Target, and caused them to be carried into the Field, where the
People were Assembled in Arms, who confirmed this choice with acclamations and
applause. The same Ceremony was practiced for Emperors and Gothish Kings.

The Scottish Historians begin the Kingdom of Scotland, An. 422. with King
Fergus, from whom they derive the succession of their Kings; though withal they
will have us believe, that he only restored it, and that it was first begun or
formed 330 years before the Nativity of JESUS CHRIST; from which time it lasted
till the days of the Tyrant Maximus, who ruined it about the year 378.

Vandals, who had passed out of Gaul into Spain, were from thence called into
Africa by Count Boniface, Revolted against the Empress Placidia: They went
over, to the number of 80000, only under the Conduct of their King Genseric,
and within seven or eight years, drove the Romans totally from thence, and
settled their own Kingdom there.

Romans drive the French beyond the Rhine, and take away the Lands they had
bestowed on them in Gaul, or at least a good part of it. It is not certain
whether this happened in the last year of the Reign of Pharamond, or the First of
that of Clodion.

Pharamond, who by that account had Reigned Ten years. They know not his Acts,
the place of his Burial, the Name of his Wife, nor of his Children, excepting
Clodion, who succeeded him.

An ancient Chronicle gives him the Glory of settling the Salique Law by Four
ancient Lords, and says they labored in it for three Malles or Assizes. It is
called Salique, from the Name of the Saliens, the Noblest of the French People.

Clodion the Hairy, OR Long Locks, King II.
POPES,
CELESTINE I. Three years. SIXTUS III. The 26th of April, 432. S. Eight years.
Hairy, or Long Locks, because in my opinion, he first brought in a custom,
that Kings, and those of their Blood should wear Long Hair, well Combed and
Curled, not only on the top of their Heads, as all the Princes of this Nation
had done before him, but likewise on the hinder part. The rest of the French
had all their Hair cut round, a little beneath their Ears.

Gaul. It is certain that Clodion in the beginning of his Reign, Inhabited
beyond the Rhine, and that he marched over it in the year 431. to make an
irruption, but he was beaten, and driven back by Aetius.

He contained himself some years without undertaking any thing, making his
Residence at the Castle of Disparg, on the other side of the Rhine: but being
informed by his Spies, that there were no Garrisons in the Towns of Belgica
Secunda, he went thither in great diligence with his People, and keeping his
March private by the Forest Charbonniere, which is Haynault, made himself
Master of Bavay and Cambray, and some other adjacent places.

The English Saxons subdue Great Britain* They had been called in by the
natural Inhabitants, who being forsaken by the Romans, had set up Kings of
their own Nation; and those Kings did not find themselves strong enough to
oppose the Picts and the Scots, which were People inhabiting the Mountainous
Countries, now called Scotland. The English gave the name of England to their
Conquest, and set up seven Principalities, of little Kingdoms, which in the end
were United into one.

The Britains, or Inhabitants of Great Britain, being tormented with these
Barbarians, got together in great numbers, and passed into Gallia Armorica: It
was then the Romans, who suffered them to settle in the Country of Vennes, and
Cornualles, and having in process of time, extended themselves to the
Bishopric of Treguier and Leon, and even to the Loire, and the Confines of
Anjou; they gave the Name of Bretagne to that Province, which it retains to
this day.

Burgundians a People of Germany, or Scythia, (for there were of them both in
the one and the other) after they had remained a long time on the borders of
the Rhine in Germania Prima, obtained the Country adjoining to Geneva, of the
Romans: and there multiplied so much in a short time, that they seized on the
Province of Vienne, on that of the Sequani, and of the First Lyonnoise. They
had received the Christian Faith in Ann. 430. by the Preaching of St. Sever,
Bishop of Treves, but some years after they fell into the Arian Heresy.

There were then Five several Dominations in Gaul, the Romans, the French, the
Visigoths the Burgundians, and the Bretons.

Clodion pursuing his Conquests, during the extreme confusion of the affairs of
the ^mpire, received a great check by the valor of Aetius, in the Country of
Artois, near to Vicus Helena, perhaps it is Lens. Nevertheless Aetius having
Artois, and enlarged his Dominion as far as the Soame, having taken the City of
Amiens, which was his Royal Seat, and of Meroveus also.

He likewise sent, says a Modern Author, his eldest Son to besiege the City of
Soissons, where that Prince having lost his Life, the Father was so touched
that he died for Grief, after he had Reigned Twenty years. It was about the end
of the year 447. having before constituted Meroveus Tutor to his Sons.

It is certain he left two; and I find they were named Clodebaud, and Clodomir.
Some of the Moderns give him Three, whom they call Renaud, Auberon* and
Ragnacaire; and from Auberon they make Ansbert the Senator to be descended, and
from Male to Male, Pepin First King of the Second Race. But for Ansbert; others
have proved, that he was issued of the Family of Tonnance Ferreole, Prefect of
the Gauls Pretorian.

Meroveus, or Merovee, King III.
From whom the Kings of the First Race, have taken the Name of Merovignians.
POPE, LEO I. The 10th of May, 440. S. 21 years, 3. in the following Reign.
Clodion, but only of his Kindred. It is said, that his Mother bathing her self
on the Seaside, a Sea-Bull came out of the Water, and made her Pregnant with
this Prince. This Fable seems to be grounded upon the Name, because Mer-veich
signifies a Sea-Calfe.

Now whether he were only Tutor to Clodions Children, or otherwise, the French
Elected him for their King or General Commander. This was in the City of Amiens.

Emp. Valentinian III and Marcian, who Marries Pulcheria, Sister to Theodosia,
in August 450. R. Six years, six Months.
The Children of Clodion having been deprived of the paternal Succession, their
Mother carried them beyond the Rhine: where it seems they disputed amongst
themselves, about that part of their Succession; but in time that came likewise
to Meroveus, we know not how.

After Attilla, King of the Huns, who caused himself to be named the Scourge of
GOD, had pillaged all the Provinces of the Empire in the East, and had killed
his Brother Bleda, to invade his Kingdom: he would likewise needs plunder those
of the West; He crossed the Panonias and Germany, entered into Gaul with 500000
Combatants, under pretense of going to attaque the Visigoths, in Aquitain; and
after he had sacked and burnt Mets, Triers, Tongres, Arras, and all those
Cities that lay in his March, he passed along by Paris, and came and besieged
Orleans: The Town had already capitulated, and part of his Forces were entered,
when Aetius General of the Romans, Meroveus King of the French, and Theodoric
King of the Visigoths, having joined their Armies together, charged them
unawares, and drove them thence, paving all the Streets with their slain.

Campis Catalaunicis, which is interpreted the Plain of Chaalons in Champagne;
but some imagine with probability, that it was in Campis Secalaunicis, in
Soulogne near Orleans. Attila lost nigh 200000 Men. Theodoric King of the
Visigoths was killed in the Fight, and the next day his Son Thorismond elected
King by the Visigoths.

Notwithstanding this infinite loss, Attila had still Men enough left to
Retreat to his own Country, Aetius having discharged the Visigoths and the
French, lest he should be obliged to pursue and make an end of them. The
youngest of Clodions Sons had cast himself into the Arms of that Prince who
adopted him for his Son, and the other under the protection of Attila: what
their Fortune was we know not; but for Attila, upon his return from another
irruption he made into Italy about the year 452. he died in his own Country
while he was in Bed with a new Spouse.

452. is commonly reckoned to be the time of the wonderful birth, or beginning
of the City of Venice, in the Adriatic Gulf. It is held that the terror of
Attilas Forces, after he had taken Aquilea, making all the people of those
Countries fly from thence, some numbers of them got into the Island Rialto,
and other Islands adjacent, who fixed their Habitation there, which was the
first foundation of that noble State.

Valentinian caused Aetius to be Massacred, who alone upheld the Empire, shaken
and assaulted on all hands. The following year he is slain himself, by the
Petronius Maximus, whose Wife Emp. Marcian and Maximus, Murderer of
Valentinian, 455. in March* Then Majorian R. six years and half.
he had violated. Maximus seizes on the Empire, and Eudoxia his Widow, whom he
Married. The peasure of his Revenge, and his Reign, lasted but three Months:
The People stoned him to death, as soon as Genseric, King of the Vandals, whom
Eudoxa had called over from Africa to revenge her, was come to the Gates of
Rome. But that Barbarian sacked the City, and took the Empress, who was carried
into Captivity with her two Daughters, being at the same time both revenged and
punished.

From thence followed the utter destruction of the Western Empire, there being
no one Head left powerful enough to repair, or indeed prop the ruins of that
vast Building: but only diverse petit Commanders, who were but the sport of the
Barbarians, and who consumed the small Forces they had, by pushing at one
another.

Emp. Stiff Majorian and Leon I. R. 17 years and half.
So that Meroveus, and afterward Childeric his Son, had the proper time to
extend their limits. Meroveus took on the one hand all the Germania Prima, or
territory of Mentz; and on the other the Belgica Secunda, which is named
Picardy, a good part of the Second Lyonnoise, named Normandy, and almost all
the Isle of France.

He Reigned almost 11 years, and dyed Anno 458. we know nothing either of
Childeric his Successor was his Son.

Childeric, King IV.
Aged XX to XXV years.
POPES,
LEON I. Three years, HILARY the 12th Nov. 461. S. Five years Ten Months.
SIMPLICUS the 20th Sept. 561. S. Twenty Five years, Five Months.


The French who were not accustomed to such infamous dealings, degraded him
from his Throne, either by Sedition only, or by some kind of judicial
proceedings, and in his stead, Elected Aegidius or Gillon, Master of the Roman
Militia, who was a stranger, but in high reputation for Wisdom and Probity.
Childerick knowing after this, that they sought his Life also, retired himself
into Turingia to King Basin, but left a faithful friend in France, named
Guyemans, who promised to work his Restoration, by turning the Hearts of the
French against Gillon.

Guyemans being very subtle, gained much upon the Good Will and Confidence of
Gillon, and encouraged him to charge them with Taxes or Imposts; and when they
made a great noise about it, he counseled him to strike off the most stirring
Heads, who were the same that had degraded Childeric: then do they come
secretly to make complaints to Guyemans, who persuades them to recall their
natural King: and when he observes them disposed so to do, gives him notice of
it, and for a French go as far as Bar to meet him, and re-establish him in his
Royalty with formal Solemnity.

Gillon, he pushed at him vigorously, forced him to abandon Colen, took Treves
by Assault, and Burnt it, Conquered the Country now called Lorrain; and
afterward crossing Champagnes which then remained firm to the Romans, he made
himself Master of Beauvais, Paris, and of many other Towns upon the Oise and
the Seine; the People giving themselves up to the French, rather out of choice
than by compulsion, to free themselves from the horrible Tailles, and cruel
Concussions of the Roman Magistrates, who had put them into so great despair,
that they sought their own relief in the ruin of the State.

A little after, Childeric came from Turingia, Queen Basina charmed with his
Virtues, forsook her Husband to come to him; he took her to Wife, and within
the year had a Son by her, who was named Clovis.

Gillon, as it should seem, had called in some Auxiliaries of the Saxons,
Commanded by their King Odoacer, which he employed to defend the Cities above
the Loire, as well against the Visigoths as the French. When he was dead, viz.
in the year 464. the Count Pol took the Command, and Odoacer on his side, would
secure the City of Angiers, and fortified the Islands in the Loire to preserve
his booty: but Childeric vanquished the Count Pol near Orleans, and after he
had possessed himself of that City, pursued him to Angiers, where he forced his
way in, and laid him dead on the Pavement. This done, he dislodged the Saxons
from their Islands; and after an agreement with them, he set them at work to
drive away the Germans, who at that same time had made an irruption into Gaul.

Anno 476. Of the Christian Era, and the 1229. from the foundation of Rome,
the Roman Empire ended in the West; there having been in the last Twenty years
Nine or Ten Abortives of Emperors, of which Romulus, whom they called
Augustulus, was the last. He was a young Child of about Ten or Twelve years
old, to whom the Patrician Orestes his Father, had given the Title of Emperor
to Govern in his Name. Odoacer, Emp. Zenon, 474.
King of the Heruli having slain Orestes, locked up this Child in a Castle, and
gave beginning to the First Kingdom in Italy.

Diverse years before Gondiochus, King of the Burgundians was dead, and his Four
Sons Gondebaud, Godegesile, Chilperic, and Gondemar, had shared his Kingdom
amongst them. Now Anno 477. Gondebaud the eldest, and the most knowing of all,
had Vienne: Gondemar was burned in a Tower, where he was defending himself:
Chilperic fell into the Victors hands, who caused him to be Massacred with his
two Sons, and his Wife thrown into the River with a Stone tied to her Neck, but
spared the Lives of his two Daughters. They were called Sedeleube, and
Clotilda, both of them were of the Orthodox Faith, though their Father and
Uncle were Arrians. The First Consecrated her self to God, the other Gondebaud
kept, and had her bred up in his own House.

King Childerick, upon his return from an Expedition against the Almains, is
assaulted by a Fever, and dies, aged at least 45 years, of which he had Reigned
22 or 23. He left Four Children, one Son whom they named Clouis, and three
Daughters, Andeflede, who espoused Theodorick, King of the Orstogoths,
Alboflede and Lantilda. Alboflede, being Converted from Paganism, and Lantilda
from the Arrian Heresy; These were not Married.

It is conjectured, that he held his Royal Seat at Tournay, because in our
times, in the year 1654. digging under some Houses, there was a Tomb
discovered, and amongst other singular Curiosities was found a Ring, whereon
his Effigies and his Name are Engraved.

Clovis, or Louis, so to be u d rstood th rough the whole History.
Clovis, King V.
Aged Fifteen years.
POPES,
FELIX III. The 8th of March, S. Twelve years. GELASIUS I. in March 492. S.
Four years nine Months. ANASTASIUS II. the 28 th. November. 496. S. Two years.
SYMMACHUS the 20th. November. 496. S. Fifteen years, Eight Months, whereof Three
years in the following Reign.
* Clodowic, Ludwin, or Louis, all the same Name.
CLovis, or Louis, (for it is the same Name) handsome, well shaped, and
personally brave was not so soon at age to Command, but he undertakes a War
against Siagrius, Son of that Gillon, who had been set up in the place of his
Father Childeric; he Fights him, and Defeats him near to Soissons; the
unfortunate Man flies to Aleric, King of the Visigoths for refuge: but Clovis
by Threats, forces him to send him back; and when he has him in his hands, he
puts him to death, having first secured all his Towns to himself, which were
Soissons, Rheims, Provence, Sens, Troy, Auxerre, and some others; and thus
there remained nothing in the hands of the Romans amongst the Gauls.

French, that all the Plunder should be brought in common, Clovis took no
notice of it for the present, but a year afterward, upon a general Review, he
quarreled with him, because he did not keep his Arms in good Order, and cleft
his Head with his Battle-Axe: a bold undertaking, and which made him to be the
more dreaded by the French.

From the year 489, Theodoric, King of the Ostrogoths was entered into Italy;
after Odoacer King of the Heruli, he settled a potent Monarchy there, Anno 494.

Clovis subdues a part of the Thuringians, and imposes a Tribute upon them.

Gondebaud King of the Burgundians was either his Vassal, or his Officer,
perhaps Grand Master of his Militia.

Emp. Anastasius raised to the Empire by Ariadne, the Murderer of Zeno her
Husband.
Toward the end of the year 491, he Married Clotilda, Daughter of King
Childeric, and Niece to that Gondebaud, who consented not to that Match but out
of fear; Aurelian a French Lord was the Mediator, and had the County of Melun
for a recompense.

The Almains one of the most puissant people of Germany, who then inhabited
Suabia, part of Retia on this side the Rhine, Swisserland, and perhaps the
Country of Alsatia, to Strasbourg, were entered in hostile manner upon the
Lands of Sigebert, King of Colen, or of the Ribarols: Clovis his Kinsman went
to his assistance, Tolbiac; it is guessed to be Zulg, within Ten Leagues of
Colen. In the midst of the Engagement, his Men gave ground, and ran into
disorder: the greatness of the danger made him then think of Praying to the God
of his Wife, and to make a Vow, that if he delivered him from that peril, he
would be Baptized. Immediately the Scene of the day changed, his Men returned
to the Charge, the Enemies were put to flight, and left their King, and a
multitude of their Army slain upon the place.

He hotly pursued his Victory, entered upon their Country, and without Mercy
exterminated all that were on this side of the Rhine; the others saved
themselves Italy, under the protection of Theodoric King of the Ostrogoths. It
is to be believed, that at the entreaty of this great Prince, who was his
Brother-in-law, he suffered such as desired it, to return to their own
Dwellings; but he perfectly subdued them, gave them some Counts, and a Duke to
Govern them, and shared their Lands amongst his Captains. After this check they
had no more Kings, and were but inconsiderable, till the time of the Emperor
Frederick the II. under whom, in my opinion, they gave the Name to all Germany.

As he returned from this Expedition, his Wife took care to send some Holy Men
to him, to exhort him to keep his Word, and to instruct him in the Orthodox
Faith. St. Vaast, who was as then but a Priest, and dwelt at Verdun, Catechized
him by the way. St. Remy, Archbishop of Rheims, powerful in Works and
Eloquence; confirmed him mightily in the belief of Christianity.

Having therefore brought the most part of his Captains to have a good opinion
of this Conversion, he received Holy Baptism, with great Ceremony in the Church
of Rheims, on Christmas day, Anno 496. The Bishops plunged him in the
Consecrated Lavatory: Three thousand of his French Subjects followed his
example; and this regenerated Flock with their Leader, wore the White Robe
eight days together, according to the Ceremony then practiced in the Church.

France, his Successors, with many miraculous and singular Favors; That the
Saint Ampoulle, i. e. Holy Oil, was conveyed at his Baptism by a Celestial
Dove; That the Shield Seem with Flower-de-Luces, and the Standard Royal de
l'Oriflamme, were by an Angel, deposited in the hands of a good Hermit, living
in the solitudes of Joyenval, near St. Germans en Lay; That he had the Gift of
Healing the Evil, and made proof of it upon Lanicet his Favorite. But God made
him a more extraordinary and more excellent Present than all those, when he
bestowed upon him the Heavenly Knowledge of the Orthodox Faith, there being
amongst all the Princes upon Earth, none but himself that did not live either
in Error or Idolatry.

This Conversion did him no little Service toward keeping the Gauls, who were
all Christians, in Obedience, and to allure others who were Subjects to the
Gothic and the Burgundian Princes, whose Government was odious to them,
because they would compel them to follow the Opinion of Arrius.

The zeal of Christianity did not allay his Warlike heats, Gondesigilus having
promised, if he would assist him in suppressing his Brother Gondebaud, to share
the spoil with him; he fell with his Army upon the Burgundians Country;
Gondesigilus Gondebaud failed not, but when it came to the Battle, which was
fought on the borders of the River L'Ouche, near Dijon, Gondesigilus went over
to the French, and began to Assault him: Gondebaud finding it was a thing
designed betwixt them, fled to Avignon, Clovis pursues, and besieges him there.
The Sage Aredius, Principal Counselor to Gondebaud, cunningly contrives to do
his Master Service upon this occasion; the Siege spinning out to some length,
he pretends to desert him, and renders himself to Clovis, with whom he manages
Affairs, so wisely, as that King agrees to a Composition, and Gondebaud becomes
his Tributary.

Clovis was out of that Country, and perhaps employed in other business,
Gondebaud scorning to pay him the Tribute, assembles his Forces together, and
besieges Gondesigilus in Vienne. One Fontenier, whom they had thrust out
amongst the useless People, discovered to him the mouth of an Aqueduct, by
which way he sent in some Men, who surprised the City; his Brother having
sheltred himself in a Church belonging to the Arrians, was there slain,
together with a Bishop of the same Belief. Thus Gondebaud remained sole King of
all Burgundy.

French, as Procopius tells us, not having been able to subdue the Armoricae,
betwixt the Seine and the Loire, did incorporate with them by a mutual
Confederacy, which of two made them bat one People. The Roman Garrisons not
being strong enough, either to Retreat or to Defend themselves, restored their
Towns to them, but did not quit the Country, where they for a long time
afterward retained their Laws, their Discipline, and Habits.

The Citizens of Verdun being Revolted, it is not said for what reason, Clovit
being ready to force them, the Prayers of Euspice, Archdeacon of that City, a
Man of a very Holy Life, allayed his Wrath, and obtained their Pardon.

I cannot tell precisely in what year happened that which Procopius relates, how
Clovis and Theodoric, King of the Ostrogoths, having made an agreement together
to conquer Burgundy, and divide it, upon condition, that if either of the two
Armies did not meet at a certain time appointed, they should pay a certain Sum
to the other: the Visigoths made no great haste, but left the French to bear
all the brunt; then coming when the hottest work was over, and the Country
subdued, took their share of the Conquest, paying the Sum as had been
stipulated.

Gondebaud; who afterward made a strict Alliance with Clovis against the
Visigoths.

There is great likelihood that it was in these peaceable days that Clovis
labored to reform the Salique Law, which having been made by the French, when
Pagans might contain many things, contrary to the manners and Laws of
Christianity. This Law was only for the French in his own Kingdom, for those of
Colen had another which we find to this day by the name of the Law of the
Ripuarians, conformable, notwithstanding in many particulars to the Salique Law.

Clovis and Alaric, could not be long Neighbors and good Friends. Diverse petty
differences set them at variance, by the secret practices of the Bishops of
Aquitain, who being troubled they should obey Alaric an Arrian Prince, pushed
on Clovis to a Rupture. The Two Kings had an Enterview, and discoursed each
other in the Island D'Or, nigh Amboise, It lies between the Bridges of Amboise.
between the City of Tours, which belonged to the Visigoths, and that of
Orleance, appertaining to the French. This Meeting salved up their quarrel for
a time, and Theodoric, King of the Ostrogoths, Father-in-law to Alaric, and
Brother-in-law to Clovis, undertook to make them agree; but as great a
Politician as he was, he could not restrain the Ardour of Clovis. This
Conqueror knowing the Visigoths were softened, First Wars for Religion
or effeminated by a long Peace, and having made sure of Gondebaud, by a League
contracted betwixt them, resolved to Attaque Alaric, under the specious
pretense of Religion; the French followed him with great cheerfulness, those of
Aquitain invited Tours surrenders to him; Alaric, who was getting his Forces
together at Poitiers, lets him pass along to Vienne, then imprudently resolves
to give him Battle; it was in the Plains of Vouglay, Ten miles from Poitiers.
Clovis having exhorted his Soldiers, Armed them with the Sign of the Cross, and
for the Word, gave them the Name of the Lord. Alaric's Army was defeated, and
he slain in the Fight by Clovis's his own hand.

The vanquisher divided his Army in two Bodies, with the one his Son Thierry
makes himself Master of Albigeois, of Rouergne, of Quercy, and of Auvergue; and
himself with the other, of Poitou, of Saintonge, all Bourdelois, and Bordeaux
it self, where he passed the Winter; then in the Spring, of Thoulouse, wherein
was the Treasure Visigoths: At his return he took the City of Angoulesme, the
Walls whereof sell down before him; in fine, of all the Three Aquitains, the
Catholics casting themselves into his Arms, to be freed from the yoke of the
Arrians.

At the same time Gondebaud, pursuant to the Treaty made with Clovis, Conquered
the two Narbonnoises, and the City of Narbona, from whence he drove Gesali^,
Alaric, who had seized on the Kingdom of the Visigoths, because Almaric, the
Legitimate Son, born of the Daughter of Theodoric, was yet in his insancy.

The Fame of Clovis his Valor, spread even to the East; The Emperor
Anastasius, thereby to engage him the closer to the Empire; sent him Consulary
(Honorary) Letters, and the Imperial Ornaments, viz. The Purple Robe, the
Mantle, and the Diadem. Clovis having put them on in St. Martins Church,
Mounted on Horseback in the Portall, and bestowed a Largess on the People;
after that day he was ever Treated with the Title of Consul, and August, which
were not altogether useless to him, toward the bringing the Gauls to better
Obedience, by those Titles, for which they had still some reverence.

Theodoric, King of the Ostrogoths, jealous of his success, takes in hand the
Defense Goths, and of Gepide, and Commanded in Chief by the Count Ibba. The
French held then the City of Carcassonne, besieged, and the Burgundians that of
Arles, the first quitted their Siege, and joined the others at Arles, to hinder
him from passing the Rhosne.

There happened many Combats, and at last a bloody Battle; the Count gained it,
having killed 30000 French and Burgundians, and afterward wrested from them
all Provence, and in Languedoc, excepting Thoulouse, and Vzez.

After this advantage, Theoderic remained King of the Visigoths; and having
taken away the Crown and Life of Gesilac, joined what they held in Gaul and in
Spain to his Kingdom of Italy, till his Grandson Or Amaulry.
Amalaric should be come of age.

Clovis fretted at these losses, distempered with a long Fever, and having the
Spirit French, who were his Kindred, and rids himself of them by methods full
of Cruelty and Treachery. He incited Chloderic Son of Sigeb^rt, King of Colen,
to kill his Father, and caused him afterward to be Massacred by his own
Domestiques. He compelled Cararic and his Son (we know not in what Country
they Reigned) perhaps it was at Triers or Arras) to enter into Holy Orders; and
being informed that the Son expressed some threatenings, he sent, and caused the
Throats of both to be cut. He cleft in two the Heads of Ragnacaire, King of
Cambray, and Riquier his Brother, with a Battle-axe, they being both delivered
into his hands by their own Subjects, and his Satellites assassinated Rignomer,
King of Man's, in his own City.

He dies himself at Paris, the 26 th of November, in the year 511. and is
interred St. Peter and St. Paul, which he Built; and where St. Genewiefue had
been buried the same year: his Reign was 30 years, and his Age 45. Some have
made him parallel with Constantine the Great, and find great resemblance
betwixt them both, for Good and Evil.

He had four Sons living, Thierry, Clodomir, Childebert, and Clotaire: the
first by a Concubine, the other three by Clotilda, and by the same also a
Daughter, named Clota, or Clotilda, who Sixteen years afterward married
Amalaric, Ring of the Visigoths in Spain.

Under his Reign the French wholly freed themselves from the Roman Empire, and
became their Allies on equal terms; till then, as I believe, they had been
stipendaries, or tributary to them. That part of Gall which reaches from the
Rhine to Manners and Customs.
the Loire, was called France. The French measured those Lands, and took the
third or fourth part, which they shared amongst themselves. There were but two
sorts of People, or Conditions amongst them, the Freemen and the Slaves; all
the Freemen bore Arms. Gall, which was almost a Desert,* began to be
re-peopled, and to rebuild their Towns. The Galls paid a Tribute to the French,
but the natural French paid hardly any thing but their personal Service. These
lived according to the Salique Law, the Galls Conformed to the Roman
Institutions. These were called Romans, all the other Nations which flocked
thither from beyond the limits of the Empire, were named Barbarians.

They were bred to the exercise of War, from their greenest years, of a good
shape and stature, enured to Labor, strong, and so nimble, that they were upon
the Enemy almost as soon as the Dart they had thrown against them. They had
left off the use of Arrows, and employed in their stead for offensive weapons,
the Sword, the Angon, which was a Dart of moderate length, having an Iron
bearded Head, and cheeks of Iron, and the two-edged Axe, which they called
Francisque. This might be darted as well as the Angon, but nearer at hand. For
defensive A^ms* unless it were their Commanders, they had only the Buckler,
which they managed very dexterously to shelter, and Tortoise-like, cover
themselves when they went to make a Charge or an Assault. Their whole Armies
were Infantry; or if there were some few Horse, they served only to attend the
General, and carry his Orders.

They retained a good part of the establishment, made by the Romans, as the
manner of raising Imposts, but much lesser, of providing Magazines for the
subsistence of their Forces, of maintaing Horses and Carriages for Travelers
on the great Roads, of public Sports, Horse-racing, and combats of wild
Beasts; and their Kings believed themselves as absolute as Emperors, created
Dukes, Counts, and great Masters of their Militia, nay, even Patricians, and
perhaps the Mayers of the Palace held the Office of Praefecti Praetorii.

In the Fifth and Sixth age, the Gallican Church received few into the Church
for Church.
Bishops but Saints, or such as they made so. They were for the most part, the
greatest Lords of the Country, who to secure themselves from the suspicions
and Visigoths and French might have against them, cast themselves into the
Church, as a safe Harbor or Asylum.

They reckon amongst the most Holy, Honorat d'Arles, being of the Monastery of
the Isle of Lerins, which bears his Name to this day; Hilary his Successor, and
Eueheres of Lions, coming from the same place, German d'Auxerre and Loup de
Troyes, Palladius, or Palais de Bourges, Brice de Tours, Agnan d'Orleans,
Simplicius de Vienne, and Mamertus his Successor: This was he who instituted,
or rather revived those Processions or Litanies we call Rogations, which all
the Church has received. All these did not survive the one half of this Age,
unless Loup or Lupus, who lived a long while after.

In the Second, lived Apollinaris-Sidonius of Clermont, Alcimus Avitus, the
Successor to Mamert, Eleutherius of Tournay, Remy de Reims, the true Apostle of
the French, and Vaast of Arras; these three survived a long time after Clovis.
We should not omit the illustrious Virgin Geneviefve, who even in her life time
was the Patroness of Paris, and remains so still; nor St. Maximin, or Mesmin,
Abbot of Micy, near Orleans, which Place now bears his Name, and from whence
came about Eighteen or Twenty good Friars, who spread themselves in several
Countries, where they are all at present prayed to as Saints; nor the good
Hermit Severin, whom Clovis, being long sick of a Fever, caused to come from
the Monastery d'Agaune, that he might be healed by his Prayers; Nor that other,
named Maixan, who had his little Cell in that part of Poitou, whereon there is
built an Abbey, and at length a Town of his Name.

Clovis resetled the Bishoprics in Belgica, bestowed great Possessions on the
Church, and built many. The French who were Converted, imitated his Pious
Examples. I do not know, whether before his Reign there were many Parish
Churches in the Country, but since his time we find great numbers, and
likewise many Oratories, in which the Sacraments were not administered.

We need not tell you that the Titles of Pope, of Father of the Church, of
Beatitude, and of Beatissimus, of Holiness, of Sovereign-Priest, of Servant of
the Servants of God, of Apostolic, were common to all the Bishops; nor that
almost every one of them erected Monasteries in their Episcopal Cities. They
often elected Widowers and Married Men, provided, they had been so but once,
and to a Maiden. The Vote of the People passed in these things for a Call from
God: they were bound to obey, and to live with their Wives as with their
Sisters: if they had any Children, or Nephews that were Wise and Learned, they
often succeeded them. Their Election was made by the Clergy of their Church,
and by the People; the Confirmation by the comprovincial Bishops, principally
by the Metropolitan, and never without him: They were to have regard only to
Merit, oftentimes they considered his Birth: and even in those early days there
were some wicked enough to make use of Bribes and Corruption.

Simony is the most ancient or first, and will be the last of Heresies; In all
Ages it has stuck like Rust on the Church, the others did not make any great
mischief in Gall during this age. That of Eutyches did not extend so far, but
the Condemnation of him by the Council of Chalcedon was sent by Pope Leo I. who
before had demanded the Suffrages of the Bishops, the more to authorize that
celebrated Letter, which he wrote to the Council.

The Monk and Priest Leporius hatched an Heresy, almost the same as that which
Nestorius maintained since; but having been for that reason expelled from his
Church at Marseilles, he retracted in Writing Anno 425. That of Pelagius, a
Monk of Great Britain, who began to dogmatize toward the year 412. was first
discovered by two of the Gallican Bishops, named Heroes and Lazarus, who
prosecuted his condemnation, first in Palestine, afterward in Africa.

After St. Augustine had trampled that proud Heresy in the Dirt, which made the
Salvation of Man depend upon his own strength; no body in France durst openly
embrace it. But in Provence there were Priests and Monks who framed a middle
Opinion, between that Error, and the Doctrine of this great Bishop: they were
called Semipelagians.

As for Councils, they were often held by Order from the Emperors and Kings.
Sometimes the desire of the Pope, the request of a Metropolitan, that of a
single Bishop, or the least occasion caused them to assemble. It is not known
in what place that was held which Anno 429. sent St. German, and St. Lupus into
England, to oppugn the Errors of the Pelagians; nor that which Anno 444.
deposed Chelidonius, Bishop of Besancon, because he had been married to a
Widow, and had been assisting in Judgment, of matters criminal; but it is well
known, that the Council at Riez was held in 439. The first at Orange in 441.
That of Vaison in 442. That of Angiers in 443. The second of Axles, toward the
year 452. The third of the same place, Anno 455. That of Tours, 461. That of
Vannes, 465. The fourth of Arles, 475. That of Agde, Anno 506. and that of
Orleans, (the first that was celebrated under a French King) Anno 511.

All these Councils were composed only of the Bishops of the Province where
they were held, excepting that of Agde, and that of Orleance; whereof the first
comprehended the three Aquitanes, and the two Narbonnoises, as yet subject to
Alaric, King of the Visigoths; and the other of the three Aquitanes, newly
conquered by the French, and the second, third, and fourth Lyonnoises; for the
first belonged to the Kingdom of Burgundy.

At the third of Arles, that Error was condemned which they call the
Predestinati; and there was another called at Lion for the same purpose: but
both by the pursuit of Faustus de Riez, who was a Semipelagian.

At the fourth of Arles, was Treated concerning the difference of Foustus,
Abbot of Lerins, with the Bishop Theodorus, and there they made for the first
time, a notable breach upon the Authority of the Bishops, in limiting their
power over Monasteries; they had ever had it entire, even to that degree, that
they had the power of placing Abbots, and to choose them out of any of the
Clergy.

In these Councils, several Canons were made for Ordinations, to prevent the
encroachments the Bishops made upon one another, to preserve the Rights, the
Privileges, and the Goods belonging to the Church. To regulate the Functions
of the Clergy* hinder them from Pleading before Secular Judges, Repress Usury,
and the liberty of running out of their Diocese. To preserve the Chastity of
Virgins, and Widows; touching Homicides, and false Witnesses; touching
Penances, and the Penitents; touching the Holiness and Celibacy which the
Priests and Deacons ought to observe. To the same end tended the Epistles of
the Popes Innocent, Zozimus, Boniface, Celestin, Leons, Simplicius, Felix,
Gelasius, Anastasius, Symmachus, which they generally directed to the Bishop of
Arles, as their Vicar, to be sent to the other Gallican Bishops.

As there were no great Bishoprics in Gaul, the Gallican Church was much more
submissive, and subjected to those Bishops of Rome, then the Eastern ones, or
those of Africa, but yet much less then the Italians. There was often recourse
had to them; upon the greatest occasions they were consulted withal, touching
the usages and meaning of the Canons: and afterward when they found that their
Answers were held for Decisions, they Ordained what they thought good, even
before they were consulted withal. They made themselves immediate Judges of all
Disputes between Bishops, before the Cause had been brought to the
Metropolitan, intermedled in bounding their Territories and Jurisdictions,
deposed those that were not well Ordained, or were Criminal, and compelled them
to trudge to Rome to prosecute their business before them. The Power they had
by the Primacy of their See, to cause the Canons to be duly observed, advanced
them to this great Authority, but the Bishops took great care they should not
be infringed, and themselves acknowledged they were obliged to walk by them.

Childebert, I. King VI.
POPES,
The 26 th of July, 414. S. Nine years. JOHN I. The 23 August 423. S. Two years
nine Months and a half. BONIFACE II. The 15 th Oct. S. One year. JOHN II. In
December. 431. S. Three years four Months. AGAPETUS, In July 534. S. One year.
SILUERIUS, In June 536. S. Four years. VIGILIUS, In 540, S. 15 years.
Thierry, King of Me^z. or of Austrasia, aged between 28 and 30 years.
Clodomir, of Orleans, aged 16 or 17 years. Childebert of Paris, aged 13 or 14
years. Clotaire of Soissons, aged about 12 years.

Thierry had all Austrasia, and the Countries beyond the Rhine, the other Three
had Neustria; they were all equally Kings, and without dependence upon one
another: yet nevertheless all these parts together, made but up the body of one
Kingdom. The Historians count their Succession by the Kings of Paris, because
that City, has since been the Capital of all France.

Clotilda being yet young, and perhaps the two last under the Government of
their Mother; it seems a little after the death of their Father, the Visigoths
regained from them the Country of Rouergne, and some other Lands in the
neighborhood of Languedoc.

France then began to be divided into Oosterrich, or the Eastern part, called
by corruption, Austria, and Austrasia; and into Westrich, or Western part, and
by corruption, Neustria. Austrasia comprehended all that is between the Meuse
and the Rhine; and even on this side the Meuse, Rheims, Chalons, Cambray, and
Laon. Besides ancient France, and all those people subdued beyond the Rhine, as
the Bavarois, the Almains, and a part of the Turingians depended upon it.
Neustria extended from this side the Meuse unto the Loire. Aquitain was not
comprised under the name of France, nor Burgundy, not even after it was
conquered, nor Bretagne. Armorick, at least the lower, because it was an
independent Estate.

Gondebaud, King of Burgundy, dyed in the year 516. He had compiled, or written
a Law, called by his Name, the Law Gombete, which was long in use amongst the
Burgundians, as the Salique was amongst the French. He had two Sons, Sigismond
and Gondemar: The first succeeded him in all his Dominions; and having been
Converted many years Emp. Justin is Electin July. R. 8 years.
before, by the Instructions of Avitus, Bishop of Vienne, he abjured
Arrianisme, at his first coming to the Crown, and brought all his People over
with him to the Orthodox Faith.

A Danish Captain, named Cochiliac, exercising Piracy, had made a Descent on
the Thierry's Kingdom, near the mouth of the Rhine; when he would have gotten
on Shipboard again with his Plunder, comes the Prince Theodebert, eldest Son
of Thierry, who assaults him, kills him, and having stained both Land and Sea
with the Blood of those Pirates, regained all what they had seized and stolen.

Sigismond bad at his first Marriage espoused Ostrogotha, Daughter to King
Theodorick of Italy, by whom he had a Son named Sigeric. After the death of
that Queen, he took one of his Servants into his Bed, who having conceived a
Step-mothers hatred against the young Prince, made him seem criminal in his
Fathers Eyes, by her frequent calumnies, who caused him to be strangled with a
Napkin as he was sleeping: but immediately he was so struck with Remorse, that
he retired himself for a time to weep for this d'Agaune, which he himself had
built, or much enlarged, in Honor of St. Maurice and his Companions.

The Divine Justice, as may be well believed, stirred up the French Kings to
chastise him, though he had married his Daughter, Sister to Sigeric, with King
Thierry; the other three Brothers forbore not to conspire his ruin, being
incited thereto by Clotilda, who yet cherished in her bosom, the desire to
revenge her Fathers death. If at least we may suspect such a thing from so
pious a Princess.

In few days they made themselves Masters of a great part of Burgundy, either
by the gaining of some Battle, or the defection even of the Burgundians.
Sigismond fearing to be delivered up by his own Subjects, disguises himself
like a Monk, and retires to the top of an inaccessible Mountain; he had not
long been there, but some of those he thought his most faithful Servants, went
and found him, and advised him to quit that place, as not safe, and betake
himself to St. Maurice's Church, the most Sacred Asylum of all those Provinces;
when he was come almost to the Gate of that Monastery, the Traitors delivered
him into the hands of the French; Clodomir carries him away with his Wife and
Children, and shuts them in a Castle not far from Orleans.

As for Gondemar, having saved himself by flight, he awhile afterward, gathers
Clodomir could not endure it, and Leagued himself with Thierry his elder
Brother, to complete his overthrow, Before he set forth, he was resolved to rid
himself of Sigismond. St. Avy, Abbot of Micy, endeavored in vain to prevent
him by his Pious Arguments; adding, In the Name of God, the threats of a
Reprisal on his Head and his Family: but he Treated him in Ridicule, and caused
Sigismond to be cruelly Massacred, with his Wife, and Children, and their
Bodies to be thrown into a Well.

The prophetic threatenings of the Holy Abbot, soon had their effect. It was
impossible but Thierry must in his Soul have a just Resentment for the death of
Sigismond, his Father-in-law; so that when he beheld Clodomir far engaged in
the medley (which was, in a Battle they fought against Gondemar near Autun) he
forsook him, and suffered him to perish. The Burgundians knowing him by his
long Royal Locks, cut off his Head, and fixed it on a Lance; but that
spectacle, instead of terrifying the French, inflamed their Courage and Fury:
they revenged his death by a horrible slaughter of the Burgundians, and
conquered a part of that Kingdom, to wit, that which lay nearest the Kingdom of
Orleans.

Clodomir was aged some Thirty years, he left three Sons, then but Children,
Theobald, Or Gontier.
Gontair, and Clodoaldo, whom Clotilda their Grandmother took care to breed,
hoping that when they came to be of age, their Uncles would restore their
Fathers Kingdom to them. Clotaire his younger Brother presently married his
Widow, she was named Gondiocha; so little the Princes of this First Race had
any consideration for their Blood, being as brutish in their Amors, as in
their Revenge.

THIERRY in Austrasia, at Mets. CHILDEBERT in Neustria, at Paris. CLOTAIRE, in
Neustria, at Soissons.

The Kingdom of Burgundy was not shared amongst these Brothers, till some years
afterward, and Thierry had no part of it.

Theoderic, King of the Ostrogoths, and Visigoths, the greatest Prince amongst
the Barbarian Kings, had he not been an Arrian, being in the end become a
persecutor of the Catholics, died at Rome the second of September; he left his
Kingdoms to two Sons of Emp. Justin^an, Son of a Sister to Justin, Created by
his Uncle, in April, R. 38 years, 7 Months.
his Daughters, that is to say, that of Spain, or the Visigoths to Amalaric;
and that of Italy, or the Ostrogoths, to Athalaric, who was under the Tutelage
of his Mother Amalasuinta: To this last he likewise gave Provence, which in
those times comprehended the Second Narbonnoise, part of the First Viennoise,
and all the Fifth; and to the other, the First Viennoise, otherwise called
Septimania, and which even at that time was also known to the French, under the
Name of Languedoc.
Gothia, because it was poss ssed by the Goths.

Amalaric re-establisht in his Kingdom, dreading the Power of the French Kings,
desired their Sister Clotilda in Marriage.

The King of Turingia (perhaps it might be Basin) had had three Sons,
Hermenfroy, Baderic, and Bertier. The First married Amalabergue, Daughter of
Amalafrode, who was Sister to Theoderic, King of the Ostrogoths, and Widow of
Trasimond, King of the Vandals, at the instigation of this wicked and ambitious
Woman, not content with having taken away the Life, and part of the Kingdom
from Bertier, he was besides, Leagued with Thierry, King of Metz, and by his
assistance, had in the Baderic. This year 531. Thierry, angry that he gave him
no part of this last Conquest, as he had promised him, made an agreement with
his Brother Clotaire, to overrun Turingia. Hermenfroy meets them, and fights
them; at the first they were in some little disorder, their Horses falling into
pits, covered with Branches and Turfs; but having gotten out of the snares,
they drove him as far as the brink of the Onestrud, where there was so great
slaughter, that the dead Carcasses made a Bridge over the River. He narrowly
made his escape out of this danger, and with much ado shut himself up in a Fort.

The Kingdom of Turingia wholly Conquered and Extinguished, remained to
Thierry, Clotaire satisfied himself with the Spoil and Captives, amongst whom
was found the Prince Amalafroy, and the young Radegonda, Children of Bertier.
He caused Radegonda to be carefully brought up, and Married her some years
after; but by the Council of some wicked People, he caused Amalafroy to be
slain, and Radegonda afterward parted from him, and went and Founded the
Monastery of the Holy-Cross at Poitiers, where she piously ended her days.

Mean while Thierry being returned to his Kingdom, allured Hermenfroy to his
Court, having sowrn he should be in all security; then barbarously falsifying
his Faith, as they were one day walking together upon the Walls of Tolbiac,
there came a fellow and thrust him down from top to bottom. Amalabergue, the
cause of all these Tragedies, made her escape into Africa to her Mother.

The same year upon a false report blown abroad, that Thierry had been slain in
Turingia; Arcadius, one of the Senators of Auvergne, invited Childebert to
seize upon the Town of Clermont, which belonged to Thierry's share. The People
and Lords being well contented to be rid of the Government of the Austrasians,
submitted easily to his: but after finding that Thierry returned victorious, he
quitted Auvergne, and marched into Septimania, to make War upon Amalaric, King
of the Visigoths.

Arrian Prince used toward his Sister Clotilda, in hatred, for that she
constantly persevered in the Catholic Religion. Amalaric lost the Battle not
far from Narbonne, which was his Royal Seat; and when he thought to fly to his
Ships, he was killed, either in that City, or in Barcellona, by the French, or
by Theudis himself, who succeeded him. Clotaire nevertheless gained nothing but
some plunder, and the honor of having revenged his Sister, who died on the way
as he was bringing her back: For Septimania still remained in the hands of the
Visigoths; but their Kings, naturally timorous, transferred their Royal Seat to
Toledo, to be for the future at a more safe distance from such like irruptions.

Childebert and Clotaire being associated, go on to pursue Gondemar, take him
prisoner in a Fight, lock him up in a Tower (where in all probability he ended
his days) and invaded all that was left of his Country. Thus the First Kingdom
of Burgundy was extinguished, after it had subsisted Fourscore and ten years,
and became united to France; but it retained its Name, its Laws, and its
particular Magistrates. Its Governors were ordinarily styled Patricians.

Burgundy between them, sent to the Queen Clotilda their Mother, that she
should let them have the three Sons of Clodomir, to put them in possession of
their Fathers Kingdom; Clotilda did the more easily believe it, because in
effect, they had not yet divided it amongst themselves: but when they had these
poor innocent Creatures in their hands, they most inhumanely massacred the two
eldest; the Third, named Clodoald, or Cloud, was saved by his Fathers Barons.
Bravo's, and after he had lain some time concealed, he secured his Life by
cutting It Is the Town of St. Clou.
off his Hair, and then confining himself in a Holy Sanctuary, or Retreat at
the Borough of Nogent, near Paris, which keeps even to this day, his Relics
and Name.

Because Thierry of Metz refused to accompany his two Brothers against
Gondemar, the French Austrasians, angry that they should not have their share
in the plunder of Burgundy, threatened they would own him no longer; In the
First and Second Auvergne, who were revolted from him, to give themselves up to
Childebert, whence they brought away an innumerable multitude of Captives, and
all that was portable.

A Lord named Munderic, reckoning himself of Blood Royal, acted the part of
King, and made the Mobile follow him as such. Thierry at his return from
Auvergne, besieged him in the Castle de Vitry; and seeing he could not gain it
by force, he makes use of Perjury: Aregisa, one of his Captains engages his
Faith that he should be well received; and when he was come out of the place,
he gave a Signal that they should fall on him. Munderic perceiving it, prevents
him, and kills him with a Dart; and afterward taking his Sword in hand,
together with such as had followed him, he sold his Life at a dear rate.

Vandals, and Asrick, with the Islands of Corsica and Sardinia, and the
Baleares returned to the Empire, after they had been cut off from them 107
years. The Emperor Justinian, under pretense of taking in hand the Defense of
King Hilderic, whose Kingdom Gilimer had usurped, sent the great Captain
Belisarius thither, who made an end of that Conquest in less than Six Months,
having happily overthrown those Arrian Barbarians in some Battles; taken
Carthage, and received the Tyrant Gilimer upon Composition, who had sheltred
himself in a Fortress.

The Visigoths during the Wars of Burgundy and Turingia, had taken diverse
places of Septimania. The Princes Gontier and Theodebert, who were Sons, the
former of Clotaire, the latter of Thierry, had Orders from their Fathers to
recover them. Goutier returned without doing any thing; Theodebert took some
Castles in the Country of Beziers, but suffered himself to be taken also by
the Beauty of the Artificious Deuteria, Lady of Cabriere, who received him into
her Castle, and into her Bed.

From Septimania he carried the War to Provence, reckoning to have a better
Market of the Ostrogoths. When he had sorely snaken it, and already received
some Hostages from the City of Arles, he received news that his Father was very
sick at Mets: he goes away in all diligence, and arrived there some few days
before he died.

Thierry Reigned a little more then 23 years, and had lived about 55. He had no
Son but Theodebert; but a Learned Historian gives him likewise a Daughter,
named Theodechildus; he believes it to be her that was Married to Hermegisile,
King of the Varni, of whom Procopius relates a memorable Adventure, and who
being returned into France, amongst many pious Works, built the Monastery of
St. Pierre le Vis, near Sens.

It is fit we observe that the They were named Bajobares, or Bajoarians.
Bavarois, or Bojarians, were under his obedience, since in their Estates, or
General Assembly at Chaalons, he put their Laws in Writing. They were
originally of Germany; it is not certain of what Canton, but that they had the
same Language as the Lombards. About the time of the death of Odoacer, King of
Italy, they were come to possess that part of the Part of the high and middle
Austria.
Norica which lies on the Banks of the Danube; and in time they also gained the
Mediterranean part, and Rhetia Secunda, which was situate betwixt the Rivers
L'Oein and the Lec, so that they were bounded by Panonia, Swevia, Italy, and
the Danube. Perhaps Clovis subdued them at the same time he subdued the
Almains, but they had always retained their Laws, and a Duke of their Nation,
who was confirmed by the King of Austrasia, he was to be of the Race of the
Agilolfingues, or Descendents of Agilolfe, who in all appearance brought them
into that Country.

CHILDEBERT in Neustria at Paris. CLOTAIRE in -- and -- Neustria at Soissons.
THEOD'EBERT aged about 30 years, in Austrasia. Burgundy betwixt both.

Theodebert were prepared to invade the Kingdom of his Father, his diligence
broke their measures. After he had agreed with them by a Peace, which he
bought, and that he in appearance had tied the knot of a strict amity with
Chlidebert, who promised him the Succession, because he had no Children, he
sent for Deuteria, and publicly Married her, despising Wisgard, the Daughter
of Wacon, King of the Lombards, whom he had betrothed in the life time of his
Father Thierry.

Yvetot in Normandy, which was done, say they, by King Clotaire, in
satisfaction for his having with his own hand in the very Church, and on a
Good*Friday
Holy Friday, Killed one Gautier, who was Lord of the Manor.

Athalaric, King of Italy, dies in the age of Adolescency. Amalasuinta his
Mother, espouses Theodad, Son of Amalafrede, Sister to King Theoderic, and sets
him on the Throne: but shortly after the Ungrateful makes her away, upon a
suspicion of Adultery.

The death of Amalasuinta caused the ruin of the Ostrogoths. Justinian, with
whom she had always kept in amity, gave Command to Belisarius to revenge her
death, and to recover Italy. At first Dalmatia, the Islands of Sicily and
Sardinia, after that Abbruzza and Lucania, the Campagnia, or Terra del Lavor,
surrenders to him without any resistance; and the City of Naples is surprised
by a way thorough an Aqueduct. Theodad sends an Army under the Conduct of
Vitiges his Great Master of his Horse.
Officer; but the Ostrogoths who had a hatred for him, elect this Vitiges; who
to secure the Diadem for himself, puts Theodad to death, and Marries
Mattasuinta, Daughter of Amalasuinta.

Theodad dyed, he was in Treaty with the French, and proffered them Provence,
and Two thousand pound of Gold, if they would embrace his Defense. Vitiges
being pressed by Belisarius, and finding himself not strong enough to resist
the Imperialists and the French, put in execution what his Predecessor had
projected, and delivered Provence, and the Money to the French. If we must
believe Procopius; Justinian confirmed this Cession by his Letters Patents. It
seems they divided it into two Provinces, that of Marseilles, and that of Arles.

Theodebert made no scruple to take off both Parties, that he might be the
better enabled to ruin them both; He had caused Ten thousand Burgundians to
slip into Italy, who having joined with Oraia, one of Vitiges Chiefs, had
helped him to retake Milan.

Milanois with Two hundred thousand Men. The Roman Army, and that of the
Ostrogoths were encamped one just over against the other near Pavia; either of
them thought he came to their assistance, and his design was to surprise them
both. He therefore Assaults and Defeats the Ostrogoths, and then comes
thundering upon the Romans, and cuts them all in pieces: But a Plague and
Famine soon revenged them upon him for this perfidiousness. When he found his
Men perished by thousands, he repassed the Mountains with all speed, for fear
lest Belisarius, who was in Tuscany, should come and attaque him.

Vitiges being Besieged by Belisarius in Ravenna, omitted not to crave help of
the French, who promised to come to his assistance with Five hundred thousand
Men; but before they were arrived, he had compounded with Belisarius, and was
gone to Constantinople, where of a King, he became an Officer to the Emperor.
The Visigoths in his stead chose Theodobaldus Governor of Verona; and he being
slain three years after, they substituted the famous Totila, who Took, and
Sacked the City of Rome twice, in 547. and in 550.

Deuteria became so furiously jealous of her own Daughter, because the King her
Husband began to look on her, that she made her away in a cruel and ingenious
manner, having caused untamed Bulls to be harnassed, to draw her Chariot, who
precipitated her from off the Bridge at Verdun into the Meuse. The French, who
during the Two first Races, and a good while in the Third, had a right to
concern themselves, and to intermeddle about the Marriage of their Kings,
offended at so unnatural an act; and besides, touched with a just sense of pity
for Wisgard, whom Theodebert had contracted seven years before, obliged the
King to repudiate Deuteria, and take Wisgarda. This lived but two years, and
made room for a third Wife.

Childebert's Uncle and he, fell unawares upon Clotaire; he had only time to
retire with what people he could get together to the It is not well known what
Forest this was.
Forest d'Arelaune, near the Banks of the Seine, and to stop up the Avenues
with great Trees, cut down and laid across. When they were ready to force him
in this Post, the Heavens moved by the Prayers of the Queen Clotilda, excited a
miraculous Tempest, which not hurting the Camp of Clotaire, and thundering upon
theirs, did so astonish them, that they sent to him to desire a Peace, and his
Amity:

Theudis Reigned then over the Visigoths; the French being ever their mortal
enemies: Childebert and Clotaire passed the Pireneans, and ravaged all Arragon.
The City of Saragossa being besieged, the Inhabitants bethought themselves of
making a general Procession round their Walls in the habit of Penitents and
Mourners, carrying, instead of a Banner, the Vest of St. Vincent, Martyr, their
Patron. This extraordinary Spectacle amazed Childebert, and mollisied him;
insomuch as he accepted of some Presents made him by the Bishop, amongst which
was the Robe of St. Vincent, It is now St. Germain des Prez.
which he brought to Paris, where he built a Church in Honor of that Martyr,
and put that precious Relic there in Depositum.

The Spanish Authors say, that upon their return, the French were beaten at
their passage to the Mountains, by one of the Generals of the Visigoths, who
was called Tediscle: If this be so, there is some likelihood that they made two
Expeditions into Spain at different times, yet soon after one another.

In the year 548. Theudis, King of the Visigoths was killed in his Palace, and
this Theudiscle set upon his Throne; but within two years after be was Treated
in the same Agila put in his place.

Whilst the Imperialists and the Ostrogoths were engaged with each other,
Theodebert, who was already master of Rhetia, of Vindelicia, and of Suevia,
would needs take his advantage of that War, and by his Lieutenants (Hamingue
was the Principal) made himself Master of the lesser Italy, that is to say,
what they have since called Lombardy. Justinians Forces having gained some
advantage over his, That Emperor had the vanity to thrust in amongst his other
Titles, that of Francica, which is to say, Conqueror of the French.

Theodebert not able to suffer it, would cross over Panonia, and Mesia, and
bring all his Power into Thrace, to let him see the French were not vanquished.
As he was preparing for this Expedition, a mournful accident took away his
Life. Being one day a Hunting, (an exercise fatal to many Princes) a wild Bull
pursued by his Huntsmen, whom he waited for with a Javelin in his hand, broke
down a Branch, which hit him so rudely upon the Head, that a Fever seized him,
whereof he dyed in the 14th of his Reign, and about the 43 of his Age. He had
one Son and one Daughter, Theodouval, or Theodebaldus, and Bertoaire;
Theodebaldus born of Deuteria, succeeded in his Estates; a Prince of a weak
Mind and Body, who became impotent and benumbed from his Waste downwards.
Bertoaire kept her Virginity, and served the Church with great Devotion.

About the time of the death of Theodebert, happened that also of Clotilda, who
piously ended her days at Tours; She retired her self thither, to pray to God
on the St. Martin, where in those times were the greatest Devotions of the
Gauls and French.

As Theodebert had been a Prince of vast Undertakings, he had mightily
burdened French. Partenius had been the chief Author and Minister; he was a
terrible Glutton, as most of those Men or Cattle generally are, who took Aloes
to digest his Meat, wherewith he crammed himself, and so emptied his Belly more
Beast-like then he filled it. The French Men being stirred up to do Justice
upon him, he besought two Bishops to convoy him to Tryers; he was in no more
safety there then at Mets, the People seeking for him to murder him, and
having haled him out of a Church Chest, where those Prelates had concealed him,
affronted him by a thousand Outrages, and after tied him to a Post, where they
stoned him to death.

CHILDEBERT in Neustria, at Paris. CLOTAIRE in Neustria at Soissons.
THEODEBALDUS, Aged 13 or 14 years, in Australia. Burgundy belonging to both
these.

Ambassadors from Justinian solicited Theodebaldus to abandon the Defense of
the Ostrogoths, and to make a League with the Empire; he refuses the one and
the other, and nevertheless sends his to Constantinople, to Treat of some
difference concerning the Cities he held in Italy. They had full satisfaction
from Justinian, but could not prevail with him, whatever instances they urged,
upon the requests of the Italian Bishops, to restore to their Sees, Pope
Vigilius, and Datius, Bishop of Milan, whom he detained, and Treated very ill.

Visigoths, between King Agila and Athanagildes, this last had recourse to the
assistance of the Emperor Justinian, who failed not to make use of so good an
occasion. The Patrician Liberius having conducted several Forces there on his
behalf, seized on several Towns, and was going to regain all Spain, as
Belisarius had Africa, if the Visigoths had not killed Agila, and Elected
Athanagildes; which did not however prevent the Romans by the Alliances they
made in the Country, and with the assistance they received from time to time,
to maintain themselves there about 90 years, till the Reign of Suintila, who
drove them quite out from thence.

Totila, King of the Ostrogoths, too proud of the Victories gained over the
Romans, is Defeated, and slain in Battle by Narses the Eunuque, Lieutenant to
the Emperor Justinian. Teia his Successor has the same misfortune a short
time after, and Narses brought under the Imperial Laws, the greatest portion of
what that Nation possessed. Thus the Kingdom of the Ostrogoths was extinguished,
in Italy, where it had subsisted but 58 years.

The remainder of the Ostrogoths having implored the assistance of the French,
two Alman Lords, who were Brothers (they were called Leutarius and Bucelinus)
by the permission rather then by Order of Theobaldus, descend into Italy with
75000 Combatants, partly Almans, and partly French, and ravage it both on the
Right and Left, even to the further end of the Country.

Leutaire, which had pierced as far as Otranto, thinking to bring their Plunder
to some safe place, was beaten near Fano, in the Province Emilia, Dutchies of
Parma, Plaisance, Modena, and Boulognia.
and from thence, being Retreated by very difficult ways into States of Venice,
Trent and Mantcua.
Venetia, which then belonged to Theobaldus; when they thought to rest
themselves in a little Town, the small and unwholesome Lodgings bred so furious
a Contagion, that it destroyed them all, not one Soldier escaping.

That of Bucelin, who staid in the Country de Lavour, being already weakened
very much with the like Plagues, was made an end of in a Battle which Narses
gave them near Capoiia, from whence only Five Men escaped. The year following
the Duke Amingua, another General of Theodebaldus, being joined with the
gleanings Ostrogoths, whom the Count Vidin had gathered up, had the same fate
as Bucelin; there remained nothing to the French in Italy, but the passage of
the Alps.

After such bloody Losses, Theodebaldus ended his languishing Life, being in
the 20th of his Age, and the 7th of his Reign. He had Married but one Wife,
Valdrade, Daughter of Wacon King of the Lombards, by whom having no Children,
his Succession returned to his Two Great Uncles. But Clotaire who was the
strongest, because he had Five Sons, all bearing Arms, seizes upon it
immediately, and on his Wife likewise, whom he Married. As touching the
Kingdom, Childebert, who had none but Daughters, durst not then speak a word;
but as for the Wife, the Bishops made him so many Remonstrances about that
Incest, that he quitted her, and gave her in Marriage to Garibald, Duke of
Bavaria.

CHILDEBERT in Neustria at Paris, and CLOTAIRE in Neustria and Austrasia.
Burgundy to them Both.

The Saxons, who were Tributaries to the French, even from the time of Thierry
Mets, having heard of his death, took occasion to Revolt conjoyntly with the
Turingians. Clotaire straightway goes thither, and having beaten them near the
Weser, plundered the Countries both of the one and the other.

French would give no Ear, but resolved to chastise them; and because he
refused to lead them on, they tore down his Tent, and forced him to go in the
Front; and indeed they were beaten with a horrible slaughter, and the King
gladly proffered the Saxons that Peace which had been denied them.

Childebert, jealous of his prosperities, incited them a third time to take up
Arms against him, and at the same instant, set his own Son Chramne to rebel
against him. Clotaire had bestowed on him the Government of Aquitain where he
had behaved himself so tyrannically, that great Complaints were brought against
him; his Father had therefore recalled him to Court, to give an account of his
actions: he having refused to come, he sends his two other Sons, Charibert and
Gontran into Aquitain, to compel him to Obedience; and in the mean time marches
against the Saxons, whom he brought under by several Defeats, and imposed a
Tribute on them of 500 Oxen.

While he was in Saxony, a rumor was spread that he was slain; Childebert
falls into Champagne, and ravages it; the two young Brothers being affrighted,
retired into Burgundy; Chamne pursues them, and from thence comes to Paris,
where he engages himself by an Oath to Childebert, never to reconcile himself
to his Father.

Childebert returning from Champagne, was struck with a troublesome malady,
which having made him languish for some time, ended not but in death. St.
Germain, Bishop of Paris, buried him in the Church of St. Vincent, which he had
Erected. Amongst his Virtues, he was eminent in his Charity toward the Poor,
and his Zeal for Religion. The first made him part with all his Gold and Silver
Plate, to bestow it in Charity; the other was signalized by the several
Foundations for pious Uses, and by his care to propagate the Faith, and
preserve its Purity. For he made an Edict to demolish all the Pagan Temples;
and the Pope Pelagius being suspected guilty of the Errors, condemned by the
Council of Chalcedon, he sent to him to know his Profession of the Faith, that
he might take some course against that scandal.

His Wife Ultrogoth survived him a long time, and led a Holy Life, with two
Daughters she had by him; they were named Chrotherge, and Chrotesinda; they
never Married. Their Uncle Clotaire, whether in hatred to their Father, or for
fear lest they should pretend to the Succession, detained them in prison with
their Mother, till he had secured himself of the Kingdom.

This is the First Example of the Salique Law, in favor of the Males to the
Crown. Clotaire succeeded, to the exclusion of his Nieces; and he was so happy,
that having survived his three elder Brothers, he rejoyned in his own person,
the entire Succession of the Grand Clovis.

Clotair I. King VII.
POPE, JOHN III. 559. In March S. 14 years, Two only under this Reign.
Chramne, destitute of the protection of Childebert, reconciled himself to his
Father; but soon after he flies off again, and retires into Bretagne to
Conober, one of the Princes of that Country; for there were diverse, and such
as did not depend upon the French. His Father hotly pursues him, and fought him
near the Seaside; History does not exactly mark out the place, but that the
Bretons were defeated, Conober killed in the Fray, and Chramine taken prisoner.
The cruel Father orders his People to burn him, with his Wife and his Children,
which they presently executed on the spot, putting Fire to a place filled with
Straw, where they had locked them up.

So cruel an action caused in him a cruel Repentance, in vain he strove to
appease Cuise, a burning Fever seized on his Bowels, whereof he died at
Compiegne. He was in the 61 year of his age, and about the

His four Sons conducted his Corpse with great Pomp, the Priests Singing all the
way of the City of Soissons, where they buried him, as he had ordained, in the
Church, and before the Altar of Vulgarly, St. Mard.
St. Medard.

He had four or five Wives, amongst the rest, he kept two Sisters together at
one time, Ingonde and Haregonde, by the First he left three Sons, Cherebert,
Gontran, Sigebert, who Reigned, and a Daughter named Clodosuinda, who Married
Alboin, King of the Lombards. By Haregonda he had Chilperic, who Reigned
likewise; and by Ghinsine, the unhappy Chramne. Many Authors, ancient enough,
give him a Daughter named Blitilda, and Marry her with the Senator Ansbert,
whom they make paternal Grandfather to St. Arnold. Some modern Critiques have
maintained, that the Chronology did not agree; but there is no appearance that
so many Authors should, or could have invented such a Fable without any
necessity, or ground to move them to it.

Cherebert, King VIII Cherebert, Aribert, Caribert, is the same Name.
.
POPE, JOHN III. S. Ten years under this Reign.
CHEREBERT, King of Paris, aged Twenty years. GONTRAN of Orleans, and of
Burgundy, aged 36 years. SIGEBERT of Austrasia, aged Twenty five or Thirty
years. CHILPERIC of Soissons, aged Twenty, or Twenty five years.
THe Kingdom was for the Second time divided into Four, for his four Sons,
which was the cause of infinite Civil Wars, Murders, Treasons, Plunderings,
and Calamities.

Before their shares were settled, Chilperic the youngest of them had Bresne,
and afterward that at Paris; but he was driven thence by the other three. This
done, they drew Lots which gave the Kingdom of Paris to Cherebert, that of
Orleans, and a good part of that of Burgundy to Gontran, (he resided at
Chaalons) that of Austrasia to Sigebert, and that of Soissons to Chilperic.

Besides this, each of them had a share in Aquitain, as the four Sons of Clovis
before Provence; that so each of them, and altogether, might be obliged to
maintain them with their joint Forces.

The Austrasians had nominated for the Office of Mayre of the Palace, a Lord
named Chrodin; he refused to accept of it, considering, that all the Grandees
of the Country, being his Kindred, would have thought they might have taken
the liberty of committing all sorts of violence on the People with impunity;
and that he could not have the severity to punish them for it. He therefore
advised them to Gogon Emp. Justin. Son of a Sister of Justinians, in November. R.
13 years 9 Months;
to them, who was of his Educating, and taking him by the Arms, he puts them
round his Neck, in token that he owned him for his Superior.

The Avarois, a People of Hun, flying the Tyranny of the Turks, who were of the
same Nation, had forsaken their Native Soil, and were come to the Service of
the Emperor Justinian. After his death, being slighted by Justin, they sought
their Fortunes elsewhere, and having penetrated into the heart of Germany, they
ravaged Turingia, which belonged to Sigebert. This King not fearing these
Barbarians, who were reckoned so terrible, attaqued them near the Banks of the
Elbe, and having mated them in a great Battle, he sent them back again with
shame to the Danube, from whence they were come.

Chilperic in the mean time falls upon his Territory, and ruined all the
Country of Rheims. Sigebert being come back, repels him most vigorously, and
took his Son Theodebert prisoner, with the City of Soissons. In this same year
the quarrel ended in a peace, followed with the liberty of the young Prince;
but not a perfect reconciliation,

In 570. began the Kingdom of the Lombards in Italy, their King Alboinus being
Milan this year, after he had conquered all the Country from the Alps to
Tuscany, excepting only the Exerchat of Ravenna, which yet remained in the
Empire. The name of Lombards came either from their wearing of long Beards, or
that they were armed with long Thence com^s the Name of Halbards.
Bards; which was a kind of Axe. Their first Habitation was on the further
Banks of the Elbe, whence coming forth, and having often changed their
Dwellings, Four hundred years together, they in the end fixed themselves in
Pannonia, in the days of the Emperor Justinian. From thence their King
Alboinus, a very Warlike Prince, and brought some Forces into Italy for the
Romans Service, in the time of the Funnque haarses. Now they had takensuch
delight in the Habitation so rich and fruitful a Land, that that Great Captain
being dead, they all went thither with their Wives and Children, in the year
568, under the Conduct of that King. He likewise carried thither Thirty
thousand Saxons, who were willing to follow him, and the remainder of the
Gipedes, whose Kingdom he had extinguished in Pannonia.

French, and begot a mortal Enmity between them. As they were huge covetous,
and pussed up with their Victories, they were not satisfied with the spoils of
Italy, but made frequent incursions into Rhetia and Provence. In that very
year, some numbers of them, in a body, without a Head, were sallen into the
Country of Valais, but instead of carrying away Plnnder, they lost their Lives.

The year following, they marched much stronger into the Kingdom of Burgundy,
Gontran had sent against them, and slew their General. This was Amat Patrician
or Governor of the Province of Arles; but when they would needs come again the
Third time, and had ransacked the Countries about Ambrun, the Patrician
Mummole, Successor to Amat, ensnared, or surrounded them; and having stopped
all the ways, by felling of huge Trees, charged these Robbers so smartly, that
he destroyed almost the whole Army, or made them prisoners.

France took in their Marriages. Gontran after he had chosen a Servant for his
Mistress, belonging to some Courtier, from whom he had forced her, espoused
Marcatrude, Daughter of Magnachaire, whom he rejected in a short time
afterward, to take one that waited on her; she was called Austrigilda Bobilla.
Chilperic had repudiated Queen Andovere, though he had three Sons by her, for
the love of Fredegonda, one of the Women belonging to his Chamber. Cherebert
put away Ingoberge, whom he had Married in the life time of Clotaire, and
Married with Meroflede, Daughter to one that worked in Woollen; and then
afterward with her Sister Marcovefe, though she were under the Holy Veil, and
likewise with Theodegildus, Daughter to a Shepherd.

King Sigebert on the contrary, desiring a lawful Marriage, and one well
qualified, espoused Brunechild, or Brunehand, Daughter of Atanagildus, King of
the Visigoths. Sometime afterward Chilperic followed his example, and having
for a short while quitted his Amors to Fredegonda, demanded likewise
Gelasuinta, Sister to Brunebaud. The Father consents to it, but not without a
great deal of repugnance, and the obliging both himself, and the chief Lords
his Subjects, to swear by many Oaths, that he should never take any other
whilst she was living.

Cherebert being gone into Xaintonge, which was in his Lot, dyed in the Castle
of Blaye on the Garonne, and was buried in the same place, within the Church of
St. Romain. He was little less then Forty nine years, and had Reigned Nine. He
had but three Daughters, Berte by Queen Ingoberge, and Berteflede, and
Crodielde by some Mistress. These two last were Veiled; but very vain Nuns.
Berte was Married to Ethelbert, King of Canterbury in England, and the most
potent of all the English Kings. She was bestowed upon him, on condition she
should have the free Exercise of the Christian Religion: and to this end she
took a Bishop along with her. She was a very Beautiful, and yet a more virtuous
Princess, who wrought upon the mind of her Husband to embrace Christianity, and
who insinuated Civility, and Politeness amongst the English, who were very
barbarous till then.

Chilperic, King IX.
GONTRAN in Neustria and Burgundy, at Chaalons. SIGEBERT in Austrasia, at Mets.
CHILPERIC in Neustria, at Paris.

CHerebert's three Brothers immediately re-divided the Kingdom amongst Paris,
and put in this Condition, which they confirmed by Oath, upon the Relics, or
at the shrine of some Martyr, That neither of the Three should go in thither,
without the consent of the other two, and he that should offer it, was to
forfeit his share in that City, and in the Kingdom that was Chereberts.

Chilperic, notwithstanding his solemn Oaths, soon joined again with his
Fredegonde; Gelasuinta to be strangled in her Bed. His Brothers conceived a
horror for this Crime, and made War upon him; Sigebert, more hotly then the
other, being incited by his Wife Brunehaud, to whom he was forced to give up
for reparation of this Murder, the Countries of Bourdelois, Lymosin, Quercy,
Bearn, and Bigorre, which he had given to his Sister for a Marriage Portion,
and which he had seized on afterward

The Avarois broke the Treaty, and made a Second irruption into Turingia
Sigebert presenting himself to give them Battle, upon the nick of the On-sett,
instead of Weapons, they made use of Diabolical Enchantments, and caused
hideous Fantasmes, or Spirits to appear, most dreadful to the French men's
Sight; perhaps they had ugly Vizards on, or had blacked their Faces. Whatever
it were, it dismayed them so much, that it put them to the rout, and drove them
into a corner, where they hemmed them in on all sides. Sigebert could not get
out from this extremity, but by the power of Money, and by furnishing them with
Provisions, which they had great need of.

Going from hence, he made War against Gontran, to get from him the City of
Arles, Aix, Avignon, and Marseilles, which he held in Provence. Firmin Count
d'Auvergne, and Audover, drawing near with some Forces, the Burghers easily
surrendered to them, and then drove them out again with more ease. For as soon
as Celse the Patrician of Arles, appeared on the behalf of Gontran, they
persuaded them to go forth and Fight him, assuring them, that whether Victors
or Vanquished, they would receive them again into the Town: but when Celse had
repulsed them, and they desired to be let in, they kept the Gates fast shut
against them. Thus their Men were all cut off or drowned in the Rhosne, and
they made prisoners. Sigebert having Gontran.

Anno 574. Alboinus, King of the Lombards was poisoned by Rosamond his Second
Wife, cruelly enraged, for that he had constrained her at a Feast, to drink out
of the Skull of Cunimond, King of the Gepides, her Father. Clepbus having
succeeded him; and a while after he being also assassinated by one of his own
People, the Lombards would have no more Kings, and committed the Government to
Thirty Dukes, each of them having a City. Three of the most potent, undertook
to Conquer, upon the score of convenience, that part of Gaui, which lies
between the Alps and the Rhosne, and entered upon it with three several Bodies
of Soldiers. But the Patrician Mummole beat them in several Rencounters, and
drove them out all three.

Upon the dividing the Kingdom of Cherebert, Touraine and Poiton fell to
Sigebert, Chilperic burned with a desire to accommodate himself therewith, at
what price soever. Sigebert; King Gontran their Elder, endeavored all he
possibly could to prevent them, and when he could not, he sometimes went along
with the strongest.

After two or three Ruptures, and two or three Agreements, Chilperic, who would
not let fall his design, allured Gontran to his Party, took up Arms again, and
fell into Champagne; whilst on the other side, his Son Theodebert entered into
Poiton. Sigebert hearing of it, took a positive Resolution to pursue him to the
death. Having therefore drawn together all those fierce People from beyond the
Rhine, he penetrated without opposition, even to the Banks of the Seine. At the
same instant he sent Gontran-Boson, and Gondesigilus to Poitou, to drive out
Theodebert thence. That young Prince being forsaken by his Men, would
nevertheless Fight, but he was Taken, Slain, and Stripped by Order of
Gontran-Boson, who afterward being afraid of Chilperic's wrath, took Sanctuary
in St. Martins at Tours.

Chilperic received notice likewise of the agreement between Gontran and
Sigebert. The same hour, overwhelmed with grief and astonishment, he went from
Rouen, whither he had retired himself, and shut himself up, together with his
Wife and Children in Tournay. Every thing surrendered to Sigebert, Paris opened
her Gates to him, and his Wife Brunehaud animated by revenge, came presently
thither with her Children to establish her Throne, and push forward her
Husbands resentment against Chilperic. For this purpose he dispatches away a
part of his Army which besieged him in Tournay; and he with the other Body
encamped at Vitry, where he took the Oaths of the Neustrian Lords, who having
abjured his Brother, acknowledged him for their King, and lifted him up on
their Pavois.
Target or Shield; or set him on the Throne.

Nothing was left for Chilperic, but the determinate Courage of Ferdegonde,
this was enough to save him. She by her flattery and caresses, knew so well how
to Enchant a couple of Citizens of Terouenne, Men robust and brutish, that
they coming to Sigebert, under pretense of entertaining him with some affair of
great consequence, did stab him in his Tent, where they were soon cut in pieces
by his Soldiers, as she wished.

Sigebert was very near the 44 th year of his age, and about the end of the 14
th of his Reign. He had a Son but four years and eight Months old, named
Childebert, and two Daughters, Ingond and Clodosuinde, the first was Married to
Hermenigildus, the Son of Leuvigildus, King of the Visigoths; the Second
betrothed only to Recaredus, elder Brother to Hermenigildus. His Body was
interred in St. Mards at Soissons, near his Father, by whose Order he had
finished that Church.

GONTRAN King of Burgundy at Soissons. CHILPERIC King of Soissons and Paris, in
Neustria. CHILDEBERT II. called the Young, aged Five years, in Austrasia.

Sigebert was followed with a sudden and general Revolution, the Austrasians
raised the Siege of Tournay, and having joined with those who were at Vitry,
they retired in confusion: the Neustrians returned to the Obedience of
Chilperic; and Brunehaud found her self surrounded and cooped up in Paris,
where she then was with her Children, and knew not how to get thence. But the
wisdom of the Duke Gombaud, the greatest Lord of Austrasia, found out a way to
save the Pupil Childebert, having let him down over the Walls in a Basket, and
put him into the hands of a faithful Person, who himself carried him into the
City of Mets.

Already some of the Austrasians had made their Composition with Chilperic, but
the rest being assembled together in great numbers, according to their custom,
set the young Prince upon the Royal Seat on New-years-day, and put him under
the protection of Gontran; so that Chilperic lost his hopes of invading that
Kingdom: but he seized upon that of Paris, and banished Brunehaud to Rouen, and
her two Daughters to Meaux.

Meroveus his eldest Son by Queen Audovere, to seize upon Poitou, which
belonged to the Kingdom of Childebert. Meroveus, instead of putting this design
in execution, went to Tours, and from thence to Rouen, where he suffered
himself to be so much surprised with the charms of Brunehaud, as then aged at
least 28 years, that he Married her; Pretextat, Bishop of Rouen, Godfather to
the young Prince, making the Marriage. The Father hastens thither, and having
by deceitful words drawn those so newly Wedded out of a Church, where they had
taken shelter, he set a Guard upon Brunehaud, and carried his Son away with him.

Mean time the Austrasian Lords, who were come to submit to him, returned again
to Childebert: Godin amongst others, who to carry somewhat with him that might
bid him welcome, armed the Champanois and made himself Master of Soissons, where
he wanted but little of surprising Fredegonda. Chilperic was quickly there,
vanquishes him, and re-takes the Town: but Fredegonda believing that Godin had
not undertaken so bold an enterprise without the participation of Meroveus and
Brunehaud, obliged her Husband to confine that young Prince, and a while after
to force him to turn Priest, and send him to the Monastery of Aunisse, which is
called now St. Calas, the name of its first Abbot.

The Austrasians demand their Queen Brunehaud with so much earnestness, that
Childebert. His Son Clovis took the Town of Saints: but the Duke Didier going
to besiege that of Limoges, met in his way the Patrician Mummole, whom Gontran
sent to Didier's, who saved himself with much ado.

About the same time Meroveus escaped from the Monastery, and secured himself
in the Church called St. Martins of Tours, prompted thereto by Gailen his most
intimate Confident, who was come to visit him, and drawn by Gontran-Boson, who
had sheltred himself in that place, as we have related. The Stepmother
Ferdegonda favored this Boson, for the same reason that Chilperic would put
him to death, and maintained a private Commerce with him, that he might destroy
Meroveus, as he had made his Brother Theodebert to perish.

The young Prince having notice that Fredegonda sought by all means to take
away his life, did not find himself there in security: He goes out from thence
accompanied with this Boson, whose treachery he knew not of, and would go to
find out Brunehaud, but the Austrasians refused to admit him: he remained then
some time concealed, and a Vagabond in Champagne. After which, this Boson and
Giles Bishop of Rheims, upon the pretense of delivering up the City of*
Terouenne to him, made him fall into their Ambuscades, surrounding and taking
him Prisoner in a Village, of which they gave immediate notice to Chilperic: he
went thither with Fredegonda, who made him believe, that apprehending he should
be put to tortures, he had borrowed the helping hand of Gailen his favorite to
dispatch him.

A while before the Bishop Pretextat his Godfather, was accused before the
Bishops assembled in Council at Paris, where no proofs appearing strong enough
against him touching what was alleged, he suffers himself to be induced by two
false Brothers, upon an assurance the King would pardon him, to confess more
than they could desire, for which he was banished to an Island near Coustances:
but with hopes of returning, because he pretended he had not been degraded,
though they had placed Melantius in his See.

Death having snatched away the two Sons which Gontran had by Austrigilda his
second Wife, although he were not above the age of getting Children, not being
above Fifty, he desired the Austrasians to bring his Nephew Childebert to him,
and Adopted him, having placed him in his Royal Seat. These two Princes being
thus allied, sent to Chilperic to demand their part of the Kingdom of Paris,
and declared War against him: Chilperic did but scoff at them, diverting
himself in building of Cirques (or places for public Spectacles) at Paris and
at Soissons, where he would have entertained the People with Chariot-races,
could he have found Charioteers that had skill enough.

The Bretons about the year 441. had possessed themselves of Vannes; afterward
Clovis had taken that place again, and likewise the Cities of Nants and Rennes,
at that time governed by Roman Captains. This year 578. Waroc or Guerec a Count
of Bretagne had the boldness to seize again upon Vannes, which appertained to
the Kingdom of Chilperic, and march up to the French who were encamped on the
Banks of the River Vilain. They had some Companies of Saxons or Sesnes-Bessins
in their Army; one night he passes the River and beat up their Quarter; but
three days afterward finding himself too weak for so potent an Enemy, he
desires Emp. Tiberius II. Chosen by Justin in August, R. four years.
Peace, swore fealty to the King, and renders up the City of Vannes, upon
condition he should remain Governor. A short while after he again seizes it,
and so long as he lived put the French to a great deal of trouble.

Chilperic and his wicked Wife Fredegonda over-burthened the People with
Imposts: they had taxed an Amphore of The 7th or 8th part of a Muid, and the
Muid is a third part of a Tun.
Wine upon every half Acre of Vineyard, several other Charges upon things of
another kind, and a Tribute upon the head of every Slave, and indeed a kind of
Poll-money for every Freeman, insomuch that their Subjects ran away out of the
Kingdom, as a place of Torment, and peopled that of Gontran and Childebert:
Wiser in so doing, than those of Limousin, who having opposed a Referendaire
(or Lord Chancellor, so named in those times) who was going to settle the Taxes
or Duties in that Country, and Chilperic sent thither to chastise their
Sedition.

Sampson, eldest Son of Fredegonda died: the following year Chilperic was
tormented with a long and continual Fever; as he was upon Recovery, two France,
and affected Children most generally. Fredegonda believed this Sickness of her
Children was inflicted by Heaven, who thus avenged the Sufferings of the
oppressed People: she was stricken to the heart, and wrought so far upon her
Husband by her arguments and entreaties, that he threw the Lists of all the
Tax-gatherers into the Fire, and recalled those that were sent abroad to
collect them.

Audovere; his name was Clavis. This Prince seeing himself necessarily the
Successor* let fall some words of Resentment and Threatening imprudently; By
this she well foresaw what must become of her if he Reigned, and resolved to
prevent it: she therefore accuses him to his Father for having poisoned her two
Sons, and pre-possessed him so far with this Calumny, that he gave up his only
Son to her Vengeance. The wicked Woman causes his Throat to be cut, and the
Body to be cast into the River, and afterward the unfortunate Audovere to be
Strangled, though she wore the Sacred Vail, and her Daughter Basina to be
locked up in the Monastery of Poitiers, after her Sattelites had deflowred her.
A Fisherman having found the Body of the young Prince, and knowing it to be his
by the long Hair, buried it under a Monument of Turf, from whence King Gontran
afterward transferred it to St. Vincents Church in Paris.

Two years before Chilperic had sent Ambassadors to the Emperor Tiberius, to
congratulate him, as I believe, upon his promotion to the Empire, and make up
some kind of League with him against the Lombards. This year they brought him
back all imaginable satisfaction and very rich Presents, amongst others were
Medals of Gold a pound in weight.

Austrasia and Childebert's Person being under the Government of Queen
Brunehaud, the Lords of the Country despised the Commands of a Woman, and lived
in excessive Licentiousness; Those that gave her the most trouble, were
Ranchin, and Gontran-Boson, Vrsion, Bertefrey, and Giles Bishop of Rheims, who
associated together and oppressed whom they pleased. Loup Duke of Champagne, a
faithful Servant to his Prince and Master, as Wise as Just, was insufferable to
them because of his good qualities: they took up Arms to destroy him, and he
got his Friends together to defend himself. The Queen had all the trouble
imaginable to prevent their coming to blows, even to the enduring outrageous
words from Vrsion: but after all she could not so well secure the Duke from
their fury, but he was forced to quit the Kingdom, and take refuge with Gontran.

Rheims: as he was secretly engaged and wedded to Chilperic, of which he had
given testimonies, having formerly treacherously delivered up the City of
Rheims, and drawn Meroveus into the fatal snare: he caused his Faction to act
so powerfully, that the Austrasian Lords, to the prejudice of the Alliance
their King had made with his Uncle Gontran, obliged him to make a League with
Chilperic against him; The Lure was, That Chilperic having at that time no Son,
promised the Succession to him.

This League being made, Childebert sent to demand the half of Marseilles of
his Uncle, who very far from restoring it, made himself Master of the other, by
the treachery of Dynamius Governor of Provence for Childebert. After this feat
Dynamius goes over to Gontran, as in revenge the Patrician Mummole, pushed at
by some intrigues of Court (ever satal to great Commanders) forsakes Gontran to
be of Childebert's side, and sortifies himself in the City of Avignon, which
that King without doubt had put into his hands for his security, and that from
thence he might make incursions in the Enemies Country.

The business of Marseilles caused an absolute Rupture betwixt the two Kings;
Chilperic who desired this, presently falls upon Gontran's Countries, and the
Duke Didier by his order invades Perigord and Agenois, without much opposition.

Another of his Dukes by name Bladastes was not so fortunate against the
Gascons; Acquitaine, he was hemmed in, and his Forces cut in pieces. The
Gascons then inhabited upon the Confines of Cantabria, between the Countries of
the Visigoths and the French, and by their Excursions made themselves
formidable both to the one and the other, carrying away whatever they could
meet withal, and afterward sheltring themselves again on their Mountains.

There was only Chilperic that made open War upon Gontran: but the Patrician
Mummole with the secret support of the Lords of Austrasia, was contriving a
dangerous Design against him; There was a certain Person named Gondebaud who
pretended to be the Son of King Clotaire, and he might well be so, considering
the multitude of Wives that King had. This Gondebaud not having been able to
get Constantinople, Tiberius the Emperor then living; It happened that
Gontran-Boson Emp. Mauritius Son in Law to Tiberius, in Aug. Reigned nigh
twenty years.
made a Voyage into those parts, it is not mentioned upon what account, and he
persuades this Man so much that the French wished for him, and that Gontran and
Chilperic having no Children, he might safely come to the Succession, that he
resolved to return into France. Tiberius having a prospect of what he might
possibly attain to one day, assisted him with great Sums of Money: he comes
ashore at Marseilles, was received by the Bishop, and afterward Entertained at
Avignon Mummole. But the same Gontran-Boson who had persuaded him to return,
having set himself now to persecute the Bishop and such as favored him, he
wisely withdrew himself into an Island at the mouth of the Rhosne: and then the
Traitor seized on all his Moneys, and took a Commission from King Gontran to
besiege Mummole in Avignon. Childebert being informed of it, sent one of his
Dukes, who quashed that Design.

The Provinces suffered most horribly by the cruel Discord of these Kings, the
Soldiers who marched every where, plundered, burnt, and put all to the Sword.
There was no Discipline, but so uncontrolled a License, that the Soldiers would
fly in the faces of their own Officers, if they did but question or forbid
them, as soon as on the meanest fellow.

With this cruel Desolation, Heavens sent a cruel Epidemical Disease which
raged over all France, but most fiercely over Paris and that Vicinage: it was
called, Lues Inquinaria, because it appeared in those parts: it burnt those
that were tainted with it, with great pain, and made an Escar in a short time
like a Cautery: the most part died howling and shreiking most horribly, and
there was no cure found but in the Churches, and especially that of our Ladies.

Chilperic had besieged Melun, and commanded three of his Dukes to attaque
Bourges: the Berryvians came forth to meet them, and gave them Battle, which
was very bloody to both Parties* Gontran who went in his own Person to fight
Chilperic, having met with a Body of his Men, who had left the rest to get
Plunder, cut them all off; Chilperic much cooled with this Rebuke, caused some
Propositions to be made toward an Accommodation: and Gontran who was of a mild
and peaceable Temper, receives them with joy.

Chilperic thought with himself that now he should get him to join to oppress
Childebert, in whose Kingdom he had great intelligence by the means of the
Bishop of Rheims: but maugre all the intrigues of those Factious Spirits,
Gontran and Childebert were reconciled, the Uncle restored that part of
Marseilles which began the breach to his Nephew again, and they formed a League
together to recover at their joint Charges and Expense, those Cities belonging
to Chereberts Kingdom, which Chilperic had gotten from it.

Upon the point when Childebert was preparing himself to assault Chilperic, the
Emperor Mauritius for the Sum of 50000 Crowns of Gold, ready Money, obliges him
to carry his Forces into Italy against the Lombards who held the City of Rome
besieged. The young Prince but Fourteen years of Age went in Person; Their King
Autaris did not oppose Force with Force, but putting his Men into several
places, let the Torrent run on: and that it might for ever be turned another
way, he yielded up his Kingdom to the French, and became their Tributary.

It is fit we understand that in the year 584. the Lombards perceiving that the
Emperor Mauritius would needs endeavor by all means to root them out of Italy,
they thought the best way to preserve themselves was to restore their State to
a Monarchy again, and made Autaris the Son of Clephus King; But nevertheless
their thirty Dukes kept as their Propriety, and as Hereditary the Titles to
those Cities they then held: but so that they should be obliged in certain
Services to him, particularly to obey and follow him in time of War. This is
perhaps the true Original of that Knights Service, or Fee, so much searched
after by the Curious: at least it is said they were settled or established
according to the Custom of the Lombards.

Chilperic thinking to enjoy some rest, was Assassinated in the Court of his
Palace of Chelles in Brie, which happened toward the end of September. One
Evening in the twilight, as he was alighting from his Horse, being come from
Hunting, accompanied with but few, a Murderer gave him two Stabs with a Knife,
one under his Arm-pit, the other into his Belly. An Author attributes this
unhappy blow to Brunehaud, but others accuses his Wife Fredegonda, who was
obliged, say they, to prevent him, because he had discovered her Adultery with
a Lord named Landry.

History describes this King to us Proud, Inhumane, Malicious, Dissembling, and
a great Projector of Imposts: but Crafty, Patient, Magnificent, and instructed
with good Learning. In our days have been found (it was Anno 1643.) a couple of
Tombs just by one another, under ground at the entrance into the Church of St.
Germain des Prez; the name of Chilperic which was written upon one of the two,
has made it to be conjectured that it was his, and the other his Wife's:
however it be, that other Tomb in the same Church, whereon we see his Statue,
is a Cenotaph which has been placed there in these last Ages.

Of so many Sons as he had gotten on diverse Women, there remained but one, who
was but four months old, and had as yet no name: he caused him to be Nursed at
the Borough of Vitry near Tournay for fear they should destroy him by Poison
or Witchcraft, as he believed they had done the others.

He had likewise a Daughter by Fredegonda (she was named Rigunta) who was then
on her way into Spain to meet with Ricarede the King, eldest Son to
Leuvigildus, to whom she was betrothed. When she was gotten to Thoulousa the
news came of her Fathers Death: Didier Duke of that Country rifled all her
Equipage, so that she went no farther, but returned to her Mother, to whom she
gave a great deal of trouble, being much like her in Humor and ill Qualities.

Clotair II. King X.
POPES,
PELAGIUS II. S. Five years during this Reign. St. GREGORY I. Called the Great,
chosen Sept. 590. S. thirteen years six months. SABINIANUS, In Sept. 604. S.
five months nineteen days. BONIFACE III. Chosen in Sep. 606. S. nine months.
BONIFACE IV. Chosen 607. S. six years eight months. DEUS-DEDIT, Elected in 614.
S. three years. BONIFACE V. Chosen in 617. S. nine years. HONORIUS I. Elected
13 May 626. S. twelve years five months, of which six years in this Reign.
Uncle. Cousin Germans. GONTRAN in Burgundy and part of Neustria. CHILDEBERT in
Austrasia. CLOTAIR II. Aged four or five months in Neustria.

Childebert, who was at that time at Meaux, terrified Fredegonda so much, that
leaving part of her Treasure at Chelles, she flies to Paris, and thrusts her
self for Sanctuary in the Church of Nostre-Dame, under the Protection of the
Bishop.

Gontran having heard of the death of his Brother, came presently with great
Company; Childebert was set forward likewise to have gotten in, but finding the
place was possessed, he retires to Meaux, and sends Ambassadors to him, to
demand part of the Kingdom of Paris, and then again some others to pray him to
deliver up Fredegonda to him to punish her for the Murder of her Husband, and
of Meroveus and Clovis. To the first he Replied, That all the Kingdom of Paris
belonged to him, because his Brothers Sigebert and Chilperic had forfeited
their shares by violating the Treaty of Agreement made between them three: and
as for the other, he would refer it to an Assembly of the Estates, which was to
be held on a day appointed.

He remained two months at Paris, in which time Fredegonda knew so well how to
sooth him, that he took her and her Son into his Protection, and ordered the
Lords of Chilperic's Kingdom to repair to Vitry, and acknowledge that Son for
their King, and to name him Clotaire, however he appropriated most of the
Kingdom of Paris to himself, only the City of Paris excepted, which he left to
the young Child.

He afterward employed himself in doing Justice to those that made complaints
of the several violences of the deceased Chilperic, and of all the Grandees
belonging to that Kings Court, who being unjust and griping to the utmost
extremity, had suffered all manner of Robberies and Spoil in them. In fine,
believing himself Master of all France, during the Minority of his Nephews, he
took possession of their Lands in Neustria as he pleased: but in Austrasia his
Power was not owned.

The hatred they had against Fredegonda did not diminish, she durst not come
out of her Asylum of Nostre-Dame, wherefore he sent her to Van de Rueil near
Rouen; Being there in more security, she began afresh to make use of Poison and
Poyniard, they did several times apprehend and discover some Assassines which
she was sending to Murder King Childebert and Brunehaud; That Queen having
detected one especially amongst the rest (it was a Clerk) after he had been put
to many Tortures, sent him back again to her in derision: and she for shame and
madness, caused the Feet and Hands of this miserable Wretch to be cut off.

Two years after the beforementioned Gondebaud, who was come from
Constantinople, Rhosne, Gontran-Boson, the Patrician Mummole, Didier Duke of
Thoulouse, Bladaste, who had been beaten by the Gascons, and some other
Factious Heads sworn Enemies to King Gontran, had persuaded him to take the
Title of King, listing him up upon the They set up their new made King on a
Shield or Target, and so carried him before the People.
Target at Brine la Gaillarde: The Lords of Childebert's Court, several Bishops
of Aquitain, Brunehaud her self, who desired him for her Husband, favored him
openly enough, and all the Country beyond the Garonne obeyed him.

The thing did particularly concern King Gontran, he seared his Nephew
Childebert might assist this Conspiracy, which aimed at no less than to strip
him: it was by this Motive that he desired he would come to him, and that he
confirmed the Adoption before made, putting his Javelin into his Hand; At the
same time he caused an Army to march into Aquitain under the Conduct of
Leudegisile, and the Patrician Egila. Gondebaud knowing they approached, shuts
himself up with good store of Ammunitions in the strong City of Lions de
Cominges: he was there besieged a while after. The Fifteenth day of the Siege,
Mummole ever perfidious, and the other Lords delivers him to the Besiegers,
thinking to purchase their Lives with the price of his; In effect he was killed
upon the place; but they fared never the better for that, Mummole was treated
in the same manner as well as Bishop Sagittary, as soon as they had orders from
the King; The City was sacked and destroyed, and remained buried in its Ruins,
till about the year 1005. when Bishop St. Bertrand, whose name it bears,
Rebuilt it in the very same place: but of a far less Circumference than before.

Gontran came to Paris to hold the little Clotair at the Font, which was not
performed this time, Fredegonda keeping the Child at a distance, and fearing
that he desired to see it only to seize upon it, and to shave it, for he could
not believe it was his Brothers Son; so that to cure him of this doubt, she
sent him three Bishops, and three hundred Notables, who affirmed upon Oath,
that this little Prince was Legitimate.

Hermenigilda second Son of King Leuvigilda, had Married Ingonde Daughter to
King Sigebert: The young Princess having Converted him to the Catholic
Religion, Goisuinte her Mother in Law used her outrageously; Hermenigild her
Husband had taken Arms against King Leuvigild his Father, and being Leagued
with the Sueves and the Greeks, had trusted his Wife in the hands of these
last; Now, not being able to resist his Father, he had surrendered to his Mercy,
and the Father kept him miserably confined in close Imprisonment. The Greeks
seeing him detained, retained his Wife also, and Embarked her to transport her
to Constantinople. Her Brother Childebert, that he might obtain her Release of
the Emperor, sent a puissant Army to make War upon the Lombards: but it being
made up half of French and half Almains, the Discord betwixt those two Nations
made them trudge back again as they went, without so much as seeing the Enemy.

Ingonde was dead in Affri^k, and that Leuvigildus had caused her Husband to be
Strangled. King Gontran animated with a just Resentment against those Arrian
Barbarians, undertook to drive them out of Languedoc; His Forces of the Kingdom
of Burgundy besieged Nismes, and those of Aquitain, Carcassonne: but there was
so little Order and so much Licentiousness in both these Armies, that they
reaped nothing but shame, nor did they make any feel the effects of War but
their own fellow Subjects, plundering and killing all the poor Peasants: and
indeed at their return the lower Countries being utterly destroyed, and the
Bridges broken down, some of them perished for Hunger, others in passing over
the Rivers, nay above five thousand by their own Swords, in the Contests one
Company had against another almost every hour.

Leuvigildns broken with Age, spared not either Prayers or Presents to obtain a
Peace with Gontran: but that King would never hearken to it, he could not so
soon forget the ill Treatment they had showed to his Nephew, nor the Affront he
had received the year before from Recarede, who had made Inroads and taken some
Places in Provence.

Leuvigildus dies, but had before renounced Arrianism, and his Recared or
Richard professed the Catholic Religion, and Established it amongst his People.

Before his Death he had practiced some Intelligence with Fredegonde, to rid
themselves of their common Enemies: he meant Childebert and Gontran, who at
that time were firmly united; For Gontran having again declared Childebert his
only Heir, without making any rockoning of Clotair whom he counted a Bastard or
one foisted in, Fredegonda mortally hated them both, and sought to thrust them
out of the World: Two Clerks were apprehended whom she had sent to assassinate
Childebert with Poisoned Knives, they were put to death by Torments, their
Noses, Hands, and Ears being cut off.

Pretextat had been restored to his Bishopric of Rouen by King Gontran, she
could not behold him without rage, in so much that having one day had some
words with him, (for she was come from Val de Ruel to Rouen) she hired a wicked
Slave, who upon Easter Day wounded him to death, whilst he was at the Altar in
his Cathedral Melantius, with the Archdeacon of Rouen, had given him Money to
commit the Parricide; and that none might doubt of this truth, she put
Melantius into that Episcopal See.

King Gontean by good fortune avoided three or four Attempts she made against
his Person; and notwithstanding, either out of faint-heartedness, or because
the Neustrian Lords jealous of their Authority, would not have suffered him to
undertake any thing against the Mother of their King, he did not do so much as
he ought to secure his Life by the Chastisement of this Megera.

Childebert had attained to the age of Fifteen years, he began to make himself
to be feared by some examples of severity, having caused Duke Magnoald to be
killed, whom he had invited to his Palace to see a Combat of Wild Beasts, and
Arrested Gontran-Boson, to Punish him according to what Judgment King Gontran
should pronounce, who very well knew the Treachery of this Villain, and indeed
did not pardon him.

The other Grandees of Austrasia, particularly Ranchin, Vrsion, and Bertefroy
took the allarm at it: Fredegonda by her secret Correspondence increased their
Apprehensions, so that in Consort with her, they conspited to kill their King,
and make his two Sons to Reign, the eldest of which was but two years old.
Childebert having had notice hereof from Gontran his Uncle, sent for Ranchin,
and caused him to be knocked on the Head going out of his Chamber; Vrsion and
Bertefroy who had sheltred themselves in a Church were handled after the same
manner.

Mauritius had for some time solicited King Childebert upon very advantageous
Conditions, to make a Descent into Italy, for the driving out the Lombards: at
length Childebert to acquit himself of his Promise and the Sums he had
received, went thither with a powerful Army. Autaris knowing by experience that
Money drew the French thither but would not drive them back again, did not
profer them any, but resolved in himself either to Conquer or else to dye with
Honor; The Fates were favorable to him in a great Engagement at the entrance
to the Alps; Childebert having been soundly beaten, retired.

Rccared could make to King Gontran, he could not obtain a Peace; on the
contrary, he was obstinately bent to continue the War against him: but he only
increased his Shame and Losses. Duke Boson, whom he had sent into Septimania,
despising the Enemy and minding nothing but to Debauch, suffered himself to be
drawn into an Ambuscade, where most part of his Army was defeated by a very
small number of Visigoths.

Croix of Poitiers did puzzle King Gontran as much as if it had been a business
of greater moment; amongst them there were two Princesses, Crodield Daughter of
King Cherebert, and Basine Daughter of King Chilperic: Crodield having a fancy
in her own Head to Command, accused Lubovere her Abbess of many Irregularities
to make her be put out; After that she went away with forty Nuns of her Cabal,
to make complaint to King Gontran: then being returned to Poitiers, she seized
upon St. Hilary's Church with a Troop of Pick-pokets, who committed a world of
Villainies and lewd Actions there: They were fain to make use of the Regal
Authority and Power to punish those Rascals, and call an Assembly of the
Bishops to judge of the Accusation against the Abbess: She was declared
Innocent, and Crodield and Basina Excommunicated; which was again confirmed by
another Assembly of Bishops of the Kingdom of Gontran: but at the Entreaty of
the King's, the Council of M^ts gave them Absolution. Basina went again into
the Monastery, Crodeild stubborn in her Disobedience, had leave to dwell in a
Country House which King Childebert had ordained for her.

Childebert sent into Italy against the Lombards, did most of it perish there
by Famine and Sickness: but withal struck King Autaris into so much dread,
that he promised the French, if they would leave him in Peace, that he would
every year send them some Presents.

Childebert discovered again another of those Assassins whom Fredegonda sent to
Murder him; This new Attempt, giving him occasion to examine and inquire into
the old Conspiracies, they apprehended Sonnegisile who had been concerned in
that of Ranchin: This Person accused Giles Bishop of Rheims, and the King gave
order to lay hold on him: but upon complaints made by the Bishops, that they
should treat a Prelate thus without hearing him, he released him to bring it to
a formal Trial. For this end he calls a Council at Mets the Fifteenth of
November, and there this unhappy Wretch convicted by Witnesses, and his own
Confession of Treason, and Lasae Majes^atis, and of his having been the
Firebrand of the Civil Wars, he was deposed from his Bishopric and banished to
Strasburgh, the King having given him his Life upon the Petition of the other
Bishops.

The Count Waroc and other Princes of Bretagne, notwithstanding the Oath they
had given two or three times, ransacked the Bishoprics of Rennes and Nants,
which belonged to King Gontran; he would once for all punish their audacious
Attempts, and commanded his Forces in the Kingdom of Burgundy to march that
way. They had two chief Commanders, Ebracaire and Boubelene, who could not
accord together: The first of these left his Companion with the best part of
the Army upon the point of the business; however Boubelene defended himself
valiantly for two days together, but on the third he was overwhelmed and
perished with almost all his Men. Ebracair being returned to Court was divested
of all his Estate and Goods to the King, who awarded them to the Heirs of
Boubelene.

Gontran Hunting one day in the Vosga, perceived that some body had killed a
Buffalo; The Keeper accused the Chamberlain to the King: and the Chamberlain
denying the Fact, Gontran compels him to justify himself in Combat, as the
custom then was in doubtful cases. His Champion and the Keeper kill each other;
and he, as being Convicted by the death of his Champion, was tied to a Stake,
and Stoned.

Gontran, proceeded his Inconstancy and Apprehensions, which turned him
sometimes on one side, sometimes on another: He could not but mortally hate
Fredegonda, and yet nevertheless upon her entreaty he came to the Palace of
Ruel, and held the young Clotaire her Son at the Font for his Baptism in the
Church of St. Genevieue of Nanterre, which gave great Umbrage and cause of
Complaint to Childebert his other Nephew.

Chaalons, where he kept his ordinary Residence, and had caused the Church and
Abbey of St. Marcel to be built, he fell Sick, and died the 28th of March, being
in the One and thirtieth or two and thirtieth of his Reign, and above the Sixty
eighth of his Age.

Of several Children he had had by several Wives, but one survived him, which
was a Daughter named Clotilda, who was veiled. It appears, he left all his
Lands to Childebert, and little or nothing to Clotair, though he were his
Godfather.

He was beyond comparison the best of the four Brothers, pious, Charitable, a
lover of Justice and of public good, respectful to the Church and Prelates,
taking a particular care the Canons should be observed: but Inconstant,
Timorous, Suspicious, and easy to be caught by Flatteries, and transported
with Choler, which but too frequently gave him cause to repent.

CHILDBERT in Austrasia, Burgundy, and part of Neustria. and CLOTAIR in
Neustria at Paris.

Childebert, Valiant, powerfully Armed, and enriched by the Succession to
Gontran, whereof he went immediately to take Possession, thought to have an
easy task of Clotair a young Child, and his Mother Fredegonda, who was hated by
all the French: but this Woman, Subtle and Courageous, sparing neither
Flatteries nor Money, nor Promises, regained the most alienated Minds, and tied
them to her Service. She appeared every where, carried her Son about with her,
and holding him up, sometimes in her Arms, showed him to the Soldiers, and
crowds of People, and did animate them with compassion of his innocence.

Thus with their faithful assistance, and with the Conduct of her Landry Mayre
of the Palace, she obstructed the progress of the Enemy, having surprised and
defeated his Army by stratagem, in a place of So^ssonnois which they called
Truec. The Dukes Gondouand, and Wintrion Commanded it; There was slain 3000 Men
on their Clotair; but could not however prevent Childebert from tearing away
some Towns at the further part of his Kingdom.

The Warnes, Garues, or Guerins, were a People of Germany, whose first
Habitation had been in that Country, where is at this day the Duthcy of
Mecklenburgh (where there is a River which they yet call Warn, which passes by
Rostoc.) From thence they issuing out with the English, the Saxons, and the
Heruli, were come to Lodge in Friesland, and in Batavia; on the North of those
Countries, the French held beyond the Rhine; and there had settled a little
Kingdom: but I believe they had been conquered by Theodebert, or by Clotaire I.
and subjected to the Kingdom of Austrasia. Now having Rebelled this year 594.
against Childebert, they were utterly extirpated, either by the Sword, or led
away into Captivity; insomuch, as since that time the name of them has never
been heard of.

October, in Anno 595. Childebert and his Wife were both snatched out of the
World by Sickness, near the same time; perhaps it was by poison from
Fredegonda's Shop, or of Brunehauds preparation, Fredegonda being their avowed
Enemy, and Brunehaud put beside her Authority by her Sons age, which she might
possibly endeavor to recover in the minority of her Children. Childebert dyed
in the 25th of his age, and the 20th of his Reign. I know there are some
Chronologists that allow him three years more; as also 33 years Reign to
Gontran: but let us leave them to handle these Briars and Thorns. He had two
Sons, Theodebert and Thierry, who succeeded him; Theodebert had Austrasia,
Thierry had Burgundy, and the Kingdom of Orleans.

CLOTAIRE II. In Neustria, aged Eight years, under FREDEGOND his Mother.
THEODEBERT, King of Austrasia, aged Nine or Ten years. and THIERRY, King of
Burgundy, aged Eight or Nine years. BROTHERS. Under Brunehaud their
Grandmother.

France, they were but Children that had at this time the Titles of Kings, and
which was worse, two Women versed in all manner of crimes, held the reins of
Government. Brunehaud ruled those of her Grandchildren by her self, and by her
Confidents, she resided in Austrasia with Theodebert, whose Seat was at Mets,
as Thierry's was at Chaalons on the Soane.

Fredegond more Fortunate, and also more Active then she, betook her to the
Field to regain Paris, and the Cities on the Seine, which Childebert had taken
from her. The Austrasians came to meet her, and there were the three little
Kings to be seen, of whom the eldest was but Eight years, at the Head of their
Armies. The Victory fell to Clotaire, with the Cities for which he fought.

Fredegond, Victorious and Triumphant, but more Illustrious, yet for her
Crimes, then by her good success, dyed, aged 50 or 55 years, with this
advantage, that she left her Sons affairs in a condition to defend themselves
alone.

Huns made inroads upon Turingia, passing thorough the Behemans, or Bohemians
Country, (a Sclavonian People) who were their Subjects. Brunehaud durst hazard
nothing against them, but removed them by force of Money.

This Princess was not less cruel and vindicative then Fredegond; and besides
that, very covetous, and who making her Revenge ever tend toward the filling
of her Wintrion to be killed, who had great Treasures; he was Father of that
Glosina, who much against his Will, did shut her self up in a Monastery at
Mets, where she is to this day venerated as a Saint.

Brunehauds became so insupportable to the Austrasians, that they haled her by
force out of the Royal Palace, and led her even to the Frontiers of the
Kingdom, where they left her all alone, clothed only in Rags, nigh the Castle
d'Arcies, upon the River Aube, which parted the Kingdoms of her two Grandsons.
A poor Man knowing whom she was, conducted her to Chaalons upon the Soane, to
her Son Thierry, who received her both with joy, and indignation at once. Her
Conductor for his reward had the Bishopric of Auxerre.

The two young Brothers could not forget the loss of Paris, and other Cities
about the Seine, which Clotaire had forced from them; their Grandmother
provoked Burgundy. The two Armies fought nigh the Banks of the little River
Arouane, which glides betwixt that of Yonne and Loing, and falls into the
Loing, close by Moret. Clotaire lost the Battle, and almost Thirty thousand
Men, and saved himself by speedy posting to Paris. But he durst not stay there
long, for the Victors being advanced as far as Essonne, he retired into the
Forest of Arelaune. In fine, he was constrained, left he should lose all, to
yield up to them, the greatest part of his Kingdom; to Thierry, all that was
between the Loire and the Seine, as far as the Sea, and to Theoderet the Duchy
of Dentelen, which was between the Oise and the Seine, or perhaps between the
Sum and the Oise.

Gascons took occasion to come and plant themselves in the Country of Oleron,
of Bearn, and of Soul. The two Brother Kings thought it to better purpose,
having vanquished them, to make them become Tributaries, then to drive them
quite away, and gave them a Duke to Govern them, he was called Genialis. But as
they are a stirring People, during the Civil Wars of the French, they gained
all Aquitania Tertia, which because of them is named Gascongne.

Brunehaud had all the power in the Court of young King Thierry, having made
him taste the pleasure of Women, and Love betimes, to keep him from meddling
with business of State by charms of voluptuousness, and out of fear, le^t a
lawful Wife, if he should take one, should induce him to retrench her
Authority, by gaining Emp. Phocas, chosen by the Army; kills Mauritius in
November. R. 18 years.
the Affections of her Grandson from her. This year he had a Son by one of his
Mistresses, which they named Sigebert.

Though Brunehaud were a Great-Grand-Mother, she was not exempted from Love,
nor from inspiring it in others, by the opportunities she had of bestowing the
greatest Favors, but this she did most commonly at the expense of the richest,
whom she fleeced by her Calumnies, and her assassinations. The precedent year
she Egila, Patrician of Burgundy, to enrich her self with his

She loved amongst others, a young Lord named Protades, of Roman extraction,
that is to say, Gaulois, and had already made him Duke des Transjurains: this
was not enough, she must raise him to the Office of Mayer of the Palace* But
Bertoald, who then executed it, must first be put out of the way. To this end
she sent him to gather up the Imposts in Neustria, newly taken from Clotair,
and as yet not well subjected. Landry, Mayer of the Palace, soon chases him,
pursues him even to Orleans. and Besieges him. King Thierry being informed
thereof, Mounts on Horseback, the Battle was fought at the passage over the
River of Estampes, most part of Landry's Men were cut off; but Bertoald was
slain there, as Brunehaud had wished, and she gave that Employment to her
Protades.

Theodebert had taken the Field, to run upon Clotaire; but the two Kings being
there present, Theodebert, grants him a Peace, desiring to preserve him for a
time of need against his Brother Thierry; who likewise, and perhaps upon the
same consideration, did in a while after, make his accommodation with Clotaire.

Theodebert, or rather the Austrasian Lords; she infinitely desired Thierry
might make himself Master of that Kingdom, that she might execute her Revenge.
She made him believe therefore that Theodebert was not his Brother, but that he
was the Son of a Gardener. Was it that she would have it meant he had been
Supposed, or Changed; or that the Queen Faileube had committed Adultery with
some person of that condition? Upon all occasions she and her Favorite
thundered it in the Ears of Thierry, and laid hold of every little subject of
Pique, to exasperate the Spirit of that young ambitious and violent Prince:
Insomuch as that in fine, he took up Arms to deprive his own Brother, both of
his Crown and Life. One day as the two Armies were encamped near each other, the
Leudes or Vaslals of the Kings, detesting this impious War, endeavored an
accommodation; Protades opposing it, those that belonged to Thierry gathered
together, and notwithstanding the Entreaty and Commands of that Prince Chess.

Brunehaud found means to sacrifice all those that had procured his Death, to
the Manes of her beloved Friend. But notwithstanding, instead of one Gallant
she chose many, and those the handsomest of her Court. The scandal was so
great, that St. Didier, Bishop of Lions, was obliged by his Pastoral Office and
Duty, to make some public Remonstrances of it to her. They wrought no effect
upon a Soul so plunged in the Mire of her Lust; but they acquired the Crown of
Martyrdom for this Holy Prelate; This Second Jesabel having first caused him to
be degraded, and banished by an Assembly At Chaalons.
of Bishops, devoted to her passion; then two years after stoned to death by
her Satellites.

Some remorse of Conscience having touched Thierry, he would needs take a
lawful Wife, and caused Hermenberg, the Daughter of Bertric, King of the
Visigoths, to come out of Spain, that he might Marry her: But Brunehaud by her
Witchcrafts, as it was said, hindered him from consummating the Nuptials, and
even persuaded him to send her back, and most unjustly detain all that she had
brought with her for him.

The disorders of this Court were at such a height, that it was to ruin ones
self not to approve of it. Nevertheless, the H. Abbot Colomban, who feared
naught but God alone, spared not to conjure King Thierry, to put an end to his
Debauches, Brunehaud; she ceased not from irritating the King her Son against
the Saint, till he had caused him to be plucked out of his Monastery with
violence, and turned out of his Kingdom.

At that time when she her self was driven from the Court of Austrasia, she had
left one of her Servants there, bought with the price of Money, named
Bilechild, a Virgin of much Wisdom, and more Beauty: Theodebert having Married
her, the kindness that Prince had for her, begot the aversion of Brunehaud. It
happened that this year she dyed by some ill beverage. It was not known from what
hand it was directed, whether that old jealous Woman, or her Husbands, who was
grown weary of her, and would have another* as indeed he Married Theodechild,
one of the same quality and condition.

But her death was imputed to Brunehaud, as well as the War that was kindled
betwixt the two Brothers. Theodebert, a Prince more stupid and cruel then
valiant, began it to his own misfortune, having taken Alsatia, and the
Countries of Suntgow, from Tergow and Thierry, alleging for a pretense, that
her reassumed them, as pieces belonging to the Kingdom of Austrasia. They had
been so indeed, but Childebert had cut them off by his Testament, to join them
to Burgundy.

The Lords of both Kingdoms prevailed with the two Brothers, to meet with Ten
thousand Men apiece at a Castle situate on the Rhine, between Savern and
Stratsbourgh, to refer all the differences between them to the French. Thierry
came innocently Theodebert brought a great Army, Emp. Heraclius elected by the
Army, put Phocas to death, R. 3^ years.
and beset his Brother; insomuch as he was constrained, that he might get
himself out of this Net, to yield up to him that Country which was in question.

After this, Thierry inflamed with a desire of Revenge, which was more blown up
by Brunehaud, easily persuaded himself, that he was not his Brother, and vowed
to pursue him to the death.

The end of this detestable War was, that Thierry having vanquished his Brother
in two Battles, the most bloody and furious that can be imagined, the First
hard by Toul, the Second at Tolbiac: he destroyed him with his whole Race. Some
say that the Ribarols when he had made his escape to Colen, cut off his Head,
and stuck it on the top of a Pike, to get the better Composition from the
Conqueror; others tell, that he was taken beyond the Rhine, and carried to
Brunehaud, who having first caused him to be shaved, Murdered him some few
days after, as well as his two Sons, Clovis and Meroveus, which last she
brained against a Wall. He Reigned 16 years, and Lived 25.

When Thierry had resolved first upon this fatal War, he made an agreement with
Clotaire, that he might have no Enemy behind his back, and promised to restore
the Duchy of Dentelen to him, upon condition; he would not concern himself in
this quarrel.

CLOTAIRE II. in one part of Neustria. and THIERRY. in Austrasia, Burgundy, and
part of Neustria.

Clotaire according to the Treaty, put himself in possession of the Duchy of
Dentelen; but Thierry naturally violent, and grown more insolent by his Success
and Victories, sent to him to withdraw his Garrisons, otherwise he would
ove-run his whole Countries with Armed Soldiers. And indeed Clotaire having
scoffed at his threatening words, he made all his Forces march that way, when a
sudden death put a period to all his Designs, and made his Armies retire again
into their own Provinces.

Bertoaire, who was about Twelve years old, he took a fancy to Marry her,
Brunehaud strove to dissuade him, showing him that it was not lawful to Marry
with his Niece; upon this he flies out into fury, even to the reproaching her,
that she was then a wicked and unnatural Woman, who had caused him to Murder
his Brother and Nephews; and had he not been withheld, had at that time run
her through with his Sword; but she cunningly dissembling it, took a fit
opportunity to give him poison, which brought a Disentery upon him, whereof he
dyed in violent Torments. He is allowed 17 years Reign, and to have lived 26
years.

He had Six Sons, all Bastards, Sigebert, Childebert, Corby, Meroveus, and two
others, whose Names are not known. Sigebett was I leven years old, and
Childebert Ten.

He left Austrasia to the First, and to the Second he gave Burgundy.

CLOTAIRE II. in Neustria. SIGEBERT, in Austrsia. aged Eleven years. CHILDEBERT
in Burgundy, aged Ten years.

Brunehaud imagined that she should Reign still, under the name of her Great
Grandsons; and to this end she would needs make one King of Austrasia, and the
other King of Burgundy. But the Austrasian Lords, amongst others, Arnulph and
Pepin, who could no longer endure this abominable Conduct, were more willing
rather to submit to Clotaire; who much unlike his wicked Mother, had many
Virtues of a good Prince. Those of Burgundy were likewise drawn into the same
Conspiracy by their Mayer Varnaquier. Clotaire assured of their Suffrages,
pushed forwards with his Forces into Austrasia, as far as Andernac, which is
betwixt Bonne and Coblents: She sends to warn him out of the Territories of her
Grandson; and he answers, that the Succession after Thierry's death belonged
to him, to the exclusion of Bastards, and protests to stand to the Judgment and
Award of the Lords of those Kingdoms.

But she being rather willing to trust to the chance of War, then their
Judgment, caused Sigebert to mount on Horseback, who got together those People
beyond the Rhine, as Varnaquier, who had not declared himself, did those of
Burgundy. Sigebert was advanced to defend the Frontiers of Austrasia, as far as
the Plain of Chaalons, near to the River d'Aisne: there when the Armies were in
a posture ready to come to blows; Sigebert's Men, upon a signal given, instead
of Sounding a Charge, Sounded a Retreat; Clotaire pursues gently, without
pressing upon them; and when they were got to the Banks of the Soan, they
delivered up to him Sigebert, and his Brothers Corby and Meroveus. Childebert
saved himself on a nimble Horse; it is not known what became of him, a brave
subject for the Genealogists, who would oblige some Family with his illustrious
Pedigree.

Clotaire had got these Children, he went and encamped at Rionne, upon the
brink of the Vigenne, which disgorges into the Soane. Brunehaud was retired
with Theudelain, Sister to Thierry, to the Castle d'Vrbe, in the Country of
the Transjurains; she was immediately taken, and brought to Clotaire: the same
moment he had her in his power, Sigebert and Corby had their Throats cut;
Meroveus, who was his God-Son had his Life spared: but he must dye as to the
world, by taking Sacred Orders upon him.

That done the French were called together in a Military Assembly, to judge the
miserable Brunehaud, Clotaire himself became her Accuser, and represented all
her Crimes, my, even more then ever she had committed, for he reproached, her
even with the death of Ten Kings, though he himself had killed two of them that
very hour, and his Mother at least four. All cried out aloud, that she deserved
death, and the most exquisite Torments; and this voice of the French Nation
formed her Sentence. She was wrackt three days together, afterward they led
her through the whole Camp upon a Camel, then they fastened her to the Tail of
an unback'd Mare, who beat out her Brains, and dragging her over Stones and
Briars, tore her in pieces. Others say she was drawn in pieces by four wild
Horses; the Flames consumed

CLOTAIRE II. called the GREAT, remains sole King, Aged 32 or 33 years.
France restored to one hand; but Clotaire himself Governed only Neustria; for
Austrasia and Burgundy would needs retain the Title of a Kingdom, and their
distinct Officers: Varnaquier was Mayer of Burgundy, Radom of Austrasia, and
they Ruled as Viceroys.

He had given the Office of Patrician, or Governor, in the Duchy Transjurane
to Duke Herpin, a very good Man, to settle things with Order and Justice. The
Grandees of the Country fearing the Reformation might extend to them, caused
him to be slain by the People. Clotaire going expressly into Alsatia, punished
that crime, by the death of many that were guilty.

The Patrician Aletea had tampered in it with Count Herpin, and Lendemond,
Bishop of Sion: beside, he grew so impudent, as to send to tempt the Queen by
that wicked Bishop, to throw her self into his Arms with all the Kings
Treasure, endeavoring to make her believe the King would dye that year
infallibly, and that he being of the Royal Blood of the Burgundians, would
recover the Kingdom of Burgundy. The Queen sad and allarmed, having related
this feigned Prophecy to her Husband, the Bishop made his escape into the
Monastery of Luxeu. He had the good fortune to obtain his Pardon, by the
intercession of the Abbot Eustaise: but Aletea being Commanded to Court to give
an account of his actions, could not justify himself, and paid down his Head
for it.

Clotaire heving no more Enemies, made it all his business to regulate his
Kingdom, and establish Law and Justice. All those that had unjustly been thrust
out of their Estates he restored again, he abolished all Imposts, that had been
made without the consent of the French People, by Brunehaud and Thierry;
revoked all excessive Grants, and resumed all that had been Usurped, or
Alienated from the Demesnes of the Crown; enlarging the Fountain of his
Revenues, at the same time when he eased his Subjects, ^or he had learned by
Brunehaud's example, that those people can easily forsake that Prince who
oppresses them.

Lombards of the 12000 Crowns of Gold which they owed him for Tribute; provided
they paid him down in hand, what was due for three years only.

Bertrude, a very good, and most amiable Princess, being dead, Anno 620. he
espoused Sichilda; of whom he became so jealous, that he caused a Lord named
Boson to be killed, who he imagined held too great a correspondence with her.
His eldest Son, whether by Bertrude, or by some other, was then about Twelve
years old. He placed him under the Tuition of Arnulphus, or Arnold Bishop of
Mets, to instruct him in good Literature and Virtue.

Dagobert relates, how one day this young Prince Hunting a Buck, and that Beast
taking Covert in the place, where as then were the Relics of St. Denis and
his Companions; a Divine power withheld the Dogs, so that they could never
break into the place; That Dagobert some while afterward, having incurred the
indignation of his Father, because he had chastised the insolences committed
against him, by Sadragisile, Duke of Aquitain, who was made his Governor or
Tutor, and remembering this Miracle, put himself for security into the same
place; and that he found the same effect against those Men the King his Father
sent to take him thence: In acknowledgment of which miraculous protection, he
took the Holy Bodies out of that little Chapel, which was then but ill
adorned, and much neglected, and built them a magnificent Church and a fair
Abbey. This Narrative, to say no more, is much suspected of falsity.

Austrasia more exposed to the Barbarian Nations then the other parts of
France; needed to have a King upon the place; Clotaire gave this Kingdom to
Dagobert, under the Regiment of Pepin the Old, who was Mayre of the Palace;
(the Moderns call him Pepin de This a (...) upon (...) confines (...) B^abant,
and of Has (...).
Landen,) and Arnold Bishop of Mets; but reserved to himself all the Ardennes,
and the Vosge, with the Cities of Aquitain, which the Kings of Austrasia had
possessed.

CLOTAIRE II. in Neustria and Burgundy. DAGOBERT his Son in part of Austrasia,
aged 15 years.

Dagobert was 15 or 16 years of age when he began to Reign, whilst he followed
the wise Counsels of P^pin and Arnold, and afterward of Cunibert Bishop of
Colen; his Life was an exemplar of Wisdom, of Continency, and of Justice.

Vencdes and Sclavonians, inhabited originally that part of the European
Sarmatia, which is at this day called Prussia; from whence in process of time,
they spread from the Scythian Sea even as far as the Elbe, and from the Elbe as
far as Bavaria, and Hungary, nay even into Greece, and occupied Dalmatia, and
Liburnia, which from their Name have to this day the appellation of Sclavonia.
There were above Thirty people Sclavonians; those who possessed Carinthia,
Carniola, and the other Countries along the Danube, were under the Dominion of
the Avarois, who were gotten into the Lands which the Lombards had forsaken,
when they passed over the Alps. The places near Italy obeyed the Lombards,
there were some of them free; those that were under the subjection of the
Avarois, finding it heavy and tyrannical, cast off the yoke, and chose for
their King one named Samon, a French Merchant, Native of the Bishopric of
Sens, who Traded into their Country, and appeared to them to be a Man of a
good Headpiece. It is believed be resided in Carinthia, and that from thence
he extended his Kingdom to the Elbe, and at length to the confines of Turingia.

Dagobert is sent for by his Father, who Marries him The ^th. of (...).
with Gomatrude, Sister of Sicbilda his Wife. The Nuptials were kept at the
Palace de Clichy, where his Festival ended in a quarrel between the Father and
Son. The last would have what his Father reserved to himself, of that which
belonged to the Kings of Austrasia. The business put to a reference of Twelve
French Lords, the Son gained what he demanded, except the Cities of Aquitain.

St. Arnold quits the Court and his Bishopric, to retire into Solitude, where
he passed the remainder of his most happy Life. Cunibert Bishop of Colen, a
Prelate of great Merit, took his place in the Councils of Dagobert, and the
friendship of Pepin.

Varnaquier was Deceased, and his Son Godin killed by the Kings Command, upon
an accusation of the crime de L^sae Majestatis, brought against him by his
Fathers Wife, whom he had Married, but was forced to part withal, because such
Incest was punishable with death; Cl^taire assembles the Estates of Burgundy at
Troyes, and asked whether they would Elect another; they made reply, that they
desired no other but him; and since that they were a long time without any.

Saxony were a potent People, it comprehended diverse of different Names, and
they had Dukes in each Country. Those that owed Tribute to the French, were
this year revolted against them. Dagobert making War upon them was wounded with
a blow of a Sword, which took off part of his Helmet, and a little of the skin
of his Head, with some of his Hair. It is said, that having sent these Tokens
to his Father all bloody, who was Hunting nigh Ardennes, the King moved by his
good nature, got what Forces he could together, and having passed the Rhine,
attaqued the Saxons, encamped on the other side of the Weser, where he slew
Bertold their Duke with his own hand; and after scowring over all the Country,
he did not leave any one of them alive, that was taller then his Sword.

In the Assembly of the Estates of Neustria and Burgundy, which was holden at
Clichy, there arose a great quarrel. Eginaire, Intendant of Ariborts Palace,
the Second Son of Cl^taire, having been killed by Egina's People; the Favorite
of this King, the young Prince and his Uncle Brunulph would revenge his death.
Egina encamps with his Friends upon the side of Montmercure, or Montmars, at
this day Mont-Martre. But the King having commanded the Burgundians to sall
upon the first that began to stir, it cooled the hottest amongst them.

Adaloald King of the Lombards, and Son to King Agilulf, had been poisoned by
his People, Arioald was raised to the Throne upon the consideration of his Wife
Gundeberge Sister to Adaloald; who nevertheless being accused how she intended
to Poison him, that she might Marry Tasin Duke of Tuscany, he had kept her
Prisoner for three years. King Clotaire, to whom she was of Kin, took
compassion on her, and commanded his Ambassadors to reproach that wicked
Husband. One of these having upon his own head proposed to the Lombard King
that it would be well to put the decision of so important a matter to the
Judgment of God by Combat, two Relations of Gundeberges brought a Champion, who
vanquishing Adalulf (so was the Accuser called) asserted and recovered the
Honor and Liberty of that Princess.

This year is remarkable for the Death of that famous Impostor, and most false
Proph^t Mahomet, whose abominable Religion composed partly of Judaism, and
partly of the Whimseys of several Heretics who were retired into those parts,
and accommodated to the Sensualities of Corrupt Nature, was embraced by such
Robbers and wicked Varlets as knew neither Justice nor the Deity. The greatest
part of our Hemisphere bath submitted to the Tyranny of that Law; and had it
not been for the Valor of the French, they had diverse times made themselves
Masters of all Europe.

The Era or manner of accounting and Calculating the time by this Sect,
commences at the year of the Egyra, or the Retreat of Mahomet to the City of
Medina, which happened the 26th of July in the Six hundred twenty second year of
Jesus Christ; But it must be noted that they are Lunary years, consisting but
of 354 days, whereas those amongst Christians are solary of 365 days, without
reckoning the Bissextile.

Clotair happened Anno 628. in some House of his near Paris: He was buried at St.
Vincents, at this time St. Germain des Prez; The time of his Reign in Neustria,
within four months of the time of his Age, was about forty five years, and his
Reign over all France, after the death of Thierry, was fourteen.

We know the names of two of his Wives: the one was Beretrude, the other
Sichilda; perhaps he may have had some other before these. He left two Sons,
Dagobert and Aribert, of what Mothers we cannot tell certainly, but only that
they were not both of one and the same Bed.

He was an affable Prince, very different from the cruel and brutish ferocity
of his Predecessors, Just, Pious, instructed in good Learning, and Liberal,
especially toward the Church and such as professed a Monastic Life.

Manners and Customs.
Their Kings were always chosen of the Blood of the Reigning Race: three
Conditions were required in them, their Birth, (it mattered not whether they
were Legitimate) the Will of the Father, and the Consent of the Grandees; the
last did ever almost follow the two first. After the death of Clovis (as I
believe) they added to the ancient Custom of lifting them upon the Target Le
Pavois.
, that of seating them on the Throne or Regal Chair; which had neither Arms nor
Back, for a King must support and sustain himself by his own strength; The
Regal Ornaments were long Hair or Locks pleited, the Purple Mantle and Tunick,
and the Diadem or Headband enriched with Precious Stones.

When they left Children that were in Minority, if they had not allotted their
shares, the Queen Mother and the Grandces ordained as they thought convenient,
and had the Administration of Affairs, and the Education or Bailifes of the
Minor Kings. From hence these Lords were called Nourricers; Fos^erers.
Nursers) but there was one amongst the rest that bore this Title.

When a King undertook any Expedition, they held up their Hands in token of the
Assistance which they promised him; Peace might be made without them, but War
could not. In Civil Discords they made themselves Arbitrators between the
Princes, and obliged them to agree.

The first day of March they held an Assembly in the open Field under Tents,
where the Militia was often sent for; Because of the day on which they met, it
was called the Field of Mars. The Kings presided and consulted with the Lords
concerning the Campus Marti^
Affairs of that year either touching Peace or War; These Assemblies gave them
the Command of the Armies, which was not necessarily tied to their Persons, at
least till the time of Clovis. They ever had about them a certain number of
Braves or Barous who guarded them, and for their safety exposed themselves to
all manner of dangers.

The most eminent Offices of the Kingdom were the Prefect or Mayre of the
Palace, who was elected by the great ones or Grandees, and confirmed by the
King; The grand Referandary, who had the Royal Seal, and under him several
lesser or petty Referandary's, and also great numbers of Expeditioners, whom
they called Chancellors, because they did their business Intra Cancellos or
Lattices; The grand Apocrisiary who was the chief of the Priests and Clerks of
the Court (in the second Race he was called Arch-Chaplain:) The Count of the
Palace who was Judge, the Chamberlain Cubicularius.
who gave all Orders in the Kings Chamber, the Count of the Stable who took
care of the Stables and perhaps of the Equipage. I cannot tell whether they had
in those times a Provost or grand Seneschal of the Table, as there was since
under Pepin the Bref. The Children of Lords were bred in the Kings House, or in
the Houses of great Officers, and Trained up to all noble Exercises, more
honorably then Pages are in these days.

The Kings Revenues consisted in Lands or Demeasns, and in Imposts which were
taken only of the Gauls, for it was thought odious to take any of the French;
Some of them were levied in Moneys, others in Goods. When they made the
Division of Lands into Acres, or Furlongs, the Kings for their shares had much
of the best, especially about and near the greatest Cities; They made their
Residence and built them Palaces in the most pleasant places, and especially
near some great Forests: for they delighted in Hunting, and made a general one
every Autumn. In all those places which they called Villae Fiscales Regiae.
, they had Officers or Servants, who were named Fiscalins, and he that
commanded them, Dom*stick. There they laid in Stores of Provision, as Wines,
Wheat, Forage, Meat, especially Venison and Pork. Amongst the Lords they always
chose out some to eat at their Table; and that was one step toward the highest
Employments. They only took the Quality of Illustrious Vir inluster.
, which was common to all the Grandees of the Kingdom; Sometimes the Title of
Dominus was given them, which was likewise ordinary to all that were any way
considerable, also of most Glorious, most Pious, most Clement, and Queens were
fined most Pious and most Clement.
Precellentissime. The Kings wrote their names under that of the Bishops when
they wrote to them. On the contrary Pope Gregory I. and the Emperor Mauritius
preposed theirs before that of any Kings, Gregory II. did not do so. The Popes
and Councils styled them sometimes their Sons, and sometimes the Sons of the
Catholick-Church; Their Male-Children in their young age were named Domicelli.
Damoiseaux; and at their Birth they gave some Fiscalins their Freedom in all
the Lands and Houses belonging to the King their Father.

They often took Wives of mean Birth and servile Condition, on whom they did not
bestow the Title of Queen till after they had born Children, nor always then
neither. The Daughter of a King had that Title as soon as they were Married:
They had their Dower in Lands, some Possessions in proper which their Kindred
inherited, their share of the Household Goods, and great Officers just the same
as the Kings had. Often times the Sons of France before they came to Reign were
called Kings, and the Daughters Queens.

There were but two Conditions of Men, the Free or Ingenuous, and the Slaves;
Amongst the Free there were Nobles, who were so by Blood, and by Antiquity, not
by Exemptions, and amongst the Nobles the Grandees optimates. I believe that
those they called Majores were the Noble, and the Minores those that were not
so.

One knew not then what People of the Gown or Robe meant, all the French made
profession of bearing Arms: Justice was rendered by People Armed, their Battleax
and Buckler hung upon a Pillar in the midst of the Malle. In the Kings House it
was the Count of the Palace that administered it, sometimes the King himself
took the Seat together with the Bishops and the Grandees, and having heard
Causes of highest concern, pronounced Sentence himself; In Villages the
Centeniers, in Cities the Counts and Dukes that gave Judgment without any thing
of Pleadings or Writings. They were called in general terms Judges and Seniors;
The Kings gave them these Offices for time, and frequently continued them for
Money. Sometimes it was left to the People to choose them, and perhaps it was
their Right. There were no Degrees of Jurisdiction, all judged without appeal,
because they took Cognizance of nothing but what was proportionable to their
Degree; It is true the Parties had a way of carrying their Complaints to the
King, if they believed they had not been judged according to Law: but if the
Complaint were not made good, they were condemned, is * Persons of Quality to a
pecuniary Mulct, the other to be Majores personae, Minores personae.
Whipped. The Counts and Dukes had Viguiers, or Lieutenant-Generals who did
Justice in their absence, and several petty Viguiers which administered it in
the Country. They had Assessors whom they called Rachinbourgs; they sat on
every eighth or every fifteenth day, according to the multiplicity of Affairs;
But the Dukes held the Grand Assizes from time to time, where the Bishops of
the Province were bound to be present; There were likewise a kind of
Commissary's or Envoys, some for the King, others for the Dukes, who went about
to visit the Provinces; In their Proceedings and Public Acts they counted
their Terms by Nights. As the Galls governed themselves according to the Roman
Rules and Laws, they were forced to have Judges that understood them: and the
French might perhaps imitate and follow them in many of their Contracts, for
the Salick Law was not extensive enough to comprehend and regulate every
particular case.

The same Counts and Dukes, as judged the French, led them to the Wars: There
were no other Soldiers but the Militia: They commanded those of the nearest
Provinces, or of any Province as they thought fit* those that failed were put
to a Fine; they gave Letters of Dispensation to such as were grown over-aged in
the Service. In all the Provinces and particularly on the Frontiers they had
Magazines of Provisions and Forage, but as I believe they had no pay but their
Plunder* which was brought together and so shared always equally amongst them.

They put those into the condition of Slaves or Servants whom they took
Prisoners of War, as likewise such as were sent them for Hostages, if they
broke their Faith.

The great ones that were accused of any Crime, were judged Militarily by their
Equals, the Execution was performed with a Sword, or Battle-Ax, sometimes by
Dukes and Counts themselves. Often times their Kings would not wait till
Judgment was given, their Wrath or Covetousness made Death go before any
Sentence; As for the People of a meaner Stamp, they were extended on a Stake,
and were either Strangled or Whipped. In some places they were Hanged on a
Gallows, or they were branched upon a Tree; For lesser Crimes they were
condemned to grind like Mill-Horses, to dig Vineyards, to work in Quarries, and
sometimes they were Branded with a hot Iron. When a Man was accused for a Crime
of State, they tore off his Military Girdle and his Clothes, and dressed him
all in Rags. Between Private Persons, they might seek their satisfaction with
their Swords, and do themselves justice, whence proceeded infinite Murders, if
the King did not prevent it. Murderers bought their Lives with their Money,
and the punishment of most Crimes, unless they were Crimes of State, were
pecuniary and determined by the Law. The whole Kindred were liable to the
payment, if the guilty Person were insufficient. When the Parties wanted
Evidence to prove the Fact, they came to a Combat, either in Person, or by
those Champions they could procure; This they said was to determine a Cause by
the Judgment of God Almighty. The Ordeal-Trial by red hot Irons, or Brass, that
by boiling Water or cold Water, and another likewise by presenting themselves
before the Cross, were in use also by the approbation of the Bishops. Such as
had any Quarrels and Contests gave their Oaths for caution and security in
public, which were made upon the Shrines of Saints or on their Tombs. This was
also the way to purge or clear themselves of any Crime when accused in a Court
of Justice; and the Accused in certain cases, as Adultery and the like, when it
could not be fully proved, was allowed to bring several of their Friends to
make public Oath, either Men or Women, according to their Sex.

As for Marriages they took the liberty to repudiate or cast off their Wives
when they could not endure them; Their Kings had sometimes several at the same
time, and the Proximity of Blood or Degrees of Parentage never hindered them
from satisfying their Desires; When it pleased them the Children of their
Mistresses succeeded them, as well as the Legitimate.

They made Money of the Gold they found in their own Country, and Coined it
more fine, and of a much higher value than the Visigoth Kings, a Mark of the
Excellency of their Royalty above all others. Payments were made as much with
Gold and Silver not Coined as Coined. But we shall elsewhere more amply
Discourse and Explicate the Manners and Customs of this Nation, and all the
Orders they observed in their Judicatories, their Wars, and in their Government.

The natural Language of the French was the Teutonick or German: the
Austrasians, at least those nearest to the Rhine, kept to it ever, and use it
still, but much changed or corrupted. Those the most distant on this side, and
the Neustrians left it by little and little for that of the Galls, which was
the Romanick, or Romanciere, otherwise called the Rustic Latin, engendered of
the Rust and the Corruption of the Roman or Latin, wrested and turned according
to the genius of the Nation, and the Idioms of the several Provinces as well
for the inflexion and signification of Words, as the Air, Accent, and Phrase.

The Church.
Notwithstanding the Conversion of Clovis and all the care of the Prelates, who
by Authority of the Kings pulled down the Temples, there were yet a world of
Pagans, especially amongst the French* and those of the most Principal; and as
for those that were converted. they had much ado to wean them from their
ancient Superstitions: they bore a Reverence still to the places where the
Gentiles had Worshipped and Adored, and still retained some remainders of their
Ceremonies, their Festivals, Augures, and the Witchcrafts of Paganism, which
they mingled with the Exercises of the Christian Religion.

Since the Baptism of Clovis the Gallican Church not only enjoyed in all
liberty the Gifts the Galls had bestowed upon her, but likewise acquired much
greater ones by the liberality of the French. Her excessive Riches begot envy
in the Ambitious and the Covetous; To enjoy them, they Courted and Caball'd for
Bishoprics, which they would not have desired, if there had been nothing but
Study and Labor. The Grandees of the Court renounced the noblest Employments
for a Miter, where they met with Honor, Authority, Riches, and assurance
against Disgrace; There was no need of forbidding them to choose Laymen against
their Wills: but rather not elect them when they used underhand dealings to
obtain it. There were few chosen but of noble Race: and the Elections were ever
made with the Kings leave, never against his Will. Often times he forced them by
his absolute Commands, or prevented them by Recommendations, which were all one
as a Command. The Bishops knew well enought this was to violate the Canons: but
the fear of bringing things to greater disorder, Interest and Complaisance shut
up their Mouths and tied their Tongues. The only Man Leontius of Bourdeaux had
the courage or boldness to call a Council at Saints to thrust out one Emerius
a young Youth who had been named for Bishop of that Church by Clotair I* but
King Cherebert his Son received him but very scurvily that was put in his
place, and caused him to be carried into Exile in a Chariot full of Thorns.

These unworthy Elections and Intrusions bred most infinite Disorders, public
Simony, which spread it self from the Head even over all the Members, the
Non-Residence of Bishops, their servile and perpetual adherence to the Court, a
disgust to Christian Virtues and the Functions of their Ministry, the love of
Vanity and the things of this World, which led them into all manner of
Pleasures and Secular Employments, as Feastings, sumptuous Clothes, Hunting,
and the use of Arms. From hence arose the scorn of the People toward these
false Pastors who were crept in at the Windows, and in the Civil Wars a
wonderful desire and itch to invade the Wealth and Goods of the Church, as
esteeming it only the taking from such as were wholly unworthy of enjoying
them, thereby to correct their excess by paring away what was superfluous.

It cannot be denied but there were some extremely irregular, as Salonius
d'Ambrun, and Sagittarius de Gap, who should rather be termed Bandits then
Bishops, Giles de Rheims a perfidious and factious Firebrand of Civil Wars,
Saffarac Bishop of Paris, and Contumeliosus of Riez, both of them, as I think,
guilty of Uncleanness, and Deposed for that Crime, and that Cautin of Tours, of
whom Gregory recounts most horrible wicked things.

But in Recompense there were a great many, who having edified their Flocks by
a most Religious Conduct, have left their Names and Memory in great veneration
amongst all the Faithful.

In the beginning of this Age flourished Remy de Reims, and Vaast d'Arras, whom
I have mentioned in the last, but were still in being, Gildard of Rouen,
Aquilin d'Eureux, Contest de Bayeux, Melaine de Rennes, Avite de Vienne,
Cesarius d'Arles, Venne In Latin Vide^^^.
de Verdun; a little after Ageric or Agroy of the same City, Lubin de Chartres,
Firmin d'Vzez, and Macutus or Malo first Bishop of Quidalet. This City having
been ruined, the Bishopric was transferred to another, which was raised out of
its Ruins, and bears the name of this holy Prelate. About the middle of the
same Age, were Nicetius de Treues, Paul de Leon in Bretagne, Felix de Nantes,
Aubin d'Angers, Lauto or L, de Coutances, Medard de Noyon, Saulge d'Alby,
Germain de Paris. This last died Anno 579. and was Interred in the Church of
St. Vincent, which was likewise called St. Croix, and is at this day St.
Germain des Prez; And about the latter end lived Gregory de Tours, who has
written the History of the French, till within a year or two of the time of his
Death: it happened, as I believe, Anno 595. Sulpicious de Bourges, whom they
surnamed the Severe, to distinguish him from the Affable who since fat in the
same Bishopric, St. Gall de Clermont, Milleard or Millard de Sees, Agricola.
Arigla de Nevers, and Sanson de Dol.

Amongst those most holy for a Monastic Life, we find Queen Radegonda,
Institutrice of the Monastery at Poitiers, and Glodesina or Glosina of that
which bears her name at Metz, she was Daughter of Duke Guintrion; Maur the
Disciple of St. Bennet came to dwell in France about Anno 540. and brought his
Order which in time increased so much, that it abolished, if we may call it so,
all the others. Cloud or Clodoald lived in the Diocese of Paris, Leufroy in
that of Eureux, Calais Carilesa^.
in that of Man's, Cibard Eparch^us.
in Perigord, Leonard in Limousin, the Hermit Victor at the Diocese of Troyes,
Celerin in that of Sees, and Senoc in Poitou.

The Church of Rome had in Gaul, as in diverse other Countries, a certain
Revenue in Lands, which she called her Patrimony; and the Popes had a Vicar,
who failed not to set a value on his Power, to make this Commission of the
higher value. It was the Bishop of Arles (from whom they had taken almost all
the Rights and all the Authority he pretended to, as well for the Antiquity of
his Church Established by St. Trophime Disciple of the Apostles, as from the
pre-eminence of his City, which the Emperor Honorius had made the capital of
seven Provinces) they pitched upon (for fear he should make his too great a
See) to be their Vicar in Gaul; and so he held two during pleasure, which he
might have held in chief, and that Superiority which his Bishopric gave him
over the seven Provinces, was absorbed by that which they gave him over the
whole seventeen.

Moreover they favorably received all those that appealed to Rome; Leo X.
restored Chilidonius of Besanson, deposed by Hilary of Arles his Vicar, and
Agapet restored Contumeliosus whom John II. his Predecessor had judged very
Criminal.

As they had a right to see the Canons observed and the ancient Customs, when
any one desired any Prerogative or any License, they applied to them, so that
by little and little it brought them to allow some small favor, even in things
of little weight, but at length even to dispense with the Canons. Pope Gregory
I. amongst others gave it to several Churches; which induced others to desire
it also, and sometimes pretend that his Predecessors had before granted them
the like.

The question concerning Images made a noise in France even in the days of that
Pope. For he reproved Serein Bishop of Marselles, for having broken them down,
but however applauded his Zeal from having hindered the People from adoring
them: because they might be used as Books to instruct the ignorant, but not as
the Objects of Divine Adoration.

We observe in this Age near forty Councils; I shall quote those of whom we
have any Canons or Acts. The first of Orleans, which we mentioned before, was
assembled in 511. in the Reign of Clovis; The second in 533. to abolish the
remainders of Idolatry; The third five years after; The fourth in 541. and the
fifth in 549. These four in the Reign and by the Authority of Childebert, who
likewise called another at Arles, (which was the fifth) Anno 554. There were
two held in the Reign of Sigismund King of Burgundy, that of Epaon, Anno 517.
and the first of Lions in the same year: This last upon the account of Stephen.
Estienne his Intendant, who had Married Palladia his Cousin-German, and was
upheld in it by that Prince. There were two Convocated at Arles; to wit, that
which is reckoned the fourth in Anno 524. by the consent of Theoderic King of
the Ostrogoths, to whom the Province at that time obeyed, and the fifth
abovementioned in the Reign of Childebert. Three met in the Countries of
Atalaric King of Italy, that of Carpentras in 527. of which there is but one
Canon remaining; the second of Orange two years a terwards: and the third of
Va^son in the same year. There were two in the City d'Avergne, (that is
Clermont) the first with the consent of King Theodebert in 535. and the second
of his Son Theodebald in 549. Four at Paris, viz. the second Anno 555. the
third Anno 557. the fourth Anno 573. and the fifth Anno 615. The second and
third were by order of King Childebert, and the first of these two, to review
the Process against the Bishop Sa^^aracus, who had been condemned and deposed
(the Sentence was confirmed); the other to confirm some Canons touching the
Discipline. The fourth was held by the consent of Chilperic I. to suppress the
attempt of Giles Metropolitan of Rheims, who had ordained one Promotus Bishop
in the City of Cbasteaudun, though it depended on the Bishopric of Chartres,
and had never been made an Episcopal See. The fifth was summoned by order of
Clotair II. for Reformation of Abuses. I do not speak of that in the year 577.
where Pretextat of Rouen was condemned, having suffered himself by a credulous
and weak condescension to be induced to confess such Crimes which he had not
committed: no more then that of Valence, Anno 584. which confirmed all the
Grants King Gontran, his Wife, and his Daughters had bestowed on the Church.
There were three at Lions, the first under Sigismond before noted, the second
in 567. and the third in 583. Two at Mascon, the first Anno 581. the second
four years afterward, all these four by the Authority of King Gontran. One at
Tours, Anno 567. in the Reign of Cherebert, which ordained many things, and
confirmed the Religious Congregation of Virgins instituted by St. Radegond. One
at Auxerre, Anno 578. where none met but the Bishop of the Place, (his name was
Aunaquaire) with his Abbots and Priests. King Recarede called one at Narbona,
Anno 589. Clotaire II. one at Metz, Anno 590. and one at Paris, which was the
fifth, Anno 619. as we have already hinted. In that of Metz, Giles Bishop of
Rheims was condemned for the Crime of Treason, deposed and banished to
Strasburgh.

Of all these Councils there was only that of Orange that meddled with
Controversies, having fully discussed the points of Grace, according to the
Judgment of St. Augustine, and of the Holy Chair. The rest spent their time to
compose Quarrels and Disputes, or about Discipline, and especially such
particulars as we have already mentioned. This History not allowing us to quote
more than some necessary Articles.

In the reading of these Councils, one may observe, that there were great
multitudes of Lepers and of Jews in France; (perhaps the Jews had brought in
and spread abroad that Leprosy.) That the Bishop took care to relieve the
first, and prohibited all manner of Communication with the other.

The Church had a particular care or the Poor, of Widows and Orphans, the
first being made as it were of the Family, the rest under their Protection:
insomuch that they espoused their Cause in Courts of Judicature, and the Judges
never gave Sentence in any Cause of theirs, but he first acquainted the Bishop
thereof.

In her Judicature she followed that Order Established by the Roman or Written
Law. The Canons concerning Degrees prohibited, were different according to the
different Countries. In the beginning in some Churches they hardly prohibited
the Marrying with two Sisters, or two Brothers; But the Council of Agde, the
third of Orleance and other following Councils, extended it to a Niece, to the
Aunt, to the Brothers Widow, and the Uncles, to the Wives Sister, to Cousins
and Cousin-Germans.

There were Sanctuaries in the most famous Churches, which the Bishops made
good to the utmost of their power. Their intercession often times obtained
Pardon for the greatest Criminals; and whatever failings themselves did fall
into, they most commonly came off only with Degradation or Banishment, their
Brethren most times persuading the Kings to spare their Lives.

St. Augustine had began to persuade the Faithful to give the Tithe of their
Goods for the relief and support of the Poor, grounded upon this Principle,
That Christians were obliged to a greater Perfection then the Jews, who had
allowed it to the Levites. The Prelates of the second Council of Tours exhorted
the People to pay them to God, according to the example of the Patriarch
Abraham. The second of Mascon ordained it, as being a Right and Duty
Established in the Old Testament, and which they affirmed had been of a very
long time observed by the Christians. The Temporal Lords to whom they primarily
belonged, bestowed much upon the Monasteries, little on the Bishops and Curats;
to whom notwithstanding, in case they were of Divine Right, they ought to
belong.

There were ^ew Festivals observed as Holy in all Churches, except Christmas,
Easter, and Whitsuntide. The noblest of the Diocese were obliged to keep them
in the Episcopal City: the Country Curates the same, as likewise to meet as the
Synod which was yearly held at a time certain. The King solemnised these
Holy Days in what City he pleased; and the Bishops ambitiously courted and
strove who should have that honor in his own Church. Since, that Method being
altered, and the Charms of the World being stronger to allure the Bishops to
Court, then the Duties of Christianity were to draw the Court to the Church:
the Kings celebrated those Festivals in their Palaces, and the Bishops
forsaking their Flocks went thither in greater Crowds then was desired.

New Cells or Hermitages were not suffered to be made, nor new Congregations of
Monks without the Bishops allowance. An Abbot durst not run forth nor absent
himself from his Monastery; when he fell into any fault, the Bishop might
displace him, and give him a Successor; and if he were rebellious he was not
admitted to the Communion. Shame alone could not confine and keep those in
their Monasteries who had Vowed and Dedicated themselves to God, but the Church
compelled them to continue by all the Penalties that were in her power.

No Tribute or Tax was raised upon any thing belonging to the Church, neither
upon their Foundations, their Goods, nor their Persons; and neither the Judges,
nor the Kings Receivers could exercise any Power or Jurisdiction on their
Lands. But those Bishops and Abbots who desired to obtain the King's, or the
Grandees favor and protection, having begun to make them Euloges or Presents,
this Custom grew into a necessary Right and Duty, which was afterward exacted
from them, when they failed to do it voluntarily.

Dagobert I. King XI.
POPE, HONORIUS I. Who S. nine years and an half during this Reign.
DAGOBERT I. Aged Twenty six years, in Neustria, Austrasia, and Burgundy.
ARIBERT, Aged Thirteen or fourteen years, in part of Aquitain.

Aribert, Caribert, and Cheribert are the same Name.
Aribert being with King Clotaire when he died, it might be thought that in the
absence of his Brother Dagobert who was in Austrasia, he might with his Fathers
Treasure have raised Men and Friends enough, to have seized on the Kingdom: but
as he was young, and perhaps his Father had bequeathed him no part in the
Kingdom, by his last Testament, it was in vain that Brunolph, his Mothers
Brother, endeavored to stir up the Neustrians in his behalf. Dagobert used
such diligence, that he made himself secure of the Kingdoms of Neustria and
Burgundy; so that Aribert with his Uncle were constrained to go and meet him,
and to submit. It was in the beginning of the Seventh year of his Reign in
Austrasia.

French Lords, he gave him Saintonge, Perigord, Agenois, Thoulousam, and all
the third Aquitain. Aribert settled his Royal Throne at Thoulouse.

As soon as he was acknowledged in Neustria, he went to visit Burgundy, which
in many years had not beheld a King, but was governed by Mayers, neither had
they had any Mayer since the death of Varnaquier.

Being at St. John de Laone, he heard the complaints of his People, rendered
Justice to all his Subjects, took a care to compose all their Disputes: but it
seems all these fair appearances were but to cover a Villainous Murder, for
which purpose perhaps he had undertaken this Journey. For one Morning going
into a Bath, he commanded three Lords of the Court to kill Brunolph who had
followed him, though he were guilty of nothing, unless being affectionate to
the Interest of his Nephew Aribert, they might apprehend he would be again
stirring and acting something for him.

It seems the Neustrian and the Austrasian Lords did each of them struggle, who
should possess the King. The first carried it from the others, by taking him on
the blind side, and flattering him in his Passions. The Queen Gomatrude was an
Austrasian of Kin to Cunibert and Pepin, who were present at her Wedding, the
Neustrians who knew the amorous inclination of their Prince, persuaded him to
repudiate her upon the pretense of Barrenness, to Marry Nantilda one that
served him.

By this means Ega Mayer of the Neustrian Palace, got the highest place in the
young Kings favor, who presently dismissed Cumbert, but retained Pepin still
at Court; not to make use any more of his Counsel, but for fear he might cause
the Kingdom of Austrasia to revolt, his Office of Mayer of the Palace and his
Virtues giving him too great a power.

Nantilda was soon deprived of the Affection of her Husband by another Woman.
Being gone into Austrasia, and delighting to show himself in his Royal Habit to
those Provinces, with great Pomp and a splendid Court, he in her room took a
very beautiful Virgin named Ragnetrude. Sometime after he Married two more
Women, Wlfegunde and Bertechilde, (for Kings thought they had this Privilege
of having several) and took as many Mistresses as the desire and gust of change
could wish for, which is infinite.

After he had thrown off his two prudent Governors, who kept him within
compass, he let himself loose to all the heats of his Youth, and the violence
of his Sovereign Authority. The first cast him into all sorts of Pleasures; The
second made him heap up Money, and lay his griping Hand upon his Subjects
Treasure, as if all had been his own. It was natural to see a Prince of Twenty
six years to be amorous: but it was a prodigy against nature, that at that age
he should have such a covetous heart, as nothing could satisfy. Nevertheless
being in himself at the bottom very good, the Remonstrances of St. Amand Bishop
of Tongres, somewhat allayed the heat of his Covetousness; He took Nantilda his
first Wife again, and lived with her the rest of his days.

Ragnetrude the same year that he Married her. He sent to pray his Brother
Aribert to come and hold it at the Font. Both of them met at Orleance for that
Ceremony, and the Child was Baptized by the Bishop St. Amand, and named
Sigebert.

Aribert was no sooner returned to Thoulouse, but he died; and his Son
Chilperic who was yet in his Cradle, survived him but a few days. It was
suspected that Dagobert had contributed to the death of that Innocent, to
regain Aquitain by seizure, as he presently did.

DAGOBERT I. Sole King.
It is certain this King had a singular Devotion for St. Denis, and his
fellow-Martyrs, and that he Erected a Church in honor of him, to which he
joined a rich Abbey. But the subject or cause which we related elsewhere, passes
amongst the Critics but for a Fable; I cannot tell whether it be a truth that
he unfurnished several other Churches of their most precious Ornaments to
enrich this same.

French Merchants who Traded with the Sclavonians were Robbed: King Samon
having refused to repair this Wrong, Dagobert would needs right himself by the
Sword. The King of the Lombards and the Duke of the Almains, the first of which
was Allied, and the other Subject to France, attaqued them jointly on the one
hand, whilst the Austrasian French assaulted them on the other.

The first got the advantage and slew a great many of them: but the Austrasians
who were discontented with Dagobert, because he had preferred his Residence in
Neustria before that of Austrasia, behaved themselves very cowardly. For having
besieged the Castle of Vagastburgh, wherein the bravest of the Enemies had put
themselves, they raised it the third day, and retreated in great disorder.

After this the Sclavonians were emboldned to make Incursions in Turingia, and
other Countries belonging to the French. And Debvan or Dervan, Duke of the
Sorabes (they were a People of Sclavonia who inhabited M^snia) drew himself off
from the Obedience of the French to put himself under Samon.

There had been of a long standing a Colony of Bulgarians who had taken up
their Quarters in Panonia, where they were Allied or become Tributaries to the
Avares, who possessed the greatest part of that Province with that of Dacia. It
is disputed whether the ancient Bulgaria was in Sarmatia Asiatica, along the
River Volga, otherwise called Rha, or else in the European on the borders of
the Euxine. Now the Bulgarians being entered into a War with the Avares were
vanquished and so trodden under foot, that there were left but nine thousand,
who were forced to forsake the Country with their Wives and Children. These
Wretches having besought Dagobert to give them an abiding in some Corner of his
Dominions, he sent orders to the Bavarois to receive them and to quarter them
separately in Villages and Buroughs, till the Estates of the Kingdom had
ordained how to dispose of them.

The Estates found the best Expedient would be to cut the Throats of them all
in one Night, and that was put in execution but too punctually. One of their
Chiefs having got some wind of it, made his escape with seven hundred of them
into Sclavonia, that Country is yet called the March of Wenden, between the
Rivers Save and Drove.

Visigoths in Spain made and un made their Kings as they pleased. This year
631. the Government of Suintila who had Reigned ten years, being uneasy and
displeasing to them, they cast their Eyes upon Sisenand, who implored the
Assistance of Dagobert, promising him in Recompense the great Golden vasa or
Vessel, weighing 500 pounds and enriched with Jewels, which Aetius had bestowed
upon Torismond for helping him against Attila. Sisenand being instated in his
Throne by the assistance of the French, could not refuse this Vessel to the
Ambassadors: but the Visigoths Waylaid them and took it away again from them
by force. Dagobert was offended and threatened; the business was canvassed, and
in the conclusion he was contented with two hundred thousand pieces of Silver.

As he was raising great Forces to stop the Incursions which King Samon with
his Sclavonians made into Turingia, the Saxons came and profer'd to repel them
at their own Peril and Charge, if they would forgive them the Tribute of Five
hundred Beeves which they owed to France. The profer was accepted, and they
were relied upon to make good their Promise; but either they wanted strength,
or perhaps faith to perform it and secure Turingia as was expected.

Thus it continued still exposed to the insolency of those Barbarians. The
Neustrians were too remote to defend them, the Austrasians should have done it;
and they had strength more then enough to have accomplished it, but being ill
affected, they did not much trouble themselves about it. It was necessary
therefore to regain their hearts and affections to give them a King that should
reside amongst them.

DAGOBERT in Neustria and Burgundy. SIGEBERT his Son in Austrasia.

Dagobert having Assembled the Prelates and the Lords of this Kingdom at Mets,
he by their Advice, and with their Consent makes his Son Sigebert King of
Austrasia, furnished him with a Royal Treasure, that is to say rich Movables,
Precious Vasa's or Vessels, and Silver Coin, and left the Conduct of his
Education, of his Court, and his State to Cunibert Bishop of Colen, and to the
Duke Adalgise. Then the Austrasians counting themselves restored to their
Liberty, because they had a King, stood up for their Honor, and valiantly
repulsed the Sclavonians.

Nantilda, who was named Clovis. Nantilda considering that if her Husband
should come to die without settling the Succession, this Son would have no
share, solicited him so earnestly, that he sent for the Lords of Austrasia, and
made them understand that he meant and intended that Neustria and Burgundy
should belong to the Infant that was newly born: but that all the Cities of
Aquitain, of Provence, and of Neustria, which had been joined to the Kingdom of
Austrasia should so remain united, excepting the Duchy of Dentelen, which
Theodebert the Young, had taken from King Clotaire.

Gascons who had possessed one part of the Novem-populania, or third Aquitain,
had again began their Robberies after the death of Caribert. There were sent
twelve Dukes with the Militia of Burgundy, and several Counts without Dukes to
bring them to their Duty. They fallied forth out of their Rocks and their
Fastnesses, and set upon the French with wonderful alacrity: but after all they
found it better to make use of their agility to save themselves then to Fight;
They were pursued without stop or stay, and Fire and Sword flew after them even
into their strongest Retreats; till there being no other security left them but
the Mercy of their Prince, they promised to sall down at his Feet and submit to
all his Commands.

I know not where some Authors have found how Aquitania Secunda was concerned
in their Revolt, and that Dagobert having gone thither in Person, razed the
City of Poitiers and sowed it with Salt in token of its Desolation. If this
were true, it must have been because of the too heavy Imposts upon Salt, that
the Poitovins Rebelled.

Bretons to run upon the French Territories. Eloy, who was since Bishop of
Noyon, went and demanded Reparation of their King Judicael or Giquel Son and
Successor of Jukel. He found it no difficult thing to persuade that Prince,
that he were better come and wait on the King then have his Country overrun
and plundered by the Forces that were returning Victorious out of Gascongne: he
brought him to the Palace of Clichy, where he humbly craved pardon of Dagobert,
promised him for the future to prevent the like Disorders, and submitted both
himself and Kingdom to his disposal.

Gascon Lords, with their Duke Aighina came to the same place, as they had
promised the foregoing year, to surrender themselves up to the mercy of
Dagobert; and because they dreaded his wrath, they had recourse to the
intercession of St. Denis, and put themselves into Sanctuary in his Church. The
King in honor to that Saint, gave them their Lives and Fortunes, and they in
acknowledgment laying their hands up on his Altar, swore an eternal Fidelity to
him, to his Sons, and to all his Successors, Kings of France.

Dagobert did not enjoy this Repose very long: for the Second year he was taken
with a Dysentery at Espinay, which was one of his Royal Houses upon the Seine,
a little below St. Denis. His Sickness increasing, he made them carry him to
that Abbey, where he dyed the 17th of January, in the year 638. being very near
38 years of age. He Reigned in all but 16 years, as I think, that is, Six in
his Fathers life time, and Ten after his death. At his dying he earnestly
recommended his Wife Nantilda, and his Son Clovis to Ega, Mayre of the Palace
of Neustria, and to such Grandees as were then present.

The great Donations he made to the most famous Churches of France, deserve the
unparalleled Encomiums of the Clergy, who have allowed him all the qualities
of as Virtuous, as Wise, as Valiant, and as much accomplished a Prince, either
for Peace or War, as any that ever Reigned over the French,

The Chronology begins to be very confused and uncertain in this Reign, for
some will have it that he dyed An. 639. others, that it was in 643. Some reckon
the Sixteen years of his Reign from the death of his Father, others, from the
year that he made him King of Austrasia. I am of the opinion of the latter.

Gold and Silver had been very scarce and rare in France in the Reign of Clovis
and his Children; but since then, the Expeditions they made into Italy, the
Pensions they drew from the Emperors of the East; and as it is credible, the
Commerce they settled with the Nations in the Levant, brought great quantities
of those precious Mettles, as likewise precious Stones, and rich Vasa's, and
Ornaments; insomuch, that the Bravery and Luxury of the Court of France, was
not inferior to the Emperors.

Clovis II. King XII.
POPES,
SEVERIAN Elect in 639. S. some Months. JOHN IV. Elect in December. 639. S. One
year nine Months. THEODORE, Elect in November. 641. S. Seven years and half.
MARTIN I. Elect in July 649 S. Six years three Months. EUGENIUS I. Elected in
August 654, S. One year.
PEPIN and then GRIMOALD Maire. SIGEBERT in Austrasia, aged 8 or 9 years.
CLOVIS II. in Neustria, aged 4 years. EGA then ERCHINOALD Maire.

Mayres of the Palace, and all the affairs of State, governed according to
their capricious Fancies and their Interests. Pepin delivered by the death of
Dagobert, who had always kept him near himself, upon some Honorable pretense,
got again into the administration of his Office of Mayre of Austrasia. Dagobert
having committed the Government of that Kingdom to Duke Aldagise; that Lord
gave it up to him, either willingly or by compulsion, and he gave notice
thereof to Cunibert the Bishop, his old friend, who was Governor to Sigebert.
It was perhaps for his sake that he transferred the Court, and Royal Seat of
Austrasia, from the City of Mets to that of Colen.

Austrasia, who required that the Fathers Treasures should be divided betwixt
the two young Kings; the Grandees both of the one, and the other Kingdoms
assembled at Compiegne, to make the estimate, and to share it.

Pepins return into Austrasia, he fell sick and dyed, having held the Office of
Mayre Seventeen years: a Man as great for Honesty as Policy, being one
according to the Heart of God and Man: By his Wife Itta, whom some do name
Juberge, he had three Children, a Son named Grimoald, and two Daughters, Begghe
and Gertrude; The First Married Ansegise Ansegisile, Ansgise, Anchisus.
the Son of St. Arnold, and Father of young Pepin; and being a Widow, Devoted
her self to God in the Monastery of Nivelle, with her Mother who built it, and
her Sister Gertrude.

Grimoald, with the assistance of Cunibert, got himself into possession of the
Office of Mayre of the Palace: but Otho, who was Bail, or Fosterer of the young
Prince, and for that reason, very powerful in the Kings House, disputed it with
him for three years. In fine, Grimoald, to enjoy it quietly, caused him to be
slain by Leutaire, Duke of the Almains. This is the First time that Office
descended from Father to Son; hereafter we shall sind it Hereditary.

Sigebert, Radulfe, or Raoul, Duke of Turingia, sets up for Sovereign; having
allied himself with the Sclavonians, and made a League with Fare, who would
needs revenge the death of Chrodoald his Father, whom King Dagobert had caused
to dye for his Crimes. The Austrasian Lords led the Forces of their Kingdom,
and the King himself thither, to chastise their Rebellion. At first, Fare
having dared to come and meet them, was discomfited, and laid dead upon the
spot, with the best part of his Men. But the end was not answerable to the
beginning. Radulfe being retreated with his Forces, resolved to undergo all
extremities, in a Castle built of Wood, which he had furnished with all sorts
of Provisions, upon a HIll, nigh the River Onestrud; and Sigebert having
Besieged him, a difference happened amongst his Commanders, some would
immediately assault it, others would give the Soldiers time to refresh, and
recruit themselves. The First persisted obstinately, and went up to make their
Attaque, the rest foreseeing what the event would be, found fit to remain in
their Camp, and keep about the King's Person. Radulfe comes forth to meet those
that were climbing up to assail him, beats them back, and tumbled them down the
steep Hill headlong with great slaughter, the young King who was on Horseback
could do nothing more then weep, to behold them cutting the Throats of his Men
in his sight. Those who were about him, grew so much afraid, that they sent to
demand permission of Radulfe, that they might retire, and had leave from him as
a singular favor.

Emp. Con^tantin^, Son of Heraclius, R. four Months.
Ega, Mayre of Neustria being dead this year of a Fever, at the Palace of
Cli^hy; Erchinoald, who was of Kinn to King Dagobert, by his Mothers side, a
person who had all the Virtues that could be desired for that great Office, was
substituted in his place.

Then Heracl^^n, Son of his St^p mother, R. Six Months.
It was in the Lords of the Kingdom to elect the Mayre, and in the King, or his
Guardian to confirm him. Since the death of Varnaquier, who ended his life, An
607. there had been none in Burgundy. Queen Nantilda having held an Assembly of
the most Principal at Orleans, which was become the Capital of that Kingdom,
recommended Floachat her near kinsman to them, who was chosen for the place.

This good Queen ended her life soon after, having Governed in Neustria four
years and a half, without any trouble.

Austrasia, against those of Neustria and Burgundy, because those would fain
have joined these Emp- Constance, Son of Constantine, R. 26 years.
two Kingdoms to their own, and have put all France under the Empire of
Sigebert, as it had been under that of Clotaire: Erchinoald and Floachat
understanding their design, united themselves more closely together, and
promised each other mutual assistance.

Floachat made use of this Union to ruin Villebald or Guillebaud, Duke of the
Transjurains, his Enemy. They had reconciled themselves, and sworn, and given
mutual Faith to each other on the Tombs of Saints, and diverse Holy Relics:
Nevertheless Floachat did not forbear, having caused Guillebaud to come to an
Assembly which was held at Autun, to fall upon him in his Lodgings; Guillebaud
defended himself very bravely, at length he was over-powred and slain, with a
great number of his friends, and his Equipage rifled by Erchinoalds followers.
But the Murderer, as by Divine Judgment, was seized with a burning Fever,
going down the Soan, of which he dyed.

Sarrazins, a People of Arabia, who were known even in the days of Pompey the
Great; and who had since served the Romans in their Armies, were retired into
their own Countries, and had frequently made incursions upon the Empire. As
they were addicted to Robberies, and had neither Law nor Religion, they easily
embraced the Mahumetan, which was propagated by the Sword.

That Impostor lived but Ten years after he had declared himself Legislator,
and made no great progress, having only small numbers of Soldiers, rather like
a Captain of Thieves, or Highway Men, then a Prince. But in a very short time
his Successors raised themselves prodigiously. Abubecre, the next after him
broke into Syria, Ann. 635. his Successor Omar took Damas, with all that fair
Province, Ann. 636. and in a few years afterward Phoenicia, Palestine, Egypt,
and Persia it self; the last King whereof was Isdigerd, infecting all those
Countries with the Superstitions of Mahomet. Their Sovereign Communders were
Heads of their Religion, as well as of the State; and they were called Caliphs;
an Arabian word, which signifies Lieutenant, that is to say of God, whom they
pretended to represent both in Spirituals and Temporals.

Neustria, obliged Clovis to take the great Plates of Silver, which covered the
Tabernacle or Chapel of St. Dennis his Shrine, to buy Provisions for the
feeding of the Poor; a pious and just Act, for which, nevertheless the Monks
say, that God did severely punish him, having weakened and stupify'd his
Spirits. It is true, he had a weak Brain, and all those that descended from
him, were tainted with that Defect; but at that time he was not above 14 or 15
years of age at most.

The indigency of Authors of those times is so great, and the style of such as
are yet left of them, so confused, that we can hardly tell any thing of
certainty, neither Ann. 650. the First day of February, the death of Sigebert,
King of Austrasia, who lived but little above 21 years. His Merciful Humor,
his Devotion, and Ten or Twelve Abbeys which he built in his Kingdom, have
acquired him a room in the Roll of Saints. His Body was buried in the
Abby-Church of St. Martins, which he had erected in the Suburbs of Mets, from
whence it was transferred to Nancy; when the French demolished it, to maintain
the Siege against the Emperor Charles V. in the year 1552.

He had but one Son, named Dagobert, aged at most but two years: Grimoald his
Mayre of the Palace published, that before he had that Child, he had adopted
his Son, named Childebert. It is not credible that he could despair of having
any at the age of 19 years, unless that he had made a vow of Continence, and
afterward had broken that Vowagain. But perhaps Grimoald proclaimed this, to
have some Title to usurp the Kingdom, as he did, when he thought he had
disposed things so as he might undertake it.

CLOVIS in Neustria and Burgundy. DAGOBERT an Infant in Austrasia.

Dagobert the Son of Sigebert, bore the name of a King a year and an half or
two years, in which time I meet with nothing considerable, or memorable.

Grimoald imagining, as it is probable, that he had duly taken all his
measures, caused him to be shaven by Didon, Bishop of Poitiers, and banished,
and transported him into Ireland, under the Guard of some people, whom we may
believe, had all the care imaginable to keep him concealed, and confined in
some remote Monastery. It was a long time before any news could be heard of
him; the Queen Imnechild his Mother, sheltred her self under the protection of
King Clovis, with whom, as afterward with Childeric II. his Son, she had great
Interest and Power.

This done, Grimoald confidently sets up his Son upon the Throne; there are
proofs of some Royal Acts he did: but this attempt lost him all the veneration
the Austrasians had for the memory of Pepin, and gave them such horror for
their Mayre and his Son, that having taken them in some Ambuscades laid for
them, they led Grimoald to Paris to King Clovis, who caused him to be put to
death, or as others will have it, confined him to perpetual imprisonment;
however there was Austrasians elected another Mayre. Perhaps Erchinoald
executed that Office in all the three Kingdoms: for since the Decease of
Floacat, the Burgundians had created none.

CLOVIS II. Solus.


The Authors of those times accuse Clovis with giving himself up to the
Debauchery, or pleasures of the Mouth, and Women, and make a mighty noise for
his having plucked off an Arm from the Body of St. Denis, to place it in his
Oratory. They say he immediately fell into a fit of Madness, as if he had been
smote from Heaven, Franee during the Reigns of his Successors.

The same year this King, aged only 21 or 22 years, but having his Brain much
shaken Dagobert dyed; as the Authors of these times usually do: but if we
account from the very day he succeeded him, he was entering into the Eighteenth;
he was interred at St. Denis.

His Mayre Erchinoald had amongst his Domestiques, a young English Maid, named
Batilda, Vulgarly Baucdour.
of a rare Beauty, but whom he had bought out of the hands of Pirates, who had
stolen her away amongst some other Captives, for in those days they brought
great numbers from those parts: he bestowed her upon this young Prince for a
Wife, about the year 548, or 49. and of his Slave, made her the Wife of his
Saxon Princes, who Reigned in England.

By this Batilda, Clovis had three Sons, Clotaire, Childeric, and Thierry;
Clotaire was saluted King of Neustria and Burgundy, under the Government of his
Mother, and Erchinoald, and Childeric made King of Austrasia; whither he was
Conducted and left, he and his Kingdom, under the management of Vlfoad, Mayre
of that Kingdom: Thierry had no share, perhaps, because he was but yet in his
Cradle.

Clotaire III. King XIII.
POPES.
VITALIANUS, Elected in August 655. S. Thirteen years three Months.
EBROIN Mayre. CLOTAIRE III. King in Neustria and Burgundy, aged at most but
Five years. CHILDERIC King of Australia, aged Three or Four years.

Mayre Erchinoald ended with his Life, which happened in a few Months after the
death of Clovis, the II, or as others say, a short time before. Some, with
probability enough, make him the prime stock of the House of Alsatia; whence is
issued that of Lorrain of these days, which for Nobility, yields to none in
Chistendom, unless that of France.

The French bestowed that Office upon Ebroin, a man active, valiant, and who
being greatly in friendship with the most Holy Men of those times, and Founder
of some Churches, was held a good Man; and he lived in that Reputation many
years.

Batilda Governed with as much Goodness, Prudence, and Justice, as any wi^e
King could have done: And indeed for Ten years together there happened no Trouble
in her Sons Reign. Before her time, the Gauls, as well those Infants that lay
in their Cradles as their Fathers, paid a great Tribute by Poll, which
restrained many from Marrying, or obliged them to expose their Children: the
good Queen discharged them from it, and forbid those Jews that used to buy such
poor innocent Children, and send them into Foreign Countries, to deal any
longer in so inhumane a Trade. Nay, she bought several that those Infidels had
already purchased; and likewise such as had been stolen away by Thieves, and
sold for that purpose: but she exhorted them to put themselves into
Monasteries, which she very greatly desired might be well Peopled.

She had a very particular care for all that concerned the Church: For some
time past the Princes had taken Money for Spiritual Promotions; and the Bishops
sold by Retail what they bought in the Lump: She forbad that Sacrilegious
Traffic. Chelles, the other for Men at Corbie, on the Sum, and invited many
Holy persons to Court: but to tell truth, she gave too much access to the
Bishops, either for the good of the Church, or her own Reputation.

Ledger, whom she had made Bishop of Autun; and Sigebrand, we cannot tell of
what place. This last extremely proud of the Queens Favor, which gave occasion
of much jealousy and ill report amongst the envious, did so highly distaste
the great ones, that they put him to death, without any form of Process or
Trial. After this attempt, whether they apprehended the Resentments of that
Princess, or had slandered and bespattered her on purpose, to make her
incapable to Govern; they besought her so importunately to retire, that she was
obliged to condescend. Even those whom she had most gratified with her
Goodness, were of the party: Some of the Grandees conducted her to her
Monastery of Chelles, where of a Queen, she became only a simple Nun, and yet
was more Illustrious in her Humility, then she had been in her exalted
Greatness. She lived till the year 686.

Ebroin the Mayre had managed all this contrivance, that he might be left sole
Governor; for when the Reyns were off, his Pride, his Avarice, his Cruelty and
Treachery began to appear barefaced. He seized the Goods, he took away the
Offices, he hunted away the Greatest that were about the Court, and forbid any
others to come in there without his leave. Above all, he hated Ledger, the
Bishop of Autun, because he was a Creature of Queen Batilda's, and more able
then any other to make head against him, and to bring many more to join with
him.

Clotaire having been about three years in the hands of this wicked Minister,
dyed the 14th of his Reign, An. 668. He had no Children, but was capable of
having some, being 17 or 18 years old. Some say he was buried at Chelles,
others at St. Denis.

Childeric II. King XIV.
POPES.
VITALIANUS, some Months in this Reign. ADEODAT, Elected in April, 669. S.
Seven years eight Months and an half, of which, Four in this Reign.
Ebroin Mayre. THIERRY King of Neustria and Burgundy, aged 16 or 17 years. and
CHILDERIC. of Austrasia, aged 18 years. Wlfoade Mayre.

Emp. Constant. Pogo, or the Bearded. Son of Constans. R. 17* years.
AFter such an insolent Deportment, Ebroin could not hope that the Grandees of
Neustria and Burgundy, whatever King they should Elect, would confirm his
Office of Mayre; and therefore upon his own Head, and without waiting for their
Assembling or Consent, which was necessary in this case, he takes Thierry, and
sets him upon the Royal Throne, according to custom,

Autun got and kept them together, and they sent a dispatch to Childeric, to
proffer him the Kingdom of Neustria.

Childeric comes greatly accompanied; Ebroin is forsaken of all the World, and
found no Sanctuary, but the Horns of the Altar. The French, touched with an
imprudent Mercy, content themselves with Shaving, and Confining him to the
Monastery de Luxeu, to do Penance. His King Thierry is likewise Shaved and
sent to the Monastery of St. Denis, not to play the Monk, but to be prisoner
there. He had Reigned almost a year in Neustria.

CHILDERIC alone. WLFOADE Mayre.

France was reunited under one single King. Wlfoad was Mayre of Austrasia; and
Ledger, if he did not bear the Title, did at least bear the Office in Neustria,
and in Burgundy.

They had very much changed the Laws, which the best Kings and the wisest
Magistrates had made to deal Justice impartially: honest people desired they
might be restored, or revived; their Demand was granted, and it was ordained
amongst other things, that the Judges, Counts, and Dukes, should observe the
ancient Customs of the Country, and that those Employments should not be
perpetual, lest they should become Tyrannical.

But some wicked persons having gotten the ascendent over the young King, and
plunging him into the Debauches of Wine and Women, soon brought him to a breach
of all these Ordinances, and to do many unjust actions, without the knowledge,
Ledger. The Prelates enemies imputing all these faults to him, he was obliged,
that he might justify himself, to speak somewhat freely to him, even to the
threatening him with the wrath of God.

The young Prince was at first touched with his Remonstrances, or seemed to be
Leger's best friends whilst he was in greatest Favor, were those that threw
most Oil upon this Fire.

Childeric was gone to celebrate the Festival of Easter at Autun, where one
certain Hector, Patrician of Marseille, being arrived some days before; they
persuaded the King, that those two Lords were met only to plot against him: so
that upon the Easter-Eve, being troubled, and having his Head full of the fumes
of Choler and Wine, he ran into the Baptistary to kill him. The Holy Prelate,
and Hector perceiving his wrath, endeavored the following night to avoid it by
flight, but they were pursued. Hector was killed on the way, and the Bishop
brought back to the King, who with much ado gave him his Life, and confined him
to Luxeu. There he found Ebroin, who reconciled himself to him: The Wolf and
the Lamb dwelling together under the same roof, for fear of a more terrible
power, and because they had nothing there to decide betwixt them.

In those days Flavius-Vamba was King of the Visigoths. Three Lords of
Septimania, Paul with an Army to chastise them. But that General proving
unfaithful to his Prince, joined with them, taking advantage of their
Rebellion, and the assistance of the French and Gascons, to get himself to be
Elected, and proclaimed King in Narbona. His Ambition had a shameful end: Vamba
having retaken all the Cities he had seized upon, besieged him in the Arenes, A
Theater, or Gravelly place to Fight, or a kind of Amphitheater.
Sands of Nismes; and the unfortunate wretch surrendered to the Kings Mercy, who
led him in triumph thorough the Cities of Spain, and caused his Eyes to be put
out. But he durst not break with France: on the contrary, he loaded all those
French whom he had taken prisoners, with Gyves, though they had sided with that
Rebel.

Childeric's Debauches and Excess easily led his ill nature to the highest
Cruelties; Luxeu, to drag out the good Bishop Ledger, and hurry him to Court, to
be sacrificed to his revenge: and about the same time it happened, that he caused
a Lord, named Bodillon, to be tied to a Post and whipped. The Great ones of the
Kingdom resented this Outrage, as if themselves had felt the blows, and
wickedly conspired to Treat him as a Tyrant, who Treated them like Slaves. The
business being agreed upon, they wait for him at his return from Hunting, in
the Forest of Lochonia, which is perhaps that of Lyhons: Bodillon, the most
furious of all, revenging himself with his own hand, Massacres him, and with
him the Queen Bilechild, who was great with Child; and also a Son of theirs,
but very young. The Mayre Wlfoad made his escape, it is not known how, from
amidst the swords of these Furies, and retired into Austrasia.

Bilechild is by some Authors, said to be Sister of her Husbands Uncle: but
which, they say nothing, nor whether he left any Children, unless we will
believe a Chart, or Manuscript, wherein that Daniel Chilperic, whom we shall
mention hereafter, is called his Son. The time of his Reign is not agreed upon.
The most probable opinion is, that it was Fifteen years in Austrasia, and Three
in Neustria and Burgundy, which is about Eighteen years in all

Some years since, as they were repairing the Church of St. Germain des Prez;
they found two Stone Tombs, side by side, in the one lay the Body of a Man, and
in the other a Woman's, with a little Child. The Inscription bearing the Name of
Childeric, and some Regal Ornaments which were therein, discovered that they
were the Tombs of this King and his Queen.

An Inter-regnum of some Months.

THis Tragical Death was followed with an Inter-regnum, and universal Confusion
St. Ledger out o^ Luxeu, asked him pardon, and conducted him to his City of
Autun; where the Burghers and the Lords of Burgundy made a League to defend
him, in case they should attempt upon his Life, during this Inter-regnum

It is credible, that amidst these Divisions, all the Austrasians, or at least,
part of them, by the persuasion of Queen Imnichilda, Widow of King Sigebert II.
and who had had credit in the Court of King Childeric, desiring to have a King
that they might not fall under the power of the Neustrians, recalled her Son
Dagobert, whom Grimoald had shaven, and banished into Ireland, and acknowledged
him for King of Austrasia, where he Reigned many years.

Neustria and Burgundy, that they might not fall into an Anarchy, went and drew
forth Thierry from the Monastery of St. Denis, where he had time to let his
Royal Locks grow again, and set him on the Throne, giving him for Mayre of the
Palace Leudesia, or Liuteria, the Son of that Erchinoald, who had that Office
under Clovis II.

Thierry I. King XV.
POPES,
ADEODAT, S. three years and an half in this Reign. DONUS, Elected in No. 676.
S. one year three months. AGATHON, Elected in 678. S. three years eight months
and half. LEO II. Elected in August 683. S. eleven months. BENEDICTUS II.
Elected in 684. S. eighteen months and half. JOHN V. Elected in 685. S. one
year. CONON, Elected in 685. S. one year. SERGIUS, Elected in December. 687. S.
thirteen years eight months and half, whereof three years and an half under
this Reign.
LEUDESIA then Ebroin Mayres. THIERRY in Neustria and Burgundy, Aged 22 or 23
years. and DAGOBERT in Austrasia, Aged about 15 years.

EBroin having quitted the Monastery of Luxeu, after he had wandered a while
with a small Band of Men, grew so Confident as to throw off his Clerical Habit;
which was in those times esteemed a most horrid thing, though a Man had even
been compelled to put it on. His design was to seize upon the Government again:
to this end he got together all such as were banished, and such as were Enemies
to Ledger, whose opposition he most feared, and made a League with Wlfoad Mayer
of Austrasia, who mortally hated the Holy Bishop.

With this Crew of Rascally Villains and Austrasians, he takes the Field, and
in Neustria to surprise Thierry and Leudesia his Mayre. The first was passing
his time at Nogent in the Country of Laonnois, and the other was in a Palace on
this side the Oise. His Enterprise having failed him, because they got away
with all speed, he applies himself to fraud; and having, under color of an
Accommodation, engaged Leudesia to come to a Conference, he laid an Ambuscade
for him by the way, where he was Assassinated.

All this notwithstanding did not restore him to the Office of Mayre, King
Thierry Austrasia, as he was advised by two evil Bishops who had been Deposed,
Didon-Desiree of Chaalons, and Robon of Valence, to spread the Report abroad
that Thierry was dead, and to impose a false or pretended Clovis whom he said
was Son to Clotaire III. This Statue being set up, he forces the People to take
an Oath of Fidelity to him, and ruins all those Countries that refused so to
do.

But principally he Assaults Ledger in Autun by Vaimer Duke of Champagne, who
Autun, after he had broken all his Silver Plate to give to the Poor, and
delivers himself to Vaimer. That wicked Man caused his Eyes to be plucked out,
and shut him up in a Monastery. In Recompense for so good a piece of Service,
Ebroin instals him in the Bishopric of Troyes by fraud and violence, and Didon
invaded that of Autun; but both the one and the other perished soon after by
the same Tyranny, of which they were the Ministers.

Immediately after this, the Grandees of Neustria and Burgundy, as if they had
left their hearts by the imprisonment of Ledger, who indeed was the greatest
Genius of that Court, accepted Ebroin for Mayre of Thierry's Palace; and then
he having no more need of his false Clovis, took off his Vizard, and returned
him to a private Condition.

Being in this high Power, his Tyranny had no bounds, he sacrificed all that
had opposed him to his Revenge, and to his Covetousness those that possessed
fair Estates, or great Employments: but all under the pretense of some imputed
Crime, which deprived them of their Honor, before he robbed them of their
Lives. The most wary saved themselves in time, some in Aquitain, others in the
utmost skirts of* Austrasia.

Childeric, for which, it was well known, he rejoiced more than the Actors
themselves. He failed not to bring in and involve Ledger and the Count Guerin
his Brother; These two Lords being brought before him, he caused the latter to
be Stoned to death at a Stake, and the other to have the Soles of his Feet torn
out, and his Lips cut off, then put him into the Custody of one of his
Sattelites, who kept him near two years in the Monastery of Fescamp.

The most part of the Bishops flattered him in his Injustice, because they
either dreaded him, or had some interest in it. Dadon himself, otherwise Owen.
Ouin Bishop of Rouen, and one that has a Place in the Calendar of Saints, was
his Friend and one of his principal Counselors. This Man clapped St. Filibert
Abbot of Jemieges in Prison, for having made some Remonstrances to the Tyrant;
And afterward perceiving that such Violence was too odious in the Eyes of
honest People, he banished him to Aquitain, under color of building a
Monastery in the Isle of Herio; Indeed he did Erect one there, whence it took
the name of Noir-moustier.

The Exemplary Virtue and Christian Liberty of a few Prelates made the Tyrants
Process: he undertook to make theirs, and dishonor them to justify his own
Conduct which they had condemned. This could not be without the Sentence of
their Brethren. To this purpose he therefore calls an Assembly of some that
were most devoted to him in one of the Kings Palaces in the Country. They began
(thereby to gain a good opinion of their Justice and Impartiality) with two
Bishops who deserved it very well. These were Didon and Vaimer, who had
offended the Tyrant, it is not said wherein. Both these were Degraded, and
afterward delivered over to be put to Death. Didon perished by the Sword, and
Vaimer by the Cord.

That done they proceeded against Amat de Sens, Lambert de Tougres, and Ledger
d'Autun: the two first retired into Monasteries: but as for the other, the
Fathers of the Council, or rather the Slaves to that Tyrant, tore his Garment
from top to bottom, that was the manner of Degradation; then he was put into
the hands of Crodebert Count of the Palace, who having with grief carried him
into the Forest d'Iveline, caused his Head to be cut off.

Dagobert King of one part of Austrasia. I know there are some Authors that
make him live many years longer, and bestow a Son, and many Daughters upon him:
but in my mind it is upon very doubtful proof, and if he had any Son, we cannot
say that he outlived his Father, unless some Modern Genealogist have need of it
to make up his Account.

A little before, or a little after him, Wlfoad his Mayre ended his days,
having enjoyed that Office near twenty five years. The Austrasians having no
Prince of the Blood, and refusing to obey Thierry out of hatred to Ebroin, put
the whole Government of the Kingdom into the hands of Martin and Pepin; They
were Cousin-Germans issued from two Sons of St. Arnolds, the first from
Clodulph, the second from Anchisa and Begga the Daughter to Pepin de Landen. To
distinguish these, some of our Historians call this Pepin the Gross, others
Pepin de Herstal; which is a Village upon the Meuse between Jupil and Liege,
where he had been brought up.

THIERRY in Neustria. MARTIN and PEPIN Princes in Austrasia.

THe two Cousins foreseeing Ebroin would come upon them, went out to attaque
Locafao Not now known.
at the entrance into Neustria. The Tyrant gained the Victory, and they escaped
by flight, Martin to the City of Laon, and Pepin a great way in the Kingdom of
Austrasia.

Ebroin with his Army approaches Laon, and finding the place impregnable by
force, gives out Propositions of Accommodation. Two Bishops, Engilbert of
Paris, and Rieul Regulus.
of Rheims would needs be Instruments of the fraud. They persuaded Martin to go
and meet him in his Camp; and for security gave him their Oaths upon the
Shrines of some Saints, which they carried about them, but out of which they
had taken the Relics. Martin having forgotten the Example of Leudesia, relies
on the Faith of these Prelates; When he was come into the Camp, Ebroins
Soldiers surrounded and cut him off with all his Men. Thus all the Government
of Austrasia remained in Pepin, who made advantage of his Enemies Crime, and
the defeat of his Cousin.

This great success pushed the insolence of Ebroin to the highest degree. But
Treating the French more tyrannical then ever, a Lord named Hermenfroy, whom he
had stripped of all his Estate, and whom he threatened with Death, delivered
France from that Monster: He watched him one Morning before break of day at his
going from home to the Church, and cleft his Head with a Sword; afterward he
made his escape into Austrasia.

In his place the French made choice of Varaton a wise old Man, who immediately
Treated with Pepin, and gave him Hostages. He had joined with him in that
Administration, a Son of his (named Willimer Guillimer, Gislimer.
) able, crafty, and undertaking: but rough, choleric, and one that had nothing
more in view then the honor of Commanding; This unnatural Child grew weary of
being his Fathers Companion, he would be his Master and dispossessed him of his
Employment.

Presently after he breaks the Treaty with Pepin, and having raised a great
Army, marched as far as Namur, where he catches some of his Enemies with the
lure of an Hipocritical Faith, and caused them to be slain. At his return from
thence he was seized with a Distemper, whereof he died, not without Divine
Punishment, being Emp. Justinian II. Son of Progonatus, Reigned nine years and
an half.


Berthier who had Married a Daughter of his Wives, succeeded him by Election.
This was a little fellow, Ill-shaped, Hair-brained, Unjust, Proud, Covetous,
and in fine much the same as Willimer, only he had neither Wit nor Judgment.
The greater part of the Neustrians finding themselves despised and controuled
by so contemptible a Creature, conceived so much scorn and hatred for him, that
they forsook Pepin.

This Lord both Generous and Politic took in hand the Cause of those that had
been banished by Ebroin, and whom Thierry treated still as Criminals, that he
might have some color to detain their Estates. He advised them to send to that
King to implore an Amnesty and Pardon for what was past in the most submissive
manner: and after their Supplications had been rejected, he brought them back
into their own Country with an Army, and spared not to assault Thierry and his
Mayre; He fought them at Tertry, which is between St. Quentin and Peronne.
Heavens having favored him with a complete Victory, he seized on the Royal
Treasure, then on the City of Paris and Thierry's own Person who had sheltred
himself there. After which Berthier, whose evil Counsels had occasioned all
these mischiefs, was knocked on the Head by Combination of almost all the
Neustrians, and the instigation even of his Wives own Mother.

Some, not without reason, do here put an end to the Reign of the Merovignians,
because in truth and in effect they never had after this but only the vain and
empty Title of Kings, their whole Kingdom, and even their Persons being in the
Power of Pepin and his Children. He was owned Mayre of the Palace through all
France, and he took the Title of Duke or Commander of the French, according to
the ancient usage of the Germans; that is to say they gave him all Authority in
the Armies without dependence upon the King, but under whose name
notwithstanding all Acts were passed; and that was the sole honor that
remained still in him.

Austrasia environned with fierce and rebellious People, wanted the presence of
Pepin: He durst not take King Thierry with him, lest he should displease the
Neustrians, but he left a Lord with him called Nordbert who disposed of all,
and gave him an account.

French found no prejudice by this change, the interest of a new Prince who
desired to Establish himself, being to gain the Affections of the People: and
indeed, he repaired all the Breaches that he possibly could, which had been
made in the foregoing Reigns, restored what had been ravished from the Church,
the Bishops to their Sees, the Grandees in their Dignities and Lands, resolved
upon nothing without the Advice of the Lords and Prelates, defended the Cause
of the Oppressed, of Widows and Orphans, and applied himself to give vigor to
the Laws, which are the only Shields for the weak against the mighty ones.

French Militia together, and by the Advice of the great ones carried the War
into Frisia, and compelled the Duke or King Ratbod who revolted, to render him
Obedience, and to pay him Tribute.

At his return he called a Council, the place is not named, wherein they
Treated and Considered of the ways and means that should be taken to repress
Disorders and Violence, and for the defense of the Church, of Widows and
Orphans. He knew there were no greater Charms to make them love his Government,
then Piety and Justice.

Poor Thierry being stripped of the real part of his Royalty, which is his just
Power, and reduced to be contented with a moderate Revenue in Lands, ended his
Pepins Victory, and four under the Power of that Mayre.

He had two Sons, Clovis and Childebert, and two Wives Clotilda and Doda,
unless that name of Doda They yet call such in French Dodue, as are fat.
were an Epithet of Crotilda, who perhaps was so called because she was fat and
plump. His Tomb and that of this Doda are to be seen at St. Vaasts of Arras.

Clovis III. King XVI.
POPE, SERGIUS, Who S. four years in this Reign.
CLOVIS III. In Neustria. PEPIN, Mayre in Neustria, Sovereign in Austrasia.

IF there had been two Kings, there must have been two Mayres, but Pepin would
Austrasia, because he held that as properly his own: for this reason he gave to
Clovis, which was the eldest of Thierry's two Sons, the Title of King in
Neustria and Burgundy, but himself kept the whole Administration. Emperor
Leontius I. having chas^d and mutilated Justin, Reigned two years and some
months.


Perhaps the French according to their ancient Right, had conferred upon him
the Sovereignty of Austrasia: but it is certain, that all those People who were
Tributary's to that Kingdom, as the Turingians, the Frisians, the Saxons, the
Almains shook off the Yoke and made themselves Independents. On the other hand,
the Aquitains, and likewise the Gascons created each a Sovereign Duke of their
own, and the Bretons enlarged their little Frontiers

Clovis, according to some, Reigned but two years, others more probably give
him

Childebert II. King XVII.
POPES,
SERGIUS, Who S. five years and an half during this Reign. JOHN VI. Elected in
Oct. 701. S. three years two months. JOHN VII. Elected in March 705. S. two
years seven months. SISINNIUS, In January 708. S. twenty days. CONSTANTINE, In
March 708. S. six years, whereof three i^ this Reign.
CHILDEBRT II. Called the Young, aged Eleven or twelve years. PEPIN, Mayre,
etc.

Pepin set up his Brother Childebert, who because of his Minority, was yet
reduced to a lesser scantling of Allowance, then his Brother had been. The
great Officers, as the Count of the Palace, the great Referendary, (or
Chancellor) the Intendant of the Royal Houses, were all with the Mayre: The
Kings had only a small number of Domestics, which served rather as Spies and
Jaylors then Officers; And indeed they needed them not, being ever locked up in
a House of Pleasure, whence they never went forth, but in a Chariot drawn with
Oxen, and showed not themselves to the People but once a year, in the Assembly
of Estates which was held the First day of March.

Egica King of the Visigoths had War with the French, toward the borders of
the third Aquitain; the success we know not.

Norbert who was the sub-Mayre and Lieutenant to Pepin in Neustria, being
deceased, Pepin caused Grimoald his young Son to be elected Mayre of that
Kingdom, and gave the Duchy of Champagne to his eldest Son Drogo, whom he
would keep near him.

Emp. Tiber. Absim* elected by the Soldiers degrades Leont. Reigned seven
years. 700, etc. 706, and 7. Emp. Justinian II. restores himself, and puts
Tiberius to Death, Reigned seven years.
Ratbod King of the Frisons, notwithstanding he had given his Faith and
Hostages, revolts a second time, and is again beaten by Pepin near Dorstat.

There was nothing observable in the eight or nine following years.

Pepin, besides his Wife Plectrude, who was already old, had taken a Concubine,
or if you will a lawful Wife; for the French, notwithstanding the sacred Canons
and the Prohibitions of the Church, repudiated their Wives when they pleased,
and Wedded others. The Kings themselves, according to the ancient Custom of the
Germans, had often many at one time. This same was called Alpaide: Pepin had a
Son by her named Charles, and since surnamed Martel. Lambert Bishop of Liege, a
Zealous Defender of the Christian Truth, having dared to reprove him several
times, and called that Conjunction Adultery in public: Dodon the Brother to
Alpaide Assassinated him by consent of Pepin. Soon after, the Murderer being
eaten with Worms, and enduring horrible Torments a while, cast himself into the
Meuse. This infection of Worms was very frequent, and as it were Epidemick at
that time, as have been St. Anthony's Fire and some other odd Diseases.

Pepin lost Drogo or Dreux his eldest Son, who left two Sons, Hugh and Arnold,
by his Wife Austrude, who was the Widow of the Mayre Berthier.

The Almans and Souabues made now but one People; governed by the same Duke,
who appertained to the Kings of Austrasia, or held of them: But Godfrey the now
Duke had cast off the Yoke to make himself independent; Being dead Anno 709.
Willehaire succeeded him. Pepin in two Expeditions which he made thither,
vanquished him, and triumphed over his Pride. He could not wholly subdue it
though, so that it was found necessary to send a third Army into that Country:
but when Childebert.

The last of this Kings days was the 15th of April, Anno 711. He was Aged about
Stephens at Coucy.

Though he had not the opportunity of doing any Act himself, being as it were
Tethered by the Authority of Pepin: nevertheless they gave him the name of
Just, rather to distinguish him from the other Childebert, then because he
deserved it.

Some give him two Sons, Dagobert and Childeric. The first Reigned, the other
was bred up to Learning or clerkship, and surnamed Daniel. There are those that
will make him to be the Son of Thierry the First.

The Piety of Gontran, the Mildness and Justice of Clotaire, and the
Tranquillity Church*
of his Reign after the death of Brunehaud, turned the genious of the French,
already very Devout, to be highly Religious, and inclined them more generally
to Reverence holy things, and such as they believed to have a more frequent
Communication with Heaven. The Kings and Grandees outvied each other, who
should bestow most Gifts upon the Churches: They deposited in those sacred
Treasuries even to their very Girdles, their Belts, their Precious Vessels,
their Apparel when they were rich and set with precious Stones, or Embroidered,
their Household Furniture, and any other Rarities which were more for Ornament
then use. It was then who should build most Churches and Hospitals, and who
should found the noblest Monasteries.

The Kings strove to exempt such as they founded, from all Temporal
Jurisdiction and Charges, and to ascertain the full and free Possession of all
what they bestowed. And therefore because of the assumed power the Bishops had
to lay hands on all those Goods, and that they disposed of the Donations and
Offerings which were made to any of the Churches within their Diocese, and for
that besides they took some certain Duties for Blessing the Chrisome, for the
Consecration of Altars, for their Visiting, and sometimes for Ordinations: they
obliged them to free them from all such Impositions, and even not to meddle
with any Monastery, but to leave the Correction and Government of the Monks to
the Abbot, excepting in case he had not power enough to compel Obedience, and
withal to confer the Sacred Orders to such Monks as should be presented,
without exacting any thing.

The Princes on their part did likewise freely bestow many the like Immanities,
which exempted them as well from Contribution for their Lands, and from all
Imposts on their Goods, as from New-years-Gifts, Lodging and Expense of Judges,
which they claimed from all other People wherever they went to hold their
Courts.

Now these Exemptions were agreed to by the Diocesan, but with the consent of
his Brethren of the Clergy. That of St. Denis, the oldest now remaining, was
conceded by Landry of Paris, upon the entreaty of King Clovis II. Anno 659. in
the Assembly of Clichy: it contains many more things then the Protocole or
Deed of Marculfe. That of Corbie was given by Bertefoy of Amiens, Anno 664. at
the request of Queen Batilda. It makes mention, that there had been the like
heretofore granted to the Monasteries of St. Mauries in Chablais.
Agaune, and St. Honorat.
Lerins, and Leuxeu.

Pope Adeodat in the year 672. confirmed that which had been granted to St.
Martins at Tours, saying, That diverse others in France had obtained the like,
without which he would not have given his consent, it being contrary to the
Canons, There was the like granted to St. Vandrille.
Fontenels by Ansbert of Rouen, in a Council which he called for that purpose
in that City, 682. In fine, there were few great Abbeys that did not obtain the
like; and ever the last gained something more, and enlarged themselves as I may
say, to the prejudice and cost of the Hierarchy, who lent them her Authority to
destroy her self, and them likewise, since the Perfection of a good and holy
Monk consists in Obedience and Humility.

I hardly find any Age wherein the heat for a Monastic Life reigned so greatly
as in this. Such as were prompted with that Spirit, went from one Country to
another, wandering in every corner to seek out Forests and Mountains; which were
the more and sooner peopled by how much they were the more solitary and
melancholy. Ireland, Scotland, and England sent great numbers of these good
Monks into France. Colombanus the most renowned of all, Irish by Birth, having
been very well received by King Gontran, then by Childebert, built the famous
Monastery of Luxeu, in the Mountain of Vosge; His Reputation spreading over the
three Nations, drew thither a vast number of People; and the Sentence of the
Council of Mascon in the year 627. who undertook the defense of this Institute,
against the Monk Agrestin who would oppose him, gave him such a Vogue, that it
spread all over France, going an equal pace with St. Bennets, and producing
most eminent Servants to God, as Emery, Deile, Deicola.
Eustasius, and Gal, Disciples of Colombanus. Eustasius was Abbot of Luxeu, and
Gal who was likewise an Irishman, went and built a Monastery in the Country of
the Swissers, about which was afterward raised the City of St. Gall.

St. Vandrille built one in the Diocese of Rouen, at that place called
Fontenelle. St. Riquier one in Vimieu. St. Vallery and St. Josse two others in
the Diocese of Amiens upon the Seacoast. This St. Josse was younger Brother of
Judicael King of Bretagne, and had for Brother Vinok and two more who all chose
to lead the same Life. St. Ghislain one in Haynault, Romaric one for Remiremont.
Nuns in the Vosge, in the place where stood his Castle of Romberg Trudon.
, St. Tron one in the Country of Liege, St. Bavon one at Ghent, St. Goar one on
the River Woker near the Rhine; All these Monasteries to this very day bear the
names of these Saints.

The Princes or Grandees gave them Ground whereon to build them, together with
the assistance of devout People, and sometimes some of them did build at their
own Charge and Expense. Sigebert King of Austrasia erected twelve; A Lord named
Bobelen four in the neighborhood of Bourges; Clovis II. or rather an
Archdeacon of Paris, St. Maur des Fossez; The Queen Batilda two very famous
ones, viz. Corbie for Men, and Chelles for Women; King Thierry St. Vaast of
Arras, as an Expiation for having consented to the death of St Ledger; St. Ouin
or Owen filled his Diocese with a great number, the most illustrious of them
are Fontenelle, Fescamp and Gemieges. This last, as likewise that of
Noir-moustier in an Island of Poitou was the work or production of the care of
that Philebert whom we have mentioned. St. Eloy amongst many others built one
at Solongnac in Limousin, and one for Virgins at Paris, of which St. Aura was
the Abbess; At this time it is the Church of St. Eloy before the Palace
inhabited by the Barnabites.

Nor was there ever in France such prodigious multitudes and swarms of Monks
who lived a most admirable Life in the Eye of all the World. For besides those
I have mentioned, there was likewise Ame whom Colombanus had brought from the
solitude of Agaune, Bertin who made a Monastery at Sitieu: It Is there where at
present is the City of St. Omers. Baldomer.
Germier who has given his name to a small City within twelve Leagues of Lions:
Foursy a Scotchman who erected a Monastery at Lagny: Landelin who began that of
Lobe upon the Sambre: St. Sor a Hermit in Perigord, and diverse others, whose
Memories the Church does Celebrate with Veneration.

We must acknowledge that these Flocks of Penitents were very useful to France,
yea, beneficial to the Temporal Advantage; For the frequent and long incursions
of the Barbarians having destroyed and laid it waste and desolate, it was yet
in many parts overrun with Thickets and Woods, and in the low Grounds, drowned
and Boggy. These good Monks who had not devoted themselves to God to live an
idle life, wrought with their hands, to clear and drain, and Plant and build,
not so much for themselves who lived in great frugality, as to maintain the
Poor, so that of Barren, Woody, overflown drowned Deserts, that were frightful
to look upon, they made fruitful and delightful places, the Heavens with its
sweetest influences favoring those places that were cultivated by such pure
and disinterressed Hands. I shall not mention how that all what is remaining of
the History of those Ages has been preserved by them also, and derived to us.

The weaker Sex had not less strength and resolution to lead this Penitent
Life, then the Men. The noblest Virgins sought for Vowed or Married themselves
to Chastity and Devotion.
Husbands in the Cloister, and Widows found their greatest Comforts there.
Princesses built some expressly for their own Retirement. Queen Batilda, or
Baudour made one at Chelles in Brie; Fare or Burgundofare Sister to the Bishop
St. Faron another in the same Country, which is called Fare-monstier; Gertrude
a Virgin, and ^egge her Sister, Widow of Ansegise Son of St. Arnold, both
Daughters of Pepin, retired to that of Nivelle, which their Mother Ita had
founded; Aldegouda and her Sister Va^ltrude erected one at Maubeuge on the
Sambre; And Saleberge another in the Town of Laon.

In all these Ages (which we shall observe once for all) a great many of the
Bishops were taken out of Monasteries, or made their retreat thither after they
had served the Church some years. Amongst those holy Pastors who most
enlightened the Church by their Life and Doctrine, we find in this, Romain of
Rouen, who is said to have quelled and overcome a prodigious Dragon, in memory
whereof his Shrine has yet the privilege to save every year one Murderer
from Execution, Faron de Meaux, Magloire de Dol, Archard de Noyon, two Didiers,
one of Vienne Martyred by Brunehaud, the other of Cahors promoted to that
Bishopric by Dagobert I. whose Grand-Treasurer he was; Arnold of Metz,
Cunibert de Cologne, Oudrille Ausiregesilus.
de Bourges, Amand the Bishop of Tongres or Liege, Audoen surnamed Dadon,
vulgarly St. Owen, Successor to Romain beforementioned, and Eloy de Noyon
after Archard. These two were illustrious in the Court of Clotair II. the one
for his rare Goldsmiths Works, the other in the Office of Chancellor or
Referendary, and for his Counsel, both these were Consecrated on the same day
in the Reign of Clovis II. and this Character gave them the greater Authority
with the King. At the same time lived Landry of Paris, Paul de Verdun, Ledger
Leodecarius.
d'Autun, Prajectus.
Prey or Priet de Clermont, who was not much his Friend, no more then Owen or
Ouin; Omer de Audomarus.
Terrouenne, Sulpitious the Pious after Oudrille. About the end of this Age or
Century, Robert first Bishop of Salzburgh in Bavaria, Remacle Bishop of
Tongres, who was a Monk both before and afterward, and Wilbrod who took the
name of Clement, an English Priest, in whose favor was first Established the
Arch-Episcopal See at Vtrecht, Anno 697. Amongst all these I observe four that
made most generous Remonstrances to their Princes against their excess, Amaud
to King Dagobert, Didier to Brunehaud, Ledger to Childeric, and Lambert to Duke
Pepin; These three last sealed the Christian Truths with their Blood.

The Kings favor having the greatest influence in all Elections, we must not
wonder if those that attained to a Bishopric by that means, were either People
of the Court, or became so; and if by the advantage of Study and Learning they
had a little more knowledge and insight then others, the Princes would keep
them there to serve in their Councils. But we may observe that the Court Air
was no less dangerous to them, then contrary to the Duty of their Residence,
since Arnold himself retired from thence to do Penance, and that those who
passed for the most holy, as Owen and Ledger, had their Interests, their Cabals
and their Passions there. What can we believe of others who were less Virtuous,
but they committed all sorts of Irregularities, which sometimes led them into
the most enormous Crimes, of which they were the Instruments, and many times
the Actors and Executioners. For proof of this, we need but call to mind that
wicked Bishop, who undertook to suborn Queen Beretrude, those two Flatterers of
Ebroin who forswore themselves upon the empty Cases or Shrines to bring Martin
to Butchery, and those two false Councils, whereof the one condemned Didier of
Vienne, the other St. Ledger d'Autun, without ever endeavoring afterward to
interpose by Petitions and Prayers for saving their Lives, which those Kings
never refused them.

Because of these Disorders and those the Civil Wars produced, which much
troubled France, the Councils were much less frequent then in the foregoing
Age. We have already mentioned the Fifth of Paris See Page the 51.
. There was one assembled at Mascon in 627. which approved the Rule of St.
Colomban, much opposed by the Monk Agrestin revolted against him. Anno 630.
there was one at Reims concerning Discipline, one at Chaalons, Anno 650. and
one at Autun called by St. Ledger, Anno 670. for the same purpose. In that of
Chaalons, Agapius and Bobon, who, as I believe, were Concurrents, were deposed.
There was one at Orleance in the year 645. which confuted a Greek Monothelite
Heretic, and drove him most shamefully out of France. We have the Canons of
that of Paris, of Reims, and of Chaalons, and some of that of Autun, which are
most of them no other then a Confirmation of such as had been made by the
foregoing Councils.

France had no share in the Controversy of the Monothelites, who mightily
disturbed the Eastern Church. The shame that Grecian met with in the Council of
Orleance, who thought to have introduced that Heresy, hindered others, as I
suppose, from coming to Preach or cry it up, and the French from being infected
with it. Which without doubt encouraged Pope Martin not to be daunted with the
Threatenings of the Emperor Constance By others named Constantine.
, nor the endeavors of Paul Bishop of Constantinople, who had undertaken to
obtain the Reception of that condemned Opinion, and had joined all those to his
Party that adhered to the Doctrines of Severus, of Eutyches, and of Manes. And
indeed we find that in the year 649. he sent the Articles of the Council of
Rome to Clovis II. and desired him and also King Childebert to depute some of
their Bishops to Rome, that they might accompany and countenance the Legation
he intended to send to the Emperor upon that Subject.

Dagobert II. King XVIII.
POPES,
CONSTANTINE, Three years in this Reign. GREG. II. Elected March 714. S.
sixteen years nine Months and an half, of which one year in this Reign.
DAGOBERT II. Called the Young, Aged Eleven or twelve years. PEPIN, Mayre in
Neustria, and Sovereign in Austrasia.

CHildebert being out of the World, Pepin made choice of Dagobert his Emp.
Philippicus Bardanes, causes Justinian to die, Reigned two years.
eldest Son to wear the Bauble, and instaled him in the Royal Throne, by the
Counsel and Approbation of the Estates. Where having caused him to preside,
after he had received the Gifts or Presents from the French, after he had
recommended the care of the Rights of the Church, of Widows and Pupils,
renewed the Decree against Rapine, and give Command to the Army to

The first year of his Reign, Pepin undertook a fourth Expedition against the
Almans; who were this time so battered, that they could not stir again for many
years.

After many Wars, having not been able wholly to bring under him Ratbod Duke of
the Frisons, he not only came to an Agreement, but likewise allied himself with
him, by Marrying his Son Grimoald to that Kings Daughter.

The Sarrazins who were Masters of Africa, did not let slip the fair occasion
that presented to invade Spain. The Children of King Vitiza had been Excluded
the Kingdom by Roderick, (whose Fathers Eyes Vitiza had caused to be put out)
and had retired themselves to Julian, Governor of the Visigoths in the Province
of Tingi, who was himself likewise much offended for that this new King having
Debauched his Daughter would own her but for his Concubine. These three Lords
having joined their Resentments, addressed themselves to Maza Lieutenant in
Africa under Valit or Vlit Caliph, or chief Sovereign of the Sarrazins; He gave
them some Forces, over whom Roderick getting the better, he again sent others
commanded by Tarac (this was he that gave the name to Gibal-Tar) to the
Mountain Calphe, where he built a Fort, whence likewise the Straights-mouth
has its denomination. At length there happened a great Battle betwixt him and
Roderick, where that King was overcome and slain with all the flower of the
Visigoths.

Within two years all Spain was subjected to the Tyranny of the Sarrazins, the
remainders of the Visigoths fled part of them into the Mountains of Asturia and
Galicia, part into France, from whence they by degrees came all to Prince
Pelagus, Emp. Anastasius II Philippicus having been degraded, and his Eyes put
out, Reigned one year six months.
Son of Fafila and Grandson of King Chindasuint, who yet preserved to himself a
petty Principality amidst the Mountains of Asturia, which in process of time
and by assistance of the French, increased so much that it consumed the
Sarrazins in the end.

While Pepin was at Jupile, he fell into a long and troublesome Distemper. His
Son Grimoald going to Visit him, passing by Liege to make some Prayers for him
on St. Lamberts Tomb, this was in the Month of April, he was Assassinated by a
Rascal named Rangaire, a Frison, for which reason an Author has pretended,
that it was Rotbod his Father-in-Law.

Emp. Theodosius, elected by the Army, degrades Anast. Reigned two years.
Pepin being Recovered, severely revenged the Death of his Son upon all the
Accomplices he could lay hold on. This was the dearest to him of all his Sons,
he had likewise a great regard for his Bastard, named Theodoald, and obliged
the Neustrian Lords to elect him for their Mayre.

Some months after he relapsed more grievously then before, in so much as he
died December, having held the Government of all France from the Battle of
Tertry, which was in 687. even to his Death, with great success, and with much
greater Virtue, of which the most eminent, and which gained him most the favor
of Heaven, was his Zeal for the propagation of the Faith, not having spared any
thing to plant it in Germania, Secunda, and beyond the Rhine, where all the
Inhabitants were at that time Idolaters.

Besides Drogon and Grimoald, he had two more Sons, Charles Martel and
Childebrand. It is unknown by what Woman he had the last, but a very exact
Historian has proved that this Robert le Fort, (the Strong) who was the
Paternal Great, great Grandfather of King Hugh Capet, was descended from him by
the Male Line.

Now be it that Pepin left the Mayrie of Austrasia to Arnold, who was the Son
of Drogon, as that of Neustria to Theodoald, or changing his mind a little
before he died, had bestowed it upon Charles for all the three Kingdoms, or
perhaps only the name of Prince of the French, which seems to be above that of
Mayre; Plectrude his Widow seized upon the whole Government, and got Charles by
a wile into her hands, keeping him Prisoner at Colen, where she made her usual
abode.

Neustrians already tired with the Domination of the Austrasians, were yet more
impatient of being ruled by a Woman. They therefore Armed themselves, and put
their King Dagobert in the head of their Forces, to prevent her from coming
under the name of Theodoald a Child and a Bastard, to usurp the Government of
their Country.

The Army that brought Theodoald being near Compeigne, the Neustrians went to
meet them, and put them to the rout: All the Austrasians could do, was to save
Theodoald. After this Victory they chose Ragenfroy, or Rainfroy for their
Mayre, being one of the most considerable and most valiant Lords amongst them:
who to perplex the Austrasians the more, made a League with Ratbod Duke of the
Frisons, and led King Dagobert to ransack Austrasia even to the Meuse.

Austrasians being in a great consternation, Charles happily made his escape
out of Prison, and having gotten his Friends together, was received with
incredible joy by all his People.

About the end of the same year died Dagobert King of Neustria, after he had
Thierry, who was yet in his Cradle, and who had afterward the surname of
Chelles, because he was brought up there.

Immediately upon this Rainfroy that he might have a name under which he might
still hold the Government, took Daniel out of the Monastery, caused him to be
instaled in the Throne by the Grandees according to custom, and named him
Chilperic. It is not certainly known whose Son he was, some believe him to have
been Childeberts, others Thierry's, and others again the Son of that Childeric
who was Assassinated by Bodillon, Anno 673. If these last are in the right, he
was at least Forty four years old when he began to Reign, and indeed he must
have been of some years, since he had been a Clerk, and had stayed time enought
to let his Hair grow long again.

Chilperic II. King XIX.
POPE, GREGORY II. Who S. six years during this Reign.
CHILPERIC II. King in Neustria, with Rainfroy his Mayre. CHARLES, Mayre or
Prince in one part of Austrasia. THEODOALD, Under the Regency of Plectrude in
the other part.
BY virtue of a League contracted the foregoing year, Rainfroy and Ratbod
Charles on each side, Ratbod being entered into the Country as far as Colen, met
him in his way, it was in the month of March. The Battle was very bloody on
either hand; but disadvantageous to the last; and this was almost the only
misfortune or defeat he met with in his whole Life.

After this Victory the Frisons and the Neustrians joined their Forces, sacked
all Colen. Plectrude who was in the Town with her Emp. Leon Isaur* by the
cession of Theod. Reigned Twenty four years.
Nephews, found means to make them withdraw again by giving them Money. In the
mean time Charles having rallied his Men together, laid an Ambuscade for
Rainfroy at his return, where he beat and plundered a Party of his Army. This
was in the Ardennes at the place named Amblave from the River which passes
there near the Abbey of Staulon.

The following year he in his turn made an irruption into Neustria. Rainfroy
with Childeric came against him, and gave him Battle at the Village of Vinciac,
in Cambresis, upon a Sunday the 20th of March. The success being a long while
doubtful ended in favor of the last; he put Rainfroy to the rout, and pursued
him very near to Paris.

At his return Austrasia owned him for their Head, Colen opened him her Gates,
and Plectrude was constrained to give him up his Father Pepins Treasure,
together with his Grandchildren Theodoald, Hugh, and Arnold, whom he kept
under a strong Guard.

Though he had all these Advantages, he yet wanted the name of a King: he
Clotaire who was of the Blood Royal. Some make him the Son of Thierry III. not
long since deceased, perhaps he might be the Son of Clovis II. Son of Dagobert.

RAINFROY, Mayre. CHILPERIC, in Neustria. CLOTAIRE, in Austrasia. CHARLES
MARTEL, Mayre.

RAinfroy finding little Assistance from the Frisons, had recourse to the
Aquitains, Odon or Eudes. This Duke and Rainfroy having joined their Forces
nigh Paris, took their March to find out the Enemy in Austrasia. Being come
near Soissons, they were much amazed to hear that he was come to meet them
himself, and was very near at hand* And indeed, he Charged them so furiously,
that he routed them, and gave them Chase even to Paris. Eudes retired himself
into Aquitain, and carried Chilperic and his Treasure with him. Charles
pursuing him overran Orleannois and Tourrain at his pleasure. This Victory put
the whole Kingdoms of Neustria and Burgundy into his hands.

Clotaire did not long bear the Title of King, he died the same or the
following year. His Tomb is at Coucy in Vermandois.

After his death Martel governed some months without any King: but knowing the
People were too much accustomed to that name to be without it, he sent to Eudes
to profer him a Peace, and to send back Chilperic: Eudes accepted the
Conditions, and sent him to him with many Presents. Charles causes him to be
owned for King thorough all the three Kingdoms, that so he only might be Mayre.
Pope Gregory II. calls him Duke and Mayre of the Palace of France; which shows
that he held himself as an Officer of the Kingdoms, and not of the King.

CHILPERIC alone. MARTEL sole Mayre.

OF all the People who being Tributary's to the French had revolted, the Saxons
were the most Potent: They had not only thrown off the Yoke, but had likewise
imposed it upon the Bructeri, the Attuari, and the Toringians. Martel carried
his Forces thither three or four times to quell them: but that honor was
reserved for Charles the Great. It is worthy our taking notice, that they were
divided into several distinct People, and that they had almost as many Dukes as
there were several Countries belonging to them.

The Saracens pretended that Septimania, or Narbonnensis Prima, having been
part Visigoths, ought to be an Augmentation to their Conquests. Zaman Governor
of Spain under the grand Emir, Isic or Gizit, took Narbonna and put in a
Garrison: but having besieged Thoulouze, Duke Eudes began to bestir himself,
defeated his Army, and drove him bravely thence. Ambissa Successor to Zaman
Conquered Carcassonna, Nismes, and all the rest of Provence as far as the
Rhosne.

Chilperic did not live two years after his Re-establishment, and Reigned in
all but Noyon either in this year 721. or in the year before. He was buried in
the same place.

Thierry II. King XX.
POPES,
GREGORY II. Who S. near Ten years, during this Reign. GREGORY III. Elect 731.
in Apr. S. Ten years Three Months, of which about Seven in this Reign.
THIERRY II. named de Chelles, aged about Six years. CHARLES, Duke and Maire of
France.

IMmediately after, Charles, who would ever have an Image wherewith to amuse
the People, caused Thierry, or Theoderic the II. Son of King Dagobert the II.
to be Installed by an Assembly of the Grandees.

Rainfroy was abandoned by Eudes, but had not yet laid down the Title of Mayre
of Neustria, and for this cause Charles besieged him in Angi^rs. He secured
himself for this bout by the strength of the place; but the year after he was
forced and slain, or at least degraded of his Mayership, and reduced to a
private condition.

Charles had diverse Wars with the Saxons, the Almans, and the Bavarois. In the
year 725. he reduced Hubert, Duke of Bavaria, Bilitrude, and her Niece
Bilichilde. Some are of opinion, that this Bilitrude is the same
beforementioned Plectrude, that had retired her self to this place, to procure
him fresh troubles. She must needs then have been very aged; but it appears
rather that she was Sister to Odillon Duke of Bavaria, and Widow of some Lord
of that Country, as yet very beautiful, since Martel would take the trouble of
bringing her; unless it were some affection he had for the Niece, whom indeed
he was Married unto some while after.

After diverse Wars against the People beyond the Rhine, of which we have no
particulars, Aquitain, Duke Eudes had broken the Treaty made with Charles, and
made a League with the Sarrazin Munuza, giving him for pledge of this Union,
his Daughter Lampagia, one of the most beautiful Princesses of those times.
This Munuza was Governor of the Spanish Countries on this side the Hebrus, but
was revolted from Iscam, who was Caliph. Charles, who was ever on Horseback,
having had intelligence that Eudes moved, falls immediately into Aquitain, and
having sacked it all as far as the Garonne, severely chastised him for his
breach.

But he was not quit for all this, for at the same time as Charles went out,
Abdiracman, or Abderame, Lieutenant General of the Caliph Iscam in Spain, being
entered Munuza prisoner in Cerdagne, with his new Spouse, traversed Aquitania
Tertia, perhaps not without fighting the Gascons who held it, and forced and
sacked the City of Bordeaux. In this manner it was that Eudes drew the
Sarracens into France; which has given occasion to some to write that they
were called in.

Now he durst not wait for them beyond the Rivers, but was retreated on this
side the Dordogne: and there being reconciled with Martel, he assembled his
Forces, staying for him to come and join him with his French Men. Abderame
would not allow him the time, but pressing still forwards, passed the River to
attaque him in his Camp. Martel's Army, which had passed the Loire, and were
Encamped, some say near Tours, upon the River of Cher; others a little on this
side of Poitiers.

Abderame following his blow, after he had sacked the City of Poitiers, marched
Tours, to plunder the Sepulcher of St. Martin; in his way he meets with Martel,
who puts him to a full stop. The two Armies having looked with threatening
countenance upon each other seven days, beginning first with several
skirmishes, at length came to a general Battle, which was given upon a Saturday
in the month of October. The Saracens being light and nimble, charged with much
briskness; but being ill Armed, broke themselves against the great Battallions
of the French, who were sheltred under their Bucklers. There were great numbers
slain, but not 375000, as has been said, for in their whole Army there were
but 80 or 100000 Men. Abderame himself the General perished there. The night
parted the fray, and favored the Infidels, who not daring to abide another
days Engagement, Retreated by long Marches into Septimania: the French
perceived, very late, that their Camp was forsaken; but fearing some stratagem,
and withal, being busy in getting together, and sharing the Plunder, which was
very rich, they did not endeavor to pursue them.

Barbarians, if they had gained France, which was its only Bulwark: but it
seems Charles did not make good use of this great advantage, no more then of
all those others that Heaven bestowed upon him: when he gained his ends, he set
himself upon persecuting every thing that cast but the least shadow upon his
Grandeur; even the very Prelates, whom he banished, and imprisoned, taking away,
not only the Treasures and Revenues of the Churches, to pay his Captains; but
likewise bestowing on them Abby's and Bishoprics for their reward; so that
there were many without Pastors, and Monasteries were filled more with Soldiers
then with Monks. The Churches of Lions, of Vienne, of Auxerre, were destitute
of their Bishops, and dispoiled of their Goods, which he had given to his
Martial Officers, as if they had been a Prize taken from the Enemy.

Upon his return from Aquitain, he banished Eucher, bishop of Orleans, with
some of his Kindred, First to Colen, then into the Country of Hesbain, because
he defended the Rights and Possessions of the Church with too much courage.
Five years before he had also banished Rigobert, Bishoy of Reims, who had
refused him his Gates when he marched against Rainfroy.

Burgundy did not as yet own his Commands; perhaps Arnold, the Son of Grimoald,
whom some believe was their Duke, thought to hold the Sovereignty. When he had
conquered the Saracens he marches directly to them, and brings all the Country
into subjection.

Frisons, killed their Duke Popon, who succeeded Ratbod in a great Battle,
subjugated afterward the Ostergow, and the Westergow, these are two Countries
in West Frisia, pulled down all their Temples, their Sacred Groves, and their
Idols, and covered all the Land with slaughter and destruction, and the rubbish
of their Ruins.

Aquitain; this Duke having been compelled to make a very disadvantageons
Treaty with Charles, to procure assistance against the Saracens, as soon as the
danger was over, scorned to keep his word; Therefore Martel marches a third
time into his Country, and having followed him at the very heels with his
drawn Sword from place to place, without being able to catch him, returned home
laden with spoil.

The same year Death ended the misfortunes of that Duke, but not those of
Aquitain. He had two Sons, Hunoud and Hatton; some add Remistang, who to others
appears rather to be his Wives Brother. He bestowed upon Hatton the County of
Poitiers, for his Portion; Hunoud had all the rest of the First and Second
Aquitain, The Gascons held the Third.
of which he took possession, as if it had been an Hereditary and Independent
Estate. Charles, who would have no other partaker, soon returned again with his
Army, and marching quite thorough to the Garonne, seized upon Blaye, and some
other places; so that Hunoud was constrained to submit to his Will, and receive
the Duchy from him as he had before from his Father, giving his Oath both to
him and to his Son Pepin.

Aquitain Forces, and went and settled the Governors that had disturbed the
City of Lions, and a part of Burgundy, and proceeding forward, made sure of
Provence, and put Governors into Arles and Marseilles. From thence he turned
upon the Saxons, beyond the Rhine, and brought them so low, that they did not
afterward make any attempt for diverse years.

As Martel was an Usurper, every Governor thought he had reason enough to
disobey Maurontus, Governor of Marseilles, that he might make himself
Independent, craved the assistance of the Saracens, and delivered the City of
Avignon up to them, whence they spread themselves over Dauphine, Lyonnois, and
if credible, even as far as Sens, with a horrible desolation of all those
Countries.

The Barbarians did not hold Avignon long, Charles sent thither his Brother
Childebrand, who having made them quit the Field, besieged them in that City.
Soon after he came thither himself with the gross of his Army, gave an Assault
by Scalado, and forced them; part of the City was burnt, and all the Infidels
that were within it put to the Sword.

This done, he crosses over Septimania, and goes to besiege Narbonne, resolved
to have it what ever it cost, thereby to shut up that passage into Gall.

Athim, Governor of the City, and perhaps of all that Country for the
Saracens, was gotten into the Town: Those in Spain, informed of the danger the
place was in, made great Levies of Soldiers, and put them aboard some Vessels
to relieve it. There is a Lake between Narbonne and Ville-Salse, at whose Mouth
the little River of Bear discharges it self into the Sea; it is called the Lake
Oliviere: there it was their Boats came into Land those Forces they had
brought; Amoroz, Governor of Terragonne was their General. Martel leaving his
Brother with part of the Army to maintain the Siege, went thither to them, and
gave them Battle nigh Sigeac. It was very obstinate; but in the conclusion,
Amoroz was overthrown upon huge heaps of his slain Men, and most of the rest
that fled into their Boats, Drowned, or put to the Sword.

Athim's courage increased by this ill success, and he defended himself so
bravely, that Charles left him there, and turning his Forces toward more easy
Conquests, made himself master of Besiers, Agde, Maguelonna, and of Nismes, all
which he dismantled.

Thierry of Chelles, about the 23 year of his age, and the 17th of his
imaginary Reign. Now Charles Martel, having perhaps the design of taking up the
Title of King, as he had the Authority, put no other in his stead, nor his Sons
neither, till a year after his death, so that there happened an Interregnum of
Five years.

Interregnum.
Popes, Greg. III.
Charles Martel, Maire and Duc of the French.
A Second time Maurontus calls the Saracens into Provence; Jusep, Governor
Narbonne, Besieged and Took the Town of Arles, and from thence ove-ran, and
ransacked all Provence. Charles summons Luitprand, King of the Lombards, to
join with him against this Enemy. Luitprand, who did not desire to have them so
near Italy, and who besides was a friend to Martel, presently marches to join
him; the Infidels dare not stay for them, but retreat to Narbonne without
striking a blow. Maurontus likewise forsakes Marseilles, and retires amongst
the Rocks; so that Provence remained peaceably in the hands of the French.

Saracens which threatened to overwhelm all Christendom, being as it were upon
its ebb, the Spanish Princes recovered themselves by little and little again,
especially with the assistance of the French; and yet nevertheless, they were
above Seven hundred years in regaining what they lost in three years time. This
year Charles Martel sent them a considerable assistance, which helped them more
then a little toward the settling their affairs.

In Spain they called the Saracens Moors, because indeed they were come from
Mauritania, which they had conquered, and because most of their Forces were
composed of Men from that Country.

The dispute about the worship of Images caused a pernicious and bloody Schism
in the Church. The Emperor Leon upon the reproaches the Saracens and
Mahometans had made him, that it was Idolatry to adore Stone and Wood, would
needs pull chem out of the Churches, the Popes at the same time contending to
keep them there. Gregory II. stood up stoutly in this Cause; the Dispute went
so far, that An. 726. not looking upon Leon as his Sovereign, he wrote him
Letters that were very haughty and full of new Maxims, stopped the Moneys he was
raising in Italy, and turned the People from that Obedience they owed to him.
Gregory III. his Successor went yet farther, and Excommunicated him. On the
other hand, the Emperor turned every stone to revenge it: but all his
endeavors proved fruitless, and a shame to himself in the end.

740. Emp. Constantine Coprin Son of Leon IV. R. 34
Whilst affairs were in such a condition, that the Pope could hope for no
assistance of the Emperor in his occasions, it happened that he offended
Luitprand, King of the Lombards, by giving Retreat to Trasimond, Duke of
Spoleta; and making League with Godescal, who had invaded the Duchy of
Beneuent: That King pressing upon him with his Army, and having seized some
Towns within the Duchy of Rome, he had recourse to the protection of Martel,
and wrote two or three very moving Letters to him, in Sub-King, or Viceroy.

Charles was a little hard to be moved, the Letters having operated no great
matter; St. Peter, and the Bonds wherewith that Apostle had been tied; and
after that came another, which bestowed and conferred upon him the Sovereignty
of Rome, and the Title of Patrician.

He was not now any more in a condition for great enterprises, a troublesome
and lingering distemper which undermined him by little and little, forwarned him
to think of his Death, and the settlement of his Family: He had three Children
Legitimate, Carloman, Pepin, called the Brief, and Griffon; the two first by
Cbrotrude, and the other by Sonichilde; and besides these, three Bastards, Remy
or Remede, Hierosme, and Bernard. Remy was Bishop of Rouen, Hierosme and
Bernard Married. The First had a Son named Fulrad, Abbot of St. Quintins, which
he built. The Second had three Sons and two Daughters, the two eldest Sons were
Adelard and Vala, both Counts at Court, then successively, Abbots of Corbie,
and the Third named Bernier was likewise a Monk. The two Daughters Gondrade and
Theodrade, vowed themselves to God in a Religious Life: the first in her Virgin
State, the other in her Widdow-hood.

Now Prince Charles dividing the Estate between his three Legitimate Children,
as if he had been the lawful Sovereign, gave to Carloman, who was the eldest,
Austrasia, Souaube, and Turingia; (Bavaria had its Dukes, Frista and Saxony
were Revolted) to Pepin, Neustria, Burgundy, Septimania, and Provence; and to
Griffon, a Portion betwixt his two Brothers, made up of some parcels of the
three Kingdoms. The Son of the Duke Eudes held Aquitania Prima and Secunda, and
the Duke of the Gascons the other.

Shortly after, on the 20th of October, he ended his Life in the Castle of
Carissy Now Crecy a small Village.
upon the Oyse, within three Leagues of Noyon. He had ruled about three years
in Austrasia, and 28 in this Kingdom and in Neustria. The Martial Courage and
Spirit which inclined him to have always his Sword in hand to smite his
Enemies, acquired him the name of Martel in History, and an immortal Fame: But
the Ecclesiastics, whom he had rudely handled, fullied his Memory, and would
not forgive him in the other World. For they affirmed, according to a
Revelation of St. Eucher, Bishop of Orleans, that he burned both Body and Soul
in Eternal Flames, and that his Tomb having been opened, there was nothing to
be found in it, but a huge Serpent and a stinking Blackness, the marks of the
ill condition of his State, or Salvation.

CARLOMAN in Austrasia, and PEPIN in Neustria and Burgundy.

Dukes and Princes of the French.

HOw little soever the share was which Griffon had, his two Brothers could not
endure it; they Besieged him in the City of Laon, shut him up in Chasteauneuf
in Ardenna, and having seized on his Mother Soxichilde, allotted him the Abbey
of Chelles for his Subsistence and his Prison. At the same time Theodebald Son
of Grimoald, whom Martel had left in Peace after he had stripped him, was taken
out of the World, perhaps because he had some intrigues with Sonichilde.

All those People, whom Martel had brought to their Duty by the power of the
Sword, imagined, that after his death it would be easy for them to cast off
the yoke: Particularly Thibaud, Son of Godefroy, Duke of the Almans, and Hunoud
Duke of Aquitain. This last being the most dangerous, the two Brothers joined
their Force against him. They handled him so roughly, having driven him beyond
Poitiers, and forced the Castle of Loches, that he desired a Peace, the
conditions are not specified. Before the two Brothers left Aquitain, they
shared the Kingdom* betwixt them, or rather what they had taken from Hunoud,
which they did at the place called The Old Poitiers, between the Clain and the
Vienne, near Chastellerand.

Besides these two Expeditions, the year was remarkable for the Birth of
Charles Great, or Charlemain, the Son of Pepin, and Berte his Wife, who was
born into the World in the Palace of Ingelheim upon the Rhine, this year 742.

The same year Carloman passed the Rhine, marched into the Almans Country,
Lee, which separates them from the Bavarians, and brought them so low, that
their Duke Thibaud, Son of Godefroy, gave him up Hostages for pledge of his
Faith, and the tribute he was to have from him.

It seems to have been in this year, or at least the next, that the two
Brothers bethought Childeric in it, who was surnamed the Witless, or L'Incense
or L'Hebete. Dull, Slow Blockish.
Senseless, as being either really such, or so represented to the People. Some
make him to be the Brother of Thierry de Chelles, others of Clotaire III. and
if so, he must have been at least ^7 or 18 years of age; but many think him the
Son of Thierry, and then he could be but 10 or 12 at most.

Childeric III. called the WITLESS.
King XXI. Aged Eighteen years.
POPE.
Zachary Elect in Dec. 741. S. Ten years Three Months, whereof above Nine
Months in this Reign.
CARLOMAN in Austrasia. and PEPIN in Neustria. Dukes and Princes of the French.

Martel, obeying his Children but unwillingly, made a powerful League to break
and throw off the Bonds of their subjection. Odillon Duke of Bavaria was the
Head, instigated, no doubt, by his Wife Chiltrude, Daughter of Martel, and
Sonichilde, who two years before, having stolen away from her Brothers, went
into that Country and was Married to him. The Saxons and Almans assisted him
with Men, and at the same time, while the two Brothers were on their way
thither. Hunoud, Duke of Aquitain falls upon Neustria, and descends as far as
Chartres, which he forced, and buried almost under its own Ruins.

Odillon was encamped with his Army on the brink of the River Lecq, which he
had Palisadoed with strong Timbers. The two Brothers having staid Fifteen days
right over against him, without attempting to pass; one fair night, a kind of
impatient Spirit prompting the French, they forced their way over, with the
loss of many of their Men, who were drowned, and brought a terror to his whole
Camp: All his Men betook themselves to flight, and left their Baggage, and the
two Brothers their full and free liberty to range over the whole Country of
Bavaria for two Months together.

Carloman marched against the Saxons, gained the Castle of Hochsburgh, upon
Composition; and Theoderic Duke of that Country, who solemnly gave his Faith
to him; and yet he nevertheless broke it again presently, and obliged Carloman
to return thither the very next year, to the very great damage of his Country.

But it was not till after the two Brothers having ravaged Aquitain, had
constrained Hunoud to crave their pardon the third time, and redeem his fault
with the price of many great Presents made to them.

Hatton being come to see him upon the security of his Word, he put him to
death, and a short while afterward, either upon some Motions of Repentance, or
lightness and giddiness of Brain, he made himself a Monk in a Monastery, in the
Isle of The, having left his Duchy to his Son Gaifre, about the age of 18 or
20 years.

Prince Carloman, after he had struck his last blow against the Almans, whose
pride

The Fifth year of his Principality, having given up his Estate, and his Son
Drogon, or Dreux into the hands of Pepin; he went to pay his Devotions at St.
Peter's in Rome; from thence he went to take the Habit of St. Bennet at Mount
Sora^ie, or Mount St. Sil; and some while after, because he was too much
importuned by Visiters, he retired to Mount Cassin.

Pepin allowed no share of his Dominion to his Nephew Dreux, nor his Brothers
other Children: but the same year, and perhaps at his request, he set their
youngest Griffon at liberty, Treated him Honorably in his Court, and gave him
some Counties for his allowance.

The ambition of this young Prince, not being tamed by a Prison, could Saxons
in his quarrel. Pepin followed him close, the Sorabe Sclavonians, who were
divided from the Turingians by the River of Sal; the Abrodites and other
Sclavonians, who were spread all along the Frontiers of France, brought him
10000 Fighting Men. Insomuch as the Saxons Nordsqaues, overwhelmed with his
numbers, submitted to his pleasure, and received Baptism. Griffon with the
other Saxons, was Encamped and Entrenched on the other side of the River
Ovacre; fear seized upon them, they deserted their Post in the night time, and
their Country remained exposed to the mercy of the French: so that not finding
himself any longer in safety there, he leaves them to make their Peace, and
retired to Bavaria; where he seized on that Duchy, usurping it from the young
Tasillon, aged but 6 or 7 years, who was the Son of his Sister Chiltrude and
Odillon.

This Country no more then that of Saxony, could not protect him from the
pursuit of Pepin, who joining Gold and his Favors, with his Sword and Threats,
soon unhinged his Party. The Bavarois made their agreement; Landfroy Duke of
the Almans, and Suidgard Earl of Hirsberg did the same; and he finding himself
alone, was compelled to follow their Dance, and come to his Brother. He
received him most kindly, and assigned him the City of Man's, and Twelve
Counties in Neustria: but the very self same year he made a third escape, and
cast himself into the Arms of Gaifre Duke of Aquitain.

Pepin having gained the better over all his enemies, had no more left him to
do, French, and there was no other Prince of the Merovignian Race remaining,
but one young stupid and witless Man. He therefore assembled a Parliament,
which being wholly Devoted to him, were very willing to confer the Title of
King on him: but he was glad that he might be disengaged from his Oath of
Fidelity, to consult with the Pope, who had great authority over the Galican
Church, and whose Answers passed for Oracles, though not for Laws.

He who sat then in the Holy Chair was Zachary, a most intimate friend of
Pepins, who wanted his assistance against the Lombards, and who could well
apprehend, that what was desired of him, was a most favorable prejudgment for
the Popes France, after so many Idols and Shadows, should now have a King in
reality; and therefore he could not but answer favorably to the point that
Pepin propounded, and consulted him about; and his Reply was certainly of great
weight. It is in this sense, according to my opinion, that we must understand
some Authors of those times, who tells us, that Boniface set him upon the
Throne by the Command of Zachary. Otherwise we should say the French did not
truly understand their own Right, and that this Pope attributed to himself what
did not belong to him.

Upon this Answer, the French having called another Parliament at Soissons,
degraded Childeric, and elected Pepin. There is some likelihood that this was
done in the general Assembly, which was held in the month of March. The Bishops
were there in great numbers, Boniface, Archbishop of Ments being in the head
of them, who declared to them the validity of the Popes Answer; and indeed this
King and his Successors, as if they had some obligation to the Clergy for their
Royalty, gave them a great share in the Government.

By the same Decree Childeric was shaved and made a Monk at Sitieu St. Bertin
at St. Omers in Artois.
There are some affirm, that from thence he was removed to the Monastery of St.
Himeran at Ratisbonne, and his Wife being veiled to that of Conchiliac. But
others believe he was not Married, though he were of an age ripe enough for it.

Thus ends the First Race of the Kings of France; who if we reckon from the
year 418. to the year 751. had Reigned 333 years, and had 21 Kings, only
accounting those of Paris: but Thirty six, if we take in all those that had the
Title, as well in Austrasia, where there was but one that resided at Mets, as
in Neustria, while sometimes three of them at the same time had their Seats at
Orleans, at Soissons, and at Paris. The first Four of these Kings were
Idolaters, and all the rest Christians. But their Baptism did not quite purge
away their Barbarity, they were Savage and Bloody till Clotaire II. Those that
followed were more Benign, Merciful, and Religious, excepting Childeric II.
But all being either shallow-Brain'd, or Minors, they fell necessarily under
the Government of others.

End of the First Race.
The Second Race OF KINGS Which have Reigned in FRANCE, And are Named CARLIANS,
OR Carolovinians.
THIS Second Race is commonly called the Or Caroline. 752.
Carlian, or Carolovinian Race. We know not whether it took that denomination
from Charles Martel, or Charles the Great. After it had been raised to a great
height by the Virtue of its Five first Princes, to wit, the two Pepins, Charles
Martel, Charlemain, and Lewis the Godly, and had extended their Empire much
beyond the Bounds of the First; It began to decline under the Children of that
Lewis, and in the end was reduced to so narrow a compass, all the Lords having
made themselves Masters in their Governments, that their last Kings had nothing
left which was properly their own, but the Cities of Laon, and that of Reims.

It is observed, That they had much resemblance with the First Race, in that
they had a very fair beginning, and an unhappy end; That Charles of Lorraine
their last Male, was deprived of the Crown, as Childeric had been; and that
they had several stupid and senceless Princes amongst them. But this held one
Advantage above the other, That they Reign to this day in all Europe, by the
Males in the House of France, and by the Women in that of the other greatest
Princes. Insomuch, that the Carlovinian Blood is held for the most Noble in all
the Earth; whereas there is not any remaining of that of Meroveus.

PEPIN named the Brief, OR, The Little, King XXII.
Aged XXXVI, or XXXVIII Years.
POPES,
ZACHARY, One Year during this Reign. STEPHANUS II. in 752. S. 2. Years, 3.
days. STEPHANUS III. The same Year, S. 5. Years, 20 Days. PAUL I. Elect in May
717. S. Ten Years, one Month. CONSTANTINE and PHILIP, False Popes, in 767.
STEPHANUS IV. In August 768. S. 3. Years, 5 Months, whereof 2 months in this
Reign.
Soissons had Elected Pepin, and, as it is believed had lifted him on the
Pavois and upon the Royal Throne, he would needs add the Ceremonies of the
Church, to consecrate his Royalty, and render it more august: Boniface
Archbishop of Ments Crowned him in the Cathedral of Soissons, and anointed him
with holy Oil, according to the Custom of the Kings of Israel, that thereby
the Word of God, Touch not mine Anointed, might become a Buckler to him and his
Successors.

The Anointing and Crowning began from this time to be practiced at the
Inauguration of the Kings of France, and has been continued to this day.

Being of a very low stature, the Lords had not all that respect for him which
they should. Having perceived it, he would needs let them see by experience
that he had more Courage and Virtue than those great bulks who very often have
nothing but an outward appearance of bravery. Those Kings took much delight in
Combats of Wild Beasts, and not only pleased themselves with the divertisement
of such Spectacles in those Public Entertainments they gave the People, but
many times in private in their own Palaces. One day being at the Abbey of
Ferrieres, a furious Lion having grappled with a Bull, whom he held fast by the
Neck, he said to some Lords that were about him, That they must needs make him
let go his hold. Not one had the Courage to undertake it, the very proposition
affrighted them. After he had observed them all, and plainly perceived their
astonishment, he leaped down from the Scaffold, his Back-Sword in his hand,
went directly to the Lion, and at one stroke managed with as much skill as
strength, divided his head from his body, his Sword entering even a good way
into the Neck of the Bull. After this wonderful blow turning himself toward
his Lords, Do you not believe, said he with a kind of Heroic Pride, that I am
worthy to Command you?

Saxony, where he constrained the Saxons to pay every Year Three hundred Horses
for a Tribute, and to bring them to him into the Field of Mars or General
Assembly of the French.

Griffon his Younger Brother. That unquiet Spirit being come out of Aquitain
whither he had retired to Duke Gaifre, was assassinated in the Valley of
Morienne going into Italy, either by some People of Pepins, says our Author, or
by some of Gaifres, who conceived some Jealousy for having been too familiar
with his Wife.

To Childebrand Grandson of Luitprand King of the Lombards, degraded by his
Subjects, Rachis Duke of Friul succeeded by Election: who professing himself a
Monk in the same Covent with Caroloman Brother of Pepin, Astolphus his Brother
had taken his place. He finding the Emperor Constantine Copronimus full of
Trouble, had seized on the Exarchat of Ravenna and Pentapolis, which till then
had been held by the Exarchs or Vicars of the Emperor. Besides, he had got
into his power even under the very Walls of Rome, several Towns, belonging to
several private Lords who had made themselves as it were Sovereigns in the time
of the distress and disorders of the Grecian Empire; and finding all things
submitted to him, he had likewise a great desire to make himself Master of
Rome, pretending and maintaining, That the Exarchat he had conquered, gave him
all the Right and Title the Emperors had enjoyed in Italy, and therefore Rome
and the Popes being in subjection to the Empire, were now under his.

Rome, and sent to Summon the Romans to acknowledge him, and to pay him a Crown
in Gold for every head. Pope Stephanus much amazed at this enterprise,
beseeches him to leave the Lands belonging to the Church in Peace, has
recourse to the intercession of the Emperor Constantius, and afterward comes
himself to Pavia to see the Lombard. But finding his Entreaties, nor the
Emperor's Request had no influence upon him, he implored the Assistance of
Pepin and his Protection, as Gregory III. had done that of Martel. So that,
after he had prepared and disposed him by some Ambassadors sent beforehand,
he went from Lombardy into France, to the great astonishment and vexation of
Astolphus, who however durst not detain him.

Morienne, as he had made him hope, sent to entreat him to come to Pontigon a
Royal Castle near Langres; Charles his Eldest Son went above fifty Leagues to
meet him. The Pope arrived at Pontigon the sixth day of January: the King with
his Wife and Children, received him about a mile from the place, and treated
him with all manner of respect and honor; But not to that degree as to walk on
foot by his Horses side, and hold the bridle, as Anastasius has written, who
in some places has spoken of ancient times, rather according to the Practice
and Customs of the days he lived in, then according to the naked truth.

After several Conferences both public and private, Pepin promised him all
manner of assistance, as soon as he had put his own affairs into some order,
and wished him in the mean time to go and repose himself in the Abbey of St.
Denis in France. Stephanus has written, That being fallen desperately ill, and
causing himself to be carried into the Church under the Belfrey.
Bells to beg his recovery of God, ^e beheld St. Denis in a Vision, together
with the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, who miraculously restored him. Which
could not but be very pleasing to the French, who had a singular Veneration for
that Saint, and to Pepin himself, whose Father, either out of devotion, or to
do like other Kings, had acknowledged he was greatly beholding to the
intercession of those Holy Martyrs.

A little while after his being recovered from his Sickness, which was in the
Month of July, he Crowned and Anointed Pepin and his two Sons with his own
hands, exhorting the French to keep their Faith* and from that time
Excommunicating Denis, before the Altar of St. Peter and St. Paul, which the
Pope did on that day dedicate, in remembrance of the recovery of his health.
Others believe it was in the Abbey-Church of Ferrieres. Wherever it were, the
Ceremony being ended, Stephanus declared him Advocatus.
Advocate or Defender of the Roman Church.

Astolphus well foreseeing that the Pope would bring the French upon him, had
by Threats obliged the Abbot of Mount-Cassin to send the Monk Carloman into
France to bring Pepin his Brother, upon pretense of demanding the Corpse of St.
Bennet, which had been stolen, and conveyed to the Abbey of Fleury upon the
Loire, which from thence was named St. Bennets* but it was to oppose the
endeavors of the Pope, and countermine his Designs in those Undertakings. In
effect the Monk pleaded the Cause of Astolphus so stoutly in the Parliament of
Crecy, that it was agreed some Ambassadors should be dispatched to Astolphus to
endeavor an accommodation.

The Lombard received and treated them as coming from a Great and Potent State.
He was willing to lay aside his pretenses to the Sovereignty of the City of
Rome and its dependences; but would reserve the Exarchat he had conquered by
the Sword. The Pope on the contrary maintained that it belonged to him a^ being
the spoils of an heretic; and he solicited Pepin so effectually, that that
King promised to assist him in the conquering of it.

Carloman for having espoused the Interest of the Lombard too far, brought
himself to an ill pass: for the King and the Pope consulting and contriving
together, shut him up in a Monastery at Vienne, where he dyed the same Year,
and his Sons were shaved for fear they should one day claim the Estate their
Father had once possessed.

Astolphus from his firm resolution of detaining the Exarchat and the
Pentapole, Pepin caused his Army to march that way. His Vanguard having seized
the Cluses or the Passages of the Alps, and beaten off those Lombards that
thought to defend them, Astolphus retires into Pavia, where presently
afterward he was shut up by Pepin.

The havoc, the ruin, and firings the French made use of round about that
City, could not draw him into the Field. The Pope in the mean while grew weary
and melancholy at the desolation of Italy, and he also feared lest Pepin should
make himself absolute Master, if he took that Place by force. He therefore
condescends to an Accommodation at the earnest entreaty of the Lombard; and it
was easily obtained, for he then promised him to give up the Exarchat, and the
Justices of Saint Peter; which in my apprehension were certain Lands within the
Bishopric of Rome.

French-mens backs were turned, the Lombard instead of performing those hard
Conditions, resolves to revenge himself upon the Pope, and the following Year
went and laid Siege to Rome, where he made such spoil as declared his cruel
resentment. This infraction obliged Pepin to repass the Mountains. Upon the
noise of his March, he decamps from before Rome, which he had much straightened,
and retreats the second time to Pavia. Pepin besieges him and presses on so
close, that having no other means to save his Life and Crown, he is compelled
to take himself for Judge and Arbitrator of the differences between him and the
Pope. It was not possible but Pepin must judge in favor of the last. And
indeed he would grant no Peace to Astolphus, but upon condition he should make
good his former Years agreement, and moreover give up Comachio. This was
treated and negotiated in the presence of the Emperor's Ambassadors, who
being come to that Siege to demand those Countries for their Master, the
Lombards had taken, suffered the displeasure and shame of a refusal.

The Exarchat comprehended Ravenna, Bologna, Imola, Faenza, Forly, Cesenna,
Bobia, Ferrara and Adria.

The Pentapole held Rimini, Pesaro, Conca, Fano, Senigalia, Anconna, and some
other lesser places.

Pepin's received all these Towns, brought away Hostages, and laid the Keys
upon the Altar of St. Peter and St. Paul at Rome, with the draught of the
Treaty, to signify that Pepin made a donative thereof to those Holy Apostles.
Some do imagine he did it in the Name of the Emperor Constantine Copronimus,
who indeed would not consent to it; and they believe that it is upon the
equivocation of this name, that the Popes have founded their fabulous donation
of Constantine the Great.

Astolphus dyed the Year following by a Fall from his Horse, Didier his
Constable had a Party strong enough to Elect him King. But those for the Monk
Rachis Brother to King Luitprand, who had left his Cloister, puzzled him very
much. He betakes himself to Pope Stephanus, promising him to make good the
restitution Astolphus had agreed to. Pepin's Ambassadors were of Opinion that
he should assist him in it; so that he constrained Rachis to return and betake
himself again to his Monastery. Stephanus dies some Months after, Paul I.
succeeded him, Didier and he lived well enough with each other.

Constantine had not yet lost all hopes of recovering the Exarchate by means of
the French; and he endeavored to regain it by the force of Presents and fair
Words. Amongst other things he sent a pair of Organs to the King who was then
at Compiegne. These were the first that had been seen in France.

Tassillon Duke of Bavaria, Son of Duke Vtilon or Odillon, came to the same
place to take his Oath of Fidelity to King Pepin, rendering Homage to him, his
hands Se commendans per manus.
within the Kings, and promising him such Service as a Vassal owes to his
Lord; which he confirmed by Swearing on the Bodies of St. Denis, Saint German
of Paris, and Saint Martin at Tours.

March, and was now put off till May. And so it was no longer called the Field
of Mars, but the Field of May.

Pepin thought to take some rest this Year, when Intelligence was brought him,
that the Saxons were revolted. Though they were embodied in an Army, and had
made Retrenchments upon all the Passages into their Country, he gained them all
at the first attempt, and forced them to give him their Oaths and to pay
Tribute.

The Kings of this Second Race Celebrated the Festivals of Christmas and
Easter with great Solemnity, cloatbed in their Royal Ornaments, the Crown upon
their heads, and keeping open Court: and for this reason the Authors of those
times never fail to put down every Year the place where they solemnized those
holy Feasts.

Narbonna was yet held by the Saracens. This Year Pepin having besieged it, the
Citizens who were Visigoths and Christians, slew the Infidel Garrison, and
delivered the place up to him, upon condition that he should suffer them to
live according to their own Laws; that is to say, the Roman Law, which had ever
been observed by the People of Septimania, and is yet to this day.

France, none but Aquitain, that was not brought to their duty. Their Duke
Gaifre did not acknowledge Pepin; and moreover he, or the Lords of his Country,
retained what belonged to those Churches the French had in Aquitain. This was a
plausible pretense for Pepin to quarrel, by demanding restitution of the Poors
Patrimony. He expected that Gaifre would refuse to do right; thereupon he gets
his Militia together and marches into Aquitain, to the place they call Theodad,
where was an Ancient Palace of their Kings. Gaifre who was not prepared for so
sudden an Expedition, was so much astonished, that he promised him full
satisfaction, and gave him up some Hostages.

It was to be feared that the Saracens in Spain would bring assistance to this
Duke, and that he might be persuaded to deliver some places into their hands
for Security and Retreat, which would have given them footing in France: Pepin
provides against this, by pretending to desire the Alliance of their Caliph; to
whom he sent a splendid Embassy. The Caliph looked on this proposition as very
honorable coming from so great a Prince, agreed to all what was desired, and
sent back; the Ambassadors laden with rich Presents, whose Voyage thither and
home again took up three Years time.

And the following.
Instead of performing his promise, Gaifre sent out his Forces, who ravaged all
about Chaalons upon the Soane. Pepin extraordinarily offended at this
Infidelity, resolves to make a perpetual War upon him, till he were quite
ruined. This Year he conquered Bourbon, Chantelle, Clermont, and diverse Places
in Auvergne, and from thence descends into Limosin and took Limoges, having
defeated and slain in a great Battle Chilping Count d'Auvergne, and Amingue
Count de Poitiers, who would have hindered him. His Eldest Son Charles began his
first Apprentiship of War in this Expedition.

Carisy, or Crecy upon the Oyse, he entered for the third time into Aquitain,
and by force took the City of Bourges and the Castle of Tours.

Neuers, he pierced as far as Cahors. But the Duke Tasillon his Nephew, whom he
carried along with him, having made his Escape and got into Bavaria, he feared
that Young Prince might have some League with the Saxons and with Didier King
of Lombardy, whose Daughter he had married.

France, he let slip one Year without taking the Field: during which time
nothing was done, but sending and receiving Messengers from Bavaria and
Lombardy, concerning Treaties with Didier and Tassillon.

Aquitain. Gaifre had dismantled most of his Towns, as not having Numbers
sufficient to maintain them: Pepin Repairs them, and places good Garrisons,
then made himself Master of Angoulesme, Saints, and Again.

Argenton in Berry, and according to some Chroniclers, took the Town of
Limoges, which by this reckoning must have been taken twice.

Anno 767. After the General Assembly of Orleans was over, he enters into
Septimania, and gained the Cities of Nismes, Maguelonne, Beziers, Thoulouse,
Albi, and the Country of Givaudan. We cannot find by what Title these Cities
could belong to Gaifre; and if it be said, They were in the hands of the
Visigoths, what reason had Pepin to take them from those People.

He must of necessity have made all this long March in the Winter time, since
he kept his Easter Festival at Vienne, held the Field-meeting of May at
Bourges, and in the Month of August descended from thence as far as the Borders
of the Garonne, clearing all the Country of such of Gaifres Garrison Soldiers
as skulked amongst the Rocks and in the Caves of Auvergne and Perigord.

After the Celebration of the Christmas Festival at Bourges, he crossed
Aquitain Saints. In his way he took Remistang, Brother, or Uncle by the
Mothers side, to Gaifre, whom he caused to be hanged for having broken his
faith to him Three Years before; and while he was at Saints, they presented to
him the Mother, a Sister and a Niece of the same Dukes.

This Unfortunate Man fled still before him, sometimes into one Town, then into
another. In fine, the King after he had kept his Easter at Selles in Berry,
divided his Forces in two Bodies, that he might be hemmed in. So that Gaifre
being put to a full stop near Perigueux, was constrained to stake his last
Fortune in a Battle: but he lost it and his Life soon after, being slain either
by the French, or even by his own men, who were willing to put an end to their
Troubles, and the desolation of their Country.

Thus all Aquitain was entirely subdued, saving only they permitted the Gascons
to have a Duke. Pepin had but life enough just to finish this Conquest: for
being come back to Saints, he fell sick of an Hydropisia. As they were
conveying him to Paris, he paid his Devotions and made his Offerings on the
Tomb of St. Martin de Tours; and being brought to perform the same duty at St.
Denis France, he resigned up his Soul the 24 th of September, in the Year 768.
Aged 52. or 54. Years, of which he had reigned Seventeen and a half, if we
reckon from the day of his Election, supposing that was made in the Field of
Mars, Anno 751.

He married but one Wife who survived him, which was Bertha, whom the
Historians have surnamed Great Foot, Daughter of Caribert Count of Laon, by
whom he had four Sons, Carloman, Charles, Pepin and Gilles; and three
Daughters, Rotaide, Adelaide, and Giselle. Of his Sons, the Youngest was thrust
very young into the Religious Monastery of Mount Soracte; Pepin dyed when three
years old; The Kingdom was left to the other two, who were Crowned in the Month
of October following, Carloman at Soissons, and Charles at Noyon. As for the
Daughters, the two Eldest Rotaida and Adelaida, dyed young, Griselle married to
a Cloister and was an Abbess. Some Genealogists bestow five or six Sons more
upon him, and as many Daughters, of which, say they, Berte was married to Milon
Count of Angiers, and Father of the invulnerable Orlando, and Chiltrude to Rene
Count of Genoa, who was the Father of Oger the Dane.

Charles all Neustria, and Carloman Austrasia.

In the Reign of Pepin, God began to make Christendom feel the strokes of the
severest scourge that was ever laid upon them. I mean the insulting Turks,
which to this day threatens to overwhelm us. They were not unknown in Pliny's
time, who reckons them amongst those who inhabited along the Palus Meotides.
There may have been some likewise amongst the Messagetes and elsewhere, as we
have observed of some other Barbarians. In the time of the Emperor Justin,
they were even then so potent, that they overawed the Avari and other
Neighboring people. The Emperor Heraclius made use of them against Cosroes,
and they made a mighty diversion being entered into Persia, a great part whereof
paid them Tribute diverse Years afterward. But in the Year 763. they fell upon
Armenia, and so spread themselves very far into Asia, where they subdued even
the Kingdom of Persia, An. 1048. Nevertheless they had no Sovereign, nor Chief
General, but only many Colonels, till the first Croisado of the Christians in
1196. at which time they made choice of one to be the better united for their
own defense and preservation.

CHARLES I.
CALLED The Great. OR, CHARLEMAINE, King XXIII.
Aged XXIX, Or XXX. Years.
POPES,
STEPHANUS III. S. Three Tears, and Three Months. ADRIAN I. Elected in Feb.
772. S. near 24. Years. LEO III. Elected in December. 795. S. Twenty Years, Five
Months, of which Eighteen under this Reign.
Charles in Neustria and Burgundy, Aged 29. or 30. Years. Carloman in Austria,
Aged 22 Years.

Hunoud the Father of Gaifre who had put himself into a Monastery, throws down
his holy Frock to take up the Title of Duke of Aquitaine, and endeavored to
make that Province Revolt by the assistance of his Friends, and a League he
made with Loup Duke of Gascongny. Charles, to whose share this Province fell,
entreated his Brother to help him in quenching this Flame of Rebellion.
Carloman joins Forces with him: but in the midway, either of himself or by the
suggestions of some busy-bodies, he conceives a Jealousy against his Eldest
Brother, and leaves him there. Charles however continues on his March.

Hunoud flies, and goes to hide himself in the farthest parts of Gascongny,
where he thought to find an Asylum. But there is none against too great a
Power. The Duke of Gascongny fearing the Threatenings of Charles, proved no more
a Faithful Ally, then he had been a Faithful Vassal, but comes to meet Charles,
submits entirely to him, and delivers up that Unfortunate Man to his disposal;
who notwithstanding a short while after having made his Escape, got into
Sanctuary at Didiers King of the Lombards. Thus ended the Duchy of Aquitaine,
which about Eleven years afterward was Erected to a Kingdom by Charlemaine for
Lewis the youngest of his Sons.

In this Expedition he built Franciac, which is to say, the Castle of the
French upon the River Dordogne. It is now called Fronsac.

Pepin in his Lifetime had married his two Sons, it is not mentioned to whom,
perhaps they were only betroathed; but if they were completely married, we must
say they afterward were divorced: for their Mother obliged them to take other
Wives. Carloman espoused Berthe or Bertrade, whom the old Annals make to be the
Daughter of Didier King of the Lombards. Charles likewise was married to
Hildegard another of that King's Daughters, notwithstanding the great
opposition the Pope made, even so far as to represent to him, how the Lombards
stunk, and were infected with the Leprosy.

Carloman his Brother was of an odd humorous spirit, which gave him a great
deal of trouble. But death happily delivered him in the Month of November of
this Year 770. having cut the third of his Life in the Palace of Montsugeon
nigh Langres, at the beginning of the Third year of his Reign, and the 28th of
his Age. His Brother caused his Corpse to be conveyed to the Abbey of St. Remy
of Reims, which he had greatly endowed. He had one Wife named Berthe, and two
Sons.

While Charles held a General Assembly at Carbonnac, most part of the Lords and
Austrasian Prelates came thither to acknowledge him for their King. They might do
so; and it must be granted, that if he had not had that right, he had been an
Usurper. The Widow of Carloman apprehending they might proceed further,
Tassillon Duke of Bavaria.

Some Spanish Chroniclers, to whom I know not what faith we are to give, have
written, that besides Gaifre and Hatton, Eudes Duke of Aquitaine had a Son
named Aznar, who considering the misfortune of his Brother, passed the Hebre,
and having in Battle slain four petty Kings, or Saracen Generals, became the
First Earl of Arragon. It was at that time but a small Territory between two
Rivers of that name, whereof the City of Jacque was the Capital.

Charlemaine alone in all the Kingdom.
ONe cannot hear the Name of this Prince, without conceiving some great Idea.
He was of a tall and becoming stature, seven foot in height, well shaped in all
his Limbs, unless his Neck, which was somewhat too thick and short, and his
Belly strutting out a little too much. His gate was grave and firm, his voice
of the shrillest. His Eyes were large and sparkling, his Nose high and long,
his Countenance Gay and Serene, his Complexion fresh and lively, nothing of
effeminate in his gesture and carriage, his humor sweet, facile and jovial,
his conversation easy and familiar. He was humane, courteous and liberal,
active, vigilant, laborious, and very sober, although fasting were prejudicial
to him; an enemy to Flatterers and vanity, who hated huffing and new modes that
were strange, clothing himself very modestly, unless it were on some public
Ceremonies, where the Majesty of the Kingdom ought to appear in their
Sovereign. At his Meals he made some read to him the History of the Kings his
Predecessors, or some Works of St. Augustine's; took two or three hours repose
after Dinner; interrupted his sleep in the Night, rising three or four times;
heard all Complaints, did Justice at all Seasons even at his time of dressing
himself.

The Spring and Summer time he spent in War, part of Autumn in Hunting, the
Winter in Counsels and the Management of his Government. Some certain hours
both of the day and night in the Study of Learning, as Grammar, Astronomy and
Theology. And in truth he was one of the most Learned and most Eloquent of that
Age; the Works he left behind him to posterity are undeniable proofs of it.
With all this clement, merciful, charitable, who maintained the Poor even in
Syria, Egypt, and in Africa, who employed his Treasure in rewarding Soldiers
and Scholars, in building public Structures, Churches and Palaces, repairing
of Bridges, Cause-ways, and great Roads, making Rivers Navigable, silling
Seaports with good Vessels, civilizing Barbarous Nations, and carrying the
Honor of the French Nation with much Credit and Luster into the remotest
Kingdoms. And who above all other things had the greatest care to regulate his
People with good and wholesome Laws, and bent all his Actions and Endeavors to
the Welfare of his Subjects, and the advancement of the Christian Religion.

Amongst the rest he had four very Potent Enemies to deal with, the Saxons, the
Huns, the Lombards, and the Saracens. The Saxons a most Warlike and as yet
Idolatrous Nation, compounded of several People, and such as had been
invincible, had they acted by a mutual agreement and consent, gave him work and
exercise enough for above Thirty Years; during which time he made diverse
Expeditions against them always with advantage. He never denied them Peace, and
they broke again as soon as he was out of their sight: But his Piety constant
as their Malice, was never wearied in forgiving them; not so much out of a
desire to allure them to his obedience, as to bring them under the Yoke of
Christ Jesus; The highest part of his Care having no other end but the
propagation of Religion.

He entered into Saxony therefore this Year, and would try to terrify those
Rebels by Fire and Sword: but they were not afraid to bid him Battle somewhat
near Osnabrug. Their Confidence was punished by a huge Slaughter of their men;
those that remained made their escape beyond the Veser. He pursuing his
Victory, took in the Castle of Eresburgh, demolished the Famous Temple of the
false God Irmensul; and broke his Idol; It is supposed to have been the God
Mars, whence Mers-purg took it is name. He afterward passed the Veser,
compelled the Saxons to give him some Hostages, and having rebuilt Fresburgh,
put a French Garrison into it.

Didier not able, or willing, to give over the Design his Predecessors had
formed to abate the Power of the Popes, to make himself thereby Master of all
Italy, sowed a Schism in the Church of Rome whereby to discompose and weaken
them. Pope Paul being dead Anno 767. Toton Duke of Nepet at his instigation
enters into Rome, and forced the Clergy to Elect his Brother Constantine who
was not in Orders. The following Year another Cabal, Enemies to this Violence
of Constantine's, sets a Priest in the holy Chair, named Philip; But Crestofle
Primicera (this was the highest Dignity in the City, next to the Prefect)
constrained both the one and the other to renounce the Popeship, and caused
Stephanus to be duly elected, a Priest of St. Cecil's, who was the fourth of
that name.

Didier bethinks him of another method, in the Year 770. he goes to Rome upon
pretense of Devotion, and by force of Presents, gained Paul Afiarte, Duke or
Sovereign Judge in Rome, to cause this Crestofle to be put to death, and to
banish, or imprison for colorable reasons all such Roman Citizens as he knew
to be most able and disposed to thwart his attempts. Afiarte did according to
his desire: but Adrian, who was chosen after Stephen, stopped those unjust
proceedings, and not only eluded all the vain essays of the Lombard; but was
likewise the cause of his utter destruction.

After all other Experiments, Didier employs Force, seizes on several Cities of
the Exarchat, ravaged the Neighborhood of Rome; and the Year after, to turmoil
the Pope, advances toward him, upon pretense of Visiting the Sepulcher of the
holy Apostles; carrying along with him the Sons of the late King Carloman, to
oblige him to Crown them. The Holy Father flatly refuses him, and failed not to
make use of this Motive to exasperate Charlemaine the more against the
Lombards.

Betwixt these two Kings there were already some other causes of Enmity. For in
the Year 771. Charles had repudiated Hildegard the Sister of Didier, saying she
was infirm; A pretense that did not please a great many good people,
particularly Adelard the King's Cousin, who for this reason retired from the
Court into a Monastery. And Didier on his side had given a reception to
Carloman's Widow, and promised her his assistance and support to restore her
Sons to the Inheritance or Kingdom of their Father. These offenses having
inclined Charles's Mind to hearken to the Pope's Entreaties, he was the more
easily induced to pass over the Mountains, but with so great and numerous
Forces, that it was evident it was not meant so much to assist him, as to
conquer Lombardy.

Having therefore Rendevouz'd his Army at Geneva, he divided it in two Bodies,
his Uncle Bernard with one took his way by the Mount Jou, and himself led the
other by Mount Cenis. Didier had fortified the Passages; and in case they
should be worsted, himself was advanced with all his Forces near Turin, and in
Aost; to observe and oppose the French even to the hazard of a Battle: but some
of their Army having stolen by him very silently, and charging them in the
Rear, he was so much afraid of being hemmed in, that he cast himself into
Pavia, and Adalgise his Son, whom he had made Partner of his Crown, into Verona.

Those of Spoletta and Rietta had already forsaken him to join with the Pope.
When his Retreat was known, all the Marca Anconitana, and many other Cities
followed their Example. Charles with a part of his Army encamped before Pavia,
and sent the remainder before Verona. And to demonstrate he did not intend to
go thence till he had them in his power, he ordered his new Wife Hildegard,
Daughter of Childebrand Duke of Suevia, to come to his Camp, and passed the
Winter there even till Christmas, at which time he goes to Verona to press
that Siege forwards. Adalgise apprehending to fall into his hands, abandoned
that City, and fled to the Emperor of Greece. The Veronese soon after yielded,
Carloman's Children and Widow; they were carried into France, what afterward
became of them, is not mentioned that I know of.

Nothing remained but Pavia. The Siege spinning out in length, Charles had a
desire to go and pay his Devotions at Rome, at the good time of Easter. The
Pope made him a magnificent Entrance; such as was accustomed to be made for the
Exarchs. He in return confirms all the Grants made by his Father, and besides,
say some, added that of Sovereign Justice and absolute Power in all those
Countries. So that, to speak properly, the Popes before this time, held what
they had from the French Kings, from whom it must be owned they derive the best
portion of their temporal Grandeur.

In length of time Pavia became so straightned, not by any Attaques, but by
Famine, and the people so ill disposed, Hunoud the Firebrand of this War,
having been knocked on the head by the Women, that Didier surrenders himself
with his Wife and Children to Charles. He was conveyed into France, Cloistered
and Shaved, and died soon after. Thus was the Kingdom of Lombardy in Italy
Extinguished, after it had lasted some 204 Years.

Before his return into France, Charles made a second Voyage to Rome, where the
Pope with 150 Bishops whom he had summoned to honor his Reception, and
likewise the Roman People, conferred upon him the Title of Patrician, which was
the Degree the nearest to the Empire. It belonged to the Emperors only to
bestow it: but they being now no longer acknowledged in Italy, the Pope and
Romans attributed that Power to themselves: and which is more, agreed, That
Charles should have the power of the Investiture of Bishoprics, and even to
Nominate the Popes, to prevent those Cabals, and the Disorders that happened upon
Elections. The Italian Authors assure us that he remitted this right to the
Romans: but however he at least reserved to himself that of Confirming them,
which the Emperors had enjoyed without the least contradiction, for above
Three Ages. After this there was a very great and strict Friendship betwixt
Charles and Adrian.

Charles was Crowned* King of Lombardy, as the Kings of that Nation were used
to be* at the Borough of Modece near Milan, by the Archbishop of that Great
City, who Anointed him, and put the Iron Crown upon his head. It is so called,
because indeed it was made of a Circle or hoop of Iron, but covered over with a
Plate of Gold. It is said, That the generous Teudelaine, Daughter of Garibald
Duke of Bavaria, she who about the Year 593. converted the Lombards from
Arianism had it made for the Coronation of her Husband Agilulf.

The Order he established in Italy was thus. To the Pope he left the Exarchat,
the Pentapolis, (they were since called Romandiola) the Dutchies of Perusia, of
Rome, of Toscana Vlteriora, and Campagnia. He gave the Duchy of Benevent to
Aragisa Son in law to Didier, that of Spoleta to Hildebrand, and that of Friul
to Rotgaud, upon conditions only of Homage and Service, and to revert again to
him for want of Heirs Males.

He gave the Earldomes and Captainries of those Countries upon the same
conditions. The rest he reserved for himself, viz. Liguria, Emilia, Venetia,
and part of the Alps, and settled Counts there to govern them, and do Justice.
He imposed a certain Tribute on the Cities, and would have the Salique-Law be
in force there; so that they had three sorts of Laws, the Lombard, the Salique,
and the Roman; and the Subjects were permitted to live, and observe, and make
any Contracts according to such of these Laws as they best liked. Since that,
this Conquest has been called the Kingdom of Italy, and it extended to the
River Aufidus, or Ofantus, Puglia and Calabria together with Sicilia, belonging
then to the Grecian Emperors.

During his absence the Saxons had unchained themselves, and put all in the
Hesse to Fire and Sword. About the latter end of the Year he sent four
squadrons of men thither, who Attaqued them in four several parts, and brought
a great deal of booty thence.

Sigeburgh, rebuilt that of Eresburgh which they had demolished, drove them
upon the Veser, and having beaten them soundly, forced them to quitt the Post
of Brunsberg, where they had fortified themselves.

He after this divided his Army in two Bodies, and chased them to the River
Ouacre, and there he received the oaths and hostages of Prince Halson or
Helsis, and of the Ostfales or Ostrelands, which is to say Easterlings; then
upon his return at the place named Buki, those of Vitikind, and the most
considerable of the Duchy of Angria.

In the mean time the other part of his Army had like to have been surprised by
other Saxons near the River Ouacre, of whom he took so severe a revenge by Fire
and Sword, that these likewise cried him mercy, and gave him up hostages.

During all this, Adalgise Son of Didier, whom the Emperor had honored with
the Title of Patrician, got an Army at Sea to recover his Kingdom of Lombardy,
and debauched Rotgaud Duke of Friul, who was very unwilling to obey a stranger.
Charles hastens thither with all diligence, defeated Rotgaud in a great Battle,
caused his head to be cut off, and having chastised those that supported this
Rebellion, gave that Duchy to a French Lord by name Henry, together Empp.
Leon. II. Son of Copronymus, in Sept. 775. R. 5 Years.
with Stiria and Carinthia, placing Counts and Garrisons in the Cities.

In his absence the Saxons fly to their Arms, surprised and razed the Castle of
Eresburgh: but thinking to do the same to that of Sigeburgh, they were repulsed
by the French, who pursued them with slaughter to the banks of the Lipp. With
this misfortune they had intelligence likewise that Charlemain was in their

March following they all came from their several quarters to the general
Assembly of Paderborn, excepting the Valiant Vitikind Duke of Angria, who had
retired himself into the Country of Danemark, which the Authors of those times
call Normandy. Thither likewise came the Saracen Ibnalarabi Governor of
Sarragossa, with some other principal persons of the same Nation, who implored
the protection of Charles. He easily granted it, and would lead his Army
thither himself, rather to defend and increase the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
then for his own honor or augmentation of Empire.

There had been Nine or Ten Lieutenant Generalissimo's in Spain belonging to
the Caliph, who resided at Damas; whence he ruled all that vast Empire
extending from the Indies to the Pyreneans. There were two very potent Families
amongst the Saracens, that of Humeia and that of Alevaci. The first had held
the Sovereignty for 150 years, and there had been Fourteen successive Caliphs
of them: the other pretended to be descended from Fatima the Daughter of
Mahomet; and for that reason had their claim. Now it happened that Abulguchase,
who was of the Alaveci, revolted, and having vanquished and slain Merouane the
last of these Fourteen Caliphs, and undertaken the task to destroy the whole
Race; Abderame flying from that Persecution, had saved himself in Spain, and
freed that part from the dominion of the Caliph, by making it a distinct and
independent Kingdom. But in this revolution other Governors had also fallen
off from his obedience; and amongst these was Ibnalarabi, with the rest that
came along with him, who wanted the assistance of the French to maintain them
in their Usurpation.

Charles, being divided in two Bodies, marched two different ways. The first
with whom he went in person, passed thorough Bearn into Navarre, and laid Siege
to Pampelune. This was the longest and the most memorable that ever the French
had undertaken. At last the place surrendered upon composition.

From thence he marched toward Sarragossa, where the other part of the Army
who had taken their way thorough the Countries of Rousillon and Cerdagne joined
him. Ibnalarabi, and the other Saracen Chiefs came to meet him, and tendered him
hostages and other assurances of their fidelity.

We must know that till this time the Christians on all those Frontiers, as
well as those of Spain had been subdued by the Saracens, to whom they paid a
Tribute. Charlemain delivered them from that Slavery* and made them join in a
League with these petty Moorish Princes who had put themselves under his
Protection. It is said that he also sent some Forces to Alphonso the Chaste, to
help him to throw off the Yoke of Vassallage and Tribute to which he had been
hitherto compelled: Which these Divisions of the Moors made the more easy to
be effected* Thus do the Spaniards owe their first Enfranchisement to the
Assistance of the French.

The Gascons about the Pyreneans, who carried on the Trade of Theft, rewarded
him but very ill for all his generous help; As he returned into France, passing
by Pampelune which he dismantled, these Banditi lying in Ambuscade in the
narrow Passages about Roncevaux, took all the Baggage which was in his Rear,
and slew many of his brave Lords; amongst the rest, that Famous Rowland his
Nephew, his Irene Empress, Wife of Leon with Constantine her Son, in Sept.
Sisters Son, who was Marquess of the British Seas; that is to say, Governor
of the French Coasts along that shore. The Lords of those Countries fearing
his just Anger, delivered up many of those Robbers to him, that they might
suffer such punishment as he would have inflicted on them.

Spanish Authors triumph of this Defeat, and cry they have Vanquished Charles
the Great and his Twelve Peers. But certain it is that Navarre, Arragon, and
all that is between the Pyreneans and the Hebre, was at that time brought under
the dominion of this King, and that he placed Counts at Girone, Ampuries,
Vrgel, Barcelonna, Ribagorra, and other places. This Extent of Land was called
the Marches Limes Hispanicus, Marca Hispanica.
of Spain.

When he returned he placed French Counts in all the Cities of Aquitain and of
Septimania, to keep those People the better in obedience. Some others will have
this Establishment to have been in 781. at the time when he bestowed the
Kingdom Aquitain upon Prince Lewis.

Vitikind had re-inflamed the Fury of the Saxons, who made most terrible havoc
as far as Ments and Colen. As soon as he was come back, he sent away Three
Squadrons of his Army, who soon beat them off; and the following year went
thither in Person. They had the confidence to wait for him near the Lipp, and
to give him Battle: but he overcame them, and afterward reduced Westphalia,
Eastphalia and Angria; and the next year went outward as Hoar meets and joins
with the Elbe, and received many of their People, amongst others those that are
called Nordleudes and Bardogaves. Then having given the necessary orders to
secure these new Conquests, and bridle the Sclavonians who were on the other
side of the Elbe, he returned into Neustria.

Now fearing left Italy, wont to have a King, and who besides were molested
with the Huns by Land, and the Saracens at Sea, should receive Adalgise, or
give the Crown to some other; He makes a third Journey to Rome under color of
Devotion. He celebrated the Feast of Christmas at Pavia, and that of Easter at
Rome. The Pope baptized his second Son Pepin, and was his Godfather, and
afterward Italy, and Lewis his younger Son King of Aquitain: This last was
scarce three years old. His Kingdom contained the Duchy of Aquitain, that of
Gascoyne, and the Marca of Spain. The King gave not any to Charles his eldest
Son, because he would keep him near himself to manage the Affairs of France and
of Germany.

Charlemaine King of France. Pepin -- King of Italy. And -- Lewis King of
Aquitaine.

Lewis to Orleance under the Tutelage of a Bail, or Governor, named Arnold, and
left Pepin in Italy, where he kept his Royal Seat at Milan, but yet was
frequently at Ravenna. Though he had been already Crowned at Rome, yet he would
be again Crowned at Modece.

Tassillon Duke of Bavaria had suffered his Faith to be shaken by Luitperge his
Wife, Daughter of King Didier. Whilst Charles was at Rome, the Pope had agreed
with him to send a couple of Bishops to that Duke, to put him in mind of his
Oaths. The Pope failed not, and Tassillon having taken Hostages for his
Security, comes to Worms, and gave Twelve on his behalf.

Charles held his General Assembly in Saxony: This was held at the Springhead
of the Lip, where he gave Audience to the Ambassadors of Sifroy King of
Denmark, and those from Cagan and Ingurre, Princes of the Huns. The Assembly
being ended, he repassed the Rhine, and then Vitikind, who upon his former
approaches had saved himself in Denmark returned to his own Country, and caused
part of the Saxons to rise up again.

The Sorabi, a People that inhabited the Country between the Elbe and the Saal,
were of the Confederacy. Three of the Kings chief Commanders who were ordered
to observe and oppose them, leaves them, and goes against the Saxons; and
falling rashly and disorderly upon them, without staying for Count Thierry, who
was of Kin to Charlemaine, because they thought all the honor of the Victory
and Success would be attributed to him; they were surrounded, and most of them
cut off and destroyed. The shame for this rebuke and loss enraged the King so
highly, that for this time he would not forgive the Saxons* unless the Country
would deliver up Four thousand of the greatest Mutineers to him, all whose
heads he caused to be struck off upon the Banks of the River Alare.



Before he took the Field, Charles had the unhappiness to lose a very good Wife
Queen Hildegard, who died on the last of April, on the Ascension Eve.

The very same Year he married another who was named Fastrude, Daughter of a
French Count called Raol.

All the following Year the King with a Flying Army, and Charles his Eldest Son
with another, did only scowre and make Incursions upon the Saxons, sometimes
upon

Frisons their Allies: but they were as ill handled as before. In fine, their
two Bravest Leaders Albion and Vitikind being disheartened by so much ill
success, gave ear to the Friendly persuasions which the King, being touched
with a real esteem for their great Courage, had made use of to bring to their
duty. Having taken their Sureties, they appeared before the Estates at
Paderborne, and thence followed him into France, where they were Baptized in
his Palace of Atigny. He gave the Duchy of Angria to Vitikind, who from that
day forward led so good and Christian a life, that some have placed him amongst
the Saints. From him many do derive the descent of the Race of the Capetine
Kings.

Paderborn, Lewis King of Aquitaine, came to his Father with all his Forces. He
often sent for him and his Brother Pepin, either when he wanted them, or to
call them to an account, thereby to keep them in subjection.

Easter in the Year 786. the Army went and fell upon Bretagne, whose Princes
thought themselves independent, and had their little Kingdom apart. These
likewise were compelled, after they had lost diverse strong Places, to submit to
the Grandeur of Charles, and to send several Lords to him to take their Oaths
of Fidelity; But not believing themselves bound to do so, they kept them no
longer, then till they found an opportunity to violate their Faith without
danger.

Adalgise, Son of the unfortunate Didier, was at Sea with an Army, soliciting
his Brother in Law Tassillon to fall into Italy at the same time as he should
land, for the same purpose having made sure of Aregisa Duke of Benevent who
married his Sister; Charles to prevent the execution of their Designs, passes
the Mountains the fourth time, and having taken Benevent and Capova from
Aregisa, who would be called King, forces him to give sufficient Pledges, and
renounce that vain Title.

He had seen the Pope at his passing by Rome, upon his return he saw him again.
France the Gregorian Singing, and the Liturgy or Mass that was used at Rome,
and would needs abolish the Music and Service of the Gallican Church. This
change begot many difficulties, and stirred up Persecutions against the Ancient
Galls, who persisted in keeping their own Customs: This good Prince was so
wedded to this Singing, that he made it a considerable business, and a main
point of Religion; whereas several of the Ancient Fathers held it as a very
indifferent thing.

Rome, Tassillon's Ambassadors came thither to entreat the Pope to reconcile
Charles perfectly to him. The holy Father and the King willingly hearkened to
it. But when the King pressed them to name the time wherein their Master would
perform what he promised; they replied, that they had nothing in Commission but
to carry back his answer: So that the King perceiving he did not walk
uprightly, resolved when he got again into France, to make him speak clearly.
Having therefore held the Estates at Worms, he drew three Armies into the
Field, his Son Pepin's in Italy, one of the Eastern French, and a third which
himself Commanded.

Tassillon saw them all upon his Frontiers, the first in the Valley of Trente,
the second on the Borders of the Danube, and the other under the Walls of the
City of Augsburgh, not knowing which way to turn, he came with all humility to
beg his pardon, and delivered up Thirteen Hostages, whereof his Eldest Son,
Theudon was one.

Yet the hatred he had for the French, and the correspondence he held with
Adalgise his Brother in Law, still prompted him secretly to solicit the
Bavarian to take up Arms, and to join in League with the Huns his Neighbors
who held Pannonia; which is Hungary and Austria. Part of these were led by his
persuasions, but the rest apprehending the Calamities of War, gave the King
notice hereof. For which cause this Duke being a second time summoned to the
Assembly of Estates which met at Ingelhenin, and there accused by his own
Subjects, and convicted of Treason, was by his Peers condemned to lose his
Life. Howbeit the King, in favor of him as being near of Kin, commuted that
punishment; so that both he and his Son Theudon were only Shaved and sent to
the Cloister of Loresheim, and then to Jumiege. And at this time The Duchy of
Bavaria was Extinguished, and divided into several hereditary Counties.

Huns angry for the loss of their Allie, and that the French were become their
Neighbors, began a most bloody War with them, which lasted for Eight Years
together. This Year let them however know what the Event was like to be, for
they lost three Battles against them, one in Friul, and two in Bavaria.

At the same time Adalgise having obtained some Forces of Constantine the
Emperor of Greece, who was netled for that Charles had denied him his Daughter
Rotrude in Marriage, descended into Italy by Calabria, imagining the rest of
the Lombards would take up Arms in his Quarrel. But he was mistaken in his
reckoning. Grimoald Son of his Sister, and Aragise Duke of Benevent, whom
Charles had gratified with the Duchy after the death of his Father, Hildebrand
Duke of Spoleta, Vinigisa who was so after him, and some other of King Pepins
Captains, fought him at his going forth of Calabria, and obtained an entire
Victory. That unfortunate man falling into their hands alive, was cruelly put
to death, as generally most Princes are that endeavor to regain their own,
when they suffer themselves to be taken.

German People, there was hardly any but those that Inhabited along the Baltic
Coasts, who did not acknowledge Charlemain, or held themselves Enemies to the
French and their Allies. Those nearest to his Frontiers were the Wilses, seated
on the further side of the Elbe, in the Southern part of the Country. He built
a Fort upon that River, which he strengthened with two Castles, and having made
an inroad even to their Principal City, which they called Dragawit, brought
such astonishment amongst them, that they all submitted without striking one
blow; Their chief Head, named Viltzan, coming forth together with the most
eminent of them to take the Oath of Fidelity, and offer him pledges for
Security.

Worms, without undertaking any Military expedition. He addicted himself to
works of Piety, sent great Alms to the Christians in Syria, Egypt and Africa,
who groaned under the Saracen yoke, and besought the amity of those Infidel
Princes, thereby to oblige them to treat the Christians more mercifully.

France and Scotland. Charles having sent four Thousand Men in assistance of
King Achaius, who made him a present (say the Scottish Authors) of Claudius
Clement, Emperor istantine ^ing banishhis Mother.
and Alcuinus an Anglo-Saxon, two learned Men for that Age. It is added that
they came to Paris, and erected some public Schools, Beginning of that Famous
University, the Mother of all those that are in Europe.

France having at this time no other Affairs, Charles thought it was time to
take his Revenge of the Huns: but so as it proved a blessing to them, by their
being subdued to embrace the Christian Faith. They had, say some Aut^ors, seven
Ringues, or Vast Enclosures, locked within one another, and wonderfully
Pallisadoed and strengthened with Rampires, into which they made their retreat
with their Spoil, which they had practiced above two hundred Years. Charles
having passed the River Emms, which divides Bavaria from their Country, went
forwards with his Forces who marched along the two sides of the Danube,
attended with a Fleet which sailed on the same River; and at the same time
another Body of Eastern Frenchmen entered upon them from Bohemia. Upon his
arrival they all fled, and left two of their Ringues to him, and afterward he
made his way and ravaged as far as the River Rab. Had it not been for a great
mortality which almost destroyed all his Horses, he would have pushed his
Conquest further.

We must observe, That the Country of those Avari, which lay on the East of
Bavaria, was by the French, because of their Situation Eastward in respect of
them, called Oosterich, whence comes the name of Austria.

French Austrasian Lords, offended at the lofty behavior of the Queen
Fastrade, conspired to be freed from her to ridd themselves of their King her
Husband, and to set up one of his Bastards, named Pepin, in his stead, who had
a handsome face, but crooked, and as malicious as it was possible. The plott
was discovered by a poor Priest, who being accidentally in the corner of a
Church, where they met for this purpose, overheard them discoursing of the
design. Charles by Sentence of the Estates, caused several to be beheaded, some
their Eyes to be put out, others hanged, and his Bastard to be shaved and
thrust into the Abbey of Prom, which is in the Bishopric of Triers.

Liderick de Harlebec Great Forester of Flanders, was made Earl of it, but not
hereditary; though from him are descended the Earls of that Country.

Benevent, contrived perhaps by Grimoald and the rest of the Lombards, which
proved so dangerous, that Lewis King of Aquitaine went into Italy with his
Forces to assist his Brother Pepin.

Charles was at Ratisbon, and had laid a Bridge over the Danube, to go and
subdue the Avari; A Design was propounded to him which would have proved of
great benefit in that War, and for ever after to all Europe. Which was to make
a Communication between the River Rhine and the Danube, and by consequence
between the Ocean and the Black-Sea, by cutting a Channel from the River
Almu^s, which discharges it self into the Danube, to the River Redits, which
falls by Bamberg into the Meine, which does afterward run into the Rhine near
Ments. To which end he caused a world of men to work: but the continual Rains
that happened, filling up his Trenches, and overflowing and washing away his
Banks, ruined that brave and useful Undertaking.

Besides, he was diverted by two accounts of ill tidings; one, the revolt of
the Saxons, who having kept themselves quiet seven or eight years, now threw
off again both the Yoke of Obedience and of Religion; The other, that the
Forces Commanded by his Counts in the Marea of Spain, were defeated by the
Saracens.

Felix Bishop of Vrgel had in his answers to Elipand Bishop of Toledo,
published a most dangerous heresy: That Jesus Christ as Man, was but the
Adopted Son of God the Father; And although about two Years before the King
having sent for him, obliged him to recant, and to go to Rome to abjure his
Error: nevertheless he began anew to dogmatize. Wherefore he caused a Council
of French Bishops to assemble at Francfort, as also several Bishops of Germany
and Lombardy, who all condemned that Error in presence of the Pope's Legate:
They also rejected the Second Council of Nice, which had ordained the adoration
of Images, and pronounced that it did not deserve the title of Oecumenique.

Whilst the King was at Francfort, died Queen Fastrada his third Wife.

Saxons Country, his Army being divided in two, whereof he Commanded one part
himself, and his Eldest Son the other, struck so great a Terror thorough all
those Provinces, that instead of running to their Arms, they came running to
him to beg for Mercy; and this good Prince sparing the blood of those
obstinate People, contented himself with the taking away of one third of all
such as were capable of bearing Arms, and transporting them to the Seacoast of
Flanders.

Juliers, where having discovered some hot Baths, he built a fair Palace and a
Church to the honor of the Virgin Mary. For which reason that place was called
Aix la Chapelle. These Baths had in former times been accommodated and adorned
with handsome Structures by some great Lord, or Roman Governor, whose Name was
Granus, (it is not well known in what time) from whence in Latin it takes the
name Aquis Granum.

But I should have told you, that before this Year was expired, the Saxons had
once more played the enraged Devils, cutting in pieces an Army of the Abodrites
in the Passage to the Elbe, as they were marching by the King's Command upon an
Expedition against the Avari. Viltzan who Commanded them was slain; which put
the King into so great Wrath, that he gave up all Saxony to the mercy of the
Sword; and at this time there were slain at the least Thirty thousand of those
People bearing Arms.

Pope Adrian his intimate Friend being dead, Leo was Elected by the Senators
and the Principal of the Clergy at Rome. He sent him an Ambassador to give
Peter's Church, with the City Banner and other honorable Presents to him,
desiring him to send one of his Princes thither to receive the Oaths of
Fidelity of the Romans, a certain proof, that the King in quality of Patrician,
held the Lordship of the City of Rome.

Avari-Huns were so strangely bent to destroy one another, that both of them
perished in that Civil War. Henry Irene the Empress having put out her Son
Constantine's Eyes, in July.
Duke of Friuli, taking his opportunity when that Nation was weakened by so much
loss of Blood, enters the Country and makes himself Master of their principal
Ringue, where he sound Vast Treasures which those Robbers had heaped up, out of
the plunder of all their Neighboring Provinces for at least two Ag s. He sent
all to Charl^^aine, and Theudon one of their Princes came to him almost at the
same Raab, he did not keep his Faith long. And so he was slain by the French
and Bavarians.

Avari thinking to restore themselves, Elected a Cagan.
Kan, (that is to say, a Commander, for so they called all their Princes) but
he was likewise Slain in a Battle by King Pepin; all the Country conquered from
the River Raab to the Dravus, and from thence to the Danube, and all those
Barbarians put to the edge of the Sword, or driven over the River Tissa.

French and the Moors, beyond the Pyreneans. The City of Barcelonna, which was
sometimes the ones, sometimes the others, fell into the hands of Zad a Saracen
Prince, who fearing he should not be able to keep it, came and paid Homage to
King Lewis: but upon the first occasion broke his Faith with him.

Charlemaine spent this Year and almost the two following in completing the
Conquest of the Saxons, who broke all Agreements as soon as they had made them,
and sometimes signalized their Treachery by some base and mean Cruelties; As
they did Anno 798. having killed the King's Commissaries or Judges, who did not
Heristal upon the Weser.

The Astronomers of those times, observe that the Planet Mars was not visible
in the Heavens, from the Month of July in the Year 797, until the same Month
of the Year 798.

Some Roman Officers Kindred of the deceased Pope Adrian, and Enemies of Pope
Leo, having made a great Faction, fell one day upon him, whilst he was at a
Solemn Procession, and endeavored to tear out his Eyes, and cut out his
Tongue, afterward dragging him to a loathsome Prison. But he escaped being so
mangled as they supposed him to be, and he found friends that contrived his
escape to the French Ambassadors, who were lodged at Saint Peter's: they
conducted him to Spoleta, and thence sent him to the King, well guarded, who at
that time was in Saxony. The King having heard his sad complaints, sent him
back again to Rome with the same honor as he had received him, promising he
would soon be on the place to do him justice.

The Islands called Baleares, Majorque. Minorque.
gave themselves up to France, that they might be protected against the Saracen
Pirates.

Saracen Aza, who had made himself Sovereign of Huesca, that he might have the
protection of the French, sent the Keys of his City with Presents to Charles
the Great, proffering to deliver it up to him when ever he desired it. But when
they would have taken him at his word, he failed them, and they did very well
in keeping the Forts in their own hands which were erected opposite to Huesca
and Sarragossa. Count Aureolus Commanded them.

Avari after several vain attempts to recover their Liberty, were entirely
subdued, all their Nobility cut off in the several Battles that had been
fought, and the remainder of their Wealth carried away by the French, who
became very rich, and began to adorn themselves with Ornaments of Gold even to
the very common Soldiers.

Guy Count of the Marches of Bretagne wholly submitted that Country, and
brought the Shields and Arms together with the Names of all the Lords and
Commons that were become Subjects to the King. So that all that Country was for
a time under the Dominion of France.

Danes, Normands and Saracens began their Pyracy and robbed the Coasts of
France, these in the Mediterranean, the others in the Ocean. Charlemaine
Visited them all, gave Orders to build Vessels, and to raise Forts in several
places; and amongst others, to repair the Tower d'Ordre A Tower called the Man
of Boulogne.
at Boulogne, an ancient Building which had been erected by the Romans.

The Pyracy of those Insidels was not only an effect of their inclination to
get Wealth and Plunder, but like wise of their false Zeal against the Christian
Religion. Idolatry being hunted and pursued from one Country to another, and
drove beyond the Rhine, had taken refuge in Saxony with her false Priests,
together with all those that struggled in their defense: And then being hotly
attaqued by the French, had thrown themselves beyond the Elbe and in Denmark,
as their last Bulwark. From whence those Exiles and their Offspring, burning
with the cruel desire of avenging their Gods and their loss of Liberty, made
perpetual Excursions, and principally exercised their bloody malice upon such
Priests and Monks a^ they could light upon, as being those that had destroyed
their Superstitious Temples and false Gods.

Luitgard fourth Wife of Charlemaine dies at Saint Martins de T^ars, whither
she was gone to pay her Devotions.

From Ments, where he had called a Parliament, he went into Italy, as well to
take cognizance of those Outrages committed against the Pope, as upon some
vehement suspicions that they were contriving with Grimoald Duke of Benevent,
not well affected, and the Inhabitants of Friuli, who had ^lain their Duke
Henry, to revolt from the French.

Friuli, he punished the Authors of that Murder. Being at Rome, he admitted
Pope Leo to justify and purge himself by Oath, no body then appearing to accuse
him. He afterward ordered Process to be made against those that had attempted
him so basely, who were all condemned to death: but the Pope imitating the
Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, interceded and obtained that both their Lives
and Limbs should be spared. For in those times it was so common a punishment to
Mutilate, that even some Abbots used it toward their Monks.

The Pope in retribution of so many favors which this King, his Father and
Grandfather, had conferred upon the Holy Chair, and to gain that protection
which the Grecian Emperors were incapable to give, obliged the Romans to
demand him for their Emperor, and Crowned him upon Christmas Day in Saint
Peter's the People crying aloud three times, A long and happy Life and Victory
to Charles the August, Great, and Peaceable Emperor of the Romans, Crowned by
God. This was in the Year 800* beginning the Year on the First day of January;
but Christmas Day the first of the New Year, as the French Authors Emperor
Constantine in the East. And Charlemaine in the West.
of those Times are wont to do. After the Ceremony the Pope adored the New
Emperor; that is to say, Kneeled down before him, and acknowledged him for his
Sovereign, and caused his Portraiture to be exposed in public, that so all
the Romans might pay him the same respect. If we give credit to some of the
Annalists of those Times, he did not seek for this honor, and the Pope
surprised him when he besought him to accept of this Title. And indeed, it was
so far from bringing him any advantage, that it made him now hold that only by
the Election of the Romans, which he before held by the power of his Sword.

By this means the West had an Emperor again: but one that had no connection
now with that in the East, as formerly it had.

France, being at Spoleta, there was a furious Earthquake, accompanied with
horrible Noise which shook the Country thereabouts. Neither was France and
Germany free from it. But Italy felt it most: a great number of Cities being
thrown down and destroyed: and this Prodigy was followed with Furious Tempests,
and afterward with diverse Contagious Maladies. This Year Charles made no
Military Expedition: but his Son Lewis made himself Famous by the taking of
Barcelona.

Saracen Princes upon the Frontiers of Spain feared they should be oppressed by
the King of Cordoua, who was Generalissimo of Spain, they made an Alliance with
the French, but the danger once past, they fell again to their wonted
Treachery. Zad Prince of Barcelona studying some Treason against the French,
was nevertheless so imprudent, thinking the better to conceal his Design, as to
come to King Lewis at Narbonna, who caused him to be seized. The Saracens
Elected one Hamar of his Kindred in his room, resolved to defend themselves to
the uttermost.

Whilst this happened the Gascons revolted, because Lewis had set up at Fesensac
a Count they were not pleased with. After he had severely chastised them, he
undertakes the Siege of Barcelona. The King of Cordoua takes the Field to
Relieve it: but being informed there was a Body of an Army to hinder his
passage, he bends his Forces against the Asturians. The besieged after a
Twelve-months resistance, surrendered themselves up to Lewis, who came himself
to hasten forwards the Attaques, he settled a Count in it, named Bera, who is
said to be the Stock of the Earls of Barcelonna.

All the Princes of the Earth either feared or loved Charlemaine. Alphonso King
of Galicia and the Asturia's, writing or sending Ambassadors to him, would be
called no other but his Man Proprius.
, his Vassal. The Scottish Kings Of Scotland, and Ireland.
always styled him their Lord, and termed themselves his Subjects, and his
Servants. The Chiefs of the Saracens of Spain and Africa, reverenced him and
besought his Alliance. The Haughty Aaron King of Persia, who despised all other
Princes in the World, desired no Friendship but his; He this Year sent him
Jewels, and Silks and Spices, and one of the largest Elephants. Withal,
understanding that he had a great devotion for the Holy Land, and the City of
Jerusalem, he gave him the Propriety of them, reserving to himself only the
Title of his Lieutenant in that Country, And two Years after interposed so
earnestly in his behalf with Nicephorus, that he engaged that Emperor to
conclude a Treaty of Peace with him very advantageous to France.

Charlemaine to conquer all the remainder of Italy and their Islands; the
Grecians having only a very wicked Woman in their Imperial Throne, it was Irene
the Widow of Leo, who had caused the Eyes of her own Son Constantine to be put
out. But to stop his progress had the policy to amuse him with the hopes of
marrying her, which would have put the Empire of the East into his hands.

Emperor Nicephorus having chaced away Irene and Charlemaine.
This Negotiation was well advanced, and Charle's Ambassadors were at
Constantinople to conclude it, when she was driven thence by Nicephorus who
made himself Emperor.

Nicephorus having chaced away Irene, proposed to the Ambassadors of France,
who were come to Treat with her, to make an agreement with Charles about
Emperor as well as himself, and that all Italy should be his to the Rivers of
Ofantus Ausidus.
, and the Vilturnia, with Bavaria, Hungary, Austria, Dalmatia, and S^l^vonia,
the Gauls, and Spaines. For as to Germany, it had never been in subjection to
the Romans: But Great Britain or England had been a Member, and by consequence
ought to hold of Charlemaine.

Grimoald Duke of Benevent had revolted under the favor and with the support
of the Greeks. The French gained from him the City of Nocera: but soon after he
retook it with Vinigisa Count of Spoleta who lay sick in the place. But when
the agreement was made betwixt the two Empires, he sent him back again very
civilly, and made his peace with the French.

Saxons now revolted for the last time, especially those beyond the Elbe,
incited by Godfrey, who was King of Denmark, and very potent at Sea. Charles
being come thither with all his Forces, and having pitched his Camp near the
River Elbe, that King advanced as far as Sliestorp upon the Borders of his
Kingdom and the Country of Saxony, to confer with the Emperor: but some kind
of Jealousy made him on the sudden turn back again: and so the Saxon
Holsatians finding themselves abandoned, redeemed themselves from utter
destruction by turning all Christians.

But he transported one part of them into Flanders, and another into the
Helvetian Country, whence it is said the Swisse are descended, a People who are
very free in their own Country, and yet serve in all others. He bestowed the
Lands they inhabited beyond the Ebre upon the Abrodite Sclavonians; and he
established a Council in Saxony in manner of an Inquisition, who had power to
punish Mutineers, especially such as returned again to their Idolatry. This
sort of Inquisition lasted in Westphalia to the 15 th Age. Thus ended the long
and obstinate Rebellion of the Saxons, who partly by consent, partly by force,
submitted to the Yoke of Jesus Christ, and the Dominion of France.

October of the same Year, Pope Leo's Ambassadors came to him at Aix la
Chapelle, to let him know their Master desired to see and entertain him with
some of the Miraculous Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was affirmed to
have been found at Mantoua. The King sent his Eldest Son Charles as far as
Saint Maurice in Chablais to meet him, and himself went and received him at
Rheims, whence he had him to his Palace of Crecy Carisiacum.
upon the Oise to pass his Christmas, and from thence to Aix la Chapelle, to
consecrate the Church. The Holy Father having been there eight days, went back
again to Rome thorough Bavaria.

He had undertaken this Journey to complain how that Maurice Duke of the
Venetians, and his Son John whom he had joined with him, persecuted the
Patriarch Fortunatus whom he had approved of, and honored with the Pall; and
also how they favored the Grecian Emperor. The City of Venice was not yet
built, and the Seventy two Islands that compose it, together with the Country
and Towns upon the Shoars of the Gulf, were governed by Tribunes who
counter-balanced the power of the Duke. Now those Tribunes (Beat and Obelier
whom our French Authors of those Times call Willeric) had caused themselves to
be Elected Dukes by one part of the People, and had driven away Maurice and
John, who had recourse to the Assistance of the Greeks.

John Duke of Zara, with some other Lords of Dalmatia, came to the Palace at
Thionville to desire assistance of the Emperor, in case the Greeks should
assault them.

Whilst he remained there, he shared his Estates between his three Sons, in
such manner that either of them happening to dye without Children, his Portion
should

This partition was made, all his Sons being present, subscribed by the French
Lords, and carried to the Pope, that he might likewise Sign it, not to make it
the more Valuable, but to render it the more Authentic.

Navarois were reduced to the Obedience of the French, from whom they had
withdrawn themselves (upon what motives is unknown) to put themselves under the
dominion of the Saracens.

The Emperor's eldest Son employed himself without intermission in subduing
the remaining Idolatrous people in Germany. The preceding Year he had gained a
very great Victory over the Beheman Sclavonians, or Within 200 years Bohemia
was called Behaigne.
Behains, they are now called Bohemians, and slew their Duke named Lechon. This
Year he had the like advantage over the Sclavonian Sorabes, who inhabited on
the other side of the River Elbe.

At the same time, his two other Brothers labored each in his division to
increase their Limits upon the Infidels. Pepin made War against the Saracens at
Sea, Ademar Count of Genoa lost a Battle and his Life: but Bouchard Count de
l'Estable obtained another very signal one. Lewis with his Aquitains made his
Incursions to the further Shore of the Elbe.

Nicetas Patrician of the East, sent into the Adriatique Sea by the Emperor
Nicephorus, to recover Dalmatia, restored that Country to the obedience of his
Master, and re-settled Maurice and John Dukes of Venice, who had been expelled,
and they soon expelled all those that had taken part with France. Pepin had
resolved to attaque Nicetas; yet he made a Truce with him for some Months,
perhaps because he had enough to do with the Saracens who infested the Tuscan
Seas.

This Year 807. was seen in the Heavens two extraordinary Phenomena, besides
three Eclypses, two of the Moon, and the third of the Sun. For on the last day
of January the Planet Jupiter seemed to enter into the Moon* who was in her
17th day, and the 14th of March Mercury appeared in the diske of the Sun, a
little above the Center, like a little black speck; which lasted so eight days.

Normands, and their Descents and Landing on the Coasts of Neustria, and even
in the Mediterranean, became more frequent and troublesome. Charlemaine one day
being in Provence, and seeing some of them appear, was so touched with the
Misery France was like to suffer by these Pirates, that he could not refrain
from Tears.

Persia brought him Rare Presents, Tents all of Silk, and a Striking Clock with
wonderful Automata. They were accompanied by some Monks whom the Patriarch of
Jerusalem (for Syria was then under the obedience of the Persians) had given
them to be their Guides.

In the East all acknowledged or honored Charlemaine. There was none but
Godfrey that countermined his Grandeur; and Charles desired to get into his
Country, not to take possession of the Ice and barren Rocks of that Northern
Region: but to bring those poor ignorant Wretches to the Knowledge of true Faith.

Dane prevented him, and had the confidence to attaque his Country. At first he
made a great bustle, drove before him Traciscon Duke of the Abrodites, who was
under the dominion of the French, took by Treachery, and hanged another of
their Dukes, and made two thirds of those people become his Tributaries.
Nevertheless having lost his best Men, and his Brothers Son upon the storming
of a Castle, being informed that Charles eldest Son to the Emperor had passed
over the Elbe, he retreated, and spoiled or ruined his Haven at Reric, whither
much Goods and Merchandise had wont to be brought, for fear the French should
fortify themselves there.

He designed likewise to shut up and cover his Country of Danemark, by drawing
a line and making a great rampart just opposite to the Saxons Territory, from
that Gulf of the Sea on the Eastern part to that on the West; and all along
the Banks of the River Egidore or Egid, and in this part of his Earthen Wall or
Work, he had but one Gate well flanked, for the passage of Carts and Soldiers.

Amongst diverse exploits which were done in the Marches of Spain, Lewis King of
Aquitain took by force of Engines and assaults the City of Tortosa in Catalonia.
But Count Aureolus who had the Government of those Frontiers dying the year
after, Amoroz a Saracen Prince of Sarragosa seized upon several Fortresses of
the French, protesting notwithstanding he was ready to restore these places and
his own person to the Emperors disposal. Whereupon a Treaty was begun, during
which Abular King of Cordoua, to whom these Negotiations were no way pleasing,
sends his Son Abderaman, who craftily seized upon Sarragosa, and constrained
Amoroz to retire himself to Huesca.

French and the Greeks, Pepin enters into the Gulf of Venice, and gave Battle
to Paul, who was Patrician and one of the Greeks Generals. Each side pretended
they had gained the Victory.

Nicetas having presented him Battle near Comachio was rudely repulsed.

At the same time Charlemain desiring to repress the Danes incursions, sent
orders and materials to build a great Fort on the River Sturia, at the place
called Aselfelt.

The Gascons were again revolted, Lewis being gone to Dags with a powerful Army
ruined all the Countries of the most Factious and Stubborn, and gave quarter
only to those that besought his Pardon. From thence finding he was so far on
his way, he pushes on to Pampeluna, where he made some stay to assure himself
of the fidelity of the Inhabitants of that Country, which was very uncertain.
Before he Filed off his men through the passages of those Mountains, he would
needs be precautioned against the Robberies of those Gascon Mountaineers, some
of them being already in Ambuscade, by seizing on their Women and Children, and
hanging one of their Spies, who came on purpose to observe them, and give his
Companions notice of their motion.

Aquitain, he mightily labored to reform that Kingdom, and especially the
Ecclesiastical Order, which was so much deformed, the Prelates and Priests
being all turned Swordmen, that there were no footsteps of any Discipline
remaining. He not only restored it by his exemplary devout life, and by his
good Rules and Orders, but also by the great care he took to repair or build
Monasteries which were as the Seminaries of good Churchmen. The Author who
wrote his life, reckons no less then Five and Twenty, or Thirty.

Pepin not able any longer to endure the double dealing of Maurice and John
Dukes of the Venetians who favored the Greeks, and desiring to restore Obelier
and Beat who were expelled, goes out of Chiassi, which is the Port of Ravenna,
with his Fleet, and enters the Lake of Venice. In the beginning he took all the
little Towns which were upon the Shore, then turned toward the Island of
Malamauca the Dukes Seat, which he found quite forsaken, Maurice and John his
Son having withdrawn themselves into that of Rialto and Oliuolo.

The Venetian Authors relate that commanding his men to Attaque those Islands
with floats of Boards or Timber, and the Army of the Dukes defending them, it
happened that wanting knowledge of the Channels and Depths, his Fleet received a
notable repulse; That a great number of the French were slain, and stifled in
the Mud; and that he himself who staid in the Island Malamauca with the least
part of his Forces, Retreated to Ravenna carrying Obelier and Valentine, who
had very unluckily engaged him in this enterprise, along with him.

In this Island of Rialto was soon after built a Palace for the Duke, and in
that of Oliuolo another for the Bishop, and in time they joined all those
little Islands, near one another, by Bridges, so that all these together have
made the City of Venice so renowned, for its wonderful situation, and more for
the wisdom of its conduct.

In the mean time Godfrey with a Fleet of Two Hundred Sail, lands in Frisia,
pillaged the Country, and exacted Tribute. He bragged also that he would give
the Emperor Battle, who was encamped near the place where the Rivers Alare and
Veser join together: but instead of coming forwards he retreats back into his
own Country, where he was killed by a certain Son of his, in revenge for having
repudiated his Mother. Heming his Brothers Son, who succeeded him, Treated a
Peace with the French.

France had not their revenge for the affront received in the Gulf of Venice,
Emp. Michael. Curopal. Brother in law to Nicephorus. R. 19 Months, and
Charlemain.
because Pepin, a Son worthy of his Father, dyed at the age of 33 Years, the 29
th of his Reign in Italy. He left only one Bastard-Son named Bernard, who
succeeded him in that Kingdom, a young Prince not above Twelve or Thirteen
Years old at most.

About the end of the following Year Charles the Eldest Son of the Emperor dyed
likewise, who left no Children. But the preceding Spring his Father concluded a
Peace with the Dane, and sent Three Armies, one against the Sclavonick Hedinons
beyond the Elbe; the second into Pannonia to make head against the Sclavonians,
for they molested the Huns very much who were Subjects to the French: and the
third against the Bretons, who renouncing that obedience they had sworn to him,
had chosen themselves a King named Coenulph Machon. The Bretons and their new
King.

Charlemain being already broken with Age and Labor, the loss of his two Sons
made him more inclinable to have a Peace with the Saracens in Spain, with the
Greeks, and with the Danes. Which was the more easy to be compassed, for that
Mahumed King of the Saracens in Spain being in War with Abdella his Brother,
was the year following forced to let him have a share in the Kingdom in Greece,
Nicephorus was slain in a Battle against the Bulgarians, and Heming King of
Denmark being dead there was a Civil-War about the Succession between Sigifroy
and Amulon or Hamildon, this Nephew to Hericold, and the other to Godfrey. They
fought a bloody Battle, where both of them were slain together with Ten or
Eleven Thousand men: but Amulon's Party remaining Victorious, Secured the
Kingdom to Heriold and Rainfroy his Brothers.

Amidst the Multitude of Affairs which Charlemain had in all the three several
parts of the World, he did not forget what concerned Religion. Upon the
entreaty of Biorn King of Sweeden, he sent some Priests thither to instruct
those People in the knowledge of the Gospel, Ebon a Man of a holy life
established a Bishopric there in the City of Lincopen.

Lewis to come to the Parliament of Aix, where he had called together the
Bishops, Abbots, Dukes Emp. Leo the Armenian Michael being turned Monk An. 813.
R. 7 years and an half.
and Counts; he asked them all one by one, whether they would be pleased that
he should give him the Title of Emperor. To which all having replied, yes, he
declared him his Partner in the Empire, commanded him to go and take the Crown
which was upon the Altar, and put it himself upon his own head.

In the same Parliament he likewise declared Bernard the Son of his Son Pepin,
King of Italy, whither he had already sent him under the Conduct of Vala, or
Galon Son of Bernard his paternal Uncle.

The death of this mighty Prince was preceded with all sorts of prodigies both
in the Heavens and upon the Earth, enough to astonish even those that have but
little faith in such presages and give least Credit to them. Whilst he was
studiously employed in the Reading and the Correcting some Copies, or
Manuscripts, of the holy Bible in his Palace at Aix, a Fever seized him and
carried him out of this World the 28 th of January the Two and Seventieth year
of his Age, at the beginning of the 14 th of his Empire, and the 48 th of his
Reign. His Will and Metropolitan Churches of his Kingdoms. He was buried in the
Church of Aix la Chapelle which he had erected*

Capitulary's is a name that extends to all sorts of constitutions, as well
ecclesiastical as civil, or political, etc.
He caused all the Laws and Customs of the several Nations under his Empire to
be digested in writing, contrived several Capitulary's or Ordinances, he
Collected all the ancient Poetry that contained the brave Acts of the French,
to serve as Memoirs for a History thereof, which he did intend to Compose. He
understood Theology so well, that he wrote himself against the Heresy of Felix
Vrgel, and about the controversy of Images. He made Speeches in their great
Assembly's, and took as much care to make his Eloquence triumphant as his Arms.
In the clearest Nights he pleased himself in the Observations of the Spheres
and Planets; whereof there are many curious things in his Annals, which it is
believed were made by himself. To illustrate his Language, which was the Dutch,
he brought it under Rules and made the Grammar, and assigned names for all the
Months in that Tongue, as likewise for every Wind, such as for the most part
are retained to this very day.

In fine, hitherto no King of France has had a life and Reign so long and so
Illustrious, nor a Kingdom of so large extent as he. His Fame would be without
blemish, as it is beyond parallel, had he not been too much given up to Women,
and too indulgent toward his Mistresses and his Daughters in their carriage.

He had at least Three lawful Wives, Hermengard Daughter of Didier King of the
Lombards whom he repudiated the second year, Hildegard Daughter of Childebrand
Duke of Suabia, and Fastrade Daughter of one Count Rodolph. The last brought
him no Children: but Hildegard had Nine, Four Sons, and Five Daughters. The
Sons were Charles, Pepin, Lewis, and Lotaire; these two last were Twynns.
Lotaire dyed young, Charles and Pepin fell in the strength of their Age. Louis
reaped alone the whole Succession of his Father. The Daughters were named,
Rotrude who was promised to the young Emperor Constantine, Son of Leo the III.
and Irene, she dyed when Marriageable: Berte who espoused Count Angilbert
afterward Abbot of St. Riquier, Gisele who became a Nun, and Hildegard and
Adelelaid who dyed in infancy.

Neither the number or names of his Mistresses are set down, who were not few:
but amongst his Bastards there is mentioned Pepin the Crook-back, Hugo Duke of
Burgundy, called the Great Abbot, Dreux Bishop of Mets; and amongst Seven or
Eight Daughters, Tetrade Abbess of Argentuil, Euphrasia Abbess of Saint
Laurence of Bourges, and Hildetrude who became scandalous in her Fathers House,
by her actions.

The church in the 8th Century.
The Gallican Church had never yet been in so great disorder as toward the
latter end of the Seventh Age or Century, and to the middle of the Eighth, and
indeed they were above Sixty Years without any Council. Nevertheless they had
happily enough preserved their Temporal Estates under Pepin the young, who was
a liberal and religious Prince; but Charles Martel his Son had not the same
countenance, nor showed the same respect as he had done. Many Prelates of
Neustria and Burgundy, having favored Rainfroys Party, gave him an occasion to
squeeze them; and the Wars he had against the Saracens, furnished him with a
pretense of taking away the riches of the Altars to defend them.

In some Countries he gave the Abbeys and Bishoprics to Laymen, who instead
of keeping Clergymen, maintained Soldiers: In others he took away their Lands
and Tithes, and distributed them amongst his Warriors. The Priests and Monks
that mixed with them laid down their Psalters to take up the Sword, some out of
pure licentiousness, others to get a livelihood; For the same reason the
Bishops and Abbots turned Soldiers and were made Captains. The whole Clergy was
in extreme disorder, the most of them had Concubines, there were some Deacons
known to have at least Four or Five in keeping. The least debauched married
Wives and proceeded even to second Marriages. The Nuns neither kept their
Cloisters, nor their Vows. In fine, there was no rule, no obedience of
Inferiors toward their Superiors, little Divine Service, no Study, and great
ignorance in things of Religion, and the Holy Canons.

This disorder gave opportunity to Boniface a Man very Illustrious in those
days, as well for his exemplary Life, as his Activity and Zeal to strengthen
himself with the Authority of the Pope, that he might apply some Remedy. He was
an Englishman by birth, who by a particular inspiration, and emulation of
diverse holy men of the same Robe had gone from his Monastery, to sow the Seed
of the Gospel amongst the barbarous Nations in Germany, especially the Frisiae,
the Turingi and the Catti, and had devoted his Service to the Pope so strictly
and entirely, as to change his English name which was Vinfred or Winifred, to
that of Boniface: he had been first made Bishop by Gregory the II, then
Archbishop by Gregory the III, and by him not only honored with the Pall, but
also with the Title of his Vicar. In this quality he divided Bavaria, where
there was but one Bishopric, into Four Diocesses. This was in the Year 739.
The following Year he established Three in Germany, one at Wirtsburgh, another
at Buraburgh, and the third at Herpsford. These two last held not this honor
long. But the Pope, together with the Title of Vicar had given him power to
call Councils and to make Bishops in those Countries which he had Converted to
the Faith, with Letters of Recommendation to those People, and to Charles
Martel, praying him to take him into his protection, which he did; as likewise
an Order to the Bishops of Bavaria and Germany to assemble together when he
should call them, as being his Vicar.

Now Prince Carloman having declared he would restore the Ecclesiastical
Discipline, Boniface embraced that work with much willingness; and as he was
active and indefatigable, he advanced apace, but not indeed without somewhat
diminishing the Liberty and the Dignity of the Gallican Church to the advantage
of the Popes.

At his instance Carloman held a Council in Germany (the place is not
mentioned) where he assisted with the Grandees of his Kingdom, and the Year
after another at the Royal Palace of Leptines or Estines, just against Bincks
in Hanault, which confirmed the Acts of the former. Pepin likewise Convocated
one at Soissons An. 754. and subscribed it with three of the Great Men of his
Country's, perhaps there might be one belonging to Neustria, one to Burgundy,
and one to Aquitain. In all these Councils Boniface presided in quality of
Legate from the Holy Chair. And in the first the Clergy Signed a Profession in
writing, which obliged them not only to keep the Catholic Faith, but likewise
to remain in Unity, subject and obedient to the Roman Church, and Saint Peter's
Vicar: which being carried to Rome and laid upon the Tomb of that Prince of the
Apostles, was received with huge joy by Pope Zachary, and not without reason.
Thus there, as upon all other occasions, he contrived things so, that all made
still more and more for the Popes Severaignty, and tended chiefly to that end.

As to the Discipline, it was resolved that the Bishops should be readmitted
to their Sees, the Churches to the enjoyment of their Goods, and the Clergy to
their Rules: but the two first particulars were not brought to pass till the
time of Charlemain. The Canons which they made were principally to prohibit the
Clergy from bearing Arms, or going in the habit and garb of Soldiers; and yet
the Bishops could not be excused from going to their Wars and Armies, till
Charlemain exempted them by a particular Capitulary: to take away their Wives
and Concubines, to hinder and prevent Incests and Adulteries, the punishment
whereof was left to the Bishops, and also to abolish and root up the remainders
of Pagan Superstition. The Religious of both Sexes, were enjoined to walk by
the Rule of Saint Bennet which Wilfred Bishop of York had set up and caused to
be observed in England. Till that time the Rules of Saint Colomban and Saint
Cesarius of Arles, amongst many others, had born the greatest Vogue in France.

At the Council of Soissons were two men Condemned, who were Consecrated, but
without any See, Adelbert a Gaul, and Clement of the Scotch Nation. The first
was an Hypocrite and Frantic, rather then an Heretic, he made the ignorant
people follow him, as having a particular Spirit of God, built Oratory's, and
set up Crosses near Fountains, in Woods, and the midst of open Fields. The
other Preached diverse Errors, maintaining that Jesus Christ descending into
Hell, Redeemed Pagans as well as the Faithful, that they ought according to the
Jewish Custom, to marry their Brothers Widow, and that which appeared more
horrible, he would needs keep his Wife, and wear his Mitre at the same time.

At Leptines, Carloman caused it to be ordained, with the Consent of the Clergy
either voluntary or extorted, that to carry on the War which he had on every
side of him, he might take part of the Lands belonging to the Church, and
bestow it during pleasure, or while that necessity lasted on his followers, who
for every Mansion or House, should pay only a Crown in Gold, or twelve Deniers
in Silver, and the Ninths or Tenths toward the reparation of the buildings,
and that such as held these Precaires, or Leases during pleasure, happening to
dye, the Prince should give it to any other upon the like conditions.

In the Year 779. Charlemain made an Edict; wherein he ordains that such as
held those Lands should pay the Nones and the Tithes to the Church. But
moderates the Tax or Quit-Rent to a Sol for Fifty Manses, and half a Sol for
Thirty. Besides the Council of Francfort, and Lewis the Debonnaire in his Edict
of 828. Charges the Possessours with the Reparation of Churches. This was the
beginning of the Alienation of those Lands, by public Act and Authorized by
Law. There are some that maintain that those Kings did not only invest the
Laity with these Church Lands, but the Tithes, and all the Rights and Revenues
of the Altar, as the first fruits, oblations, distributions for Missa cantania.
Masses and other Prayers, and even with the right of putting in Priests,
whence say they is derived the gifts and presentations claimed and exercised by
many Lords in diverse Churches: Hence they are called Patrons; a name found in
the Council of Rheims held Anno 878.

It had been ordained in the Council of Soissons, that thenceforward a Council
should be held there every year to stifle and suppress disorders, and heresies
at their first birth. Likewise Pepin called one at the Royal Palace of Verberie
Anno 752. where he would assist in person, one at Mets the year following, one
at Vernon upon the Seine two years after, one at Compiegn about the same
distance of time, and one at Gentilly right against Paris Anno 767. We have the
Canons of the first four: but nothing of that at Gentilly, unless the two
questions they propounded: to wit, Whether the Holy Ghost proceeded from the
Father and the Son, which the Greeks denied, and whether we ought to adore
Images.

We may almost put in the Rank of Councils the Conventus or Assemblies which
the Kings often held, as that of Duria in 760. that of Neures, of Worms,
Attigny, Orleance, and Saint Denis, which were held successively from the year
763. to 768. In all which the Lords being joined with the Bishops, they
ordained such things as concerned the Polity and Government of the Church, as
well as what concerned the Temporal and Government of the Kingdom. Of the
decisions of Councils, and the Ordinances made in those Assemblies, partly
Politic and partly Ecclesiastical, were Composed those Laws which are called
Capitulary, the best and most holy that any Nation has had since the Roman Law.

Never Prince had more affection for the Honor and the Discipline of the
Church then Charlemain; There hardly passed any year in all his life but there
were either some of these Assemblies or Councils for that purpose. I will not
quote the years of the Councils held at Worms, (which were Five) at
Valenciennes, Geneva, Duren and other places, because we have only the names.
But that of Frankford is very considerable. It might be called the Western
Council: for the Bishops of the greatest part of Italy, with those of Germany
and those of Gall, were there. It was called and appointed by Charlemain, who
it seems presided in it, at least he reasoned and argued very learnedly against
the Errors of Elipand, of Toledo, and Felix d'Urgel, who taught that Jesus
Christ was the adopted Son of God the Father according to the Flesh. Those
whimseys were Condemned, and that Great King refuted them, in a long Letter
which he wrote to the Bishops in Spain, very amply and very learnedly.

They also discussed the questions about Images. The Council of Nice had
ordained that they should be retained in the Churches and adored. In France
they would have them allowed to be set up in Churches as things proper to
instruct the people, but not to be adored. Wherefore the Fathers in this
Western Council Assembled, disdaining to acknowledge that for Oecumenick
rejected that Adoration in all respects and manners, and condemned it by common
consent; and Charlemain wrote a Book to oppose it, to which Pope Adrian made a
reply.

There remains nothing of that of Aix la Chapelle held in 809. but that the
question concerning the Procession of the Holy Ghost was again debated, and no
doubt but they agreed, That the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father and the
Son; For the French believed that so firmly, that it was the cause of having it
added as an express Clause in the Symbol Qui ex Patre Filioque procedit.
of Faith or Creed. The last year of his life, he Convocated Six, at Arles, at
Ments, at Reims, at Towrs and at Chaalons on the Soan, of all which the Canons
are still to be found. Thus the Church of France could not miss the being
reformed, and Pope Adrian would needs contribute toward it by giving several
Reglements to Charlemain, drawn from the Councils of the Greek and Latin
Churches, and the Papal degrees, which he sent to him in the Year 789, by
Ingilram Bishop of Mets.

The Ecclesiastiques had their particular Judges for their Lands, where the
Kings Judges had no inspection neither for things Civil nor Criminal, and as
for their persons, they were judged by none but of their own Body. Now it was
almost impossible to Convict them, for mean and reproachful people were not
admitted to accuse them; and there were to be Seventy and Two Witnesses to
Convict a Bishop, Forty for a Priest, Thirty Seven for a Deacon, and Seven for
others of inferior degree, all without exceptions, and if they were of the
Laity, only such as had Wife and Children. This last condition was required in
all sorts of Testimonies, at least in matters Criminal.

Charlemain excessively increased the power of the Bishops, by renewing in all
his Dominions the Law of Constantine the Great, quoted in the Sixteenth Book of
the Theodosian Code, which allows of one of the parties pleading before a
Secular Judge, to bring the Cause before the Bishops, and leave it to their
Arbitration without Appeal, though the other party does not consent thereunto.
Which would have still continued perhaps, had they not corrupted the effects of
so holy a Law by infinite deceits, and by appeals to the Metropolitan, and from
thence to the Court of Rome, against the express terms of it.

It was in the Eight Century that the Metropolitans commonly took up the Title
of Archbishops; for there are none mentioned in the foregoing. Those that
subscribed the Council of Chaalons, and to the immunity of the Abbey of Saint
Denis had not this Title as yet.

Toward the end of the same Age, or about the beginning of the Ninth, began
the Devotion and Pilgrimages to Saint Jacques, St. Jago.
or James, the Great in Gallieia. This Apostle suffered Martyrdom at Jerusalem,
however his body was immediately carried into Spain, and being hid in the times
of the Pagan Persecution, Sancta Maria finis terr*
was not found out again till about that time by the Bishop of Iria, near
Compostella, where King Alphonsus built him a Church, at the recommendation of
Charlemain, Pope Leo transferred thither the Episcopal See of Iria, and Two
Hundred years afterward Pope Calistus II. the Metropolis of Merida.

We find by the Ecclesiastical Capitulary's of Charlemain, that there were
besides some Chore Bishops.
Chorevesques, and although they were only the Successors of the Seventy
Disciples, they pretended nevertheless to do all Functions of Bishops, who were
Successors to the Apostles. There were endeavors for Five or Six Hundred Years
together used to bring them to the just bounds they ought to have kept (it were
difficult to describe it) and in the end, it was found much more easy to
abolish, then to regulate them.

The ignorance amongst the Bishops was amazing, since they were enjoined even
to learn to understand the Lords-Prayer, and Charlemain after so great a
reformation had much ado to bring them only to make some little kind of
exhortations to the People*

To dissipate these Clouds of Darkness, it was ordained there should be Schools
in the Bishoprics and the Abbeys: but they only taught the Psalter, Music, to
Compose, and Grammar. I find one Capitulary that enjoins them to send their
Children to study Physic, it does not mention at what place.

Under so ignorant a Prelacy the People could not but be blockish, unpolished
and very illiterate, all their Religion was turned into Superstition; and there
were a great many Soothsayers, Enchanters, Who raised Storms and Tempe^s at
their Vintage and Harvest time.
Tempestaries, and other such infamous Sorcerers, who were very wicked, because
they thought themselves such, or would have others believe so.

We must not wonder if amidst such gross Ignorance, even the very Women would
needs Usurp a Power in the Church. There were some Abbesses so vain, without
doubt because many of them were of great Families as to give their blessing to
people with the sign of the Cross, and Vail some Virgins with the Sacerdotal
Authority.

Likewise the better to reform the Clergy, it was ordained that they should
live by Rules and in common. The superiors of those Communities were called
Abbots, and they Chanons, which is to say, Regulars.

In those very times there were found to be certain Amphibies, if I may so say;
Who put on the habit of the Religious, and yet would neither be Monks nor
Priests. It was said they should be compelled to one of the two Professions, it
being fit they should make their choice to be either one or other.

The Covetousness of the Clergy was not less apparent then their ignorance, all
the Councils from the Fifth Century, and all the Capitulary's are full of Rules
and Orders to Tie them up from Selling of Holy Things. They took Money for
Ordinations, for Visits, for the Crisme, for Baptising, for Preaching, for
Confirmation, and for every thing.

People of servile condition were not admitted to Orders: which we should have
noted before. If such had been admitted their Masters had power to disband and
turn them out of that sacred Militia, and bring them back to the Slavery and
Chains of their former mean condition. Even the Freemen could not be admitted
to enter into Orders, or into a Monastery without Letters from the King,
because many were otherwise apt to creep in, either out of base Cowardice as
afraid to serve in the Wars, or for want of understanding, being seduced
thereto by such as had a mind to get their Wealth and Estates from them.

Because the Archdeacons managed the Alms and Offerings, the Laity would
needs get that preferment; and this abuse had been introduced in the former
Ages. Whatever Orders Pepin could make, they still held the most part of the
Abbeys and Bishoprics, and enjoyed the Revenue, allowing but a small portion
thereof to the Bishops and Abbots. Charlemain did almost quite root out this
abuse, and restored the liberty of Elections, at least his Capitularies bear
it: however History makes mention that he often named and recommended people to
Benefices.

Tithes were become obligatory, so that such were excommunicated who did refuse
to pay them after three admonitions: and it was even exacted upon the increase
of Cattle. Pious Donatives were not restrained, unless by one Law, which
prohibited the Church from receiving any which disinherited Children and the
next of Kin.

Charlemain had a very great care of the poor. Of every thing that was bestowed
upon the Church, there was Two Thirds alloted for them, the other third only
being for the Clergy, unless in some places where they were richest they shared
them equally, afterward they made the Division in Four parts, one for the
Bishop, one for the Clerks, one for the Poor, and one for Repairs.

The practice of public Penance and Absolutions, was almost the same as in
the Former Ages, I mean the third and fourth, as well as that of Baptism,
which was performed by dipping or plunging, not by throwing on or sprinkling of
the Bishop, or the Priest, and this was only done at Easter and Whitsuntide,
unless upon urgent occasions.

The prayers for the dead were very frequent. Singing made up a great part of
their Study and Employment, not only amongst the Clergy, but the Nobility also
that were very devout. The French had brought this Passion toward Music from
Rome. Bells grew also mighty common, but they did not make any very great ones.
The Churches as well as most of their other Buildings, were almost all of Wood.
It was ordained that the Altars should be made of Stone.

The Bishops and Abbesses had their Judge of a Bishops Temporal Jurisdiction.
Vidames, the Abbots their Advoyers or Advocates; some Cities likewise had the
same. They were as their Proctors or Administrators, in whose names all things
were transacted, and who Treated and Pleaded every where for them. Every
Bishop, Abbot and Count, had his Notary. Excommunications were so frequent as
they even became an abuse. The person Excommunicated was Treated with great
rigor, no body would keep any Commerce or Conversation with them.

The Gallican Church had not extended the degrees prohibited in Marriage but to
the Fourth, in which Case it self they did not separate them, being satisfied
with imposing a Penance on both the Parties: but the Popes extended it to the
Seventh; and Gregory the II desired it might reach as far as any thing of
parentage or kindred could be made out between the parties. But if so, it being
notorious to Christians that all Mankind are of Kin in Adam, to whom should
they marry? They likewise established the degrees of Spiritual Affinity between
the Godfather and Godmother, and between the Godson and his Godmother, as well
in Baptism as at Confirmation.

Saints.
Notwithstanding the Corruptions we have noted, the Church was not without her
great Lights and Ornaments, I mean a good number of Holy Men, and some that
were not Ignorant. Amongst the Bishops Sylvin de Toulouze, Wlfrain de Sens, who
renounced the Miter to go and Preach the Faith in Frisiae, where he Converted
Ratbod the II, Son of that King of the same name, who was so obstinate a
defender of Idolatry. Rigobert de Reims who was driven from his Seat by Martel.
Gregory of Vtrecht who was the Apostle of the Turingians, and the Countries
adjacent to Dorestat. Corbinien Native of Chastres under Montlehery near Paris,
who was the first Bishop of Frisinghen in Bavaria; as Suidbert the first of
Verden, Immeran of Ratisbon who was a Poitevin by birth: Eucher d'Orleans, who
was banished by Martel, and lived a good while after him, as appears by the
revelation he had how it fared with Martel after his death, as has been
observed in the life of Martel, if that were true. Gombert held the Bishopric
of Sens, and then retired to the solitude of the Vosge, Lohier Lotarius.
that of Sees, and after him Godegrand, doubly remarkable, both for his own
Virtue, and for his Sisters Saint Opportune, who took upon her the Vows of
Virginity, and listed many more into her Muster-Roll, of whom she had the
Gonduct. But above all Boniface of Ments was eminent, whom we have mentioned;
he suffered Martyrdom An. 754. amongst the Frisons; He was Founder of* the
Great Abbey of Fulda, in the Forest of Buken, the most Noble of all that are
in Germany.

In the monasterial retirements, we observe two Fulrads or Volrads, the one
Abbot of Saint Denis, however a little too much taken up with Court Affairs and
Negociations for one that is dedicated entirely to God, the other Cousin to
King Charlemain, and Abbot of Saint Quentin. Adelard of the same degree of
parentage to the same King, who withdrew from Court for the reasons we have
before noted, and was Abbot of Corbie, and from thence recalled into the Kings
Council. Angilbert who exchanged the favor of Charlemain, one of whose natural
Daughters he had married, for the austerity of the Monastery, and was Abbot of
Centule St. Riquier.
Pirmin, who is said to have quitted the Bishopric of Meaux, and who having
retired himself into a solitary place in Germany, built there that Celebrated
Abbey of Riche-Nowe, Augia Dives, and Nine or Ten other Monasteries in those
parts and in Alsatia; and the learned Alcuin to whom Charlemain gave the Abbey
of Tours in recompense of those inestimable Treasures of Learning and Science
he brought into France, with Claud and John the Scotsman.

Manners and Customs under the Second Race.
A great part of the Manners and Customs we described under the First Race
were preserved under the Second. All the great Offices of the Kings House were
still the same, unless the Maire of the Palace, in whose place it seems the
grand Seneschal or Dapifer succeeded, but with much less authority, and
different Functions. Hincmar sets down an Apocrisiaire, a Count of the Palace,
a great Camerier or Chamberlain, three Ministerial Officers, to wit, the
Seneschal, the Butler, and the Count of the Stable, one Mansionary, that is,
grand Marshall of the House, Four Huntsmen, and one Faulc'ner. The King had
ever a Council of State, in his Train, consisting of men chosen out of the
Clergy and Nobility. The Apocrisiary assisted in it, when he pleased, the other
great Officers never went but as they were sent for.

Those of the Clergy had a place apart to meet in, where they treated of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, as the Nobility treated of matters purely Temporal; and
when there was any thing of a mixed nature, they joined all together to
determine it.

In the Militia and Courts of Justice we hardly meet now with any Dukes, but
only Earls; some of whom were called Marquesses, when the Care and Guarding of
the Marches was committed to them, which ordinarily was in the new Conquered
Countries: others were called Abbots, either because they possessed the Revenue
of the Abbeys, or because they commanded some certain Company's near the King,
and taught them their Discipline and Exercise, the Grandees were called
Princes, and we have light enough even in those dark times to see, that it was
not in the power of the King to disseize them, nor put them to death but by
certain Forms and Rules, and the Judgment of their Peers and Equals where he
presided, or in their general Assemblies.

I find three sorts of great Assemblies, the general Pleas of the Provinces;
the May-Assembly whither came the Seniores and Majores natu of the French
people, there they chiefly consulted about Warlike Affairs; and the Conventus,
Colloquia, Parliaments where met together, the Bishops, Abbots, Counts, and
other Grandees, consider of Laws and Rules for their Policy, Justice and the
Treasury, as well as the Discipline of the Militia both sacred and profane.
The two last kinds of Assembles were after confounded in one.

The Kings had ever made use of Envoyez or Intendan, of Justice. But Charlenain
made them ordinary; and I observe that there were Intendances fixed and
prpetual, but no Intendants that were so. Neither do I find that they hadany i^
Aquitain nor in Lombardy. He most commonly joined in such Commissions (...)
Count and a Bishop. Seldom do we find two of either of these qualities joynd in
the same Commission; they were called Missi Dominici, and their Jurisdicton
Missaticum. The People found them Lodging and a certain quantity of Proision;
They took care chiefly to publish the Kings Orders and put them in Excution, to
hear the Peoples Complaints and do them right, to punish the Cont or Bishop if
they were faulty, to reform and reverse unjust Judgments, and co^pel the
refractory to obey. And if they wanted strength or power to effect it, hey gave
notice to the King. They likewise drew up into Writings and D^ds such Grants of
Lands as the King and the Church bestowed in Benefice. They roe their Circuits
Four times a Year, in January, April, July and October. They co^d not keep
Courts but in those Months, and in Four different places if they th^ght fit;
They summoned the Counts, and were forced to let them hold al^the rest. They
Elected Sheriffs with the consent of the people, as also A^oyers and Notary's.
The Sheriffs were, if I mistake not, the Assessours of the C^nts.

those that were Freemen were only obliged to be at Four Assizes or Pleadings
a ^ar. This was a most Christian Method that the cause of the Poor was the
fir^of all determined, the Kings business next, then what belonged to the
Church, and last of all that which concerned the People in general. The
Centenier had not power of Condemning to death. The King gave Audience one day
in every Week, before whom were brought only such Causes as concerned the
Grandees who had no other Judge but himself, or such whom the Commissioners or
Counts had refused to do Justice to, or had adjudged contrary to Law.

The licentiousness in times of War had made most part of the Frenchmen turn
Thieves and Robbers, and some of them false Coyners. The greatest difficulties
the Judges met withal were to suppress these disorders. Those that made
counterfeit Money had their hand cut off, the other accomplices escaped only
with a Whipping. They were forced to reduce all their Money to one sort of
species, and to punish such as harbored a Thief with the same severity as the
Thief himself; and that was the loss of an Eye for the first fault, the loss of
the Nose for the second, and the third cost them their life.

Even in those days drunkenness was very frequent, particularly in the Armies,
since they were fain to punish such as forced another to drink, and he that
made himself drunk was Excommunicated and Condemned to the Penance of drinking
Water only, for a certain time.

The Law permitting every one to take his own satisfaction or revenge for an
affront or injury, unless he chose rather to accept of a certain Sum of Money
Taxed by Law, Murders were very frequent. Charlemain Commanded the Judges to
be very careful in agreeing such as had any thing of a quarrel, and if any
appeared too obstinate to bring them before him.

There was three sorts of restraint, the one was imprisonment, another was a
Guard set upon them, the third was bail or caution who obliged themselves to
answer for the Parties.

Homicide committed on a Clergyman cost them much dearer, then upon any other
of equal condition; for they were to pay 800 Sols of Gold for killing a Bishop,
600 for murdering a Priest, 400 for a Deacon, and as much for a Monk.

Clovis. They had as much Cavalry as Infantry almost; and they used great
Lances Used amongst the Moroccans to this day.
which they darted, or retained in their hands after they had struck their
blow. They were Armed Cap a Pie, their very Horse were barded, so that a
Squadron seemed to be all of Iron. The Infantry had no Cuirasses on Armor, but
covered themselves admirably well with their Bucklers. They also began to learn
the use of Engines in some Sieges.

Whoever deserted the Army without leave incurred Capital Punishment. Every one
was obliged to carry Three Months Provision, and Arms and Cloat^s for Six, to
be reckoned from the time they went beyond the Marches or Lim^ts of their own
Country. This when they came from Aquitain hitherward wa the Loire; to those
that went thence into Spain, it was the Pyrrenean: to those of Neustria, when
they made War on Germany, it was the Rhine, and to those in the Provinces
beyond that River, when they were to march far into Germany it was the Elbe,
which were thus set as their Limits, or Frontiers. The Solders were allowed to
take nothing but in an Enemies Country. Those Lords tat led them were
responsable for their pilfering, and they were disbanded presenly in the Field
if they did not justly punish them. When the Captains cameo Court they were
presented with some Gifts or Regalia; and it was the Queen^d the care and
charge of such distributions, or in her absence the grand Chambriar ^
Chamberlain.

Though the Demeasnes of the King and those of the Church were inalierble, they
had been necessitated either to reward such as had served them, or to ^tain
such as could do them mischief, to bestow upon several, but it was ^ly for life
and by title of gratification; wherefore they were called Benefi^, which term
remains only in the Church. Which had of two sorts, the onef such Goods as are
effected to such as deserve, which at the present we call a Be^fice, and the
other certain Lands which they gave to Seculars, to hold of (...) during Life.
There were even in those times Arts and crafty ways to confound the demeasnes
of the Crown with the Lands of particular People; and this substraction was
accounted for a Crime, since it was punished with Banishment and Confiscation
of Goods.

There were besides another sort of Lands, which were called Dominicates,
appropriated to Dominus which was the King, but which were Rented by particular
Men, at about the Ninth Nona.
of the Profits. These were ordinarily only some little Farms or petty
Portions of Lands perhaps lopped off from the greater ones belonging to the
Crown, which could not all be set to the most advantage.

The Levying of Moneys was of three sorts, either by Poll, or upon the fruits
and growth of the Earth, or Merchandise and Goods for Traffic; But of the
last kind, the Carlovinian Princes took none but of the Trading Merchants. For
every one besides sent his Goods up and down in Carts or any other ways for his
own Families use without paying the least Toll, no more then those that
supplied the Kings Household, or even those that went to the Wars.

We may again in some other place, according as occasion requires, take a
summary Notice of certain Laws and Usages practiced in the time of the
Carlovinian Race.


CALLED Debonnaire, is Courteous, Affable, Meek, Gentle, Mild, Friendly, of a
sweet temper, and conversation, Pious.
Debonnaire, or Pious.
King XXIV.
POPES,
LEO III. S. 2. Tears, 4 Months, under this Reign. STEPHANUS V. Elect. in June,
816. S. 7 Months. PASCAL I. elect. January 817. S. 7 Tears, 3. Months and a
half. EUGENIUS II. Elect. in 824. S. 3. Tears, 3 Months. VALENTINE, Eect. in
827. S. 40 Days. GREGORY IV. Elect. in September 827. S. 16 Tears, whereof 13
under this Reign.
Lewis I. Called the Debonnaire, Emperor and King of France, Aged about 35
Years. Bernard his Nephew, King of Italy, Aged 16 Years.

Empp. Leo the Armenian, And Louis I. Called the Debonnaire.
to that which is to succeed, it was to be feared there might be some Faction
in that of Charlemain which would oppose the advancement of Lewis. He
particularly dreaded Walla an undertaking person, who being a Prince of the
Blood, and one that had a great hand in the management of his Fathers Affairs,
might have aspired to the Succession, or have called in Bernard King of Italy
who was the Elder Brothers Son; and he might likewise have been incited thereto
by the Daughters and Mistresses of Charlemain, who were confederated against
Lewis, because he would reform their disorders.

The Forces he brought from Aquitain, and which he gathered up in his way
dispersed the whole Faction, if any such were: Walla comes to him upon his
Summons with an entire submission, and all the French Nobility made haste to go
and meet him. He had a very great mind to purge the Court from Scandal, and to
that end had Commanded Count Garnier to seize upon two Lords Odille and Tulle:
who lived too familiarly with his Sisters. The first of these had the impudence
to find out Garnier and murder him, but he was cut in pieces on the place, and
the Emperor enraged at his insolence caused the eyes of Tulle to be put out.

After he had celebrated the Funeral of his Father, and divided the Goods with
his Brothers and Sisters, he thrust out of the Court all those Women who were
there only upon pleasure, and sent his Sisters to remain in those Abbeys which
Charlemain had bestowed upon them.

Constantinople, returned home in Company with some who came from the Emperor
Leo, and brought with them a Treaty of Peace betwixt the two Emperors. He sent
Lothaire the eldest of his Three Sons into Bavaria, and Pepin into Aquitain,
but retained Pepin at Court with himself, because he was as yet too young.

Grimoald Duke of Benevent surrendered his Duchy into his hands, that he might
receive it again and hold it from him, upon condition of a yearly Tribute of
Seven Thousand Crowns of Gold. Bernard King of Italy in obedience to his
Command, came to wait on him, acknowledged himself his Vassal, and gave him
Oath of Fidelity. He could not require this in quality of Emperor, nor as the
first of the Family: It must be, in my opinion, that Charlemain had given it to
Bernard, upon condition that he should hold it of his Uncle.

Godfrey who had sheltred themselves in Sweden being returned to Denmark with
their Friends, had given Battle to Heriold and Reginf^oy, where the last was
slain, but the others obtained the Victory. Heriold driven out of his Country
came to Louis to implore his Assistance, and became his Vassal.

The French Counts who Commanded in Saxony, with the Abrodites, had orders to
restore him again. They passed the River Egid with a potent Army. The Sons of
Godfrey raised one more numerous, and withal a Fleet of Two Hundred Sail: but
keeping themselves at Sea near an Island about Three Leagues from the Shore,
the French could do no other mischief but only scowre and plunder the Country.

Abulaz King of the Moors or Saracens in Spain; but that Prince being dead, and
the Moors still pillaging the Coasts of Italy and its Islands, the Deputies of
Calara in Sardinia obliged the Emperor to break it.

Romans having Conspired against Pope Leo, he put some to death by his own
Authority. The Emperor took those proceedings very ill as being contrary to his
natural Clemency, and his Sovereignty over the City of Rome. He ordered Bernard
King of Italy to go thither and inform himself of the full truth and
particulars, which he did; the Pope on his part, sent his Legates into France
to clear himself there: but the Romans were so dissatisfied at that cruelty,
that Leo being fallen sick, they did not only seize upon those Lands he had
Usurped from them, but likewise ransacked his Castles in the Country. Bernard
was forced to send Vinigise Duke of Spoleta with an Army, to appease the
Tumult. He took some of the most active and leading Mutineers and sent them
into France.

Sorabes having rebelled were reduced, after the taking their best Hold, by an
Army of Austrasian, French and Saxons. The Gascons a giddy People, had also
taken the Field, because their Count named Seguin was taken from them, who had
showed himself disobedient to the Emperor: They were punished for their
insolence by the loss of two Battles, and compelled to renounce him whom they
had Elected in the room of Seguin. We must observe that Gascon^ne was divided
into a County and a Duchy, and that the County held of the Duchy, and
comprehended the Country from the Pyrene^ns to the River of Adour, so that Dags
was part of it.

Pope Leo being dead the 23 d of May, Stephen the Deacon, was put in his place
by Election of the Clergy. He waited not for the Emperors confirmation to be
Installed, to whom nevertheless he made the Romans swear fidelity and
afterward came himself to him at Reims to tender his Devoirs. The Emperor gave
order to his Nephew Bernard to accompany him as far as the Alps, where diverse
Lords attended to receive him on his behalf; and when he was gotten farther
into the Country, he found his Arch-Chaplain and Two or Three Bishops. The
Emperor staid for him at Reims, received him upon his allighting Thegan says he
prostrated himself before him, with his whole Body.
off his Horse, accompanied him to the Abbey Church of Saint Remy, which when
they entered he took him by the hand to help him. The French Clergy sung the Te
Deum, and the Romans made loud acclamations in the Emperors praise.

The Pope and the Emperor eat and drank some consecrated Bread and Wine
together; then the Emperor retired to the City, and left him to lodge in the
Abbey. They entertained each other with Feasting, and gave mutual Presents: the
Emperor began, and the Sunday following the Pope Crowned both him and the
Empress Hermengarde, having purposely brought with him two gold Crowns: that
for the Emperor was set all over with Jewels and Stones, the other being plain
Gold without other Ornament.

Leo went out of France, he died at Rome the 25 th of January An. 817, a nd the
Clergy Elected Paschal: this man knowing the softness of the Emperor, durst
likewise take his Seat in the Pontificial Chair without waiting for his
consent; and yet excused it to him by an Ambassador sent expressly. Though the
Emperor was not very well pleased, yet he did what was required for his
Confirmation: But he reproved the Romans, and admonished them never to fall
upon such an attempt again. And yet if we believe the Partisans of the Court of
Rome, Paschal wrought so far upon the Emperor that he yielded up his right of
confirming Popes.

The Sons of Godfrey demanded Peace of the Emperor: It was taken to be only
Heriold. Upon the demand of the Grecian Emperors Ambassadors, who were come for
that purpose, Louis dispatched a Deputy to settle the Limits of Dalmatia
between the two Emperors, together with Cadolac who commanded for him in those
Marches, and the Sclavonians that had some interest.

th of February, during an Eclipse of the Moon, a Comet began to appear in the
Sign of Sagittary.

Holy-Thursday, as the Emperor was coming out of the Church belonging to his
Palace, a Gallery fell down under him, twenty persons of Quality were hurt; but
it proved to have more of fear then danger, for their bruises and broken-shinns
were soon healed.

It seemed Louis was Born rather for the Church, then for the World; For as he
behaved himself he would have proved a better Abbot or a Bishop, then a King.
Besides his perpetual exercise in Devotion) (which does not always suit with
the Activity of Government) he busied himself very much about the reformation
of the Clergy; Amongst other things in the Assembly at Aix la Chapelle, he
caused a Rule to be made for the Chanons, drawn from the Writings of the
Holy-Fathers, commanded the Benedictins to observe theirs, sent Commissary's
into the Provinces to prevent the Simony, Luxury and Pride, with such other
like abuses of the Churchmen, and obliged the Bishops, in Fine, to Reform at
least in outward appearance, and throw aside their Belts, and Embroid'red
Girdles, their Daggers with Hilts beset with Jewels, and gingling Spurs; which
drew upon him the hatred of the Churchmen, amongst whom the Greatest number
were the worst.

In this assembly he Associated Lotaire his Eldest Son in the Empire, and gave
Aquitain to Pepin, and Bavaria to Louis, both with the Titles of Kingdoms.
Tegan Chorevesque of Treves has written that he designed Lotaire his Eldest to
be Sole Heir; whether he did it before or after this partition, it was a great
weakness.

Louis the Debonnatre, Emperor and King of France, Eastern and Western.
Lotatre, King of Italy, and Associate in the Empire. Pepin, King of Aquitain.
Louis, King of Bavaria.

To this place they brought him intelligence of the defection of the Abodrites,
and the conspiracy of Bernard King of Italy: both the attempts of the one and
the other were suppressed and stifled in their Birth. Bernard a young Prince
had suffered himself to be possessed with an opinion that he could dethrone his
Uncle. This counsel came from the very Court of France, where he had diverse
abettors, who without all doubt persuaded him that all the Kingdom was his,
belonging to him as Son to the Eldest. His design was discovered before he had
time to take his measures: the Forces to whom he had committed the defense or
keeping of the passages to the Alps, abandoned them upon the first notice of
the March of the Emperors Army, and those that first set him upon this
business, were the first that forsook him. In this distress he took the most
dangerous counsel, which made him come himself to Chaalons, and fall down at
his Feet begging his pardon. This hindered not his being made a Prisoner,
together with all those Lords that were in his Train.

The Emperor being returned to Aix la Chapelle caused their process to be made:
The Seculars were all condemned to Death: The Bishops, amongst whom was
Theodulfe d'Orleans, degraded and consined to a Monastery. Some of the first
suffered the rigor of the Sentence, others had their eyes put out, whereof two
of the most Eminent died, and Bernard himself lost his life within three days
after. Whoever disturb the Peace of a Nation deserves death; but it was too
extreme a rigor toward a young Prince of nineteen years, and an Uncle toward
his Nephew. And indeed Louis had great remorse all his life, nor did the French
forgive him that cruelty.

Bernard left but one Son named Pepin, and at his age, he could scarce have any
more, at least Legitimate. This same begat three, Bernard, Pepin, and Heribert.
From Pepin sprang The First Branch of Vermandois.

The Emperor apprehending his Bastard-Brothers, (Charlemaine had left several)
might fall into the like Conspiracies, caused them all to be shaved and thrust
into Monasteries, and sent away Adelard Abbot of Corbie, and Valla his Brother.

The Bretons had created a King called Morman or Morvan. The Emperor going
thither in Person reduced all the Country in Forty days and Morman being Slain
in his own Camp, either by his own, or by the Frenchmen, he gave them a Duke
of his own.

At this return from this Voyage he lost his Wife Hermengard. She died at
Augiers, leaving him three Sons Lotaire, Pepin and Louis.

The Abodrites were Subjects and Tributaries to the French, who nevertheless
allowed them to have a King. He whom they then had was called Sclaomir; who
having intelligence with the Enemies of France, was seized upon by the Emperors
Lieutenants, and being unable to justify himself before him, was banished, and
his Crown given to Ceadragne Son of Traciscon who had been cut off by the Danes.

Loup Centule Duke of the Gascons, guilty of the like Crime, being vanquished
in a great Battle by the French Counts, and afterward taken Prisoner, was
likewise destituted and exiled. He withdrew himself into Spain to the Court of
the King of the Asturias.

These Commotions showed enough the weakness of the Government, Liudewit Duke
of Pannonia Inferiora, who sought pretenses to revolt for grievances he
alleged to have suffered by Cadolac Duke of Friuli, threw off his Masque in
the end, and for three or four years gave a great deal of trouble to those
Lieutenants that served the Emperor in Dalmatia, Friuli and Bavaria, till at
length he was quite driven out of those Countries. The same Year, upon his
return from that expedition, Cadolac died upon the Frontiers, and Baudry
succeeded in his place.

In the general Assembly held at Aix Bera Count of Barcelonna being accused of
Treason, and thinking to justify himself by combat, fell under the Sword of his
accuser, and should have shamefully forfeited his life according to the Law,
had not the Emperor changed his Sentence of Death, for banishment.

Judith Daughter to Helpon Duke of Bavaria, so much the more a trouble to his
repose as she was Beautiful Witty and Gallant.

The Truce between the French and Saracens of Spain is broken, and the Saracens
begin to range about the Coasts of Italy, Sardinia and Corsica.

Thirteen Normand Vessels having attempted to make a descent in Flanders at the
Mouth of the Seine, went and pillaged the Island of Amboum upon the Coasts of
Poitou. So great a Mortality happened amongst Bulls and Cowes, that it almost
destroyed the whole Race of that sort of Cattle through all France.

Lotaire with Hermengard, Daughter to Count Hughes, and the year after Pepin
Empp. Michael the Stammering. and Louis.
with Engheltrude Daughter of Thietbert Earl of Matrie. Lotaire, when his
Marriage was consummate, went into Italy, where the Pope Crowned him Emperor,
and Pepin returned into Aquitaine.

We omit several minute things, as the Negotiations of Ambassadors from diverse
Princes, little exploits in War against the Abodrites, Bretons, Saracens, and
others. But it is a very memorable thing, that Louis the Debonnaire touched
with remorse for having put his Nephew to Death, and Cloistered all his
Brothers and natural Cousins against their wills, made his confession to the
Bishops, and did public Penance before all the People at the general Assembly
of Attigny. After which he gave liberty to all those he had caused to be shaven
to quit their Cloister, and recalled Valac and Adelard to be of his Council.

Charles the Bald, and with him a world of Michiefs. Which one may say had been
presaged by many terrible prodigies happening this year: an Earthquake which
shoke the Palace of Aix la Chapelle, Furious Storms which spoiled the Corn and
Fruits of the Country, a shower of huge Stones which fell together, with
Prodigious Hail, many Men and Beasts in diverse places struck with lightning, a
Girl that lived ten Months without eating, and after all these a most raging
Pestilence.

French at Rome did much incommode the Pope; He knew what Emperors he had to do
with, and sought underhand to weaken them, and to render them odious and
contemptible. It happened that Theodorus Prmicere of the Church, and Leon
Donatour his Son in Law, were killed in his House, for no other reason, but
because they had too much affection for Lotaire. He purged himself by Oath that
he had not consented to this Murder: but however he would not deliver up the
Murderers, saying they were of the Family of St. Peter: And Louis too
Debonnaire, or meek, puts up this injury, whereas he should at least have
required Justice upon them.

Eugenius II. his Successor made some satisfaction to the French, and there
were Judges established in Rome, all of the Emperors Palace, none of the Popes.

The Bretons as obstinate for their Liberty, as the Saxons for their Religion
assayed to withdraw themselves from the obedience of the French, and Elected a
Lord of their Country to command them: He was called Wihormac, or Guyormac, and
was Vicount of Leon. The Emperor being entered into the Country with three
Armies, whereof he commanded one, and his two Sons the two others, made so
great waste in the parts belonging to those Rebels, that about the end of ten
or twelve days they were glad to come and fall at his Feet, and give up the
Children of the most Noted Families for a Pawn of their Submission. The
following year the Principals, and Guyomare their Chief, came to the general
Assembly at Aix, as making up now a part of the French Monarchy. The Emperor
rewarded them all with rich Presents: but when occasion offered they made it
appear they could swallow the Bait and yet avoid the Hook.

The Peace being broken with the Saraeens of Spain, the French Earls, Guardians
of the Frontiers had in An. 822. passed the Segre, and going a great way into
the Country, brought thence very rich booty. The King of Cordona would needs
have his revenge upon Navarre, and those Neighboring Countries that were under
the French. Those People could hardly receive any assistance: For the Saracens
held Sarragossa and Huesca, which hindered the passage of any succors that
would go the lower way, I mean Catalonia: and the way through Gascony by Aspe
and Ronceveaux was very incommodious: insomuch that the Emperor could send only
the Gascons, unde r command of the Counts Ebles and Azenar or Aznar, who were
of that Country. When they had taken care to secure Pampelonna, and thought to
retreat, they found the Saracens had cut off their way back. So they were
forced to get the assistance of the People Inhabiting those Mountains to show
them some Saracens lay in Ambuscade, so that they were cut in pieces, and Ebles
sent in Triumph to Cordoiia, but Aznar set at liberty as being of Kin to some
of those false-hearted Robbers.

The Bulgarians had already signalized themselves by their Incursions into the
Territories of the Eastern Empire: The French began to know them when they came
to be their Neighbors. Omortag their King sent Ambassadors to the Emperor to
settle the Limits between the two Nations. He detained them above two years
with him, and then sent them back without any answer.

By the assistance of the French, Heriold was received in part into the Kingdom
of Denmark with the Sons of Godfrey. But those Princes out of hatred for that
he Dane. Soon after it was renewed, and Heriold forced to content himself with
the Earldom of Riusty which the Emperor had given him in Frisia.

Normands Scowring the Coasts of Spain, took Sevil which they held a whole year.

The Affairs of France, being in a declining condition toward the Marches of
Spain since the defeat of Ebles and Aznar, a Lord named Aizo, who had left the
Emperors Court in discontent, seized by a wile upon the City of Ossonna in
Catalonia, and made a League with the Saracen King who gave him Powerful
assistance: with which help he so tormented the Governors of places, that some
quitted them, and others went and joined with him. There was none but Bernard
Earl of Barcelonna, that persevered in the fidelity he owed the Emperor.

Aizo got a very great re-inforcement of the Saracens, and the Emperor on his
part gave Pepin an Army to chastise him, and to re-settle his affairs in those
Countries: But the Infidels ransacked the Counties of Gironna and Barcelonna at
their pleasure, before the French Forces were in condition.

The negligence of their Commanders was the cause of this delay: which was most
severely punished at the general Assembly of Aix, with the loss of their
employment: And whatever other favor they held of the Emperor. This done to
repair their fault, he gave a great Army to his Son Lotaire, who advanced as
far as Lions, but having conferred with his Brother Pepin, he went no farther,
because the Saracens had made no new attempt.

This was the last Trial the French made for those Marches. For the following
year, there being a division bred in the Royal Family whereof Bernard Earl of
Barcelonna was the pretense, the Saracens and Spaniards too, made great
advantages of the same; So that France could preserve only the Lower Marches,
to wit, the Counties of Barcelonna, Ampuries, Roussillon, Cerdagne, Vrgel,
Paillars, Ossonna and Ribagorce. The People of the higher Marches seeing
themselves abandoned by the French bethought themselves of making a King; and
chose Eneco or Inniguo Earl of Bigorre; surnamed Arista, by corruption from
Ariscat, a word which* in that Country Language signifies the bold, the
resolute: By whose valor and the eredit he had amongst the Gascons and the
Inhabitants of the Pyreneans, they promised themselves assistance sufficient
enough to make Head against the Saracens. As indeed he regained Pampelonna, and
some other Cities from those Infidels.

It Is here therefore we must assign the beginning Of the Kingdom of Navarre,
and not 70 years earlier by one Garcia Ximenes. For all the Six Kings whom they
place before this Inniguo Arista, are fabulous; as well as the pretended
Kingdom of Sobrarue where they tell us they Reigned. Now Sobrarue is a little
Country between the Ancient Earldom of Arragon, and that of Ribagorce, which is
within the precincts of the Kingdom of Arragon, not of Navarre, and has but
six Leagues of extent, and some Buroughs in a Valley, with the Abbey of Penna.
Inniguo Arista had for Son and Successor Ximene or Semenon Ximene Semenon,
Emiron, Emenon, Ximinus, Eminus are the same Name.
d'Innigo, and he had one Innigo de Semenon, and Garcia both Kings. D'Innigo
II. was Son of Garcia II. who had two Sons which were Successively Kings, viz.
Fortunius Garcia, and Sance Abarca the first of that name. After him the
Succession of their Kings of Navarre is clear and indisputable.

The Bulgarians ransacked Pannonia Superiora as they listed, Balderic Duke of
Friuli never stirring to repel them; But his cowardly neglect was punished as
it

The Emperor desperately fond of his Wife and of his Son Charles, bestowed
Rhetia and part of the Kingdom of Burgundy upon that Child, his other Brothers
present. But Trembling with jealosie and wrath.

Empp. Theophilus Son of Michael, and Louis Debonnaire with his Son Lotaire in
October.
Louis Emperor Lotaire Emperor and King of Italy. Pepin King of Aquitaine.
Louis King of Bavaria. Charles King of Rhetia, aged 6 years.

Then all the re^t of the Party that had been for King Bernard, the Relations

The Emperor foresaw the Tempest well enough by the gathering of these clouds;
His Wife, as well to have the Absolute Government of her Husbands weak Spirit,
as out of affection, increased his Apprehensions, and persuaded him to put an
entire confidence in Bernard Earl of Barcelonna whom she loved, with the Office
of Chamberlain, that she might ever have him near her.

Bernards Pride and his too great familiarity with the Empress bred envy and
jealousy, which caused several other Lords to join with the contrary Party. All
the discontented therefore address themselves to Pepin: And in the ill humor
he had conceived against his Mother-in-Law, easily made him believe that
Bernard was her Gallant, and that she had bewitched her Husband: and therefore
it was a becoming Duty in the Son, to revenge those injuries Practiced against
his Father, and to restore him to his Honor and Wits again. He believes them*
and takes the Field; The Emperor being informed that he approached permits
Bernard to retire, sends his Wife to a Monastery at Laon, and comes to
Compeigne.

The Conspirators Seize the Empress; she promises them to persuade her Husband
to suffer himself to be shaved, or deposed: and upon this assurance they grant
her the liberty to speak with him in Private. They having conferred together
made an agreement that the Empress should wear the Vail for a time, but that he
should demand some longer time to consider and resolve them.

Mean time his Son Lotaire arrives from Italy, who confirmed all that had been
done, shutts up his Father in the Abbey of St. Mard at Soissons, and appointed
some Monks to instruct and advise him to put on the habit.

Some time after the Empress was brought to her Husband and upon the Peoples
clamours confined to the Monastery of St. Radegonde of Poitiers.

Debonnaire passed the Spring and Summer-season, his Courage so sunk that he
would have consented to turn Monk, if the very Monks themselves, who designed
to take advantage of the opportunity, and by some methods bring the Affairs of
Court into their management by his means, had not dissuaded him, and found a
way for his escape out of that Captivity. One Gondeband amongst others stickled
much in his service, and went in his behalf to his two Sons Pepin and Lewis, to
entice them to embrace their Fathers Case, to which they were already much
inclined out of the jealousy of the growing power of their elder Brother, and
his undertaking to govern all things according to his own fancy.

The Power of these two Brothers serving as a Counter-poise to that of Lotaire,
there needed a general Assembly to settle the Government. The contrary Faction
would have it in Neustria where they were the stronger, to degrade him, or at
least to dissolve his Marriage with Judith, because she was of Kin to him: But
yet he had Friends or craft enough to have the meeting held at Nimiguen. There
making his Party the strongest by the help and addition of the Eastern French,
he obliged his Son Lotaire to come and submit to him in his Tent, and give up
the principals of the Confederates into his hands. All the Lawyers, and his
Sons themselves Judged them worthy of Death: He Pardoned them notwithstanding,
and did only command the Laity to be shorn, and the Churchmen to be shut up in
Monasteries.

When he was got back to Aix, he recalled his Wife, and her Brothers who
Easter-Holy-days, he was so merciful, that in Honor of him who with his own
Blood had Redeemed all Mankind and obtained Pardon for Sinners, He released and
recalled likewise all those whom he had caused to be shorn, and restored them
to their Estates and Lands; but he sent his three Sons into their own Kingdoms.
Bernard was admitted to purge himself by combat, and there appearing no accuser
to oppose him, he purged himself by Oath.

Pepin and Louis, though he had enlarged their shares, did not leave vexing
him; And Lotaire their elder did underhand contrive all their practices. Pepin
being sent for to a general Assembly at Automne, came not till they were broke
up, which made his Father keep him with him. At the same time almost Louis was
making ready to come and visit him with too great an Attendance: But the Father
going forth to meet him, made him retire, and pursued him as far as Augsburgh.
From thence he summoned him to be present at the Assembly of Franefort; to
which he obeyed.

Pepin was again Arming himself; he went therefore as far as the Palace of
Iogontiac in Limosin where he Assembled the Estates of Aquitain. The rebellious
Son was forced to appear there; And his Case having been discussed, he was kept
Prisoner. As they were conveying him to Triers he escaped, and as soon as his
Father was out of Aquitain, he got in again with the same evil Spirit. In fine,
having been Summoned to appear at the general Assembly of Saint Martins, he not
obeying, his Father punished his Rebellion by taking the Kingdom of Aquitain
from him.

Gombaud the Monk enraged because Pepin hindered him from Governing the Emperor,
in recompense of his good Services; stirred up his Fathers wrath against him,
and Judith with her Artifices completing the Project, pushed the young Prince
on to these extremes, that she might have his spoil for her own Son Charles; as
in effect the Emperor did bestow it on him, and caused him to be acknowledged
by the Lords of the Country, to the great displeasure of the other two Sons,
who feared the like Treatment.

Lotaire, who brings Pope Gregory along with him the better to Authorize him.
They take the Field with a numerous Army; The Father on his side gets his
Forces together at Worms; for they were arrived nigh Basle. The Ambassadors he
sent to his Sons, and the Pope, finding they urged the Pope to Excommunicate
him, declared before his face, that if he came for that purpose, he might
return Excommunicated himself, since he trangressed the Holy-Canons.

The two Armies remained encamped between Basle and Strasburgh Five or Six
days, during which time the Emperor and the Pope had some conference about a
Peace: But under the pretense of Treating, his men were debauched and persuaded
to forsake him, and went to the service of his Sons; In so much, that himself
was likewise compelled to go over to them, having before Stipulated that his
Wife nor his Son Charles should either of them forfeit Life or Limbs.

They immediately confined young Charles to the Monastery of Prom, but did not
shave him, and banished the Mother to Tortona in Italy, maintaining that her
Marriage was Null, because she was of Kin to their Father within the degree
prohibited, which was truth. And that in those days was accounted a crime so
great, by the Church, that they punished it with the utmost rigor. Add that
the Prelates were mightily offended with her, for that she had caused Frederic
Bishop of Vtrecht, a man reputed to be of Holy-life, to be Massacred, because
he had dared to reprove the Emperor publicly as he was eating at his own Table.

The Debonnaire, being thus detained, Pepin returned to Aquitaine, and Louis to
Bavaria. Lotaire assigned a general Assembly at Compiegne to be on the first of
October, leaving his Father under a strong Guard in the Monastery of Saint
Medard Soissons. During the Assembly the French beginning to be touched with
compassion toward their ancient Emperor, some Lords with some of the Bishops,
who feared they should be punished if ever he were again restored, contrived
wholly to exclude him, by degrading and condemning him to do public Penance.
Ebon Archbishop of Reims, his Foster-brother and his School fellow, but Son of
a Slave, was the principal Author and Promoter of this Counsel.

The Ceremony of this Degradation was as follows. The Bishops having
remonstrated his Scandalous faults to him, he sent for his Son Lotaire, and his
Princes, and made his reconciliation with him. Then they led him into St.
Medards Church, where prostrated before the Altar upon a Sackcloth, he
confessed he had been the cause of great mischiefs and troubles to France; and
the Bishops exhorting him to name his Crimes openly, he repeated them according
to a writing they had given him, containing amongst other things, that he had
committed Sacrilege, Parricide and Homicide, in that he had violated the
Solemn Oath made to his Father in the Church and Presence of the Bishops,
consented to the Death of his Nephew, and done violence to his Relations. That
he had broken the agreement made betwixt his Children for the Peace of the
Kingdom, and compelled his Subjects to take new Oaths, which was Perjury; from
whence proceeded all manner of mischiefs in the Government. That after so many
disorders and infinite damages and losses to his People, he had again brought
them together to destroy each other: For which he desired pardon of God. Then
he presented a Paper to the Bishops, who laid it upon the Altar. After this
they took off his Military Girdle, which was laid there likewise: And lastly
they disrobed him of his secular Habit, and clothed him with a Penitential
one, which was never to be quitted, when once they had put it on.

The People (that is say to the Soldiery) who would dave trampled him under
foot before he was depes'd, now pitied him after his deposition. Louis King of
Germany feeling some remorse, or thinking to Aggrandize himself if he restored
him, Solicited Lotaire to deliver him, to which Pepin joined his interest. But
Lotaire not being inclinable thereto, and having transferred him thence to
Compiegne, and then to Saint Denis, both of them brought their Forces into the
Field, and appointed a place to join together nigh Paris. Lotaire observing
they flocked thither from all parts, amuses them for some days with the
Prospect of a Peace; then finding there was no safety for him, he takes his way
by Burgundy, and retires to Vienne, leaving his Father at Saint Denis.

The Debonnaire being at liberty, would not immediately put on his Imperial
Robes, but first desired to be reconciled to the Church by the Bishops: So that
even in Saint Denis Church it self, they returned the Crown and Military girdle
to him with the deliberation and consent, or Counsel of the French People. Some
time after a couple of Bishops brought his Wife and his Son Charles to him who
were set at liberty by those that were to guard him.

Lotaire had placed some Counts in the Cities above the Loire, amongst others
Lambert at Nantes and Mainfroy at Orleans, who undertook to preserve those
Countries for him. These Counts having with great advantage defeated those sent
by the Emperor who went and unadvisedly Attaqued them, did so importunately
Solicit their Master to return thither and pursue the Victory, that he went
to them immediately, having forced and burnt the City of Chaalons upon the
Soane.

Pepin was come to the assistance of his Father with considerable Forces: So
that they were much Superior to him in strength. Nevertheless he came and
Encamped right over against them, not far from the City of Blois, promising
himself to withdraw and get away his Men, as formerly. But finding that on the
contrary he was in danger of being forsaken by his men, and that he could not
make his retreat without a hazardous Battle, he resolved to come and beg
pardon; which he could never have obtained, had he been taken with his Sword in
Hand.

His Father received him Sitting on a Throne which was raised very high in the
midst of his Tent, where he would see him prostrate on his knees, and
condescended not to pardon him and his, but upon condition he should come no
more into France without his leave, but should remain in Italy; all the
passages from which place he shut up after him with strong Garrisons.

Ebon Archbishop of Reims, who had most contributed to the degradation of the
Emperor, being taken as he was flying away with the Churches Treasure, was
brought before the Mets. And there the Emperor accused him personally, after
his own restoration had been signed by all the Grandees. The unhappy Creature
did not endeavor to make any defense, but as a favor desired he might be
judged in private by the Bishops, and owned his Crimes in writing, whereupon he
was deposed, and subscribed his own degradation. After this Ignominy he retired
into Italy to Lotaire, whither many others had already saved themselves.

France that Lotaire had never repassed the Mountains. But the Empress Judith
desiring to have a support for her Son Charles after the death of the old
Emperor, who was very Sickly and Infirm, endeavored to reconcile them, and
caused word to be sent, that he should come to Court. To which notwithstanding
he durst not trust so soon; And besides he could not have come, being at that
time fallen ill of an Epidemical distemper which brought him to extremity, and
almost all the French Lords, who went thither with him, to their Graves. It
carried off Valac esteemed the best Headpiece and the most powerful Genius of
his Court, as it had been of Charlemains, and so many other of the most
considerable Lords, that it was said it had left France naked both of Counsel
and Strength.

Rome: But the Rumor of the Normands falling upon Frisia, where they burnt
Dorstat and Antwerp, detained him in France, where he called general Assemblies
as was usual.

Easter Day there appeared a Comet in the Heavens in the Sign Virgo, which
having in 25 days passed thorough the Signs of Leo, Cancer, and Gemini, came
and lost its Train and Globe of Fire, right against the Head of Taurus under
the Feet of the great Bear. The Emperor who was a great Astronomer, did first
discover it. There had been another Visible the preceding year, on the 11th of
April, in the Sign Libra, which showed its self but three days only.

The principal cause of the trouble and Rebellions of Debonnaires Children was
the frequent alteration he made in the partitions and division of the Portions
of his Sons. The Empress who feared Lotaire, and desired to gain him persuaded
her Husband to send for him, and to propound to him the division of his whole
Estate in two parts, Aquitaine and Bavaria not comprehended, whereof the
Emperor should choose one, or else that he should divide it, and Lotaire should
take his choice. Lotaire referred the division to him; and that being done, he
took the Eastern France from the Meuse upward, and left the Western to Charles
his youngest Brother, obliging himself by Oath to defend him* and not to
undertake any thing against the will of his Father.

Normands ceased not from pillaging the Coasts of Flanders. They had gained a
great Battle in the Island Walcheren, which makes part of Zeland, where the
Count of that Country was slian; and having afterward Fortified themselves in
that Post, made great Ravage, till the French Army beat them from thence.

January a Comet appeared in the Sign Scorpio a little after the Sunset. Some
fancied it presaged the Death of Pepin King of Aquitaine, which followed in the
Month of November after. He was Aged some 35 years, and had Reigned Twenty one.
They buried him at Saint Croix of Poitiers. He left by his Wife Engeltrude,
Daughter of Thiebert Earl of Matrie, two Sons, Pepin and Charles, whose
adventures we shall relate in due place, and one Daughter named Matilda who
Married Giraud Count of Poitiers.

To have done as Charlemain; when a King had allotted his Children their
division and that one happened to dye, if this left any Sons, it depended on the
People to Elect one in his stead, or to let his share be given amongst the rest
of the Brothers. After the decease of Pepin there were two Parties in Aquitain:
One whereof a Lord named Emenon was Chief, would have the eldest Son Pepin to
succeed him; the other, headed by Ebroin Bishop of Poitiers, referred it to the
Emperor. Ebroin comes to him to know his Intentions, for which he was rewarded
with the Abbey of Saint Germain des Prez. At the very time when the Emperor
would have followed him into Aquitain with an Army, he was drawn toward the
German side.

Lotaire, Lewis was forbidden to take upon him the Title of King of East-
France any longer: his interest and resentment made him take up Arms to
preserve it. Now before he could put himself into a posture of defense, his
Father passed the Rhine, and stuck so close to him, that he was either advised
or compelled to come and ask his Pardon.

At his return from this Voyage, the Emperor goes into Aquitain; and being
entered as far as Clermont in Auvergne, he there met and gave reception to the
Lords of the Country, whom Ebroin had disposed to obedience, and made them give
their Oaths for his Son Charles. But young Pepin with his Friends, kept the
Inheritance of his Father still by some corner or other, and held so fast and
tugged so strongly against him, that he could not be dispossessed in many years.

Louis the Debonnaire, Emperor and King of France. Lotaire, Emperor and King
of Italy, aged 45. years. Louis King of Bavaria, aged 34 years. Charles King of
Rhetia, Burgundy, Neustria and Aquitain, aged 17. years. Pepin disputing
Aquitaine, aged 14. years.




Chaalon, was returned to Aquitain, being at Poitiers to take some course to
secure that Kingdom to his Son Charles, he had notice that Louis had debauched
the Saxons and Turingians, that he had Siezed all the Country without the
Rhine, and then being come to Francfort had taken the Oaths of several Eastern-
French. Never any business troubled him so greatly as this same; Though he were
indisposed by a defluxion upon his Stomach, and the Weather as yet very
unseasonable, he went from Aquitain with the resolution of putting an end to
that affair.

He left his Wife and his Son Charles at Poitiers, kept his Easter at Aix,
passed from thence into Turingia, and held a Parliament at Vormes. Then his
Malady increasing, he went down the Meine to Ingelheim near Ments, where lying
in his Tents, his Heart pierced with grief, and his Stomach oppressed with an
Impostume, he gave up the Ghost the 20 th of June, having every Morning for
forty days together received the Sacrament or Body of our Lord Jesus Christ. He
was in the beginning of the 64. Year of his Age, and the end of the 27 th of
his Empire and Monarchy, before which time he had been King of Aquitain 32
years.

His Brother Dreux conveyed his Corpse to Mets, whereof he was Bishop, and
Intombed him in the Abbey of Saint Arnoul; who was the Stock of the Carlovinian
Family.

He was of a mild and sweet Nature, but too easy and too credulous, insomuch
that sometimes his Counselors could persuade him to unjust things. From his
youth he had plunged himself into a profound Devotion; And if we may not say,
that he gave too much credit to the Churchmen, we may at least own, that he
could not discern the good from the bad, or that employing them in his affairs,
and bestowing too much wealth upon them, he spoiled them. His Fathers method
had been much better, who never suffered one man to have more then one
employment, or more then one Benefice at the same time. For the rest of his
character, he was Laborious, Sober, Vigilant, Liberal, very knowing and
Learned, both Speaking and writing Latin as well as any man in his Kingdom,
and who together with the perfect knowledge and understanding in the Laws, had
ever a great care to see them put in execution.

His first Marriage was with Hermengard Daughter to Duke Ingelram, by whom he
had three Sons, Lotaire, Pepin, and Louis; and three Daughters, Adelais whose
first Husband was Conrard Earl of Paris; her second Robert le Fort; Gisele, who
married Everard Duke of Friuli, Father of that Berenger who was King of Italy;
Hildegarde married to Count Theodorus; and Alpais Wife of Count Begone. By his
second marriage which was with Judith Daughter to Velpon or Guelfe Earl of
Ravensperg, he had Charles, whom they surnamed the Bald.

CHARLES II.
Surnamed The Bald.
King XXV.
Aged xvii. Years.
POPES,
GREGORY IV. S. 3. Tears under this Reign. SERGIUS II. Elected in Febr. 844. S.
3 years, one Month. LEO IV. Elected in April 847. S. 8. Tears, 3 Months. BENNET
III. Elected in August 855. S. 4. Years. NICHOLAS I. Elect. in April, 858. S.
9. Years, 6 Months. ADRIAN II. Elect. in December. 867. S. 5. Years. JOHN VIII.
Elect. in December. 872. S. 10 years, whereof 5. under this Reign.
Lotaire Emperor and King of Italy. Louis King of Germany. Charles King of
Burgundy and Neustria. Pepin Fighting for the Kingdom of Aquitaine.

Debonnaire had sent his Scepter, his Crown Empp. Theophilus, and Lotharius 1.
840.
and his Sword, the tokens of Empire, to Lotaire his eldest Son, recommending
to him the protection of Prince Charles, and enjoining him to preserve that
share for him which had been allotted with his own consent. But Lotaire, or
Lotharius was possessed in his mind that his Birthright and his Quality of
Emperor ought to make him Sovereign over his younger Brothers.

With this design he parts from Italy, comes to the Kingdom of Burgundy, where
he designed to Rendezvous and bring his Forces together with his Friends,
dispatches his Commissaries into all parts to solicit the Lords to give their
Oaths to him, passes from thence to Worms, and draws the Saxons to his party.
From thence Marches even to Francfort. But Lowis coming to encamp close by him,
startled him: and as he made more use of craft then strength, he made Truce
with him till the 12 th of November, at what time they were to meet in the very
same place to decide their differences, in a Friendly manner if possibly they
could, if not, by Dint of Sword.

Charles was then at Bourges where he waited for Pepin who failed at the
Rendezvous promised. From thence he dispatched one to Lotharius to entreat him
to remember his Oaths, which he had made in the presence of his Father, and
withal Lotaire amuses him with fine words, and in the mean time adjusts all his
Engines to turn him out of his Estates.

After Charles had by his presence confirmed those People betwixt the Meuse and
the Seine, and had withal made a Journey into Neustria, he returned with
diligence into Aquitain, to put a stop to Pepin's progress, whose courage was
much augmented upon the approaching of Lotharius. He took off somewhat of the
sharpness of his Mettle by gaining a Battle: but in the mean while, the
Neustrian People joined with Lotaire.

Those Lords that accompanied Charles observing these Artifices believed the
best way was to break through them all with a brave resolution, and advised he
would march directly to him. Thus the two Armies were found to be within Six
Leagues of each other, the City of Orleans lying between them. Then the Lords
on either part endeavored to bring them to an accord as was the usual custom
of the French. Those of Charles's party, finding themselves by much the weaker,
yielded to an agreement very disadvantagious, whereby was left to him only by
provision Aquitain, Languedoc and Province with some Counties between the Loire
and the Seine; and it was said, they should meet at the Parliament to be holden
at Atigny, to compose all their differences: but they added this Clause, that
in the interim Lotaire should attempt nothing upon Charles nor Louis, otherwise
they should be quit of their Oaths and promises.

Charles marched toward Bretagne to quell the motions of some Lords of that
Country. From thence he returns on his way to be at the Parliament of Atigny.
Lotharius had in the mean while endeavored to shut up the passages against
him, broken down all the Bridges over the Seine, and ordered Forces on either
Shore, who coasted along incessantly. Which did him no good, because Charles
having information that there were several Vessels at Rouen Seized them with
great diligence, and wafted over his Army with them. His enemies betook
themselves to Flight upon the first appearance of his Standard.

At the same time Lotharius by the advice of Albert Earl of Mets, his chief
incendiary, and Othbert Bishop of Ments, were dealing with the French
Austrasians; and knowing that Louis of Germany was upon his march to join with
Charles, caused some Troops to pass over the Rhine to meet him, and did entice
away a part of his men, so that he was counseled, fearing he might lose the
rest, to retreat into Bavaria: where it had been easy for Lotaire to have
crushed him, had he but pursued it.

Charles marching up along the River Seine, makes his Prayers in the Church of
St. Denis, joins some Troops which two or three of his Counts, brought him
near Montereau on Yonne, beats two of the Counts that Lotaire had sent to
oppose him in his March, goes on to Troyes, where he celebrated the Feast of
Easter. From thence he went to Atigny, to let them know he would not neglect to
meet at the conference appointed between him, and Lotaire. After his having
remained there some days, he Marched toward Chaalons, and there finds his
Mother the Empress Judith, and those Forces she brought him out of Aquitain.

He had intelligence at the same time that his Brother Louis having gained a
Battle against Albert Count of Mets, made all possible have to join with him.
Wherefore he goes that way to meet him. Lotaire gave out a report that he fled,
and pursues him. Mean time Louis arrives, and thus the two young Brothers being
united, were found to be the strongest. Lotaire therefore gains some days time
by his feigned negotiations, till Pepin who was upon the March, could join with
him. When he had this re-inforcement, he talked of nothing but bringing them to
obedience, and having a Monarchical Sovereignty. All the tenders they could
proffer, did but confirm his resolution of having all. So that they were
constrained to send him word they would give him Battle the next morning about
the second hour of the day; which was the 25 th of June.

Fontenay by Auxerre. The whole Power of France, all the bravest Officers, and
most of the Grandees and Nobility were about the Four Kings, who were to be
both the Witnesses and rewarders of their Actions. Since the Beginning of the
French Monarchy, to the very day I write these Lines, there has not been so
much French Blood spilt in any Battle whatever. A Hundred Thousand men perished
there; a horrible wound, and which weakened the Carlovinian-House so greatly
that it could never well recover it self again. The victory fell to the younger
Brothers share. They used it with all humility, and would not give the Emperor
chase, for fear of spilling more blood. They likewise caused his men to be
buried, and took care to dress the wounded as their own, proclaiming a general
pardon to all those that would accept thereof.

Louis repassed the Rhine, and Charles took his way toward Aquitain to drive
Pepin entirely from thence. But some dissension happening in his Councels, so
that he acted not vigorously enough; Pepin, who had been brought very low, and
would certainly have submitted, reassumed his courage.

On the other hand Lotaire having gathered up his scattered men, and raised new
ones appeared soon after in Neustria, where he had a great many abetters. His
Army and Charles's drew near each other about St. Denis, the River betwixt
them. Charles's being the weakest saved themselves in the Forests of Perch;
Lotaire pursued them, but not able to compel them to a Battle, he sent back
Pepin whom he had called thither with his Forces of Aquitain.

Charles found the way open and clear, he went to the banks of the Empp.
Michael III. and Lotharius.
Rhine to his Brother; and both of them being met the 22 th of February in the
City of Strasburgh made a new League, and Alliance of Friendship, promising by
Solemn Oath never to forsake each other. This Treaty was framed and written in
two Languages, viz. Romanied or Rustica Latina.
Romance (the Original of the present French) and the German.
Tudesque. It mentioned that if either of the two Brothers contravened, their
Subjects should be no longer obliged to serve them. Which was in truth to leave
a gap open for them to change their Sovereign when they pleased.

Lotaire had inveigled, and increased their Forces, they sought for him to give
him battle: but he left the Country in so much have that he made no stop till
he was gotten to Lions, and by his slight abandoned all Austrasia to them, and
part of the Kingdom of Burgundy.

Aix, the Bishops by them Assembled pronounced a Solemn Judgment, whereby they
deprived Lotharius of all his Portion of Lands on this side the Mountains; and
yet they would not admit the two Brothers, till they first were assured by
them, that they would govern according to the Commandments of God. To which
having answered that they desired so, the Bishops told them: And we by the
Divine Authority do pray you to receive and govern them according to the will
of God. They then divided betwixt them that portion of Austrasia which had been
possessed by Lotaire.

Nevertheless this partition did not stand: for that Prince endeavoring an
accommodation with them, the Friends on all hands brought it so to pass that the
three Brothers had a parley together in an Island on the Soane, each
accompanied and assisted with Forty Lords, in the presence of whom they agreed
to divide the whole Succession of their Father (not including Bavaria,
Lombardy, and Aquitain,) in three equal parts, whereof Lotaire should take his
choice. That the same forty Deputies on the behalf of each of them, should meet
together in November in the City of Mets to make that division, and that in the
interim each of them should keep the same Portion he then enjoyed, and remain
therein.

The Assembly of the Six-score Lords was not held at Mets; because Lotaire
being at Thionville it would not have been secure for those on the behalf of
the two younger Brothers; It was removed to Coblents; where for want of ample
powers they could agree to nothing but a Truce till St. John Baptist's-day, and
another meeting at Thionville before that time.

Charles Married in his own Palace of Crecy upon Oyse, with Hermentrude
Daughter of Wodon According to some Odo, or Eudes, Earl of Orleance.
, Grandchild to Adelard who had governed Louis the Debonnaire, and had been a
most horrible squanderer of the Treasures and Demesnes belonging to the Crown;
which on the one hand had got him the hatred of those that loved the welfare of
the State, and on the other the affection and esteem of Courtiers, and all such
as were not able to maintain their expenses but by the profusion of such
Ministers.

French Lords assembled at Thionville succeeded so well about the partition
between the three Brothers, that they completed it the 6 th Day of March. To
Charles fell the western Kingdom of France, which is near upon the same which
we call at this very day France, that is from the British Ocean to the Meuse:
To Louis fell Germany unto the Rhine, with some Villages on this side which he
would needs have included, because there were some Vine-yards; and to Lotharius
with the Title of Emperor, the Kingdom of Italy, and Provence, and all that lay
Scheld, the Meuse, the Rhine, and the Soane. In the German Tongue this was
called Loterreich, in Romance or Old-French Lohier-regne, and by contraction
Lorreine, that is to say the Kingdom of Lotaire or Lotharius. The Country that
bears this Title at present, is but a small part thereof.

As for Pepin, they allotted him no share: but having gained a great victory
over those sent by his Uncle, who endeavored to take away his Kingdom of
Aquitain, he maintained himself for some years, even till his Vices, rather
then the power of his Enemies, dethroned him.

This division of the Kingdom betwixt Brothers equally, divided the affections
of the People of Germany, Gaul and Italy, who had begun to cleave, if I may say
so, or join together in one Monarchick body, and made the Subjects become
inconstant, unfaithful, Factious, and take to themselves a liberty of choosing
their Princes, believing they might do so, provided they were of Royal blood.
But that which was worse, was that France, having lost the best of her Forces
by that blooddy Battle at Fontenay, was no longer able to keep those People
under which had been subdued, especially the Gascons and the Bretons, neither
to defend themselves against the incursions of the Normands.

As for the Gascons, Azenar who had Seized upon the County being dead in the
year 836. his Brother Sance had also invaded it in despite of Pepin, and
justified it by the assistance of the Basques, and the Navarrois. The Duchy
was then held by a Lord named Totilus; Azenar far from obeying him, did tire
him with his continual incursions, and whilst he held him in play, gave
opportunity to the Normands to ravage the whole Province.

One cannot without horror recount the Ruins, Murders and Destructions by
Fire, which those Barbarians practiced over all France* Necessity forced them
out of their houses to seek for a subsistence elsewhere: for every fifth year
they sent out Colonies or swarms of young People, to go and seek out their
Fortunes in other Countries. The desire of plunder and honor, made them ever
fall upon the richest Provinces; the false Zeal of their Brutish and Impious
Religion made them cruel and bloody, especially toward Churchmen; the French
making use of their assistance in their public quarrels, had brought them into
their Country; and such rascally people as were but too much at liberty, and in
too great numbers during the Civil-War, served them for guides, and not only
so, but sometimes became their commanders and encouragers, assisting them in
their pillaging and robberies, with so great destruction, that no times nor
History can parallel. For from one Sea to the other, there was not one
Monastery standing that had not felt their fury and devilish rage, not one Town
that had not been ransomed, plundered or burnt two or three times. Which was
demonstration sufficient that it was a terrible vengeance sent from God.

Louis the Debonnaire, appeared a Comet; and another again in An. 842. From the
year 840. to 850. there were frequently Battles in the Air to be seen: And the
Earth-quaked often times with Terrible roarings.

During the Government of Duke Totilus in Gascogny, those Barbarians having
failed in an attempt upon Bordeaux, ruined Basas, Air, Laitoure, Dags, Tarbe
de Bigorre, Labor, Oleron and Lascar; and beat that Duke Twice; But the Third
time he had the advantage against them, and drove them quite out of all
Gascogny.

He survived but a short while after his victory; that command was given to
Seguin: and to strengthen him the better against Sance, and likewise against
the Normans, the County of Bordeaux was joined to his Duchy, which before was
Aquitania Secunda; and if I am not deceived, that of Saints. Which hindered not
the Normans upon a second descent An. 843. from defeating him in a bloody
Battle Saints and Bordeaux, where his death Crowned their Victory.

Duke William his Successor could not stop this Torrent which overslowed
Aquitania Secunda, and made them Masters sometimes of Saints, another while of
Angoulesme, then of Lemoges or Perigueux. The confusion they brought into those
Countries, and the revolt of Bernard Duke of Septimania, which happened in the
same years, gave so much confidence to the Gascons of the Duchy, that they
joined with those of the County, and together made Count Sance Duke of
Gascogny. To whom some years after succeeded Arnold Son of Emenon or Immon
Count of Perigord.

In the year 841. whilst the Kings were in the Field to destroy each other,
Hochery or Oger, one of the most Famous Commanders of the Normands, who
commanded a Fleet of 150 Ships, Burnt the City of Rouen the 14 th of May, and
the Abbey Pridie Idus.
of Gemiege some days afterward, and for Fifteen or Sixteen years together
continued his Barbarities upon Neustria, and more particularly upon Bretagne
and Aquitain.

They had also taken their course by Bretagne to make a descent. The revolt of
that Province opening a gap for them. Louis the Debonnaire had given the
Government to Neomenes descended from the Ancient Kings of those Countries, and
younger Brother of Rivalon Father of Solomon. Now Neomene having acquired some
reputation for having made head against the Normans An. 836. began to think
himself worthy of the Crown belonging to his Ancestors: however his design did
not appear till after the Battle of Fontenay, when being incited thereto by
Count Lambert, he openly declared himself Sovereign, and drove all the French
out of Bretagne, unless those in Rennes and in Nantes, who held out.

This Lambert enraged because King Charles had refused him the County of Nantes
which he desired and demanded as a reward for having fought valiantly for him
at the Battle of Fontenay, renounced his Service and Leagued himself with
Neomene; with whose assistance having beaten and slain Reynold Count of
Poitiers, to whom the King had given Nantes, he remained Master of the City.
But being in a short time driven thence in a contest happening between Neomene
and himself, he mischievously went and fetched the Normans, and brought them up
the River before Nantes, which they took by Escalado on Saint John's Festival,
cut the Throats of most of the Inhabitants who were gotten into Saint Peter's
Church, Noir Moustier. Thus Lambert became Count of a ruined City, and
endeavored to maintain himself there wavering betwixt the King and Neomene,
unfaithful to both, and beloved by neither.

After the division made by the Kings, Bretagne being a pretended Member of
West- France, which fell to the lot of Charles the Bald, that Prince having now
no enemies at home, turned his Sword that way, thiuking to bring Neomene to
obedience. But he confidently comes toward him, and meeting him on his March
in the Road from Chartres to Man's charged him so smartly, that he put his Army
to the Rout, and forced him to fly to Chartres on Horseback.

This advantage redoubled the Bretons Forces, who made inroads upon Maine,
Anjou, and Poitou. It seems nevertheless there was some Truce, since upon King
Charles's entreaty, Neomene drove Count Lambert out of Nantes who went and
Nestled himselfin the Lower Anjou, and there Built the Castle of Oudon.

At the same time that Charles was defeated by Neomene a Civil-War infesting
Denmark, the Lords of those Countries who found themselves strong at Sea,
amongst others Hasteng and Bier Iron-sides, fell upon West- France, and haing
forced the Guards that defended the Mouth of the Seine, went up that River with
their Barks. They Sacked all on the right and left Shore, and Paris, they
destroyed all that lay without the Island, Plundered the Abbey of Saint Germain
des Prez, and Ruined the City of Melun.

When they were pretty well laden with spoil, they were soon tempted with
Presents made them by Charles to withdraw themselves, but as they returned they
ravaged Picardy, Flanders and Friseland, and took the City of Hamburgh: however
observing all Germany was rising up, to expel them from thence, they quitted it.

The Priests and all Religious Orders fled before them from place to place,
seeking out places of safety, or at least hiding places to conceal and keep the
Churches Treasure in, as also their Holy-Relicks; toward which their devotion
did so much

Lotaire had denuded Italy of all it is Forces to lead them into France, the
Dukes Radelchise of Benevent, and Sigenulfe of Capoua, quarrelling with each
other, without regarding young Louis his Son called the one the Saracens of
Spain to his assistance, the other those of Sardinia (for those Barbarians had
invaded that Island) and gave them entrance into Italy, where having Fortified
themselves ^in many places they exercised their fury for twenty years together.
And An. 847. pillaged the Borough of Saint Peter, and the Church of that
Prince of the Apostles. Which obliged Pope Leo the IV. to enclose it with a
wall, and quarter the Corsicans there whom the Saracens had driven from their
Island.

Gisabert dared to Steal away the Daughter of the Emperor Lotharius, and
conveyed her into the Dominions of Charles to marry her; which gave great cause
of complaint to Lotaire, and much trouble to Louis of Germany to appease his
resentment.

In Guyenne the great ones raised Forces for their private quarrels, and fought
in despite of Pepin. In Italy in the year 844. the Clergy and Citizens of Rome
had the considence to elect Sergius II. Pope, without the Emperors permission,
who nevertheless having sent Twenty Bishops, and with them some Soldiers forced
the Pope to render his devoir, and to acknowledge him for his Sovereign.

It is a Fable, that this Pope first changed his Name, and that before his
Election he was called Swines-snowt, for it was Sergius IV. had that filthy
Name, and he whom we here mention was called Sergius as was his Father. It is
held by some that it was one Octavian introduced this mysterious change, who
would needs be named John. He was the 12th of that name.

French being entered into Bretagne, entangled themselves unadvisedly in Boggs
and Fenny-grounds, where they received a second blow.

Charles was preparing for a Third expedition against that Country, the terror
of the Normans obliged him to agree to a peace with Neomene; which nevertheless
did not hold long, for he began immediately again to make his inroads France.
For which Charles taking revenge by Fire and Sword in Bretagne, Neomene did the
like to all the adjacent Countries, and the Territory of Rennes, which did not
then belong to his petty Kingdom.

Hitherto he had not taken the Title of King, or at least had not put on the
Crown. The custom of those times were, that the People did not believe a Prince
wore it Legally, if it were not put on by the hand of one Bishop, and the
consent of all. Now those of Bretagne having for the most part been nominated
by Louis the Debonnaire, would not give their Ministry nor their approbation
to this Usurper. He contrived therefore an accusation of Simony against them,
by the means of an Abbot named Connoyon esteemed as a Saint by the People. The
assembly sends them before the Pope to justify themselves, the Abbot follows
them to Rome, and Neomene causes him to be accompanied with a stately Embassy
with a Present of a Gold Crown for the Pope, and an order to desire of him the
Restoration of the extinguished Royalty in Bretagne. The whole House of France
opposed this so strongly, that he obtained nothing of the Holy-Father but some
Relics, and verbal Reprimands for the accusation against the Bishops. But at
their return he frighted them so with the fear of Death as made them confess
those crimes, and thereupon caused them to be deposed.

Dole, Treguier, and St. Brieuc, and Ordained the Bishop of Dole for
Metropolitan. The Popes had bestowed the Pall on those Prelates, in the sixth
Century. All this tended toward his Crowning and Anointing, after the Mode of
the French Kings. Which was performed in the City of Dole, where he had
assembled the Estates of his petty Kingdom. All his Bishops assisted except
Actard of Nantes, who for that reason being turned out of his See, retired to
the Archbishop of Tours his true Metropolitan: who having called together the
Bishops of his Province, and those adjoining, caused some Remonstrances to be
made to Neomene, but to no purpose.

Pepin and the Normans, drew Charles's Army into Aquitain. In the Month of
March he took some of those Pirates Ships in the Dordogne, and compelled Pepin
to leave the Field to him: But when he was gone from that Province, the
Normands surprised Bordeaux by the treachery of the Jews that were in it, and
took William Duke of the Gascons Prisoner, and such others as their
covetousness prompted them to spare alive, after their fury had been glutted
with blood. The French were so feeble and weak, as to let them make that place,
their Storehouse and Armory for several years.

Lotaire and Charles had an interview in the Palace of Peronne, and by Oaths
renewed again their affection and league for mutual Security. Charles Brother
to Pepin of Aquitain, relying too much upon these seeming demonstrations, was
so imprudent, when he returned from Lotaire's Court, of whose protection he
made no doubt, as to pass by West- France. Count Vivian observing his steps,
stopped him, and carried him to Charles the Bald; who at the Assembly of
Chartres caused him to be shaved and sent him to the Monastery of Corbie. About
four years afterward Louis the Germanick his Uncle, made him Archbishop of
Ments.

Pepin his Brother had many very ill qualities, he was a Drunkard, filthyly
Debauched, and Violent, vexing and grieving his Subjects, and Authorizing the
unjustice and robberies committed by his Officers. A good part of the Grandees
of Aquitain having conceived a kind of scorn and hatred for him, invited and
called in Charles the Bald whom they received with great applause at Limoges,
and attended him to the Siege of Tolouse, which surrendered on composition. But
as soon as he had left Aquitain, they reconciled themselves to Pepin.

Charles the Bald made into Bretagne, to put a reinforcement into Rennes, did
not prevent Neomene from Besieging that Town, and taking Prisoners all the
Chief Officers of that Garrison.

Lambert having turned his Coat, seized Count Amaulry* and diverse other French
Lords who were gotten into Nantes, without doubt to defend that place.

Neomene attaquing the French Territories by Anjou, and destroying their
Churches with as much Barbarity almost as the Normans, was smitten, as it is
believed, by the hand of God, whereof he died in few hours space. His Son
Herispoux succeeded him.

There was a general Assembly held of all the Kingdoms of the French Monarchy
on the banks of the Meuse, where the three Brothers met, and swore Amity and
mutual Assistance. At their departure from thence, Charles goes into Bretagne
to attaque Herispoux, whom he guessed to be as yet unsettled. Their Armies
engaged on the Confines of Anjou. If we credit the Bretons, Charles's was but
ill handled. However it were, he agreed to a Peace with the Breton, to take
possession of Aquitain, which was a thing of more importance, and also to
oppose the Normans.

The same year the Pyrate Hachery coming out of Bordeaux with his Fleet
destroyed the Abbey of Fontenelle to the very Foundations, then going up the
Seine with his small Boats, he plundered all the Country for a great way on
either side, and burnt diverse Cities* amongst others that of Beaurais.

Pepins ill conduct had so highly offended the Lords of his Kingdom, that in
fine they seized on his Person, and delivered him up to Charles, who caused him
to be shorn and confined to the Monastery of Saint Mard. Whence making his
escape he roved a while, and took part with the Normans, which made him only
the more odious; So that being retaken, he was close shut up in the Castle of
Senlis.

Lotaire associated his eldest Son Louis in the Empire. He had three living,
this Louis, Lotaire, and Charles.

Lotaire, and Louis his Son, associate in the Empire. Louis King of East-France
and Bavaria. Charles of West-France and Aquitaine.

There would be no end, if we should set down all the exploits and ravages of
Normans. In An. 852 and 853. other multitudes went up the Seine again, and this
latter year some went up the Loire, plundered the City of Tours, and set Fire to
the Churches, particularly to that of the Grand Saint Martins.

Ebon had settled himself again in the Archbishopric of Reims, when Lotaire
invaded Charles the Bald: Afterward that King expelled him, and in his stead
caused Hincmar to be Elected, who after many contests, was this year confirmed
in that Archbishopric by the Synod of So^ssons.

Bald treated the Aquitains very rudely. He caused several of the principal
Heads to fly, amongst others that of a Count named Gosbert, which begot so much
aversion in them toward their new Sovereign, that under pretense that he took
no care to defend them from the Normans they sent Deputies to Louis the
Germanique to pray him to accept of the Kingdom, or send his Son to them.

German King scruples not to break it, when it concerned the gaining of a
Kingdom, and sent one of his Sons into Aquitain to observe the disposition of
those People. He did not find it such as he desired, there being none that
concerned themselves or espoused his Interest besides the Friends and Relations
of Gosbert. But Charles having discovered his toward him, sought the
Friendship of Lotaire, with whom he conferred in a Parliament holden at
Valenciennes, a place so situated between both their Territories, that Lotaire
possessed one half and Charles the other half of the City.

Liege, to which they invited Louis, to advise together in common touching the
general Affairs of the French Monarchy, but he refused to be there.

Going from thence Charles passes into Aquitain, and was Crowned at Limoges. It
is not true that he reduced it to a simple Duchy: for his Son of the same
name, held it for some time with the Title of a Kingdom; and we find that it
continued so under the first Kings of the Capetian Race.

Leo IV. happened that strange adventure of Pope Joan, as is said. It was
esteemed a very great truth for Five Hundred years together; but in these
latter ages, the Learned, nay even some of those that are separated from the
Church of Rome, have held it to be a ridiculous Fable.

The Motions of the Grace of God, which when he pleases can mollify the most
obdurate hearts, or perhaps the Melancholy and restless thoughts of the
Emperor Lotaire, a Prince Fantastical and inconstant, gave him so much
dissatisfaction and disgust of the Vanities and Pomp of the World, that he
stripped himself of his Sovereignty, and changed his Imperial Purple for a Frock,
wherewith he clothed himself in the Abbey of Prom, where he Died some Months
after, having ruled the Lorrain Twelve, reckoning from the time the partition
was made amongst the Brothers.

He had for Wife Hermengard Daughter of Count Hughes the Couard, who brought
him four Children, Louis, Lotaire and Charles, and one Daughter named
Hermengard who was stolen away by Gisabert, Count of the Mansuarians.

Before his Abdication he shared his Lands between his three Sons, giving to
Louis the eldest of them, Italy and the Empire, wherein he had associated him
in the year 851. To Lotaire the Kingdom of Lorrain, and to Charles, Provence,
and part of the Kingdom of Burgundy.

Louis the Germanique in Germany and Bavaria. Charles in Neustria. and
Aquitaine. Louis Emperor and King of Italy. Lotaire II. King of Lorrain.
Charles King of Burgundy and Provence.

Lotaire much courted by his two Uncles, joined at last with Charles: But the
Emperor Louis made league with the German King, who sought all manner of ways
to ruin him.

Charles was much hated by the Grandees of his Kingdom, forasmuch as out of
mistrust of their affection, or contempt of their small courage, he bestowed
his military employments upon people of Fortune, rather then on them. Neither
was he overmuch in the esteem of the people, because he defended them but ill
from the incursions of the Normans and Bretons, and also connived at the
pilferings of his Officers. So that there being a grand Conspiracy contrived to
set him beside the Throne, they deputed some to Louis the Germanique, offering
to acknowledge him for their Sovereign, if he would govern them with Justice,
and employ his Forces in their defense.

Therefore whilst Charles was gone to make Head against the Bretons, he crosses
Alsatia with an Army, and comes into Burgundy, where in the Palace of Pontigon
he receives the Homage of a great many Neustrian Lords. After that he assigns
a Parliament at Atigny to receive it from all the rest, and is introduced into
the City of Sens by the Archbishop, named Wenilon or Guenilon; ungrateful and
treacherous to Charles his King, who from a Clerk of his Chapel had made him
Archbishop, and would needs be anointed and Crowned by his hands at Saint
Croix of Orleans.

Charles who was then on the banks of the Loire with his Army to make head
against the Normans, having information that his Brother invaded his Kingdom,
left those Barbarians there, and advanced to Brie to fight him: but when he
perceived that all went on that side, that his Soldiers themselves began to
forsake him, being afraid his own People might deliver him up, he abandons his
Army, which quickly submitted to his Brothers commands.

This sudden revolution was as soon followed with one quite contrary. Those
that had called in the German were the first that repented, and to repair one
Treason by another, they conspired to make him fall into the hands of Charles;
Which was very easy for them, since having been so credulous to follow their
advice, he had sent away his own Forces. But he discovered their intentions and
evil design early enough to escape the snare; and upon the news he received of
the incursion of the Venedes, took therefore the opportunity to return to
Germany. As soon as his back was turned, Charles having gotten his Friends
together regained the Kingdom with as much facility, as he had lost it.

German gave some jealousy to young Lotaire, and induced him to league himself
with his Uncle Charles for their common defense. In consequence of this union
the Bishops of the Kingdom of Neustria and Lorraine being Assembled at Mets the
26 th of May, charged Hincmar Archbishop of Reims to go and summon the German
to repair the wrongs he had done his Brother, and meet at the approaching
general Parliament, where he that should be found guilty, should make
satisfaction, and adhere no longer to those Traitors. He replied that he was
ready to appear there, but having done nothing but by the Counsel of the
Bishops, he desired to consult with them.

About mid- June therefore was held a Council at Savonnieres, in the Suburbs of
Toul, consisting of the Bishops of twelve Provinces, wherein they labored for
the reconciliation of the two Brothers and Lotaire their Nephew. It is not
expressed upon what conditions.

The 16 th of that Month Charles presents them a Libel of complaints against
Wenilon de Sens. It mentioned amongst other things, That he was anointed King
by consent of the Bishops; therefore, he could not be deprived of that
consecration without their consent: And likewise added, that he would have
appeared there to answer them, had he been called thereto. They allotted four
Metropolitans to Judge Wenilon, who assigned him to give his appearance, before
them within Thirty days. We do not find they continued this proceeding, for he
died peaceably in his Archbishopric in the year 865.

It is a mistake if we believe this man to be the Subject of those ancient
Fables of Ganelon, so renowned for his Treacheries in the old Romances: Such as
understand the old French Tongue, know that Enganner signifies to deceive, and
Gannelon a deceiver, a Traitor.

The Fathers of this Council, or perhaps of another held at the same place,
wrote likewise to the Bishops of Bretagne to exhort them to acknowledge the
Metropolitan of Tours, and sent them a Memorial to admonish King Solomon to
obey Charles King of France his Sovereign; which he took little notice of.

The two Brothers Lewis and Charles, and their Nephew Lotaire being reconciled
by the mediation of honest men, had an enter-view at an Island on the Rhine
near Andernac, attended by an equal number of Lords who staid upon either hand
of the River. They shook hands, and agreed to meet the following Autumn at a
general Assembly which was to be held at Baste. But they did not come there,
having adjourned the enter-view till the next Spring at the Assembly of
Coblents.

At this place the Bishops who were then Masters of the Government through the
weakness of the Princes, and the little Credit of the Grandees, who showed no
courage but in fighting one another and devouring the People, contrived the
agreement between these three Princes, and drew up the Articles or Form to be
observed in this Peace, which the German first swore to, and the two others
after him.

This year 860. the Winter was so hard that the Adriatique Sea was Frozen, and
the Merchants of the Neighboring Countries carried their Goods to Venice by
Wagons.

861. Empp. Basilius.
The Bretons continually infested the Territories belonging to Charles,
wherefore he gave the Duchy, that is to say, the Government between the Seine
and the Loire to Robert Surnamed the Strong or the Valiant, to keep those
Marches or Frontiers. Which I was willing to observe, because he was certainly
The stock of that Glorious Race of the Capetines; the which (should we reckon
their Original or Commencement but from this year) would have eight hundred and
odd years of Antiquity, clearly made out from Male, to Male, and of crowned
Heads; an Honor which no Line on Earth besides can boast of.

This year the Bald made a Lord named Thierry Earl of Holland, from whom are
descended those that have Hereditarily held that Earldom: but they have ever
had a much limited Authority, and such a one as could undertake nothing against
the Liberty of that Country.

(...).
Baldwin Earl of Flanders having the support of the German, took the confidence
to come as far as Senlis and steal away Judith the Daughter of Charles his
King, the young Widow of Eardulfe King of England. He retired into the Country
belonging to Lotaire, whence he conducted her to his own, and soundly beat
those Soldiers under Charles's pay, who would needs pursue them. The Pope
having excommunicated him at that Kings complaint, the young Count was so
startled, that the following year he went to Rome and threw himself at his
Feet: the Holy Father touched with his submission, and the Princesses tears
interposed to obtain his Pardon. Charles was advised to condescend; Nor indeed
could the fault be any other ways repaired.

The passion of King Lotaire bred a greater scandal. He had married Thietberge
Daughter of Huebert Duke d'outre le Mont-Jou, and allied to Charles the Bald:
Valdrade Niece to Thietgaud, and Daughter of Gontier, this being Archbishop of
Colen, the other of Treves: these two Prelates Interessed and Flatterers having
Assembled their Suffragans at Aixla Chapelle, obliged them to dissolve the
Marriage; and immediately Lotaire publicly marries Valdrade. The pretended
Motives for this Sentence, were a supposed Incest of Thietberges with her own
Brother; and the Bishop of Mets his assuring them, that Duke Huebert who could
do all things in that Court, had forced the Prince to take Thietberge for Wife
after the death of the King his Father, who in his Life time, said he, had made
him Marry Valdrade.

At this time Nicholas I. was Pope, a Prelate of great capacity, and one that
carried it high: He wrote concerning this to Charles, who before sought to
quarrel with Lotaire; and indeed would have expelled him, to break this Match,
had not Louis the German King interposed and obliged them to meet at a general
Assembly. Lotaire appearing there, promised to submit to the judgment of the
Church; and to elude Charles his pursuit, appealed to the Pope, praying to let
this cause be judged by a Council of French Bishops to be held at Mets, and
whither his Holiness might send his Legates.

The Holy Father grants his request; the Council was assembled in June. The two
Bishops Goutaire and Thietgaud served the passion of the young Prince: his Rome
to have the Popes approbation. But far from that, he calls a Council in the
Lateran Palace, by whom they were deposed and both of them excommunicated, and
it was declared that all the other Bishops who were assisting at this false
judgment should incur the same punishment, unless they craved pardon by express
Legates.

Thietgaud and Gontaire replied very smartly to the decree he published, and
framed another whereby they declared him excommunicate himself, and
contravening even, said they, the Holy Canons favoring the excommunicated, and
separating through pride from the society of the other Bishops. Which did not a
Photius Patriarch of Constantinople, and the obstinate resistance of Hincmar
Archbishop of Reims. Nevertheless soon after Thietgaud submitted to the
Sentence, but could not obtain his absolution during the life of Nicholas. But
the Archbishop of Collen regarded it not, still continuing in his obstinacy.

Charles the Bald's subjects, male-contented with his Government, had made
several Leagues against him: he engages his Friends likewise to make one for
his service, and to meet in all parts of the Country under his Standards, to be
ready to

Valdrade had promised to go for absolution to Rome; she went twice into Italy.
And twice repenting her having repented, returned back. The Pope having
therefore Assembled his Church declared her excommunicate, and wrote very harsh
Letters Lotaire, threatening to deprive him of his Kingdom.

There is no craft nor submissions which this Prince did not put in practice to
elude that Sentence. But the Pope not valuing all those Arts, sent a Legate into
France named Arsenius: who addressing himself to the German Louis called a
Synod, Lotaire that he must take his Wife again, or remain excommunicated with
all his Adherents. The Kings his Uncles maintained this Sentence in such sort,
that for the time he was forced to obey.

But so soon as the Legate was departed France, he began afresh to mis-use his
Wife, to threaten to make process against her for Adultery, and prove that
crime by combat. The accused retires to the protection of Charles, the Pope
takes her business much to heart, and excommunicates Valdrade; and Duke Huebert
Brother Lotaire plunders his Country, kills his people, Empp. Basilius,
Macedonius, who flew Michael III. who Associated him. And Louis II.
and exercised all manner of cruelty, till he was slain himself, by Count
Conrard, Father of that Rodolph who was the First King of Burgundy beyond the
Jour, or Transjurain.

Solomon had fancied that the Kingdom of Bretagne, though Neomene had obtained
it rather by conquest then succession, belonged to him, because he was the Son
Rivalon eldest Brother to that King. Thus having forgotten he was carefully and
tenderly bred under his tuition, he contrives a conspiracy against Herispoux
his Son, assaults him in the Fields, then kills him in the Church to which he
fled for safety, and so puts the Crown all bloody upon his own head.

Neomene and he entitled themselves Kings of Bretagne, and a great part of
Gaul, because in effect they possessed the Countries of Main and with that
the lower Anjou, which they had wrested from the French. For this cause was
Anjou divided in two Counties, the one containing what is beyond the River
Maine and held by these Breton Kings, the other what lies on this side, and
remained to the French.

At the same time the Normans entering into Neustria by the Loire, spread
themselves all over Nantois, Poitou, Anjou, and Tourraine. Ranulfe Duke of
Aquitain, and Duke Robert the strong, who was so called because he guarded
those Marches against these Barbarians and the Bretons, having attaqued them in
a Post which they had fortified near the River, were by misfortune both slain
in the combat: So that their Army wanting a Head, though they got the
advantage, let those robbers get away from them.

Robert had two Sons very young, Eudes and Robert whom we shall find to have
reigned hereafter.

The Saracens tormented Italy no less. Lotaire went thither with his Forces,
not only to assist the Emperor Louis his Brother, but moreover by this means to
deserve and gain the Favor of the Pope, which was Adrian successor to
Nicholas; hoping in time to obtain the dissolution of his Marriage with
Thietberge. The Holy-Father received him very well, because he assured him he
had punctually obeyed to all that was enjoined him: but when both he and his
came to receive the Holy Communion from his hands, he obliged them all to swear
it was true that he had quitted Valdrade.

Now it happened shortly after that the most part of these Lords died of sickness
or otherwise, in such numbers and so suddenly as if they had been cut down by
the Sword of an exterminating Angel; and Lotaire himself was Seized with a
Fever at Luca, which he dragged along to Piacenza where he gave up the Ghost
the 6 th of August. Which some interpreted a divine Vengeance, for the false
and Sacrilegious Oath he and his Courtiers had made. The Body of Jesus Christ
in the Sacrament being a destroying Sword to the wicked and unworthy
Communicant.

Charles King of Provence, endeavored to reap his succession, and was Crowned
at Mets by the Bishop Adventius. But he survived not long after, and died
without Issue. He was Interred in the Church of St. Peter's at Lions.

LOUIS in Bavaria and Germany. CHARLES in West-France, Burgundy and Lorrain.
LOUIS II Emperor in Italy.

Charles who then held a Parliament at Poissy, informed of the death of
Lotaire, went and Seized on the Kingdom of Lorraine, neither minding the
Emperor Louis Brother of the two last Kings, to whom it should have belonged,
nor the Mediation of the Pope who desired him by an express Legation, to do his
Nephew Justice. The Bishops of that Kingdom being Assembled at Mets, gave him
the Crown; And Hincmar the Archbishop, chief promoter of that Decree, put it
on his Head with the usual Ceremonies.

Lotaire had one Son and two Daughters by Valdrade. The two Daughters were
Berte and Gisele; Berte was first wife to Count Thibauld Father of Hugh Count
and Marquess of Provence, and by her second Marriage to Adelbert Marquess of
Tuscany, Father of Guy and Lambert. Gisele was Wedded to Godfrey the Dane, who
Reigned in Friseland, the Son was named Hugh who when he came to Age contended
for the Kingdom of Lorrain.

Hermentrude Wife to Charles the Bald, dying at St. Denis the 16 th of October,
Richende or Richilda his Mistress, Daughter of Earl Buvin or Boves, and the
Sister to Thietberge Widow of King Lotaire III.

It was with some justice, but without legal power, that the Pope should take
Lotaire. He dispatched a second Embassy to Charles the Bald, to exhort him to
surrender it to the Emperor Louis, otherwise he would Excommunicate him; And he
wrote to the Bishops that they should forbear all, Communion with that King,
unless they would be cut off from the Church of Rome. Charles replied modestly
enough to the Legates; but the French Bishops went a higher Note, and the
Archbishop Hincmar wrote very smart Letters to Adrian.

His Nephew, of the same name, Bishop of Laon, was of an other opinion, and
with much heat maintained all those Orders brought from the Pope. He had
Excommunicated a Norman Lord, because he detained some Lands belonging to his
Church whereof the King had given him the Benefice. His proceedings were blamed
and condemned by the Bishops at the Synod of Verberie: he appealed to the Pope:
for which cause his Uncle having cited him before the Council of Attigny, which
consisted of the Bishops of twelve Provinces, he caused his Equipage to be
Plundered by the way, and when he came to the Assembly forced him to renounce
Hincmars to Rome: but the Archbishop replied with force, and hindered him.

This dispute went so far that the Bishop of Laon was deposed and clapped in
Prison, whereafter two years Persecution his Eyes were put out.

The two Brothers Louis and Charles, after many persuasions used by the latter;
and by the mediation of the Bishops and Lords, met in a place agreed upon on
this side the Meuse, each with a certain number of People, and there divided
the Kingdom of Lorrain in two, without having any regard to their Nephew the
Emperor Louis.

Whose cause the Pope still supporting, sent a famous Legation to the two
Brothers. Louis s^nt them back to Charles, and he taking time to delay,
advanced as far as Lions, as it were to confer with the Pope: but it was in
effect for a quite contrary design. For very far from doing his Nephew justice,
he likewise seized on the Kingdom of Burgundy, where he met with no opposition
but from Berthe the Wife of Count Gerard, who sustained a Siege in Vienne and
surrendered it upon composition. Charles the Bald gave this County in charge to
Boson Brother to the Queen Richilda his Wife, whom he also made Duke of
Aquitain and Grand-Master of the Porters Princeps O* stiariorum.
, and raised him in such sort, that he was shortly after one of those that
dismembered the Monarchy.

Hincmar, who by his Genius no less powerful then daring, had rendered himself
very necessary. He had no small ado to hinder the designs and enterprises of
Carloman eldest Son of his King. This Prince had some years before conspired
against his Father who had made him a Deacon in despite of him; and having
rebelled another time, he put him in Prison. The Prayers of the Popes Legates,
who came the year before into France, had got him out again: but abusing this
mercy, he fell again to his old Practices. Now being fallen the third time into
his Fathers hands, he caused him to be condemned to Death, and then changed
that Sentence to a deprivation of his sight, that he might have time to repent
Some time afterward a couple of Monks craftily got him out of Prison, and
conveyed him to his Uncle the German King, who gave him an Abbey for his
maintenance. But Death did not leave him long in the enjoyment of it.

This cursed Custom of putting out Eyes and other ways of dismembring, was the
invention of the Greek Princes; and it has been long practiced in the West, so
that Vassals in their Oaths of Fidelity; swore they would defend the persons of
their Lords, and never consent they should be maimed in any part of their
Bodies.

About these times the Gascons desiring to collect their Forces under a Duke of
their own Nation, and of the Race of their ancient Dukes to secure themselves
against the fury of the Normans, and the revenge of Charles the Bald, went into
Spain to the Son of Loup Centulle, whom the King of the Asturias had made an
Earl in old Castille, to desire and get one of his Sons. The youngest after the
refusal of all his Brothers, accepted the Honor: his name was Sanche, his
surname Mitarra, the Saracens Medarra in their Tongue signifies ruin and
destruction.
had bestowed it on him because he was their Ruin, and their Scourge. From him
are proceeded the Hereditary Dukes of Gascogny who lasted near 200 years. He
had a Successor of the same name and surname as himself. This Son was Father of
Garcia Sanchez the Crooked, who had three, Garcia Sanchez Duke of Gascogny,
William Count of Fezenzac, and Arnold Count of Astarack. This last not Born the
natural way, but by an incision they made in his Mothers Flank, was surnamed
Non-nat. Not Born.

The Princes of the Carlovinian Line, were for the most part, of weak Spirits,
Fools, or Sottish. Louis Emperor of Italy, though Pious and Valiant, was so had
no Male-Children. And even Adelgise Duke of Benevent made him Prisoner, and
extorted from him very unjust things.

Louis the German gave their Father a great deal of trouble, and seemed to
punish him for the disquiet he had given to his. The eldest named Charles, and
afterward surnamed the Gross, troubled without doubt with horror for the
conspiracies he had made against him, had violent fitts of Madness, believing
he had seen the Devil and was possessed by him. He was cured of that Frenzy for
some time, after many Devotions, and Vows over the Graves of Saints: but his
Brain having been once so disturbed, he felt it all his life afterward.

Normans had seized on the City of Angers about four years since, and settled
themselves there with their Families, from whence, when they had a mind to it
they ran about the Loire, and all those other Rivers which fall into it,
loading their Barks, with the Plunder and Pillage of all the Country. Charles
assisted by Solomon King of the Bretons, besieged them in that City. The Siege
was long: the Bretons by great labor bring it to an end; they turned the
stream of the Maine, and by this means their Vessels lay all on dry ground, and
gave them opportunity to aproach to the foot of their Wall. The Pirates could no
way have escaped, if they would have forced them: however the Bald, so terrible
had they made themselves, fearing the revenge such other Parties they had
abroad in diverse parts of the Kingdom might take, not only did them no hurt;
but likewise gave them the liberty to depart with all their plunder. They only
made a promise never to return any more into France: but at their departure
from thence, they went and nestled themselves in an Island within the Loire,
from whence they continued their old Trade.

Toward the Month of August, an unknown cause brought toward the Coast, or
Borders of Germany, a prodigious quantity of Locusts, which were about the
bigness of an inch, having six wings, and teeth as hard as a stone. In less
than an hour they had eaten up all the Herbs and Greens growing in a Country of
seven or eight Leagues in length, and two in breadth, to the very Branches and
Rinds of young Trees. After they had done incredible mischiefs, a strong Wind
hurried them into the British Sea, where they were drowned: But dead they did
no less hurt then when living: the great heaps thrown by the Waves upon the
Shore, infecting the Country with the Plague.

Solomon, who was become a good Man and devout to the doing of Miracles, was
thinking to retire into a Monastery, and leave his Crown to his Son Gueguon:
two of his Cousin Germans Pasteneten or Pasquitan Son of Neomene, and Vrsand,
assisted by Wygon Son of Duke Rodolph, and some French Inhabitants of Bretagne,
whom he had treated ill, conspired against him, and besieged him in his Castle
of Plelan; where surrendering himself and his Son, upon some false promises the
French put out his eyes, and a few days after put him to death.

The two Cousins having shared the Sovereignty, soon quarreled each other, and
came to blows near Rennes; Vrfand with a Thousand men only, charged Pasquitan
who had Twelve times as many, and got the advantage.

The other Lords of the Country, after the example of these two, set up
likewise Alain Earl of Broerec, that is to say, the Territory of Vennes and
that of Porhoet, and Solomon Count of Rennes, Son of the Sister to a King of
the same name; On the other hand the Normans wasted all the Country; so that
Bretagne thus torn, lost the name of a Kingdom. And took that of a County, and
then a Duchy. In those days, these two Titles were confounded.

Soon after Vrfand fell sick to extremity; Pasquitan having notice of it gets
his Forces together. Vrfand whose courage could not fail, but with his Life,
was carried in a Litter to the head of his men* his presence gave them the
victory, but hastened his death a little. A great deal of honor which cost him
but a Moments Breath.

Alain his Brother, and Judicael Son of the Daughter to Herispoux. They found
it better to share it by agreement then by the Sword, and at length it fell to
Alain by the Death of Judicael, who was slain in a mentioned hereafter.
fight against the Normans.

Louis Emperor of Italy Dies without Male Children in the Month of August An.
875 the 20 th of his Empire, who had been mightily disturbed by Factions of the
Grandees his State, and incursions of the Saracens. His Tomb is to be seen at
Milan in St. Ambrose Church.

His Wife was named Engelberge, according to some the Daughter of Ethico who
was Son of another Ethico Duke of Suevia or Germany, by whom he had but one
Daughter only, named Hermengarde, who An. 876. was Ravished by Boson Brother to
the Queen Richilde, and with the consent of Everard Berenger Son of the Duke of
Friuli; who had her in keeping.

Louis the Germanick. Charles the Bald.

Germanick and the Bald who should first Seize upon Italy. The Bald making
great diligence got thither before Charles and Carloman two of the Germanicks
Sons, who went two several ways, whilst their Brother Louis fell upon France to
make a diversion. For the two first the Bald amused them with very fair words,
and sent them back handsomely; and as for the third, the Prelates made such
pathetical remonstrances to him, that he took pity of the poor people, and
returned without committing many acts of Hostility.

The Popes interest was to have an Emperor of a great name, one that could lend
him powerful assistance, as Pepin and Charlemaine had done, but yet not abide
in Italy, where he must have lain too heavy upon his shoulders: wherefore he
would have no Italian Lord, because they were both weak and resided upon the
place; and besides being to choose out of the Carlovinian Line, he could not so
well comply with the roughness of those that Governed in Germany. He therefore
pitched upon Charles the Bald, and incited him by a sumptuous Embassy to come
to Rome to receive the Imperial Diadem, as if it had been absolutely in his
disposal.

Empp. Basilius and Charles II. called the Bald at Christmas.
He set it on his Head upon Christmas Day with great Solemnity. After which
the new Emperor bestowed the Duchy of Spoleta upon Gay the Son of Lambert, and
that of Friuli on Berenger the Son of Everard.

At his return he received also the Crown of Lombardy at Pavia, and a
Confirmation of the Imperial one at an Assembly of Counts and Prelates in the
said City,

And the following year, there being yet several Lords in Italy who refused to
acknowledge him, the Pope held another Council in Rome to Confirm him a second
time adding Excommunications against the refractory.

Western Empire could be but a vain or empty Title, and at most had nothing
belonging to it but the Exarchate of Ravenna, and the Pentapolis; for his power
was not Rome, and the Kingdom of Lombardy belonged, nor held any wise of it.

Nevertheless the Bald esteeming himself wholly obliged to the Pope, and of
Gallican Church. In a Council held at Pontigon he supported as much as he could
the Popes Legates, who brought Letters of Primacy to Ansegise Archbishop of
Sens, saying the Pope had Commissioned him to assist at that Council, and to
cause his Orders to be put in execution, and in effect he made him take his
Seat immediately next the Legates. But the French Prelates encouraged by Hincmar,
who thought he better deserved that honor then Ansegise, could never be
induced neither by Prayers nor threatenings to give consent to that Novelty. At
the eight Session the Bald brought in the Empress his wife (so fond was he of
her) with the Crown upon her Head, to preside there with him; of which the
Bishops were so ashamed that they did not so much as rise up to receive her.

Though the Germanick were Seventy years old, and much discomposed in his
Family by the discord amongst his Sons, he had nevertheless so great a
resentment, for that Charles the Bald did him no justice in the matter of the
Empire and Territories of Italy, that he gathered all his Forces to make a
powerful irruption upon Neustria. Being come to Francfort, Death broke the
third of his life and his undertakings the 28 th of August, the Seventieth of
his Age, and the 59, since his first Coronation

This Prince was well read in the Learning of those times. He was all his life
long Active, Warlike and Liberal, one that cared not for money but to bestow
it, and had a greater esteem for Steel then Gold; a great Zealot in Justice and
Religion, an equitable distributer of commands and employments, in Fine
approaching more then any Prince of his Line, to the noble virtues and
qualities of Charlemaine: By Emne his sole wife, a Spaniard by Nation, much
applauded by the Authors of those days for her Wisdom and Piety, he had three
Sons, Carloman, Charles, and Louis.

Bald, of a defender which he was just before, became an aggressor, and
resolved to strip those young Princes his Nephews before they could be aware.
Louis nearest Neighbor to this danger sent Ambassadors to him, to put him in
mind of the Treaty made with his Father, and offered him to prove by thirty
witnesses, whereof ten should undergo the trial of cold water, ten more of hot
water, and other ten that of burning Irons, that they had on their part never
infringed it in the least.

The Bald petended to give ear to those justifications, and agreed to a
Cessation, during which he made Oath he would not molest them. Yet he pursued
his march by narrow and unfrequented ways through the Mountains, intending to
surprise him near Andernack where he lay encamped, and to put out his Eyes. But
the Bishop of Colen who was with him, having in vain used all his endeavors to
dissuade him from this treachery, gave secret notice to Louis, who put himself
into so good a posture as he deseated his great Army, and might have cut them
all off would he but have pursued them.

Carloman the eldest had the Kingdom of Bavaria to which belonged Panonia,
Carinthia, Bohemia and Moravia. Louis the second had East- France or Germany,
and with that part of the Kingdom of Lorrain. Charles had the Country of the
Grisions, Swisserland, Souaube, Alsace, and the other part of Lorrain bordering
on them.

CHARLES the Bald, Emperor, King of Neustria, Aquitain, Burgundy and Provence.
Carloman, King of Bavaria, and the Title of King of Italy. Louis II. of
East-France. Charles of Germany, properly so called. Lorrain between both.

During all these dissentions the Normans had fair play. The Bald put no stop
to them but with Presents of Gold and the like, which rather invited them soon
after to come again, then persuaded them to stay away; So that while he lost
himself with the imaginations of vain conquests, they imposed True in old French
signifies Tribute.
Tribute upon West- France, and had it paid as themselves demanded, or after
their own mode, the reason perhaps why they were called Truands.

The Saracens on the other hand tormented Italy no less: they had Fortified
themselves at Tarente, and having made a League with the Duke of Naples, sacked
all to the very gates of Rome. Pope John cries out and calls upon the Bald for
help, and as a great favor sends him the confirmation of his Election to the
Empire. He goes therefore into Italy with Richilda his wife whom he led about
every where. The Pope comes to meet him as far as Versel, Crowned the Empress
at Tortona, and from thence they went down to Pavia, to consult with the Lords
of Italy about the means to drive out the Saracens.

While they were there they heard that Carloman King of Bavaria approached with
a great Army to resume the Kingdom of Italy and the Empire. Upon the bruit of
his march the Assembly dissolves, the Pope flies to Rome, and Charles makes
have into France: But at the same time Carloman Seized with a Pannique fear,
turns back again to Germany.

Whilst the Bald was absent from his Kingdom, the French Lords formed a
conspiracy against him, Boson himself his Favorite and Brother in Law to his
Wife, was of the Knot. They hated him mortally, and the occasion or pretense
was, that he raised people of mean Birth, and seemed to despise the French
Nation, in affecting to wear his Clothes after the Greek Mode who were their
mortal Enemies. It happened therefore by the wicked contrivances of these
Factious persons combining, that upon his return, passing by Mount Conis, he
was poisoned by Sedecias his Physician, a Jew by Birth, and reputed a Magician.
Accidents not un-common Vercel, and seven years after brought thence to the
Abbey of St. Denis. He died at the Age of 55 years, the second of his Empire,
and the 38 th of his Reign, accounting from the Decease of his Father.

At he loved Pride and vain Pomp more than Solidity, so Fortune in conformity
to his humor, made him happy in appearance but unhappy in effect, she bestowed
many great Lordships and but little good success upon him. The best of his
qualities was that he acquired great learning, and gratified good Scholars
with Honor and rewards, seeking and sending into Greece and Asia for them to
enrich France by their knowledge; worthy of praise for so doing, had he but
taken care to provide for the necessity and security of his Country, before be
brought in those Ornaments.

His Father was blamed for raising people of a servile condition to
Ecclesiastical dignities: And he going farther yet advanced very mean persons
to Military Employments, and to such dignities as were due only to the greatest
in his Kingdom: This turned the whole State, as it were upside-down, the
greatest Families sunk to nothing, and the meanest were raised to the highest
pitch, to whom the obscurity and ignorance of those times was very favorable
in concealing and preventing

The City and Abbey of St. Denis are obliged to this King for the Fair at
Landy.

He had no Children by Richilda his second wife; but by Hermentrude his first
he had many: there was but one now alive, which was Louis whom they surnamed
the Stammering, because in truth he was so.

The hatred they bare to the Father was transferred to the Son: he endeavored
to take it away by force of gratifications, bestowing Abbeys upon some, to
others Lands and Employments were given: but by pleasing and pacifying a few,
he created a world of discontents; and the Princes (so the great Lords were
called) took offense, that he should grant of himself, what he could not well
do without their consent, and in the general Assembly.

The Fathers Will, was a necessary condition.
ordained he should succeed him; his Mother in Law Richilda comes with all
speed and brings him his Father Charles the Bald's Will, by which it was
manifest he had given him his Kingdom, and did invest him in it by the Sword of
St. Peter, and the Royal ornaments which he sent to him.

Louis being a little better Authorized by this means, the Lords agreed with
him, but certainly not till it had cost him a great deal: And the Archbishop
Hincmar Crowned him in the City of Reims the 8 th day of December.

LOUIS II.
Surnamed The Stammerer.
King XXVI.
Aged about XXX, or XXXII. Years.
POPES, JOHN VIII. During all this Reign, and in the following.
Louis, called the Stammerer, Emperor, King of Neustria and West- France are
the same.
Neustria, Aquitain, Burgundy and Provence. Carloman, King of Bavaria. Louis of
East-France. Charles of Germany. Lorraine to both.

Lambert Count of Spoleta and Albert Marquess of Tuscany, partisans of King
Carloman who pretended to the Empire, being entered into Rome kept Pope John
VIII. a prisoner. But soon after, having made his escape out of their hands, he
takes Shipping and Lands in Provence, whence Empp.
he was conducted to Lions. From that place, always defrayed in his expenses
Basilius and Louis the Stammerer.
by the Bishops of France, he came to Troyes, where he held a Council: the King
came likewise thither, and by his hands was Crowned Emperor, the seventh of
September.

Hugh Bastard Son to King Lotaire II. and Valdrade, who pretended to be
Legitimate, and had collected together some herds of Robbers to regain the
Kingdom of Lorrain. He likewise restored Hincmar Bishop of Laon, permitted him
to say Mass, though he were blind, and bestowed one half of the revenue of the
Bishopric upon him.

Stammerer going toward Lorraine, conferred about Marsenne upon the Meuse,
with Louis King of Germany. They made a Treaty by which they divided Lorrain
betwixt them, as it had been betwixt their Fathers, and the Stammerer promised
him part in Italy.

Neither the obedience nor affection of the Lords was firm toward him, they
gave little heed to his Orders: and it happened that having taken up Arms to
suppress Bernard Marquess of Gothia, whose Government he had given to Bernard
Earl of Auvergne, he fell sick in his passage by Autun in Burgundy, not without
suspicion he was poisoned, wherefore he sent for his Son Louis whom he put into
the hands and keeping of Bernard Earl of Auvergne, Thierry his great
Chamberlain, the Abbot Hugh, and some other Lords. This Hugh or Hugues was very
powerful toward the latter part of the Reign of Charles the Bald, under Louis
the Stammerer, and likewise under his Children.

The Stammerer being with much difficulty brought to Compeigne, gave up his
Soul upon Holy- Friday the 19 th of April: He was buried at the same place in
the Abbey-Church of St. Cornille, his Age was 30 or 35 years, of which he had
Reigned only Louis, by the Bishop of Beauvais and an Earl, with order to have
him anointed King as soon as possible.

He was in his youth married to An^^arde, by whom he had had two Sons, this
Louis of whom we speak and Carloman: but as she (...) of mean extraction, the
King his Father without whose consent he married her, obliged him to put her
away. For this reason it is that some Historians say that these two Princes are
Bastards. After this divorce he took another named Adelaid, or Alive Daughter
of some English Prince, and Sister to Wilfrid Abbot of Flav^gny in the Duchy
of Burgundy. She was with child when he died, and brought a Posthumus Son into
the World, Born the 17 th of September following. He was named Charles the
Simple.

The Western Empire remained vacant two whole years, and Italy in an extreme
confusion, thorough the discords of the Lords, and the spoil and ravages of the
Saracens, to whom the Pope was fain to pay Tribute.

We may in this Reign, place the Original of the Earls of Anjou, from a Lord
named Ingelger, the Son of a Breton named Torquat or Tortulfe, on whom Charles
the Bald had bestowed some Lands in Gastinois, and Perretta Daughter of Hugo
Labbe in marriage. This Ingelger was the Father of Fulke le Roux, who being
made Earl of Anjou by Charles the Simple, valiantly defended that Country
against the Normans.

LOUIS III. AND CARLOMAN, King XXVII.
At the Age of Adolescency.
POPES,
JOHN VIII. 3 Years and half in this Reign. MARTIN, Elected in January 883. S.
one Year, and 20 days. ADRIAN III. Elect. in January 884. S. One Year, 3.
Months, whereof Six Months in this Reign.
LOVIS III. And Carloman, his Brother, Kings of West-France, Burgundy and
Aquitain. CARLOMAN King of Bavaria. Louis the Young, King of Germany or
East-France. Charles the Fatt, of Germany, properly so called. Lorrain to both.

Thierry and the rest to whom the Stammerer had recommended his Son, sent to
the other Lords to meet at the general Assembly at Meaux: And they reconciled
the quarrels between Thierry and Boson. Gauzzelin one of the Princes or great
Lords of Neustria, Abbot of St. German des Prez, forgot not the injuries he had
received by the preceding Government, and having made his Party with some
Bishops and Lords, proposed that to heal the distempers of France, they ought
to bring it all under one head, and for that purpose call in Louis of Germany
(with whom he had contrived and held intelligence, as having formerly been
taken Prisoner by him at the Battle of Andernac) promising to bring him in and
make the French accept and own his Title to the prejudice of the Bastard Sons
of Louis the Stammerer; For thus he called them.

The greatest Friends to these two Princes could no other way divert this
Storm, but by yielding up to the German King that part of Lorrain which the
Bald and the Stammerer had possessed. And ever since, that Kingdom, though
disputed and diverse times resumed by the Kings of West- France, yet remained at
last with the Germans or Kings of East- France.

Louis would not have been satisfied with less than the whole Monarchy, had not
his affairs pressed him to return home in have; For being informed at M^ts of
the sickness of Carloman his eldest Brother who was Seized with the Palsy, he
posted to Bavaria to prevent him from giving the Kingdom to Arnold his Bastard
Son. Now Carloman died soon after, and was Interred at Ottinghen in Bavaria in
St. Maximilian's Monastery founded by him. He had no Legitimate Children, but
two natural ones, Arnold to whom he could leave only the Duchy of Carinthia,
King Louis having even in his life time received the Oaths of his Subjects; and
Gisele, who An. 890. married Zuendipold King of Moravia, whom for that reason
some have called Carloman's Son.

Louis III. and Carloman as beforesaid. Louis and Charles the Fatt as
abovesaid.

Gauzelin and Conrard fearing to be oppressed by the other Neustrian Lords,
applied themselves to Lewitgarde the wife of Lewis of Germany, a very ambitious
Princess who solicited her Husband so earnestly, that she overpersuaded him to
return once more into France with much greater strength then he at first
carried.

Louis eldest Son of the Stammerer, but also Carloman his Brother to be both
Crowned in the Abbey of Ferrieres in Gastinois.

Amiens, divided their Fathers Kingdom betwixt them; Lewis had Neustria, and
Carloman the Kingdoms of Aquitain and Burgundy.

At their first accession they meet with the displeasure of seeing two
Kingdoms, belonging to their Father dismembered from the Succession, which were
Lorrein, as we have observed, and Burgundy. As for this last it was lopped off
by Boson. That Lord had been in such high favor with Charles the Bald, that he
had given him Provence, if not in Sovereignty, at least to perpetuity, and his
Niece Hermengarde to Wife. Having these advantages he was encouraged by that
ambitious Princess to make himself King; So that having gained the Lords and
Prelates of those Countries he was Crowned King of Burgundy in the Royal Castle
of Mantale in Dauphine by the hands of the Archbishop of Lions.

This attempt went near the hearts of the two Brother Kings: but besides him
they had two Enemies more to deal withal, their Cousin Louis and the Normans.
They gained a Battle against the last night the River of Vienne the first day
of November. After which leaving their victory imperfect, they turned head
against Louis, who by the instigation of the Abbot Gauzelin was advanced even
to their Frontiers. Having intelligence they were coming toward him, he durst
not march forward, but demanded to parley with them at Gondouville where they
saw each other.

In his retreat he defeated in Hanault a crew of eight or ten thosuand Normans,
but lost his Bastard Son in that Bustle. Those Pirates had burnt Saint Omers,
Terouenne, Arras, Tournay, Saint Riquier, Saint Valery, and all the Countries
of Hainault, Flanders and Boulonois. Four Burghers of Tournay, who fled to
Noyon, rebuilt the City, and let houses at easy Rents. Arras was deserted
thirty years, the Inhabitants having forsaken it for Beauvais.

The four Kings to compose their contests, had assigned a general Assembly at
It may be Gondreville.
Gondoul a Town near Mets. Louis of Germany sent to excuse himself because he
was fallen into a sit of sickness: but Charles his Brother came there and
conferred with Louis and Carloman touching their common interest and affairs.
They found it necessary to enter into a league together for the destruction of
their Enemies. Louis the Germanick, with Louis and Carloman against Hugh the
Son of Valdrade, who sacked all the open Countries of Lorrein: And Charles the
Fatt also with his two Brothers to pull down Boson's pride.

As for the first, the Forces of Louis the German and the two Brothers having
encountered the Army belonging to Hugh, commanded by Tybault his Brother in Law,
they put it to the rout and made a great slaughter.

Then Charles the Fatt and his two Brothers marching jointly against Boson,
defeated him in Battle, and afterward besieged Vienne, where that Rebel had
left his wife, retreating himself to the Mountains. We shall not find this
siege at an end till about two years hence.

Charles was come thither upon the request of his Cousins, and had left the
affairs of Italy, whither had he made one Voyage already, and in some Months
time had secured to himself all Lombardy, whereof he was Crowned King by the
Archbishop of Milan. And being impatient to return again, he took leave of
them, and having repassed the Mountains, went directly to Rome* accompanied by
the Patriarch of Aquilea.

At this time the Pope, who hesitated on whom he should bestow the Imperial
Crown, could not deny a Prince so powerfully Armed, and therefore set it on his
Head upon Christmas Day, in the year 881.

This was the proper word, as well for Land, as at Sea.
Fleet of Normans entering by the Vaal or Waal, fortified Empp. Basilius and
Charles the Fatt, at Christmas.
themselves at leisure in the Palace of Nimeghen: So that Louis not being able
to force them, only obliged them to quit the Kingdom. They went away indeed
with all their men, but took all their Plunder with them likewise.

Another very strong Fleet going up the Sum, forced the rich Abbey of Corbie
Amiens, then spread themselves at large over the neighboring Countries. The
mischief was very great: therefore Louis leaving his Brother Carloman at the
siege of Vienne, hastened into Picardy, fell upon the Normans near Amiens, and
laid nine thousand of them dead on the place. Nevertheless whether it were that
he expected some other greater Body of them was marching toward him, or was
Seized with a Pannique fear, he returned home, and the remainder of those
Barbarians fell a plundring as before.

A third Body of them came to the place called Haslou nigh the Meuse, and
having fortified themselves there, set the City of Liege on Fire, and likewise
burned Tongres, which had otherwhile been ruined by the Vandals, then set fire
to Colen, Bonne, Nuis, the Palace of Aix la Chapelle, and Triers, and Me^ts;
and having Mets was slain, made a horrible slaughter amongst the poor Peasants
who were in Arms for them.

Louis the German was getting his Forces together to oppose them, he died at
Francfort the 20 th of January in the strength of his Age, having Reigned but
six years. His Corpse was conveyed to St. Nazaire the Abbey-Church of Loreshein,
where his Fathers lay.

He was the only Brother of three that married: his wife was called Luidgarde,
daughter of Ludolfe Duke of Saxony, and Sister to Otho Father of Henry
L'Oiseleur, or Bird-catcher. He had but one Son, who in An. 880. playing in a
Window, fell down and bruised himself so that he died.

Charles the Fatt Emperor, King of Italy, Germany or East-France, Bavaria and
Lorrain. Louis and Carloman of East-France, Aquitain and part of Burgundy.

The Succession of the German Kingdom and likewise the necessity of affairs
called Charles the Fatt into France, where the Normans posted at Haston played
the Devils, assisting and being reciprocally assisted by Hugh the Bastard of
Valdrade: who invited and animated those Barbarians, and kindled factions
amongst the Lords, to revenge himself at least, if he could not settle himself.

Charles therefore comes over the Mountains, confirmed the donation of
Carinthia to Arnold his Bastard Nephew, and gave him the command of his Army,
and after he had held a Parliament at Worms, Arnold having joined him, he
marched toward Haston.

His Vanguard at first made the Normans retreat; And had it not been for the
intelligence and correspondence between some of his Chief Officers (in favor
without doubt of Hugh) and those Barbarians, he might have forced them upon
this first disorder. The Emperor afterward blocked them up with his whole
Army: But a most dreadful Tempest and furious Plague infesting his Army, were
once more favorable to them: So that after ten days Siege, they were quit upon
condition to leave the Kingdom, whence they carried infinite riches.

Sigefroy and Godfrey. The first Embarked with above 40000 men. The other,
whether for Interest or Devotion, received Holy Baptism, and had the Emperor
for his Godfather, who gave him a natural Daughter of King Lotaires II. in
Marriage, named Gisile, and two thousand and fourscore Livers in Gold, with the
Duchy of Frisia.

Louis King of West-France, going to meet some Breton Princes, who were
bringing him an Army to march against the Normans, fell sick at Tours, whence
being brought back in a Litter, he died at Saint Denis in France, the of
August, having Reigned somewhat more then three years. Paul Emilius says that
spurring his Horse to run after a pretty Maiden that fled from him into a
House, he broke his back riding in at the door which was too low, and thereof
died.

Carolus Crassus, or Charles the Fatt, Emperor and King of Germany. Carloman
King of West-France, Aquitaine and Burgundy.

Carloman immediately went from the Siege of Vienne, leaving the prosecution
thereof to Earl Richard, to secure his Succession and head that Army, which was
marching against the Normans. Upon his arrival at Autan he had information that
those Robbers being afraid were fled out of the River Loire, and a few days
after, he sees Richard come to him, who having taken Vienne, brought thither
both the wife and daughter of Boson Prisoners.

From thence he marches against another Body of Normans, who having gotten in
by the Mouth of the Sum, ran up as far as Laon and Reimes: he charged them
vigorously, and one part of them were defeated, the rest made their escape in
their Barks by the River Aisne.

At this time the grand Hincmar Archbishop of Reims worn out with age, and
pierced with grief to see his Country thus Plundered and wasted, himself being
forced to fly from his City, threatened by those Barbarians, as they were
conveying him in his Litter, he died at Espernay, leaving the Gallican Church
almost quite destitute of any Prelate, that understood her Rights or took care
of her discipline.

After the example of the Emperor Charles the Fatt, Carloman his Cousin treated
with the Normans to go out of his Countries, compounding with them for twelve
thousand Marks of Silver to do so.

d'Iveline near Montfort a days journey from Paris, he was mortally wounded by a
wild Boar, or as others say, by a Gentleman of his Train, who thought to dart
the Boar. He lies buried at Saint Denis. In all he Reigned five years, that
is, three jointly with his Brother, and two alone.

His Father had contracted him to Boson's daughter An. 878. But it is most
likely he never did marry her: Nor do we find that he had any Children. For
that Louis le Faineant, or Do-nothing, which some would bestow upon him, is a
pure Chimera.

Normans had the news that he was dead, they entered upon the Kingdom again,
subtly interpreting, according to their Genius, and their own interest, that
the Treaty expired with his life. Hugh the Abbot fought them, and made so
terrible a slaughter, that they left France in quiet for some time.

CHARLES III.
Surnamed Crassus, or, The Fatt.
King XXVIII.
Aged about L. Years.
POPES.
ADRIAN III. Nine Months under this Reign. STEPHEN IV. Elect. in May 885. S.
five Years, and some Months, whereof 2 Years. 8 Months under this Reign.
Charles the Fatt Emperor in Italy, and Germany. Charles the Simple aged 7
years, a Minor under the Tutelage of Hugues the Abbot, in France.

Western-French standing in need of a King in his Majority to command their
Armies, did not confer the Crown upon Charles the Posthumus Son of Lewis the
Stammerer, who was but seven years of Age, but gave their Oaths of Fidelity to
Charles the Fatt, who was very potent, and was not as yet observed to be weak
Spirited and inclining to be distracted.

Hugh the Great with his Guardianship and Education; who held in Fief, the
Earldom of Paris and the Duchy of France, that is to say, all that lies within
the Seine, the Loire and the Sea, excepting only the Bishoprics.

Valdrade's Bastard had not quitted his pretention to Lorraine: And Godfrey the
Norman Duke of Frisia, his Brother in Law, were creating some quarrel that they
might have an opportunity to restore him to the possession of that Kingdom. The
Emperor Charles ridd himself both of the one and the other, but by unhandsome
means, according to the contrivance of Henry Duke of Saxony. For this Henry and
Guillebert, or Gilbert, Archbishop of Colen, having drawn Godfrey to a
Conference at an Island in the Rhine, there massacred him, and all the Normans
that attended: And at the same time Hugh, who came upon his promise of Faith
and security to Ioinville, was Seized an d his Eyes put out, then confined to
the Abbey of St. Gal.

Normans which began to be allayed, burst out again upon this bloody Treachery,
and made most horrible work under the conduct of Sigefroy. They entered the
River Seine with 700 Barks, and so great a number of other Vessels that the
stream was covered with them for above two Leagues in length: the City of Paris
seated on an Island, and having Bridges on either branch of the River, put a
stop to this formidable Fleet. The Barbarians who would needs have the passage
thorough this River free, held it besieged three years.

Gosslin, the Abbot Ebon his Nephew, the Earl Eudes, whom we shall hereafter
find to be King, with a great many valiant Knights and the Parisians, whose
courage was then greater than their City, defended it better then it was
attaqued.

The besiegers did from time to time make attempts, and assaulted the Towers of
the two Gates, from whence being repulsed would make incursions upon the
adjacent Provinces, still keeping the City blocked up with Forts which they had
built very nigh the place.

Twice did the Emperor Charles send thither Henry Duke of Saxony upon the
carnest entreaties of the French, who deputed Count Eudes to go and implore
assistance from him. The first time he forced the Danish Camp, and put some
relief into the City, which done he returned: but the second riding headlong
imprudently into a ditch covered with straw and some small branches (a
Stratagem often used in those times) he fell into the snare, and was instantly
slain and stripped. His Army finding themselves a Body without a Head returned
into Germany.

Montmartre. Yet through some discontent which happened between him and the
French Lords, or some other cause, he chose rather to make use of Gold then
Steel to drive out those Robbers, and came to composition with them: importing
that for seven hundred pounds weight of Silver, they should go out of France in
the Month of March, that in the mean while they might winter about Sens in the
Duchy of Burgundy, where those troublesome Guests staid six Months. And this
concluded he returned much troubled with a grievous Headache, for which they
were fain to make diverse Incisions.

When they were assured of the State of his indisposition and affairs, they
came and planted themselves again in the Fields of St. Germans, pretending
however to keep their agreement; but indeed to surprise the City, as they
thought to have done one day about dinner time (for it was the custom then for
all the Inhabitants to dine at the same hour) if they had not been observed to
come up slowly in their Boats, which they had made proof against their darts,
and very well manned.

West-France was without any Head, and all the Lords of almost equal Authority,
unless it were somewhat they showed of more then ordinary respect to Hugh who
was Tutor to Charles the Simple; but this eminent Lord died in the great
disturbance and trouble of the Kingdom, An. 887.

Eudes, as I believe, succeeded him in the most part of his Governments, more
for his virtue, then because he was his own Brother by the Mother. For the
Genealogists assure us that their Mother was Adeleis Daughter of Louis the
Debonnaire, who had been first married to Count Conrard, by whom she had this
Hugh the Abbot and another Conrard Father to Rodolph Duke of Burgundy, and in
her second Marriage to Robert the Strong, she had Eudes and Robert.

Charles the Fatt had ever had a weak Brain, since he fancied he saw the Devil,
which grew weaker after they made Incisions in his Head. He became suspicious
of his Empress, which gave confidence to Berenger Marquess of Friuli to plunder
the equipage belonging to Luitgard Bishop of Verseil accused of Governing that
Princess at his pleasure. Nevertheless Charles showing some resentment the
Marquess came and made him satisfaction at the Parliament of Vberlinghen. But
Richard.

His frenzy appearing more notorious in the general Assembly at Tribur, all
his Subjects both of the Kingdoms of Germany and Bavaria, forsook him even by
the Brothers advice of his own Sister Hildegard, to Elect and own in his stead
Arnold his Bastard Son: And when he thought to Arm himself against him, he was
likewise forsaken by the Lorrainers, then by the Almans or Suabes, his ancient
Subjects. In so much, that he had not a man left to serve him, nor a single
penny to help himself. There was none took any pity, or gave him Food but
Luitperd Bishop of Ments, till Arnold to whom he sent a natural Son of his to
beg Bread allowed him the revenue of two or three Villages for his Subsistence.

Thus was this Prince, who in those days had been the most potent of the whole
world, having no apparent Vice, but on the contrary was very good, very just,
and Devout to excess, reduced to this extremity because he had not strength of
judgment, and wanted lawful Children, two things very necessary for a Sovereign.

This deplorable condition lasted perhaps a shorter time then he would yet have
had it: He died a little while after, either with grief or strangled by his
Enemies th of January An. 888. His Corpse was buried in the Monastery of
Richenoue, situate on an Island in the Lake of Constance.

Of all the Carlovinian Race there was but two Princes left, Arnold and
Charles, one a Bastard, the other but a Child. According to the humor of the
French in those days, all should have been governed by Arnold: But there were
so many of the Nobility equally Powerful and Ambitious, who thought themselves
as worthy as a Bastard, being of the Carlovinian blood by their Mothers-side,
that he could get no Authority amongst them neither in West-France, nor in
Italy.

Italy, that is Berenger Duke of Friuli, and Guy de Spoletta, Lands wherewith
Charles the Bald had invested them. Each of these descended Empp. Louis IV. and
Guy, in 888.
of the Blood Royal, though only by the Female side, who believed that for want
of Males, capable to Govern, they ought to take their shares of the Succession
of Charlemaine. They therefore agreed together, that Guy should have the Title
of Emperor and Gallick France, and Berenger should enjoy Italy. Now the first
having spent time in getting himself to be Crowned Emperor at Rome, stayed a
little too long e're he came into France, so that finding their humors changed
he went back into Italy, where he overthrew Berenger in two bloody Battles and
forced him to take Sanctuary with Arnold.

Arnold likewise not making that diligence he ought, and besides the
Neustrians, or Westerns not agreeing well with the Eastern or Germans: was much
amazed that the Lords of Neustria, which henceforward we shall name simply
France, sent word to him when he was coming, that in the Assembly at Compiegne
they had Elected Eudes Earl of Paris and Duke of France.

And indeed, though some made a noise in favor of Charles the Simple, yet he
was Crowned by Gautier Archbishop of Sens.

On the other hand Rodolph the Son of Conrard, and Nephew of Hugh the Abbot,
occupied the Lands between the Mount-Jou and the Alps Penines, that is, Savoy
and the Swisse-Countrey, and was Crowned King of Burgundy, Trans-jurane, or
beyond the Jour, at St Maurice's in Valais.

Louis the Son of Boson, whose Father the Usurper of the Kingdom of Burgundy
Cis-jurane, having been drove from thence by the Kings Louis and Carloman,
Seized on the Country which lies between Lions and the Sea, betwixt the Rhosne
and the Alps, under the Title of King of Arles or Provence, and caused that
Kingdom to be confirmed to him by a Council held purposely at Valence An. 890.
Charles the Fatt, had Adopted him, in the Assembly of Vberlinghen. You may
observe that all those Princes that thus dismembered the Monarchy, were sprung
from the Daughters of the blood Royal, and believed themselves fitter and more
capable to Succeed then Arnold or Charles the Simple, whom they looked upon as
both of them Bastards,

EUDES, King XXIX.
Aged XXVI. Years.
Arnold Emperor and King of Germany. Eudes King of West-France and Aquitain.
Louis of the Kingdom of Arles. Rodolph of Burgundy Trans-jurane. Guy Emperor,
and Berenger disputing for Italy, betwixt them.

Carlovinian House was divided into five Dominions (without counting the Lords
who set up almost for Sovereigns) 1. Italy which was joined with the Title of
the Empire. 2. Germany, which then also comprehended the Kingdom of Bavaria. 3.
France, which had the Kingdoms of Neustria, Aquitain, and part of Burgundy. 4.
Burgundy Cis-jurane, named ordinarily the Kingdom of Arles or Provence, under
which were likewise the Lyonnois and Daufine. 5. and Burgundy Trans-jurane, or
beyond the Jour, as the other on the contrary.

We need not doubt but these new Kings gave part of the Quarry to the Lords of
their Party, and consented to every thing to get only their Oaths and Homage;
nor can we imagine but these Lords did the like toward their Vassals, and
these again to the lesser Nobility. From hence arose so many Lordships both
small and great, of which the Bishops themselves such as were of good Families
and had but courage enough, did not forget to take their shares.

Eudes to show himself worthy the choice they had made of him, went out against
the Normans who ravaged Burgundy. He set upon them on St. John Baptists Day,
nigh Mountfaucon, slew nineteen thousand, and pursued the remainder to the very
Frontiers, showing himself personally brave on all occasions.

Another party of them who were in Champagne, descended by the Marne as far as
Paris, and there loading the Barks upon Wagons, carried and put them into the
River again below the City, then falling down to the Sea and so running along
the Coasts plund'red the Country of Constentine.

Alain and Judicael, who were contending for their shares in Bretagne, agreed
together to sight the Normans their common Enemy. Judicael alone rashly
presents them Battle, and so doing lost both his Life and honor: But Alain
having gotten all his Forces together, fought them so fortunately that of
fifteen thousand hardly did four hundred escape. The Bretons attribute this
success to a vow he made to bestow the Tithe of the Spoil he should gain upon
St. Peter's at Rome.

Such Devotion toward the Holy-Chair was very ordinary in those Ages. Diverse
Princes devoted their Estates, and became Tributaries to St. Peter. Which did
not a little contribute to imprint that persuasion the Popes then had in their
minds, that they had a right both to give and to take away Crowns.

After these losses the Normans having but few men left in France, two of their
Chiefs They called them Kings.
, Godfrey and Sigefroy went and shipped a new levy of a hundred thousand men
raised in Denmark, Sweden and Norway, that their reputation might not be wholly
blasted. They entered the Meuse with fourscore and ten thousand, leaving the
remainder to guard their Vessels. King Arnold's Lieutenants assaulting them
indiscreetly, were defeated with the loss of an infinite number of the Nobility.

Arnold himself, picqued at so bloody an affront, passes the Rhine with the
whole Force of Germany, seeks them in their very Camp which was close by the
Meuse, and forced them with so much fury that he left not so much as one of
them alive. The dead Bodies made a Bridge quite cross the River, and the Flood
was swollen with the Blood of those Barbarians.

If any wonder whence there could come such vast numbers, we must know, First,
that all the rascally and pilfering French, and the like of other Countries
joined with them: That besides those Countries were then extremely populous:
and all those Inhabitants greedy of Plunder listed and embarked themselves to
come and rob such rich and fertile Nations. In fine, there came so many, who
were either destroyed, or else Inhabited in France, that those large
Territories of the North are unpeopled to this very day. Thus in these last
Ages, Spain which once swarmed with men, has made her self become a Desert,
through the covetous humor in her Subjects, who all transport themselves into
that new World where are the Mines of Gold and Silver they so long for.

Neustrian Lords did not own Eudes for their King. Aymar Earl of Poitiers, whom
he would have dispossessed of his Estate to give it to his Brother Robert,
Ranulfe II. Duke of Aquitain and some others in those parts, had taken up Arms
against him.

Poitou in the War, a confederacy was contrived between Herbert, Hebert.
Herebert and Pepin Brothers sprung from Bernard King of Italy, the one Earl of
Vermandois, the other of Senlis, and Baudouin, or Baldwin, Earl of Flanders,
Fulk Archbishop of Reims, and many others, who having been to fetch Charles
the Simple out of England, whither his Mother had carried him, caused Rheims
the 27 th of January in the year 893. It was by the assistance of Fulk, that he
immediately wrote Apologetick Letters to Arnold, Guy and Rodolph, exhorting
them to help the Pupil against the Usurper. Which at first made some impression
upon Arnold, in favor of Charles; but soon after, either in terest or
inconstancy, turned him on Eudes side.

Some have said that that Guy of Spoleta whom we have mentioned, had likewise
been Crowned at Langres three years before. So that there were three Kings
chosen and Crowned in West-France: But Guy had absolutely quitted it for Italy,
and seemed to pretend no more to it.

CHARLES, Called The SIMPLE, King XXX.
POPES,
STEPHEN VII. Near Three years. THEODORE II. Elect. 901. S. 20 days. JOHN IX.
also Elected in 901. S. 3. Years, 15 days. BENNEDICT IV. Elect. 905. S. about
2. Years. LEO V. Elected in 907. S. 40 days, after which Christopher dethroned
him, and S. 7 Months. SERGIUS III. an. 908. having dethroned Christopher. S.
about 3 years. ANASTASIUS III. Elected an. 910. S. 2 years, 2 Months. JOHN X.
Elected in 912. S. 15 years, whereof 12 under this Reign.
Arnold King of Germany, Bavaria, and Lorraine. Eudes and Charles Competitors
for West-France. Guy Emperor and King of Italy. Rodolph in Burgundy, and LOVIS
in Arles.

Charles and Eudes made War with various success. Eudes being returned from
Guyenne drove Charles out of Neustria, but shortly after he got in again by the
assistance of the Lords of his party.

Eudes made him work enough, and had no less to do himself, being forced to
guard himself as well from his own party, as from his Enemies. Count Gautier,
Son of Adelme his paternal Uncle and Count of Laon, drew his Sword upon him in
open Parliament; and had afterward the confidence to take shelter in the City
of Laon: but Eudes followed him so close, that not giving him time to put
himself into a posture of defense, he took the Town, and caused his Head to be
cut off.

Arnold was sometimes on his side, sometimes for his Rival.

The well meaning French tired with these discords, during which the Normans
took their opportunity to return, contrived I know not what kind of Truce,
between the two Kings. It seems Burgundy and Aquitain, Champagne and Picardy
were to belong to Eudes, all the rest was Charles's.

It troubled Arnold very much that contrary to the custom of France, such
Princes who were of Charlemain's Blood but only by the Female side, should
dismember the best Portions of his Succession. He goes down therefore into
Italy, drives Guy de Spoleta out of all Lombardy, and forces him to retire to
Spoleta. But he satisfied himself with that advantage only and went back into
Germany. Now this Guy laboring to gather an Army about Spoleta, died of a
bloody Flux, say some, though others make him to live a great while longer.
How-ever it were, Arnold gained nothing by his Death, for as he was at
distance, the Lords conferred the Kingdom upon Lambert his Son, before Berenger
his Competitor, who thought to restore his own Title, had time to take his
measures. This Lambert was Crowned Emperor, and bare the Title as long as he
lived.

Empp. Leo and Lambert.
In the mean time Arnold attaqued Rodolph in Burgundy beyond the Jour or
Trans-jourane, and put him to a great deal of trouble: however he could not
force

Tribur, which is betwixt Ottenhin and Ments on the other side of the Rhine,
and after that a Parliament at Worms, where King Eudes was present, and upon
his return Plundered the Baggage belonging to the Ambassadors whom Charles the
Simple was sending to Arnold.

In this Assembly Arnoid, with the consent of the Lords, which he had very much
ado to obtain, got Zuentibold his Bastard Son to be accepted for King of
Lorrain. This young Prince embracing Charles's Party, besieged the City of
Laon, then esteemed very important because of its advantageous situation upon a
Hill: But when he found Eudes returned out of Aquitain with his Army, he raised
the Siege and turned his back to him.

The Normans began again their Incursions on that unhappy Kingdom with so much
the more assurance and facility, as they found Eudes backward and careless to
suppress them, who indeed was only able to do it, but left them to go on to
revenge the inconstancy of the French, who having made him King, would not obey
him as he expected and required.

This year Rollo, or Roll one of the most considerable Leaders of those Pirates
after he found he could do nothing in England, where he had tried to Land,
being also advertised by a Dream or divine Vision, steered his course toward
France, and puts in at the Mouth of the Seine. Perhaps he might be called in by
Charles, who turned every Stone to ruin his Rival.

As for the Empire of Italy, Arnold being invited by Pope Formosus, who would
revenge himself for the outrages received from the Romans, forced the City of
Rome, and having chastised them, was Crowned Emperor: But soon after as he was
besieging the Widow of Guy in the Castle of Fermo, one of his Valets de
chamber, whom that subtle woman had corrupted, gave him a Drink which laid him
asleep for three whole days, and brought him to be Paralytick for a while.

Roman Church, Formosus Bishop of Porto, otherwhile degraded and condemned by
Pope Nicholas, was elected Pope after Stephanus VI. This was the first example
in the Church, and of most pernicious consequence, as we find it now every day,
that without any necessity a Bishop is transferred to another See, and as one
may say, does quit and forsake his first wife, to marry another. But after his
death, Pope Stephen VII. his Successor, caused him to be taken out of his
Grave, and having placed him in the Papal Chair dressed up in his Pontifical
Ornaments, reproved and told him that Tiber with a stone about his neck.

Charles and Eudes, ended by the death of the latter, which happened the 3 d. of
January An. 898. about the end of the 36 th of his Age, and the 8 th. of his
Reign. At his death he very earnestly desired and enjoined his Brother Robert
and the other Lords to own and acknowledge King Charles, whom he hoped they
should find a Prince as much deserving for his Virtues, as his Birth to Rule
over them. He left but one Son by his Queen Theodorade, named Arnold, who took
the Title of King of Aquitain: But death soon snatched the Crown from him before
he was married, or, as I believe, of Age enough to be so.

Arnold Emperor in Germany. Charles alone in France. Zuendibold in Lorraine. --
Louis in Provence. Rodolph in Burgundy. Lambert in Italy.

Lorrain did much displease the French; wherefore Charles to gain their esteem
endeavored to recover it. The rebellion of Duke Reinier who had been the
Favorite of Zuendibold, and whom that Prince had driven out of his Country,
did facilitate the means, he therefore passed the Meuse, with a great deal of
company. Zuendibold betakes himself to flight, but soon after all his Lords
coming to him, he pursues him in his turn; and there had been a Battle if the
Lords on either Part had not procured a Truce between them.

Soon after an Assembly was held in the Abbey of Gorze nigh Mets, which
confirmed a Peace between Charles, Arnold and Zuendibold.

Toward the end of the year Arnold died, having Reigned twelve years since the
Death of his Father Charles the Fatt; And held the Empire only two years

He had diverse Children by three several women; amongst others Zuentibold, and
Arnold the Bad, by two Concubines, and Louis by a lawful Wife. This last was
but eight years old when his Father died.

Charles the Simple, in France. Zuentibold in Lorraine. -- Louis in Germany.
Louis in Provence.
Rodolph II. in Burgundy Transjurane. Lambert and Berenger in Italy.

The German Princes immediately Crowned Louis, and committed his person to the
care and Guardian-ship of Otho Duke of Saxony who was married to his Sister,
and Archbishop Haton, as they did the conduct of his Army to Lutpold or
Leopold, Duke of the Eastern Frontiers of Bavaria. From whom some make the
House Bavaria to be derived.

The Dominions of Louis were soon enlarged by the death of Zuentibold who
behaving himself with much irregularity and little justice, and making his
chief exercise the divertisement with women, and taking counsel only of the
lowest and meanest People, gave the Lords of Lorraine just cause to forsake him
to submit themselves to Louis. Those that had the Government of this young
Prince brought him purposely to Thionville where they put the Crown upon his
Head: and Zuentibold endeavoring to revenge it, was slain in a Battle fought
between them, the d. day of August in this year 900. He Reigned five years.

Charles in Neustria, or West-France. Louis in Germany and Lorraine. Rodolph I.
in Burgundy. Louis in Provence. Lambert and Berenger in Italy.

In the War which Arnold Earl of Flanders made against Hebert Earl of
Vermandois, Eudes had favored Hebert, and King Charles took part with Arnold
to whom he was in some sort obliged for what he enjoyed. Now Eudes being dead,
Hebert who was subtle and insinuating, found means to make friends with
Charles, and got into so much credit with him, that this simple and un-knowing
King, took the City of Arras from Baldwin, and gave it to Count Altmar, that he
might restore Peronne to Hebert.

Baldwin or Baudouin coming to the King, to beseech him to let him have his
Town again was denied with rough language. Now Fulk Archbishop of Reims, great
both by birth and merit, was then chief Counselor to Charles, and holding the
Abbey of Saint Vaast, had excommunicated Baldwin, for invading the Lands
thereof: Wherefore Winomach Lord of the Island, Vassal to the Count, imputing
the affront his Lord had received to the Counsel of this Archbishop, waylaid
him in a Wood and murdered him; for which being pursued and excommunicated by
all the Bishops, made his escape into England, where he was eaten up with Lice.

It seems this was an Epidemical distemper in those days; For we find diverse
persons in History that died thereof, amongst others Arnold the Emperor the
preceding year, and King Rodolph of whom we shall hereafter make mention.

The Hungarians began to make themselves known about the latter end of the
Reign of Charles the Fatt. They then seated themselves in Pannonia, having
chased out the Huns; and from thence became a Scourge to all the Provinces
beyond the Rhine and the Danube, as the Normans were to all on this side. They
were Originally a People of Scythia, Brutish and Barbarous beyond all
imagination. Their Mothers trained them to inhumanity from their Birth, gashing
and mangling their Faces that they might have nothing of humane; and by
swallowing down blood mixed with their own tears before they sucked their first
Milk, they might grow Blood-thirsty, and pitty-less to all mankind. They
caroused in blood, and fed upon raw flesh, cut the hearts of those they took
Prisoners in quarters, and swallowed the gobbets reeking warm, had no faith,
nor truth, nor honor, no wit but to defraud and contrive mischief, always a
turbulent and furious courage either against an Enemy or against one another.
The women were yet worse then the men. They had scarcely any other weapons
besides Arrows, but were so dextrous in the use of them, that every one they
shot did some execution, and every wound almost was Mortal. They were all
Horsemen, very serviceable in flat and open Countries, who would notably
harrass an Army within their Bow-shot, but aseless in Mountainous or Woody
places, or for Sieges; Nor indeed would they ever adventure to come to
handy-blows, but ever made a running Fight.

King Arnold had brought them in to fall upon the back of Zuentibold You must
mistake this Zuentibold, for the Son of Arnold.
a Sclavonian Prince, who would have usurped Moravia and make himself King. He
being dead, they were not afraid to fall upon the Countries belonging to Louis
his Son; And this year they gained a great victory against his Forces near the
Augsburgh, and afterward Plundered Bavaria, Scwaben, Franconia and Saxony.

Berenger and Louis the Son of Boson they marched into Italy. The Italians An.
899. tired with the Government of Berenger, and above all with Adebert Marquess
d'Yvree Father of another Berenger who was likewise King of Italy, had called
in Louis: But Berenger I. had made himself so strong with the assistance of
Adebert Marquess of Tuscany, that he hemmed him in and forced him to a promise
he would renounce the Kingdom, upon condition he would give him free liberty to
march home again without farther let or molestation.

The oaths of ambitious Princes are as frail and short lived as the vows and
promises of Lovers: the same Adelbert who had supported Berenger's cause,
turning Coat, and soliciting Louis to return thither again, that un-advised
Prince confides in Faithless men. But he had time to repent at leisure. For
they delivered him up to Berenger, who deprived him both of his Empire and his
fight. That done he Empp. Leo VI. and Lambert.
forces the Pope (it was John IX.) to Crown him Emperor, but so soon as he was
gone from Rome, the Pope sent for Lambert, who was then private in some corner
of Italy, and Crowned him. Which was confirmed by a grand Council held Ravenna.

Berenger Governed 22 years, we might say happily enough, had it not been for
the incursions of the Bulgarians. In the Month of August this same year, they
again entered Italy with a numerous Army, and having ransacked the Territory of
Aquilea, Verona, Coma and Bergamo, came at last toward Pavia, Berenger mean
while had got his Forces together: When they saw his numbers three times more
then they expected, they endeavored to make a retreat; and when he followed
and pursued them so close that they could not get off without fighting, they
profer'd him all their Plunder and their own Baggage. The Italians would hear
of nothing less then to have them all upon discretion. Necessity converted
their fear into fury and despair; the Hungarians now attaque their pursuers,
and cut their Army all in pieces. And Lombardy did afterward become their
prey: Nor did they attempt to drive them thence but with their money: a Bait so
sweet that it allured them to return again often.

In the year 903. a Star appeared near the Pole-Artick, which darted from the
North-North-East, toward the South-West, along Train resembling a Lance, which
passing between the Signs of the Lion and the Twinns, crossed the Zodiac. It
was seen for three and twenty days.

For seven or eight years together there was nothing so remarkable as the cruel
incursions of the Normans. An. 903. Heric and Haric two of their Captains burnt
Tours, and Saint Martin's Church.

An. 905. Rodolph and Gerlon two other Commanders of the same Nation took the
City of Rouen upon composition, and there settled their Habitation, fortifying
the Castles that were near them.

From thence for five years space they made Incursions into all the
neighboring Provinces, conquered Constentine, and Inhabited it, sacked all
Picardy, Artois, Champagne, and the Country of Messin, often frighted Paris,
covered the Seine, the Marne and the Loire with the Ashes of those Cities they
consumed by Fire near those Streams, and beat the French every where; excepting
at Chartres from whence they were repulsed by the protection of the Holy
Virgin, and the courage of Bishop Gosseaume, and at Tonnere, where one of their
Parties was defeated by Richard Duke of Burgundy.

The foregoing year Lambert was killed by treachery, as he was taking his
pleasure in hunting, by Hugo Earl of Milan. The Western Empire remained vacant
till the year 915. When Berenger was again Crowned by Pope John X.

We may here place the Birth of the Kingdom of Arragon, because about this time
Sancho Abacca I. having extended his Kingdom of Navarre, or Territory of
Pampeluna, toward Huesca, and conquered all the rest of the Province of
Arragon, besides the Earldom of the same name which held already of him, took
the Title of King of Pampelune and Arragon.

An. 911. happened the Death of two Kings, Rodolph of Burgundy beyond the Jour,
and Louis King of Germany. The first left Rodolph II. his Son for Successor.
The second being only 19 or 20 years of age, had only two Daughters Empp.
Constantine VIII. Son of Leo, Reigned 50 years.
Placidia or Plesance, and Matilda, who for Husbands had Conrard Duke of
Franconia, and Henry the Bird-Catcher Duke of Saxony and Son of Duke Otho. The
Lords of Lewis's Kingdom intending to bestow the Crown upon this Otho, he
excused himself upon the Score of his great Age, and generously advised them to
Elect Conrad Duke of Franconia, though he had been his Enemy.

Charles the Simple in France. Conrad in Germany. Louis in Provence. Rodolph
II. in Trans-jurane. Berenger in Italy.

Rollo the great Captain did by little and little make himself familiar and
friendly with Franco Archbishop of Rouen. Upon his entreaties he had twice or
thrice granted a Truce. The design of that virtuous Prelat was to convert him,
Rollo's was to attain the Sovereignty, and of the head of those Pirates become a
Legal Prince. The French Lords had much ado to suffer such a Stranger to be
settled thus in the best Country of the Kingdom: But the People so long and
often tormented by their plundrings and continued disturbance, cried out to
them to put a period to their miseries. Besides Robert Earl of Paris, who
aspired to the Monarchy, desired he might remain in that Station, to have his
assistance in time of need. For these reasons, Charles made a Truce with him,
during which he propounded to him, to give him in propriety, and with the Title
of a Duchy, that part of Neustria between the Sea, the River of Seine and the
Epte which falls into the Seine; with his Daughter Gisele in marriage, if he
would be converted and embrace Christianity.

Upon these conditions Rollo was Catechized, and received holy Baptism upon
Easter-Eve An. 912. Earl Robert was his Godfather and named him. After this

Thus this Province which the Romans called Lugdunensis Secunda, was dismembered
from the propriety of the Kings of France; But not from their Sovereignty: and
according to the name of it is new Inhabitants took that of Normandy.

As this was granted to them, because they knew not how to drive them out, so
for the same reason they were released of the Homage, and dependence of
Bretagne, because they were indeed Masters of it, and pillaged it when ever
they pleased: And withal by this means it was reduced to the Sovereignty of the
Crown, by subjecting it under a Duke that held it of the King.

Rollo failed not to demand Homage of the Bretons with his Sword in hand. Duke
Alain Rebre in Breton does signify great.
Rebre' or the Great had been dead six years and left his Children very young.
Those that governed them, rather then let them derogate from their Sovereignty,
carried them out of the Country with some of the greatest Nobility. And since
that we find no meution of them in History Perhaps some Genealogist may find
them out again, for his advantage.
. Count Porhouet, named Mathued, who had married a Daughter of Alain's the
Grand, went into England with his Wife. Berenger Earl of Rennes and Alain de
Dol having defended themselves the best they could, were at last constrained to
bow the Knee before the Normans and shake hands with them.

There were besides in diverse other parts of France, especially in Bretagne,
Anjou and the Country of Maine, and the Islands in the River Loire numbers of
these people; but in time, following the example of Rollo, they took
Habitations, and Naturalized themselves French, but not without first doing a
vast deal of mischief; and for a long while after, the settlement of these drew
in fresh swarms from Denmark and Sweden, who were no less ravenous and cruel,
though not so formidable as the first.

Germany were not satisfied with the Election of Conrard.

Arnold Duke of Bavaria Proud for having vanquished the Hungarians in his
Duchy, rose up against him with design to make himself King: and not being
able to compass it, pretended to stickle that Charles might have it.

Lorrian. Now meeting this fit juncture, and the assistance of Reiner Count of
Ardenn^, who was very potent in those Countries, he enters into Lorrain and
makes himself Master of part of that Kingdom, whereof he made him Governor with
the Quality of a Duke.

Rollo had repudiated Pope Daughter of the Earl of Bayeux to marry the Daughter
of Charles the Bald; that Princess being dead, he takes his former wife again,
by whom he had two Children William and Gerlote or Gerloc.

Henry Duke of Saxony rebels against Conrad, gains a Battle over Everard his
Conrad himself; whilst on the other side, the Hungarians overrun even to
Alsace, burning the City of Basle, and can have no stop put to them but by Sums
of Money, which Conrad is forced to give them.

An. 917. Died Rollo first Duke of Normandy, for ever renowned for that severe
justice and exact policy he established within his Dominions; Where the very
mention of his name is able to this day to stop the Progress of Villians, and
bring those that are such before the judgment Seat. Some put off his death to
the year 924. his Son William, afterward surnamed Long-Sword, Succeeded him;
And because he was but yet a Minor, Robert Earl of Paris, Godfather to his
Father, undertook his Tuition.

Baldwin the Bald Earl of Flanders. His Eldest Son, Arnold the Fatt Inherited
his Earldom; Adolph the Second Son, the Cities of Terouenne, Boulogne and Saint
Omers, but some few years after he died without Children.

Fulk le Roux Earl of Anjou, Son of Ingelger, quickly followed Baldwin, Fulk
the Good his Son Succeeded him.

Conrad King of Germany went off likewise the same year by a Wound he received
in the Bavarian War. Dying he commanded with a more then Royal generosity,
Everard his Brother, to carry the Regal Ornaments to Henry Duke of Saxony,
though he had always made war against him. Thus he returned the kindness that
Otho his Father had showed in giving him the Crown, and laid down all thoughts
of revenge to promote the happiness and safety of his Country which stood in
need of a Prince able to defend it against the Incursions of the Hungarians.
This Henry was called the Bird-Catcher, because he was found catching of Birds,
when they brought him the news of his Election.

Charles the Simple in France. Henry the Bird Catcher in Germany. Rodolph II.
in Burgundy Transjurane. LOUIS in Provence. Berenger in Italy.

Before Henry was well settled, Charles falls into Lorrain, conquered it all as
far as Worms, and compel's him to become his Subject for the remainder of that
Kingdom.

French Lords, who apprehended that if Charles grew too potent and too
peaceable, he might take away their Estates which they intended to make
Hereditary, stirred up new troubles. Amongst others in Lorraine Gisalbert and
Otho Son of Duke Regnier, the first of these had wedded a Daughter of King
Henry's, and in France Robert Brother of King Eudes who held Intelligence with
the Son of Regnier.

Henry and Charles were thrusting each other out of Lorraine, did in the end
make their Cabal so strong that all Charles's Subjects abandoned him, as had
done otherwhile those of Charles the Fatt. The pretense for this general revolt
was, that he had a Favorite by name Aganon, who disposed of every thing, wasted
the Royal Treasure, and treated the Grandees of the Kingdom insolently.

Herve Archbishop of Rheims getting him into his house, found a means to make
up the Breach between him and his Subjects, so that they restored his Crown to
him, but not his Authority.

Charles refused the Abbey of Chesles to Hugh called the Blanc Son of Robert
who pretended to it, for that his Aunt and Mother in Law had enjoyed it, to
bestow it upon Aganon his Favorite: the troubles not only began again, but
which was worse, Robert at the Instigation of Gisalbert, having gained a great
Party amongst the French Lords, got to be Elected and Crowned King at Rheims by
the Archbishop Herve the 20 th of June in the year 922.

Charles the Simple. in France. Robert his rival. Henry the Bird-Catcher, in
Germany. Rodolph II. in Burgundy Transjurane. LOVIS in Provence. Berenger
Emperor in Italy.

Charles raises his Siege from before the Castle of Capremont, where he held
Gisalbert one of his greatest Enemies cooped up. This Gisalbert had once before
been stripped of all his Estate by this King, and being restored again by Henry
his Father in Law, had revolted this second time. Then Charles, who had had the
advantage over Henry, changed condition, and became a supplicant to him. Both
he and his rival strove to get him first; and by that means confirmed him in
the possession of the Kingdom of Lorraine.

However these two competitors had each of them still some share. Charles
having raised considerable Forces in that part which he held, came resolutely
to find out Robert encamped with his men near Soissons, on this side of the
River Aisne, and having passed over unawares, charged him furiously whilst his
men were feeding and refreshing themselves. Robert fighting at the head of his
Army, was slain with the stroke of a Lance, which honorable deed some Authors
bestow upon Charles. Nevertheless Hugh his Son, Earl Hebert of Vermandois and
the others Chief Officers of his Party, not only made head against Charles, but
gained so upon him, that they had utterly defeated him, had they but followed
their pursuit.

This combat happened the 15 th of June, so that Robert Reigned not one whole
year. He had married Beatrix daughter of Hebert II. Earl of Vermandois, by whom
he had a Son Hugh, whom they surnamed the Blanc Blanc, is white.
, the Grand, and the Abbot, and one Daughter Emma wedded to Rodolph Duke of
Burgundy, Son of Duke Richard who died the year preceding.

Roberts Party was not broken thorough the loss of their Head, but held the
firmer united because their danger appeared the greater, Therefore the Lords by
the persuasions of Hugh his Son, who found himself not potent enough to be a
King, but to make one, Elected Rodolph Duke of Burgundy his Brother in Law, a
Nobleman of a brave presence, and a much better judgment, and Crowned him at
Saint Medard in Soissons the 13 th Day of July.

The French Historians place this Rodolph and Eudes before mentioned in the
rank of their Kings, and yet they do not put in Robert Brother of Eudes, for
which there can be no reason assigned but the shortness of his Reign.

RODOLPH, King XXXI.
Charles -- Rodolph the Simple his rival. in West-France. Henry the
Bird-catcher, in Germany. Rodolph II. in Burgundy Trans-jurane. LOVIS in
Provence. Berenger, Emperor.

AFter the Election of Rodolph, all the world forsook Charles: the Norman
assistance which should have come to him, not being able to pass, because his
enemies lay betwixt them, rendered him more odious. Having therefore no other
refuge, he wrote in a doleful manner to Henry King of Germany, and gave him up
Lorrain, upon condition he would help him against these Rebels. The reward was
great, and the Act of restoring a King very glorious, Henry did therefore
promise he would undertake it with all the power of Germany.

Robert's Party was greatly astonished at this News, they did not know how to
ward so dangerous a blow, Hebert Earl of Vermandois draws them out of this
difficulty. King Charles believed he had quite taken him off from their
interest: But this Traitor, whose Sister Robert had married, having decoyed his
King into the Castle of Peronne, whither he was so simple as to let them lead
him, detained him Prisoner, and confined him to Chasteau-Thierry, where he was
strongly guarded.

Queen Ogina having heard of this detention of her Husband fled to England her
own Country, and carried with her the only Son she had by him, named Louis, to
wait a better opportunity out of the reach of those who could no way secure
their Royalty but by his Death. Seulfe Archbishop of Rheims, having had some
contest with the Kindred of Hetto his Predecessor, for having taken some Fiefs
from them which they held of the Church, was joined with Hebert's Party to gain
their protection, and had made him a promise never to assent to any Election
whatsoever but whom he pleased.

Rodolph, of Jews Transmarine and Lotaire III. there was almost a continual
War betwixt the French and the Germans, for the Kingdom of Lorrain; We shall
mention only the great events. It is certain that Rodolph reduced a great part
thereof to his obedience.

Normans, as Charles the Bald had done several times, partly by voluntary
contribution, the rest by way of a Tax.

The Duke of Aquitain, William I. of that name the Son of Ebles, did not submit
himself so much as he ought to Rodolph, he was obliged to turn his Sword that
way. William knowing his resolution, advanced to the River of Loire, which made
the bounds of his Duchy: where after some negociations he passed the same, and
alighting came to Rodolph, who embraced and kissed him sitting on Horseback,
and the next day granted him a Truce for eight: Which being expired the Duke
did him Hommage, and in requital had the City of Bourges and Berry restored
which Rodolph had taken from him.

Italians grown weary of Berenger, bestowed the Sovereignty upon Rodolph II.
King of Burgundy Trans-jurane. Berenger taking no other counsel but from
revenge, was so unhappy as to make a league with the Hungarians, and drew them
into Italy. Those Barbarians having sacked Mantoua, Brescia and Bergamo,
reduced the celebrated and rich City of Pavia Capital of the Kingdom of
Lombardy to a heap of ashes. Two hundred of the Citizens escaping the Fire and
Captivity redeemed the Walls thereof from the hands of those destroyers for
eight Bushels of Silver, which they had raked together out of the Ashes and
Rubbish of it is ruins.

This money being received the Bulgarians passed the Mountains, and penetrated
Languedoc. The same Rodolph, and Hugh Count of Vienne followed them and pressed
so close upon them, that those Barbarians partly cut off by the Sword, and the
rest perishing by the Flux or Dysentery, and want of Food, enriched greatly
those Countries with their Spoil which they came to plunder.

Berenger struggling to regain the Kingdom of Italy, was slain by his own
People at Veronna. After his death the Title of Emperor in the West was not
conferred upon any, at least by the Pope or Italians, till Otho I. An. 962.

Western Emp. vacant Emp. of the East likewise.
By his death the Kingdom remained entirely Rodolph's: but the inconstancy of
the Italians, who were ever hunting out one Lord and Master by another, made
them resign themselves to Hugh Count of Arles the Son of Brethe, to ridd
themselves of Rodolph. Who being informed that they had Treacherously killed
Burchard Duke of Swevia, his father in Law, withdrew himself into his own
Kingdom of Burgundy, not daring to attempt any thing amongst such wickedly
disposed people.

Rodolph King of France. Henry of Germany. Hugh of Italy. Rodolph II. of
Burgundy.

Every year almost the Normans made Incursions: Besides those that were in
Neustria, there were others in Burgundy, and toward Artois; and at all times
they were forced to be making head against them, or be in pursuit of them; but
they had such sure friends amongst the Grandees, who would not suffer the
Kingdoms grievances to be scanned, that they ever got away scot-free.

This year Rodolph King of France, having surrounded them in a Wood in the
Country of Artois, they made a Furious Salley unawares, in which he was wouned,
and had been taken without the timely assistance Count Hebert gave him. Those
that held the Islands in the Loire, having been a long time besieged by Hugh
and Hebert, defended themselves so stoutly that they gave them the City of
Nants for their habitation.

Rodolph and Hebert, the City of Laon, became an occasion of discord between
them. Hebert would have it for Otho his Son, and the King desired to keep it to
himself. Hebert not able to get it by friendship, had thoughts of gaining it by
force. He therefore draws Charles the Simple out of Prison, and carries him to
parley with the Normans, who suffered his confinement with great impatience,
because he had bestowed upon them the richest Province of France. This menace
having effected nothing, for as much as Emma the Wife of Rodolph was
obstinately bent to preserve Laon, and had put her self in there, he conducts
him to Reims as if designing to restablish him.

Then was the Queen forced to let go her hold, and surrender up the place to
Hebert: who being by this means appeased, returned Charles to the Castle of
Peronne, and made a new Oath to Rodolph.

Hugh King of Italy came into France (we do not find for what reason) King
Rodolph went toward Lyonnois to receive him and conferred with him.

A Trench or Moat.
A crew of Normans gotten into Boulenois made a double Fosse or Water-graft
round about Guises. Afterward Arnold Earl of Flanders gave it in Fief to
Sigebert Eltrude; but finding he came to besiege him, was in so much dread of
his wrath that he hanged himself, and left that Woman great with child of a Son
named Adolph, who was since Earl of Guisnes.

Rodolph, otherwhile Hebert gave hopes of setting the unfortunate Charles the
Simple at Liberty, and paid him all the respects due to a Sovereign. Yet only
death took him out of their custody, putting a period to his Captivity and
unhappiness in the City of Peronna, the 7 th Day of October in the Year 929. He
was Interred at St. Foursy's in the same City. His Reign if we reckon from his
Coronation day to that of his imprisonment was 37 years, his life 50. He left
but one Son named Louis by his Queen * Ogina, Daughter of Edward King of Ogiva.
England.

Rodolph King of France. Henry of Germany. Hugh of Italy. Rodolph II. of
Burgundy.

Whilst King Rodolph was gone into Aquitain, he had news that the Normans of
the Islands in the Loire had adventured to run as far as Limosin: He went and
Dextricios, we cannot well tell where that was, and so hemmed them in that not
one of them returned. This seasonable victory gained him great esteem amongst
the Aquitains, and induced them to acknowledge him with a little more submission.



Hebert could not agree with Rodolph, because he was his Sovereign, he held a
correspondence with all his Enemies, and sought all means to weaken him. The
pretense for this quarrel was that Hugh Brother in Law to the King had allured
some of his Vassals from him, amongst others Herluin Earl of Monstrueil.

Hebert made use of the assistance of the Lorrainers against him, and had given
his Oath to Henry King of Germany. But Rodolph being helped by Hugh the Great,
took the City of Rheims which Hebert enjoyed, because he had caused them to
Elect his Son Archbishop, though a Minor destituted Benon Bishop of Chaalons,
who had followed Hebert, and besieged him in Laon himself, which he gained upon
composition.

Hebert's Insolence being a little abated, Rodolph made a journey into Aquitain
and Languedoc, where he received hommage of Raymond and Ermengard Gothian
Princes (for so was named that part of Languedoc, nearest to the Pyrennean
Hills) and of Loup Azenar Duke of Gascogny, whom, if we credit Flodoard, was
mounted upon a Horse one hundred years old, and yet vigorous and lusty.

William Duke of Normandy did likewise pay him hommage, and in retribution he
gave him those Lands the Bretons held on the Seaside; I believe those were the
Bessin and the Constentin.

In Italy King Hugh from the year 929. had obtained the Seignory of the City of
Rome, by wedding the lustful Merosia Widow of Guy Marquess of Tuscany, who
then Governed the City and the Holy Chair: but he was soon driven thence by
Alberic the Son of that Woman, to whom he had given a Box on the Ear, and
retired into Lombardy. Lambert who Succeeded in the Marquisat of Tuscany to Guy
his Brother, was likewise Brother by the Mothers-side to King Hugh, for he was
Son to Berte his Mother, who in her widdow-hood married the second time to
Adelbert Father of Guy and Lambert. Hugh notwithstanding put him to death, and
bestowed Tuscany upon Boson his Brother both by Father and mother, who proved
as little faithful to him as Lambert.

Rodolph. These two Princes being ready to embroil all Italy, their friends
contrived an agreement between them, which was such that Rodolph should
renounce the Kingdom of Italy, and also should assist Hugh with a certain
number of men to preserve it, on condition Hugh should give him la Bresse,
Viennois, and all that he held in Provence, Arles; which by this means was
united to the Kingdom of Burgundy Trans-jurane.

The name of the Kingdom of Arles, was not given it because those Kings that
enjoyed it, did ever reside there, nor were ever Crowned there, but because
that was so renowned a City as to deserve the Title, having been in the Roman
Emperors days, the Capital of seven Provinces of the Gauls, and her
Metropolitans Vicars of the Holy Chair.

Notwithstanding this agreement, the Italians persisting in their resolution to
set aside Hugh, invited Arnold Duke of Bavaria to come and take the Crown.
Verona and was well received; but Hugh got good footing there, and chased him
back again into Bavaria. After which to maintain his ground the better, he
associated his Son Lotaire to the Crown.

The Acts we find of Louis the Blind King of Provence, makes it appear he was
yet alive An. 933. So that there is no color to mention his death till An.
Charles Constantine, who not being at that time out of his Childhood, the
Provensals who then stood in need of a King able to Govern, Elected Hugh Son of
Count See before in An. 829.
Thibauld and Be^the, who was Marquess of Provence.

In the mean time the two most potent Lords in France, Hugh le Blanc and Hebert
de Vermandois, not being able to agree together made a rough War upon each
other, the King favoring Hugh, whose Sister he had married. Henry King of
Germany having interposed to make up this Breach, Saint Quintins was restored
to Hebert, and likewise Peronne, by a Cessation which ended in a final Peace.

Anno 935. The three Kings of Germany, France, and Burgundy had an enterview
near the Meuse, to give joint orders for repressing the cruel incursions of the
Bulgarians, who infested the Dominions of all these Princes. This very year
having ransacked Lombardy, they were gotten into Burgundy: but when they
understood the King of France was marching that way, they returned speedily
into Italy.

In this march the same King besieged and took Dijon, which Boson his own
Brother had got in his possession. Which I mention only to show the universal
disorders of those Reigns, even amongst the nearest Kindred.

Ebles Earl of Auvergne and Poictou, and Duke of Aquitain, the Son of Ranulfe
and Successor to William, leaving his Estates to William surnamed Test
d'estoupe, or Flaxen-head, his Son.

As likewise Rodolph the King of France left this World the 14 th of his Reign
and the 15 th of January in the City of Auxerre, where he fell sick in the
former Autumn of a Phtiriasis. His Monument is at St. Columbes of Sens. He was
a Prince most Liberal, Valiant, Religious, Just, and worthy of better times.
His wife died a Twelvemonth before him, and his Brother Boson about a quarter
of a year: both Child-less. But they had another Brother called Hugh le Noir,
i. e. the Black, who bare the Title of Duke of Burgundy and the surname of
Capet.

Henry the Bird-Catcher also ended his days, and in his place the Germans set
up Otho his eldest Son, afterward surnamed the Great.

Church of the 9 th Century, or Age.
Never Prince employed so much care, and so much Time in regulating all that
concerned the advantage and administration of the Church, the Discipline of the
Clergy, and Christian manners, as Louis the Debonnaire. In all the Assemblies,
hardly any other thing was ever treated of: He and the Grandees of his Kingdom
were present in the Councils to approve and subscribe what was ordained; which
afterward he confirmed by his Letters Patents.

At the Council of Aix-la-Chapelle in the year 816. were digested in writing
the Form and Method of the Insticution of the Ecclesiastics in CXLV. Articles,
and those of Religious Orders in XXVIII. both taken out of the Ancient
Councils, and Holy Fathers. After this Council, and in the same place, he made
XXIX. Capitulary's, as was the Custom upon the like occasions.

The year following 817. he assembled the Abbots and their Monks in the same
place, who made XC. Chapters or Rules for Monastic Discipline: After which
Bennet Abbot of Aniane, labored in the reformation of the Order of St. Bennet,
which was much u^settled and shattered.

The Laity were much given to abuse and often murder the Clergy: And for this
reason he called a Council at Thionville An. 821. where the Bishops ordained
long and tedious penances for such as should commit those crimes. The next year
he convocated another at Atigny, and there in imitation of the Example of the
Great Theodosius, he would needs voluntarily undergo public Penance for the
Death of Bernard, and those violences he had committed against some other of
his Kindred. He also made several Capitulary's for the Government of Church and
State.

To the same end, and to find out some way to appease the wrath of God, which
appeared visibly in the frequent Incursions of the Normans, he gave order An.
828. for the Assembling of four Councils the year following, in four several
parts of the Kingdom, at Ments, Paris, Lions and Thoulouze, and framed Articles
of what they were to consult about. He confirmed the Decrees of all those four
in one at Worms, which was held the same year in presence of some Legates sent
by Pope Gregory IV. We have the Acts of that held at Paris, which is the VI. of
that name. They are very judicious, and divided into three Books.

He called another Assembly An. 832. in the Abbey of St. Denis, to reestablish
the Monastic Orders, and Authorized this Reformation by a Declaration.

We must not amongst these Holy Assemblies place that of Compiegne, where this
good Prince was degraded and condemned to wear the Habit of a Penitent. That of
St. Denis in the year 834. reconciled him to the Church, and restored him to
the Communion. The Council of Thionville did the same thing, and besides that,
degraded Ebbon Archbishop of Reims, who had been the Principal Author of that
attempt.

To show his thankfulness to God as well by his works, as his Prayers and
Devotion, he caused one to be held at Aix An. 836. where some excellent Decrees
were made, which the Fathers sent to Pepin of Aquitain, thereby to admonish him
of his Duty toward God, and restrain him from treating the Churches so ill for
the future, as he had done. These Decrees were Commented as one may say, and
Corroborated with Reasons and Arguments extracted from the Fathers, which was
frequently practiced by the Councils of those Ages.

It would be too tedious to mention all those that were held during the Reign
of Charles the Bald, with all those Capitulary's which were framed for the same
purpose of Reformation. We have the Council of Lauriac in Anjou An. 843. that
of Thionville and another at Vernon in An. 844. those of Beauvais and Meaux An.
845. that of Paris the year following, to complete the Regulations which could
not be finished in that of Meaux; One at Soissons in 853. and another at
Verberie, to digest all that had been Ordained at Soissons; One at Touziack It
is believed to be Tuze nigh Vaucouleurs. Diocese of Toul.
in the Bishopric of Toul, An. 860. composed of the Bishops of fourteen
Provinces. One at Soissons, An. 866. One at Troyes the year after, as it were
for a supplement to that of Soissons, all these being for the Reformation of
Discipline, and Manners. Most of the others were for particular affairs, and
yet did often make Canons. That of Ments in the year 848. where Rabanus Maurus
the Archbishop presided, sent back Godeschale the Monk Of this see hereafter.
to Hinomar of Reims his Metropolitan; who at the Council of Crecy on the Oise,
the same year, caused him to be condemned. This Monk was accused for preaching
errors concerning the Doctrines of Predestination, Free Will, and the
Redemption by the Blood of Jesus Christ; These questions were debated again An.
853. in the third Council of Valence, which met to prosecute the Bishop of that
City for certain Crimes.

The Council of Paris of the year 847. was called for the business of Ebbon of
Reims, that of Tours met An. 849. about the enterprise of Neomene, who had
given the Bishops of Bretagne a Metropolitan, and had thereby subtracted them
from the Archbishopric of Tours. In that of Crescy An. 858. the Bishops
deputed two of their Assembly to go and make remonstrances to Louis the
Germanick, upon his invading the Kingdom of his Brother Charles. There was one
at Savonieres, the Suburbs of Toul, An. 859. to make up that Breach. Lotaire
the Young convened two at Aix-la-Chapelle, in the year 860. about the business
of the Marriage of Thietberge and Lotaire II. and there was likewise a third at
Mets for the same Subject.

In that of Senlis An. 863. Hincmar caused Rouauld Bishop of Soissons to be
degraded, upon the accusation of a Priest whom Rouauld had deposed, for being
surprised with a Woman, and Mutilated in those Parts or Members, which are
unuseful to a good Ecclesiastic. Rouauld appealed to Rome; Pope Nicholas sent
word to Hincmar and the Bishops that they should order the Party accused to
come to him that he might review his Process; and upon the second Summons he
interdicted their saying Mass, till they did obey. But Hincmar who had great
Credit in the Gallican Church, stood it out, and caused Guards to be set upon
Rouauld lest he should slip out of the Kingdom. Nevertheless two years after he
went to Rome, and was restored to his Bishopric by Pope Nicholas.

The same Holy Father ordered Herard Archbishop of Tours to call a Council at
Soissons An* 866. (which was the III) to restore Wlfade He was afterward,
Archbishop of Bourges.
and his Companions to their places of Clerks in the Church of Reims, in case
Hincmar who had displaced them, refused to do so: That of Troyes in 867.
labored in the same business. There was a Council Verberie in 869. One at
Atigny An. 870. and another at Douzy in 871. concerning the affair of the
unfortunate Hincmar of Laon. In that of Atigny, was likewise debated the
division of the Kingdom of Lotaire I. and the Rebellion of Carloman Son to the
Bald, who was condemned to be kept Prisoner at Senlis. Which was confirmed in
another held at Senlis An. 873.

The Council of Douzy Perhaps it is Tuisy upon the River of Vesle, Diocese of
Reims.
II. An. 874. was against incestuous marriages, and such as invaded any thing
belonging to the Church. That of Pontigon Thought to be Pont-yon, two Leagues
above Vitry,
in 876 confirmed the Regulations framed in that of Pavia. Pope John VIII.
having escaped out of the Captivity of Lambert Count of Spoleta, and Albert
Marquess of Tuscany, while he was in France, called that of Troyes in 878.
where he caused the Excommunication he had at Rome thrown upon those
persecutors to be approved, as also the Condemnation of Formosus Bishop of
Porto, and his Adherents. The Bishops of Burgundy in that of Maintaille The
Palace of the Burgundian Kings, about four Leagues from Vienne.
gave the Kingdom to Boson An. 879. There was one at Fimes in Champagne in 881.
amongst whose Acts we find an exhortation and advice to King Louis Son of Louis
the Stammerer to Govern well. King Arnold had one held at Mets An. 888. That of
Valence in Daulphine An. 890. gave the Kingdom of Burgundy Cis-jurane or Arles
to Louis the Son of Boson. In the same Kingdom there was one at Vienne two
years after, of which some Canons are remaining. The same year that of Reims,
where Foulks Successor to Hincmar presided, which ordered comminatory Letters
to Baudouin, or Baidwin, Earl of Flanders, who Invaded the Propriety belonging
to the Churches.

The question about the Worshipping of Images, and that touching
Predestination, had like to have divided the Gallican Church. For the first, it
is certain there were no Bishops in all France that would have broken them, or
rejected the Intercession of Saints, unless Claude de Turin, who was so pelted
on all hands, that he could not stand his ground. But many, and those of the
most Learned, amongst others Jonas of Orleans and Agobard of Lions, could not
consent or yield, that Images should be adored. In so much that the Emperors
Theophilus, and Michael having sent Ambassadors into France An. 825. to consult
with the Debonnaire about the means to take away that Schism which divided the
Greek Church from the Roman, the Bishops who were Assembled at Paris to confer
about it, examined the Sayings of the Fathers with their reasons and opinions
on that Subject, whence they did infer that the Worshipping of Images was not
to be permitted.

They also wrote Letters conformable thereunto, to be sent unto the Pope on
this occasion, as well in their own as in the Emperors name, and others
likewise for his Holiness to send to the Eastern Emperors. But we do not find
that these resolutions had any effect; the Gallican Church has allowed and
received the Worshipping of Images, and hold those of a contrary opinion to be
Heretics.

For the question of Predestination, that made more noise yet. It was
Godeschale the Monk a Native of Germany, but who had taken his Frock in the
Abbey of Orbais in the Diocese of Soissons, who gave occasion for these
Disputes. On his return from a Pilgrimage to Rome passing by Ments, he made out
some propositions upon this Subject, which seemed to be hard and Scandalous; he
was accused for Teaching that God destined, or Predestined unchangeably, the
reprobated to be damned, as the Elect to be glorified, and therefore as he was
the Author of good Actions, so he was likewise the Author of Sin. Those on the
other side for him maintained that he held no other then the Doctrine of St.
Augustine, St. Gregory, St. Fulgentius, and in fine the whole Church, which is,
that God prepares Eternal punishments for those whom he foresees will dye in
Sin, without Predestinating or Inclining them to Sin.

However it were, Rabanus Maurus Archbishop of Ments, adjudged him guilty of
the Error whereof he was accused: but because in condemning him he seemed to
contradict that Proposition in General, that God Predestinates to Death, not
knowing it was the opinion of St. Fulgentius and authorized by many of the
Fathers, Godeschale reproached him that his was contrary to their Sentiments.

There is some likelihood this Monk did not express himself with all that
respect and submission he ought to so great a Prelat; and indeed being cited
before the Council of Ments, he presented a Petition containing an accusation
against him; The Archbishop called him Makebate and Insolent, and sent him
back to Hincmar his Archbishop to give judgment against him.

Hincmar, who of himself had but little mercy, and was besides'something evilly
disposed against the Monk, because of his too confident proceedings, used great
severity toward him. For in the Council of Crecy, he caused him to be
condemned for his Incorrigible obstinacy, and for his having been the cause of
trouble, to be deposed from the Order of Priesthood, whipped till he should
throw his Writings into a Fire which was kindled near him, then shut up in
close imprisonment, where he died at ten or twelve years end.

He persisted however in his opinions to the last; and Hincmar treating him
like one excommunicated denied him the Sacraments, even at the time of his
dissolution, and Christian Burial after his death.

Now as in the Council of Crecy, that the Archbishop had composed four
Chapters, wherein he seemed to refute that Proposition of St. Fulgentius, and
examine and oppose some others of St. Augustin's; the greatest men of those
Times withstood the enterprise. Amongst others St. Prudence Bishop of Troyes,
Servais Loup a Priest of Ments, Loup Abbot of Ferrieres, Ratramne a Monk of
Corbie; Nay even the Church of Lions, to whose judgments Hincmar referred
himselftogether with all those of the Kingdom of Arles, and his Pastor St.
Remy, who for his Doctrine, and Ecclesiastical capacity was to be compared with
the ancient Fathers.

Diverse Councils were held, and many things written on either side, especially
by John Scot for Hincmar, and by Florus for the Church of Lions: By which, (say
the Learned) it appears they were all for St. Augustine, but did not well
understand themselves, or explain their own meaning clearly, so that the Errors
they charged each other withal lay only in the different Interpretations and
Sense of either Party. And indeed the Councils before whom these Controversies
were brought wisely suppressed them, declaring that they were to be considered
in a more ample manner and sober discussion. Which certainly they would never
have done if there had appeared any positive or notorious errors in either
Party.

All the mischief of this Storm fell upon two Priests, Godeschale and John
Scotus* who suffered because they had reflected on the Bishops. The first was
handled as is abovementioned; the other having been mightily baffled and
despised, was compelled in the end to forsake the Court and Kingdom: And even
after his death was condemned as the Precursor of Berenger, and the
Sacramentarians; Rabanus, and Amalarius Deacon of Treves were likewise censured
or blamed in their life time for holding that villainous or filthy opinion of
the Stercoranists, which is not to be explained without trespassing on that
respect, which is due to the most Sacred of all Mysteries.

The Authority especially was excessively increased ever since Pepin made use
of their interest to obtain the Crown, and Charlemain, after the Pattern of the
Visi-Goth Kings, would have affairs both Civil and Ecclesiastical debated in
the same Assemblies; where those Bishops being the Principals, often times
carried things so as best pleased and served themselves. But the Rebellion of
Louis the Debonnair's Children against their Father, and afterward the Civil
Dissentions ensuing, raised their power to a higher pitch yet, and put them
into such a Capacity that they seemed to pretend a Right of Electing Kings,
like the Pope, who disposed of the Empire, as if it had been a Benefice
depending on him.

It is fit we observe that at the Coronations of Kings, they forgot not their
own Interests, nor failed to make them promise solemnly to maintain the Rights
of the Church: But we do not find them always so careful and zealous for the
good of the People and the Prerogative of the Nobility.

Of those that appeared with most Splendour, some were such as were noted for
Intrigues and Factions; and of them were a great number, Ebbon of Reims,
Agobard of Lions, and Bernard de Vienne active in the degrading of Louis the
Debonnaire. Ebroin of Poictiers for disposing Aquitain to surrender themselves
into the hands of that Emperor, who would bestow it upon Charles his beloved
Son. Thietgaud de Colen and Gontier de Ments touching the marriage of Valdrade.
And Hincmar of Reims for his resisting the Pope, and intermedling with all
affairs both of Church and State, wherein he acted with as much heat as
judgment during the Reign of Charles the Bald.

The others were illustrious for their Learning; as the same Agobard,
Theodulfe, and Jonas his Successor, Rabanus Maurus of St. Bennets Order and
Archbishop of Mentz, Hincmar of Reims who had been Abbot of St. Denis, and the
other Hincmar his Nephew, Remy de Lions, Adon de Vienne, Hilduin Abbot of St.
Denis, Loup Abbot of Ferrieres in Gastinois, Henry Monk of St. Germain
d'Auxerre, Valafride Strabon Abbot of Richenoue, Florus Master of the Church of
Lions, that is a Divine, and John Scot, or Scotus, surnamed Erigena. This last
was a great Philosopher, and for the Beauty and Delicacy of his wit, highly
cherished by Charles the Bald, even to the lying in his Chamber: But in
Theology he passed for one of a raving Brain, whose sentiments were not right
and sound.

As for Hincmar de Reims, we have his works whereof every one may judge. The
other Hincmar his nephew very zealons for the Popes authority collected their
Decretal Letters, and was the first that durst put down the names of some
Ancient Popes, who till that time had none, but which Is^dore Mercator had
already gathered together. Other Canonists followed his error, till at length
the more judicious found they were but fictitious. Adon de Vienne composed a
Matyrology which is yet in being: Hilduin wrote the life of St. Denis the
Areopagite by command of Louis the Debonnaire, from the Memoires of Methodius,
Patriarch of Constantinople; who to flatter the French endeavored to have two
things believed, which the Critics pretend to condemn of false-hood; The one,
that this Saint Denis had been Bishop of Paris; the other, that those Writings
which go under his name, were his own.

We have the Epistles of Loup de Ferrieres which give a great light in the
affairs of those times; And the Monk Henry wrote the Life of Saint Germain de
Auxerre in more Elegant Verse then the roughness of that Age could promise.

I shall observe en passant that Latin Poetry began to rouse its self under
Charles the Bald, and amongst other Poets that flattered him, there was one
that made a Piece containing three hundred Hexameters in praise of the Bald,
where every word began with the Letter C.

Saints.
Some for their good lives deserved to be placed in the Catalogue of Saints; as
Anscher taken out of the Order of St. Bennet by Louis the Debonnaire, to be the
first Archbishop of Hamburgh Established by that Emperor, and to Preach to the
Danes and Swedes; the same Rabanus whom we have mentioned: Two Audr^'s, one of
Sens, the other of Man's; Ayos Aigulsus.
de Bourges, Prudence de Troyes, Hildeman de Beauvais, Foulquin and Hunfroy de
Terouanne, Amant de Rodez, and Bernard de Vienne. This last had Adon
abovenamed for Successor both in his Sanctity and his See: But he had very few
in that good Christian Maxim, so often in his Mouth, and ever in his Soul: That
the Riches and Goods of the Church, are the Patrimony of the Poor, and that a
Clergyman has no right to them but for his necessities. Nor did he keep any
more Domestique Servants but one Priest and one Layman; Proclaiming to all
Prelates by this noble example; That he who is great in himself, has no need of
other Equipage, or Train of Servants to make him appear so.

LOUIS IV.
Surnamed TRANSMARINE, King XXXII.
Aged XIX, or XX Years.
POPES.
LEO VII. in 936. S. 3 years, 6 Months. STEPHEN IX. Elect. in 939. S. 3 years,
4 Months. MARTIN II. Elect. 943. S. 3 years, 6 Months and one half. AGAPET II.
Elect. 946. S. 9 years, 7 Months.
Louis IV. surnamed Transmarine, in France. Otho I. in Germany. Rodolph II. in
Burgundy Transjurane. HUGH and Lotaire his Son in Italy.

French Lords Hugh le Blanc Earl of Paris and Orleans Duke of France, and
Brother in Law to the late King, had the greatest Authority in the Kingdom: He
durst not however take the Crown, because Hebert Earl of Vermandois and
Giselbert Duke of Lorraine, two very potent Enemies would have broke his
Measures. He found it therefore more safe to make a King of the Blood of
Charlemaine, who should be wholly obliged to him for his Crown.

To this purpose he dispatched a Famous Deputation of Prelates and Lords,
whereof William Archbishop of Sens was the Chief, into England, to beseech
Ogina the Widow of Charles the Simple, to bring back her Son Louis, whom the
French desired to own for their King. She granted their request, but not
without great opposition of King Aldestan her Brother: He apprehended his
Nephew might be destroyed by some treachery as his Father had been; and
therefore would not be satisfied with only their Oaths, but took Hostages
besides. Hugh and the other Lords came to receive their King at his Landing at
Bullogne, tendered their Hommage on the Strand, and thence conducted him to
Laon where he was Anointed by Arnold Archbishop of Reims the 20 th day of June.

Hugh who still retained the Administration of the Kingdom, carried him into
the Duchy of Burgundy for his own ends, for there were some pretenses, but how
grounded we do not well know; And Hugh le Noir appropriated it to himself as
Heir of the Deceased Rodolph his Brother, who had it from Richard his Father,
on whom Boson had bestowed it when he was made King of Burgundy. Le Noir, or
(the Black) had therefore Seized on the City of Langres after the Decease of
King Rodolph, but the new King and Hugh thrust him cut again without striking
one blow, and engaged him to yield up one half of the Duchy to Hugh le Blanc
or the White.

An. 937. King Rodolph died, having Reigned 25 years in Burgundy Transjurane,
and only five in the Kingdom of Arles. He left three Children, Conrade who
Succeeded him, but whom Otho Seized upon and detained fourteen years: Burchard
Bishop of Lausanne; and Adeleis a most Illustrious Princess, who by her first
marriage was Wife to Lotaire King of Italy, and at her second to the Emperor
Otho I.

LOUIS in France. Conrad in Burgundy and Arles. Otho in Germany and Lorrain.
HUGH and Lotaire his Son in Italy.

Lewis Transmarine took the Government in hand, and sent for the Queen his
Mother to come to Laon to have the Benefit of her Counsel. To settle his
Authority the better, he first began with some petty Rebels by little and
little, then falls upon Hebert himself whom he thought the more easily to
overcome because he was grown odious for his Treachery against Charles the
Simple. And indeed he gained some places very quickly: But Hugh fearing they
would set upon him likewise joined with Hebert, who was besides his Uncle by
the Mother; And because he judged there would be little security in a person
that had broke his Faith, he armed himself likewise with the Alliance of King
Otho by Wedding his Daughter, named Hanvide, Haduid, Haduige, Avoy.
Havida.

The King on his side fortified himself in a more strict Union with Arnold Earl
Flanders a Mortal Enemy to Hugh, Artold Archbishop of Reims, Hugh le Noir
Brother of the Defunct King Rodolph, and some others: but this year Giselbert
Duke of Lorraine, being come to the assistance of Hugh the Great his Brother in
Law, Arnold and the Noir negociated a Truce till the first day of January of
the following year, between the King and that Duke.

As soon as that was expired the War began afresh. Whilst the King was in
Burgundy, to divide it with the Noir, Hugh le Blanc, Hebert and William Duke of
Normandy, overran and Burnt the Territory's of Arnold. The Bishops censures
had not power enough to stop them: but the Kings Return gave them more cause of
dread, and made them renew the Truce to the Month of June.

Henry the younger Brother of Otho fancied to himself that the Kingdom of
Germany belonged to him, he being Born when his Father was a King, whereas Otho
came into the World before he was so. Giselbert very powerful in Lorraine, and
who had married Gerberge Sister to these two Princes, instead of behaving
himself as a Mediator between them, takes part with the Younger.

These two Brothers in Law thus Leagued, sent to King Louis to put themselves
under his obedience; After which Otho having beaten and forced them at a
passage over the Rhine, the despair they were under made Giselbert and some
other Lorrain Lords, come even to Laon to do him Hommage.

Louis wanted but very little of having the whole Kingdom of Lorraine surrender
to him; he got into Alsace and was well received every where: But when he came
to treat those as a conquered people, who had voluntarily submitted to him, it
soon alienated their affections.

Hugh the Great, Hebert, William Duke of Normandy, and even Arnold of Flanders
not thinking it expedient for themselves that King Lewis should make himself so
potent, re-allied themselves with Otho; who having quitted the Siege of
Capremont, which was Giselbert's impregnable Fortress, and joined with them,
easily drove Louis out of Alsatia, then laid Siege before Brisac, a place very
considerable in those days, and where they showed notable Feats of Arms.

Whilst Otho was at this Siege, a party of his, especially the Clergy abandoned
him. But Giselbert and Everard were defeated by his men at their passage over
the Rhine near Andernac, where the last remained dead on the spot, and the
other that had been the Firebrand, of all these Wars, was drowned. This
unhoped for advantage, having ruined Henry's Party, he grew wise, and timely
yielded Brisac surrendered and all Lorrain was his, the Government whereof he
bestowed upon Henry himself, and soon after upon Count Otho.

The year following King Lewis thinking to strengthen himself on that hand, or
perhaps gain Vassals and Friends amongst the Lorrainers, married that Kings
Sister Gerberge, the Widow of Giselbert by whomshe had two Children Regnier
and Lambert.

Count Hebert of Vermandois had by craft and force got his Son, but ten years
of Age, to be nominated Archbishop of Reims: which being contrary to the Rules
of the Church, the Clergy placed one Artold in that Episcopal See, who by
consequence was an Enemy to Hebert, and a great friend to the King. The contest
about this Archbishopric begot a War, which lasted 18 or 20 years, and
greatly molested all Champagne.

Hebert with Earl Hugh, and Wlliam Duke of Normandy besieged Reims; The
Inhabitants being terrified, forsook Artold and opened their Gates to them.
Artold thorough the like fear suffers himself to be persuaded to renounce the
Archbishopric and accept of an Abbey; whereof repenting again, the King
embraces his defense, and the quarrel revived again.

From thence the Confederates went and planted the Siege before Laon: but upon
the noise of the Kings March, who was returning from Burgundy, they retired
toward Otho, and having led him as it were in Triumph to the Palace of Atigny,
they put themselves into his protection.

King Louis having refreshed Laon, retires into Burgundy. His strength lay that
way, because of Hugh le Noir who together with William Count of Poitiers
accompanied him. King Otho having a potent Army, pursued him thither, and
struck Hugh le Noir with so much terror, that he made Oath never to employ his
Forces more against Hugh le Blanc, nor against Hebert, who were his new Vassals.

Louis notwithstanding besieges Laon, wherein was Count Hebert; but it was to
his own great damage; for being surprised in his Legements by his base
Subjects, he beheld above one half of his men slain with his own Eyes, and
could not save himself but by a shameful flight.

After which forsaken of all his Neustrian Subjects, he took shelter under
Charles Constantine Earl of Vienne, his Cousin German, being the Son of Louis
the Blind King of Italy and Arles, and a Sister of Queen Ogina's. Thence he had
recourse to the Pope, the Lords of Aquitain, and to William Duke of Normandy.
The Pope sent a Legate to exhort the Lords of Neustria to be faithful to him:
those of Aquitain came and tendered him Hommage at Vienne, and profer'd their
assistance; And William quitting the Associates treated him magnificently in
his City of Rouen, and served him with his Forces, as did likewise the Bretons.

With these Forces he sought all opportunities to fight his Enemies: but they
were retreated on this side the Oise, and having broken down all the Bridges
would not come to any Engagement. Therefore a Truce was made between them; Otho
a Peace was concluded, by which Hugh and Hebert submitted to their King.

William Duke of Normandy, and Arnold Earl of Flanders, because this Last would
constrain Herluin Earl of Monstreuil to become his Vassal, and had taken his
Castle, whilst William on the contrary had espoused Herluin's quarrel and
powerfully assisted him. Arnold not being able to have his will of Herluin,
betook himself to base and treacherous means to compass it; For having upon
pretense of reconciliation, procured an enter-view with William in an Island on
the Sum right against Pequigny, he caused him unhappily to be assassinated
the 18 th of December An. 942.

That good and virtuous Prince had just designed, before he was murdered to
take upon him the Habit of St. Bennet in the Monastery of Jumieges, which he
had begun to rebuild. He left but one Son named Richard, Born of Sporta his
wife who was Daughter of Hebert Count of Senlis; he Succeeded him in his
Dukedom.

A great part of the Normans were yet Idolaters, and there came every day new
flocks of them from the North, who encouraged them in their Superstitions.
After the Death of William they rebelled against his Son, and would force him
to Hugh the Grand allied to his Father assisted him against those impious
revolters, beat them in several rencounters, and helped him to destroy their
Leaders: their names were Setric and Rodard.

The King knowing that while the Normans were divided, their little Duke
Richard might easily be stripped, and that it would be a Noble act to recover so
great and good a Country, went to Rouen about Autumn, and Siezed upon Richard's
person, under pretense of breeding him in his own Court. The Burgher's at first
took the Alarm, and stood in his defense, so that he was fain to show him to
the people and confirm the Duchy to him: but their first heat being spent, he
so managed the business that persuading them he would have a great care of his
Education, they suffered him to be carried away to Laon.

When he had gotten him absolutely in his power, Arnold Earl of Flanders whose
interest it was to exterminate all the Normans, by his Presents and Counsel,
easily inclined him to the resolution of incapacitating him for ever, and
resuming Richard's wise Governor, by name Osmond, craftily drew him out of the
Danger; He stole him out of Court, trussed up in a Faggot of Herbs, and
conveyed him into Senlis. That City one of the strongest in those days, was
then held by Count Bernard Uncle to Richard by his Mother; who kept that Pupil
and would not surrender him either to the King, nor to the Normans, till he
could see a little more clearly what was like to be the event of that War then
threatened.

Hebert of Vermandois died at Peronne, tormented with the gnawing remorse of
his treacheries, crying perpetually in his Agonies, We were twelve of us that
betrayed King Charles! He had three Sons, Hebert and Robert who shared his
Lands, and Hugues or Hugh pretended Archbishop of Reims.

King Lewis, who had that fault that he could not dissemble, adventures rashly
Hugh agreed with the Normans, and King Otho made one, and openly declared
against Louis: who for that reason reconciled himself to Hugh.

At first this Duke had embraced the cause of little Richard: but the King
promising he should share the Duchy of Normandy with him, and likewise have
the Territory's belonging to the Bishoprics of Evreux, Lysieux and Bayeux, he
not only abandoned the Pupil, but also joined with the King to ruin him. They
entered the Country therefore at the same time, the King by the way of Rouen,
and Hugh toward Evreux. Bernard Count of Senlis, who had saved his Nephew, did
likewise preserve his Country by his wonderful Sagacity. He advised the Normans
to pretend a submission to the King, to avoid the desolations of a War; and
afterward easily persuaded him to reserve all that rich Province to himself,
and take away from Hugh those places which he had conquered; so that by this
Method he caused a new rupture between those Princes.

Hugh to undertake once more the protection of Richard, and to promise him his
Daughter Emma.
Emine, who was not however married till Sixteen years after. And more-over
this little Prince being still dispossessed, he so craftily contrived his
affairs that he restored him. And thus it was. There was a Chieftaine or Norman
King named Aigrold, who being come some years before from Denmark, had taken
his Habitation in Constentin: This Prince having consulted with Bernard,
revolts against Lewis, and sends to summon him to set the little Richard at
Liberty. Upon this news Bernard counterfeiting great zeal, assures the King
that all Normandy was united for his service, and by these plausible pretenses
obliges the King to go thither in person to suppress that P^rat. His Army and
Aigrold's being near each other, Aigrold seems to be afraid, and demands a
Conf^rence; the King agrees to it, and to that end goes to the Village of
Crescenville in the midway between Caen and Lisieux. The train was so well
laid that the Norman finding himself the stronger, cuts off all that came with
him, Seizes upon his person, and sends him Prisoner to Rouen.

Herluin Earl of Monstreuil, the principal subject of the quarrel between the
deceased William and Arnold, was slain by Aigrold in revenge for that although
he had always been protected by William, nevertheless he had ingratefully sided
with Arnold to oppress Normandy and it is little Duke.

Gerberge implore the assistance of King Otho her Brother for the deliverance
of her Husband. He refused to apply any other means but only his mediation. By
virtue of a plenarie power Signed by the Bishops at his desire and by all the
French Lords, he decreed with them at a Conference held at St. Clair sur Epte,
That Louis should restore Richard to his Duchy and receive hommage, and from
that time he should be set at Liberty, and give his second Son and two Bishops
for security. But Louis getting out of the hands of the Normans, remained still
under the power of Hugh; who upon I know not what pretenses detained him at
least a year under the guard of Thibault Earl of Blois his Cousin German, and
would not let him go till he had gotten the City of Laon of him.

In the mean time King Otho who had conquered the County of Burgundy, whether
he feared an absolute reunion between the King and his Subjects, or whether
the Tears of his Daughter Gerberge and compassion to behold a King so ill
treated by his means moved his heart, he roughly refused Hugh who sought his
amity, and Louis his assistance to revenge himself.

Lewis accepted it, and soon after he was out of his imprisonment, went to Otho
at Cambresis, where Arnold Earl of Flanders had joined Forces with him: So that
they had together above thirty Legions: And which is remarkable, all these
combatants, except the Abbot of Corbie in Saxony, had all Straw-hats, without
doubt to defend their heads from blows, or from the cold.

Hugh and all his Allies: but after they had tried Laon, driven away
Archbishop Hugh from Reims, and restored Artold to his See, having showed
themselves before the Gates of Senlis and the Suburbs of Paris, they ran
themselves on ground and Shipwrackt against Rouen. The death of Otho's Nephew
and a great number of Saxons who were slain there, the autumnal Rains, the
approaching Winter, Arnolds desertion who withdrew in the night time with his
Forces, apprehending to be delivered up to the Normans, constrained Otho to
raise his Siege and retire.

Hugh besieged Reims, and King Lewis Monstreuil, held by Rotgar Son of Count
Herluin: but both without success.

In August the two Kings Louis, and Otho conferred together on the Kar, or the
Cher, concerning their affairs. This River which coming from the Country of
Luxemburgh falls into the Meuse between Sedan and Mouson, has ever since made
the bounds or separation of the Kingdoms of France and Lorrain as it did
heretofore of Neustria and Austrasia.

Anno 947. Italy suffered a New change. Auscare and Berenger, one Brother, and
the other Son of Adelbert Marquess of Ivrea, having ingratefully conspired
against King Hugh, that Prince put Auscaire to Death, and Berenger escaped to
Herman Duke of Suabia. Now this man having good information that Hugh had
rendered himself very odious to the Italians, having sounded their affections,
repassed the Alps. He was received in Verona and in Milan, and seemed welcome
to most part of the Nobility. Nevertheless the People moved with pity toward
Lotaire the Son of Hugh, a handsome young Prince not above 14 or 15 years old,
would have the Title of King to be preserved for him: And Berenger consented
for that time the more willingly, because all the Authority was in him. The
agreement made, Hugh returned into Provence with his Treasure, where he died
the same year.

Lewis in France. Conrad in Transjurane and Arles. Otho in Germany and
Lorraine. LOTAIRE and Berenger in Italy.

The dispute for the Archbishopric of Reims between Hugh of Vermandois and
Artold was a mighty business. It was first treated of at Douzy by some Prelates,
who having not power to determine it; referred it to a Synodical Assembly of
Gallican and German Bishops, which was held at Verdun in the middle of
November. Robert Archbishop of Triers presided there. Hugh appeared not, but
having sent thither certain Surreptitious Letters from the Pope, which they
little valued, the enjoyment of the Archbishopric was awarded to Artold, and
Hugh was excluded for his contumacy, till he should appear before the General
Council in the Month of August following, and had purged himself of the crimes
imputed to him.

Hugh makes complaint to the Pope, who sent a Legate to Otho to enjoin him to
Gallicans and Germans to determine this difference, as also to decide the
quarrel between King Lewis and Hugh le Blanc. He convocated them at his Royal
Palace of Ingelheim; he and King Lewis assisting there and sitting on the same
Bench. The Council heard the Kings complaint, and then Artold's Petition. The
King declared all the mischiefs Hugh had done him, even personal proof in the
Field of Battle. Upon these complaints they wrote Letters to Hugh le Blanc and
his adherents, to admonish them to return to their duty, under pain of an
Anathema; and doing justice upon the Petition of Artold, they confirmed the
Archbishopric to him, and excommunicated Hugh his competitor, till he duly
repented.

With this, Otho assisted Lewis with good Forces, the Lorrain Bishops his
Vassals took Mouson and razed it, excommunicated Thibault, who maintained the
City of Laon for Hugh, and caused Hugh himself by virtue of the Legates letters
to be cited to appear before the Council of Triers, to give satisfaction for
the damage he had done the King and the Church. Who not appearing was
excommunicated.

Reims as well as by the Kings Forces, and those that belonged to Hugh.

This year happened the death of Fulk the Good Earl of Anjou, a mighty Religious
Prince and a lover of Learning; who being one day informed that the King
scoffed at his going so often to Sing in the Quire, wrote only these words to
him; Know, Sir, that a Prince without Learning, is a Crowned Ass.

Hungarians being fallen An. 949. upon Lombardy, Berenger compounded with them
for eight Bushels of Silver, and upon pretense of raising that money committed
violent extortions. About that time Lotaire either out of grief to find himself
despised, or by some poison fell into a Frenzy and died without Children
toward the end of the same year. Berenger immediately caused himself to be
proclaimed King and was Crowned together with his eldest Son Adelbert.

Otho very glad of the disturbances in France, gave slight assistance to Louis,
who in the necessity of his affairs, relied much upon him and often went to
him, or sent his wife Gerberge. He also made cessations from time to time: In
one of which he and Hugh meeting by consent at the Marne, the River between
them, Hugh was to surrender up to him a great Tower which he held in the City
of Laon.

Peace being made on this side, Lewis takes his progress toward Aquitain to
secure himself of the Fidelity of the Lords of that Country. For during these
revolutions the Subjects faith was grown so wavering, that often in less then a
years time, they swore obedience and fealty to three or four several Kings.
Which was indeed, because they would have had none, had it been in their power.

This year 951. Ogina Ogiva.
Mother to King Lewis, Aged above 45 years, went Loan, where her Son kept her
as a Prisoner, and married Hebert of Vermandois Count de Troyes, Son of that
Traitor Hebert who made her Husband die in Prison. She thus satisfied her
revenge to the prejudice of her honor, or perhaps made that only a cover for
her incontinence.

LOUIS Transmarine in France. Otho in Germany and Lorrain. Conrad in Burgundy
and Arles. Berenger II. and Adelbert his Son in Italy.

Adeleida the Widow of Lotaire was Beautiful and Charming, she had the City of
Pavia in Dowre, and besides great riches and possessions, much credit, and many
Friends as well in that Country, as on this side the Mountains, being the
Daughter of Rodolph II. and Sister to Conrad Kings of Burgundy. For these
reasons Berenger sought to gain her for his Son; but she courageously rejected
the proposition. Upon her obstinate refusal he besieges her in Pavia, took her,
and sent her Prisoner to the strong Castle of Garda, whence the Lake has
borrowed its name. She notwithstanding made her escape by the help of a Priest,
reduced after she was got out to live upon such Alms as the Priest begged for
her; Then retired to the Marquess Athon her Kinsman, who undertook to protect
her in his Fortress of Canossa.

Berenger besieges it with all his Forces. The second year of the siege and the
end of their provisions drew near, when that Queen sent to implore the aid of
King Otho, and to offer him with her self the Kingdom of Italy. The Love of
Honor, more then Love to that Lady, drew this Prince thither: He Germany,
leaving his Army with Conrad Duke of Lorrain to finish that War.

Conrad prosecuted the War so briskly against Berenger and his Son, that both
of them laying down their Arms came to a Conference with him, and thorough his
persuasions went both of them into Germany to King Otho; who having treated
them magnificently, and taken their Oaths and made them do hommage restored to
them all that Kingdom, excepting only Veronnois and Friuli, which he bestowed
upon his Brother Henry Duke of Bavaria.

The contest about the Archbishopric of Reims and some other particular
Lordships, had brought King Lewis and Hugh le Blanc again to Daggers-drawing:
But Hugh in fine, whatever motive prompted him, desired to confer with Queen
Gerberge his wives Sister, who came to meet him; And afterward treating with
the King personally in Soissons, he made Peace about the end of March in this
year 953.

Otho but little, but he found himself not in a condition to disturb it. He was
too much troubled with the Civil-War made against him by his own Son Luitolf,
incited by Conrad Duke of Lorrain, who made him jealous of a Son as yet in the
Cradle, which his Father had by Adeleida his second wife. Otho thrust Conrad
out of his Duchy, and at length brought his Son to his duty, not without much
hazard fighting and labor.

Conrad obstinately rebellious turned every stone to be revenged. He made a
League with Berenger King of Italy, as ungrateful as perfidious against Otho,
and drew the Hungarians in twice; first into Lorrain An. 954. whence they
overrun even to Champagne and Burgundy, and having done a world of mischief
were beaten back into Italy; the second into Bavaria, where a most dreadful
multitude got in Otho fought them, and cut them all off, after Conrad had been
killed in the scuffle. This was in Anno 595.

Lewis died by a strange accident. As he was going from Laon to Reims, spurring
to ride after a Wolf which he met in his way, his Horse stumbled, and threw
him so rudely on the ground that he was bruised all over. These bruises turned
into a kind of Leprosy, which caused his death the 15 th of October in the City
of Reims, whither he would be carried, and where he lies buried in the Church
of St. Remy. His Reignwas 18 years, three Months, and his Age 38, or 39, years.

Of five Sons which he had by Gerberge, there were but two remaining, Lotaire
and Charles, whereof Lotaire the eldest was about 14 or 15 years old, and
Charles but 15 or 16 Months.

The small Age of this last, the poverty of the Kings who had scarce any other
Towns in propriety but Reims and Laon, and perhaps the interest of Hugh le
Blanc; were the reasons why he did not share the Kingdom with his elder, as had
been ever almost the Custom in the first and second Race, or Line. Since this
time it was never equally divided amongst the Brothers: the eldest alone has
had the Title of King, and the cadets, or younger have only had some Lands in
appennage and under an entire Subjection. And even of these the Kingly power
being increased has taken the Reversion for want of Heirs-males; which has
not a little contributed to restore the Grandeur of the Monarchy.

LOTAIRE, King XXXIII:
POPES,
AGAPET II. above a year in this Reign. JOHN XII. who was the first that
changed his name, introduced An. 955. S. 9 years within some Months: is
deposed. BENEDICT V. put in by the Romans An. 964. S. some Months. JOHN XIII.
nominated by the Empp. Otho in 964. S. almost 7 years. DOMNUS Elect in 972. S.
3 Months. BENEDICT VI. in 972. S. one year 3 Months. BENEDICTUS VII. in 974. S.
9 years, and some Months. JOHN XIV. Elect. in July 849. S. one year, one Month.
Lotaire in France. Otho in Germany and Lorrain. Conrad in Burgundy and Arles.
Berenger and Adelbert his Son in Italy.

THE greatest part of the power being in the hands of Hugh, he might have taken
the Crown, had he not feared the Forces of King Otho, maternal Uncle to the
Sons of the deceased King, and the jealousy of the other French Lords. For
these reasons, Queen Gerberge his wives Sister, being come to him to take his
Counsel, he chose rather to preserve his Authority by protecting a Widow and a
Minor, then by oppressing them. Having therefore carried Lotaire to Reims, he
caused him to be Crowned the 12 th of November by the Archbishop Artold.

Upon this occasion the young King gave the Dukedoms of Burgundy and Aquitain
to Hugh le Blanc and to Hugh Capet his eldest Son: who being satisfied and the
Duke of Normandy likewise for their sakes, it was not difficult to calm the
other Lords who were less considerable.

These Dukes in my opinion, were of two sorts in those times; the one held the
Cities and Lands, and were become Hereditary; the other were general commands
over a whole Kingdom, as well for the Militia as to do Justice, which the Kings
could bestow, or take away. So there was a Duke for Lorrain which was Bruno
Archbishop of Colen, King Otho's Brother, One for France, one for Aquitain,
and one for Burgundy; and Hugh was such in all those three Kingdoms, by
consequence he was as the Kings Lieutenant General, and in that quality might
be set aside, if his great alliance and the Cities in his possession had not
rendered him indestituable.

France was quiet enough three years together, only Hugh An. 955, led the King
into Poitou to make William Earl of that Country and Duke of Aquitain become
obedient, and laid Siege to Poitiers. Scarcity of provisions and the terror of
a Thunderclap which tore his Tent in two, forced him to raise it; and yet the
Count presuming to pursue the French upon their retreat, they turned head and
put him to the rout with great slaughter of his Nobility.

The following year Hugh, who without a Scepter, had Reigned more then 20
years, being the Son of a King, Father of a King, Uncle to a King, and Brother
Le Blare.
in Law to three Kings, died in his City of Paris full of years, glory, and
riches. He was surnamed the White * from his skin, the Great from his power, or
perhaps his bulk; and the Abbot, because he held the Abbeys of St. Denis, St.
Germain des Prez, and St. Martin's of Tours. At his death he entreated Richard
Duke of Normandy his Son in Law, to be the Protector of his Children and
Vassals.

He had three wives, Rotilda Sister of Lewis the Stammerer, Ethild Daughter of
Edward King of England, whose two Sisters were married to Charles the Simple
and Otho, and Avida Hauvida and Hadevida.
, or Avoye Sister of the same Otho and Queen Gerberge. There came no Children
by the first two, but by the third he had Hugues, or Hugh, surnamed Capet, who
was Earl of Paris and Orleance, then also Duke of France; Otho who was Duke of
Burgundy after the Death of Gilbert his Father in Law: Eudes or Odon who
succeeded him; and Henry who likewise enjoyed it after them.

Gerberge governed peaceably enough, excepting some petty quarrels about the
Castles belonging to the Archbishopric of Reims and some private contests.

The worst of it was, that it seemed most of the affairs were managed according
to the pleasure and will of King Otho and Bruno his Brother Archbishop of
Colen, and Duke or Governor of Lorrain, so that they became as it were the
Moderators and Arbitrators of France.

Hugh and the Widow Avoye her Sister, for some Castles which King Lotaire had
taken from them in Burgundy, Bruno came into France and brought them to an
agreement in a Parliament held at Compiegne. After which the Queen and her Son
Lataire went to keep Easter at Colen with Bruno who entertained them
splendidly, and sent them back furnished with very brave Presents.

A while after being called to their assistance against Robert Earl of Troyes,
and Count of Chaalons by his wife, who had surprised Dijon, he returned into
France with his Lorrainers and regained that place. At the same time he sent
some Saxon Forces to Troyes to restore the Bishop whom that Robert had thrust
out thence: But Renard Earl of Sens and Rimbauld Archbishop of the same City,
friends to Robert gave them Battle and defeated them.

The same year died Alain surnamed Barbe-torte Curle-beard, or Twist or
Twine-beard.
Duke of Bretagne and Son of Earl Matueda, who left two Bastards, Hoel and
Guerec, and one Legitimate Child named Drogon then in his Cradle, whom he
declared Heir. Thibauld Earl of Chartres Grandfather by the Mother to this
Child had the Tuition, and the Mother the care of his person. Now marrying
again with Fulk Earl of Anjou, this

The Succession begot a bloody debate in Bretagne which lasted 34 years. The
two Bastards of Alain disputed it with one Conan, who was descended by a
Daughter from King Solomon: he made them both perish, Hoel by the hands of a
Soldier who assassinated him, and Guerec, by a poisoned Lancet wherewith a
Chyrurgeon let him Blood. But himself perished at length in a Battle he lost
An. 992. against Fulk Earl of Anjou a Capital Enemy of the Bretons. Geofrey the
eldest of the four Sons he left succeeded him.

The Children of the Defunct Hugh the White, thorough the persuasion of
Archbishop Bruno, tendered hommage for their Lands to King Lotaire, who in
retribution declared the Eldest, Duke of France, as his Father had been, and
bestowed Poitou upon him; you must understand if he could conquer it, for it
was possessed by another very potent Earl. This is a conjecture that the Kings
had not yet given entirely away their power, of bestowing Dutchy's and
Earldoms, and that if they were Hereditary, it was only by Usurpation, not as
yet by Concession.

All the new Principalities and Seigniories or Lordships which were started up
in the Kingdom did not trouble the King so much as that of the Normans, who
being strangers and the Issue of those Fathers that had plagued and plundered
France 80 years together, should yet enjoy so rich a Province. Wherefore Bruno
who governed the affairs of the Kingdom, being excited by the persuasions of
Arnold Earl of Flanders, Baldwin his Son, Thibauld Earl of Chartres, and
Geofrey Earl of Anjou; combined to ruin Duke Richard. For this purpose he sent
for him to come to the Royal Parliament, or General Assembly of Estates at
Amiens* putting him in hopes, if he came thither, they would give him the
Administration of the Kingdom: But it was with design to Sieze and send him
Prisoner into Germany. Richard who was on his journey, being informed of this
Combination by two unknown Cavaliers, returned whence he came and stood more
upon his Guard.

Epte, to which place sending for him to come and do him hommage, he meant to
lay hold on him. The Duke had already passed the Epte, when the Scouts he had
sent forth to discover what the King was doing, brought him word that all his
Enemies were about the King, and were making ready to set upon him. By this he
understood the meaning of the French, and withdrew in time.

Berenger and Adelbert had been restored to the Kingdom of Italy by Otho, they
never ceased to conspire against him, and withal cruelly vexing their Subjects,
so that he had sent his Son Luitolf to chastise them. This young Prince had
almost hunted them quite out of the Kingdom, when he was surprised by Death An.
958. not without suspicion of poison, and thus left his Conquest imperfect.

Empp. Roman. Porphyrogenetus having poisoned Constantine the VIII. his Father,
in November and the Empire vacant in the West.
Now the complaints of the Lords and Prelates, and the earnest entreaty of the
Pope pressing King Otho, he resolved to go himself, after he had Crowned his
Son Otho II. at Aix la Chapelle, though he were but seven years of Age.

Upon his Arrival in Italy, Berenger, his Son, and his Wife abandoned the
Cities and Country, and retired each of them into a strong Fort. Otho was there
received with universal applause, recovered Pavia, was Crowned King of Lombardy
at Milan by the Archbishop, and thence marched to Rome, where he received the
Imperial Crown upon Christmass-day by the hands of John XII. who had been put
into the Holy Chair by the Credit and Money of his Father Alberic before

This Alberic was the Son of Marosia, who had chaced King Hugh from Rome; after
which he had changed the Government there, and made himself Consul that he
might command in Chief with a Prefect and some Tribuns.

Now the young Pope who had earnestly desired Otho to come, quickly changed his
mind, and recalled Berenger to Rome as soon as Otho was gone from thence to
reduce the rest of those places which that Tyrant still held. Otho being
informed of this odd fantastical news did not give over his Conquests, then
when he thought Empp. Nicephorus in March, Basil, and Constantine, the Sons of
Romain being Minors. and Otho I.
it seasonable to return to Rome he led his Army thither.

The young Pope being fled with Berenger and the Treasure of the Church, he
caused his Process to be made, not for his Intrusion, but for Murder,
Sacrilege, Adultery, Incest, Simony, and other enormous crimes. For this end
he Assembled a Council, John was cited before them in due form, and not
appearing they deposed him, and in his place put Leo, who was the VIII. of that
name.

Otho the power thenceforward to Elect the Popes and Bishops, and to give him
Investiture. The Ecclesiastical History does likewise observe that this John
XII. was called Octavian before his Election, and that he was the first Pope
that changed his name.

Whilst Otho was passing the Christmas Holy Days at Rome with the new Pope,
having quartred his Army out of the City: the Faction and money of John the
deposed Pope, made the Romans rise to Attaque him Treacherously, he had notice
of it time enough to prevent surprise, put himself in the head of his Army

He delivered them up again some few days after upon the entreaties of Leo; but
no sooner was he gone to besiege Camerin, but they revolted, drove out Leo, and
received John in their City: where he exercised most revengeful cruelty upon
Leo's Friends. He had continued it to the end, had he not been killed in the
very act of enjoying a Woman. After his death the Romans persisting in their
Rebellion Elected the Arch*Deacon Bennet. Immediately Otho returns again,
reduces Rome to a Famine, compels Bennet to ask pardon in the Synod of Bishops,
and causing him to be degraded of his Priesthood, sent him Prisoner into
Germany, where about a year after he died at Hamburgh.

Some months thence believing Italy might remain in Peace, because he had taken
Berenger and confined him to Bamberg in Germany, he returned home and marched
his Army with him. After his departure some Lombard Counts revolted having
Adelbert and Guy the Sons of Berenger at their head: But Duke Burchard whom he
sent back overthrew them in a great Battle, which was fought on the Banks of
the Po. Guy the most mischievous of them all was left dead upon the place, and
Adelbert escaped with much ado.

This last having gathered some Forces together, hazards another Battle An. 968
Italy, or if you will it passed over the German Princes who let it moulder away
and come to nothing.

After Pope Leo VIII. was dead, and that John XIII. had been set in the Chair
with the consent of Otho, on whom Leo had bestowed the power of Confirming the
Election of Popes: the Prefect, Consuls, Tribuns and other Magistrates of the
City of Rome, displeased that Otho had greatly limited their power, which
before led all Italy as they pleased, they put this Pope in Prison, then turned
him out of Rome, calling to their aid Rofroy Count of Campania.

The Pope retires to Pandolfus Prince of Capoua who restored him, and John his
Brother slew Rofroy. In recompense the Pope erects an Archbishopric at
Capoua,

But Otho desiring to remedy things once for all by suppressing these
Rebellions, returns to Italy, where he settled his Authority by severe
punishments, by rewarding Calabria and Puglia, which he wrested from the
Grecian Empire, who had kept them hitherto.

Otho at Milan by the hands of the Pope, and joined him in the Empire. This
young Prince three years after, that is to say in An. 971. Married Teophania or
Tifaine Daughter of the Emperor Nicephorus who was then dead.

Thus Otho but little inferior to Charlemaine, raised the Western Empire, the
Germany, with pretenses much more great and extensive then their Forces. We
shall henceforth speak no more of the affairs of Italy, and little of Germany,
unless where things do jointly relate to the French.

Italy, diverse quarrels were troublesome to France, the two greatest were that
about the Archbishopric of Reims, and the hatred of the Counts Thibauld de
Chartres and Arnold of Flanders against the Normans. The first might have been
ended by restoring Hugh of Vermandois to his Dignity in Reims, Artold the
Archbishop being dead An. 962. if the Queen could have suffered it: But far
from giving her assent, she so brought it about, that the Council of Soissons
referred it to the Pope who declared him Excommunicated.

Hugh furiously Animated against Guibuin Bishop of Chaalons, who in that
Assembly had proved thechief obstacle against his restoration, Burnt the City.

Chartres was supported by the King against the Normans, because he was joined
both by alliance and affection to the Interest of the Sons of Hugh the Great.
He lost a Battle in Normandy, for which he received satisfaction by the
conquest of Evreux which the King put into his hands, having obtained it by
intelligence. Richard followed him close at the heels, and getting into the
Country almost as soon as himself made terrible havoc. The Earl of Chartres
had his revenge the very same year, carrying Fire and Sword to the very Gates
of Rouen: but was rudely repulsed, and lost his Son in the Retreat.

Arnold surnamed the Old, the Fair and the Great, Earl of Flanders died in the
year 965. The Son of Baldwin his Son, named Arnold the Young Succeeded him
under the Guardianship of Matilda of Saxony his Mother. This was that Arnold
who being come to Age, began to Fortify the Port of Petressa or Scalas, which
then belonged to the Abbey of St. Berthin. It is now named Calais Neighbor to
Portus Iccius; in these days, as it is believed, called Blanc Nez, and very
Famous in the Romans times, who from thence passed over into Great Britain. He
thought to make good use of it against the Normand Pirates, and because he could
not always be on those Coasts, he gave the County of Guisnes to Adolph Son of
Siffroy, who had married the Daughter of Hernieulle Earl of Boulogne.

King Lotaire having heard of the Death of Arnold the Old, went immediately
into the Country to receive Hommage of the Lords, and took Arras and Doway. As
on the other side William Earl of Pontieu, took from that Minor Boulogne and
Terouenne, and two of his Sons were Earls, each of one, of those Cities.

Bruno being come into France to determine some difference between his Sister
Gerberge and King Lotaire with the Children and Widow of Hugh, was Siezed with
a Fever at Compiegne, which he carried to Reims with him and there Died.

Some Authors give him the Title of Archduke of Lorraine, because he commanded
all the Dukes and Earls of that Kingdom. And this is the first time that I find
that Title in any Authors.

There was before this time a Marquess and Duke of the higher or Mosellanick
Lorrain; which was Gerard, from whom it is held the Lorrain Princes of our days
are descended. Some Genealogists derive it from Erchinoald Mayre of the Palace,
and from the same stock they make the Austrian Habspurgh-House to spring, with
that of Zeringhen, from whence is issued the Princes of Baden.

The King marry's Emme or Emina Daughter of that Lotaire King of Italy Poisoned
by Berenger II. and the Queen Adeleida whom the Emperor Otho made his France
and Germany.

There happened nothing very observable during these two years, unless it were
that in An. 967. King Lotaire gave his Sister Matilda in marriage to Conrad
King Burgundy, and for her Dowre bestowed the City and County of Lions.

The Earl Thibauld supported by the King, went and encamped before Rouen, from
whence he could not be forced but by the help of the Infidel Normans, which the
King of Denmark of Kin to Richard sent thither, who having made him retreat,
ran Paris. Empp. John Zemisy, having killed Nicephorus, in December


The ignorance of those times was extreme; which is the reason that for want of
Historians, we scarcely find any thing, and must sometimes slip over whole
years without mention of any occurrences.

969. and Otho I. 970. 973.
In the year 973. Died the Emperor Otho, very justly surnamed the Great,
founder of the Germain Empire, Subduer of the Hungarians and Sclavonians, and
who found out the Method to Quell the Italians Pride, and Chain up their
persidious mutability.

LOTAIRE in France. OTHO II. Emperor of Italy and Germany, Aged 21 or 22 years.
CONRAD in Burgundy.

Empp. John Zemis, and Otho II. in May* R. 10, years and 6. Months.
The Reign of his Son Otho II. was neither so steady nor so happy as his own.
Giselbert the Husband of Gerberge, afterward Queen, had a Brother named
Regnier Long-neck Earl of Mons in Haynault, and Valenciennes, who having been
taken in that City by Archbishop Bruno, had been confined to the Country of
the Venedes; and some time after two Counts named Garnier, and Raginald or
Renold, who were in my opinion of his Kindred, were invested in his Lands. But
his Sons Regnier II. Lambert after the Death of Otho, Armed themselves with the
Aid of the French to be restored.

Then Basilius and Constantine R. 50 years. in December.
This begot a Bloody and most obstinate War. The two Brothers defeated and slew
in a Battle, fought at a Village of Peronne near Binns, the Counts Garnier and
Renold: But Otho II. immediately substituted Renauld and Godfrey two Lorrain
Lords, whom he invested with the Earldoms of Hainault and Valenciennes. Now
Charles Brother to King Lotaire and Hugh Capet, whose Daughters they afterward
Married, got possession again of those Counties: But it was at soonest not till
An. 983.

Lorrain in despite of him; however he dissembled it, having other affairs
which would not allow him time to break with King Lotaire.

Charles his Brother Duke of Lorrain, a young Prince about the Age of 23 or 24
years.

The French had not forgot the remembrance of their Ancient right to Lorrain;
And the King, as Son of Gerberge, who of her own held very many great
possessions in Capite, expected that Otho his Cousin German would restore some
part to him, especially seeing he had given such sweet Morsels to the Bishops
of Liege and Colen.

But not doing so, Lotaire undertakes to compel him. He gets unexpectedly into
the Country with an Army, takes the Oaths of the Lorrainers in the City of
Mets, and from thence marches directly to Aix-la-Chapelle. Otho was diverting
himself there very securely with his Family, it wanted not above half an hours
time to have surprised him: He could do no other, but only just get on
Horseback and fly for his safety, leaving his Dinner at the Table, and all his
precious Lotaire plundered, and then scowred thorough all the whole Country.

In revenge of this Exploit, the very same year Otho made a great irruption in
France with Threescore Thousand men, sacked all Champagne, and that which is
called the Isle of France even to Paris, sending word to Hugh Capet, who being
Count of that City had put himself in there, that he would have an Alleluya
sung upon Montmartre by so many Clerks it should be heard at Nostre-Dame.

Those Rodomontado's were not justified by the effects. His History does not
mention his name.
Nephew going in a Bravado to plant his Lance in one of the Gates of Paris, was
slain by Gefrey Grisegonnelle Earl of Anjou; Winter which came on obliged him
to retire, and Lotaire and Hugh Capet having drawn their Forces together, cut
off all his Reare-Guard at his passage over the River of Aisne, which was
overflown, and pursued him fighting to the Ardennes.

The Almain Monks of those days, as it is the Genius of men to pretend Miracles
in great danger, write that St. Udalric Bishop of Ausburgh, who accompanted
that Emperor in this War, went over the River Aisne dry-fout, leading the way
before him and his whole Army who followed, the over-following Stream
miraculously growing hard and firm under them, the River becoming a Bridge to
it is self.

In this retreat the Earl of Anjou did let the Germans know, that the quarrel
being between the two Kings, it would be better according to common right, for
them to decide it singly hand to hand, then to spill the Blood of so many
innocent people* But the Germans replied, that although they did not doubt the
courage of their France.

Otho thus roughly handled, sought an accommodation with the French: Lotaire
and he conferring together in the City of Reims, concluded a Peace upon
condition, that Lotaire should yield him Lorrain to be held in Feif of the
Crown of France, say our Authors; for which the French Lords showed a great
deal of discontent.

Lotaire, the Duchy of the Lower Lorrain, which two years before had been
bestowed upon Charles his Brother by Otho, reverted to his disposal: but as he
must give some part to Charles, he agreed he should enjoy that also. Which was
consented to at an enter-view between that King and Otho upon the River of Kar,
the German Prince having desired that conference before he undertook this
expedition into Italy against the Saracens.

Charles imagining his Brother had yielded him that Duchy but by compulsion,
was so ill advised, that he might have some body to support him in it, as to
render Hommage for it to Otho, instead of holding the Sovereignty himself as he
might have done.

Otho, to oblige hm the more, gave him likewise the Country all about Mets,
Toul, Verdon, and Nancy and other Lands between the Meuse and the Rhine.

Now this submission tendered by Charles to a Stranger, sounded very ill amongst
the French, and the Augmentation of his power certainly shocked the designs of
Hugh Capet, who was preparing his way to the Throne. For we must consider that
Charles was the only obstacle, Lotaire having but one Son, weak both in Age and
understanding, and of very small hopes.

Besides the long abode of that Prince in those Countries without coming into
France, the too great affection he showed for the Germans, who at that time
were the Capital Enemies of France, as likewise some ren-counters with the King
his Brother; one amongst the rest about the City of Cambray, which he defended
against that King who would have plundered the Churches as he had done those of
Arras: gave his Enemies occasion to decry him amongst the French.

Otho II. Died in the year 982. having before declared his Son of the same name
Successor of his Estates.

LOTAIRE and LOUIS his Son in France. OTHO III. Emperor and King of Germany and
Lorraine, Aged 17 years. CONRAD in Burgundy.

Empp. Basile and Constant. and Otho III. R. 20. years.
Upon the News of his Death Lotaire believed that Germany was going to be all
in confusion and combustion by reason of the contests about the Guardianship of
young Otho, who was then but seven years old: wherefore he entered Lorraine An.
983. to regain it, and took (...) with Godfrey Earl thereof: but when he
understood Otho was Crowned by the content of all the Grandees, he engaged no

Verdun, gave Godfrey his liberty, and caused his Son Louis to be Crowned to
Reign with him. He had already married him to a Princess of Aquitain, named
Blanch; And yet was at most not above 18 or 19. years of Age.

It is not well known of which Aquitain she was; for in that Age, and the next
following, the French comprehended Languedoc and Provence likewise under that
name.



This was a great misfortune in the Royal Family, and a greater yet that
Lotaire Died the 12 th Day of March in the following year of some desperate
morsel, given

He was a Warlike Prince, active, careful of his affairs, and worthy in fine to
have commanded better Subjects. He survived little more then the 45 th year of
his Age, and the 33 th of his Reign.

LOUIS THE Falneant, Lazy, Idle, Donothing.
Lazy, or Sloathful, King XXXIV.
Aged about XX Years.
POPES,
JOHN XV. Elected toward the end of An. 985. S. 10 years, 4 Months, and a
half, whereof 16 Months, under this Reign.
LOUIS the Do-Nothing in France. OTHO III. CONRAD.

IT was divulged that at his Death he left the Guardianship of his Son to Hugh
Capet, who in effect was his Cousin German. How-ever it were, Emina June to his
Grandmother Adeleida, Widow of Otho I. and Tutoress of Otho III. A Heroic
Princess who was called the Mother of Kings.

But they did not give her the time: for the 22 th of the same month, the Poor
Prince ended his Life in the same manner as his Father, and by the crime of
Blanch of Aquitain his wife. He lies at St. Corneille of Compiegne. An Author
of those times says that he gave his Kingdom to Hugh Capet; another, that he
bequeathed it to his wife, upon condition he should marry her.

He Reigned in all about three years, Eighteen or Twenty Months with his
Father, and sixteen Months alone.

With his Reign ended that of the Or Caroline.
Carlian or Carlovingnian Line, after it had lasted 236 years, and had a
Succession of Eleven Kings There were two of these that were not so, to wit,
Eudes and Rodolph.
taking only those of West-France; for if we reckon all the others, we shall
find above thirty, without speaking of all those Princes who dismembered this
Kingdom, as being issued of this August blood descended by Women.

There were sprung up three Branches of this Race, one in Italy by Lotaire I.
Emperor, another in Germany by Lewis his Brother, named the Germanick, and a
third in West-France by Charles the Bald. All three ended their Reigns with a
Louis, that of Italy by Louis II. great Grandson of Lotaire, that of Germany
by Louis Son of Arnold, and that of France by this Lewis the Faineant.

The Princes of this Race at their Coronation, received the Sacred Unction.
They were almost ever on Horseback and in the Field, and had their wives with
Charles Martel and Pepin, when they were at rest and peace, held their
residence at Paris and thereabout, Charlemain at Aix-la-Chapelle, the
Debonnaire in the same place, or at Thionville, Charles the Bald at Soissons
and at Compiegne, Eudes at Paris, Charles the Simple at Reims, Lewis
Transmarine at Laon.

If we consider the causes of the ruin of this Race or Line, we shall meet
with five or six principal ones. 1. The division of the main Body of the Estate
into diverse Kingdoms, which was necessarily followed by Discords and
Civil-Warrs between the Brothers. 2. The irregular Love the Debonnaire had for
his too dear Son Charles the Bald. 3. The imbecility of most part of these
Princes, there not having been amongst all of them above five or six who were
furnished with Sense and Courage together. 4. The ravages and inroads of the
Normans who ransacked France for Four-score years together, and favored the
attempts of the great Lords. 5. The multitude of Bastard Children which
Charlemaine had, who played the Sovereigns in those Countries allotted them for
their subsistence. 6. And if we will believe the Clergy, the Curse of God,
which fell upon those Princes, because they gave the Churches goods to their
Lay-officers and their Soldiers of Fortune.

7. One may add that this Tree bearing no more good Fruit, God would pluck it
up to plant another in its place, infinitely more fair and more fertile, whose
duration shall be extended to the end of time, and it is renown and glory to the
ends of all the Earth.

End of the Second Race or Line.
THE THIRD RACE OR LINE Of the KINGS of FRANCE, Called the Capetine Race, or of
the Capets.
First Part.
Hugh Capet, King XXXV.
POPES,
JOHN XV. S. Eight years and an half during this Reign. GREGORY V. Elected in
June 996. S. Two years eight months, whereof some months under this Reign.
Hugues.
HUGH CAPET, Aged Forty four or Forty five years.

Carolovinian Race remaining but Charles Duke of Lorrain. This Prince was
absent, of little Merit, and very ill in the minds of the French. Hugh Capet on
the contrary was in the heart of the Kingdom, Powerful and Esteemed; He held
the Duchy of Burgundy by Henry his Brother, that of Normandy by Duke Richard
his Nephew, and that of France, with the Counties of Paris and Orleance in his
own hands. Besides he had a Party made; so that having Assembled the Lords in
the City of Noyon, he prevailed to be Elected and Proclaimed King about the end
of the month of May. From thence he went to Reims to receive the Unction and
the Crown from the hands of the Archbishop Adalberon, who invested him the
Third of July; Not one of all those that were present at Noyon, and at that
Ceremony claiming for Charles, but on the contrary all giving their Oaths in
Writing as well as by Word of Mouth to his Enemy.

One might say, that this poor Prince had destituted, or deprived himself, by
rendering himself a Stranger, and that this Estate could not suffer or admit a
Head that was Vassal to another King. Hugh might also make use of the Testament
which King Lewis made in his favor: but his best Right and Title was the
general consent of the French People.



You must observe, that from about the time of Charles the Simple, under the
name of the Kingdom of France were comprehended that of Neustria, that of
Aquitain, and that of Burgundy, at least that part of it which lies on this
side the Saon; and therefore when those Kings would be Crowned, they were fain
to call together the Lords of all these three. For this reason perhaps it was,
that the first Capetine Kings having joined them all under one Title, took
likewise upon them the Quality of Emperors; unless we should say, they did so
not to seem inferior to the German Kings: but either by some Treaty, or upon
some other Condition to us unknown, they quitted it, and contented themselves
with that of King.

Geofrey called Grise-Gonelle, Earl of Anjou, ended his days. His Son Fulk
surnamed Nerra was his Successor.

Hugh Capet six months after his Coronation, desiring to have an Assistant,
obtained in an Assembly of French Lords, which was held at Orleance, that his
Son named Robert, should be Associated in the Throne with him. He was Crowned
in the same January in the year 988.

HUGH CAPET, and ROBERT his Son Aged about Sixteen years.

IT is to be presumed, that Prince Charles did not omit to present himself to
have or demand the Crown: but being come too late, he was rejected by the
French, so that he betook himself to Arms, to resume his pretended Right.

Amongst all the Lords of the Kingdom, there were only Arnold Earl of Flanders,
and Hebert Earl of Champagne, his Wives Father, that assisted him: but the
first died this year, having been ill handled by Capet, and Hebert durst not
proceed to act any farther for his Son-in-Law, but underhand.

Mean time the young King Robert Married Lutgarde the Widow of the Earl of
Flanders, though she were already very aged, and he not yet above Seventeen
years old.

Duke Charles had a Bastard Brother named Arnold, who was a Clerk in the Church
of Loan: by his means he seized upon that City and upon the Archbishop
Ancelin-Auberon Adalberon.
. This Ancelin was a very subtle Man, but without Faith, who to regain his
liberty, pretended to be come wholly his Friend, and wrought so upon his Mind,
that he made him the first of his Council.

Charles was in Laon, came presently to besiege him, re^olved to take it by
Famine. In the length of the Siege, his Men not standing carefully upon their
Guard, Charles made a stout Sally, put them to the rout, burnt their Lodgments,
and forced them to retire; Then made himself Master of Reims and Soissons.

But suffering this heat of good success to grow cool, few People declared for
him, and even the Archbishop of Reims whom he importuned to Crown him, told him
that he could not do it of his own head, and that it was a public Business,
that is to say, it required the Consent of the Lords of the Kingdom.

Hugh's interest to gain Arnold Bastard Brother of Duke Charles to his Party;
To this end he gives him the Archbishopric of Reims, which was vacant by the
death of Aldaberon, having first taken an Oath from him in Writing: but six
months after his being in that Town, Charles his Brother was introduced there,
and made himself Master by means of a Priest named Adalger.
Aldager, and in Confederacy, as was thought, with the Archbishop; who
notwithstanding, ever denied it, and remained Prisoner in the hands of Charles,
either really or at least pretended.

William III. Earl of Poictou and Duke of Aquitain refused to acknowledge the
two Kings Capet and Robert, though he were Uncle to Robert by the Mother,
openly accusing the French of Perfidiousness, and their having abandoned the
Line and Blood of Charlemaine. Both the Kings marched that way to bring him to
Obedience, and besieged Poitiers. He repulsed them smartly, pursues them to the
Loire; and there happens a bloody Engagement, but the conclusion was to the
Advantage of the French.

Anjou, for Mirebalais and Loudunois, and did so roughly handle him, that in
the end he was constrained to acknowledge him and hold them in Fief of him.

Charles living in too great security at Laon, and with too much confidence in
Ancelin, King Hugh gained that Traitor; who like another Judas, upon
Holy-Thursday-night opened the Gates, and delivered the poor Prince and his
Wife up to him. He sent them away Prisoners to Senlis, and from thence to
Orleance, where they were shut up in a Tower.

Arnold his Brother was taken with him. The Bishops of France Assembled in
Council at Reims, made his Process as one that was guilty of Perjury, and who
had broken his Faith to King Hugh, and therefore degraded him of his Prelature;
after which the King sent him Prisoner to Orleance to keep his Brother company.

Gerbert a Benedictine Monk, who had been Tutor to the Emperor Otho III. and to
King Robert, was chosen in his place. He was so Learned for those times,
particularly in the Mathematics, that it gave him the Reputation of a Magician
amongst the ignorant.

Anno 993. William III. Duke of Aquitain made Peace with the King, and owned to
hold his Lands of him. But another William Duke of Gascongne kept himself still
independent. He it was who having gained a memorable Battle against a Fleet of
Normands landed in Gascongny toward the end of this Century, and believing he
obtained that Advantage by the intercession of St. Sever, who was said to have
appeared that day on a white Horse with glittering Arms fighting against the
Barbarians, put his Dukedom under the protection of that glorious Martyr, and
Erected a Church and Abbey over his Tomb; round about which Edifice is built
that City called St. Sever, Cape of Gascongny.

Many believe, but without any certain proofs, that Hugh Capet confirmed the
Inheritance of all the great Estates, Dutchies and Earldoms to those Lords that
had usurped them; and it is probable that they themselves had first given such
as depended upon them, to their own Vassals, thereby to engage them to maintain
and justify them in their Usurpations.

It is certain he annexed to the Crown, which had scarce any thing left in
Propriety, the Earldom of Paris, the Dukedom of France, containing all that is
between the Loire and Seine, and the Earldom of Orleance.

Amongst a very great number of Lords who enjoyed of the Regal Rights, the
Eight most considerable were the Dukes of Burgundy, Normandy, Aquitain, and
Gascongne, (Bretagne then held of Normandy) the Earls of Flanders, of Champagne
and Thoulouze; This last was likewise Duke of Septimania and Marquess of
Gothia; the Earl of Barcelonna in the Marches of Spain, and the Earl of Anjou
on the Frontiers of Bretagne, this held of the Duchy of France. All these
Lords had a great many more besides who took upon them to be Sovereigns.

I do not speak of the Estates that were set up in the Kingdom of Lorrain:
amongst others the two Dutchy's that bare that name, to wit the higher or
Mosellanick, which retains it to this day, and the lower which is Brabant; Nor
of those that were framed out of the Ruins of the Kingdom of Arles, and that
of Transjurane, as the Earldom of Burgundy, those of Viennois, Provence, and
Savoy, Daufine, the Dukedoms of Zeringhen and Alman, and diverse others, because
those Countries were not of France, but held of the Emperors of Germany, who
were Titularies of those two Kingdoms.

The Grandees of the Kingdom thought that Capet ought to suffer all from them,
because they had set the Crown upon his Head: His Patience and Courage, which
he exercised diversely according as occasion required, kept them from running to
extremity, and maintained him in his Throne.

One Adelbert Count de la March and Perigord was one of the most unruly, and
concerned himself in all their Quarrels. Fulk Nerra had some Pretensions to the
City of Tours; he besieged it in his behalf. The King sent and commanded him to
desist; Adelbert would do nothing; and asking him, Who was it that made you a
Count? He insolently replied, Those same that made you a King, continued the
Siege, and took the Town.

Conrad King of Burgundy, William III. Duke of Aquitain, and Hebert Count of
Meaux and Troyes. Conrad left his Estate to his Son Roldolph called the
Faineant or Do-nothing, William left his likewise to his Son of his own name,
but surnamed Fierabras; and the third dying without Children, to Eudes his
Brother, Earl of Chartres and Tours: who was the first that entitled himself
Earl of Champagne.

William IV. of that name, Earl of Toulouse and of Arles, turned Monk, and his
Son William V. succeeded him.

After the death of the Count of Poitou, his Son being yet but young, found his
Country in Combustion, by the Rebellion of many of his Vassals, especially
Adelbert who besieged Poitiers, and made diverse other Enterprises: but in the
end he met with that fate which attends the Factious, being slain at the Siege
of a small Castle. Boson his Fathers Brother succeeded in his Dominions.

Arnold without his Authority, which the Bishops of France believed to be in
their own power. He therefore took this Business mightily to heart, and
dispatched the Abbot Leon to France, with an order to the Prelates to Assemble
in Council about that Affair, and to Seguin Archbishop of Sens, to Represent
his Person amongst them.

Hugh complained, opposed it, and held good some time against this Enterprise;
But a new born Royalty could not but comply and yield at last to those Orders,
for fear of being quickly tumbled down again. The Council which was held at
Reims deposed Gerbert, and restored Arnold to his See after three years
imprisonment Gerbert withdrew himself to his Disciple King Otho, who bestowed
upon him the Archbishopric of Ranonna, from whence some years after he was
raised to the Holy Chair.

Charles died in Prison at Orleance. It is not said what became of his Wife,
but he two Sons, Otho and Lewis; and two Daughters, Gerberge and Hermengarde.
All these Children went to the Emperor Otho III. The eldest enjoyed the Duchy
of the lower Lorrain some years, and died without Heirs. The other is not
mentioned. Hereafter we shall take notice to whom his Daughters were Married.

Hugh as well as Pepin, and all such Princes as set up by a new Title amongst
People that are not perfectly Barbarians, was truly Religious, Devout, and a
lover of the Church and Churchmen, gave up all the Abbeys he held, and
surrendered the Right of Election to the Clergy and Monks.

By his Example those Lords that possessed Church Lands, as their own
Patrimony: not only restored them, but for Restitution of their unjust
Enjoyment and Detention, founded diverse Monasteries which they peopled with
reformed Monks: who certainly were much less good and more interested, then the
former had been.

Anno 996. the 29th of August, or according to others the 22th of November,
aged about Fifty five years, having Reigned nine years and some months. He was
buried at St. Denis. If he Married Blanch, the Widow of Lewis last
Carolovinian King, he had no Children by her: but by his first Wife Adeleide,
Daughter, according to some, of William II. Duke of Aquitain, he had a Son
named Robert, and three Daughters, Haduige or Avoye Wise of Renier IV. Earl of
Monts and of Haynault, Adelais Wife to Renand I. Earl of Nevers, and Gisle who
Wedded Hugh I. Earl of Pontieu, to whom she brought the City of Abbeville in
Marriage.

Richard surnamed Sans Peur, or without Fear, Duke of Normandy, ended his days
in his Palace of F^scamp, aged Sixty four years, of which he had Reigned nine,
and was Interred before the Portal of the Church there: His Son Richard II.
succeeded him.

About these times, that Sacred Fire which they named the Burning Mal des dents.
Sickness, and had otherwhile made great destruction, broke out and kindled
again, cruelly tormenting France, especially for two Ages. It seized again on a
sudden, and burnt the Intrails, or some other part of the Body, which fell off
piecemeal. Happy were those that escaped with the loss of a Leg or an Arm.
This caused many great Donatives to be given to those Saints whose help they
believed they had received in the midst of their dreadful Torments: as likewise
the frequent sounding of Hospitals for such as were infected with this
Distemper.

The Calamity, which Anno 994. destroyed in Aquitain, Angoumois, Perigord, and
Limosin, above 40000 Persons in a few days time, wrought at least this good,
that the Grandees who had troubled this Province by their private Feuds,
fearing the Wrath of God, made a Solemn Oath amongst themselves, to do Justice
to their Subjects, and for this end formed a Holy League, which drew other
Provinces by their Example to do the like,

It was likewise in this Age that Pilgrimages to the Holy Land grew very
Frequent; I mean amongst the Seculars, for the Monks and Clergymen traveled
to those Holy Places from the time of King Clovis.

Church of the Tenth Age.
If the Tenth have deserved the name of the Iron Age, which is commonly
bestowed upon it, must have been for the continual and very Bloody Wars,
between the Western Princes, and for the terrible Devastations of the Normans,
the Hungarians, and the Saracens, but if they called it so for the ignorance
and irregularity of their Manners, it was rather in respect to the Church of
Rome, where in truth there were horrible Disorders and Crimes, then those of
France and Germany.

It is certain that the Bishops and Abbots notwithstanding the Prohibitions of
Princes and Councils bore Arms and went to the Wars; a Custom which passed into
a Law and Obligation, and lasted a long time in the third Race; That several
were plunged into Vanity, Luxury, and Dissolution, and lived rather like
Princes of this World, then Apostles of Jesus Christ; That those Wars which
scourged them, made them yet but more worthy of Chastisement, for the Disorders
and Licentiousness they fell into; That their Manners run to ruin with their
Buildings; and that as there hardly remained any Monastery or Church entire, so
there was scarce any Discipline left, not even amongst the very Monks That, in
fine, many Churches were without a Pastor; for example, there was but one
Bishop in all the Country of Gascongny, who enjoyed the Revenue of six or seven
Bishoprics.

But after all these Ruins, they began, before the middle of this Century, to
gather up the broken pieces or fragments, and reform the behavior of the
Clergy, as well as rebuild their Churches. William Duke of Aquitain and
Auvergne, having founded the Monastery of Clugny in the year 910. and St.
Mayeule having raised, as it were a Nursery of Religious good Men, they took
some Plants from thence to stock and furnish those Abbys which the Princes
re-edifi'd. This Abbot and Odillon his Successor furnished at least twenty or
thirty, who remained still in submission to their common Mother, and formed the
Congregation of Clugny. As much did William Abbot of St. Benign at Dijon; as
likewise Abbon de Fleury, to some others about Aquitain; Subordinations which
may procure much good, and perhaps much greater evils. St. Gerard of the Blood
of the Dukes of Lorrain, having embraced a Monastic Life, reformed Eighteen or
twenty. Adalberon Bishop of Metz, Brother to Frederic first Earlo Bar, made a
Regulation in those of his Bishopric, amongst others in that of Gorze, and at
St. Arnold, from whence he expelled the Canons who were grown disorderly, to
place Monks in their stead.

Abbon de Fleury going to settle his Reformation in the Monasteries of Squirs
upon the Garonne, which therefore was called the Rule, and in the Language of
that Country, La Reovle, and near to which was built a City of that name: was
knocked down by a Sedition which the Gascon Monks of that place, and the Women
had raised against him.

Amongst the Bishops there were diverse that were noted for their famous
Intriguing and Disorders. In the Wars between the Kings, Henry the
Bird-catcher, and Charles the Simple, Hilduin falsifying his Faith, which he
owed to Charles, who had given him the Bishopric of Liege, went and
acknowledged Henry, and forced away the Treasures of the Church, which he
distributed to that Prince and his Courtiers, to maintain him: but the face of
Affairs being changed, Charles would not suffer him to hold that Bishopric,
but bestowed it upon the Abbot Richer, which was confirmed by the Pope. King
Henry recompensed Hilduin with the Bishopric of Milan. Herve de Reims,
otherwise a very learned Prelate, was likewise unfaithful to Charles the
Simple, whose Chancellor he was, and Crowned Robert Brother to Eudes: but he
died within three days after, as if he had been smitten by the avenging hand of
God. Seulfe, Hugh, and Artold his Successors, did all cause many troubles for
more then Twenty five years. The Traitor Adalberon de Laon delivered up Prince
Charles, who had made him his prime Minister; and Arnold de Reims was contented
to owe the Obligation of that Archbishopric to his Brothers mortal Enemy, and
then broke his Faith with him.

Saints.
It will be difficult to cull out any so excelling in Christian Virtues, as to
merit the Titles of Saints; unless we place in this Rank Erembert of Toulouze,
Gambert of Cahors, and Turpion of Limoges. I do not speak of those of Germany;
amongst them this Age produced a sufficient number, whose Apostolical Labors
and Endeavors converted the Danes, Sclavonians, Hungarians, and other Infidel
Nations. But amongst the Monks, we find in Burgundy five Abbots, Bennon, Odon,
Mayeule, Odillon and William, the four first of Clugity, the last of St.
Benign, and in Lorrain Gerard, who are respected by the Church.

Books were become mighty scarce, the Wars had almost destroyed them all by
burning, tearing, and other such like barbarities; and as there were none but
Monks who Transcribed the Copies, and that Monasteries were much deserted, the
numbers of Learned Men were very small. However Herve of Reims about the
beginning of this Age, Ruthier de Liege about the middle, and Arnold d'Orleans
toward the latter end, made it appear they were not ignorant in the knowledge
of Holy Scripture, and the Canons and Usages of the Church. Aymoin a Monk of
Fleury, Frodoard Abbot of St. Bemy of Reims, and Dudon Dean of St. Quentin,
wrote of History; and Gerbert passed for a Prodigy of Science. He had been bred
young in the Monastery of Orillac, and going into Spain, he was by the
Recommendation of Borel Count of Barcellonna instructed in the Mathematics,
either by Bishop Hutton, or by some Arabian Doctors. He was afterward Rector
or School master in the City of Reims, (and perhaps he was the first that
taught it in France) where for Scholars he had Prince Robert Son of Hugh Capet,
Leoterick Archbishop of Sens, and Fulbert Bishop of Chartres; After which he
had also the honor to teach Otho III. We know how he was raised to the Sea of
the Church of Reims by Hugh Capet, then to that of Ravenna by Otho, and at
length to that of Rome by the name of Silvester II.

Councils.
As for the Councils of the Gallican Church, the first that I find in this
Century, is that of Trosly, Anno 909. Trosly is in the Diocese of Soissons,
Between Soissons and (...).
and pretty near that City; Herve Archbishop of Reims was President. There are
fifteen Chapters, which are as so many warm Exhortations and excellent Sermons,
against all the Abuses and enormous Crimes, that had These were the Expresions.
overwhelmed France, where the weak were become a prey to the stronger, where
the Laws were made a snare and burden by the violence of particular powers;
for which reason God had, to the plague of War, added that o^ Barrenness and
Famine, caused by a most horrible Drought.

Anno 921. King Charles the Simple Convoked one or Sixteen Bishops for the
business of Hilduin whom he had thrust out of the Bishopric of Liege. I
neither find the Place nor the Acts.

There were three more at Trosly, one in 921. where Erleband Earl of Castrice,
who had been Excommunicated by the Archbishop Herve for invading what belonged
to the Church of Reims, was absolved after his death upon the entreaty of King
Charles, by the same Archbishop. Another, Anno 924. wherein Isaac Earl of
Cambray having given satisfaction for some wrongs to Stephen his Bishop, was
absolved and reconciled to him. The third, Anno 927. of six Bishops called by
Count Hebert of Vermandois, Mangre King Rodolph, where Herluin Earl of
Monstreuil was admitted to Penance for having Married a second Wife, his first
being yet alive.

In the year 923. there was one in the Diocese of Reims, the place is not
named, which ordained those that had born Arms in the Wars betwixt King Charles
and King Robert, to do Peunance for three whole Lents, three several years
consecutively, and also fifteen days before the Feast of St. John, and fifteen
days after it, fasting all the Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays during that
space of time, and besides all the Saturdays throughout the whole year with
Bread and Water only, unless they bought it off. The first time of this
Penance in Lent, they were to stay out of the Church, and at the last to be
reconciled upon Holy-Thursday.

The Council of Duisburgh, Anno 928. Excommunicated the Factious Party of Mets
who had put out the Eyes of their Bishop Bennon; after which King Henry the
Bird-catcher severely Revenged that villainous act of theirs, and made it fall
upon their own heads.

That at the Abbey of Cherlien in 926. and that of Fimes in 935. endeavored to
repair the Desolations of the Holy Places ruined by Robbers and other such
wicked People.

The Debate for the Archbishopric of Reims between Artold Artaud.
, and Hugh the Son of Hebert Earl of Vermandois, was an occasion of calling
diverse Councils. Hugh having been advanced to that See too young and against
the Canons, was deposed, and Artold placed in his stead. But Anno 940. Artold
had renounced, and made Solemn Oath not to intermeddle any more in the
government of that Church. Thereupon a Council called at Soissons in the year
941. by Hugh and Hebert, destituted him, and re-establisht Hugh. On the
contrary that of Verdun, Anno 947. restored him. That of Mouson in 948.
confirmed him: and that of Ingelbeim the same year where the Kings, Lewis
Transmarine and Otho l. were present, Excommunicated the Bishop Hugh of
Vermandois, and resolved to Treat Count Father of Hugh Capet.
Hugh in the same manner, who being a Rebel to his Prince had held him Prisoner
a year, if he did not come and give satisfaction.

The same year that of Treues, where Marin the Popes Legate presided, confirmed
the Sentence against the two Hughes, and thundered against the Bishops
irregularly Ordained by Hugh of Vermandois.

Artold being dead, Anno 961. some Bishops Assembled together near Meaux, the
year following, to contrive some Method to bring Hugh in again to that See: but
considering that a small number could not undo, what had been done by a
greater, and that they had notice from the Pope to clear their doubts, that he
had Excommunicated him in a Council held at Rome Anno 949. they broke up
without proceeding any farther.

That of Reims in 975. wherein presided Stephen Deacon to Bennet V. Pope, and
Adolberon of Reims, Excommunicated Thibauld who had usurped the Sea of Amiens.

In 983. that of Mount St. Mary in the Diocese of Reims, where Adalberon
presided, confirmed the Decree made by that Bishop, to put Monks into the
Monastery of Mouson, in the stead of those Canons that were there. In the
foregoing Age, in many places the Canons were more desired; The Humor was
changed in this.

Gerbert soliciting with heat to have Arnold de Reims his Process made, a
Council was called in that same City Anno 992. where his Credit and the
vehement Eloquence of Arnold d'Orleans carrying it against the Remonstrances of
Abbon Abbot of Fleury, and the Sentiment of Seguin de Sens who was President,
Arnold was deposed and Gerbert instaled in his See. The Pope believing it
entrenched upon his Authority if he suffered them to undertake this without his
Order, sent a Legate into France the year ensuing, who first called together
some Bishops at Monson, then a greater number at Reims, where Seguin
representing the Person of the Pope, it was said that Gerbert should be deposed
and Arnold restored: but this last being a Prisoner at Orleans, Gerbert
disputed it, and stood his ground yet for some time; and appealed to the Pope,
who grew more stubborn and stiff in favor of Arnold, and forced the King by
the threatenings of a terrible Excommunication to release him and suffer him to
enjoy his Bishopric.

Robert, King XXXVI.
POPES,
GREGORY V. About two years under this Reign. SILVESTER II. Elected in March
999. S. Four years and two Months. JOHN XVIII. Elected in May 1003. S. Five
Months. JOHN XIX. Elected in Novem. 1003. S. Five years ten Months. SERGIUS IV.
Elected in Aug. 1009. S. Two years eight Months, and an half. BENEDICT VIII.
Elected in 1012. S. near Twelve years. JOHN XX. Elected in March 1024. S. Nine
years eight Months.
ROBERT, King XXXVI* Aged Twenty four or Twenty five years.

THis King complete both in Body and Mind, of a handsome Stature, a sweet and
grave Air, a composed and sage Humor, having been nurtured to Piety and good
Learning by Gerbert, became very knowing for that Age, much more Religious and
Zealous in the Service of God, and as Just, Charitable, and Debonnaire toward
his People, as any Prince that ever wore a Crown. And indeed God favored his
Reign with the choicest Blessing he is wont to bestow upon those Kings who are
according to his own Heart, I mean with a long and happy Peace, which he
enjoyed near Thirty years, after some slight and petty Wars.

Richard I. Duke of Normandy, who was past his Seventieth year; He left his
Dukedom to his Son Richard II. surnamed the Good.

William Earl of Poitou and Duke of Aquitain, having War with Boson II. Earl of
Perigord and de la March, Robert was obliged to assist him as his Kindred and
Vassal. They both laid Siege to the Castle of Belac: but their Army wanting
Provisions, because they were too numerous, could not subsist till the taking
of the Place. The Chronicles of those times who are all very succinct, do not
give an account of the end of that War, no more then of many other things.

Eudes Earl of Brie and Champagne prompted with great desire to have a passage
Seine as he had already over the Marne, thereby to go commodiously from Brie to
his County of Chartres, cast his Eyes upon Melun, and with Money gained the
Vicount or Castellaine belonging to Earl Bouchard, who delivered it up to him.

Bouchard had been the favorite of Hugh Capet, who had given him that Earldom,
and he was yet at this time Count Palatine for King Robert. Wherefore this King
took in hand his defense, sent Richard II. Duke of Normandy his Cousin and good
Friend, and with him besieged the place. The Battery with their Battering Ramms.
Engines having made a Breach, the Garrison surrendered upon Composition: the
Castellaine and his Wife were both Hanged on the top of a Hill near the place.

They did not punish Gentlemen with Death for Rebellion or Felony, unless they
committed Treason; but in that case they hanged them in some eminent Place,
that Crime degrading them of all Nobility.

Poland was honored with the Title of a Kingdom by the Emperor Otho III. who
going to Gnesne to Visit the Sepulcher of St. Adalbert Martyr, gave the Regal
Ornaments to Duke Boleslaus.

The following year Hungary had the same Advantage and Honor, but would
receive it from the hands of the Pope, to whom Prince Stephen the Son of Geisa,
who first embraced Christianity, sent to demand the Royal Crown.

Emperor Basilius and Constan. and Henry II. Reigned Twenty two years and an
half.
Toward the end of January in the year 1002. the Emperor Otho, aged but Twenty
nine years died in the City of Rome, or in Paterna, not leaving any Children.
It was believed to be of Poison; the cursed practice thereof being much in use,
as I have observed in this Age, thorough all the West. Henry II. of that name,
called the Cripple, Duke of Bavaria and Earl of Bamberg, succeeded him by an
Election of the German Princes, but did not bear the Title of Emperor, at least
not in Italy, till he had been Crowned by the Pope, which was Twelve years
afterward.



Lutgard the first Wife of Robert being dead, he was advised, by Maxims of
Policy, to Wed Bertha Sister to Rodolph the Faineant, Do-little, or Do naught,
or the Idle or Lazy.
Lazy King of Burgundy, Widow of Eudes I Earl of Chartres, and Mother of Eudes
II. as yet but young. She being of Kin in the fourth Degree, and besides he
having held a Child with her at the Font; he thought he might prevent the
inconveniency of nullity of Marriage by the Authority of the Gallican Church:
he called therefore his Bishops together, who having heard his Reasons, were of
opinion upon consideration of the public good, that he might take her for his
Wife notwithstanding the Canonical Obstructions; which was a kind of
Dispensation.

Abbon who was Abbot of Fleury, a vehement Man, not having been able to
dissuade him from this match, bestirred himself with much heat to have it
dissolved. The Pope, to whom Robert had made no Application, Excommunicated the
Bishops that had authorized it, and the two Parties that were Contracted, if
they did not separate forthwith.



These Severities, and not a Monstrous Birth by his Wife, whom the
Miraclemongers say was delivered of an Infant with the Neck and Feet resembling
a Goose, constrained him to part from her, but that was not till two or three
years after; and we find that they made a Journey to Rome, either to defend
their Cause before the Pope,

I cannot forget one memorable Example of the Sovereign Power, and the extreme
Rigor of the Pope, it was Silvester II. Guy Vicount of Limoges was cited to
Rome by the Bishop of Angoulesme, because he had detained him Prisoner in a
Castle. The two Parties appeared. The Cause pleaded upon the very Easter Day,
the Pope pronounced that Guy for Reparation of his Crime, should be tied to the
Necks of two Wild-horses, and his Body thus torn and bruised, thrown on the
Dunghill, which was to be put in Execution three days after. In the mean time
Guy was delivered up into the hands of the Bishop; but the Prelat being moved
with pity pardoned him, and stealing away in the night, generously brought him
thence into France again with him.

About this time Henry Duke of Burgundy Brother of Hugh Capet, died without
Children. Now by the induction of Giselle his Wife, Widow of Adelbert, as
above, King of Italy and Son of Berenger II. he left his Dakedom by Will and
Testament, to Otho-William surnamed the Stranger, issue of that Woman by her
first Husband, Burgundy beyond Soane, named Franche-Comte, and besides assisted
by Landry Earl of Nevers his Son-in-Law, and Brunon Bishop of Langres, whose
Sister he had Married, took possession of all Burgundy by virtue of that Grant.

But King Robert, to whom this Dukedom belonged lawfully, as Heir to his Uncle,
led a powerful Army thither, with the aid of Richard II. Duke of Normandy,
suppressed the Usurpers Faction, took Auxerre by Composition, and Avalon by
Battery; the Walls, as it is said, falling down miraculously before him; and at
length forced out Otho-William and confined him beyond the Saone, where he
became the Stock of the Earls of Franche-County.
Burgundy.

Otho Son of Prince Charles, Duke of the Lower Lorrain, being dead without ever
Marrying, King Henry gave his Dukedom to Godfrey Count of Verdun, Bouillon and
Ardenne, without any regard to the Sisters of the Defunct who were Married,
Gerberge to Lambert Earl of Brabant, and Hermengarde to Lambert Earl of Namur.
From these issued the Dukes of Brabaut, and the Earls of Namur.

Baldwin Earl of Flanders already an Enemy to the Emperor, undertook the
Emperor Basilius and Constable. and Henry II. Crowned by the Pope.
Quarrel of these Daughters. The Emperor came to the Relief of Godfrey whom he
had invested with this Fief; and the King of France embraced Baldwin's Party
who was his Vassal. The Emperor in vain besieged Valenciennes and then Gaunt:
Finally this War being made at the Charge and Expense of the Flemming, he
agreed with the Emperor and restored Valenciennes.

German Princes, gave him that City again, and withal the Island of Walcheren
being part of Zeland: whence proceeded a long and bloody Contest between the
Flemmings and the Hollanders, these pretending that Zeland appertained to them,
by virtue of a certain Grant which they alleged had been made to them by the
Emperor Lotrire Son of Lewis the Debonnaire.

Robert with Constance surnamed Blanch Daughter of William V. Earl of Arles,
Provence, and Toulouze; a Beautiful Princess, but Haughty, Capricious, and
Insupportable.

We must observe that the Authors of those times frequently called Provence,
Aquitain, whether out of ignorance, or because of its City of Aix, Aquae
Sextiae.

Saracens at the instigation of the Jews in France demolish the Temple of
Jerusalem and the Holy Sepulcher; which re-inflames the Devotion of the Western
Christians, and their hatred against the Jews, whom they Banish or knock on the
Head every where.

Robert addicted himself entirely to works of Piety, Charity, Mercy and
Justice, re-edified old Churches, or built new ones, and fed great numbers of
poor People in all the Cities throughout his Kingdom. He kept above Two hundred
in his House whom he led every where; having no aversion to see them even under
his Table, to touch their Ulcers, and make the Sign of the Cross over them,

He delighted to Sing in the Quire, and Compose Words and Notes for the Songs
and Responses, in honor of God or his Saints. The Church has preserved some
of them which they make use of to this day.

This year 1012. was seen toward the farther Southern parts, a Star of an
extraordinary magnitude, which seemed to dart its bright Rays into the
beholders Eyes. It appeared for three months together, sometimes contracting
its self, other while seeming much greater, as if it took new Fire, then again
as it were quite extinguished. Anno 1003. a Comet had likewise been observed
which kept near the Sun, and appeared but seldom, which was about the break of
day. Eight years before, viz. Anno 995. another had been observed upon St.
Laurences-day; And in 981. also another yet about Autumn. Which I take notice
of to show that these Phenomena are not so rare as to make so much noise about
them.

Bourges upon Goslin his Natural Son Abbot of Floury, the Clergy of that Church
made great opposition, saying, That the Holy Canons admitted no Bastards to the
Prelacy: Which occasioned many Tumults, that were not allaied till five years
afterward.

The Earl of Sens, Raynard II. of that name, called the Bad Or Wicked.
, using much violence against Leoteric his Archbishop and all the Clergy within
his Territory, the

The Burgundians having Rebelled, and diverse Lords plundering and committing
Robberies in the Province by means of their Castles and Fortified places, the
King

His eldest Son whose name was Hugh, a Prince accomplished both in Mind and
Body, giving very great hopes, though he were not yet Ten years old: He caused
him to be Crowned at Compiegne on the day of Pentecost in the year 1017. and
afterward his name was put to all Acts with that of his Fathers.

ROBERT, and HUGH his Son.

Aquitain at his return from his third, or fourth Pilgrimage to Rome (those
that made most were the most esteemed) found his Country enriched with a new
Treasure. The Abbot of St. John's de Angery having lighted on the Scull of a
Man in a Wall, the Report was spread that it was the Head of St. John Baptist.
The People of France, Lorrain, and Germany, who in those days ran with much
Zeal after all sorts of Relics, flocked thither from all parts: King Robert,
the Queen, the Duke of Normandy, and a great number of other Lords, brought
their Offerings thither. The Kings was a Scollop-shell of Gold which weighed
Thirty pounds; an admirable Present in such times when Gold and Silver were
fifty times more scarce then in our Age.

The Danes or Normans beyond Seas, having not quite forgotten their custom of
Piracy, did yet sometimes make Descents in England and on the Coasts of France.
They had Conquered a great part of England, and at last made some Kings there.
This year they landed in Poitou, being perhaps informed of the great Crowds of
Pilgrims that came to see the Head of St. John; and indeed they carried away a
great many good Prisoners. All the Country Armed to drive them thence; The Duke
of Aquitain going to attaque them, twenty or thirty of his most considerable
Gentlemen fell into Holes covered over with Branches and green Turfs which the
Normans had dug about the Avenues to their Camp. This accident disheartened
the rest from going on; however the Normans fearing a ruder onset, dislodged in
the night, and got into their Vessels: but they were forced to give them what
Ransom they pleased to demand for the Prisoners they had gotten.

Gefroy Jefroy. 1018.
Duke or Earl of Bretagne (for in those times the Dukes took indifferently the
Titles of Earls) dying, his eldest Son Alain III. of that name succeeded him in
his Dukedom, and Eudes his second had the Earldom of Pontieure in Partage.
Alain espoused the Princess Or Avice.
Avoise Sister of Duke Richard; and by that means Normandy and Bretagne
hitherto great Enemies, were united in Alliance and Amity.

Richard Duke of Normandy and Eudes or Odon Earl of Champagne and Chartres,
because Eudes would not give up the City of Dreux granted him in Dowry with
Matilda the Sister of Richard, who was lately dead: so that Richard had built
the Castle of Tilleres, from whence he made incursions on the Country of Dreux.
Eudes put himself in a posture to surprise the Garrison, having with him the
Counts Valeran de Meulan, and Hugh du Man's: but he was soundly beaten and put
to the rout.

Norman Duke, that that Prince fearing to be overwhelmed, sent to Lagman or
Lacime King of Sueden to assist him, and also Olaus King of Norway, who being
landed in Bretagne, and having forced and sacked the City of Dole, marched
toward the Chartrain Country. All France upon remembrance of their former
Desolations, fell into an extreme apprehension and dread, and the King
bestirred himself with so much activity to quench this Flame, that he brought
the two Princes to an Agreement, and satisfied the Northern Kings, who returned
again, after the Norwegian had received Baptism at Rouen, having the name of
Robert give him at the Sacred Font.

The Emperor Henry and King Robert desiring cordially to take away all cause of
difference between them, agreed upon an Interview at the River Meuse. Whilst
the Courtiers on either side were making several Scruples about the Place, the
Manner, and such like trivial Circumstances and Punctillios, and the two
Princes on the contrary had it in their thoughts to outvye each other in
Civility; Henry passes the River early in the morning and pleasantly surprises
Robert, who the next day repays his Visit in the same manner. Both Treated one
the other Magnificently, and offered each very rich Presents to the other: but
Robert took only a Book being the New Testament, and a Reliquary or Shrine,
wherein was a Tooth of the Martyr St. ^incent, which was enriched with Precious
Stones: and Henry a pair of Ear-Pendants.

Bamberg, the German Princes elected Conrad Duke of Worms, who could not go to
Rome to receive the Imperial Crown, till the year 1027. At first the Italian
Princes and Prelates hating the Teutonick Nation, who Treated them Peremptorily,
ruling as it were with a Rod in hand, refused to obey, and sent into France to
profer King Robert the Kingdom of Italy for his Son Hugh.

Emperor Basil^^ and Cons. and Conrad II. Reigned 25 years.
Upon his refusal they Addressed themselves to William Duke of Aquitain, very
well known in Rome by his frequent Pilgrimages. He hearkened to the Proposal,
understood their Methods, sent some thither to found them thoroughly, and after
went himself. When he was amongst them, he found nothing of all they had
promised, every one demanding of him instead of giving to him; they propounded
no Conditions but such as were very ridiculous; so that finding they had a
design upon his Purse, and feared his Power, he laughed at them and left them.

The imperious and proud Humor of Queen Constance gave the King perpetual
trouble and displeasures, who used all means to soften her. One day being
offended and angry with a favorite of his named Hugh de Beauvais, who upheld
the Husbands Spirit against her undertakings, she makes her complaint to Fulk
Earl of Anjou her Cousin, entreating to Revenge her. The Count sent twelve of
his own Country Emperor Constantine alone and Conrad.
Gentlemen, who taking their opportunity when this Favorite was Hunting with
the King, seized on him, and cruelly cut off his Head in the Kings presence,
without any regard to his Entreaties.

Hugh with the greatest indignity, even to the reducing him to much indigence
of all things fit for him.

I find in the Life of this most Wife King an act of Clemency more then Royal.
There having been discovery made of a grand Conspiracy against his Life and
State, and the Authors taken, when the Lords were assembled together to
Sentence them to Death, he caused those Wretches to be splendidly entertained,
and the next day admitted to the Sacred Communion: then would needs have them
be set free, saying, They could not put those to Death whom Jesus Christ had
newly received at his A Criminal is reputed to have Pardon if the Sovereign
admits him to his Table.
Table.

This year William IV. Duke of Aquitain and Earl of Poitiers died, and his
eldest Son William V. surnamed the Gross took the Government of his Country. The
Widow Duchess second Wife of William IV. having Children, to gain assistance
against those of the first Bed, Married Geofrey Martel a most valiant Prince,
the Son of Fulk Earl of Anjou.

Richard the Good Duke of Normandy ended his days, and for Successor Richard
III. his eldest Son.

Othe-William Earl of Burgundy, left this World likewise, and his Son Renauld
possessed his Estates.

An enraged Passion to govern Armed Baldwin, then surnamed the Frison, and
afterward the Debonnaire, against Bearded Baldwin his own Father Earl of
Flanders, so that he drove him out of his Country; This unnatural Son valuing
himself highly on the Alliance of King Robert, whose Daughter he had Married,
but who nevertheless did not countenance his impiety. Richard III. Duke of
Normandy (others affirm it was Robert) received the old banished Man and
restored him to his Earldom: but he could not totally supress the Partialities
in those Countries, where some still sided with the Son, as others stood up for
the Father.

September the young King Hugh died in the Flower of his Age, bemoaned of all
Europe for his rare and lovely Qualities, which had acquired him so great
Reputation, that he could hardly have made it good if he had longer survived.

King Robert had three more Sons remaining, Henry, Robert, and Eudes. Some
Eudes was the eldest of them all. However it were, the King after the Death of
Hugh would have Henry Crowned: but Queen Constance by a depraved Emperor Roman
II. Cousin to Constable. in November, Reigned Five years six months, and Conrad.
appetite had undertaken to put Robert in the Throne.

The Fathers Authority and Reason carried it for Henry amongst the French
Lords: and yet this Woman's Obstinacy could not acquiesce, but caused many
Tumults, her Husband not being able to prevent her even in his Life time, from
contriving a great Conspiracy to dethrone the eldest, and place the younger in
his stead.

ROBERT, and HENRY his Son Aged some Eighteen years.

RIchard III. Duke of Normandy having Reigned but two years, died of Poison by
by his Brother named Robert, who after his death enjoyed the Dukedom obtained
Fratricide.

Eudes Earl of Champagne, Chartres and Tours, and Fulk Earl of Anjou, because
Fulk fortified the Castle of Montrichard which Eudes said did belong to the
Country of Touraine. After some Rencounters they came to a pitched Battle, each
being at the head of his Army: the loss was great on either side, but the
Angevin obtained the Victory.

Robert commonly permitted the liberty of Elections, yet the Bishop of Langres
being dead, he by his absolute Authority substituted another, as having need of
one wholly at his Devotion in that place, to help him in the bridling and
containing of Burgundy. The Canons having Poisoned this, he put in a second
there; which excited so great trouble amongst the Clergy of that Diocese, that
he was forced to send his Son to install the last promoted, and to secure him
from their Attempts.

Henry was in that Country, happened a great Eclipse of the Sun, and Robert his
Father was seized with a Distemper, whereof he died the 20th of July in the
year 1033. having lived Sixty one years, of which he Reigned Forty five and an
half, that was Nine and an half with his Father, and Thirty six since his death.

He had four Children living; three Sons, Henry who had the Crown, Eudes who
contended with him for it, and Robert who was Duke of Burgundy: and one
Daughter named Adeleida, who Married Baldwin Earl of Flanders.

It was no fault of his Government that France was not completely happy: he
gave his Subjects what depended upon him, Justice and Peace; but had the
unhappiness to see a Famine three times, and after that a Plague make great
destruction in his Dominions, the first in Anno 1007. the second, Anno 1010.
and the third from the year 1030, to 1033. The first was general over all
Europe, and the last so severe in France, that many People were seen to dig up
dead Carcasses for Food, to go a hunting after little Children, and lie in wait
at the corners of Woods like Beasts of Prey, to devour Passengers. Nay there
was a Man so possessed with the covetous desire of gain, more cruel then the
Famine it self, that he exposed Human Flesh to sale in the City of Tournus: but
that detestable Prodigy was by them expiated in the Flames.

Henry I. King XXXVII.
POPES,
BENEDICT IX. A young Boy intruded in December 1033. S. near Ten years. Three
Anti-Popes, the same BENEDICT, SYLVESTER, and GREGORY VI. Elected after the
Abdication of BENEDICT, Anno 1044. S. Two years. CLEMENT VII. Named by the
Emperor, Anno 1046. S. Nine Months. DAMASUS II. Elected in 1048. S. Twenty
three days. LEO IX. After Five Months vacancy, Elected in Feb. 1049. S. Five
years two Months. VICTOR II. Named by the Emperor, Anno 1054. S. Three years.
STEPHANUS X. Elected in August 1057. S. Eight Months. NICHOLAS II. Elected in
1058. S. Two years six Months.
Robert her beloved Son, raised a good Party of the Grandees against him,
particularly Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and Eudes Earl of Champagne, bestowing
the City of Sens upon this last to engage him to her Party.

But Henry whose Resolution was above his Age, went himself, being the Twelfth,
to Robert Duke of Normandy to implore his Assistance. The Duke by Motives of
Fidelity, or hatred against the Champenois, aided him with all his Forces: With
which having in a short time defeated the Queen's in several Rencounters, and
taken the Rebels Holds, he unlinked the whole Party, and reduced her in despite
of all her Projects to live quietly with him.

The War ended, he gave Robert the Cities of Chaumont and Pontoise, and the
French Vexin.

Burgundy to his Brother Robert. From whom issued the First Race of the Dukes
of Burgundy of the Blood Royal.

The Earl of Champagn did not hold himself vanquished by the defeat of the
Party: to make him lay down his Sword the King was forced to beat his Army
twice, and

About the year 1032. or 33. Geofrey surnamed Martel, made a cruel War upon
William V. called the Gross, Duke of Guyenne and Earl of Poitou, whose
Mother-in-Law, or his own Fathers second Wife he had Married; She was named
Agnes Daughter of the Earl of Burgundy. The Subject of the Quarrel was the
Earldom of Saintonge and the Country of Aulnis, which he disputed for. The
Authors do not tell us plainly by what Title he claimed; but that he vanquished
the Duke in a great Battle near Monstrenil-Bellay, took him Prisoner, and did
not release him till three years end, after he had yielded up Saintonge, and
paid a lusty Ransom.

Rodolph or Rouel King of Burgundy beyond the Jour and of Arles dying in the
year 1033. instituted his Heir Conrad the Emperor who had Married Gis^lle his
youngest Sister, and had by her a Son named Henry, and made no account of Eudes
Earl of Champagne the Husband of Berthe his eldest Sister, because while he was
living he would have forced him to acknowledge him for King, and had bred
Factions and Stirs in his Country.

By this Institution the Kingdom of Burgundy and Arles passing over to German
Princes, was by them as it were united and joined to the Germanick Kingdom and
the Empire, who being at too great a distance have insensibly let it slip
through their Fingers, and after they had lost the Possession, have likewise
lost the very Title to it.

In these days lived Humbert, Surnamed White-hands, Earl of Maurienne and
Savoy, Stem of the Royal House of Savoy, which at this day holds a great Rank
amongst Christian Sovereigns, the Offspring of this Humbert, having by
Marriages, Successions, Conquests, and other means, assembled and joined all
the several pieces whereof that State is composed. Some Historians make this
Prince to be descended from Boson King of Provence, others from Hugh King of
Italy, and some from the ancient Counts of Mascon; but Tradition, and which
appears most probable, makes him the Son of one Berald of Saxony who descended
from Vitekind, by the same Branch as the three Otho's Emperors, or by some
other.

Champagn not able to endure that Conrade should allow him no part of a
Patrimony, of which the best share ought to be his, took his time when that
Emperor Michael Paphlagonian, in April, and Conrad.
Prince was employed in Hungary, and with his own Forces and those of his
Friends, made himself Master of a great part of the Kingdom.

Conrad at his return having led his Army into those Countries, drove Eudes
Garrisons forth of all the Places he had taken, put in his own, and received
Hommage France who hated him, might agree with the Emperor to strip him, he
went and surrendered upon Mercy, and humbled himself before him.

Robert Duke of Normandy by force of Arms constrains the Bretons to do him
Hommage.

Nicea in Bithynia, upon his return from a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. At his
departure he had instituted an only Son of his, but a Bastard named William to
be his Heir, begotten on a Citizens Daughter of Falaise, leaving him at Paris,
in the guard and protection of King Henry who had very great Obligations to
him, and giving the Regency of the Country to Alain Duke of Bretagne.

William had two Paternal Uncles, Mauger Archbishop of Rouen* who was Married
and had Children, and William Earl of Argues, to whom the Nobility of the
Country would much rather have obeyed then to a Bastard. This was the occasion
of great Troubles, and would have ruined Normandy, had the French King's Forces
been but as great as his desire to regain it.

Normands began to grow famous and potent in Italy, especially in Puglia and
Calabria. In the year 1003. forty Adventurers of that Nation, upon the quitting
the Holy Land, having acted some things there almost incredible against the
Saracens, in favor of Gaimar Duke of Salerna, who was hugely tormented by
them, being returned into Normandy laden with Honor and Presents, had excited
other brave Men of their Country to go seek their Fortunes beyond the
Mountains. The first that tried, was a Gentleman named Drengot-Osmond, who
being forced to quit the Country for killing one William Repostel in the
presence of his Prince having vapoured that he had abused his Daughter, went
with four more Brothers and some others of his Kindred, to offer his Service to
Mello Duke of Bary, and Pandolphus Prince of Capoua, who were Revolted against
the Greeks. They received them with open Arms, and gave them a City and some
Lands to maintain themselves. Then after these were settled, not without many
hazards, Combats and Adventures, six of the Sons of Tancrede d'Auterville, a
Gentleman of the Bishopric of Constance, who had twelve all of them brave and
courageous, arrived there and carried their same to a higher pitch then the
former.

Normandy was all in Fire and Blood by the particular Feuds of some Lords
upheld by the Uncles of the young Duke Alain III. Duke of Bretagne, his
Guardian being come to appease them, could not avoid a Mortal Poison given him
by the Factious Antagonists. Conan II. his Son but then in his Cradle succeeded
him.

William the Gross Duke of Aquitain was delivered out of Prison and died the
same year. Otho or Eudes his second Brother succeeded him. Two years after he
inherited the Dukedom of Gascongne, taking possession thereof in the Church of
St. Severin at Bordeaux according to the Custom. He had this Lordship in Right
of his Mother Brisce who was the Daughter of Duke Sance. Thus the House of
Gascongne resolved, or dissolved into that of Poitiers or Aquitain.

Eudes Earl of Champagne to the Kingdom of Burgundy not being wholly stifled,
he fell with an Army into the Kingdom of Lorrain which belonged to the Emperor,
and took the City of Commercy: but as he would have attaqued Bar, Gotolon Duke
of Lorrain came and opposed him so roughly, that he defeated his Army and laid
him dead upon the place. His two Sons Thibauld and Stephen shared his Lands.
Thibauld had the Earldoms of Chartres and Tours, and Stephen those of Troyes or
Champagne, and Meaux in Brie.

Geofrey Martel, following the Passion of Agnes his Wife, excited the Subjects
of Eudes Duke of Aquitain to rebel against him, thereby to advance his Brothers
of the same Venture, Peter-William and Guy the Son of that Agnes: which
succeeded as he wished; for Eudes who had no Child being slain in the year
1039. at the Siege of a little paltry Town, Peter-William succeeded him, and
Guy-Geofrey had the Earldom of Gascongny.

Normans under the Conduct of William surnamed Fierabras, the eldest of
Tan^reds Emperor Micbael, and Henry III. or according to others II. Son of
Conrad, in June 1039.
Sons, were employed by the Grecian Emperor's Lieutenant, to drive the Saracens
out of Sicily, upon condition they should have part of the Conquests. Whereof
finding themselves frustrate by the Greeks, they fell upon Puglia or Apulia,
which they began to take footing in. Duke Fierabras their General happening to
die, they chose his Brother Drogon in his stead, and he being likewise
treachcrously killed by the Lords of that Country, they Substituted Onfroy the
third of those Brothers.

Grecian Emperor's Lieutenant brought his Army from Sicily to stop their
Enterprise, and fought them near the Streams of Aufidus, and not far from
Cannes, where otherwhile Hannibal made so horrible a Slaughter amongst the
Romans. The Greek was not more fortunate then the Carthaginian, he lost the
Battle and so great a number of his Men, that the Grecians could never raise
themselves again in that Country; and the power of the Normans increased so
much, that it suppressed theirs in a few years.

Foulk Or Fulk, 1039.
Earl of Anjou died in the City of Mets in his return from the Holy Land:
Geofrey surnamed Martel his Son succeeded him. This Foulk being in Jerusalem
touched with a deep Repentance for his Sins, caused himself to be drawn all
naked on a Hurdle with a Rope about his Neck, and Whipped till the Blood run,
crying out, Have Mercy Lord, on the Treacherous and Perjured Foulk.

Eudes Earl of Champagne refused to do Hommage for their Lands to King Henry,
because he had not assisted their Father against the Emperor Conrad. The
pretense of their Felony was, that they said the Crown belonged to his Brother
Eudes; In effect they encouraged him to set up for King. Which has made some
suspect that he was the eldest.

Henry did not give this Conspiracy time to make any progress, he besieged his
Brother in a Castle whither he was retired, and having taken it, sent him under
a strong Guard to Orleans. I do not find what became of him.

This done, he marched against Stephen Earl of Brie and Champagne, whom he put
to a rout; and thence turns against Galeran Earl of Meulan their Allie whom he
deprived of his Earldom.

On the other hand he animated Geofrey called Martel against Thibauld,
whereupon he besieges the City of Tours, and whatever Agreement could be
afterward made between the King and Thibald, Martel would not give over his
Enterprise.

He had kept it blocked up almost a year; Thibald knowing it was like to perish
for want of Victuals, resolves to relieve it. Geofrey going to meet him with
the Chappe or Mantle of St. Martin, which he caused to be carried in manner of
a Standard, gained the Victory, made Thibald a Prisoner, and afterward reduced
the Town, which since belonged to the Earls of Anjou.

In those times Princes caused the Relics of some Saint Worshipped in their
Countries to be carried for their Ensigns, or some which they had procured from
other places, and likewise often took the Banners used in Churches which served
as their Standards.

William the Bastard occasioned in Normandy, the King took his opportunity to
make them deliver up the Castle de Tilleres, upon pretense that the Rebels
might seize upon it: and in truth he caused it to be razed, but soon after he
rebuilt it, and placed a Garrison there, then stepping farther into Normandy,
he ransacked the County of Hiesmes, and there burnt the little City of
Argentan, which perhaps is the place the Romans called Arae Genuae.

William took the Government; and because he was yet a Minor, chose himself a
Guardian, it was Rodolph de Gace his Constable. But the Lords obeyed
unwillingly because of the defect of his Birth: they had for Chief Guy of
Burgundy, who being the Son of Reynold Earl of the Franche Compte, and Alix
Sister of the deceased Robert, pretended that in his Conscience the Duchy
belonged to him.

William; but being somewhat re-assured, he had recourse to King Henry, who
having now another design then to destroy him, went and joined Forces with him:
both gave the Rebels Battle Emp. Constantin Monomaq, in June. And Henry III.
in a place called the Valley of the Downs, some Leagues on this side the City
of Caen. The King was struck down with a Lance by a Gentleman of Constantine,
but recovered himself again without any hurt. The Rebels were wholly cut off,
Guy of Burgundy Brionne, was divested of the Lands he held in Normandy, and
retired to the Franche Comte.

Anjou, who had been once in greatest favor with the King, there being I know
not what coldness grown betwixt them, let fall some words, which so highly
offended the King, that he undertook to chastise him; he sent therefore to the
Norman Duke to accompany him in this Expedition, and entered upon the Earls
Lands; but they were immediately reconciled.

Norman and the Angevin; it lasted as long as the life of the latter, and
Fortune was favorable sometimes to the one, sometimes to the other.

The Norman Duke having attained to years fit for Marriage, espoused Matilda,
Daughter of Baldwin, called the Pious, Earl of Flanders, and Alix, or Adeleida,
Daughter of King Robert. Being of kin to him, they were fain to obtain a
Dispensation from the Pope, who allowed it, upon condition to build four
Hospitals in four several Cities, each to maintain an hundred poor People.

Mauger Archbishop of Rouen, Uncle to the Duke, not out of any zeal for
Canonical Discipline, but because he would embroil them, that his Brother the
Earl of Arques might make himself Duke, Excommunicated them both. The Duke
having Convened the Bishops of the Province at Lisieux, the Popes Legate
presiding, deposed him, and banished him to the Island of Grenezay.

Arques having his Party Formed, rises up in Arms, the Duke gives him a
repulse, and besieges him in Castle of Arques; the King who changed sides,
either according to his Interest or Humor, highly undertakes his Defense, and
goes in Person to put Provisions and Relief into Arques. Notwithstanding this
Refreshment, the Duke is bent to keep the place blocked up; so that the Earl
wanting Provisions, is obliged to Capitulate, provided he may enjoy his Life
without loss of Members, and some Lands for his subsistence.

The broken remnants of the party fled to the King, who being a little jealous
of the prosperity of William, and pushed forwards by the Earls of Anjou and
Poitou, enemies to the Duke, promised to turn him out of his Duchy. He had but
the design, the event was contrary: being advanced toward Rouen, the Normans
cut his Vanguard in pieces, between Escouy and Mortemer; he was compelled to
face about, and after this checque to deliver up the Castle of Tilleres to him.

This Duke not wont to pardon any that took up Arms against him, especially his
Relations by the Fathers side; most of those who had engaged for the King, or
the Count d'Atques, went into Puglia, where they made a better fortune then
they were like to have found, had they remained in Normandy.

The victorious Duke carries the War into Anjou, and in his passage seizes on
the County of Maine, which Earl Hebert had given him by Will, in recompense for
that he had defended him against the Angevin.

The valiant Geofrey Martel, Earl of Anjou in the year 1047. about Eight and
forty years old, quitted the World, and retired to the Abbey of St. Nicholas of
Angers, where he lived till An. 1061. Before his Retreat, he left his Estates
to Geofrey called the Bearded, and to Foulke surnamed the Rechin, who were the
Children of his Sister Adeleida, and Alberic, Earl of Gastines in Poitou.
Geofrey bare the Title of Earl of Anjou, and dying, left it to Foulk.

Henry III. called the Black, and Henry King of France had an Interview this
year in the Country of Mesin, where they renewed the ancient Alliance between
the two Crowns.

Leo IX. a Lorainer by Birth, and who had been Bishop of Toul, being come into
Gall, to reconcile Godfrey Duke of Lorrain with the Emperor, and put a period
to that bloody quarrel, which was betwixt that Godfrey supported by the Earl of
Flanders, and the Houses of Alsace and Luxemburgh, held a Council at Reims, and
negotiated so effectually, that he made an end of that War.

At his going from Germany he carried some Forces into Italy, to oppose the
Normans, who being grown potent did sometimes undertake upon the Countries
belonging to the Holy Chair. These brave Adventurers conducted by Onfroy, did
first

In recompense, he granted and gave them Title to all the Lands they had
conquered, and likewise all such Lands as they should hereafter gain from the
Greeks and Saracens; and Onfroy shared part of his Conquests with Robert
surnamed Guischard, which is to say the Crasty, and Roger and the rest of his
Brothers.

Thibald Earl of Chartres taking it to heart that the King should thrust him
out of the Earldom of Tours, and not being able to get satisfaction, went and
waited on the Emperor at Ments, who made him his Knight, and promised him his
protection.

Emp. Theodora, Daughter of Constant. then Michael VI. and Henry, IV. Son of
Henry II.
sown between the Emperor and the King, (...) fit to set all right by a mutual
Interview, at the same place where they (...) met. The King complained that the
Governor had contraven'd to the Articles o^ Alliance, but he found no
satisfaction; and having conceived some apprehension of an ill design upon his
Person, retired by night.

The brave Robert Guischard with his Normans having completed the Conquest of
Calabria, called himself Earl for two years, and after feared not to take upon
him the Title of Duke.

Normandy having still in its bosom some sparks of Division, the King who
thought to make advantage by it, attempted to bring it to his bow by a second
Expedition, which was no more fortunate then the first, his Army having been
set upon, and defeated on the Common of Varaville, between Caen and Lisieux, he
accepted of a Peace with the Duke.

Anno 1059. was seen an unheard of Prodigy, a vast multitude of Snakes and
other Serpents, Emp. Isaacius Comenus, and Henry IV.
being assembled together in a Plain near the City if Tournay, divided into two
Bodies, who fought obstinately, till one of them being overcome and fled, left
the Field all covered

Not long after King Henry finding himself broken with labor, though he were
not above 54 years of age, assembled the Grandees of the Kingdom, and having
told them the Services he had done for the Nation, and how well he had
acquitted himself Philip his eldest Son for his Successor, and to give him
their Oaths; which having all promised, he caused him to be Anointed, and
Crowned at Reims the 22 of May, being the Feast of Pentecost, by the
Archbishop Gervais, whom afterward this young King Honored with the Office
of Chancellor.

Vitry near Paris, having Reigned Twenty eight years and four Months after the
death of his Father.

To avoid the danger of contracting a Marriage within the Degrees prohibited,
he sent to seek a Wife as far as Russia or Moscovia: She was Ann, the Daughter
of George, some call him Juriscold, King of those Countries, by whom he had
three Sons, Philip, Robert, and Hugh: the Eldest was then but Seven years old;
Robert dyed Hugh when come to age had the Earldom of Vermandois, and was the
Stock of the Second House of that Name. For they made him Marry Emp. Constan.
Ducas, chosen by Michael, who turned Monk. And Henry IV.
Adeleida Daughter of Hebert, last Earl of the First Branch of Vermandois, She
enjoying her Fathers Lordships, though She had a Brother alive named Eudes, his
Vassals judging him incapable to succeed, from the imbecility of his
understanding; a defect very ordinary in the Carolovinian Race.

Henry left all his Three Sons under the Guardianship of Baldwin Earl of
Flanders, who had Married his Sister, and likewise entrusted him with the
Regency of the Kingdom.

Queen Anne his Widow retired to Senlis, where she was building a Church in
Honor of the Martyr St. Vincent. Her Solitude was not so Austere, but she
could listen to the Addresses of Rodolph Earl of Grespy, who was of that
neighborhood. She made no difficulty to Marry him; and this Second Flame had
like to have kindled a Civil War, not for the difference in their Qualities,
for the Grandees went almost equal with their Kings; but because Rodolph was of
Kin to the First Husband; for which reason the Bishops Excommunicated that
Lord: but nothing could make him let go his hold of her, save death, which
untied him from his Princess, Ann. 1066. Being a Widow, and destitute of
support, she returned to end her days in her own Country.

Philip I. King XXXVIII.
Aged Seven or Eight years.
POPES.
Vacancy of Three Months. Alex. II. Elect 1 October. 1061. S. Eleven years, and
near Seven Months. Gregory VII. Son of a Carpenter, Elect in April 21. 1073. S.
Twelve years, One Month. Victor III. Elect in May 1086. S. about One year Four
Months. Vacancy Five Months. Urban II. Elect in March 1088. S. Eleven years and
Four Months. Paschal II. Elect 12. August 1099. S. Eighteen years, and Five
Months.
Baldwin, the Gascons only refused to submit themselves, apprehending, said
they, lest by that Title, he should destroy his Pupil to invade the Crown, upon
pretension that he was Married to the Daughter of King Henry.

He wisely dissembled this injury; but two years after marched an Army toward
the Pyreneans, giving out, it was to make War upon the Saracens in Spain; and
when he had passed the Garonne, he stopped in the Rebels Country, and brought
them to their Duty without striking a blow.

Guy Gefroy-William Duke of Aquitain, believed that Gefroy Martel Earl of
Anjou, being dead without Children, his Nephews, Sons of his Sister, had no
right to Xaintongne. He would therefore seize it, and besieged Xaintes: his
Army was defeated by the two Brothers near Chef-Boutonne: but the following
year he got another Army, and took the Town from them.

Foulk le Rechin, the younger of the two, gained the Lords of Touraine and
Anjou, who betrayed his Brother Gefroy, and unfortunately delivered him up with
the City of Angers.

In the mean while the Duke of Aquitain having re-conquered Saintongne, led his
victorious into Spain, where he forced the City of Barbastre, at that time very
rich and renowned.

The Zeal of Religion did often lead the Princes and Lords of Aquitain and
Languedoc into Spain, to succor the Christians against the Saracens, and their
assistance raised, and very much supported the petty Spanish Kings.

Edward, King of England, whose Christian Virtues have placed him in the number
of Saints, dying without Children, left his Kingdom by Will and Testament to
William the Bastard Duke of Normandy, in consideration of the good Reception
and Treatment he found in the House of Robert his Father, when he was driven
out English not affecting the Government of a Stranger, gave the Crown to
Harold, Son of Godwin, one of the great Lords of the Kingdom.

The Bastard on his side sought from all parts the assistance of his Friends
and Allies, to get himself into possession of his Right; insomuch as having got
by his large promises, a powerful Army of Normans, French, Flemmings and others
together, he landed in England, gave Battle to Harold the 14th of October, who
was slain in the Fight with his chief Commanders, and left England to the
discretion of the Conqueror. A Revolution thought to be presaged by a terrible
Comet, which for Fifteen days blazed with three great Rays, over-spreading
almost all the Southern parts of the Heavens.

Before William past the Sea, happened the death of Conan Duke of Bretagne; it
was said he caused him to be poysonn'd, because he claimed the Duchy of
Normandy, as belonging to him by his Mother, Daughter of Duke Robert. Hoel who
was Married to his Sister, succeeded him.

English ill-Treated by Williams Lieutenants and Officers, Revolted the
following years, and called in the Danes to their aid, but that only increased
their misery and yoke, for he took from them almost all their Lands, and even
their ancient Laws, introducing and imposing those of his own Country, as he
did that Language in all Courts of Justice, and instruments of Law, withal
putting such Lords as followed him, in possession of English Men's Estates, the
greatest part of them being punished or slain.

Thus ended the Reign of the English in that Island, which has notwithstanding
retained their Name; but in effect has ever since been swayed, and is still by
the Norman Blood, their Kings, and the greatest of the Country being
descended, and holding their Rights of this William the Bastard, to whom was
given the Surname of Conqueror.

Baldwin, Regent of the Kingdom of France, and Earl of Flanders, ended his days
An. 1067. He had Two Sons, Baldwin, called of Monts who was Earl of Flanders,
and Robert, who was Surnamed the Frison, as being Lord of that Country of
Friesland.

1069. Arnold Lord of Selne began to build the City of Ardres, upon the ruins
of his Castle of Selne. Emp. Roman* Diog. having Married Eudoxia, Widow of
Ducas* R. Three years. And Henry IV.


A War did soon break out between Baldwins two Sons, the Eldest thinking to
divest the Younger, was by him beaten and slain in the field of Battle, leaving
two Sons, Arnold and Baldwin very young. The Guardianship of these begot a
bloody contest between Robert their Uncle, and Richilda their Mother. This
Princess, supported by Gefroy Crook-Back, Duke of the lower Lorrain, defeated
Roberts Army, and thrust him out of a part of his Countries. This happy success
made her so haughty Flemmings Flammengant forsook her, and she had none left
but the Walloons and the Hennuyars. The King would have made himself Judge and
Arbitrator between both parties; but Richilda coming to Paris with great
Presents, gained his Counsel, and engaged him openly to take her quarrel.

Richilda taken and carried to St. Omers. But as he was retreating toward
Monstreuil, Eustace, Earl of Boulogne, who had a great Body of Reserves, took
Robert, and carried him to St Omers: He that Commanded the place, surrendered it
to deliver Richilda, for which the King was enraged, that he sacked and burnt
the City.

Richilda, though still assisted by the French, lost another Battle; in which
Eustace Earl of Boulogne being made prisoner, his Brother, Chancellor of
France, and Bishop of Paris, to obtain his freedom, obliged the King to
intermedle no more in that dispute.

Emp. Michael VII. Son of Ducas, R. Five years, and Henry IV.
Nay, which was more, he made him Marry Bertha, the Daughter of Florent I. Earl
of Holland, and Gertrude of Saxony, who had taken Robert for her second Husband.

By this means he was engaged to maintain the Cause for his Father-in-law, who
by his assistance defeated Richilda's Army the Fourth time, and so remained
Master Flanders.

Roger, Brother of Robert Guischard, Duke of the Normans in Puglia, was by his
Brother sent into Sicilia, which was possessed by the Saracens; he conquered d
the City of Panormus Palermo now.
and Messina, which opened him a way to become Master of the whole Island.

Baldwin the Regent, King Philip being arrived to the age of Adolescency, ran
into many disorders and vexations with his Subjects. Whereupon Pope Gregory
VII. who sought but the occasion to constitute himself the Judge and Reformer
of Princes, wrote to William Duke of Aquitain, that together with the Lords, he
should make him some Remonstrances, and Declare, that if he did not amend, he
would Excommunicate both him and all the Subjects that obeyed him, and would
place the Excommunication upon St. Peter's Altar, to re-aggravate it every day.

Robert I. Duke of Burgundy; his Son being deceased before him, had left two
Sons, Hugh and Otho, the first of these succeeded his Grandfather.

William the Conqueror had entirely subdued England, suppressed the Rebellion
of his Son Robert, and quelled the Manceaux, he went into Bretagne to reduce
Emp. Niceph. Boton an Usurper R. three years. And Hen. IV.
them to his Obedience, and laid Siege to Dol. The Duke or Earl Hoel implored
the Kings help, who marching in person to his assistance, made them raise their
Siege.

A Peace immediately followed, but was broken almost as soon again upon another
Normandy to his Son Robert, before he went to invade England: Robert would take
possession of it, the Father hindered him, and the King justified the Son in his
demands. This was the subject of a new War.

The Father besieges his rebellious Son in the Castle of Gerbroy near Beauvais.
In a Sally the Son wounds him, and turned him off from his Saddle with his
Lance; but England.

Gozelon, Gotelon.
Duke of the Lower Lorrain, who in favor of Baldwin, Earl of Monts, Richilda,
had fought, and defeated Robert the Frison, being a while after this Victory
assassinated in Antwerp, the Emperor detained the Duchy of the lower Lorrain,
and gave only the Marquisate of Antwerp to Godfrey Duke of Bouillon, the Son of
Add, Sister of Gozelon and Eustace, Earl of Boulongne; but Twelve years after
for his great Services, he gave him the said Lorrain.

Touraine and of Maine extremely pressing Foulk Rechin by force of Emp. Alexis
Comn. R. 37 years 7 Months* and Henry IV.
Arms, to set Gefroy his Brother at liberty; this barbarous Man, rather then
release him, chose sooner to give the County of Gastinois to King Philp, that
he might maintain him in his unjustice.

Some time after his own Son named Gefroy likewise, and surnamed Martel, moved

The famous Robert Guischard, Prince of the Normans in Apulia Puglia.
Puglia, after he had gained Venetians, and the other over the Greeks, died
this year 1085. He had two Sons, Boemond and Roger; the eldest being then upon
the coasts of Dalmatia with a Navy, his younger Brother seized on the Dutchies
of Pouille Apulia, or Puglia.
and Calabria; for which the Brothers were contending, till the time of the
first Croisado, or Holy War, when the French Lords passing that way to the Holy
Land, brought them to an agreement. Their Uncle Roger held Sicily, with the
Title only of Earl.

Robert showed to his Norman Subjects; his Father the Conqueror comes over out
of England to chastise him; but his paternal tenderness did easily admit of a
reconciliation.

The death of Guy-Gefroy-William, his Son William VIII. aged but 25 years
succeeded him.

Philip, a very voluptuous Prince, being disgusted with Berthe his Wise, made
use of the pretense of Parentage which was between them, and having proved it
according to the course then in use, caused his Marriage to be dissolved by
authority of the Church, though he had a Son by her named Lewis, about Five
years old, and a Daughter named Constance. He banished his Divorced Wife to
Monstreuil upon the Seaside, where she lived a long time poorly enough.

Roger Earl of Sicilia, named Emma, who was conducted as far as the coasts of
Provence: however he did not Marry her, the reason is not given.

William the Conqueror become crazy, was under a strict regiment of Diet at
Rouen, to pull down his overgrown fatness, which did much incommode him. The
King rallied at him, and asked when he would be up again after his Lying in:
the Duke sent him word, that at his Uprising he would go and visit him with
10000 Lances instead of Candles: and indeed, as soon as he could, he got on
Horseback, he destroyed all the French Vexin, and forced and burnt Mantes. But
he overheated himself so much in the assaulting of that place, that it set his
own Blood and Body on fire, and brought a fit of Sickness, so that he returned
to Rouen, where he dyed in a few days.

By his Will he gave the Kingdom of England to William called Rufus, who was
bat his Second Son; Normandy to Robert who was eldest; and some Rents and
Moneys to Henry the youngest of the three.

An. 1089. happened the death of Robert called the Frison, Earl of Flanders. His
Son of the same name succeeded in his Earldom. Some time after he was Surnamed
of Jerusalem, because he was present at the Siege of that City, An. 1099.

Foulk le Rechin extremely incontinent and changeable toward Women; but yet
fuller of desire then ability, after he had turned away two, under color of
Proximity, had in An. 1089. Married Bertrade, the Daughter of Simon de
Montfort. The appetite of this Woman, Young, Beautiful, and Gay, did not suit
with the age of her Husband; she forsook him at three years end to cast her
self into the Arms of King Philip, who was a lover of Ladies, and had not
passed his 35th year. There happened to be a Bishop (it was Eudes of Bayeux) who
undertoo to Marry them together, upon condition he might have the Revenue of
some Churches, which the King bestowed upon him.

Bertrade was of Parentage to the King in the Fifth or Sixth Degree, and le
Rechin her Husband in the Third or Fourth; these were therefore two obstacles:
besides, if Philip were free, as he pretended he was, Bertrade was not, because
her former Marriage had not been dissolved: wherefore upon the hot pursuit of
Ives, Bishop of Chartres, who showed himself a zealous Defender of the
Discipline of the Canons; he was threatened with Excommunication at the Council
d'Autun, though the Pope suspended the effect or execution till the following
year, that he thundered it himself Clermont.

Gregory VII. and Henry VI. The First very imperious and undertaking, the
latter wicked, cruel, and irregular to the highest degree. The Pope pretended
to take away from the Emperor, the investiture of Benefices, as an unjust and
sacrilegious thing; but his true motive was a desire of the Empire of Italy,
and to subject all Princes to his Pontifical Power, which seemed very feasible
and easy, because all Europe being divided into a Hundred, and a Hundred
several Dominions; the Princes were but weak and the greatest number of them,
either out of Devotion, or to avoid the Sovereignty of the more potent,
submitted, and even devoted themselves to the Holy Chair, and paid him Tribute;
so that had there been but three or four successive Popes, crafty enough to
have cloaked this design, with at least an appearance of Sanctity, and would
have taken fit opportunities of relieving the people against their Oppressors;
they had made themselves sole Monarchs, as well in Temporals as in Spirituals.

There was not that little Lord that did not Brave King Philip, rocked asleep
within the Arms of his Bertrade. Miles, Lord of Montlehery, and Guy Troussel
his Son, made him sweat for anguish, with their Castle of Montlehery, and four
or five others which they held in those parts,: with which they domineered over
all the Country, and interrupted the Trade betwixt Paris and Orleans; though
Guy Lord of Rochefort, Brother of Miles, was greatly in favor with Philip.

Urban II. being come into France, the refuge of persecuted Popes, that he
might be owned the true Head of the Church (for the Emperor had dethroned him,
and caused another to be Elected) Assembled a Council at Clermont in Auvergne,
in the Octave of St. Martins: wherein he made a great many Canons for the
reformation of the Clergy, and especially to root out Simony, and prohibit the
Marriage of Priests; and afterward he Excommunicated King Philip, and Bertrade
his Concubine.

In the same Council, upon the application and instances made by the Emperor
Alexis, to have some assistance against the Turks; and upon the Remonstrances
of Peter the Hermit, a Gentleman of Picardy, near Amiens, who having made a
voyage into the Holy Land, had been witness of the cruelties those Insidels did
exercise upon the Christians: the Pope by a warm discourse animated all the
Prelates then present, to incline the Faithful to take up Arms for the defense
of Christendom, and go into the East. His Exhortations were so moving, that
they made impression on all their minds; and this Zeal in a short time was
spread all over Europe; an infinite number of all qualities, of all ages, and
of all Sexes, Listed and Enroul'd themselves in this Sacred Militia. The Signal
was a Red Cross sowed upon the left Shoulder, and the word Dieu le Veut God
will have it so. Or Diex el vol^*


The Turks after diverse irruptions, being called and taken into Pay by Machmet,
King of Persia, who was a Saracen, and had War with the Caliph of Babylon, a
Mohammedan, turned their Swords against himself, and made themselves Masters of
part of his Country in An. 1048. then of Mesopotamia, Syria, Judea, and almost
all Asia; and had formed five or six Kingdoms, one in Persia, one in Bithynia,
one in Cilicia, one in Damas, whereon Jerusalem depended, and one in Antioch.
Now subduing the Persian, they had taken up their Religion, which was the
Mohammedan; This Reason joined with their natural Barbarity, inclined them to
treat those Christians that inhabited Judea with all manner of cruelties; and
besides, they threatened to invade the rest of Asia, and destroy the whole
Eastern Empire.

These Croisado's and beyond sea Voyages, the heat whereof lasted for above two
hundred years, was the ruin of the Great Lords, and multitudes of the common
people. But the Popes and Kings found great advantages toward the making
themselves absolute. Those, because they had the Command of these Expeditions,
whereof they were the Heads; took into their protection, the Persons and
Estates of such as adventured; made the use of Indulgences and Dispensations
more common and current then formerly; their Legates collected, and managed the
Alms and charitable Contributions that were given for the carrying on these
Wars; and it was even made a fair pretense to raise the Tenths upon the Clergy.

The Kings found their reckoning likewise, because all the brave active, and
hottest Spirits going into these foreign Provinces, left them a cleerer stage,
and more easy Government, with less opposition to attain their chiefest ends.
The Lords and Grandees sold them their Estates, or Engaged and Mortgaged them
to raise Moneys; or at their death they fell to Minors, or Women, from whose
hands they were easy to be wrested; And in fine, France which swarmed with
prodigious numbers of Men, being evacuated by these great and frequent
Phlebotomies, became more gentle and submissive, and their Wills less dependant
on the Laws and ancient Orders of the Kingdom.

Germany, and Hungaria; others by Sclavonia: others again by Italy, to embark
in Fuglia Pouille. A^ulia.
; these conducted home the Pope, and restored him to the Chair in despite of
his Enemies. They all got into Greece, and thence passing the straight of the
Hellespont, or arm St. George, arrived in Bithynia. But those who were led by
Peter the Hermit, and Gautier Waher.
de Saint Sauveur being ill conducted, were almost all cut in pieces by Solomon
Sultan of the Turks in Bithynia.

Amongst the Chief Commanders of these Forces, were Hugh the Great, Brother to
King Philip, Robert Duke of Normandy, the Earls Raimond of Toulouze, Stephen de
Chartres, Baldwin of Hainault, Hugh de St. Poll, Rotrou du Perch, William de
Forez, Rambol of Orange, Baldwin of Mets, Fulke of Guisnes, Stephen d'Aumale,
another Stephen of Franche Comte, William of Angoulesme, Herpin de Bourges, who
sold his Earldom to the King, Boemond Duke of Apulia, Tancred his Nephew, Son
of Robert Guischard, and above two hundred other Lords of note.

All these being passed into Bithynia, elected for their Chief, Godefroy Or
Godfrey.
Duke of Bouillon and the lower Lorrain, Son of Eustace Earl of Boulogne. An
Election so glorious for him, that all the Scepters of the Universe together,
are not comparable to it.



Nicea in Bithynia, was the first exploit of these Christian Adventurers; The
defeat of Solymans Army, followed with the surrender of the places in Lycaonia,
Lycia, Cilicia and Pamphilia, the Second; and the taking of Antioch, which held
them seven Months, and cost them a great deal of Blood and Trouble, the Third.

After they were got in, they went to meet Corban, or Corbaget, General of the
Army to the Sultan of Persia or Babylon, fought him, and slew an hundred
thousand of his Men, which weakened the power of the Turks so much, that the
Sultan of Egypt, who was a Saracen, took from them Judea, and the Holy City of
Jerusalem.

June, and carried it by main force the 15th of July. All the chief Commanders
agreed to give it, with all its dependencies, and the Title of a Kingdom, to
Godfrey of Bouillon, their Prime General; who notwithstanding, was so humble,
that he would never suffer them to put the Crown upon his Head, nor give him
the Title of King in a City where the King of Kings had been Treated like a
Slave.

The Sultan of Egypt with reason apprehending, left the Christians, after so
many advantages should deprive him of his Country likewise, without which it
is very difficult to preserve the Holy Land. Seeing them therefore much
weakened, so that they had scarce 5000 Horse, and 15000 Foot left, he got
together an hundred thousand Horse, and four times as many Foot, giving the
Conduct of them to a Lieutenant, to cut them off. Godfrey the greatest Soldier
of his age charged them so resolutely, that he put them into disorder, and slew
above an hundred thousand. So great a Victory gave him all Palestine, one or
two places only excepted.

Jerusalem, under which were the County of Edessa, the capital City of Media,
the Principality of Antioch in Celosyria, and the County of Tripoly, which was
not conquered till many years afterward, upon the Maritime coasts of the
Phenician Syria. At that time was Caliph in Babylon, Albuguebase Achamet the
Son of Muquetady, the Eight and twentieth of the House of Guebase.

West by those Princes that returned, excited such others as had not been
there, to go and signalize their Names. They made therefore a Second Croisade,
composed of above 300000 Men, French, Almains, and Italians. William VIII. Duke
of Aquitain, carried an hundred thousand, two thirds of them being his own
Subjects: Hugh le Grand the Kings Brother, and the Earl of Burgundy who had
been in the first Expedition, went also in this: and diverse Prelates, and many
illustrious Ladies would go this Voyage. Godfrey being dead the preceding year,
his Brother Baldwin succeeded him in the Kingdom of Jerusalem.

Hungary and Thrace, and by the straight crossed over into Asia. In their
passage Duke William saw the Grecian Emperor, and in too lofty Language,
denied to pay him Hommage for those Lands he should conquer from the Infidels.
The persidious Emperor being offended in his mind, ordered them such Guides,
who having harassed, and enseebled them, by the difficulties of the bad ways,
and want of Food, made them pass over a River, where the Enemy waiting for them
with advantage, killed above Fifty thousand in one day, the rest made their
escape as they could in Cilicia. Hugh the Kings Brother went to Tarses, where
he died of his wounds.

These Voyages to the Levant renewed, and extremely increased the hatred the
Greeks had conceived against the Latins, or Western People; insomuch that those
Traitors did them more mischief a great deal, then the Infidels themselves.
Hereafter we shall mention no more of these Wars then what relates to our
History.

But we must not forget to tell that they gave beginning to the use of Coats of
Arms Scutcheons, Cognisances, also Armoires, Coats.
. In all times every Nation bore some Figure or Symbol in their Banners or
Ensigns. The Roman Legions were distinguished by the different painting of
their Shields or Bucklers, and the different Lines traced or drawn upon them.
Particular Men did likewise adorn their Shields with devices which made known
their birth, or their brave acts, or their Wit and Humor.

Now in these Expeditions to the Holy Land, those that had such Symbols before,
made them more proper for them; and those that had none, contrived, and made
choice of such as might render them conspicuous and remarkable in Battle (their
Armor for the Head, hindering them from being known by their Faces) as well as
to distinguish them from others; And likewise that those Coats of Arms might
serve them as it were for Surnames; for in those days there were yet but few or
none.

Some therefore to show they were going in these Croisades, took Crosses in
their Shields, of which there was infinite variety and several sorts; others to
make known they had been in the Levant, and passed the Seas, took Besants,
Lions, Leopards, or Escollop Shells. Others framed their Arms of the Linings of
their Mantles or Cloaks, according as they were Checkie, Vary, Diapred,
Gyroned, Lozanged, Vndulated, Paled. Some there were that chose rather to
charge their Field with some piece of their Arms, as the Spurs, Lance, Maillets
and Sword. Several chose such things as had resemblance to the Surnames people
had given them, or to the Lands they held, as what they produced, how situated,
or some particularities of their Castles, or such Office they bore. Some there
were that chose such things as preserved the memory of their brave Feats of
Arms, or some singular Adventure which had hapued to them, or theirs: and
others in fine would have such as betokened their inclination; not to mention
those that would needs have their Coats out of a mere fantastical Humor, and
without any design.

These glorious Marks and Badges belonged otherwhile only to the Nobility, and
was not the least illustrious part of the Succession of their Noble Families.
Now at this time every one has them, the meanest villains are the most curious
herein; they have not only brought the

Croisade, William Rufus King of England, taking the opportunity of his Brothey
Roberts absenc, had seized on the Duchy of Normandy. Swollen with this increase
of Power, he promised himself to invade France, because he saw the
Excommunicated King, languishing in the Arms of his Concubine; who besides, had
but one lawful Son of 15 or 16 years of age, and was destitute both of Money
and Friends. Nevertheless this young Prince surpassing his age, did by his
Courage and Virtue defend himself so well three years together, that Rufus was
forced to leave him in Peace, and retired again into England.

In that Country letting himself loose to all sorts of infamous pleasures,
tyranny, Henry his younger Brother got It is observed that more Kings perish in
Hunting then in Wars.
into the Throne during the absence of Duke Robert, who was still in the
Holy Land.

Notwithstanding the Popes Excommunications, the King had renewed society with
Bertrade, by the consent even of Foulk her Husband, being so infinitely
enchanted with that Woman, that he was often seen at her Feet, there to receive
all her

Some of the Belgic Bishops honored the Kings Adultery with the name of
Marriage, and on their great Feasts, according to ancient custom, placed the
Crown upon her Head, to show or signify they did not hold her to be
Excommunicated; but the Popes Legates denied to communicate with him, and
convened a Council at Poitiers in July, where he was Excommunicated once more.
William Duke of Aquitain, who feared the like Treatment, having committed the
like fault, for he entertained a Concubine, and had forsaken his lawful Wife,
affronted and abused the Prelates greatly; and perhaps his Sorrow and Repentance
for it afterward prompted him to go to the Holy Land, as we have observed.

The King constant in his Affections, solicited the Popes Favor so earnestly,
that he sent some Legates to re-view the Cause.

Baugency. The King and Bertrade promised to abstain from each other till the
Popes Dispensation, and thus the Council broke up Rome; in the end he had it,
he was Absolved in the City of Paris, and his Marriage confirmed; so
officacious is constancy, even in things not commendable. The opposition of the
Bishops served only to authorize the use of Dispensations from Rome, which
since have been very common in all matters and occasions.

Young Lewis, whom they named the Prince of the Kingdom, and was designed King
by his Father, (it is not specified in what year) took the Government of
Affairs.

PHILIP LEWIS, Surnamed the Gross, designed King, aged 19 or 20 years.

In those times the Rights Liberties and Privileges.
of the French were such, that they could not legally arrest the Lords, nor
punish them with death, unless it were for Treason; but only deprive them of
their Lands; I mean those they held of the King. (they called them Honors.)
This was it that gave them License to arm, to oppress the weaker, to rob and
plunder, and above all, usurp the Goods of the Church.

Lewis had to do first with Bouchard Lord of Montmorency, against whom he
embraced the Cause of the Monks of St. Denis, whose Lands that Lord had
pillaged, and having appeared according to an assignation in the Kings Court of
Justice, refused to obey the Sentence or Judgment given against him therein. He
forced him by destroying and burning all his Villages, and his Castle it self,
to submit to Reason.

In like manner he chastifed Droco or Dreux de Mouchy, and Lionnet de Meun, who
tyrannized, this over the Churches of Orleans, the other over those of Beauvais.

Also he humbled Matthew, Count of Beaumont upon Oise, Son-in-law to Hugh Earl
of Clermont in Beauvoisis, who having half of the Lands of Luzarches in Dowry,
had seized upon all, and had divested the good Man his Father-in-law.

Norman Brothers, Robert and Henry. The First upon his return from the Holy
Land demanded the Kingdom of England of his younger Brother, who had usurped it
after the death of William Rufus. The business after three years Negotiation
and War, was determined in this manner; Robert An. 1107. having lost a Battle
at Tinch^bray in Normandy, was made prisoner by his cruel Brother, who deprived
him of Sight, by placing a burning Basin of Brass before his Eyes, whereof he
dyed in Prison. Thus the whole Succession of William the Conqueror, remained in
Henry the youngest of his three Sons.

Lewis passed into England to King Henry, I cannot tell upon what design.
Bertrade his Mother-in-law, who could willingly have sent him out of the World,
solicited Henry to make him away; and this Artifice failing, she caused poison
to be given him at his return into France, which put him in great hazard of his
Life.

Montlehery, agreed upon a Marriage with Guy Troussel, betwixt Philip his Son,
and bertrade, to whom he gave the Earldom of Mantes, on condition that Guy
should deliver him the Castle of Montlehery, which he did.

Guy Lord of Rochefort, Uncle of Troussel, entirely possessing the Kings
Favor, contracted his Daughter Luciana, but ten years old, to Prince Lewis.

Ebles Baron de Roucy a famous Captain, who often raised Soldiers, with which
he went into Spain, not so much to fight the Saracens, as to find opportunity
to plunder and pillage the Churches, vexed all those of Champagne, upon
complaint of the Clergy Lewis hastens to Reims; his Celerity astonished the
Plunderer so much, that he laid down his Arms, and promised to forbear those
Robberies.

Thomas Lord of Marle, against Enguerrand de Boves his Father, was not so just.
Thomas by means of his Castle of Montagu in Laonnois, committed a thousand
Cruelties and Robberies, insomuch that his Father was forced to besiege him.
Lewis upon the request of Thomas re-victuals the Castle, at which Enguerrand
and the Lords were so enraged, that they declared they owned him no longer for
their Sovereign, since he protected the wicked. They were almost ready even to
give him battle; but being brought to a Conference, they kissed his Hand, and
swore Service to him.

The unhappy Emperor Henry IV. against whom the Popes had stirred up first his
eldest Son Conrad, then he being dead, Henry his Second Son, being taken
prisoner by this unnatural Child, wrote very pathetical Letters to King Philip
and Prince Louis, which begot a great deal of compassion toward him, but no
help. Being got out of prison, he died in the City of Liege the Second of
August, and Henry V. his Son succeeded him in his quarrel with the Pope, as
well as in his Estates.

Emp. Alexis, and Henry V.
Pope Paschal II. not willing to go to this Henry, because, said he, the
Germans are yet enough humbled, came into France, passed to Clugny, la Charity,
Tours, Paris, and went to St. Denis, where the King and his Son paid him their
Respects, by bowing Chaalons he Treated with the Ambassadors of Henry V. and
held a Council at Troyes.

In this Council, whether by the zeal of the Prelates, or the suggestion of
Prince Lewis, the Pope pronounced the Dissolution of his Marriage, not yet
consummated with Luciana.

Guy de Rochefort discontent for the Divorce of his Daughter, retires from
Court. Anseau and Stephen de Garland the Brothers exasperate Prince Lewis's
Spirit against him, which they swayed. Rochefort commits some hostilities at
his Castle of Gournay upon Marne. Lewis besieges the place; a League is formed
between Rochefort and Thibauld Earl of Blois and Chartres; Lewis goes to meet
the Army of these discontented Gentlemen, defeats them, and returning to the
Siege takes Gournay.

Philip quite wasted with excess of pleasures, dies at Melun the 26th of July,
aged 56 years, whereof he had Reigned 48 and two Months. From thence he was
carried to St. Bennets Abbey on the Loire, where he had chosen his Burying
place. He was a Prince of a good shape and stature, but his softness and
amorous Commerce had rendered his Body unactive and heavy, and stupisied his
Conscience and Courage.

He had had two Wives, Berthe the Daughter of Florent Earl of Holland, and
Bertrade of Simon de Montfort. The First brought him two Children, Lewis who
Reigned, and Constance who Married Boemond Prince of Antioch, An. 1106. By
Bertrade were born two Sons, Philip and Florus Was he not also called Charles?
or Fleury, and one Daughter named Cecely. The two Sons were Married, but had
no Male-issue. The First was Earl of Mantes, M^un upon Yeurre, and Montlehery:
the Daughters first Husband was Tancred Prince of Antioch, the Second was Ponce
Or Pontius.
de Toulouza Count of Tripoly.

Church of the Eleventh age.
The Tenths, the Offerings, the Presentations, and the very Churches as we have
related, had been Infeoffed to the Laity by a strange abuse, whereof the
Footsteps are yet to be seen in Gascongne. The Lords took the investiture of
the Prince, and held them of him in Fief; so that they could not alienate them
without his consent, and when they sold them, it was upon condition of
preference for the Curate, or for the Bishop, if he would.

Now to bring them back by little and little to the Ordinarys, it had been
ordained by the Councils, especially by that of Mets under King Arnulf, that
the Laics should not put them off of their hands, nor give them to the
Monasteries, without the permission of the Diocesan Bishops or the Pope, which
was since confirmed by the Council of Rome in the year 1078. and by that of
Melfe, An. 1090.

When it happened then that the Seculars would discharge their Consciences, and
restore those Possessions to the Church, which their Fathers had usurped during
the Wars; the Ordinaries believed they ought not to suffer the Monks should
draw these to themselves, and joined together to make them revert to the
benefit of the Hierarchical Order.

This was the subject of an obstinate and bloody quarrel between the Bishops
and the Monks; the First held diverse Assemblies to preserve their Rights. There
was one amongst the rest in the Abbey of St. Denis, about the end of the Tenth
Century, where Seguin de Sens, venerable both for his Age and Virtue presided.
The Monks perceiving the Council was going to pronounce against them, raised a
furious Sedition to scatter them. Abbon de Fleury was accused to have been the
Boute-feu Firebrand.
. How ever it were, Seguin was wounded with an Axe betwixt the two Shoulders;
and Arnold d'Orleans, a particular enemy to Abbon, had lost his Life there, had
he not fled away betimes.

As the conduct of the Prince is the Rule to all his Kingdom, the Piety of
Robert served not a little to contain the Ecclesiastics in their Duty, and
incline them to Learned Men.
the exercise of their Religion, and the study of good Literature. We ought
certainly to reckon him the first amongst the Learned Men of this age, not so
much for his quality and rank, as for his capacity, which was not little for
those times; and to him we may add Gauslin his bastard Brother, Archbishop of
Bourges, who amongst other Works, composed a Discourse about the causes of the
shower of Blood that had fallen An. 1017. in Aquitain for three days together,
and had this of wonderful in it, That it could not be wiped or rubbed off from
any Flesh, Clothes or Stones, but out of Wood the spots might be easily taken
away, and leave no stain behind. Amongst other persons of erudition, those that
most excelled, were Or Fulk.
Foulk and Yves, Bishops of Chartres, Leoterick of Sens, Gervas de Reims,
Chancellor of France, Beranger Archdeacon of Angers, Hildebert du Man's his
Disciple and Admirer, and Gefroy de Vendosme (these two passed very far in the
other age) Lanfranc Abbot of St. Stephens at Caen, Durand Bishop of Liege, and
the Monks, Sigebert of Gemblours, Glaber of Clugny, and Helgaud de Fleury, who
all three labored in History.

Saints.
We must take notice besides those most eminent Servants of God, Odillon, whom
we have already mentioned, and Hugh, both Abbots of Clugny, who being favored
by Heaven, were in great credit with the Princes of this world; of Thierry
Bishop of Orleans, Burchard de Vienne, Bruno de Toul, all three in the
beginning of this Century: and in the latter part of it, Austinde d'Auch, Hugh
de Grenoble, Arnold de Soissons, and Maurille de Rouen. Add to these Prelates
Brune who was Institutor of that most austere Order of the Chartreux; and
Robert Abbot of Molesme, who was Institutor or Founder of the Cisteaux. For
Robert d'Arbresel he is not yet in the Catalogue of Saints.

Heresies.
France was not exempted from Heresies; In the year 1000, there started up a
Phanatiqee Peasant, named Leutard, in the Borough de Vertus, within the
Bishopric of Chaalons, who broke down the Images, Preached that they ought not
to pay Tithes, and maintained, that the Prophets had not always spoke those
things that were good; he was followed by an innumerable multitude of the
Populace, who believed him to be inspired of God: his Bishop (it was Guibin)
having easily convinced him, and afterward disabused those ignorant people;
the unhappy wretch, in despair to see himself forsaken, cast himself into a
Well, his Head foremost.

Some years afterward came from Italy I know not what Woman, infected with the
dotage of the Manicheans, which she inspired into a couple of the most Noble,
and most Learned Clergymen of Orleans, and those into several other people of
several conditions. King Robert who made his Residence in that City, being
informed hereof, assembled a Council, An. 1017. to convince them; but not able
to dis-infatuate them, they kindled a fire in a neighboring Field to burn
them, if they persisted in those Follies. These obstinate Zealots far from
dreading those Flames, ran to them, Thirteen were burnt, Ten whereof were
Canons of St. Croix.

The same severity was practiced toward all of that Sect that could be
discovered in any place, especially at Toulouze An. 1022. But the remainders or
Seeds of those ashes, or (as some say) the frequent Commerce the French, who
traveled to the Levant, had with the Bulgarians, who were Manicheans, soon
after raised up this Frenzy again in Languedoc and Gascongne.

The error of the Sacramentaries was more subtle, and therefore did not make so
great a progress. Joh. Scot. Erigene, and other half Learned, and too subtle
Wits, disputing about the incomprehensible Mystery of the Holy Sacrament,
according to the notions and terms of humane Philosophy, had raised doubts and
difficulties in the minds of Men, touching the real presence of the Body of
JESUS CHRIST in the Holy Eucharist. We may believe that even in the Tenth age,
some scruples had been made by people contending herein, since there were
miracles wrought to prove it.

But the First that durst openly say contrary to the belief of all former ages,
that the Holy Sacrament was but the Figure of the Body of our Lord, was
Berenger, Archdeacon of Angers, Treasurer and Or Schoolmaster.
Super-intendant of St. Martin de Tours. As he was one of the most Learned Men
of his time, and had such charms in his Discourse and Entertainment, that he
was followed by vast numbers of Disciples, for which reason his adversaries
said he was a Magician: he drew to his party Br^^o Bishop of Angers, and very
many others, who spread his Doctrine thorough France, Italy and Germany.
Durandus Bishop of Liege, and Adelman his Rector, afterward Bishop of Bresse,
stopped the current of it by their Writings; and King Henry by his Authority: so
that he kept close and quiet for some years. At the end whereof moving the
question afresh, Pope Leo IX, condemned it in the Council of Rome, and in that
of Vercel, both in An. 1050. In the last they ordered Scots Book to be burned,
which was the Well from whence he had drawn his error. Five years afterward
Hildebrand Legate from Pope Victor II. being sent into France to reform the
Clergy, convened a Council at Tours, where he compelled him to abjure his
Error, and subscribe his Retractation.

For all this he desisted not from his former ways, they were fain to cite him
before the Council which was held at Rome, An. 1059. where he was ordered to
burn Scotus his Book with his own hand, and Sign to a Confession of Faith
composed by Cardinal Humbert: but as soon as he was at liberty he renews the
Dispute, which lasted till the year 1079. when Gregory VII. having summoned him
before another Council in Rome, managed this turbulent Spirit so well, that he
owned and confessed both from his Heart and Tongue, the substantial Conversion
of the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST..

Being returned into France, he took up the Habit of St. Bennet for his
penance, and retired into the Priory of St. Cosmo, which is in an Island of
the Loire, about two Leagues from Tours, whither he drew several Cannons of St.
Martins, who were enchanted with the sweetness of his Conversation. He passed
the rest of his days there with great austerity, and died very Religiously, An.
1091. aged above Fourscore years.

What care soever was used to reform the disorders, and take away the Weeds and
Darnel out of the Church, yet they could never pluck up the most spreading and
fruitful root of Simony. I shall give you a little taste of it. In a Council
which the Legate Hildebrand held at Lions, An. 1055. there were 45 Bishops, and
23 other Prelates, who without any other accusation but their own Consciences,
publicly avowed this crime, and renounced their Benefices: An example very
common as to the fault, but singular for the repentance.

I do not know any times wherein so many Churches and Abbeys were built, as in
these days. King Robert himself founded above 20. There was not one Lord but
Founders; whilst they ruined the Churches on the one hand, they built on the
other, and made their Sacrilegious Offerings to God of those things they had
ravished from the poor, and needy.

The fancy that reigned in Men's minds at the beginning of this Century is most
remarkable, which was to pull down old Churches to build new, nay, even the
fairest and noblest, to erect others after their own mode.

This change of material Walls, seemed to be a sign of that change was made in
those times in the whole Face, and if we may say so, the Body of the Gallican
Church. From the Eighth Century the Popes had found out means to diminish the
Authority of Metropolitans, obliging them by a Decree in Council, held at Ments
by St. Boniface, necessarily to receive the Pall at Rome, and subject
themselves Canonically to obey the Roman Church in all points. A Profession
since changed into an Oath of Fidelity, under Gregory VII. They had likewise
attributed to themselves, exclusively to all others, the Right of Separating,
or Dissolving the Spiritual Marriage which a Bishop contracteth with his
Church, and to give him the liberty of Marrying with another, they had enlarged
their Patriarchal Jurisdiction over all the West, by necessitating the Bishops
to have confirmation from them, for which they paid certain rates, which in
time were converted into what they call Annates; in admitting the appellations
of Priests, and in taking cognizance of things that belong only to Bishops.

Nay, much more, they had as it were annihilated the Provincial Councils, in
taking away their Sovereignty by a cassation of their Judgments; insomuch as
those Assemblies were in the end laid aside as useless, yielding no other
satisfaction to such as resorted thither, but the displeasure of having their
Sentences oftentimes reversed at Rome, without any proofs, or any reasons
brought before them. Gregory II. made it a Rule of common Right, That none
should be so bold as to condemn any that appealed to the Holy See.

But they never made a greater breach in the liberties of the Gallican Church,
then when they introduced the Belief, that no Councils could be called without
their Authority; and after they had made diverse attempts to set up perpetual
Vicars in Gall, found out the way to have their Legates admitted and received.
To this purpose they first made use of a Canon of the Council of Sardique,
which gave them power to send Legates into the Provinces, to review any Process
of the Deposition of Bishops, where complaint was made. After they had
accustoned the French Prelates to suffer the Legates in such Cases, they gained
by little and little another Point, during the weakness of their Princes, which
was to send a Legate whether there were any such Process, or Appeal, or not; and
finally when they had received the Yoke, Alexandre II. settled it for a maxim,
that the Pope ought to have the whole Government of all the Churches.

Of these Legates, some of them had the whole Kingdom under their jurisdiction,
others a part only. They came with Authority to Depose Bishops, or the
Metropolitan himself, when they pleased; to Assemble Councils in their
District, to preside with the Metropolitan, and precede him, to make Canons, to
send to the Pope the decision of such things to which the Bishops would not
consent; as likewise all Acts of the Council, which he disposed of at his Will;
and it is to be observed that their Suffrage counterpoised those of all the
Bishops; and often, by their sole Authority, they judged of the Elections of
Bishops, of Benefices, of the Excommunications of Laics, and other such like:
so that those Assemblies formerly so Holy and Sovereign for the Discipline,
having now no more power, were to speak properly, rather Councils to assert the
Will of the Pope, then lawful and free Councils.

Now after Alexandre II. had ordained, that the Bishops of those Provinces,
whether the Legation extended, should be at the charges for their subsistence,
and defray their expenses; and that Gregory VII. had added to the Oath the
Bishops take when they receive the Pall, that they would Treat them Honorably
at their going, and upon their return, and would furnish them with all
necessaries; the profit of those employments was not less great then the Honor
and Dignity. So that the desire of gain made them court these employments with
great earnestness; and the Popes bestowed them as rewards upon their creatures.
There was nothing but going and coming of Legates, and as soon as one had
crammed his Purse, immediately another came in his place. Insomuch as the
Bishops and Clergy extremely tired, and impoverished by these perpetual
exhaustings, did not look upon these Legations any longer as a remedy, but as a
disease. In effect, it became so importunate and vexatious, that at length they
were forced to consider of some moderation, and not to receive any more Legates,
but upon very important occasions.

We should never have done if we quoted all the Councils that were assembled in
this Century. We find a great number in the Epistles of Yves de Chartres,
Gregory VII. and Gefroy de Vendosme. I will likewise set down some, An. 1003.
The Bishops of France approved the Marriage of King Robert with Berthe; and the
year after, being constrained by the Anathema's from Rome, they revoked their
Sentence, and Excommunicated the King.

Glaber relates that many were celebrated in Italy, and in Gall, about certain
usages of no great importance; as to consider, whether they should Fast on the
days between the Ascension and Pentecost; permit the Benedictines to Sing the
Te Deum on the Lent Sundays; and celebrate the Feast of the Anunciation the
25th of March, or else the 18th of December, as the Spaniards did, according to
the Decree of their Tenth Council of Toledo. The decisions were, That those
Fasts should be all abolished, excepting upon Whitsuntide Eve; the Benedictines
maintained in their Singing the Te Deum in Lent; and the Festival of the
Annunciation be observed in March.

King Robert convened several Councils, particularly one about the year 1017.
at Orleans, to extirpate the Heresy of the Manicheans, which sprung up apace in
that City; another in the same place An. 1029. for the Dedication o^ St. Agnes
Church, which he had built there. The same year was held one at Limoges,
Gauzlin de Bourges presiding, about the contest started, Whether they must give
St. Martial, the Bishop of Limoges, the Title of Apostle, as the Limosins would
have it, or only that of Confessor, as some others maintained. These frivolous
questions proceeded from the ambition of the Prelates, who to gain precedence
from others, did all of them attribute the Foundations of their Churches to the
Apostles or Disciples of Jesus Christ, and to that end invented Fables, and
perverted all History.

This Council had not power enough to determine this question, it was again
debated with great contention in that of Bourges, An. 1033 in the second of
Limoges, and that of Beauvais, which were held in the year 1034. and withal,
they consulted the Holy Chair herein, where it was decided, that St. Martial
ought to be revered as an Apo^^le.

In this second Council of Limoges, complaint being made concerning Absolutions
granted to such as being Excommunitated, addressed themselves to the Pope; it
was said, That none could receive Penance or Absolution from the Pope, if he
were not sent thither by his Bishop.

The same Glaber writes, that the same year 1034. there were diverse Councils in
the Provinces of France, particularly in Guyenne, for the reformation of
Manners, which all people most earnestly desired, thereby to appease the wrath
of God, who had sorely afflicted France with Famine. Amongst diverse Decrees,
there was one which Ordained upon pain of Excommunication, abstinence from Wine
upon Fridays, and Flesh upon Saturdays, unless Sickness, or some great Festival
happened upon those days. Gerard the Bishop of Cambray rejected this Decree as a
Novelty, contrary to the Orders and Rules of the Church, and which had no
Foundation, but I know not what Revelation.

These Assemblies labored likewise to secure what belonged to the Church from
the Rapine and Thefts of some Lords, and restore the Discipline, for which some
Canons were made in the Second of Limoges, That of Beauvais was held Fifteen
days after that of Bourges. Pope Leo IX. being come into France, Convened one
at Reims, toward Autumn, An. 1049. Victor II. One at Toulouze, An.

King Henry desiring to have his Son Philip Crowned, Assembled the Prelates and
Lords of the Kingdom at Paris, An. 1059, or 60. Amat, Bishop of Oleron, Legate
from Rome in Aquitania Tertia, and Narbounensis held diverse; Two in Gascongne,
One wherein he Excommunicated such as detained any Goods belonging to the
Church; another wherein he Dissolved the Marriage of Centulle, Vicount of
Bearn; and another also at the Borough of Deols in Berry, with Hugh, Legate and
Archbishop of Lions, about the affairs of that Abbey. The same having the Popes
Legation in the lesser Bretagne, Convened one An. 1079. in that Province, to
take some course against the abuses of false pennances, that is to say, their

About the end of the year 1080. there were three, One at Lions, where Hugh, de
Die, the Popes Legate caused the Sentence to be confirmed, whereby Manasses,
Archbishop of Reims had been deposed; One at Avignon, where he consecrated
another Hugh, Bishop of Grenoble, and the Third at Meaux, in which Vrsion de
Soissons was deposed, and Arnold a Monk of St. Medard installed in his place.

The year following the same Hugh, and Richard, Abbot of Marseille, Cardinals,
called one at Poitiers; Amat d'Oleron Legate in Aquitain came likewise thither.
They provisionally ordained a Divorce of William Earl of Poitiers from his
Wife, because of their consanguinity.

That of Toulouze in An. 1090. was Convened by the Legates of Urban II. Some
Rules were there made concerning Causes Ecclesiastical, and the Bishop of that
City purged himself of certain things imposed upon him.

The most famous of all was the Council of Clermont, An. 1095. where the same
Pope with great zeal Preached up the First Croisade; and to obtain the
assistance of the Holy Virgin toward those that should undertake the
Expedition, ordained the Clergy to recite the Office, or Heures Prayers for
certain Hours.
of our Lady, which the Chartreux and Hermits instituted by Peter Damianus, had
already received amongst them. There was one more at Tours the year following,
to prepare them to that expeditition of the Holy Land.

The last year of this Century they had one likewise at Poitiers, whereat John
and Benedict, Cardinal Legates presided; King Philip was here struck with an
Anathema, for having retaken Bertrade; and the Kingdom of France put under an
interdiction. The precedent year, there had been one held at Autun, and the
following, there was also one at Baugency for the same business.

The prohibition of Marriages, even to the seventh Degree, extremely
embarrass'd the Eleventh and Twelfth Century; and as that rigor was excessive,
the Princes broke thorough without much scruple, and afterward became
obstinate against Excommunications, with so much the more Reason and Pretense,
as having the opinions of many great Lawyers, who reckoned these Degrees after
another manner then the Churchmen; so that it served for little else but a
specious color for such as were distasted with their Wives, to procure their
Divorce.

The custom practiced in the Church of Jerusalem, where because of the too
great confluence, the Laity communicated only under the species of Bread,
introduced it self by little and little, into the Western Church; and there is
some appearance that the Canon of the Council of Clermont was favorable to it,
ordaining, That those that communicated should take the two species separately
(this was to avoid that abuse of the Greeks, who soaked or dipped the Bread in
the Wine) Unless in case of necessity, or by PRECAVTION, That is to say, if
there were danger of spilling the Challice, as when the multitude and throng of
Communicants was They permitted then in that case to communicate under one
species.
too great.

There was like a change in the Government of some Churches; the Sees of
Gascongny, which had been vacant above two ages, were filled; the Bishoprics
of Arras and Cambray, both which had been Governed by one Pastor since Saint
Vaast, began each to have their own, after the death of Gerard II. who held
them both; and Manasses was the first Bishop of Cambray, An. 1095.

The same thing was attempted for Noyon and Tournay, which had been joined
since St. Medard: but King Philip opposing, they remained so united till the
year 1146. When Simon the Son of Hugh the Great being Bishop thereof, they were
divided. Anselme a Monk of Soissons, and Abbot of St. Vincent de Laon, was the
first that held the Sea of Tournay.

An. 1179 Gregory VII. by his Bulls gave, or as others say, confirmed to the
Archbishop of Lions the Primacy of the four Lyonnoises only, being perhaps
persuaded, as some others, that Lions was in ancient times the capital City and
first Church of the Galls. The Archbishop of Tours was the first who
submitted, but those of Sens and Rouen opposed it with all their might: and
although this establishment had been maintained in the Council of Clermont, and
since by judgment contradictory, which was given in the Court of Rome, Anno
1099. they had much ado to submit themselves; and it was, as I believe, during
this Contest that he of Rouen began, out of emulation, to take up the Title of
Primate of Normandy.

The Abbot Odillon being excited by diverse Revelations to ease the Souls that
were in Torments after Death, ordained the Monks of his Congregation of Clugny
to make a Commemoration every year the day after All Saints, in their Prayers
and Divine Service; which the Universal Church received soon after.

About the end of his Age three famous Religious Orders had their Birth; That
of the Chartreax Anno 1086. by Bruno Canon o^ Reims, and St. Hugh Bishop of
Grenoble, who were the first that retired into the horrid Solitude of the
Chartreuse in Dauphine, which gave name to this Order. That of St. Anthony at
Vienne, in the same Country, by a Gentleman named Gaston, who devoted his
Person and Estate to the assistance of those that were seized with the
Distemper called St. Anthony's Fire, and came to implore the intercession of
that Saint at Vienne, where they had his Corpse, brought thither from
Constantinople by Jocelin Count d'Albon, in the time of King Lotaire Son of
Louis Transmarine. This Gaston got together some Companions, who at first were
of the Laity, but soon after they became Friars under the Rules of St.
Augustine, and planted their Congregation in several Provinces.

In the year 1098. Robert Abbot of Molesme Instituted the Order of the
Cisteaux, being as it were a younger Sprig of that of St. Bennet, and became so
Potent that for more then Twenty years it governed almost all Europe both in
Spirituals and Temporals.

We must not omit how Robert, Native of the Village d'Arbresel in the Diocese
of Rennes, founded the Order of Fontevralt, whose Monasteries are double, of
Men and Women, living according to the Rule and wearing the Habit of St.
Bennet. This Robert was at first Archdeacon of Rennes, then had a particular
Mission from Pope Urban II. to Preach to the People. Finding he was every where
followed by an infinite multitude of either Sex, he built Cells for them in the
Woods of Fontevrault three Leagues from Saumur on the Confines of Poitou; and
then shutting up the Women apart (this was perhaps after the good Advice of
Gefroy de Vendosme) he made a large Monastery, which produced many others in
each of them the Abbess Commands, and she of Fontevrault is the General of the
whole Order.

About the year 1048. began a famous Dispute between the Benedictine Monks of
St. Denis in France, and those of St. Himmeran of Ratisbonne, these having
given out a report that they had the Body of St. Denis the Areopagite, and that
it was bestowed upon them by King Arnold. They held a famous Assembly at St.
Denis upon it, where the Contenders of either side, having fasted and prayed,
the Shrine of this Saint was opened; and there his Corpse was found entire,
excepting one Arm which Pope Stephanus III. had carried to Rome. Those of
Ratisbonne would not yield for all this, but always maintained their
Supposition.

The great Zeal People then had for Relics, prompted such as hold nothing so
Sacred as Money, to go for some to Jerusalem and the East, to steal Relics
wherever they could come at them, and oftentimes likewise to suppose and bring
Counterfeit ones to make Merchandise: and the great Lords gave dear Prices for
them, not only out of Devotion, but also to enrich their Towns and Castles, by
the affluence of those People that came to behold them.

Lewis the Gross, King XXXIX.
POPES,
PASCAL II. Nine years six Months during this Reign. GELASIUS II. Elected in
January 1118. S. One year. CALISTUS II. Elected in Feb. 1119. S. Ten years, ten
Months. HONORIUS II. Elected in December. 1124. S. Five years, one Month and an
half. INNOCENT II. Elected in Feb. 1130. S. Thirteen years seven Months,
whereof Seven years seven Months during this Reign.
LEWIS the GROSS, King XXXIX* Aged about Twenty seven years.

Guy Earl of Rochefort was the chief Promoter; and, this perhaps, had hindered
him from being Crowned in his Fathers life time.

The fear of this League obliged him to hasten his Coronation, so that five
days after the Death of Philip he was Anointed and Crowned at Orleans by
Giselbert Archbishop of Sens, assisted by all his Suffragants. He would not
have it performed at Reims, because Rodolph who was chosen Archbishop by the
Clergy, and confirmed by the Pope, had not his approbation, for which reason he
disturbed him in the enjoyment, and Rodolph thereupon had put the City under an
Interdiction.

Guy de Rochefort and his Friends, lasted still. The new King besieged
Chevreuse and other little Castles which the other party defended well. Mean
time Guy died, and Hugh surnamed de Crescy, his second Son, succeeded to the
Animosity of his Father.

Hugh Lord Puiset in Beauce, mighty famous for his Robberies, was of the
League. Eudes Ea. I of Corbeil, Grandson to Earl Bouchard See before Fol.
, having refused to join with the Malcontents, Crescy, though his Brother by
the Mother, made him Prisoner, and shut him up in the Castle of la
Ferte-Baudouin. The King set him free soon after, taking the place, partly by
Intelligence.

Henry King of England and Duke of Normandy. The Subject was, that that Prince
did not keep the Promise he made upon his doing Hommage for Normandy, to pull
down the Castle of Gisors, built on this side the Epte, a River which served as
a Boundary between the Territories of the French and the Normans.

The Difference put to Discussion between the Deputies of the one and other
side, and the Parties not able to agree the Fact; King Lewis offered to prove
it by Combat Body to Body. Some idle Jesters said, the two Kings had best fight
upon the Bridge which shook and was ready to fall. Henry having refused this
Challenge, they came to a Battle, the English lost it, and their broken Remains
sled to Meulan.

Robert Earl of Flanders pursuing them too rashly, was wounded to Death. His
Son Baldwin surnamed Of the Hatchet.
a la Hache succeeded him.

Under the favor of this War, the Malcontents drew Philip the Kings Brother
to their Party: The power and greatness of Amaury de Montfort his Uncle by the
Mother, the credit of his Mother Queen Bertrade and of Foulk Earl of Anjou,
afterward King of Jerusalem, his Brother heightened his courage. He had two
strong Holds, Mantes and Montlebery; the King besieged Mantes, and forced it to
surrender.

For that of Montlehery, the better to keep it, they would have given it to
Hugh de Crescy with a Daughter of Amaury's in Marriage: but the King prevented
it, and restored it to Milon Vicount de Troyes who had some right to it.

He after this attaqu'd le Puiset in favor of Thibauld Earl of Chartres, who
was mightily molested by Hugh, Lord of that Castle, and took the place together
with the Lord, whom he kept under a good strong Guard in Castle-Landon.

This War begot another. Thibauld would build a Fort on the limits of the
Country of Puiset: the King obstructing him, he maintained he had promised him
leave to do it: and therefore did him wrong, which he offered to prove by
Combat, proposing his Chamberlain for Champion, in his own stead, he being yet
too young. The King on his part appointed his Grand Seneschal Anseau de
Garlande: but the Champions could find no Court or Judge in the Kingdom, who
would secure them the field of Battle. Perhaps the King might underhand
obstruct it.

The Earl therefore declares War against the King with the Assistance of Henry
King of England, his Mothers Brother, and the Duke of Bretagne; for according
to the Customs of those times the Lords thought they might do it, when they
apprehended there was a denial of Justice. With him joined the Lords, Hugh de
Crescy, Guy de Rochefort returned from the Holy Land, Lancelin de Dammartin,
Payen de Mont-Jeay, Rodolph de Beaugency, Milon Vicount de Troyes, and Eudes
Earl of Corbeil.

To tell it in gross, the King received a great deal of trouble, and made them
suffer so much too, that he brought most of them to their Duty one after
another. Eudes being dead during these Transactions, he Treated with Hugh de
Puiset who was to inherit that Earldom, and making him resign his Right
provided he would give him his liberty, put himself in possession of that
place, of great importance at that juncture.

Hugh having re-fortisied le Puiset, and committing a thousand Insolences upon
the Neighboring Countries, he besieged him in that place: but the Champenois
having the rest that were in League together for him, failed not to come to
relieve it. Two great Battles were fought, one to the Kings disadvantage, the
other to his advantage; after that they talked of an Accommodation, and Hugh
obtained his Pardon.

Milon Vicount de Troyes whom the King had re-setled in Montlehery, had
withdrawn himself from the rest of the Leagued Party, Crescy not being able to
draw him in again surprised him by Treachery; and after he had led him about to
diverse Castles bound and setter'd, not knowing where to secure him so, but the
King would deliver him, nor how to let him go but he would take his Revenge, he
caused him to be Strangled in the night, and thrown out of a Window at the
Castle of Gumet. He would have had it believed that he had broken his Neck,
endeavoring to make his escape; but the Crime was discovered; and the King
with great diligence besieged the Castle of Gumet. The wretched Murderer being
condemned to justify himself by Duel in the Court of Amaulry de Montfort, had
not the courage to expose himself to that hazard; and therefore finding himself
Convicted, he came and cast himself at the Kings Feet, gave up his Lands to
him, and put on the Habit of a Monk as his Penance.

Hugh du Puiset being Revolted the third time, the King again besieged that
Castle, razed it, and then turned that Rebel out of all his Estate. This
unfortunate Man having in a Sally killed Anseau de Garlande Grand Seneschal and
Favorite to the King, and not daring to remain any longer in the Country, went
a while after to the Holy Land, which in those times was the Refuge of Banished
and Condemned People, as it was likewise of true Penitents.

Thomas de Marle Lord of Coucy had been Excommunicated and Degraded of his
Nobility Anno 1114. by the Popes Legate in the Council of Beauvais, for the
Sacrilege and Robberies he committed upon the Churches, and the People
belonging to the Bishoprics of Reims, Laon and Amiens. That Sentence had
inflamed his Rage to do yet worse, even to the setting Fire to the City of
Laon, and the Noble Church of Nostre-Dame, (I believe it was that of Liesse) to
Massacre the Bishop Galderic, and cut off that Finger whereon he wore the
Episcopal Ring. The King who flew about every where with incredible Celerity,
ran that way before this Robber had seized the Tower of Laon, forced and razed
his Castles of Crecy and Nogent, and brought him to Reason.

Adam, that ravaged all the Neighborhood of Amiens. He had gotten possession
of the City Tower which was very strong, and gave a great deal of trouble: but
the King having begirt it for two years, gained it and razed it.

About Ten or Eleven years afterward Thomas draws the King again upon him, by
the like Deportment, so that he went and besieged his Castle of Coucy. It
happened that making their approaches, Rodolph Count de Vermandois met him,
wounded him, and took him Prisoner. He was carried to Laon where he died
miserably of his Wounds.

Henry King of England was the Boute-feu Firebrand
, and Support of all these Revolts: Lewis in Retaliation had stirred up against
him his Nephew William Son of the Deceased Duke Robert, whom he admitted to do
Hommage for the Dukedom of Normandy, and gave him the Castle and City of
Gisors, the first occasion of the Quarrel. This Nephew being thus supported,
put his Uncle to so much trouble that he was fain to make a Peace with Lewis,
promising to leave all the Rebels to his Mercy.

Archimbald, or Archibald.
Archambaud Lord of Bourbon being dead, Hemon his Brother surnamed Vaire-Vache,
under pretense of claiming his Share detained the whole Possession to the
prejudice of the Son, and Treated his Subjects, especially the Clergy very
Tyrannically. The King assigns him to plead his Right before the Parliament.
Upon his refusal to appear, he went in Person to compel him, and besieged his
Castle of Germigny. Hemon dreading his Wroth, came and craved his Pardon: he
received him to Mercy, and took both him and his Nephew along with him, to
bring them to an agreement of all their Disputes.

Emperor Joh. Comnenius, Son of Alexis in Aug. Reigned Twenty four years nine
Months; and Henry V. still.
The Quarrel between the Emperor and Pope concerning the right of Investitures,
being burst out anew with more heat then ever. Pascal II. being Pope, the
Emperor Henry V. had seized both upon him and all his Cardinals, and
constrained him to allow him the privilege of nominating two Bishoprics.
Afterward that Pope being at liberty annulled that Treaty in the Council of
Latran, and Excommunicated the Emperor.

Galasius was elected in the room of Pascal, or Paschalis, but he sought not
the approbation of the Emperor, who being displeased at that neglect or
contempt, caused one Maurice Burdin to be chosen, a Limosin by Birth, and
Archbishop of Braga in Portugal, to whom they gave the name of Gregory.

Gelasius being then driven from Rome took his way into France, to hold a
Council there, as he did in the City of Vienne: but he died the same year in
the Abbey of Clugny.

Guy Archbishop of Vienne, who took the name of Calixtus II. He was the Brother
of Stephen Earl of Burgundy, and Uncle of Adele or Alix Queen of France, who
was the Daughter of his Sister and of Humbert Earl of Morienne: and this
consideration did fortisie the Holy See with great Alliances against the
Emperor.

France having taken his part, he came from Vienne to Toulouze, where he held a
Council. Thence he went to Reims where he called another, in which diverse
Canons were made to take away Simony, the Investiture of Benefices from Laics,
Concubines from Priests, and the selling of Sacraments. The King was present,
the Emperor Henry would not be there, and having refused to part with the right
of Investitures, was Excommunicated.

There was almost the same contest and difference betwixt the Popes and the
Kings of France; These pretending the Election and Provisions of the Popes were
not sufficient without their consent. So that it had begot great troubles in
the Churches of Bourges, Reims, Beauvais and others. But the Popes durst not
shock these Kings so rudely. It was good Policy not to make so many Enemies at
once, to keep France in reserve as a Refuge against the Emperors; and bring
down the Germans first, because they troubled them most.

The Peace between the two Kings Lewis and Henry, was of no long duration. The
Friends of the late Duke Robert and William his Son declared for Lewis, and the
Earls of Anjou and of Flanders served him zealously: as Thibald Earl of
Champagne served Henry who was his Uncle.

Baldwin Earl of Flanders being wounded upon an assault of the little Castle of
Bures in Caux, did so inflame his Wound with his Debauches, that he died of it
at Aumale. Charles surnamed the Good, Son of his Sister and Camut King of
Denmark succeeded him in the Earldom of Flanders, and maintained himself there
courageously, notwithstanding that Clemence of Burgundy Mother of Baldwin, who
was again Married to Godfrey Earl of Louvain, endeavored to make it fall into
the hands of a Bastard of Flanders named William of Ypres who had Married her
Niece.

After a world of Ravages, Firings, Sieges, Surprises, and Plunderings of
Places; after two great Battles fought betwixt the two Kings, one in the Plain
of B^eneville near Noyon on Andelle, where the French had the worst, the other
near Bre^euil where the success was doubtful: Pope Calixtus, as the common
Father, being come expressly Gisors, brought them to agree, by persuadin them
to restore what places they had taken to each other. Thus the Duchy remained
to Henry; who gave it to his eldest Son William, surnamed Adelin Or Athelln.
, in wrong of William his Nephew.

This Peace did not put an end to his grief and troubles; For a few weeks after
he lost his three Sons, and with them above Three hundred Gentlemen, the flower
of Harfleur to go into England, their Seamen who were drunk, split the Ship as
they were getting out of Harbor. And at the same time his Nephew's Friends and
Partisans stirred up new Disturbances in Normandy, and re-engaged the King of
France to uphold them. Which renewed the Desolations of that Province.

In Anno 1119. died Alain surnamed Fergeant Duke of Bretagne Son of Hoel, who
departed this Life Anno 1084. His Son Conan surnamed the Gross or Ermengard
succeeded him.

This Alain, if we believe the Historian of Bretagne, prescribed certain Forms
and Rules for the doing Justice in his Country, where before it was administered
very confusedly. For he Established a Seneschal at Renes, to whom he would have
all Persons to resort, unless those of the County of Nantes who had one
likewise; and began to hold an Assembly or Parliament, which judged of Appeals
from the Seneschals of Rennes and Nantes, for in Matters Criminal there lay no
Appeal. There were no certain and fixed Officers, no more then any certain
times for sitting. They afterward made a President in the absence of the
Chancellor and a Master of Requests.

Hugh III. of that name Duke of Burgundy, to whom succeeded Odon his eldest
Son, who Married Mary the Daughter of Thibauld Earl of Champagne.

Normandy betwixt the French and King Henry, and was ca ried on with various
success. But Henry found nothing more troublesome then his Domestic Officers
and Servants, who had framed a Conspiracy against his Life. He could confide in
no body, he trembled at the approach of all that came near him, he died a
thousand times a day for fear they would Murder him, and in the night shifted
Beds five or six times, and changed his Guards, not thinking he was safe in any
place, believing there were none but Enemies about him.

France.

Matilda, Daughter of the English King, for that reason, as likewise for the
Resentment he conceived because Lewis had protected Pope Calixtus, he raised a
very great Army to destroy and lay that City of Reims flat with the ground,
where Calixtus had held the Council against him. Lewis on his side resolved to
draw all the Forces of his whole Kingdom together, even to the very Priests and
Friars, so that in a short time he had 200000 Men out of the Isle of France,
Champagne and Picardy only. The Emperor having information of these prodigious
Levics, found it safer for him not to come into the Country of Messin, but
retire.

At his return Triumphant Lewis brings back the Martyrs Holy Standard, (called
the Oriflamme) and deposites it again in St. Denis, whence he had taken it,
rendered Solemn Thanks to those Glorious Saints, carried their Shrines upon his
Shoulders, which had been taken down and exposed on the high Altar during all
the time of the War, and made or confirmed several Grants to that Abbey,
especially the Fair of Lendit out of the City, for they had one already within.

Upon this occasion we may observe the difference there was between the Forces
of France and the Kings. For when he made a War for himself, he could have only
the People of those Countries properly in his own possession, and they served
but unwillingly; but when it was the Kingdoms Cause or Concern, all the Forces
of France were in action, every Lord came in Person, and brought all his
Subjects along with him.

Henry being dead, the Princes of Germany brought in Lotaire Or Lotharius.
Duke of Saxony; who likewise retaining the Kingdom of Burgundy as united to
the Empire, Renold Duke of Burgundy refused to acknowledge him. For which he
Emperor Joh. Comn. and Lotaire II. Reigned 13 years.
would have deprived him of his Earldom, and have bestowed it upon Bertold Duke
of Zeringhen; and this begot a bloody War between these two Houses, who fought
till the time of Frederick I. who Married Beatrix the Daughter of Renold.

This year 1126. the King received the Complaints made by the Bishop of
Clermont Robert Earl d'Auvergne, and going

Five or six years after, the repeated Violences of the same Earl engaged him
to make a second Expedition and besiege Montferrand. The Duke of Aquitain came
to relieve his Vaslal; but having from the height of a Mountain taken a view of
the great Strength and Forces the King had with him, he sent to offer him all
Obedience, and brought the Earl as far as Orleans to demand Pardon, and submit
to all that should be enjoined him.

William VIII. Duke of Aquitain Aged Fifty six years. He left his Possessions
to William IX. his Son, who was the last Duke of those Countries. The Father
had Married Emma only Daughter of William Earl of Arles and Toulouze, and
Brother of Raimond de Saint Gilles. By her he pretended to the Earldom of
Toulouze: but Raimond de Saint Gilles said his Brother had sold it to him,
before he went to the Holy Land. It caused a War between William Duke of
Aquitain, and Alphonsus Son of Raimond, and afterward again between Queen Or
Alienor.
Elionor and the same Alphonso.

Charles, most justly surnamed the Good, prudently governing Flanders,
relieving the Poor, protecting the Clergy, and doing Justice to all; a Family
in Bruges abounding in Riches and in numbers of Men, but of Servile Race,
taking offense for that he had commanded them to open their Granaries in the
time of Famine, and withal being instigated by the Bastard William of Ypres,
plotted the Death of this Prince; So that one Morning before daylight whilst
he was at Prayers in St. Donats Church at Bruges, these Villains Murdered him
at the foot of the Altar.

The horror of the Fact, and entreaties of the Nobility of the Country, made
the King take Horse immediately to revenge this Parricide. He besieged the
wretched Authors in the Church, and having taken them, punished the two
principal very severely. For one, after they had put out his Eyes and cut off
his Nose, was bound to a Wheel planted very high, where they pierced him with
an infinite number of Arrows and Darts thorough every part of his Body. The
other was hanged on a Gallows with a Dog tied on his Head whom they beat
continually that he might tear his Head in pieces. All the rest who fled into
the Steeple were cast down from the top to the bottom, and dashed against the
Ground.

This done he adjudged the Earldom to William of Normandy Son to Duke Robert as
being the nearest, or next Heir, without any regard to Baldwin Earl of
Hainault, and to William of Ypre, who pretended a Right. The last obstinately
struggling to carry it by force, the King handled him so roughly, that he took
from him the City of Ypre, and all the Lands he held in Flanders.

Stephen Brother to the Earl of Champagne, who was Earl of Boulogne, by his
Wife, though the King of England his Uncle supported him in this design, not so
much to advance him, as out of hatred to the King of France, and a fear of the
growing greatness of his Nephew William. The King finding that with the
Assistance of the Earl of Hainaults and Godfrey of Namurs Forces, he had
besieged Ypres, led his Army into that Country again, gave them Chase and
secured the Country to William.

However the Covetousness of this Prince vexing his new Subjects with Imposts
he wanted not, and selling of Offices; the principal Cities revolted, and
invited in Thierry Earl of Alsatia whom they owned for their Prince; and in
truth he was of the Blood of their Counts by the Female side. The King
therefore made a third March toward those Quarters, and advanced as sar as
Artois, to serve William: but not finding things disposed so as he expected, he
came his ways back again.

William did not lose Courage for all this; He gave Battle near Alost to
Thierry, and put him to the rout: but pursuing his Victory, he received a Wound
in his Arm, which being ill-dress'd caused his Death; and after that all the
Disturbances raised in Normandy by his Partisans wholly ceased.

In this Kings Reign there were four Brothers, private Gentlemen of the Family
of the Garlands, Anseau William, Stephen, and Giselbert, who had the greatest
share in the favor of the King, in his Council, and Offices. Anseau had that
of Grand Seneschal or Dapifer, which he held in Fief of the Earl of Anjou, who
was the Lord Suzerain: (for in those times Offices and Dignities were granted
in Fief, and even the Contributions or Offerings, and other Revenues proceeding
from the Charity and Devotion of the Faithful.) Stephen who was Archdeacon of
Paris was provided with that of Chancellor, and Giselbert with that of Butler.
Now Anseau being slain at the Siege of Puiset, Anno 1118. the King bestowed his
Office upon William; and he being dead about the year 1120. Stephen desired it
rather for himself, then for his younger Brother Giselbert.

This was a Monster, that never any Reason, nor any Example could justisie, a
Soldering-Priest, making profession to spill Human Blood. And indeed all good
People had him in horror, but his Ambition, and the flattery of Courtiers, who
lay the fairest Colors upon the fowlest Facts, stopped his Ears, that he might
not hear the just Reproaches of his Brethren, nor the checks of his Conscience.
His Pride ascended to that height to shock Queen Alix, who had Spirit enough
not to endure it, and it was perhaps for that reason that he would surrender
his Office to Amaulry de Montfort who was Married to his Niece the Daughter and
Heiress of Anseau.

England, Thibauld Earl of Champagne, and other of his Masters Enemies, plainly
demonstrating thereby, that in his former Services his Livry which they had
fortified; they shot at him, and he was wounded in the Thigh with an Arrow. The
smart of his Wound redoubling his Anger, he forced the Castle and razed it; In
fine, he continued to make so hot a War upon them, that Stephen was constrained
to renounce the Office of Seneschal. But the Party being strong, he thought fit
to leave him that of Chancellor.

Lewis old, he found it fitting the better to secure the Kingdom to his Family,
to have his eldest Son Philip Crowned. Which was performed in the City of Reims
the 14th of April, being Easter Day, in presence of Henry King of England his
Vassal.

LEWIS the Gross, and PHILIP his Son.

HEnry likewise having no Children by his second Wife, caused his Daughter
Matilda Widow of the Emperor Henry to be acknowledged and accepted of as
Heiress to his Crown and Dominions, and Re-Married her to Gefroy surnamed
Plantagenet Son and future Successor to Fulk Earl of Anjou. The Party was good,
and besides he made it his choice thereby to divide this House of Anjou, which
had given him so much trouble, from the King of France's Party, and join it to
his Interest.

King Lewis who had defended the Churches and protected the Clergy, changed his
Language toward the end of his Reign, because they carried themselves too
haughtily toward him, and would not suffer he should meddle with the
nomination of Benefices, nor lay his hand upon their Revenues. He turned some
out of their Sees, and seized their Lands. Stephen Bishop of Paris, and Henry
Archbishop of Sens adventured to Excommunicate him: but the Pope Honorius
annulled their Censures.

Innocent II. Successor to Honorius, was no sooner elected, but makes himself
General of an Army, to compel Roger Duke of Puglia, to resign that Country to
him, which he pretended (I know not wherefore) to belong to the Holy See. In
the beginning he overcomes Roger and blocks him up in the Castle of Galeozzo;
but his Son William hastening thither, disingages his Father, cuts the Popes
Army in pieces, and takes him Prisoner. Now although he set him immediately at
liberty again, nevertheless the report of his Captivity being carried to Rome,
caused them to elect another Pope, who took the name of Anacletus.

Innocent not daring therefore return to Rome, held a Council at Pisa, where he
Excommunicated Anacletus. From thence he came into France, where he called
another at Clermont in Auvergne. His Cause had some difficulties; the King
assembled the Prelates of his Kingdom at Estampes to know which Party they must
take. St. Bernard Abbot de Cleruaux strongly maintained Innocents, after his
example every one embraced it. Nevertheless Girard Bishop of Angoulesmes
advice, to whom Anacletus had restored the Legation of Aquitain that had been
taken from him; had so much influence upon William Duke of Aquitain, that he
declared himself for this Antipope, and persisted a year and an half in that
Schism, vexing those Churchmen extremely who would needs side with Innocent.

October, as the young King Philip was riding thorough some Street of the
Suburbs of Paris, a Hog thrusts himself betwixt his Horses Legs, who flownced
and curveted in such a manner as threw him on the Ground, and then ran over his
Body; wherewith being much bruised, he died the same night.

To Comfort the King for this loss and the great and sensible grief it was to
him, and in some measure repair it, he was Counseled to let his other Son
named as himself Lewis be Crowned. He carried him to Reims, where the Twenty
fifth of the same Month he was Anointed and Crowned by Pope Innocent, who then
held a Council there against the Antipope Peter Laon.

It seems it was at this Coronation that they reduced the Pairs or Peers, who
were hereafter to be assistant at those Ceremonies to the number of Twelve, Six
Ecclesiastics, and Six of the Laity, who were chosen from amongst all the
Lords and Prelates of that Quality. They did not however take away from the
other Pairs their Prerogative of not being Judged by any but their Pairs in
matters Feodal, as well Civil as Criminal.

Of these Twelve Pairries are remaining only the six Ecclesiastics, five of
the Lay ones having been reunited to the Crown by Confiscation, Marriage, or
otherwise, and the sixth, which is that of Flanders, torn from them by the
Emperor Charles V.

LEWIS the Gross the Father. LEWIS the Young his Son called the Pious or
Debonnair, Aged about 20 years.

THierry of Alsatia remaining Master and Possessor of the Earldom of Flanders,
was admitted to render Hommage to the King who received him, because it would
not have been in his power to drive him out, and besides he was his Kinsman.

Geofrey Plantagenet was come to be Earl of Anjou, Fulk his Father being
returned to the Holy Land to take possession of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, to
which he was called by King Baldwin his Father-in-Law. He pressed King Henry
his Wives Father very earnestly to give him Places and Money for advancement of
Succession; which begot such a divorce between them, that Gefroy besieged and
burnt Beaumont, and Henry had carried his Daughter back into England, had she
not been in Childbed.

When she was up again, she fell into Dispute with her Father, and parted very
much discontented from him; which gave him so much jealousy and anguish, that
being taken ill of a slow Fever and a Looseness, he died the First day of
December, having Reigned Thirty five years.

Stephen Earl of Boulogne of whom we have spoken, his Sister Adela's Son, being
in England, seized on that Kingdom, and maintained himself in it as long as he
lived; Not content with that, he likewise disputed for Normandy, and almost
totally dispossessed Matilda and Gefroy her Husband. The unhappy Province
dividing it self in favor of both Parties was ravaged by both, and the King of
France favoring sometimes the one, sometimes the other, kept it still in a
Flame.

William IX. Duke of Guyenne touched with Compunction, resolved to go in
Pilgrimage to St. St. Jago, or St. Jacques. 1136.
James's in Galicia. Before he went he made his Will and Testament, wherein he
ordained that his eldest Daughter named Alianor should Marry the young King
Lewis, and should bring him all his Lordships in Dowry; For his only Son was
dead: but he had yet another Daughter called Alix-Pernelle. In his Journey he
fell sick and died having confirmed his Will.

His Corpse was conveyed to St. James's in Galicia and interred in the Church;
and yet the Legend-makers do not stick to say, That he feigned only that he was
dead, and stealing away so privately that his own Secretary knew not of it, he
went and turned Hermit in a Grotto or Cave near Florence, where he macerated
his Body by terrible Penance, and that it was he who instituted the Order of
the Guillermins Or Willermins.
.

Of the same Fabric is the Tale they make of the Emperor Henry V. saying, That
to do the greater Penance for his Faults, he caused it to be reported that he
was dead, and retired to Angers, where he ended his days serving the Hospital,
but before he died, discovered himself to his Confessor, and was known by
Matilda his Wife, who was again Married to Gefroy Earl of Anjou.

King Lewis was likewise fallen Sick of a Diarrhea, which took him upon his
return from his last Warlike Expedition, in which he had razed the Castle of
St. Bricson on the Loire, the Lord thereof using to rob the Merchants.

William's last Will and Testament being brought to him, he accepted of the
Match, bestowed a gallant Equipage upon his Son, and ordered a Train of many
Lords and above Five hundred Gentlemen, with whom he went to Bourdeaux, where
Elienor Resided, and there Espoused her in presence of the Lords of Gascongny,
Saintonge, and Poitou, then brought her to Poitiers toward the middle of July.

Paris the First day of August, the Thirtieth of his Reign, and the Fifty
eighth of his Age. His Body was carried to the Church of St. Denis.

Before this Prince Violence reigned, Majesty and Justice were trampled under
foot; the People, Merchants, Clergy, Widows and Orphans were exposed to Rapine
and Plunder; The Lords and Gentlemen had all of them Castles from whence they
fallied out to Rob upon the Highways, upon Rivers, and the defenseless
Countries. As soon as he could ride on Horseback he buckled on his Armor,
running wherever the Oppressed cried out to him for help, and sighting
Personally as a private Soldier, so that having brought many of these Tyrannets
to Reason, he began to settle things again in order and security.

He had by his Wife Alix Daughter of Humbert Earl of Savoy Seven Children yet
living, Six Sons and one Daughter. The Sons were Lewis who Reigned, Henry who
was a Monk at Clerveaux then Bishop of Beauvais, Hugh of whom we know nothing
but his Name, Robert who for his share had the Earldom of Dreux, from whom
sprung the Branch of the Earls of that name, Peter who Married Isabella
Daughter and Heiress of Renaud Lord of Courtenay, whence came the Branch of
Courtenay, whereof there are yet some younger Brothers or Cadets. Philip who
was Archdeacon of Paris, and being elected Bishop, had so much modesty that he
yielded it to Peter Lombard called the Master of Sentences; whose Book has
served as a foundation of School Divinity. The Daughter was called Constance,
she was Married first to Eustace Earl of Boulogne by whom she had no Children,
her second Marriage was with Raymond V. Earl of Toulouze.

As for Scholastic Learning, it is fit we observe that toward the end of the
Reign of Lewis the Gross, a Philosopher named John Rousselin, and after him the
famous Peter Abelard his Disciple both Bretons, introduced in the Schools
certain Notions and certain Expressions, with a Sophistical manner of Arguing,
drawn from Philosophy and applied to Theology, which has entangled it with
Questions subtle and dangerous, and which savor more of the Metaphisicks then
of the Holy Scripture. The great Wits of those times, having nothing better to
apply themselves to, there being none that taught the true Sciences, nor good
Literature, fell all into these Ergotries.

Lewis called the Young, King XL.
POPES,
INNOCENT II. S. Six years under this Reign. CELESTINE II. Elected in Sept.
1143. S. Five Months and an half. LUCIUS II. Elected in March 1144. S. Eleven
Months and an half. ANASTASIUS IV. Elected in July 1153. S. One year and five
Months. ADRIAN IV. Elected in Dec. 1154. S. Four years and near eight Months.
ALEX. III. Elected in Sept. 1159. S. almost Twenty two years.
LEWIS called the Young, during his Fathers Life time, and the Pious, King XL.
Aged Nineteen or Twenty years.

Lewis the Young had taken possession of Guyenne, he brought his new Spouse to
Paris, where he labored with his Council to establish the public Safety, and
that Justice, which some petty Tyrants began to disturb afresh, Ranfomming the
Common People and Merchants.

The Cities to defend themselves from these Oppressions had framed Communities,
that is to say, created Popular Magistrates, with power to Assemble the
Citizens and Arm them. For this end they must have the Kings Letters Patents,
which he granted willingly, with many fair Privileges thereby to oppose them
against the overgrown power of the Lords. Some Citizens of Orleans making use
of this power, to the prejudice of the Regal Authority, and running into
Mutinies, he repressed them as he past that way, and brought them to their Duty
again.

Normandy, he was obliged to concern himself in the Dispute between Gefroy
Plantagenet Husband to Matilda, and Stephen Earl of Blois and Boulogne, who
disputed it between them. At first he took part with Gefroy, invested him in
the Duchy and received Hommage from him, and in Recompense Gefroy gave him the
Normand Vexin: but when Stephen who was come over from England, had got some
advantage upon Gefroy, Lewis changing his Party, puts his Son Eustace into
possession, aged not above Fourteen or Fifteen years, and gave his Sister
Constance in Marriage to him.

The Schism in the Roman Church was extinguished by the Death of Anacletus, and
after by the Cession of Victor, whom the Cardinals of Anacletus had elected
Pope.

The Emperor Lotaire II. deceased in a thatched Cabin, the Third of December
Anno 1138. After four Months Interregnum, Conra d III. of that name was elected.

Roger having made himself Master of the Duchy of Puglia by the Death of Duke
Reynold Feudatary to the Holy See bad taken Pope Innocent Prisoner who made War
upon him without Mercy ever since he got into the Papacy: Now having him in his
own hands be obliged him partly by force, partly by his good Usage and Respect
to confirm the Title of King of Sicily to him, which Anacletus the Antipope
had already bestowed upon him. Thus began the Kingdom of Sicily, which besides
the Island likewise comprehended Puglia and Calabria, that is to say, what we
now call the Kingdom of Naples.

Emperor Jo. Comnenus; and Conrad III. elected in May after the death of
Lotaire II. Reigned near Thirteen years.
Thierry of Alsatia goes into the Holy Land with great numbers of the Nobility,
to the relief of Fulk King of Jerusalem his Wives Father, and leaves the
Administration of his Earldom of Flanders in the hands of Sibylla his Wife.

Stephen returned into England is vanquished and taken by Robert Earl of
Gloucester Bastard Brother to Matilda. William of Ipres a brave Soldier, who
had taken Sanctuary in that Country, found a way to make this Robert Prisoner,
the sole Counselor and Support of Matilda: so that to get him again she
releases Stephen: but during the time he was under Restraint, Gefroy recovered
a great part of Normandy.

Alfonso I. Duke of Portugal having obtained a most famous Victory over five
petty Moorish Kings or Generals, was saluted and proclaimed King by his Army.
Five Anno 1078. he puts it wholly under the protection of the Pope, and
increases the Tribute unto two Marks of Gold; upon which Condition Alexander
II. confirmed the Title of King to him.

This Alfonso was the Son of one Henry, who going into Spain about the year
1089. to seek his Fortunes, Married Tresa Daughter of Alfonso VI. King of
Castile, and had for Dowry the Earldom of Portugal, formerly gained by him from
the Moors. The most exact Genealogists assure us that this King Henry was of
the French Blood, being Son, say they, of another Henry, who was Son of Robert
Duke of Burgundy, Son of King Robert.

Frances Territories; unless it were some Contentions amongst the Divines.
Peter Abelard, disputing with too much subtilty concerning the Trinity and
other Mysteries of Faith, had given occasion to accuse him of Novelty and
Error, for which he was condemned by the Popes Legate. Afterward the Archbishop
of Sens gave him leave to explain and make good his Propositions against St.
Bernard. But being come for that purpose to the Council of Sens, he would or
durst not dispute there, but appealed to the Pope. Being on his way toward
Rome to pursue his Appeal, he stopped at the Abbey of Clugny, and there led a holy
Life in the Habit of St. Bennes, which he had long before taken upon him.

These Prosecutions were carried on by the Zeal of St. Bernard Abbot of
Clervaux, a Burgundian Gentleman, who had raised himself to so high an Esteem
for several years before amongst the Clergy, the Nobility and Common People,
that there happened no Cause in Matters Ecclesiastical, no considerable Contest,
no important Enterprise, wherein his Judgment was not required, together with
his Counsel and Mediation. To show us, that the Wise and Virtuous have a more
natural

Bourges had elected for their Archbishop one Peter de la Chastre a Person of
singular Learning and Piety: The King whether he did not like him, or desired
that Benefice for another, refused to give his consent. Peter would therefore
have desisted: but Pope Innocent enjoined him to perform his Duty; which the
King obstructing, it bred a great deal of trouble, and grew to that height,
that the Pope Excommunicated the King, and put the King under an Interdiction.

Thibauld Earl of Champagne, a Lord of great Authority, as well for his Power
as his Virtues, having intermedled somewhat too much about this business,
offended the King; whose anger was yet more inflamed upon another occasion,
which was this.

Rodolph de Vermandois, who was in effect the first Prince of the Blood (but in
those days that Title was not known, those Princes being considered only
according to the Gerbete Cousin German to Thibauld to be dissolved, upon
pretense of Parentage, that he might have Alix-Pernelle the Sister of Queen Or
Eleanor.
Alienor for his Wife. The Pope at the instigation of Or Theobald.
Thibauld Excommunicated Rodolph, and interdicted the Bishops that had
pronounced the Divorce.

Emperor Manuel the Son of John elected in April, Reigned Thirty eight years,
and Conrad III.
Lewis lays all upon Thibauld and enters his Lands in Hostile manner; Thibauld
has recourse to the Pope, who to deliver him from that War which oppressed him,
takes off the Excommunication; but as soon as that was over he thunders it a
second time, and then the King more exasperated then before, turns his Army
into Champagne; They take Vitry by force, putting all to the Sword and setting
Fire on the Church, wherein three hundred poor innocent People were burnt who
were got in to secure themselves.

Bernard had much ado to persuade him that he might obtain Mercy from God upon
his Repentance. In this Condition it was easy to persuade him to restore the
Archbishop of Bourges to his See, and procure a Peace for the Earl.

Fulk King of Jerusalem being dead, Anno 1142. the Government being in the
hands of Melisenda his Widow, his youngest Son Baldwin, and the Christians of
that Country worse then the Turks; their Affairs ran all into confusion: so
that Sangnin Sultan of Assyria tore the Principality of Edessa from them, one
of the four Members of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.

The King had before Vowed a Voyage to the Holy Land, these sad Tidings moved
both him and the other French Princes to carry them Relief. St. Bernard the
Oracle of those times being consulted with herein, refers the business to the
Pope, who sent him orders to Preach the Croisade over all Christendom.

France, he Convened a National Council at Chartres, by whom he was chosen for
Generalissimo of that Expedition: but he refused the Sword and was content to
be the Trumpet only. He proclaimed it every where with so much fervor, so
great assurance of good success, and as they believed, with so many Miracles,
that the Cities and Villages became Deserts, every one listing themselves for
this Service.

Conrad and the King were the first that took the Badge of the Cross with an
infinite number of Nobility. Each of these Princes had a Legate from the Pope in
his Army. Conrad led threescore thousand Horse, he went away first and arrived
at Constantinople about the end of March in the year 1147.

France after him, to receive Pope Engenius who by the Revolted Romans was
forced to quit that Country. He set forwards a fortnight after Whitsontide in
the same year, and having marched thorough Hungary and Thrace passed the
Bosphorus; so that the following Lent in Anno 1148. he got into Syria whilst on
the other hand his Naval Force was put to Sea to meet him there.

Estampes, he left the Regency of the Kingdom to Rodolph Earl of Vermandois,
and Sugar Abbot of St. Denis who was in great Credit at Court, even from the
time of Lewis the Fat. Before his departure he went according to the usual
Custom into St. Denis Church to receive his Staff and Scrip, the Badges of
Pilgrimage, and the Standard de L'Oriflamme on the Altar of the Holy Martyrs.

It is fit we should tell you the Kings of France of the Second Race displayed
at the head of their Armies St. Martins Cope or Mantle: But Capet and his Line,
after their great Devotion to St. Denis made use of the Banner belonging to his
Church, which they called Oriflamme. It had wont to be carried or born by the
Count de Vexin-Francois who was Hommager to the Church of St. Denis: After the
Kings had possession of this County they appointed some Person of great Merit
and Illustrious Birth to carry it.

There is not that wicked or mean Artisice and Treachery but the perfidious
Manuel Emperor of Greece put in practice to destroy both the Emperors and the
Kings Armies. Against the first he had his will, by Poisoning their Meal, he
was to furnish them withal with Lime and Plaster, and appointing such Guides,
as having led them a long way about, which made them waste all their
Provisions, at last delivered them half dead, and languishing into the hands of
the Turks, who cut them all in pieces, so that there was not a tenth part of
them escaped.

Asia, found the Emperor Conrad at Nicea where he comforted him in the best
manner he could. Then he marched along by the Seaside and ran the same hazard
as the other had done, however he saved himself, more by good fortune then
prudence. He won a Battle at his passage over the Meander: but reaped little
benefit: for after that, not standing upon his Guard, he received a notable
check in a narrow Pass through the Mountains. At last he arrived at Antioch,
whereof Raimond Uncle to the Queen his Wife then held the Principality.

Raimond did all he could to oblige him to employ his Forces for the enlarging
the limits of his Principality. The King refusing it because he would continue
his march toward Jerusalem, he resolved to be revenged, and to this purpose
persuades the Queen, to demand to be Divorced from him, as being of
Consanguinity within the third or fourth Degree. This Princess being Fickle and
Amorous, and having but a mean Esteem for her Husband, was easily over-sway'd
by her Uncle: The King could find no other remedy to avoid this scandal, then
by taking her away in the night time out of Antiocb, and sending her before him
to Jerusalem.

Now the Emperor Conrad after he had been at Constantinople to refresh himself
was come to Jerusalem to pay his Devotions. The King and he holding a Council
together with the Lords in that Holy City, resolved to besiege Damascus. This
Enterprise had no better success then all the rest, by reason of the horrid
treachery of the Christians of those Countries. So these two Princes detesting
their wickedness, which outvied the Malice and abominable Vices of the very
Infidels, thought of nothing but their return again.

The Emperor having made Alliance with the Greeks against Roger King of Sicily,
was by them brought back into Italy. Soon after the King being Embarked in his
Roger King of Sicily their capital Enemy, commanded by his Lieutenant, who made
them quit their Prize, having burnt, taken, and sunk a great many of their
Vessels.

Alfonso Earl of Tonlouze Third Son of Raimond de Saint Gilles, had also made
that Voyage about the same time as the King, but went all the way by Sea, and
landed at the Port of Ptolemais. He got not far into the Country before he
died, having been basely Poisoned, though it could not be known who had
committed the Execrable Deed. His Son Raimond was his Successor.

During the time of this Expedition, St. Bernard was wholly employed in
Languedoc in opposing one Henry a certain Monk that had cast off his Frock a
Disciple of Peter de Bruys, who Preached with much applause, but with little
integrity of Life as it was said of him, almost the same Opinions as the
Zuinglians and the Calvinists Preached in these latter Ages.

Lions named Valdo, did likewise about Ten or twelve years after this Preach
the same things in Lyonnois and the neighboring Provinces. They called such as
were Followers of Henry and Peter de Bruys, Henricians, and Petro-Bruysians,
and those Valdo, Poor of Lions or Vandois. There were some Remnants of these
last in the Valleys of Dauphine and Savoy, when Luther began to appear.

Conan the Gross Duke of Bretagne; Eudon Earl of Pontieure, who was Married to
Berthe his Daughter, seized on the Duchy, to the prejudice of Hoel, whom the
Duke Conan had disowned for his Son. From hence broke forth a War between these
two Princes; which two or three years afterward was complicated with another
much longer, which lasted Thirteen or fourteen years at times between the same
Eudon and Conan III. surnamed the Little his own Son, who would needs enjoy the
Dukedom, because it came by his Mothers side. This bad Son having recourse to
Henry King of England for assistance, used his Father roughly, and also
compelled the Nantois who took Hoels part, to forsake him: we do not know what
became of him at last.

The ill success of the Foreign Expedition, which had made so many Widows and
Orphans, ruined so many good Families, and unpeopled so many Countries, bread
Bernard, who seemed to promise them a quite contrary Event. So that when the
Pope would, two years after, have had him Preach up another Croisado, and
obliged him to go Personally to the Holy Land, to draw the greater numbers
after him: the Monks of Cisteaux broke all those Measures, fearing a second
misfortune, which might have proved greater then the first.

France finding the War continued still between King Stephen and Matilda,
joined his Army with Eustace Son of Stephen to besiege the Castle d'Arques.
Gefroy the Husband of Matilda and his Son Henry to whom the year before he had
resigned the Duchy, marched to the Relief. The two Armies being within sight,
the Lords on either side undertook an Accommodation, and managed it so that the
King (who without doubt found himself to be the weaker) agreed to receive
Prince Henry upon Hommage; who by this means was the Twelfth Duke of Normandy.

Toward the end of the year Gefroy ended his days at the Castle du Loir,
leaving three Sons, Henry, Gefray, and William. He ordained that forthwith
Henry should quietly enjoy the Mothers Estates, to wit England and Normandy;
That Gefroy should have the Paternal, that is Anjou, Touraine, and Maine, with
the Castles of Loudun, Chinon, and Mirebeau; and William the Earldom of
Mortaing.

Enstace Earl of Boulogne: his Death was a means to restore Englands Peace, for
as much as Stephen his Father seeing himself Childless, was overpersuaded (it
was not though till two years after) to consent that when he died the Kingdom
should return to Henry.

This Prince, as English Authors tell us, would have resumed the County of
Toulouze in right of his Wife: but Earl Raimond gained so much upon him by
Marrying his Sister Constance the Widow of Earl Eustace newly dead, that he
confirmed to him the possession thereof.

The following year 1152. happened the death of Thibauld Count Palatine of
Champagne, Liberal, the Father of the Council, and Guardian of the Poor and
Orphans; a Man of great Justice, who notwithstanding was almost in continual
War with the Kings. He had four Sons, and five Daughters. The Sons were Henry
Earl of Troyes or Champagne, Thibauld Earl of Blois and Chartres, Stephen Earl
of Sancerre, Henry Archbishop of Sens, afterward of Reims.

This year also died the Emperor Conrad, to whom for want of Male Issue by
Election succeeded Frederick I. surnamed Barbarossa Duke of Alman or S^wabe his
Sister Son.

If I do not mistake, it was under this Frederick that the French began to give
the Germans the name of Allemans, or Almans, because this Prince being Duke of
the Almans, had ever both in his Train, and in all Offices more of those People
then of any other Country. The Italians even in those days called then
Teutonici.
Tudes^hi, as they do still.

Death ravished from the King his two ablest Counselors, which were Sugar Abbot
of St. Denis the Fifteenth of January, and Rodolph Earl of Vermandois, the last
Prince of the second Royal Branch of that name. He having no Children, and his
Sister being Married to Philip Son of Thierry Earl of Flanders, the King who
cherished this Philip, left him the possession of Vermandois; the Subject of a
Quarrel in the Reign following.

Baugency.

Immediately proceeding with integrity, he withdrew his Garrisons from Aquitain
to leave her that Country in freedom, and gave her liberty to go whether she
pleased, keeping the two little Daughters he had by her with him. This Woman
burning with Love and Ambition, Married some Months after Henry Duke of
Normandy and Presumptive King of England, a Prince both young, hot, and
Red-Haired, very able to satisfy her Desires.

As soon as Eleanor.
Alienor was Divorced, Lewis sent to demand Constance-Elizabeth Alfonso King of
Castile, by Hugh Archbishop of Sens, who performed the Ceremony of that
Marriage at Orleans, and there Crowned the new Queen; the Archbishop of Reims
protesting in vain that this Right belonged to him only.

Lewis not able to endure his Vassal should go equal with him, nor Henry who
had so many great Lordships, suffer a Sovereign above him, it was imposible
they should continue good Friends. This last being assigned to appear in
Parliament, refused to come. Lewis to punish him besieged and took the City of
Vernon, but Henry submitting out of some apprehension he yet had of King
Stephen, the Lords reconciled him with Lewis, who restored the place to him.

Stephen the Usurper of the English Crown being dead, Henry gets into
possession of that Kingdom, according to the former agreement betwixt them.

Emperor Manuel and Frederick Barbarossa in Feb. Reigned Thirty six years.
It was not permitted the Kings of France, says Yves de Chartres, to Wed any
Bastards. Now there went a report that Constance was such: wherefore King Lewis
two years after his Marriage would satisfy himself herein, and under the
pretense of going on Pilgrimage to St. Jago in Galicia, took her Fathers Court
in his way, the most magnificent Prince of those times, who received and
entertained him Burgos, and took away that suspicion he had conceived.

Roger I. King of Sicily, one of the most Warlike and Potent Princes of this
Age. He raised the reputation and fame of the Normans to its highest pitch, in
so much as after him, it did ever decline. He had a Son named William, and a
Daughter called Constance, the Son Reigned, but with so much Injustice,
Avarice, and Tyranny, that he deserved the surname of Wicked or Bad. He prided
himself most in filling his Coffers, and draining his Subjects to the very last
Penny. Constance being an old Maid Married the Emperor Henry VI. in the year
1186.

Gefroy Earl of Gien on the Loire knowing himself too weak to oppose William
Earl of Nevers, who made a rude War upon him, allied himself with Stephen de
Champagne Count of Sancerre, and gave his Daughter to him, and for Dowry his
Earldom, to the Exclusion of his Son Herve. The Son thus disinherited by his
Father without any fault committed, implored the Kings Justice, who goes in
Person and besieges Gien, takes it upon Composition and settles him there.

Henry was possessed of England, Gefroy his Brother demands Anjou, Touraine,
and Maine, according to their Fathers Will: but far from giving these, he takes
Loudun, Chinon, and Mirebeau from him; so that he had been left without any
thing, had it not been his good Fortune to be chosen by the Nantois for their
Earl, who having forsaken Hoel, stood in need of a Prince to defend them
against the Assaults of Conan.

Lewis and Henry being ready to break forth, the Lords found out a way to
prevent it yet a while, by the Alliance of Henry's eldest Son of the same name,
with Margaret Daughter of Lewis by his second Wife, though both of them were
Children and had scarce left off their Bibs. The Girl was put into the
Father-in-Law's hands, and Lewis promised to bestow in Dowre with her Gisors
and other places in the Normand Vexin; which in the interim were trusted to the
keeping of the Grand Master of the Knights-Templars, to be delivered up to
Henry when the Marriage should be Consummate.

The Emperor Frederick composed the Difference between Bertold of Zeringhen and
Renauld about the Earldom of Burgundy, in such a manner that he dismembered or
cut off from it the little Country of Nuctland which is beyond Mount-Jou, and
the Cities of Geneva, Lausanna, and Sion to give them to Bertold, leaving the
remainder to Renauld, whose Daughter and Heiress named Beatrix he Married.
After which keeping open Court with great Pomp at Besancon, he received Hommage
of all the Lords and Prelates belonging to the Earldom of Burgundy and the
Kingdom of Arles; who notwithstanding regarded not his Sovereignty, but only to
obtain a better Title to their Usurpations.

Those that were common Friends to both endeavored to procure an Enterview
between him and the King of France, and agreed upon the time and place: but the
King stung with Jealousy at the Grandeur of that young Prince, or having some
suspicion he would design upon his Person, would go attended with a great
number Frederick to withdraw very much dissatisfied.

Gefroy Earl of Nantes being dead without Children, Conan Earl of Renes or of
Little Bretagne, seized on the City of Nantes. King Henry Brother of Gefroy
pretending it belonged to him by Succession, undertakes to recover it by force
of Arms. Conan being hardly pressed, buys his Peace by giving him his Daughter,
and Heiress, (named Constance) for his Third Son, by name Gefroy, the same as
his Uncle deceased.

After the Death of Pope Adrian, the greater number of the Cardinals elected
the Cardinal Rowland a Siennois, who was named Alexander III. But the Roman
People and two Cardinals only gave their Votes for Cardinal Octavian a Roman,
who took the name of Victor. The Right of either side was dubious: for on the
one hand the Decrees of some Popes had referred the Election to the Cardinals
only, and on the other the Roman People pretended they had the better Title,
and had most commonly maintained themselves in possession of it, alleging the
Popes could not deprive them of a Right born with the Church its self, and
practiced in the times of the Apostles.

Lewis relying upon the Judgment of the Gallican Church, whom he Assembled for
this purpose at Estampes, adhered to Alexander. All the West followed his
Example, excepting the Emperor Frederick, who with his Almans, and what
Partisans he had in Italy, fiercely rejected him, because he was Installed
without his Approbation.

King Henry besides the Kingdom of England, held the Duchy of Normandy, (which
had then a part of Bretagne holding of it) the Country of Maine, Anjou,
Touraine, and the Province of Aquitain. His Ambition upheld by this great
increase Toulouze. For this end, having made Alliance with Raimond Prince of
Arragon and Earl of Barcelonna, he raised a great Army of Aquitains and Old
Soldiers experienced.
Routiers, amongst whom was Malcolme King of Scotland; entered upon Languedoc,
took M^issac, Cahors, and some other places.

The jealousy Lewis had of his growing Greatness, moving him at least as much
as Raimond his Brother-in-Law, caused him to march that way, and cast himself
into Toulouze, but he had so few with him, that it was in the power of Henry to
have forced that City, had not the scruple of falling upon his Sovereign
deterred him from it. After which they were reconciled: but Henry would not let
fall his claim and hold of the Earldom of Toulouze, till he bestowed his
Daughter Jane Widow of William II. King of Sicily, on Earl Raimond.

In these days the cursed Crew of Routiers and Cottereaux began to make
themselves known by their Cruelties and Robberies; we cannot tell certainly why
they were so called; but they were a kind of Soldiers and Adventurers coming
from diverse parts, as from Arragon, Navarre, Biscay, and Brabant, who wandered
over all Countries, and would be hired by any one that offered to take them,
provided they might be allowed all manner of License. The Cottereaux were most
of them Foot-Soldiers, the Routiers served on Horseback.

In the mean while Pope Alexander fearing the Emperor, after he had pulled down
the Pride of the Milannois, might come to Rome, did not judge himself a fit
match, and so retired into France, where he remained above three years.

Clermont, in which he did not forbear to thunder against Victor, Frederick and
all their Adherents.

France was the House of Champagne: Lewis to divide them from the English and
gain them to himself, takes Alix for his third Wife who was youngest Sister to
the four Brothers Champenois; for Constance his second Wife was dead, Anno
1159. and for the two Daughters of his first Bed he gave one to Henry the
eldest of the four Brothers Earl of Troyes, and the other to Thibauld the
second Earl of Blois.

Alexander came to Torcy on the River Loire, where the two Kings Lewis and
Henry received him with extreme submission: Both of them alighted, and each
taking one of the Reins of his Horses Bridle, conducted him to the House
prepared for him.

Burgundy bringing his Victor with him, and a second time some endeavored to
procure a Conference betwixt him and the King, to determine that Difference
which made the Schism, by the Judgment of a Council. They agreed upon the place
of Interview to be at Avignon, as being the Frontier of either Prince, whither
the King by Oath obliged himself to bring Alexander. But that Pope refusing to
go there, saying he could be judged by none, it broke off the Conference, and
put the King in very great danger. For the Almans having reproached him that he
kept not his word, plotted to way-lay him, and had taken him Prisoner, had not
the King of England caused his Army to advance to disengage him. Thence
followed a cruel War between the Emperor and Alexander, which horribly
tormented Italy, and out of which the Emperor could not withdraw himself but by
the means of a shameful submission, craving Pardon of the Pope, and suffering
him to set his Foot upon his Throat. Which happened in Anno 1177. in the City of
Venice.

Anno 1163. Alexander assisted at the Council of Tours Assembled by his order;
and there he thunders once more against Victor and Frederick. He caused some
Decrees likewise to be made against the Heretics who had spread themselves
over all the Province of Languedoc.

There were especially of two sorts. The one Ignorant, and withal addicted to
Lewdness and Villainies, their Errors gross and filthy, and these were a kind of
Manicheans. The others more Learned, less irregular, and very far from such
filthiness, held almost the same Doctrines as the Calvinists, and were properly
Henricians and Vaudois. The People who could not distin^uish them, gave them
alike names, that is to say, called them Cathares, Patarins, Boulgres or
Bulgares, Adamites, Cataphrygians, Publicans, Gazarens, Lollards, Turlupins,
and other such like Nicknames.

Odo III. Duke of Burgundy, to whom succeeded Hugh III. his Son.

There being Peace between the two Kings, Lewis employs himself in doing
Justice and suppressing Disorders. The Inhabitants of Vezelay having made a
Corporation, would have shaken off the Abbot who was their Lord, protected by
the Earl of Nevers: He compelled them and their Earl to ask Pardon and break
their Corporation. The same year he went in Person to ^ight the Earl of
Clermont, the Earl du Puy, and the Vicount de Polignac, Lords of Auvergne, who
denied to forbear plundering of Churches, overthrew them and brought them
Prisoners to Paris; where having detained them a long while, he released them
upon giving their Oaths and Hostages.

In like manner he punished the Earl of Chaalons with the loss of his County,
because he had pillaged the Abbey of Clugny and killed above five hundred, some
Monks, some Servants. However the Daughter of this Man re-entred upon her
Patrimony.

Thomas Becket Chancellor of England, elected Archbishop of Canterbury Anno
1163. soon lost the good favor of King Henry, for diverse causes; and
particularly France in the Abbey of Pontigny of the Diocese of Sens, whence he
gave much trouble to his King, and suffered not a little himself during six
years.

Death of Victor the Antipope, in whose stead the Cardinals of his Party
elected Guy de Creme who named himself Paschal, and was confirmed by Frederick.
But Alexander III. recalled by the Romans, left France the year following and
returned to Rome to put an end to that Schism.

Lewis had a Son born, whom he believed Heaven had sent him in return of his
Prayers. For this reason he was surnamed Given by God, or God's Gift.
Dieu-Donne, i. e. Gift of God, or God-Gift, and after for his brave Acts the
Conqueror, which Paul Emilius has rendered by Interpretation Augustus, and is
followed in the same by all the Modern Historians.

Conan the Little, Duke of Bretagne which had been ever full of trouble, ended
Anno 1166. to make room for Gefroy of Normandy his Son-in-Law. This Prince
being yet but Fifteen years of Age, remained together with his Datchy under the
Guardianship of the King his father for some time, after which being at
liberty, he begins a War against him, because he would make him do Hommage for
his Dukedom; a Duty he required by virtue of a Treaty made by Charles the
Simple with Rollo Duke of Normandy.

Thierry of Alsatia Earl of Flanders dies at Gravelin, Philip his Son governs
after him.

d'Auvergne, whom Lewis as Sovereign Lord took into his protection and
safeguard against Henry to whom the Earl was a Vassal holding of him in
Aquitain; the other, the support he gave to Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.
The War thereupon breaks forth, and lasted for two years; however it was
carried on but slowly, and so, as the Respect either of them had for Pope
Alexanders Mediation, brought them to an Agreement for some time.

Saint Germain en Lay, concluded the Peace betwixt them; and there the King of
England's Sons rendered Hommage to Lewis for those Lands their Father assured to
them by advance of Inheritance; Henry of the Duchy of Normandy, the County of
Anjou, and the Office of Grand Seneschal, joined thereto from the time of
Grisegonnelle, as also the Earldoms du Maine and de Touraine; and the second
named Richard, of the Dakedom of Aquitain; as for the third (which was Jeffery,
or Geofrey.
Gefroy) he had Bretagne by his Wife, and owed Hommage to none but the Duke of
Normandy.

The Kings Intercession obtained of Henry, that Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury
might return into England: but he continuing to act with the same heat, four
Gentlemen of Henry's Court out of Complaisance as mean as detestable, having
plotted and contrived to deliver their King of him, entered the Church at
Canterbury where that Holy Prelat was reading Service, (it was on the Christmas
Holy Days) and Murdered him at the foot of the Altar.



Lewis had this advantage, that being the Sovereign Lord, he had a right of
hearing the Complaints of Henry's Vassals, and of making himself his Judge.

Aquitain and Normandy: but this year he Armed his own Children against him.
The eldest with Margaret his Wife, being gone to Visit him, and having staid
some time in that Court, had a fancy put into his Head that since he was
Crowned he ought to Reign, and to demand of his Father the enjoyment either of
the Kingdom of England, or the Dukedom of Normandy.

With this disposition, and fretted for that his Father had taken some young
People from about him who gave him such like ill Counsels, he stole away one
Night from him, and came and cast himself into the Arms of the King.

Immediately all the young Nobility follows him, Queen Alienor favors him, his
two Brothers, Richard Duke of Aquitain and Gefroy of Br^tagne joins with him;
and those whole Provinces follow their Motions. The King of France takes them
into his protection, William King of Scotland declares for them and attaques
England, whither at the same time went some French Forces under the Command of
Robert Earl of Leicester.

Lewis having taken Verneuil au Perch, durst not hold it, and retreated before
him. The Earl of Leicester is defeated in England, and all those that followed
him either slain or taken, then all the Kingdom reduced in less then Thirty
days by old Henry, who went thither presently after this defeat.

Thomas Becket's Tomb, William King of Scotland his most capital Enemy loses a
Battle against his Lieutenants, and was taken Prisoner. The Fleet of young
Henry is dispersed and disabled by Tempest; King Lewis who had carried Philip
Earl of Flanders with him, is rudely repulsed from Rouen; so that finding Henry
who was come over-Seas again to Relieve this City, made ready to give him
Battle, he hearkens to a Truce for some Months.

Henry going into Poitou, and subduing Richard the worst of his three
Rebellious Sons who held that Country, all the others returned to their
Obedience; and he enters upon a Treaty of Peace with Lewis; who gave him Alice.
Alix his Daughter for his Son Richard, and put her into his hands to complete
the Marriage when she should be Age for it.

Languedoc to extirpiate those Heretics, already mentioned by us. But they
thought it more convenient first to send the Popes Legate thither with three or
four other Prelates to endeavor to reclaim them by Exhortations and Anathema's
which converted and brought back a great many, and kept the rest within bounds
for some time.

These Heretics were all called Albigensis, because they propaged most in
those Countries, under the protection of Roger Earl of Alby who much favored
them.

Lewis who was extreme feeble with Age, using the same provident foresight as
his Predecessors, resolved to have his Son Philip Crowned: but it happening that
this young Prince fell ill upon an afright for having lost his way in a Wood as
he was Hunting, this Ceremony was fain to be put off, which was not performed
till the year following.

In the mean time Peoples Devotion increasing toward the Relics of St.
Thomas of Canterbury, from the example of King Henry, who of his Persecutor was
become his Adorer: King Lewis passes into England, prayed on his Tomb, and left
very rich Tokens of his Piety there behind.

Philip was Anointed Crowned at Reims on All Saints day by William Archbishop
of that City and Cardinal, Brother to the Queen his Mother; The Duke of
Normandy and Philip Earl of Flanders, both Pairs or Peers, assisting at that
Ceremony, and holding the Crown upon his Head.

Philip Earl of Flanders faithful and affectionate to King Lewis, procured the
Marriage of his Niece Isabella-Alix Daughter of his Sister and of William Earl
of Hainault, with the new King who was his God-son; and treating her as his own
Daughter because he had no Children, he gives her in favor of this Marriage
the County of Artois, and the County all along the River of Lys.

Lewis died of the Palsy in the City of Paris the 18th or 20th of September,
Aged, as many tell us, near Seventy years, but according to my Computation not
above Sixty three or Sixty four, whereof he had Reigned Forty three. His Corpse
lies in St. Denis.

He was not very happy in his grand Designs, and too effeminate or mild in
Affairs that required vigor; but as Pious, Charitable, Good, Just, Liberal,
and Valiant as any Prince in his Time. He can be taxed but for two faults, the
one against Prudence for Divorcing his Wife; the other against the Laws of
Nature, having supported the Rebellion of Henry's Children against their Father.

He had three Wives, Alienor or Eleanor of Aquitain, Constance of Spain, and
Alix or Alice of Champagne. By the first he had two Daughters Mary and Alix,
who Married the two Brothers, Henry Earl of Champagne and Or Theobald.
Thibauld Earl of Chartres and Blois. By the second came Margaret Married first
with Henry the young King of England, and then with Bela III. King of Hungary.
By the third he had two Daughters, Alix who was betroathed to Richard of
England, afterward Married to William Earl of Pontieu, Agnes Married to
Comnenius the Son of Emanuel of Constantinople; and a Son named Philip who
Reigned.

Philip II. King XLI.
POPES,
ALEX. III. One year under this Reign. LUCIUS III. Elected 29 Aug. 1181. S.
Four years three Months. URBAN III. Elected in December. 1185. S. One year and
near Eleven Months. GREGORY VIII. Elected in October. 1187. S. a little less then
two Months. CLEMENT III. Elected in January 1188. S. Three years three Months.
CELESTINE III. Elected in April 1191. S. Six years nine Months. INNOCENT III.
Elected in January 1198. S. Eighteen years six Months nine days. HONORIUS III.
Elected in July 1216. S. Ten years eight Months, whereof seven during this
Reign.
PHILIP II. Surnamed the Conqueror, or Augustus, King XLI. Aged Fifteen years.

Emperor Alexis II. Son of Manuel in October. Reigned Two years, and Frederic I.
EVen in the Lifetime of Lewis the Young, Affairs began to be governed in the
name of Philip, and by the Administration and Care, as I believe, of Philip
Earl of Flanders, who was his Guardian, his Governor, and his Godfather.

The Methods of Piety and Justice his Father and Grandfather had taken to
Ebles Lord of Charenton in Berry, Imbert Lord of Beaujeu in Lyonnois, and Guy
Earl of Chaalons upon Soane, who oppressed the Ecclesiastics.

At the same time he began to let the Grandees of the Kingdom know how he could
order and reduce them, for he dissolved a powerful League which they had formed
against him, perhaps out of the jealousy they had conceived of the greatness
of the Earl of Flanders, and forced the Earl of Sancerre, who was the first
that declared himself, to fly to his Mercy.

Gods Heart, Gods Foot, etc.
Name and Body or Members of the Son of God, condemning them to pay a certain
Pecuniary Mulct, if they were People of Quality, and to be thrown into the
Water if they were meaner People.

Jews within his Territories and Confiscated their Estates, suffering them to
carry away only the Price of their Household-Goods.

His Piety appeared no less in the expulsion of Comedians, Juglers, and Jesters
or Buffoons, whom he turned out of his Court* as People that serve only to
flatter Vice, encourage Sloth, and fill idle Heads with vain Chimera's which
perverts them, and puts their Hearts into those irregular Motions and Passions
as Wisdom and true Religion commands us so much to suppress and mortify.
Princes were wont to bestow great Presents on those People, and reward them
with their richest Clothes: But he, being persuaded, says Rigord his Historian,
That to give to Histriones.
Players was to Sacrifice to the Devil* chose rather according to the Example
of that Holy Emperor Henry I. to make a Vow he would henceforth employ his
Money toward the maintenance of the Poor.

Emperor Andronic who strangled Alexis, Reigned Three years, and Frederic I.
Anno 1183. he encompassed the Park du bois de Vincennes with a Wall, and
stocked it with Deer which the King of England sent over to him.

The same year Henry, the young King of England, died in the Castle of Martel
in Quercy; Perhaps by the just Punishment of Heaven, for having been so often,
as he was at this time, in Rebellion against his Father.

William the Conqueror had Established this Law in England and in Normandy,
Anno 1080. Raimond Berenger Earl of Barcelonna in his Country Anno 1060. the
Council of Clermont had confirmed it Anno 1096. and that of Rome Anno 1102.

Now as these Truces were but ill observed, and Languedoc and a part of
Guyenne, principally upon occasion of that War betwixt the King of Arragon and
Raimond Earl of Toulouze, were most miserably tormented with Factions,
Murders, and Robberies: a certain Carpenter named Durand, who seemed a plain
simple Fellow, du Puy in Auvergne, commanding him to proclaim Peace, and for
proof of his Mission had given him a certain Image of the Virgin which he
showed. So that upon his Veracity, the Grandees, the Prelates and the Gentry
being Assembled at Puy on the day of the Feast of the Assumption, agreed
amongst themselves by Oath upon the Holy Evangelists, to lay down all
Animosities, and the remembrance of former Injuries, and made a Holy League to
reconcile Men's Spirits, and entertain Love and Peace, which they named the
Peace of God. Those who were of it, wore the Stamp of this Image of our Lady in
Pewter upon their Breasts, and Capuches, or Hoods of white Linen on their
Heads which this Carpenter sold to them. Which had such power over their Minds,
and had made such Impression, that a Man with those Badges was not only in
security, but likewise in Veneration amongst his most mortal Enemies.

Champagne, Brothers to the Queen Mother, had gotten the upper hand at Court,
and put the King out of conceit with the Earl of Flanders, or for some other
cause; the King summoned him to surrender up Vermandois, which Louis the VII.
had given him only, as was pretended, for a certain time. The Earl being very
Potent would maintain the possession, passed the Sum with a great Army and
came as far as Senlis. But upon tidings of the Kings march, he turns back the
way he came and went and besieged Corbie; from whence he decamped again
immediately for the same cause. The King not being able to overtake him,
besieges Boves, the two Armies drew near to engage. Some Mediators put a stop
to their impetuous haste, and made up the Peace; The Earl yielded all
Vermandois, excepting Peronne and Saint Quentin, which they let him enjoy
during Life.

French.

The Patriarch of Jerusalem, and the Prior of the Hospital of St. John's,
deputed on the behalf of the Christians from the Holy Land, brought the Keys of
the Holy City to King Philip, imploring his assistance, and representing to him
the extreme danger it was reduced unto. Whereupon having held a great Assembly
of Prelates and Lords at Paris, he enjoined them to Preach the Cross or
Croisade, and to publish it every where: and in the mean time sent at his own
Expense a considerable Relief of Horse and Foot into that Country.

The Complaints of the Clergy of Burgundy whom Duke Odo had plundered, and the
de Vergy, whose Castle that Prince besieged, engaged the King to march that
way, and besiege Chastill^n on the Seine, the strongest Bulwark belonging to
that Rebel. Who finding his Fort taken by Assault, came humbly to submit to his
Commands, promised to pay 30000 Livers for Reparation to the Clergy, and gave
up four Castles; which however were soon after put into his possession again;
without doubt because they had some need of him.

Berry there were several Bands of Robbers that wasted the Country: they were
named Cottereaux, and were believed to be tainte ^ith the Heresy that spread
in Languedoc, because they aimed chiefly to do m^schief to the Churchmen: the
Berriers getting together with the help of some Men sent them by the King, cut
them in pieces, killing seven thousand upon the place.

Emperor Isaac Angelus, having killed Andronicus, R. Nine years nine Months,
and Frederic.
The vast Multitudes of eople that flocked to Paris, the Kings Train increasing
with his Authority, made the Streets so dirty and (...) that there was no going
in them. The King sent therefore for the Citizens and their Provost, and
enjoined them to remedy it, which they did by Pav ng it with Stone at their own
expenses.

I find about this time, that one Girard de Poissi, who managed the Exchequer
brought in thither of his own proper Moneys or Fund, Eleven thousand Mark in
Silver. It is to

Margaret of France Widow of Henry the Young King of England, is Re-Married to
Bela III. King of Hungary.

Gesroy Duke of Bretagne and Brother of that Henry, being come to wait on the
King who tenderly loved him, died of a Distemper at Champeaux, and was Interred
at Nostre-Dames in Paris. He had one Daughter named Eleanor.
Alienor; and one Son only, aged but three years. The Bretons would give him
the name of Artus, or Arthur.
Artur, in memory of that famous King whom the Romancers make to be the Author
of the Knights of the Henry, and Richard his Son, who made several Attempts to
seize upon his Person that they might get Bretagne into their possession. The
Widow Constance afterward Married Guy Lord de Thouars.

The memory of Gefroy is still very famous amongst the Bretons, because of that
Law he made in his Parliament or Estates General, which was called the Assize
of Count Gefroy; Whereby it was ordained that in the Families of Barons and
Knights, the Estates should not be shared or equally divided as heretofore; but
that the eldest should reap the whole Succession, and bestow such part upon the
younger as himself and the rest of his Kindred should think fit. This has
since been thus proportioned, the Thirds amongst all the younger Children,
during Life to the Males, and Inheritance to the Female. In time, the rest of
the Gentry, not to yield in Quality to the Barons, would needs be comprehended
herein likewise.

Toward the end of the year 1186. a War was raised between King Philip and
Henry of England, for two causes; One was, that Richard refused to do Hommage
to Poitou, grounded perhaps on this, that it held immediately of the Duchy of
Aquitain. The other, Henry deferred to surrender Gisors and other places of the
Vexin, which Louis VII. had given in Dowre to Margaret who had no Henry. Philip
sets upon him toward Berry, took Issoudun, and besieged the Castle-Ruouel. The
King of England and his Son came to its Relief, and sent to bid Battle: but the
two Armies being ranged, Henry's heart failed him, he talks of an Agreement,
promises Satisfaction to Philip, and leaves him Issoudun for his Expenses in
that War.

September, Lewis the first born Son of Philip, came into the World, for which
the City of Paris expressed so much Joy, that they made the whole week but one
Holy Day, keeping all darkness at a distance by the infinite numbers of
Flambeaux every where.

Saladin King of Syria and Egypt, who from a low Birth was raised to that high
power, not without great desert, after his having obtained many Victories over
the Christians, at last tears the Holy City of Jerusalem from them, whereof Guy
de Luzignan was then King (it was taken the Second day of October) and all the
Holy Land, excepting only Tire, Tripoly, Antioch, and some strong Holds.

Thus at the end of Eigthy eight years, Ended the Kingdom of Jerusalem, which
Title after it had ambitiously passed through the Houses of diverse Princes,
does at this day make us part of the Catholic Kings.

At this dreadful news which arrived toward the end of the year 1187. all the
Faithful made a great moan: never was any sorrow so great or so universal. The
Kings Philip and Henry being sensibly touched, Conferred together at Gisors and
Try, and resolved to take up the Cross with great numbers of Princes, Lords
and Prelates to recover those Holy Places out of the hands of the Infidels. In
remembrance whereof they erected a Cross in the Field, where they had resolved
upon this Croisade, and mutually promised to leave all Disputes in the same
posture they then were, till after their return from this holy Expedition.

March following Philip Assembles a Parliament at Paris, where it was resolved
by Advice of the Bishops and Barons, to take the Tenths of all Goods, Movables
and Immovables of all Persons, as well Ecclesiastics as of the Laity,
excepting only the Monks de Cisteaux, the Chartreux de Fontevrault, and the
Spittles belonging to the poor Leprous People. This Impost was called the
Saladine Tith.

Richard for I not what little Injury received of Alfonso Earl of Thoulouze,
renewed the old Pretention of his Mother Alienor to that County, and
endeavored to recover it by the Sword. Philip to disengage his Brother-in-Law
and make a Diversion, falls into Berry, takes all the places the English were
possessed of, drove out old Henry who was got thither with an Army, and pursued
him as far as Normandy.

Richard falls out with his Father, and threw himself into the Arms of Philip.
His discontent proceeded from his Fathers delay in giving him Alix of France
betroathed to him. Some believe the old Man cast other looks upon her, then he
ought toward his Sons Wife, and besides by completing this Marriage, he had
been obliged, according to the Contract; to let his be Crowned, and give him
the Title of King.

The Physician Rigord in the History of Philip relates, That being at
Argenteuil, when the Moon was at Full, and the Night very clear, a little
before daybreak, the Prior of that Monastery, and several of the Monks saw
that Planet descend in a Moment to the Earth, where having rested some time, it
went slowly up again and took its former place*

Philip takes the Field, Conquers all the Country of Main and the City of
Man's, Touraine and the City of Tours, himself having, as by Miracle found a
Foard in the Loire which he discovered to his Army.

At the same time John surnamed Without-Land, the Third Son of Henry, likewise
takes up Arms against his Father, who not knowing which way to turn himself,
leaves Chinon and advances toward King Philip humbly to desire a Peace: Philip
grants it, and reconciles him to Richard, upon condition that one of them
should accompany him to the Holy Land.

Henry as unfortunate in War as he was unfortunate in his Children, overcome
with shame and sorrow, dies three days after he was returned to Chinon. Richard
succeeds him: and then Philip his Brother-in-Law generously restores to him all
he had Conquered of his, excepting Issoudun and the Fiefs he held in Auvergne,
settling Gisors and all the Vexin for his Wives Portion.

The two Princes thus united in a Friendship which appeared to be very cordial,
and so firm that one would imagine nothing could untie or shake it, fitted
themselves for their Expedition to the Holy Land, appointed the Rendezvous for
their Armies at Vezelay, and took Shipping, Richard at Marseilles, and Philip
at Genoa. Both of them landed in Sicily; but Philip not so happily as Richard,
a furious Tempest having forced him to throw overboard part of his Horses and
his Equipage.

Philip with the leave and by the agreement of all his Barons left the
Guardianship of his Son and the Government of the Kingdom to the Queen his
Mother Alix de Champagne, and to William Cardinal-Archbishop of Reims Brother
to that Queen. But fearing they might abuse it, he left an Authentic Order in
Writing Signed by the Great Officers belonging to the Crown, which limited
their Power and prescribed their Lesson in many cases. Amongst others he would
have them bestow vacant Benefices of the Regalia by the Advice of Brother
Bernard, who was a devout Hermit living in the Bois de Vincennes, and that
during his absence, no Tailles should be levied by any Lords upon their Lands,
nor in case he should happen to dye, by the Regents during the Minority of his
Son.

Paris, that they should take care to enclose it with Walls and Towers. There
were no Ditches made, the Enclosure on the left hand of the River upwards has
been often enlarged and altered. The Burghers of other Cities by their example,
were ambitious to Wall their Towns and make Ramparts for defense.

William the Good King of Sicily, Son of William the Wicked or Bad, being dead
without Children Anno 1189. He had an Aunt the Daughter of King Roger, named
Emperor Isaac Angelus, and Henry VI. Son of ^rederic I. Reigned seven years,
about the end of 1190.
Constance, who being almost Thirty years of Age, not a Nun as some have
falsely maintained, who had Married Anno 1186. Henry Son of the Emperor
Frederic. This young Prince was raised to the Empire this year 1190. The
Emperor his Father having drowned himself while he was bathing in the little
River of Serre between Antioch and Nicea, as he was leading great succors into
the Holy Land. Now Constance pretended to succeed his Nephew: but Tancred his
Bastard Brother had excluded him, and seized on the Kingdom.

It was he that received the two Kings at Messina, where they landed in the
Month of March, and sojourned there above six Months. During their stay Richard
had great Contests with Tancred, concerning the Articles of his Sister Jane's
Dowry, Widow of King William. He was often like to come to blows about it, and
had thoughts of forcing the Town of Messina. In sine Philips Mediation procured
him 60000 Ounces of Gold from Tancred, whereof he had a third for his pains.

Tancred, whether it were true, or whether by a Diabolical Artisice, showed
Richard some Letters, which he affirmed to have been written to him by Philip,
wherein that King profer'd him all his Forces to attaque Richard and seize upon
him in the night, if he would at the same time fall upon him likewise. Richard
believed the Letters to be real, and made a great stir about it. Thus the two
Kings were mightily exasperated against each other; Richard for the design
contrived against his Life: Philip for the reproach against his Honor.

Richard makes known to Philip that he cannot Wed his Sister for certain
Reasons, which he will not discover, (perhaps it was because old Henry his
Father had kept her too long and declares to him he had betrothed Berengaria
Daughter of Garcias King of Navar, and that his Mother Alienor was bringing her
thither to Consummate the Marriage.

Philip was not Transported, but wisely suppressing his Anger, left him to his
liberty of quitting his Sister, provided he would surrender those Lands he had
given him for her Dowry, and would at the first convenience go along with him
to the Holy Land. Also he consented to a Truce for those Countries during all
the time they should remain abroad. Richard accepted of the Truce willingly,
but refused to go so soon. These were the chief causes that changed the mutual
affectionof these young Kings into a cruel hatred.

James d'Avesnes with some Flemish Forces and the remainders of the Emperor
Frederic's had already besieged the City of Acre Acre, or Acon, in Latin,
Ptolemais.
(it was otherwhile called Ptolemais) very considerable for its Port and its
strong Walls. King Philip parted from Messina in the beginning of March, and
landed near this place, took his Quarters about the Town, raised his Batteries
and made a wide breach.

Richard putting to Sea, was driven by Tempest on the Coasts of the Island of
Cyprus, It was then in the possession of one Isaac Or Isaacius.
a Grecian Prince, who having abused and pillaged his weather-beaten Soldiers,
whereas he ought to have relieved them, provoked his just wrath, in so much
that he seizes on that Kingdom, and carried away an immense quantity of rich
Plunder together with the said Isaac and his Wife, both of them bound in Chains
of Gold.

Acre till two Months after Philip; and far from promoting the taking thereof,
he retarded it by the continual disagreement between them. The Siege lasted
five Months in all, and caused a great many Princes and brave Men to perish
there.

In the end the City surrendered upon Composition, importing that the Besieged
should obtain of Saladine the release of all the Christian Prisoners in his
hands, and the true Cross which he had taken in Jerusalem, for which their Lims
and Lives were to be Security till performed, at the Mercy and discretion of
the Conquerors. They were therefore, together with all the Spoil, equally
shared betwixt the two Kings; and as Saladine would not perform the first of
these two Conditions, and the second was not in his power, because the true
Cross was not to be found, Richard too passionate and choleric put seven
thousand of them to the edge of the Sword who were his Prisoners, and reserved
not above two or three hundred of the Principal.

In this Siege were slain a great number of People of quality, Rotrou Earl of
Perch, Thibauld Earl of Blois, Great Seneschal and Uncle to the King, and
Alberic Clement Lord du Mez his Marshall, Son of another Clement who had
executed the same Office.

Our Kings of France in those times had but one, and these Clements were the
first who raised or improved this Office by their favor, and extended it to
the Soldiery, whereas before them, it had nothing to do but with such as
belonged to the Kings Stables.

Philip d'Alsace Earl of Flanders, ended his days in the Month of June. He had
no Children, but only one Sister whom he had Married to Baldwin Earl of
Haynault, from whom were sprung two, Elizabeth who was Married to King Philip,
and a Son of the same Name as the Father.

Philip being likewise seized with a long fit of Sickness, which was suspected
to proceed from some ill morsel, because his Nails and Hair fell off, resolved
to return into France: but to remove the jealousy Richard might conceive at
his departure, he made Oath he would not in the least meddle with his Lands,
till forty days after he were certain of his being returned into France.

He likewise left with him near Six hundred Horse, and Ten thousand Foot, with
their m inainance for their three years, under the Conduct of Hugh III. Duke of
Burgundy. After that, having taken leave of his Lords, he puts to Sea; and
being Convoyed by three Galleys only, which the Genoese furnished him withal,
landed in Puglia. When he had somewhat recovered his Health, he sets forward on
his journey with a small number of followers, visited the Sepulcher of the
Apostles at Rome, and France in the Month of December. He passed his Christmas
Holy Days at Fontaine Vulgarly Fontain-bleau.
Eblaud, and from thence came to his dear City of Paris.

After his departure, all the Forces put themselves under the Command of
Richard; who did so many prodigious acts of valor, that they surpass the
belief, as well as the ordinary strength of Mankind. In a word, he had regained
the Holy-City, if Hugh, Duke of Burgundy, had not obstructed his progress.

And indeed he had a design in his Head of forming a great Kingdom in those
Countries and that none might dispute the Title with him of King of Jerusalem,
he purchased it of Guy de Luzignan, giving him in exchange for it, the Kingdom
of Cyprus, which the House of Luzignan held, till the year 1473. as we shall
observe in its due place.

We find frequently enough in History, the apparitions of Meteors in the Air,
representing Battles, Firing, and as it were engaging one another: but this
year a most wonderful thing, some were seen to descend upon Earth near the City
of Nogent in Perch, and fought in the Fields, to the great terror of the
Inhabitants of that Country.

Philip being returned into France, remembered very well, that Philip d'Alsace
Earl of Flanders, had promised upon his Marriage with Queen Elizabeth his
Niece, Daughter of the Earl of Hainault, to give him after his death, the
County of Artois. He considered likewise, that to the Queen belonged some part
of the inheritance of the said Uncle. To this end therefore he goes very well
attended into Flanders, and forced him to give up all the Country of Artois,
with the hommage of the Counties of Boulogne, Ghisnes, and St. Pol, which till
then had ever held of the Earls of Flanders, and extended as far as Neuf-Fosse.
This was the first leaven of that mortal hatred, and obstinate feud and wars,
between the Flemming and French.

Richard and the Duke of Burgundy, the perpetual jealousy that King lay under,
lest Philip in his absence should seize upon his Lands, and withal the
indisposition of his Body, which had been twice or thrice sorely shaken with
Sickness during his stay in that Country, would not let him remain any longer
in the East. Of a sudden he grew so impatient to return, that he sacrificed all
the fruits of his heroic Valor to that longing and pressing desire. For on
condition of a three years truce, he renders to Saladin all those Places he had
Taken or Fortified in this last Expedition.

Hugh Duke of Burgundy died of a fit of Sickness, to whom Odo, or Eudes III.
his Son succeeded.

Richard had left what Forces he had yet remaining, and such places as the
Eastern Christians had still in Syria, with Henry Earl of Champagne his
Nephew,; he embarked the 10th of October with little attendance; and because
he durst not pass thorough the territories of the King of France, his declared
Enemy, he went and landed near Aquilea to pass thorough Germany. But the Lords
of those Countries, especially Leopoldus Duke of Austria, whom he had highly
offended at the Siege of Acre or Acon, caused him to be so narrowly watched,
that notwithstanding he went disguised, and traveled thorough unfrequented
Roads, he fell into the hands of that Duke. He delivered him basely up to the
Emperor Henry, who kept him prisoner Fourteen Months.

When Philip heard of his Captivity, he dispatched Messengers into Germany to
negotiate with the Emperor to detain him as long as possibly he could. Some
Months after he sends to declare a War against him, incites under hand his
Brother John, a Prince without Honor or Faith, to seize upon the Kingdom of
England; and he at the same time falling into Normandy, takes Gisors, and some
places in Vexin. Some reckon this last event in Anno 1292. and by consequence
before the imprisonment of Richard.

However it were, in the month of February Anno 1193. he took the Town of
Evreux which he gave to John, keeping the Castle himself, and went to besiege
Rouen, but lost his labor there.

Elizabeth his Wife had been dead about two years, he demanded in Marriage the
Princess Isemburge Or Ingeburge, some name her Botile.
Sister of Canut King of Denmark, a beautiful and chaste Princess, but one that
had some secret defect. And indeed the first night of the Nuptials, they being
Married at Amiens, in the beginning of the month of August, he took such an
aversion that he would never touch her.

He kept her notwithstanding some time; and afterward growing weary of that
unnecessary Expense, he so contrived it, that the Archbishop of Reims the
Popes Legate with some French Bishops, gave sentence of Divorce or Separation.
He did it upon the testimony of some Lords whom he produced, who asserted they
were of kindred within the Fifth and Sixth Degree. In effect Isemburge and
Philip, had both of them for Great, Great, Great, Great Grandfather Jaroslas,
or Jarisclod, King of Russia. This Jaroslas was Father of Ann, who was the Wife
of King Henry I. and of Jaroslas II. whose Son was Vlodimer, that had a
Daughter named Isemburge, wife of King Canut IV. This Canut begot Voldemar; and
from Voldemar came Canut V. and our Isemburge,

Richad having in fine got himself out of Captivity, in despite of all the
obstacles Philip had made use of, endeavored to revenge himself by force of
Arms: but having drained himself of Moneys to pay his Ransom, his Exploits did
not answer his Resentments.

During two years, the two Kings reciprocally destroyed eithers Countries with
Fire and Sword, demolished a great many places, and then made a Peace about the
end of the year 1195. restoring on either side what they had taken from each
other, unless it were the Vexin which remained to Philip.

Philip was passing by Blois, the English who had laid themselves in Ambuscade,
took all his Baggage, amongst which (as the Grand Seignor does to this day) he
made them carry all the Titles, or Papers belonging to the Crown. Thus they
were all destroyed or lost to the great damage of the Kings affairs, and the
French History. He caused Copies to be collected where ever they could meet
with them, to complete and furnish the Treasury of his Charters or Paper-Office.

In the Month of March of the year 1196. the great overflow or inundations of
Waters, Seine, were so terrible and frightful, that Paris, and the Isle of
France seared a second Deluge. We take notice of it, because it was the
greatest of any whereof the Histories of France make mention.

Philip commences the War against Richard for two reasons: One, because he had
built a Fort in the Island d'Andely on the Seine: And the other, because he had
taken the Castle of Vierzon in Berry, from the Lord to whom it belonged, who
claimed Justice of the King their Sovereign Lord.

Baldwin XI. Earl of Flanders, grudging in his heart that Philip had taken from
him, the half of his Succession left by his Uncle, Leagued himself with Richard
against him; as did likewise Renauld, Son of the Count of Dammartin,
notwithstanding Philip had assisted him in getting the Heiress, and the Earldom
of Boulogue.

Philip de Dreux Bishop of Beauvais, Cousin german to the King. This Bishop
being taken in the War Armed and Fighting, by some of Richard's Soldiers, was
detained a long time in an uneasy prison. The Pope would interpose his
recommendation to Richard for his deliverance, and in his Letters he called
this Bishop His most dear Son. But Richard having sent word back, in what
posture and manner he was taken; and having sent his coat of Maille all Bloody,
with order to him that carried it, to ask him, Behold Holy Father, whether this
be the Coat of your Son? The Pope had nothing to reply, but that the Treatment
they showed to that Prelat was just, since he had quitted the Militia of Jesus
Christ, to follow that of the World. Emp. Alexis Angelus, and Otho IV. Duke of
Saxony, R. 21 years. Philip his competitor


Death of the Emperor Henry. As he had manifested himself as rude an enemy to
the Popes as his Predecessors; and besides, was very odious for his cruelties;
Innocent III. strongly opposed the Election of Philip his Brother,
excommunicating all his Adherents, and stood up for Otho, Son of the Duke of
Saxouy, and a Sister of Richards, who was Crowned at Aix la Chapelle: so that
there was a Schism in that Empire, which had often occasioned one in the
Church. The King of England, the Earl of Flanders, and the Archbishop of Colen
supported Otho, and King Philip on

The same year died in the City of Acre, or Acon, the generous Henry, Earl of
Champagne, Titular King of Jerusalem; his Nephew Thibauld, or Theobald III. of
that Name, Earl of Blois, inherited those Lands he had in France, in prejudice
of his Alix, and was Queen of Cyprus, and by her was born a Daughter of the
same Name, whom we shall find making War against Thibauld IV. The Second was
called Philippa, who was Married to Erard de Brienne.

France: but the greatest was, that Philip grew extremely covetous, and became
too greedy in heaping up Treasure, under pretense of the necessity of raising
and maintaining great numbers of standing Forces; which are truly very proper
to make Conquests, and new Acquisitions; but some times become oppressive to
the Subjects, and destructive to the Laws of the Land.

As he was the First of the Kings of France that kept Men in pay, and would
have Soldiers always ready, to employ them in what he pleased; he set himself
likewise upon making great exactions upon the People, ransoming or taxing the
Churches, and recalling the Jews, who were the introducers of Usury and
Imposts. But, however he was very frugal, and retrencht himself as much as
possible, knowing and considering

Richard as covetous of Money as he was proud, having intelligence that a
Gentleman of Limosin had found a vast Treasure, and carried it into the Castle
of Chalus, he went presently and besieged him: he was wounded there with a
Cross-bow; and his debauchery having envenomed his wound, he died of it the
Eleventh day of April, in this year 1199.

He had introduced the use of Cross-bows in France; before that time, Swordmen
were so generous and brave, that they would not owe their Victory but to their
Lances or Swords: they abhorred those treacherous weapons, wherewith a coward
sheltred or concealed, may kill a valiant Man at a distance, and thorough a
hole.

England and the Duchy of Normandy, belonged of right to young Arthur Duke of
Bretagne, as being the Son of Gefroy his Brother, elder then John, without
Land: but John having seized the Money, gained Richards Forces, and stepped into
the Throne.

In the mean while the Earl of Flanders with his Allies, regained the Cities of
Air, and St. Omers. It happened that the Kings party took his Brother Philip,
Earl of Namur, and Peter, Bishop Elect of Cambray. The King refusing to release
this last, the Popes Legate puts the Kingdom of France under a prohibition; so
that after three Months time he was constrained to set him free.

Ascension, in the year 1200. Peace was concluded at a solemn Conference
between the two Kings, between Vernon and Andeley. It was warranted by Twelve
Barons on either part, who made oath to take up Arms against him that should
break it: and moreover, confirmed by the Marriage of Blanch, Daughter of
Alfonso VIII. King of Castille, and Alienor, Sister to King John, with Lewis
the eldest Son of Philip; to whom King John, in favor of this Alliance,
yielded up all the Lands and Places which the French had taken from him.

Each had a care to secure his Partisans, John was obliged to receive his
Nephew Arthur into favor, who did hommage to him for his Duchy of Bretagne,
but yet remained with Philip. Reciprocally Philip pardoned Renauld Earl of
Boulogne, and some while after Treated the Marriage between his Son of his own
name, whom he had by his Queen Agnes, and that Earls Daughter.

Since the repudiation of 1semburge of Denmark, King Philip had kept her in a
Convent at Soissons; and at three years end, that is, Anno 1196, he had
espoused Mary-Agnes, Daughter of Bertold, Duke of Merania and Dalmatia. Pope
Celestine III. upon the complaints of King Canut, Brother of the Divorced Lady,
had Commissioned in the year 1198. two Legates to take cognizance of this
Affair, who had assembled a grand Council at Paris, of the Bishops and Abbots
of the Kingdom: but all those Prelates, being partly terrified, and some
corrupted, durst give no Sentence, and the Legates were suspected to favor the
Cause of Agnes. Afterward the Holy Father more December in the year 1199. having
called the Prelates of France to Dijon, notwithstanding the Appeal interjected
by Philip to the Pope, pronounced Sentence of prohibiton upon all the Kingdom,
in presence, and by consent of all the Bishops; and nevertheless that he might
have leisure enough to get away into some place of safety, he was willing it
should not be published till twenty days after Christmas.

He had reason to fear Philips anger. In effect, it burst out with furty
against all his Subjects; against the Ecclesiastics first whom he believed to
be all accomplices in this injury: for he drove the Bishops from their Sees,
cast the Canons out of their Churches, put the Curats from their Parishes, and
consiscated and plundered all their Goods; Then against the Laity, vexing and
loading the Citizens with new Imposts, and unheard of Exactions, tiercing, or
thirding the Gentry, that was, taking away Thirds of their Revenues, and of all
their Goods, which had never been heard of in France.

The Interdiction lasted Seven Months: during this time, Philip solicited the
Pope so earnestly, that he gave order to his Legates to take it off, upon
condition he should take Isemburge again, and in six Months, six Weeks, six
Days, and six Hours, he would have the Case of her Divorce decided by his two
Legates, and the Prelates of the

The Assembly was held at Soissons, by Isemburges choice, King Canut sent the
ablest people in his Kingdom to solicit and plead her Cause. After twelve
days juggling and proceeding, Philip had intimation that Judgment would be
against him; he goes one fair Morning to fetch Isemburge from her House, and
setting her up on Horseback behind him, carries her thence, having ordered
notice to be given to the Legate, not to give himself so much trouble about
examining whether the Divorce he had Decreed were good or not, since he owned
it, and would have her for his Wife. Nevertheless he used her but little better
then before, nor did show any more kindness, besides some little Civilities to
her.

Agnes her Rival died, having been five years with the King. She had two
Children by him, One Son and One Daughter, whom Pope Innocent III. Legitimated.

Died likewise Thibauld Earl of Champagne, who had then only One Daughter, a
Minor. The King would have the Garde-noble; or Wardship.
Guardianship-Noble: but soon after the death of Thibauld, his Wife was brought
to bed of a Post-humus Son, who had his Fathers Name, and the Surname of Great.
The Daughter lived not long after the birth of the Posthume.

In those times Usury and Uncleanness Reigned barefaced in France; God raised
up two great and virtuous Men, Fulk, Curate of Neuilly in Brie, and Peter de
Roucy a Priest in the Diocese of Paris, to Preach against these Vices, with so
much power and efficacy, that they reclaimed a great many Souls from those Sins
and Follies.

Now it happened, that a few Months before the death of Thibauld, Fulk, who had
this gift of persuading People to what he approved, by his earnest
Exhortations, knowing there was to be a great meeting of Princes, Lords and
Gentlemen, at a d'Ecris, between Braye and Corbie, went thither, and exhorted
them so earnestly effectually to undertake the voyage to the Holy Land; that
the Earls Baldwin of Flanders, Henry d'Anguien his Brother, Thibauld de
Champagne, Lovis de Blois his Brother, Simon de Montfort, Gautier, or Gualtier
de Brienne, Matthew de Montmorency, Stephen du Perch, and several other Lords
Or put on the badge of the Cross.
Crossed themselves: nevertheless they could not set forwards till two years
afterward.

The reconcilation between the two Kings, seemed perfect and sincere. This year
they conferred at Andeley. Nay, Philip had the the King of England with him
Paris, and Treated him with all the magnificence, and all the demonstrations of
friendship he could desire.

But John had begun to contrive his own unhappiness, by casting off his Wife
Avice or Havoise.
Avoise, Daughter of the Earl of Glocestre, to Marry Isabel, only Daughter of
Aymar Earl of Angoulesme, and Alix of Courtenay, whom he ravished from Hugh le
Brun, Earl de la March, to whom she was affianced,

From that time, the said Lord sought all manner of ways to revenge himself for
that injury. He began to hold private intelligence with Philip, he endeavored
to make an insurrection in Poitou* and Rodolph his Brother, Earl of Eu, began
to commit Hostilities on the skirts of Normandy. John chastised them for their
Rebellion, bydepriving them of their Lands, especially some Castles in the
County d'Eu. They make address to the King of France their Sovereign Lord, and
demand Justice of him.

Upon this difference, the two Kings saw one another near Gaillon; where Philip
who had laid his design; spoke high, and summoned John to appear in his Court,
that right might be done, not only upon the complaint of Hugh, but likewise of
Prince Arthur, who demanded Maine, Anjou, and Touraine.

Flanders and the other Lords that had taken the Cross, departed for the Holy
Land; and as in those times there were but few Vessels upon the coasts of
Provence, they had taken their way by Venice, where they hoped to find a great
many well fitted; and there Thomas I. Earl of Savoy, and Boniface, Marquis of
Montferrat joined them. But the Venetians would not furnish them with Vessels,
till they had first employed their Arms to recover the Cities of Sclavonia,
especially that of Zara for the Republique, from whom they had withdrawn
themselves to own the King of Hungary; which retarded them above a year in
those parts.

Isaac Angelus, Emperor of the East had been deprived of his Empire, his
Sight, and his Liberty, by his own Brother Alexis. And the Son of that Isaac
likewise named Alexis, had made his escape into Germany, flying to Philip of
Snevia Suabe, or Scwaben.
pretended Emperor, who had Married his Sister. This young Prince having
notice, that there was an Army of the Crossed at Venice, went thither to
implore their assistance. Several difficulties hindered them from going into the
Holy Land; besides the Venetians hoped to find it better for their purpose to
make a War in Greece, because the spoil and plunder promised more gain, and
seemed more certain to them; and more-over, all the Latin Christians were
ravished to meet with this occasion and opportunity, to revenge the Treachery
and Outrages the Greeks had practiced since the beginning of the Holy-War. They
concluded therefore to turn their Arms that way, upon condition the young
Alexis would defray the charges of their expedition, allow them great rewards,
and submit the Greek Church to the Obedience of the Pope.

To provide for the expenses of his War, King Philip endeavored to accustom
the Clergy to furnish him with Subsidies; and they excused themselves upon
their Liberties, and for that it was not lawful to employ the Moneys belonging
to the Poor in prosane uses: they only promised to assist him with their
Prayers to God. Now it happened that the Lords de Coucy, de Retel, de Rosey, and
several others went and pillaged, and invaded their Lands; they fly to the King
for protection, who in their own coin, assisted them with Prayers to those
Lords: but as they understood one another, they proceeded to worse dealing.
Then the Prelates redoubled their entreaties, and besought him to employ his
Forces; to which he replied, that Soldiers could not be kept without Money.
They soon understood what he desired, and the mischief pressing hard upon them,
they were constrained to give, and immediately the Lords desisted from
plundering.

John King of England summoned for three several times, to answer the
accusation in King Philips Court, endeavored to gain time, and made all
delays. But Philip finding himself strong in Men, and provided with Money,
having no counter-poise in his Kingdom, because he held in his own hands the
Garde-noble of the potent House of Champagne, and the Earl of Flanders was gone
into the Levant; had resolved to push on against him. He therefore gave some
Forces to Prince Arthur, to pursue his Right, having before betrothed his
Daughter Mary to him. At the same time he entered upon Normandy, where he forced
five or six places; and received the most considerable Lords of the Country
into favor, amongst the rest, Hugh de Gournay, and the Earl of Alenson, who
assured him of their Service and their Towns.

Arthur on his side attaques Poitou, the Earls de la March, and d'Eu, Gefroy
de Luzignan and their friends being joined with him. His Grandmother Alienor
had Mirebeau; he besieges her there: King John hastens thither with so much
diligence, that he surprises him one fair Morning napping in his Bed, takes him
prisoner, and sends him to the Castle of Falaize.

Normandy and Poitou being shaken in this manner, comes a Legate from the Pope,
who ordains the two Kings to assemble the Bishops and Lords of their Countries,
John would readily have consented to this Order, but Philip who was not willing
to give over so fair a Game, obliged his, who were assembled at Mantes, to
throw in an Appeal from the Sentence of the Legate to the Pope himself, which
was to gain time, and continue his progress.

Alienor had still withheld King John from staining his hands in the Blood of
the unfortunate Arthur: Soon after her death, he caused him to be brought to
the Castle of Rouen he kept his Court in that City: and in a very obscure night
he drew him forth thence, and led him to such a place, that afterward he was
never seen.

It being justly presumed that he had murdered him. Constance, the Mother of
that young Prince, demanded Justice of King Philip for that parricide committed
in his Territory, and upon the person of one of his Vassals. He caused John
therefore to be summoned before his Peers or Pairs; where not appearing, nor
sending any to excuse him, he was by judgment of that Court, Condemned, as
attainted and convicted of Parricide and Felony, to lose all the Lands he had
in France, which should be consiscated and forfeit to the Crown, and all such
as should defend them, reputed Guilty de Laesae-Majestatis.

Philip partly by force, partly by intelligence, took from him this year,
almost all the higher, or upper Normandy, whilst this unworthy lazy Man, passed
away the time with his Wife at Caen, as if all had been in a profound Peace.

We may imagine that if he would have taken some care of his Affairs, Philip
could not so easily have conquered so many places, since the single Castle de
Gaillard near Andeley, situate on a Rock, both very high and steep on all
sides, endured a Five months Siege: but both Heaven and Earth had declared
against him, his friends betrayed him, his Subjects became unfaithful, and he
meanly abandonn'd himself.

Philip made himself Master of all the Cities of the Lower Normandy, almost
without a blow. Rouen it self, which was the Capital of the whole Province,
environed with a double Wall, and very affectionate to her natural Dukes; After
a Siege of forty days, being informed by the Deputies sent to King John, that
no Relief or assistance could be had from him, surrendered to the Conqueror,
upon condition he should maintain the Citizens in their Franchises and
Privileges: which he agreed to, and they obtained Letters, or a Charter to
secure it; a procaution as feeble against an absolute Power, as Paper is
against Steel.

Rouen; and so it was that in less then three years he gained all Normandy,
which had had Twelve Dukes of that Nation (whereof John was the last) who had
Governed them about Three hundred and sixteen years.

At the same time William des Roches who had quitted John's party to join with
Philip, secured the Counties of Anjou, du Maine, and de Touraine; and Henry
Clement, Marshall of France, conquered all Poitou for him, excepting only
Niort, Touars, and Rochel.

des Loches, and some places that remained in the hands of the English in
Touraine.

Constantinople with only 28000 Men, forced the Harbor, and afterward the
City, though there were above Threescore thousand Fighting Men there, delivered
Isaac out of prison, and caused the young Alexis his Son to be Crowned. The
Tyrant Alexis and his Brother-in-law Theodorus Luscaris having made their
escape over the Walls, retired to Adrianople.

Constantinople, and Isaac and his Son endeavored to make good what they had
promised them for their reward; the people upon whom they Levied very great
sums of Money, mutined, One certain Alexis Ducas, surnamed Murzufle, Great
Master of the Wardrobe to young Alexis headed the sedition, seized on that
Prince, whilst Isaac was in his last Agony, and strangled him with his own
hands. Then caused himself to be Declared Emperor, and went forth with the
City Militia against the aforesaid Army, but they were presently beaten back,
Constantinople besieged, and within Sixty days taken by Storm, swimming in
Blood, and a great part consumed by Fire.

The Conquerours gave power to Twelve of the chief amongst themselves, to elect
an Emperor, upon condition, That if he were a French man, the Patriarch should
be a Venetian, and so on the contrary. The intrigues of the Venetians, for
whose interest, Boniface Marquis of Montferrat was not so convenient, though he
seemed most worthy of the Empire, managed it so, that the Electors conferred it
upon Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and the Patriarchat upon Thomas Morosini a
Venetian.

Emp. Baldwin and Otho.
After they had settled things in order within the City, they easily conquered
all what the Grecian Empire possessed in Europe, and formed several
Principalities there, of which the Marquis de Montferrat, who married Isaac's
Widow, had Thessaly for his Candia to the Venetians. The Grecian Princes
preserved Asia to themselves, where they established diverse Sovereignties,
Theodorus Lascaris attired himself with Imperial Robes at Nicea in Bithynia,
and had the largest Dominion for extent. Of the Family of the Comnenes, Michael
had part of Epirus, David Heraclea, Ponticus and Paphlagonia; and Alexis his
Brother the City of Trebisond on the Pontus-Euxinus.

There was the Empire of Trebisond formed, which still remained separate and
distinct from that of Constantinople, till the Turks devoured both the one and
the other.

Baldwin enjoyed not the Empire two years; for going to besiege Adrianople,
Joannitz, or Calojan King of Bulgaria, coming to assist the Greeks, drew him
into an Ambuscade, made him prisoner, and having carried him into Bulgaria, cut
off his Arms Henry succeeded him in the Empire. He left two Emp. Henry the
Brother of Baldwin and Otho.
Daughters, the eldest Married Ferrand, Brother of Sancho, King of Portugal,
who by this means was Earl of Flanders, the youngest had Children by Bouchard
d'Auesnes.

John not attributing his misfortunes to his crime, his cowardice or sloth, but
to the ill will of his English Subjects, particularly the Clergy who had not
assisted him in his necessities, sets himself upon molesting and vexing them by
all

Guy de Touars who Governed Bretagne, being Husband to the Duchess Constance,
had turned to Philips party, and assisted him not a little in his late
Conquests. He had likewise brought over to him the Vicount Touars his Brother:
but this year both of them were at variance with him. Guy would Cantonnize
himself in Bretagne, the King begirts him in Nantes, and compels him to return
again to his Service; how-ever, the Vicount remained for the English Interest.

That King having Levied vast sums of Money, and a powerful Army in England,
comes and Lands at Rochel: the Vicount Savary de Maulcon, and some other Lords
join with him; Philip finding himself too weak, contents himself only with
providing and strengthening his Towns in Poitou with all speed, and then
retires to Paris. John marches into Anjou, takes Angers, dismantles it, and
presently after, remembering that it was his Ancestors native City, causes the
Walls to be rebuilt.

At the same time there were some Bretons, who seizing upon the Promontary de
Garplic, built a Fort there, to favor the approaches of the English upon those
Shallows.

These were all the Effects of the great Prowess of King John; for being soon
tired, he caused a Truce to be propounded, by the interposition of the Pope,
who threatened Excommunication in case of refusal. Philip agrees it for two
years, against the opinion of the French Lords, who proffered him all
assistance, and engaged not to forsake him, although the Pope should proceed
against him by censures.

German Empire, Otho and Philip had agreed, An. 1207. in such sort, that Otho
who had the approbation of the Pope, but was the weaker, should leave the
Empire to Philip, whom if he happened to die without Children, Otho should
succeed him, and in the interim Marry his Daughter. Now this year Philip being
Murdered in his Sick Bed by Otho Palatine of Vitelspack, the Empire fell to
his Competitor, who the following year went into Italy, and was Crowned at
Rome. Immediately after he had a quarrel with the Pope, about some Enterprise
upon the Lands belonging to the Church, and those belonging to Frederick King
of Sicily, Feodary to the Holy See, for which he was Excommunicated, An. 1210.

He was elected at the age of 35 years.
Innocent III. was then Pope, a Prelat of great courage, rare merit, and who
being in the strength of his age, was stirring in every place, and concerned
himself in every thing, driving all things to the height, where he met with a
weak or divided party. England made an unhappy Experiment. King John being
absolutely resolved not to accept of Cardinal Stephen Lanctbon for Archbishop
of Canterbury, whom the Moines de Cisleaux.
White Friars had Elected to the Popes liking, but without the Kings consent,
and the Pope standing stiffly up to maintain and justify this Election, the
contest grew so hot, that the Pope sends to three of the English Bishops, a
Sentence of Interdiction to be laid upon the whole Kingdom. John was so
enraged, that he confiscated the Estates of all the Clergy, and resolved
utterly to abolish Episcopacy in the Nation, Commanding them immediately to
depart; and to secure himself against any personal effects of the
Excommunication, wherewith he was threatened, he took Hostages of the Towns and
Nobility.

The Pope not being able to reduce the Heretics of Languedoc, who had almost
gained the whole Province, falls upon Raimond Earl of Toulouze, because he was
their chief promoter and encourager, and had caused one of his Legates to be
massacred; it was Peter de C hastean-neuf, a Monk de Cisteaux, or White Friar,
and the First that exercised the Inquisition. He Excommunicated that Earl,
Absolved his Subjects of their Oath of Fidelity, and gave his Lands to the
first Occupier, but without prejudice to the right of the King of France his
Sovereignty.

Such an apprehension seized on the Earl, that being come to Milon the Popes
Legate at Valence, he entirely submitted; gave up eight places of strength to
the Roman Church to perpetuity, as a pawn of his Conversion; and the following
year to obtain Absolution, suffered himself to be scourged with Rods at the Gate
of St. Giles's Church, where Peter de Chasteau-neuf lay buried, and thence
dragged to that Friars Tomb by the Legate, who put the Stole about his Neck, in
presence of Twenty Archbishops, and an infinite multitude of People. After
which he likewise crossed himself, or put on the badge of the Cross, and joined
the next year with those that took his, and the Towns of his Allies.

Holy Land, had this very year ordered a Croisade to be Preached against the
Albigenses, and many Lords, Prelates, and great numbers of common People, had
listed themselves in this Militia; the King himself set out Fifteen thousand
Men, that were to be maintained at his own charge.

These bore the Cross upon their Breast, to distinguish them from such as went
to the Holy Land, who wore that badge upon their Shoulder.

Amongst these Heretics, there were some whom they called the Poor, others
who named themselves the Humbled. The First made profession of an Evangelical
poverty; the Second undertook to Preach wherever they came. To contradict or
countermine these, two Religious Orders were instituted: viz. The Friars
Mineurs or Cordeliers, and the Preaching Friars, or Jacobins. The First
Foundation of that was laid in Italy by St. Francis d'Assise; of the other in
Languedoc by St. Dominique of the Noble Family of the Guzmans in Spain, and
Cannon of Osma, who came into this Province with a Bishop, to Convert the
Albigenses.

Philip would have been himself in this Expedition, or would have sent his Son;
(for these Sectaries had committed some Hostilities in his Territory,
acknowledging his Enemy King John) had he not feared a Landing of the English
in Bretagne, under favor of the Fort du Garplie. He went not therefore beyond
the Loire, but Commanded the Nobility that held of him to arm themselves, and
take that Fort, as in truth they did this year.

The Bishops of Orleans and Auxerre who had been sent thither with their
Vassals upon this Expedition, being returned again without leave, pretending
not to be obliged to march with the Army but when the King was there in Person:
the King commanded their Regalia to be seized, that is to say, what they held
in Fief of him, not their Tithes, Offerings, and other dues necessarily
belonging to People of that Function. They made complaint, by their Envoys, to
Pope Innocent III. then went themselves. The Pope having examined the matter,
found they had failed and transgressed against the Customs and Laws of the
Kingdom, so that they were fain to pay a Mulct to the King to re-enter upon
their Temporals.

Burgundy, the Earls of Nevers, St. Poll, and de Montfort. The general
Rendezvous was at Lions about the Feast of St. John. Thence going into
Languedoc, they assault the City of Beziers, one of the strongest held by the
Albigenses, forced it, and put all to the edge of the Sword, there being slain
above threescore thousand Persons. Those in Carcassonne terrified with this
horrible Slaughter, surrendered upon Discretion, thinking themselves very happy
to escape naked, or only in their Shirts.

Simon Earl of Montfort, chief Commander in this War, and to govern the
Conquests they had and should make upon those Heretics. That done, the Earl of
Nevers returned with a great Party of those Soldiers, and soon after the Duke
of Burgundy with another; so that Simon was left ill attended, yet he
maintained himself by a more then Heroic Valor, and Conquered Mire-p^ix,
Pamiers and Alby. In so much as in a little time he made himself Master of the
Albigois, the Counties of Beziers and Carcassonne, and above an hundred Castles.

Paris flourished more then ever. They gave it the name of University, because
all sorts of Sciences were universally taught there, although in effect the
desire to Study or Learn, and the affluence of Scholars were much greater then
their Doctrine. A certain Priest of the Diocese of Chartres named Almaric,
beginning to Preach up some Novelties, had been forced to recant, for which he
died of grief. Several after his Death following his Opinions were discovered
and condemned to the Fire, he Excommunicated by the Council of Paris, his Body
taken out of the Grave, and his Ashes cast on the Dunghill. And because they
believed the Books of Aristotle's Metaphysics lately brought them from
Constantinople, had filled their heads with these Heretical Subtilties, the
same Council prohibited either the keeping or reading them upon pain of
Excommunication.

Guy Count d'Auvergne for the violence and injustice he committed against the
Clergy, particularly the Bishop of Clermont whom he had imprisoned, was
deprived of his County by King Philip, and could never be restored again.

Otho grew stubborn in the defense of the Rights of the Empire, and prepared to
go into Italy wholly to subdue it with a mighty Army, which he raised with the
Money his Nephew King John had sent him, upon condition that from thence he
should fall upon France. Thereupon he was thunderstruck with Excommunication
by Pope Innocent; and a little after a great part of the German Princes elected
Roger-Frederick II. Son of the Emperor Henry VI. about the Age of Seventeen
years, and who in his Fathers Lifetime had already been named King of the
Romans. The Pope consented to this Election, and the following year Frederic,
who was then in his Kingdom of Sicily, passed into Germany.

Every other while there came new Bands of Soldiers of the Cross to the Earl de
Montfort, even from Flanders and Germany, but slipped away again within six weeks
or two Months. With these Recruits he carried all the Places and Castles not
only of the Heretics, but likewise of other Lords. The King of Arragon, of
whom diverse in those Countries held their Lands in Under-Fiefs because of some
Lordships he was possessed of, wrote to the Pope about it, and the Earl of
Toulouze went even to Rome to make his Complaints, where his Holiness received
him well enough, and promised him Justice.

Montfort, if he would let him have all he had already taken. He could never
consent to it, and Milon the Popes Legate Excommunicated him in the Council of
Avignon, because he levied certain new Tolls upon his Lands. The King of
Arragon, came in Person to another Council which was held at St. Gilles, to
endeavor to accommodate Affairs, and restore the Earl of Foix and the Vicount
de Bearn who were dispossessed as favorers of Heretics: but he could not
obtain any thing.

Toulouzain, after so many mean and ruinous Submissions, takes the Bit in his
Teeth and puts himself in a posture to defend his own. Then is he openly
Excommunicated, and his Lands exposed to any that could Conquer them. Montfort
besieges Toulouze, but the grand Recruits that were come with him stealing away
in a little time, he is forced to raise the Siege. The Earls of Toulouze and de
Foix with their Confederates pursue him and besiege him in Chasteauneuf; a
thing incredible, above 50000 Men could not overpower or force three hundred,
are beaten and shamefully retreat.

Frederick II. and Lewis eldest Son of King Philip, delegated by his Father,
Confer at Vaucouleurs upon the Frontiers of Champagne, to renew the Alliance
between France and the Empire, and to unite themselves more closely against
Otho and against King John his Uncle, two irreconcilable Enemies.

Renauld Or Reynold.
Earl of Boulogne had served Philip very well since his Reconciliation, and had
likewise been very well recompensed, by a great deal of good Land bestowed upon
him in that Country. Nevertheless the King suspecting him of holding
Correspondence with the King of England, demands his strong Holds of him; and
upon his refusal to deliver them, he attaques them, and pressed upon him so
briskly that he durst not defend them, but went away to the Earl of Bar his
Kinsman, and from thence to Flanders.

John had been Excommunicate the precedent year by the Popes Legate, he scoffed
at those Censures. But he was hugely astonished when he understood, that by a
more terrible Sentence the Pope had absolved his Subjects of their Allegiance,
and exposed his Kingdom as a Prey, and that King Philip made great preparations
to invade it, having already a prodigious number of Vessels ready at the mouth
of the Seine.

The Legate by secret Informations increases his fears, and disturbs him to that
height as he promises to make his Kingdom hold of the Holy See, and to pay a
thousand Mark of Silver as a yearly Tribute, besides the Peter Pence.

When the Legate had wire-drawn all he desired from him, he tries to persuade
Philip to wave his Enterprise: but he was too far engaged in Honor and Expense
to break off so.

Soissons the Morrow after Palm Sunday, had promised to assist him with their
Lives and Fortunes. There was only Ferrand Or Ferdinand.
Son of Sancho I. King of Portugal, Earl of Flanders that refused to accompany
him in this Expedition, unless he would restore the Cities of Air and St. Omer
which he had gotten from him, to have his consent that he might Marry the
Heiress of Flanders who was the eldest Daughter of Baldwin V.

The King thought that his approach might bring him back to his Duty, when he
should see him on those Coasts ready to Embarque. Therefore when he was at
Boulogne, he sent him order to come and meet him at Graveline: The Earl made
them wait for him, but he appeared not: so that the King resolved before he
took Shipping to put him in a Condition not to be able to hurt him.

Ipres, Cassel, and all the Country to Bruges submitted to his Sword, His Naval
Force consisting of One thousand seven hundred Sail, having cast Anchor at Dam.
While the greatest part were in the Road with scarce any Men, comes the English
Fleet Commanded by the Earls of Boulogne and Salisbury, who took and sunk a
great many, and laid Siege to the place. Philip decamping from before Ghent,
routs those they had sent on shore and slew two or three thousand. Nevertheless
they keeping the Seas, and his Vessels not being able to get out without
falling into their hands, he took out all their Furniture, and caused them all
to be burnt, and the City of Dam afterward.

Bruges, squeezed great Sums of Money from those Citizens, as likewise from the
Inhabitants of Ghent and Ipres, sacked and dismantled L'Isle, he left his Son
Lewis, and Gaucher Count de Saint Pol in that Country with a strong Body of
Horse, and Garrisons in the Cities of Doway and Tournay only.

When he was retired out of Flanders, the Earl Ferrand re-entred, and soon
Mastered Tournay and L'Isle which Lewis was beginning to repair, as in revenge
Lewis sacked and burnt Courtray. Philip for the second time goes into Flanders
to secure his Conquests, and presently Ferrand withdraws: but as soon as Philip
was gone, Renauld Earl of Boulogne took the Field with some Forces he brought
out of England; But without doing any Exploit, only after he scowred about the
Country once or twice, and attempted two or three Sieges in vain, he forced
Henry Earl of Louvain and Duke of Brabant, who had Married one of the Kings
Daughters to join with him.

On the other side King John landed at Rochel with a great Army* and having
patched up again with the Earls de la March, d'Eu, d'Angoulesme, de Lezignan,
and other Poitevins who assisted him with their Forces, crosses Poitou, made
himself Master of some places in Anjou, and began to rebuild the Walls of
Angers his Native City.

To hinder this Progress, the King recalled his Son out of Flanders, and sets
him in opposition. This Prince takes his head Quarters at Chinon, and was
seconded with the Forces of Bretagne by Peter de Dreux, who this year had
Married the Heiress of that Duchy. It was Alix or Alice Daughter of the
Duchess Constance and Guy de Touars.

English wrought diligently about the fortifying Angers, and enclosed that part
toward the River of Maine with a Wall. His Soldiers made excursions to the
very Suburbs of Nantes on the other side of the Loire, surpised Robert the
eldest Son of the Earl of Dreux in an Ambuscade, who was got over the Bridge to
attaque them, cut his Men in pieces, and made him Prisoner.

Peter King of Arragon having gotten into his League and under his Protection,
the Earls of Toulouze, de Foix and de Comenges, the Vicount de Beziers and
others whose Lands Montfort had usurped, s^^t his Heralds to de^ie him.
Montfort had left a strong Garrison in Muret to make waste in the Neighborhood
of Toulouze. This King lays Siege to it in the Month of September. His Army
consisted of an Hundred thousand Men almost: Montfort who was at Castlenaudry,
having hardly drawn together a thousand or twelve hundred, got into the place.
From whence making a furious Sally upon the King, who slighting so small a
number, set down to eat at the beginning of the Fight, cut all his Army off,
threw him on the ground, where his Throat was cut by a private Soldier, took
his Royal Standard which was carried in Triumph to Rome, and covered the Field
with dead Bodies, without the loss of

The weighty blow of this Club made the Earl of Toulouze and the Inhabitants of
that great City fall down at the Legates Feet; they offered to submit to
whatever Conditions he would impose: but they could not get off with words, it
was resolved they should be plumed of all.

France was shrewdly attaqu'd by King John, and on the Flanders side by the
Emperor Otho, and the Counts Ferrand of Flanders, and Renauld de Boulogne: but
both in the one and the other part his Arms remained Victorious. Prince Lewis
having drawn his Forces together at Chinon, marched resolutely against King
John who besieged the Castle de la Roche au Moine upon the Loire between Angers
and Nantes. Being within a days Journey of that place, that King was frighted,
repasses the River in such great haste that he left all his Warlike Engines
behind, and part of his Men who were killed or drowned upon the Retreat. Never
after durst he show his head in any place where he knew Lewis could come, and
abandoned all Anjou to him, and his new Fortifications of Angers which were
presently demolished.

Lewis's Victory, King Philip his Father gained a much more signal one nigh the
Village of Bouvines which is between L'Isle and Tournay, against the Emperor
Otho and his Confederates. They had an Army of 150000 fighting Men, his was
weaker by one half, but strengthened with the flower of the Nobility, and many
Princes of the Blood, viz. Eudes Duke of Burgundy, Robert de Courtenay, Robert
Earl of Dreux, and his Brother Philip Bishop of Beauvais. The Battle was fought
the 25th of July, and lasted from Noon till Night. Guerin Knight of the Order
of St. John of Jerusalem, and a little before elected Bishop of Senlis, to whom
the King left all things, drew up the Army in Battalia, Matthew Baron of
Montmorency, William des Bars Seneschal to the King, Henry Earl of Bar,
Bartholomy de Roye, Gaucher Count de Saint Pol, and Adam Vicount de Melun, had
the greatest shares in the Danger and in the Victory. Guerin fought not with
his hands, because of his Quality of Bishop, nor did Philip Bishop of Beauvais
smite with the Sword, but a Wooden Club, believing that to beat out Peoples
Brains was not shedding of Blood.

The King ran a great hazard in his own Person, having been beaten down, trod
under the Horses Feet and wounded in the Throat: but in fine his Enemies were
worsted every where, Otho put to flight, his great Standard, being a Dragon
with an Imperial Eagle over it, and the Chariot which bore it broken all to
pieces, and five Earls, amongst whom were Ferrand and Renauld, with two and
twenty Lords that carried Banners, taken Prisoners.

The Fortune Tellers had assured the old Countess of Flanders, Ferrands Aunt,
that there should happen a great Battle, that the King should be overthrown,
Horses tread over him, and that Ferrand should enter in Triumph into Paris. The
first part of this Prediction held good without Equivocation, the second was
likewise true, but after another manner then they imagined: for indeed, they
carried him into Paris in Triumph, but in quality of a Captive, laden with
Chains, and linked fast in a Chariot drawn by Ferrand Horses; that is according
to the Language then used, of an Iron-grey-Colour.

The Parisians made the King a most pompous Entrance, and Celebrated his
Victory with Solemn Joy for eight days together. Ferrand was shut up in the
Tower of the Louvre without the City Walls, and Renauld in the new Tower of
Peronne with Shackles on his Legs, and a Chain that fastened him to a great
piece of Timber. Philip had made a Vow in the midst of his Joy for this most
happy success to build an Abbey in honor of God and of the Blesled Virgin, his
Son Lewis performed it by founding that of Nostre-Dame de la Victoire, near
Sanlis.

The Lords of Poitou that had favored the English, finding that Lewis was
Victorious, sent to tender him all manner of Submission. He would not trust to
their words, but went into the Country with his Army to bring things to a full
period. The Vicount de Touars, the most considerable of them all, obtained the
Kings Pardon without much ado by the intercession of Peter Duke of Bretagne:
the rest were utterly lost, and King John who was then in Partenay, could not
have avoided being taken, if he had not bethought himself of interposing the
Popes Legate to demand a Truce. That power was so formidable, that the King
durst not deny him, and agreed to it for five years.

Louis or Lewis, whether out of devotion, or jealousy of the Power of Count de
Montfort, took up the Cross on him against the Albigeois, and made a Voyage to
Languedoc; Montfort came to Vienne to meet him, and the Legate to Valence.
Montfort who accompanied him received Bulls from the Pope, Montpellier held
some Months before, gave him the Tolosian Territories in guard or keeping, and
all those other that had been Conquered by the Adventurers of the Cross, upon
Condition to receive Investiture of the King, and render him Feodal Duty. So
that we may say,

From thence Lewis was at Montpellier, then at Beziers, where he gave order the
Walls of Narbonne and Tolose should be demolished. Mean while the Lateran
Council, notwithstanding the pitiful Remonstrances of the Count de Tolose, who
was there in Person with his Son, adjudged the propriety of his Lands to
Montfort, reserving only those he had in Provence for his Son, and four hundred
Marks of Silver yearly for his Subsistence; to be understood if they showed
themselves obedient to the Holy See. From that time Montfort took on him the
Quality of Earl of Toulouze, and came to receive Investiture from the King in
the City of Melun.

While Lewis was yet in those Countries, the English Lords sent to offer him
the Crown of England and demand Assistance against the Tyrannies of John who
was Excommunicated by the Pope, and who had robbed them of their Liberties and
Privileges, for which cause they had taken up Arms to Dethrone him. They had
the City of London and some other places for them: nevertheless their design
did not go on well, and their despair forced them to seek their safety by some
Foreign Assistance.

English, and sent a Legate into France to divert Lewis from that Enterprise,
and desired King Philip to put a stop to it.

Philip makes protestation of all Respect and Obedience to the Holy See, but
said he could not impose upon his Son that necessity not to pursue the Rights
of his Wife, who was Niece to King John. So that Lewis accepted the Crown of
England, and landed with a great Equipage in the Isle of Thanet, thence went to
London, where he was solemnly Crowned.

John being excluded from his Capital City retired to Winchester, and by his
flight gave him full leisure to receive the Hommage of all the Nobility and
secure all about London. The Legate not being able to put a stop to Lewis by any
Arguments or Persuasions, Excommunicated him and all his Adherents, but he
appealed to the Pope, (they had not yet found out the way of appealing to the
Councils) and notwithstanding goes on and reduces Sussex, and all the Southern
parts, excepting Windsor and Dover.

The Ambassadors pleaded his Cause earnestly at Rome, they showed that John was
justly degraded for his Tyrannies, and because he had been condemned to death
for the Murder of his Nephew Arthur by the Pairs of France, and made it out
that the Kingdom, since he was Excluded, belonged to his Niece the Wife of
Prince Lewis.

Whilst they disputed their Masters Rights, he successfully employs his Sword
in Conquering Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk. Having reduced them, he returns to
besiege Dover, his Father reproaching him for having imprudently left that
place behind him.

The Pope offended at his Progress confirmed the Sentence of Excommunication
against him, and although Philip protested he gave him neither Assistance nor
Advice, prosering even, if the Church did so ordain, to Confiscate his Lands:
nevertheless he commanded the Bishop of Sens to denounce him Excommunicate
likewise, and to put France under an Interdiction; but the Prelates assembled at
Melun, declared they would not submit to that Sentence, till they were more
fully informed of the Popes Intentions.

Mean while King John who wandered about the Country hating all his Subjects,
happened to dye by Poison, which as it was believed, a Monk had given him. He
left three Sons very young, Henry, Richard, and Edmond.

The hatred of the Englishmen toward him expired with his Life, and their
Affection for his Son Henry revived, being their Natural Lord, and one whose
Innocence and Tender Age called for their Compassion; so that the young Kings
Affairs began to prosper, and Lewis's to decline. He perceiving the English
forsook him one after another, and his own People afrighted with the thundering
Excommunications from Rome, inclined to make a Truce with Henry for some Months.

France to Consult with the King his Father, but he fearing to exasperate the
Pope, refuses to see his Son, and would not Confer with him but by the
interposition of others. Lewis upon his return into England, found his Enemies
Party were the stronger; his Army was afterward defeated near Lincoln, and he
besieged in London after that rout.

Wherefore to free himself from farther danger, and retire with Bag and
Baggage, he was forced to Treat with Henry, promising amongst other Conditions,
to surrender all the places he held in England, to submit his Pretensions to
the Judgment of the Church, to use his utmost endeavor to oblige his Father to
restore all what he had taken from King John in France, and if he could not
prevail, to do it then himself when he came to the Crown. Which was to promise
more then he would or could perform.

Henry Emperor of Constantinople, and Brother to Baldwin, who had been so
likewise, died Anno 1216. having Reigned Eleven years. Peter de Courtenay Earl
of Auxerre, who Married his Sister Yolant, went this year from France to take
that Crown. Passing thorough Italy he was Crowned at Rome with his Wife, took
Shipping eight days after and arrived in Greece: but as he was crossing
Thessalie having Pass-ports from Theodorus Comnenus, he was made Prisoner by
that perfidious Man, who slew most part of those Lords that went with them, and
having detained him three or four years caused him cruelly to be Murdered.
Yolant, a Heroic Woman, governed the Empire two years after his death, in
which time the Lords sent to profer the Empire to Philip Earl of Nevers his
eldest Son, but he refused to accept it; and yielded up willingly that perilous
Honor to Robert his younger Brother.

Henry was fully settled in his Throne, his Council sent Ambassadors into France
to challenge Lewis of his Promise, and re-demand the Duchy of Normandy, and
other Countries taken from his Father. They were answered with the Confiscation
that had been ordered by the Judgment of his Pairs.

Montfort in vain besieged the City of Beaucaire, Count Raimond brought some
Forces from Arragon, whither he was retired, with which he regained several of
his places, and especially Toulouze, which he presently fortified with
Intrenchments and Pallisado's. Montfort went and laid Siege to it, but after he
had held it besieged seven whole Months, he was slain in a Sally. He had three
Sons, Amaulry who succeeded him in the Rights of his Conquests, Guy who was
Married to Petronella, Heiress to the Count of Bigorre, as being Daughter of
Estiennete, the Daughter and Heiress of Count Centulle, and Simon Earl of
Leicester in England by the Grandmother.

Amaulry was not strong enough to maintain his Conquests; the King assisted him
first with Six hundred Men, then with Ten thousand Foot, who not being yet
enough to compass that business, Prince Lewis upon the Popes earnest Request
undertakes that Expedition the second time. He happily succeeded in the taking
of Marmanda on the Garonne, and some other places in Angenois, but not in the
Siege of Toulouze, because his Father recalled him, fearing the Troubles that
were begun in Bretagne might be created by the English, on purpose to set
France in a greater flame.

Solomon and Conan, whom Duke Peter had unjustly thrown out of their Estates,
being retired into the Forests, ravaged and wasted his Country with some
Bandits they had got together, and at the same time the Barons revolted against
him, because he would arrogate to himself the Guardianship or Garde-noble.
Wardnoble of Gentlemen's Orphan-Sons till they had attained to Twenty years of
Age. They had Combined in a League, and with Amaulry Lord de Craon, very potent
in Friends and Alliance, who had declared War against him about a certain
Castle that Duke had usurped from him. This Quarrel complicated with several
Interests lasted above two years, and ended not but by a great Battle fought
near Chastean-briand, where the Duke, much the weaker in numbers of Men gained
the Amaulry Prisoner. The Barons were not brought so low by this bloody loss,
but they continued the War for some Months; but that was only to obtain the
better Conditions.

English being prolonged, France enjoyed a Calm for three or four years, during
which Philip employed himself about the Walling, Enlarging, Fortifying,
building Bridges, making Causeys and the like conveniences in all the Cities
that were of his Demeasns, or belonging to the Crown, which Expenses though for
the public good, was out of his own proper Fund, not raised or exacted upon
his Subjects, but paying very justly for all those Grounds and Houses belonging
to private Persons which were necessary for him to have toward carrying on
these Public Works.

Philip, which continuing and wasting him near a years time, did in the end
bring him to his Grave.

Amaulry de Montfort had profer'd to give up all his Conquests in Languedoc to
Prince Lewis: But Philip knowing the Constitution of his Son was too delicate
and tender, could not give consent he should undertake so toylsom a War:
notwithstanding the Pope and the Clergy pressed mightily to have them make an
utter destruction of those Heretics, who without any respect still aimed at
their Persons Paris called a grand Assembly of Prelates and Lords to complete
this business. John King of Jerusalem and the Popes Legate were Assistants,
Philip sick as he was would needs be amongst them, and went expressly from
Chasteau de Pacy on the Epte, where he had diverted himself. When he arrived at
Mantes, the Distemper so increased upon him that he was forced to stop there,
and some days after gave up the Ghost the Twenty fifth of July in the year 1223.

The length of his days was Fifty eight years, that of his Reign from his
Coronation Forty four. His Monument is at St. Denis, whither his Corpse was
conveyed with great Ceremony. By his Will made the year before, he ordained and
appointed that 50000 A Liver is twenty pence.
Livers, or 25000 Mark of Silver at 40 Solz to the Mark, should be put into the
hands of his Executors, to be restored and paid to those from whom it should
appear he had detained, or unjustly taken any thing. He bequeathed likewise Ten
thousand Franks Twenty pence, the same as a Liver.
to Queen Isemburge..... to Lewis his Son, to employ for the defense of the
Kingdom and no other use; 53500 Mark of Silver to the King of Jerusalem, 2000
to the Templars, and as much to the Hospitallers (of St. John's) toward the
Recovery of the Holy Land, 21000 Livers Parisis to the Poor, to Orphans, to
Widows, and Leprous People, and 20000 to Amaulry de Montfort to redeem his Wife
and Children out of the hands of the Albigois.

He Married three Wives, Isabella Daughter of Baldwin IV. Ears of Haynault,
Isemburge Daughter of Waldemar the Great King of Denmark, and Agnes Daughter of
Bertold Duke of Merania. Of the first he had no Child remaining but Prince
Lewis who Reigned; by the second he had none, but he had two by Agnes, these
were Philip who had the Earldom of Boulogne, by Marrying the Heiress, which was
Mahauld or Matilda, Daughter of the unfortunate Regnauld de Dammartin, and Mary
who was first joined in Marriage Anno 1206. with Philip Earl of Namur, and
afterward Anno 1212. with Henry IV. Earl of Louvain, and Duke of Brabant.

He had also a Natural Son named Peter Charlot, who was Treasurer of Tours, and
afterward Bishop of Noyon.

Of all the Kings of the Third Race, he annexed most Lands to the Crown, and
most Power to those that succeeded him, wresting Normandy, the Counties of
Anjou and Maine, Touraine, Berry, and Poitou from John Without-Land: he did not
a little contribute on his part toward the lessening or pulling down the Earl
of Toulouze: and by ruining those two Princes, took away the Counterpoise that
balanced his own Power in the Kingdom. After which he brought the Grandees more
easily both to respect and fear him, and the People to bear greater Burdens
and Taxes then they had done under his Predecessors. The French gave him the
name of Conqueror, which Paulus Emilius has rendered in Latin, Augustus, and
this seemed so proper and sounded so well to all that have written since, that
they have followed and continued it, and have almost forgotten the other.

He was well shaped and without any Corporal defect, excepting that one of his
Eyes was half obscured by an Amblyopia, for which some Italian Authors Villainy
and Bocace.
have called him One*ey'd. He was a brave Cavalier and excellent Captain,
laborious and active, happy in his Enterprises, because he undertook with
Deliberation and Counsel, and executed with celerity and heat; sometimes a
little Choleric and oversway'd with Passion, but bating that, a great
Politician, who knew where it was fit to use Caresses, where to employ Threats,
whom to Reward and whom to Punish; somewhat more inclined to Severity then
Mercy; Splendid and Magnificent; highly Charitable to the Poor; zealous in
doing Justice to his Subjects, and no less zealous in Religion, taking as much
care to preserve the purity of Faith by rooting out all Heresy, and defend the
Goods and Liberties of the Church against Usurpers, as to maintain the Rights
and Honor of the Kingdom; and therefore he was respected by the Clergy and
People, as the Defender of the Church, and Father of his Country.

It is to be observed, that in his Reign, and in his Fathers and Grandfathers,
there were five great Officers of the Crown, that is the Grand-Seneschal, in
Latin Dapifer, great Chamberer Chambrier.
, Butler, Constable, and Chancellor. I believe they were in the Kings Gift, who
might both place and displace: I do not know what the Formalities were he used,
or whether the Grandees and Parliament, or General Assembly of Prelates and
Lords had any part in the nomination: but I know they were not perpetual, and
did in some measure resemble rather Commissions then Offices; that nevertheless
their Function was so necessary, that whoever held those Places, signed all
Acts and Writings of importance, so that if any one of these were They put
down, Vacant Cancellariae, or Dapifero, Buticulario and ^ullo.
vacant, it was ever noted down at the bottom of such Writing or Act. The
Author of the Lives of the Ministers of State, has very curiously observed,
that the Office of Constable was a Member taken from the Grand-Seneschal, and
that of Great Chamberlain from the Grand Chamberer. That the Constable had no
Power or Command in the Armies till about the year 1218. after Philip Augustus
had long left the Office of Grand-Seneschal vacant on purpose to destroy it, as
I suppose, because it had too great Power. He likewise proves very plainly,
that the High-Chamberlain had the management of the Kings Treasury: and that
the Office of Chancellor, was the lowest of the five great ones we have
specified; till Guerin Knight of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, and
afterward Bishop of Senlis, having that Place conferred on him by Lewis VIII.
after he had held the Seal Five and twenty years together, raised it to a
higher pitch of Honor and Degree then ever.

Toward the end of this Reign Families began to have fixed, certain and
hereditary Surnames. The Lords and Gentlemen, took them most commonly from the
names of their Lands and Estates they had in possession; Men of Learning from
the places of their Nativity, and Jews when they were Converted, as likewise
the Wealthy Merchants from the place of their abode. As for what has given
Surnames to the Plebeians, some had it from the color or cut and fashion of
their Hair, the habit or defects of their Bodies, from their Dress or Age,
Profession, Office, or Trade; some from their good or ill Qualities, others
from the Province they dwelt in, or the Town or Village where they were born.
But for the most part they were called by some proper name which was current in
the Family, or even some Nickname, which descended to their Generations.
Whoever shall take the pains to examine these Heads thoroughly and distinctly,
will find that there are few others can be made out.

Through all this Age there were two great and cruel Evils predominant in
France, but which were not new, the Leprosy and Usury: the one infecting the
Bodies, the other consuming the Estates of most Families. Those that were
tainted with the first were secluded from all Society, and shut up in places
far distant from the Habitations of other People, but yet upon or near the
greatest Roads. The number increased so fast that there was not one City or
Borough that was not forced to build some Hospital for their Retreat. They
were called Lazar-houses, and the Leprous Lazars, from St. Lazarus, the Patron
of the Poor and the Sick, whom the Vulgar by corruption called St. Whence the
Hospitals in French are called Ladreries.
Ladre. Now the public Foundations, the Gifts of the Relations and Kindred of
the Infected, the Alms of particular People, and with these the Immunities and
Privileges granted by the King and the Clergy to these miserable Wretches,
made them live so much at their ease, that in length of time they became rather
Objects of envy than of pity, at least in respect of the meaner sort of People.
They were taxed of leading Lives guilty of great Disorders, and sometimes of
Crimes. But when they were convicted of any they were burnt alive, that so the
Fire might at the same time purify and purge the infection both of their
Bodies and Souls. I have read that there were some Men so apprehensive of this
villainous, loathsome and shameful Disease, that they guelt themselves to avoid
it, and be preserved from it.

Usury was very common, and yet more excessive, the Jews practiced it with so
much cruelty, that they did not seize upon Peoples Goods only for satisfaction,
but likewise upon their Persons and reduced them to slavery. The Popes
oftentimes endeavored to suppress them, but it was in vain: for the Princes,
and especially King Philip upheld them, receiving Tribute from them for
suffering their Exactions, and withal they had it in their power to squeese
these Blood-suckers whenever their occasions required it.

Church of the Eleventh Age.
Since the first Birth of the Church there had not been any Age wherein she was
so much shattered and rent with Schisms as she was in this same. I speak not of
the Schism caused by the Emperor Henry IV. for that was more in the preceding
Age then this, though it did never end but with the Life of that Emperor, who
died at Liege, Anno 1106. after he was unfortunately deprived of his Empire by
his own Son. I must note however that his Tyrannical and Scandalous Deportment,
gave a Schisms.
fair opportunity to Gregory VII. whose Life was irreprovable, and exemplary,
to constitute himself his Judge, to summon him before his Tribunal upon the
universal complaints of his Subjects, to Excommunicate him and depose him from
his Empire, and after all this to wrest from him the disposition of great
Benefices. Which seemed the more favorable, because that Prince made a most
infamous and shameful Traffic of it, giving them to the worst, and investing
them with the Ring, etc. before they were Consecrated. But after this Schism
there were three more, two occasioned by the Quarrels that the Emperor Henry V.
Son of the abovenamed Henry, and then Frederic II. surnamed Barberossa, had
with the Popes: and a third, which happened between these two through the
ambition of Cardinal Peter Leonis. That of Henry V. began in the year 1118. the
Emperor having caused one Maurice Burdin Archbishop of Braga in Portugal to be
elected, and ended Anno 1122. the Antipope, named Gregory VIII. falling into
the hands of Calistus, and Henry afterward obtaining Absolution of that Pope.
The Schism that Frederic caused lasted from the year 1159. under three
Anti-Popes, Octavian, Guy de Crema, and John Abbot de Strume, who assumed the
names of Victor IV. Paschal III. and Calistus III. and did not cease till the
year 1183. For although Frederic were absolved at Venice, Anno 1177. he was not
fully reconciled with these Popes till six years afterward.

Church.
The Schism of Peter Leonis began in 1139. (for in that year he got to be
Elected to the Papacy, concurrently with Alexander III. taking the name of
Anaclet (and was extinguished Anno 11 --. After his death, the Peace of the
Church lasted but Seven years, and then was disturbed by the Rebellion of the
City of Rome. Arnauld, Clerk of the City of Bresse stirred it up, in the year
1145. The people of Rome by his instigation, would needs shake off the Priestly
yoke, and restore the ancient Republic. These disturbances ceased An. 1155.
for that incendiary being expelled the City, went to the Emperor Frederick,
who sacrificed him to his Interests, delivering him up to Adrian, who caused
him to be hanged and burnt.

During the troubles of these Schisms, and the combustions Arnauld promoted in
Rome; there were Five Popes that sheltred themselves in France, Paschal II. An.
1106. Gelasius IV. An. 1118. Innocent II. An. 1130. Eugenius, An. 1147. and
Alexander III. An. 1161. without reckoning Calistus II. who sojourned there
some time after his Election, which was made at Clugny, An. 1119.

The Son of the unfortunate Henry IV. of his Fathers Name, and who had
compelled him to resign the Empire, made it plainly appear he did not rebel
against him out of any zeal to Religion, since so soon as he thought himself
well settled in the Throne, he began to tread in the same steps, and the very
next year following 1107. he made it known to Pope Paschal, and the Council of
Troyes, that he intended to enjoy the Apostolic privilege of instituting
Bishops, which he pretended had been given to Charlemain. This question was
referred to a general Council, to be held at Rome in the year 1110. Paschal
therefore returns: but Henry coming thither with an Army, seizes on his person,
and forces him to Sign an agreement, wherein he allows him the investitures,
obliging both him and his Cardinals by the most Sacred Oaths to observe it. All
the Prelates in Europe cried out against this agreement, which by leaving such
Elections in the power of Temporal Princes, caused great disorders in the
Church. They held many Councils in several Provinces to damn it,
Excommunicated the Emperor, and gave out, it was an Heresy to say, that
Investitures could be made by the Laity, not considering that this proposition
made the Pope himself an Heretic, since he had newly granted it to the
Emperor.

The same question of Investitures had also troubled England; the Kings William
and Henry maintaining it was a Right and Prerogative of their Crown, and in all
times possessed by their Ancestors. For which cause, Anselme Archbishop of
Canterbury had lost his See; but at last that difference was composed, An.
1107. upon condition the King should for ever relinquish the Investitures in
the Church, and that reciprocally the Bishops should render him Hommage.

This was to speak properly nothing but the changing of terms, for he that does
Hommage is a Vassal, and receives, and holds of him to whom he renders it. And
indeed the Popes could have wished that the Bishops had not done it to
Lay-Princes; and they had expressly forbid it to those in France: but the
resolution King Lewis the Gross and his Successors showed in this point,
obliged them to relaxe. They durst not at the same time contend both with this
great Kingdom and Germany; they must leave some place of shelter in time of
need, and besides, they did not so much trouble their Heads to lessen France,
with whom they had no contests for Dominion; as to pull down the Emperors, who
being very powerful in Italy, had still an aim of restoring their Imperial
Throne in the City of Rome. Besides, France was better united, and by
consequence more difficult to be subdued then the Empire. where the Subjects
(as well those of Germany as those of Italy, and the Kingdom of Arles) being
divided amongst themselves, and having all different Interests, have at length
ruined that vast body by their Jealousies and Rebellions. It was for this
reason the Popes made it their business so much to lessen that power; and it is
certain, that all other Princes of Europe, growing jealous of it, as the most
formidable then in being, joined willingly with the Popes to suppress it. The
defense of the Holy See, and the Authority of the Church, admitting a specious
pretense to side with them. This reflection is not useless.

Now to return to our Narrative, Henry V. sunk under all this weight, as his
Father had done before. In the beginning his Presence made things prosper in
Italy: but when after various success he was driven thence, his burden was left
to the mercy of Calistus, who confined him to a perpetual imprisonment. Then he
himself tired with the daily Admonitions and Remonstrances from all parts, and
not able to wade through the many Conspiracies and Rebellions which hourly
threatened to or'ewhelm him, yielded the Cause at last: He utterly renounced the
Investitures, and Church.
promised to leave the liberty of Elections to the Ecclesiastics. This was in
Anno 1122.

The scandal and persecutions which these Schisms caused in Christendom, gave
occasion, in my opinion, for that false prediction which was spread abroad in
those days. That the world was near its end, and the Kingdom of Antichrist was
then begun. St. Norbert, and some other persons of an irre^ragable Sanctity,
preached it as a most certain Truth; which was but little doubted, and begot so
much terror, that Pope Paschal, who fled into France to avoid persecution,
staid some time in his journey at Florence, to see what the event of this
dreadful report would come to.

Soon after the agreement, Henry V. being dead without Children, the Empire was
given to Lotbarius Duke of Saxony, and after him to Conrade. Those two Princes
left the Popes in quiet, and made no breach of Peace with them. So that there
was no more fear of Schism on that side. The Church having rested in
tranquillity for eight years; began to be disturbed again by another most
dangerous division: for after the death of Honorius II. which happened in the
year 1134. two contrary Factions, or Interests, in the Sacred College, elected
each a Pope on the same day; One the Cardinal Gregory, who took the name of
Innocent the II. The other the Cardinal Peter Leonis, who called himself
Anaclet. This last had been a Monk at Clugny, a scurvy commendation for him to
the Order of the Cisteaux, which was then become the most predominant in
France. His Right, if examined in due form, appeared the best; but his
ambitious and haughty proceeding spoiled his Title; the great Gifts Rome, gave
just cause to believe there was somewhat of Simonie in his promotion, and that
he deserved not the Popedom, since he bought it. Many good people were of
opinion (so says John of Salisbury) that in the like contests, they ought to
have owned neither of those concurrents, but have elected a Pope anew, who had
not privately made any interest for the Popedom; which is of such a nature, as
well as all other Benefices, that whoever bribes for it, renders himself
unworthy of it. And indeed King Lewis VII. wavered for some time betwixt both
parties, and assembled the Council of Estampes, to resolve him which of the two
was the Legitimate. The persuasions of Henry II. King of England, had already a
little inclined him toward Innocent: the Council of Estampes fully determined
it, that Council having been satisfied by the discourses of St. Bernard, who
with much zeal and vehemence, set forth the Right and Merits of that Pope.
After so solemn a decision, most of the Princes in Europe declared for him;
there was only Roger, Duke of Apulia, and William Duke of Aquitain, that
supported Anaclet; The First, that he might have a Pope convenient for him, and
more easy to be managed then his predecessors: the Second, having been
persuaded by Gerard, Bishop of Angoulesme, that his Election was Canonical. It
was thrown in Gerards Teeth, that at first he had been of the contrary party;
but his spleen, because he was not continued in his Legation of Aquitain by
Innocent, drove him to side with Anaclet; who indeed confirmed it to him. It
was one of the handsomest, and indeed most profitable employments the Court of
Rome could bestow: for besides the three Aquitains, both Touraine and Bretagne
were comprehended in it.

I divide Bretagne from Touraine, because the former had its Archbishop apart,
this was the Bishop of Dole, who since the insurrection of Neomene, took upon
him to be the Metropolitan. The often reiterated complaints of the Metropolitan
of Tours, and the solicitations of the Kings of France in the Court of Rome,
could not obtain a Judgment in this matter for a long while: but Philip
Augustus tired with their long delays, prosecuted it with so much resolution,
and talked so high, that Innocent III. determined it by a definitive Sentence,
in An. 1198. which restored Dol, and the other Bishoprics of Bretagne, to the
Metropolis of Tours.

We find in the Life of St. Bernard, how he withdrew Duke William from
espousing the party of Anaclet, so that there was none for him but Roger Duke
of Apulia, on whom Anaclet conferred the Title of King of Sicilia, upon
condition to pay an acknowledgment of Six hundred Crowns yearly to the Sea of
Rome. The Kingdom of Sicilia comprehended the Island so named, Apulia,
Calabria, and some other neighboring Countries which Roger held in Italy.

Now although William Duke of Aquitain had suffered himself to be brought back
to the Obedience of Innocent II. in the year 1135. yet Gerard nevertheless
stood up obstinately for Anaclet to the end of his days; but some while after
he was found dead in his Bed, horribly black, and blew, and swollen. About three
years after, viz. in An. 1138. Anaclet died also; his Relations placed another
Cardinal in his stead, to whom they gave the name of Victor. In fine, Innocent
found it better to buy his peace of them, then to leave these Divisions
smothering and smoking any longer; Church.
and when they were agreed, Victor laid down the Tiara, and cast himself at his
Feet. Notwithstanding Roger held out still some time, not owning him for Pope,
because he would not own him for a King, till having taken him prisoner in War,
An. 1193. he came fairly to an agreement with him, and got the Title of King
confirmed to him.

Frederick I. being come to the Empire, young, haughty, and ambitious as he
was, undertook to recover its dignity, to which the easiness of Pope Anastasius
seemed to chaulk out a way; but Pope Adrian IV. who succeeded Anastasius,
resolved to obviate his designs, and keep him under as his dependant. Hence
proceeded a mortal enmity betwixt them, which however came not to an open
rupture; but made Frederick more plainly sensible that it was necessary to have
a Pope at his Devotion. Adrian being dead, An. 1159. it happened that all the
Cardinals, excepting three, elected Cardinal Rowland, who took the name of
Alexander III. but whilst he was showing some kind of unwillingness to accept
the Popedom, those three that were not for him, Elected immediately the
Cardinal Octavian, who was named Victor. The Emperor having notice of it,
favored him first underhand, thereby to frighten Alexander, and bring him to
his bent; then openly, when he found he could not lead the other as he pleased.
So he causes his Election to be authorized by the Council of Pisa, which he had
called by his own authority, after the example of former Emperors, and
employed all his Interest to persuade other Princes to adhere to him. The Kings
of France and of England, who had been at war, having now agreed, assembled
their Bishops, Abbots, and Barons; the one at Beauvais, and the other at
Newmarket, to discuss the right of the two concurrents: the Legates both of the
one and other side having been heard; Alexander was approved by all, and Victor
Excommunicated. This happened in the year 1161. The good Title and Right of the
former was this year confirmed by a great number of miracles, as many Authors
write; and yet there is one affirms likewise, that God wrought some in favor
of Victor after his decease. In the mean time, this last being most powerful in
Rome, Alexander seeks his refuge in France, and remained there three years: at
the end whereof, his Affairs going in a better method in Italy, the Clergy and
People call him back to Rome, An. 1164. To defray the Expenses of his journey,
he was sorced to impose a Gallican Church.

Victor his Rival died in the City of Luca. Some Prelates of his Faction being
assembled at the same place, gave the Popedom to one of those two Cardinals
that had elected him, which was Guy de Crema. He lived five years, and deceased
An. 1170. Those of his party substituted another, I cannot tell what Abbot, not
known but by his debauches; they called him Calistus III. and Frederick
supported him, as he had done the two others.

At the same time there were great stirs in England, King Henry stickling to
preserve certain pretended Rights, which he called Customs of the Kingdom; and
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury not to suffer them, as being contrary to
Ecclesiastical liberty. It would be thought strange in these days, if a Bishop
should hold his Head up so high against his Prince for the like cause: but then
the best of Men were persuaded, that such Liberties were the pillars of
Religion. The contest lasted seven or eight years, and ended not but by the
death of the Archbishop, who was murdered in his Cathedral in the year 1170.
and the Kings penitence, which was so great and so public, that the Church was
edified more by such an example, then it had been scandalized by his offense.

The Emperor Frederick was not more fortunate then the two Henrys, so that
being shattered by the Popes Thunderbolts, and more severely yet by his ill
fortune, driven out of Italy, and apprehending the sudden Revolt of Germany, he
could find no other way to save himself, but to ask pardon of the Holy Father,
and prostrate himself at his Feet, to gain his Absolution, which was done at
Venice, in An. 1177. His Antipope Calistus did as much the following year,
throwing himself at the Feet of the same Alexander. Afterward Frederick had
again some Disputes with the Popes Lucius, Urban, and Clement III. of that
name; but he was reconciled to Clement, and lived well enough with the Sea of
Rome to the time of his death. Henry VI. his Son was Crowned by Celestine III.
in the year 1191. He undertook nothing directly against the Popes, but yet he
suffered himself to be Excommunicated, for detaining Richard King of England
prisoner, and for not restoring the Money he had extorted from that Prince to
purchase his liberty. He died without Absolution, Anno 1197.

Church.
Let us now speak of Heresies. About the end of the Twelfth age, the opinions
of one named Rousselin, had made a great deal of noise. He said the three
Divine Heresies.
Persons were three separate or distinct things, as three several Angels were;
but in such sort nevertheless, that all three had but one and the same Power,
and one and the same Will: and that if custom would permit it, one might say
that they were three Gods; or otherwise it would follow, that the Father and
the Holy Ghost had been incarnate. These Sophistical impieties were condemned
in a Council held at Soissons: notwithstanding the Author did not refrain
Teaching in private; and perhaps he might have made a greater progress, if
there had not been some watchful persons, amongst the rest, Yves de Chartres,
who broke his measures. I cannot tell whether it were the same, against whom
St. Anselme, when he was but Abbot du Bec., wrote his Treatise of the
Incarnation of the Word, which he sent to Pope Urban II. to examine, An. 1094.

About the year 1125. one Tanchelin, the most profligate of all Mankind,
infected Brabant and the neighboring Countries with his Errors: he asserted
that the Ministry of Bishops and Priests was a cheat, and that the Communion of
the Holy Eucharist availed nothing to our Salvation. He drew people after him
by the magnificence of his Feasts, and the pomp of his dress and garb, being
attired in Cloth of Gold, and his Hair pleated, or wove with strings of the
same; those that followed him were so bewitched, that they drank his Urine,
kept some as Treasures and Relics, and took it as a particular favor, that he
would in their presence abuse their Wives and Daughters.

At the same time another Innovator wandered through Provence, Gascongne, and
Languedoc, named Peter de Bruys, Preaching, that Baptism was ineffectual
before the age of Puberty; that they ought to pull down the Churches, such
places not being necessary for Christians to worship in; That the sacrifice of
the Mass was nothing; That the Prayers of the Living did not avail the Dead;
and above all things he pretended we ought to have the Cross in abomination,
because our Lord had been most ignominiously nailed to it. Himself burnt a
large heap upon Good Friday, and with that Fire boiled several pots with Meat,
of which he made a public Meal, and invited the people to eat with him. But
Peter de Clugny going into that Country to hunt him thence, the people seized
on his Person, and burnt him alive in the City of St. Giles.

His Sect was not blown away with the Wind like his Ashes; one of his Disciples
named Henry, made himself their head; this was a Monk that had mewed his Frock,
who becoming a vagabond, because his Apostasy had left him no place of
security, set himself to preach up these Heresies from place to place; to which
he added some others of his own invention. Peter de Clugny refuted him in an
excellent Treatise. St. Bernard in a journey he made into that Country,
confounded him by his sound Doctrine and moving Sermons, justified with many
miracles, informed the poor People he had seduced, and followed him so close,
that at length he was taken and delivered up to the Bishop, bound Hands and
Feet, An. 1147. They called these Innovators Petrobrusians and Henricians, the
names of their two principal Doctors.

The same St. Bernard had likewise to deal with another sort of Heretics, who
gave themselves the name of Apostoliques, bragging they were the only people
that followed exactly the Doctrine of the Apostles, and were the true mistical
Body of Jesus Christ, none other Christians having the true Belief like them.
They held many of the extravagancies, as those who since have been called by
the name of the Illuminated, or Enlightened.

We may well reckon amongst the Heresies those over-bold, and too subtle
propositions broached by Peter Abailard, touching the Trinity, since they were
condemned as such in the year 1140. at the Council of Sens, which was confirmed
by the Pope, though it appears to some, that if there were too much presumption
on his part, there was also a little too much heat, and some want of
understanding on theirs. However it were, his Humility repaired his fault, for
having appealed to the Holy See, he was easily persuaded to stop at Clugny, by
Peter the Venerable, and there spent the rest of his days. His Wife Heloise had
also put on the Holy Vail. The History of their Lives and their Loves is well
enough known; this is not a place to mention it in.

The Preachings of a certain Monk named Rodolph, were something worse then
Heresies. I find that in the times of the Croisado, or Crusado in the year
1146. having assembled I know not how many thousand Men to go into the
Holy Land, he preached, that they ought before they went to kill all the Jews,
who were much Church.
greater enemies to JESUS CHRIST, then the Mahometans. St. Bernard had much ado
to save those miserable creatures from the fury of the common people, who are
never so easy to be moved, as when some act of cruelty is propounded, and

The Popes were persecuted by other Heretics, whom we might call Politiques,
because they would not allow the Churchmen should have any dominion nor
jurisdiction in Temporals. The Romans stirred up, as we have related, by
Arnauld de Bresse, designed amongst themselves to take it from the Pope in
their City, and leave him only the Spiritual; So that Eugenius III. flying from
their persecution, was forced to retire into France, An. 1147. whilst he was
there he called a Council at Reims, where they examined the propositions of
Gilbert Poret or Poree, Bishop of Poitiers: who having for Thirty years
together professed Philosophy in the chief Cities of the Kingdom, spoke of God
and the persons of the Trinity, rather according to the Topics of Aristotle,
then conformably to the language of the Holy Scripture: He said the Divine
Essence was not God: that the proprieties of the Three Persons were not the
persons; that the Divine nature had not been incarnate; that there was no merit
but that of JESUS CHRIST, and that none were truly Baptized unless he were to
be saved. His Archdeacons themselves,, moved with Zeal or Enmity, became his
Accusers. St. Bernard stoutly Seconds them; the business was debated in two
conferences, the one at Auxerre, and the other at Paris, and at last determined
in a Third, which was held after the Council of Rheims; the Pope being
unwilling before so great an Assembly, to censure a Bishop of so much Learning,
and who besides protested he would submit to what his Holiness should think fit
to judge of it. His propositions were condemned, he received this judgment with
all possible submission; but some of his Disciples were still so confident as
to maintain them.

That we may know how prone our humane nature is to be deluded, and led into
the most extravagant novelties, we need but consider and mention a wretched
fanatical Dotard, who was presented to the Pope in the beginning of this
Council. His name was Eon de l'Estoile, a Gentleman of Bretagne; he was so
ignorant, that having heard them Sing at Church, Per Eum qui venturns est
judicare vivos and mortuos, he fancied to himself, and affirmed to others, that
it was, he should judge both the quick and the dead. It is almost incredible,
how many people were infatuated with this ridiculous extravagancy: they
followed him as a great Prophet; sometimes he marched with a stately Train,
sometimes he hid himself, then he appeared again more Glorious then before.
They said he was a Magician, and made sumptuous Feasts to allure the World, but
that it was but illusion, and that the Meats they eat at his Table, and the
Presents he bestowed were only charms that alienated the Mind. The Archbishop
of Rheims having taken him, presented him to the Council, and to his Holiness.
His Answers full of frantic Conceits and Whimseys, made them look upon him as
a Madman, or rather a Fool; but yet they clapped them into close imprisonment,
where he died shortly after. Many of his Disciples more senceless yet then he,
chose rather to be burnt to death then renounce him.

There was certainly some remainders left of that Leaven of the Petrobrusians
and Henricians, which infecting many people, did again inspire them with new
and dangerous Questions and Propositions; but besides all these, another sort
of poysoners came out of Italy into France, bringing along with them the most
pernicious venom of the Manicheans; and these were they in my opinion who first
infected the Diocese of Alby, for which reason those Heretics were named
Albigensis. They were convinced at a Conference in that City at the Bishops,
who was chosen Arbitrator by both parties, in presence of many Lords, Prelates,
and Constance the Wife of Raimond Earl of Toulouze, and Sister to the King of
France; Gozelin the Bishop of Lodeve, refuting their errors by arguments and
proofs drawn out of the New Testament.

This Conquest could not wholly destroy these unwholsom Seeds, they multiplied
every day more and more, and soon mastered Toulouze, the capital City of
Languedoc. The Kings of France and England were almost resolved to make use of
Fire and Sword to destroy them; however, they thought fit to send some
Preachers first amongst them, to labor and endeavor to convert them, or
confound them, and to cut them off from all communion with the faithful, that
they might corrupt no more of them. The Popes Legate went thither in Anno 1178.
accompanied with Four or Five Bishops and several other Clergymen; they
discovered many of these people in Toulouze: amongst the rest the oldest and
the richest; and as I may say, the cock of all the others, who let them have
his Towers to Meet and Preach Church
in. They forced him to submit to a public penance, pulled down his Towers
or Turrets, The chief Citizens of Toulouze, and Avignon had Towers or Turrets
to their Houses.
and excommunicated and banished several of those Heretics, who retired into
Albigeois; that was as it were their Fort or Citadel, because Roger Earl of
Alby favored them, and made use of them to keep the Bishop of his City a
prisoner.

These Countries of Languedoc and Gascongny, as well because of their distance
as their situation, and likewise the fiery warlike disposition of their people,
were filled with another sort of wild Beasts, and such as delighted in Blood; I
mean Troops, or Herds of Bandits, who hired themselves to any one that wanted
them to take revenge upon their Enemies, or else roved all about to seek prey
for themselves. They sought not only after Money and Goods; but took their
Persons or their Lives away, sparing neither condition, nor age, nor sex. They
were of no Religion, but helped the Heretics, thereby to have some pretense
to rob Churches and Churchmen; some of them were called Brabanders,
Arragonians, Navarrois, and Basques, as coming from those Countries: Others
Cottereaux and Triaverdins, a Nickname, whose original I do not know: and
their Horsemen Routiers, from the German name Reuter. The General Council of
Lateran, which was held in Anno 1179. Excommunicated both the one and the
other, forbid the burying them in Holy Ground, and exhorted all Catholics to
fall upon them, seize upon their Goods, and bring their Persons into slavery,
allowing all those that took up Arms against them, Indulgences and Relaxations
of penance, proportionable to their Services, and at the discretion of the
Bishops.

Amongst these Heretics, there were some that were called Popelicans, who
held a great many strong Castles in Gascongny, where they had cantoniz'd
themselves, and made up a body ever since they were cut off from the Church.
Henry, who from being Abbot de Clervaux, had been made Bishop of Albe, having
in quality of Legate, gathered a good force together by his Preachings and
Exhortations, went to visit them with a strong hand in Anno 1181. They feigned
to avoid this storm, they would abjure their errors; but the danger being over,
they lived as before. This contagion spread it self in many Provinces, both on
this and the other side of the Loire; one of these false Apostles, by name
Terric, who had kept himself concealed a long time in a Grott at Corbigny, in
the Diocese of Nevers, was taken and burnt. Diverse others suffered the same
death in several places, particularly, two horrible old Women in the City of
Troyes, to one of whom, as it was said, they had given the name of Holy-Church
Or Mother Church.
, and to the other, that of St. Mary, that so when they were examined by the
Judges, they might swear by St. Mary, they believed no other then what was the
belief of Holy Church.

These Popelicans, amongst other things, did openly repugne the reality of the
Body of Our S. J. C. in the Sacrament, for which cause there were diverse
miracles wrought in those times to confirm people in the faith of that mystery.
They were condemned in the Council of Sens, of the year 1198. as were likewise
the Vandois, the Patarins, and the Cathares. The name of Patarins came from the
Glory they took in suffering for the Truth patiently; that of Catharos, in
Greek signifies Pure.
Cathares, because, though falsely, they professed great purity of Life. These
last were called in Flanders, Pifles, and in France Weavers, because the most
part of them lived by the labor of their hands, which they employed in that
Trade. It would require a whole Treatise to enumerate and particularize all
these Sects, their several Names, and their Opinions, which agreed in some
points, and were quite different in others: but in my judgment, they may be all
reduced to two, that is Albigensis and Vaudensis.
Albigeois, and Vaudois Credo quod redemptor meus vivit, etc.
and these two held almost, or very near the same Opinions, as those we call in
our days Calvinists.

There arose, if not an Heresy, at least some great doubts, touching the
resurrection of the Body, in the time of Maurice Bishop of Paris, by reason
whereof to testify what his Faith was concerning this Article, he ordained they
should engrave upon his Tomb the first Response, which we find in the Office
for the deceased. After his example, many other Ecclesiastiques gave Order
before their death, that these words should be affixed upon their Breasts in
writing, and put into the Graves with them.

These Schisms and Errors thwarting the power of the Pope and the Clergy,
confirmed and increased it the more. For First, the Popes gained the whole
advantage upon the Emperors, concerning those Disputes about Investitures.
Then when they had gotten that liberty of Elections, they would needs extend it
likewise to the persons and Goods of the Ecclesiastiques; they said the Church
owed no Contribution Power of the Popes.
but to her own Head, who is the Vicar of JESUS CHRIST on Earth, and that the
Clergy could not be corrected but by their Superiors, which they founded upon
that Maxim, That the less Noble or Worthy, ought not to command the more Noble
or Worthy; nor Church.
the inferior be judge of him that is above him. However, this point striking
at, and diminishing the Authority of all other Temporal Princes, as well as the
Emperors, could not pass for current, but in the Countries of those that were
weak, and on the other side of the Mountains.

The third subject of the differences they had with the Emperors, was, they
pretended it belonged to them to dispose of, or give the Empire; and that the
election of the Grandees belonging to it, could make but a King, unless their
own Authority would honor it with the Title of Emperor. This belief was
grounded upon what they had done for Pepin and Charlemain, whom indeed they
first dignified with the Title of Patrician, and afterward conferred that of
Emperor upon Charlemain. As for this point they carried it clearly against the
Emperors. The example of Henry VI. puts it out of all doubt; for when he took
the Imperial Crown at Rome, in the year 1191. Pope Celestine III: who was upon
a Scaffold, and sitting, holding it between his Feet, threw it down upon the
ground, to show, it lay in his power to overthrow it; and the Cardinals having
caught it in their hands, put it upon the Emperors Head, who was below, and on
his knees, waiting that favor with submission.

But the Popes could not so easily gain a fourth point, which was to hinder the
Bishops from paying Homage to their Temporal Sovereigns. They opposed this
submission, because they thought it unworthy that those Sacred Hands, which
were employed in the operations of the most Holy Mysteries of Religion, should
be touched or pressed by Hands profane. Now although Sovereign Princes,
especially the Kings of France had a great reverence for all that came from the
Holy See, they could not for all that yield them this point, nor that
concerning the franchise of Goods and Persons. For King Lewis VI. would not
suffer Rodolph to re-enter the Archbishopric of Bourges, till he had done him
Homage; which Yves de Chartres excused to Pope Paschal, upon the apprehension
of a greater inconvenience. And that Pope having granted a Bull, at the
requisition of the Clergy of France, which prohibited, upon pain of
Excommunication, all Bailiffs and Prevosts Collectors.
belonging to the King, the exacting any Loan of poor Clerks; the said King
wrote Letters full of heat to Yves, threatening he would take the Goods of any
Clerks wherever he could find them, if that Bull were not revoked: I cannot say
what happened upon this.

There was a Maxim set up in those ages, which gave the Popes an indirect
Dominion over Princes, and right of animadversion on their Government; which
was, that although they did not believe the Princes depended upon them for
things Temporal, they thought they had good ground, considering the Spiritual,
to judge whether their actions were good or evil, to admonish them, to correct
them, to forbid them things they held unlawful, and command them to do what
they thought was just. When two Princes made War, they concerned themselves to
bring them to a Truce, to refer their business to Arbitration, and oblige them
to debate it in their presence. King John pressed upon by Philip Augustus had
recourse to Innocent III. who wrote thereupon, that being proposed to the
Government of the Universal Church, he found himself obliged by the command of
God, to proceeed in that Affair, according to the Rules and Forms of the
Church, and to pronounce the King of France to be an Idolater and a Publican,
if he did not make his Right appear before him or his Legate. For although, said
he, it did not belong to him to judge of the Fief, yet he had right to take
cognizance of the Sin; and it appertained to the Holy See to correct all
persons of what quality soever they could be, and if they proved refractory to
his Commands, to employ the Power and Arms of the Church. These were the
Excommunications, and also the Interdictions, cruel remedies, which took away
the use of the Sacraments, and the Divine Service from the Living, and
sometimes the very Burials from the Dead. They were persuaded it was part of
their Duty to provide against all public scandals; of their paternal care, to
help and protect all the oppressed; and of the grandeur of their Tribunal, to
do justice to the whole World. So they received the complaints of all that were
under oppression; nay, they would go to meet them, as it were, and take
cognizance of what injustice Princes used toward their Subjects, and of their
new exactions. They sometimes denounced Anathema against those that levied
them; and sometimes exposed the Goods and Estates of these they Excommunicated
as a Prey, and gave Command to seize their Persons, and bring them into
slavery. The Sovereigns were not exempted or secure against these
Thunderclaps: for whether by virtue of an opinion, commonly received in those
days, but in my judgment not to be maintained or made out, that the
Excommunicate have lost all Titles to their Estates, or whether they did not
believe the Church
Government of Catholic people, was not to be left in the hands of Princes
revolted from the Church, they proceeded even to the deposing them, declaring
their Subjects Absolved of all the Oaths they had taken, and forbid them longer
to obey them. Gregory VII. began to exercise this Authority against the
Emperor Henry IV. He would have practiced the same toward Philip I. King of
France: For he once wrote to all the Grandees of the Kingdom, to hinder the
excess he committed, especially toward those Merchants that went to great
Fairs: And another time he threatened to dissolve those Bonds and Obligations of
Fidelity, which tied his Subjects to him, if he did not forbear the sale of
Benefices, and suffer the elect Bishop of Mascon to enter upon his Bishopric.
Victor II. did in effect, Excommunicate him in the Council of Clermont. Other
Popes Excommunicated and deposed the Emperors Henry V. Frederick I. and
Frederick II. and have attempted the like things against diverse other Crowned
Heads.

It is admired that Popes who had so great a reputation for their goodness,
particularly Gregory VII. and Alexander III. should have undertaken such
things, which seem so contrary to the Maxims of the Ancient Fathers, and the
Innocence of former ages. We must therefore know, that these supposed Letters
of the First Popes, upon which they founded a new Cannon right, had made their
Predecessors believe, even from the end of the Eighth Century; that their
Authority and Power over the Faithful had no limits; that in quality of
universal Pastors, they had Power to lay Commands, or to forbid any of the
Faithful, in any thing that concerned their Salvation, and the promotion of
Religion; to admonish them, and afterward punish them if they did not obey.
That if the predecessors of Gregory had not made use of this power against
Emperors; it was because those Princes were then more regular, and the Popes
of those times involved in great troubles: but on the contrary, Henry IV. had
made himself execrable by his infamous Vices; And Gregory was venerable through
all Christendom for his Virtues.

I shall presume to add that there was even some things in the preceding Ages
that might give some color to what that Pope did undertake. For in the Sixth,
the Church had assumed power to exclude those who were enjoined public
penance, from exercising any function Civil or Military, or even from
Marriage, that it might be the more humble and perfect. S. Leo the Pope had
only advised it, his Successors made it a Law, and the Councils of Toledo
reduced it into practice toward their very Kings; witness Vamba, one of the
most illustrious, and most renowned of their Monarchs: who being ordained
Penance, while he was in the agonies of death, not with his consent, for he
was deprived of all understanding, but according to the custom of those times,
was yet obliged upon his recovery, to renounce his Kingly Office. Observe, if
you please, that these Councils of Spain furnished the Popes with great
advantages and presidents, to bring other Sovereigns under their Command and
Disposal. For the Visigoth Kings being elective, the Bishops had a great share
in their Election, and their Councils were as so many Assemblies, where the
Grandees and the Kings themselves were present. There they corrected all the
disorders of the Crown, and imposed Laws upon them under the penalty of
Anathema, or Deposition if they infringed them. The Bishops of France undertook
the same thing by deposing Louis the Debonnaire; and though it were a perfect
Faction, that Prince however did not resume the Crown, but by the authority of
another Assembly of Bishops. Foulk, Archbishop of Rheims, threatened Charles
the Simple, he would withdraw his Subjects from their Obedience, if he made any
Alliance with the Normans, who were then Barbarians and Unbelievers. Now the
Popes believed it as an Article of Faith, that their power was much greater
then that of all the Bishops; and that it had no other limitation then was
expressed in the Canons of the Councils, and the Decrees of the Apostolic
See, which never had forbid them to Depose Kings, because it cannot be
imagined, the thoughts of such a thing could ever enter into their brains.
Gregory II. in Anno 730. having thundered his Anathema against Leo Isaurian,
suspended at least the payment of all Tribute, and Obedience of his Subjects,
or perhaps wholly Absolved them, as some pretended. Moreover, taking upon them,
as they did, the Authority of creating Kings, which was allowed by the ambition
of such as desired that Title: they imagined they might well take away the
Crown from those that were unworthy, since they could bestow one upon such as
did deserve it.

Church.
There were besides all this many occasions which served not a little to
confirm this opinion. Amongst others the Prohibition of contracting Marriage
between Kindred, even to the Seventh Degree, and betwixt Allies to the fourth
and fifth; The cognizance they took of all great Causes, not only amongst the
Ecclesiastics, but Temporal Princes; and the Croisado's. For as to the first
they could easily find enough of Parentage or Alliance to dissolve a Princes
Marriage, and by this means made themselves formidable. And for the second,
they were not less considerable for the power they had to judge of all Causes,
because all Parties have naturally a fear and a respect for their Judges; and
they having by this incredible affluence of Business, an opportunity to employ
great numbers of People, it drew to their Court all those that had an ambition
to be made use of by them, or such as had the curiosity to be fashioned, or
instructed in that most famous School of the whole Universe. In effect all the
greatest Wits of Europe flocked thither to gain Employments; and as we have
still an Affection for those by whom we are advanced, when they went from
thence, after they had done their Business, or made their Fortune, they
proclaimed the Grandeur of the Popes in every Country, with an ardent desire to
set up their Maxims.

The Crusado's or Holy War made them likewise very powerful. For in all the
Expeditions to the Holy Land, they enjoined Princes to list themselves, they
held the Sovereign Command of those Armies by their Legates, and in a manner
made themselves Lords of all those Adventurers: not only because they exacted
obedience from them, but which was more, because they took them under their
Protection till their return; which was, as it were an Order of State to stop
all Proceedings both Civil and Criminal. In other Crusado's which were
undertaken against Schismatics and Heretics, they made it a Law, That whoever
were convicted of those Crimes, should forfeit all their Goods, Honors and
Dignities: In pursuance whereof, they deprived those that were guilty, or
caused them to be deprived by Councils assembled by their Legates; then gave the
Spoil to such as had served well in those Expeditions, without consulting the
Sovereign Lords of whom they held those Estates, because they durst not refuse
Investiture to those whom so holy a Power had provided in that manner for.

But their greatest Power or Force consisted in that of the Clergy and
Religious Orders; Those great Bodies being in those times very firmly united
for the maintenance of his Franchises and Liberties, which they positively
believed to be Jure Divino, looking upon the Pope as a Chief Head, and
Potentate that would never fail them at need. Indeed his absolute Authority lay
heavily upon the Bishops Shoulders: but when it pressed too hard, they had
recourse to that of the Prince, as Protector of the Goods and Liberties of the
Clergy. Reciprocally they made use of the Power of the Pope, to shield them
from the Attempts of their Princes: and governing themselves thus between the
Power of both, they endeavored to moderate and qualify the one by the other.

However they had cause to complain that the Popes took from them a good part
of that Authority belonging to them, as Successors to the Apostles; as by
drawing immediately to their Tribunal, the Cognizance of all Causes, not
leaving them any thing almost to judge of Primarily, or Originally. By obliging
them to give them their Oaths according to a certain Form to which Gregory VII.
had added some Terms which amounted to Fealty and Hommage; By imposing the
necessity for their going to Rome; By arrogating to themselves the Right of
Consecrating Metropolitans; By granting Dispensations for not observing the
holy Canons, as if the whole Ecclesiastical Discipline depended only upon their
absolute Authority; By allowing Exemptions to Inferiors to withdraw them from
their Obedience to their Superiors. They complained moreover of their having
reserved to themselves alone the power of receiving Caodjutories, and that of
dissolving the Spiritual Marriages of Bishops, that is, of separating them, or
putting them away from their Churches, by Cession, or Translation, or
Deposition; and their taking upon themselves the disposing of most Benefices.

Let us say something more particular upon the chiefest of these points; The
differences between particular People were handled only in the Court of Rome in
the Twelfth Age: however when the Cause was very important, or concerned the
whole Church, or a whole Kingdom, they referred it to the Judgment of a
Council. Thus Gregory VII. when the Quarrel betwixt him and the Emperor Henry
V. came to be renewed, promised he would assign a Council, in a place of
safety, where every one might come Friend or Foe, as well those of the Clergy
as the Laity, to Church.
judge whether he, or the Emperor had broke the Peace, and to consider of some
means to restore it again. Gelasius II. said the same thing, and that he would
acquiesce in the Judgment of his Brothers the Bishops, whom God had Constituted
Judges in his Church, and without whom a Cause of that Nature could not be
determined. Innocent III. wrote word, That he durst not decide any thing
concerning the Marriage of King Philip II. without the determination of a
General Council: and that if he should do it, he might run the hazard of his
Order and of his Office; very remarkable words, for that they seem to insinuate
that a Pope may be deposed not only for Heresy, but likewise for abusing his
Power.

In those times they were likewise obliged to govern the Church by Advice of
the Cardinals; whose Power was raised to such a height, since the year One
thousand, that they were the Collaterals and Coadjutors of the Pope, says St.
Bernard; that their Privileges or Rights were greater then those of the
Patriarchs and the Primates, and that they had the Power of giving Authentic
Censures against the Popes themselves. The assistance and ability of so many
great Men chosen out of all the Western Churches, as filled this sacred
College, did not a little help the Popes in bearing the great burden of
Affairs, and maintaining and increasing their Authority in the remotest
Countries. But when they were once become great enough by their assistance,
they freed themselves from their dependence, and now they only ask them their
opinions, and do not think themselves at all obliged to follow what they Advise
or Council.

As for the disposing of Benefices, they had gotten the greatest into their own
power, as the Archbishopricks, Bishoprics and Abbeys, by making themselves
Masters of the Elections, under pretense of judging those Differences that
happened betwixt opposite Parties; and the lesser as the Dignitaries and Canons
of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, by their recommendations to the Chapters
in favor of those Clergymen that followed their Court. When having often
obtained the thing desired, they at length turned such Recommendation into an
absolute Command by the instigation of Flatterers and interessed People; and
then that was followed with Reservations, and after with Expectatives, the
abuse whereof went on increasing still, notwithstanding the Pragmatick of St.
Louis, and the Remedies Philip le Bell, or the Fair, would have applied, and
lasted till the time of the great Schism, when King Charles VI. and after him
Charles VII. set roundly upon it, and brought back all Elections, Collations
and Presentations to the same method and order as had been Decreed by General
Councils, without any regard or respect to those pretenses and claims the Court
of Rome had taken up and exercised.

In the Fifth Age not only the Bishops, but almost all the Churchmen on this
side the Mountains, had taken up that pious Custom, of going to Rome to visit
the Sepulchers of the Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul, as it were to pay their
Hommage, and testify they held the same Faith which those Apostles had
preached. At the same time they paid their Respects to their Holy Fathers, who
in length of time converted this Voluntary Devotion into an indispensable
Obligation, in so much as they highly reproached such as omitted it.

Dispensations were utterly unknown in the first Ages, and when they did begin
to give them, it was not to allow them to infringe the Canons, but rather to
absolve those that had infringed them. After the Eleventh Age the use grew very
frequent. I observe four or five causes; The continual Wars between private
Persons as well as between Princes: The multiplicity of Decrees, which were so
numerous, it was difficult to avoid breaking some or other of them; The
corruption of Manners, and the little regard they had for Ecclesiastical Orders
or Rules: insomuch as they obliged to obviate that scorn by granting
Dispensations, and they thought to hide or conceal the Transgression by
permitting it. The Popes however did not dispense in things against our Faith,
nor against good Manners, but in those that were only forbidden or permitted by
positive Law. As for the Divine Law, they did not directly dispense with that,
but by Interpretation and by Declaration.

As for the Exemptions of Monasteries, we have observed in the Sixth Age, how
they began by the concessions of the Bishops, and how all the Grandees affected
to obtain them for such as they founded. The first we find that were allowed
them was only to free the Monks from Temporal Payments and Duties. Afterward
they obtained some kind of Privileges to be added; amongst others, That they
should choose their own Abbots; That they should be Masters of their own
Discipline, and that the Bishops should Ordain Priests for them, at their
Request. In fine, they found out means to extend them to the Spiritual
Jurisdiction, and free themselves from any dependence upon Bishops: to which
three things were required, Church.
the Bishops Consent, the Authority of the Holy Chair, and the Pragmatick
Sanction of the King.

The number of these Exemptions increasing day by day, the Pope arrogates to
himself the power of giving them, and of submitting the Monasteries to the Holy
See, maugre the Bishops Diocesans. He did the very same in relation to some
Bishops and some Chapters, substracting these from their Bishops, and the
Bishops from their Metropolitans. Virtuous Men could not held their Tongues
upon these Disorders: their Writings mention it yet: St. B^ruard though a Monk
and very

These favors were not bestowed gratis at Rome, the Abbots and Monks stripped
their Monasteries to purchase this independance, and made them oft-times
Tributary to the Holy See, of many Silver Marks which they paid yearly.

The Abbots notwithstanding these Exemptions were still obliged after their
Election to render Obedience to their Bishops, and by a Writing: but the most
part refused it, so that the Council of Rheims was forced to make a Decree to
compel them, and yet they did overmuch care to submit to it; which
Disobedience was so far carried into a common Right, that Henry II. King of
England made bitter complaints to Pope Innocent II. for that Hugh Archbishop of
Rouen exacted this said Duty of the Abbots of Normandy. The Pope perceiving
with what heat the King wrote to him, sent to the Archbishop that he should for
a time forbear to ask that Right too rigorously, for fear of greater
inconveniency.

The need the Pop s had of the Credit of the Order of St. Bennet during their
Quarrels with the Emperors, inclined them, as I believe, to bestow upon the
principal Abbots of those Congregations, the Ornaments which had belonged only
to the Bishops: Those were, the Miter, the Surplice, the Gloves and the
Sandals; some have since added the Crosier. But such as loved the Hierarchy,
detested this abuse, and those Abbots that were but somewhat humbly Religious,
did not often make use of those Tokens of Honor, believing that what is the
Mark of Jurisdiction in a Bishop, is a stain of Ambition in a Monk. Peter de
Blois wrote to his Brother, an Abbot in the Kingdom of Naples, to whom the Pope
had made a Present of these Pontifical Ornaments, that he should send them back
again, or rid himself of his Abbey. Pope Urban II. beholding the happy Peter
Abbot of Caves bare-headed in a Council, sent a Miter to him to cover it; This
holy Man having received it with great Respect, would not however put it on,
but kept it still upon his Knees. But Hugh Abbot of Clugny did not refuse those
Ornaments from that Popes hands, who gave them to him and all his Successors.
Calistus II. desiring to gratify that Abbey, because he had been Elected and
Consecrated there; gave likewise the Title of Cardinal to the Abbot Ponce de
Melgueil, to enjoy it, both he and all the Abbots of that House.

The Popes Originally had Right to confirm only the Elections of the
Metropolitans of the Roman Diocese. The sending the Pall to those of the
Galican Church, chalkt out the way to usurp it upon them also. In the beginning
St. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, engaged them to seek that Honor, to bring
them by that means to the greater dependence, then when they were accustomed to
deck themselves with those Ornaments, which in their opinions distinguished them
much from Bishops, the Popes obliged them to receive them always from him, as a
thing very necessary, and forbid them all Exercise of their Function till they
had received them.

Bishops could not change, or take another Bishopric, unless they were turned
out of their own by the Barbarians, or upon some very urgent necessity; and
that by Sentence of the Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province: the Popes
notwithstanding permitted it without restraining them to all those Forms. Which
was introduced in this Twelfth Age, not all at once, but by little and little,
as it were sounding the Foord.

The ancient form of Elections was yet preserved as the Soul of the Hierarchy,
that is to say, they were made by the Clergy and by the People, afterward they
were examined by the Metropolitans, assisted with the Counsel of his
Suffragans. If he judged them good he approved them, and if he found any
default, he annul'd it and sent them back to proceed to a new one: that is to
be understood, if they had Church.
not knowingly and designedly, elected one that was unwerthy, or lay under some
Canonical impediment; For in such case the Metropolitan and his Suffragans,
elected one themselves. The Bishops were not obliged to be Personally present
at such Elections and Judgments; but sent some Clergymen who represented their
Persons.

The Consecration of Bishops in France was performed by the Metropolitan and
his Suffragans, the Pope or his Legate having no right to it: but if the
Metropolitan refused to Consecrate the Elect, the Electors appealed to the
Pope, who sometimes did Consecrate them himself. When the Metropolitans were
suspended from their Episcopal Functions, the Legates, as representing the Holy
Father, pretended that that lame belonged to them.

The Elections, and the Right the Metropolitans had to Consecrate the Bishops,
were not directly overthrown during this Age, but suffered great breaches and
diminution. For the new Right founded upon the supposed Epistles of the first
Popes, having perverted all the Canons, and reduced all Elections to the
litigious forms of Proceedings, as there most commonly happened diverse Contests
between the opposite Parties electing, or difficulties in the Judgment given by
the Metropolitans, one of the two Cabals seldom failed of making an Appeal to
Rome, which was an inextricable labyrinth of perplexed Proceedings; and if there
were any omission of formality in the Election, the Pope declared it null, and
reserved to himself alone the right of providing the Bishop, and of
Consecrating the Person whom he chose. Though it were forbidden to take any
thing for that, notwithstanding the Officers of the Court of Rome exacted
furiously, under pretense of their Salaries, and Paper and Ink: afterward the
Popes themselves, who had so highly condemned all Exactions, converted to their
own proper benefit those abuses which they could not hinder. I find that the
Bishop of Manse gave for his Ordination Seven hundred Mark of Silver. In time
they settled this Exaction at a years Revenue moderately Taxed, which they and
their Cardinals shared amongst them.

The power of the French Bishop; was likewise great proportionably. For besides
that they were the most considerable Member of the State, and had most power in
the great Parliaments, or General Assemblies, the Kings rested much upon their
Counsels, submitted to their Remonstrances, and were Crowned by their hands
upon every Solemn Feast in the year. So that when any King was Excommunicate,
as was Philip I. the Bishops refused to do this Office, and held in a manner,
as in suspense, not the Royalty, but the Respect of his People. By the Popes
example they sometimes made use of Interdicts, often of Excommunications; which
by being so often employed upon trivial occasions, became so odious, that the
Secular Judges appearing against them, caused those to be apprehended that
carried them, tormented them in their Estates, and the Estates o^ their
Relations, and vexed even such as obeyed those Fulminations, or who refused to
hold Communication with such as were Excommunicated; And therefore in the year
1274. the Council of Lions one of the most famous that has been held in
France, Ordained in presence of King Philip the Hardy or Bold, and the Emperors
of the East and West, That those that did so hereafter should be cut off from
the Communion of the Church, and if they persisted two Months in their
Contumacy, should not be absolved but by the Holy Chair. Which was allowed in
France, provided those Excommunications were just, and did entrench upon the
Rights of the Crown. Now for as much as it depended upon his Officers to judge
herein, they eluded them most commonly, and seized upon the Temporals as well
of those that pronounced it, as those that submitted, and even caused their
Houses to be pulled down.

The reason why they fore-armed themselves so strongly against these Censures,
was because that in those times so soon as a Man was Excommunicate, he
forfeited the benefit of his Goods, Honors and Dignities, that any one had a
right to pillage him, that they denied him the Sacraments and Burial, and he
could not be absolved but upon very hard Conditions, and by doing Public
Penance, the Mortification whereof is more cruel then Death it self to such
who have much more concern for the shame of this World, then fear of God before
their Eyes. And indeed the Clergy revenged their Injuries, how great soever, no
other ways then by the Spiritual Sword, and were so jealous of their Sentences,
that if a Secular Judge would according to the Laws of his Prince have
Chastised an Excommunicated Person for killing an Ecclesiastic, they would
have opposed it, as an attempt upon their Jurisdiction. And therefore the
Murderer of a Layman was punished with Death, and of a Priest, nay even a
Prelat, had oftentimes no other Punishment but Excommunication.

Church.
The most part of the Bishops were taken out of Monasteries: for as it went by
Election, and those Houses were taken for Schools of Piety and Wisdom, such as
aspired to this Dignity or that of an Abbot, which was not so honorable, but
much more convenient, thrust themselves into the bottom of a Cloister, and
affected a

But often times those good Prelates who were not zealous for a Bishopric out
of any other Motive then the call from God, when they found their strength
decay and grow too weak for that great Office quitted the Bishopric, and made
their retreat into some Monastery to recollect and prepare themselves to render
an account of their Administration to their Sovereign Judge.

They had yet the power of declaring to the People whom they might Honor and
Pray to as Saints, which is that they call Canonizing; This was ordinarily done
in a Council, or in an Assembly of the Fraternity; The Bishop in whose Diocese
the Party died that merited this Honor, gave account of the great Virtues had
made his Life illustrious, and the Miracles that were wrought on his Grave,
according to public Fame and the evidence of many particular People; and
thereupon the Assembly giving their Judgment by Acclamations rather then in
Writing, they all went to take up the Holy Body, put it into a Shrine, exposed
it to the Devotions of the People, and ordered his Festival should be
Celebrated.

It had been a very ancient and abusive Custom in the Eastern Churches, that
Clerks should rob and plunder the Bishops Goods as soon as ever Death had
closed his Eyes. In France, from the year One thousand, at least for as much as
I can observe, the Laity took the same License as well toward Bishops, as all
other that were Beneficed, grounding their so doing upon the Consideration
perhaps, that the Goods of the Church belong to and are the Portion of the
Poor, and therefore they might justly take them again, when the Pastor to whom
they were given for that purpose had kept it so long from them. However it
were, this abuse continued notwithstanding all what the Popes and Councils
could do to prevent it. Now the Sovereign's who think that all Rights of their
Subjects are eminently theirs, because they are head of them, made a Right of
this Custom to themselves, and in a short time made it extend to the whole
Revenue of vacant Bishoprics, and afterward to the collation of Canons and
all other Benefices depending thereon, excepting such as have the cure of
Souls. This Right is called Regalia. This Custom was before the Reign of Philip
Augustus, though in his time, it were not approved of by all the World. Yves de
Chartres redeemed it of King Philip I. for his Bishopric, and Lewis VII.
permitted Peter Archbishop of Bourges to dispose of the Fruits of that Church
by Will, when he died.

The Custom of the Kingdom which obliged the Bishops to follow the Kings
because of their Fiess, was not much unplesant to such amongst them as
delighted more in the Court then in the Church. Nevertheless those that desired
rather to have the reputation of good Pastors, then great Statesmen retired
from Court: but sometimes the Kings interpreted such retreat a want of Duty. We
find that Louis the Gross was distasted with the Archbishop of Sens and the
Bishop of Paris: and that Philip Augustus caused the Goods of the Bishops of
Paris and Auxerre to be seized, because they came not to his Army. In the end
the good and virtuous Bishops gained this point of the Kings that they
dispensed with their Personal Attendance in the Wars, provided they sent those
number of Men to which they were obliged by their Fiefs.

The Parochial Churches of Borroughs and Villages had for a long time been
served by Canonical Priests whom the Bishops sent thither, and recalled again
when he pleased to his Cathedral. The Lords having erected Chapels in the
Country for the convenience of their Dove-coats, and Peasants, appropriated to
them the Oblations, First Fruits and Collections, for they had not then the
Tithe of the Fruits of the Earth and increase of Cattle, but the Lords
themselves took those. It Is a great question by what Title, I think they were
part of their Demeasns, and that it was a Duty they levied upon their Tenants,
in most places the Tenths, in others the Elevenths, the Fifteenth and the
Twentieth part. However it were, when once they had suffered themselves to be
persuaded, that of Divine Right they belonged to the Ministers of the Church,
and that they were bound to restore them; They gave a good part to the
Benedictine Friars, who in those days did the Chruch very great Service, and
gained the love of the Nobility, their Monasteries being like Church.
open Inns for Gentlemen and other Travelers, and Free-Schools to instruct
their Children. Upon condition of these Grants they ordered some Priests of
theirs to serve in those Chapels; and finding such Funds and Incomes very
sweet, as accruing to them without labor, they hooked in as much as possibly
they could. The Regular Canons obtained likewise some. In so much as there
remained very little for the Secular Priests.

Now these Benedictine Monks thus dispersed through all the Country Villages
wandering from the strictness of their Rules, and growing corrupt out of their
Monasteries, as the Fish perishes out of the Water: The Council of Clermont in
the year 1095. ordained that they should quit those Employments and leave them
to the Secular Priests. This Decree was not altogether observed, no more then
that of the Council of Poictiers in the year 1109. which prohibited them all
Parochial Functions: they held these Cures till Anno 1115. the Latran Council
took them all wholly away from them by a general Constitution. However they
left them a right of Presentation, and the Tithes likewise, unless it were some
small or moderate proportion for the Curate that Officiats in those Churches.

By this Constitution the Regular Augustins.
Canons were excepted, upon condition they should have a Companion to converse
always with them, that they might not turn absolute Brutes by daily frequenting
of rude Peasants, worse then solitude it self. This Companion was but his
second, and by consequence the other who Officiated was first in respect of
him; for which reason they called him Prior; and hence comes it that those
Benefices were named Priories, though in effect they are but simple Cures, no
more then those held by the Secular Priests.

There are several proofs in the Acts of the Councils and elsewhere, that
Pluralities were forbidden; an Abuse that must be for ever condemned by true
Churchmen, who look upon their Benefice as a Charge of Souls, but ever
practiced by such as consider them only as a Revenue.

The Princes of those times did easily give way to great Revenge, and run into
extreme Violence: but when the first heat of their fury was spent, they were
easily persuaded to Repentance, as well by the Sentiments of Christianity
imprinted in their Hearts, their Religion not being only mere Policy, but true
Faith, as by the good Instructions and Arguments of their Bishops and others of
the Clergy. For those godly Pastors not knowing how to sooth and flatter Vice
in any one, much less give way to Crimes in Ruling Potentates and Grandees that
ought to be Exemplary to inferiors, boldly reproved them for their faults,
which otherwise they knew themselves must answer for at the Tribunal of the
King of Kings. They first made use of Admonitions, which they did by word of
Mouth if there were opportunity of access, or else by Writing. If afterward
they found the Vice incurable, the Scandal continue and increase, they added
reprehensions, and those sometimes public, and in the end let loose the
Censures of the Church upon them. By this Evangelical liberty assisted with the
Holy Spirit; they often mollified the hardest hearts, and gained respect by
their Apostolic constancy, whilst others were but slighted and contemned, as
not having the courage to open their Mouths against the greatest Sinners.

When any Church was wronged in her Liberty or Goods, the Priests took down the
Shrines and Images of their Saints, and set them on the ground, either to turn
the hearts of their Persecutors and bring them to Repentance, or to inflame the
indignation of the People against them.

Those that did not believe the reality of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Holy
Sacrament, were Heretics: but the too curious started several Questions
touching the manner and the circumstances of that incomprehensible Mystery.
Some not being able to conceive what could become of the Sacred Body of Our
Lord, after they had eaten it, said it passed with the rest of our Digestion.
Rupert Abbot de Tuit, was of that opinion, that the Bread and the Wine remained
with the Body and the Blood of Jesus Christ. And it appears that Peter de
Blois, believed, that the Cup could not be Consecrated without Water, and that
it was no Sacrament without the Chalice, because it is a Mystical Repast; and
in a Supper there must be somewhat to drink as well as to eat.

In those times they yet Communicated in both the Species, but diverse, and
amongst others the Monks of Clugny, to prevent the Profanation in case the Cup
should happen to be spilt, or some small drop should remain sticking on the
Beard of the Communicant, administered the Bread dipped in the Wine, and that
Bread was round and about the thickness of a Crown. Now this method not seeming
conformable to the institution of the Sacrament by our Savior, was often
reproved and condemned Church.
by the Popes themselves, who at length not being able to rectify this abuse,
took the Cup wholly from the Laity. Such as impugn the real Presence, however,
are mistaken in saying that the word Transubstantiate, was introduced by the
Council of Latran, which was held in Anno 1215 for we find it in Peter de
Blois, who wrote some years before; but it is true that that Council authorized
that Term of Transubstantiation.

The use of public Penance was yet very common, the Penitents could not come
into the Church, nor Communicate, nor receive the Blessing or the Salutation of
Peace, nor Shave his Beard, nor cut his Hair, nor put on any Linen, nor
Christen a Child; they eat nothing but Bread, and drank only Water, on Mundays,
Wednesdays, and Saturdays in each Week. But this severity was much abated by
the Indulgences or Relaxations of Punishments allowed by the Canons. The Popes
freely bestowed these Indulgences on such as took the Cross to go into the Holy
Land, or against Heretics and Schismatics; The Bishops likewise when they
Consecrated any Church were not sparing to such as would come to visit them,
upon condition they would come the day before, and give their Alms or
Contribution toward the upholding and maintaining of the Fabric.

They had then a particular fancy to build Subterraneal Chapels. I have
observed that at the building their Churches, they would in the Foundations
often times bury Vessels full of Silver, that so when either Time, or other
accidents should come to destroy them, they might find wherewith to rebuild
them anew. Also when any happened to fall to ruin, they brought the Relics of
that Saint that was most honored by all the Neighboring Countries, to invite
People out of Devotion to contribute largely toward another Edifice. It was
impossible but they should be rich, for there was no one died that did not
leave them some Legacy. I shall observe by the way, that by their Wills they
ever affranchised some certain number of Slaves according to their Qualities,
and we may reckon this amongst others for one main cause which has by little
and little abolished Slavery or Servitude in France.

Those Persons that had committed great Sins, though they were not such whom
the Canons ordained to do public Penance, yet they omitted not, especially
being at the point of Death, to make a public Confession; and diverse great
Princes would needs die flat upon the Ground, lying upon a Cross of Daft and
Ashes; some even with a Rope about their Necks, others in the Habit of a Monk,
or Friars holy Frock and Cowle, believing that Sacred Livery would shelter them
against the Torments in the other World.

Auricular Confession had ever been practiced in the Church; Gratian examining
in the second part of the Decree, whether it were of absolute necessity or not,
after he has mustred the Reasons on either side, according to his Method,
seems to leave every one his Judgment free, assuring us that Persons both very
Devout and Pious were many for it, and many against it. But the Church has
determined it in the affirmative.

The Monks did not Administer the Sacraments to the Laity, nor did they hear
Confessions unless it were from those of their own Coat, it being forbidden
them by the Councils to exercise any Curial Function. A certain Abbot of St.
Riquier undertook to Confess some Seculars, and to Preach without leave of the
Ordinary, of which complaint was made against him at Rome, the Pope caused him
to be cited before him, but he pleaded his Cause so well, that the Holy Father
allowed him both the one and the other, and gave him Sandals, which in those
times were the Marks or Badge of a Preacher.

The Clergy busied themselves mightily in multiplying the Ceremonies, the
Ornaments, and practice of Devotions, and in making a great many frivolous
Disputes upon each of these.

The profession of Physic, and that of Law, were hardly exercised by any but
the Churchmen. the Laity being very little addicted to Study: and as they were
very profitable, the Monks and Regular Canons had likewise an itch to practice
them; The Council of Latran under Innocent II. did expressly forbid their
meddling with either of them.

The Mortifications and Austerities, the Sackcloth, Shirt of Hair, knotted
Girdle, and voluntary Fustigation, which they called Discipline, was much in
practice, at least in the precedent Age, since Peter Damianus mentions it as a
thing that was very common. When they desired to appease the Wrath of God, or
obtain some particular favor from his Bounty, the Pope, and sometimes the
Bishops of their own Church.
Heads would ordain new Fasts. Thus in the year 1187. Gregory VIII. sorely
afficted for the loss of Jerusalem, thought fit thereby to animate the
Christians to Arm themselves powerfully for its Recovery, to command all both
Men and Women to fast every Friday for five years successively, with the same
strictness as in Lent, and to abstain from Flesh the Wednesdays and Saturdays.
He enjoined all the Cardinals and their Families to do the same, and imposed it
upon himself and all his.

As for the Fast of Lent it was then very strictly observed; they eat but once
in the whole day, and that after Sunset, all the Divine Service, and Masses
being then over. We may see some footsteps of it remaining to this day, in that
they say Vespers with the Mass before Noon. Some gave themselves the liberty of
eating at the hour of Noon, which is Three hours after Twelve, or Dinner time.
The Friars fasted but till that hour from the Septuagesima to the Quadragesima;
but from the Quadragesima; till Easter they nor any of the Faithful did eat
till after Vespers. The Princes and great Persons did not omit this abstinence,
nor fasting neither, which did not so much impair their Health as it abated
their Concupisence: and in these Holy Times, the least Devout were obliged at
least in Honor, to give Alms every day.

The Functions of those in holy Orders were yet different and different and
distinct; the Priest seldom did the Office of a Deacon or Subdeacon. Many out
of humility remained Deacons still, or at least a long time, not taking upon
them the Order of Priesthood till near the end of their days. We read that
Celestine III. at the time he was elected Pope was but a Deacon, and had lived
Sixty five years in that Order without aspiring to be a Priest.

They sometimes tolerated the Marriage of Subdeacons, but it was Sacrilege in
a Deacon.

Baptisin was commonly not Ministered or Conferred but at the time of Easter, if
those that were to receive it, were not in danger of Death. They plunged them
three times in the Sacred Font; to show them what operation that Sacrament has
on the Soul, washing and cleansing it from Original Sin.

After they had given the extreme Unction to the Sick, they ordinarily laid
them upon a Bed of Straw, where they gave up the Ghost. Some would needs die
upon a Bed of Ashes, with their Heads lying on a Stone.

In those times the Clergy called all those Martyrs of their Order that were
killed, though it were neither for Religion, or the maintaining of Christian
Doctrines. We find in the Decretals, some Apostolical Letters of Alexander III.
which forbids they should honor the Prior of the Monastery of Gristan as a
Martyr. The History is strange and odd enough. The Monks of that House
distributed to the People I know not what sort of Water which they hallowed
with certain Prayers, and by that invention got store of Alms, wherewith they
made good Cheer. It happened one day that their Prior being drunk, wounded two of
his Friars with his Knife, who immediately beat out his Brains with a Staff
that was at hand by chance. The rest of their Fellows instead of concealing
this Scandal, had the impudence to make advantage and profit of this accident,
and feigned diverse Miracles upon his Corpse, by virtue whereof they Crowned him
with the Laurel of Martyrdom, and the silly People gave credit to the Cheat.

They had been mightily puzzled in the other Age to bring the Priests to
Celibacy. There were some yet that could not agree to it. The Popes Calistus
II. and Eugenius III. compelled them by diverse Punishments, and amongst others
deprived them of their Benefices, and Excommunicated all such as went to hear
them say Mass. Now it not being allowed them to make use of the rights of
Nature by Marriage, there were some, though but few in number, who made use of
things against Nature, burning with such flames of Lust, as ought not to be
extinguished but by Fire from Heaven. As for the greater part of the rest, the
Law of God, that is to say his Church Cumque sator rerum privasset semine
Clerum. Ad Satana vitum successit turba nepotum.
forbidding them to have Children, the Author of all Confusion substituted
great Throngs and Crowds of Nephews in their stead; and from thence followed
great Disorders: for if those Nephews were Ecclesiastics, they perpetuated the
Benefices in their Families by Coadjutories or otherwise, and possessed as by
Right of Inheritance the Sanctuary of the Lord: If they were of the Laity, and
thrifty People, they made their Uncles grow Covetous, Usurers and Extortioners
to heap up Riches for them, or else they endeavored by all ways imaginable to
alienate the Lands of the Church, and joining them to their own, appropriate
all to themselves. Often times they became Masters of their Parents House, and
living there with too great a Train, squandred away the Patrimony of the Cross
and the Poor, in Feasting, Equipage of Hounds and Horses, and sometimes in
things much worse. We might quote Church.
a great many Examples of this scandalous Nature, I shall instance one which is
of the Nephews of an Archdeacon of Paris, who committed extraordinary Violences
and Exactions in his Place: whereof Thomas Prior of St. Victors having often
given him warning, they Murdered this holy Holy Friar in the very Arms of the
Bishop himself near Gournay, as he returned from a Visit.

Councils.
The Councils of the Gallican Church having now but little Authority, because
their Decisions were often annul'd at Rome, without hearing their Reasons, the
Bishops took not so much care to call any. I cannot tell in which it was where
an old Bishop appeared with ill Clothes, a Crosier half broken, and a Mitre out
of order, to let them see by that Equipage to what a vile Condition those holy
Assemblies were reduced. Most of those held in France during this Age, were
called either by the Popes themselves or by their Legates. The Popes were
Personally present in Six, Paschal II. in that of Troyes, Anno 1107. and there
the Simoniacks, and the Laics, that conferred Benefices were Excommunicated.
Gelasius held one at Vienne in the year 1119. where he thundered his Anathema
against the Emperor Henry V. and (...) Antipope. Calistus II. his Successor
(Guy Archbishop of Vienne) did the same thing in that of Rheims the following
year, which had been denounced by Gelasius. Those that made sale of things
Sacred, and took Money for burying the dead, for the Crisome and Baptism, were
likewise Excommunicated. Innocent II. held one at Clermont in Anno 1130. and
another at Rheims in Anno 1131. where he fulminated the Antipope Anacletus,
and his Adherents. Eugenius III. did Celebrate one at Rheims in the year 1137.
where diverse excellent Regulations were decreed. And Alexander III. one at
Tours in Anno 1163. where he gave an acount of his Election, and proved the
nullity of Octavian's his Rival.

These are a good part of those called by the Legates. One at Troyes in Anno
1104. in which the Bishop of Senlis was accused of Simony by some ill designing
People, but the Bishops rejected them as no good Evidence. He desired
nevertheless to purge himself from that suspicion by Oath before the Legate, to
which he was admitted. Two Cardinal Legates assembled, one at Poitiers, in Anno
1109. to reform the Manners and Habits of the Clergy: They were forbidden to
take any Benefice from the hands of the Laity: The Abbots to use Gloves,
Sandals or the Ring; Monks to Exercise Parochial Function, as to Baptize or to
Preach; which nevertheless was allowed to the Regular Canons. There was one at
Vienne, Anno 1112. where Godfrey Bishop of Amiens was President, in Quality of
Legate, because the Archbishop Guy had no very fluent Tongue. The Emperor Henry
V. was Excommunicated there: As were also those guilty of Simony, and such of
the Laity as gave the Investiture of Benefices.

There were three in the year 1114. one at Soissons, one at Beauvais, and
another at Rheims to Excommunicate Henry V. and Burdin his Antipope. One at
Toulouze in Anno 1124. which condemned certain false Brothers or counterfeit
Monks who declaimed against the Temporal Riches and Incomes of the Church, and
against the Sacraments. One at Troyes, Anno 1127. where the Order of the
Templers was confirmed; The Abbots Stephen de Cisteaux, and Bernard de Clervaux
were assistant there, and the latter drew up the Rules of that Order of Knights
Templers. There was one Assembled at Estampes in the year 1130. to condemn the
Antipope Anacletus. One likewise at Jouars the same year, to avenge by
Canonical Punishments the Murder of the B. Thomas Prior of St. Victors.
Another at Soissons, Anno 1136. which condemned the Errors of P. Abailard. One
at Sens four years after for the same business: King Lewis the Young was
present there. Another at Vezelay in Burgundy, in the year 1145. for the
Expeditioin to the Holy Land. That of Paris in the year 1147. confuted the
Opinions of Gilbert Poree Bishop of Poictiers, who REcanted before Pope
Eugenius at Rheims, after the Council was dissolved which had been held in that
City.

That of Fleury in the year 1151. was to annul the Marriage of King Lewis VII.
and Alienor of Aquitain. In that of Auranches in Normandy, Anno 1173. the
Legates gave for the second time, the Absolution for the Murder of St. Thomas
of Canterbury to Henry II. King of England. That of Alby, which was in Anno
1176. condemned the Heresy of the Albigensis. In that of Dijon which was held
about Michaelmas in the year 1197. the Legate from Pope Innocent III. put the
whole Kingdom of France under an Interdiction, to comple Philip Augustus to
quit Agnes de Merania, whom he had Espoused in prejudice of Isemburge his
Lawful Wife. Church.
In that of Sens, which was held in the year 1198. the Abbot of St. Martins of
Nevers, and the Dean of the great Church of the same City being present, were
convicted of the Heresies of the Popelicans, the Abbot deposed, the Dean
suspended, and both of them sent to Rome.

We hardly find above three or four that were called by the Kings order, and
the Authority of the Bishops of France. Amongst others one at Rheims, Anno
1109. one at Estampes, Anno 1130. and two at Paris, the first in the Year 1186.
the other in 1188. Both of them were called by King Philip, to consider of the
best means to relieve the Holy Land; and in the last they agreed to raise the
Tenths, which was called the Saladine Tithe. That of Estampes was called by
King Lewis VII. to judge whether of the two Popes they were to own, either
Innocent or Victor. That of Rheims was by the proper motion of the Bishops of
that Province, to do right to Godfrey Bishop of Amiens against the Monks of St.
Valery. He had made discovery that certain Letters of Exemption by them
obtained of the Holy See were false: their Cause was worth nothing in France,
they transferred it to Rome, and found such Advocates there as obtained a
Sentence to their advantage. The Bishops complained to the Assembly. We find in
the LX VIII. Epistle of Peter de Blois, that sometimes the like counterfeit
Letters were discovered: These were declared such by the Council. Thus it is
related by Nicholas Moine of Soissons, who has written the Life of this holy
Bishop. A modern Author has endeavored to invalidate this Narrative by
contradicting of the Dates of times assigned: his proofs may be examined.

Monastic Discipline was in its vigor in the newly Established Orders, but
some of the ancient Monasteries, as well of Men, as Virgins, and the old
Canons, were greatly in disorder having run into much irregularity; Sometimes
there were Bishops, that took care to reform them by gentle means: but when the
Debaucheries were too great, they put Regular Canons, or some new Monks in
those places.

There were time out of mind some Canons in the Church St. Genevieve du Mont,
which was called the Chapter St. Peter, and who upon the Recommendation of King
Robert had been exempted from dependence on the Bishop, and immediately subject
to the Holy See: it hapued that Pope Eugenius being lodged in their House, a
Quarrel arose between them and his Officers, these would needs take away a rich
Silk Carpet, which the King had made a Present of to his Holiness to cover the
place he kneeled on at Prayers; the others pretending it ought to be left to
their Church: From words they came to blows, the Canons fell upon the Popes
Officers so rudely, that several of them were hurt, the King himself had like
to have been so, while he was endeavoring to prevent the Scuffle. For
punishment of this Insolence, upon the Popes complaint, the King resolved to
expel them from that House, and gave it in charge to Sugar Abbot of St. Denis:
who placed twelve Canons Regulars there whom he took from St. Victors; Thus of
a Chapter they made an Abbey, the first Abbot they had was named Odon.

As for that of St. Victor, it was built in Anno 1113. or rather amplified by
Lewis the Gross, for before that time it was the Habitation of a Recluse, a
famous Doctor named Thomas de Champeaux, who taught Divinity at Nostre-Dame,
having taken on him the Habit of that Order, was Commissioned for the
Government and Conduct of the new Institution, and transferred the Divinity
Schools to that place, where he read, till he was called thence to the
Bishopric of Chaalons. Geduin his Pupil succeeded him, and bare the Title of
Abbot. We may say in praise of this House, that they never withdrew themselves
from their Obedience to their Bishop, but that they ever allowed and received
his Visitation and his Correction, whereby they have fared so well, that in
Five hundred and fifty years, for so long they have been there, they never fell
into any so great disorder as has required a Reformation of the whole, as all
the rest have done, who did shake off that Yoke of Lawful Authority.

The Order of Fontevraud, of which we made mention about the end of the last
Age, was confirmed by Pope Paschal II. in the year 1117. The following year
some Gentlemen zealous for the defense of holy Places, amongst others Hugh de
Paganis and Gefroy de Saint Ademar, to that end Instituted an Order of
Religious Kinghts, who were named the Poor Knights of the Holy City, then the
Templers, because they had their first Lodging or Quarters near the Temple of
Jerusalem and for the same reason they likewise called those Houses they had in
France, Temples, and so in other Countries. Their Order received its
Confirmation, Rules, and Habit at the Council of Troyes in the year 1127. Their
Rules were contrived by St. Bernard, and their Habit was to be white for the
Knights, and black or gray for the Servants. Their number was then but small,
but it increased in a while to three hundred, I Church.
mean of Knights alone, for the Servitors were almost innumerable. The Order de
Premonstre was instituted in Anno 1120. by Norbert, who was afterward promoted
to the Archbishopric of Magdebourg. That of the Carmes.
Carmelites did not begin till the year 1181. as you shall find in the other
Age.

The Orders of the Chartreux, de Grandmont and de Cisteaux, were instituted in
the preceding Age, as we have observed: They were all in great Veneration
because of their austerity: the two first were so still for their horrid
solitariness, indeed both of them were reckoned amongst the Hermits; and
besides they considered that of Grandmont for their rigorous Poverty. The
Friars Converts of this last (they were named the Bearded, because they wore
great Beards) having the management of their Temporal Goods, would have the
Government of the Order, and bring the Priests under their Ferula or Lash; but
in the end they lost their Cause.

The Chartreux have to this day preserved their Cloister and their Discipline,
having ever avoided all Intrigues of the World, Conversation with Women, and
the

These good Fathers had so much respect for the holy Sacrifice of the Mass,
that within their Walls they never celebrated it but upon Sundays and Holidays:
nevertheless they sometimes allowed those that had an earnest desire to it, to
say Mass every day to such as were indeed devout. We must not wonder at this
practice, which would appear strange in these days: St. Francis, in his Letters
which are called his Testament, ordains his Brothers, that but one Mass be said
each day in the places where they lived, according to the custom of the Church
of Rome. Masses were not then the best part of the Revenue and Subsistence of
the Convents, and poor Priests.

The Congregation of Clugny had been an hundred years in very high Reputation,
but her Monks had made themselves a little too dainty, taking too much delight
in being Clothed in the finest Stuffs, providing against the Heat and Cold,
avoiding all Labor and the open Air, and seeking the Shades and Rest. They
heaped up Riches with both Hands, got all the Cures to themselves to have the
Offerings and Tithes, and obliged the Chapters and Bishops to bestow the
Prebendaries of their Churches upon them. In so much that when the Reformation
of the Citeaux appeared, and those new Friars were observed to follow St.
Bennets Rule literally, without omitting one single point, laboring with their
hands, refusing to acept of any Tithes, and behaving themselves with great
submission toward their Prelates; the Reverence and Devotion of the People
turned to them. Thus they acquired much Wealth, as well by Gifts presented to
them, as by their assiduous Labor, there being in some of their Houses two or
three hundred Friars that cleared the Lands of the Woods and other Lets to
Tillage, drained the Fens and Bogs, dug and planted, and withal lived with
great Frugality. Being very poor in their beginning, Pope Innocent would have
them exempted from paying Tithes for their Lands; a favor that was allowed to
some Abbeys, the Lazar-Houses, Canons Regulars, and the Kinghts Templers and
Hospitallers. Now as their great Thriftiness, and Gifts of Pious People, did
furnish them wherewith to make new Purchases; the Prelates made great complaint
of this Covetousness, which did withold from them what they believed to be
justly theirs by Divine Right. The Monks of Clugny, who were much perjudic'd or
impaired by them, because they had the Tithes in diverse places, made loud
complaints and a great stir wherever they could come to be heard, so that in
fine the Council of Latran which was held in the year 1115. restraining that
Privilege to the acquisitions they had already made.

This Difference joined with the jealousy of growing too powerful, prompted
these two Congregations to decry each other. Both of them were very Potent, the
Popes and Kings took their Counsels, gave them notice of their good or ill
success, recommended themselves to their Prayers in all their great
Undertakings, and made them large Gifts and Presents to be Associates and
Partakers of the Merits of their Societies. That of Clugny had acquired much
Renown by the desert and reputation of four or five of her first Abbots, but
lost a little by the irregularity of Ponce, who squandred away a great part of
the Wealth of that rich Abbey: on the contrary the Cisteaux increased so much in
Credit by the Reputation of her St. Bernard, that those Monks were the Agents
or the Organs of all the weighty Affairs of those times.

Church.
I must tell you here, (if I have not mentioned it already) that the Will of
the Parents made the Monk, as well as his own choice. The Father might put his
Children into the Monastery without acquainting the Mother, and even against
her will. He had that power over them till they were Ten years of Age,
afterward that Term was enlarged to Thirteen, says Yves de Char^res; and then
to Fourteen, as we find it in Gratian. When the Father had resolved and
destined his Son to Monachism, he offered him to God in the Church belonging to
the Convent, wrapped all over, or sometimes only the Arm in the Altar Cloth,
and by that Devotion obliged him so fully, that he could not gainsay it. But
Clement III. and Calistus III. changed that too unnatural Right and Power, and
declared, That those Children ought not to be compelled to Monastic Life,
unless they did by their own free choice oblige themselves when they had
attained to years of Discretion.

Cardinals.
The Dignity of Cardinals was in great luster, their College was numerous, and
their Virtue and Birth most eminent. France had as great a share at least in
this Advantage, as Italy. Duchesne who has written their Lives very exactly,
has noted in this Twelfth Age above Fifty that were Frenchmen: the greatest
part of them having been bred in Monasteries, particularly in the Congregation
of Clugny, and Order de Cisteaux; These last were almost all of them the
intimate Friends or Disciples of St. Bernard. Galon Disciple of Yves de
Chartres, Bishop of Beauvais then of Paris, Guy Brother of Stephen Earl of
Bu^gundy Archbishop of Vienne, and afterward Sovereign Prelat by the name of
Calistus II. Pontius de Melgueil Abbot of Clugny, Stephen Son of Thierry Earl
of Montbelliard, William de Champagne successively Archbishop of Sens and of
Rheims, Uncle to King Philip Augustus, and very powerful in the Government of
the Kingdom, Rodolph de Nesle, Henry de Sully, and Albert Brother of the Duke
of Brabant, were all of illustrious Birth, and withal of extraordinary Virtue,
excepting Ponce, or Pontius, who was singular for the Disorders of his Life;
which were scandalous after his re-entry perforce into the Abbey which he had
once renounced, that going to Rome, whither he was cited by the Pope, he was
confined to a perpetual imprisonment, where a Month after he died. And
nevertheless a certain Martyrologist quoted by Duchesne does call him Saint.

The end of Albert was also Tragical, but the Cause being brave, his Memory is
the more glorious. He had been Elected Bishop of Liege upon the Solicitation
of Henry Duke of Brabant his Brother; The Emperor Henry VI. who hated both of
them, would not give his consent to this Election; The Pope however confirms
him, and Albert comes to Rheims to be Consecrated, which was then the
Metropolis of Liege. The Emperor took this for an outrageous affront and
slighting, and dispatches some German Cavaliers after him to take his Revenge.
These Ruffians having craftily insinuated themselves into a familiarity with
the Bishop, who then sojourned at Rheims, found an opportunity one day to get
him out of Town to take the Air and walk, and Murdered him with Nineteen
Wounds, then made their escape to Verdun, and from thence into Germany to the
Emperor. Four hundred and twenty years after, that is in the year 1612. the
Archduke Albertus of Austria, and his spouse the Infanta Clara Eugenia,
obtained leave of the Most Christian King Lewis XIII. to take his Corpse up out
of the Cathedral Church at Rheims, where it had been deposited till that time,
and caused it to be conveyed to Brussels in great Pomp. Paul V. completed his
Crown of Honor by Canonizing him as a Martyr for the liberty of the Church
which is the Spouse of Jesus Christ.

I observe Eight or ten other Cardinals, who had no other Nobility but what
their Virtue acquired: as one Robert de Paris, who with some others so pressed
Pope Paschal, that he had made him break the Treaty by which he had yielded up
the Investitures to the Emperor Henry V. Foulcher de Chartres, Matthew de
Rheims, and Alberic de Beauvais, the first of whom had been Secretary to
Godfrey de Buillon in his Expedition to the Holy Land, the second Prior of St.
Martins des Champs, or in the Fields, and the third a Monk of Clugny and Abbot
of Vezelay; Stephen de Chaalons, Bernard de Rennes, (these two had likewise
been Monks) Rowland d'Auranches, and Matthew d'Angers; all which took their
names from the places of their Nativity, according to the Mode of Men of
Learning who were of mean Extraction.

There were diverse others besides whose Parents are unknown to us, as one Yves
a Canon of St. Victor raised by his Learning to that Dignity, and one Martin
who came from the Abbey de Citeaux, and was Bishop of Ostia, a Prelat of an
Apostolic Continence and Fragality. It is related that he being sent as Legate
into Denmark for the Conversion of those Infidels, he came back so poor that he
Traveled on Foot as far as Florence, herein much more like the humble Apostles
of Jesus Christ, then the other Legates of those times, who coming very
beggerlike into those Provinces whither Church.
the Popes sent them, went thence again laden with Spoil, as from a Country
Conquered by them, and returned back to Rome with an Equipage sit for a King.
The Bishop of Florence seeing this good Man on foot, made him a Present of a
Horse, not out of generosity, but hopes to oblige him to be his Friend in a
Process he had at Rome ready to be determined; but when it came to Judgment,
and this good Man to deliver his opinion, he Addresses himself to him, and said
freely he did not know he was to have been his Judge, and therefore prayed him
to go to the Stable and take his Horse again, that his Vote might be without
partiality.

Neither did France want for Bishops, whose Learning, Merits, Zeal, and Piety
acquired the Titles of Great Men, and of Saints. Not to mention again that
Galon, Guy of Burgundy, William de Champagne, and Albert de Brabant whom we
lately ranged amongst the Cardinals: France had amongst others seven great
Archbishops, Hildebert de Tours, Peter de Bourges, who was of the Family de la
Chastre, Odvard de Cambray, Arnold Amaulry de Narbonne, Henry de Rheims, Rotrou
de Rouen, and Hugh de Vienne. Arnold had been Abbot of Clerveaux, and was the
first Inquisitor to root out the Heresy of the Albigensis; Rotrou was Son of
the Earl of Warwick, near of Kindred to the King of England, as Henry was to
the King of France, Louis the Gross: but both of them more eminent for their
Christian Humility, then high Birth. Hugh endured rather to be expelled from
his See by the Emperor Frederic I. then to renounce Alexander III. whom he
believed to be the true and Legitimate Pope. I should never come to an end, if
I undertook to give an account of all the Bishops of this Age who deserve
Immortality and Renown. But can we forget Yves and John of Salisbury who
governed the Church of Chartres, the first in the beginning of this Century,
and the last toward the end? Godfrey d'Amiens of whom we shall speak
hereafter; Peter of Poitiers, who courageously opposed William VIII. Duke of
Aquitain, who would force him to absolve him of the Excommunication wherewith
he was fettered; Gilbert Poree who held the same See as Peter, but Twenty five
years after; Arnoulf Bishop of Lisieux; Robert de Beauvais, he was the Son of
Hugh Duke of Burgundy. John surnamed de la Grille who transferred the
Bishopric of Quidalet to that place now called St. Malo's; Simon de Noyon, and
Guerin de Senlis. In the time of Simon, whilst he was at Jerusalem with King
Louis VII. (in the year 1146.) the Church of Tournay was cut off from that of
Noyon, to which it had been joined in the days of St. Medard, and had for their
first Bishop Anselme who was Abbot of St. Viucent of Laon, Guerin de Senlis was
very great in the Reign of Philp II. and of Louis VIII. Keeper of the Seals
under the first, Chancellor under the second.

I shall conclude with four Bishops of Paris, whose Memory ought to be dear to
that great City, and the whole Gallican Church. Stephen de Garlande, Peter
Lombard, Maurice and Odon. These two last bare the name of Sully, Maurice
because he was a Native of that place, but of very poor Parents, Odon because
he was of that illustrious House, Issue of the Earls of Champagne. Stephen had
been Chancellor of France under Louis VI. Peter Lombard was called the Master
of Sentences, from that Book so well known through all Christendom, and which
was the Foundation of all School Divinity. Maurice had a noble Soul, liberal
and magnanimous: He founded the Abbeys de Herivaux, and de Hemieres, as
likewise two Monasteries for Virgins, Gif and Hieres, and laid the Foundation
of the Church Nostre-Dame, one of the greatest Buildings to be seen in France.
Odon his Successor finished it, and founded a Monastery for Women of the Order
de Cisteaux at Port Royal, being assisted in that Pious Work by the Liberality
of Matilda Daughter of William de Garland. He labored also to root out an
ancient but ridiculous Custom which had been suffered in the Church of Paris,
and in diverse others of the Kingdom. It was the Holy Day or Feast of Fools; in
some places they called it the Festival of Innocents. It was observed at Paris,
principally upon the day of the Circumcision, the Priests and Clerks went in
Masquerade to Church, where they committed a thousand Insolences, and from
thence rode about the Streets in Chariots, mounted upon Theaters or Stages,
singing the most filthy Songs, and acting all the tricks and postures the most
impudent Buffoons are wont to show to divert the Rascally and Sottish Populace.
Odo or Odon endeavored to put down this detestable Mummery, having to that
effect obtained an order of the Popes Legate, who made his Visitation there: but
we may well believe that his desire had not its full accomplishment, that
Custom lasting Two hundred and fifty years afterward, for we find that in the
year 1444. the Masters of the Faculties of Divinity at the request of some
Bishops, wrote a Letter to all the Prelates and Chapters, to damn and utterly
abolish it, and the Council of Sens which was Church.
held in Anno 1460. does yet speak of it as an Abuse which ought to be
Retrencht.

The Bishops labored assiduously to edify and instruct the Faithful by their
Works and Doctrine: most part of them have left their Writings, whereof many
have been published, the rest as yet lie hid in several Libraries. And truly as
this Age was not ungrateful to Persons of Merit, the liberty of Elections
giving them opportunities to reward them, there were more Men of worth and
parts to be found, then had been heard of in a long time, who improved the
Sciences with good success, and drew an incredible number of Students to learn
Philosophy and Divinity at Paris.

Human Learning, or Les belles Lettres, made some Attempts and Essays to raise
it self, which were not altogether in vain. It appears in the Writings of
Hildebert, of John of Salisbury, and Stephen de Tournay. Peter Comester or the
Margeur.
Eater, Dean of the Church of Troyes, and afterward a Monk of St. Victors,
compiled the Ecclesiastical History; and he was called the Master of it; and
Elinand Native of Beauvais, a Monk of Froidmont, wrote the Universal History to
the year 1212. in Forty eight Books.

We have three Latin Poets or Versisicators, who are not to be despised,
Galternus, William le Breton, and Leonius. The first made a Poem of Alexanders
famous Exploits, which he Entitled Alexandreides. Le Broton in imitation
composed the Philippides containing the History of Philip Augustus; and Leonius
made himself known by several Copies, which though not very long, are gentile
and full of Wit. He was Canon of St. Victor.

I shall not set down all those whom in this Age the Church put into her number
of Saints; but only the two Bernards, the one being the first Abbot de Tiron of
St. Bennet's Order, and the other Abbot of Clervaux, whose Wit and clear
Judgment, his Zeal and Piety, his Conduct and Capacity in business of the
greatest weight, made him appear with more luster then any other in his time.
Three Institutors of new Religious Orders, Robert Abbot de Molesme, that of the
Cisteaux, Stephen that of Grandmont, and Norbert that de Premonstre; Five
Bishops, Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, whom I place amongst the French,
though he were a Native of the Valley d'Aost, because he Studied in France, and
was Abbot du Bec; Peter Abbot de la Celle, then Bishop of Troyes; another
Peter, Bishop of Poictiers; Aldebert de Brabant Bishop of Liege; and Godfrey,
Bishop of Amiens*

They relate an action of this last which our times would sooner wonder at,
then imitate. It was the Mode then, for such as would be Gallants, to wear long
Hair, curled and tressed: this courageous Prelat one time refuses to admit any
to the holy Table who came tricked up in that fashion; and that refusal put
them to such shame and confusion, that they all cut it off themselves, choosing
rather to lose that vain Ornament of their Heads, then the Comfort of eating
the holy Bread of Angels. When he found them so well disposed, he admitted
those as Men and Christians whom he before had turned away as dissolute Women,
or Men wholly effeminated.

About the year 1180. the People Reverenced a certain Maiden as a Saint, whose
name was Elpide or Alpaida, dwelling in the Village du Cudot, in the Diocese of
Sens, who for Ten years together would swallow nothing but the Sacred Host; and
though a simple Country Girl, had great light and knowledge of things Natural
and Divine. This debility happened after a severe fit of Sickness, which had
turned all her Body into a corrupt and stinking purulent Matter extremely
infected. I cannot say how long she survived after the year 1180. but there is
yet to be seen in the Parochial Church of that place her Monument, and her
Effigies also in Stone, which over-head is crowned with Flowers; The People of
that Country assure us, That God by diverse Miracles has approved the Devotion
they have toward her.

Lewis VIII. King XLII.
POPE, HONORIUS III. All along this Reign, and beyond it.
LEWIS VIII. Surnamed the Lion, and the Father of St. LEWIS, King XLII. Aged
Thirty six years complete.

PHilip Augustus had not caused his Son to be Crowned in his Lifetime, whether
he had a jealousy of him, or thought his Family so well Established that he
had no need of such precaution to secure the Crown to him. He was therefore
Crowned at Rheims with his Wife Blanch de Castille, the Tenth day of the Month
of August

The King of England did not assist at his Coronation as he ought to have done,
in Quality of Pair of France: but sent Ambassadors to summon him according to
the Oath he had made at London, to surrender Normandy to him with all those
other Countries that had been taken from King John his Father. They received
for Answer, That they had been Consiscated by Judgment of the Pairs, and that
they pretended to have the remainder likewise which he held, so far were they
from giving back what he demanded.

Languedoc did easily return again to their Natural Lord Raimond Earl of
Toulouze, Amaury finding himself too weak to stay in those Countries, came and
resigned and yielded up all the Right and Title he had into the hands of the
King; who for Recompense made him High Constable.

It was then but an Employment, lasting no longer then the War; So that we
sometimes find such Lords on whom it has been conferred two or three several
times.

Raimond Earl of Toulouze having made his Address to Pope Honorius with all
imaginable submission, the Holy Father sent to his Legate to call a Council at
Montpellier to reconcile him with the Church. After which Raimond before an
Assembly of the Clergy in Languedoc, promised and swear entire Obedience to the
Roman Church, sufficient security to the Clergy for restitution and the
enjoyment of their Goods and Profits, and the extirpation of Heretics
throughout all his Country. Upon this satisfaction the Pope received him to
Mercy, and owned him for Earl of Toulouze.

Romain a Cardinal that had the Title of St. Angelo, to persuade him to
undertake that Expedition; which he did the more readily because it suited with
his zeal and with his Interests.

Lewis of France, and Henry of Germany, eldest Son to the Emperor Frederic, had
a Conference at Vaucouleurs, where they Treated about several Difference
between the two Crowns, and made diverse Propositions, but came to no conclusion.

At his return from thence, pursuant to a Resolution had been taken to drive
the English wholly out of France, Lewis enters Poitou, gains a Battle there
over Savary de Mauleon General of the English in Guyenne, makes himself Master
of the Cities of Niort and of St. John d'Angely, and generally over all the
Places even to the Garonne, and receives the Homage of all the Lords of those
parts.

Rochelle, where Savary de Mauleon defended himself for a long time expecting
Relief from England. In fine, being basely disappointed and deceived by the
King of England's Ministers who sent him Chests full of old Iron in stead of
Silver to satisfy the Garrison, he was forced to surrender the Town the 28th
day of July; and afterward pretending, whether true or false, that he had been
Treated in England as a Person whose Faith they suspected, he quitted his old
Master, and went to the King of France.

After the taking of that important City, the Kings to secure it the better to
themselves, had as it were outvied each other, in gratifying it with many great
Privileges, by which means it was raised to a high pitch of Renown, for its
Wealth and Liberty: but through their ill management of those Advantages, she
has utterly lost them all in these latter times.

Guyenne had been gained by the French, if Richard Brother to King Henry had
not landed at Bordeaux with a great Army, which raised up the drooping Spirits.
He took St. Macaire near Bordeaux by Storm: but la Reoule gave him a great
Repulse; and being informed that the French Army was at the River Garonne, he
Shipped himself again and left order with Aimery Vicount de Touars to procure a
Truce.

There wandered a certain Person about Flanders, near this time, who said he was
that Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and Emperor of Constantinople, that had been
taken Prisoner by the King of Bulgaria. He related how he made his escape out
of Prison, and put them in mind of several Tokens and Circumstances to know him
by. The Flemings who mightily loved Baldwin, gave Credit to this Man, and put
him in possession of all Flanders.

Jane Daughter of Baldwin finding her self at a loss (for her Husband Ferrand
was still a Prisoner at Paris) had recourse to the King, who sent word to this
pretended Baldwin, that he should come to him at Peronne. He came boldly
thither: but disdaining or not being able to answer the Questions put to him,
which he must needs have known if he were not a Cheat, the King commanded him
to depart his Territories within three days, and gave him a safe Conduct. Being
afterward forsaken by all the World, he endeavored to escape away in a
disguise, but he was taken in Burgundy and carried to the Countess; who after

Touraine, the Legate went to him and obliged him to prolong the Truce with
Aymery Vicount de Touars, the only Nobleman that opposed the King yet in
Poictou. This Vicount shortly after came to Paris to render Hommage to the King
in presence of the King of England's Ambassadors.

Avignon having refused the Army passage, was besieged the 14th of June. It
defended it self obstinately, Guy Count de Saint Pol one of the bravest of the
Besiegers was slain there, the Plague got amongst the Soldiers, and the Earl of
Champagne Malcontent went away without leave. The King nevertheless swore he
would not decamp till he brought the Besieged to Reason; in so much that on the
Our Lady Day in Harvest.
Assumption-day they were reduced to a Capitulation. They gave up two hundred
Hostages, their Walls were pulled down, their Moats and Grafts filled up, and
three hundred Houses with Turrets demolished. These were Inns belonging to
Gentlemen, who had the like at Toulouze, and other great Cities in those
Provinces.

Going thence, the King went into Provence, and all the Towns surrendered to
him within four Leagues of Toulouze. The Season growing bad, and he somewhat
tender of Constitution, he takes his way back toward France, leaving the
Conduct of his Forces and the Government of those Countries in the hands of
Imbert de Beau-jeu.

Montpencier in Auvergne, upon a Sunday being the Octave of All Saints. He had
Denis by his Father.

The Clergy because of his Piety and his Chastity, reported that his Sickness
proceeded from his too great Continence; (for his Wife did not go with him) and
that he chose rather to dye then make use of an unlawful Remedy they presented
him for Cure.

As he foresaw things in a posture that threatened great troubles after his
death, he took the Oaths and Seals of Twelve Lords that were about him, that
they should cause his eldest Son to be Crowned, and if he failed, they should
put the Second in his stead.

By his Wife Blanch de Castille he had nine Sons and two Daughters; there were
but five Sons alive, Lewis, Robert, Alphonso, Charles, and John. According to
his Will and Testament Lewis Reigned, Robert had the County of Artois, and
propagated the branch of that name; Alphonso had that of Poitou, and Charles
that of Anjou. From him sprung the first Branch of Anjou. John dyed at the age
of 14 years. Of the two Daughters, only Isabella was left, who having been
promised to diverse Princes, and grown to be an old Maid, took on the Holy vail,
and shut her self up the year 1260. in the Monastery of Longchamp, between
Paris and St. Cloud, which the King her Brother founded for her.

Saint Lewis, King XLIII. Aged Eleven years six Months.
POPES.
HONORIUS III. Five Months. GREG. IX. Elect in April, 1227. S. Fourteen years,
Five Months. CELESTINE IV. Elect in Sept. 1241. S. Eighteen days. Vacancy of
Twenty Months. INNOCENT IV. Elect in June 1243. S. Eleven years, Five Months
and a half. ALEXANDER IV. Elect in December. 1254. S. Six years, Five Months.
URBAN IV. Son of a Cobbler of Troyes, Elected about the end of August, 1261. S.
Three years, Thirty four days. CLEMENT IV. Elected in Feb. 1265. S. Three
years, and about Ten Months. Vacancy of Thirty five Months, from Dec. in the
year 1268. the Cardinals not agreeing amongst themselves in the Conclave, about
the Election.
THis is the Third Minority in the Capetine Race; and the First wherein a
Blanch de Castille a stranger, but courageous and able; undertook it, and
carried it, being assisted by the Counsels of Romain, the Cardinal Legate, who
had great power with her, and grounded upon the Certificates of some Lords, who
attested that her Husband being on his Deathbed, had ordered that he would
have his eldest Son with the Kingdom, and all his other Brothers, be left to
her Guardianship and Government.

Immediately before the Lords had time to contrive any obstacles to her
Regency, Lewis, to be Crowned in the City of Rheims. The Episcopal See being
vacant, the Bishop of Soissons, who is the Suffragant, performed the Ceremony.
It was on the First day of December.

The Lords of the Kingdom had been invited thither by Letters, but the greatest
part refused to come; amongst others, Peter Duke of Bretagne, Henry Earl of Bar
his Brother-in-law, Hugh de Luzignan, Earl de la March, Thibauld Earl of
Champagne, Hugh de Chastillon; Count de St. Pol, and diverse others. They were
framing a League amongst them, demanding, that the Regent who was a Stranger,
should give security for her good Administration, that whatever had been taken
from the Lords during the two last Reigns, should be restored to them, and such
as were prisoners should be released, especially Ferrand Earl of Flanders.

Rheims, notwithstanding the severity of the Winter, she marched toward
Bretagne, where lay the strength of the League. The Confederates being not yet
ready, avoided what mischief they could by a Retreat; but she followed so close
at their heels, that the Earl of Champagne fell off from the party; then the
others entered into a Treaty, and promised to appear in full Parliament, which
was to be held at Chinon, and which at their request was removed to Tours, then
to Vendosme.

March, a Peace was patched up between the Regent and the Lords; but the same
year they being assembled at Corbeil, plotted to surprise the King as he was
coming from Chastres to Paris: their design had infallibly succeeded, if the
Queen Regent had not been informed, and cast her self with the King into
Montlehery. The Citizens of Paris having taken up Arms, went thither to guard
him, and brought him back with joyful acclamations to their City.

The Earl of Champagne was the man that had given this private intelligence to
the Queen. This young Prince had a pretense of Love or Gallantry for her,
rather out of some Court-like vanity, then for the power of her charms, she
being a Woman of above Forty years of age; she knew how to make her own
advantage of his folly, and wished him to continue amongst those discontented
People, that he might betray all their intrigues to her.

England would needs concern himself in this quarrel, and promised them his
assistance; and the Earl of Toulouze taking his opportunity, during these
Brouilleries and Stirs, had got possession again of all his Places. The Queen
Regent fearing this Flame might be blown too high, renewed a Treaty with the
Princes of this League, whom by that means she kept from farther proceeding all
this year; and in the mean while, she confirmed the Alliance with the Emperor
Frederick, made a Truce with the English for a Twelvemonth, and came to an
agreement with the Duke of Bretagne, who gave his Daughter to be Married to a
Son of hers, named John.

Thus the Earl of Toulouze was left alone. Imert de Beau-jeu having received a
notable re-inforcement, bethought himself, instead of taking the Castles one by
one, it would do better to spoil and ruin the whole Country about Toulouze,
pull down the Houses, root up the Vineyards, and burn the Corn; which so
disheartened the Toulousains, that both they and their Earl, were forced to
submit to what conditions he pleased.

Meaux, and completed at Paris, the Earl and Deputies of Toulouze being
present: The Earl was deprived of all his Lands, excepting some little
fragments they for mere pity left him. It was ordered they should all devolve
to his Daughter Jane, who should be Married to Alphonso the Kings Brother, into
whose custody she was put forthwith; That the Earl should pay Seventeen
thousand Marks of Silver, part to the King, some to the Monks de Cisteaux, and
the rest for a Foundation of Doctors in Divinity at Toulouze; That the Walls of
that City, and of Thirty more should be demolished; for performance whereof he
should give Hostages, and in the mean time remain prisoner; That there should
be an exact search after Heretics, at his charge; and that for penance he
should go and make war five years against the Saracens.

These Articles Signed, he and those of his company that had been
Excommunicated, were at Nostre-dames of Paris upon Good Friday barefooted, in
their Shirts, to receive Absolution of the Popes Legate. That done, the Earl
returned prisoner to the Tower of the Louvre, till he had given his Hostages.
About the Feast of Pentecost the King gave him the Order of Knighthood, and
sent him into his own Country. The Legate went with him, and settled the
Inquisition, which exercised great severities, and was again the cause of many
troubles and Massacres.

Spanish Woman and an Italian Cardinal; they therefore took up Arms again, drew
to their party, Robert Earl of Dreux, elder Brother to the Duke of Bretagne,
and Philip Earl of Boulogne, the Kings paternal Uncle, to whom they promised
the Crown: so that the King feared a second time to be involved by this
conspiracy, and had been surprised, if the Earl of Champagne had not run
seasonably to him with 300 * Horsemen to bring him off.

They were called Militer* 1228.
In Spring the Conspirators turned all their Force against the Earl of
Champagne and Brie. They demanded those Counties of him for Alix Queen of
Cyprus, Daughter of his Uncle Henry, who died in the Levant; and more then
that, called him Traitor, and accused him of having poysonned the deceased
King, proffering to convict him by Duel; a reproach that made him so black and
loathsome amongst his Vassals, that they joined in League with his Enemies
against him.

The Count finding so heavy a burden on his Shoulders, and his City of Troyes
besieged, implores the assistance of the Queen Regent, who caused the King to
march to his relief, and commanded them, if they had any thing to say against
the Earl, they should come and require justice upon him in her Court.

But they who would not acknowledge her Regency, as if the Kingdom had been
vacant, elected in a private Assembly or Cabal, the Lord de Coucy for King, who
was in great reputation for his Wisdom and Justice. The Queen Regent having got
intelligence, gave immediate notice of it to Philip Earl of Boulogne, whom they
had made believe they would give the Crown to: by this means she took him off
from them, then by diverse politic contrivances made all their designs vanish,
but not their ill intentions.

Bretagne, by their assistance and Councils, took up Arms again, and called the
King of England to his aid, who landed in Bretague with considerable Forces:
but when he saw the King, conducted by the Queen Regent, had taken the Castle
de Belesme au Perch from the Duke, which was held impregnable: he Shipped
himself again. The Duke thus abandonned, was constrained to betake himself to
an agreement.

Nantes; so that to get out of the Briars, and make the best of a bad bargain,
he was forced to render him hommage of Allegiance for the Duchy. The Bretons,
who pretended they owed but ouly single Homage, named him, because of his so
doing, Mau-clerc, as who should say, Witless, or wanting Judgment and
Understanding.

Emp. Baldwin II. Reigned 35 years. And Frederic II.
Thibauld Earl of Champagne was ill rewarded for the good services he had done
the Queen Regent. She took in hand the cause of her Cousin Alix, and condemned
him to pay her Forty thousand Marks of Silver, and sell to the King to raise
that Money, the Counties of Blois, Chartres, Sancerre, and the Vicount of
Chasteaudun.

Albigensis, and the hurly-burlies of the Scholars belonging to the University
of Paris. It was then the fairest Ornament of the Kingdom, and the innumerable
numbers of Scholars that flocked thither from all parts of Europe, brought
great riches to that City, which in a manner made all the other Universities in
Christendom submit to it. Now some of them having been ill handled in some
scuffle with the Citizens, and not obtaining such satisfaction as they desired,
they all resolved to quit Paris; not without having first published a great
many Songs, and Licentious Poems, which fullied the reputation of the Queen
Regent, and Cardinal Romain the Popes Legate, who swayed her. The Duke of
Bretagne and the King of England proffered to receive them into their
Countries, and to grant them great privileges; but the Kings Council fearing
that capital City might be deprived of so great an advantage and benefit, found
means to allay their heats, and keep them there.

Marseilles, and the adjacent Countries being revolted against Raimond
Berenger, Earl of Provence, called in Raimond, Earl of Toulouze to Command
them, because he was next Heir; For we must know that Gilbert Earl of Provence
and Nice, had had two Daughters, Faidide, who Married Alphonso, Great, Great,
Great. Grandfather of Raimond de Toulouze, and Douce that had married Raimond
Berenger, Earl of Bacelonna, from whom was descended the Earl of Provence now
mentioned.

He therefore accepted of their Homage, and acted as their Lord, whence
followed a War that lasted four years between those two Cousins.

This Earl of Provence having been harrass'd by diverse Revolts, and other
misfortunes, was at the end of his days, made completely happy, by the Marriage
of four Daughters he had by his Wife Beatrix of Savoy, a most Virtuous
Princess. For all four of them had the honor to be Married to Kings: Margret,
who was the eldest, was the most happy, being joined this year to Lewis King of
France, a Prince that

The same year the Earl of Champagee, it is not said for what cause, fell again
into Rebellion, for which he was punished with the loss of his Cities of
Montereau-Faut-Yonne, Bray and Nogent upon the Seine. These losses did not make
him much wiser, he persisted still in his foolish passion for the Queen who had
ruined him, and retired to his Castle of Provins to write Verses and Songs, for
entertainment of his amorous Dotage.

Sancho VIII. called the Strong, King of Navarre, who dying without any Males,
left the Kingdom to him as the next Heir and Son of his Daughter Some say she
was Sister to Alphonso VIII.
Blanch. So he went and took possession, and transported a great number of
Husbandmen from his Lands in Brie and Champagne, who improved, and made that
Country very fertile and populous.

The Country of Artois was erected to an Earldom Of the Peerage.
Pairrie, in favor of Robert the Kings Brother, on whom his Father had
bestowed it by his Will. Some place this erection in the time of Philip
Augustus. However it were, I think we may be confident it is the first of that
nature.

At the solicitation of Pope Gregory (who had as well a quarrel to the
Emperor Frederick's Forces, his Enemy declared, they being in possession of
the remainder of Jerusalem, as to the Saracens) there was a great Crusado of
French Lords, over whom the new King of Navarre was made Chief. But these
Adventurers had no better success then all the rest; for the ill conduct of
these new Soldiers of the Cross, and their Divisions, brought the whole Army
almost to ruin, and most part of the Officers and Commanders were slain there,
or taken prisoners.

Peter, Duke of Burgundy died in his return from this Expedition, his only Son
John, Surnamed Rufus succeeded him. The affairs of Constantinople were no whit
better; the Emperor Baldwin comes into France to beg assistance against the
Greeks, and for a great sum of Money, sold the Crown of Thorns wherewith our
Savior was Crowned, the Spung, and the Lance, which pierced his Side, to St.
Lewis the King, who put them into his Treasury of Relics in the Holy Chapel,
which he had purposely built in his own Palace.

It was now about three years that all the Doctors both Seculars and Regulars
of the Sacred Faculty of Divnity at Paris (which was then almost the only
School for that Science, and as it were the perpetual Council of the Gallican
Church) had resolved the question, and were all agreed upon this judgment in a
famous Assembly, and after mature deliberation and discussion, that oue and the
same Ecclesiastical person could in Conscience hold but one Benefice at one
time.

This year 1238. William III. Bishop of Paris, held another Assembly of the
same Faculty in the Chapter of the Jacobins, where it was unanimously
concluded, That one could not, without forfeiture of Eternal Happiness, possess
two Benefices at the same time, provided one of them were of the value only of
Fifteen Livers Each Liver Parisis, is ^ about 2 s. 6 d. sterling.
parisis, per annum. There were none but Philip, Chancellor of the University,
and Arnold, afterward Bishop of Amiens, who were obstinately resolved to hold
their own. The First when he lay on his Deathbed, being earnestly desired, and
pressed home by the Bishop William, to discharge himself of that burden which
would sink him down to Hell; replied, That he would try whether that were true.
How few are to be seen in these days that do not choose to run the same hazard,
or are not troubled that they cannot have the opportunity of such

The quarrels between Pope Gregory IX. and the Emperor Frederic growing hot,
to all extremity of Outrages on either side. Gregory sent to St. Lewis King of
France, to proffer him the Empire for his Brother Robert, Earl of Artois. The
Lords assembled by the King, upon a proposition so important, did not approve
that violent proceeding, and said it was sufficient for Robert, that he was
Brother to a King, who was more excellent in Dignity and Nobility, then any
Emperor whatever.

The Albigensis could not submit themselves to the Orders of the Inquisition;
Trincavel, Son of the Vicount de Beziers, and five or six Lords of the
Country, putting themselves at the head of them, they seized upon Carcassonne,
and some John Earl of Beaumont, who drove them out from Carcassonne, and
besieged them in Mont-real: where after they had held some time, they made
their capitulation, by means of the Earls of Foix and Toulouze.

The old de la Montagne, so they named the Prince of the Assassins, a People
that occupied the mountainous Canton of Syria, had dispatched two of his
Murderers into France to kill the King: but soon after, I cannot say by what
motive, he repented, and countermanded them by some others; who before they
could find them out, advertised the King to have a care of himself.

This old de la Montagne bred up great numbers of young Youths, in pleasant and
delicious Palaces, and the hopes of an Eternal Felicity in the other World, if
they obeyed his Commands blindfold; and to make them the more capable, and fit
to execute his bloody Will in all Countries, he made them learn all Languages.

Frederick and Honorius, and then Gregory IX. who succeeded Honorius, fell
necessarily into discords, and afterward into mortal hatred. Gregory lets fly
the Thunderbolts of the Church against Frederick, and his Legate having called
the Prelates of France together at Meaux, ordered several of them to go to Rome
to hold a Council, where they pretended to degrade that Emperor.

He complained to the King, desired him not to permit his Bishops to go out of
France; and his desire not taking effect, he caused them to be waylaid, and
watched at Sea, and having taken them, distributed them in diverse prisons. Then
in his turn, he for a while slighted the Kings intercession for their release;
which thing made some alteration in that good correspondence, that for some
time had continued between France and the Empire.

In the year 1240. The King having assembled the flower of the Barons, and the
Saumur, gave the Girdle of Knighthood to his Brother Alphonso, (whose Marriage
had a little before been completed with Jane, Daughter and Heiress of the Earl
of Toulouze) and also gave him the Counties of Poitou and Auvergne, and all
that had been conquered in Languedoc upon the Albigensis.

Tartars made cruel irruptions: amongst others, one in Hungary, under the
Command of Bath, who was one of their Generals; and one in Russia, Poland, and
Silesia, whither they were conducted by another of their Generals, who was
named Pera.

These Barbarians were Scythians, Originaries, between the Caspian Sea, and
Mount Imaus. Some make them descended from the Ten Tribes of the Hebrews, who
were transferred by the King of Assyria into those Countries, and derive their
Name from the Hebrew Word, which signifies Forsaken. Others derive it from the
River Tatar, which ran thorough their Country, and say it was given to the
whole Nation of the Mogles, composed of seven principal People, of which they
made one: They were Tributaries, and as we say, Slaves to a Christian Nestorian
Prince, whose Kingdom was in the Indies; he was called Prestor-John. But
Cingis, or Tzingis-Cham set that Nation free about the end of the last age,
ruined the States of Prester-John, and founded a very great Kingdom out of it;
from whence diverse Colonies went forth and settled in other Countries Tartars of
Procop. or Crim. Tartars along the Volga, etc,
even in some parts of Europe.

The Earl of Toulouze sought out all means, underhand, to repair the shameful
Treaty he had made with the King: and therefore he consulted, and contrived
with James King of Arragon, who was come to Montpellier, and with the Earl of
Provence, though he were the Kings Father-in-law, to Dissolve his Marriage with
Sanchia, Arragonians Aunt, upon pretense of parentage, that he might Marry the
Daughter of the Earl of Provence, and that his Daughter Jane, whom he had
perforce given to the Earl of Poitou, might not be his Heiress. An example that
proves, to any that might doubt, that amongst Great ones, Honor, Parentage,
Alliance and

Hugh, Count de la March, to his misfortune, had Married Isabella, the Widow
of King John, who had formerly ravished her from him. This Woman's pride would
not suffer him to do Homage to Alphonso, the new Earl of Poitou; the King
undertook to compel him, and on a sudden took several of his Towns, and
demolished them; amongst others, Fontenay, where his Brother Alphonso was
wounded with an Arrow.

The King of Englands assistance in behalf of his Mother, was too slow; he and
his Brother Richard landed in the River of Bordeaux. The Earl de la March had
assured them, that all Poitou would rise and join with them upon their arrival:
but as his promise failed, their courage failed too; the King falls upon them
at the Bridge of Taillebourg, fighting desperately in person, making them
retreat as far as Xaintes, and from thence to Blaye. The Earl and his proud
Dame, being forced to forget she had been a Queen, found no safety but at the
Kings Feet. They experimented his Goodness was as great as his Courage; and
although she had suborned Rascals to Murder him, who had been discovered, and
punished, he pardoned both her and her Husband, keeping only two or three of
their Places in his hands, till he was better assured of their Obedience.

Italy was horribly shattered by the Factions of the Guelphs and Gibelins. The
First held for the Pope, the others for the Emperor.

Franciscans and the Dominicans, which had its Birth almost with their Orders,
increased likewise proportionably with their growth; Insomuch that the Pope,
who stood in need of them, and the King St. Lewis, who cherished them, found it
no little trouble to distribute their favors equally, and hold the balance so
even, that they should have no cause to take advantage of each other.

But both of them took much over all other Religions Orders, whom they despised
as more imperfect, and not only set a value upon themselves for their Divinity,
wherein sometimes they were so merely notional, and over-subtil as it
approached very near to error, but likewise took upon them the functions of
ordinary Pastors, drawing the grists of Alms, pious Legacies, and Burials of
rich people to their own Mills, concerning themselves in the directing of
Consciences, and the administration of the Sacraments, to the prejudice of the
Hierarchy, who from that time has ever been contending with them to maintain
her authority.

Innocent IV. was elected. He was thought to be a friend to Frederick; but
whether that Emperor had not used him well, or what else it were, he followed
the steps of his Predecessors, and began to quarrel with him upon the same
score of differences. The feud grew so hot, that Frederic being the stronger in
Italy, Innocent went thence, that he might with more safety let fly his Thunder
against him, and came into France, where being arrived in December this year
1244. he called a Council at Lions, for the year following.

In the year 1228. the Emperor Frederic being constrained by the threats of
Pope Gregory, was gone into the Holy Land, where by his Reputation rather then
his Sword, he had so contrived it, that the Sultan had given him up the City of
Jerusalem, but dismantled, with part of the Holy Land. The Pope not satisfied
with that agreement, had afterward procured other Adventurers to go, who broke
the Truce aforesaid, to the great damage of the Christians; who being mightily
weakened; it happened Ann. 1244. that the Chorasmins, a People drove out of Persia
by the Tartars; others say of Arabia, fell upon the Holy Land, laid it all
waste, ruined all the Holy places of Jerusalem, and drowned them in the Blood
of Christians.

This news was brought to St. Lewis whilst he was fallen sick at Pontoise,
toward the end of December. All those that were about him, despairing of his
Life, he made a vow to God, if he restored him to health, that he would go in
person to make war against those Infidels: and in truth, being recovered, he
took the Cross from the hands of the Legate, but could not so soon accomplish
his pious design.

Lions was opened the Monday after St. John Baptists Feast, in the Abbey de St.
Just; and from thence transferred to the Cathedral Church of St. John's. The
Emperor Baldwin, the Earl Raimond de Toulouze, and Berenguier de Provence were
present there, these two soliciting for the dispensation, that Raimond might
Marry with Beatrix, the youngest Daughter of Berenguier: but the Kings of
France, and of England, and Richard Earl of Cornwall, who had Married the other
three Sisters, hindered the Grant of it.

Frederic having quitted his Affairs of Italy to come there, and having in the
mean time sent his Ambassadors thither before, received tidings when he was got
to Turin, that the Pope and the Fathers had Excommunicated him, with Candles
extinguished; and degraded him for diverse things imposed upon him: amongst
others, That he detained the Church Lands, That he had intelligence with the
Saracens; That he erred in diverse Articles of Faith,

Milaneses beat him, the other Christian Princes took an aversion for him as an
impious person; even the Germans, (that they may not reproach the French for
contributing to ruin the Empire) rejected him, and for King of the Romans,
elected Henry VII. Landgrave of Hesse and Turingia; when as the King in an
enterview he had with the Pope at Clugny, endeavored to make up the breach, by
an agreement betwixt this unfortunate Emperor, and the Roman Church, by virtue
of a Procuration he had from him.

Raimond Berenguier, Earl of Provence, having by his Testament constituted
Beatrix his fourth Daughter, his Heiress. James King of Arragon caused some
Forcesto march into Provence, to secure so good a party for his Son. But the
King of France did not intend to let a stranger run away with such a prize; He
therefore drove the Arragonians out of that Country, and by consent of the
Daughter, as well as her Mother, and her Uncles the Earl of Savoy, and the
Archbishop of Lions, he so ordered it, that she was promised to her Brother
Charles, who was Earl of Anjou. The Marriage was not consummated till the year
following.

December, died also Jane, Countess of Flanders without having had any Children
by her Second Husband Thomas, Earl of Savoy, no more then by her First, who was
Ferrand of Portugal; her Sister Margaret succeeded her.

This Margret had had Children by two Husbands, John and Baldwin by Bouchard
d'Avesue her first Husband, and William, John and Guy, by William de Dampierre
her Second. These pretended, that the Sons of Bouchard ought not to inherit,
because it had been discovered that he was in Holy Orders when he married their
Mother; and for that reason the Marriage was declared null.

Peronne, and therein it was ordained, that those of the first Bed should have
Hainault, and the others should have Flanders.

Romans, Henry Landgrave of Hesse, being dead in Battle, or of sickness; the
Germans, who persisted obstinately, under the pretense of Biety, to ruin the
dignity of the Empire; elected the year following, William Earl of Holland,
potent in Friends and Alliances, whilst Frederic was struggling with his
misfortunes, and his enemies in Italy.

Burgundy and some French Lords were Leagued with him to defend the Liberties
of their Countries, against the usurpations of the Court of Rome; being
supported by this League, he leaves Lombardy to come to Lions, whether to
invest the Pope, or to mol^ifie him by his Prayers: but he was recalled by a
blow the Milanese had given his bastard Son Entius, whom he had left in Parma.

These Affairs, and the great preparations for War, detained the King till the
month of May of this year, from accomplishing the Vow he had made three years
before. It cannot be written in Characters ^o great as it deserves; how this
pious King being persuaded that Sovereigns are responsable by Laws, both Divine
and Humane, for all the miscarriages of their Officers, caused it to be
published through

That done, and having taken leave of the Holy Martyr, and given the Regency to
the Queen his Mother, he quitted Paris, being conducted out of the City by all
the Orders in Procession: He took his two Brothers Robert and Charles with him,
the Queen his Wife, theirs, and an infinite number of Princes, Lords, Prelates,
and Gentlemen. He received the Popes Benediction in his passage thorough Lions,
thence Rhosue, and going on board at Aigues-mortes in Languedoc, the 25th of
August, set sail two days after, and landed happily in Cyprus the 25th of
September, where he past the Winter, to wait for the rest of his Forces and
Ammunitions.

In this Island he received at the beginning of December, Letters from
Ercalthay, one of the chief Chams of the Tartars, and soon after arrived
Ambassadors from the King of Armenia. Ercalthay sent him word how the Great
Cham, and a good number of his Captains had embraced Christianity, and that he
had sent him with a great Army to destroy the Sultan of Balduc, or Bagdet, the
most potent of all the Mohammedan Princes. The Armenian Ambassadors assured him
that this news was true, and that their King had vanquished, with the
assistance of the Tartars; the Sultan of Iconia or Cogny, to whom they were
tributary, and cast off the yoke of those Infidels

Ascension, the Holy King having drawn all his Men togther from their Winter
Quarters in the Island of Cyprus, and received a new reinforcement, brought him
by Robert Duke of Burgundy, came the fourth of June into the Road before
Damiata in Egypt. The Saracens expected him in good order upon the Shore; he
landed in despite of them, and made them give way. They being well beaten, so
great a fear seized upon them, that the next day they forsook the Town, after
they had set fire to it in several places, and carried off in Boats beyond the
River Nilus, all their Families, and the richest of their Goods.

The overflowing of the Nile, which infallibly begins some days before the
Summer Solstice, hindered the Army from going on at the same time, to take the
City of Grand-Cairo, and kept them almost till the midst of Autumn, in so much
idleness, as brought them into all manner of debauchery and dissoluteness.

September, Alphonso the Kings Brother arrived with new Adventurers of the
Cross. Raimond his Father-in-law, who had accompanied him as far as
Aigues-Mortes, where he took Shipping with his Wife, died upon his way home in
the Town of Millau in Rouergne, giving all the demonstrations of a hearty
Repentance. He was the last of the Earls of Toulouze, who had Ruled over the
greatest part of Languedoc above 350 years. His Daughter Jane being deceased
without any Child by her Husband Alphonso, his Lordships were reunited to the
Crown, in pursuance of the Treaty made in the year One thousand two hundred
twenty eight.

The 20th of November, the pious King parted from Damiata, and marched against
the Saracens, who had drawn all their Forces about the City of Massoura. He
encamped on an arm of the Nilus, formerly called Canopus, and in those times
the Raschit, which was not foordable; whilst this was doing, their Sultan,
named Melidin happened to dye, and till his Son could come, they gave the Command
to the most valiant of his Emirs or Satrapes, who was Farchardin.

French having passed over the Raschit, gained in two several days two Battles
against the Insidels, wherein St. Lewis, animated with a Sampson-like Spirit
and Zeal, did prodigious acts of Valor but in the first which was fought in
February, his Brother Robert was slain, pursuing too inconsiderately the flying
enemy thorough the City of Massoura.

Pharamia, to refresh themselves, Melec-Sala, the Son of Meledin, arrives with
another Army which he had obtained of the several Sultans of his Religion,
wherewith he so beset the Christians, stopping up all passages by which they
were to receive Provisions, that hunger, and the distemper, now called the
Scurvy or Scorbut, reduced them to a miserable condition. In this extremity it
was resolved to lead them back to Damiata; but it proved too late, the Army was
utterly defeated in their march, and the King taken prisoner with his other two
Brothers Alphonso and Charles, and almost all the Officers; there were but very
few of his who escaped from captivity or death. This misfortune happened the 5th
day of April.

To this grief of the good King's, the Barbarian Conquerours added an outrage,
which touched him yet more sensibly, than either the loss of his Army or his
Liberty. They scourged a Crucifix before him, defiled it with spitting upon it,
and dragged it thorough the Mire. However, the Sultan- Melec-Sala took a
particular care of his person, so that he restored him to his health again. He
also agreed a ten years Truce with him; but thereupon, being murdered by his
Emirs, the King was likewise in great danger of perishing in the same storm of
rage: notwithstanding him whom they elected for Sultan (he was named Turquemir)
preserved him, and confirmed the Treaty.

By those Articles they gave both him and all the Christian Captives their
liberty, with leave to carry away with them all their equipage: they agreed to
a Truce for Ten years, and left them all they held beside in the Holy Land,
upon condition they Damiata, and should set free the Saracen Slaves, and give
them 400000. Livers ready Money. It is remarkable, that this generous King not
enduring they should set a price upon his Person, would needs have that sum to
be the ransom for the rest, and the City of Damiata for his; and having notice
that upon payment of the said Moneys, the Saracens had mis-told, and taken less
then was agreed by a great deal, he sent them the remainder immediately.

It is a Fable that he should give a consecrated Host to those Barbarians for
security of his Word: He would have exposed himself a thousand times to death,
rather then have delivered uphis God, to those impious enemies. It is true
indeed, that they afterward coined Moneys, with a Pix stamped upon it, and the
Sacred Host over it, and that the same Figures were wrought in some pieces of
their Tapistries, and to this day there are the Figures of some Chalices Graved
or Carved about the Walls of Damascus, or Damas; perhaps they meant to let the
World know by these means, and preserve the memory of it to future ages, what
Victories they had obtained against the Christians, and how they had led their
God in Triumph.

Damiata restored, the King and Princes were delivered, and embarquing upon
some Galleys belonging to Genoua, landed at the Port of Acon: but for the rest
of the prisoners, such as were sick, being in great numbers, were knocked at
head, and the remainders constrained to pay a new Ransom; or to renounce.

It has been said, that the Barbarians put out the Eyes of Three hundred
Gentlemen; and that in memory of those Noble Martyrs, that St. Lewis some years
afterward, Founded the Hospital des Or Fifteenscore.
Quinze-vingsts at Paris; but this is no whit mentioned in the Grant or
Writings for this Foundation; and I find far before this time, that a Norman
Duke built one of the very same sort at Rouen, only it was for maintenance but
of One hundred blind People.

Of above 30000 Fighting Men who followed him in this Expedition, there were
hardly Six thousand remaining, too scanty a number for any Enterprise.
Notwithstanding upon the Christians carnest entreaties who belonged to those
Countries, and because he knew those Barbarians would break the Truce as soon
as ever he were gone, he resolved to stay some time; and in the interim sent
his Brothers Alphonso and Charles home into France.

Whilst the Emperor Frederic was again drawing his Sword to be revenged on the
Pope, he died at Firenzuole the 13th of December, perhaps stifled or poisoned
by Mainfroy, one of his Bastard Sons. He left the Empire and Germany to his
eldest Son Conrad, to Frederic his Grandson, issue of his eldest Son Henry, the
Dukedom of Austria, and to the abovenamed Mainfroy, the Principality of
Tarentum. But all that Race was extinct in a few years, for having, say some,
opposed the Holy See.

When Pope Innocent had heard of the death of Frederic, he went from Lions,
where he had staid Six years and a half, to return again to Rome.

Hungary, pretending, and affirming he had a particular Mission from God, went
picking up all the young Country fellows over the whole Kingdom, to go, said
they, and deliver their Prince, and the Holy Land. These new Brothers of the
Cross were called Pastorels.
Pastoureaux, i. e. Shepherds, or Graziers.

The Bandits, Robbers, Heretics, and all manner of wicked rascally people
listed themselves in this crew; who took the liberty to commit all manner of
disorders, especially against the Clergy, and against the Jews. The Inhabitants
of Berry, with the Nobility, fell upon them and routed them; some of them were
hanged, afterward this rabble was dispersed and vanished to nothing.

Blanch afflicted for the absence of the good King her dear Son, and for the
sickness of her other Son Alphonso, who seemed incurable, ended her days at
Melun the Six and twentieth of November, aged above Sixty and five years. Her
Son having sounded the Monastery of Maubuisson, of the Order des Cisteaux for
her; She was conveyed thither in great pomp, upon the Shoulders of the chief
Nobility of the Court, sitting in a Golden Chair, her Face bare, being clothed
in her Royal Robes over her Religious Habit of that Order, which she had taken
some time before her death, being besides, and long before that time, of the
third Order of St. Francis, according to the Devotion of those times.

Some modern Historians are much in doubt, whether she were elder or younger
then Berenguelle, who was Married to Alphonso, King of Leon. This had the
Guardianship of her Brother Henry, and that Prince being dead, succeeded to the
Kingdom Castille; but some have believed that it was by Usurpation upon Blanch
her Sister, who was then a great way off from that Country: and they go upon
this ground, that amongst the Records, they find Letters from nine Castillian
Lords to Lewis VIII. in which they own and acknowledge his Son for their That
is, St. Lewis.
King, and say, that Alphonso IX. King of Castille, had declared by his Will,
that in case his Son Henry died without any Heirs, the Children of Blanch were
to succeed by right of Inheritance: but to tell the truth, it does not follow
from thence, that Blanch was the eldest; it is more probable that these
discontented Lords grounded it upon this, that Alphonso and Berenguelle being
of kin, within the degrees prohibited, Pope Innocent III. had declared their
Marriage to be null, and the Children that should proceed from that conjunction
Vide the Letters of Innocent III. Printed at Colen.
incestuous, Bastards, and incapable to succeed: So that upon their exclusion,
those of Blanch came to the succession of Alphonso IX. their Grandfather: and
this is it that gave a Right to the Kings of France, which they held a long
time to the Kingdom of Castille.

Blanch, there arose a sharp contest between the Secular Doctors of Theology at
Paris, whereof William de St. Amor was as it were the Head; and on the other
part the Orders Mendicants of Preaching Friars, and Friars Minors: because
those Monks as the others, reproached them, were so far from submitting to the
Statutes and Discipline of the University, that they aimed to make themselves
the Masters.

The thing was obstinately debated five or six years together, St. Amor got
the better at Paris, but the Dispute being transferred to Rome, he was worsted,
and his Book was condemned, not as Heretical, but as scandalizing those good
Fathers. They had great credit in that Court, and obtained great Privileges
with so much the more facility; as their trampling on the Laws increased the
power of the Donor, and diminished that of the Bishops, to whose prejudice they
were granted.

About the beginning of this quarrel, Robert de Sorbonne, Doctor in Divinity,
and very highly esteemed by St. Lewis, built the College of the Poor Masters
of SORBONNE; under which Name the Vulgar are wont to comprehend all the Faculty
of Theology of Paris. In effect, it is the most renowned of all those Colleges.

Thibauld, who was the Fifth of that Name, as Earl of Champagne, but only the
First, as King of Navarre. His Successor in all his Estates, was Thibauld II.
or VI. aged Fourteen years, under the Guardianship of his Mother.

Conrad the Son of Frederic did not find himself strong enough in Germany, to
cope against William Earl of Holland, pretended King of the Romans: he was gone
into Italy in the year 1251. and some time after, having unhappily caused his
Nephew Frederic to be strangled, had seized upon his Treasure, and upon his
Kingdom of Sicilia. But this year 1254. was himself poysonn'd by Mainfroy; to
whom, not knowing he was the Author of his death, he lest the Regency of the
Kingdom, and the Guardianship of his Son Conrad the Young, vulgarly named
Conradin, aged but Three years.

St. Lewis the King went out of France, and Three years and a half that he had
been in the Holy Land, visiting the Holy Places with an incredible Devotion,
sortifying the Towns, and reviving the courage and affairs of the Christians in
those Countries, as much as possibly he could.

France destitute of any Pilot by the death of his Mother, most earnestly
desired his return. He therefore took Shipping at the Port of Acon, or
Ptolemais, on St. Marks Eve, and landed at Marseilles the Eleventh day of July.

England, who was this year come into Gascongne, desiring to avoid the long
voyage by Sea, obtained leave of the good King to cross thorough France, and
take Shiping at Boulogne. He met the King at Chartres, who from thence took him
along to Paris, where he Treated him Four days together with all the
magnificence imaginable. The joy and splendour was the greater, because the four
Sisters, Daughters of the Earl of Provence, the eldest Married to the King of
France, the Second to the King of England, the Third to Richard his Brother,
and the Fourth to Charles, Earl of Anjou, met all there together.

William Earl of Holland, and King of the Romans, making War against the
Friezelanders, who were Rebels to him, had lately been knocked on the Head by
certain Peasants hid amongst the Reeds, when his Horse was sunk into the Snow
and Ice. The following year being 1256. the Electors basely selling the Honor
of the German Nation, and their Votes, to Foreign Princes, gave the Empire some
of them to Richard, Brother to the King of England, others to Alphonso X. King
of Castille. Richard went into Germany, and sojourned there above two years,
having Emp. Baldwin II and Richard, and Alphonso, competitors.
been Crowned at Aix la Chapelle in the year 1247. Alphonso was no way known to
them but by his Money, and both of them disputed their Right and Title before
the Pope for diverse years, without eve coming to any agreement.

The Son of Bouchard d'Avesnes, cast out by Guy Earl of Flanders, and their
Brothers of the Second Bed by the same Mother, took Sanctuary with William Earl
of Holland, who had vanquished Guy, and taken him prisoner with one of his
Brothers. The Mother to be revenged, had called in Charles, Earl of Anjou, and
given him the enjoyment of Hainault and Valenciennes during his life.

He regained those Countries easily enough from the Hollander, because he found
him fully enough employed against the Frisons, where he was killed, as we have
related. His Son Florent who succeeded him, set the two Brothers at liberty for
a great Ransom; and St. Lewis obliged his Brother Charles to restore Hainault
for a sum of Money, as likewise the parties concerned, to stand to the award he
had made in Anno 1246.



The Titles of the Chamber of Accounts which have been showed us by Mr.
d'Heroval, to whose care the History of our Kings of the Third Race is indebted
for the greatest part of the new discoveries made known in these last times,
tells us, amongst many other rare and curious things, that this, truly, most
Christian King, spared nothing for the Conversion of Infidels: that for this
end he took up all the Jewish Children that were Fatherless, or in want, caused
them to be bred up in the Christian Faith, and allowed them two, four, six
Silver Deniers a day for their Diet or Keeping, which was paid out of his own
Demesnes, and passed in Dowry to their Widows, and oftentimes to their
Children; that these were called the Baptized, as those who embraced
Christianity being of age, were called the Converted; That the Duke of
Burgundy, the King of England, and some others, practiced the like in their
Countries, which brought over a world of Jews from their obstinacy; and that
the Kings his successors did imitate him therein, till the Reign of King John.

We have by the same means likewise learned that when St. Lewis made a journey
any where, there was always a Prelate, which was ordinarily the Archdeacon of
Paris, and a Lord of some note that followed some days after the Court, and
made inquiry at all the Lodgings, and in all the Countries and Places they had
passed, what wrong or spoil they might have done to the Landlords, or to their
Lands; and the just King made present reparation and satisfaction with his own
Money, without any complaint made by the party agrieved; so far was it from
suffering

Marscille did not give that obedience to Charles as he expected and desired,
wherefore he blocked them up with his Army, and brought them to that low
condition by Famine, that they surrendered at discretion to this merciless
Prince, who caused many of the principal Citizens to be beheaded.

Italy, the Venetians, the Genouese, and the Pisans, were become mighty
powerful in the Levant Seas, and for that reason were grown very jealous of
Acon or Acre, fell to quarrelling with each other, upon some private pieque,
and went together by the ears, to their mutual destruction; which completed
the ruin of the Western Christians in the East.

Montpellier, the two Kings Lewis of France, and James of Arragon, Treated the
Marriage of Philip, then Second Son to King Jews, but who in two years after
became the eldest, with Isabella, younger Daughter of James, to whom her Father
gave in Dowry, the Counties of Carcassone and Beziers.

St. Lewis yielded up to the Arragonian, the Sovereignty which France had still
held upon Catalonia, Barcelona, Rousillon, Empurs, Vrgel, and Geronde, from the
time the French first conquered those Countries of the Saracens. And on the
other hand, the Arragonian yielded to him all the right he pretended, whether
by Marriage of his predecossors, or otherwise by any Title whatsoever, to the
Counties de Razez, Narbonne, Nisines, Alby, Foix, Cahors, and other parts in
Languedoc, held in Under-Fief of the Crown of France: as also the Rights he had
in Provence, to the Counties of Forcalquier and Arles, and to the City of
Marseilles.

English had still a very passionate desire to recover Normandy, and the other
Countries they had lost in France: and if Richard could have fixed himself well
in Germany, he and his Brother Henry might have attaqued France very shrewdly
on both sides. The pious King was not ignorant of it, but he knew likewise that
Henry was so dangerously engaged in a quarrel with his Barons, that it would be
easy to content him with a little, and even to oblige him to an
acknowledgment; and therefore the business having been stated by the Popes
Legates, the King of England passes over into France, together with his Wife,
his Brothers and his Children, and being arrived at Paris, confirmed the Treaty.

The substance of it was, That he, his Sons, Brothers and Successors, should
for everrenounce all claim to Normandy, Anjou, Maine, Touraine, and Poitou; and
that the King gave a great sum of Money to Henry, and released to him and his,
that part of Guyenne beyond the Garonne, and on this side Limousin and
Perigord, upon condition, to do Homage-Liege to the Kings of France, and take
place amongst his Pairs, in quality of Duke of Guyenne.

Immediately upon this, the King of England does this Homage, and the eldest
Son of France happening to dye, he was at his Funeral, and helped to bear his
Corpse upon his own Shoulders, with the other Lords, part of the way from Paris
to St. Denis.

In the year 1260. a new and strange heat of Zeal inspired many Christian
people, which was to whip themselves in public with small Cords, or with
Thongs of Leather. These whipsters were called the Devots, and afterward they
were named the Flagellants. This Frenzy begun in the City of Perugia Perusia,
or Perouse.
in Tuscany, by the example and Preaching of a Hermit, named R^ynier, spread it
self even into Poland, traveled as far as Greece, and in the end degenerated
into Superstition and Heresies.

In the month of July, of the year 1261. a Lieutenant to Michael Paleologus
VIII. of that name, Emperor of Greece, who returned from making a War against
Michael the Despote Lord Governor.
of Epirus, made himself Master of Constantinople, getting entrance by a hole
under the Walls of the Town, discovered to him by some Traitors; a thing of
great importance, which he effected the more easily, because the Emperor
Baldwin was abroad, having carried his Naval force to besiege a little City
upon the Black Sea, or Pontus Euxinus.

Thus was it that Constantinople fell again into the hands of the Greeks, from
whom about two hundred years afterward, it fell under the Tyranny of the
Turks. The Latins had kept this fragment of the Eastern Empire, about Seven and
fifty years, Emp. Michael VIII. and Richard, and Alphonso.
and as it had begun with a Baldwin, it ended with a Prince of the same name.

The Venetians who had a great interest in this loss, put a mighty strong Fleet
to Sea, wherewith they Commanded the whole Archipelago, and reduced
Constantinople Manuel was upon the point to abandon it. But the Genoese in
hatred to the Venetians, made a League with him, and relieved him,
notwithstanding the entreaties of all the Christian Princes, and the Popes
Excommunications. The Emperor Baldwin yet held for some time after, the Island
of Eubaea or Negropont.

The bastard Mainfroy, not content to have usurped the Kingdom of Sicily,
without consent of the Holy See, domineered over the Pope, and the Countries
belonging to the Church most strangely; Insomuch that Alexander IV. had offered
that Kingdom to the King of Englands Son Edmund, who had accepted it; and to
this end his Father had laid so many Imposts and Taxes upon the People, that
most of them made a League against him, and were revolted.

Urban IV. Successor to Alexander, having caused the Crusado against Mainfroy
to be Preached, stirred up some French Lords to go into Italy, who at the very
first, forced the passages of Lombardy, and beat the Saracen Soldiers, whom
Mainfroy entertained in his Service; but soon after, their Pay falling short,
they came back into France, leaving the Pope more in the Briers then ever.

Mainfroy contracted Alliance with James III. King of Arragon, giving his
Daughter in Marriage to Peter his eldest Son, who disdained not the Match,
because it gave him approaching hopes of having the Kingdom of Sicily; Mainfroy
having no Male-Children. In effect, it is by this means, the Kings of Arragon
have attained it, and they must needs own they hold their Right from a Bastard,
an Usurper, and Excommunicated person.

Lewis did not understand this false policy, which has quite other Maxims then
are practiced, taught, or allowed by Christianity, and natural Justice. And for
this reason it was, that he endeavored with all his power, to decide the
quarrels between his neighbors, and not to foment them; with this spirit of
Charity, he labored so happily to compose the business between the Barons of
England, of whom Simon Montford Earl of Leicester was Head, with their King,
that they submitted to what he should ordain. He calls his Parliament for this
purpose at Amiens, and pronounced the Sentence in presence of King Henry:
However, the Barons found some difficulties and exceptions, and would not abide
by it.

Insomuch, that the troubles continuing, the Pope sent to revoke the gift of
the Kingdom of Sicily, which he had made to Edmund the King of Englands
Brother, since he could not pursue it, and invested Charles, Earl of Anjou,
Brother of St. Lewis. His Wives vanity, which made her greedily long to have
the Title of Queen, as well as her other Sisters, inclined and persuaded him to
accept of it.

Orviete, that the Sacred Host cast forth Blood upon the Corporal, or fine
Linen, wherein the Sacrament is put, to convince the incredulity of the Priest
that celebrated the Mass. Pope Urban satisfied of the truth of this Miracle,
instituted the Feast and Procession of the Holy Sacrament, to be solemnized
the* Thursay after the Octave of Whitsunday. St. Thomas Aquinas, who was then
Professor in Theology at Orvieta, composed the Office for it.

Urban IV. being dead at Perusia the third of October, the Cardinals after a
vacancy of Four Months, elected the Cardinal Guy the Gross, a native of the
Province of Languedoc, who had been Married before he entered into Holy Orders.
He took the name of Clement IV. amongst his Virtues he is admired for his rare
Modesty, though very little imitated by his Successors: He made a protestation
at his first coming to the Sea, that he would advance none of his kindred; and
so exactly did he keep his word, that of three Prebendaries which his Brother
had in possession, he obliged him to quit two; and far from Marrying his
Daughters to great Lords,

Toward the end of the Month of July, about the beginning of the night, a
Comet was observed toward the West, and some while after, a little before
break of day, it appeared in the East, pointing its tail Westward. It was
visible till the end of September, lasting two Months and a half.

Clement IV. upon his advancement to the Holy See, ratified the Election his
predecessor had made of Charles of France for the Kingdom of Sicily, obtained
of St. Lewis, a Tenth of all the Clergy of his Kingdom for him, and lent him
all the Money he could scrape together, having for that purpose engaged the
Revenue of the Churches in Rome.

Charles with this assistance, with the Kings help, and his Wives great care,
who sold all her Jewels to raise Soldiers, which she culled and chose for the
bravest; got a good Army on foot to go into Italy by Land, and in the mean time
put to Sea with Thirty great Vessels, and sailed to the Port of Ostia.

He was received at Rome with great Honor by the People, declared Senator of
that City (which was as it were Governor, and Sovereign Judge.) And the year
following, upon the 28th of June, Crowned King of Sicily by the Pope in St.
Peter's Church, upon condition, to pay the Pope Eight thousand ounces of Gold,
and a white Palfrey every year; never to be elected Emperor, nor to unite that
Kingdom to Italy that was not lesser then their own.

Rome. The following he marched to Naples, the Guelphes flocking from all
parts, to List themselves under his Banner. The Earl de Caserta quitted the
passage du Gariglian most basely to him; he afterward gained the Post of St.
Germain, guarded by Six thousand Men; and in fine, the Twenty sixth day of
February, in the Campaign of Benevent, he gained an entire, but bloody victory
against Mainfroys Army, who was slain upon the place.

All submitted to the Conqueror, both beyond, and on this side the Fare,
except the City of Nocera, where Frederic II. had placed a strong Garrison of
Saracens, which yet held out a long time. It then appeared, that Charles knew
not how to Govern his good fortune with Humanity; for he let Mainfroy's Wife
and Children dye in prison, with many Lords of that party, and his Army
committed horrid cruelties upon the taking of the City of Beneventum,

Italy, with the Title of Keeper of the Peace, and in this quality he by one of
his Lieutenants, subdued all the Gibbelins of Tuscany, especially those of
Florence, and restored all the Guelphes to their Lands and Dwellings.

In the mean time the young Conradin had sent a Manifesto to all the Princes of
Europe, declaring himself to be the rightful Successor to the Kingdom of
Sicily, and imploring their assistance to recover that Succession of his
Fathers. Insomuch, that with the aid of the ancient friends of the House of
Souaube, or Scwaben, and some Italy about the end of October; observing, and
giving ear rather to the importunities of the Gibbelines, who pressed him to
march on, then the wise Counsels of his Mother, who feared the unexperimented
Youth of her Son, scarce Sixteen years of age, would be Ship-wrack'd, against
the fortune and courage of Charles.

He had brought with him out of Germany the young Frederic, Son of Herman
Marquess of Baden, who said likewise he was Duke of Austria, being Son of a
Daughter of Henry, Brother to Frederic, last Duke of those Countries; and
withal, he held himself certain of the assistance of Henry and Frederic,
Brothers of Alphonso X. King of Castille, who upon his arrival in Italy, were
to declare in his favor.

Those Brothers having been driven out of Spain by the King Alphonso, had
retired themselves into Africa to the King of Tunis, where they had acquired a
great deal of reputation, Money and Friends. Henry having information of the
progress of Charles in Italy, was come to proffer him his Service, with Eight
hundred Horse, and had lent him a considerable sum of Money. In requital,
Charles had gotten him to be chosen Senator of Rome: hut because he afterward
thwarted him in his designs of obtaining by the Pope, the Kingdom of Sardinia,
that Spaniard was alienated from him, and secretly conspired with Conradin, so
that he disposed the City of Rome to receive him, driving thence, or
imprisoning all those that contradicted; and when he saw him approaching near,
he set up his Flags and Arms upon the Gates and joined openly with him.

Conradin having spent the Winter at Verona, despising the Popes Thunders,
embarked at the coast of Genoa, on some Vessels belonging to Pisa. Being
landed in Tuscany, he surprised, and cut in pieces those Forces that Charles
had left there; and Conrad See hereafter in Anno 1269.
being come from Antioch, caused all Sicily to Revolt, except only Messina and
Palermo.

These prosperous beginnings betrayed young Conradin, and flattered him to bring
him to his death: while he was entering into the Kingdom of Sicily, Charles
quitted the Siege of Nocera, and came to meet him, resolved to decide the
quarrel by a Battle: it was fought the Five and twentieth day of August near
the lake Fucin, now Celano: the French gained it, but not without much hazard,
and much blood. Conradin, Frederic Duke of Austria, and Henry of Castille saved
themselves by flight; but being discovered, they were taken and brought back to
the Conqueror.

After this Victory, he took upon him again the dignity of Senator of Rome,
which he had been obliged to lay down, and by the Pope was constituted Vicar of
the Empire in Tuscany. His Fame would have been beyond a parallel, had he been
but as merciful as valiant, and had not exercised such mortal feverities upon
his prisoners of War, and such people as revolted from him.

Africa with St. Lewis the King, not knowing what to do with Conradin and
Frederic, whom it was very dangerous to keep, and more to set them free in a
Kingdom full of Factions and Rebellion; he caused their Process to be made by
the Syndics of the Cities of that Kingdom. Those Judges having condemned them
to death as disturbers of the Churches quiet, their Heads were cut off upon a
Scaffold in the midst of the City of Naples the Twenty seventh day of October:
an execution which makes posterity tremble yet with horror, but which seemed a
retribution of the Divine Justice, for those yet more horrible barbarities,
which Frederic the Grandfather of Conradin had used to all the Family of the
Norman Princes.

Henry de Castille had his Life given him, but was confined to a prison, from
whence he got not out till Five and twenty years after, to return into Spain.

Almost at the same time, this Conrad Prince of Antioch, Son of one Frederic, a
bastard of the Emperor Frederic II. who was come from the East, to the
assistance Conradin, and had contributed to make the Island of Sicily revolt,
being taken by some belonging to Charles, was hanged: and thus ended by the
Hangmans hands, that famous and glorious Race of the Prince of Scwaben, of whom
there have been so many Kings and Emperors.

I should have told you before, that Conradin being upon the Scaffold, after he
had made bitter complaints of his misfortunes, and the cruelty of his Enemies,
threw down his Glove in the Marketplace, as a token of the investiture of his
Kingdoms to such of his kindred as would prosecute his quarrel: a Cavalier
having taken it up, carried it to James King of Arragon, who had Married a
Daughter of Mainfroy's.

The abuses and the designs of the Court of Rome were grown to such a height,
and come to that pass, that the King St. Lewis, though very devout to the Holy
See, made this year a Pragmatique, to stop the current of them in France,
especially, touching the dispensation of Benefices.

This same year the Marriage of his Daughter Blanch was made with Ferdinand,
eldest Son to Alphonso X. King of Castille, the Pope having given his
Dispensation for the near consanguinity between the parties. The Nuptials were
celebrated at Burgos; Philip, Brother to the Bride, Edward Prince of England,
James King of Arragon the Bride-grooms Grandfather, Alhumar, King of Granada,
and diverse other Princes, and great Lords honored the Solemnity with their
Presence; and it was expressly said in the Contract, that if Ferdinand died
before his Father, her Children should represent him, and succeed to the Crown.

The affairs of the Christians in the Levant being reduced to the last
extremity by Bendocabar, Sultan of Egypt: the exhortations of the Pope, and the
zeal of St. Lewis stirred up those of the West, to make one more great attempt
to support them. The King of Arragon, and Edward, eldest Son to the King of
England, promised to Second St. Lewis, and his Brother Charles to go thither
with all the force of Italy. The number of Adventurers of the Cross, consisted
of Fifteen thousand Horse, and Two hundred thousand Foot, which were divided in
two Armies, to attaque the Saracens in two several places at once.

Arragonian and the English undertook to go and make War in the Holy Land; the
Arragonian being Shipped, turned back again, and only sent some Vessels
Commanded by Ferdinand his bastard Son: but Edward did generously make good his
Vow.

As for St. Lewis, he turned his Enterprise against the Kingdom of Tunis, the
conquest thereof being in his judgment the way to conquer Egypt, without which,
they could never keep the Holy Land. Besides, his Brother persuaded him to it,
to make Africa become Tributaries to his Kingdom of Sicilia, as they had been
in the time of Roger the Norman Prince.

Having therefore left the administration of his Kingdom to Matthew Abbot of
St. Denis, and Simon, Earl of Nesle, he left Paris, as I believe, the first day
of March, January, or the year 1269. if we make it begin at Easter, as they
then did in France. He was accompanied by three of his Sons, Philip, Tristan,
and Peter, his Brother Alphonso, his Nephew Robert II. Earl of Artois,
Thibauld, King of Navarre, Guy Earl of Flanders, and a great number of the
Nobility.

He was near four Months, either upon his way, or about Aigues-mortes, where he
waited some time till his Vessels were ready. He went on board in the beginning
of July with his Brothers, and set fail the day following; his Forces, and the
other Lords took Shipping in several Ports, particularly at Marseilles: the
Rendezvous for the whole Fleet was appointed to be at Sardinia in the Road of
Calary.

Africa, and secure themselves of Tunis, as well because it was thought
important to have that coast, as for that the King of those Countries had given
them hopes he would become Christian, if they would but stand by him with their
Forces, against his resisting Subjects; but this was only to amuse them.

The Army being then landed on the African shore, immediately took the Castle
and the City of Carthage, built indeed upon the ruins of that famous rival to
Rome, but which had nothing now that was great but its name. Afterward they
besieged the City of Tunis, which is situate at the further end of the Lake of
Goletta, five miles distant from the Sea.

At five weeks end from the beginning of the Siege, the excessive heats of the
Country, scarcity of Water, the Sea Air, and the toil the Army endured, having
the Saracens perpetually upon them, it bred the pestilential Fever and
Dysentery's amongst them, whereof a great many people of note dyed; amongst
others, Prince John, Tristan de Nevers, and Peter de Ville-Beon, Chamberlain to
the King, and his intimate Confident.

The good King himself being seized with a Flux, was some days afterward taken
with a continual Fever, which put an end to his glorious Labors by a happy
Death August, the Seventy fifth year of his Age, and the Four and fortieth of
his Reign. Being on his Deathbed, he called for his Son Philip to leave most
Excellent and most Christian-like Instructions, which he had some time before
drawn up and written with his own hand.

He had together all the Virtues of a great Saint and a great King, of a true
Christian and a true Gentleman. He was humble to his God, and fierce to the
Enemies of the Faith, modest and a hater of Luxury, as to his particular, but
brave and pompous in public Ceremonies; as mild and affable in Conversation,
as rough and terrible in Fight and Battle; prodigal to the Poor, and sparing of
his Subjects Money more then of his own; liberal to Soldiers and Men of
Learning, prompted with a sincere desire to keep the Peace between his
Neighbors, enflamed with an incredible zeal for the glory of God, and for the
administering of true Justice: in fine, worthy to be the Model of all Princes
that desire to Rule according to the will of God, and the good of their
Subjects.

Amongst his servent Exercises of Piety, which never did abate in all the days
of his Life, he observed the Fasts Ordained by the Church with great exactness,
eating but once that day; and if either his weakness or the unavoidable labor
in business did at any time oblige him to eat twice, he redeemed the
Transgression according to the Canons of the Church, by some great Alms,
feeding an Hundred Poor some other day; I mean an Hundred extraordinary, for he
ordinarily entertained a very great number, and served Two hundred at Table,
upon every great Festival day.

I find that every Lent, he distributed Sixty three Muids of Wheat, sixty eight
thousand Herrings, and three thousand two hundred nineteen Livers Parisis to
the Monasteries and Hospitals, and One hundred pence a day to other poor
People. And to make this Alms and Charitable Benevolence perpetual, he charged
his own Demeasns with it, as also with many other Pious Grants and Foundations,
which instead of diminishing the Estate of his Successors, has been as it were
a miraculous Leaven that has increased and multiplied it.

It were to be wished that that great and good Ordinance he made upon his
return out of the Holy Land, to root out the Misdemeanors of Judges, the
Debaucheries of Gaming, Drinking, and Women, were as much in our practice, as
it is yet in our Books.

I cannot omit that he did never intermedle in the naming any to Bishoprics
and Abbeys, but left the liberty of Elections entirely free. Insomuch as an
Ambassador of his having brought a Bull to him from Rome which gave him the
right of Nomination, he was very angry with him, and threw it into the Fire.
For the other Benefices he ever bestowed them upon the most Worthy, and never
on such as were in Employments already, unless they first surrendered the other.

He founded a great many Churches and Monasteries, particularly for the Orders
of St. Dominique and St. Francis; several Hospitals, amongst others that for
the Or Fifteenscore.
Quinze-Vingts, the fair Abbey of Royaumont, that of St. Matthew near Rouen, and
the Holy Chapel in his Palace, where he put in Canons and Chaplains. They
attribute to him the Institution of the University, and the first Parliament of
Toulouze. It is certain he was the first, who out of humility, added the Sign
of the Cross to the Ceremony of touching those troubled with the King's Evil.

He had Eight Children, four Sons and four Daughters. The Sons were Philip who
Reigned, and was surnamed the Hardy Valiant, Stout, Adventurous, Bold,
Courageous, etc.
or Daring, John Tristan who was Earl of Nevers, Peter Earl of Alenson, these
two left no Posterity; Robert Earl of Clermont in Beauvoisis, who Espoused
Beatrix Daughter and Heiress of Agnes de Bourbon, (who was so of Archembald
Lord of Bourbon) and of John III. Son to Hugh Duke of Burgundy. From this
Marriage issued the Branch of Bourbon, who came to the Crown Three hundred
years after by King Henry the Fourth, surnamed the Great.

The Daughters were named Isabella, Blanch, Margaret, and Agnes; Isabella was
Married to Thibauld the II. King of Navarre, and died without Offspring.
Blanch a little before this Voyage to Africa, Married Ferdinand, called De la
Cerde, eldest Son of Alphonso X. King of Castille, and had two Sons who were
unjustly deprived of the Kingdom by their Grandfather, because their Father had
preceded him, and Representation had no place. Margaret was Affianced to Henry
Duke of Brabant and Limbourg, then that Prince turning Monk, Married to John
his Brother and Successor; They had no Children. Agnes Espoused Robert Duke of
Burgundy, and brought him many.

Philip III. King XLIV.
POPES,
A Vacancy. GREGORY X. Elected the 1st of September 1271. S. Four years four
Months ten days. INNOCENT V. Elected in January 1276. S. Seven Months. JOHN
XXI. Elected in July 1276. S. Eight Months. NICHOLAS III. Elected in November
1277. S. Two years nine Months. Vacancy of Two Months. Martin IV. Elected Feb.
21. 1281. S. Four years, one Month, seven days. HONORIUS IV. Elected in April,
1285. S. Two years, one Month, whereof six Months in this Reign.
PHILIP III. Surnamed the Hardy Bold, Resolute, Valiant, etc.
King XLIV. Aged Twenty five years four Months.

Charles King of Sicily, who with his Naval Forces landed at the very time the
King his Brother was giving up the Ghost.

Being come ashore he came and paid him his last Duty, and caused his Flesh to
be all taken from his Bones, as it was then the Custom when any died in Foreign
Countries. He carried the said Flesh to Sicily with him, and buried it in the
Abbey of Montreal near Palermo; and King Philip kept the Bones, which he
deposited in St. Denis in France. The Funeral being over, they continued the
Siege, Charles having the Command of the whole Army, because Philip being
fallen Sick could not act.

At the end of three Months, the taking of the place being most infallibly
certain, though not till the Winter was over, King Philip's impatience, who
much desired to Charles who cared for nothing but to get Money, and oblige the
King of Tunis to pay him Tribute, were the Motives that made them give Ear to
Propositions of Peace with that Barbarian King.

Charles as much Tribute, as he paid to the Pope Annualy: That he would deliver
up all the Christians he then held in Slavery: That he would grant free liberty
of Trade, and exemption of Imposts to all their Merchants; and would permit
them to dwell in Tunis and have the Exercise of the Christian Religion.

At the end of the Siege Prince Edward of England arrived there with his
Forces, hoping that after the taking of that place, the two Kings would go into
the Holy Land, as they had promised: but they thought it fitter to return to
their own homes, and left him to pursue his Voyage.

Philip was Embarked, arrived happily enough at the Port of Trapani or Trapos
in Sicily: but the others that had King Charles and his on board were overtaken
with a moit furious Tempest, which destroyed most of them, with the loss of
Four thousand Men, all their Equipage and the Treasure that was in them.

Besides all this, Thibauld King of Navarre being taken Sick, ended his days at
Trapani about the end of December, (his Brother Henry the Fat succeeded him)
Isabella of Arragon Queen of France being great with Child, hurt her self by a
fall from her Horse, and died in the City of Cosenza; Alphonso Brother of St.
Lewis was taken off with a Pestilential Fever at Siena: and his Wife Isabella
de Toulouze died in the same place about twelve days after him. So that King
Philip clothed in Mourning Weeds for the Death of his Father, his Wife, and
his nearest Relations, after so much Expense and Toil, brought nothing back
into France but empty Chests, and Coffins full of the Bones of the dead.

Sicily about two Months, departed toward the end of February, crossed Italy
and arrived at Paris in the beginning of Summer. He was Crowned at Rheims the
Fifteenth day of August, or as others say, the thirteenth, by the Bishop of
Soissons, the Archbishops See being vacant. Of the ancient Pairs of the Laity,
there was none assisted at this time but the Duke of Burgundy and the Earl of
Flanders; Robert Earl of Artois bore the Sword of Charlemaine, they name it
Joyeuse; At their going thence he entreated the King to go and visit his
Country, and received him in his City of A^ras with such Welcome and Expressions
of Joy, as hitherto had not been heard of in France.

This King passing thorough Rome paid his Devotions on the Tomb of the
Apostles. At Viterbo finding the Cardinals had been there Assembled for two
years together without coming to any agreement concerning the Election of a
^ope, he exhorted them to make some end, that the Church might be no longer
without a Head. His good Advice did not take effect till Eight Months
afterward, upon their electing of Thibauld de Piacenza Archdeacon of Liege,
who went Legate into Syria with Prince Edward; he took the name of Gregory X.

Toulouze was vacant by the decease of Jane the Daughter of Raimond and Wise of
Alphonso, Philip put himself into possession pursuant to the Terms of the
Treaty made with Raimond in the year 1228. but it was King John that annexed it
to the Crown.

Richard pretended King of the Romans. The year after his Brother Henry III.
King of England followed him, and his Son Edward I. of that name, who was in
the Holy Land, succeeded.

Armagnac had against Gerard Lord of Casaubon his Vassal, it happened that Roger
Earl de Foix, whom the Earl of Armagnac had called to his aid, pursued Gerard
and besieged him in a Castle belonging to the King, whither he was fled and had
put himself under his Protection. The King angry for the little Respect these
Earls had for him, marched into those Countries with an Army capable of
striking a terror to the very heart of Spain. He besieged Roger in his Castle
de Foix, and being resolved to level a Mountain which hindered his approach to
it, daunted him so much, that he came and threw himself at the Kings Feet; He
could not however obtain his Pardon till after he had been detained Prisoner a
year in the Castle of Beaucaire.

At his return from the Holy Land Edward passed thorough France, and did Homage
to the King. Being afterward gone to visit his Countries of Guyenne, Gaston de
Moncado Lord of Bearn refused to render him Homage; Edward seized upon his
Person, and kept him Prisoner in his Train for a while. From whence making his
escape, the King of England made complaint to Philip Sovereign Lord of Guyenne.
This King having summoned his Parliament and Debated the Case, gave Judgment in
favor of Edward, and compelled Gaston to hold his Lands of him.

The Viscounty of Bearn was Originally a Member of the Earldom or County of
Gascongny which held of the Duchy, but had been dismembered and held by Lords
who were the Issue of those Dukes, till it came to the House of Moncado by the
Marriage of the Princess Mary Daughter of Vicount Peter, and Sister of the
Vicount Gaston deceased without Children; This was about the year 1170. The
Princess being yet a Minor, having put her self, I know not for what reason,
under the Power of Alphonso II. King of Arragon, in whose Dominion she had also
some Lands, was obliged to do Homage for Bearn to that King, and to Marry
William de Moncado; which Advantage Alphonso procured him as a Recompense for
his having brought about the Marriage between Prince Raimond Berenger Earl of
Barcelonna his Father, and Petronella Daughter and Heiress of Ramir le Moyne
king of Arragon. The Family of Moncado is one of the Nine most illustrious of
all Catalongne, and are said to be Issue of a Dapifer or Grand Seneschal to
Charlemain.

German Empire so long in confusion, met together at Emperor Michael VIII. and
Rodolph I. the Stock of the House of Austria, Reigned Eighteen years.
Francfort upon the earnest entreaties of the Pope; and without any regard to
the opposition King Alphonso made, resolved never more to make any Emperor that
was not of the German Nation. So that at that very time they elected Rodolphus
Surnamed Rufus, who had been Master of the Palace to Othocare King of Bohemia.
He was Earl of Habspurg, a Family which as well as that of Lorrain, were the
Issue of the Earls of Alsatia, and the Mayre Erchinoald.

He was raised to the Imperial Dignity principally by the Suffrage of Vernher
Archbishop Mentz, the only Elector almost that knew him, and whom he had
otherwhile obliged in some Affair of Importance. Now it was the more easy for
this Elector to do him this good Office, because the King of Bohemia, and all
the other German Princes refused this Title, as being much more burthensom then
gainful or honorable.

Grecian Empire between Michael and Baldwin, and for that of Germany between
Rodolph and Alphonso, the hopes to unite the Greek Church to the Roman, and the
pressing necessity for assisting the Faithful that were remaining in the Holy
Land, to which the Pope had solemnly obliged himself at the time he received
the news of his Election.

Lions, which lies, as it were in the midst of the principal Estates of
Christendom. He came thither himself about the latter end of this year 1273.
and was visited by the King, who let him have several of his Gentlemen and
Officers to serve him for a Guard.

May in the year 1274. there were present Five hundred Bishops, seventy Abbots,
and a thousand others, as well Doctors and Deputies as Chapters. Gregory
presided accompanied with Fifteen Cardinals. The Ambassadors from the King, the
Emperor Rodolphus, and from several other Western Princes were there. Those
from Michael, the Emperor of Greece, arrived there at the Fourth Session, and
prescuted some Letters from him; by virtue of which they were admitted to an
abjuration of their Schism, and a profession to follow the Faith of the Roman
Church, especially about the Procession of the Holy Ghost. After that, the Pope
owned Michael for rightful Emperor of the East, and forbad Baldwin to bear that
Title any longer. This was the end for which Michael had feignedly desired the
reunion.

The Election of Rodolph was likewise confirmed, but not till after King
Alphonso had submitted and referred his Right to the disposal of the Pope, upon
Condition he might have leave, which was granted him, to take the Tenths of all
the Clergy in his Kingdom, to make War against the Moors. Thus all the
Reparations, whatever happens, are ever laid upon the Peoples Shoulders to make
satisfaction, who pay for all at last.

There were several Constitutions concerning the Elections, Provisions, and the
Residences of Benefices. They Treated about the settling many Differences
betwixt the Princes and Cities in Italy: It was Ordained, That the Cardinals
should be hence-forward shut up in the Conclave for the Election of Popes; and
they made very severe Decrees against Usurers, by virtue whereof the King put
them all in Prison thoroughout the whole Kingdom: but soon after he released
them upon the payment of some certain Taxes which he imposed upon them. Which
was, to tell

They granted likewise a great many Indulgencies and Privileges to such as
listed themselves for the Holy Land, or did contribute their Money toward that
Expedition; and they suppressed all the Orders Mendicants excepting only the
Preachers and the Minors. The Augustins and the Carmelites were tolerated only
till a more ample deliberation.

Two great and Holy Scholastic Doctors died in these times, St. Thomas Aquinas
Terracina as he was coming to the Council, and St. Bonaventure in Lions after
he had been assistant there. The first was of the Order of the Preaching
Friars, the other of the Minors, and had been made a Cardinal by Pope Gregory X.

Philip tired with being a Widower four years, cast his Affection upon Mary
Daughter of Henry and Sister of John Duke of Brabant, Married her at the Bois
de Vincennes in the Month of August, and Crowned her the year following in the
Holy Chapel of Paris on St. John Baptist's day. He would needs have the
Archbishop of Reims perform ^he Ceremony, without any regard to the right of
him of Sens who was the Metropolitan.

The 21th of July, Henry the Fat King of Navarre died at Pampeluna, his Fat
having suffocated him. He left by his Wife Blanch of Artois one Daughter only,
named Jane, but Three years of Age. By his Will and Testament he gave the
Guardianship to her Mother, and enjoined she should Marry her in France: but
the Lords were divided upon the point, and the greatest Party being against the
Mother, gave Don Pedro Sancho de Montagu to the Pupil for her Guardian.

The King of Arragon and the King of Castille had, I know not what, pretenses
to that Kingdom; under that color each of them makes his Party to get the
Regency, and have the young Heiress in their hands; Peter Infant of Arragon
desired to have her for his Son, and Ferdinand Infant of Castille for one of
his.

Navarre with his Sword in hand, seconding his demand with his force: The Lords
of the contrary Party called in the Infant of Arragon and made an agreement
with him; but the Widow whose inclinations tended toward France, came and cast
her self with her Daughter into the Arms of Philip. Who accepting of the
Guardianship, sent Eustace de Beaumarchais to govern the Kingdom in his Name,
and immediately all obeyed him.

Ferdinand de la Cerde died in his return from Navarre. He had Two Sons by
Blanch of France his Wife, those were Alphonso and Ferdinand, who ought legally
to have succeeded to the Crown of Castille after the decease of their
Grandfather Alphonso: but Prince Sancho second Son of Alphonso, maintaining
that it belonged to him as the nearest, not to his Nephews, (though the
contrary was expressed in the Contract between Ferdinand with Blanch) got
himself immediately to be acknowledged presumptive Heir. Alphonso their
Grandfather, instead of opposing this Usurpation did authorize it with all his
might; and to reduce Blanch and her Children to such a low condition that she
might not have it in her power to Resent it, he denied that Princess all she
was to have by Agreement, and even the means to Subsist.

Queen Yolante could not bear the ill Treatment used toward her
Grandchildren; so that it was by her Counsel and in her Company that the
unfortunate Widow stole away, and fled into the King of Arragons Country. But
that Prince being gained upon by Alphonso, suffered himself to be persuaded to
send her back to him, and detain the young Orphans in a Castle. The Mother
fearing to be used like the Children, escaped into France, not without great
difficulty. Some say the Castillian set her at liberty upon the earnest
entreaty of the King, but the Arragonian still kept the Children in hold.

Lewis Son to the King, and the eldest of the first Bed, being dead, Peter de
la Brosse, who was not loved by the young Queen, would needs make use of this
opportunity to ruin her. He was a Man came from nothing, that had served as
Barber to St. Lewis, had been taken into favor by Philip, and by that Prince
raised to the highest Degree. In this post, having nothing to fear but the too
great Affection the King had for his Wife, he found out an Accuser, that said
she had caused Prince Lewis to be Poisoned. In effect the Child was so made
away; And if we believe an Author, she had run the hazard of being burnt alive,
if the Duke of Brabant her Brother had not sent a Gentleman who offered to
prove her Innocence by Duel against the Accuser, who not having courage enough
to justify what he had spoken, was Condemned to the Gallows.

There were in the Kingdom three false Prophets, the Vidame of Laon, a wandering
Monk, and an old Nun, or Beguine, whom La Brosse, as it was believed, had
Consulted and Instructed to soretell something that might cool and change the
Kings Affection toward his Wife. Admire the simplicity of this King; Devout as
he was, he sends Matthew Abbot de Vendosme, and Peter Bishop of Bayeux to
Discourse the Beguine (or old Nun) about that business. The Bishop being of
Kindred to La Brosses Wife, going before, talked alone to the Beguine, to
inform her what to say, and brought word back to the King, that she would
discover nothing to him, but at Confession. The King dissatisfied with this
proceeding, sent again the Bishop of Dol and a Templer to her, who returned
with this Answer, That the Queen was Innocent and faithful to her Husband, and
all what had been talked to asperse her, was Falsehood and Calumny. From that
time the Credit of the Queen was much strenthned, and that of La Brosse began
to diminish.

Now after the King, who had undertaken the defense of Blanch his Sister, found
that Three several Ambassadors whom he sent to Castille, could obtain nothing
from an unjust Uncle, and an unnatural Grandfather, he at length defies them by
a Herald, and having gotten a great Army together, not only of French, but
Low-Country-Men and Germans, marches directly to the foot or the Pyrenean
Mountains, and took a re-view of his Army in Bearn.

Spaniards, had not their Gold, which procured them private Agents and
Intelligence, stopped them there, contriving it so that there was neither
Provisions nor Ammunitions to be had for them. So they could advance no
farther. Only one Party of them under the Conduct of Robert d'Artois was sent
into Navarre. The Castillian Faction had made them rise up against Eustace de
Beaumarchais the Kings Lieutenant; and the Rebels who possessed that part of
Pampeluna, which they named the City or the Navarrerie, held him besiged in the
other part which they called the Borough.

The Gentry and Soldiery of the Faction having defended themselves for some
time, feared they should be overpowered at length, and retired in the night
time; The Burghers forsaken, and knowing not either how to Capitulate or defend
themselves, were soon forced, and a great number fell by the edge of the Sword,
the rest were Hanged without Mercy, the fugitive Gentlemen degraded of all
Nobility, and by these terrible Examples the Regency of the French was settled
in Navarre.

The King was still in Bearn: The Castillan with design to amuse him that he
might enter upon Spain, demanded to Confer with Robert, and made him lose five
weeks time. In so much that the Army wanting Provisions, Philip decamps on a
sudden and marches toward France; whereof the Castillan being informed by
some Traitor, does immediately give notice to Robert, who was much amazed at it.

Peter de la Brosse. Now the Court being at Melun, a Jacobin of the Town of
Mirepoix delivered a Packet to the Kings own hand, which he told he was
enjoined to do by a certain Man who died in that City. What it contained was
not known, but only that there was a Letter Sealed with the Seal of Peter de la
Brosse, and that the King having read it stood much amazed. It must be some
Intelligence he gave to the King of Castille. Whatever it were, he was made a
Prisoner, carried to Paris, thence transferred to the Castle of Janville in
Beausse, then some days afterward brought back again to Paris, where he was
Hanged on the public Gallows, in the presence of the Dukes of Burgundy and
Brabant, and of Robert Earl of Artois. Guilty enough, had he committed no other
Crime but the Bayeux his Brother-in-Law, made his escape to the Pope, where he
remained a long time in Exile.

Charles King of Sicilia aspired to all. He thought to hold all Italy by the
Offices of Senator of Rome, and Vicar of the Empire; he was contriving the
Conquest of the Grecian upon the right Baldwin had to it, whose Daughter he had
taken for his second Wife; and this year 1277. he purchased the Title of King
of Jerusalem of the Princess Mary Widow of Frederic, Bastard of the Emperor
Frederic the II. and Daughter of Raimond Rupin Prince of Antioch, and Melisinda
Daughter of Aymeric de Lusignan King of Cyprus and Jerusalem. This Kingdom had
been already annexed to Sicilia by the Marriage of Yolante de Brienne who was
Heiress to it, and since it has ever remained so annexed.

Rodolph, and the Emperor Michael Conspired together to put a stop to that
Grandeur which run up too fast, and threatened to stifle theirs. And besides the
Pope, (it was Nicholas III. of the House of Vrsini) who not only, did not
desire to have to so Potent a Neighbor, but withal was cruelly offended, for
that having demanded one of his Daughters for one of his own Nephews, Charles
had received his insolent Proposition with raillery and contempt.

Rodolph mightily increased by the Victory he gained over Othocare King of
Bohemia, who was left dead in the Field. Of the Spoils of that Prince, whose
Domestic he had been, he got the Duchy of Austria, and invested his Son
Albertus in it. His Posterity have still preserved it, and have taken the name
of it, as more illustrious then that of Habspurg.

Charles quitted the Title of Senator and that of Vicar. He wanted but little
in Anno 1279. of losing Provence likewise: Queen Margaret Widow of St. Lewis
his Sister-in-Law disputed it with him as being elder Daughter of Earl Raimond
Berengier, and implored assistance of the Emperor, of whom that County was
held, because of the Kingdom of Arles. Notwithstanding the business being
brought to Examination, Provence was left to Charles upon Condition of doing
Homage to the Emperor, whose Daughter Clemence should likewise be Married to
the Son of his eldest Son. His Name was Charles, as was his Fathers and
Grandfathers.

Edward King of England crossed over Seas with Alienor his Wife, and came to
King Philip at Amiens to Treat of their Affairs. Philip agreed he should have
the Earldom of Agenois, and surrendered up that of Pontieu which belonged to
Alienor by right of her Mother. She was Jane the Wife of Ferdinand III. King of
Castille, and Daughter of the Earl Simon, and Mary Daughter and Heiress of
William, likewise Earl of Pontieu. Reciprocally Edward renounced the Duchy of
Normandy, but retained Thirty Livers Rent upon the Exchequer or Court of
Justice of the Province.

John otherwhile Lord of the Island de Procida had been divested of his Estate
by Charles, for having tampered in some Conspiracy. Being therefore prompted by
a cruel Resentment, he framed the design to bring the King of Arragon as Heir
to the House of Scwaben by his Mother, into the Kingdom of Sicilia, and made so
many Journeys backwards and forwards to the Pope, the Emperor, and the
Sicilians, that he brought the Project to his desired issue.

Nicholas who had projected for the most part what we shall find to break out
in those Countries, happened to die, and a French Cardinal, it was Simon de Brie,
was Elected in his room, he was named Martin IV. This last knew nothing of the
Tragical design contrived by his Predecessor, and had intentions quite
contrary: but it being already put in motion, he found the effect of it before
ever he could foresee the blow.

The Death of Nicholas did not discourage the Conspirators, the Lord de
Prochyda Prochyt^ Island.
continuing his Voyages disguised like a Monk, brought from Constantinople
Three hundred thousand Ounces of Gold to the Arragonian, who was ready to put a
great Naval force to Sea under pretense of making War upon the Saracens, and
had the Craft, the better to conceal his intentions, to borrow Twenty thousand
Gold Crowns of King Philip, and even, as some say, of Charles himself whom he
was going to Dethrone.

Africa to favor the Enterprise agreed upon, and in the mean while Charles
neglected the Advice was given him to stand upon his Guard and be aware, and
employed all his Forces for the Conquest of the Eastern Empire, in which he did
not succeed very well, his Fleet having been worsted at Sea by that of the
Emperor Michael. Whilst he is thus lulled asleep by his ill fate, the Sicilians
upon an Easter Day, at the first ringing of the Bell to Vespers, cut the
Throats of all the French that were in the whole Island: which they did execute
with so much fury and rage, that the good Friars Jacobins, and the Cordeliers,
did with pleasure wash their hands in Blood, and Murdered their unhappy
Enemies at the very Altars; The Fathers ripping up the Wombs of their own
Daughters if great with a French Child, and dashing little Infants against the
Rocks. They killed Eight thousand in two hours space, and pardoned but only one
by reason of his rare Probity. He was called William des Pourcellets a
Gentleman of Provence.

Charles who was at this time in Tuscany, more enraged then frighted at so
terrible a blow, Arms himself powerfully by the assistance of the Pope and the
King of France, which was brought him by the Earl of Alenson, and besieges
Messina. That City terrified with the glittering of his Arms and the
Fulminations of the Holy See, would have surrendered at the very first, and all
the Island afterward, if his just Wrath could have received them to any Mercy:
but that Prince being grown inexorable, despair puts some courage into their
faint hearts, and the arrival of the Arragonian who landed at Palermo, about
the end of August, and was Crowned King of Sicily there, re-assured them
wholly. So that Charles, whether for that, or for some other reason, raised the
Siege at the latter end of September, and went back into Calabria.

The Arragonian notwithstanding, finding himself unequal in Strength to
Charles, whom he observed to be daily supplied out of France, bethought himself
of a Villainous piece of Subtilty, which made him keep Sicily, but with the loss
of his Honor. He profer'd Charles to decide this great Quarrel by a Personal
Combat between them, each to be assisted with an hundred choice Knights.
Charles more brave then well advised, accepted the Challenge, notwithstanding
the contrary Counsel and reiterated Commands of the Pope. King Edward being
related to both, undertook to secure the Field for them at Bordeaux, the day
was appointed to be the first of July the year following, and upon the word of
this perfidious Man, Charles raised imprudently the Siege, and agreed to a
Truce.

In the interim the Pope pouring all the Treasures or Viols of his Wrath upon
the head of the Arragonian, not only Excommunicated him, but likewise degraded
him of his Kingship, and exposed his Kingdom as a prey; but he turned all this
into raillery; and as though he would obey the Popes Sentence, he would no
longer be called King, but the Knight of Arragon, Lord of the Sea, and the
Father of three Kings.

The day of Combat being come, Charles enters the Field with his hundred
Knights, and remained there from the Suns rise till Sun setting. The Arragonian
appeared not, but toward night comes post thither, goes to the Seneschal of
Bordeaux, takes Witness that he had presented himself, and leaves his Arms with
him to serve for Testimony, then retires in great have, feigning he was in
dread of some suprizal by the King of France. A very brave act of Appearance or
Comparition, worthy the Courage of a Prince, to whom his Subjects have given
the Surname and Epithet of Great.

Emperor Andro^ious, Son of Michael, Reigned Fifty years, and R^l^lph.
The Pope who had thundered his Excommunication against him the former year, did
re-aggravate it again in this, published a Crusado or Holy War against him with
the very same Indulgences and Privileges as for the Holy Land, and gave his
Kingdom to Charles de Valois, the second Son of France, whom he caused to be
invested by Cardinal John Cholet his Legate, whom he expressly sent into France.
And certainly the destruction of Peter having place, that Crown was devolved to
this Charles

Arragonian, he was confirmed in his Crime by the good success of Roger de
Lauria his Admiral. This Captain, the ablest Seaman of his Age, having gained
several Advantages over Charles's Subjects, came and planted himself before
Naples in his absence, engaged Charles the Lame, his Son, to a Battle the fifth
of June, vanquished him, and carried him Prisoner to Palermo. His Head ran
great danger of serving as a Reprizal for the Head of Conradin: The Sicilians
had Condemned him to Death, Constantia drew him subtly out of their hands,
and sent him into Arragon to the King her Husband.

Apulia and Colabria, and having wrastled six Months longer with his
Misfortunes, Foggi in Apulia the 17th of January, in the year 1285. leaving his
Son, Charles the Lame, the Heir to his Misfortunes, as well as to his Crown.

The foregoing year Alphonso King of Castille died, dispossessed almost of all
his Estate by Sancho his unnatural Son. On his Deathbed he made his Will and
Testament, whereby he left him his Paternal Curse, deprived him of the
Succession, and recalled Alphonso and Ferdinand, who were the Sons of his
eldest Son Ferdinand, and upon their default Philip King of France, to whom
Castille already did belong by right of Blanch de Castille the Mother of St.
Lewis: but Sancho knew how to keep himself securely enough in possession of it.

August King Philips eldest Son of the same name, and the Surname of Fair, Aged
but Fifteen years, Married Jane Queen of Navarre, and Countess of Brie and
Champagne, who was but Thirteen, the Pope having given Dispensation because she
was his Cousin German.

A Legate of the Pope having caused the Croisado to be Preached, against Peter
King of Arragon; King Philp would go himself in this Expedition, to Install
Charles his second Son in that Kingdom. He had no less then Twenty thousand
Horse, and fourscore thousand Foot. He Shipped part of these Foot-Soldiers in
fourscore Vessels which he took with him to carry Ammunition, Provisions, and
Artillery. James King of Majorca and Minorca, whom Peter his Brother had
divested of his Lands, followed him, or to say better, Conducted him in this
Voyage, thereby to recover them.

Narbonna, began to march in the Month of May. Perpignian surrendered to James
and received the French. Elna was taken by Storm, and all that were within
destroyed, excepting the Bastard de Roussillon, who showed them a passage
through the Mountains. These two Cities were belonging to James.

The Arragonian who guarded the narrow Passages, finding the French at his
back, quitted his Posts, and left their entrance into Catalonia free. They on
the sudden took several little places, and laid Siege to Geronde. That King
was lying in wait to relieve it: but being beaten and grievously wounded in an
Ambuscade, he had designed to intercept the Convoy which was marching from the
Port of Roses, the place surrendered for want of Provisions, after a two Months
Siege.

Three Months after the Fight, that King died of his Wounds in Valentia.
Alphonso his eldest Son succeeded him in that Kingdom, and James the second Son
seized on that in the Island of Sicilia.

French, the Admiral Lauria knowing, that out of an imprudent Management and
Husbandry to save Charges, they had sent back the Vessels belonging to the
Pisans and Genoese who were under pay, fell upon the rest of the Fleet and
defeated them all, except such as escaped into the Port de Roses. The scarcity
of Provisions and Sickness, brought the whole Army almost to nothing; The King
falling Sick, and hoping for no good by the approaching Winter, took his way
toward France, and was brought back to Perpignian in a Litter.

Geronde, and all the places he had Conquered in Catalongne, held but a very
few days after his departure: The Melancholy he conceived upon this Revolution,
and the agitation of the Journey increased his Sickness so much, that he died
at Perpignan the 6th day of October. He was in the beginning of the Five and
fortieth year of his Life, and the Sixteenth of his Reign. His Flesh and Bowels
were interred in the Cathedral of Narbonne, and his Bones brought to St. Denis.

If we consider his Qualities, he was Valiant, Good, Liberal, Just, and very
Pious, but too simple, and too easy to be deceived. If his Conduct, it was not
over-happy in those undertakings he made abroad, but for his Enterprises at
home they could not succeed better for his Kingdom, since it grew rich and
flourishing by a Peace of Fifteen years continuance, without any vexation of
Imposts, and the maintenance of a most exact and speedy Justice.

By Isabella, Daughter of James I. King of Arragon, he left two Sons, those
were Philip and Charles; The first Reigned, the second was Earl of Valois, and
Father of a Philip who came to the Crown. By his second Wife, Mary de Brabant,
he had one Son and two Daughters, the Son was Lewis Earl of Euvreux. From him
sprang the Branch of Euvreux, into which the Crown of Navarre was brought by
Marriage. The Daughters were Margaret and Blanch, Margaret was Married in the
year 1298. to Edward^. King of England; Blanch having been twice Contracted,
once with John de Namur, eldest Son of Guy Earl of Flanders, the other time
with John d'Avesnes Earl of Ostrevant, eldest Son of John d'Avesnes Earl of
Haynault, Married at last in the year 1298. to Rodolph Duke of Austria, eldest
Son of Albertus the Emperor, by whom she had a Son, but both the Mother and the
Child were Poisoned in the City of Vienna, Anno 1305.

Philip IV. King XLV.
POPES,
HONORIUS IV. Eighteen Months. Vacancy Nine Months and an half. NICHOLAS IV.
Elected the 22th of February 1288. S. Four years, one Month and an half.
Vacancy Two years, three Months. CELESTINE V. Institutor of the Celestines,
Elected the 5th of July, 1294. S. Five Months and an half. BONIFACE VIII.
Elected the 24th of December. 1294. S. Eight years, nine Months and an half.
BENNET XI. Elected the 20th of October, 1303. S. Eight Months, seventeen days.
Vacancy Eleven Months. CLEMENT V. Elected the 5th of June, 1305. transfers the Sea into France, S. Nine years wanting five weeks.
PHILIP IV. Surnamed the Fair, King of France XLV. and of Navarre also by his
Wife, Aged Seventeen years, and some Months.

Philip had brought back into France the remainder of the Army, and conveyed
his Fathers Bones to St. Denis, he went to be Crowned at Rheims by the hands of
the Archbishop Peter Barbet, the Sixth day of January, with the Queen his Wife.

Guy de Dampierre had succeeded in the Earldom of Flanders after the death of
his Mother, and had done Homage for it to Philip the Hardy, but neither his
Mother, nor himself, for want either of will or power, had not as yet caused
the Articles to be Sworn to, and Ratified, which were made in the year 1225.
between Philip Augustus and Ferrand, because in truth they were very
destructive and ruinous to the Flemmings. This year the King having threatened
Guy, if he did not perform it without delay, to own him no longer for his
Vassal, but to declare a War, the Cities and Commonalty of the Country were so
alarmed and scared, that they obeyed his Will and Pleasure.

Ever since the death of Philip III. Edward King of England had omitted no
endeavor to confirm the Treaties with his Successor. In the year 1286. being
landed in France about Pontieu, he was received at Amiens by several Lords whom
the King sent to meet him, from thence he came to Paris, where he was Treated
magnificently, was present at the Parliament which was held after Easter, and
going from thence about Whitsontide, went by Land to Bordeaux.

The apparent cause of his Voyage was the desire he had to Compose the business
of the King of Arragon, because Alphonso the eldest Son, and Successor of
Peter, had Married his Daughter Alienor. He forgot not likewise to press
earnestly he might have some reparation for Normandy, and those other Countries
which both his Father and himself had renounced, but could obtain nothing in
either of these two points. Being returned to Bordeaux, he solemnly received
the Ambassadors from the Kings of Castille, of Arragon, and of Sicilia, all
Enemies to France, which gave no little jealousy to Philip.

John de Launoy Viceroy for Philip in Navarre, continued the War against the
Arragonians. But a Lord of the Country named John Corbaran, whom he had
entrusted with the Command of the Armies, having been worsted by their Forces,
a Truce was agreed upon between the two Crowns.

The King of England labored very seriously to Compose the Difference between
the Kingdom of France and that of Arragon and Sicilia. To this purpose he
Conferred with Alphonso and Ol^ron de Bearn, and afterward took the pains to
make a Voyage into Sicily, that he might Treat with James the Brother of
Alphonso, who, as we have related, had seized upon that Island.

The Negotiations of the King of England were somewhat retarded by the Progress
some French Lords had made in that Island. But the rest, who were going thither
to complete that Conquest, being beaten and taken at Sea by Lauria the Admiral,
they gave a more willing Ear to what was propounded.

Charles the Lame was set at Liberty, promising he would bring it so about with
the Earl of Valois, that he should renounce the Kingdom of Arragon, and with
the Pope, that he should invest James of Arragon in that of Sicily, which his
Brother Alphonso should yield to him: For security whereof, Charles gave his
Three Sons, and Fifty Gentlemen of Quality as Hostages.

When he was delivered from his Imprisonment, he did not hold himself obliged
to make that good which he had been forced to promise: on the contrary, being
in France, he exhorted the Earl of Valois not to desist from his Right to the
Kingdom of Arragon, and going afterward into Italy, he got himself to be
Crowned by the Pope, who was then at Geronsa, King of Sicilia both on this side
and beyond the Fare.

Sicilia on this side the Fare, is the Kingdom of Naples.
So that James of Arragon perceiving the Treaty was broke, fell upon Calabria,
where the City of Catensana had revolted in his favor. Robert d'Artois laid
Siege to it, James and his Admiral Lauria hastened to its relief, and being
beaten, went and blocked up Gaieta, thinking to make a Diversion: but Charles
and Robert followed at the same time, and besieged the Besiegers so straightly,
that they reduced them to Famine.

Then the Sicilian caused, I know not how, the Popes Legate to intervene, who
demanded a Truce for two years, and Charles not well informed of the extremity
wherein his Enemies were, consented to it a little too easily; at which Robert
was so incensed that he retired into France, and carried all his Forces with
him.

Don Sancho King of Castille desired earnestly to have a Peace with King
Philip; and for that reason he would have given him up the two Sons of Alphonso
de Cerda, and to this intent had endeavored to get them out of the hands of
the Arragonian who kept them. Now the Arragonian having denied so to do, he
Treated with Philip, obliging himself to give the Kingdom of Murcia to the
eldest of those two Brothers, and some other Lands to the second. The
Arragonian hearing of this Treaty, made haste to set them at liberty, that so
they might be obliged to him, and continue still Enemies to Sancho. In effect,
they were so ill advised, as to refuse to stand to the Agreement which Philip
their Cousin German had made for them, and immediately took up Arms against the
Castillan.

Philips displeasure for being thus cantradicted by these two Brothers was
craftily managed by the Castillan, so that those two Kings had Interview at
Bayonne, and there made a Treaty; by which Philip, according the Advice of some
interessed Counselors, totally abondoned his unhappy Cousins, and withal
yielded up and gave to Don Sancho all the rights he might have to the Crown of
Castille.

This year Alexander III. King of Scotland dying without Children, there arose
a long and bloody Quarrel for the Succession between two Lords, each of them
pretending to be the next Heir. Both of them being of the Blood Royal by their
Mothers, who were the Daughters of Scotland; Their names were Robert Bruce, and
John de Baliol. This last was Originally of Normandy, History does not mention
of what part, for there are diverse places have the name of Baliol. These two
Competitors, having referred their Difference to Edward King of England, he
gives Judgment in favor of Baliol, whether he believed his Title to be the
better, or whether it were because he made himself his Vassal, as the Scots
reproach him, and had promised to hold his Crown of him.

Alfir Sultan of Egypt had in the year 1288. wrested all the Cities of Tripoly,
Syria, Lidon, and Tire, with some other strong Holds out of the hands of the
Christians. They had nothing more left in all those Countries, but the Seaport
Town of Ptolemais, which made a Truce with the Sultan. The French, the Pisans,
the Genoese, and the Venetians had each of them their distinct Quarters and
Magistrates. The Pope, the King of Cyprus, the Earl of Tripoly, the Patriach of
Jerusalem, and the Templars contended for the Sovereignty. Amidst these
Divisions there was nothing but Murders, Robberies, and Plunderings, both
within and without the City.

Besides all this, they were so imprudent as to suffer some numbers of new
Recruits that were come to them as Adventurers of the Cross, to break the
Truce. The Sultan Mebee-Arafe who succeeded to Alfir, demanded Reparation, but
as it was not in their power to deliver up the Violators, he besieged the City,
and after Forty days continual attaques, gained it by Storm, putting to the
Sword all that were within, excepting only such as could save themselves on
Shipboard.

Such was the end of the Christians Conquests in Syria, and their Expeditions
into the Holy Land. For although the Popes have since caused the Croisado's to
be preached for the recovery of it, and several Princes and great Persons have
made Ptolemais, none of them have gone thither, but only some Pilgrims.

Charles the Lame was in the end forced, that he might free his Children and
release those Gentlemen he had given in Hostage, and who were all sent into
Arragon, to persuade his Cousin Charles Earl of Valois, to renounce the Kingdom
of Arragon; upon which Condition King Alphonso engaged himself to go with his
Forces into the Holy Land, and in his pasiage through Sicilia, to do his utmost
to induce his Brother James, Usurper of that Island, to restore it to Charles
the Lame. Who in the mean while gave his Daughter Clemence in Marriage to
Charles de Valois, and for a Portion the Counties of Anjon and Maine.

Otheline Earl of Burgundy ready to be trod under foot by Robert Duke of
Burgundy, who would have the Earldom to hold of the Duchy, and do him Homage;
cast himself headlong into the protection of King Philip, bringing to him his
eldest Daughter named Jane, that he might Marry her to one of his Sons: and in
favor of this Alliance, he from that time gave him up his Earldom, reserving
only to himself the Revenue during his Life. This Jane was afterward Married
to Philip the Long, the Kings eldest Son, who was then but in his Cradle, and
her Sister Blanch to the second, who was called Charles the Fair.

Italian Bankers, sucked all the Substance of the poor People: The King had need
of Money, he was glad o^ such an opportunity and pretense to do Justice to get
some from them. He therefore caused them all to be seized upon May Day night;
This was a sweet Knot or Nose-gay of May-Flowers: but since under the same
pretense, they laid hold of many honest Merchants likewise, and raised great
Fines or Taxes upon them, as well as upon the Blood-sucking Leeches, this
inquiry, which in it self was just and necessary, was converted into a most
odious Robbery.

It is believed that this year the holy Virgins little House at Nazareth, where
the Incarnation The Annunciation.
of the Word was declared to her, was by Angels transferred to the top of a
little Mountain in Dalmatia, on the other side of the Adriatique-Sea, That from
thence, three years afterward, it was brought to the hither-side in a Wood
that belonged to a Widow named Loretta, and that it was removed at two other
times into two several places, in the last whereof, the Angels left it. There
is a Magnificent Church built there and a pretty good Town, and both are called
by the name of Loretta.

The Emperor Rodolph ended his days in the Borough of Ge^inesheim near Spire,
the last day of September, having Reigned Eighteen years. He laid the
foundation of the prodigious Grandeur of the House of Austria, but undermined
that of the Empire in Italy, by neglecting to go thither, and selling the
Sovereignty to diverse Cities of Tuscany in the year 1286. especially to that of
Luca and Florence, who bought it of him with their Money.

In his room Adolph Earl of Nassau was elected the 6th of January and Crowned
at Francfort; a brave and generous Prince, who would have maintained that Title
better then any of his Ancestors, had he but had as much Riches as Virtue

The Peace between France and England had lasted to this time, to the great
satisfaction of both Nations, when the accidental Quarrel of an English Mariner
with a Mariner of Normandy upon the Coast of Guyenne, where they had landed to
take in fresh Water, set them against one another. First, Ship and Ship
endeavored to Emperor or Andron. and Adolphus of Nassau, Reigning Six years
and an half, is slain in a Battle.
plunder or take what they could singly on each side, then they brought Fleet
against Fleet. The English had the worst, their King Edward demanded
restitution of such Merchants Goods as had been made Prize in these Scuffles.
Philip on the contrary Summons him to appear in his Court of Parliament as his
Vassal, Edward sent his Brother Edmund, but Philip not satisfied with that,
caused him to be declared Contumacious, and ordered his Lands should be seized.

Rodolph de Nesle seized several Cities in Guyenne, and even that of Bourdeaux,
which was the Capital.

Thus a Riot between Private Men blew their little Sparks of Contention into a
flame of War, which, one may say, proved very fatal to France, since it gave
way to the overthrowing of her ancient Laws and Liberties, and the introducing
and establishment of diverse Charges and Subsidies on the People. The increase
and burden whereof is ordinarily followed with Revolutions and Seditions, as
it fell out this year by a great Commotion happening at Rouen; but which had the
same end and event as all the like Enterprises generally come to, that is to
say, the Hanging of the most froward and hottest, and the Banishment or Ruin
of the rest.

England vexed at the loss of, those places in Guyenne, solicited all Princes
against France, particularly the Emperor Adolph with great Sums of Money, and
Guy de Dampierre Earl of Flanders, with the hopes o^ the Marriage of his Son,
Prince of Wales, with Philippetta, that Earls Daughter. Adolph sent to defy
the King in haughty language, but they gave him no other answer but a Sheet of
white Paper; For which he showed no other Resentment but by Threats, and so
turned his Arms against some German Rebels.

Guy, having been allured to Paris, with his Wife and Daughter, by Letters from
the King, fraught with Expressions of Kindness, he was much amazed to find
himself made a Prisoner there. It is true, that about a Twelve month after,
himself and his Wife were set at liberty, but his Daughter they kept still to
break the Measures of that Match, too pernicious to the French.

Benedict Cajetan, by intrigues, or by deceit and fourbery, obliged Pope
Celestin to resign the Popedom, and by the same Methods got himself to be
elected, he was named Boniface VIII. His Ancesters were Originally Catalonians,
and had taken the name of Cajetan because they first dwelt near Gaeta o^ Gaetan.
Cajeta, before they transplanted themselves to the City of Anagnia, where he
was born.

France and England: but he settled that between Arragon and France. King
Alphonso was dead, and James his Brother succeeded him. It was agreed, that
Charles Earl of Valois should renounce the Kingdom of Arragon, wherein he had
been invested by Pope Martin V. upon which Condition the Arragonian repudiating
Isabella de Castille for being too nigh of Kin, should Marry his Laughter, set
the three Sons of Charles the Lame, and other Hostages at liberty, and
surrender Sicily, and what he had Conquered in Abruzza: but Frederic his
younger Brother, to whom Alphonso had by his last Testament willed that
Kingdom, got himself to be named King by the Sicilians.

Since then, that which we call the Kingdom of Sicilia, was dismembered in two,
that beyond the Fare, which was the Island, and that on this side which they
called the Kingdom of Naples. They were again re-joyned in Anno 1503. and are
to this day in the same hands.

The Sons of Charles the Lame being set at liberty, the eldest named Charles
entered into the Order of the Friars Minors. The following year he was by the
Pope promoted to the Archbishopric of Thoulouze, which he accepted not of till
after he had made his Vows.

The King of Englands heart was much set upon two things, the one to Subject
the Kingdom of Scotland, and the other to recover the Tows in Guyenne; He
thought the first was pretty well advanced, having obliged Baliol to render him
Homage; and to compass the second, he prepared a mighty Fleet, and had
strengthened himself with Friends and Alliances. But Philip to prevent his
designs, induced the King of Scotland, already threatened by his Subjects, who
scorned to subject themselves to the English, to break the Treaty he had made
with Edward, and Allie himself with France; and for security of this new Bond
of Alliance, he promised to give the eldest Daughter of the Earl of Valois to
his eldest Son, whose name was Edward.

At the same time he caused the People of Wales also to rise, who out of a wild
and untamed humor for Liberty, were easily heated and drawn into the Field.
The great devastations and spoil they made this time in Pembrook-shire, and
thereabout, broke all the King of England's Measures. He was forced to go in
Person that way to stop their progress, and lay aside the business of Guyenne,
till he had quelled those hot and stubborn old Enemies; as he did, having
overmaster'd almost all of them, in four Months time.

About this time the Principality of Milan and Neighboring Cities was fixed
and perpetuated in the Family of the Vicounts, to which Otho Vicount Archbishop
of Milan contributed not a little. Matthew his Brothers Son was created the
first Adolph, who likewise gave him the Vicarship, or Vicegerency of the Empire
in Lombardy.

In Pistoya, a City in Tuscany, as then powerful enough, it happened that the
rich and numerous Family of the Cancellary were divided in two Factions, the
one of the White, the other of the Black; The first joined themselves with the
Guelphes, the second with the Ghibelins; and that fury and madness spread over
all Italy, and caused insinite Seditions and Murders.

Boniface was Proud, Haughty, Imperious, and Undertaking, he thought all the
Princes of the Earth must bow to his Commands: but he found a Philip of France
at the head of them, a young Prince of no very patient Humor, more Potent then
any one of his Predecessors, and who had a Council consiting of People that
were Boniface, who ardently pursued the Design he aimed at to oblige all Kings
to the Holy War, having sent to tell both him and the King of England, that
they must make a Truce upon pain of Excommunication, he made Reply, That he
took no Rule or Law from any one in the Government of his Kingdom, and that the
Pope had in this case no right, but to Exhort and Advise, not to Command. This
was the first occasion of Enmity betwixt these two great Powers.

Boniface received the Complaints of the Earl of Flanders, who implored his
Justice, because Philip denied to restore his Daughter to him; The other, for
that he erected the Abbey of St. Antonine de Pamiez to a Bishopric, and put the
Abbot of St. Antonine into it. Observe, en passant, that this City was other
while called Fredalas.

King Philip was offended at this Erection, and more yet with the choice of the
Bishop, (his name was Bernard Saisset) because he believed him a Factious Man,
and too much devoted to Boniface. Nor would he suffer him to take possession,
and therefore Lewis Bishop of Toulouze administered in that Church for two whole
years together.

Guyenne by the Earl of Valois and the Constable de Nesle, and then by Robert
Earl of Artois. The English had for Commanders there, John Earl of Richmond,
and Edmond the Kings Brother. To what purpose would it be to relate the taking
of many petty places, and the diverse small Skirmishes? The French say they won
two Signal Victories, one of them was gained by the Earl of Valois, and the
other by the Earl of Artois. It is certain, that Edmond being beaten by the
first near Bayonne, was forced to retire into that City, where he died; and the
Earl of Lincoln, who commanded that English Army afterward, having lost many
of his Men before Daqs, durst not stay for Robert d'Artois, and retreated.

France. A League was made at Cambray, by the Interest of the King of England,
whereinto he entered with the Duke of Brabant, the Earls of Holland, Juliers,
Luxemburgh, Guelders and Bar, Albert Duke of Austria, the Emperor Adolphus, and
the Flemming himself; all which sent their several Cartels of Defiance to King
Philip; but none of them vexed him so much as the Challenge from the Earl of
Flanders, because he was his Vassal.

The Earl of Bar began the Attaque, by ravaging Champagne: but he retired when
he heard how Gaultier Or Walter:
de Crecy Lieutenant of the Kings Army, burnt and plundered his Country. Soon
after the Queen being advanced that way to defend her Country of Champagne, he
was so saint-hearted as to surrendet himself to her without making any desence.
They sent him Prisoner to Paris; from whence he could get no Release but upon
very hard Conditions. For he did Homage to the King for his Earldom, which he
ever had pretended to hold in Franc Alleud, or Free-Tenure; and moreover he was
condemned by a Decree of Parliament to go and bear Arms in the Holy Land till
the King were pleased to recall him.

Florent Earl of Holland, he was killed by a Gentleman whose Wife he had
Dishonored. His Son John died soon after him, by eating of some ill-Morsel.
John d' Avesnes Earl of Haynault their Cousin and nearest Relation, inherited
Holland and Frisland.

Flanders: King Philip marched into the Country with a vast Army, to whom the
Queen joined her Forces after she had subdued the Earl of Bar. He took L'Isle
by a three Months Siege, and Courtray and Douay without much difficulty; whilst
on the other hand Robert Earl of Artois gained the Battle of Furnes, where the
Earl of Juliers was so ill handled, that he died of his Wounds.

Adolphus detained in Germany by the private Troubles the French started
amongst them, or the Sums of Money Philip gave him underhand, did not bring
the Flemming that Relief which he expected. Withal they found a way by the
all-powerfulinfluence of Money to debauch Albertus Duke of Austria from the
Party, who brought over with him the Duke of Brabant, and the Earls of
Luxembourg, Guelders and Beaumont. As for the King of England who was there in
Person, and had his Navy at Damm, and his Land Forces in the Country Towns, he
brought more inconvenience then assistance to the Flemming. Besides we may add,
that the greatest Cities in Flanders, as Ghent and Bruges, had been against the
making of this War, and amongst them a Faction had declared for the French, who
called themselves the Portes-Lys, or the Flower-de-Luce-Bearers.

Now the King being retired to Ghent with the Earl of Flanders, could find no
other way to Charm the Swords of the French in those Countries, but by a Truce.
The intercession of the Earl of Savoy, and Charles King of Sicilia obtained it
with difficulty for them, from the Tenth of October till Twelfth-day, for
Guyenne, and to S. Andrews Holy Day for Flanders only.

Edward knew how to employ that time to good purpose; Having passed the Sea, he
went against the Scots who had shaken off the Yoke; and not only forced their
King John and his Barons to do Homage to him a second time, of which a Charter
written in French was Signed and Sealed, and to renounce the Alliance with
France: but likewise kept him Prisoner a while with some of those Lords,
confining them in the Tower of London, resolving not to release him till he had
made an end of his Disputes with the French.

Guyenne by the Month of March in the year 1298. Nevertheless, as either of
these Kings had partly what they desired, that is, the King of France the Towns
in Flanders, and the King of England the Kingdom of Scotland: it was not
difficult for their Ambassadors, who met about it at Monstreuil on the Sea
Coast, to prolong the Truce to the end of the year.

It was agreed, That the Allies of both Kings should be Comprised, by
consequence John Bal^ol ought to have been so, but they could never obtain his
liberty; and that all the places Conquered in Flanders should be in the hands
of Philip during that Truce. The King of England had obliged himself by Oath to
the Flemming, not to make a Peace till they were restored: but in the mean time
he agreed his Marriage with Margaret the Sister to Philip, and that of his Son
Edward with Isabella the Daughter of that King.

Adolphus had received on both hands, from the Kings of France and England, was
the cause of his Ruin, and on the contrary, what Albertus had taken for the
same end, served to raise his Fortune. For this last having made use of some of
it to corrupt the Princes of Germany, who were displeased for that Adolphus had
given them no share of his, it happened that in an Assembly they had at Prague
for the Coronation of King Venceslaus, they easily suffered themselves to be
persuaded, that the Pope was consenting to the Deposition of Adolphus, as being
useless to the Empire; And in effect, the Cabal was so strong that they did
Depose him, and elected Albert Duke of Austria. The two Competitors came to
blows about it near Spire the Second of July, Adolph fighting valiantly, but
betrayed, or at least forsaken by his Men, lost his Life there.

Albert was illegal, to rectify it he was fain to lay it down, at least
seemingly, in the hands of the Electors, who elected him the second time with
all the Formalities, the Seven and twentieth of the same Month. But the Pope
still Emperor Andron. and Albert, elected in Anno 1298. Reigned Ten years.
refused to approve it, and designed that Crown for Charles de Valois, for whom
he had a particular Esteem.

He seemed now as if he would have sweetened the sharp Humors of Philip; for
the year preceding he Canonized St. Lewis his Grandfather, and he interpreted
the Bull, by which he had forbidden the Clergy to pay any Tenths or
Contributions to Princes, very favorably. Philip believing he had done it
expressly to choque him, was offended, several Letters had been written on that
Subject to each other, and things were like to have proceeded to the greatest
Extremity. However Boniface upon the entreaty of some French Prelates, yielded
to reason, declaring, that he intended not to forbid voluntary Contributions,
provided they were made without Exaction. He added, that they might be levied
without permission from the Pope in times of the Kingdoms necessity; and that,
even upon urgent necessities, they might be constrained by the Authority
Apostolic, Spiritually and Temporally.

But as their Spirits were already exasperated on either side, the Wound burst
open afresh in a short while afterward. Boniface had been chosen Arbitrator of
the Differences between the King, with the English and the Flemming; After the
hearing of their Deputies, he gave his Sentence of Arbitration, which ordained,
That the Flemmings Daughter should be set at liberty, and his Towns restored;
and as if he had been the Sovereign Judge, he caused it to be publicly
pronounced in his Consistory. Which so touched the King and his Council, that
it being brought to Paris by the English Deputy, the Earl of Artois snatched it
out of his hands, rent it, and threw it into the Fire.

The Queen on her part made use of the means within her power to highten the
King her Husbands Wroth against the Flemming, for whom she had a mortal hatred.
So that the Truce being expired, the Earl of Valois had order to enter into
Flanders, and carry things on to the last push.

Dam and Dixmude from him, he besieged him in Ghent with all his Family. That
unfortunate Prince destitute of all succor, and forsaken even by his own
Subjects, was advised to render both himself and his two Sons into his hands.
The Earl of Valois promised he would carry him to Paris to Treat with the King
himself, and assured him, that if within a Twelvemonth he could not procure a
Peace, he should be set again at liberty, and brought back to the same place
where they had taken him. But the King would have no regard to what his Uncle
had sworn, detains the Flemming and his two Sons, and disposes them into
several Prisons asunder from each other.

Valois being picqued for that they violated the Faith he had given the
Flemming, or by some other motive of Ambition, went out of the Kingdom, and
passes into Italy, whither the Pope had earnestly invited him for at least
Three years. He there Married Catharine the Daughter and Heiress of Baldwin the
last Emperor of Constantinople, and the Pope gave him that Empire, and made him
his Vicar or Lieutenant over all the Lands belonging to the Church, hoping by
his means to carry on that great design of the Holy War which was ever rumbling
in his Head.

John Baliol Or, de Bail^eul, if a Frenchman by Descent.
King of Scotland, who was brought into Normandy, and left in the keeping of
some Bishops who were willing to take that Charge upon them.

Albert could not obtain his Confirmation of Boniface, and Philip was
apprehensive of the audacious Undertakings of this Pope: for this reason, both
the one and the other to prevent him from taking advantage of their Divisions
to ruin them, Conferred together at Vaucouleurs. In that Interview they
renewed the ancient Confederations of the Empire with France; and to unite
themselves more closely, Treated the Marriage between Rodolph the Son of
Albert, and Blanch the Daughter of Philip. It was not completed till the
following year.

At the end of the Thirteenth Age of the Christian Era, the Pope published a
general Indulgence or Relaxation of Canonical Pains due for Sins, for all those
who being Confessed and Penitent, should visit the Church of St. Peter and St.
Paul, for a certain number of days. Since that, Clement VI. reduced it to Fifty
years, and called it the Jubilee.

Boniface has been reproached, that on this Ceremony he appeared sometimes in
Pontifical Habit, sometimes in Habits Imperial, causing two Swords to be
carried before him to signify his double power, Spiritual and Temporal. He had
so in effect, but the last only in his own Territory. However he did not
understand it thus: as his Actions, and the Sixth Book of the Decretals,
wherein he boldly affirms, that there is but one Power, which is the
Ecclesiastical, does but too plainly show.

This Institution of the Jubilee seems to have its Original from Secular
Pass-times. The Ancient Romans Celebrated them once in every Hundred years;
Paganism being abolished, the People did not lay aside their Custom of coming
from all parts to Rome the first year of every Age: but sanctifying that
profane Solemnity, they paid their Devotions on the Tombs of the Apostles, St.
Peter and St. Paul.

Several do in this year place the beginning of that dreadful Family, or House
of the Othomans, and tell us that the Turks having conquered much of the
Countries belonging to the Greeks in Asia, divided those Lands into seven
Principalities, of which the Province of Bithynia fell by Lot to Osman, or Or
Ottoman.
Othoman, Son of Ortogules, who was in great reputation of probity and valor
amongst his Contrymen. His Successors have devoured, not only the other six
Principalities, but the Grecian Empire, the Kingdom of Egypt, and so many
Countries of the Christian Princes, that it is to be feared they may swallow up
the Western Empire likewise.

Boniface was grown obstinate in his design for the expedition to the
Holy Land, and persuaded himself he had a right to oblige all Christian Princes
to it. He therefore sent Bernard Saisset, Bishop of Pamiez to Philip, with a
charge to exhort him to this voyage; and also to summon him to make good his
word to the Earl of Flanders, by setting his Daughter at liberty. He acquitted
himself of his Commissions in such high terms, and it was told the King that he
held discourses upon several occasions so injurious to his Person, and so
factious against the quiet and peace of the Kingdom, that he made him be seized
and kept prisoner.

Then their hatred ran up to the extremity, the King besides all this being
mightily heated by the ill reports of William de Nogaret. For he informed him,
that when he was sent Ambassador to the Pope, to acquaint him of his Alliance
with the Emperor Albert; he perceived that his Holiness was very ill inclined
toward him, that he had bad designs, and that he led a scandalous life, and
most unworthy of the Succession to the Apostles.

Boniface dispatched the Archdeacon of Narbonna to Command him to set the
Bishop of Pamiez at liberty, and let him know there was a Bull, importing, that
the King was under his correction for the sins he committed in his Temporal
Administration, as well as for others; That the collation of Benefices did not
appertain to him, and that the Regalia was an usurpation. By another Bull he
suspended all the privileges granted by his predecessors to the King, to those
of his House, and to his Council. And by a Third he ordered all the Prelates of
the Kingdom should come to Rome, to find out some remedy against Philips
disorders, and the Enterprises he made upon the Ecclesiastical State.

Pamiez into the hands of the Arch-Bishoy of Narbonna, his Metropolitan: but he
forbad the Prelates for going out of the Kingdom, or the transporting of any
Gold or Silver. And for that point which he believed did concern his
Sovereignty, he thought it best to support himself with the Authority of all
the Estates of his Kingdom against Boniface. The Estates assembled in
Nostre-Dame the 10th of April, in the year 1301.

During these quarrels a prodigious Comet appeared in the Heavens; it began to
show it self in Autumn, toward the West, and in the Sign of Scorpio, darting
its Rays sometimes to the Eastward, and sometimes to the Westward. It was seen
but one Month.

The Earl of Artois, Nogaret, Peter Flote, Chancellor to the King, and the
Colona's, whom Boniface had thrust out of all, proscribed and imprisoned,
exasperated all things more and more. Many nevertheless were scandalized, that
they should contend against the Pope, and therefore it was thought decent to
maintain that he was not so, and that by opposing his Person, they did not
oppose the Vicar of Jesus Christ, but an ill Man that had intruded himself into
the Papacy.

The King being therefore at the Louvre, Nogaret in presence of diverse Princes
of the Blood, and Bishops, presented a Petition the Twelfth day of March,
accusing him of Heresy, Simony, Magic, and other enormous crimes, and
demanding the Kings assistance, that there might be a general Council called,
to deliver the Church from this oppression.

The Pope had dispatched into France a Cardinal, named John Le Moyne, a native
of the Diocese of Amiens, a knowing Man, and very Learned, upon pretense of
negotiating some agreement with the King: but indeed, to sound the inclination
of the Clergy in his favor. Now being but ill satisfied with the answers the
King made to his Quaeries; he sent another Bull which declared him
Excommunicate, for having hindered the Prelates from going to Rome, forbid them
to admit him to the Sacraments or Mass, Commanded them to be at Rome within
three Months, and summoned some by name, upon the penalty of being deposed.

During these Contrasto's, Charles Earl of Valois was gone into Sicilia with a
great Army, with design to reduce it to the Obedience of Charles the Lame his
Nephew. He made so little progress, that he thought fitter to make peace
between both parties. In effect, he succeeded better in it then in his War. The
conditions of the Treaty were, That Frederic should marry his Daughter Eleonor,
for whose Portion Sicilia should remain to him under the Title of the Kingdom
of Trinacria: but if he had no Children by her, the Island should return to
Charles the Lame, or to his Heirs, upon their payment of a hundred thousand
Ounces of Gold.

Before his expedition into Sicilia, he had been sent to Florence by the Pope,
to calm the Factions wherewith that Republic was most horribly tormented.
During five Months time that he remained there, his Care nor his Authority
could by no means prevent the Guelphs and Black from proscribing the White, who
were for the most part Gibbelins, and from ruining their Houses. Dante Aligeri,
one of the rarest wits of his time, who was of the faction of the White, though
otherwise he were a Guelph, was put into the number of the banished, and could
never obtain to be recalled. He lays the fault upon the Earl of Valois, for not
having provided against those injurious proceedings, and tried to place his
revenge upon all the House of France, by the cruel bitings of his Pen; which
certainly would have made some impression upon their posterity, had there not
been prooss much clearer then the Sun at Noonday, which dispelled that
Satirical calumny.

There are some Authors that assign in this year 1302. the Invention of the
Mariners Compass, or Needle, by one Flavio a native of Melplus; Or Melfe.
However, since we find some mention of it in Authors long before this time^ we
can at most but give this Flavio the honor of having brought it to greater use
and perfection.

This same year 1302. Flanders revolted, and was lost as to the French. Those
people, irreconcilable enemies to Taxes, and heavy oppressions, could not
endure the violence and imposts wherewith their young Governor James de
Chastillon vexed and tormented them, by the evil Counsels of Peter Flote, a
violent and most covetous Man; and indeed he was one-ey'd. They therefore
called in William Son of the Earl of Juliers, and a Daughter of ^arl Guy's to
be their Chief, whose younger Sons, with the Sons of his Brother John, came
into the County of Alost to support this Rising.

Malan, but broke out more fiercely at Bruges, where the French Garrison, being
all knoc'd on the Head, the Towns of Furne, Bergh, Bourbourgh, Cassel followed,
and Guy Earl of Namur, one of the Flemmings Sons, laid Siege before the
Citadel of Courtray.

The King raised a great Army to chastise the Rebels, and gave the Command of
it to Robert d'Artois. That Prince marched to relieve Courtray, with Ten
thousand Horse, and Forty thousand Foot; The Flemmings though they were but ill
Armed, had neither Nobility, nor Cavalry, durst resolutely wait his coming, and
gained the Victory, with the slaughter of Twenty thousand French, amongst which
number was that Prince himself, above Twenty great Lords with him, and Peter
Flota, principal cause of those misfortunes. This was on the 9th of June.

Flemmings, and the intelligence sent him by his Sister the Queen of England,
that if he hazarded a Battle, he would be betrayed to his own Men, hindered him
from proceeding any farther then Douay; besides the Autumnal Rains rendered his
march very difficult.

This War very troublesome in it self, would have been much more so, had the
King of England meddled in it; as he ought to have done after he had engaged the
Flemmings. Their troubles helped to advance his Affairs, after his having
prolonged the Truce two or three times with the French, he converted it at last
to a final Paris the Twentieth day of May 1303. It was agreed that Philip
should restore to him all what he had taken from him in Guyenne, and should
grant him a Patent for the investiture of that Duchy. John Baliol was set at
full liberty; but the Scots despised him as a Man of little courage, who had
twice bowed the knee before the King of England, and would not own him for
their lawsul King; so that he remained in France, where he ended his days as a
private person. It is not said what the fortune of his Son Edward was. However,
although the English had wholly subdued Scotland, it nevertheless happened, that
some years afterward, Robert, Son of Robert Bruce raised that Kingdom again,
which seemed to be extinguished, and freed it from the bondage of England.

Flemmings being untameable, their old Earl who grew weary of his imprisonment,
obtained a Truce, by the means of Ame Earl of Savoy, during which interval they
permitted him, leaving his Sons in hostage, to go to his Towns in Flanders, to
endeavor to bring them back again to the obedience of the King.

The same year the King having had information, that there was a dangerous
Faction brooding in Languedoc, and in Guyenne, took a progress into those
Countries, where he visited, and highly caressed the chief Cities and Nobility:
At his return Guy de Luzignan Earl of Angoulesme, and Lord of Cognac having no
Children, resigned his Lands to him, to the great prejudice of three Sisters he
had. The King, to make those Sisters some manner of reparation, gave them I
know not what Lands in Angoulmois.

Queen Jane his Wife, Heiress of Navarre, Champagne and Brie, built and founded
in the University of Paris, that famous College that bears the name of
Navarre, and France. She died about the end of the same year.

The Earl Guy not having been able to gain any thing upon the Flemmings, the
King resolved to make them bend by force. He got together the most numerous
Army that had been levied of a long time of French, Germans, Spaniards, and
Italians, and put himself at the head of them. At the same time he had a Fleet
at Sea, commanded by the famous Roger de Lauria. This Admiral gained a bloody
Battle against Philip, one of the Flemmings Sons, who besieged Ziriczea, that
held for John Earl of Holland, who by this means preserved Zealand and kept it.
The King soon after Mons, the Eighteenth of August, but not without great
danger to his Person. Above five and twenty thousand Flemmings were slain there.

For all these rebukes they would not stoop, nor give over; but having shut up
shop in all their Cities, and got an Army on foot of Sixty thousand fighting
Men, they came before l'Isle, which he then held besieged, demanding Peace, or
a Battle. This Lys, which should remain to the King, as likewise the Cities of
l'Isle and Douay, till the Earl should be more fully agreed with him, and the
Flemmings paid down the sum of 800000 Livres.

Emp. Androni. and Albert.
The prisoners set at liberty, the Earl Guy went to visit his Country and his
Children. Being returned to Compeigne upon his faith, as he had promised to
finish the Treaty; he died some few days after, aged Fourscore years. His
eldest Son Robert de Betune succeeded him in his Earldom.

The preceding year before he undertook this Expedition, King Philip had
considered how to pre-arm himself against the Bulls of Boniface; and for that
purpose had Paris. The Earls Guy de St. Pol, John de Dreux, and William du
Plessis, Lord de Vezenobre, did there accuse the Pope of Heresy, and diverse
things so horrible, that a Christian can hardly tell how to name, much less to
believe them. Duplessis offered to prosecute him before the Council, adhering
to the Appeal heretofore brought by Nogaret, and putting himself under the
protection of the Council, and the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul.

The King promised to procure the Convocation, and in case Boniface should any
way proceed against him, formed his Appeal as Duplessis had done.

Moreover, fearing his People too much oppressed with Imposts, and dissatisfied
with the Government of his Ministers, should chance to fail him in his
necessity, he found it necessary to prevent all stirs and factions that might
be set on foot in favor of the Pope, to have. Writings or Letters of all the
Provinces, Cities, Corporations, Churches, Religious Houses, Prelates, and Lords
of his Kingdom, who approved of his Resolution, and joined therein with him.

Nogaret was gone into Italy to seize upon the Person of Boniface, under
pretense of bringing him by fair means or by foul to the Council. The Pope had
retired himself to Anagnia, the place of his Nativity, where he thought himself
in greater security then in Rome; and there he was upon the Birthday of our
Lady, to publish a Bull, by which he Excommunicated the King, dispensed his
Subjects of their Obedience to him, and gave his Kingdom to the first occupier.
He had already offered it to the Emperor Albert, and to engage him to it, had
confirmed his Election.

But the Eve before, Nogaret, who was in a Castle near at hand, assisted by
Sciarra Colonna, whom Boniface had kept in the Galleys, with some other
Gentlemen of the Country, enemies to Boniface, and Two hundred Horse of those
Troops as Charles de Valois had left in Tuscany, enters into Anagnia, gained
the People, and having forced his Palace, seized on his Person; which was not
done without some sort of Outrage worthy an Italian revenge, and by plundring
his Treasures, which were immense, together with the Houses of three or four
Cardinals.

Anagnia repenting of their baseness, drove the French and their Soldiers out
of the Town. The Pope being thus at liberty withdrew to Rome; and there that
haughty spirit was assaulted by a burning Fever, of which he died upon the
Twelfth day of October.

Nicholas, Cardinal of Ostia, of the Order of the Preaching Friars, elected by
the Cardinals the Two and twentieth of November (he was called Benedict XI.)
carried things with more sweetness, received the Ambassadors sent by the King
very honorably, not admitting Nogaret however at their Audience, who was one,
and sent three other Bulls which annulled all those of Boniface, and restored
all things to the Colonna's, excepting only that he did not restore those two
again to the dignity of Cardinals, who had been degraded: but he proceeded
severely against Nogaret, and all such as had assisted at the Capture of
Boniface, and the robbery of the Churches Treasure.

He died the Eighth Month after his Election, being the Seventh of July, in the
French, the other Italians, and friends to the Pope, were almost eleven Months
in the Conclave at Perugia, before they could come to an agreement; in the end
the Italians named a French man, which was Bertrand Got Or De Got, de Agatis.
He was the Son of Berraud, Lord of Villandraud, near B^urdeaux.
Archbishop of Bourdeaux, whom they knew to be a great enemy to the King; and
besides, a Subject to the English. The French before they would consent to it,
gave speedy notice to the King, who having sent privately for him, and
conferred with him near St. John d'Angely, declared to him, it was in his power
to make him Pope, provided he agreed to Six things which he required of him,
whereof he named five of them to him, but reserved the sixth to time and place.
The Archbishop a Gascon, and Vain, cast himself at his Feet, and promised him
all; by this means he was elected, being absent, the fifth day of

Italy, as the Cardinals be ought him, he sends for them to Lions, to assist at
his Coronation, which was performed the Fourteenth of November. The King, his
Brother Charles, a great number of Princes and Lords, and infinite multitudes
of People came to be present at this Ceremony. The King having for some space
held the Reins of the Popes Mule, left that Office to be done by his Brother
Charles, and John Duke of Bretagne, whilst he mounted on Horseback, to march
along beside the Holy Father. As they were in their march, an old Wall
overcharged with People, tumbled down, and by its fall, overwhelmed the Duke
of Bretagne, and a Brother of the Popes, hurt Charles most grievously, the King
somewhat lightly, and beat the Tiara off from the Head of the Pope. A presage
of the misfortunes the translation of the Holy See into France was to bring to
the Kingdom, and to all Christendom, nay, to the Papacy it self, which by this
means did submit to the discretion of the secular Power.

Lions the Pope returned to Bourdeaux, where he sojourned all the year 1306.
went the following year to Poitiers; then in Anno 1308. to exempt himself from
the importunities of the Court of France, removed his See to the City of
Avignon, which belonged to Charles, King of Sicilia his Vassal.

The Residence of the Court of Rome in France has introduced three grand
disorders, Simony the offspring of Luxury, and Impiety; Litigious Lawsuits,
the exercise of Scratch-papers, and idle fellows, such as were the swarms of
puny-Clerks who followed that Court; and another execrable irregularity, to
which nature cannot give any name.

Clement continued the Absolution which Benedict had given the King, restored
the Colonna's to their Dignities of Cardinals, made a promotion of Ten
Cardinals more, Nine of them being French, and explicated or revoked all the
Bulls which Boniface had made, that prejudiced the Kings Authority.

Nogaret, and the other persons of the Kings Council, by the despair they were
in of obtaining their Absolution, persisted still in their accusation against
Boniface; and the King pressed Clement to condemn his Memory, and cause his
Body to be burnt, not believing he could otherwise wash himself clean of those
censures and reproaches he had bespattered him withal; but Clement to elude
that pursuit, referred it to a general Council, which was assigned to be three
years after that at Vienne in Dauphine; and in the mean time there were diverse
proceedings and instructions toward carrying on that business.

The Jews were still the execration of Christians, and especially of the common
people, because they grated, and even flayed them by their cruel Usury, and by
the exactions of new Imposts, of which they were the Farmers. And truly in
revenge, or retaliation, they were liable to all sorts of affronts; in any
sedition, in their Crusado's, they ever fall upon them; and they were every day
accused, either of having committed some insolence against the Sacred Host, or
the having crucified some Children upon Good Friday, or for having affronted
the Image of our Savior; and if they did get out of the Judges Hands, they
could hardly save themselves from the fury of the Populace. The Princes after
they had made use of those cursed Instruments, made them disgorge again, and
often drove them out, that they might have Money to recall them back. This year
they were seized upon thorough out all France, the Two and twentieth day of
July, banished the Kingdom, and their Goods confiscated. Was this Zeal or
Avarice?

Enguerrand le Portier, Lord of Marigny, who in scraping and levying great sums
of Money to bring to his Master, did not forget to fill his own Coffers, and to
enrich his Family with more Lands, Employments, and Benefices, then a faithful
and disinteressed Servant ought to do. So the People had extreme troubles and
vexations to undergo; one of the greatest was the changing of Moneys, they had
made it light and weak, of too base allay, and put too high a value; then they
would set them at a lower rate, the loss was great, the people of Paris
mutined* pillaged and ruined the House of Stephen Barbet, Treasurer; from
thence ran to the Temple where the King lay, and committed a hundred insolences
there: but the sedition over, a great many were hanged in several places.

The Templers were observed to have contributed to this mutiny; it was believed
they had done it, because having a great deal of Money, they lost much by this
abating the value of the Coin. It is likely that the King, who never forgot an
injury, kept the remembrance of this in his mind, and it was one motive that
induced him to revenge himself upon the whole Order.

In completing the peace with the Flemmings, several Articles were changed or
added; amongst others it was allowed that the King might banish Three thousand
of the most factious; that the Cities of Ghent, Bruges, Ipre, l'Isle and Douay,
should be dismantled, and that if the Country in general, or any particular
person offended the King, or his Officers, they should immediately be liable to
the thunderings of Ecclesiastical censures.

Lewis Hutin the Kings eldest Son, visits his Kingdom of Navarre, fallen to him
by the death of his Mother, and is Crowned at Pampelona, the Fifth of June.
Before his return, he took off the two Heads of the Factions that had much
troubled Navarre, these were Fortunio Almoravid, and Martin Ximenes de Aybar.

The effect of that secret promise the Pope had made to the King, began to
appear in his revenge upon the Templers. The too great riches of those Knights,
their unsufferable pride, their covetous and disobliging behavior toward such
Princes and Noblemen, as went into the Holy Land, the little esteem they made
either of Temporal or Spiritual Power, their dissolute and libertine Humors,
and rendered them obnoxious and very odious, and furnished those with a specious
pretense, who were resolved to exterminate them.

Poitiers, caused them all to be laid hold on in the same day, the Twelfth of
October, thoroughout the whole Kingdom, seized their Goods, and took possession
of tho Temple at Paris, and of all their Treasures and Writings.

The Great Master, whose name was James de Molay, a Burgundian, being sent for
by Letters from the Pope, to come from Cyprus, where he valiantly made War upon
the Turks, presented himself at Paris with Sixty Knights of his Order, amongst
whom was Guy, Brother to the Dauphin de Viennois, Hugh de Peralde, and another
of the principal Officers. They were all arrested at the same time, and their
Process was immediately made, excepting the three I have mentioned, whom the
Pope would reserve to his own judgment. Fifty of them were burned alive in a
slow Fire, but who denied at their deaths what they had confessed upon the
wrack.

Without doubt they were guilty of many enormous crimes, but not perhaps of all
the things (I cannot tell whether I should say horrible or ridiculous) that
were imposed upon them, and laid to their charge in general. In the mean time
upon King Philips importunity, the Templers were likewise seized on in all the
other States of Christendom, and severely punished, yet not with death in many
places. This prosecution lasted to the year 1314.

Edward I. was going to make War upon Robert Bruce, who disputed for the Crown
of Slotland, he died upon the borders of that Kingdom.

His eldest Son Edward II. succeeded him, but was neither like his own Father,
nor his own Son, but only in Name. This Prince suffered himself to be Governed,
first by his Favorite Peter Gaveston, then by the two Spencers; caused great
troubles and commotions in his Kingdom.

This year the first lineaments of the Helvetian Alliance were rough-drawn in a
generous conspiracy of the Three Cantons of Swits, Vren, and Vndervald, against
the oppressions of the Lieutenants for the House of Austria who possessed the
Duchy of Scawben. But it was not till the year 1315. that they drew up
conditions in writing, and got them confirmed by the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria.

Anno 1308. the Emperor Albert was slain near Rhinfeldt, under the ancient
Castle of Habsbourgh, by the conspiracy of John the Son of Rodolph, Duke of
Scawben, whose Countries he kept from him. King Philip importuned the Pope
extremely, to make the Empire fall into the hands of Charles Earl of Valois:
but the Pope dreading the too great power of the House of France, sent to the
Electors to make Emp. Andronic and Henry VIII. R. Five years.
haste, so that they named Henry Earl of Luxemburg, who was the Eighth of that
Name.

The Sixth of May, Charles the Lame, King of Sicilia, on this side the Fare, a
Prince unfortunate in War, but very illustrious in Peace, and highly beloved of
his Subjects, ended his Life and Reign in his City of Naples. He had nine Sons,
the Eldest was named Charles Martel, the Second Lewis, and the Third Robert.
The First was King of Hungary, by Mary his Mother, Daughter of King Stephen IV.
but he was dead before his Father, having left a Son, whom they named Carobert,
Successor in his Kingdom. The Second was Bishop of Toulouze. For the Third
which was Robert, a great question was started between him and Carobert, to
wit, which is preferable to the Succession, either the eldest Son, or the
Uncle; and whether the Son represented the Father to succeed his Grandfather.
The Lawyers of those times, and the Pope himself (as well upon motives for the
public good, as Reasons and Grounds of Right and Title) were for the Nephew;
the Pope admitted him to Homage, Invested him, and Crowned him in Avignon, the
first Sunday of the Month of August.

Observe that Carobert had two Sons, Lewis and Andrew; that Lewis was King of
Hungary after his Father, and of Poland, by his Wife Elizabeth, Daughter of
Ladislas, and that Andrew Married to his great misfortune, Jane I. Queen of
Sicilia, Daughter of Charles Duke of Calabria, who was Son of King Robert. As
likewise that Lewis had two Daughters, Mary Queen of Hungary, who Married
Sigismond of Luxemburgh, afterward elected Emperor; and Heduige Queen of
Poland, who was Married to Jageston, Grand Duke of Lithuania, in which Family
that Kingdom remained till the year 1572.

Vienne coming on, the Pope to hinder the obstinate pursuit of the Kings people
against the memory of Boniface, gave all the Bulls they could desire for the
justification both of the King and his Officers. Nay, even for fear lest
Nogaret should blow up the flame anew, he granted him Absolution; but upon
condition he should go on certain pilgrimages, and also travel into the
Holy Land.

St. John of Jerusalem were retired to the Island of Cyprus, after the loss of
Ptolemais; but finding themselves ill Treated by the King of that Island, they
sought another Habitation, and gained themselves one by the taking of the
Island of Rhodes, and five other neighboring Islands: they gained it from the
Turks after two years Siege; the Turks had taken it from the Saracens, and the
Saracens from the Grecian Empire.

Turks made great attempts to recover it, but the Knights maintained it
bravely, by the assistance of the generous Earl of Savoy, named Ame V. who got
the Surname of Great by it, and preserved it, as well as he had gained it, by
many other generous actions. To this might well be applied the Simbol or Devise
FERT, which his Successors retain to this day, and the four Letters might be
thus made to say, Fortitudo Ejus Rhodum Tenuit: but it is certain, the Princes
of this House bear it a long time before.

Vienne the First day of October, in the year 1311. the Pope declaring it was
for the Process of the Templars, for the recovery of the Holy Land, for the
reformation of Manners and Discipline; and for the extirpation of Heresy.
Philip came thither the year following about Mid-Lent, with a stately Train of
Princes and Lords, assisted at the opening of the Second Session, and took his
Seat at the right Hand of the Pope, but on a lower Chair. The Order St. John.
That of the Or both Sexes of that Order.
Begards and Begardes was likewise abolished; they were a sort of Monks and
Religious People, that made profession of Poverty, but not of Abstinence nor
Celibacy, and who besides were acccused of many errors.

As for the most important point, which was the Process against the memory of
Boniface, the King, though there present, had no satisfaction in it. For it was
declared that Pope Boniface had always been a good Catholic, (the other
crimes were not mentioned.) Three famous Doctors, one in Theology, another of
the Civil-Law, and the Third of the Canon Law, made it out to the King by
several reasons and particulars; and there were two Catalonian Gentlemen that
offered to justfy it by combat, throwing down their Gantlets, which no man
there would take up. However, the Pope and Cardinals made a Decree, importing,
that the King should never be hereafter reproached for all, or any thing that
he had done against Boniface.

Lions had for a long time held of the Kings of Arles, who had given the
Temporal Lordship thereof to the Archbishop: but since the Kings of France
taking advantage of the weakness, and the distance of the Emperors, who were
Kings of Arles, had by little and little drawn to themselves the Sovereignty of
this Kingdom, and the City of Lions had began to hold of them. Now during the
War between Savoy and Dauphine, the Citizens fearing they might be plundered,
had recourse to Philip, who gave them a Warden; who coming within the City,
contrary to what had been agreed upon; the Archbishop stirred up the People
against him. Prince Lewis Hutin going thither with an Army, brought the Bishop
away prisoner and he could never get clear, but by yielding up the Temporal
Jurisdiction to the King, for which the Pope helped him to some recompense. But
afterward Philip the Long gave it to him again.

The Emperor Henry who was gone into Italy from the year 1310. thinking to
restore the dignity of the Empire there, found so much opposition from the
Guelphs, the great Cities, and Robert King of Naples, that he perished there,
as well as his Predecessors. He died the Four and twentieth day of August, in
the territory of Sienne, having been poysonn'd, as it was reported, with the
Sacred Host, by a Dominican Monk, a Florentine. Vacancy of the Western Empire
One year.


Robert Earl of Flanders would needs have again his Cities of l'Isle, Douay,
and Orchies, affirming that he had paid down the redemption to Enguerrand de
Marigny, who governed absolutely both King and Kingdom. The Flemmings refused
also to

To provide for the charges of it, the King summoned the Notables of the
People, and from a Theater raised high, he showed them his Necessities. The
Deputies had suffered themselves to be persuaded, and granted him by the mouth
of Stephen Barbete, the Impost of Six Deniers in the Livre, and other Subsidies
more troublesome yet; but the Cities of Picardy and Normandy opposed it highly,
and all the rest called for the justice of Heaven to fall upon the Head of
Marigny, the Author of all these galling and flaying extortions; These moans
and curses did not move him: on the contrary, he aggravated their misery by
making new Coins of very bad Gold* and Silver.

After all, none but himself and the Exchequer-men, or Receivers could get any
profit by it. The King having past over the River of Lys, and the Armies in
sight of each other, Marigny, who had done his own business, took advantage of
the interposing of the Popes Legates, to bring the parties to an agreement, and
persuaded the King to an ignominious Truce. Thus that great Army which ought to
have conquered all Flanders, vanished in smoke.

This disgrace of Philips was followed with one much greater. All the Wives of
his three Sons were accused of Adultery; Margaret, Jane, and Blanch. The First
the wife of Lewis Hutin, and the Third the wife of Charles, being convicted of
that crime with Philip, and Gautier de Launoy, Brothers and Gentlemen of
Normandy, Gaillard of Andeley; and their two Gallants slay'd alive, dragged
into the Field de Manbuisson, which was newly Mowed, those parts cut off that
had committed the Sin, then beheaded, and their Bodies hung up, being fastened
under their Armpits upon a Gibbet. Margaret the most guilty of the three,
perished in prison; Blanch was divorced seven years after, upon pretense of
Parentage. As for Jane, who was wife of Philip the Long, after she had been
confined almost a year, her Husband was willing to own her for honest, and took
her to himself again; Happier, or at least wiser then his two Brothers.

Molay, Grand Master of the Templers, and his three Compagnons, had confessed
all whatever they would accuse them of, in hopes of gaining their liberty: but
finding they were still kept prisoners, Molay and the Dauphin's Brother
retracted; but they were burnt alive upon the eleventh day of the month of
March. Molay by his mavelous constancy made every one judge he was innocent.
It is related, but without any proof, that he summoned the Pope to appear
before the Tribunal of God Almighty within Forty days, and the King within that
year; and indeed neither of them outlived that time.

As for the Pope, being tormented with troublesome and cruel distempers, and
going to his native Country to take the Air, he died at Roquemaure upon the
Rhosne. He gave order for his Corpse to be carried to the Church of Vzest, a
Borough in the Diocese of Basas. The Cardinals met at Carpentras to elect
another, after four Months debate, not being able to come to an agreement, and
growing weary of their confinement, they set fire to the Conclave and retired
some to one place some to another. Thus the Sea remained vacant two years and
three months.

And afterward the Empire was so likewise for a time, then fell into a
dangerous Schism, one party of the Electors having given their Votes for Lewis
Count Palatine of Bavaria, and the other for Frederic the Fair, Duke of
Austria.

Emp. Androni. and Lewis of Bavaria, R. 33 years. Frederic of Austria his
Competitor.
About the end of the year, King Philip was seized with a grievous fit of
Sickness, which put a period to his days the Four and twentieth of November,
whether proceeding from some occult cause, or a fall from a Horse, while he
pursued a wild Bore too eagerly. Fountainblean, which had been the place of his
birth, was that of his death, in the Forty eighth year of his age, and the
Twenty ninth of his Reign, His Monument is at St. Denis,



He had by his Wife Jane Queen of Navarre, three Sons, Lewis Hutin, Philip the
Long, and Charles the Fair, who Reigned after each other, and left no
issue-male. He had likewise three Daughters, Margaret, who married Ferdinand
King of Castille, Son of Sancho the Usurper; Isabel, who was wife to Edward II.
King of England, and Blanch, who died young.

He was the handsomest and best shaped Prince of his time. He had a proud and
haughty Heart, a lively and quick Spirit, a firm and resolute Soul, was
magnificent and liberal, and yet very greedy of Money, severe even to
hard-heartedness, and more inclined to revenge then pardon.

As to the rest, the furious exactions on his People, the frequent change and
alterations of Moneys, and the little progress he made in Flanders with the
many vast sums he had raised, the absolute power of his insolent and covetous
Minister, his proceedings against his Daughters-in-law for Adultery, and his
bitter repentance at death for having so greatly oppressed his Subjects,
demonstrates what his Reign was, and his Conduct.

* Or Holy Expeditions
The zeal for Croisado's lasted yet all this age, and beyond it. The Popes who
were the promoters had found a way to make use of them, not only against the
Insidels and Heretics, but even against their particular enemies, which at
first acquired them some kind of grandeur; but at length a great deal of
jealousy and hatred from the most Christian Princes, who besides were
concerned to see them undertake to do acts of Sovereignty in Temporals upon
every occasion. For they gave away the Lands of Heretics to those that should
conquer them, as they did those of the Albigensis to Simon de Montfort, and
reserved a quit-Rent or Tribute to themselves; they took otheir Lands and their
Lords under their protection, and the protection of St. Peter: for in the War
or Feuds between particulars, which were then allowed of, and very frequent,
there was always safety for the Lands of the Church: they enjoined Christians
to list themselves under the badge of the Cross, gave their Legates the conduct
and absolute command of those Armies, imposed Tenths and Subsidies on the
Clergy for those expeditions, and distributed them to such Soldiers and
Officers, or Noblemen as they pleased. They exhorted Sovereigns, and if they
found them a little weak, commanded them to take up, or to lay down their Arms,
constituting themselves the Arbitrators and Judges between Kings; and when one
party made application to them, they would forbid the other to prosecute him.
In fine, they made themselves absolute Masters of Privileges, Dispensations,
and of all Discipline; even of most of the Benefices, to which they nominated
upon diverse pretenses.

Councils.
Councils were held almost every where by their Legates, and none without their
consent. As for those of this age, some were called for the extirpation of
Heresies, some concerning the quarrels between the Emperor and the Pope,
several for the reformation of abuses, others for particular facts.

Those that were held against the Heretics.
For the Heresy of the Albigensis, there was a Council de Lavaur in 1213. upon
the request of the King of Arragon, who desired an accommodation for the Earls
of Toulouze, Foix, Cominges, and Bearn; he obtained of the Pope a Truce between
the Toulouzian and Simon de Montfort; but the Holy Father revoked it
immediately. That of Montpellier in 1215. gave unto Montfort the Lands he had
conquered of the Albigensis. This was an act of Sovereignty which Treated the
King as a Vassal, and those Countries as Under-siefs.

That of Toulouze assembled in the year 1228. to complete the ruin of those
Heretics, confirmed what had been done the same year at Paris, with Raimond
Earl of that Country. The Cardinal Romain Legate, had assembled one at Bourges
in the year 1226. to judge of the said Earls Lands, to which his Son demanded
to be restored. There met seven Archbishops; but he of Lions pretending the
Primacy over him of Sens, and he of Bourges over those of Bourdeaux, Ausch and
Narbonne; they took their Seats as it had been in a Counsel Or Cabal.
rather then in a Council. At their breaking up, the Legate endeavored to make
valid some Bulls, by which the Holy Father reserved the Revenue of two
Prebendaries in each Cathedral Church, and of two Monks places in every Abbey,
to increase the Revenue of his Court. The Churches grew hot against this
enterprise, and stickled so highly, that the Legate was forced to let it fall,
and to own the unjustice of it.

There was one held at Narbonne in Anno 1235. wherein the Legate, Archbishop
of the place presided, to give advice and assistance to the Jacobins, in order
to their rooting out the Heretics. They regulated the method of proceedings
against them in the year 1245. in that of Beziers which was composed of Prelates
of the Narbonnensian Province. And that of Terragona, Anno 1242. did the same
thing against the Vaudensis, whose Opinions were creeping into those quarters.

Besides the Albigensis, the Vaudensis, and that swarm of different Sects which
had got in, nestled and increased greatly in Languedoc and Gascongny; there was
one Amaulry Or Almeric.
of Chartres, a Doctor of Paris, who went about teaching his fancies for
Truths; saying amongst other things, That if Adam had not sinned, Men would
have been multiplied without Generation; that there was no other Paradise but
the satisfaction of well-doing, nor any other Hell besides the ignorance and
obscurity of Sin; That the Law of the Holy Ghost, or Spirit, had put an end to
that of Jesus Christ, and to the Sacraments, as these had accomplished that of
Moses, and the Ceremonies of the Old Testament; and that all such actions as
were done in charity, even Adulteries, could not be evil. This Doctrine being a
great encouragement to lewdness and Scandal, the Author was obliged to go and
give an account to the Pope, who forced him to retract, which having done with
his Mouth only, and not from his Heart, his Disciples persisted in his
whimseys, and added many others to them. Peter II. Bishop of Paris, and Friar
Guerin, Principal Counselor to King Philip, having made discovery both of the
Persons, and the Secrets of these Sectarics; by an Emissary who crept in
amongst them, caused a great number of Men and Women, Clergy and Laity to be
laid hold on. These People having been convicted in a Council held at Paris, in
the year 1209. were delivered over to the Secular power, who gave the Women
their Pardons, and ordered the Men to be burnt.

The Friars Preachers, and the Friars Minors endeavoring to outvie each other
in Scholast que Subtilties, there were some that lost their way in that
Utopian, or Imaginary Country, of Terra incognita, and who were as soon
restrained and corrected by the Sacred Faculty, or by the Bishops. Thus by
Bishop Stephen II. at the Council of Paris, which met in Anno 1277. was William
the Friar Minor corrected, who had published diverse Heterodox propositions
touching the Soul, Free Will, the Resurrection, and the worlds Eternity: but as
soon as they were condemned, he retracted them with great submission, contrary
to the custom of those singular Spirits, who having once taken their flights,
do hardly ever stoop again. We find likewise a certain David of Dinand, who
maintained, that God was the Materia Prima; St. Thomas has Learnedly refuted
him. In the Fourth Tome of the Library of the Fathers we read; That Anno 1242.
William Bishop of Paris, in an Assembly of the Doctors of Theology, condemned
some errors touching the Divine Essence, the Holy Spirit, the Angels, and the
place where Souls remain after death, and several other propositions, either
rash or false, which all proceeded Such as were (...) for the Discipline, and
upon other occasions.
from the contentious subtilties of Scholastique Doctors.

It would be too tedious to quote all those Councils that were held about
Discipline, and for other matters. The two most famous were those of Lions,
Pope Innocent III. presiding in the First, Anno 1245. pronounced a Sentence of
Excommunication against the Emperor Frederic II. In the Second, which was in
the year 1 74. the most numerous that ever was, for there were Five hundred
Bishops, Seventy Abbots, and a Thousand other Prelates; Pope Gregory X. made
diverse Constitutions, amongst others, that which directs the Cardinals should
be shut up in the Conclave for the Election of a Pope; and he admitted the
Emperor Michael and the Greek Church to a reconciliation with the Church of
Rome. Robert de Corceonne, Cardinal Legate, assembled one at Paris in the year
1212. for the reformation of Abuses, and of Clerks, as well Secular as
Regulars. Gerard de Beurdeaux held one of his Province at Cognac, in Anno 1238.
for the same purpose, and to maintain the Rights of the Church. Vincent de
Pilonis, Archbishop of Tours, likewise one of his Province at Rennes, in the
year 1263. for the Second point. In that of Bourges in the year 1276. held by
Simon de Brie, Cardinal Legate; they Treated of the Liberty of the Church, of
Elections, of the power of Judges Delegates, or Ordinaries, of Bishops Courts,
of Tithes, of Wills and Testaments, of Privileges, of Canonical punishments,
of the Jews. Simon de Beaulien, Archbishop of Bourges, Assembled one in the
year 1287. where he Collected and Reformed all the Constitutions his
Predecessors had made in the diverse Councils of that Province.

The Bishop of Beauvais pretending that the King (it was Saint Lewis, but as
then very young) had usurped on the Rights of his Church; Henry de Brienne,
with all his Province of Rheims, undertook this Cause very vigorously, and held
three Councils to have satisfaction, two at St. Quentin in 1230, and 1233. and
one at Laon in 1232. when he put the business so home, that in fine, the King
gave them satisfaction.

Before Charlemain, the Archbishop of Bourges pretended to no Primacy over the
other Metropolitans of Aquitain; but that King having made this City the
Capital of the Kingdom of Aquitain, composed of the three Provinces of that
name, and the Narbonnensis Prima, which is Languedoc, would needs, to link them
together the better, that they should all resort for Spirituals to Bourges; and
the Pope authorized this Novelty, the color for it being, that Bourges was the
Metropolis of Aquitania Prima. Thus this Bishop took up the Title of Primate,
and that of Patriarch, over the Archbishops of Narbonna, Bourdeaux, and Ausch.
He of Narbonna shook off the yoke at the time the Earls of Toulouze became
Marquis de Gottia; He of Bourdeaux would have done as much when Aquitania
Tertia was left to the Kings of England, under the Title of Duchy of Guyenne.
He of Bourges stood upon the possession for at least three ages, and the
Judgment of several Popes: but the other defended himself by his common Right,
and the ancient usages of the Gallican Church. The quarrel lasted a long while;
he of Bourges assembled many Councils for that business, one amongst the rest
in that City, in the year 1212. proceeding always against the other as his
inferior; even so far as that Giles de Rome about the year 1302. caused
Bertrand de Got to be Excommunicated, by Or Gualter or Walter.
Gautier de Bragas of the Order of the Minors, and Bishop of Poitiers, because
he, like himself, took up the Title of Primate of Aquitain. Bertrand was so
offended, that Gautier who was his Suffragan should join with that party, and
have the confidence to fulminate against him, that when he was raised to the
Papacy, being at Poitiers in 1308. he Deposed him, and sent him hack to his
Convent: A terrible punishment for a Monk! and indeed he fell sick upon it; and
it was easier for him to go out of the world, then get out of the Town of
Poitiers, where he died.

The attempts the Friars Preachers and the Friars Minors made for Confessions
and Pennances against the Rights of the Ordinaries, by virtue of some Bull they
had gotten from Pope Martin the IV. obliged Peter Barbet, Archbishop of Reims,
to assemble a Council in his Metropolis, Anno 1487. where it was ordered they
should pursue that business in the Court of Rome; the Bishops not finding in
themselves a sufficient power to apply any remedy.

Religious Orders.
In the beginning of this age, France had four Orders of Religious People,
which were called the four Mendicants, that is, the Preachers, Minors,
Carmelites, and Augustins, who took deep rooting in her Territories, and
increased wonderfully; the two latter have no certain Instituters; but were
composed of a mixture of several pieces, as we shall observe. That of the
Minors The Minors are called Cordeliers, because they wear a Cord for their
Girdle. And the Preachers Jacobins, because their first Convent was in the
street of St. James in Paris.
was instituted by Saint Francis, a Merchants Son of the Town of Assise; That
of the Preachers by Saint Dominique de Guzman, a Spanish Gentleman and Canon of
Osma; each of them have their Nuns living under the same Rules. Sancta Clara, a
Native of Assise was the first that listed her self in that of Saint Francis.
They both had their beginning at the same time, about the year 1208. and were
both confirmed in the Council of Lateran, Anno 1215. by Pope Innocent III.

That of the Friars Minors was the first that renounced to the propriety of all
Temporal Possessions, and made profession of an Evangelique poverty, to be
conformable to JESUS CHRIST and his Apostles. Afterward the three others were
stirred up to follow their example.

It has multiplied into above Fifty several Branches, produced by different
Reforms, Additions, or Retrenchments; notwithstanding the History of them does
expressly mention, that the First, who would be particular in the change of his
Habit, though he were one of the Eight oldest Compagnons of Saint Francis, was
smitten with the Leprosy, and hanged himself in despair.

Now the Patriarch Saint Francis Preaching on Mount Carmerio near Assise, was
followed by a vast number of People, both of the one and other Sex, who would
never forsake him, till he had received them all for Brothers and Sisters. From
whence the Order of the Penitents took its birth, which they named the Third
Order, in regard to that of the Minors, and of Sancta Clara. The Friars
Preachers would be sure not to want one likewise. Those that enrolled
themselves were only Seculars, and for the most part Married; The Religious
could not admit them under any Vows, nor have any Superiority over them,
because they were Subjects to the Hierarchical Jurisdiction. Since then, at
least amongst the Minors, there has some sort of Religious Institution been
made, tied to some Vows, and a Capouch as well as the rest.

The Order of the Carmelites began in Syria after this manner. Several Pilgrims
of the Western Regions lived in Hermitages, scattered up and down, exposed to
the incursions and violence of the Barbarians. A^^nerie the Popes Legate, * Or
Almeric.
and Patriarch of Antioch, gathered them together, and placed them all upon
Mount Carmel, which having formerly been the retreating place of the Prophet
Elias, gave them occasion to call themselves his Disciples and Successors.
Albert the Patriarch of Jerusalem, a Native of the Diocese of Amiens, and
Nephew, once removed to Peter the Hermit, drew up their Rules, or approved them
about the year 1205. Pope Honorius III. confirmed them, Anno 1227. Saint Lewis
at his return from the Holy Land, brought some into France with him, and settled
them in Paris. There were however already some of this Order in diverse places,
especially at Bourdeaux: for we find that Simon Stock, an English Man by Birth,
their Prior-General, died there in the year 1250. Their first Habit was White,
the Coat or Mantle laced at the bottom with several rows of Yellow. Pope
Honorius having commanded them to change it, they left off lacing their
Mantles: but not to lose any of their colors; they took a light Or a Soot and
Gray, called Minime in French.
reddish Yellow for their under Garment, with the White Mantle over it.

As for the Augustins, that Order was composed by the bringing, or assembling
together of several Congregations of Hermits in the West, who were of different
Habits, and under different Rules. I have taken notice of one amongst the rest,
named, Of the Penitence of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, which had been instituted at
Marseilles by the order of Pope Innocent IV. toward the year 1251. and had
spread it self in France and Italy. Pope Alexander IV. by his Constitution of
the month of May, of the year 1256. assembled them all in one, under the Rule
of Saint Augustine, gave them the Black Habit, and for their first General,
Lanfranc Septalana, a Milanese. Then they quitted the Deserts, and willingly
came to dwell within the Cities.

The minds of the Religious in this age, was so much taken with the Wallet,
(therefore most of them were named Walletiers, or Budget-bearers Saccati.
) and in believing the highest perfection consisted in that humble poverty,
which begets peoples admiration; that there swarmed great numbers from all
parts of these Sects of Mendicants, or Beggars of both Sexes. The most famous,
besides those already mentioned, were the Begards and the Beguines: but the
Church finding they were over-stockt with these new bands of idle drones, who
besides, were proud of their vain poverty, and let loose their fancies to sow
new Doctrines: she suppressed them all, and reserved only those four that
remain to this day.

Under the Rules of Saint Augustine, was also established the Congregation of
Saint Catherine du The Vale of Scholars.
Val des Escoliers, in Anno 1217. in the Diocese of Langres, by one William,
who having studied in Paris, and afterward taught in Burgundy, retired into
that solitude with his Scholars, and got his Institution to be approved by his
Diocesan Bishop. Seven or Eight years before, there was another Order began of
the Cisteaux, in the place called Le val des Choux.

That of the Holy Trinity, of the Redemption of Captives, was confirmed by the
Pope in the year 1209. They vaunt their not being of the invention Non a
sanctis fabricatus, sed a solo summo Deo.
of Men, but the appointment of God, who gave the Form and Design of it to the
blessed John de Mata, a Gentleman of Provence, and Doctor in Divinity at Paris,
and to the Hermit Felix who were both retired into the solitude de Cerfroy,
near Meanx. I find that the Religious of this Order, called themselves
otherwhile the Friars of the Asses, because they used to ride on them.

That of Our Lady of Mercy.
Nostre Dame de la Mercy, instituted to the same end, owes its being to James
King of Arragon, in the year 1223. to Raimond de Pegnafort, a Dominican his
Confessor, and to Peter de Nolasque a Gentleman, Native of the Diocese of Saint
Papoul in Languedoc.

The Congregation of Des Serfs Servants of St. Mary the Mother of Christ.
de Saint Marie Mere de Christ, was instituted at Marseilles, in the Monastery
of Saint Marie des Arenes, by the Prior, and the Religious of that House, and
confirmed by Pope Alexander IV. Anno 1257. The people because of their Habit,
called them White Mantles; and the Convent given to them at Paris, retains that
name still; it was bestowed on them in 1268. the Benedictins have the House at
present.

Devotions.
All these Orders, particularly the Mendicants, applied themselves much for the
stirring up peoples Devotion toward the Sacrament, and the Virgin Mary. Saint
Dominique instituted the Rosary, which is composed of a certain number of Ave
Maria's, and Pater-nosters, which are repeated, and whereof as one may say,
they make * A Hat is Un Chapeau, whence the word Chaplet for Beads.
a Hatband or Coronet of Flowers to put upon the Head of that Queen of Angels.
The Carmelites, not to come behind them in their Zeal to the Holy Mother of
God, established the Devotion of the Scapular, to which they attribute great
Virtue, particularly to redeem them from the pains of Purgatory, and not to die
without Confession. They affirm that Saint Simon Stoe, their General,
instituted it upon a Vision he had of the Holy Virgin.

The peoples Devotion toward the Relics of Saints was still very warm and
zealous. Charles the Lame, King of Sicilia, and Earl of Provence, at his coming
out of his imprisonment, being persuaded by the Revelation of two Friars,
whereof one was his Confessor, caused a certain place, named Ville-late, in the
Diocese of Aix, to be dug, where they found a Corpse, believed to be St. Mary
Magdelins, said to be buried by Saint Maximin, and afterward removed and hid
in another place, not far from the first in the time of the Saracens
incursions. Charles caused it to be taken out with great ceremony, and built a
fair Convent in the same place for the Preaching Friars; the resort of people
by succession of time, has added a Town to it, which bears the name of St.
Maximin.

The Benedictine Monks of Vezelay in Burgundy, were notwithstanding able to
aver, they had the full possession of this Holy Corpse, which had been brought
to them from Aix; or as others say, from Jerusalem, by the care of Gerard de
Rousillon, Founder of that Abbey about the year 882. The universal concourse of
the whole Nation, the Bulls of diverse Popes, even after this invention of
Ville-late, the Authority of two Kings Lewis VII. and Lewis IX. who had paid
their Devotions in this place, made this believed to be a Truth, above
contradiction amongst the French. But that of the Greeks destroyed equally both
the pretenses of the Monks of Vezelay, and of the Jacobins. For we find in some
of their Writers of the Seventh age, that the Body of Magdeline was at Ephesus;
and their Historians relate, how the Emperor Leo the Philosopher, who began
not to Reign till the year 886. transferred it from that City to
Constantinople, as also the Corpse of Lazarus from the Island of Cyprus.

However it were, after this new discovery at Ville-late, they told how this
Holy Woman flying from the persecution of the Jews, had made her escape by Sea
into Provence with Lazarus her Brother, her Sister Martha, Marcella servant to
Martha, and Saint Maximin, one of Seventy two Disciples of our Lord. That
Maximin was the first Bishop of Aix, and Lazarus of Marseilles. That Martha
preached the Faith in the Diocese of Aix, and that she vanquished the Dragon
whom they called the Tarasque, which has given name to the City of Tarascon,
where the Den of that Monster was. That Magdeline retired into a This is that
they call the Holy Baulme.
Baulme or Grotto, where after Twenty years solitude and mortification, the
Angels carried her Soul up to the Region of the Blessed; and many other things
unknown in the former ages.

The Sciences flourished with great luster in the University of Paris,
Theology, the study of the Civil and Canon Law, Physic, and Philosophy with
the Arts: but not being accompanied, or joined with humane and polite Learning
and Eloquence, which came not into play or use till a long while after, they
expressed themselves but in barbarous terms, and learned more Sophistry and
shuffling then solid Truths.

All the substitutes of the University being Ecclesiastiques, the skill and
knowledge of the Law and Physic was in their hands, and the Pope was owned for
Head of that Body, and of all the Men of Learning. As for Physic, they taught
little more then the Theory, under the name of Physic, leaving the practical
part of Medicines to the Laity. For the Law, the Popes would willingly have
reduced it all to the Canons and their own Decretals: (from which we must
ackowledge, that France has taken most of her Forms and judicial Orders, that
so all Christendom making use of the same Laws, both in Temporals and
Spirituals, might accustom themselves to own but one Head, to wit, him who has
all the Laws both Divine and Humane in his own Breast.

It was for this in my opinion, that Honorius III. by his Bull of the year
1219. did forbid, upon pain of Excommunication, to Teach the Civil Law at
Paris* and all other Citis in France: and Gregory IX. renewed it as to Paris.
Some are apt to believe those two Popes did it upon the request of the two
Kings, Philip Augustus and St. Lewis. In effect, the Letters of King Philip the
Fair, for the Institution of the University of Orleans speak the same: but some
doubt of the truth of their exposition, and believe the prohibitions of
Honorius, and of Gregory, was only intended to have respect to the
Ecclesiastiques, whom they would fain have weaned from that too great affection
they had to the study of a thing which being very gainful made them lay aside,
and desert their Divinity.

Now whether one or other of these Opinions be the Truth, it is certain, that
since they forbore not to Teach the Civil Law in the University of Paris, till
in the year 1579. that advantage was taken away from them, by virtue of an
Article found in the Ordonnance of Blois: but truly it did not slourish there
so much as in those of Toulouze and of Orleance.

The University of Toulouze was instituted in Anno 1230. by Saint Lewis: that
of Orleance was not till the year 1312. by King Philip the Fair. It is true,
that above One hundred years before, there was in this last City, as also in
Toulouze, Angers, and diverse others, a famous School: but which had no Seal,
nor the power of making Graduats, and other marks of a Company formed and
approved by the Prince. Clement V. in acknowledgment of his having studied
there, gave several Bulls, all in the year 1303. to make it an University; The
Scholars thinking to have the benefit in the year 1309. before they were
approved of by the King, the Burghers opposed them with Sword in hand; and
those troubles were not quieted, till the King in 1312. had given a Being to
that Body by his lawful Authority.

That of Montpellier, otherwhile very famous for the Art of Physic, because of
the commerce and correspondence they had with the Arabian Physicians that were
in Africa, had been erected by Pope Nicholas IV. and by the Kings Letters
Patents in the year 1289. The others of this Kingdom which are now Ten in
number, Angers, Poitiers, Bourges, Bourdeaux, Cahors, Valence, Caen, Reims,
Nantes, and Aix, were instituted in the following ages, and at several times.

Learned Men.
Now the University of Paris, which excepting that of Toulouze, was as yet the
only singular one in France, drew thither, or bred there all that were then Men
of Parts and Learning. Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas, Vincent de Beauvais,
all three of the Order of the Preaching Friars; John Gilles, or Joannes
Aegidius, who was also of the same Order, Rigord of the Order of St. Bennet,
and Chaplain to Philp Augustus, and Richard of Oxford, all three Philosophers
and Physicians; James de Vitry Cardinal, John de Sacrobosco, who excelled in
the Mathematiques, Roger Bacon an English man by birth, and of the Order of St.
Francis, a very subtle Genius, and thoroughly versed and accomplished in all
manner of Learning, particularly in Chemistry, in whose Works is to be found
the secret for making Gunpowder. Michael Scot, who to acquire the knowledge of
these Arts more perfectly, and that of Astronomy and the Mathematics, Learned
the Oriental Languages. Alexander de Halez, Bonaventure his Disciple, and a
long time after him, John Duns Scotus, all three of the Order of the Friars
Minors, and great Scholastiques. Scotus lived Ten years in the following age,
they called him the Subtle Doctor, and he was so indeed. He was excited to some
Opinons, opposite to those of St. Thomas, as their two Orders were, which
produced in the Schools those two Sects, the Thomists and the Scotists. They
also reckon amongst the Learned, Guy le Gross, and Gilles de Rome, famous
Lawyers; the first had been Married, and yet became Pope, the other was an
Augustine Monk, then Archbishop of Bourges; he lived many years in the age
following, and wrote Anno 1302. in favor of Philip the Fair against Boniface,
demonstrating, that the Popes Authority does not extend to Temporals. Robert de
Sorbonne, a native of the Village of that Name near Sens; William de St. Amor,
and Christian de Beauvais, born in those places, and rough adversaries of the
Friars Preachers and Minors; William III. and Stephen II. Bishops of Paris;
Henry de Grand, a famous Doctor in Divinity, Hugh the Cardinal, William
Archbishop of Tire, and Chancellor to St. Lewis.

Many of these Learned persons joined a Holiness of Life to their exquisite
knowledge. The Church implores the Suffrages of Albert the Great, of Thomas
Aquinas, and of Bonaventure; as likewise of Peter de Chasteau*neuf, of the
Order de Cisteaux, and Legate from the Pope, Martyred by the Albigensis in the
year 1208. Of Bertrand, Bishop of Cominges who rebuilt that City, to which the
name of its Restorer has been given. Of William de Nevers, who daily fed Two
thousand Poor. Of Stephen de Die in Dauphine, taken out of the Order of the
Chartreux. Of Gefroy de Meaux, who renounced his Bishopric, and retired
himself into the Monastery of St. Victor in Paris, which then was, as it is now
at this day, most flourishing in Doctrine and Piety. Of William de Valence,
under whom the Bishoprics of Valence and Die were united in the year 1275. and
of Robert de Puy. This Man very Noble for his Birth, and much more so for his
Virtue, being slain by a Gentleman whom he had Excommunicated for his Crimes,
the People in revenge razed all the Houses belonging to the Murderer; and the
King banished both him and all his Race out of the Kingdom.

We ought to add to this immortal company, Eleazar de Sabran, a Gentleman of
Provence, Earl of Ari^n, whose perpetual celibacy in Marriage, made him the
compagnon of Angels; and his charitable liberalities the Father to the Poor;
Yves Priest, Curate and Official of the Diocese of Treguier in Bretagnc, a good
Lawyer, and who by a more noble interest then that of Money, was ever the
Advocate of the Indigent and the Orphan. The Men of that Calling own him for
their Patron, but imitate him seldom. He died in the year 1303.

Amongst those that wear the Crown of Glory in Heaven, the great King Saint
Lewis, who wore the Royal Crown here below, and his Nephew of the same name,
the Son of Charles II. King of Sicilia, are of the highest rank. This last
buried the Grandeurs of this World in the Sackcloth of his penance, turning
Monk of the Order of St. Francis, from whence he was drawn out againsth is
Will, to be made Bishop of Toulouze. He died in the year 1298.

Lewis X. called Hutin, King XLVI.
Aged XXV, or XXVI years.
Vacancy, which began at the end of the Reign of Philip the Fair, and lasted in
all Two years, Three Months and a half.

AS soon as Philip was dead, his eldest Son Lewis succeeded him, but he could
not get to be Crowned at Reims, till the Third day of August in the following
year, as well because he waited for his new Spouse Clemence, Daughter of
Charles Martel King of Hungary, as because all the Kingdom was in combustion
for the vexation of Imposts, and the alteration of Moneys.

Charles de Valois his Uncle, put himself in possession of the Authority,
displaced many Officers to advance his own Creatures; and there being no Money
to be found for the expenses of the Coronation, he upon that score took
occasion to inquire into, and examine the Officers of the Treasury, especially
Enguerrand de Marigny, with whom he before had some rude bustlings.

Enguerrand sent for before the King to give an account of the Treasury, had
the impudence to tell him who was his Masters Uncle, that he had had the
greatest part, and even to return him the Lie: That Princes Sword had punished
him at the same time, if Heaven had not reserved him for a more infamous
chastisement. He was therefore seized upon some weeks after as he was coming to
the Council: this was on the Tenth of March, put in prison in the Tower of the
Louvre, and from thence transferred into that of the Temple.

The prosecution being slow, it was discovered that his Wife abused by some
Enchanters, sought to bewitch or charm the King, and make him languish to death
by means of some waxen Devovet absentes simulacraque cerea fingit, etc. 1315.
Images; Those rascals being taken, the King gives him up to the Law. There
were four chief Heads of accusation against him, his having altered the Coins,
laden the people with Taxes, stolen several great sums, and degraded the
Kings Forests.

His Process was made in the Bois de Vincennes, by the Lords Pairs, and Barons
of the Kingdom, who condemned him to the Gallows the Saturday before the
Festival of the Ascension. The Saturday following he was transferred from the
Temple to the Chastelet, and from thence they carried him to Montfaucon These
are the words of the great Chronicle of St. Denis. 1315.
Where on the highest part of the Gibbet, with the other Thieves he was hanged.
His immense Riches sufficiently proved the Justice of this Sentence.

Afterward those Receivers or Officers of the Treasury who were of his gang,
were laid hold on, and several put to the Wrack: they would confess nothing
however; so well those Caterpillars know how to wind up their bottoms, desiring
rather in the greatest extremity to lose their Lives, then part with their
Money.

They carried on this search even to his very friends, and particularly, Peter
de Latilly, Bishop of Chaalons, and Chancellor of France. He was accused of
giving the Morsel, that is to say, of having poysonn'd the Bishop his
Predecessor; and also the late King. He was put out of his Office, and left a
prisoner in tbe hands of the Archbishop of Reims his Metropolitan.

The execrable Custom of Poysonning was grown very common in France, and it
grew so in my opinion, because the Ministers of the deceased King had been so
extreme Violent and vindicative. This Prelat accused of so Villainous a Crime,
was referred to the Judgment of the Bishops of his Province. To that end there
was a Council Assembled at Senlis in the Month of October of this year 1315.
where the Archbishop of Reims was present with his Suffragans. The Party
accused, upon his request, and according to Law, was first redintegrated to his
Liberty, and his Bishopric; and afterward it having been proved, that four
Women had been Convicted and Punished for Poysonning his Predecessor, he was
absolved fully and wholly.

Artois, having diverse causes of Complaint against their Countess Mahaut, the
King sent for her, in presence of Ame the Great, Earl of Savoy, and obliged her
to give him her Hand, that he might take notice of it.

This Ame the Great was one of the most considerable Princes of his time. He
acquired the Title of a Prince of the Empire, which was granted him by the
Emperor Henry VII. in Anno 1310. He increased his Territory with the Lordships
of Bresse and Baugey, by his Marriage with Sibilla the only Daughter of Guy
Lord de Baugey; as likewise with a part of the little Country of Revermont by
Purchase of the Duke of Burgundy, who had it of Humbert Dauphin of Viennois,
and the Earldoms of Ast and Yvree, the first whereof came to him by the
Concession of the Emperor Henry VII. the second by the voluntary subjection of
the People. His Wisdom made him reign in all the greatest Courts in Europe, the
Emperors, King Philip's of France, Edward King of England's, and made him find
the Art to be so much a Friend to all these Princes, who were at great
variance, that he became the perpetual Mediator, concerning those Differences
which Interest and their Jealousy bred amongst them.

Flemming being at an end about the very time of the Coronation, the King
assembled his Forces, and whilst on the other side William Earl of Hay^ault
ravaged the Country along the Scheld, he besieged Courtray. The unseasonable
Weather did what the Flemming durst not undertake, and forced him to raise the
Siege: but the infinite havoc and spoil the Soldiers made, caused a horrible
Famine in Flanders.

About the end of the Month of May, in the year 1316. King Lewis began to feel
the effects of those Poysonnings grown so rife in France; They had given him a
Dose so violent (by what hand was not known) that it carried him off the Fifth
day June. An Accident which the Vulgar thought to be presaged by a Comet, which
had December before. He died at the Bois de Vincennes, the Nineteenth Month of
his Reign, and the Eight and twentieth of his Age.

He left Clemence his second Wife with Child, being four Months gone. By his
first, which was Margaret Daughter of Robert II. Duke of Burgundy, he had had a
Daughter named Jane, to whom belonged the Kingdom of Navarre, and the Counties
of Brie and Champagne: but the Kings, Philip the Long, and Charles the Fair,
found out pretenses to detain them.

REGENCY without a KING for Five Months.
Lewis Hutin left this World, Philip the Long Earl of Poitiers his Brother was
at Lions, where in pursuance of his Orders he labored to make them elect a
Pope, to supply the Sea that had been vacant for above three years. He had
employed himself with so much zeal, that at length he got all the Cardinals to
Lions, and had shut them up in Conclave, in the Jacobins Convent. They had been
there together some days, when the news was brought him of the death of Hutin,
this made him return to Paris with diligence, after he had left the guard of
the Conclave with the Earl de Fores.

After the end of forty days, the Cardinals could come to no other agreement
about the election of a Pope, then to refer it to the single Vote of James
Dossa a Cardinal, Bishop of O Porto, who without hesitation named himself, to
the great astonishment of the whole Conclave, who notwithstanding let it pass
so. He took the name of John, the Twenty second of that name. He was of the
Country of Quercy, the Son of a poor Cobbler, but very Learned for those times.

The Succession of the Males to the Crown was established, not by any Written
Law, but by the inviolable Custom of the French: nevertheless, because in all
other Kingdoms, and in great Fiefs the Daughters succeeded, and that in France
of a long time no occasion had been offered to exclude them: The Friends and
Parents of little Jane, particularly Eudes Duke of Burgundy, Brother of her
deceased Mother, were on the Watch, pretending the Crown belonged to her, in
case the Fruit of Queen Clemences Womb should come to no Perfection.

In the mean time they named Philip the Kings Brother for Regent till the time
of her delivery.

Philip V. King XLVII.
POPE, JOHN XXII. Elected the 7th day of August 1317. S. Eighteen years and
Three Months, whereof Five years under this Reign.
PHILIP V. Called the Long, because he was Tall, King of France XLVII. and
enjoying the Kingdom of Navarre, Aged Twenty six years.

November the Queen brought a Son into the World, whom they named John, but he
went out of it again eight days after. He was buried in St. Denis; and in the
Funeral Pomp was declared King of France and Navarre. Which has given some
occasion to some Modern Authors, to increase the number of the Kings of France,
and to call him John I.

Charles Earl of Valois seemed to favor little Jane, and the Duke of Burgundy
her Uncle claimed and stickled for her: but the Grandees of the Kingdom, and
the Pairs assembled in Parliament toward the Feast of the Purification,
confirmed the Right of the Males, and gave Judgment in favor of Philip. Who,
well attended, went to be Crowned at Reims the Ninth day of January, the Gates
of the City being shut, fearing some might have come to make opposition. The
Bishop of Beauvais, though only a Count-Pair, carried the Precedence from him
of Langres, who has the Title of Duke.

The Estates being Assembled at Paris, where were present most part of the
Lords, the Deputies of Corporations and Cities, and above all the Burghers and
the University of Paris, gave their Oaths to the Chancellor, (Peter d'Arablay,
afterward Cardinal) not to acknowledge any other King but Philip and his Heirs
Male, to the Exclusion of Females.

Robert II. Earl of Artois had had a Sister named Mahaut, and a Son named
Philip. Mahaut was Married with Othelin Earl of Burgundy, and from that
Marriage were issued two Daughters, whom the Fair gave unto two of his Sons.
Now Philip died in the War of Flanders before his Father: but he left a Son who
was named Robert as his Grandfathers name. The Earldom of Artois ought to have
belonged to this same, however the Fair had adjudged it to Mahaut, upon this
pretense, that it was not a Fief Masculine, and that according to the Custom of
those Countries, Representation did not take place. Robert Armed himself during
the Regency of the Long, and got himself into the possession by force: but the
business being examined, the Lands were sequestered into the hands of the King,
and at last adjudged to Mahaut, whose Daughter Philip the Long had Married.
This partial or interested Judgment caused a world of mischief.

Flemmings, and three several times it ended in a Truce.

Eudes Duke of Burgundy, could not forbear mentioning the wrong they did to
young Jane by detaining the Kingdom of Navarre, and the Earldoms of Brie and
Champagne from her. The Long desiring to appease him, gave him his Daughter
also named Jane, in Marriage, with the Earldom of Burgundy.

Eudes insisted so highly for his Niece, that the King was obliged to Marry her
to Philip the Son of Lewis Earl d'Euvreux, (this Lewis was Paternal Uncle to
the King) with the Rights she could have to the Kingdom of Navarre, and the
Earldoms of Brie and Champagne.

The great Peril France was in after the death of Hutin, about the doubt of
Succession, and the cruel War that had afflicted Scotland for a business almost
of the same nature after the decease of Alexander IV. was cause, that upon the
renewing the Alliance which was made between the two Crowns, they added this
Condition, That if ever there happened any difference for the Succession of one
of those two Kingdoms, he of those two Kings that should survive, should not
suffer any other to step into the Throne, but him that should have the Judgment
of the Estates for him; that he should come in Person to defent it, and should
oppose whomsoever would contend for the Crown against him.

Mahaut was so obstinately bent to change the Customs of the Country of Artois,
that the Lords and Commonalties revolted against her; and nevertheless they got
nothing by it, being subdued by the Assistance the King and the French Princes
lent her.

Verdun molested by Thomas de Blamont their Bishop, put themselves under
protection of the King.

A fourth time Robert de Bethune Earl of Flanders broke the Truce; but Ghent
and the other Cities in his Country, who in all these Wars had gotten a Power
that counterbalanced his, being risen up in Arms against him, he was fain to
consent that the Popes Legate, who was a Cardinal, and had been chosen
Arbitrator, should come to Paris the following Spring.

May. The Cities of Douay, L'Isle, and Orchies remained to the King. The
Flemmings obliged themselves to pay Thirty thousand Florins of Gold, and gave
Oath not to assist their Earl in case he contraven'd to this Agreement. The
King promised his Daughter Margares to Lewis Earl of Nevers, and Retel Son of
another Lewis eldest Son of Earl Robert, upon condition he should succeed his
Grandfather in the Earldom of Flanders, though his Father should die before his
Grandfather.

Gibbelins growing powerful in Italy, Pope John XXII. solicited the King so
earnestly, that he sent thither his Son Philip Earl of Valois, who was
afterward King, to relieve Vercel, whom the Sons of Matthew, Viscount, Lord of
Milan, held besieged. He had but Fifteen hundred Horse, but the Pope, Robert
King of Sicilia, the Florentines, and other Guelphs were to send him Forces to
make up a great Army while he was at Mortara; Matthews eldest Son had so
wrought upon his Lieutenant by Money, and upon himself by submission and fair
words, that he persuaded him to return into France without once drawing his
Sword, after he had made I know not what kind of Treaty, which plaistered up a
reconciliation between the two Factions in Lombardy.

Lewis, seized the Peasants and Pastorels for the recovery of the Holy Land,
upon the instigation of a renounced Monk and a Priest put out from his Cure.
They made their Muster in the Pre an Clerks at Paris, marched into Aquitain,
from thence to Languedoc, Massacring the Jews every where, and Plundering their
Magazines. The Earl de Foix gave them Chase so smartly that he dispersed them
all.

Robert de Cassel second Son of the Earl of Flanders, having accused Lewis his
elder Brother, that he would have poisoned his Father, Lewis was made Prisoner,
his Servants and Confesser put to Torture; but not being able to make out any
proof, he was set at liberty, but upon condition, however, that he should never
enter into the Country of Flanders. By this means Robert would chalk out his
way to the Succession, to the prejudice of his elder Brother.

History has not thought it unworthy its Remarks, that in this year 1320. the
Prevost Or, Sheriff.
of Paris, named Henry Capperel, for having caused an innocent, but poor
Fellow, to be Hanged in the stead of a Rich Man condemned for great Crimes, was
by a Sentence of Parliament tied up to the same Gibbet. We every day see his
parallels, save the rich Man that is guilty, and punish his innocent Purse.

The Lepers did not give only a horror to all the World, but envy likewise,
because they enjoyed great Wealth, and that loathsome Distemper did not render
them incapable of enjoying their pleasures, add, that they paid no Subsidies,
wherewith the rest were so overloaden. It was perhaps for these reasons they
were accused for having by a Compact made with the Jews, these had been
restored in the Reign of Lewis Hutin and Intelligence with the Turks, cast some
of their Ordures, or some Bags of Poison into the Wells and Fountains, thereby
to infect all those that were in Health with their fowl Leprosy, or else to
poison them. They were besides guilty of several Crimes against nature: so that
great numbers were condemned to the Fire, the rest shut up very close within
their Lazar-Hospitals. As for the Jews, the Populace did justice upon those
themselves, and burned a great many. The King drove the whole Nation of them
out of the Realm.

France, the same Weights, the same Measures, and the same Coyns: but as under
the pretense of some Expense and Charges they would be at, they would likewise
take the Fifth part of the Subjects Goods* The Princes and Prelates who had a
right of Coining Money, would not suffer the Kings Commissaries to go on in
this Reformation, they appealed to the Estates, and Leagued themselves with the
Cities; so that the Impost being not raised, the Reglement was let alone.

Philip laden with the Curses of his People, and hated of the Clergy, because
of his too frequent exaction of the Tenths, fell sick of a Quartan Ague,
wherewith he langushed five whole Months, and in the end died at Bois de
Vincennes the Third day of January. He lived One and thirty years, and Reigned
Five years and six weeks. His Corpse was conveyed with Ceremony to St. Denis,
his Heart to the Cordeliers at Paris, his Bowels to the Jacobins. Ever Lewis,
these good Fathers claim it as a special Right, to have some part of the
Entrails of our Kings, which were not given them without Foundations.

He Married but one Wife, to wit, Jane, who was Daughter of Othenine Earl of
Burgundy, and was also his only Heirese, her Sister Blanch having been forced
to Encloister her self to expiate her Crime. By this Jane he had Three
Daughters, Jane Countess of Burgundy and Artois, who Married Eudes IV. Duke of
Burgundy, and brought him these two Earldoms; Margaret, who had for Husband
Lewis Earl of Flanders, Nevers, and Rhetel; and Isabella, who first Married
Guignes Dauphin of Viennois, and afterward John Baron de Fanlcongmey in
Franche-Comte.

Charles IV. King XLVIII.
POPE, JOHN XXII. During all this Reign.
CHARLES IV. Called the Fair, King of France XLVIII. and enjoying the Kingdom
of Navarre, Aged Twenty eight years.

Charles came to the Throne, and was Crowned at Reims the Eleventh of February
without any opposition, all the Pairs assisting thereat, excepting the King of
England and the Earl of Flanders.

The named Gerard de la Guerre Native of Clermont in Auvergne, and of mean
Parentage, had held the Sovereign management of the Treasury under Philip the
Long, and had been the grand Projector of the Imposts. In the beginning of this
Reign being sought for and taken for his Depredations, he was put to the Wrack
and Examined, which they did so rudely, that he died in the midst of those
Torments. This prevented not the dragging his Body thorough the Streets, and
hanging him on the Gallows at Paris.

There was afterward a general search made for all the Farmers, and such as
were any ways concerned in the Revenues, who were for the most part Lombards
and Italians, horrible Usurers and Exacters. Their Goods were all Consiscate,
and they sent back into their own Country, This is the greatest of Punishments
to such Rascals.
as beggarly as they came thence.

The King had been indulgent enough in not putting his Wife Blanch to Death,
who had been condemned for Adultery: When he came to the Crown, the desire of
having Children prompted him to repudiate her under pretense of Parentage; and
after she had taken on the Vail at Maubuisson, he Espoused Mary Daughter of the
Emperor Henry of Luxembourg. Who dying in the year 1324. in her first
Childbed, and the Infant some few days after, he Married for the third time
Jane Daughter of Lewis Earl of Evreux his Uncle, having to that end obtained a
Dispensation from the Pope.

After the death of Lewis de Nevers, Earl of Rhetel, which happened at Paris (for
he had retired himself into the Court of France) and also the death of Robert
de Bethune, his Father, Earl of Flanders, which followed soon after, the eldest
Son of Lewis bearing his Fathers name, enjoyed all those three Earldoms.

But Robert de Cassel his Uncle, pretending to be the nearest by one degree,
because he was the Son of Robert, whereas Lewis was but Grandson, presented
himself to the King, demanding the Investiture of that of Flanders. In the mean
while, Lewis went immediately to take possession, without rendering him that
Devoir. Which so irritated the King, that although this young Prince were his
Nephew, he caused him to be summoned before the Parliament, and kept him
Prisoner.

The Parliament taking this weighty Affair into their Cognizance, pronounced in
favor of Lewis; who being set at liberty, did Homage to the King, and gave
Oath never to re-demand the Cities of Lisle, Douay, and Orchies. The King
confirmed the Appennage given by the Father to Robert de Cassel. He likewise
made an Agreement between William Earl of Haynault and Holland with Lewis, who
desisted from disputing with him for the Islands of Walcheren.

One Jordain Lord of the Island in Aquitain, had committed many enormous
Crimes, and Murdered an Usher of the Kings with his own Mace, as he was
summoning him to appear in Parliament. He was notwithstanding so much a fool as
to come to Paris, trusting to his great Alliances, and upon his having Married
the Niece of Pope John XXII. But for all those Considerations, he was committed
Prisoner to the Cha^tellet, and by Sentence dragged at a Horses Tail, and hung
up on the Gallows at Paris.

Edward because he had not assisted at his Coronation, and that his Seneschal
of Bourdelois had placed a Garrison in a Castle which the Lord de Montpesat had
built in a place which was Land belonging to France. Wherefore after some
Negotiations, in which the English seemed not to proceed fairly; he sent
Charles de Valois, his Uncle, into Guyenne; who set so close upon the Skirts of
Edmond Earl of Kent, Brother to King Edward, in the City de la Reoule, that he
obliged him to Capitulate, and then pass immediately over into England, to
persuade his Brother to give the King satisfaction, promising, that if he could
not obtain it, to return as his Prisoner. In the mean time the Earl of Valois
made an end of the Conquest of Guyenne, excepting only Bourdeaux, St. Sever,
and Bayonne.

England found it necessary that Queen Isabella, who was Sister to Charles the
Fair, should pass over into France with Edward his eldest Son to Negociate the
Peace.

She managed the business with a great deal of Skill, and finished the Treaty,
contriving it so, that her Son Edward was invested in the Duchy of Guyenne and
the Earldom of Pontieu, for which he did Homage to the King.

The King of England had too near him the two Hugh Spensers, Father and Son:
the last having been bred with him in an unbecoming familiarity, had an
absolute empire over him, and made him do what ever he desired. The English
Lords having made some Conspiracy, and taken up Arms against this Favorite, he
drew them to a Parley, where he caused them also to be seized against the
Public Faith, and afterward chopped off the Heads of Two and Twenty Barons,
amongst whom was Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Son of Prince Edmond, who, when
living, was Brother to King Edward. Pursuring his design, he kept Queen
Isabella and the Earl of Kent, the Kings Brother, at distance from the Court;
and likewise did privately seek to destroy them, whether for that they had been
in the Conspiracy with the Lords, or that he apprehended their Credid or
Interest; and this was the chief ground for their coming into France.

Charles received his Sister with all the tenderness of a good Brother, kept
her a great while in his Court, Treating and Honoring her according to her
Quality, and promised her assistance both of Money and Men, as much as he well
could, without breaking with the English, to Chastise that insolent favorite,
who continued to take off all those Heads that stood in the way which his
Ambition led him to.

Unhappy Flanders was hardly ever without Troubles. The Flemmings had but
little affection to their Earl, because he was too much French by inclination,
and resided but little in that Country. He had a long and bloody Contest with
the Citizens of Bruges, Robert de Cassel supported them because he would have
had him been killed. They made John Earl of Namur, his Uncle, Prisoner, and a
while after they also did detain himself. But when the Pope had laid an
Interdict upon the Country, when those Mutineers had been beaten by the
Ghentois Those of Ghent were then true to their Prince.
, and they found the King was sending Forces to his relief, they were forced to
bend the Knee and humble themselves before him. He Chastised them by great
Fines, the loss of their fairest Privileges, and by the banishment of a great
number of the hottest Spirits.

Charles Earl of Valois languished with a Distemper which was very odd, and yet
more painful. Who knows whether it were not the effect of some cruel Poison.
The Physicians not knowing either how to find out the true cause of the Malady,
nor any Remedies, the poor Prince falls into an imagination that it was a
Divine Punishment, for the too eager and severe pusute he had made against
Enguerrand de Marigny. They have not forgot to mention his Penitence, and to
enumerate the satisfactions he offered to his Memory: but perhaps these
proceeded from a Mind as sick and as much out of tune as his Body. After all,
if God so severely Chastised a Prince for persecuting a public Robber, and
bringing him to Justice by unjust Methods and with an ill intent; what did not
that Robber deserve, who for so long a time had tormented Millions of innocent
Souls?

Spensers dreading the Storm which threatened them from the Coast of France,
obliged Edward earnestly to re-demand his Wife: and they made use of so many
Arts, and scattered so much Money in King Charles his Court, and even in the
Popes, to make him bestir himself for them, that at length Charles, won by
their Presents, or frighted with the fears of a Rupture, not only retracted
those Promises he had made his Sister, but likewise, upon pain of Banishment,
forbid all Knights to assist her, and Commanded her to go out of his Countries.

Roger de Mortimer, a Gentleman of Normandy, was very much in the favor and
good opinion of this fair Princess* the Spensers had taken occasion to raise
some Jealousy in the King her Husband, and detain this Roger in the Tower of
London: but having sound means to escape, he was come over into France; and
perhaps this was none of the least Arguments for which King Charles, who was an
Enemy to that unclean Folly, would endure her no longer, and so abandoned her.

France, she retired disconsolate into the County of of Pontien, then into
Hainault: where she was so happy, that John Brother of William, the Earl,
declared himself her Knight Errant, caused her to be well and kindly received
in his Brothers Court, and having mustred Three hundred Knights more, he
carried her back into England.

No sooner was the news of her being landed known, but Henry Earl of Lancaster,
the Brother of Thomas came to her, the Earls, Barons, and Knights flocked
thither from all parts. She besieged the King and both the Spensers in Bristol;
Spenser the Father, and the Earl of Arundel, Son-in-Law to the younger Spenser,
were taken in the City and beheaded. The King and Spenser the Son, who were
retired into the Castle, and from thence thought to make their escape in a
Bark, were taken at Sea. The Favorite, according to his Sentence given by the
Barons, was drawn on a Hurdle thorough the Streets of Hereford, then led to the
top of a Ladder, where the Executioner cut off those parts that had
transgressed, and plucked out his Heart, then threw it into the Fire, and
quartered his Body.

Edward III. in his stead. Afterward, the Friends to this unfortunate Prince,
by practicing several means to save him, completed his ruin; It was resolved
to dispatch him out of the World, and that after a most cruel manner. They
thrust a red hot Iron up into his Fundament through a Pipe of Horn, fearing the
burning should be discovered. His Wife in her turn was punished by her own Son
in the same horrible manner of revenge.

Edward Married Philippa, the second of the four Daughters which the Earl of
Hainault had by Jane Daughter of Charles Earl of Valois.

Diverse Bands of Gascon Adventurers, whom they called the Bastards, perhaps
because their Chiefs were such, ravaged Guyenne; They went into Saintonge,
where they seized upon the City of Xaintes: but perceiving that the Captains
whom King Charles had sent thither, were resolved to give them Battle, they
withdrew in the night having set Fire to the City.

Alphonso of Castille surnamed de la Cerda, who had brought some Forces against
them, was fallen sick in that Country; from whence being returned to Court, he
died in the Village of Gentilly near Paris, at the Inn Hostel, Princes Houses
are called Inns, as Audley Inn.
of the Duke of Savoy. He had a Son named Charles, who was afterward
Constable, but the cause of great Mischiefs.

At the request of the Romans, who were troubled that their City was deprived
so long of the presence and emolument of the Papacy, Lewis of Bavaria had
passed the Mountains in 1324. without coming to any agreement with the Pope.
Thus these two great Powers set all Italy in a flame, the Guelphs and the
Gibbelins by their Factions renewing their horrible Tragedies.

France it self felt it in the excessive Levies the Pope made upon the Churches
to maintain that War, and to revenge himself upon the Milanois, the most
obstinate of all the Gibbelins, and his worst Enemies. At the first beginning
the King opposed it with vigor, but he relaxed as soon as the Pope had
permitted him to levy the Tenths upon his Clergy for two years together. Thus
both the one and the other taught their Successors to share those Sacred Goods
between them, and gave the Church a Wound which is so far from closing up, that
it grows wider every day.

Christmas-Eve of the year 1327. King Charles grew sick at the Bois de
Vincennes, and after he had languished six weeks, died at last on the First day
of February, Aged Thirty four years, having swayed the Scepter Six years and
one Month. He oppressed the People as his Father and his Brother Philip had
done; Though

He Married three Wives. The first was Blanch Daughter of Othenine Earl of
Burgundy, who being proved faulty, he was contented only with a Divorce, and
chose to cover her Shame under a Sacred Veil. The second was Mary Daughter of
the Emperor Henry VII. who having hurt her self when going with her first
Child, died with the Fruit of her Womb. The third, which was Jane Daughter of
Lewis Earl d'Evreux her Uncle, had only two Daughters; whereof the one named
Mary survived her Father but a few years, and the other which was Posthumus,
and was called Blanch, Married Philip Duke of Orleance, Son of King Philip de
Valois.

REGENCY.
AS Charles the Fair had no Male Children, and that his Wife was pregnant, the
Regency of the Kingdom, and Guardianship or Care of the Fruit to come were
given to Philip, eldest Son of Charles Earl of Valois, and the nearest Male to
the deceased King, whom it was said had so ordained it in his Testament, and
last Will.

Blanch, who in due time was Married, as we have hinted.

Thus dried up at the Root and perished the whole Descent of Philip the Fair.
Whereupon one might say, as a famous Author has done, That the Divine
Providence would not permit that those who had sacked the Kingdom by so many
Exactions and Violences, should have any Descendants that should possess it,
were it not that the Branch of Valois has used them yet worse then they had
done.

The end of the First Volume.
A Chronological Abridgment, OR EXTRACT OF THE HISTORY OF FRANCE By the Sieur
de Mezeray.

TOME II.

Beginning at King PHILIP de VALOIS, and Ending with the Reign of HENRY II.

Translated by John Bulteel Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, Samuel Lowndes, Christopher Wilkinson,
William Cademan, and Jacob Tonson.

Philip VI. King XLIX.
The Second Part of the Third Race.
The first Collateral Branch.
POPES,
JOHN XXII. Near Seven years under this Reign. BENEDICT XII. Son of a Miller of
Saverdun in the Country of Foix, Elected the 20th of December 1334. S. Seven
years four Months. CLEMENT VI. Elected the 14th of May 1342. S. Ten years seven
Months, whereof Eight years and three Months during this Reign.
PHILIP VI. De Valois, Surnamed the Fortunate, King XLIX. Aged Thirty six years.

Edward King of England had been excluded from the Regency during the Queens
being with Child; he did not hold himself excluded from the Kingdom when that
Princess had brought forth only a Girl. He agreed most readily that the
Daughters could not attain to the Crown of France, because of the imbecility
of their Sex, neither did he claim it for his Mother: but he maintained that
the Sons of the Daughters having not that defect, were not incapable, and that
on this score they ought to prefer him, being a Male and Grandson to Philip the
Fair, before Philip de Valois, who was but his Nephew.

Paris immediately after the death of Charles, upon this great Question: Both
Parties made their private and underhand Interests with all the pains and craft
imaginable: Robert d'Artois Earl of Beaumont, whose Quality, Eloquence, and
Reputation could do a great deal in that Assembly, employed himself with all
his might for Philip, as thinking the advantage that Prince would receive by
his Interest, might be of service to himself in his Cause against Mahaud. In
fine, his vehement Persuasions, the force of the Salique Custom, very
conformable to the Law of Nature, and that aversion the French had for the
Government of a Stranger, obliged the Assembly to preserve the right of the
Males, and to declare that the Crown belonged to Philip. Edward acquiesc'd in
the Sentence, and confirmed it by several Acts during some years.

Philip was Crowned at Reims with the Queen his Wife the Eight and twentieth of
May upon Trinity-Sunday. He was surnamed the Fortunate, because Death had taken
his three Cousins out of the World to set the Crown upon his Head.

The Estates of Navarre having sent to entreat he would send them back their
Lawful Queen and the King her Husband, he granted their just Request, having
taken the Advice of his Lords, whom he called together in Council upon a
business of that weight. However he still detained Brie and Champagne, giving
to the Queen of Navarre and her Husband several Lands in exchange, which all
together were to yield the same Revenue as those two large Counties. They were
not Crowned at Pampelonna till the Fifth of March in the following year.

Hugh Capet, there was no Reign so much stained with the Blood of War as this
same. The beginnings were signalized by the gaining of the famous Battle of
Mont-Cassel. The great Cities of Flanders had mutinied against their Earl
Lewis, and misused him so strangely, that he durst not go into any of them but
Ghent. The King as his Lord and of near Parentage, took his part, and entered
Flanders with an Army of Twenty five thousand Men. The Flemmings had posted
Sixteen thousand upon a Hill near Cassel to guard their Frontier. He coming to
encamp in a Valley beneath them, they had the confidence to go and attaque him,
and appointed three Bodies at the same instant to make their way to his Tent,
to the King of Bohemia's, and to that of the Earl of Hainault; thinking to
surprise them all three unawares. His Person was in great danger, but whilst
the bravest of his Men stood as a Rampart and put a stop to the Enemy, the rest
Armed themselves and charged the Flemmings so stoutly, that the three Princes
defeated those three Parties, not one Man of them escaping.

All Flanders quelled by this great shock, submitted to his Mercy. He caused
several hundreds to be Hanged, Banished, and Confiscated, and the year after
dismantled five or six of their Towns; which allayed their heat for some time,
but did not extinguish it.

Peter Remy Sieur de Montigny, had succeeded to Marigny and la Guette in the
management of the Treasury: their sad example had not so great influence upon
him, as the passion to enrich himself as they had done. So that by Sentence of
Parliament; where there were Eighteen Knights, Five and twenty Lords and
Princes, and the King himself present, he was Condemned to be Drawn and Hanged
as a Traitor, at the Gallows of Montfaucon, which he had caused to be rebuilt.
His Confiscation amounted to Twelve hundred thousand Livers It was more then
Fifteen Millions is now.
, a prodigious Sum for those times.

Of the Six great Peerage.
Pairries of the Laity, the Kings had appropriated four to themselves, to
substitute others in their place, and erected many new; to wit, Beaumont le
Roger in Anno 1328. for Robert d'Artois, and Anno 1329. the Barony of Bourbon,
this with the Title of Duchy, that with the Title of Earldom; Then afterward
in several years Alenson, Evreux, Clermont in Beauvoisis; all for Princes of
his Blood, and upon Lands, truly of much lower Dignity and Consideration then
those of the former six Pairries, but as much above those of this Age, as the
Princes of the Blood are above Private Gentlemen.

Edward Earl of Savoy, was come into France to demand assistance of the Who was
his Ki sman.
King, against the Dauphin de Viennois and the Earl of Geneva, his perpetual
Enemies. Paris, and leaving only a Daughter, John III. Duke of Bretagne,
Husband to this Princess, made earnest suit to have the Succession: but the
Estates of Savoy, wherein presided Bertrand Archbishop of Tarentaise, declared,
That the Salique Law took place there, and called Aymon Brother of the
deceased, to that Crown.

Edward by two Lords who had express Commission, according to the custom of
Fiefs, he promised to come and do Homage to the King of France. The seizure of
his Fiefs of Guyenne and Ponthieu was therefore deferred, and he came to Amiens
in great Equipage. After he had there in vain demanded the restoring of what
had been taken in Guyenne from his Father, he did Homage. But it was with his
Tongue, and in general words only, intending to Advise first with his Barons
what was to be done. When he was returned into England, he sent Letters to King
Philip under his great Seal, in which he declared, That that Homage was Liege,
and that he owed it for the Duchy of Guyenne, and the Earldoms of Ponthieu and
Monstereuil.

The Troubles that happened in England, had hindered him from performing that
Devoir sooner. His Mother with her Mortimer had made him believe, that his
Uncle Edmund, Earl of Kent, had plotted to take away his Life: Indeed tha^ Earl
endeavored to get King Edward II. out of prison, who was his Brother, and as
he thought yet living. Upon this Information young Edward causes him to be
seized and condemned to death somewhat too lightly: but afterward Mortimer and
the Queen his Mistress were Treated in the same manner. For the young King
weary of their scandalous deportment, caused the Gallant to be hanged Be^eaded
faith Mezeray.
upon pretense of several Crimes, and his Mother to be shut up in a Castle,
where they hastened her end: a very just act, had it been done by any other hand
but that of a Son.

The discord between Pope John XXII. and the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, grew to
that extremity, that Lewis being in Italy, after the example of the Emperor
Otho, degraded John of the Papal Dignity, and in his place substituted Michael
de Corbiere a Friar Minor, under the name of Nicholas V. Michael de Cesenna,
General of that Order, and diverse of his Monks, supported him mightily by their
Preachings and Writings.

These Monks, and others of the Imperial party, having spread many reproachful
and bloody Invectives thorough all Christendom against Pope John XXII. an
Assembly of the Clergy was held at Paris, where the Bishop in his Pontifical
Habit, attended by many other Prelates and Clergymen, declared to the People in
the Church Porch of Nostre-Dame, the Attempts and Mistakes of Corbiere, and
pronounced Excommunicate both the said Corbiere, the Emperor Lewis, and
Michael de Cesenna with their Adherents.

Two things ruined this Party, the Emperors ill Conduct, which forced him to
go out of Italy, and the disagreement between the Friars Minors, many of whom
having forsaken their General, it weakened his Interest so much, that in the end
he was disowned by all of that Order. So that Corbiere after many Adventures,
being caught and brought to Avignon in the year 1330. begged pardon of John
XXII. with a Rope about his Neck: but he could not get off so; they put him in
prison, where he died some Months afterward.

Peter Cugnieres, Knight. Counselor and Advocate-General of the Parliament,
touching the Usurpations and Attempts of the Clergy upon the Secular
Jurisdiction.

The business was discussed in a Council held at Vincennes, then again in the
Assembly of Parliament. Cugnieres spoke earnestly, and to the good liking of
all the Nobility who applauded him. Peter Roger elected Archbishop of Sens,
afterward made Pope, and Bertrand Bishop of Autun, who was a Cardinal, having
undertaken the defense of their Body, replied very eloquently. The Clergy was
in great danger, not only of being lopt off in part, but quite rooted out of
their Jurisdiction. The King at last by a Decree of the Twenty eighth of
December maintained them in their possession, protesting it was his hearty
desire to augment the Rights and Privileges of the Church, rather then any way
dimish or infringe them: for which reason they gave him the Surname of the Good
Catholic. Notwithstanding after this shock, the Authority of that Body has
been so much weakened, especially by Appeals in all Cases, that now they really
believe they have more just cause of Complaints against the Secular Judges,
then the Seculars had in those times against them.

France being in Peace, King Philip, following the footsteps of his
Predecessors, had conceived a desire of undertaking an Expedition into the
Holy Land. To this purpose, upon his return from a Pilgrimage he made to
Marseilles with a very small Attendance, in performance of a Vow he had made to
St. Lewis Bishop of Toulouze, he visited the Pope in Avignon, and discoursed in
particular with him about his design.

Toward the end of the year he summoned the Estates of his Kingdom, and laid
before them the passion he had for the Holy War. By their advice, he sent to
demand permission of the Pope to levy the Tenths of all the Clergy in
Christendom, and many other things, but so extraordinary that he could obtain
no favorable Answer.

English could not well digest that Edward had so easily renounced to the Crown
of France; They ceased not from spurring him on, opportunity seeming to present
it self favorably, because Scotland, which France was wont to make a
counterpoise to England, was extremely embroiled. For Edward the Son of John
Baliol Vide, Before touching Scotland.
, who for a long time led a private Life at his House in Normandy, with a small
Force had recovered that Crown, and driven out King David who was retired to
the Court of France together with his Wife and Children.

After the death of Mahaut, the Earldom of Artois sell Jane of Burgundy, Wife
of Philip the Long, and according to the Articles of Marriage, was given to
Blancb her Daughter, the Wife of Eudes Duke of Burgundy. Robert d'Artois who
could not yet forbear his pretentions to that Earldom, renewed the Process, and
produced certain Grants under the great Seal, which he said he had found by
Miracle. He believed the King, being his Brother-in-Law, and owing him so great
obligation, would not search too deep after the truth of it. But the King,
because it concerned the interest of his Daughter, who was much nearer to him
then his Sister, caused these Letters Patents to be examined so exactly, that
they were found to be false; and a Gentlewoman of Artois that had counterfeited
them, was burnt alive for it, they having accused her as being a Sorceress.

Robert enraged for the loss of his Process and of his Honor, slew to
reproaches against the King, so much the more injurious as they were true, and
so exasperated his anger, that he was pushed on to the utmost extremity against
him. They seized upon his Confessor, whom they obliged by force or promises, to
bear Witness against him: his Wi^e was laid hold on, though she were the Kings
own Sister; and after some delay, for want of appearing, he was Banished by
sound of Trumpet and Proclamation through all the Suburbs of Paris, and his
Estate was declared to be Confiscate.

He then knew there was no more quarter for him, and would have taken Sanctuary
at the Earl of Hainaults: but the Kings wrath did not suffer him to be so near,
he excited the Duke of Brabant to make War upon the Hanuyer. Robert not to be a
Cause of the ruin of his Friend, went out of those Countries, and resolved to
all the extremities whereunto despair does usually hurry Men of courage; he
goes to the King of England, and by force of blowing the Coals, kindled the
Flame that set all France on Fire.

England strenghned himself with Alliances, Moneys, and all sorts of
Ammunitions for some great Enterprise. He had in his Party the Earl of
Haynault, the Emperor Lewis his Brother-in-Law, several German Princes, with
the Cities of Flanders; and to have the greater power in the Low Countries and
over the Princes along the Rhine, he purchased at a dear rate the Quality of
Vicar of the Empire. The King was secure of the Earl of Flanders, the Duke of
Lorrain, the Earl of Bar, the Kings of Castille, of Scotland, and of Bohemia:
but Emperor And^o^i^^s the Young Reig^^l eight years and an half, and Lewis of
Bavaria.
especially of this last, whom he had made fast by many several ties. For
besides that he had Married a Sister of his, and his Son Charles born of that
Wedlock had been bred in the Court of France, he also Married his Daughter
Bonne to John Duke of Normandy. The Nuptials were completed at Melun.

The Designs of the English being not yet formed, gave Philip no apprehension;
so Charles of Bohemia, Philip of Navarre, and Peter of Arragon, with a great
number of Dukes, Earls, and Knights. The Clergy took but small joy in it, so
mightily were they oppressed with extraordinary Exactions, as if they had a
design to ruin the Churches of France to go and restore those in Palestine.

Philip endeavored to make Peace between all his Neighbor Princes, he brought
the Duke of Brabant to an agreement with the Earl of Flanders, and the Earl of
Savoy with the Dauphin de Viennois. The difference betwixt the first was for
the City of Malines. It belonged to the Bishop of Liege and to the Earl of
Guelders: the Bishop had sold his part to the Earl of Flanders, the Duke of
Brabant claimed it, saying, he was the Lord of the Fief. It was concluded it
should remain to the Flemming, unless the Duke would rather choose to reimburse
him 85000 Crowns. With that was agreed the Marriage of three Daughters of the
Brabanders, with Lewis eldest Son of the Flemming, William Earl of Holland, and
Renauld Earl of Guelders.

John XXII. had publicly preached at Avignon; This opinion had been common
enough in the former Ages.
That the Vision, or Joys of the Blessed Souls, and the Pains or Torments of
the Damned were imperfect till the final day of Judgment, and endeavored to
make this opinion pass current for the Doctrine of the Church. The Faculty of
Theology of Paris courageously opposed it; He tried to get them to own it by
two Nuncios whom he sent to them; the one was the General of the Cordeliers,
the other a famous Jacobin Doctor. The most Christian King did not judge the
Pope to be infallible, but ordered the question to be discussed by Thirty
Doctors or the Faculty of Theology, who confounded the Cordelier Nuncio;
whereupon a Decree was made, and Sealed with their Thirty Seals, which he sent
to the Holy Father, exhorting him to believe those who understood Divinity
better, then did the Canonists of the Court of Rome. So that the Pope
perceiving his Opinion was not well received and entertained, said he had
proposed it only by way of Disputation, or Argument.

He died the year following, leaving an immense Treasure, scraped together by
his exactions made upon the Clergy of France. Peter Fournier Cardinal, of very
mean and low birth, but greatly eminent for his Moderation and Frugality,
succeeded him in the Holy See, and took the name of Benedict, or Benet XII.

Arthur. II. Duke of Bretagne had married two Wives; the First was Mary,
Daughter and Heiress of Guy, Vicount Limoges. The Second, Yoland Daughter of
Robert IV. Earl of Dreux, and one Beatrix, Daughter and Heiress of Amaury V.
Earl of Montfort; by Mary came three Sons, John II. who was Duke after his
Father; Guy, who had for his part the Earldom of Pontieure (and from whom came
a Daughter named Jane;) and Peter, who died without Children. Of Yoland; came a
Son named John, who had the Earldom of Montfort, as his Great Grandfather by
the Mother had.

Duke John II. having no Children, and his Brother Guy being dead in the year
1330. leaving only a Daughter, which was Jane; it was easy to foresee, that
great troubles would arise for the succession of the Duchy, between this
Daughter, and John de Montfort; for this last pretended, that he was one degree
nearer then she was; and besides, being a Male he ought to exclude her. Now as
Duke John had a particular affection for the House of France* from which he was
descended by the Male line, he had it in his thoughts, to avoid the destruction
of Bretagne, for to exchange this Duchy with the King, for that of Orleance,
or to leave it in Sequestration in his hands to restore it to which of the
pretenders he pleased. The Lords of the Country not able to endure either of
these two methods, he bethought him of Marrying his Niece to Charles de
Chastillon, Brother of Lewis Earl of Blois, and Nephew by his Mother to King
Philip de Valois, upon condition he should take the Name, the Motto, and the
Coat of Arms of Bretagne. The Marriage was consummate in Anno 1339. The Duke
kept him with him, and Treated him as his presumptive Successor; John de
Montfort dissembling those pretenses he had to the contrary.

Edward having attained to full majority, prompted by his own great courage,
and the Favors Fortune had newly bestowed in a Victory over the Scots, was
easily led by the continual instigations of Robert d'Artois, animating him to
recover the Kingdom of France by the Sword. He thought it convenient to begin
with complaints, and accused Philip before the Pope, for having ravished that
Crown from him, during his Minority.

The Pope having given him no other Answer, but an exhortation not to disturb a
Prince, who had taken on him the Cross for an expedition to the Holy Land, the
young King impatient of such long delay, sent to defy King Philip. All his
Allies, every one in particular, except only the Duke of Brabant, accompanied
his Limoges was the bearer.

Some time before, the King having intelligence that they were preparing to
make the Rupture, went to Avignon with John Duke of Normandy his eldest Son, to
visit the Holy Father Benedict XII. as well to justify himself of the
accusations of the King of England, as to cut out work for the Emperor Lewis
of Bavaria, by rendering his agreement with the Pope more difficult.

Gautier de Mauny began first by opening the War on the Flanders-side,
surprising the City of Mortagne, not the Castle, then that of Thin l'Evesque;
which he kept to bridle Cambray, that showed it self for the French. The King
of England's Lieutenants likewise began the War in Saintonge, by the taking of
the Castle of Palencour; the Governor whereof, for having but poorly defended
himself, lost his Head at Paris.

Thus the expedition to the Holy Land was broken off, the King called back the
Forces he had at Marseilles, and kept the Genoese in his pay, the best Men for
Seaservice in those days, with theirs, and the assistance of the Castilians, he
sent a Naval force to the coasts of England, where they did a great deal of
mischief, there being no less then Sixty thousand of them under pay.

Rodolph Earl of Eu, and Guisnes his Constable, entered Guyenne, and gained the
Lands of the Vicount de Tartas. The Earl de Foix who succeeded him in that
employ, did likewise conquer many other petty places.

Flanders, whereof Ghent is as it were the Head, hesitated some time between
the fear of the power of the French, and the distress and indigence the English
drove them into, expressly having prohibited the carrying to them any Wools out
of England into their Country; but when an English Army had deseated one of
theirs in the Island of Cadsant, James d'Artevelle, whom Edward had gained by
the power of Money and Presents, mtroduced his Ambassadors into Ghent, and
Treated his Alliance with that City.

This Artevelle was a private Brewer and Beer-Merchant, but crafty, undertaking
and politic, who had acquired almost the absolute Government in Flanders, and
maintained Agents in all the Cities. So that the Earl could not possibly stop
the torrent, and was constrained to quit the Country.

Edward, who after the Declaration of War, had returned to his own Island, came
and landed at Scluse, with an Army and Fleet of Four hundred Sail, went by Land
to Colen to confer with the Emperor, who confirmed the Title of Vicar of the
Empire to him, and promised to attaque France with the Forces of Germany,
provided he might have such great sums of Money as he demanded.

Colen he encamped some days before Cambray an Imperial City, but wherein the
Bishop had suffered Prince John, the Son of King Philip to enter. Finding he
could do little there, he passed the Scheld to give the King battle. The two
Armies were nigh each other about the Village of Viron-fosse in Cambresis. The
King much the stronger in appearance, forbore to give battle, because Robert
King of Naples, a great Astrologer, had sent him word, that in what place
soever he should venture to fight the English he should lose the day, and run
his Kingdom into an extreme danger. The remainder of the year was spent in
picquering, and sending forth small parties to make inroads upon one another.

Flemmings, as the three Cities of L'sle, Douay, and Orchies, stuck much in
their Stomachs, they proffered their Service to the King, in case he would
surrender them; which being denied, they acknowledged Edward to be King of
France, and gave him their Oaths of Fidelity: then did he begin to take that
Title upon him in all public Acts, and to put the Flowers-de-Lys in his Coat
of Arms, and in his Seals. However I find, that the year before, he had by a
Declaration forbid any to call Philip, by the name of King of France, but only
Earl of Valois.

England to recruit himself with Money, there was nothing done in all this year
but sacking or plundering, and some skirmishes that were not decisive. In the
mean time the King by his Craft and Money together, had found means to take the
Emperor off from the English Interest; Insomuch as he repeated his Title of
Vicar of the Empire, which he had sold at so dear a rate to him.

Flemmings, they could not be brought over again; and their Earl not daring to
return into that Country, nor put any trust in Artevelle, kept himself within
l'Isle. The Pope upon the Kings request had put their Country under Interdict,
and all their Priests obeyed very exactly, which did at first cause a great
consternation; but the King of England sent some that were less scrupulous
amongst them, who opened the Churches, and officiated boldly.

Normandy (this was John the eldest Son of Philip) after he had made strange
havoc in Hainault, laid Siege to the Castle of Thin-l'Evesque on the Sambre,
because it did much incommode the City of Cambray. The French and Flemmish
Armies were there once more near each other, but the Flemmish now withdrew
themselves without blows; the besieged observing their retreat, set fire to the
place, and made their escape.

As soon as the King of England had recruited himself with Money and Men, he
came and landed a Second time at Scluse, and overthrew the French Fleet that
lay

Philip retired, and distributed his Army in the several Garrisons. The King of
England sent to defy him in single combat, one to one, or else a hundred on
either side, or both Armies in a pitched battle. He was answered, That a Lord
accepts of no challenge from his Vassal.

Some days after he besieges Tournay, which was reduced to great distress; but
the long and vigorous defense of the besieged, saved the place by the Truce
that was then made.

Flemmings were cut in pieces before St. Omers; Robert d'Artois who Commanded
them, was not only in danger of losing his Life there, but afterward being
pursued by the Populace, who cried out he had betrayed them, was forced, much
wounded as he was, to make his escape to the King of England.

French Garrisons were drawn together in a Body to relieve Tournay. Philip had
made diverse attempts for that purpose, had lost all hopes of succeeding in it;
when on the sudden Edward condescends to a Truce, whether by the mediation of
the Widow Jane, Countess of Hainault, who was his Sister, and Mother of the
Queen of England, at that time retired to the Convent of Fontenelles, or as
Villain tells it, because of the desertion of the Duke of Brabant, whom the
King had gained by his Money and besides, being unwilling that City should fall
into the English hands, went away from them with all his Forces. It was to last
from the Twentieth of September, to the Five and twentieth of June following;
and was again prolonged at an Assembly, which shortly after was held at Arras,
upon the earnest desires of the Popes Legates.

John II. Duke of Bretagne dying this year 1341. upon his return from Flanders:
whither he had attended the King, Vide a few pages before*
that War which he so much apprehended, broke out in his Country, and kept it
in a flame for two and twenty years space. For John Earl of Montfort being very
liberal of those Treasures he had in Limoges, secured himself of the best
Soldiers, and of the Cities of Breast, Nantes, Rennes, Hennebond, and Avray.
Then foreseeing his Antagonist would have recourse to the King of France his
Uncle, he goes over into England, where he contracted a secret Alliance with
Edward, and also did homage to him.

Charles de Blois comes unto the King, as to his Sovereign Lord. The Duchy was
a Fief of the Crown of France, ever since the Dukes Peter Emp. John V.
Paleologus, Son of Andronicus a Minor, and Lewis of Bavaria.
de Mauclere, and John le Roux his Son, had acknowledged it to be held of the
Crown, and moreover, it was a Pairrie; Philip the Fair having graced it with
that Title in Anno 1277. in recompense for that John II. had brought him Ten
thousand Men to the Siege of Cour^ray. Besides, both of the contenders had
presented their Petitions to the King, to be admitted to do homage, which no
doubt but either of them would have performed in any manner required: and for
this reason the King

The Duke of Bretagne appeared; but finding by the very first words the King
spoke to him, that not only his Cause, but likewise his Person was in danger,
he makes his escape one fair night into Bretagne, with three more, himself
disguised like a Merchant, ^aving left all his Officers at Paris, who put a
good face upon it, as if their Master were not sled, but kept his Bed for some
indisposition.

The better to cover his evasion, he left a procuration with one of his people,
to act and carry on this Cause before the King and Pairs, and produce what
Deeds and Papers were necessary to maintain his Right. His adversary had done
the same; but either of them notwithstanding without power of concluding on any
thing, but only for debating, and putting their Arguments and Titles into a
method to instruct the Judges.

Charles de Blois to homage, and threw out Montfords Petition. Immediately
Charles and his friends were putting themselves into a posture to execute the
Decree; the Duke of Normandy entered into Bretagne with an Army, and having
forced Chantoceaux, besieged Nantes, where Montford had shut up himself. The
Nantois terrified at the misfortune of Two hundred of their Burghers taken in a
Salley, obliged Montford to surrender himself to the Duke, who sent him to
Paris, where he was confined to the great Tower of the Lovre.

Thus one would have guessed the business had been at an end; but his Wife
Margaret, Daughter of Robert Earl of Flanders, a wise and courageous Princess,
who made good use of her Head in Council, and of her Sword upon occasion, as
well as the deepest Politician, or the bravest Soldier of her time could have
done, upheld that ruined party, and not only so, but even raised it again by
her heroic Virtue: She retired to Breast, fortified her places, put her Son,
who was but four years old, in a place of safety, having sent him into England,
and pressed King Edward so earnestly for the assistance he had promised to her
Husband, that he sends it by Sea to her.

It came inde ed somewhat too late to preserve Rennes, but early enough to save
Hennebond, whit her he was retired. It was however too weak to maintain the
cause the Enemies were Masters of the Field, and took the Towns: but Charles de
Blois, I cannot tell by what motive, gave her some respite by a years Truce,
during which, this Princess goes over into England to represent the state of
her Affairs there.

In the Month of April of this year 1342. happened the death of Benedict XII.
This good Pope moreconcerned and affectionate for the exaltation of the Holy
See, then of his own Family, left a vast Treasure to the Church, and nothing at
all to his kindred, but good instructions for the saving of their Souls. Peter
Roger, Native of the Village de Rose, in Limosin, and Archbishop of Rouen,
succeeded him, by the name of Clement VI. This Man behaved himself quite
contrary, he scrupled not at all to make use of his Wealth to enrich his
Relations, and restored the The setting up of Nephews and Nicces.
Nipotisine very prejudicial to to the Church.

Margaret acted so successfully at the Court of England, that she brought back
a powerful supply, commanded by Robert d'Artois. The Naval Forces of the
Genoese and Spaniards, which were under the Command of Lewis of Spain, Brother
of Alphonso, who was Constable, set upon them smartly, and might well have
hindered their Landing, if a sierce Wind had not obliged him at night to put out
to Sea, fearing his great Vessels should run aground; their Ships being
smaller, got to Port near Vannes. Robert d'Artois being landed, besieged that
City, and carried it by Assault, which he made upon them in the night,
presently after another very hot one, which he had given them in the day time.

But after that the Captains of the contrary party knowing he had sent the
greatest part of his Army to besiege Rennes, and that himself staid in Vannes,
they came and besieged him, and pressed so hard upon him by repeated Assaults,
that they regained the place. Himself was hurt in the last attaque, and with
much ado saved himself by a postern, and got to Hennebond; from thence he went
into England, where he thought to find best Chyrurgeons: he died of his wounds
in London, detested of all good and loyal Frenchmen, and passionately regretted
by Edward, who promised him to revenge his death.

And in effect, he landed soon afterward in Bretagne, where all at one time he
besieged Vannes, Rennes, and Guincamp, protesting he did not intend to break
the Truce made with the French, but only he would defend and protect the Lands
of a Pupil; he meant Montfort's Son, to whom he had promised his Daughter in
Marriage. On the other hand, the Duke of Normandy thought he did not infringe
it if he assisted Charles de Blois his Cousin German.

Edward before Vannes, both by Sea and Land. Now as the English were reduced to
hunger, and the French extremely incommoded with the Autumn Rains; they were
glad on both sides to get out of these straights by a Truce for two years,
which was concluded betwixt them only for Bretagne. The Legates of the new Pope
brought this about; and withal got the promise of both Kings, that they should
send to Avignon to the Holy Father there to determine all their Disputes by a
firm and lasting Peace.

The Twenty eighth of January happened the death of Robert the Wife, King of
Naples, who left his Kingdom to Jane, Daughter of his Son Charles; and the
Sixteenth of September that of Philip King of Navarre: Charles his Son, who
since ws surnamed the Bad, came to the Crown, under the Guardianship of Queen
Jane of France, his Mother.

Normandy and the English Deputies met at Aviguon to Treat about a Peace: and
although they could not come to an agreement in any one thing, yet nevertheless
it was believed they would conclude a Peace at last; because the Popes
Mediation was pleasing to both Princes. But here an unhappy accident falls in
their way, and not only stopped their proceedings toward a Peace, but set them
at farther distance then ever they were, and overwhelmed France with a deluge
of woes.

Oliver de Clisson, and Ten or Twelve Lords Bretons of the French party, having
accompanied Charles de Blois to a Turnament that was held at Paris, the King
caused them to be all made prisoners, upon some suspicion of their holding
intelligence with the English, and soon after beheaded, without any Trial or
Hearing of their Case, to the great astenishment of all the World, and
indignation of the Nobility, whose Blood till then, had never been shed but in
Battle: and indeed this too severe King, who revenged even his own mistrusts,
did so alienate the affection of his Grandees, that they served him but very
ill, when he had need of them upon great occasions.

Bretagne, enraged the King of England; he was almost like to have done the
same to Henry Lord of Leon, of Charles de Blois his party, whom he held a
prisoner; but upon the humble entreaties of the Earl of Derby, he gave him his
Life and Liberty, upon condition he should go and declare to King Philip, that
the Truce was infringed by this Murder, and that he was now going to begin the
War anew; as he quickly did, as well in Guyenne by the Earl of Derby, assisted
by the Gascon Lords under his obedience, as in Bretagne by Montforts party,
till he could go himself and carry a War into the very heart of the Kingdom.

France had liberally granted to King Philip, very notable Subsidies of Money
for his Wars; he raised them by much, and which was worse, he settled a new one
upon Salt; for which cause, Edward by way of railery, called him the Author of
the Salique Law. This impost which makes the Sun and Water to be sold so dear,
was the invention of the Jews, mortal enemies to the name of Christians, as the
word or term Gabel denotes, which comes from the Hebrew.

Derby, after the having refreshed himself at Bourdeaux, with the Forces he had
brought from England, took the Field to fall upon the Provinces on this side
the Dordogne. The Earl de Laille and the Gascon Lords, who had thrown
themselves into Bregerac, thinking to obstruct his passage over that River,
were constrained to abandon that Town to him, and to let him overrun all the
Upper Gascongny, where he conquered several small places.

When he was returned to Bourdeaux, the Earl de Laille took his opportunity,
having sent for the Lords of that Country, he being as it were Viceroy, and
laid Sieg to Aubero^ke, but not with the like success. The Earl of Derby coming
to its relief with only a^thousand Men, defeated his Army, which consisted of
Tenthousand, and took him prisoner, with eight or ten Earls and Vicounts more.
After which, he with much ease, besieged and took the Cities de la Reole,
Angoulesine, and diverse others.

John Earl of Montfort had been set at liberty by virtue of the Truce, upon
condition that he should not depart the Court: notwithstanding he goes and puts
himself at the head of his Forces in Bretagne; he besieged Kemper, but was so
far from taking it, that himself had like to be taken. Going from thence he
sacked and burnt Dinant: then over burdened with grief and anger, for the slow
progress in his Affairs he died about the end of September; leaving the
management of his pretensions to his Wife and his Son, who was yet very young.
He had the same name as his Father, and afterward gained the Surname of
Valiant.

Artevelle had made a promise to King Edward, to procure, that his Son the
Prince of Wales should be owned for Earl of Flanders by the great Cities, to
the exclusion of their natural Lord. Upon this assurance Edward carries his Son
to Scluse: the Deputies of the Cities went to wait on him, he treated them very
magnificently, but they would not hear of disinheriting their Earl.

Artevelle's enemies did not fail to make use of this occasion, to stir up the
peoples hatred against him. When he was returned to Ghent, having been so ill
advised as to remain some days at Scluse, after the other Deputies, the People
fell upon him and murdered him. The King of England retired in a fury for the
death of his good friend however, the Cities of Flanders having sent their
Deputies to him, he accepted their satisfaction, and the offer they made him,
to bestow the Daughter of their Earl upon the Prince of Wales.

There was great reason to put some stop to the Earl of Derby's progress in
Guyenne, the Duke of Normandy goes to Toulouze in the beginning of January,
with an hundred thousand Men bearing Arms. All this formidable multitude did no
more in three Months, besides the taking of two or three little paltry Towns in
Angenois, and the City of Angoulesme; whence they fell down upon Tonneius, and
after that, came and hesieged Aiguillon, seated on the confluence of the Rivers
De Lot.
d'Olt, and de Garonne, well munition'd, and well fortified those times.

In all this age we do not find a more memorable Siege, either for the
Attaques, or the Defense. They made three Assaults each day for a whole week
together, then they came to their Artillery, and their Engines both by Sea and
Land. Philip the Son of Eudes Duke of Burgundy, and Earl of Boulogne by his
Wife, who was Daughter and Heyress of Earl William, was wounded upon a Salley,
whereof he died. At last the Battle of Cressy Or Crecy.
being lost drew away the Duke of Normandy from this Siege, which till then he
obstaintely continued.

June, Edward with a Fleet of Two hundred Sail, wherein he had Four Frotssard
makes them Fourscore thousand.
thousand Men at Arms: Ten thousand Archers, and as many Foot, as well Irish as
Welshmen, puts to Sea with his eldest Son, with intent to land in Guyenne. He
did not rely so much upon his Forces, as upon the secret discontents of the
French Nobility, and the intelligence he held with many of the Grandees. He had
with him Gefroy, Brother of the Earl of Harco^r; a Lord very powerful in
Normandy, who having lost the favor of King Philip in his indignation, and
finding no certain security there, went into England.

The winds having turned Edward two several times out of his road toward
Guyenne, this Gefroy inslamed with revenge, persuaded him that Heaven would
have him steer his course for Normandy, a fat and plentiful Country, that had
not felt a War for two ages; so that he went and landed at the Port de la Hogue
St. Vaast in Constantin, near St. Sauveur, which were Lands belonging to
Gefr^y, resolved to cross thorough France to go and join the Flemmings.

Gefroy undertook the Office of Field* Marshal. The Cities of Valongnes,
Carentan, St. Lo, and Harfleur were his first prey. Rodolph Or Ralph.
Earl of ^u and of Guisnes, Constable of France, and the Count de Tancarville,
whom the King had sent to Caen, increased his Spoil and Fame by taking them
prisoners, with the defeat of Twenty thousand Men; the Burghers, braver in
words then deeds, having fortaken them in the midst of the Fight.

Going from thence, he continued his march by the Bishoprics of Lisieux and
Evreux, saccaged and burnt all along the Seine, even to Paris, but approached
not nigh Rouen, and came and encamped at P^issy; from thence he sent a defiance
to Phil^p, to fight him under the Walls of the Louvre: but after he had staid
there five days, fearing to be enclosed betwixt the Rivers of Seine and Oyse,
he caused the Bridges to be repaired, and passed into Beatvaisis, with design
to retire into his County of Ponthieu, marking his road all the way with long
traces of Fire and Blood.

Philip foaming with rage to behold with his own eyes from his capital City,
suh Flames in the very heart of his Kingdom, goes forth to pursue him in great
haste, that he might fight him before he could pass the Sum. Edward not being
able to find any passage over the River, was so happy as to have a prisoner
that showed him the Foord of Blanquetague below Abbevilie. Gondemar du Fay a
Norman Lord could not hinder him with Twelve thousand Men from passing at low
Water, and was put to the rout. The same Evening Edward went and encamped at
Cressy, and the next day Philip lodged at Abbevilie, which is within three
Leagues of it on this side; he had not less then an hundred thousand Men, with
which he might have hemmed them in, and reduced them to a Famine in a few days:
but he believieng that having over-taken them, was conquering them, he marches
the next day out of Abbeville, and gives him battle the same day, which was the
Six and twentieth of August.

His too hasty March, and three long Leagues of way, had made the French lose
both their breath and strength before they engaged the enemy. On the contrary,
the English were fresh and recruited, and despair re-doubled their courage. The
Genoese the chief strength of Philips Infantry, who were commanded by Antony
d'Oria, and Charles Grimaldi, did nothing to the purpose their Cross-bow
strings being made useless by a deluge of Rain that fell just upon the first
beginning of their Service; they retreating from before a shower of the English
Arrows, the Count d'Alenson, who suspected it to be Treachery, rides quite over
them with his Cavalry, and so began the rout. We must also take notice, that in
this famous Battle, the English had four or five pieces of Canon which gave
much terror, for that was the first time they ever saw those thundering in our
Wars. To all this add, that some amongst the Grandees, very glad to see Philip
engaged upon this occasion, made more show then they did service. These causes
chiefly gave the victory to the English.

The Battle lasted from four in the Afternoon till Two the next Morning. A
great flight of Ravens, which a little hefore the Fight were observed to hover
over the French Army, were esteemed as a presage of their defeat.

Of the French side there remained dead upon the place Thirty thousand Foot,
Twelve hundred Knights, and Fourscore Banners taken. John King of Bohemia,
Charles Earl of Alenson, Brother to the King, Lewis Earl of Flanders, and
Twelve or Fifteen of the most illustrious Counts lost their Lives. King John,
stark blind as he was, fought very valiantly, having caused his Horses Bridle
to be sastned to the Bridles of two of his bravest Knights horses. His Son
Charles, King of the Romans was hurt with three wounds; but it is not true that
the Kings of Majorca, Scotland, and Navarre were in this Engagement; the two
first were in their own Countries, busy enough about their own concerns, and
the other not above the age of Thirteen or Fourteen years, under the tuition of
his Mother.

The King this time Unfortunate, retired out of the Battle, under the favor of
the night, and saved his Person in the Castle of Broye, from thence got to
Amiens, and so to Paris, to raise another Army.

The next day another slaughter, twice greater then the former was made, by
Five hundred Lances, and two thousand Archers, amongst the common People, who
being ignorant of what had happened, were marching to the French Camp.

The English having ravaged all Boulonois at their pleasure, went and laid
Siege to Calais about the Eighth of September, and stuck close to it with the
more security, upon the news that David King of Scotland was vanquished and
made prisoner by the Queen of England, upon his falling on the Frontiers.

Before the Battle of Cressy, the Emperor Lewis was Excommunicated by the
Pope, and degraded by Five Electors, who in his stead placed Charles the Son of
John King of Bohemia. This Prince after the death of Lewis, which happened in
October the following year, got his Election confirmed, and bought the Claims
of two or three others, who disputed their Title to the Empire with him,
because they had been named by some of the Electors.

Normandy had raised the Siege of Aiguillon, the Earl of Derby remained Master
of the Field, regained all that part of Guyenne which lies beyond the Dordogne;
and having passed the Rivers, ravaged and burnt Saintonge and Poitou, took St.
John d'Angely and kept it, sacaged the great City of Poitiers and quitted it,
after he had refreshed himself there for Twelve days together.

Flemmings having lost their Earl at the Battle of Cressy, sent a Deputation to
the King to re-demand his Son who was their natural Prince. Whilst he was in
their power, they had assianced him to King Edwards Daughter; but that Alliance
being contrary to his inclination, he escaped from them, and returned to the
Court of France.

After he had staid there a year, he made a particular peace with the English,
by the consent of Philip his Sovereign. It was agreed that he should permit the
Flemmings to give them assistance: but as for himself he should not intermeddle
with the Affairs either of the one or other of the two Princes.

Flemmings being at Edwards Devotion, made great inroads upon Artois; and on
the other side John de Montforts party got the upper hand in Bretagne by the
help of the English. For Charles de Blois, going to besiege la Roche de Rien;
Montfort gave him Battle the Twentieth of June, vanquished him, and took him
prisoner with his two Sons John and Guy, and most of the Lords of his party.
His Wife, whom ambition, and the Royal Blood she came of, inspired but with too
much courage, gathered up the fragments, and maintained the business so well,
that he recovered once more.

Philip advanced between Wissant and Calais, with an Army of One hundred and
fifty thousand Men, to relieve the City; the English had enclosed Emp. John
Cantacuzene an Usurper upon John Paleologus the Minor, R. 8 years. And Charles
IV. of Lu^emburgh.
his Camp with such good Trenches, that he could find no way to attaque him.
The besieged driven to the severest extremity of Famine, were forced to
surrender the last day of August.

Fame shall never forget the name of Eustace de St. Pierre, the most noted
Citizen of Calais, and his heroic generosity to save his fellow Citizens.
Edward mortally enraged at their long resistance, would not receive them on
composition, unless they would deliver up to him six of their principal
Burghers to do what he pleased with them: The Council not knowing what to
resolve, and the whole City remaining Eustace freely proffered to be one of
those Six: By his example there soon followed enough to make up the number, who
went out in their Shirts with Ropes about their Necks to deliver the Keys to
Edward. He was so obstinately bent to put them to death, that the Queen his
Wife had all the trouble imaginable to obtain his pardon for their Lives. He
drove out all the Inhabitants of the place, even the Ecclesiastiques, and
repeopled it with natural English.

Robert King of Sicilia having no Heirs of his own Body, but Jane Or Joane.
the Daughter of his Son Charles Duke of Calabria, had Married her, Anno 1333.
to Andrew, Second Son of Carobert King of Hungary, the eldest of these two
being then but seven years of age. It happened Twelve years afterward, Andrew
not being enough to Jane's liking, and having been Crowned King by the Pope,
pretending that the Kingdom did delong to him, certain Conspirators made him
rise one night out of the Bed where he was lying with her, and hanged him at a
Windore. Charles Prince of Duras, who was likewise of the blood of the Kings of
Sicilia, and had espoused Mary the Sister of Jane, was Counselor, and Author
of this infamous act. Jane was not innocent; well might she lament and sigh,
her cries and tears signified less toward her justification, then her
subsequent Marriage with Lewis her Cousin-German, a lovely Prince, and
according to her desires, made for her conviction.

Lewis the Great, King of Hungary, being come into Italy to revenge the death
of his Brother Andrew, and to get the Kingdom, Treated Charles de Duras in the
same manner as they had used King Andrew. He would have done the like to the
Princess and her fair Husband, had they fallen into his hands, for which reason
she fled away in good time to her County of Provence, and her Husband soon
after her. The Pope showed her great respect, but taking advantage of the
extreme necessity she was reduced unto; he got from her the City and County of
Avignon, for which he was to give but Fourscore thousand Gold Florins of
Florence Some say he paid them not.
, but over and besides this bargain he approved her Marriage with Prince Lewis,
who in requital ratified this sale. It belongs to the Lawyers to judge whether
the minority of this Queen, and the Edicts she afterward made, to declare null
all alienations of the Lands in Provence, which had been made as well in the
Reign of Robert, as by her self whilst she was yet a Minor, do not make this
Contract void and null: but the Emperor Charles IV. confirmed it, and wholly
freed this County from the subjection of the Empire, of whom it held, as being
an Under-Fief of the Kingdom of Arles.

We ought to know that when the Earls Alphonso de Toulouze, and Raimond
Berenger of Barcelona, married the two Daughters of Gilbert ^arl of Provence,
and parted his Succession between them (whereof Alphonso had all from the
Durance to the Lisere, with the Title of a Marquisate; and Raimond what is from
the Durance to the Sea, with that of an Earldom) they likewise divided the City
of Avignon betwixt them; and that the Kings of France as Successors to Alphonso
de Poitiers, Brother of St. Lewis, who married the Heyress of Toulouze, had
enjoyed the one moity till the year 1290. When Charles the Fair gave it to
Charles II. King of Sicilia, upon the Marriage of Charles de Valois his
Brother, with Margaret the Daughter of that King.

The Lords of Montmorency de Charny and others, who commanded the French Forces
in Artois and Picardy, thinking it might not be amiss to recover Calais during
the Truce, held some intelligence with Aymery of Pavia, a Lombard Captain in
that City; but the double-hearted Traitor gave ear to them only to surprise
them; he gave notice of it to Edward, who desiring to be of the party, passed
the Sea with ^ight hundred Men at Arms, that this great draught might not break
out of the Net, so that when it came to be put in execution, they found
themselves unfortunately caught in the toil with the Twenty thousand Crown
bargain, and a thousand select Men; whereof One hundred of them who had engaged
themselves in a Tower belonging to the Castle, and the rest who waited for
entrance, were charged and cut in pieces, after a brave defense.

In the Month of August of the year 1348. there appeared on the side of Paris a
kind of Comet or Star, extraordinary Luminous, the Sun being not then Set; it
appeared as not very far distant from the Earth: the following night it was
thought to be much greater, and divided in several Rays: but soon after it
disappeared.

France was miserably tormented all manner of ways; it had undergone a horrible
Famine Anno 1338. and after that the spoil the Soldiers made, had caused every
thing to be held excessive dear, and kept the whole Kingdom in great scarcity.
This year 1348. A cruel Plague made all the Provinces desolate; the Exactions
worse then all these Plagues together, ruined the People utterly; and by I know
not what curse, the more the Taxes were increased, the more indigent was the
King.

There never had been any Plague more furious and destructive, then that in
Ann. 1348. It was universal over all our Hemisphere; there was neither City,
nor Village, nor House but was infected. It began in the Kingdom of Cathay,
Anno 1346. by a vapor that was most horrible stinking, which breaking out of
the Earth like a king of subterraneal Fire, consumed and devoured above Two
hundred Leagues of that Country, even to the very Trees and Stones, and
infected the Air in such manner, that there fell down millions of young
Serpents, and other venomous Infects. From Cathay it passed into Asia and
Greece, thence into Africa, afterward into Europe, which it ransacked
throughout, to the very utmost bounds of the North. The venom was so
contagious that it infected by the very sight; It was observed to last Five
Months in its full force and rage, where once it had got footing. Those that
suffered least by the Sword of this exterminating Angel, could hardly save one
Third of the Inhabitants: but in many places it did not leave above the
Fifteenth or the Twentieth person alive.

Peter des Essards the Kings Treasurer, was condemned to the sum of a hundred
thousand Gold Florins, which was moderated to the half. Afterward to stop the
peoples Mouths, and daily complaints they chose out for the management of the
Treasury, two Bishops, two Abbots, and four Knights, and they expelled all the
Italian Usurers, called Lombards, out of the Kingdom. The principal
Lottery-Money they had lent, was taken and confiscated to the King; this was
but about Four hundred thousand Livres, but their Use-Money, which was two
Millions, was remitted to the Owners.

Queen Jane, Daughter of Robert Duke of Burgundy, being dead in the year 1349
King Philip, though he were yet in mourning weeds, took fire for Blanch,
Daughter of Philip, King of Navarre. He had sent for her to be Married to his
Son, but he liked her best for himself, and did wed her.

Savoy, and the Dauphins de Viennois. The Dauphin Humbert, feeble in Body and
Courage, not able to endure the continual Attaques of Ame VI called the Earl
Verd Or the Green Earl.
, and besides being very melancholy for the loss of his only Son, withal over
Head and Ears in debt, and having no love for his kindred, bethought himself of
giving up his Country to some great potentate, who might plague, and put the
Savoyard to as much trouble as he had put him. His inclination was to make an
accommodation with the Pope; the People could have wished to be under the
Government of the Savoyard, that they might have no more war on that side: but
the Nobility liked rather to be under the King of France, who had Employments
and Offices to bestow. Henry de Villars Archbishop of Lions, and John de Chisy
Bishop of Grenoble, biased the Dukes mind, so as to make it run that way.

He had therefore in the year 1343. made a Donation to King Philip, of the
Lordship of Daulphine, and the Lands adjoining, upon condition that all their
privileges should be preserved entirely; that it should be incorporated for
ever in the Crown of France, and that the Kings eldest Son should enjoy it, and
bear the Title and the Arms of Daulphine; for which the King gave him Forty
thousand Crowns of Gold, and ten thousand Florins Rent to be levied on the
Country.

Jacobins, where he took on the Habit. The Pope tied him to the Church by
Sacred Orders, fearing he might start back and gainsay the thing. He received
them all on Christmass-day, the Subdiaconal at midnight Mass, the Diaconal at
Mass by break of day, and the Priesthood at the Third Mass. The same day he
Celebrated, and eight days after was promoted to Episcopacy, and honored with
the Title of Patriarch of Alexandria.

Philip had likewise, either by purchase or by engagement of James of Arragon
King of Majorca, the Counties of Rousillon and Cerdagna in the Pyreneans, and
bought of the same Prince the Barony of Montpellier in Languedoc, which the
House of Arragon held in Under-Fief of the Crown of France, for the sum of
Sixscore thousand Crowns of Gold, current Money.

In the Month of June, of the year 1350. the Truces were prolonged between the
Kings for three years.

Philip fell sick at Nogent le Roy, perhaps of the toil and fatigue of his new
Marriage, very often mortal to ancient people that take beautiful Wives.
Feeling his last hour draw near, he sent for his Children and the Princes of
his Blood, and gave them warning and counsel to live in amity and concord with
one another, make a Peace if it could be had, maintain good Order, and
countenance Justice, case the People, and other fine and excellent things which
Princes oftener recommend to their Successors at their deaths, then practice
themselves while they are alive. He expired the Two and twentieth day of
August, in the seven and fiftieth year of his age, and in the Three and
twentieth of his Reign. Very brave in his own person, more happy in
Negotiations then in Battle, hard-hearted toward his Subjects, suspicious,
vindicative, and one that suffered himself to be too far transported by the
impetuosity of his anger.

He had two Wives, Jane and Blanch, that the Daughter of Robert II. Duke of
Burgundy, and this of Philip d'Evreux King of Navarre: By the First he left two
Sons, John who Reigned, Philip who was Duke of Orleans, but had no posterity;
and one Daughter named Mary, who Married John Duke of Limburgh, Son of John
III. Duke of Brabant. By his Second he had but only one Daughter, Posthumus,
she was named Jane, who died at Beziers in the year 1373., as they were
conducting her to Barcelona, to marry John Duke of Girona, eldest Son to Peter
IV. King of Arragon. The Queen her Mother survived her Husband almost Fifty
years, which she passed in perpetual Widdow-hood. Thus under the Reign of King
John, there were two Queens Dowagers in France, this same, and Jane d'Evreux
widow of Charles the Fair, who died in the Month of May, Anno 1970.

John I. King L.
By some called the Good King; Aged XLII years.
POPES,
CLEMENT VI. Two years three Months, during this Reign. INNOCENT VI. Elected in
December 1352. S. Nine years, and near Nine Months. URBAN V. Elected the Eighth
of October, 1362. S. Eight years and above Two Months, whereof one year and Six
Months during this Reign.
John had assisted at the Funeral of the King his Father, he was Crowned at
Reims, with his Second Wife Jane of Boulogue, the Twenty sixty day of
September. From thence he came and made his entrance into Paris the Seventeenth
of October, sat in his Seat of Justice in Paris, gave the Order of Knighthood
to his two eldest Sons, to some other Princes and Lords, and began some show of
laboring about the Polity, and the Reformation of the whole Estate.

The Prince having maturity of age, the experience of Affairs, a valor tried
in occasions, the example of his faults before his Eyes, and four Sons that
would soon be able to draw their Swords, promised a happy conduct, and a most
flourishing Government: yet having the same defects as his Father, too much of
impetuosity and precipitation for revenge, little prudence, and as little
consideration for the miseries of his poor people, he fell into greater
misfortunes, and such as did not let go their hold, but stuck to him till his
death.

The Blood wherewith he sullied the entrance of his Reign, was a presage, and
perhaps a cause of it, much likelier then the prodigious Comet which appeared
this year. Rodolph Earl of Eu and of Guisnes, Constable of France, a prisoner
of War to the English ever since the Battle of Caen, had made diverse voyages
into France English; he was then arrested by the Prevost of Paris the Sixteenth
of November, and the Nineteenth beheaded obscurely, and without form of
Process, in presence of the Duke of Bourbon, and seven or eight Lords of note,
before whom it was given out in public he had confessed his crime.

His spoil was thus divided; his Office of Constable was given to Charles
d'Espagne de la Cerde, Favorite to the King; the Earldom of En, to John
d'Artois Son of that Robert of whom we have mentioned so much, and that of
Guisnes to Jane the only Daughter of the defunct, whose first Husband was
Gualter Duke d'Athenes, and her Second to Lewis Earl d'Estampes, of the Branch
d'Evreux, from which sprung that of the Earls d'Eu Princes of the Blood.

English who was a sumptuous and liberal Prince, who had instituted the Order
of the Garter; King John instituted, or rather revived the Order of the Star,
in a famous Assembly which he held in his Palace of St. Ouyn near Paris, and
ordained, that whereas those Knights did formerly wear the Star upon their
Helmets or Crest, or hung about their necks, they should now have them
embroidered on their Clothes. The Chapter was held upon Twelfth-day. Charles
the Fifth his Son observing this Order, much debased by the multitude of mean
people admitted, left it to the Chevalier that Commanded the Watch and his
Archers.

Emp. John Paleologus, John Can^acuzenus, and Charles IV.
Though the Truce was not expired, there was still some enterprise upon one
another. The English seized upon Guisnes, having corrupted the Governor with
Money. Edward excused it pleasantly; saying, The Truces were Merchandise, and
that he did no more then follow the example of King Philip, who would have
bought Calais. The Traitor that had sold Guisnes, was taken, and drawn in
pieces by four wild Horses.

Guy de Nesle Marshall of France was defeated and taken with Arnold
d'Endreghen, and several people of note in a rencounter in Guyenne.

Bretagne the two parties of Blois and Montfort, though they had only two Women
in the head of them, were perpetually engaging and fighting it out desperately.
In those days challenges between Cavaliers, and the chief Commanders of parties
that were enemies was very common, but more frequent between a certain number
appointed on each side, then singly hand to hand; and indeed they called them
Battles. The most remarkable in these years, was that of Thirty Bretons,
against as many English Richard Brembo was the chief of these, and the Lord de
Beaumanoir of the others. The victory fell to the Bretons, and the greatest
Honor to their Chief Du Guesclin fought another time in a Ring with Brembo,
one to one, and slew him.
.

The following year 1351. Charles *de Blois, who had been four years a prisoner
in England, was released upon ransom, giving two of his Sons for hostage till
the payment of it; and till he had discharged that debt he forbore to take up
Arms.

The Lords that had been taken prisoners in their attempt upon Calais, having
been discharged, carried on the War with the Marshall de Beaujeu about the
Country of St. Omers; having upon a time surprised the Lombard that had
betrayed them, they

The Earl of Flanders had denied to assist at the Kings Coronation, because
they refused to restore his three Cities to him: nevertheless he came to Paris
to pay homage for his Lands, and renew the Treaty of Confederation.

The Sixth of December happened the death of Pope Clement VI. Cardinal Stephen
d'Albert, a Limosin by birth, and Bishop of Clermont succeeded him the
Eighteenth of the same Month, and took the name of Innocent VI.

Charles of Navarre his return into the Kingdom, brought with it a long train
of war and calamities. He had all the good qualities that a wicked Soul renders
pernicious, Wit, Eloquence, Craft, Resolution, and Liberality.

Though he had this year 1353. married Jane, one of the Kings Daughters, he
gave not over from pursuing his pretensions to the Counties of Brie and
Champagne, and also Angoulesme. Charles d'Espagne, to whom the King had given
this last, dissuaded him from proffering satisfaction. The Navarrois
discontented, retires to his County of Evreux; and understanding that the
Constable was in his Castle de l'Aigle; he undertakes a thing as base as it was
bold; He carries with him a hundred Horse -- men, January) and makes them stab
him in his Bed. That done, he had the insolence to own the fact, to justify
himself by Letters to the King and Council, and all the good Cities of the
Kingdom, to raise Forces, fortify his Towns, and solicit all the
neighboring Princes to a League against France.

Paris, but he will not come till they grant him conditions very advantageous,
of Lands for the value of Brie and Champagne, the independance of his Earldom
of Evreux from all others but the King, full and free Absolution for those that
had murdered the Constable; and besides all this, a very considerable sum of
Money, and the Kings Second Son in Hostage.

Paris the third day of March. The King sitting on his Throne, attended by the
Pairs, the Legate, and diverse Prelates. The criminal having craved his pardon in
a studied Speech, intermixed with complaints and excuses; the Constable had
order to arrest him, only for forms sake, and lead him out to the next room,
while they debated: then straightway he was released upon the request of the
two Queens, the Widows of Charles the Fair, and of Philip de Valois. The Legate
made him a grave Remonstrance, and after all, the King declared him Absolved.

John Paleologus having deposed Cantacuzena, and Charles IV.
Some few days after he retired into Normandy, but went immediately without
leave of the King, and made a journey to Avignon. He went ierreting up and down
till the English should take the Field; whereupon the King enters again into
Normandy and seized his Lands: but that Prince returning from Navarre by Sea,
having brought Forces that sacaged all the Country; and besides, it being
English would soon Land, it was thought sitter to make use of kindness; Charles
the Kings eldest Son soothed him so finely that he was pacified, and least in
appearance, and came with him to Paris.

The Emperor Charles IV. goes to be Crowned at Rome, or rather to be covered
with shame, having made that infamous Contract with the Pope, that he would not
sojourn so much as one whole day in that City; which brought both January, he
made that famous Constitution, called the Golden Bull, of which the Politicians
judge very variously.

Upon a Shrove-Tuesday night the English by Scalado took the Castle of Nantes,
and the very same night Guy de Rochefort took it again, and hewed them all in
pieces as a reward for their having broken the Truce.

Gaston Phoebus Count de Foix, who Married the Sister of the King of Navarre,
was sent prisoner to the Chastellet at Paris, because he refused to hold his
Lands of the English. But in a Month after he was set at liberty, upon
condition he should go into Guyenne, and command the Kings Army against the
Prince of Wales.

For the Truce was no sooner at an end, but that young Prince invested in the
Duchy of Guyenne by his Father, began to make himself known by ravaging and
burnings. He made incursions, even as far as Beziers and Narbonne, without
meeting any opposition from the French Commanders; the Earl of Foix, James de
Bourbon Constable, John de Clermont, who were stronger then his party, but too
much divided by jealousies amongst themselves.

His Father at the same time landed at Calais, and ran over all the Boulonois
and Artois, even to Hesdin, where he broke through the Park, yet could not
force the Castle; but having intelligence that King John was coming directly to
him, he presently retires to Calais, and from thence to his own Island, without
returning any answer to the generous challenge sent him by that Prince, to
fight him, either hand to hand, or Army against Army.

Ruel, where having laid open to them the necessity of Affairs, they consented
to the maintenance of Thirty thousand Men: To make a fund for this, they were
fain to set up that Gabel upon Salt again, which had been laid aside, and
moreover, impose Eight Deniers per Liver upon all Merchandise, and a certain
annual Tax upon every man's Revenues, whether Lands, Benefices, Offices, nay,
even Salarys, and Servants wages.

Arras. The Marshall d'Endreghen going in amongst them, under the notion of a
pacificator, seized upon about a hundred of the most turbulent, whereof a score
of them had their Heads taken off.

Navarrois stirred up the people every where, upon pretense of the public
good. But with all his malice, he was nevertheless so much gulled, as to be
allured by the Dauphin, and drawn into the Castle of Rouen with Lewis Earl of
Harcourt, John and William his Brothers, the Lords de Clear, de Graville, de
Maubue, de Preaux, and seven or eight more of his Confederates. One day while
the Dauphine was Treating them at a Dinner, behold the King comes in at a
Postern Gate well armed, seizes upon the King of Navarre and his company, puts
the Earl of Harcourt, Graville, Maubue, and Doublet, in two Carts, carries them
out into the open fields, and there causes their four Heads to be cut off,
without any form of Process or Trial. That done he sends the Navarrois under a
strong Guard to the Castle Gailliard d'Andelis, from whence having been removed
into several prisons, and often threatened with death, he was conducted to the
Castle d'Arleux in Cambresis.

Philip Brother of the Navarrois, and Gefroy Brother to the Earl of Harcourt,
who had a good many places in Normandy, called in the English, to revenge that
outrage done to their Brothers. The Earl of Derby and the Duke of Lancaster
with Four thousand Men began the War in that Country.

l'Aigle, and having scattered them in the Woods, laid Siege to Breteuil, a
little place which defended it self Seven weeks.

In these unhappy times the smallest Towns fortified themselves, so as to put a
stop to the greatest Armies. The very Villages enclosed themselves with Works
or Walls against the plundering Soldiers; and this infinite number of Castles
served only to lengthen out the War, and devour the People by harboring
Thieves and Cutthroats.

The Nobility and Soldiery seemed as it were to triumph in the miseries of the
poor common people. Luxury, who would believe it? took its birth from
desolation. The Gentry who had ever been very modest in their Habits, began to
adorn themselves with Jewels, Pearls, and Gew-gawes like the Women, to wear
plumes of Feathers in their Bonnets, a sign of their levity, and give
themselves passionately over to play at Dice all the night long, and all the
day at Tennis.

Chartres where he was drawing all his Forces together, he was informed that
the Prince of Wales with Twelve thousand Men, of which there were but Three
thousand natural English, had pillaged Quercy, Auvergne, Limosiu, Berry, and
was marching to do the same in Anjou, Tourain, and Poitou. He thought fit to
cut off his March upon his Retreat, and led his Army along the Loire. The
Prince being advertised, left the Road to Tours, and retired by Poitou: but he
could not do it so speedily, but that the Kings Army overtook him within two
Leagues of Poitiers. The Prince finding him so near, entrenched himself amongst
the Vines, and strong thick Hedges, nigh the place called Maupertuis.

de Perigord the Popes Legate, went often from the one Army to the other to
prevent them from coming to blows. Edward offered to pay for all the damages he
had done in his march from Bourdeaux, to deliver up all his prisoners, and not
to bear Arms himself, nor any of his Subjects for Seven years time against
France. But King John believing the Victory secure and certain, rejected all
his submissions; and blinded with passion and anger, instead of hemming him in
and starving him (which could not have failed in three days time) went on
headlong with the courage and fury of a Lion, rather then of a Captain, to
attaque him within his fastness the Nineteenth of September. Nay, by the worst
advice in the world, he caused all his Horsemen to alight, excepting three
hundred select Men, who were to begin the onset, and the German Cavalry who had
Orders to second them.

Englishmens bearded Arrows made the Horses mad, and turned the^ upon the
Germans; these fell into the Avant-Guard; and they were totally routed by a
gross of the enemies who came forth and charged them during their disorder.

Of the four Sons the King had in this Battle, three of them were a little too
soon carried out of the fray by their Governors, together with Eight hundred
Lances; and this gave a fair pretense of excuse to all such Cowards as were
glad to ollow them. There was only Philip the youngest of the four, who
obstinately resolved to run the fortune of his Father, and fought by his side.

The Kings single valor sustained the enemies charge a considerable time, and
if one fourth part of his Men had but seconded him, no doubt but he had gained
the victory. At length he yielded himself up into the hands of John de
Morebeque an Artesian Gentleman, whom he had banished the Kingdom for some
crime. Philip his Son was taken prisoner with him. There were but Six thousand
French killed in this fatal day, but of that number were Eight hundred
Gentlemen, and amongst those the Duke of Bourbon, the Duke d'Athenes Constable,
the Marshall de Nesle, and above Fifty more of good quality.

The youg Prince as courteous as he was valiant, Treated the King as his Lord.
The same night he served him at his Table, and endeavored to allay his grief
and misfortunes by the most obliging and becoming Language he could express.
The next day fearing this noble prey might be snatched from him, and withal
observing his soldiers were so laden with plunder, that they were incapable of
further service, he took his March toward Bourdeaux, and carried away the King
and his Son along with him, tg either with a prodigious number of prisoners.

Charles the Dauphin Lieutenant, then Regent, Aged some XXI years.
Lieutenant upon him, he believed it belonged to the general Estates to provide
for the Government of the Kingdom, and the redemption of the King, and
therefore having called them together at Paris, the Fifteenth of October, he
propounded these two things to them.

But that happened then, which ever happens in such great disorders, where the
people have been evilly treated in their prosperity. Instead of assistance he
met with nothing but complaints and sharp rebukes. They would deliberate of
nothing in the presence of his Commissioners; they demanded to have the
Chancellor set aside, this was Peter de la Forest, Archbishop of Rouen, Simon
de Bucy, First President, and six or seven Officers more that had mis-mannaged
the Treasury; They would have him set the King of Navarre at liberty, and would
have him be governed and guided by a Council they chose for him; upon which
conditions they promised to maintain Thirty thousand Men, but which should
receive their pay from their own hands.

In the mean time they set up a Council for the Government of the Kingdom,
whereof Robert le Coq Bishop of Laon was the Chief, and Commissioned People
that were at their own Devotion to manage the Treasury. The Dauphin not being
able to persuade them to condescend to any other method, nor bias their
resolutions, made use of some wile to break up that Assembly, and upon diverse
pretenses obliged the Deputies of the several Cities to return. Afterward he
dispatched others to all the Bailywicks and Seneschals Courts to demand a
subsistence of them severally, hoping that none in particular would dare to
refuse him, what when altogether they had boldly denied.

During this confusion, every one imagined, now was the proper time to recover
their Rights and Privileges. The Nobility began to make Alliance with the
Cities; The Dauphin found out the way to prevent that union and draw them to
himself. The Cities on the other hand grew jealous of the Gentry, so that to
preserve themselves from being pillaged by the Soldiery, who had all manner of
License allowed them, they began to fortify; especially at Paris, where they
chained their Streets, repaired their Walls, made good their Ditches, and
enclosed all that quarter of the Street St. Anthoine and St. Pol, which before
was but the Suburbs. Stephen Marcel Prevost des Merchands, and Ronsac the
Sheriff had full power over the People, and governed them at their own
pleasure.

The unfortunate Gefroy de Harcourt had sold his Lands in Normandy to the
English, To the King of England.
to enjoy it after his decease, disinheriting Lewis his Nephew, because he
would not take up ARms against his own Country. He had some Forces at St.
Sauveur le Vicomte, from whence they made their incursions to the Suburbs of
Caen, and even to Evreux. The Estates assembled at Paris, had sent four
Captains thither to make head against him; he marching into the Fields to meet
them near the City of Coutances, was there defeated and slain; had he been
taken alive, they would have made him pay down his Head upon a Scaffold, he
chose rather to dye with his Sword in hand.

The Duke of Lancaster, and Philip of Navarre, who made War in Normandy with
Philip d'Evreux, not being able to pass over the Loire, to assist the Prince of
Wales, amidst the danger he was in before the Battle of Poitiers, were fallen
down into Bretagne. The Duke laid Siege to Rennes the Third of December, in
this year 1356. but

After the example of their Sovereign, who had studied more the enlarging of
his Languedoc, because they had been less oppressed by Taxes then the rest,
testified a public sorrow for the captivity of their Prince, and proffered to
maintain Five thousand Horse for his Service, the others refused every thing
but what should be ordained by the Estates.

Metz to confer with the Emperor Charles IV. his Cousin, who stood up mightily
for the interests of the House of France, the Duke of Anjou whom he had left at
Paris, was compelled by Stephen Marcel to forbid the carrying it on.

February to meet at Paris, at the Cordeliers; but could obtain no more from
them then he had done the former time. They forced the Chancellor la Forest to
lay down the Seals, turned out all the principal Officers of the Treasury,
caused all their Goods to be seized and inventoried, and upon the warm
Remonstrances of Robert le Coq Bishop of Laon, removed all the Great Officers
of the Kingdom; even those of the Parliament, excepting Sixteen, The Dauphin
not finding what he reckoned on, Adjourned the Assembly till Fifteen days after
Easter.

Whether it were the inconveniency of that time of the year, or the greediness
and covetous humor of the Gascons, each one of them demanding as much reward,
as if he alone had gained the Battle, and taken the King, which hindered the
English from removing him out of Bourdeaux; he passed all the Winter there, but
Served and Treated as if he had been in his own Courr.

April they transferred him into England, where he was entertained with as much
Honor and Respect, as if he had gone over only to pay a kind visit to King
Edward. They made him a public entrance at London, he was mounted upon a
White Horse, a mark of Sovereignty, and the Prince of Wales on his left hand
upon a little Hackney, They lodged him in the Savoy palace; the King, the
Queen, and the Grandees visited him, and gave him all sort of liberty. In the
mean time the Popes instant mediation obtained a Truce for two years between
both Crowns, in which John de Montfort and Philip d'Evreux were not
comprehended.

The Duke of Lancaster had sworn not to rise from before Rennes, till he had
gotten in, and planted his Banners upon their Ramparts; whist his Army was in
apprehension Betrand de Guesclin found an expedient to save the Dukes Oath,
which was, That he should enter the Town with nine more, and his Colors should
be set up on the Gate for some hours. To conclude this Treaty, they made a
Truce between the two parties, which was to last till the year 1360.

Arnold de Ceruoles, who called himself the Archpriest; he entered into the
County of Avignon, forced the Pope to redeem the plunder of his Lands at the
price of Forty thousand Crowns, and afterward to give him Absolution, and
Treat him at his own Table with as much Honor as if he had been a Sovereign
Prince.



The Dauphin being therefore better fortified by the arrival of the Earls of
Foix Armagnac, and a great number of the Nobility, did at length shake off
their Tutelage, and making le Coq return to his own Bishopric, his party
became the strongest in Paris.

But immediately afterward, the Navarrois was set free from his imprisonment
by the intrigues of his people, who escalado'd the Castle wherein he was
detained: which was not done without connivance of the Lord de Pequigny, to
whom King John had committed the keeping of this Prince. Then le Coq returns,
and the Council resumed greater power then formerly.

The Dauphin apprehended nothing so much as the malignity of that Prince,
exasperated by a long imprisonment: nevertheless, the importunities of the
Council established by the Estates, and the intercession of the two Queens
Dowagers, Jean and Blanch, obliged him to give him a safe Conduct, with which
he came and lodged in the Abbey of St. Germain des Prez, accompanied with a
huge number of his friends.

Some while after having caused it to be proclaimed about the City, That he
would entertain Make a Speech or Harangue to them.
the People upon St. Andrews day; there came above Ten thousand Men to the
Tilting-place, which was between the Abbey of St. Germains and the Pre aux
Clercs. He mounted the Scaffold, from whence the King was wont to behold
Combats or Duels; and there with a most pathetical Eloquence, declared the
injustice of nis tedious Confinement; the tyrannical execution of his friends,
the zeal he had for the good of the Nation; and above all, expressed his mighty
affection for the defense of Paris, which was the capital City.

His flattering harangue tickled the People the more* by reason, that for some
time they had met with nothing but severities. The next day he was received
into the City: the Dauphin and he had an enterview in an indifferent place. Le
Coq Head of the Council, the Prevost des Merchands, nay, even the University,
pressed the Dauphin so home to give him satisfaction, that he was sain to agree
to all he pleased. However, when he would have gone into his Towns thinking to
take possession, those that commanded there for the King, refused to deliver
them up to him or his Commissaries.

English assisted him considerably, he would have over-turned the whole
Kingdom; but having dropped an expression in his speech to the People, That he
had more right to the Crown of France, then those that disputed for it, they
lent him no more assistance then to enable him to draw the War to a great
length, that so each party weakening and tiring the other, might both of them be
forced to submit to that yoke the English designed to lay upon them.

des Marchands had for the public liberty, meeting with too great
oppositions, degenerated (perhaps in despite of him) into a manifest and most
pernicious faction. The mark or distinction was a kind of a Hood
party-colored, Red and Blue, which he bestowed for New-years-Gifts upon the
People of Paris. Who being divided and wavering in their Affections, applauded
sometimes the Dauphin, who made Speeches in public to them A thing much used
in this age.
then straightway wheeled about to their Magistrate, whom they judged to be
honest in his designs, and anon they became indifferent to either.

Paris, the Dauphin designing to make himself Master of them, drew some Forces
about the Town; the Navarrois had some likewise who kept the Field. This
troublesome neighborhood did greatly incommode the City of Paris and all that
lay near it; Marcel cast the fault upon the Dauphin, and he discharged himself
and laid it on the Navarrois.

Upon this brangle a Partisan of Marcels, named Perrin Mace, a Changer
belonging to the Treasury, Massacred John Baillet Treasurer of France, and the
Deed being done, retired into the Church St. James de la Boucherie. The Dauphin
commanded the Marshall de Clermont, John de Chaalons, Seneschal of Champagne,
and the Prevost of Paris, to drag him thence by force and put him into the
hands of Justice. They haled him out, and the Prevost of Paris caused his Hand
to be cut off, and sent him to the Gibbet.

The Churches were then inviolable Sanctuaries, the Clergy and People grew into
heats, because they had plucked a Criminal from the feet of the Altar; and the
Bishop of Paris Excommunicated those that had committed this attempt. After
this, Marcel having armed Three thousand Tradesmen, who all wore those
party-colored Hoods, entered into the Palace where the Dauphin Lodged, and
caused those three Lords to be murdered in his presence. This was not all, he
compelled him to own the Fact in an Assembly of the Estates, which was held at
the Augustins, and in Parliament; to suffer the Navarrois to return to the
City; and to give him Lands and great satisfaction for damages; notwithstanding
the other Cities refused to join with Paris in any thing, otherwise then for
the Kings service.

Navarrois had remained for some time in Paris, and thought he had well secured
himself of them; going forth again to give some Order, touching his Affairs; he
was no sooner out of Town, when the Dauphin, to lose no time, caused himself to
be declared Regent by the Parliament. After that, all Acts were passed in his
name, without any mention of the Kings; the little Seal du Chastelet which they
used in his absence was laid aside, and they had a great Seal made purposely
for the Regency.

He would be no longer at the mercy of the Parisians nor the general Estates,
he found it better to hold with particular ones; those of Champagne at Vertus,
and those of Picardy at Compiegne, consented to some Contributions. The
Parisians offended that they were despised, endeavored to seize upon the Posts
about their City; not being able to effect it, they proceeded to enclose it
with Walls from that part where the Bastille is, even to the Wooden Tower near
the Louvre, filled up all their Gates toward the University, excepting that
called St. James's, and from that Gate to that de Nesle, caused Ditches to be
made before the Walls; for till this time they had not any.



This fury was begun in Beauvoisis, and for their chief Leader they took one
named Caillet a Peasant. They called it La Jacquerie, because the Gentlemen
when they pillaged the Peasant, called him in raillery Or James the Good man.
Jacques bon homme. Had the Citis joined with these Rustiques, there had been
an end of the Nobility and Monarchique Government, as well as in Swisserland;
but not one of them opened their Gates for fear of being ransacked; they
attempted diverse to no purpose, destroyed all the little Castles in the
Country, amongst the rest that of Beaumont upon Oyse, and made themselves
masters of Senlis: but besides all this, they committed so many more then
brutish cruelties, that the Nobility of all parties, French, English, and
Navarrois, rallied themselves unanimously against them. The King of Navarre
defeated Caillets crew, who being taken was beheaded. The Dauphin cut off more
then Twenty thousand, and so this insurrection was quashed on a sudden.

In the time the Dauphin was gone toward Senlis, having left the Earl of Foix
in that part of the City of Meaux, named le March The Market.
; the Parisians who were much concerned to secure that Key of the Marne, sent
out some Forces under the command of a Grocer to seize upon it. The Mayor of
Meaux opened the Gates to them; but as they were attacquing the March.
Market, the Earl sallied out with Horse and Foot, and cut them all off. The
Grocer was slain, the City sacaged and burnt, the Mayor and some of the
Citizens beheaded.

Navarrois drew near to Paris, and having conferred with Marcel at St. Ouin,
entered the City, and harangued the People, who declared him their General: but
the Nobility affronted to see him caresse them less then he did the Citizens,
forsook him, and in an Assembly which was held at Compiegne, promised the
Dauphin all their assistance for the besieging of Paris. The Factious party
having notice of it, engaged the University to go and beg their pardon of that
Prince, offering such satisfaction as he pleased, saving their Lives and
Honors; to which not condescending, unless they would deliver up to him Twelve
of the principal Mutineers: they united themselves together again, as firmly as
ever they possibly could, and stuck close to the King of Navarre.

Paris, insinuated a jealousy into their minds, for that the King of Navarre
had brought some English thither; they massacred a great many of those
strangers; Marcel to save the remainder, clapped them all in prison, then let
them make their escapes: they retired to St. Denis, from whence teey cruelly
revenged the deaths of their compagnons, upon all those of Paris that they
could light upon. The People whatever the Navarrois could urge in his florid
Speeches against it, forced both him and Marcel to lead them thither, that they
might make a final end of them; but whether by the treachery of those two
Commanders, or otherwise, the English drew them into an Ambuscade, and slew
above Six hundred of them in the night as they were returning home all in
disorder.

Marcel and his associates fearing to be at length delivered up to the Dauphin,
conspired to deliver up the City rather to the Navarrois, by letting him one
night into the Bastille. But as the Dauphins friends had their Eyes and Ears in
every corner, one John Maillard, and one Pepin des Essards who were the Chiefs,
contrived their business so well, that having got their friends together, just
at the nick of time as Marcel was to put his plot in execution, they killed
both him and all those that accompanied him before he could get the Gates open.

Ronsac the Sheriff, Josserand the King of Navarre's Treasurer, and Caillard
who had delived up the Castle of the Louvre, all which lost their Heads in the
place of Execution, called the Greeve. After this the face of Affairs was
wholly changed, the party-colored Hoods were thrown into the Fire, and the
Dauphin returned to Paris the Twenty fourth day of August.

Navarrois fretted beyond all patience for the death of his Friends and his
Officers, protested he would never have peace with the Princes of the House of
Valois, nor did he any longer own them for Sovereigns.

In this heat he got his Forces together from every quarter, sent to desie the
Dauphin, blocked up Paris both by Land and Water, and called to his assistance
the Captal de Buch, and Robert Knolles an English Captain.

This Man notwithstanding the Truce, made horrible depredations every where,
particularly in Auxerrois, and in Champagne. Now having been forced away from
before Troyes by the Count de Vaudemont, he came and joined with the Navarrois,
in hopes to plunder Paris. It was at this time they burnt the City of
Montmorency, which was none of the least, as may be guessed by its ruins;
while in the mean time, Philip de Navarre ran about Picardy, and made several
attempts upon many Cities, which all miscarried.

The Dauphin durst not stir out of Paris, for fear they should recall the
Navarrois, who had yet good store of friends remaining amongst them. In the
mean time, as he could settle nothing in order in no part, all France was left
exposed to the plundrings of the licentious Soldiers, as well French as
English. Now at the very hour that Paris was reduced to the extremest want,
and it was in the power of the Navarrois, and only depended upon him alone to
give the mortal blow to France, his heart was changed in a moment, without any
apparent cause, but an extraordinary favor of Heaven toward this Kingdom.
Insomuch as he made his agreement with the Dauphin, and referred almost all his
pretensions to his own free Will, in despite of all the arguments and
oppositions of his Brother, who quitted him and retired to the English at Saint
Sauveur le Vicomte.

Paris, but did not ease the neighboring Provinces; The Isle of France,
Beausse Normandy, Picardy, etc.
* for those Garrisonn'd places that had held for the King of Navarre, declared
for the English, that they might still have opportunities to plunder. The Lord
Auberticour a Hennuger, ravaged Champagne, by means of certain Castles he held
upon the Marne, and the Seine: Broquard de Fennestranges a Knight of Lorrain,
drawn into the Service of France, with Five hundred adventurers, whom he had
under his Pay, delivered the Country of him, having defeated and taken him
prisoner in a great Fight near Nogent, upon the River Seine: but himself became
a more severe scourge, burning and laying all waste, till the Dauphin could
give him the Arrears due to his Soldiers.

During all these Wars with the English, until Charles VIII. had driven them
out of France, there were many of these Captains, whereof some paid their Men
out of their own pockets, and then hired them out to those that would bid most;
and others maintained theirs with the plunder they took indifferently on either
side. These last were called Robbers; those that Commanded them were mere
Soldiers of Fortune; when they were snapt they found no quarter.

John, though he had all manner of liberty, even for Hunting, and all pastimes
and gallantries, was very weary of his imprisonment; nevertheless he referred
those conditions the English propounded for his Release, to the Estates of his
Kingdom. They being assembled at Paris for this purpose (it was in the Month of
May) found them so hard, that all with one voice chose rather to have War, and
offered very great sums to carry it on; but these could not be levied so soon.

The King of England netled with their Reply, raised a formidable Army, there
were Eleven hundred Vessels, and near an hundred thousand fighting Men, landed
at Calais with his four Sons, who began to march, although the Season was very
far spent. They let him keep the Field at his own pleasure; the Towns were so
well provided that he could not take one, neither St. Omers, nor Amiens, nor
Reims, where he thought to have been Crowned King of France, nor Chaalons.
Burgundy redeemed themselves from plundering for Two hundred thousand Florins,
and some Provisions for his Camp. Nivernois compounded likewise, Brie and
Gastinois were ransacked.

About the latter end of Lent he came and encamped within Seven Leagues of
Paris, between Chartres and Montlehery; and finding they made no one step
toward the satisfying his demands, he plants himself just before the City
Gates, with design to oblige the French to Speak or to Fight.

Beauss, resolved to refresh his Men along the River Loire, and in case of
misfortune, retreat into Bretagne.

Cardinal Simon de Langres the Popes Legate, and the Dauphins Deputies always
followed his Camp, and solicited him eternally for a Peace. One day he being
encamped in the Chartrain Country, there arose a dreadful Storm, with so much
Lightning and Thunder, and such a shower of great Hail, that it grievously
maimed a great many of his Men, and killed above a thousand of his Horses. He
took this prodigy as a warning and command from Heaven; and turning himself
toward our Lady's Church of Chartres, which was to be seen about five or six
Leagues off, made a promise before the Almighty of concluding the Peace;
besides, the Duke of Lancaster, with other English Lords, pressed him
earnestly, because his Army was much shattered, and he had brought over almost
all the force of England.

May, at the village called Brotigny, within a mile of Chartres. In this place,
Treating in the name of the two Kings eldest Sons; they concluded upon all the
Articles in eight days time. On the one side they gave the English King,
besides what he had already, all Poitou, Saintongne, Rochel, and the Country
of Aulnis, Angoumois, Perigord, Limosin, Quercy, Agenois, and la Bigorre in
full Sovereigaty, besides Calais, the Counties of Oye, Guisnes, and Pontieu;
and three Millions in Gold for the Ransom, payable at three several Terms, of
King John; who should be brought to Calais, and set at liberty after the
restitution of those places force-mentioned, and upon giving up as Hostages his
Three youngest Sons, his Brother Philip, and other Princes of the Blood; and
besides all these, Thirty more, as well Earls as Illustrious Knights, and two
Deputies of each of the Nineteen Cities, whose Names were expressly mentioned.
On the other hand the King of England renounced the Title of King of France,
and generally all his other pretensions.

July King John was brought over to Calais, where he was immediately visited by
his Children, and staid there till the Five and Twentieth of October, when King
Edward coming thither, both of them swore to the agreement of Peace very
solemnly.

That between the King of England and the Earl of Flanders, and another between
the King of Navarre and King John, were made up in the same place, and Philips,
Brothers of those two Kings; the Treaties were confirmed by the Holy Father,
under the penalty of Ecclesiastical censures, against those as should first
contravene.

King John being freed from Captivity the Four and twentieth of October, which
he had now undergone four years and one Month, went to give Thanks to God at
the Church of St. Denis in France. There he received the King of Navarre into
Favor, who came and Saluted him. The Thirteenth of December he made his
entrance into Paris, and the City testified their joy by a Present of Plate of
a Thousand Marks.

France, then even the Treaty of Britigny it self; which was the selling his
Daughter to John Viscount of Milan, for Six hundred thousand Gold Crowns in
Marriage with his Son Galeas.

Although the Crown of France and its Sovereignty came to the Eldest wholly,
and was not to be divided amongst the younger Brothers; yet they assigned a
share of Lands to them, which was entirely theirs, which descended to the
Daughters as well as to the Sons, and which they might dispose of as properly
their own. Now the King to keep the Body of his Kingdom in more strength, and
not suffer his great Provinces hereafter to be as it were dismembered by such
partage, or by any Treaty, united inseparably to the Crown, the Dutchy's of
Normandy and Burgundy, Toulouze and Champagne, by Writings made at the Castle
of the Louvre in the Month of November, in the year 1361.

Easter Holy Days, Death had snatched away the young Philip Duke of Burgundy,
and in him extinguished the first Branch of those Dukes, which had produced
Twelve, and lasted 330 years. He left no Children, Margaret of Flanders his
Wife, being as yet but Eleven years of age, and he but Fifteen. He was Grandson
of Duke Eudes IV. and Son of that Philip who was slain at the Siege of
Aiguillon; and of Jane of Boulogne, who for Second Husband married King John,
and died the last year.

Artois and the Franche Comte, to Margaret, Daughter of Philip the Long, and
the Countess Mahaut, and Wife of Robert Earl of Flanders, by consequence,
Grandfather of the Wife this young Duke Poilip had Married. Boulongne and
Auvergne went to the House of Boulongne: as for the Duthcy of Burgundy, the
Navarrois challenged it, as being the Son of Jane, Daughter of Queen Margaret,
who was the Wife of King Lewis Hutin, and eldest Daughter of Duke Robert,
Father of Eudes IV. Duke of Burgundy: but the King laid his hand upon it, as
being, said he, nearer of kindred by one degree, being Son of the Second
Daughter of Duke Robert, whereas the King of Navarre was but Grandson of the
eldest.

Some will say that he did not understand his Rights well, and that he should
have reaped this Duchy as he was Sovereign, and have maintained that Burgundy
was a Masculine Fief, which reverted to him for want of Heirs-Males.

Gascons and the Bretons rambled all over Anjou, Poitou, and Tourain for
pillage and plunder, and those Bands that were named the Tard-Venus, or
Late-Comers, led by some Gascons; having in the same manner treated Champagne,
Burgundy, Masconnis and Lyonnois, in a Battle at Brignais near Lions, defeated
James de Bourbon Count de la March, whom the King had given Orders to chastise
them for their Thefts: after that they divided themselves into two parties,
whereof one was hired for Money to go into Italy by the Marquis de Montferrat,
who was in War with the Viscounts of Milan; the others fastened on Masconnois,
and never let go their hold till they were fully gorged like blood-sucking
Leeches.

France, and sought elsewhere for a more easy livelihood and subjection.

Such as did know how to secure themselves from all these miseries, did not
know where to find an Asylum against the Pestilence, which for seven or eight
years growing worse and worse upon diverse returns, seized indifferently upon
all sorts of People, both in City and Countries. There fell by it this year
nine Cardinals, and Seventy Prelates in the Popes Court, and above Thirty
thousand People in Paris.

The Jews were recalled into France for the fifth time; another plague added to
the Imposts, the Pestilence and Famine.

French, that they might make War one upon another for their particular
quarrels: the King forbid it among all his Subjects, till all the enemies were
quite out of the Kingdom. He afterward added to this Order, a prohibition of
all Duels, Challenges, etc. as well during the Peace as in time of War,

Notwithstanding his defense, he durst not take notice of the cruel War that
was renewed between the Earls de Foix and d'Armagnac, because he feared it
might offend the King of England, to whom they were Vassals for those Lands in
contest between them.

We had omitted to take notice before, how the difference for the Succession of
Gaston de Bearn, had given birth to this bloody War between these two Houses.
That Gaston who died Anno 1289. had by Mate It Is Armate.
Countess of Bigorre four Daughters, Constance, who married William the Son of
Richard of England, King of Germany, from whom there came no Children; Margaret
who was the Wife of Roger Bernard Earl of Foix, Mate of Gerauld Count
d'Armagnac, and of Fezenzac, and Guillemette of Don Pedro, Son of Don Pedro
King of Arragon, and Brother to James II. That the first and the last left no
Children behind them; that Gaston their Father, by his Testament made them all
sharers of the Lands he had in France, as well as those in Catalonia; and that
in case the first dyed without Children, he then gave Bearn to the Second, who
was Countess of Foix.

Neither had we observed how Mate, Countess of Armagnac, finding her self
wronged by this Testament, had refused to approve thereof. That in Anno 1294.
Bernard her Son (for her Husband Geraud was dead) accused the Count de Foix of
having falsified it, and called him to try it in Combat or Duel in the Court of
King Philip the Fair. That by Decree of Parliament, in the year 1295. the two
parties were admitted to Combat in the City of Gisors: but when they were come
into the Field, the King caused them to be put out again, and annulled the
Duel, by taking upon him to let them know, That this private feud should
surcease according to the Law, or Rights of the Kingdom, during the public
War between the French and the English; That the same King in the journey he
made to Languedoc, Anno 1303. finding he could not bring the parties to an
amicable composition, made a Decree to settle and regulate their pretensions;
to which Margaret Countess de Foix (her Husband being deceased) would not obey.
That the death of Guillemete, the youngest of the four Sisters, occasioned new
debates; and that Philip King of Navarre endeavored to determine them, Anno
12^9. by a Sentence of Arbitration. But nothing could quench the
irreconcilable animosities of these two Houses; nor prevent their seeking all
opportunities to destroy each other, as they did this year 1362. and the
following.

John took a fancy to go to Avignon and visit Pope Innocent, with design, as
was believed, to endeavor a Marriage with Jane Or Joane, the same Name in
effect.
Queen of Naples, the second time a Widow, defamed indeed for her ill life;
but who would have brought him in Dower the Counties of Provence and Piedmont:
being on his way, he heard of the death of Innocent, but he went forwards, and
on the eighth day of October, assisted at the Coronation of William Grimouard,
a Native of Montferrat, who was chosen out of the Sacred College, being but a
simple Abbot. They named him Urban V.

Whilst he staid at Avignon, the Holy Father Preaching for a new adventure to
the Holy Land, he accepted of the Command of Generalissimo in the Expedition.
The two Kings Peter of Cyprus, and Woldemar III. of Denmark, took the badge of
the Cross for the same purpose in the same place. But the affairs of France not
suting very well with this Enterprise, was so far from being put in execution,
that it was not so much as approved of, or countenanced.

Burgundy; but whilst he was yet in that Country, the Burgundians did so
positively make him understand that they could not live without a Prince that
was Resident amongst them, that he revoked and nulled the reunion he had made
of this Duchy to the Crown, and yielded and bestowed it upon Philip his
youngest Son, who had deserved the Name of Hardy at the Battle of Poitiers, To
hold it for him and his Heirs begotten in lawful Marriage.

About the end of this year 1363. King John Embarked at Boulogne, and went
again into England: the occasion of his voyage, was not his love toward a
Lady, with whom he had familiarity when he was formerly there: but upon notice
that the Duke of Anjou his second Son, and one of his Hostages had escaped out
of England, this generous King would repair the Honor of that young Prince,
and demonstrate, Edward to the expedition of the Holy War.

Charles the Dauphin, Regent for the Second time.
Navarre, upon the pretensions he had to the Duchy of Burgundy. This Prince
having rashly sent him defiance before he had any Army ready to justify it,
lost the Cities of Mantes and Meulan, which were taken by Bertrand du Gueselin,
whose valor was already raised much above the common standard.

England King John having had many Conferences with King Edward, when he hoped
to have dispatched all his Affairs: was surprised about mid- March, with a
distemper which ended his days the eighth of April. He died in the Savoy
without the Walls of London, after he had lived Two and fifty years, and held
the Scepter Thirteen years and eight Months, His Son the Duke of Berry, the
Dukes Philip of Orleance, and Lewis II. of Bourbon, and John of Artois Earl of
Eu, all Princes of the Blood heard his last Sighs, and closed his Eyes. The
King of England made him a magnificent Funeral, worthy the grandeur of that
King, and becoming his own generosity. His Corpse was brought back into France,
and interred at St. Denis upon the seventh day of May.

He was esteemed to be the bravest, and the most liberal Prince of his time;
but the same root which produced these virtues, did likewise bring forth Pride,
and the scorn to follow any other Counsel but that of his own Brain, attended
with prodigality, precipitation, and that violence which exposed his own
Kingdom to pillage and plunder, and his own Person to the mercy of his enemies.

But we must not deny him two great advantages or perfections he had above
other Princes, that he was frank and sincere, and did most inviolably keep his
word: nor forget that heroic saying, attributed to him; That if Faith and
Truth should be banished from all the rest of the world, yet they onght to be
found in the mouths of Kings.

He married two Wives who were named Jane, the First, Daughter of John King of
Bohemia, in Anno 1332. and the Second of William Earl of Boulongne, and Widow
of Philip of Burgundy Earl of Artois, in Anno 1349. By the First he had four
Sons and four Daughters; the four Sons were Charles, who succeeded to the
Crown; Lewis Duke of Anjou, and Earl of Main; John Duke of Berry and Auvergne,
and Earl of Poitou; Philip first Duke of Touraine, then of Burgundy. The
Daughters were named Mary, Jane, Isabel, Margaret: the first married Robert,
eldest Son of Henry Duke of Bar, the second Charles the Bad, King of Navarre;
the third John Galeaz Viscount, First Duke of Milan; the fourth devoted her
self to JESUS CHRIST in the Monastery of Poissy. By his Second Wife he had two
Daughters that attained not to the ripeness of Marriage.

Charles V. called the Wise, and the Eloquent, King of France, LI.
Aged about XXVI years.
POPES,
URBAN V. Seven years Four Months under this Reign. GREGORY XI. Elected the
Thirtieth of December 1370. S. Seven years three Months. Schism. URBAN VI.
Elected the Eighth of April, in the year 1378. S. at Rome II. years, six
Months, six Days, whereof two years and above five Months under this Reign. And
CLEMENT VII. Elected the Twenty first of September, S. in Avignon, Twenty six
years, whereof Two years under this Reign.
Emp. John Paleologus, and Charles IV.
THe prosperous Conduct of this King is the noblest proof we meet with
thoroughout all the History of France; that the weightiest Affairs are managed
better by skill and judgment then by sorce, and that success in

Reims the Nineteenth of May. It is to be observed that Wenceslaus of
Luxemburgh Duke of Brabant his maternal Uncle, John Duke of Lorrain, and Robert
Duke of Bar, though Strangers and Vassals of the Empire, did the Office of
Pairs there, the First representing the Duke of Normandy, the Second the Earl
of Champagne, the Third the Earl of Toulouze. The Duke of Burgundy and the Earl
of Flanders held their natural places, and Lewis Duke of Anjou, that of the
Duke of Guyenne.

They had just reason to say, that never King armed himself so little, and yet
did so many brave exploits in War as this same; It seemed as is Wisdom had tied
Fortune to his Service. From the beginning he made it appear that the French
could beat the English, who had always beaten them in the preceding Reigns. The
Navarrois and Montfort not having been comprehended in the Treaty of Bretigny,
their people continued the War, and the English Forces and the French took part
with them. John de Grailly Captal de Buchs, who was come to the aid of the
Navarrois, took the Command of all their Forces. The French Officers being met
to Fight him, found him near the place called Cocherel, and de la Croix St.
Leufroy, between Evreux and Vernon. Bertrand de Gueselin, on whom he had
conferred the Command, upon refusal of the young Count d'Auxerre, behaved
himself so well with his companions, that Captals Men were beaten out of their
advantageous Post, and he taken prisoner. The King thinking to get him on his
side, released him a while after: but he was rather desirous to retaliate his
defeat then that obligation.

Philip of Navarre happening to dye, Lewis his young Brother got the Forces of
that Party together, and fell upon Bourbonnois, and the lower Auvergne, where
he rifled several Castles. Nay, some of his Men surprised la Charity upon the
Loire, a place very important for the passage it gave; from thence he made a
cruel War upon the Countries on this side, whilst on the other hand the Count
Montbeliard was fallen upon Burgundy, to serve the House of Navarre, who
pretended that Duchy appertained to them. But Philip of France, to whom King
Charles had confirmed the Grant, was ordered to go and defend his Country, and
to quit la Beausse, from whence he had resolved to expel the Robbers, and had
already cleared four or five small Castles by turning them out of their Kennels.

He carried the War therefore into Montbeliard, and compelled the Earl to go
out of Burgundy. Then laid his Siege before la Charity. Lewis d'Evreux not
finding himself strong enough to make him raise it, retreated with his Forces
to Cherbourgh in Normandy. The Besieged surrendered upon Composition; which the
Duke agreed to by the Kings order, that he might be able to send help to
Charles de Blois his Cousin, who was engaged with John de Montfort for the
Duchy of Bretagne.

d'Auvray decided the Controversy between these Contenders. John de Montfort
had besieged that place with the assistance of the English led by John
Chandois, that Kings Lieutenant in Guyenne; Charles de Blois undertakes to
relieve it, backed by the French Forces commanded by the Count d'Auxerre, and
Bertrand du Gueselin. The Armies came to an engagement the Nine and twentieth
of September, the Feast Day of St. Michael. The Fight was obstinate and bloody
to extremity, in the conclusion Charles lost the day, the Duchy and his Life.
For the Lords of Bretagne had agreed amongst themselves, that to put a period
to that tedious Quarrel, they would certainly kill that Chief of the two that
was vanquished.

Charles de Blois were still Prisonners in England, and his Widow had more of
Pride then Wisdom and good Conduct. The Duke of Anjou her Son-in-Law would
willingly have assisted her with all his power: but the Council of France did
not think it fit to drive that business too far, least Montfort should turn
Homager to the English. They therefore made a Peace with him by the Treaty at
Guerrande. The Duchy was left to him, upon condition of paying his Devoirs to
the King of France. The Title of Duchess to the Widow of Charles during her
life; and for all her Posterity, the right of being restored upon want of Heirs
descended from Montfort. Moreover she had the County of Pontieure and diverse
other Lands, with Forty thousand Livers of Rent, for her self alone, to be
raised upon the whole Duchy.

Although the Holy War had been interrupted by the death of King John,
nevertheless Peter King of Cyprus, having collected some assistance of Moneys
from the Christian Princes, and gathered up here and there some numbers of
Adventurers, together with the Knights of St. John; went and landed in Egypt,
where he valiantly forced a part of the great City of Alexandria, and might
have brought it all under his power, if those that went with him, having more
regard to their Plunder then their Honor, had not returned on board their
Vessels with the Spoil.

With the like Valor and more Perseverance, Ame VI. Earl of Savoy carried his
Forces against Amurat Sultan of the Turks and the King of Bulgaria, who would
needs dispossess John Paleologus, his near Kinsman, of the Grecian Empire, the
Bulgarian holding him already a Prisoner. Ame having taken the City of
Calipolis in the Thracian Chersonese by Storm from the Turks, entered Bulgaria,
and upon the taking of diverse places, forced that King to release the Emperor;
into whose hands he also put the City of Calipolis: but the Greeks lost it
again immediately afterward, so much was their Valor declined as well as
their Empire.

The Emperor Charles IV. had much more fancy to design vast Undertakings, then
Understanding or Means to put them in execution. He pleased himself with the
empty pride and vainglory of pompous Ceremonies, because he could not attain
to those things that were truly real and solid; And as his small Revenues and
his great Expenses still kept him in a necessitous Condition, when he began any
Avignon to make a League with the Holy Father and the other Princes of Italy,
against Barnaby Viscount of Milan. He was at Mass Celebrated by the Pope
himself on the day of Pentecost in his Imperial Habit, and then went and was
Crowned King of Arles in the City of the same name. Then returned again to
Avignon, where he obtained permission of the Pope to levy the Tenths upon all
the Clergy of Germany and Bohemia for the Expenses of that War, which he never
made.

Gueselin, who had been taken at the Battle of Auvray, was set free upon
Ransom, and Oliver de Clisson, who was of Montforts Party, allured to the Kings
service. In the Month of December Montfort came to Paris and did Homage, first
for his Duchy, but only by word of Mouth and without any Oath, then for the
County of Montfort, ungirt, and on his Knees, and both his hands joined
together between the hands of the King his Sovereign Lord.

This year we met again with some Troops of those revolted Peasants of the
Jaquerie, Alsatia, from whence they were hunted out, and most of them destroyed
by the Emperor Charles IV. and the other Princes of Germany.

The Forces belonging to the Navarrois continued their Incursions in Normandy,
Navarre; A League was therefore made with the King of Arragon his Capital
Enemy, who immediately fell with an Army into that Kingdom. The Navarrois had
the more apprehension, because he knew that France was necessarily obliged to
join with that Prince, the King of England having made a League with Peter King
of Castille, an Eternal Enemy to the Arragonians. Wherefore Captal de Buch and
the rest of his Friends applied themselves with so much zeal, that they made
his peace with the King. By this Treaty he renounced all his rights to
Champagne and to Burgundy, upon condition he should have the Lordship of
Montpellier in Languedoc, which was given him.

The Habits of Men of Quality, and honest People dwelling in Cities, was a long
Gown, and a Hood almost of the same fashion as the Monks; sometimes they threw
these back upon their Shoulders, and made use of a Cap or Bonnet for their
Heads. Now luxury and folly had shortened their long Robe so much, that their
Thighs and the whole motions of their Bodies from their Reins, was plainly
Poulenes) and at their Heels a kind of Spurs. The King by his Edicts banished
these ridiculous Modes after the example of his Holiness, who but a while
before had by his Bulls condemned the dissoluteness of Apparel both in the one
and the other Sex.

France could not rid her self of those droves of Robbers that knawed her to
the English tolerated them that they might have their help upon occasion, and
there were not Forces enough besides to suppress them; Gueselin found out a way
to carry them all off into Spain upon this occasion.

Alphonso XI. King of Castille had had by his lawful Wife a Son named Peter,
who succeeded him, and by a Mistress five Natural Sons, the eldest of whom was
called Henry, and was Earl of Tristemare. This Peter was rightly surnamed the
Cruel, and the Wicked, for he showed himself more a friend to the Alcoran then
to the Gospel, having alliance and amity with the Moorish Kings. He overturned
all the Laws, and committed all the Injustice and Cruelties that Tyrants can
commit: He lived in public Adultery with Mary de Padilla, and had in Anno
1361. caused his Wife Blanch to be poisoned, who was Daughter to Peter Duke of
Bourbon, and Sister to the Queen of France, a Princess as virtuous as fair,
after she had endured all the outrages imaginable for ten years together. He
put the Lady to death that had been his Fathers Mistress, and shed the blood of
the greatest in his Kingdom almost every day, nor did he spare his own
Brothers, having Murdered Frederic one of the five, who was Grand Master of
St. James, and often attempted against the lives of the other four. Henry being
therefor prompted by a just Resentment for the death of his Brother and his
Mother, and besides authorized by the Law of Nature, which allowed him to
defend his life, rose up against him with the greatest part of the Nation,
Leagued himself with the Arragonian, and made War upon him for some time.

France. The King gave him protection the more willingly, because it offered a
fair occasion to employ his Soldiery. It was thought fit for the better
countenance of it, to let John de Bourbon Count de la March Cousin German to
the late Queen Blanch, have the chief Command in appearance: but for their true
Conductor Bertrand du Gueselin who was delivered out of the hands of Chandois,
the Pope, the King, and Don Henry having paid down his Ransom.

English, the Count de la March and Gueselin carried Henry back into Spain.
The Pope, fearing this Army might approach near Avignon, sent them Two hundred
thousand Livers with Indulgences. The King of Arragon gave them passage, and
the Duchy of Borgiae to Gueselin; and before they entered upon Castille, they
regained all those places Peter had taken from him, and put them honestly again
into his hands.

Upon the arrival and sight of Henry, all the Nobles of Castille, excepting one
single Knight, abandoned the Tyrant; They all cried out, Long live King Henry,
and opened their Gates to him; in a word, he was Crowned at Burgos about the
end of March. That done, he liberally rewarded with Estates in Lands all such
as had followed him, and thinking himself secure upon the Tyrants flight, he
discharged the most part of his Forces, who would have lain too heavy on his
new Subjects, reserving only Fifteen hundred Lances with Gueselin and Bernard
Bastard of the Count de Foix.

Portugal: but the King of that Country having refused to allow him any retreat
there, he got into Galicia, and from thence by Sea to Bayonne to implore the
assistance of the Prince of Wales. The jealousy that Prince had for the fame
of du Gueselin, made him give an ear to his supplications, he promised to
restore him, and to act Personnally in the Employment. To this end he retains
the Gascon Lords, and the same Companies that had served du Gueselin, who were
disbanded by Henry: but the Arragonian keeping the passages shut and well
guarded, they could not get to him but with a great deal of difficulty.

Navarre; King Charles the Bad having made a League with either Party, found
himself perplexed; In the end he leans toward the Tyrant, and gives him
passage, and three hundred Lances. Whilst he was wavering betwixt both Parties,
and endeavored to delude them both, he was made Prisoner by Oliver de Mauny
who held the Castle of Borgia upon that Frontier. It was imagined he had
contrived it so himself, to keep his Faith with Henry: but Oliver treated him
as a real Prisoner, and got a good Ransom from him.

When Henry knew that his Enemies had taken the City of Navarrette, he came to
meet them, and instead of stopping their passage and hindering their having
Provisions brought to them, which he might easily have done, being above three
times more numerous then they: he gave them Battle. This was the Fourth of
April between Nagera and Navarrette: but he lost it through the Cowardice of
his Brother Teilo, who betook himself to flight upon the first Charge. Gueselin
was made Prisoner with the Marshall d'Endreghen and some other Captains. As
for him, having fought very valiantly, and not giving over till the very last
extremity, he then escaped into Arragon, then came to France, where he was
received by Lewis Duke of Anjou Governor for the King in Languedoc.

Wales gained mighty reputation amongst the Sons of Mars, for having
Re-conquer'd Spain in one single Battle: but little Honor amongst the better
sort, for having restored a Tyrant, and yet much less satisfaction or profit;
For after the Tyrant had held him some Months in Castille, upon the promise of
quickly sending him wherewith to pay his Men, a Sickness got into his Army; and
he was forced to return again very ill satissied, and withal very much
indisposed in his Body.

Castillians finding they were treated more inhumanely then ever, recalled
Henry: The Duke of Anjou and the Earl of Foix did frankly give him all the
assistance they could; and du Gueselin and Bernard de Bearn newly set free upon
Ransom raised Men for him.

In few words Henry besieged Toledo, the Tyrant attended with Three thousand
Horse came to relieve it. When he was gotten near Montiel, a Village situate
upon the Hills, which parts the Kingdom of Valentia from New Castille, Henry
meets him, the Battle was fought the Fourteenth of March 1369. the Tyrants
Forces ran away, Montiel.

There finding himself cooped up without any hopes of escaping, he adventures
to come to Guesclin in his Tent, imagining by force of Presents to persuade him
to let him slip away. Henry comes just at the same time thither, either by
chance or otherwise, they fell to words, then laid hold upon each other, and
tumbled on the ground. The Tyrant in the end was brought undermost and killed.
The manner is not well agreed upon, nor whether it were done fairly: this
happened the Three and twentieth of March 1369. Thus the Kingdom of Castille
remained to Henry and those descended from him, who hold it to this day.

The Widow of the Duke of Burgundy, Daughter of the Earl of Flanders, and the
richest Heiress in Christendom, was earnestly Courted both by France and
England. The Father designed her ^or Edmond one of the King of Englands Sons:
but the Grandmother Margaret, French both by Birth and Inclination, opposed
that Match with all her power, and had a design to fortify the House of
France. She therefore pressed her Son with exceeding heat, even to the
threatening to cut off her In those days Princesses Suckled their own Children.
Breasts which had given him suck. This touched him to the heart, he bestowed
his Daughter upon Philip the Hardy Duke of Burgundy: but the Nuptials were not
completed till a year afterward.

The Prince of Wales had brought nothing out of Spain but great Melancholy, a
Mortal Indisposition, and no Money to pay off his Army. He therefore lays an
unusual, but very small Impost upon Guyenne; The Lords his Vassals discontented
with him, particularly the Lord d'Albret, advises the Tenants to make Complaint
to them; Having received their Complaint, they carry it to the Prince, and made
him some Remonstrances thereon. He rejects them in a very offensive manner.
Whereupon they had recourse to the King of France, lately their lawful
Sovereign: The King entertains them five or six Months in the same disposition
and humor, waiting a proper juncture to declare his mind.

He was in the mean time putting every thing in order to that purpose, making
sure of the Gascon Lords and German Princes with his Money, whereof either of
them were very greedy, drew the Soldiery to his service with the same Bait, by
the help of Guesclin, in whom they reposed great Confidence, and made up a
Stock of Money by the imposition of Subsidies, which the Estates assembled at
Paris did freely grant him, and which they raised with so much order and
evenness, that the People were not at all oppressed.

Wales grew daily more Hydropick, he granted his Letters of Appeal to the
Gascons, the five principal of them being the Sire d'Albert, and the Earls of
Armagnac, Perigard, Cominges, and Carmaing. This was signified to the Prince
personally by a Knight and a Clerk: but far from consenting to this Appeal, he
haughtily replied, That he would make his appearance in the same manner as he
had done at the Battle of Poitiers, and caused them to be taken upon their way
back and kept Prisoners, charging them with the having robbed their Host.

Charles amused King Edward with some Complaints which he sent to him, as if he
would have brought things to a Negotiation. The King of England returned words
for words, not thinking the effects were so near, or that the French durst
undertake any thing whilst the Duke of Berry and the other Hostages were in
England.

He thought himself absolute Sovereign in Guyenne by the Treaty of Bretigny:
but as on his side he had not disbanded the Soldiers, and moreover had
committed diverse Hostilities, the King pretended that Treaty was null and
dissolved, and that therefore that Prince remained still a Vassal to the Crown.
Upon this foot it was that he sent to declare a War against him; and afterward
his Parliament being assembled upon the Ascension-Eve, he sitting in his Seat
of Justice, made a Decree, by which for Rebellion, Contempt and Disobedience
they declared forfeit and confiscated all those Lands the King of England held
in France.

If Edwards astonishment were great to sind a Prince who was not a Man of his
hands, thus dare denounce War against him who had won so many Battles: his
displeasure was no less when he saw this Defiance brought him not by a Person
of Quality, as the custom was, but by a simple Valet or Servant; When he
understood that the Lord de Chastillon, and the Count de Saint Pol had seized
upon Abbeville and the rest of the places in the County of Pontieu, which were
unprovided; That the Barons of Gascongue, even before the declaration of War,
had defeated his Seneschal of Rovergne; That the Dukes of Berry and Anjou had
attaqued Guyenne, one toward Auvergne, the other toward Toulouze; That his
Son the Prince of Wales being swollen every day more and more, could not act but
by his Council; and that several Captains and Companies took Service under the
French.

In the interim, till he could raise greater Forces, he sent him Five hundred
Lances, and One thousand Cross-bow-men under the Command of Edmond Earl of
Cambridge, afterward Duke of York, his fourth Son, and the Earl of Pembrook
his Son-in-Law, who went on shore at St. Malo's, and crossed over Bretagne; on
the other hand Hue de Caurelee brought him Two thousand Men of those he had in
Spain, and then came about twice as many from such as held places in Normandy
and Main, which they sold to go and join with him. The four bravest Captains
he had about him were the abovenamed Caurelee, Eustace d'Auberticour a
Hennuyer, John Chandois Seneschal Of Haynault.
of Poitou, Thomas Piercy Seneschal of Rochel, and Robert Knolles, all English.
To the last of these four he gave the Command of his Forces.

To the force of Arms the Wise King joined the power of Religion and Eloquence,
which can do all things on the hearts of the People. He ordered Fasts and
Processions to be made over all his Kingdom, and sometimes he went himself
barefooted with the rest; When at the same time the Preachers made out his
Right and Title, with the justice of his Cause, and the injustice of the
English. Which had two ends; the one to bring back again those French Provinces
which had been yielded by the Treaty of Bretigny; the other to make those that
were under him willing to suffer the Contributions and all other
inconveniences of War. The Archbishop of Toulouze alone, by his Persuasions
and Intrigues, regained above fifty Cities or Castles in Guyenne, amongst
others that of Cabors. The King of England would have practiced the same
methods on his part, and sent an Amnesty or general Pardon to the Gascons, with
an Oath upon the Sacred Body of Jesus Christ, to raise no more new Imposts; but
all this could not reclaim those minds that had bent themselves another way.

Diverse incursions were made by the French into Guyenne and Poitou, and by the
English into the Neighboring Countries, and in one of them these last took
Isabella de Valois the Widow Duchess of Bourbon, and Mother to the Queen of
France, at her Castle of Bellepeche in Bourbonnois. She was afterward
exchanged for the Prince of Wales his Knight.

The Earls of Cambridge and Pembrook marched even to Anjou, and there took the
strong Castle de la Roche-sur-Yon, from whence they scowred all the Country; as
they likewise did that of Berry, having gained the City of St. Severe, which is
situate in Limosin upon that Frontier. But on their side they suffered more
loss by far then all this came to, the most considerable being that of
Chandois, who was unfortunately slain in a Rencounter near the Bridge of Lensac
in Poitou.

Besides the ordinary Troops which they called Companies, the Lords and
Gentlemen often came together, and of their own accord drew themselves into a
Body for some great Enterprise, or else to make Incursion; then after such a
Riding Cheuachee admits of many interpretations, but this is most proper in
this place.
, so they then called it, they returned back to their own homes again.

King Charles had undertaken to raise an Army that should land some Forces in
England, his Brother Philip was to Command it, and they were to take Shipping
at Harsleur. When he was ready to go on board the Vessels, the news was brought
him, that John Duke of Lancaster, King Edwards third Son, was landed at Calais,
and made inroads upon the French Country. He was advised to quit his design,
and turn his force that way. Lancaster seeing him in the Field, posted himself
upon the Hill de Tournehan, between Ardres and Guisnes. Philip encamps right
against him, as either to attaque or surround him, but before he had been long
there, grew weary, and disbanded his Men. Thus Lancaster had leisure and
opportunity to overrun the Country of Caux, even to Harfleur, and at his
return the Country of Pontieu; where he took Prisoner Hugh de Chastillon,
Master of the Cross-bow-men, who had seized upon that Country in the name of
the King.

At the same time the Dukes of Guelders and Juliers, moved by the Charms of
English Sterling Coin, sent to defy the King, who soon set up the Duke of
Brabant and the Count de Saint Pol to coap with them, as taking fire upon some
particular Interest.

There happened a furious Battle between both Parties at Baeswilder, betwixt the
Rhine and the Meuse, which brought those Princes very low; On the one side the
Duke of Juliers was slain, on the other the Duke of Brabant was taken Prisoner.
The Emperor his Brother released him, and made up the Quarrel.

December, granted to the King an Imposition of a Sol or Penny per Liver upon
Salt, of four Livers upon every Chimney in the Cities, and thirty Sols in the
Country: as likewise upon the sale of Wine in the Country, the 13th in Gross,
and the 4th upon Retail, and upon entry at Paris, fifteen Sols for every Pipe
of French Wine, and twenty four per Pipe for Burgundy Wine: To which the Cities
joyfully consented, as knowing these Levies would be well managed, and cease
again with the War.

1369. Hugh Aubriot, Prevost des Merchands, caused the Towers of the Bastille
to be built near the Gate St. Antoine, the same as we find them at this day.

France having held Counsel together, resolved that the Duke of Anjou, and the
Duke of Berry should attaque Guyenne, that the former should enter about
Toulouze, in that part that lies betwixt the two Seas, the other about Berry
in Limosin, and that they should both join at Limeges to besiege the Prince of
Wales there.

du Guesclin out of Spain, where King Henry had bestowed upon him the Earldom
of Molines and the Lands of Soria King Charles had also given him the Earldom
of Longueville.
. He came upon the Kings first commands, and having joined the Duke of Anjou,
took, as he was upon his march, the Towns of Moissac, Tonneins, Aiguillon, and
other Castles less considerable along the Garonne. On his part the Duke of
Berry made himself Master of Limoges, more by his Intelligence with the
Citizens, and the Bishop, who betrayed the Prince of Wales, though his Gossip
and very good Friend, then by his Sword. After this the two Brothers, knowing
that the Prince, too Politic to suffer himself to be cooped up, had taken the
Field, discharged their Soldiers.

England on his part had sent the Duke of Lancaster with some Companies of Men
at Arms, and Archers into Guyenne, and given the Command of all his Army about
Picardy to Robert Knolls. It consisted of above Thirty thousand Men. His march
struck a terror through all France, even to the Loire; for they sacaged
Vermandois, Champagne, and la Brie, burnt all round about Paris, made the sound
of their Trumpets echo in the very Gates of the Louvre, while neither the
smoke of those Incendiaries, nor the noise of their Martial Music could move
the wise King to hazard any thing, nor let one Soldier go out to the Enemy.

Du Guesclin was almost the only Man who was capable of revenging him for all
these Affronts: to this end the second day of October, he puts the Sword of
High Moreau de Fiennes, too much broken with age and toil, could bear no
longer, but gave him few Soldiers, that he might only observe the Enemy, and
not fight them. Du Guesclin, who had another aim, increased the numbers at his
own expense, having sold all his Jewels and rich Household Furniture he had
gotten in Spain, to buy up more Soldiers.

After he had followed and annoyed the Enemy for some time, he had an
opportunity to be t up one of their Quarters near the Pont Valain in the
Country of Main. By this means, having broke the ice, he put them to a rout,
then defeated them piece after piece, till even Knolles himself had much ado to
escape.

Berry, and drove out the English, who fled into Poitou, cleared Touraine and
Anjou, and did the like in Limosin and in Rovergne.

France, having brought the King of Navarre to an Enterview with King Charles.
In the present posture of Affairs that Prince might have done a great deal of
mischief, by introducing the English into Constentin, where he held Cherbourgh
with some other places, and into the County of Evreux, which was all his own.
But he being as irresolute as malicious, he neither knew how to keep his Faith,
nor break it to his own advantage. Though he had made a Truce the preceding
year, he still deferred the concluding of the Peace by his Artifice. In fine,
he suffers himself to be led to it when he had least need, and was contented
with the City of M^ntpellier, which was put into his possession. Upon which
Consideration he renounced the English Interest, at that time when it would
have been more advantage not to do it.

In the year 1367. Pope Urban V. had made a Voyage to Rome, in appearance to
give some Orders for the Affairs of Italy, but indeed out of anger, for that
the Army going into Spain had oppressed and extorted a great deal from him.
After he had staid there two years and an half, he returned to Avignon, where
in short time he died, the 19th of December. The Cardinals placed in the Holy
Chair Peter Roger, who was Son to William Earl of Beaufort in Valee, and Jane
Sister of Pope Clement VI.

In the Month of May of this same year, David King of Scotland, Son of Robert
Bruce, died without Children. Thus that Crown passed into the House of the Or
Steward.
Stewarts, by one Robert, who was his Sisters Son. He ratified the Truce with
the English, and prolonged it for thirteen years.

The Maritine Cities of Flanders being all filled with Merchants, had no other
Interest to mind but Trade: Wherefore neither considering that of their Earl,
nor English, thereby to secure their Commerce, which appeared more advantageous
from that side, then from the French.

Within a while, after the new Constable had re-conquer'd Perigord, and Limosin
from the English, the Prince of Wales, though he could not stir but in a
Litter, draws his Men together at Cognac, and went to besiege Limoges. His
Hurons That was their name in those days.
or Miners, of which he had great numbers, having thrown down a great part of
the Wall into the Ditches, the Town was taken by Storm. He was so enraged
against the Inhabitants, that he took cruel Vengeance even upon the very Women
and Children, above four thousand of them dying by the edge of the Sword. This
was his last exploit in War, afterward he retired very much indisposed into
England, where yet he languished three years. When he was gone the Affairs of
the English ran every day into decay, the greatest part of the Lords, and
Commanders in Guyenne, whom his Valor and Bounty tied to his Court, going over
to the French.

Lancaster, who stayed no long time in Guyenne, but went over into England to
be present in a great Council which was held about the concerns on this side
the Water. At his departure he Married the Daughter of Peter the Cruel, and
styled himself King of Castille: his Brother, the Earl of Cambridge, likewise
took the youngest Sister to his Bed.

This was to declare a Mortal War against King Henry, who besides being engaged
to the Crown of France, resolved as well for his own security as out of
gratitude, to English were sending an Army into Poitou, Commanded by the Earl
of Pembrooke; he put out a Fleet of forty great Ships to Sea, well stored with
Canon and Firearms, who lay in wait for the Earl of Pembrooke at the chops of
the Rochel Channel. The Fight lasted two days, the Eves-eve, and the Eve of St.
John's Feast, the Rochell^rs looking on in cold blood, not to be persuaded by
their Governor to go out to the aid of the English, who in the end were
overcome, and all either taken or sunk. The Victors carried away the Earl of
Pembrooke with the rest of the Prisoners into Spain, all laden with Chains.
This was the Custom both of the Spaniards and Germans toward their Enemies,
the French and English treated theirs with more generosity and civility.

This disaster was the utter ruin of the English Party. The Constable besieged
Berry in reducing St. Severe, which was believed to be impregnable, he came to
take possession of the great City of Poitiers that opened her Arms to him. The
Commanders that kept the Field were all amazed at it: but much more astonished
upon the defeat of the Captal de Buch, who marching to relieve the City of
Soubise, situate at the mouth of the Charente, sound himself surrounded and
taken by the Spaniards, whose Fleet hovered about that Coast. No Ransom nor
Exchange could persuade the King to set him at liberty a second time, he was
shut up in a Tower belonging to the Temple at Paris, where he died four years
after.

Rochellers could never agree with the English humor, scarce compatible with
any Nation whatsoever; they studied how to withdraw themselves from their
Government; and for this purpose it was that the Spaniards kept so nigh to
favor their design. The Castle only hindered them, the Mayor bethought himself
of a Wyle. Having given the Captain a Dinner, he presented him certain Letters
Sealed with King Edwards Signet, out of which he read, That they were ordered
to make a Muster of the Garrison in the Castle, and the City Militia. There was
nothing of all this in the Letter, but the Captain, who could not read,
believed it, and drew out the Garrison. The Mayor had laid an Ambuscade amongst
some Ruinous Buildings, which cut off his passage and hindered his return. Ten
or twelve Forelorn Wretches that were left in the Castle, Capitulated. After
this, the crafty Rochellers, before they would open their Gates to the French,
made their Treaty with the King, and obtained to have the Castle demolished, or
if we will believe their Memoirs, an Amnesty for having demolished it before
the Treaty. Besides this, they got so many Privileges and great Advantages, as
tended as much toward the putting this City at liberty, as for the exchanging
their Master.

After the Constable, who represented the King, had taken their Oaths of
Fidelity, he pursued the Conquest of Poitou and Saintonge. Most part of the
Lords were retired to Touars, he laid Siege to it, and forced them to
Capitulate; That they should put themselves, their Lands, and that place under
Obedience of the King, unless the King of England, or one of his Sons, did come
with an Army strong enough to sight the Besiegers by Michaelmass-day.

This sort of Composition was practiced as long as there was the least faith
left amongst Men. It ever included a Cessation of Arms, during which the
Besiegers taking Hostages of the Besieged, raised their Camp, and left them all
manner of liberty, excepting only the admitting more Soldiers into the Garrison,
or to furnish or provide it with Stores.

Edward heard of this Capitulation, Honor and Necessity rowzing and bringing
to his mind the remembrance of his Victories, he puts to Sea himself with four
hundred Vessels, that he might not lose so fine a Country, and so many brave
Men. But the Winds refused to be serviceable to him upon this occasion; they
tossed him about for six weeks together, and would not afford one favorable
gale, but what blew him toward his own Ports of England. The time being
expired, the Lords performed the Capitulation: after which the Cities of
Saints, Angoulesme, Saint John d'Angely, and generally all the Country even to
Bourg and Blaye, returned to the Obedience of their Ancient and Natural
Sovereign.

John de Montfort Duke of Bretagne looked with fear upon the Prosperity of the
French, his ancient Enemies, and with regret upon the decay of the King of
England his Father-in-Law, and his Protector: but he was not Master in his
Duchy, the People would have no more War, the haughty humor of the English
was not compatible with their Liberty* and the Barons dazzled with the luster of
de Guesclin and de Clissons Fortune, had their Eyes turned upon the Employments
and Pensions of the Court of France. Thus the Duke was under great constraint,
If he admitted any English to land upon those Coasts, the Common People fell
upon them; if he quartered them in his Garrisons, the Lords rose up. Having
placed some in Breast, Conquet, Kemperle, and Henneband, they besought the King
to send them some Forces to drive them thence, and put the Cities into his
hands, as they did Vennes, Renes, and diverse others.

The Revenge he would have taken, by laying Siege to St. Mahe, did but hasten
his loss, and the Constables march with the Duke of Bourbon. Some English
Soldiers that he had sent for to strengthen himself withal, had the whole
Country against them, and were all cut in pieces; so that although he had some
good places left, he durst not shut himself in any of them, but passed over to
England to cry out for help.

Whilst he was gone the Constable secured them all excepting three, Breast,
Becherel, and Derval, (this last belonged to Knolles) he laid Siege to all
these at the same time, as likewise to la Roche-sur-yon in Anjou.

This last being farthest off from all Assistance, surrendered, Breast, Becherel,
and Derval promised to do as much, if within a certain prefixed time there
appeared not an Army sufficient, and that would hold Battle The Term then used,
Qui tint Journee.
, to make the French raise their Siege. As for Breast and Derval they saved
themselves by this means. The Earl of Salisbury was then at Sea to guard the
English Coasts against the Spanish Navy Commanded by Evans of Wales, whose
Father King Edward had put to death to get that Principality. Hearing what
danger Breast was in, he landed in Bretagne, encamped and entrenched himself
near that place, then sent his Heralds to the Constable to proclaim that he
was come to raise the Siege, and expected him there. The Constable did not
think sit to attaque him in so well fortisied a Post; Thus that place was
delivered. At their departure thence, Knolles, who had defended it, threw
himself into Derval, not thinking himself obliged to stand to the Treaty made
by that Garrison; which cost the Lives of their Hostages, and by way of
Reprizal, the Lives of some Gentlemen whom Knolles had taken Prisoners. As for
Becherel it held out a whole year; at the end whereof, no Army appearing on the
day prefixed to relieve it, it fell into the hands of the French.

The King of England did not fail of his Guaranty to the Duke of Bretagne; he
raised an Army of above Thirty thousand Men, whom he gave to the Duke of
Lancaster to restore that Prince, who had the confidence to send defiance to
the King of France his Sovereign: they landed at Calais the twentieth of July,
marched thorough and pillaged Artois, Picardy, Champagne, Fores, Beaujolois,
Auvergne and Limosin, and descended into Guyenne, instead of going into
Bretagne, as Montfort hoped and expected.

It was the constant resolution of this wise King, not to hazard any great
Battle against the English; but he ordered his Forces should be lodged every
night in some Town, should follow the enemy by day, and never cease from
galling and disturbing them, falling upon all straglers, and sitting so near
their skirts, as to keep all Provisions and Forage from them; by which means he
defeated their great Armies by little and little, and made them moulder away to
nothing. These having been observed and pursued by the Duke of Burgundy, as far
as Beaujolis, and from thence to the Dordogne by the Constable, were not only
prevented from undertaking any thing considerable, but were so much weakened and
diminished, that scarce six thousand of them got into Bourdeaux.

Anjou, Governor of Languedoc, made another, much more advantageous into the
upper Guyenne. He conquered several places of little or no name at present, but
in these days of great importance.

Mal des Ardents mentioned before.
Two great Judgments, a Famine and a * Plague, tormented France, Italy, and
England this year 1373. There likewise Reigned, especially in the Low
Countries, a phrantick passion, or frenzy, unknown in the foregoing ages.
Such as were tainted with it, being for the most part the scum of the people,
stripped themselves stark naked, placed a Garland of Flowers upon their Heads,
and taking Hands with one another, went into the Streets and Churches, Dancing,
Singing, and running round with so much violence, that they fell down for want
of breath. This agitation made them swell so prodigiously, they would have
burst, had not great pains and care been taken to swathe them with bands, about
their Bellies immediately, such as looked on them too attentively, were often
infected with the same distemper. Some believed it an operation of the Devil,
and that Exorcisms did much help them. The vulgar named it, The Dance of St.
JOHN.

Bruges in Flanders, whither they sent their nearest Princes of their Blood,
and the most illustrious Lords of their Kingdoms. It lasted almost two years
incredible expense: There was first a Truce made for a year, to commence in the
month of May of this year 1375. which being concluded, the Duke of Lancaster
and the Duke of Bretagne passed into England.

Bretagne not being comprehended, their Duke returns with an Army of English,
and partly by force, partly by correspondence regained St. Mahe, St. Brieue,
and seven or eight other places, whilst John d'Evreux, Brother to the King of
Navarre made great spoil and waste all about Kemperlay.

He had built a Fort thereabouts for his retreat, from whence he very much
incommoded that City, Clisson, Roban, Beaumanoir, and other Lords of Bretagne
besieged him in it. The Duke hastened thither to deliver him, they quickly
marched off, he pursues them and besieged them in Kemperlay: Now when they were
just ready to be exposed to his mercy (he would have showed but little to those
whom he proclaimed Traitors and Rebels) a second Truce wherein they comprised
him, drew them most fortunately out of his hands.

France (if I do not deceive my self) lasted to the age of Twenty years, and
during all that time, all Command, all Orders, and all Acts were made under the
name of the Regent. The wise King considered, that an Authority so absolute,
might force or snatch the Crown from his Son, if he left him a Minor; That the
people, were it error or custom, did not willingly acknowledge a Prince for
their King till he was Crowned; and that it might be feared, lest the Duke of
Anjou should make them believe, by some former examples or presidents, that
they ought to choose one that was in Majority, and capable to Govern. For these
reasons, or for others we are ignorant of; he made his memorable Ordonnance by
the advice of the Princes, Lords, Prelates, University, and other notable
persons which imports, "That the eldest Sons of France, as soon as they have
attained to the age of Fourteen years, should be held for Majors, and capable
of being Crowned, and that they should receive the Homage and Oaths of sidelity
from their Subjects. This was made at the Bois de Vincennes in the month of
August 1374. and verified in Parliament the Twentieth of May of the following
year.

We must not however imagine, that he believed (as much King as he was) that he
could advance the course of Nature, and give his Son the Sense and Wit that age
alone can bestow, since the same Year, and the same Month, he made a
Declaration, which mentioned, that in case he died before his Son should have
attained to the age of Fourteen years, he left the Guardianship and Government
of him, and of his other Children; as also the Government and Defense of the
Kingdom to the Queen Mother (she was then living) and joined with her the Dukes
of Burgundy and of Bourbon, with a necessary and sufficient Council of near
Forty persons.

Bruges, and kept the Ambassadors of both Crowns there with them to labor for
a Peace; But the Propositions on either side being at too great a distance to
be brought to a mean, they obtained at least a prolongation of the Truce to
the Month of April, in the year 1377.

In Gascongne the Earl of Armagnac thinking to take revenge upon the Earl de
Foix, who had beaten him, increased both his shame and loss. He had taken the
little City of Caseres, and put himself into the place without providing it
with Ammunition; the Earl de Foix besieges him, and without striking a blow,
reduces him to the extremest want; but he would not agree to give him and his
their Lives, but upon condition, that they should creep out thorough a hole
made purposely in the Armagnac and twenty more of the principal, paid great
ransoms before they could be released. The King of Navarre passed his word for
that of the Sire d'Albret.

During the long absence of the Popes, Italy had accustomed it self to
disregard and disown them. The People of Rome set up themselves as several
petty Tyrants to preserve some Image of their Liberty; and by the same Spirit,
the Cities belonging to the Ecclesiastical State, at the solicitation, and
with the aid of the Florentines, had shaken off the yoke, and turned out his
Apostolical Legates. Gregony IX. thinking to redress these disorders; and
besides, being earnestly pressed by St. Bridget of Sweden, and by St. Catherine
of Sienna, two persons who were thought to have a very frequent Commerce with
Heaven, resolved to transfer the Holy See back to Rome, from whence it had been
removed Seventy two years. He departed from Avignon the three and twentieth of
September, embarked at Marseilles, and after very great dangers on the Sea,
Signs of the agitations that change had wrought in the Church, he arrived at
Rome the Twenty seventh of January following.

Edward in the mean while had lost the brave Prince of Wales, his eldest Son,
who had left a Son named Richard very young; and for two years past found
himself much broken, and his Brain decayed with weight of continual business
and contention, though he were but 65 years of age: This was it made him desire
to have a Peace, and made him willing to relinquish many Articles of the Treaty
of Bretigny. But death prevented the effects of that disposition, and took him
out of the World the 21 of June. His Grandson Richard II. Surnamed of
Bourdeaux, succeeded him.

He had seven Sons, whereof five only lived to Men's Estate, and were Married,
those were Edward, Lyonel, John, Edmond, and Thomas; Edward was the brave
Prince of Wales; for the other four, the First was Duke of Clarence, the Second
of Lancaster, both of them by the Heiresses of those two Houses, and the Third
Earl of Cambridge, then Duke of York, the Fourth, Earl of Buckingham, and
afterward Duke of Gloucester: He had also Four Daughters, Isabella, who
Married the Earl of Bedford, Jane, who was Wife to the King of Spain, Mary,
that was so to John de Montfort Duke of Bretagne, and Margaret to the Earl of
Pembrook. This great multitude of Children was his strength during his
lifetime, and the ruin of England after his death.

assured of the event o^ the War, he began it anew with five Armies: He sent
one into Artois, One into the Countries of Berry, Auvergne, Bourbonnois, and
Lyonnois, One into Guyenne, One into Bretagne, and kept the Fifth near himself,
as a reserve Burgundy, of Berry, and of Anjou, Oliver and the Constable; all
which behaved themselves so well, that the English could not preserve any
places of importance but Calais in Belgica, Bourdeaux, and Bayonne in Guyenne,
and Cherbourgh in Normandy, which was sold to him by the Navarrois.

Charles, as himself was, had a great desire to see the King of France his
Uncle; his Father was just then upon the point of concluding a bargain with the
English, very disadvantageous to France, which was to give them some Lands and
Places he held in Normandy, and to take the Duchy of Guyenne in exchange, for
the defense whereof they were to furnish him every year with Two thousand Men
at Arms, and as many Archers to be paid by them. When his Son therefore went to
see his Uncle, he would needs take this opportunity to brew some Plot or
Conspiracy in France, and even to poison the King. He had therefore placed
about his Son the most crafty, and most wicked Men he could pick out; amongst
others la Rue his Chamberlain, and du Tertre his Secretary; but was so
unadvised withal, as to send the Captains of his best places of Normandy.

His design was discovered, or perhaps prevented; the King caused his Son and
his Captains to be seized, and la Rue and du Tertre to be put into the hands of
Justice. The Son whatever intercession could be made, remained a prisoner Five
years, the Captains were not set free, till the places they belonged to were
surrendered to the King; du Tertre and la Rue had their Heads cut off. At the
same time some Forces were sent into Normandy, and took all his Holds, to the
number of Ten or Twelve, excepting Cherbourgh, which after a long Siege
remained still in English hands, and immediately dismantled them.

The Duke of Anjou pressed the English very home likewise in Guyenne. The
taking of Bergerac, and the gaining of a Battle which was fought near the
little City of Aymet, where almost all the Chiefs and Barons of Gascongne
remained prisoners, made himself Master of all the Places above the two Rivers,
the Dordogne and the Garonne.

Three things weakened the English so much, that they had neither the Sense nor
Courage, nor Forces and Strength to defend themselves. One was the Minority of
their King, aged but Thirteen years, the Second a great Plague, which
depopulated England, and the Last, the incursions of the Scots, who had broken
the Truce, being incited to it by the King, and upon condition of a hundred
thousand Gold Florins, with the Pay for Five hundred Men at Arms, and as many
Sergeants.

France to make Peace, and pressed the Emperor Charles to make use of his
intercession. The Emperor, whether out of affection for the Royal House of
France, or to take measures, to secure the Empire to his Son Wenceslaus, or for
some other subject, desired to visit that Court, though he were very much
tormented with the Gout. The King sent two of the most illustrious Earls, and
two hundred Horse to meet him at Cambray, where he kept his Christmas, the
Duke of Bourbon to Compiegne, and two of his Brothers to Senlis, himself went
beyond the Suburbs of St. Denis, to receive him, and lodged him in his Palace.

All the time he was in France he entertained him with all the magnificence
imaginable, paid him all manner of Respects, unless such as denote a
Sovereignty, and which hereafter might give a Title to some imaginary
pretenses. For this reason when they received him into any City, they did not
ring their Bells, nor bring their Canopy of State; such as made Speeches did
not forget to tell him it was by order of their Sovereign; and at his entrance
into Paris, the King affected to be mounted upon a White Horse, and ordered a
Black one for the Emperor. He came in thither the Fourth day of January, and
went out thence the Sixteenth, returning by the way of Champagne.

France, he gratified the Dauphin with the Title of Vicar irrevocable of the
Empire, by Letters Patents, Sealed with a Seal of Gold; and by others he
likewise gave him the same Office for Danphine, with the Castles of Pipet and
Chamaux, which till then he was possessed of in the City of Vienne. Since that
we do not read, that the Emperors have concerned themselves any more in the
Arles, nor touching Daupine, which have remained in complete Sovereignty under
the Kings of France; who indeed, even long before, did not acknowledge the
Emperor.

Gregory XI. had scarcely been Fourteen Months at Rome, when either of
Melancholy, or otherwise, he fell ill of a detention of Urine, whereof he died
the Seventh of March, having declared in his agony, that he foresaw grievous
troubles, and that he did heartily repent his having rather given credit to
deceitful Revelations, then followed the certain light of true knowledge and
good understanding.

There were in all in the Roman Church three and twenty Cardinals, six whereof
remained still at Avignon, and one was gone upon a Legation. Of the Sixteen
that were in Rome, there were Twelve of them Frenchmen, and four Italians; all
of them foreseeing that the Roman Populace would force them to elect a Pope of
the Italian Nation, agreed amongst themselves, that they would elect one
feignedly only, to avoid the fury of the People, and another in good earnest,
whom when they were gone thence they would own for the true Pope. During this
Convention, the heat and violence of the People growing more terrible then they
Bartholomew Boutillo a mock Pope.
Boutillo a Native of Naples, Archbishop of Barry in that Kingdom, who
immediately took himself to be lawful Pope, and assumed the Name of Urban VI.

The Cardinals in the mean time were forced to dissemble, till they could have
fit opportunity to declare the Truth, and to write Letters to all Princes, that
his Election was Canonical; however, they gave notice to the King of France,
that he should give no faith to their Letters, till they were out of danger.
But when upon pretense of avoiding the extreme heats in Rome, they were retired
to Anagnia; being moreover offended at the proud deportment of Bartholomew,
they made the Truth of the matter of Fact known to all Princes, admonished
Bartholomew three several times, to desist from pretending to the Papacy, since
he well knew they had no intention to elect him; and afterward they proceeded
judicially against him, and declared him an intruder. That done, they retired
to Fundy, under protection of the Earl of that place, and there elected one of
the six Cardinals France. This was Robert, Brother of Peter Earl of Geneva,
whose Courage was as high as his Birth. He took the Name of Clement VII.

France after several Assemblies had been held of the most Learned of the
Clergy, and the most judicious Prelates and Nobility, adhered to Clement; the
Kings of Castille and of Scotland, who were his Allies did the same; the Earl
of Savoy, and Jane Queen of Naples also, although in the beginning she had
protected his Competitor. But all the rest of Christendom owned Urban, the
Navarrois, the English, and the Flemmings out of spite to France, the Italians
to preserve the Papacy in their Wenceslaus his Son; the King of Hungary that he
might have a pretense to dispoliate the Queen of Naples; and the rest for
diverse interests. Peter King of Arragon remained Neutre.

At first Clement was well armed, and in a condition to overtop his adversary,
having in his service one Sylvester Bude, a Captain of Bretagne with Two
thousand old Adventurers of that Nation, who took the Castle St. Angelo,
defeated the Romans in Rome it self, and made themselves Masters of the City.
But after another famous Captain who was an Englishman, and was named Hacket Or
Haucut
, otherwhile Head of the Tard-Venus, and now in the service of Urban, had
vanquished and taken him prisoner; Clements Affairs went on so ill, that he was
driven out of Italy, and retiring himself to Avignon, left his Rival sole
Master of Rome,

Emp. John Paleolog^s, and Wenceslaus, Son of Charles IV. R* 22 years.
This Schism lasted Forty years, either party having great Persons, Saints,
Miracles and Revelations, as they said, and even such strong Arguments and
Reasons on his side, that the dispute could never be decided but by way of
Cession, that is, by obliging the two Contenders to abdicate the Papacy; so
that it is great boldness to call those Anti-Popes, who during this Schism,
held the Sea at Avignon.

The death of the Emperor Charles IV. fell out upon the Nine and twentieth of
November, in the year 1378. in the City of Prague, the 63 year of his age.
Wenceslaus his Son who was elected King of the Romans in the year 1376.
succeeded him in the Empire, and the Kingdom of Bohemia; a Prince deformed both
in Body and Soul.

Flanders to own any other Pope then his King had done, and indeed he showed
him ill will for it, and more yet toward the Breton, who encouraged him in his
obstinacy. Besides, it had so fortuned, that the Flemming by the Counsel of
that Duke, had caused one of his Envoyes to be staid, who was passing through
his Country on his way to Scotland, to incite Robert Stewart to break the
Truce with the English. The King made complaint to the Flemming, and Commanded
him to drive the Breton out of his Countries; but the Flemming having taken
advice of his People, who assured him of Two hundred thousand Combatants, in
case he were attaqued, refused to give him that satisfaction.

The Breton nevertheless went out of Flanders and took refuge in England. The
place of his retreat aggravated his crime; the King orders him to be summoned
to appear in Parliament, to be judged by his Pairs. Not presenting himself, he
was declared, by Sentence of the Ninth of December, attainted of the crime of
Felony; and all his Lands, as well in Bretagne, as all others he held in the
Kingdom, consiscated, for having defied the King his Sovereign Lord, and for
having entered the Country in Arms with the enemies of the Kingdom.

That which in appearance seemed likeliest to ruin this Duke, raised him. The
Bretons, who for a thousand years past, had so generously fought for the
liberty of their Country, having discovered that the King designed more
against the Duchy it self, then the Duke alone, and that he would take it away
from the guilty, only to apply it to himself, began to complain, to withdraw
from their affection to the French, to reunite amongst themselves, and to make
diverse Leagues and Associations between the Cities and the Nobless. Even the
Widow of Charles de Blois, by Counsel of the friends of her House, sent to
protest against that Decree, and alleged that Bretagne was not subject or
liable to consiscation, because it was not a Fief, and that if the Dukes had
submitted their persons, by obliging themselves to certain Service, it was not
their power to subject their Country.

This year a most cruel War was kindled in Flanders, which lasted Seven years.
The interior cause of this inflammation was the Luxury of the Nobility, and the
dissolute and excessive expenses of the Earl; the occasion was a quarrel, that
rose between one called John Lion, and the Matthews, who were six Brothers,
both the one and the other were very powerful amongst the Navigators, or
Mariners, and between the Cities of Ghent and Bruges, for a certain Canal, or
River which those of Bruges would needs make. The Earl took part with these,
and was cause that John Lion formed against him a faction of White Hats in the
City of Ghent. He sets up the Matthews to oppose and countermine them. John
Lion was found to be the stronger, and pushed the contest on to the utmost
extremity.

The Duke of Anjou was mighty greedy of Money, and a great exactor; his People
by his Order, or upon their own Authority, having laid some new Imposts upon
the City of Montpellier, which was under his Government, but of the Propriety
of the King of Navarre, the People mutined, and killed Fourscore of them,
amongst which number were his Chancellor and the Governor. The Duke hastened
thither with some Forces, and caused a most horrible Sentence to be given for
punishment of that crime; but it was moderated almost in every point, by the
intercession of his Holiness, excepting against the Authors of that Sedition,
who paid down their Heads for it. After all, the King coming to know of the
capacity of that Duke, took the Government of the Province from him, and
bestowed it on the Earl of Foix.

Whether the King were ignorant of the disposition of the Bretons, or thought
he could change them, he sent for the Lords of that Country, and screwed a
promise from them that they should assist the Duke of Bourbon, and those other
Chiefs he would send into Bretagne to execute the Decree against their Duke.
But the Lords on the contrary, sent for him to come thither, and stood by him
so effectually with their Forces, and such as he brought over with him from
England, that they restored him to most of his Towns.

This was the greatest and almost the only shock this wise King met with in all
his Enterprises. He was so transported, and sensibly touched, that he Commanded
all Bretons who should refuse to serve against the Duke, to go out of his
Kingdom, and showed more severity toward some of them, then was agreeable to
his nature. But this usage did only strengthen the party for the Duke, and draw
those over to his service, that were at that time the ablest Men of the French
Armies.

He durst not, even upon this occasion, make use of the valor of his
Constable, who would but unwillingly have drawn his Sword for the destruction
of his native Country: he chose rather to send him into Guyenne to clear some
places, from whence the English, and certain crews of vagabonds by their
connivance, foraged the Country of Auvergne. After the taking of some Castles,
and beating some of those Bands, whilst he was besieging one of them in
Chasteau-neuf de Randan, between Mendes and le Puy in Velay, he was assaulted
by a Fever, whereof he died the Thirteenth of July; his very Name completed
the Work, the Besieged surrendered and brought and laid the Keys upon his
Coffin. The King (upon the refusal of Enguerrand de Coucy) gave the Constables
Sword to Oliver de Clisson, Compagnon, and Countreyman of the Deceased, no less
valiant then the other, but very unlikein all things else, Unjust, Proud,
Covetous, and Cruel.

Bretagne was then the Theater of War, the King had resolved to throw in all
his Armies there, when he was constrained to quit the World and all his
Designs. Some years before Charles the Bad, had caused some poison to be given
him, the violence whereof a Physician belonging to the Emperor Charles IV. had
allayed, by opening an issue in his Arm to discharge part of its venom; that
issue being stopped it took his Life away: He died in the Castle of Beauty upon
the Marne, which is beyond the Bois de Vincennes, the Sixteenth of September,
the Sixth Month of the Seventeenth year of his Reign and the Four and
fortiethof his Life. His Tomb is to be seen at St. Denis; his Heart was carried
to the great Church of Rouen, because he had been Duke of Normandy, and his
Bows to Maubuisson, and laid by the Body of the Queen his Mother.

Upon his Deathbed, this Wise King could not forget his care for the Kingdom,
he confirmed the Law concerning the Majority, left the Government to Lewis Duke
of Anjou his eldest Brother, with a Council, and the Guardianship and Education
of his Son Charles to the Dukes of Burgundy and of Bourbon, Commanding them
most expressly to take off the Imposts, to make some agreement with the Duke of
Bretagne, if it were possible, and to Marry his Son into some potent Family of
Germany.

In all his Conduct there appeared much solidity of Judgment, and mavelous
clearness of Wisdom and Understanding, a great deal of Moderation and Goodness,
much Frugality and Aeconomy, and yet Magnificence and liberality upon occasion.
He had been carefully bred in the Study of good Learning, by Nicholas Oresme a
Theologian of Paris, and Dean of Rouen, whom he made Bishop of Lisieux; and
indeed he had as much affection for the Sciences, and for Learned Men, as
aversion for Comedians, Juglers, Buffoons, and all those sorts of People, who
under the pretense of Divertisement, corrupt the bravest Souls.

He delighted to hear the Truth from the Mouths of honest Men; and although

The expenses of his Wars did not hinder his Magnificence from showing it self
in the Buildings of the Castle du Bois de Vincennes, which subsists to this
day, and that of the Louvre; the other parts whereof we have seen demolished,
to make room for tho proudest Structure that ever Architecture raised upon
Earth: but which, how great soever it can be, shall yet be much less then the
King that undertakes it.

But above all his Virtues, the fear of God and zeal to Justice did shine in
him to a supreme Decree, the care of which being the noblest Function of a
King, he took pleasure in dispensing it himself, and very often came to hear
the Pleadings in his Parliament, where he made them admire his Reasoning and
Eloquence, speaking so fully to the Subject in hand, that there was nothing
left for his Chancellor or Attorney General to say.

He left considerable Treasures behind him in Lingots of Gold and rich
Furniture. It is a Problem in the Politiques, whether he did well in heaping it
up; In point of Justice it is none, if they may make Millions of People
miserable to enrich one single Man: And in truth his memory is not exempt from
all blame on that side; but they throw it upon the Cardinal of Amiens, one of
his principal Counselors. His Name was John de la Grange, an obdurate Soul,
ambitious and covetous, whose great possessions fully demonstrate that he
caused the Subsidies to be doubled merely out of design to enrich himself.

By Jane Daughter of Peter Duke of Bourbon, and Isabella de Valois, a Princess
much accomplished both in Body and Mind; he had two Sons, Charles, who Reigned,
Lewis, who was Duke of Orleans, and six Daughters who all dyed very young.

Charles VI, King LII.
Called by some, The Well-beloved King. Aged near XII years.
POPES,
URBAN V. S. at Rome Nine years One Month, during this Reign. And CLEMENT VII.
in Avignon, S. Fourteen years during this Reign. BONIFACE IX. at Rome. Elected
the Second of November 1389. S. Fourteen years, Eleven Months. BENNET XII.
Peter de Luna in Avignon, Elected the Twenty eighth of September, 1394. S. till
his Deposition in Anno 1409. INNOCENT VII. at Rome, Elected the Seventeenth of
October. 1404. S. Two years, and Twenty two days. GREGORY, XII. at Rome, Elected
the last of November, 1406 till his Deposition by the Council of Pisa, 1409.
ALEXANDER V. in 1409. S. Ten Months. JOHN XXIII. Elected the Seventeenth of May
1410. S. Five years, Deposed at Constance, Ann. 1414. Vacancy from the year
1414. to the year 1417. MARTIN V. Elected the Tenth of November 1417. S.
Thirteen years Three Months and a half.
Charles the Wise was happy enough, but too short; this very long and exteramly
unfortunate. A Minor King, and then alienated in his Understanding,
Sick-Brain'd; a Queen, an ill Wife, and unnatural Mother; Princes of the Blood
Ambitious, Covetous, Squanderers and Cruel; the Grandees by their example,
giving themselves upto all manner of Licentiousness; Subjects mutinous and
seditious, tumbled France into an Abyss of all kinds of Miseries, and under
the dominion of Strangers.

From the very first day, some jealousies about the Government divided the
Kings Uncles. The Duke of Anjou being seized of the Regency, disposed of
Commands, and changed the Officers: The Dukes of Burgundy and of Bourbon
Bourbon was Maternal Uncle.
could not suffer it, and would have the King Crowned: he maintained on the
contrary, that he ought not to be so till he were Fourteen years of age,
according to the Declaration of the late King. About this difference an
Assembly of Notables was held, where John des Marais, Advocate-General of the
Parliament maintained the Duke of Anjou's Cause, and Peter d'Orgement the
contrary.

This conference having only heated them the more, the friends of either
partyarm'd. themselves: Paris beheld her self surrounded with Soldiers who
lived at Discretion The Lords of the Kings Council mediated an agreement, and
prevailed so far, that the parties referred it to Arbitrators, who concluded,
That the King should be Crowned without delay; That afterward he should have
the administration of the Kingdom, that is to say, he should receive the
Homages and Oaths, and all Acts should be expedite in his Name; and for this
purpose the Regent had aged him, that is to say, Emancipated; That the Duke of
Anjou should continue Regent; that the other Two should have the Guard of the
Kings Person, with the Revenues of Normandy, and three or four Bailywicks for
his entertainment.

They likewise agreed to choose a Council of Twelve Persons, necessarily
resident at Paris, where by a plurality of Votes they were to ordain all things
concerning the Revenue, and Offices belonging thereto, and without whose
Authority no part of the Demeasnes pertaining to the Crown, should be alienated
either for Life or Perpetuity; and who should make an Inventory of the
Revenues, Plate, Jewels and Furniture that was the Kings, which the Duke of
Anjou seized upon, and never gave a good account of.

The Imposts having been very excessive, in the last years of the Reign of
Charles V. caused some Emotions in the Cities, particularly of Paris and
Compiegne: but without any miscievous consequence or accidents. The Cardinal
d'Amions who had been principal contriver of those Subsdies, was now paid part
of the reward he so well deserved: for the young King remembered he had checked
him with saucy Language in his Fathers lifetime, and expressed his resentment in
discourse to the Chamberlain Peter de Savoisy, in these terms, God be thanked,
we are now delivered from the Tyranny of that Chaplain! The Cardinal having
notice of it, makes up his pack and retires to Douay, and from thence to
Avignon, carrying away an immense Treasure which he had scraped together to the
poor Peoples cost, and by picking the pockets of the whole Nation.

Clisson had been confirmed in the Office of Constable, he had the Commission
to conduct the King to Rbeims, with that Pomp and Magnificence, as was usual on
those Ceremonies. The Duke of Anjou staying some days behind, seized upon the
Treasures which Charles V. had concealed in the Walls of the Castle at Melun,
having forced Savoisy, with whom the King had entrusted the secret and guard of
it, to show him the where it lay, which prompted the courage of that Prince, to
undertake the unfortunate War of Italy, where himself perished with the choice
Flower of the French Nobility. So true it is, that those vast sums of Money
collected by Sovereign Princes, does for the most part bring only trouble to
their Kingdoms in the end, and that their Treasures are no where so secure, as
in the affections of the Subjects, who are ever affectionate and kind, when
they are

The Duke of Anjou having overtaken the King upon his way to Rheims, the
Coronation was performed the Fourth of November. Of the Lay-Paris were none
present but the Duke of Burgundy, who being the first of all, it was by
judgment of the Council ordained, That he should take place before the Duke of
Anjou, his elder Brother and Regent; and when this last not submitting to that
judgment, had seated himself at the Feast made on that Ceremony, next to the
King, the Burgundian boldly came, thrust himself between, and took the place
above him.

The Princes and their Council of Twelve, had no other aim but their particular
Interests. The Duke of Anjou was the most powerful, the Duke of Burgundy made
Head against him, Bourbon's Duke sloated betwixt both, the Duke of Berry made
no considerable Figure.

At the Coronation there was proclaimed the relaxation of the Imposts, pursuant
to the last Will of Charles V. but the Duke of Anjou having taken all the Money
of the Treasury, and refusing to employ any of it toward payment of the
Soldiery, or the Kings Family, in one Month after they were fain to settle new
ones, especially upon the City of Paris. The Populace mutined, a Cobbler makes
himself Head of them, and compelled the Prevost des Marchands to go to the
Palace, attended with a multitude of Mutineers, to demand the Revocation of
them; nevertheless the Chancellor (it was William de Dormans, Bishop of
Beauvais) appeased that Commotion by fair words, and with a promise that was
made, to grant them what they did desire.

The very next day another Troop of the Rabble pulled down their Courts or
Offices, tore their Accounts and Registers; and going thence fell upon the Jews
Houses: there were Forty in one Street, plundered them all, and burnt their
Writings, took their Children and haled them to Church to Baptize them, and
would have beat out the Brains of their Fathers, had they not taken Sanctuary
in the Prison of the Chastelet. The King restored them to their Houses again,
and caused Proclamation, that every one should give them back what they had
forced from them.

In the Month of July, the Earl of Buckingham with a potent Army was landed at
Calais, not in Guyenne, as is told us in the History of this Reign, written by
a Monk of St. Denis, which is not very true in many places. He crossed Picardy,
Champagne, passed near Troyes, where the Duke of Burgundy had made the general
Rende-vouz of his Army, then by Gastinois, la Beause, Vendosinois, and Main,
to go into Bretagne to the assistance of that Duke.

Sartre, King Charles V. passed into the other World. The news of his death
allayed that hatred the Breton had conceived against the French: Insomuch as
the English having laid Siege before Nantes, he even left them there two Months
without joining them, as he had promised. They were fain to go and find him out
at Vennes. He was mightily perplexed, for the Breton Lords, even those who were
the most affectionate, being tired with suffering under strangers, and the
miseries of War, and withal, revolted from him by the intrigues of Clisson, and
the credit of Beaumanoir, would peremptorily have him agree with France; in
effect, they compelled him to make a Peace with the King, to dismiss the
English, and renounce their Alliance; and also gave such cautions as obliged
him to make good this Treaty.

They did not breed up the young King conformable to the good instructions of
his Father, but according to the inclinations of his age, and airy Nature, to
Hunting, Dancing, and running about here and there. One day when he was Hunting
in the Forest of Senlis, a large Stag was rowzed, which he would not pursue
with his Dogs, but took him a Toil They found about his Neck a Copper Collar
Gilt, Hoc me Cefar donavit.
with an Inscription in Latin, which imported * that Casar had given him it.
The young King, because of this, or for that in a Dream he had been carried up
into the France. Before him our Kings had Flowers-de-Luce Sans number in their
Scutcheon, he reduced them to three, we do not know wherefore.

Navarrois, to wit, his Eldest, and his Second Son, and one Daughter, who had
been taken in one of his places of Normandy, being yet prisoner; the wicked
King hired an Englishman to poison the Dukes of Berry and Burgundy, in revenge
for that they hindered their being set at liberty. This wretched fellow was
discovered and quartered alive. Nevertheless John King of Castille, the Son of
Henry, importuned by the continual solicitations of his Sister, who Married
the Infant of Navarre, interceded so effectually with the Kings Uncles, that
they released those innocent Children of a very wicked Father.

Avignon were so many Tyrants, to whom Clement gave all sorts of License, They
had Proctors every where with Grants of Reversions, who snapp'd up all the
Benesices, the Claustral Offices, the Commandery's, retained the best of them,
and sold the rest, or gave them upon pension, or rather Farmed them out.

Clement himself, besides his seizing upon all that any Bishop or Abbot left
after his death; besides his taking a years Revenue of each Benesice upon every
change, whether it happened by vacancy, or by resignation, or by permutation,
ravaged the Gallican Church, by infinite Concussions, and extraordinary Taxes.
Good People bewailed these disorders; there were none but Purloiners that
wished they might be continued, and nothing but the particular Interests of
Princes kept this Schism still on foot. Clement allowed the Duke of Anjou the
Levying of the Tenths, and the Duke allowed of all his pilserings, and
violently reproved all those that durst complain. This unjust proceeding,
rather then the Justice of Vrbans party, was the cause why many of the
principal Doctors of the Faculty put themselves under the Obedience of that
Pope; and also made the University begin to desire and demand a Council, as the
Sovereign remedy for all these mischiefs.

Berry, angry that he had no part in the Affairs, his Father-in-law, the Earl
of Armagnac, persuades him to demand the Government of Languedoc, as then in
the hands of his Enemy the Count de Foix. The Council consents to his demand,
but the Count armed to maintain himself, and the Province, where he was as much
beloved for his Justice and his Generosity, as the Duke of Berry was hated for
his Thievery, stuck close to him. The Duke with an Army to take possession by
force, the Count beat him foundly near the City of Rabasteins; but after he had
let him know he was able to keep his Government, he yielded it up to him, that
he might not be the ruin of those that defended him.

John Lion chief of the White Hats, had so blown up the troubles in Flanders,
that his death could not extinguish the Flame. Most part of good Towns in that
Country had joined themselves to the Ghentois; the Peace the Duke of Burgundy
had made betwixt them and the Earl his Father-in-law, lasted but a very short
time; the Earl goes secretly out of Ghent, and the Gentry combine against the
Cities; Ghent had all manner of ill success; but neither their being thrice let
Blood, which cost above Fifteen thousand Lives, nor Waste, nor Famine, nor
being fortaken by the other Cities, nor yet the miseries of two Sieges, could
quell those stubborn obstinate lovers of their liberty.

After the loss of most of their stoutest Leaders, they chose one, named Peter
du Bois, and upon his persuasions another also* to wit, Philip d'Artevelle, Son
of that James, formerly mentioned, much richer then his Father, but less
crafty, and much prouder. This last took the upper-hand, and pretended to all
the Functions of a Sovereign.

Peter de Villiers, and John de Marais, Persons venerable with the People, and
also very much regarded by the Regent, somewhat appeased the commotion at
Paris; but could by no means persuade them to suffer those new Levies. The
Burghers took Arms, set Guards at the Gates, created Diseniers Constables; and
such like Officers.
, Cinquanteniers Constables; and such like Officers.
, Centeniers Constables; and such like Officers.
, and made some Companies to keep the Avenues and Passages to the City free.

Anjou was therefore forced to dissemble for the present, but he had not
resolved to let go the thing thus, and intended only to wait till their heats
were grown colder to go on as before. It happened the following year, that having
published the Farming of those at the Chastellet, one of the Officers belonging
to the Farmers demanding a Denier Six make a Penny.
of an Herb-Woman for a bundle of Cresles; the Rabble gathered together upon
the noise this Woman made, grew into fury, went and broke open the Town Hall to
get Arms, and took out three or four thousand iron Maillets or Hammers, for
which cause this seditious crew were named the Malletiers. After this they
massacred all that were concerned to gather it, plundered their Houses, and
razed them, opened the Prisons and took out all the Criminals; amongst others,
Hugh Aubriot Prevost of Paris, whom they made their Captain, but he forsook
them the very same night and fled to his own Country of Burgundy.

He had been condemned some Months before at the Suit of the Clergy, to end his
days between four Walls, for crimes of Impiety and of Heresy, and showing
himself a most bitter Enemy to the Scholars and Heads of the University.

The Sedition at Rouen which happened at the same time, was called the Harelle
Herd.
The Populace took a wealthy Merchant, and perforce gave him the Title of King;
then leading him in triumph about the City, compelled him to declate an
abolition of all Imposts.

The King was counseled to punish the Mutiniers, and not let fall any of those
Impositions. He began with Rouen, going thither in person, he caused a Gate to
be beaten down, that he might enter by that breach; Commanded all their Arms to
be carried into the Castle, punished a great many of the Faction with death,
then set up the Imposts with Taxes and Fines.

Parisians, they pretended to listen to the intercessions of the University,
and a Deputation of some honest Burghers, who went to wait upon the King at the
Bois de Vincennes, and to consent at last to the suppression of the Imposts,
and forgiveness for all excess committed in their Mutinies; only they excepted
those that had any hand in forcing the prisons of the Chastellet. Under this
pretense a great many were taken, and the Prevost of Paris not daring to
execute them publicly, threw them into the River by night at several times,

This severity not being capable to fright the Parisians, so far as to make
them consent to the settling of the Imposts, they fell to Treaty with them,
which ever proves advantageous to the Superior, against his Inferiors. By
this means the Court got an hundred thousand Francs of the City, to whom
perhaps they would have given double the sum, could they have done it with
Honor, to have had the liberty of returning thither.

England was not less troubled with the like Commotions, having a King under
age Eleven years old.
, and Governors extremely covetous. Never was that Kingdom in so great danger.
The Commons revolted against the Nobility, who in truth kept them in a most
servile condition; One John Valee Ball, as Baker calls him.
a Priest of the Archbishopric of Canterbury, had so well catechized and
instructed the Country fellows, by diverse Discourses after they had been at
Church, concerning the equality that God and Nature made amongst all Mankind,
that they conspired the destruction of the Rich and Noble. To this end they
flock to London in several parties, under pretense of demanding justice of the
King, and stirred up all the Counties to join with them, like so many packs of
Bloodhounds. For some Months the Citizens and Gentry durst not stir; but these
Russians having neither Head nor Council, nor Discipline, their Captains being
surprised and executed, they were soon dispersed, and beaten home with Cudgels
like so many brute Beasts.

Because of these disorders the English entered upon a Conference with the
French, to make a Peace; Boulogne was the place they met in: the Deputies not
coming to a conclusion, made only a Truce for one year, during which time they
went and entangled themselves in that War, which Ferdinand King of Portugal
made against John King of Castille. The Earl of Cambridge, who had married a
Daughter of Peter the Cruel, carried some Forces thither, fancying he might
regain Castille, both to his own advantage, and the Duke of Lancaster's, his
Brother. France failed not to assist the Castillan; and thus the French and
English having a Truce in these parts, made War upon each other in Spain.
Scarce had it lasted eight Months, when the Portugais not receiving from
England all that assistance they were promised, claps up an agreement with the
Castillans, and made the English their enemies.

The hundred thousand Livres.
Francs they drew from the Parisians, was the Duke of Anjou's last hand, who
did not forward those Impositions, but only to have the greatest share himself
for his voyage to Italy, whereof this was the Subject.

After Clements party were ruined at Rome, Urban thinking to revenge himself
upon Jane Or Joane
Queen of Naples, persuaded Lewis King of Hungary to send him Charles de Duraz,
surnamed Peaceable, to come and take possession of that Kingdom, to whom he
proffered the investiture, as being the nearest of the Males.

This Prince had all the obligations imaginable to Queen Jane, or Joane, for he
was of the very same Blood as she, Son of Lewis Count de Gravines, who was the
Son of John VIII. Son of Charles the Lame, and therefore Brother to King
Robert. She had bred him with as much care and tenderness in her Court, as if
he had been her own Child; she had married him to the Princess Margaret her
Niece, she designed to make him her Successor, and kept his Children at this
very time in her own Family. The execrable ambition for a Crown rendered him
ungrateful, and made him break thorough all these obligations, and noble
endearments. The Queen finding he was coming, with an intention and preparation
to Dethrone her, had recourse to France her first Original, and adopted the
Duke of Anjou for her Son and presumptive Heir, in Anno 1380.

King Charles the Wise, after the example of St. Lewis, would have spared
nothing to establish his Brother in the Throne; but happening to dye, the
Enterprise was left in suspense. In the mean while Charles lost no time, for
being Crowned King of Sicilia Rome, in the beginning of the year 1381. he
marched toward Naples, where being received without opposition, he besieged
the Queen and her Sister Mary, in the Castle del'Ovo, forced them in fine to
surrender, after his having defeated and taken Otho of Brunswic, Janes fourth
Husband, and caused both of them to be strangled in prison.

Anjou was leading to that unhappy Princess, being now useless, and Charles by
that time settled in the Kingdom; the Duke was hesitating whether he should pass
the Mountains. Pope Clement, who had but this one way to Dethrone Urban,
engaged him by such great allurements and advantages, as plainly manifested, he
did not care whether he ruined the Church, both in her Spirituals and
Temporals, provided he could but compass his own establishment.

Jane was Besieged, and caused his Forces to march toward Provence. The Pope
invests him with the Kingdom of Sicilia, and Crowned him at Avignon, the
Thirtieth day of May. Jane had been dead eight days, but as it was not known in
a long time, he gave him only the Title of Duke of Calabria. The Provensals
were not satisfied or consenting to the adoption of the Duke, much less would
they own him for their Sovereign whilst Jane was alive: nor would he take the
Crown or leave them, till he had made himself sure; it took him up six Months
time to reduce them, and afterward he loaded them with all manner of Taxes and
Imposts, as he had done the French.

Italy, his Army consisted of Thirty thousand Horse. Ame VI. Earl of Savoy, one
of the most renowned Princes of his time, accompanied him with Fifteen hundred
Lances, all Knights or Esquires.

Being entered into the Kingdom by the Marca Anconitana, not without much toil,
he took the City of Aquileae, and diverse other places in Apulia, and Calabria,
and was acknowledged by several Grandees of the Country.

Charles, desirous to be rid of him without any hazard against so potent an
enemy, had recourse to the inventions of those Countries, and sends him a
crafty poysoner, under the Title of a Herald: this wickedness being
discovered, and the false Herald Beheaded and Quartered, he bethinks him of
challenging Lewis to a Combat, to amuse him and gain time; their Cartels are to
be seen, they are dated in * Challenges, 1382. in November.
the Month of November; a single Combat between Man and Man was first
propounded, then they agreed to decide all Disputes by ten on each side. The
Earl of Savoy was to be the Chief on Lewis's part, but Charles by a hundred
delays and evasions, temporised till he furnished all his Places, and then
openly broke off all that Project.

This year happened the Tragical History of the only Son of the Count de Foix,
and Agnes, Sister of the King of Navarre, whose Name, as his Fathers, was
Gaston Phoebus. The Count not much caring for his Wife, because he entertained a
Mistress, took occasion to send her back to her Brother, for that he took no
care to pay the Ransom of the Lord d'Albret. Now the Son going to see his
Mother in Navarre, this wicked Uncle gave him a Powder to strew upon his
Fathers Meat, making him believe, that so soon as he had swallowed any he would
recall his Mother. The young Boy too credulous, took that for a Philtre, which
in effect was a deadly poison, and did not conceal what he would do, from a
bastard-Brother of his: the Bastard having told the Count, this unfortunate
Father, after he had most outragiously used his Son both by Words and Blows,
cast him into prison where he lost his Life, either through Grief, or by his
hands that had given it him.

Flanders had besieged Ghent, and was himself at Bruges, whose Inhabitants
rendered him all possible service to destroy that City their grand enemy. The
Ghentois reduced to hunger by their Earl, without being able to obtain pardon,
staked down all they had left at once. The First day of May, by the advice of
Artevelle, and under his Conduct, they went forth to the number of Five
thousand Men resolved to dye, and the Third day presented themselves before
Bruges.

They had no more Provisions then what was loaded in seven Wagons, and had
left none at Ghent. It had been easy for the Count to have famished them;
nevertheless, blinded with revenge, he chose rather to fight them the same day;
he had only Eight hundred Lances, but of the Burghers there went forth above
Forty thousand Men. Amidst this terrible multitude, there was more of pride and
outward pomp, then inward and true courage, they gave ground upon the very
first shock; the Ghentois pursued their point, and entered pell-mell with them
into the City, made themselves Masters, sacked it, and slew above Twelve
hundred of the principal Tradesmen, their mortal enemies.

The Count that night hid himself in the Garret of a poor Widows House, between
the Bed and Matt, where her Children lay, and escaped the next day to l'Isle,
disguised like a Mechanique. This miraculous success brought all the Cities in
Flanders over to the Ghentois Faction, only Audenard excepted. Artevelle
admired by all as the deliverer of his Country, took upon him the garb and
state of a Sovereign. Prosperity tumbled him down again, as Adversity had
raised him.

Flemming thus rudely handled, had recourse to the King of France his
Sovereign, by the interest of the Duke of Burgundy his Son-in-law, and
Artevelle craved the assistance of the King of England. This last moving but
slowly, missed an opportunity that would have been of great advantage to him;
but those that were of Council to Charles, complying with the humors of that
young Prince, which were conformable to the interests of France, resolved to
quell the City of Ghent, which seemed to be the Springhead of all those
popular disturbances.

Having therefore taken out the Standard of St. Denis, named the Oriflamme,
with the accustomed Ceremonies, he went into the Field about the beginning of
September, Arras was the general Rende-vouz for his Army, which was made up of
Sixty thousand Fighting Men, amongst which were Twelve thousand Men at Arms,
and almost all the Princes, great Officers and Lords of the Kingdom. Artevelle
who had besieged Audenard about two Months, left about Fifteen thousand Men
there to keep those Posts, Commanded by Dubois, and marched thence with Forty
thousand, resolved to fight the French, although he had no Cavalry. The First
brush was about the passage over the River of Lys, where the French twice
gained the Bridge de Comines; the Second was near the City of Ypre, where
Dubois lost Three thousand Men, and was wounded himself; the Third was a
general Battle between Rosebeque and Courtray.

Artevelle was come thither, and had encamped himself with so much confidence
and presumption, that he commanded his Men to give no quarter but to the King,
whom he was to send prisoner into England, whilst he went on to conquer and
share all France. Being informed of the great strength and excellent order of
the French Army, he would have avoided his personal danger, and have absented
himself, upon pretense of going to fetch Ten thousand Men more to join with
them, but the rest made him stay there as it were perforce.

November. The Flemmings kept in a very close Order, but did not fight with
vigor and alacrity; the French Horse pressed so hard upon them, they had not
Elbow-room to strike with much force. There were near Forty thousand of them
slain, either in the fight or the pursuit, amongst whom was their General
Artevelle, whom they could hardly distinguish in such heaps of dead Carcasses.

The courage of the Ghentois much depressed by this cruel blow, was afresh
revived and inspired by Dubois, who brought some Forces to them which he had in
Bruges, and by the coming on of Winter, which hindered the Conquerours from
besieging them; so that in some overtures that were propounded for an
accommodation, their carriage appeared as haughty as if they had gained the
Battle.

Courtray did not enjoy that favor, although they had paid down the purchase;
the cause of this their misfortune, was said to be the resentment of the French
for their annual Festivity, in commemoration of that Battle they had gained
over them in the year 1302. with certain Letters from the Parisians, which were
found, making mention of a League between the Cities in France with those in
Flanders, for the utter rooting out of the Nobility; they were therefore
plundered, massacred, and the Town afterward set on fire.

And in effect, as soon as the King was gone out of France, the Citizens of
Paris, Rouen, Troyes, Orleans, and several others, had taken up Arms upon
occasion of the Imposts; insomuch that the Princes and the Grandees, who sought
to make advantage of Confiscations and Fines; having easily persuaded the King,
whether it were true or not; that the People had conspired against the Crown;
that young Prince, by their advice and instigation, severely chastised those
Cities, by putting great numbers to death, by Proscriptions, revocation of
Privileges, and excessive Taxes.

The Parisians as proud, but less courageous then the Ghentois, went armed
forth to meet him in the Plain near St. Denis, to the number of Thirty
thousand, to pay

Amongst those of the last number, was the Kings Advocate, John de Marais, more
guilty for opposing the Princes exactions, then for contributing toward their
popular commotions. After all these punishments, they ordered all the Citizens
of Palace-yard. The King sitting on his Throne, which was raised very high, the
Chancellor d'Orgemont showed them the horror of their reiterated crimes, in
such harsh terms, and terrible expressions, as seemed to bid them all prepare
for death. They prostrated themselves upon the ground, the Ladies with
dischevell'd Hair, the Men beating their Breasts, all crying out for Mercy. The
Dukes of Berry and Burgundy fell on their knees before the King, who, as if he
had been moved at their Prayers, did with his own Lips pronounce, that he did
pardon them, and did commute the punishment they had deserved to pecuniary
Mulcts and Fines.

This was the true meaning of all that Theatrical project; above one moity of
their Goods was now exacted from them; and then whilst their terror was yet
upon them, the Imposts were again settled, and they were levied with
unexpressible extortion. The other Cities were Treated in the like manner; and
these vast sums went almost wholly into the pockets of the Nobility, who soon
squandring them away again in foolish and vain expenses, did in some sort
justify those commotions, which they so horribly chastised.

English perceived, but too late, the fault they had committed, in not
supporting the Ghentois more early; and therefore the Truce being expired, they
resolved to assist them. Urban sounding his Trumpet of war in every corner
against the Clementines, a Croisado had been preached up in England, whereof
Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich made himself Chief. Being landed at Calais,
instead of attacquing the French, he fell upon Flanders, pretending that
Country belonged to the King of France, who was a Clementine.

The taking of Gravelin and a Battle he won nigh that place, over twelve
thousand Flemmings, brought a terror upon the whole Country. After which,
having had a re-inforcement from the Ghentois, he laid Siege to Ypres; but the
King returning personally into Flanders with a powerful Army, drove him from
that place, re-took and saccaged Bergh, which the English had forsaken, and
shut them up in Bourbourgh; he might have taken them at discretion, had not the
mediation of the Duke of Bretagne obtained them terms that were honorable
enough. The History written by the Monk of St. Denis, speaks not a word of the
Bishop of Norwich, but attributes this expedition to the Duke of Gloucester.
However it were, he that Commanded was forced to go back into England without
much credit, and almost without any of his Men.

English to desire a Peace; Deputies on either side were sent to the Village of
Lelinghen, in the midway between Calais and Boulogne. The Duke of Lancaster
would comprehend the Ghentois, and the Earl of Flanders opposed it: which
caused the Conference to end only in a Truce from the Month of October, till
St. John's day following, of which it was allowed the Ghentois should be
partakers.

St. Omers, was seized with a Malady, whereof he died the Three and twentieth
of January, in the year 1384. this grief attending him to his death, that he
beheld his Country laid in ashes, and glutted with the blood of his own
Subjects. Perhaps it wounded his Heart to hear the Duke of Berry reproach him
with most injurious terms; That his too obstinate revenge was cause of all
those mischiefs. Philip I. Duke of Burgundy his Son-in-law succeeded him in all
his Estates, and carried on the War against the Rebels, but with more mildness,
and a design of reclaiming those stubborn Spirits, and bringing them to a true
submission, rather by policy and persuasion, then by force.

Guyenne. The Marshall of Sancerre, Governor of the Province, could not put
up their Emp. Wencestaus and Emanuel II. Son of John, R. 24 years.
Robberies, they having been so insolent as to attaque himself, wherefore he
cut them all off. There was another rising of the Peasants, as cruel as those
of the Jacquerie, who overran Poitou, Berry, and Auvergne, and most inhumanely
butchered all those whose Hands were not hardened with Labor they were named
the Tuchins; Peter de la Bruyere. The Duke of Berry drew his Forces together,
dispersed them, and put their Ringleader to death, with many more of his
Rustiques.

Anjou, the Duke of Berry and the Duke of Burgundy engrossed all Authority, but
especially this last. The Duke of Bourbon finding he was not able to make head
against him, quitted the Government of the Kings Person, and partly to perform
a Vow he had made to go into the Holy Land, went into Africa with the Count de
Harcour, the Lord de la Tremonille, and other Lords and Gentlemen, to the
number of Eight hundred, and a much greater number of Adventurers of diverse
Countries, with whom he signalized his Courage and Conduct against the Moors of
Barbary.

The King of Armenia Minor, sprung from the Blood of Luzignan, flying from the
cruelty of the Turks who had conquered his Kingdom, and kept his Wife and
Children in Captivity, came for relief, and assistance to the French Court,
where the King gave him Honorable Entertainment during all the rest of his
days. He enjoyed it to the year 1404. then died at Paris, and was interred at
the Celestines.

Naples, Charles de Duras and his Captains, behaved themselves so well, that
cutting off all Provisions from Lewis of Anjou, and either following, or
flanking him, so as to prevent his Fighting them, they reduced him to the
extremest want of all necessaries, even of Clothes; insomuch as this Prince,
who had carried away all the Kings Treasure, had no more left him then a Coat
of painted Cloth to wear, and one Silver Bowl to drink in. He had sent Peter de
Craon, an Angevin Lord into France, to bring him Money and Succors; this
faithless Friend made no haste to return, amusing himself at Venice with the
divertisement of some Courtisans. After the unfortunate Prince had waited a
long time without any tidings of him, he sunk under his grief, and died the
Tenth day of October, in this year 1384. or September the year following.

The Earl of Savoy died in the month of March, either of the Plague, or by
drinking Water out of a Fountain that had been poisoned. His Son Ame VII.
Surnamed Le Rouge The Red.
succeeded him. We must observe that this Ame VI. was the Institutor of the
Order of the Collar, which was composed of Love-knots, together with the
Symbolical Letters of the House of Savoy, and had at the end a kind of a Ring,
or wreathed Coronet. Duke Charles III. being at Chamberry, Anno 1518. changed
the name of this Order to that of the Annunciado Annunciation.
to honor the Holy Virgin in that mystery which is the most agreeable to her;
adding Fifteen White Roses to the Fifteen Love-knots, in remembrance of her
Fifteen Joys, and filled the Pendant with Figures of the Annunciation.

Anjou's Army perished by Famine and Want, excepting such as dispersing by
small parties, retired into France, begging their livelihood, and receiving
more injuries, and opprobrious words in their Travels, then they got bits of
Bread*

The Angevin party was not for all this quite extinct in that Kingdom, it
subsisted yet in the hearts of some Lords of that Country, whereof Thomas de
St. Severin was the Chief, and who afterward served very well upon occasion.
For this time the Kingdom rested quietly under Charles de Duraz. He was
likewise named Charles de la Paix, and Charles the Little.


The Truce with the English being expired, the King, who began to take
cognizance of his Affairs, held a grand Council, to deliberate whether they
ought to continue it. It was the interest of the Duke of Burgundy, because of
his Low Countries, to have a Peace with the English; but to counterpoise his
Power, and to flatter Sluice, and they sent to the Scots to oblige them to a
rupture of the Truce on their side.



Pursuant to the recommendation of the late King Charles the Wise, the young
Kings Uncles sought a Wife for him in Germany; the opinions in Council were
different and divided, the Duke of Burgundy carried it for Isabella, Daughter
of Stephen Duke of Bavaria, Count Palatine of the Rhine. The King Married her
at Amiens the.... of July. In the preceding month of April, the Nuptials
between John the Duke of Burgundy's Son, and Marguerite, Daughter of Albert
Duke of Bavaria: Earl of Hainault, Holland and Zealand were consummate.

England being laid aside, after a vast expense, that something might come of
it, John de Vienne Admiral, went with Threescore Sail to Scotland, and there
landed to attaque the English on that side. He made an irruption into their
Country and took some Castles, but the savage humor of the Scots, could not
comply with the free liberty of the French. Besides, Love had invaded the
Admirals Heart and Head, which made him courta Lady of the Kings Parentage;
whereat that wh ole Court, not being acquainted with those Gallantreys, took
such offense, that he found it the best way to make his escape with all
diligence.

Ghentois would not yet bend, they had two new Leaders, Francion and Atreman,
who hardened them against all apprehensions of punishment: This obliged the King
to make a third step into Flanders. They had no Port could receive any English
Succors but Damm, the king having taken that by force, and afterward burning
all the Houses round about their City; the Rebels in the end began to hearken
to Propositions for an accommodation, being inclined by the more pacifique
humor of Atreman, one of their new Chiefs, in despite of all the practices of
John du Bois, and returned to the obedience of the King, and the Duke of
Burgundy their Lord.

This Prince quite wearied with this tedious War which ruined all his Country,
gave them a general Amnesty for all things that were past, and the confirmation
of all their privileges, upon condition they would renounce all Leagues, and
that the first that should violate the Peace, might forfeit his Life and all
his Goods. The Treaty was Signed the Eighteenth of December.

A Truce was renewed likewise between France and England for some Months.

Charles de Duraz, not being satisfied with having invaded the Kingdom of
Naples, went also into Hungary and usurped that upon Mary, one of the Daughters
of Lewis the Great his Benefactor, who died Anno 1381. and Wife to Sigismund,
Brother of the ^mperour Wenceslaus, whom he detamed in captivity with the Widow
Queen his Mother. After so many Treacheries and cruel Ingratitudes, Heaven
suffered him to be murdered himself, by the order of Nicholas Gato; one of the
Palatines of that Kingdom, who was very affectionate to the Princesses, which
happened the Sixth day of January, in the year 1386.

Horvat, Governor of Croatia, one of King Charles's Partisans or Confederates,
who to revenge the death of his Master, caused the Widow and the Murderer Gato
to be massacred. He kept the Princess some time, then sent her to Sigismund,
having first obliged her by all sorts of Oaths to pardon him. Sigismund did not
think himself bound by her promises, and therefore having surprised him, made
him dye amidst a thousand torments.

Charles's Murder being brought into Italy, Thomas de Sanseverin caused Lewis
II. eldest Son of the deceased Duke of Anjou, to be proclaimed King, and
Clement VII. to be owned Pope. Afterward Marguerite the Widow of Charles being
retired to Cajeta with Ladislaus or Lancelot her Son, aged about Ten years, he
reduced almost the whole Kingdom, and Naples it self. Thus all things went on
smoothly for Lewis, till Mary de Blois his Mother and Governess, having sent
Clement de Montjoye, Nephew to Pope Clement, with the Title and Authority of
Viceroy, the Sanseverins thinking themselves under-valued, were alienated from
her Service, and turned to Ladislaus.

Lewis was put into possession of Provence, and invested with the Kingdom of
Naples by Clement, but it was not without great trouble, before the Provensaux
would acknowledge him: the Kings Counsel themselves inciting them underhand to
a Rebellion upon diverse motives, because they would have disposed them to give
themselves up to France.

After Five or Six years Truces and petty Wars, the Council resolved to
attacque the English, not in Guyenne only, but even in their own Island. For
this end they made the most formidable preparations of Men, Engines, and Ships,
that ever yet were seen. They bought up or hired all the Vessels they could
light on, from the Ports of Sweden to those in Flanders; they built a City of
Wood which was to be taken in pieces, to shelter themselves upon their Landing.
The King went to Sluyce to take a view of his Army and Navy, consisting in Nine
hundred Vessels. The Duke of Berry's envy and jealousy retarded the progress;
he would needs break the design, because he was not the contriver. In order to
which he made them wait for him till the Fourteenth of September, when the Seas
began to appear un-navigable. So the Forces drew off into Quarters, part of
this numerous Fleet were scattered by Tempests; the English picked up many that
were wracked, or stragled.

Bretagne too much, because of his too many Obligations to the English, and the
consideration that their suppression must he his ruin: wherefore they warily
minded his actions: but he to justify himself, laid Siege to Breast, which they
yet held as a bridle to Bretagne. The Constable assisted him in the
undertaking, the place was mightily straightened; but when they were at the last
gasp, the Duke of Lancaster who was going into Spain with great Forces, made
them raise the Siege.

The occasion of his voyage was this, Ferdinand, last King of Portugal had no
Child, but a Daughter born of a Lady whom he had taken from her Husband. He
caused this Girl to be owned as his presumptive Heyress; as likewise the Mother
had been owned Queen, and married her to John King of Castille, who was a
Widower and had two Sons; but when he died, the principal Cities of Portugal
apprehending the Castillan bondage, had more mind to have a bastard Brother of
Ferdinands for their King, his Name was John. Froissard names him Denis through
a mistake, instead of saying he was Grand Master of the Order D'Avis.

The fortune of the War was favorable to the Bastard, he gained a Battle at
Juberot against his adversaries, the Castillans having out of an ugly
jealousy, suffered the Gascons and French to be defeated, who took their part
with above Eight thousand Men, and then were afterward themselves defeated.
Notwithstanding this advantage, it was to be feared the Castillan would be able
yet to crush them, and therefore the Bastard sent to the Duke of Lancaster,
inviting him to come and pursue the right he had to the Kingdom of Castille; as
on the other hand the Castillian had recourse to France.

Lancaster passed therefore into those Countries with a huge force, conquered a
part of Castille, and struck such a terror into all the rest, that King John
made some overtures of Peace; but he spun out the Treaty awhile, expecting the
French succors: when he sound those did not come, the Duke of Bourbon their
Conductor marching very slowly, he concluded the Treaty; the Duke of Lancaster
Sealed it by the Marriage of two of his Daughters; one with the King of
Portugal, and the other with the Castillans eldest Son.

This little piece of Honor cost the English very dear, the losses they
suffered by contagious Sicknesses in Spain, and afterward by Storms in their
return, were so great, that the Duke of Lancaster hardly carried home the sixth
part of his Men, and not one but in a languishing condition, half dead with
malady and pain.

Or Bad.
At last by a just punishment from Heaven, Charles the Wicked who had blown up
so many flames, and burnt so many entrails with his violent poisons, was most
cruelly burnt himself. He had caused his Body to be wrapped all over with
Sheets drenched in Spirit of Wine and Sulpher, to corroborate the natural heat
decayed by his debauches; this took fire, I know not by what accident, and
broiled him to the very bones, whereof he died three days after, being the
First of January, in the year 1387. Charles, called the Noble, his Son
succeeded him.

Clisson, and the Admiral John de Vienne, had so filled the King's Head with
the expedition for England, that he makes another preparation to execute it
this year. The state of Affairs was very favorable, all England was in
combustion against King Richard, because he had put mean and vile People into
places of the highest Trust who bear all the sway, which his Uncles could not
endure, nor indeed would they have the Power lodged in any other hands but
their own.

Now when France was on the point of making advantage of these troubles, the
Duke of Bretagne, either of intelligence with the English, or without thinking
of them, was cause of interrupting the Enterprise this time, as it had been
formerly. Clisson was then in Bretagne, to dispatch the Forces that were at
Treguier, that they might go and join with those at Sluyce: but at the same
time he was Treating of the Marriage of one of his Daughters, with John the Son
of Charles de Blois, whom he had purposely got out of the hands of the English,
where he had been detained ever since the time his Father Charles had left him
there in hostage.

Vennes, under a pretense of holding a great Council. Clisson goes thither with
his Train; after Dinner the Duke carrying him to see his Castle de l'Ermine,
which he was building by the Seaside; he caused him to be stopped in a Tower,
and Beaumanoir with him, and commanded Bavalan, who was Captain of the Castle,
to throw them by night into the Sea.

The faithful disobedience of this good Servant, gave the Duke his Master time
to repent his having given Command for the death of the Constable; and the
intercession of the Lord de Laval, who at the peril of his Life, would never
forsake his Brother-in-law; drew him out of prison, upon condition of paying
the sum of One hundred thousand Franks, and the surrendering of three Castles.
But Clisson would not forgive as the Duke had forgiven; and the King taking
this affront done to his prime Officers much to heart, sent for the Duke to
give an account of his actions.

Orleans expressly, the Duke having made them wait for him a long time, sent to
be excused; Clisson pleaded his own Cause, accused him of Treason, and threw
down his gage of Battle, which no body took up. The Duke taking the advice of
the Barons, came at length to Paris, and by the favor of the Dukes of Berry
and Burgundy, was kindly received by the King, and in some measure, made
friends with the Constable, by restoring him both his Money and his Castles.

That question so much debated, touching the conception of the Sacred Virgin
Mother, was begun in the last age amongst the Professors of Divinity. The
Jacobins, according to the opinion of their St. Thomas, and their Albertus the
Great, maintained, that she had not been exempt of the original stain. The
Cordeliers their perpetual antagonists, took occasion upon this point to fall
foul upon them, as if they did denigrate the Honor of the Mother of God. The
common People, and such as were most zealous, applauded these last; and most
part of the Prelates and the Universities adhered to them; but the Jacobins
standing up too stiffly against the Torrent, fell under the Peoples hatred, and
the reputation of being Heretics. One of their principal Doctors, named John
de Moncon, for having Preached too freely on that point, was condemned solemnly
by the Bishop of Paris, and then by the Pope himself, before whom he had
brought his Appeal. Which was more, the University forbid them the Pulpit, and
cut them off from their Body, to which they were not rejoyned till the year
1403. And in the mean time they were to undergo the indignation of the Court,
the shoutings of the common People, and which was worst, great necessity.

William the Son of the Earl of Juliers, and who was Duke of Guelders by his
Mother, Daughter of Duke Renauld the I. of that name, had some contest or
wrangle with the Duke of Burgundy, who supported the Duchess of Brabant, whom
he was to succeed in the detention of certain places of Guelders, which Renauld
had otherwise engaged. Now because the Burgundian employed the Forces of France
against him, this petit Duke, truly generous and magnanimous, but rash in this
point had the confidence to declare As little ones as he had done it formerly,
but they were not alone.
a War against the King, who had twenty Lords in his Train more powerful and
considerable then he.

His bold bragging did not last long, the King fell on a sudden upon the
Country of Juliers. The Father much astonished disowns his Son, to turn away
the storm, demands Peace by the Archbishop of Colens means, and offers his
Homage. The Army therefore quits his Territory, and goes into that of Guelders;
the young Duke persists a month longer in his obstinacy. In the end the Duke of
Burgundy persuades him to crave pardon. Being come to wait upon the King, he
disowned his Challenge, though Sealed with his own Seal, and submits, and
referrs the Disputes he had with the Duchess of Brabant, to him; but did not
renounce his Alliance with the English; nevertheless he was presented with such
noble Gifts, as proved a temptation to the rest of the Germans, to engage them
to the service of France.

The King had attained to the age of Twenty years, wherefore upon the
Proposition which Peter Aisselin de Montaigu, Bishop of Laon, made in Council,
he declared that he would take the administration of the Government into his
own hands, and that he discharged his Uncles, He kept the Duke of Orleans his
Brother near him; the Author of this Counsel, and the Duke of Bourbon not
suspected by this Duke, and one whose sinceriry was likely to give a fair
prospect of good success to the Government. The other two withdrew in
discontent. The sudden death of the Cardinal de Laon, which happened soon after,
was held in the opinion of many, for an effect of their resentment.

Bureau de la Riviere, John le Mercier Sieur de Novian, and John de Montaign
had the best part. He afterward took off all the new Imposts, set aside the
theeving Officers whom the Princes had put in, gave the Provostship which he
had newly restored, to John Jouvenal the Advocate, an honest Man, Wise and
Courageous; that of First President to Ouchard des Moulins, sent all the
Prelates to reside on their Benefices; and to have time to heal the Kingdom,
whose very Bowels were torn and mangled, made a Truce for three years with the
English.

St. Denis; the Knighthood of Lewis II. King of Sicilia, and Charles Earl of
Main his Brother, with Tournaments and Tiltings very stately: after that the
Funeral of Bertrand de Gueselin, at Melun, the Marriage of his Brother Lewis
with Valentine, Daughter of John Galeazo Duke of Milan, and Earl de Vertus in
Champagne; and at Paris in the Holy Chapel, the Coronation of the Queen his
Wife.

The Marriage of Lewis his only Brother with Valentine, was in Treaty, Anno
1386. and consummate this year; she brought him in Dower Four hundred thousand
Florins of Gold: the County of Ast to be enjoyed from that hour; and that of
Vertus in Champagne after the death of the Father, with Rings and Jewels of an
inestimable value. These huge sums enabled the young Prince to make great
Purchases; These Acquisitions, and the greediness of his Wife inflamed his
covetoufness, as his birth and quality, inspired him with pomp and
magnificence. So that being possessed with two contrary passions, of getting
and spending, he succeeded his Uncle the Duke of Anjou, and even exceeded him
in the unjust desire of pillaging the Kingdom, and snatching away the Goods of
other People.

Avignon, where he was present at the Coronation of Lewis of Anjou, by the
Popes hands. From thence he went into Languedoc, where he took information of
the Duke of Berry's exactions, of which he heard daily complaints. They
punished this Prince in his Ministers, by casting out several of the worst
Officers, and making the Process of John Betisac, principal Counselor and
Minister of his violence. He was burnt alive for a crime against nature; and
this was a Bon-fire to the People, whom he had most horribly vexed and abused.

From Toulouze the King went into the Country of Foix. Gaston Phoebus received
him magnificently, and having rendered him homage for his Country, entreated
him that he would be his Heir; which was to deprive Matthew Vicount de
Castelbon his Cousin-german by the Father, of his Succession, and get some
share of it to fall upon his natural Son.

At his return he took away the Government of Languedoc from the Duke of Berry,
and bestowed it upon the Lord de Chevreuse; but five years after he restored it
again to him, as he was going to make War upon the Duke of Bretagne.

A Second time the Duke of Bourbon, upon a request the Genoese made to the
King, for his assistance against the Barbarians of Tunis, who by their
continual Piracies, interrupted all manner of Trade, fitted out a Fleet,
wherein were Five hundred Men at Arms, all Knights or Esquires, and a great
number of Cross-bow Men. Philip de Artois Earl of Eu, the Count de Harcour, the
Admiral John de Vienne, Charles Sire d'Abret were Volunteers; the Earl of
Derby, Son to the Duke of Lancaster would needs be amongst them, with some
Forces made up of his own Contrymen. Being joined with the Genoese, they
laid Siege to the City of Carthage, at that time the Bulwark of the Kingdom of
Tunis. The enterprise was greater then their Forces; at six weeks end they
found themselves so disordered through the heats of the Climate, Labor and
Wounds, that although they had gained a great Battle, yet they lost either
their hopes or courage, and re-embarqu'd again: the Genoese only had the craft
to take advantage of the King of Tunis, by a private Treaty for liberty to
Traffic.

July, while the Council were assembled at St. Germansen Lay, to settle some
new Impositions, the King and Queen being the same instant at Mass, on a
sudden there arose such a dreadful strom of Wind, Hail and Thunder, as almost
beat the Castle about the ears of those evil Counselors, and so terrified
them, they durst not go forward with their projects.

The Turks made mighty progress in Europe; Sultan Amurat gained a bloody Battle
in the Plains of Cosow, against the Kings of Servia, Bosina, and Bulgaria but
he perished there; Bajazet his Son, Surnamed the Thunderbolt succeeded him.
About the same time Themir-lanc Lane is to a^y Lame, the vulgar say Tamberlan.
King of the Tartars raised himself to great power.

Lewis the Kings Brother, buys the County of Blois, and that of Dunois, or
Chasteaudun, with some other Lands of Earl Guy, who had no Children. He
likewise got of the King the Duchy of Orleans, notwithstanding all the
Remonstrances the Burghers of that City made, by the mouth of their Bishop.

The chief ground of the mortal feud between the Houses of Orleans and
Burgundy, was their disputes for the Government. Having been raked up now for a
while, this year it began to break forth anew. The Duke of Orleans pretended to
the administration, as being nearest related, and arrived at the age of Twenty
years: but the Estates being assembled at Paris, gave their opinion for the
Duke of Burgundy.

Gaston Phoebus Earl of Foix, who bare the name and devise of the Sun, and who
was so renowned for his Victories, his Generosity, his Buildings, his
Magnificence, and his Train and Equipage equal to that of a King, died suddenly
as they were filling Water for him to wash his Hands before Supper, after his
return from Hunting. He had made a Gift of his County to the King, who not
desiring to be beneath him in generosity, returned it to his Bastard-Son.

From whence soever it came, or whose fault soever it was, the Treaty between
the Duke of Bretagne and Clisson was broken. The Duke was infinitely troubled
that France should support his Subject against him, and make a private
Gentleman equal with him. The King sent for both of them to Court, the Duke far
from coming thither, renewed his ancient Alliances with England. Upon this day
they dispatch Berry, Peter de Navarre, and diverse other Lords to him, to
complain of the correspondence he held with strangers, his Coining of Moneys,
and making his Subjects give their Oaths to him, and against all others.

He imagined this stately Embassy was only to stir up his People, and was upon
the point to seize on all of them as a pawn for his better security. His Wife
having some hint of it, though she were great with Child, and at that time half
undressed, took up her Children in her Arms, found him out, and by the powerful
influence and rhetorique of her Prayers and Tears, made him change his mind and
resolution: She farther prevailed with him to go to Tours where the King was;
but he came with Six hundred Gentlemen, and under the protection of the Duke of
Burgundy his good Cousin. The King Treated him very civilly, and desired
nothing more of him, but only that he would pay the remainder of the hundred
thousand Franc's to the Constable, and give up some places to the Earl of
Pontieure.

John Galeazo Or Galeaze. 1391.
Viscount, had usurped the Seigneury of Milan upon Bernard his Uncle, whom he
put to death in prison, and had deprived his Son Charles, and a Daughter
married to Bernard, Brother to the Earl of Armagnac of his Succession. This
Earl for his Brothers sake, and upon the entreaty of the Florentines and
Bolognians, whom Galeaze oppressed, marched into Lombardy to make War upon him.
Being more courageous then he, he kept the Field some time; but being less
crafty, he fell into an Ambuscade near Alexandria, and was wounded to death;
after which, his whole Army was dispersed, and dwindled to nothing.

Charles and Richard had, to join their Forces against the Turks, brought the
Duke of Lancaster to a Conference with King Charles at Amiens, but the
Propositions were so high on the English side, that the result at last was only
a Truce for a year.

The more the authority of the Constable and his three dependants was
confirmed, the more grievous was their power to the People. The King's Uncles
fretted, and grew enraged, the Clergy betrayed by some of the Chief of their own
Body, were on the brink of losing their immunities, had not the University,
from whom they were also taking away all their Privileges, bestirred
themselves, and put a stop to all School-Exercises and Preaching. When they
observed that all Foreigners went away from Paris, and that such an
Interdiction made a great noise all over Europe, even those that had undertaken
the ruin of that Body, would needs have the honor of procuring them an
Audience of the King, who did them justice upon their Complaints.

The Support and Privileges the Kings, ever since the time of Lewis the Gross,
had granted to this famous University, the Mother of all the rest that are in
Europe; the infinite numbers of Students that came thither from the remotest
Countries, the strict adherence of the whole Clergy to them, to whom they were
a Nursery and Seminary, and the Authority their Faculty of Divinty had
acquired, to judge of Doctrine, and Matters thereto relating, had rendered them
so considerable, that in times of confusion they were called to consult in all
Affairs of Importance; if not, they took upon them to make Remonstrances, and
knew how to oblige others to follow them.

Peter de Craon was notoriously guilty of the loss of Lewis Duke of Anjou his
Lord, the Duke of Berry had threatened to have him hanged for it; yet he was no
less regarded at Court, where the splendour of Birth and Riches, easily covers
baseness and crimes. It happened that he fell into disgrace with the Duke of
Orleans, he fancied the Constable had done him that ill Office; he resolved
upon revenge: and one Evening, the Thirteenth of June, as he was coming from
the King, Assassinates him in St. Catherines street, being assisted by Twenty
Russians whom he had gotten together in his House Hostel or ^na^, as Great Men's
Dwellings are called.
He afterward easily escaped out of Paris, the Gates having been always left
open, ever since the Constable had caused them to be taken down upon his return
from Flanders.

These wounds did not prove the death of the Constable, but they were the ruin
of Craon. Three of the Murderers being discovered and taken, were beheaded,
his Goods confiscated and given to the Duke of Orleans; his House turned into a
Churchyard for St. John's in Greve, and his stately Seats in the Country
demolished. He could save nothing but his Person, by flying to the Duke of
Bretagne, who kept him carefully concealed. Some years after the King granted
his Pardon, upon the request of the Duke of Orleans.

When the Constable began to recover of his wounds, both those that were his
friends, and such as were no way concerned, called earnestly upon the King to
punish this attempt. There was upon this, Command sent to the Duke to deliver
up the Assassin, he denies him to be in that Country; the Ministers exasperate
the King, and persuade him to march toward Bretagne to destroy the Duke. In
vain did his Uncl^s urge that this was but a private quarrel, which ought to be
legally determined by the ordinary ways and methods of Justice, and that it was
against the common Rights of Mankind, to fall upon the Duke of Bretagne, before
he was proved Guilty or Condemned; they could not alter that Resolution.

August, his Brain already much weakened with the debauchery of his youth, was
discomposed with black and noxious vapors. Two unexpected, but frightful
objects, heightened and hastened his phrensy. One day as he was going out of
Manse, passing thorough a Wood, there came forth a tall black fellow, all
weather-beaten and ragged, who laid hold of his Horses Bridle, bawling out,
Stop King, Whither go thou, thou art betrayed, then vanished. Soon after a
Page who carried a Lance sleeping on horseback, let it fall upon a Helmet which
another carried before him. At this shrill noise, and the sight of the posture
of the Lance, the Apparition or Fantasme, and its threatenings came fresh into
his mind, his Fancy was disturbed, he imagines they were going to deliver him
up to his enemy, and believed all those that were about him to be Traitors.
This puts him into a violent fit of Fury, he runs, strikes, kills without Rhyme
or Reason, till he fell into a Swoon. They carry him bound in a Chariot back to
Manse.

Witchcrafts and Poysonings were so frequent in those days, that it was
believed, his malady proceeded from some such Cause. The third day he recovered
his Senses, and by little and little his Strength (which was attributed to the
public Prayers made for him,) but not the full vigor of his understanding. In
this disorder his Uncle resumed the Government, conducted him back to Paris,
seized upon the three Citizen Favorites, who having undergone three Months
imprisonment, with the continual fear of being led to execution, as was
threatened, were set at liberty by the Kings Command, who ordered the greatest
part of their Goods to be restored: but declared them for ever incapable of
holding any Office-Royal. The Constable was so fortunate as to make his escape
to his own Country in Bretagne, where he most bravely defended himself against
the Duke, by the assistance of the Duke of Orleans and the rest of his friends.
The Princes gave his Office to Philip of Artois Earl of Eu. All Offices being
as then but Commissions, which were revocable.

Urban the Pope of Rome died in the Month of October, Anno 1389. Boniface IX.
succeeded him; this Pope showed himself to be very much inclined to reunite
the Church, dispatched a Chartreux.
Friar to Clement, to consult of some method to bring it about, Clement puts
him in prison, but the University exclaimed so, that he released him.

Clament was therefore compelled to feign, that he had a desire to put an end
to that Schism. But when the University had declared, it was impossible to be
effected without the renunciation of both Competitors, he and the Duke of Berry
who took his part, highly broke off the Proposition. But they could never stop
the mouth of that Mother of all Learning and Piety, from crying out against
that scandal, which so afflicted the whole Church.

January at the Nuptials of a Lady, belonging to the Queen, while the King and
some young Lords were Dancing a Mascarade clothed like Bears, the Duke of
Orleans holding down a Flambeau to discover their Faces, set Fire to the Tow
which was fastened upon the Bear-Skins with some kind of Glue. The Hall was in
an instant filled with Flames, Shreeks, and the astonishment of all the
Presence, they almost crowded themselves to death for haste to get out all
together; some cried aloud, Save the King; the Duchess of Berry covered him
with her Gown, which being clapped close about him, preserved him from that
torrent of Fire; Three of those Masqueraders were most miserably broiled. The
Parisians hated the Duke of Orleans to death for it, as if it had been a
premeditated design, he durst not appear for several days; and to expiate that
fault, he founded a Chapel at the Celestines.

This accident did somewhat discompose the Kings health, who was before it,
pretty well recovered; however, the strength of his age and constitution, or
the Vows and Pilgrimages he made in Person, as other devout People did for him,
did again restore him to a better temper and state: insomuch as his Uncles
having a Rendezvous at Lelinghan, between Ardres and Guisnes, to Treat about a
Peace with the Crown of England, in whose behalf the Duke of Lancaster was
commissioned; persuaded Lancaster to go to Abbeville, that the English might be
satisfied how well he was. But he relapsed into his frenzy the Twentieth day
of June, which held him till the Month of January following. They had recourse
to Prayers, Fasting, Processions, the ablest Physicians, then Mountebanks, and
even to Magicians. All this was in vain, the distemper lasted as long as his
life, not continually, but at several times and Fits, and still worse and
worse, they drawing him into great debaucheries and disorders in his better
intervals.

They did not know well whom to lay the blame upon; the Jews were for the
Seventh time enjoined to quit the Kingdom, or their Religion, and become
Christians: some chose to forsake their Religion rather then that Country,
others sold all they had and went away.

Nicholas de Clamengis, Bachelor in Divinity, a Man very eloquent, was ordered
to compose a Discourse to the King, in an Epistolary Form, to which receiving
no favorable answer, they put a Second stop to all their Exercises.

Hungary to make War upon the Turks, who having withdrawn themselves, the
Hungarians employed him against the Patarins, these were a kind of Sectaries
that were esteemed Heretics.



The free and bold Remonstrances of the University of Paris, being carried to
Pope Clement, and read against his will by the Cardinals assembled, made him
die through rage and displeasure. This news being brought to Court, the King
wrote speedily to the Cardinals, to forbear the Election of a new Pope: but
they guessing what his Letters imported before they opened them, immediately
proceeded and named Peter de Luna an Arragonian, who took the Name of Benedict
Or Bennet.
XIII. Before this Election they took an Oath to labor all they could to heal
up this Schism, and that whoever were chosen, should be obliged to lay it down
again, if it were judged necessary. Peter de Luna confirmed this Oath, and at
the first showed himself well inclined to do so.

France in his Palace; who concluded all unanimously, that a Cession was the
most certain, and Orleans, of Berry, and of Burgundy, with Ambassadors from the
King, and some Deputies from the University, went to Bennet at Avignon, to
propound this expedient to him. Of his Fifteen Cardinals there was but one that
withstood it; they therefore pressed him to condescend. He a voided it by a
thousand wiles, and did so tire the Princes with his delays and evasions, that
they returned again without obtaining any thing; and likewise without taking
their leave; nevertheless he stopped their Mouths, and pacified them, by
granting them power to raise another Tenth.

Richard and his Uncles, Lancaster and Gloucester, were in mortal jealousies of
each other for the reasons abovementioned. Richard desiring to strengthen
himself against them, demanded the Kings Daughter Isabella in Marriage, aged
but Seven years. This was agreed unto, with the prolongation of the Truce for
Twenty eight years. The Marriage was performed by Proxy.

The King relapsed for the third time into his former distemper; Some days he
appeared to be quite stupify'd, at other times he would cry out as if they
pricked him with a thousand Bodkins. He forgot his own quality and Name, and
could not endure the sight of his Wife, but would suffer himself very patiently
to be Governed by the Duchess of Orleans; for which reason the common people
would needs be persuaded that Italian had bewitched him. Indeed the Duke her
Husband had the reputation of seeking for, and conversing with Magicians. The
less credulous might well enough imagine, that she charmed the King with
something that was a more natural spell, muck like to those wherewith the Duke
Governed the Queens mind. However it were, fearing the foolish multitude should
do her some mischief, her Husband sent her for a while to Chasteau-neuf upon
the Loire.

Germany, the Kings of Hungary, Castille, Arragon, and Navarre, offered to join
with him for the Cession; the English were for the having it to determined by a
Council. Benedict flattered and soothed them all, and promised one thing to
one, and the quite contrary to another; his greatest care and drift being to
keep them from agreeing all together upon one method, or expedient.

Gallican Church did not allow of Confessors to such as were condemned to
suffer death by the Law; in this particular she followed the usage of the
ancient Canons, which did not admit to the Communion those that were branded
with enormous crimes. The Monk of St. Denis observes in this year, that Charles
the VI. was the first that granted them this favor, and says, the honor of
obtaining it, was attributed to Peter de Craon, because he set up a Cross of
Stone nigh Montfaucon, where those poor wretches use to make a stop to be
confessed. In those times they did not hang any criminal within their Cities,
they would have been thought too much polluted

Genoa, rather then submit to the command of John Galeazo, Viscount of Milan,
put themselves under obedience of the King, and transferred all the right of
propriety they had to him. The Kings Commissioners left the Government to the
Doge or Duke, after he had first resigned his Power and Dignity into their
hands; but in a little time they gave that Command to Boucicaut.

The Factions in that Seigneury had very near destroyed and brought it to
naught; The City was filled only with Robbers and Murderers, the Noblest were
banished thence, Merchants durst not open their Bank, those most in power made
War upon each other from street to street, and had raised Towers at each corner
of their Palaces, to defend themselves. The Marshall desiring to settle some
Order, and his own Authority amongst them, commanded they should bring all
their Arms into his Palace, forbad all Assemblies, cut off the Head of
Boccanegra, and a dozen or fifteen more of the most Factious, made strict
inquiry after such as had committed notorious crimes, raised and entertained
several Companies that kept Guards in all the Markets and public places, and
built two Castles which had communication, with each other, the one named the
Darse at the mouth of the Port, the other in the City, called the Chastelet.

October was appointed for the stately and magnificent enterview of the two
Kings upon the confines of their Territories, between Ardres and Calais, where
they confirmed the Truce. The King of England espoused the Daughter of France,
and rendered up Breast to the Duke of Bretagne, and Cherbourgh to the King of
Navarre: who three years afterward sold it to the King.

France having granted succors to the King of Hungary against Bajazeth, the
Duke of Burgundy gave them John Earl of Nevers his Son to be their Leader. He
had in his Army Two thousand Gentlemen of quality, besides the Earl of Eu
Constable, Admiral John de Nienne, John le Maingre-Boucicaut Marshall of
France, Henry and Philip, Sons of the Duke of Bar, Guy de la Trimouille his
Fathers Favorite, and other Lords.

Turks. Besides, their presumption swollen by success, engaged them with the
Hungarians in the Siege of Nicopolis, and then in a Battle the Twenty eighth of
September, where the Hungarians not caring to second them as they ought, they
were all cut off, or taken prisoners. Bajazeth caused above Six hundred to be
hewed in pieces, in presence of the Earl of Nevers; and having made him dye
almost as often with his threats and terrors, he reserved him with Fifteen more
of the great Lords, for whose Ransom he obliged himself to pay Two hundred
thousand Ducats. That sum being made good to them five Months afterward, they
were all set at liberty. The Earl of Nevers arrived in France about the end of
March following. It is said that Bajazeth was so far from taking any Oath, that
he should never make War again upon the Turks, that he exhorted him to take his
revenge, and promised he should ever find him in the Field ready to give him
any satisfaction.



The Earl of Eu dying in his imprisonment amongst the Turks, the Earl de
Sancerre who was a Marescal of France, was honored with the Office of
Constable.

We must observe, the better to understand what we shall relate hereafter, that
this year King Richard, for some conspiracy, whether real or pretended, put his
Uncle the Duke of Gloucester to death, as also the Earl of Arundel, and diverse
other Lords; and banished the Earl of Derby Son to the Duke of Lancaster, who
sheltred himself in France, and began to Reign very tyrannically.

The Emperor Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia took a fancy, for what reason I know
not, to visit the Court of France; the King went to meet him as far as the City
of Rheims; this was in the Month of March, and received him with as much
magnificence as affection. That Prince showed his brutality the very second day
the King had invited him to Dinner; and when the Dukes of Berry and Bourbon
went to fetch him from his own Lodgings, they found he was already drunk, and
taking his Nap to refresh himself, and digest his load of Wine.

Next day the King Treated him, the Entertainment and Mirth had lasted longer,
if the King had not found a Fit coming upon him; which brought him back to
Paris. He left the Duke of Orleance with him to keep him company, and confer
with him about the means of putting an end to the Schism.

Bennets playing fast and loose, and daily disappointments, did decree,
according as they were advised, by a great Assembly of Bishops, Abbots, and
Deputies of the Universities, that the whole Kingdom should be subtracted from
his Obedience, till he would condescend to the Session propounded* and that in
the mean while the Gallican Church, conformable to her ancient liberty should
be governed by her Ordinaries, according to the Holy Canons.

Bennets Cardinals approved of this substraction, and forsook him, retiring
themselves to the new Town of Avignon: but he stood it out, and having gotten
some Arragonian Soldiers to serve him for a Guard, shut himself in the Palace
of Avignon. The Marshall Boucicaut had order from the King to besiege him
there; he acquitted himself faithfully, and pent him up so close, that in a few
days he would have been reduced to want of Provisions, when order came to him
from Court to change the Siege into a Blockade, and suffer refreshments to be
carried in. Bennets Artifice and his Money had gained some of the Grandees who
contrived this for him.

Perigord, Archambauld Taleyrand, tormenting the Country with the help of the
English, to whom he had allied himself, and especially the City of Perigueux
which belonged to the King, was forced in his Castle of Montagnac, brought to
the Parliament and condemned to death. The King gave him pardon for his life,
but bestowed his forfeited Estate upon the Duke of Orleans.

Archambauld de Grailly Captal de Buch, having a Right to the Earldom of Foix,
as having married the Sister of Earl Matthew, dead without Children, got into
possession of it by the Sword. The King would not endure this, because he was a
Vassal English, and from Father to Son very affectionate to that party. He
therefore sent the Marshall de Sancerre, who pursued him so close, that he was
compelled to desire a Cessation, during which he came to the King, and
submitted himself to the judgment of the Parliament, giving up in the mean
time, his two Sons in Hostage. The Parliament declared in his favor,
conditionally he would relinquish the English; and the King put him in
possession. This was in the year 1400.

Constantinople was invested by the Turks, and in the greatest danger; Pera
which is as the Suburbs to it, and from whence they fetched all their
Provisions, was very likely to be taken. It belonged to the Seignory of Genoa:
the Marshall de Boucicaut going thither with only Twelve hundred Men, secured
it, and by consequence the City. After he had disengaged all the parts round
about, and made the Turks retire, whom he worsted in several Rencounters; his
Pay, and Soldiers failing him, he came into France to solicit for a greater
reinforcement, bringing the Emperor along with him; leaving the Lord de
Chasteaumoran in Constantinople to defend it.

England, caused by the ill Government of Richard, and the ambition of his
Uncles, ended in a most Tragical Catastrophe. Henry Earl of Derby became Duke
of Lancaster by the death of his Father, puts King Richard prisoner in the
Tower of London, Deposed him by the Authority and Consent of Parliament, who
degraded and condemned him to a perpetual imprisonment. Then he took the Crown
the Eighteenth day of October, and was anointed with a Holy St. Ampoulle.
Oil, which some English say, was brought by the Virgin Mary to St. Thomas of
Canterbury, whilst he took refuge in France. This Ampoulle (or Bottle) that
contains the Oil, is of Lapis, and on the top stands a Golden Eagle enriched
with Pearls and Diamonds. Notwithstanding this Unction, some while afterward
he gives way to the outcries of the People, who demanded that the unfortunate
King might be strangled. The London Citizens held Richard in execration,
because he had delivered up Breast and Cherbourg to the French.

The Duke of Bretagne, who enjoyed some repose, after the many traverses which
November in the Castle of Nantes. He left his Children to the custody, not of
his Wife Jean of Navarre, but of the Duke of Burgundy, and Oliver de Clisson,
who alone were able to trouble them. He had three, John, Arthur, and Giles.

In the Month of November of this year 1399. a Comet was seen of an
extraordinary brightness, and darting its train toward the West. It appeared
only for one weeks time, and was by Prognosticators, held as a sign of those
great Revolutions Naples, and the Empire.

Lewis of Anjou had peaceably enough enjoyed the better part of the Kingdom of
Sicilia, when Thomas de Sanseverin, Duke de Venousia, offended for that he did
not conclude upon the Marriage of his Brother Charles, Earl of Main, with his
Daughter, made him odious to the Neopolitans, and introduced Lancelot and his
Mother into the City, where he was Crowned King, and invested by the Pope of
Rome. So that Lewis having only some Castles left, returned into France to
crave assistance.

The Electors could no longer endure the Vices and brutish drunkenness of
Wenceslaus, they degraded him, and in his stead elected Henry Duke of Brunswic,
a generous Prince and great Captain; and this Henry being basely assassinated
upon his return from the Diet, by the Count of Waldeck, they substituted Robert
Duke of Bavaria, and Count Palatine, who was of the Electoral College.

The Duke of Milan, fearing left he might dispossess him, shout up all the
passages, and hindered him from going to take the Imperial Crown at Rome; and
Sigismund King of Bohemia, having procured himself to be chosen Guardian to
Wenceslaus his Brother, under this Title made many of the German Princes of his
party, who adhered to the House of Luxemburgh, or rather made this a colorable
pretense to avoid the owning any Sovereign.

France received Emanuel II. Emperor of Greece, who came to give the King
thanks for his assistance, and to crave more help of him. He met with all
manner of good Entertainment, but nothing else, unless it were an annual
Pension for his subsistence. He remained almost two years in France, at the and
whereof, news being brought of the defeat, and taking of Bajazeth, by
Themir-Lanc, the King lent him the Lord of Chasteaumorand with two hundred Men
at Arms, and gave him a sum of Moneyto re-conduct him to Constantinople.

There was not any thing of advantage presented it self, which the Duke of
Orleans did not embrace with passion: he undertook the quarrel of degraded
Wenceslaus,

The desire to Rule, and ambition for Government grew hotter every day betwixt
him and the Duke of Burgundy. Twice had they displaced each other from that
advantageous Post; and besides, the Burgundian resented it highly, that the
Duke of Orleans would have the Duke of Bretagne to be thrust out of all, who
was his Wives Cousin-german, and his own surest friend. The frequent
punctillo's between their Wives, exasperated them more than their own true
interests; the Duke of Burgundy's being the elder, Heiress of a vast Estate,
and sprung from very Noble Blood, despising the other, who in truth had been
much beneath her, had she not been considered as Wife of the Kings only Brother.

Orleans had then the upper hand, and was seized of the management of Affairs;
the Burgundian could not quit his part, both the one and the other got their
friends together, and Paris was surrounded with Soldiers. The Orleannois had
called in the Duke of Guelders with Five hundred Men at Arms, the Burgundian
was not weaker: but the Queen, the Dukes of Berry and Bourbon appearing as
Mediators, reconciled the Uncle and the Nephew, at least to outward show.

At that time the King was in his Fits; when he was recovered, the Duke of
Orleans obtained of him that when he was ill, he should have the Government of

Insomuch that the Burgundian being returned to Court, found his party strong
enough in the Council to obtain the Government again. Soon after the King
coming out of another Fit, gave order that they should Govern jointly: but the
Council, the Queen, and the other Princes and Lords, prayed him to recall it.

The Duke of Orleans went to take passession of the Duchy of Luxemburgh; which
he had purchased of Wenceslans King of Bohemia, and made an agreement between
the Duke of Lorrain and the City of Mets.

As for the Duke of Burgundy he went into Bretagne, where he rendered a signal
piece of Service to France. Jean de Navarre, the Widow of Duke John de Montfort
was going to be married with Henry King of England, and was ready to have
carried her three Daughters with her; the Duke prevented this, and having taken
order to preserve the Duchy for them, brought them to the Court of France, to
be bred Emp. Manuel II. and Robert, R. Nine years Five Months.
up in an affection to that Crown.

Bennet found means to make his escape out of the Palace of Avignon, bearing
about him the Body of our Lord, and certain Letters from the King, in which he
had made promise never to forsake him: Immediately his Cardinals were
reconciled to him, the City craved his Pardon, and the King of Sicilia made him
a visit. The Court of France was hugely divided about the business of the
Substraction; the Dukes of Berry, Burgundy, and Bourbon, insisted to persevere
therein; the Duke of Orleans on the contrary: The Clergy of France were
assembled to decide it.

The King of Spain declared by his Ambassadors, that he would take it off. In
a word, they bestirred themselves so with the King, that he restored the
Kingdom to the Obedience of Bennet. All the Universities consented, even that
of Paris at last, unless the Norman People who resisted a long while. And all
this change was made upon the Duke of Orleans becoming security for Bennets
good intentions: who after this, settled himself in Avignon, fortified it, and
got some Soldiers into the City, and others quartered round the neighborhood,
to maintain himself by power.

Orleans, Berry, and Burgundy disputed daily and contended daily for the
Government: they agreed in no one thing, but the laying of new Imposts: they
had their shares all three, but the odium fell chiefly upon the first for this
as well as for the Schism in the Church.

All the whole time of this Reign, poor France was beaten with diverse rods of
Affliction, sometimes with parching Droughts, then otherwhiles with Floods of
Rain and Inundations of Rivers; sometimes with violent Storms and Tempests,
often Paris, in the year 1399. that they were fain to forbid all great
Meetings. This year another was so rife it carried off an infinite number.
Philip Duke of Burgundy dyed of it at Halle in the Country of Brabant the
Twenty seventh of April. His Heart was brought to St. Denis, his Body to the
Chartreuse of Dijon, which he had built most magnificently.

This Prince, without being a King, had the greatest Estate in Lands of any in
his Days; but his Magnificence, which we may say has been Hereditary to the
House of Burgundy, which yielded not for number of Officers, nor rich
Furniture, to that of the Royal Family, and the excessive expenses he was at
upon all occasions, had so much impoverished him, that his Wife renounced the
Community Or Sequestered.
and laid down his Girdle, Keys, and Purse upon his Coffin as her surrender.

He had three Sons and four Daugters. Of his Sons, John had the Duchy and the
County of Burgundy, with Flanders, and Artois. Anthony was Duke of Brabant,
Lothier and Limbourg: Philip had the Earldoms of Nevers and Rhetel. Of the four
Daughters. Marguerite espoused William, eldest Son of Albert, Duke of Bavaria,
who was Son of the Emperor Lewis, and Earl of Haynault, Holland, and Zealand,
and Lord of Friesland. From them came an only Daughter named Jacqueline, of
whom we shall have many things to relate. Mary was wedded with Ame VIII. First
Duke of Savoy, who afterward was made Pope, under the name of Felix. Catharine
was Wife of Leopold IV. Duke of Austria and Earl of Tyrol. Bonna died before
she was Married.

Bretagne's Children had been bred in the Court of France; this year the Eldest
who succeeded to the Duchy (he was called John, and was the Sixth of that
name)* went to take possession thereof, and showed himself a better Frenchman
then his Father.

They were sensibly troubled in France for the death of King Richard; and they
had used all their endeavors to turn that great affection the Cities of
Bourdeaux and Bayonne had for Richard, into a hatred against his Murderer; but
they were so strictly tied to the English by their intercourse of Trade, they
could not pervert them from their Interest and Obedience, nor gain the least of
their ends upon them. And the Kings indisposition would not suffer them to
venture to take a revenge for the Murder of his Son-in-law. There were none
but the Duke of Orleans and Valeran Count de St. Pol, who had Married Richards
Sister, that showed any resentment. The First sent to defy Henry in very
opprobrious terms, but received a suitable return. The Second after most
outrageous challenges and bravado's much above what was in his power to
perform, besieged Mere by Land, from whence he was driven away most shamefully.

Henry had sent back Queen Isabella to her Father with her Portion and all her
Jewels, and Truces had been made at diverse seasons, but those were more
punctually observed French side then by the English. For accordingly as Henry
settled himself, he loosed the Reins of the Englishmens hatred, who committed
many hostilities by Sea and Land in Normandy, and in Guyenne. The Bretons and
Normans did not leave them un-retaliated; as likewise at the same time the
Constable Albert (he succeeded Lewis de Sancerre in that Office) cleared all
the neighborhood of Bourdelois of a great many petty Castles, by means whereof
they gathered great Contributions in the Country of Guyenne. The Earl de la
March Son of the Duke of Bourbon, did as much in Limosin.

Clindon, a Prince of Wales who made War upon the English, and a very
beneficial diversion for France.

Observe we hear a great mark of the power of University of Paris, as they were
going in Procession to St. Catherine du Val, near the Hostel Hense or Inn.
of Charles de Savoisy, Chamberlain to the King; some of that Lords Domestique
Servants quarreled with the Scholars, and coming insolently into the Church
with their Swords drawn, committed great Outrage there. The University
prosecuted this business with so Savoisy's Servants were whipped and banished,
and his Hostel (or House) razed by sound of Trumpet, excepting his Galleries,
where on the Gate we have seen an Inscription containing the Fact, which was
obliterated when they rebuilt the House. It is now the Hostel de Lorrain.

Orleans, who was a gulf, that nothing could fill up, or supply fast enough,
he called the Council together, to give Orders for some new Levies. John Duke
of Burgundy who had taken his Fathers place, opposed it publicly, and thereby
gained the love of the Parisians. However, the plurality of Votes inducing him
to a compliance with the rest, they laid new Impositions upon pretense of
raising great Forces. The Princes had agreed to lock the Money up in one of the
Towers belonging to the Palace, and no one was to touch a Penny of it without
the knowledge and consent of all: the Duke of Orleans for all this Engagement,
scrupled not to come one night with a strong hand, and take away the best part
of it.

April, Lewis Dauphin of France and Duke of Guyenne, espoused Marguerite
Daughter of John Duke of Burgundy; and John's eldest Son (his name was Philip)
was betrothed to Michelle the King's Daughter.

Bennet was confirmed in the Papacy, he vexed the Clergy as he had done before,
and would have Levied the Tenths: but he found the University in his way who
put a stop to his Undertakings. In the mean time his Soldiers having consumed
all his Silver, even his very Plate, the Duke of Orleans, because he had
nothing else to give him, went to Avignon to press him in the behalf of the
King, to labor for a reunion in the Church, as he had promised. For this
purpose he sent a Legation to Boniface, where they set upon him with so many
reasons to consent to the Abdication, that having nothing to reply, he fell
sick and died upon it.

His Cardinals elected Cosmo Meliorat, who was called Innocent VII. He likewise
appearing to be well enough inclined to some methods of accommodation; Bennet
resolved to confer with him, promising himself to gain him by his skill, or by
the strength of his genius, which was prevalent; Thus he went to Nice, and from
thence passed in some Galleys to Genoa, being accompanied by Lewis II. King of
Sicilia. Naples.


They were scandalized both at Court and in the City of Paris, at the too close
Orleans and the Queen, especially since the death of Philip the Hardy, whom she
ever dreaded, and also, because they took the whole management of the
Government to themselves, and oppressed and loaded the Kingdom with redoubled
and violent exactions. The Queen they said, sent one part of it into Germany,
and employed the other in all sor^^ of profusions, whilst the Kings Children
were in a pitiful equipage, and himself was left to rot in his own ordure,
without any care of undressing him, or exchanging his foul Linen.

They were not only hated by the People, but the other Princes; the Dukes of
Burgundy and Bretagne retired from Court. The King having a lucid interval, and
understanding the reason of his Uncles absenting, and heard the general
complaints against the Queen and his Brother, he thought it necessary to call a
great Assembly, and sent for the Duke of Burgundy thither. This Duke thought it
unfit to come, without bringing a good force along with him, as well for his
own security, as because he knew the Queen and her Duke had a design to seize
upon the Kings Children and prevent that double Alliance he would contract
between his, and them.

Upon the noise of his arrival, the Queen and Duke take Alarm and withdraw to
Melun, having left order with Lewis of Bavaria, Brother to the Queen, to bring
away the Dauphin, and even the Duke of Burgundy's Children, to the Castle of
Pouilly. The Burgundian who was arrived at the Louver, gets upon his nimblest
Horse, with a good guard of brave fellows, gallops thorough Paris without stop
or stay, and made so much haste that he overtakes the Dauphin at Juvisy, and
brings him back to Paris with his own consent, and in despite of the Bavarian.

Burgundians part, who gave his reasons for this action, in presence of the
Kings Council and the University; as also for his reproaches, and the drawing
of Soldiers together on either side. All Paris was in a perpetual Allarm, the
Dukes of Berry and of Burgundy fortified themselves in their own Houses: the
Duke of Orleans breathed Fire and Flames, and the Burgundian omitted nothing to
gain the favor of the People. The Duke of Bourbon and the University labored
in vain to make a reconciliation; the King of Sicily had as ill sucess: but at
last the King of Navarre, and the Duke of Bourbon, after several goings and
comings, brought it about, the two Princes embraced each other in Paris, and
swore mutual friendship with their Tongues, but in their Hearts quite other
things lay hid*

England was in a bad condition, by reason of the Famine that pinched her, and
the defeat they received by Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, who would
revenge the death of King Richard. The Constable Albret and the Count
d'Armagnac had taken, or by Intelligence and Money, got possession of above
Threescore places in Guyenne. The Dukes of Orleans and Burgundy undertook to
drive them totally out of France; the first by attaquing them in Guyenne, the
other about Calais, to which he was to lay Siege.

The Duke of Orleans lost both his time and reputation before Blaye and before
Bourgh: the Second after very great expenses durst not approach near Calais.
Thus neither reaped any thing but shame, and the Burgundian increased his
hatred against the other, whom he accused of having spoiled his design, by
craftily hindering the Levies of those sums of Money had been allotted for the
payment of his Forces.

de Boucicaut increased the power and reputation of the French, not only in
Italy, but thorough all the Levant. The City of Famagousta belonged to the
Seignory of Genoa, they having gained it from the King of Cyprus: that King had
a design to recover it by force, and to this end had besieged it; the Marshall
having armed himself to relieve it, the Grand Master of Rhodes undertook to
make an acommodation.

Turks. After he had conducted the Emperor Manuel from Modon to
Constantinople, he went and besieged the City of Scandeloro, which he took by
assault. Then the Peace with Cyprus being made, he turned his designs toward
the coasts of Syria, because he had War with the Sultan of Egypt, for some
Merchants Goods, which that Barbarian had taken from the Genoese. The Venetians
jealous of their prosperity, and watchful of the Mareschals actions, gave
speedy notice by a nimble vessel to all the Ports upon that coasts: So that
where ever he would have gone on shore, he found them armed and well provided to
receive him. Thus he missed Tripoly and Sayeta, but he took Baruc which he
carried by storm.

This good success increased the Venetians rage so much, that lying in wait for
him upon his return, having discharged the greatest part of his Men and Ships,
Charles Zeni who commanded their Galleys, set upon him without any War
declared. How weak soever he was, he defended himself so stoutly that they
could not force him; but they took three of his Galleys, wherein was Chastean
Morand, and Thirty Kinghts of Note.

The mournful Letters these prisoners sent to the Court, because they knew the
Venetians never set any free whom they had taken, till the Peace was made, and
their friends lamentations to the Princes and the Kings Council, wrought so
much, that they sent to the Marshall, not to revenge himself for this
Treachery, but allow of those excuses the Venetians made. The Marshall knowing
they were contrary both to the Truth and his own Honor, published a Manifesto,
directed to the Duke and to Zeni, relating the whole Fact in a quite different
manner, giving them the Lie, and challenging them to a Combat, either One to
One, or Ten against Ten, all Knights, or either of them in a single Galley; to
which no answer was made.

Paris did not desist from pursuing the reunion of the Church, and had in
order to it, dispatched some Deputies to Rome to Innocent, but Bennet
endeavored to break these measures by his intrigues in the Court of France.
The Cardinal de Chalan his Envoye, was but ill received; yet he for a while
hindered the Decree the Parliament were about to make against the University of
Toulouze, who had embraced the defense of that Pope, and written Letters in his
favor, injurious both to the King and his Council: but that of Paris
addressing themselves to the King with as much zeal, obliged the Parliament at
last to give Sentence; That the said Letters should be burnt at the Gates of
Toulouze, Lions, and Montpellier, and those that wrote them should be proceeded
against. Notwithstanding theycould not obtain that substraction so many times
demanded.

During these Transactions, Innocent the Pope of Rome dies, and his Cardinals
elected Angelo Coraro a Venetian, called Gregory XII. but obliged him both by
Oath and Writing, to abdicate the Papacy when Benedict would do the same, and
to give notice of this condition to all Princes.

He at first complied with his Promises, and sent an Embassy to his Competitor
for the Union. They agreed upon the City of Savonna for their Conference; all
necessary Orders for their security, and for their conveniences were issued
out, and the King omitted nothing that might be helpful, sending his
Ambassadors to labor in it, who were well received every where. But the two
Anti-Popes, each on Bennet shusfled a long time before he would give up his
Abdication in Writing; Gregory yet longer about his security, and the way he
should go. Sometimes he pretended he must go by Sea, another while it must be
by Land, finding out most incomprehensible difficulties in adventuring either
way.

Burgundy, notwithstanding his feigned reconciliation which he daily colored
over with new marks of confidence, causes the Duke of Orleans to be
assassinated. The executioner of this so abhorred a Fact, was a Norman
Gentleman, named Rodolph d'Oquetonville, animated by a particular resentment,
for that the Prince had put him out of an Office he held under the King. Upon
the 23 or 24th of November in the night time, as the Duke returned from
visiting the Queen, who was then in Childbed, mounted upon a Mule, with only
two or three Servants about him (he who had Six hundred Gentlemen his
Pensioners) the Murderer who waited for him in the Street called Barbette,
accompanied with Ten or a Dozen more like himself, First gave him a blow with a
Battle-axe, which cut off one hand, and then a Second, that cleft his Head in
two; the rest likewise mangled him with diverse wounds, and left him lying in
the Street. This done, they all saved themselves in the Duke of Burgundy's
House, having strowed the way with Calthrops, and set fire to a House that they
might not be pursued.

Upon the first noise of this Murder, the Burgundian put a good face upon it,
and went to the Funeral of the deceased, bemoaned him, and wept for him: but it
being mentioned in Council, that search should be made in all Princes Hostels
for the murderers; the horror of this crime did so confound him, that he took
the Duke of Bourbou aside, and confessed to him that he was the Author of it.
Afterward being come to himself again, he went from thence, and the next day
fled into Flanders with his Cutthroats.

His retreat with his threatenings, gave some apprehension that he would put the
Kingdom into a flame; and every man feared the like treachery might fall upon
his own Head. And for this reason, instead of prosecuting him, they sought by
all mean toa ppease him. The Duke of Berry and the Duke of Anjou King of
Sicilia, took a journey to Amiens to confer with him; he came to them well
attended, his ill act leaving him no security but force, and promised to return
to Paris, and justify himself before the King, provided they kept no Guards at
the City Gates.

Orleans, who was at Blois when her Husband was murdered, came to Paris with
her Sons, she had three, Charles, Philip, and John, the eldest was not above
Fourteen years old, to make her complaints to the King. He gave her the
Guardianship of her Children, but durst not promise to do her justice, for fear
of over-turning his Kingdom. The disconsolate Widow knowing therefore that her
Husbands murderer was returning, retired with her young ones to Blois.

Burgundy came to Paris toward the end of February, at the head of Eight
hundred Gentlemen, all armed from Head to Foot, only they did not put their
Helmets on. The Queen and Princes received him with all the demonstrations of
confidence; but they could not prevail with him to own the murder of the Duke
of Orleans publicly: He gave Commission for it to a Cordelier, named John
Petit, Doctor in Divinity, his Orator, Ever since Philip de Valois, Eloquence
was in vogue, they having need of it to persuade the People; and because they
held diverse great Assemblies, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical.
and obtained Audience for him in the Great Hall of the Hostel de St. Pol.

This mercinary Divine endeavored in presence of the Princes and Council to
make it appear, That the Duke of Orleans had been a Tyrant every way, that he
was guilty of the crime de Laesae Majestatis, both Divine and Humane; That he
had once bewitched the King, another time had conspired to kill him, and
another to have him Deposed by the Pope: That therefore his death was just and
necessary. It was not the Monks Harangue, but necessity and danger that
persuaded the Council. They gave him an Act in Writing that abolished this
crime, and in appearance reconciled him with the Queen.

The King desired to put an end to the collusion of the Anti-Popes; he resolved
to publish an Order for Substraction the Fifteenth of May. In the mean time
Pope Benedict having intelligence of it, sent his Bulls to Paris; forbidding
him to do so upon Sancho Lupi, and a Rider belonging to the Popes Stable,
having delivered them to the King, and the Duke of Berry the Fourteenth of May,
were immediately seized on. The Council sat three days, to consider what was
to be done; having heard the Opinions and Remonstrances of the University, the
King caused a Penknife to be stuck into the Bulls, which the Rector of the
University afterward cut in pieces.

Palace-yard, then mounted upon a Scaffold, where being adorned with Paper
Miters, and clothed with long painted Vests, after the Dalmatian fashion; upon
which Benedicts Arms were fastened; they were severely reproached by a Doctor,
and after led back to their prison. Diverse Prelates and Clergymen that sided
with him, were likewise sent to Goal.

Upon this news the two Popes who pretended to be going to Savona, fled each
his several way, Benedict into Catalogna, in a Galley; and Gregory by Land to
Sienna, both of them forsaken by their Cardinals.

When the Burgundian was again returned to Artois, the Duchess of Orleans,
supported by the Queen, who had Cantonized her self at Melun, came to entreat
the King that he would hear her Orator (this was the Abbot of St. Denis) in
justification of the memory of her Husband, and reparation for his death. They
gave him Audience in the Castle of the Louvre, the King, the Queen, and Princes
of the Blood being at the Council. After this Harangue of the Widows Orator,
there Burgundian, notwithstanding his Act of Abolition, was declared an enemy
to the State; and it was ordered that Forces should be sent to fall upon him on
every side, and that all the ways should be strongly guarded to keep both him
and all others from coming near the King.

He was at that instant at L'Isle in Flanders, arming himself to restore John
of Bavaria his Wives Brother, to the Bishopric of Liege. This false Prelate,
who had nothing but the vain Spirit of the World, deferring to take Holy
Orders, gave occasion to the Liegois, to turn him out of the Episcopal See, and
to put in Thierry, one of the Lord de Perruveys sons, whose Original was from
the House of Brabant. They were not satisfied with having driven him out of
their City, but besieged him in Maestricht, and had kept him blocked up for
four Months. When they had notice that the Burgundian had taken the Field, they
raised the Siege and retired, but those haughty and rude People, hearing that
he had iu all but Sixteen thousand Men, forced the Lord de Perruveys to seek
him out, and give him Battle.

They were three to one, yet were they routed and cut in pieces, Perruvey and
his two Sons, and Thirty thousand Liegois lay dead upon the place: they had no
quarter given them, the Bishop, rather a Tiger then a Shepherd, could not have
Blood enough to satisfy his cruel Thirst. Their submission did not appease his
sanguinary Rage: when he was settled, he fell not only upon the guilty and the
ringleaders, but upon Women and Children, Priests and Religious Votaries:
There was nothing else to be seen round about Liege, and those other Cities
that were Dependencies, but Forests of Wheels and Gibbets, and the Meuse was
choked up with the multitude of their wretched Carcasses, thrown into that
River, bound two and two together. From hence began that implacable hatred of
the Liegois against the House of Burgundy,

Had the Duke been worsted in that Battle, all the Orleanois party were ready
to have run open mouth upon him: when they had received this news, they found
more cause to consult their own safety, then his ruin. The Queen did not
believe her self secure in Paris; She departed thence the Thirteenth of
November, being attended by the Duke of Bretagne her Son-in-law, and took the
King with her to Tours.

Parisians, soon got to Paris with Four thousand Horse, and Two thousand Foot
mounted behind them; they received him with great joyfulness, and sent some
Deputies to the King to desire he would return. William Earl of Holland
proffers to endeavor an accommodation: A Second Peace was Treated on between
both parties, which being well advanced, the Widow of Orleans, a haughty and
vindicative Princess, died with grief and anger the 4th of December.

The Orphans were forced to consent to a reconciliation with him that had
murdered their Father. It was concluded in the City of Chartres about the end
of the month of March. The King with the Queen, and the Princes being on a
Scaffold in the Great Church, but pallisado'd round about to hinder the People
from seeing what they did; the Burgundian fell on his knees before the King,
and prayed him by the Mouth of his Advocate, and afterward with his own to lay
aside his anger, and receive him into his Favor: but touching the Murder, he
expressed himself thus, That he was ready to justify himself. The Princes that
were present, kneeled likewise, and joined their Requests to his. Then
addressing himself to the Princes of Orleans, he desired them to forget what
was past, and harbor no revenge in their hearts. After this, they made them
embrace and promise amity to each other: and for a farther tie toma ke this
agreement sure, they stipulated the Marriage of a Daughter of the Burgundians,
with Philip Count de Vertus, the Second of the Three Brothers.

Paris, and the Burgundian to the Low Countries. From whence, coming again
about the month of July, he took the whole Government upon him; and to give
some satisfaction to the People, whose affection he had gained, in showing his
dislike against Taxes; he caused the Council to call the Financiers to
Examination and Account. The most of them got off for Money, but it cost John
de Montaigu his Life, who had been Sur- Sur-Intendant was not then in use.
Indtendant.

He was a man of mean birth, Son of a Citizen of Paris, whom the Kings favor,
without any great desert of his, had raised to the Office of Grand Maistre of
his House, and his Brothers, one to the Archbishopric of Sens, the other to
that of Paris. His immense Riches, which never are acquired without crime, did
blind this little fellow, and drew the eyes of all great Men upon him; insomuch
as he bad married his Son to a Daughter of the Constable d'Albret, and his
Daughters to the greatest Lords of the Kingdom.

Though he had been very serviceable in negotiating the Treaty of Chartres;
nevertheless the Duke of Burgundy and the King of Navarre conspired his
destruction, because he had given the advice to carry the King to Tours. They
caused him to be accused of diverse heinous crimes, taking their opportunity,
when the King, who loved him, was in one of his Fits of Folly, he was Arrested
by Peter des Essards, Provost of Paris, examined by Commissioners of
Parliament, and cruelly tormented on the Rack. His sufferings could not draw
one word from him; however, his Head was chopped off at the Cut off with an Axe.
Halles. At his death he freely of his own accord, confessed his depredation of
the Kings Treasure, which in it self contains all the greatest crimes. The
Trunk of his Body was hanged on a Gibbet, his Head planted upon a high Pole.

Afterward the Vicount de Lionnois had interest enough to re-abilitate his
memory, and having caused the Body to be taken from Montfaucon, with an
honorable convoy, or attendance of Priests, and Torches, carried it to the
Celestines Church at Marcoussy, which he had founded.

de la March, de Vendosme, and de St. Pol, and that till the had so done,
nothing should be allowed without Receipts and Vouchers. The Treasurers were
likewise all put out, and the management thereof was given to some Citizens,
who were esteemed rich and less interessed.

Thus the Princes strove to gain the affection of that Queen of Cities. For the
same reason they renewed all their former Privileges, and the Provostship of
Merchants, of which they had till now only given them the keeping; and they
also granted them, (but to such only as were Natives) the privilege of holding
Fiefs with the same Franchise as any Gentleman.

The Kings sorrow was very great, when upon his recovery he heard of the death
of Montaigu, whom he had tenderly loved. But there being no way to recall
things past, he would consider of what was to come. Having therefore assembled
the Grandees of the Kingdom, he told them, that he desired when he was at any
time ill, the Queen should take cognizance of Affairs; and upon her default,
the Dauphin Duke of Guyenne, whom he discharged from being under the conduct of
his Mother, but would that he should Govern with the Councils of the Dukes of
Berry and of Burgundy. This last usurped all the Authority,

de Boucicaut was gone to Milan to receive that State under the Kings
Protection and Government, (for John Galeazo chose this, rather then that of
the Marquis de Montferrat, and Facin Can de l'Escale, who had half subdued it)
the Marquess to prevent him in it, had caused the Genoese to rise up in Arms,
by means of the Gibbeline party. They massacred all the French within their
City, forced the Citadel, and called him in to be their Lord; but soon after
they threw him out as they had done Boucicaut.

Maugre the fulminations of the two Anti-Popes, Maugre the Councils each of
them had called, Gregory in the Patriarchat of Aquilea, and Benedict at
Perpignan: that Assembly which the Cardinals of both parties had summoned, was
opened at Pisa the Five and twentieth of March. The Anti-Popes having been
cited to appear there, and all the Forms observed, the Substraction was first
ordered, then they declared Schismatiques and Heretics, and Faculty given to
the Cardinals to elect another. Their Suffrages agreed in favor of Cardinal
Peter Philargi, called of Candia, because a Native of that place. He was named
Alexander V.

During the Schism, Ladislaus King of Naples, had seized upon Rome, and the
Lands of the Church; which was the cause why the Council, and the new Pope
Alexander, more willingly invested Lewis of Anjou with that Kingdom, and gave
him the Command Ladislaus had usurped, and drove him out of Rome: but the end
was not alike.

The Eighteenth of May, or according to others, the First of June, the Emperor
Emp. Sigismund of Luxembourgh. S. and Manuel II. R. 27 years.
Robert dyed at Oppenheim in Bavaria. The Electors divided into two parties,
whereof one elected Sigismund de Luximbourgh, King of Hungary; the other his
Cousin Josse, Marquis of Moravia. This last dying soon after, all the Suffrages
joined for Sigismund.

Alexander V. had been a Cordelier Friar, upon this consideration, he granted a
Paris much offended at this Novelty, retrenched all these Orders from their
Body, unless they would renounce this Bull. The Jacobins, etc..... and
Carmelites, who found themselves feeble, obeyed this Decree. The Cordeliers and
the Augustins remaining refractory, were deprived of the Pulpit and
Confessional, of which the Jacobins made advantage, as the Cordeliers had done
upon their being in disgrace. Pope John XXIII. revoked all these Privileges,
and reduced all things to the same condition they were in before.

We find amongst Historians, that in these times there were many bloody Battles
fought betwixt Birds of all sorts, even amongst the smallest, as Sparrows, and
amongst the domestique ones, which proceeded from certain minute Bodies spread
in the Air, which pricked, and irritated them in such measure, as provoked and
Hainault, the Storks were observed to League with the Hernes and Pyes, and give
battle to the Ravens, who in their Flocks had Rooks and Choughs; the Storks
gained the Victory. In the Country of Liege in like manner some Crows or
Ravens having insulted over a Faulcon, breaking the Eggs in its Airy; the next
day were to be seen in that very place, a vast quantity of Birds of both those
kinds, who fought most obstinately, till the Crows betook themselves to flight,
after a very great slaughter of their Forces.

It was wisely Counseled, whereby to lay asleep all discords, to employ all
the Forces of France in a War upon the English, under that specious pretense of
revenging the death of King Richard II. The Nobless went about it with much
resolution; but the envy which other Princes had against the greatness of the
Burgundian, who sat at the Helm, broke off this design.

August, the Dukes of Berry and Bourbon having made a League at Gyen with the
House of Orleans, and with the Duke of Bretagne, the Earls of Alenson,
Clermont, and Armagnac, who were all his friends, or picqued against the
Burgundian, sent to make their demands of the King. Every one armed himself,
the King might command them to lay down their Arms, but it was in vain, for
they went on with their Levies. The Burgundian having to little purpose
proffered them Peace, made use of the Kings Authority to summon the
Arriere-ban, puts Ten thousand Men into Paris. The Duke of Berry, and the
Princes lodged themselves at the Castle of Wicestre, and began to make the War.

The neighboring parts round that City were eaten up by Two hundred thousand
hungry Soldiers. About the end of November, when all the Provisions were
consumed, necessity compelled both parties to come to an agreement. It was
Articled, that the Duke of Burgundy should go out of Paris, and that the Duke
of Berry should not go in; That those two Princes should name some Lords that
should take care for them of the Government and the Dauphin's Person; That the
King sho u l d chu Council of Twelve Persons not suspected, whose Names he
should communicate to them. That all the Princes should withdraw with their
Forces, and that none of them should return near the King, unless he were
commanded by Letters under the Great Seal, and written in Council.

Burgundian obeyed with sincerity, and retired forthwith; but the Duke of
Orleans with those of his party, began immediately to make new Levies. The
Queen and the Duke of (...) appeared as Neuters, and offered to be Mediators.
The King spoke (...) Master, and Commanded them to disarm; the Burgundian lay
quiet, and remained in Obedience, but the Orleannois with his Sword in hand,
demanded Justice for the death of his Father. After many Letters, and fruitless
Negotiations, he sent a very biting Cartel Or Challenge.
to the Burgundian, who answered in the same style. Their Challenges were in
the month of August.

Berry, who were at Melun, to labor for a Peace, and sent thither Persons that
were Notables of the Clergy, the Nobility, the Parliament, and the University,
the better to Authorize what they should conclude therein; but their design was
only to pillage Paris, and deliver themselves to the Orleannois. The Parisians
having timely notice, demanded the Count de St. Pol might be their Governor:
It was agreed to, but instead of strengthening himself with good honest
Citizens, he furnishes himself with Rascals, and raises a Company of Five
hundred Butchers, Commanded by the Goix, the Kings Butchers, who committing a
thousand insolences, obliged a great many good Citizens to retire elsewhere.

France then divided her self in two Factions, the one the Orleannois, vulgarly
named Armagnac's, from the Count of Armagnac, one of their principal Chiefs;
they carried a White Bend, and a Or upright Cross.
Cross with Right Angles: and the other the Burgundians, who bare the St.
Andrew's Cross. The best of the Citizens of Paris inclined toward the First,
the Populace toward the Second. From thence proceeded so many Murders,
plunderings, and Proscriptions, according as the success varied on either side.

Burgundian party was then the strongest, having the King, the Dauphin, Duke of
Guyenne, and the City of Paris on that side; so that they displaced the Prevost
des Marchands, and imprisoned and banished diverse of the contrary party.

In the mean time the Forces under the Duke of Orleans plundered Picardy, and
he seized upon Montlehery. Upon this they persuaded the Duke of Guyenne to
oblige the King to recall the Burgundian to his assistance. This Duke embraced
the opportunity, enters into Picardy with Sixty thousand Men, besieged and
forced Ham; but he could go no further. The contest about the plunder of that
City, begot a mortal dissension between the Picards and the Flemmings,
wherewith his Army was made up; insomuch as the Duke of Orleans approaching
with his, the Picards forsook him, the Flemmings withdrew, and he, though much
against his Will, with them.

The greediness with which the party Orleannois gaped for the plunder and spoil
of Paris, hindered them from pursuing and destroying the Burgundian. They
marched immediately to block up this great City, made themselves Masters of St.
Denis by a Siege, of the Tower of St Cloud, by the Treachery of him that
Commanded it, and fired the Houses of such Citizens as were not of their
Faction. In retribution, the Company of Butchers went and burnt the Castle of
Wicestre, which belonged to the Duke of Berry.

Orleannois thought themselves so very sure of the taking of Paris, that they
had already agreed upon their shares in the spoil. But now the Burgundian
returns with a relief of English, pierces thorough the midst of their Forces,
and the Thirtieth of October is received into the City, as the deliverer of the
Kingdom. Then their party declines, St. Cloud is forced out of their hands,
with the loss of above Nine hundred Gentlemen; they raise their Blockade, and
having drawn all their Men together at St. Denis, retreat in disorder over the
Bridges they had laid upon the Seine.

Burgundian causes them to be excommunicate and proscribed, gives them chase
every where, puts their Goods to sale by outcry, imprisons all their Friends
and Servants, displaces the Constable Albret, John de Hangest Hugueville, Grand
Master of the Cross-Bow-Men, and the Sire de Rieux, Marshall, to give their
places to the Count de St. Pol, the Lord de Rambures, and Lewis de Longny his
partisans. All the neighboring Cities about Paris enter into the same
interests; Orleans alone remains of the side of her Princes. The other places,
and of such as followed them, are forced to abandon them; even Guyenne and
Languedoc submit, and renounce the Government of the Duke of Berry.

English, but upon Conditions very prejudicial to France. The King being again
restored to his health, and finding this Treaty was agreed upon, vowed their
^estruction as the greatest of his enemies. After he had been at St. Denis, and
set up the Standard of the Oriflamme, which never was displayed but against the
public enemy, and against Insidels, he went in Person to besiege the Duke of
Berry in the City of Bourges (this was in June) and marched with so much
eagerness, that he did not stop one day in all that march, although he received
a kick on his Leg from one of his Horses. In the mean time his other Commanders
made War upon the Orleannois in several other parts.

There were too many brave Men in the Town, and too much Division and Treachery
in his own Army to gain it easily. The Siege drawing out in length, Sickness
invades his Forces, and constrained him to grant a Peace to the Princes. The
English who landed at the same time in Normandy, under the conduct of Thomas
Duke of Lancaster, the Kings Brother, to assist them, made themselves
formidable to both parties; the dread they had, made them hasten the execution
of the Treaty. But the Duke of Orleans who had called them in, was obliged to
satisfy them at his own expense and gave them his Brother John Earl of
Angoulesme for hostage.

Auxerre, they carried the King, whom they found to be falling again into his
distemper, to Melun, and from thence when he was grown better, to Paris. He
made his entrance in great pomp, together with the Queen and the Dauphin, and
caused the Peace to be proclaimed, to the unspeakable joy of the People.

Paris, the only Members of the State that were not utterly corrupted,
observing that the Grandees and such as were in Office, desired no other but to
continue those troubles, that they might fleece the People: And that besides,
unless it were prevented, the English had undertaken to conquer Guyenne,
persuaded the King, who ever intended well, to labor toward the Reformation
of his Kingdom, that so he might be the better enabled to resist them.

For which purpose he calls an Assembly of Notables at Paris, toward the
latter end of January. The University thoroughly noted all disorders in the
administration of the Revenue, in Courts of Justice, the Chancery, the choice
of Officers, and the Mint; such as were guilty were not spared, not even the
Chancellor Arnand de Corbie, who was accused of Concussion.

There were Commissioners chosen of all the Orders, to reform the State in all
these particulars; but neither the Princes, nor others that were in power,
could endure to be obliged to be honest, they must have lost too much by it;
especially Guyenne.

This young Prince, aged but Sixteen years, was fantastical, inconstant, and
debauched; Besides, they bred him up in all manner of Licentiousness and
disorder, as Gaming, Women, Feasting, and dissolute Dancing; and worse yet, in
Maxims of irregular Government; very proper indeed for such a life as he would
lead; for to enable ones self to commit all Licentiousness, a Man must set
himself above all Laws.

France, Paris must be quelled, and the Citizens disarmed, whom he might
afterward load with Taxes, even as he pleased. It was therefore by their
advice, that he seized upon the Castle of the Bastille, by the means of Peter
des Essards. The Burghers took the Allarm, the Burgundian underhand
exasperates the People, and incites his Companies of Butchers. He gets together
Ten or Twelve thousand Men, who having a Chyrurgeon at the head of them, named
John de Troyes, ran all about the streets; one part of them surrounds the
Bastille, the rest went and planted their City-banner before the House of the
Duke of Guyenne. He shows himself at the Window to appease those furies, John
de Troyes lets him understand that they came thither to take away those from
about him, who mischievously corrupted his youth. The Chancellor having
desired they would name them, they delivered him a List of them, wherein he
found his own Name to be the very first, and forced him to read it aloud twice
over.

At the same instant they beat open the Gates, search every where, and carry
away above twenty Persons, of whom were the Duke of Bar, Cousin-german to the
King, John de Vailly Chancellor to the Duke, James de la Riuiere his
Chamberlain, whom they led Prisoners to the Louvre. The next day Peter des
Essards surrenders the Bastille, and himself to the Duke of Burgundy, who kept
him very strictly in the Chastelet, because he had been accused of a design, to
have carried away the King and the Duke of Guyenne.

The University refused to join with those Factious people; the Princes of the
Blood detested such attemps; but they were glad in their hearts, that the Duke
of Guyenne had met with such correction.

In the beginning of May, the Factious bethought them of making White Hoods
Chappetons,
, they carried some to that Prince, and John de Troyes ushered in the Fince
present with a very rude Remonstrance. A Doctor of Divinity, named Eustatious
de Pavilly, a Religious Carmelite, being their Mouth, very freely told him of
his extravagant manner Orleance, was a punishment due for their Debaucheries;
And added likewise, that if he did not suddenly change, he would render himself
unworthy of the Crown, and give just occasion to transfer his Birthright to his
Brother. Which he urged with the more confidence, because the Queen had often
menaced him in the same manner.

He would very sain have freed himself out of the hands of these impertinent
Pedagogues, but the doors were to well guarded, the People being Masters. One
day as the King was going to Noster-Dame, John de Troyes obliged him to put on
a white Hood. Two days after he came to the Hostel de Saint Pol, justified
before the King, by his Spokesman de Pavilly, the imprisonment of the Duke de
Guyennes Servants, and named many others yet that were to be rooted out; then
Addressing himself to the Duke of Guyenne, demanded him to deliver them up.

Whatever Entreaties he could made, they took away a great many more; not only
Private Gentlemen, but likewise Lewis of Bavaria the Queens Brother, several
Ladies that belonged to her, to the Duchess of Guyenne, and to the Countess of
Charolois, whom they accused as Instruments of the most pernicious Intrigues,
and dissolute Actions at Court.

Burgundian of bringing Fuel to maintain this scroching Fire of Sedition,
though in effect he could not govern their hot Heads as he would. In the mean
while all were forced to give way to this Torrent. The King was forced to
consent they should bring their Prisoners upon their Trail, to go to Parliament
in his white Hood, and publish certain Ordinances for reforming some abuses
touching his Revenue, displace Arnaud de Corbie his Chancellor, who surrendered
the Seal to Eustace de Laitre his Son-in-Law, and to deliver up to Execution an
Esquire belonging to the Duke of Guyenne, and Peter des Essards, whose Heads
were cut off.

James de la Riviere Chamberlain to the said Duke, rather then undergo so great
ignominy, beat out his own Brains with a large drinking Bowl, or else was
killed in Prison by Helion Jaqueville a Captain of Paris: but however it
happened, they dragged him to the Gallows as one that had despaired and Murdered
himself.

So violent a Government could not last long. The Duke of Guyenne privately
agreed with the Leagued Princes; they made use of the Kings name, and a
pretense of confirming the Peace of Chartres, which was not fully executed, to
enter upon a Conference with them at Vernevil. Their Deputies being come to the
King at Paris,

To attain their ends, an Enterview was propounded between the Duke of Berry
and the Duke of Burgundy, then a Conference concerning the other Princes at
Pontoise by Deputies. All that were foundest and Wisest, the University the
Parliament, and the honest Citizens, inclined to Peace, the Burgundian had but
little stomach to it, as promising but slender advantage to him: however it was
concluded at Pontoise the first day of August; and the King agreed the Princes
should come and Paris.

This being so settled, the Duke of Guyenne puts himself in Arms at the head of
the honest Citizens, and having gotten together above Thirty thousand Men well
sitted, marched through the Streets. The Chiefs of the Factious who held the
Bastille, the Louvre, the Palace, and the Town Hall, left those places to him,
and withdrew. Then he sets free all those they had imprisoned, he changes the
Sheriffs, and putting out the Chancellor whom they had put in by force, gave
that Office to John Juvenal, then restores the Seals to Arnaud de Corbie, who
gave them up to Henry de Marle the first President.

The Burgundian not thinking himself too safe, resolved to be gone before the
Orleannois were come. Having therefore got the King one day forth a Hunting, he
takes his leave on a sudden, and without bidding adicu to Paris, hastens to
Flanders by long days Journeys, though very well attended.

Orleance was so much in the Kings favor, that he would have him Clothed in
the same Stuffs as himself wore. The Coultable d'Abret returned to Paris with
great splendor; the Chiefs and Authors of the Sedition were sought for, some
executed, some proscribed, all the Burgundians Creatures were removed, diverse
Gentlemen and Burghers Friends to him imprisoned.

They went farther yet, the Declarations that had been made against the Princes
were declared a surprise, their Innocence owned and published, and he on the
contrary detested as an execrable Murderer. And for the greater affront, Lewis
of Anjou King of Sicilia sent him back his Daugher who had been put into his
hands in order to be Married to his eldest Son; and two months after he gave
one of his own to Charles Earl of Pontieu the Kings third Son, who was not
fully Twelve years of age; by this means making both himself and his
Son-in-Law, mortal Enemies to the House of Burgundy.

Burgundian complained to the King, wrote of it to the Citizens of Paris, the
Parliament and the University: but neither his Complaints nor Letters effected
any thing. Finding he did not succeed that that way, he found means to renew
some kind of Correspondence with the Duke of Guyenne his Son-in-Law; who in
effect was angry to be detained at Court, and as it were a Prisoner in Louvre.

This was pretense enough for him to raise a great Army and take the Field to
come and deliver him. He was received at Noyon, at Soissons, and at Compiegne,
but Senlis shut her Gates against him. He made himself Master of St. Denis by
Intelligence, and afterward presented himself before Paris, notwithstanding
the King had forbid him to come near upon pain de Loesae Majestatis. He thought
to have received the former humor of the People, and have made some rising
that would have given him entrance. Thereupon the King being recovered of a
Fit, made a thundering Declaration against him: When he found this, he was
afflicted, and retreated in most horrible confusion.

Paris Brother of Montaigu, and the Faculty of Theology having examined the
Herangue of his Orator John Petit, who was then dead, drew seven Propositions
out of it, condemned them of Impiety and Heresy, and caused them to be burnt
in the Porch of Noster-Dame. John Charlier named Jarson from his Native Village
near Reims, Chancellor of the University, and a Doctor of great Reputation,
showed himself mighty zealous in this Prosecution. He had formerly some contest
with Petit, and the Burgundians had sold his Household Goods the year before for
certain Taxes.

The following year, the Burgundian removed this Business by Appeal to the
Council of Constance, where it was debated with much heat. He maintained that
those Propositions that had been condemned at Paris, were not Petits: but that
they were forged and contrived by Jarson. The Commissioners deputed to examine
the thing, having made their Report, the Council, without taking any notice of
Petit or Jarson, did in general condemn that pernicious Proposition, that a
Tyrant may be killed, or put to death by his Subject, in what manner soever.

At the same time the King proceeded against him as an Enemy to the State, went
to St. Denis to set up the Orislame Standard so called.
, and summoned the Ban and Arriere-Ban against him. He takes the City of
Compiegne upon Capitulation, and Soissons by force: This was miserably
plundered, and Bournonville who had defended it to the uttermost, had his Head
cut off.

Without doubt the Burgundian was in a great consternation at the taking of it,
and more yet when the Flemmings refused to serve him, and sent Deputies to the
King to offer him all Obedience. The taking of Bapawne by the Duke of Bourbon,
increasing his astonishment, he sent the Earl of Nevers his Brother to the King
then the Countess of Hainault his Sister, and afterward the Duke of Brabant
his other Brother, who made several Journeys to Court to endeavor to put some
stop to the Kings wroth: but nothing less would serve then the Confiscation of
all his Lands.

Aras, the Princes brought the King thither and besieged the Town. It made an
obstinate defense, perhaps encouraged by advice from some of the Besiegers: So
that their Army growing tired and weak by Sickness, the Countess of Hainault
took this opportunity, and solicited the Duke of Guyenne so earnestly, who had
all Authority in his hands, that without consulting the rest of the Princes, he
granted a Peace to the Duke of Burgundy.

This was made about the end of September: but the Agreement or Articles were
not Signed till the sixteenth of October at Quesnoy. The Conditions were very
hard upon the Burgundian; That five hundred of his Men should be excluded from
the Indemnity, That several Officers belonging to the King, the Queen, and the
Dauphin who favored him, should be removed; That he should not come near the
Court without express Order from the King, under the Great Seal, and by Advice
of the Council. It was added, That for the Kings Honor, his Banner should be
set upon the Walls of Arras, the Governor displaced, and the Burghers obliged
to take an Oath of Fidelity to the King.

English did both by Sea and Land these two last years against the French, as
being of little importance; nor how they Conquered several places in Guyenne,
the Earl of Armagnac and the Lord d'Abret siding with them because they had
been banished from the Court. The Animosity of that Nation would allow of no
Peace with France, but their King (Henry V. the Son of Henry IV. who died of a
Leprosy the twentieth of March in the year foregoing) sought to make an
Alliance with the French, that he might be supported against the inconstant and
factious humor of his own Subjects; so that the Duke of York was come into
France the preceding year for that very purpose. In the Month of February of
this same, his Ambassadors came to make Overtures, and demanded Catharine the
Kings Daughter, agreeing to a Truce for a year, to commence from the

A strange Rheum called the Coqueluke, tormented all sorts of People during the
Months of February and March, and made them so very hoarse, that the Bar, the
Pulpits and Colleges became all dumb. It caused the death of most of the old
People that were aflected with it.

Ladislaus, of whom we have made mention, was become Master of the whole
Kingdom of Naples: but as he was too much addicted to Women, and besides
mightily hated for his Cruelties, he was this year poisoned after a Villainous
manner; Jane II. of that name, his Sister, Widow of William of Austria
succeeded him; she was then forty years old, and nevertheless, her many years,
were so far from quenching her Passions, they rather inflamed them to the
highest excess.

The Council of Pisa had ordained that another general one should be held
within three years, and in the mean time was continued by Deputies. At the
expiration of that time John XXIII. had called one at Rome for the year 1412.
which being not numerous by reason by reason of the troubles occasioned by
Ladislaus, was put off till another time. Now the Emperor Sigismund being gone
into Italy in the year 1412. about some Disputes he had with the Venetians, the
Pope sent some Legates to him, to appoint the place and time for the Council.
They agreed upon the City of Constance on the Rhine, and as to the time the
Pope assigned it on All-Saints-day of the following year.

Notwithstanding it was not opened till the sixteenth of the Month by the Pope
himself. The Emperor came thither upon Christmas-Eve and sung the Epistle at
the Holy Fathers Midnight-Mass, being in the Habit of a Subdean. The second
Session was not held till the second day of March following. He was present at
diverse afterward, arrayed in his Imperial Robes.

Gregory and Bennet, did renounce, or happen to dye. Now, whether this act were
by compulsion, or that he had done it without reflecting on the Consequences,
he immediately repented, and fearing lest they should take him at his word, he
ran away by night to the City of Schaffhausen under the protection of the Duke
of Austria.

Constance, and deposed the eighteenth of May by the Council.

He then made a virtue of necessity, and submitted to the Sentence very calmly.
Gregory did likewise submit to the Judgment of the Council, and gave in his
Cession by Proxy. Bennet only remained obstinate, and kept himself shut up in
his Castle of Paniscole in Arragon till the year 1424. when he ended his days.
Even at his death he commanded a couple of Cardinals, who had all along kept
him company, to elect him a Successor. They put a Cannon of Barcelona in his
place, who took upon him the name of Clement VIII. and King Alphonso caused
this Idol to be adored for five years, in hatred to Pope Martin, with whom he
had some quarrel, then obliged him to lay down his pretended Tittle Anno 1429.

France and England was yet continued: and three or four solemn Embassies were
sent on either side. They offered the King of England Eight hundred thousand
Florins of Gold, and to give up to him fifteen Cities in Guyenne, and all
Limosin as a Portion for the Lady Catharine. He seemed to give ear to these
Propositions: yet demanded every day some new thing to hinder the concluding of
it.

His design was to fall upon France, his Subjects desired it with so much
passion, that the whole Kingdom would have risen against him, if he had not
satisfied their longing. It was suspected likewise that he was encouraged to it
by the instigation and correspondence of some Traitors; at least he was assured
he should have but half the French to deal with, it being impossible for the
two Houses of Orleans and Burgundy ever to be united.

his Cousin Charles of France, he came and landed at Havre de Grace at the
mouth of the River of Seine, where he put on shore six thousand Men at Arms,
thirty thousand Archers, and all other Necessaries proportionably.

With these he laid Siege to Harfleur. The place defended it self bravely by
the courage of four hundred Men at Arms, and seven or eight Lords of that
Province that had thrown themselves in there. In fine, it was taken by assault
and sacked, perhaps not without some secret intelligence, or at least the
cowardice or baseness of the Chiefs of the French Army, who took no great care
to relieve them. The blame fell on the Constable d'Albret.

In the mean time the King having set up the Oriflamme or Standard, at St.
Denis, got his Soldiers together. The English had lost a great many of their
bravest Men upon their Attaques, Diseases reigned in their Army, and a scarcity
of Provisions, for they were forced to keep close together, reduced them to
great streights. Insomuch as having held his Quarters for three weeks together
along the Sea Coasts, they were forced to remove, and took their march toward
Calais. They crossed the Country of Caux, the Earldom of Eu, and the Lands of
Vimeu, with intention to pass the River Sum at Blanquetaque.

French Army, which was as yet nothing but a multitude of Rascals picked up in
haste, durst not attaque them in their march: but when the King, who was come
in Person to Rouen, had sent fourteen thousand Men at Arms, and all the Princes
to them, excepting the Dukes of Guyenne, Berry, Bretagne, and Burgundy, it wa
resolved they should go and fight them; and instead of strongly guarding the
passages over the Sum, whereby to ruin them, they went to way-lay them on
the other side of the River, and lodged themselves at Azincour Or Agincourt.
, in the County of St. Pol.

The English being tired, seeing the French to be four times stronger then
themselves, and believing they should be utterly lost if they came to an
Engagement, sent to profer them reparations for all damages done from the time
of their landing in France. But their Offers were rejected; and Battle
presented for the next day, being the five and twentieth of October.

Crecy, and that of Poitiers, made them again lose this same, I mean the
necessity or desperate condition they reduced them unto, either to vanquish, or
to dye, their impetuous precipitation, the confusion in which they fought, all
the Chiefs striving to be in the Head; besides the ill order of their Vanguard
drawn up so close, that none but the first Ranks had room to stir themselves,
and the inconvenience of the Soil, so fat and slippery with the Rain, and
withal so deep that they stood half way the Leg in Mire.

The Field was bestrewed with Six thousand of theirs, and with Sixteen hundred
of the English. Amongst the slain were the Earl of Nevers, and Anthony Duke of
Brabant, Brothers to the Duke of Burgundy, the Duke of Alenson, the Constable
d'Abret, the Duke of Bar, the Marshall de Boucicaut, the Admiral Dampierre,
the Archbishop of Sens Brother of Montaigu That Montagu who lost his Head.
, and the Vicount de Lannois Son of the same; Amongst the Prisoners the Dukes
of Orleans and of Bourbou, the Earls of Vendosme and Richemont, and fourteen
hundred Gentlemen. The Army indeed Victorious, but as much shattered as if they
had been vanquished, had much ado to crawl to Calais; from whence their King
Henry went over again into England.

Burgundy went on with his design of usurping the Government; and he believed
this Juncture very favorable toward it. But when it came to be known that he
was marched to Dijon with the Duke of Lorrain, and ten thousand Horse to come
again to Paris, they brought the King back with speed; and the Duke of Guyenne
quartered Men in all the places thereabout.

The Burgundian being arrived at Lagny, sent to the King to desire he might
come to him, and that the Duke of Guyenne might receive his Wife again, whom he
had packed away to entertain a Mistress. He was promised satisfaction in this
second thing he demanded: but for the first he could never obtain it, he was
expressly forbidden to come near Paris but only with his own Servants. There
had been no security for him, he found they had put all his Friends in Prison,
Hanged up all his Soldiers they could light upon, and sent for the Count of
Armagnac his greatest Enemy to take the Constables Sword.

The mischief proceeded principally from the evil Counsels of certain Plagues
in Court, who for their private Interests, promoted the differences between the
Princes, and plunged the young Duke of Guyenne into all Debauchery. The
University and Parliament made loud Complaints, and moved that young Prince so
much, that he did promise to take some order: but in few days afterward he
fell sick of a Looseness, whereof he died the Five and twentieth of December,
not without visible marks

The Count d'Armagnac being arrived at Paris the nine and twentieth of the same
Month, set aside the Propositions for Peace, envenomed the Sore instead of
healing it, and made himself absolute Master of the Government, having obtained
the Sovereign Administration of the Treasury, and the Command of Captain
General of all the Fortresses, with power to put in what Governors and what
Garrisons he pleased.

After the death of the Duke of Guyenne, the Succession to the Crown was to
fall to his second Brother John Duke of Touraine. The Earl of Hainault whose
Daughter he had Married, had carried him into his Country: all honest Frenchmen
wished he might return to inform himself in all Affairs. In the mean time to
gain the affection of the People, and show he was not engaged to any Party, he
Commanded both of them to lay down their Arms. The Burgundian, who had stood
gaping idly in Lagny, was glad of so fair a pretense to retire. He went back
into the Low Countries, vexed to the very Soul, that his Enemies should deride
him and call him John de Lagny, not much in haste.

The Emperor Sigismund desiring to procure the Churches Peace, and also a Peace
amongst Christian Princes, made a Voyage into France, and from thence England,
but without any success, because the Constable refused the Truce for four years
which he had propounded betwixt those two Crowns. The King received him
magnificently at Paris, and was willing he should take his place in Parliament;
but it was not so well relished that he should upon any occasion assume the
Authority to bestow the Order of Knighthood upon a Gentleman.

He resolved to erect the Earldom of Savoy to a Duchy for Ame VIII. and diverse
Authors tell us he had made choice of the City of Lions for that purpose:
Montluel in Bresse, out of the Territories of the Kingdom. However the Letters
Patents for the said Erection are dated from Chamberry the Nineteenth of
February.

It is fit we observe that ever since the time of the Carlian Race, the Title
of France was the Count of Toulouze, who held the Dutchies of Septimania and
Narbonne; and the Earl of Savoy did the same, though he had the Dutchies of
Chablais and Aouste, which he did not omit amongst his Titles. But as Men who
in length of time change their humors and fancies, had an imagination that
there was something greater in the Title of Duke, Ame VIII. Earl of Savoy was
willing to have that Title given to the Earldom he bore the name of.

France met with nothing but misfortune upon misfortune, the defeat of the
Constable before Harfleur which he besieged, then of the Naval Forces upon that
Coast, the continual Incursions of the Burgundian Troops, the death of the Duke
of Berry, who was the only Person that could have allayed these Disorders, the
King of Englands second landing, this was at Tonques, with the loss of diverse
places in Normandy taken by his Forces. Besides all this, the earnest
endeavors of both Parties to make an Alliance with him: but the Burgundian
with most industry and forwardness, enraged that they had thrust him out of the
Government; and the Earl of Hainault his Cousin, to get a support for the
Dauphin John his Son in Law, whom the Orleans Faction would deprive of his
Birthright, to prefer and advance Charles Earl of Pontieu his younger Brother.

Parisians heartily desired the Burgundians return: and indeed there was a Plot
discovered to have let in his Forces. The chief Conspirators paid down their
Heads for it, the rest were imprisoned, all who were suspected banished, even
Members of the Parliament and University, the Burghers Arms seized upon, their
Chains taken away, and the Butchers Company abolished.

Burgundian that he Conferred with the King of England at Calais, and renewed
the Truce for his Countries only; which was in some manner an obligation, not
to assist the King at all. From thence retiring to Valenciennes, he had
confidence with Duke He was called Duke because in Germany all the Children of
a Family bear the same Title as the eldest.
William Earl of Hainault, and the new Dauphin his Son in Law. They swear
mutual assistance against all their Enemies. So the Dauphin declared himself
against the Armagnacs, and promised the Duke he would never return to Court
till he carried him along with him.

It was therefore resolved that the Earl of Hainault should go thither to treat
of those Affairs, but should leave the Dauphin at Compeigne. Not being able to
obtain the recalling of the Burgundian, he threatened to carry back the Dauphin
home with him* whereupon they intended to detain him till he had given up the
Dauphin: but having private notice, he craftily made his escape. But they
secured themselves of the Dauphin another, but a more wicked way, by giving him
Poison, of which he died the eighteenth of April.

Charles his Brother, a sworn Enemy to the House of Burgundy, succeeded to the
Title of Dauphin and of Duke de Touraine, and which is more, to a right of
inheriting the Crown, to the great satisfaction and joy of the Duke of Anjou
his Father in Law, who was mightily suspected to have had some hand in the
removal of the two eldest out of the World, that his Son in Law might Reign.

August. He left three Sons, Lewis, Rene, and Charles; the two first had
successively the Titles of King of Sicilia. Charles was Earl of Maine.

The Kings Person, the Dauphin, and the City of Paris, were in the hands of the
Constable d'Armagnac: the Queen only was some kind of counterpoise to his
Power. They living with much freedom and license in her Family, it was easy
for the Constable Bouredon to be taken thence and thrown into the River as a
Party concerned in those Intrigues; and afterward sent away the Queen his
Wife, as it were a Prisoner to Tours. She could never be brought to forgive him
this injury, nor even the Dauphin her own Son, it being by his consent,
although he were not then above the age of Sixteen years.

The Queens confinement, the lamentable death of the two Dauphins, the
displacing of a great many Officers, the plundering of all the open Country by
the unpaid Soldiers, the depredations of the Armagnac's, who robbed the very
Shrines in the Churches, furnished the Burgundian with specious Pretenses to
publish his Manifesto's, and to send to all the chief Cities to desire they
would be assisting toward the restoring the King to his liberty. The most part
of those in Champagne and Picardy, with the Isle of France, received him with
open Arms, because he put down all Subsidies.

However all was nothing unless he could get into Paris, he marched round about
it, approaching or going farther off for two Months together, according to the
Advice he had from his Friends that were in the place. Whilst he was besieging
Corbeil, he goes away in haste to Tours with some Troops of Horse, and having
had a Conference with the Queen at Marmoustier, whither she was come purposely
under a pretense of taking the Air, he brought her with him to Troyes; From
that time she claimed the Regency.

England failed not to push on his Affairs, Caen, Bayeux, Coutance, Carenian,
Lisieux, Falaise, Argentan, Alenson, and in fine the greatest part of Normandy
surrendered themselves up to him without scarce a blow given, excepting
Cherbourgh which defended it self three Months; and yet the Constable chose
rather to see the Kingdom lost then his Authority, and the Burgundian consented
rather to have it dismembered by the English, then governed by his Enemy.

In Germany there were several Companies of Vagabonds began to strowle about,
having no Riligon, no Law, no Country or Habitation, their Faces tawny,
speaking in a particular Canting Language of their own, and using a Slight of
Hand in Picking Pockets, while they pretended to tell Fortunes. They were
called Tartars and Zigens. These were the same in my own opinion as those the
French at present call Bohemians and the English Gypsy's.

We find in the Acts of the Council of Constance, how the memory of Wicklef was
Anathematized, and John Huss, who treading his steps, had sowed new Doctrines
in Bohemia, was burnt alive Anno 1415. notwithstanding he had a safe Conduct of
the Emperor, and how Jerome of Pragne his Associate, but more cautious then he,
chose rather to be condemned absent then present. In the same Council Bennet
having been declared Contumacious, and intruded into the Papacy, the Cardinals
of all Parties joining together, elected Otho Colomna, who took the name of
Martin, as being promoted on the Eve of that Saints day.

France. To this end he sent two Cardinal Legates, upon whose solicitation an
Assembly was held at Montereau Faut-yonne, where the Deputies on either side
agreed upon the Seventeenth of May, that all hatred being laid aside, the
Dauphin and Duke of Burgundy should have the Government of the State, during
the Kings Life. But the Constable, the Chancellor, and those that had the
greatest share in the management of Affairs, fearing they should be packed
away, or apprehending the Burgundian's Resentment, formally opposed it, and the
Chancellor did absolutely refuse to Seal the Treaty, he who was said to have
Sealed so many Instruments to the Peoples ruin and for his own private
Interest.

Paris being sick of the War, this was an excellent Theme to be preached to the
People, and stir up their hatred against them, and also to rowze the Burgundian
Faction, who had still remained quiet, had not the Populace been drawn to side
with them upon this ill management. In fine, those of his Party holding
themselves assured of his Affection, introduced into their City Philip de
Villiers L'Isle, Adau^ Governor of Pontoise, by St. Germains Gate.

He entered by night upon the Twenty eight of May with Eight hundred Horse,
crying out Peace! and Burgundy! The People did not stir till they were come
into Denis and St. Honor; then they came out on all hands and joined with
them. Tanneguy du Chastel, Provost of Paris hearing the noise, ran and took the
Dauphin out of his Bed, and wrapping him up in his Nightgown, conveyed him to
the Bastille, and from thence to Melun. The King who was in his Hostel remained
in the power of the Burgundians.

From thence spreading themselves over the whole Town, they fell upon the
Houses of the Armagnac's, and searched from the very tops of the Garrets to the
bottoms of the Cellers. Some plundered the Household Stuff and carried away the
Money, but were most eager to seize upon their Persons, and those were least
unhappy that were cooped up in private places till they had paid their Ransoms.
Most of them were haled to Prisons, whither a great many fled voluntarily to
avoid other mischiefs. The Chancellor was taken the very same day and
imprisoned in the Palace. The next day the Constable was dragged to the same
place; He had concealed himself in a Masons House, but Proclamation being made
to discover all the Armagnac's upon pain of death, his Host produced him.

June. They began with the Palace, whence they drew forth the Constable and
Chancellor, Murdered them, and exposed their Bodies upon the Table de Marbre.
From thence they went to the Prisons, Massacred the Bishops of Senlis and de
Coutances in the Petit Chastelet, and made the rest leap from the tops of the
Towers, receiving them below upon the points of their Swords and Javelines.
There was no part of the City which was not stained with the Blood they spilt.
Near two thousand Men were killed, whose Carcasses were drawn into the Fields,
with deep Incisions made upon their Backs in form of a Bend or Scarf, which
was the Signal that Party had marked themselves withal, for distinction. Such
as were found with them were held to be worse then Heretics, the Priests
denied them Burial, and Baptism to their Children.

Whether it were Policy or not, the Duke of Burgundy would not come to Paris
till a month after L'Isle Adam had made himself Master of it. The Queen and he
made their entrance the fourteenth day of July as Triumphantly as if they were
returned Armagnac.

The vilest and the most wicked had made themselves the Chiefs of that
Blood-thirsty Militia; The very Hangman was one of them; and he had so much
impudence as to shake the Duke by the Hand, who knew not what he was.

The One and twentieth of August they made another great Commotion, that
infamous Villain being their Captain; in which they killed above two hundred
Persons, and amongst others even some of those that dwelt in the Dukes Hostel;
and perhaps they would have carried it home to himself, had he not been
provided against that Scum of the Rabble. He bethought himself of a wyle, which
was to send six thousand of that common Herd to besiege Montleberry, and when
they were gone, he ordered the Hangmans Head to be chopped off, and several of
the most deserving to be Hanged, or cast into the River.

June, Paris began to be infected with the Plague, which raged extremely to the
end of October, carried off above forty thousand, most of them being the
meanest of the People, and such as had dipped their Hands in Blood.

After the Dauphin was gone from Paris, his Partisans made War in his Name.
Those Frenchmen that were disinteressed and impartial, found themselves much
perplexed between the Kings Commands, whom the Burgundian made to speak as
pleased himself, and the Commands of the Presumptive Heir to the Crown; which
side soever they could take, they were sure to be treated as Rebels and
Traitors.

Bretagne labored so much that he made up the breach a second time. All the
Articles were agreed upon at St. Maurdes Fossez: but those that had influence
over the Dauphin kept him from Ratifying them; so that there was only a Truce
for three weeks.

After he had taken all the pains imaginable to find out some way to reconcile
the two Parties, perceiving as little faith on the one side as the other, he
retired into his own Country, and renewed his ancient Alliance with the
English, only for his Marguerit de Clisson Widow of John de Blois Earl of
Pointieurs, a Woman ambitious even to the highest Crimes, never left provoking
her Sons (she had four in all) to seize upon the Person of the Duke, that they
might enter upon the Duchy of Bretagne, which she told them was their
Inheritance. The Dauphins Council offended because the Breton did not Arm
himself against the English, Treated underhand with these Brothers, and gave
them Letters and Orders to prosecute their design.

To effect this they made use of all sorts of means to get into the Dukes
favor, went to visit him at Nantes, gained great Credit with him by their
Respect and Complaisance: in fine, engage him to go and divert himself at their
House of Chuntoceaux in Anjou upon the Second of February. Going thither with
his Brother Richard unarmed, and with little Company, as being unwilling to
give them too great trouble, Oliver the eldest of the four, causes him to be
set upon and taken by forty Horsemen well armed, who carried them away bound
Legs and Arms, to the Castle of Paluan in Poitou: From thence they were removed
from place to place all the year round, causing diverse reports to be spread,
sometimes that they died in despair, at other times that they were drowned, and
lastly, that for a Penance they were both gone on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
there to end their days.

They had made account that if they could but once catch these two Brothers,
they should find strength and friends enough to get themselves into possession
of the Duchy: but the Act was so base, that even their most devoted friends
were ashamed Bretagne moved with the horror of the Fact and the lamentations of
the sorrowful Duchess, took up Arms, and sent her above Fifty thousand Men to
recover her Husband. In the absence of Arthur Earl of Richmond, whom the
English would not set at liberty, the Bretons chose Commanders of their own
Nobility, to lead them.

Chantoceaux was besieged. The Duke was not then there as they had hoped; but
Marguerit de Clisson and one of her Sons were in it. The breach being made,
this Woman's heart failed, fear seized upon her Spirits, she dispatches
Messenger after Messenger to her Son Oliver to entreat him, if he would ever
see her again alive, to release the Duke. The Dukes Head was a pawn sufficient
enough to answer for his Mothers: notwithstanding he was so weak as to let him
go. But he had beforehand made him sign to what Articles he would. The Estates
of the Country never regarded them, the four Brothers were brought to their
Trial, who were condemned to die, their Houses razed, their Lands confiscated
and given to great Men, that so they might never be recovered again.

Henry had laid Siege to Rouen from the Month of June. The importance of that
City, and the constant fidelity of her Burghers, deserved some care should be
taken to relieve them. They first endeavored it by treating with the King of
England concerning the Marriage with Catharine of France, by the Mediation of
the Popes Legates, who for that purpose carried the Picture of that beautiful
Princess to him. Then, that Project having failed, he making too high demands,
they got some Forces together and carried the King as far as Beauvais: but they
were found too weak to attempt its relief. The Besieged being in the greatest
extremity make their address to the Dauphin: this was the fairest Jewel of the
Crown which was so near being lost: he took no care for it, considering the
place as rather belonging to the Duke of Burgundy then to France.

What Miseries did they not undergo? Thirty thousand died of Famine, hunger
forced them to eat their very Bed-straw, and all the Leather they could come
at. The King of England refusing to receive them on any other terms then at
discretion, they undermined five hundred Rod of their Walls, and in their
extremity resolved to set fire on the Timbers that propt it, and then sally out
of the breach both Men and Women and take their fortune either in Death or
Victory. This desperate Resolution gave the King some apprehension, he allows
them tolerable Conditions, and was contented with the payment of three hundred
thousand Gold Crowns, and three of their Chiefs whom he should name, of those,
one called Blanchard lost his Head. Upon these Conditions he confirmed all
their Privileges; He made his entry the nineteenth January.

The taking of this City brought in all the rest of Normandy; and that Province
for some few years returned to the obedience of the English, from whom it had
been conquered two hundred and fifteen years past, by King Philip Augustus.

They did notwithstanding negotiate between the two Kings, and at the same time
between the two Parties of Armagnacs and Burgundians. A Truce for three Months
Melun to conclude on the Peace and Marriage. Men of most Judgment foreseeing
France must be ruined if it came to that, never left off till they had made
Truce betwixt the two Factions. The Dauphin would have had it for three years,
the Burgundian for two Months only; his aim was, that if within that time he
could make a full and perfect agreement with the Dauphin, they might with their
united Forces fall both jointly upon the English when the Truce expired, if
not, he would make a Peace with them that he might be the more enabled to quell
the Dauphinois.

The first not succeeding well, he comes back to Treat with the English. To
this purpose there was an Interview between both Kings in a Park prepared for
it near Melun, in the midst whereof they had pitched a Tent for the Conference.
The King of France being fallen ill at Paris, the Queen supplied his place, and
carried thither (but only the first time) Madam Catharine whom the King of
England sought in Marriage. They met in this Tent frequently almost three weeks
together, the King of England coming from Mantes, and the Queen from Pontoise,
where they were lodged.

The Dauphins Council knowing what they treated on, sought to the Burgundian
for an Accommodation, and flattered him with a perfect Reconciliation. The Duke
did ardently desire it; and therefore being pleased with that hopes, he stood
on higher terms with the English, and would scare condescend to any thing that
he demanded. Thus they began to show some coldness, and then were picqued at
one another: the Burgundian breaks off the Treaty, and thinks of nothing now
but to accommodate Affairs with the Dauphin.

They conferred therefore in the open Field near Povilly le Fort, within two
Leagues of Melun between the two Armies, each of them attended by half a score
Horsemen; and there they made a Treaty, in which they swear to love and assist
each other like Brothers, submitting themselves in case of any failure to the
Sovereign Judgment of the Holy See. After which they agreed to meet upon the
Bridge de Montereau Faut-yonne the Eighteenth of August, each accompanied with
ten Men armed, to determine all their disputes in a most amicable manner.

The Servants belonging to the deceased Lewis Duke of Orleans, particularly
Taneguy du Chastel, and John Louvet President of Provence, procured these
Interviews for no other end but to find an opportunity to revenge the death of
their late Master upon him that was the Author of it: They durst not attempt it
at Pouilly, but they put things in better order at Montereau, by the
contrivance of certain Barriers, which being made in appearance for the mutual
safety of them both, served as a snare or trap to that unfortunate Prince.

The day being come, the Dauphin arrives at Montereau: the Duke made him wait
almost fifteen days. His friends forewarning and advice, his own pressentiment,
all humane prudence and reasonning forbid his going thither: the power of his
ill destiny dragged him along, by the horrid treachery of a second Dalila, I
mean the Lady de Gyac his Mistress; or perhaps it was the hand of Divine
Justice, for the Blood of his own Cousin, and so many thousands of Men as had
been spilt in that Quarrel.

To allure him the better, they delivered up to him the Castle of Montereau,
but Emp. John II. by the Session of Emanuel his Father, Reigned Twenty seven
years, and Sigismund.
wholly unfurnished of Provisions or Artillery. From thence he descended to the
Bridge with his ten Men, and placed a guard at the end. While he was kneeling
before the Dauphin, Taneguy du Chastel and some others, leaping over the
Barriers Massacred him by several wounds, his People making but a slight
defense, only Nouailles Brother of Captal de Buch, who was killed with him. We
must believe this act was done without the Dauphins order, for he was not above
Seventeen years of age, and Heaven would never have permitted a Prince designed
to wear the France, should have perpetrated so horrible and base a piece of
treachery. However it were, the event made it appear how much those wounds did
blemish his Honor, and not only proved hurtful to him, but almost mortal to
the whole Kingdom.

For Philip the only Son of the deceased, although a very good Prince, highly
undertakes to revenge his Fathers death, and wanted not for means to do it. All
that were friends to that House, all those that were discontented came and
tendered their service to him: compassion and horror for this Murder renewed
and heated the affections even of such as were grown coldest; the Parisians
sent to assure him of their Services; and he to gain the love of the People
obtained a Truce of the English, to the exclusion of the Dauphins People who
were come to Rouen to desire the same thing, for which they made great profers.
From this time the French, the English, and the Burgundians, began to mix and
live together as if they had all been but one Nation: but the difference of
their humors and interests, would suffer no long unity amongst them.

Poitou, Orleannois, Berry, Auvergne, Lyonnois, Dauphine, Provence, and above
all thought to secure himself of Languedoc. He took away that Government from
the Earl of Foix, and gave it to Charles Count de Clermont, eldest Son of the
Duke of Bourbon. From these Provinces it was that he drew his Succors that
maintained him. Besides, the Kings of Castille and of Scotland, with the Duke
of Milan, supplied him in his necessities with some of their Forces.

England and Philp Duke of Burgundy, met at Troyes, where the King and Queen
were; and there the Peace was Treated together with the Marriage of Catharine
of France with King Henry. Which was first sworn to by all the Lords there
present, and then by all the good Cities that were of their party. The Marriage
was completed the Second day of June.

This Treaty amongst other things contained; That King Charles named and owned
Henry for his Heir to the Crown of France; That however Henry should not take
the Title of King of France during the life of Charles; but that he should have
the quality of Regent, and the government of Affairs; That the two Kingdoms of
France and England should be united and held by the same hand, viz. by Henry
and his Heirs: but that they should not depend upon one another, and should be
governed according to their Laws; That all Privileges and Rights should be
preserved to all Estates and to every particular Person; That no Treaty of
Accommodation should be made with the Dauphin without the consent of both the
Kings, the Duke of Burgundy, and the three Estates of both the Kingdoms.

The two Kings afterward with the Burgundian having taken Sens and Montereau,
journyed toward Paris. Melun made the King of England know how much all France
might cost him: he was four Months before it, and not able to force it: Famine
only did what his Sword could not. The Besieged surrendered upon composition,
but contrary to the faith given, they were all detained Prisoners.

At their departure from thence, the two Kings made their entrance into Paris,
the first Sunday of Advent; and the next day the two Queens. The Duke of
Burgundy having tendered his complaint before them and their Councils, in the
Hostel St. Pol, the Dauphin was summoned to the Table de Marbre with the usual
formalities; and afterward as attainted and convict of Murder, was declared
unworthy of all Succession, namely of that to the Crown of France, and banished
the Kingdom to perpetuity.

From this Sentence given by incompetent Judges against all Right, and contrary
to the Laws of the Kingdom, he appealed to God and his Sword, and transferred
the Parliament and University to Poitiers, at which place the most illustrious
Members of those two Companies did not fail to appear.

Thus almost every thing was double in the Kingdom, there were two Kings, two
Regents, two Parliaments, two Constables, two Chancellors, two Admirals, and so
of most of the great Officers, not to mention the multitude of Mareschals of
France, whereof each Party made seven or eight.

Portugal Navigators defrayed and encouraged by Henry Duke of Visen Son of John
King of Portugal, sailing at large in the Ocean found in their midway between
Lisbonne and the Fortunate Islands, a little Island which they named Madera,
because it was full of Wood or Materials fit for building. From thence steering
along the exterior coasts of Africa, they there discovered several large
Countries, and in time sailed to the East Indies, which till then were unknown,
at least those parts toward the Sea. Pope Martin, and after him his
Successors, bestowed upon the Portugals all those Lands by them discovered or
to be discovered, from the Cape which lies at the end of Mount Atlas, to the
Indies.

When the King of England had sojourned some weeks at Paris, he laid Siege to
the City of Meaux; the only place the Dauphin had left, upon the Rivers of
Seine and Marne. After a three Months brave defense, the Besieged capitulated
the ninth of May; the Inhabitants had their lives and liberties: but all the
Soldiers were sent Prisoners to diverse places, where they let them cruelly
perish for hunger. The Bailiff named Lewis de Gas, had his Head cut off in the
Halles at Paris. The City taken, King Henry went into England to draw over a
new supply of Men and Money.

So great was the fondness of the French for the Conquest of the Kingdom of
Naples, that Lewis Duke of Anjou forgetting those disasters of his Father and
Grandfather, and abandoning his own Country to the mercy of the English,
suffers himself to be cajolled by the promises of the Pope and Sforza, who
called him to dispossess Queen Jane, a Princess lost in her Reputation by her
continual Galantries Lewis being in a pretty good posture in that Country,
Alphonso King of Arragon, who held the Island of Sicilia, undertakes the
protection of Jane, she having adopted him her Son, Sforza does reconcile
himself to her; and in a word there was nothing left for the poor Angevin but
the way to walk home again.

English and the Duke of Burgundy, was about Jacqueline Countess of Hainault,
Holland, Zealand, and Friseland. After the death of John Dauphin of France,
they had Married her to John Duke of Brabant Son of Anthony and Cousin German
to Duke Philip: but the young Gossip not being satisfied with her second
Husband, a Man of little merit, prosecuted for a Divorce, and consederated with
some Captains to carry her away, as it were by force, into England, where she
Married Humphrey Duke of Gloucester Brother of King Henry. This undertaking
turned much to the contempt of Philip, who besides observed that the English
began to treat him with more pride, and endeavored so to settle their affairs
as they might have no further need of him.

Loire, particularly in Champagne, Picardy, and in the Countries of Perch,
Maine, and Anjou. The Duke of Clarence Brother to King Henry having got
together eight or ten thousand Men went and besieged Bauge, in Anjou: John Earl
of Bouchain a Scot, and the Marshall de la Fayette marched to its relief, gave
him battle and won it. He was slain upon the place with two thousand of his
Men, the rest escaped through the Country of Main into Normandy. This Earl of
Bouchain had brought three or four thousand Men from his own Country to the
Dauphins service, in recompense he gave him the Constables Sword.

French, the Dauphin accompanied with his new Constable and the Duke of
Alenson, regained some places in the Countries of Perch and the Chartrain. In
the mean time Henry being come back from England with a great reinforcement,
and in a rage and fury for the defeat and death of his Brother, did endeavor
all that was possible to meet with the Dauphin. He marched by Chartres and
Chasteaudun, lodged in the Suburbs of Orleans, and not meeting him in the
Field, but a violent Dysentery that took off three thousand of his Men, he
falls upon the City of Dreux, which being surrendered upon Composition, he goes
to rest himself at Paris, and sends over his Queen, who was great with Child,
to be delivered in England.

Dreux, an honest Hermit unknown to him, came and told him the great evils he
brought upon Christendom by his unjust ambition, who usurped the Kingdom of
France against all manner of right, and contrary to the will of God; wherefore
in his holy name he threatened him with a severe and sudden punishment, if he
desisted not from his Enterprise. Henry took this exhortation either for an
idle whimsey, or a suggestion of the Dauphinois, and was but the more confirmed
in his design.

The Vulgar call it the Scab of St. Fiacre.
and incurable Disease, the acuteness of its pain, made him go to Senlis to
seek for cure.

The Queen his Wife was a while before this returned out of England, having
brought forth a Son to whom they gave the same name as his Fathers. Both she
and her Husband made their entry with great splendor into Paris, and kept open
Court at the Louvre upon the Feast of Pentecost, each Crowned with their Royal
Diadems: but the People that went to see the Ceremony, had cause to regret
regret the liberalities of their ancient Kings, and detest the niggardliness or
pride of the English, who gave them none of their good Cheer, nor did vouchsafe
to profer them one Glass of Wine.

The Dauphin in the mean time had besieged the City of Cosne on the Loire, and
the place had capitulated to surrender, if they were not relieved by a prefixed
day, with an Army able to give them battle. The Duke of Burgundy got a great
number of Men to go thither, the Dauphin being informed of his march, did not
think fit to stay for him, but raised his Siege.

England, though already indisposed, was gotten into his Litter that he might
be present at this memorable Action. While he was at Melun his distemper
increased so much that he could proceed no further, but made them bring him
back to Vincennes, where he died the eight and twentieth day of August. He had
only one Son who was named Henry, he left him to the education of the Cardinal
of Winchester his Uncle, who bred him in England, gave the Government of that
Kingdom to the Duke of Gloucester, and the Regency of the Kingdom of France to
John Duke of Bedford, to whom he recommended above all things to give content
to the Duke of Burgundy, never to make any Peace with the Dauphin unless
Normandy were yielded to be left in full Sovereignty to the English, and not to
release those Prisoners that were taken at the Battle of Azincour till his Son
were come to his majority.

October following, King Charles VI. the weakness of whose Brain, stupefied
with so many relapses, made him a prey to every one that could but come to deal
with him, ended his Life, and his unhappy Reign in his Hostel of St. Pol at
Paris, attended only by his first Gentleman of the Bedchamber, his Confessor,
and his Almoner. His Funeral was at St. Denis: no Prince of the Blood went to
it, not even the Duke of Burgundy, who was ashamed to give place to the Duke of
Bedford. This last as soon as the Ceremony was over, caused young Henry his
Nephew to be proclaimed King of France.

Charles VI. Reigned two and forty years and five and thirty days, and lived
fifty two. He had by Isabella of Bavaria six Sons, the three first of them died
in their infancy, the other three Lewis, John, and Charles appeared on the
Theater: and the last survived him and Reigned. He had the same number of
Daughters, Isabella, Jane, Mary, a second Jane, Michel and Catharine. The first
was Married to Richard II. King of England, then to Charles Duke of Orleans;
the second died in her Cradle, the third devoted her self to God in the Convent
at Poissy; the fourth Married John VI. Duke of Bretagne, the fifth Philip, who
was Duke of Burgundy, and the last Henry V. King of England.

Before him the Kings of France were wont at all Ceremonies to appear with all
their Regal Ornaments, and wear some marks about them every day, as their Robes
lined with Ermines, and a Crown upon their Hoods or their Hats: In the Army a
Coat of Armor Sem'd with Flower-de-Luces, and a Hoop with Flowers pretty high
upon their Helmets: This King neglected all these Ornaments, and did not
distinguish himself at all from other People; so that he seemed to have
degraded himself of all Royalty.

Church, the fourteenth Age.
That Quarrel which Pope Boniface had with King Philip the Fair, was the Rock
whereon the Papal Power both Spiritual and Temporal was split and shipwrack'd,
which till then had Mastered had Lorded it over the Emperors and other Western
Princes. The translation of the Holy See to Avignon brought them lower yet, by
removing them out of their natural place, and laying open their defects, which
exposed the Court of Rome to the great contempt and scorn of all that did but
make the least observation on their ill Conduct. But to say the truth, France
that thought to aggrandise it self by this Spiritual Power of the Popes Court,
gained nothing but their Vices, with the plague of Litigious Disputes, and the
Maletost, or extraordinary Taxes. But if the multitude of Cardinals were an
advantage to the State, France might have vaunted that she alone had as great a
number as all the other parts of Christendom besides.

We have seen how Clement V. promoted to the Papacy by a method not strictly
Canonical, extinguished the Order of the Templers who were found to be all
guilty in France, but innocent in diverse other Countries. John XXII. was the
first who made it a fixed and permanent right to reserve the Fruits of vacant
Benefices for the Holy See.

He bestowed the same Honor on the Bishopric of Toulouze: but thinking it too
rich and of too great extent, he divided it into five, whereof Toulouze is one,
Montauban, Lavaur, Rieux, and Lombers are the other four: which he would have
to be its Suffragants, as also Mirepoix and Lavaur created new by him. Moreover
he restored the Bishopric of Pamiez to that of Toulouze, which had been taken
away and brought under Narbonne by Boniface VIII. when he erected it.

To recompense Narbonne in some manner, he made two more in the same Territory,
these were Alet, whose See was first at Limoux, and St. Pont de Tomieres. He
likewise made four for that of Bourges; Castres of a portion of that of Alby,
St. Flour of part of Clermont, Vabres of part of Rodez, and Tulles of part of
Limoges.

He likewise erected four for the Archbishopric of Bourdeaux which had been
dismembered, Condon from the Territory of Again, Sarlat from that of Perigueux,
Maillezais and Lucon from that of Poitiers. Most of these sixteen Churches were
Abbeys changed into Bishoprics, and their Abbots converted to Bishops.

Schism.
The Popes return to Rome was attended with a Schism of forty years, which
troubled all Christendom: but afflicted France particularly, overthrew the
Discipline of Elections and of Collations, filled all the Churches with
Mercinary Pastors, nay hungry Wolves, and absorded all her Revenues, not only
by ordinary Taxes upon each of them, by Annats, and Rights of Provision: but by
extraordinary Taxes and Tenths.

Church.
The Princes, first the Duke of Anjou, then the Duke of Berry, and after him
the Duke of Orleans favored the cupidity of the Popes of Avignon, that they
might share in the prey; the Cardinals gorged themselves: the Prelates either
for want of courage, or in hopes of getting into fatter Benefices, gave their
consent; the lesser ones were so much under the paws of the Wolf, they durst
not so much as open their mouths. The University of Paris alone opposed these
disorders, and notwithstanding the Princes menaces, the corruptions of the
Court of Avignon, the tricks and artifices of the Popes that were Competitors,
they saved the Temporals of the Gallican Church, and restored the Universal
Churches Peace by extinguishing the Schism.

And truly this great work is in the first place due to their zeal and labor,
and in the second place to the care and perseverance of the Emperor Sigismund,
who called and maintained the Council of Constance, and who made diverse Voyages
into Italy, France and Arragon, to establish Unity and Peace.

University.
There was not in all the Kingdom so powerful a Body as the University, as well
for the multitude of her Scholars, which sometimes exceeded the number of
thirty thousand, as because she was the Nursing Mother of all the Clergy of
France. The remonstrances she took the liberty to make to the Princes, the care
she had to procure the reformation of the State during the troubles, and that
which happened to Savoisy, are very strong proofs of it. But we will add two
more. The one, that in the year 1304. the Prevost of Paris having caused a
Scholar that was a Clerk to be hanged, they carried their complaints to the
King and left off their Exercises till they had satisfaction. He was fain to go
to the Pope for his absolution. The other was thus, in the year 1408. William
de Tignonville, who was at that time in the same Office, having likewise sent a
couple of Scholars to the Gallows who well deserved it, but were Clarks, was
forced together with his Lieutenant to go and unhang them, to kiss their Feet,
and cause them to be brought with great ceremony to the Matburins, where yet
their Epitaph is to be seen.

We find by the Letters of Pope John XXII. that the Oriental Languages, the
Greek, the Arabian, the Chaldean, and Hebrew were taught in the year 1325.

Learned Men.
There sprung up, if we may so say, a vast quantity of excellent Plants in this
fertile Nursery. I cannot tell whether I ought to reckon the Scholasticks in the
number since they have brought forth more Thorns and Prickles then either
Flowers or Fruit that is wholesome. Henry of Ghent, John of Paris, John Duns the
Scot, all lived in the beginning of this Age, which was the Fourteenth Century:
but perhaps some would rather have them placed at the latter end of the Age
foregoing: the two first were Secular Doctors, the third a Cordelier. Of the
same Order were Aureolus, Mayrons, Okam, and de Lyra. Peter Aureolus amongst
other Works, composed a short and pithy Commentary upon the Bible. The Critics
may examine whether we must distinguish him from another of the same name and
of the same Order, a Native of Verberie upon the Oyse, who was a Cardinal.
Francis de Mayrons having been rejected at the Sorbonne, would needs, to show
his ability, maintain an Act, where without having any President, without
eating or drinking, without rising from his Seat, he answered from five a Clock
in the morning till seven at night. Since that the other Batchelors pretend to
imitate him. And from hence came the Act which they name the Grand Sarbonnique.
William Okam by birth an English Man, wrote of the power of the Popes and
Emperors against John XXII. Nicholas de Lyra, a Native of the Diocese of Evreux
in Normandy, whom they say was Originally an Hebrew, compiled a Commentary or
Postil upon the Bible, of which great use is yet made.

From the Order of the Dominicans came Bernard de Guy, Inquisitor of the Faith
against the Albigensis, Bishop of Lodeve, of whom we have diverse Volumes, as
well of Holy History as Profane; Durand de Saint Pourcain Bishop of Meaux;
William de Rance Bishop of Sees, Confessor to King John; Herve Noel, by birth a
Breton, General of the Order, and Contemporary with Durand; Peter de la Palud a
Burgundian, Patriarch of Jerusalem.

Amongst the Seculars we find William Durand Bishop of Mandes, called the
Speclator, who composed the Book Entitled Speculum Juris, it was he made
likewise the Rationale Divinorm Officiorum. He lived in the beginning of this
Age, about twelve or fifteen years before the other Durandus Bishop of Meaux.
The Cardinal Bertrand Bishop of Autun. Nicholas Oresme Grand Master of the
College of Navarre, Dean of the Church of Ro^en, and Tutor to King Charles V.
who made him Bishop of Lisieux, who amongst other Works translated the Bible
into French, which was perhaps the first Translation that ever was seen in our
Language, that is to say in French Romance The several Dialects in several Ages
and parts of the Nation.
, for there had been one in French Tu^esque, even in the Church.
time of the second Race.

King Charles the Wise will not disdain to be placed in the number of the
Learned, since he is beholding for his Wisdom in some measure to the Writings
of Learned Men, whose Eloquence and Politiques, drawn from examples in History,
did both animate and instruct his Captains.

May not France also reckon amongst her Learned Men the famous Petrarque, since
he spent so great a part of his Life here, though he were Originally a Flore
tine, and was both born and buried beyond the Mountains. This great Genius
having in his youth exercised his Pen for his Mistress Laura, repented a
terwards his having trifled away so much time, and employed it afterward in
works that were more Philosophical and more Christian-like.

We must own that in this Age, as in the last, the Jacobins and the Cordeliers,
furnished the Roman Church with a great number of Bishops and Cardinals, and
that they were so powerful, that if they had but wisely managed their
prosperity, the favor of the Grandees, and the affection of the People, they
might have made themselves Masters both of the Church and State. But they
retarded their progress by their own faults; and if (...) say, it hung Clogs
upon their own Feet which hindered their higher flight; the Jacobins in being so
stiff to maintain their old opinion about the Conception of the Virgin, and the
Cordeliers in commenting with too much severity upon the observation of St.
Francis's Rules, and Philosophising too Metaphisically, touching propriety of
Goods which are consumed by the use of them.

John Duns the Scot had taken up the Cudgels against St. Thomas: In all which
Controversies he came short of the solidity of that Angelique Doctor, though he
Disputes.
had great advantage in the point of the Conception of the Holy Virgin,
maintaining that it was perfectly and entirely Immaclate, wherein he varied
from the Master of Sentences. This opinion appearing more to the honor of the
Mother of God, and more suitable to the zeal of devout Souls, was embraced by
most Christians. The Jacobins having stumbled at it, lost themselves mightily
in the esteem of the World: however the Question was never fully debated till
about the latter end of this Age.

The Cordeliers had their time of suffering likewise, for in a few years after
they were brought so low they came almost to nothing, even as the Templers
before them. A pretense for the strict observation of the Rules given by St.
Francis, without admitting those interpretations of the Popes Nicholas III. and
Clement V. had possessed diverse Monks of that Order with such crude and
ambitious imaginations, as caused them to be divided into Parties, who rambling
from one Country to another, confounded them almost with the Bisoches and the
Frerots, who were Heretics indeed. John XXII. endeavored to cure them of this
obstinacy, but not prevailing with them, he threatened Excommunication. They,
far from obeying him, retired into Sicilia, where they prescribed amongst
themselves Rules very strict, but withal very ridiculous, made choice of a
General, Provincials and Guardians, and began to live as independent from the
Holy See. Their fancies carried them yet further, for they had the confidence
to affirm that there was a Carnal Church overgrown with Riches and Vice, of
which Church the Pope and Bishops were the Prelates; and likewise a Spiritual
one, girded with Poverty, adorned with Virtue, which consisted only of them and
such as were like them, in whom was all Authority, as well as Sanctity: That
the Rule of St. Francis was the same thing as the Gospel, and nothing therefore
that was contained therein could possibly be changed. But the Pope pursued them
so close, that by burning, whipping, and shutting them up between four bare
Walls, he made an end of them.

Others at the same time debated the Question concerning Property, with as much
heat and contention. Nicholas IV. had declared by his Bull, that they were to
have only the use of those things that were given them, and that the propriety
belonged to the Roman Church. Now it happened that a Begard whom in Anno 1322.
they had brought to the Inquisition at Toulouze, having replied that neither
our Lord Jesus Christ nor his Apostles had possessed any thing either in common
or in particular: One Berenger who was Lecturer in their Convent, undertook the
affirmative, and maintained it was an Article of Faith, and very far from any
thing of Error. The difficulty was laid before the Pope at Avignon; Whilst he
was ordering it to be examined by all the Universities, the General Chapter of
the Friars Minors assembled at Perouse, declared that they would hold to the
Decretal of Nicholas, which said it Church.
was so, and as for that abdication of all propriety, it was certain that Jesus
Christ and his Apostles had taught it both by their Preaching and Example.
Which having by their Letters signified through all Christendom, and all their
Doctors teaching the same in their Schools, and in their Pulpits. John XXII.
netled for that they had prevented his Judgment, declared that the assertion in
reference to our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles, was erroneous, for they
might have sold, changed, or given away the things that were presented to them;
and for the Friars Minors, That the Bull mentioned was not to be understood of
things that consumed, because the propriety of such things cannot be separate
from the use of them, but only of immovables; For which he forbad them to make
any further prosecution or proceedings in the name of the Roman Church. For
under that color they troubled many People, and often contended with the
Prelates.

All this was but words and air; for whether they had the property, or simply
the use only of the Meat and Drink bestowed upon them, they neither eat nor
drank more nor less; nor could the Pope have any advantage by it, whether it
were so, or not so. These Bulls nevertheless did so anger them, that a great
many went to the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria with their General Michael de Cesene.
The others that did not follow them in their Schism, however stood stiff in the
maintenance of their opinion, saying that John XXII. was an Heretic in this
point. Neither was he sparing to them in his Ecclesiastical Censures, nor in
punishing them with Faggot and Fire. A great number of them were burnt in
several Countries Anno 1324. and such had a cheap and easy bargain of it, that
had nothing but their Writings condemned to the Flames, as it luckily happened to
Peter John de Serignan one of their Readers in Theology.

I fear I should fall into the ridicule should I set down the disputes they had
about the color, the fashion, and the Stuffs for their Clothes, whether they
ought to be white, black, gray, or green, whether their Hoods or Capouches
should be pointed or round, large or straight, whether their Garment was to sit
loose or close to their body, long or short, Cloth or Serge. We shall only
observe that concerning these Debates they were fain to Consult as much with
his Holiness, hold as many Chapters, assemble Congregations, publish Books and
Manifesto's, as if the whole weight and being of Religion and Christianity had
depended upon it.

At the same time, Philip Son of the King of Majorca, and Cousin to the King of
France, took a fancy to have this Rule observed, in its pure literal sense, as
not to live but by the labor of their hands, and by Alms: but to preserve
their full liberty, to own no Superior, and to ramble wherever they pleased.
The Pope having denied him his Request, he vented his anger against him in the
same terms as the Begards and the Minors of Michel de Cesene.

The same Spirit of presumption possessed two Monks of the same Order, John de
Roquetaillade, and one Haibalus, (if at least they were two distinct Persons)
who undertaking to speak against the abuses of the Court of Avignon, and
withal to make Prognostics of Divine Punishments that were to fall upon the
Pope and his Cardinals, of the coming of Antichrist and the end of the World,
were detained a long time in Prison by Pope Innocent VI.

These fogs thus obscuring the Order of the Friars Minors being dispelled, they
soon recovered their credit: But the Preaching Friars or Jacobins, who had
gotten the upper hand in this, went and entangled themselves in the Controversy
concerning the Immaculate Conception. It befell them what we have observed
elsewhere in speaking of John de Monteson. To which I shall add, that they
moreover lost the honor and privilege they had enjoyed so long while of
providing the King with a Confessor of their own Order, and the Peoples hatred
grew so outrageous against them, that some beggarly Rascals having poisoned the
Wells and Fountains, these were accused as Authors thereof, and hardly did they
escape the fury of the Populace.

Wicked Prelates.
It would be an easy Task to fill a whole Volume with the wicked Prelates of
this Age, who sailed and steered by the Compass of the Court and Wind of the
World, who dishonored their Profession, betrayed the Body of the Church by
flattery, or sold her for Interest, and in fine chose rather to be famous for
their Crimes, then for their Acts of Piety. I shall observe only for the
singularity of the Fact, that Hugh de Geraud Bishop of Cahors, whom Pope John
XXII. degraded of the Episcopacy, for having conspired against him, and
delivered him over to the Secular Power, who caused him to be Flayed, drawn on
a Hurdle, and burnt alive. The names of those other wicked Pastors deserve as
little to be inserted in History as in the Holy Saints.
Canon: But the names of St. Roch, born of a noble Family at Montpellier, much
called upon in a time of Plague, of St. Gertrude, a Nun at Delft in Holland, of
Church.
St. Peter of Luxemburgh made a Cardinal by Clement VII. Pope in Avignon, of
John Peter Birelli General of the Chartreux, and Roger le Fort Archbishop of
Bourges, of Peter d'Alenson of the Blood of France, who enrolled himself in the
Order of St. Francis, and was afterward made a Cardinal much against his will,
are worthy of -- and immortal remembrance.

Heresies.
Besides the Begards, the Bisoches, and the Frerots who appeared in the former
Age, and the Flagellants, of whom we are going to speak; if there had been any
other errors in France we might have called them the Offspring of
School Divinity. One John de Paris of the Jacobins Order, to whom they had
given the nickname of Point-lasne, subtilized I know not what Proposition
touching the situation of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist; the
Bishops, William of Paris, Gilles, of Bourges, and another William of Amiens,
with the Doctors in Divinity having examined him, forbid him to teach any more.

In the fourth Tome of the Biblioth of the Fathers, we find that in Anno 1347.
the Bishop of Paris together with the Doctors, condemned certain Propositions
made by one John Mercaeur of the Order des Cisteaux touching Volition and the
Will of our Lord, the causes of Sin, and other such like, which sounded but ill.

In the year 1348. we find that a Doctor named Nicholas d'Outrecour, was forced
to retract from sixty Articles which he had framed upon diverse Heads of
Philosophy and Divinity, owning them to be false and Heretical, and the Books
wherein they were contained were ordered to be torn and thrown into the Fire.

The year 1369. a Friar Minor named Denis Soulechat, had taught some errors
concerning the renouncing of Temporal Goods, and about Charity, and the
perfection of Love, which being condemned by the Faculty of Divinity; he
appealed to the Pope, who confirmed their Judgment, and sent him back to Paris
to retract them in the presence of John de Dormans Cardinal Bishop of Beauvais.

The great Plague which reigned over the whole Earth about the middle of this
Age, begot a Spiritual one, which was the Sect of Flagellants, which taking
birth in Hungary, spread it self in short time over Poland, Germany, France,
and England. They carried a Cross in their Hands, and wore a Capouch on their
Heads, were naked to their Wast, scourged themselves twice a day and once in
the night with knotted Cords, stuck with sharp pointed Rowels, prostrating
themselves upon the ground in form of a Cross, crying out for Mercy. Each Band
had their Chief. These Pious beginnings degenerated into Heresy by their own
pride, and their herding with the Begards, Rascals, and all sorts of idle
People. They affirmed that their Blood was united in such manner to the Blood
of Christ, that it had the same virtue, and that after thirty days scourging,
all their Sins were remitted both as to the guilt and punishment, so that they
did not care for the Sacraments. This phrensy lasted a great while in the
subsequent Age, and neither the Censures of the Church, nor the Writings of
Learned Doctors, nor the Edicts of their Princes, could purge the Brain of
these melancholy Zealots.

There started up another sort of Heretics that were more pleasant, but more
infamous withal, in Dauphine and Savoy, they were called Turlupins. These
lived without any shame, like the Cynick Philosophers, prayed not but with
their hearts, and believed that Men who were perfect ought to have a liberty of
Spirit not subject to any Law.

That Opinion which Pope John XXII. endeavored to set up touching the state of
the Soul till the day of Judgment, had, it seems, been very common in the
foregoing Ages: but the World had examined and considered it better: so that
for a long while it had passed for an error. The University therefore corrected
the Holy Father in that point, and he not only desisted from it himself, but
likewise gave a public Act of his Retraction, whether upon King Philip de
Valois his threats, who sent a Message to him in these very words, That Or, if
you will not turn, you shall burn. Councils.
if he did not retract, he would have him burnt, or rather his being better
satisfied in the Point.

The grand Assemblies being formidable to all such as govern by absolute
Authority, rather then by Law, there were very few Councils in this Age. I have
told you to what end that of Vienne was held Anno 1311. some will have it a
General one, because Pope Clement V. presided there, and it consisted of a
great number of Bishops and Prelates.

In the year 1318. Robert de Courtenay Archbishop of Reims convened one at
Seulis, where his eleven Suffragants were in Person, or by their Proxies. They
there pronounced Excommunication against all those that were Usurpers or
Detainers of the Churches Goods.

The Eighteenth of June of the year 1326. the Archbishops of Arles, Aix, and
Embrun, assembled the Prelates of their Provinces in the Abbey of St. Ruf Roux,
or Red.
near Avignon, to labor for the reformation of Manners, the establishment of
Discipline, the preservation of Ecclesiastical Immunities, and the Hierarchial
Authority over the Regulars.

Anno 1337. there was another at the same place and from the same Provinces,
which treated about the same things. Pope Bennet XII. presided there.

That of Lavaur in the year 1368. composed of three Provinces, Narbona,
Toulouze, and Ausch, and convened by the Authority of Pope Urban V. had for
their chief aim the reformation of Manners.

We must not omit that in the year 1377. King Charles V. used his intercession
to Pope Gregory XI. to order it so, that the Bishopric of Paris might be no
longer subject to the Metropolis of Sens, and that it might be honored with
the Pall like the other Bishoprics in France. His Holiness excused himself as
to the first point, as a thing too prejudicial to the Church of Sens, whereof
Clement VI. his Uncle had been Archbishop, and where himself had held one of
the highest Dignities: but for the second he willingly granted it. However we
do not find that the Bishops of Paris ever thought of making use of it.

Charles VII. King LIII.
POPES,
MARTIN V. Eight years five Months under this Reign. EUGENIUS IV. Elected the
15th of March 1431. S. sixteen years. NICOLAUS V. Elected the 12th of March
1447. S. eight years, wanting twelve days. CALIXTUS III. Elected in April 1455.
S. three years three Months. PIUS II. Aeneas Silvius, Elected the 19th of
August 1458. S. six years, whereof four under this Reign.
CHARLES VII. Called the Vctorious, King LIII. Aged Twenty years eight Months.

Espailly near du Puy in Auvergne, when he received the news of the death of
his Father. The first day he put himself into Mourning: the second he Clothed
himself in Scarlet, and after he had heard Mass, in the same Chapel made them
set up the Banner of France, upon sight whereof all those Lords that were then
present with Pennons of their Arms, cried out Vive le Roy!

The English and the Burgundian held the best Provinces of France, they had
Normandy entirely, and all that is between the Scheld even to the Loire and the
Saosne; excepting some few places which Charles had yet here and there. As for
his part he had only all that lies beyond the Loire, excepting Guyenne: but
then he had all the Princes of the Blood on his side (the Burgundian excepted)
the best Captains, and the bravest Adventurers or Volunteers; as the Bastard of
Orleans, Taneguy du Chastel, James and John de Harcour, Lewis de Culan, Lewis
de Gaucour, the Mareschals de la Fayete, de Rieux, de Severac, de Boussac,
Poton de la Hire, Stephen de Vignoles-Saintrailles, Ambrose de Lore, William de
Barbasan called the Knight without reproach, and a great many others: and
indeed he purchased them at a dear rate; for he was constrained to engage his
Castles and the best part of his Demeasnes in pawn for them. Now because during
his first years he commonly resided in Berry, his Enemies nicknamed him in
raillery the King of Bourges.

November he was Crowned at Poitiers whither he had transferred his Parliament.
The accident that happened to him at Rochel some days before, was a kind of
presage that he should fall into extreme dangers, but yet should happily get
out of them at last. Holding one day a grand Council in a House near the Walls
of the City, the Floor sunk down under his Feet, James de Bourbon Lord de
Preaux was crushed beneath the Ruins, diverse others mightily bruised and hurt:
they had much ado to pluck him out, but he had no other hurt then only some
parts of his Skin rubbed off.

In like manner at his first coming to the Crown all was in a tottering
condition threatening to overwhelm him. The Duke of Bretagne enraged for that
amongst the Papers belonging to the Lords de Pontieure they had found Orders,
which authorized and warranted them to make him Prisoner, went his way to
Amiens about mid- March with his Brother Arthur Earl of Richmond, where he made
a League against him with the Duke of Bedford and the Burgundian. These four
Princes confirmed their Alliance by a double Marriage of the Duke of Bedford,
and the Bretons Brother Arthur, with two of the Burgundians Sisters; he had
seven in all, whereof six Married, Arthur took the eldest named Marguerite,
Widow of the Dauphin Lewis, and Bedford the fifth who was called Anne.

Charles, he received melancholy news from all Quarters, the taking of Meulaue,
Crotoy, Compeigne, and Basas in Gascongne. But the worst of all was that of the
de^eat of his Men before the City of Crevant near Aux^rre. The Earl of
Salisbury had laid Siege to it: the Constable de Bouchain and the Marshall de
Severac who went thither to relieve it were beaten, a thousand of their
valiantest Soldiers lay dead upon the place, and almost as many led away
Priseners, amongst whom were the Constable and the Count de Ventadour.

Bourges the fourth of July, did for a time afford him some consolation: This
was a Son whom they named Lewis.

Constance had by their Forty four Session appointed a Council at Pavia for the
year 1423. so few Prelates met there that they were sain to transfer it to
Sienna. When they had held some Sessions, Alphonso King of Arragon endeavored
by his Ambassadors to bring the business again on foot concerning the Antipope
Peter de Luna; which he did in revenge for that Martin V. had denied him the
Investiture of the Kingdom of Naples, which he could not possibly grant him,
because the Council of Constance had bestowed it on Lewis III. Duke of Anjou.
Now Martin to prevent a Schism, could find no readier Expedient then to
dissolve the Council, upon pretense of a Plague in the Neighborhood, though
there appeared no sign of it. But that it might not be suspected he in the
least apprehended the Judgment of so Holy an Assembly, he assigned another in
the City of Basle, or Basil, for the year 1430.

Some jealousy and mistrust arising, which afterward grew up to hatred
betwixt Jean Vulgatly Henry.
Queen of Naples and Alphonso King of Arragon whom she had Adopted: This
ungrateful Man endeavored to dispossess her, and carry her away by force into
Catalonia. They fell to open War, he held his Benefactress a long time besieged
in one Naples, and without doubt had forced her to surrender, if Sforza had not
come to deliver her. This offense, in respect of the public, and according to
strict Rules of Law, was cause enough to annul the Adoption. Jean (or Joan)
therefore sets it aside, and by the advice of her Barons, gave the same right
to Lewis III. Duke of Anjou, whom she immediately called into Italy, caused him
to be owned by her Subjects, and gave him the Duchy of Calabria.

Charles then the foregoing one had been. True it is that the Earl Douglas a
Scot brought him four thousand Men, and the Duke of Milan sent him six hundred
Lances, and twice as many Cross-bowmen on foot: but they were almost as soon
defeated as arrived. The Duke of Bedford after the taking of some places, had
besieged Yvry which had capitulated after the manner used in those times, to
surrender upon the Twentieth day of August, if no Army appeared before that
time expired, able to give battle. Upon this the Constable, the Duke of
Alencon, and seventeen or eighteen Lords more, got all their Forces together,
and marched near the Town of Yvry: but not daring hazard a battle, they went
all to Verneuil, and made him that kept it for the English believe they had
gained the Victory, and by this Stratagem wrought upon them to open the Gates
to them.

The day astigned for the Battle being past, Yvry surrendered. Bedford the same
moment went and sought them out under the very Walls of Verneuil, fought them
and carried the day, having slain four thousand of their Men, and taken
Prisoners the Duke of Alencon, the Marshall de la Fayette, Lewis de Gaucour,
and above three hundred Gentlemen. Amongst the dead were found Earl Douglas,
and the Vicount de Narbonne. The Body of this last was quartered and set upon
Stakes in several places, he being an Accomplice in the Murder of John Duke of
Burgundy.

Arthur Earl of Richmond to his Party, with hopes by his means to regain the
Duke of Bretagne. This Earl had ever a Soul devoted to France, and hated the
English the more, for that he had offended them in making his escape from
thence after the death of Henry V. pretending the faith he had given, obliged
him only to that King, but not to his Successor. He had afterward patched up
an agreement with the Duke of Bedford, at their enterview at Amiens: but that
tie was too weak to hold him; he forsook them upon some little picquant words,
which passed between him and the Duke of Bedford, and Treated with King
Charles, perhaps, not without the instigation, or at least the consent of the
Duke of Burgundy.

There were a great many precautions before he could adventure to come to
Court, they were fain to give him Lords and Towns in Hostage. Having his
securities he saw the King at Tours, but he obliged himself to nothing till he
had taken advice of the Duke his Brother, the Dukes of Burgundy and Savoy.

After all these Formalities, he came to wait upon the King at Chinon, and from
his hands received the Constables Sword in the Field of Chinon in presence of
all the Lords the Seventeenth of March 1425. as the Bretons tell us, though
there is a Chronicle November 1424.

He was positively promised the King would dismiss all those that were of
Counsel for the Murder committed at Montereau, and in that for seizing the
Duke of Bretagne. The most fixed of all these was Lonvet the President of
Provence who had an ambition to govern in despite of all the Grandees. He chose
rather to be the ruin of his Master whom he had strangely fettered, then to be
thrust away from him, so that Selles and Vierzon.

Then he saw it was high time to discharge Louvet and all the rest. Taneguy
generously sacrificing his fortune to serve his King, begged leave to be gone
as his Reward. Louvet upon his retreat, as his Masterpiece of Court-craft, put
the Lord de Gyac in his place.

The Constable had no little ado to reconcile himself to the King, who fled
before him that he might not see him. At length he suffers him to approach that
he might get assistance of the Breton. Who being in the end satisfied by the
expulsion of his Enemies, came to him at Saumur, rendered him Homage, and gave
him his Contract, and the Contracts of all the Lords within his Duchy under
Hand and Seal, commanding them to go upon his Service. They did him but little
good, but they might

The Seventh of September, Charles the Noble King of Navarre ended his Life;
Blanch his only Daughter Married to John the Brother of Alphonso King of
Arragon was his Heiress.

Charles, on the other hand the Quarrel which happened between the Duke of
Burgundy and the Duke of Gloucester, about Jacqueline Countess of Hainault and
the Duke of Brabant her lawful Husband, did much retard, nay set back those of
the English, forasmuch as it diverted the Forces of those two Princes, who
would undoubtedly have wholly subdued France, had they joined them to the Duke
of Bedfords. Jacqueline would not endure that the Duke of Brabant, whom she
affirmed was nothing to her, should enjoy her Lands; and the Duke of Gloucester
who had Married her, did serve and assist her in that Quarrel. The Duke of
Bedford desiring not to distaste the Duke of Burgundy, endeavored to patch up
some agreement between the Parties: the Duke of Brabant submitted, but
Gloucester regarded it not, but still pursued the right of his pretended Wife
with Sword in hand.

Burgundian pickered by Letters, and went on so far as to defy each other to a
Personal Combat, agreeing upon the time, the place, and the Weapons. The Duke
of Bedford having assembled the chiefest of the French and English Lords,
brought that Challenge to nothing, and declared that there was no just or legal
cause for Combat. And to testify to the Burgundian that he had no hand in the
Enterprises of his Brother, he desired they might see one another at Dourlens,
as they did upon the Eve of St. Peter's day.

This did not hinder them from making a brisk War in Holland, where the Duke of
Gloucester and the Duke of Burgundy tried their Forces: but at two years end,
the Pope having declared that the Marriage of Jacqueline with the Duke of
Gloucester was of no value, that Prince desisted from his prosecution, and
Married a Damlet whom he entertained.

English had taken and fortified the City of Pontorson nigh Auranches, from
whence they perpetually molested Bretagne; the Constable laid siege to it and
regained it in a short time. He was not so happy at Saint James de Beuveron
which they had repaired: His Soldiers having forsaken him for want of their
pay, he made a shameful retreat and left all his Artillery and Equipage to the
Enemy. Pontorson was afterward besieged by the English, and having
surrendered, the Duke of Bedford came to the Frontiers of Bretagne with a great
Army: upon which the Duke was so astonished that he renounced the Alliance he
had made with France, returned to that with England, and promised to do Homage
to King Henry.

Gyac was the cause of his disaster, because in stead of sending him Money, he
stopped the current from running that way, and diverted it to his own use, and
entertained his Prince in solitude and private pleasures, that he alone might
enjoy his Person and his Favors. For this reason in the Month of January
following he went with a strong hand to surprise him in his Bed at Issoudun,
and after some slight formalities of Justice, caused his Head to be cut off, or
as others relate, drowned him.

le Camus de Beaulieu, undertook to supply the place of Gy^c, and tread in his
footsteps: some while after People were amazed to see the Constable rid himself
of him, as he had done of the other. The Marshall de Bouslac by his order,
slew him in the open Street, and almost in the Kings sight, in the City of
Poitiers.

He remembered too well what the Favorites had contrived at Montereau, and
against the Duke his Brother; wherefore he would suffer none to be near the
King of whom he was not well assured, he therefore places the Lord de la
Trimouille at Court, whom he judged to have sentiments contrary to the two
former, his House owing all their good fortunes and rise to the Dukes of
Burgundy.

But this Man soon blinded with his new fortune, as well as those whose post he
now had taken, he kept the Princes as much at distance as he possibly could, so
that even the Constable himself retired into Bretagne. This proceeded to a kind
of a War, which divided the Court and retarded all the Kings Affairs for seven
or eight Months.

French raised the Siege of Montargis in the year 1426. and the year after
recovered the City of Manse, which had been taken by the English during the
divisions of the Court.

The Siege of Orleance was yet much more memorable and more important. The
Salisbury having brought new Forces out of England, began it upon the Twelfth
of October of the year 1428. and made several Bastilles or Forts, as well on
the side toward la Beausse as that toward Soulogne, having before cleared all
the places in la Beauasse, and all others for twelve or fifteen Leagues both
above and beneath the Town along the River of Loire.

Burgundy was busied in the Low Countries in pursuit of Jacqueline of Bavaria.
He followed her so close, that having besieged her in the City of Ghent, he
compelled her to declare him Heir to all her Lands, so that to Flanders and
Artois he joined Hainault, Holland, Zealand, and Frise; and again the same
year, the Earldoms of Namur and Zutphen, after the death of Count Theodoric,
who sold them to him, only reserving the possession to himself during his life
time. Two years after, in Anno 1430. there likewise fell to him the Dutchies of
Lothier, Brabant and Linbourgh, the Marquissate of the Holy Empire, and the
Lordship of Antwerp, by the decease of his Cousin Philip of Burgundy, the
second Son of Anthony, who had succeeded to Duke John his elder Brother,
Husband of Jaqueline, who died in the year 1426.

In the beginning of this year he went to Paris to the Duke of Bedford; whither
came also some Ambassadors from King Charles, and Deputies from Orleans, to
entreat him that he would suffer the said City to be sequestered into the hands
of the Duke of Burgundy. They remonstrated that the Princes of the House of
Orleans who were Prisoners in England, could have acted nothing, for which they
ought to be dispoiled of their Towns, and that it would he sufficient to put
them under Sequestration as a security for what they should do, when they were
set at liberty.

The English believing this important City was now as good as their own,
scoffed at the request: they would not lose the time and Money they had
expended in the Siege; Besides Bedford granted but very little of those things
which the Burgundian demanded. However that he might not be exposed between two
Enemies without any Party to support him, he put on the masque of an apparent
satisfaction upon the face of his discontent.

Their attaques at Orleans were very brave, and the defense of the Besieged
much braver yet; the Earl of Salisbury lost his life by a Cannon shot: but the
French having been beaten near Rouvroy at their falling upon a Convoy of
Herrings It was called the Battle of Herrings.
which was going to the Camp, it was in Lent, and the Constable being retired
Malecontent into Bretagne, the place was just going to fall, and the courage of
all the French with it. The King was already diposing himself to retire into
Dauphine; When a most extraordinary thing, pulled down the English pride, and
raised up the hopes of France.

About the end of February the Lord de Baudricourt Governor of Vaucouleurs in
Champagne, sent a Maiden to the King, about the age of Eighteen or twenty
years, who affirmed that she had an express Commission from God to relieve
Orleans, and cause him to be Crowned at Reims, being solicited thereto by the
frequent apparitions of Angels and Saints. She was named Joan or Jane, was
Native of the Village of Damremy upon the Meuse, Daughter of James of Ave and
Isabella Gautier, and bred to keep Sheep in the Country. Her Vocation was
confirmed by miraculous proofs, for she knew the King, though meanly habited,
amidst the throng, from all his Courtiers. The Doctors of Divinity and those
that were of the Parliament who examined her, declared that there was somewhat
of Supernatural in her behavior; She sent for a Sword that lay in the Tomb of
a Knight, behind the high Altar in the Church of St. Catharine de Fierbois,
upon the Blade whereof were several Crosses and Flower-de-Luces graved; and the
King openly affirmed that she had devined a very great secret, not known to any
but himself.

They gave her therefore a suitable Equipage and some Forces; yet did they not
trust the conduct of this relief to her management, but gave it to the
Marshall de Rieux, and the Bastard of Orleans, followed by many other brave
Knights who understood the Trade. When she had displayed her Banner whereon
there were two Images, one a Crucifix, the other the Annunciation with the
Sacred Names of Jesus-Maria, she wrote to the English in the name of God, That
they should leave the Kingdom to the Lawful Heir, if not, then she would make
them go perforce. But they kept her Herald Prisoner. He was found in Fetters
when the City was relieved, and it was discovered that they intended to have
burnt him as a Confederate of hers whom they called a Witch.

Orleans, and soon after entered the City in Person, the Besieged believing her
to be sent from Heaven, resumed courage, made diverse Salleys, where she fought
valiantly, and in two or three days took their chief Bastilles, and constrained
them to decamp for good and all the Twelfth day of May.

The French ran up and down every where with this Heroine as to a certain
Victory, the English fled before her as from a Thunderbolt, and durst not
stand her approach. They were chaced from Jargeau, from Beaugency, beaten at
Patay in Beausse upon a retreat, and in fine dislodged from all the places in
those Countries.

Reims to be Crowned, though that City and all Champagne were yet in the
Enemies power. In their passage Auxerre, Troyes, and Chaalons surrendered to the
King, then the City of Reims it self, (as soon as ever those Lords that held it
for the Duke of Burgundy, were gone forth to fetch some assistance from
Burgundy) he was Crowned upon a Sunday being the Seventh day of July by Renauld
de Chartres Archbishop of that City and their Chancellor.

Arc into that of de-Luce, or Lily, and for their Coat of Arms gave them a
Field Azure with a Sword placed in Pal, the Cross and Pumel Or, accosted with
two Flowers-de-Luce, and sustaining a Crown of the same upon its point.

Laon, Soissons, Beauvais, Compiegne, Crespy, and all the Cities even to Paris.
The Duke of Bedford came and presented him Battle in the Plain of Montepilloy;
the Armies were in sight, but parted after some Skirmishes. From thence he went
to assault St. Denis, and made an attempt upon Paris; his Men were repulsed
with loss, and the Pucelle wounded at the foot of the Wall.

She was willing to have returned to her own Village, after she had executed
the two points of her Mission: but was overpersuaded by the Soldiery to stay
with them: which succeeded not so well for her, Heaven being not obliged to
assist her in what it had not commanded her to undertake.

That attempt failing, the King takes his march toward Berry. En passant he
recovered Lagny upon the Marne. Soon after he made his approach near Burgundy,
thinking to conclude an Agreement which was Negociating at Auxerre with the
Duke: but the business was not ripe.

But his good fortune was put to some kind of stand, by the differences at
Court which lasted almost a year, concerning the Vicounty of Touars, which the
Lord de la Trimouille had usurped, and held Lewis d'Amboise in Prison, whose
Cause the Constable had taken in hand, as being of his Kindred. La Trimouille
had so prepossessed the Kings mind, that he made him turn his Sword against his
Constable; and by this means gave the English time to breath.

The raising the Siege of Orleans had not much troubled the Duke of Burgundy,
if he had not found the Kings success go on with greater speed then he desired.
He was little less amazed at this sudden revolution, then the Duke of Bedford.
He who had lately scorned his intercession in the Affair of Orleans, began to
seek and court him with submission and earnest application. On the other hand
the Kings Agents offered him an Accommodation, and granted him a Passport to
come to Paris, upon some hopes they had that he would reduce them to the
obedience of the King. But when he had conferred with the Duke of Bedford, he
found it better to renew with the English, who gave him a Blanc, and together
with that the Countries of Champagne and Brie, only the Homage reserved.

Savoy and Lewis de Chalon Prince of Orange and Partisans of the Duke of
Burgundy, had promised to themselves to share the Country of Dauphine betwixt
them: Grenoble and the Mountains, were to have been the Dukes, and Viennois for
the Prince Lewis de Gaucour Governor of that Country for the King soon spoiled
the Market; He gained a great Battle between Colombiez and Anton against the
Prince, slew and took eight hundred Gentlemen, and afterward seized upon all
the places he held in those Countries. It is related that in the rout, the
Prince chose rather to leap into the Rhosne on Horseback, Armed, and venture to
swim over, then fall into the Enemies hands.

Sens was reduced to the obedience of King Charles. Melun recovered themselves,
by shutting their Gates against the Garrison who had been making inroads in
Gastinois. The Kings kindness to such Cities as returned to him, was a great
bait for others to do the same.

Paris the Burgundian returned to the Low Country, where on the Tenth of
January he Wedded in second Marriage Isabella Daughter of John I. King of
Portugal. Then was it that to grace the Solemnity at Bruges, he instituted the
most illustrious Order of the Golden Fleece, composed only of thirty
Compagnions or Knights; nor did he quite fill up that number, making then but
twenty four. The King of Spain as Heir to the House of Burgundy, holds it an
honor to be their Chief, and maintains it in all its splendor, not only by
the great dignity of those on whom he bestows it, but likewise by not making it
cheap by too great a multitude.

Compeigne was the most remarkable for the disgrace the Burgundians met with,
as being forced to raise it, and much more yet by the Pucelles misfortune, who
was there taken Prisoner the Four and twentieth day of May, upon their retreat
after a Salley made, the misfortune happening to her by the imprudence or else
the malice of William de Flavy Governor of the place, who shut her out of the
Barricado. She fell into the hands of a Gentleman of Picardy, who sold her to
John de Luxemburgh one of the Generals, he sold her again to the English for
the Sum of Ten thousand Livers ready Money, and five hundred Livers yearly
pension.

Orleans, as we have mentioned, Renaud de Chartres Chancellor of France, the
Marshall de Boussiac, and Poton de Saintrailles, resolved to go to Rouen upon
the faith of a simple Shepherd, who told them that God had sent him to lead
them into that place: but the English having notice of it, waylaid and fought
them in their march, defeated part of them and took Poton Prisoner.

Arragonian Captain named Francis de Surienne, who was in the English Service,
surprised the City of Montargis after this manner. Having made himself familiar
with a Damsel who was in Love with the Governors Barber, he promised her great
Sums of Money, and a Contract of Marriage, if she would introduce his Men into
the place thorough her House which was adjoining to the Wall. The Damsel gained
the Barber with the temptation of Money, without mention of the other part
concerning her Marriage; Both of them assisted the English in setting up their
Ladders, and getting in: but the place being once taken they were turned out,
for fear they might play the same trick again by some bargain for the French,
and got nothing but scoffs and reproaches for reward.

French surprised the City of Chartres, by the contrivance of a Fellow that
carried Goods in a Wheele-barrow. Whilst he pestered the Drawbridge with his
load of Merchandise, a hundred Men running out of a Cellar hard by, where they
had lain hid that night, and upon a Signal by them given, the Bastard of
Orleans and Gaucour who were within a League, hastened thither with three
thousand Men. The Garrison without striking a blow sled to Evreux by another
Gate. Some Burghers made resistance by the example of their Bishop (John de
Fritigny) a zealous Burgundian, but he was slain with his Weapon in hand upon
the steps of the great Church.

The Pucelle was a Prisoner of War, and they could use her no otherwise without
violating the common right of all People. But the English too much enraged for
their being beaten by a Maiden, could not endure her glory who caused their
shame. They thought to repair their honor by branding her with infamy; so that
having obliged that remnant of an University which yet remained at Paris, to
make a Request to their King, desiring Justice might pass upon her, they
carried her to Rouen, and accused her in the Ecclesiastical Court, for a Witch,
a Seducer, an Heretic, and one that had forfeited her honor.

Those were the four heads of her Accusation, but which they proved very ill,
as being unable to make out any thing clearly against her, but only that she
clothed her self in the habit of a Man, and had taken up Arms, which they
imputed a Crime, because, said they, that change of habit stained the modsty of
her Sex, and flatly contradicted the express command of God against it. Peter
Cauchon Bishop of Beauvais, in whose Bishopric she was taken, the Vicar to the
Inquisition, some Doctors in Divinity and Canon Law, were her Judges; the
Chapter of Rouen during the vacancy of the Sea, lending them place.

After diverse captious interrogatories, they condemned her to perpetual
imprisonment, the bread of sorrow and bitter water of affliction: but the
English not being satisfied with moderate injustice, pressed them so earnestly
that some days afterward they said she had relapsed in putting on the Habit of
a Man again, Excommunicated her and delivered her over to the Secular Power,
who burnt her alive the Thirtieth day of May in the Market place of Rouen.

Being on the Pile of Faggots she foretold the English that the hand of God was
lifted up to strike them, and that his Justice would not only drive them out of
France, but pursue them even into England, and make them suffer the same
calamities and mischiefs they had inflicted on the French. It is related that
her heart was found entire amongst the ashes, and that a milk white Dove was
observed to fly out of the midst of the flames, a token of her innocence and
her purity.

Charles Duke of Lorrain died in the year 1430. without any Male Children.
There was a debate for the succession between Antony Earl of Vaudemont his
Brother, who pretended that Duchy was Masculine, and Rene d'Anjou already Duke
of Bar, who had Married Isabella, who was but the third Daughter of Duke
Charles, but the two elder had renounced the Duchy. The Burgundian in hatred
to the House of Anjou, the capital Enemy to his, and the Duke of Savoy his
Allie, assisted Antony, and fortune was kind to him in the Battle that was
fought between Bullegueville and Neufchastel in Lorrain. For Rene's Army was
totally routed, Lord Bazan a great Soldier slain, and Rene taken and led away
to Dijon to the Duke of Burgundy, who detained him till the year 1437.

English Affairs went still worse and worse. To remedy this they brought their
young King to Paris, and Crowned him with a double Crown in Nostre-Dame the
Twenty seventh of November; and withal the better to retain the Duke of
Burgundy, who was ready to start from them, they confirmed the donation of the
Countries of Brie and Champagne to him.

de la Trimouille made ill use still of his favor and interest against the
Constable and the rest of the Lords. One day, he being with the King at the
Castle of Chinon, they by confederacy brought two hundred Men in thither, who
took him in his Bed, gave him a wound in the Belly, and led him Prisoner to the
Castle of Montresor. The Queen her self consented to it, and therefore soon
appeased the King: and that his fancy which never could be satisfied without
some particular favorite might not be left unfurnished, she helped Charles of
Anjou Earl of Main to gain the Kings good will and more then ordinary
kindness. La Trimou lle was not set free till he delivered up the City of
Touars, which he had usurped, and the King in an Assembly of the Estates at
Tours owned all that had been done in respect to him.

By virtue of what had been ordained at Pavia by the Council and the Pope, the
Council of Basle Or Basil.
began this year upon the Three and twentieth of July under Engenius IV. who
newly succeeded to Martin V. There was never any good correspondence between
him and the Fathers of this holy Assembly. For if on their part the Fathers at
the very first gave him to understand that they would put some curb to his
Authority, by stoutly maintaining that ancient rule, That the Council is above
the Pope: he on his part made them know that his greatest desire was to dismiss
or dissolve them. But as he could not so suddenly do it, because the Emperor
upheld them, he was obliged to confirm the Council after two years of
Controversies.

France with various success, but very feebly. Do not wonder to see it languish
in this manner for seven or eight years together, the weakness of both Parties
was the cause thereof; they wanting Money could set no great Armies on foot.
Add to this the weakness of the two Kings, Henry of England for his minotity,
and Charles of France for the easiness of his mind, still held in
leading-strings by his Favorites and Mistresses.

The Twenty fourth of November in the year 1431. Lewis of Anjou King of Naples,
died at Cosenza in Calabria without any Issue. The Second of February the year
following, Queen Joan, or Jane, ended her life also, and left Rene the Brother
of Lewis to inherit her Kingdom. The Pope confirmed this Institution; but as
Rene was yet a Prisoner to the Duke of Burgundy, Alphonso King of Arragon had
full leisure to seize upon the Kingdom. In this Jane ended the first Branch of
Anjou, which had produced above thirty other Sprigs, furnished Hungary and
Poland with Kings, and lasted near two hundred years.

Ame VIII. Duke of Savoy, wearied with the noise and perplexity of Sovereignty,
had made his retreat to the delicious Hermitage built by himself at Ripailles,
and taken on the habit of a Hermit with two more Gentlemen his Confidents,
having resigned his Estates to Charles his Son Earl of Geneva, whom he had
Married some years before to Anne Daughter of Janus King of Cyprus.

Gerbroy a little City near Beauvais. Saintraille and la Hyre had undertaken to
fortify it, and the English to hinder them; These although three times more in
number, were beaten, the Earl of Arundel their Achilles mortally wounded with a
Culverin Shot in his Heel, and eight hundred of their Men left dead upon the
place.

Burgundy, did at length incline his good nature to show his just resentment,
and to take pity of the miseries of France. His Treaty had been first begun
and rough drawn by Ame Duke of Savoy, who in the year 1423. had mediated a
Truce between the King and him, for the Dutchies of Burgundy and the Earldom of
Nevers on the one part, and Bourbonnois, Beaujolois, Lyonnois and Forez on the
other. Then it proceeded a little further at Nevers in the interview of Charles
Duke of Bourbon and the Burgundian, whose Sister Charles had Married. These two
Princes having accommodated those Affairs that were between them, concerning
the Homage for some Lands which the Duke of Bourbon refused to render him, and
for which they had made a rude War for some time, began to fall into discourse
of the Affairs of the whole Kingdom, and agreed together that there should be a
Conference held at Arras, to find out the best means for procuring Peace
between the two Crowns, and between the King and the Burgundian.

Arras the greatest and the most noble Assembly that ever this Age had heard
of. All the Princes of Christendom had their Ambassadors there, the Pope and
the Council each their Legates; The Harbingers took up Stabling for ten thousand
Horse. This was opened the Sixth day of the Month of August.

English, provided they would be satisfied with reasonable Conditions. They
were profer'd Normandy and Guyenne, if they would do Homage for them: but when
he found they would relinquish nothing of their Pretensions, he disengaged
himself from them, and made a separate Treaty, the Popes Legate having absolved
him of that says he had given them. The Popes did often practice this,
believing it a part of the power which our Lord Jesus Christ had given, to bind
and unbind. Here is the Summary of the chiefest Articles.

The King by his Ambassadors disowned that he had consented to the Murder of
Duke John, wickedly perpetrated and by wicked Counsel, for which he was sorry
with all his heart; Promised he would do justice, and cause such as were guilty
to be prosecuted whom the Duke should name to him; That if they could not be
taken, he would banish them from the Kingdom for ever, and never admit them
upon any Treaty.

He obliged himself to build for the Soul of the deceased Duke, the Lord de
Novailles, and of all those that died since in that quarrel, a Chappelat
Montereau on the place where the Body of that Duke lay interred, to set up a
Cross on the Bridge, to found a Monastery or Chartreuse where should be twelve
Friars, and a high Mass that should be sung every year in the Church at Dijon.
To pay fifty thousand Gold Crowns, at 24 Carats, etc. for the Goods and
Equipage taken, when the Duke was Murdered.

Moreover he relinquished and acquitted him of all Homage due for any Lands he
held of the Crown, and his Service and Personal Assistance during his life.

Gave him to perpetuity for him and his Heirs Males and Females, the Countries
of Mascon and Auxerre, the Lordship of St. Jengon, the Bailliwick of St.
Laurence, the Castlewick, or Chastelleny of Bar upon the Seine, and as security
for four hundred thousand Crowns, payable at two certain terms, the
Chastellenies of Peronne, Roye, and Montdidier: and the Cities of the Sum,
that is St. Quentin, Corbie, Amiens, Abeville and others. As also the County of
Pontieu on either side the Sum, and the enjoyment of the County of Boulogne
for him and the Heirs Male of his Body, with all the Rights of Tailles,
Gabelles, and Imposts, all profits of Courts of Justice, of the Regalia and all
others arising from all those Countries.

That the Burgundians should not be obliged to quit the St. Andrews Cross, even
when they were in the Kings Army; That in case of any contravention of the
Subjects both of the one and other of these Princes should be absolved from
their Oaths of Fidelity, and should take up Arms against the Infringer; That
the King should tender his submissions for the completing of this Treaty into
the hands of the Legates from the Pope and the Council, upon pain of
Excommunication, Reagravation, Interdiction of his Lands, and all other to
which the Censures of the Church can extend; That to the same purpose he should
give the Seals of the Princes of his Blood, the Grandees of the State, the most
noted Prelates, and the greatest and chiefest Cities.

Catharine the Kings Daughter, upon Charles Earl of Charolois the Dukes Son,
both as yet very young. Four years after they sent this Princess to the Duke of
Burgundy to complete the Marriage.

English much, they received another, which was the death of the Duke of
Bedford Regent in France, after whom they never had any but Men that were very
violent, hare-brain'd, without either prudence or conduct. The French in the
mean time time took Diepe by Escalado; and the kind usage they showed to the
Inhabitants brought them all the places of the Country of Caux.

September, died the Queen Mother Isabella de Baviere, in the Hostel de Saint
Pol at Paris, where she lived in a mean condition since the time of her
Husbands death, justly hated by the French, and ingratefully despised by the
English. Some have written that to save the expenses of her Funeral, they
conveyed her Corpse in a small Boat to St. Denis, attended only by four People.
Her death is attributed to an inward grief occasioned by the outrageous
railleries of such as delighted to tell her face, that King Charles was not the
Son of her Husband.

Arras, was their not treating the Duke of Burgundy well, their giving him
reproachful language, and not suffering him to be Neuter as he desired; but to
fall on his People wherever they met them, endeavoring to surprise his places,
and harrasing him so perpetually that at length they constrained him to become
their utter Enemy.

The Parisians comparing the pride and wretchedness of these Strangers with the
courtesy and magnificence of their Natural Kings, could no longer endure them;
or if any thing did yet withold them, it was some remainders of that
affection they preserved for the Duke of Burgundy; But this knot being broken,
they now sought nothing but the opportunity to free themselves from their
Bondage.

English having therefore been beaten at St. Denis by the Constable, the honest
Citizens of Paris took that opportunity to treat about their surrender to him.
Having obtained an Act of Oblivion and the confirmation of their Privileges in
such form as they desired, they introduced him by the Gate called St. James;
This was on the Friday after Easter. When he was entered, the People fell upon
the English on all hands, crying out, a la queue Or, Have at their Tails.
; Many had their Brains beaten out in the Streets, the rest escaped to the
Bastille, where they made composition. All the little Neighboring Forts were
an Accessory to this Reduction.

In the Month of August following, the King recalled the Parliament, the
Chamber des Comptes and the University thither.

The English had declared themselves Enemies to the Duke of Burgundy by all
Acts of Hostility upon his Countries, and by underhand-dealings to stir his
Subjects up to Rebellion, in those days very much knit to and concerned for
England, as well by Commerce and Trade as out of a real hatred they had toward
the French. He would therefore needs revenge himself by taking of Calais, which
he esteemed no great difficulty, and laid Siege to it with a numerous Army. In
the midst of this Enterprise, the Flemmings finding it spin out to a great
length, fell into an imagination that they were betrayed, and herding together
in several small parcels, on a sudden made up all their packs in great
confusion, leaving their Provisions and Artillery behind for want of Wagons to
carry them off. All that their Duke could possibly do for them, was to cover
them with his Cavalry, le^t the English should have charged them, and after
that to follow them.

The Duke of Gloucester, who had sent word that he was coming to give him
Battle, not finding him there, entered into Flanders, where he increased their
former jealousy by his burning all those places he came near.

Rene of Anjou to obtain his liberty of the Duke of Burgundy, without paying
him an extraordinary Ransom, yielding up several places, and consenting to a
Marriage between his eldest Daughter whose name was Yoland, as then but nine
years old, and Ferry eldest Son of Anthony Earl of Vaudemont, the means whereby
Lorrain returned to the Males of that House.

Lyonnois and Dauphine to make Moneys in those Countries; and the following
year he went even to Languedoc for the same end. Upon his return he laid Siege
to Montereau Faut-yonne which submitted not till after a long resistance. From
thence he came to make his entrance into his good City of Paris the fourth of
November; and then he might truly call himself King of France, having replanted
his Throne in the capital City of his Kingdom.

Escorcheurs Players*
, and then the Redondeurs Shavers.
, committed strange disorders.

By these ravages, the flight of the Husbandmen and Peasants who neither
ploughed nor sowed, and the continual Rains during two years, 1437, and 38.
ensued a great Famine, and then a horrible Mortality over all France,
especially at Paris and its Neighborhood. That City was so depopulated the
Wolves came and devoured Children even in the midst of the Street St. Anthoine.
They were forced that they might rid themselves of those Beasts greedy of
humane Flesh, to make Proclamation that any one should have twenty Solz a piece
for every head of a Wolf they brought to the Magistrate.

Pope Eugenius and the Council of Basil, were imbroiled to that height, that
Eugenius declared the Council dissolved, and called another to Ferrara; and on
the other hand the Prelates that were at Basil having summoned him diverse times
to come thither, began to think of deposing him, with the greater confidence,
for that the Most Christian King seemed then to favor them, having forbid the
Prelates of the Gallican Church from going to Ferrara.

This Discord in the end turned to a Schism, he that might have extinguished it
happening to die. I mean the Emperor Sigismond who ended his days in Moravia the
Emp. John VI. and Albert II. elected the Twentieth of April, Reigned fourteen
years 1438.
Eighth of November 1437. Albertus Duke of Austria his Son in Law, succeeded
him in the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, and the year following in the
Empire by the suffrages of the Electors.

The Clergy of France, ever since the translation of the Holy See to Avignon,
had suffered infinite oppressions by the Court of Rome. And therefore the King
having assembled them at Bourges to find out some way to reconcile the Pope to
the Council; who had each sent their Legates: they embraced the opportunity
which they could never have since the Council of Constance, and made their
remonstrances touching those insupportable abuses. The King desiring to provide
against it, ordered them to apply the most convenient remedies. To this end, by
advice of his Council, they framed that so celebrated Reglement, called the
Pragmatique, which preventing any the like Enterprises of the Court of Rome,
might well be termed the Bulwark of the Gallican Church.

Eugenius transferred his Council of Ferrara to Florence, where they treated
concerning the uniting the Greek to the Latin Church, their Emperor John VI.
assisting with a good number of his most illustrious Prelates. But in the mean
while those who were assembled at Basil, though reduced to a small number, and
not well agreed amongst themselves, deposed Eugenius and elected Ame VIII. Duke
of Savoy, who had retired himself, as was before related, to the solitude of
Ripaille. France, Germany, and most part of the West paid their obedience to
him during the life of Eugenius: but after his death, all of them almost turned
to Nicholas V.

Two years after Rene was delivered from captivity, he went into his Kingdom of
Naples, where according to the example of his Predecessors, his entrance was
very happy, but his exit very different.

Meaux by the Constable, although long and full of difficulty succeeded happily
for the French; but that of Auranches in the Lower Normandy, being ill managed
by the same Person and the Duke of Alenson, brought them nothing but shame: the
English having made them raise it, and taken part of their Bagage and their
Ammunition.

At the Solicitation of the Duchess of Burgundy and the Popes Legates, a great
Conference was held between Graueline and Calais, the Deputies of France,
England, and those of Burgundy meeting, to treat about a Peace. The English not
receding from that Condition, that Normandy and their other Conquests should be
left to them in full Sovereignty, they parted without doing any thing in it.

Henry II. the Kings did often and willingly make use of this term, The Public
Concerns of Our Kingdom. This year he held a great Assembly of Notables and
Deputies of the Lords of the Estates at Orleans, where it was resolved that a
Peace should be endeavored, without which all designs for reformation would be
useless and indeed impossible, and that in the mean while the Soldiery should
be all reduced into Companies established and well regulated, every Gentdarm to
three Horses, who should be paid every Month. Before this they had seven or
eight, and a great number of Roguy-boys who devoured all the Country wherever
they passed.

La Praguerie. The Dukes of Alenson, Bourbon, Vendosme, the Bastard of Orleans
and diverse others had a hand in it. They complained that the King allowed no
share in his Government, but to three or four private Persons; and thereupon
entered into a League against his Ministers. La Trimouille who was in disgrace
joined also with them, that so he might by any means whatever be brought into
play again at Court.

Alenson hies to Niort to debauch the Dauphin, who was his Godson, aged but
Sixteen years, but Married already to Marguerit Daughter of James I. King of
Scotland, and turned away the Count de Perdriac his Governor, and all those the
King had placed about him. The King ran immediately to quench this new lighted
Fire; after he had well provided his Frontiers against any attempts of the
English, he takes the Field accompanied with his Constable, the Earls de la
March, and Dunois, whom he had drawn off from that League, with eight hundred
Men at Arms, and three thousand others. He pursued the Leagued so smartly into
Poitou, and from Poitou into Bourbonnois, taking all the places where they
thought to stand at Bay and make Head, that they were forced to give up his Son
to him, and come and beg his pardon on their knees.

Charles Duke of Orleans who was detained Prisoner in England for five and
twenty years, was delivered from captivity by that hand from which he had the
least hopes in the world to expect it; It was by Philip Duke of Burgundy, who
desiring to put a final end to the mortal quarrel between his Family and that
of Orleans, by a principle of goodness, as generous as it was politic,
contrived the deliverance of this Prince, and helped him to pay his Ransom
which was three hundred thousand Crowns.

These two Princes by a sincere and cordial Reconciliation quenched the mortal
Enmities their Fathers had begot. Philip received Charles with great honor in
his Graveline the Twentieth of November, gave him his Order of the Fleece, and
accepted the Order of the Porcupine from him. Moreover Charles Married his
Niece, Daughter of his Sister and of Adolph first Duke of Cleves; In fine, each
strove to show the other all the marks and tokens of the most sincere and
perfect amity.

Amongst the Mareschals of France, there was one Giles Lord de Raiz of an
illustrious House and very valiant, but a great squanderer of Wealth, whose
mind was so depraved that he addicted himself to all sorts of Vice and Sins
both against God and Nature, entertaining Sorcerers and Enchanters to find out
Treasures, and corrupting young Boys and Girls whom he afterward Murdered
that he might have their Blood to compound his Charm and Spells. This being a
public Scandal he was put into the hands of Justice, the Bishop of Nantes made
his Process, the Seneschal of Renes Judge-General of that Country assistant,
the Cause being of a mixed nature. He was condemned to be burnt alive in the
Field of Nantes. The Duke was present at his Execution, but mitigating the
Sentence, he permitted them first to strangle him, and then to bury his Body,
not much consumed by the Flames. I think I do remember in his Process that
there was some Crime of State against the Duke, who was glad he had this
occasion to revenge that offense, in punishing those heinous offenses against
Almighty God.

Pontoise, which charge the Parisians were to defray. The City having been
re-victualled three or four times by Talbot, the honor of the English
Commanders, his heart seemed to fail and he withdrew to Poissy: but observing
this retreat despicable, he courageously returns, commanded a general assault,
and by his presence so animated his People that he carried it by main strength.

That done he went to clear all the Country of Poitou and Angoulmois of those
Robbers that infested them, and to effect this he turned all the pilfering
Captains out of their places and put honest Men in their steads.

Returning thence he came to keep his Court at Limoges during the Feast of
Pentecost, where he received the Duke of Orleans and his Wife, and gave him
160000 Franc's toward the payment of his Ransom, and six thousand Livers
Pension.

From thence he went to Gascongne, saved Tartas which had Capitulated to
surrender to the English, if they were not relieved by a prefixed day. He
presented himself John's day with so considerable an Army that the Enemy durst
not appear. St. Sever was forced, Dacqs compounded, so did Marmande and la
Reole. But so soon as the King had but turned his back, the English by
correspondence regained Dacqs and St. Sever. The King spent the Winter at
Montauban,

Cominges. Matthew de Foix had for his fourth Wife Married Jean who was the
Countess of it. As she was very aged and had no Children by him, he kept her
Prisoner in a Castle, to compel her to make a donation of all she had to him.
The King having received the good old Woman's complaint, fails not to take this
advantage for himself, and at the same price delivers her and brings her into
his Court.

Poitiers; the Earl of Armagnac who had at his second Marriage wedded a
Daughter of hers by another Husband, seized upon her Lands. He did not hold
them long; the Dauphin Lewis going into that Country, ensnared him with fair
words, and clapped him in Prison, as also his Wife, and his Children. The Earl of
Foix by his intercession got him out again, but not without much trouble and a
surrender of all the Lands, he had usurped.

August, John V. Duke of Bretagne, ended his days at the Castle de la Tousche
near Nantes. He left his Duchy very much enriched and improved by a long
Peace, and mightily Peopled by that War which Normandy. From that single
Province there went above thirty thousand Families to inhabit in Bretagne, and
a great part of them at Rennes, which mightily enlarged it, and gave occasion
to enclose with Walls that quarter of the Town which is named the Basse-ville.
He had three Sons, Francis, Peter, and Giles, whereof the two eldest* were
Dukes of that Country successively.

The foregoing year the English laid Siege to Diepe. The Dauphin being returned
out of Guyenne, went thither in quality of Lieutenant General for the King, and
chaced them shamefully thence. But the Earl of Sommerset landing at Cherbourgh
with six thousand fighting Men, pierced as far as Anjou and Bretagne, defeated
the Marshall de Loheac and the Lord de Rueil, then returned laden with spoil
back to Rouen.

Leyden in Holland attributes the honor to it self in behalf of Laurent
Johnson one of her Burghers; Mentz for a Gentleman named Gutemberg; Some allow
it to one John Mentel of the same City. Those deceive themselves that say it
came from China, for although it be true that they printed there a long time
before, yet was it not with Letters separate and movable as are ours, theirs
were graved on plates.

England was the first that made mention of an accommodation, the Deputies met
at Tours, where not being able to agree a final Peace, they made a Truce of
eighteen Months, the Twentieth day of May, and the Marriage of Marguerit
Daughter of Rene of Anjou with the King of England, to whom she was conducted
by the Duke of Suffolk.

By consent of both Kings, it was thought good to throw the French and English
Forces, upon the Countries of the Empire, which were fat and but poorly
defended. The apparent pretenses were to assist the House of Austria against
the Swisse, to revenge some incursions the Count de Montbelliard had made upon
the Territories of France, to affright the Council of Basil, that they might
put an end to the Schism, and to take part with Rene of Anjou Duke of Lorrdin
in his contest with the City of Metz, for their having assisted Anthony Earl of
Vaudemont his Enemy: but the real design or cause, was to discharge the Kingdom
of those troublesome Sons of Mars the Soldiers.

Troyes in the Month of July, took Montbelliard, and from thence went into
Alsatia between Basil and Strasbourg, Basil fortified it self and called the
Swisse in to their aid. He sought four thousand near that place, who rather
tired then overcome, died all upon the place, but sold their lives at double
the number. There were but sixteen escaped, others say but only one single man,
who being returned home to his Canton lost his Head as a deserter. The Dauphin
judging by this that he should gain naught from them but by losing too much
himself, and withal being gorged with spoil, and observing the heavy German
Body began to move, he retired for fear of being over-matched, and went to join
with his Fathers Army that lay before Mets.

He besieged that Town in favor of Rene Duke of Lorrain. The Citizens seeing
the Country wasted and ruined for seven or eight Months together, bought their
redemption at the rate of three hundred thousand Florins, of which the King had
two hundred thousand, and the other hundred thousand they give Rene acquittance
for, who owed it to them.

The Army paid with this Money, were all disbanded, excepting fifteen hundred
Men at Arms, as many Coustilliers (these were Foot that accompanied the Horse)
and three thousand Archers. This was the establishment of what they called
Companies d'Ordnnonance.



The Tenth of November was fought the bloody Battle of Varnes between the
Turks, and young Ladislaus King of Hungary. He had solemnly sworn a Peace with
them: having unhappily broken it, by the Popes instigation, who dispensed him
of his Oath, he most unfortunately lost his Life and all his Army; a wound that
bleeds yet to this very day.

The Counties of Valentinois and Diois were united this year to Dauphine. Lewis
de Poitiers who possessed them, had in Anno 1419. given them by his Will to
Charles V. who was then Dauphin, upon a condition to furnish fifty thousand
Crowns to pay off his Debts and Legacies; and in case he failed so to do, he
then gave the succession to Ame Duke of Savoy. The Dauphin not having done it,
Ame was got into possession and had settled a Governor there. But this year upon
a Treaty at Bayonne agreed the third of April, Lewis the Son of Ame gave up all
the right he had in favor of the Dauphin Lewis, who in retaliation quitted to
him the absolute Siegneury and Homage of Foucigny.

Agnes Soreau Vulgarly called Sorel.
a Gentlewoman of Touraine, a very agreeable and generous Lady, but who setting
her self up as equal with the greatest Princesses, became the envy of the
Court, and a scandal to all France.

The King of England lived much more reserved: He was a devout Prince, fearing
God, and of a gentle disposition: but having no great Spirit or parts, and
loving nothing but his Wife, he suffered her to possess him wholly. This
Princess bold and undertaking beyond the nature of her Sex, would needs take
the Helm and make her self absolute. To this end she gives some sinister
impressions to her Husband concerning his Uncle Humphry Earl of Gloucester who
then had the Government, and prevailed with him at last to put him to death
without any form of Process. Which excited the hatred of all the great ones
against her, and made them think of ruining her, that they might preserve
themselves.

Charles was then not much above the age of forty three, and the Dauphin who
was already two and twenty trod upon his Heels, and would have played the
Master, in so much as one day at Chinon he gave a box on the Ear to the fair
Agnes.

There happened another incident worse yet then this. He had bargained with
Anthony de Chabanes Earl of Dammartin, to assassinate some body that had
displeased him, James Brother of that Earl, who was Grand Maistre of the Kings
Household, dissuaded him from it. The King coming to the knowledge of this, gave
the Dauphin a sharp reprimand; The young Prince to excuse himself charged the
Earl as having suggested this base design first to him; the Earl boldly denied
it in the Kings presence, and offered to justify himself by Combat against any
of the Dauphins Gentlemen that would undertake it. The King then found the
malignity of his Son, abhorred it, and commanded him not to see him in four
Months time, but to go into Dauphine. He retired with menaces; and being once
gone thought no more of returning: but to Cantonise and Reign alone, without
any dependence but on his malicious fancies.

Emp. Constantin XV. and Frederic III.
The City of Genoa, in a few years had changed their Lords and Governors four
or five times. The Fregoses and the Adornes who were of their principal
Citizens, disputed for the Siegnory amongst themselves. Barnaby Adorn had
usurped it Janus Fregose pretending he would put it into the Kings hands,
having treated with him for that purpose, made use of the Forces and Money of
France to make himself Master, then kept it in his own hands, and French.

Felix, or at least stood Neuter: but when informed that Nicholas was elected
in the room of Eugenius, he would let all Christendom understand he approved
his Election. He sent a famous Embassy to tender his obedience, which perhaps
brought in the custom of those stately and expensive Embassies of Obedience
which Kings now send to every new Pope.

The Government of the Viscounts at Milan, after its having lasted One hundred
and seventy years, ended this year by the death of Duke Philip; And that Estate
was claimed by diverse Pretenders, as either having a right, or thinking it
would be of great convenience and necessary for them; The Emperor Frederic, the
Duke of Savoy, the Venetians, Alphonso King of Naples, and Charles Duke of
Orleans. Now as it truly appertained to this last, according to the Conditions
of the Contract of Valentine his Mother, he went thither with some Forces: but
the Milanese intending their own liberty, he could get no more then only his
Earldom of Ast. Afterward those People having for many years undergone much
trouble and affliction by the contending Parties that strugled for the Mastery,
fell, as we use to say, out of the Drying Pan into the Fire, by accepting for
their Duke, Francis Sforza, who had Married a Bastard of Duke Philips.

France; The King that he might have some that were good and well maintained,
ordained that every Village throughout the Kingdom should furnish him with, and
pay one Foot-Archer who should be exempt from all Taxes and Subsidies. For
which they called them the Franc-Archers. These made a Body of two or three and
twenty thousand Men.

English Party, this was Francis de Surienne, extremely greedy after Prey,
surprised the City of Fougers belonging to the Duke of Bretagne, where he met
with a Booty of above Sixteen hundred thousand Crowns; and at the same time the
English made irruption in Scotland, which was also comprehended in the Truce as
well as Bretagne, but they were soundly beaten there. England began likewise to
be imbroil'd within its self by reason of some new Tax which King Henry would
raise in London; which has most commonly been the occasion, or at least the
pretense for a Civil War.

Bretagne and the Scots likewise, make their complaints to King Charles for
this breach of the Truce. The English are summoned to repair the damage, they
disowned Surienne indeed, but for the rest gave no satisfaction but put off's
and delays. All this was suffered six Months; they imagine the French are
afraid. At length the Duke of Bretagne flies out, and with the Kings consent
surprises at the same time the Pont de Larche above Rouen, Conches near Evreux,
Gerbroy not far from Beauvais, and Cognac upon the River Charente.

By force of many Entreaties, Negotiations and Menaces, the King overpersuaded
Felix to set his hand to the reunion of the Church; He renounced the Papacy
more gloriously then he had accepted of it. His Conventions with Nicholas V.
were such that he seemed to quit it as a thing belonging to him, which he
conferred as a favor upon his Rival. For he made his demission in the Council
which he had purposely transferred from Basil to Lausanna, and after he had
deposited his Pontifical Ornaments, the Fathers elected Nicholas, who left him
perpetual Legate in all the Countries of Savoy, Montferrat, Lyonnois,
Swisserland and Alsatia, and received all those Cardinals he had created, into
the Sacred College.

England continuing, King Charles found the opportunity so favorable, that he
resolved to chase the English out of his Kingdom. He had made the Earl de Foix
Lieutenant of his Armies from the Garonne to the Pyrenees, and the Earl de
Dunois in all the Kingdom, in such sort nevertheless as he rendered respect and
honor to the Constable, when they both met in the same place.

The first had Order to take all places the English held at the foot of the
Pereneans, thereby to block up the passage against John of Arragon King of
Navarre, who had made a League with them, and obliged himself for a certain Sum
of Money, to keep and guard Mauleon de Soul for them, a place very strong in
those times, and situate upon a high Rock. For this purpose he had taken it
into his protection, and had placed his Constable in it. The Count de Foix was
Son in Law to that Prince, however he had more regard to the Kings Orders, then
his Father in Law, and scruples not to besiege it. The Navarrois knowing it
wanted Provisions, Armed himself to relieve it, and came within two Leagues,
but finding he was too weak, and that his prayers availed not with his Son in
Law, he retreated, and his Constable was forced to capitulate.

The Castle of Called by the Vulgar Gui^he.
Guissant, which is within four Leagues of Bayonne, surrendered likewise, after
three thousand English whom the Constable of Navarre and the Bayonne sent by
Water to their relief had been beaten by the Besiegers.

At the same time Veneuil in Perch was taken by the contrivance of a Miller,
in revenge for that the English had beaten him: the great Tower held it out yet
a while. In the interim the Count de Dunois by the small resistance he met with
from Pont-Audemer, Lisieux, Mantes, and the Forts that were round those Cities,
perceiving the English were at a low ebb, sent the King word that Normandy was
sorely shaken.

He was besides informed that the Duke of Bretagne with the Constable, had
taken Coutances, and that the Inhabitants of Alenson had restored their Duke to
his City, and besieged the Castle which immediately capitulated. Upon this good
news he departs from Vendosme where he got his Forces together, came to
Verneuil, thence to Louviers and Pont de Larche, to summon the City of Rouen,
whose Inhabitants were disposed to shake off their yoke.

Sommerset who was in it with three thousand English, did not permit his
Heralds to come near. Which could not prevent a party of the Inhabitants from
placing many Frenchmen upon their Walls; but the rest not joining with them
that design miscarried. These would first make their Conditions with the King,
as they did the next day. Their Archbishop Rodolph Roussel who was chief of the
Deputation, obtained security and liberty for the Persons, and for the Goods of
all those that were within the City, as well English as French, whether
choosing to remain there still, or to remove elsewhere if they desired it.

When he had given an account of the Treaty in the Town Hall, the English
endeavored to frustrate the execution by seizing on the Gates and Walls: but
the Inhabitants soon dispossessed them, and forced them to retire to the
Bridge, the Castle, and the Palace.

The Fort St. Catharine held but little. Sommerset having few Provisions in the
old Palace, capitulated within fifteen days, That himself and all his should go
out with their Lives and Goods, and all their furniture for War, excepting
their great Guns, That they should pay fifty thousand Gold Crowns, and all such
Debts as they owed to the Bourgois and the Merchants belonging to that Country,
That they should be obliged to procure the surrender of Caudebec,
Moustiervilliers, Lislebonne, Tancarville and Honnefleur, and for Hostages
should leave the Sire Talbot, and five or six more of their principal
Commanders. The Tenth day of November the King entered the City in Pomp, and
celebrated the Feast of St Martin the ancient Patron of Gall.

Harfleur, which was the first place that was conquered by the late Henry King
of England. It surrendered upon the Twelfth day of January. As did Honnefleur
afterward* which held out but a few days.

Bretagne and the Constable reduced Valongne with six or seven other little
places, and after a long Siege regained likewise his City of Foulgeres.

Jumieges, they poisoned his dear Agnes de Sorean, without whom he could not
live one moment. To comfort him, Antoinetta dt Maignelais Dame de Villequier,
Cousin to the deceased, took her place: but she was not sole Mistress, the
impotence of age, stirring up this Kings desires, he entertained a great number
of beautiful Damsels, at least to satisfy the pleasure of his Eye.

Some would needs have it, that some of the Dauphins friends made away Agnes,
and that he who did most contribute to it, was the famous James Coeur, Keeper
of the Kings Plate, Master of the Moneys, or Mint-Master of Bourges his Native
City, a Merchants Son, and one that managed all the Treasury. There are such
wonders related of his Riches, his Credit, and his Buildings, that Chemists
would fain persuade us, he had the Philosophers Stone.

In Anno 1452. an Accusation was framed against him in the Kings Council, and
all his Goods were seized, as well for the Crime above mentioned, as for those
of Concussion, Exaction, Transportation of Money out of the Kingdom, falsifying
of Coin, counterfeiting Seals, selling Arms and Powder to the Sarrasins, etc.
He appeared voluntarily to justify himself, he was Arrested and removed to
several Prisons; Finally the King being satisfied that he was guilty, (says the
Decree of the Nineteenth of May 1453.) of all these Crimes, and yet remitting
the pains of death, for the services he had rendered him, and upon the
intercession of the Holy Father, condemned him to make Amend Honorable An
ignominious punishment. To go bare-head and barefoot with a lighted Torch in
his Hand to some Court of Justice, or Church, and there acknowledge his Crime.
to pay a hundred thousand Crowns, and confiscated all his Goods. Some time
after, the Parliament restored him in his Reputation and Estate, after he had
paid his Fine.

Toward the beginning of this year 1450. there landed three thousand English
at Cherbourgh, commanded by Thomas Kyrle, who drawing a Party out of the
Garrisons, made up a gross of six thousand Men, with which he adventured to
take the Field. The Constable having heard of their march goes forth to seek
them, although he had not half their number of Men. He met and fought them nigh
the Village of Fourmigny between Carentan and Bayeux, along a small River which
ran behind them. These new Levies joined with such as had never hunted
together, could not stand before the old experienced Soldiers, who had so many
brave Leaders and Warlike Nobility to encourage them; few of them escaped,
since they counted three thousand seven hundred seventy four that were slain,
and fourteen hundred Prisoners.

Lower Normandy, found no great difficulty in besieging them, nor much more in
taking them. Vire, Bayeux, St. Sauveur le Vicomte, Falaize, Caen, defended
themselves but weakly: Caen made its composition upon St. John's Eve. They
provided the Earl of Sommerset and four thousand English he had about him, with
Vessels to transport them into England, but not to any other place. The City
was given up to the King the Second day of July, Falaise the Twentieth of the
same Month. The King made his entrance into Caen the Sixth. Nothing remained
but Cherbourgh, the Constable had besieged it after the surrender of Caen;
Thomas Govel who was Governor, with a thousand Natural English, gave it up the
Eleventh day of August.

Thus was all Normandy regained by the French, or to speak more properly,
helped to recover it self in one year and six days. The King desiring the
remembrance should be preserved, and that eternal thanks should be rendered to
God, ordained general Processions should be made in the Month of September of
the same year, and annually hereafter upon same day that Cherbourgh surrendered.

Guyenne; and this same year opened the passage over the Dordogne by the taking
of Bergerac, which was besieged and mastered by John Earl of Pontieure and
Vicount of Limoges. He was one of the four Sons of Marguerite de Clisson, who
was restored to the Estate belonging to his Family by Duke Francis, pursuant to
the Treaty made at Nantes in Anno 1448.

As the loss of the Battle at Fourmigny made the English lose all Normandy, the
defeat of the Bourdelois made them lose all the rest of Guyenne. Amanjeu
d'Albret Lord d'Orval, going to scowre about the Neighborhood of Bourdeaux
with seven hundred Horse only, there came forth ten or twelve thousand Horse
and Foot, English and Bourdelois, who ran confusedly upon him as to a certain
Victory. D'Orval knowing whom he had to deal with, charges them briskly, puts
them to the rout, strewed the ways and Fields with a thousand of those
giddy-brain'd Fellows, and carried away a great many more to Basas.

Summer, the King who was still at Tours, having drawn together a great many
Men, resolved to complete the Conquest of Guyenne, much crest-faln at that
shock. The Count de Dunois is Lieutenant General, the Count de Pontieure, Foix
and Armagnac attaqu'd it at the four corners; the English were beaten and gave
ground every where, so that having no more then Fronsac, Bourdeaux and Bayonne,
the Count de Dunois having besieged Fronsac, they capitulated to surrender
those three places, if upon St. John Baptists-day, there appeared not in the
Field and near Fronsac, an Army able to give them Battle. Which not having been
able to do, they executed the Agreement, excepting only as to Bayonne, whom
they abused with the flattering hopes, that the King of England was preparing
to come and relieve it Personally. The French Generals made their triumphant
entry into Bourdeanx the Nineteenth day of June.

English struggle obstinately to keep Bayonne; after some assaults, the
apprehension of being taken by Storm, obliged them also to capitulate on Friday
the Twentieth of August. The Governor John de Beaumont with all the Garrison
were made Prisoners of War; and it cost the Inhabitants forty thousand Crowns
of Gold to be spared.

The favor of Heaven was so benign toward the French, or the Peoples fancies
so strong, that upon that same Friday, they beheld a white Cross in the Air
over Bayonne, which seemed to instruct them that God would have them to forsake
the red Cross of England, and take up that of France. This place being reduced,
the English had nothing left them in all France but only Calais, and the County
of Guisnes.

If we search into the causes of this so sudden and wonderful a revolution, we
shall find it was the neglect of the English in not well providing and
strengthening their places, their wont of good Commanders, the hatred the People
had for their scornful and imperious way of Government. On the other hand the
union and hearty zeal of the Nobles and all the French Militia, the good order
and discipline in their Armies, the huge stores and provision of Canons and all
sorts of Warlike Engines, Pioneers and Ammunitions, and the new method of
approaching and attaquing of Towns by Works and Trenches: but above all, the
Civil War that Richard Duke of York had kindled amongst the English.

That Duke knew how to make such use of the disgust that Nation had taken
against the Government of Queen Marguerite who was a French-woman, as to raise
himself amidst their discontents up to the Throne, which he pretended was due
to him, rather then to Henry; For he descended (but only by the Female side)
from Lionel of Clarence who was second Son of King Edward III. and Henry came
but from the third Son, who was John Duke of Lancaster his Paternal Great
Grandfather.

de L'Esparre, deputed from the City of Bourdeaux and the Lords of the Country
of Bourdelois, who taking distaste at some new Impost that was laid upon them,
offered to restore that Country to the English. Talbot the bravest of that
Nation and the most zealous for its honor, being therefore landed in Medoc
with four thousand Men, was brought into Bourdeaux by the Citizens the Twenty
fourth day of October; and about the latter end of the year having received a
like reinforcement from England, he made himself Master of Castillon, Cadillac,
Libourne, Fronsac, and some other small places besides.

The Bourdelois had taken their opportunity when the King was just going to
engage in a great War against the Duke of Savoy, who apparently must have been
upheld by the Dauphin, and by conseqence had correspondence in the very heart
of the Kingdom.

Charlotte and the Dauphin without his consent: This was the true motive of the
War: but that he might have some apparent cause, he had taken into his
protection certain Lords belonging to the Estates of Savoy, who having joined
in a League against their Princes chief Minister, named John de Compeis, were
for ever banished, by a Sentence given at Pont de Beauvoisis. The King advanced
even to Fores to restore them: but being informed the English were landed at
Bourdeaux, the Duke being come to wait upon him at Feurs, he suffered himself
to be overcome by his most humble submissions, and agreed to a Peace.

Lusignan in Poitou, thence to St. Jean d'Angely, for the recovery of
Bourdelois. His Army besieged Castillon: Talbot coming to its relief with six
thousand Men, was beaten and slain together with his Son. His defeat caused the
surrender of the City, the utter ruin of the English Party, and after that the
regaining of Bourdeaux; For they perceiving Fronsac, Libourne, Langon,
Cadillac, and all the other Towns about them were reduced, the King quartered
at Lermont, all Relief and even all Provisions failing them, surrendered upon
composition, which the King would never have granted them, if a great mortality
had not swept away his Men.

However the better to curb and keep this City which the interest of Traffic
and reciprocal Marriages inclined to be for the English, he banished forty
Lords and Citizens who were most to be suspected, and bridled them with two
strong Castles which he ordered to be built there.

The University being one of the greatest Bodies and one of the most necessary
to all Christendom, the Cardinal d'Estouteville the Popes Legate, making use of
his faculty, but by the Kings express Order, employed himself in purging it of
some abuses that had much disfigured them, and made many good Reglements, which
are yet kept in their Archives.

Calais had the Duke of Burgundy much concerned himself in the War against the
English: but yet he was not free from crosses in his own Countries. Those of
Bruges being up in Arms Anno 1437. let him into their City as if they had
intended to give him satisfaction, then fell upon his Men, killing above an
hundred of them, amongst the rest the Lord de L'Isle-Adam. Himself ran a great
hazard, and escaped with much difficulty by breaking open one of the City Gates
with Hammers. After this fury they betook themselves to rove all about the
Country. Their rage began to cool when they found the rest of the Towns did not
approve of their rash actions, and that the Duke was coming to besiege them
with a vast Army. They craved his pardon, which they obtained not but upon rude
Conditions. It cost them two hundred thousand Gold Crowns, the loss of many of
their Privileges, and the Lives of a dozen or fifteen of the most Factions.

The Ghentois gave him much more trouble, by their frequent disturbances. The
most dangerous was that in Anno 1452. a Gabel, or Impost was the cause of it.
He would needs settle it in Flanders and make it certain and fixed, imposing 24
Gross, Money of that Country, upon every Sack of Salt. They resolved to run all
the hazards and extremities imaginable, rather then suffer an Impost upon Water
and the Sun, which are free and universal Gifts bestowed by Nature. They relied
upon the protection of the King; and indeed he wrote earnestly and in high
terms in their behalf to the Duke of Burgundy; but having received an answer in
terms that were yet higher, he thought it not prudence to embarque himself in a
Civil War, being as yet not come to an end of the War against the English his
Foreign Enemy.

The losses which the Ghentois met with in five or six great Fights, did but
heat their savage hearts the more: but the Battle of Ripelmond; and afterward
that of Gavre, where they lost twenty thousand Men, brought them so low, they
were forced to come to composition. Two thousand Men bare Head and bare Foot,
with all their Counselors, Sheriffs and Officers only, in their Shirts, went
out a League to meet the Duke and his Son, to implore their Mercy. The Gate
through which they marched out to fight him at Riplemond, was stopped up for
ever. They were condemned to pay four hundred thousand Ridders of Gold, to
bring their Banners that he might dispose of them as he pleased, and to suffer
a change of their Usages and Privileges.

Upon a Tuesday the Nine and twentieth of May, Constantinople the Trunk of the
Grecian Empire, from which the Turks had lopped off all the Branches, was
Emperor Frederic III. and Mahomet II. Reigned 28 years at Constantinople.
taken perforce by Mahomet II. not more then three and twenty years of age.
Constantine her last Emperor perished there, crowded to death by the multitude
at one of the Gates of the City. Such was The End of the Eastern Empire, the
which to reckon from the dedication of Constantinople upon the Nineteenth of
May in the year Three hundred and thirty, had lasted Eleven hundred twenty
three years. We shall henceforwards place the Turkish Sultans in the room of
those Emperors.

d'Armagnac was not grown the wiser by his first chastisement, he would play
Rex, hindering him that had provisionally the Archbishopric of Ausch from
taking possession: and obstinately persever'd to keep his own Sister for his
Wife, maugre the Censures of the Church. The King being therefore moved at the
importunity of the Pope to wipe off this scandal from the Kingdom, sent some
Forces thither with five or six of his chief Commanders, some whereof seized on
the Country of Rovergne, others on the Valley d'Aure; and another Party on the
County of Armagnac. The City of Leytoure environed with a triple Wall, and its
Castle situate upon a steep Rock, did not hold out long: so that the Count sled
out of the Country, and retired safely to some Lands he had upon the Frontiers
of Arragon:

France, to justify the memory of the Pucelle. The King therefore ordered her
Parents to Petition, the Holy See to appoint some Judges that might review the
Process. Upon their request Calistus III. ordered Commissioners, who were the
Archbishop of Reims, and the Bishops of Paris and Coutances, who being met at
Rouen, looked into and examined the Proceedings, heard diverse Witnesses; and
thereupon fully justified that Heroic Virgin, caused the former Process to be
torn and burnt, by which they had condemned her. Their Sentence was proclaimed
in Rouen, at St. Ouins Churchyard, and the old Market, and likewise in many
other Cities of the Kingdom. There was no need of taking any course against her
false Judges, the greater part of them being perished either by sudden or such
a shameful death, as seemed to show the hand of God upon them.

During these years began those divisions which did not a little contribut to
the losing of Navarre. Blanch the Heiress of that Kingdom had a Son named
Charles, by John King of Arragon her Husband. This Princess dying in Anno 1441.
John took in second Wedlock Isabella of Portugal, and retained the enjoyment of
Navarre, which in effect belonged to Charles, as then about One and thirty
years of age. This dispute Armed the Son against the Father, the Kingdom was
divided. The House of Gramont which was considerable, took part with the
Father, that of Beaumont which was not inferior, joined with the Son. The
Mother in Law, who could have wished the Son out of the World, blew the coals,
and exasperated the Fathers anger; From thence grew irreconcilable Enmity, and
cruel Wars. Prince Charles having given Battle to his Father lost it, and was
taken Prisoner. A while after he was set at liberty upon an Accommodation.

Dauphine, particularly the Clergy, did so irritate the King his Father, that
he commanded Anthony de Chabanes Earl of Dammartin to go and Arrest him.
Dammartin having been cruelly offended, as we have related, would have executed
this Order severely, had not the Dauphin been informed, and made his escape in
post-haste into the Principality of Orange, and from thence into the
Franche-Comte, from whence he was conducted into Brabant. The Duke of Burgundy
received him as the Son of his Sovereign, and assigned him twelve thousand
Crowns for his use, and the Castle of Gueneppe within four Leagues of Bruxels,
for his oridinary Residence.

de Crouy who governed the Father, and countenancing and abetting them against
the Son who could not endure them. The first year of his sojourning there they
brought Charlotte of Savoy to him to Consummate his Marriage, by whom a Son was
born about three years afterward, who died.

John Duke of Alenson, the Dauphins Godfather. This Prince returning from
Dauphine, where he had been to brew some Intrigue with his God-son, and having
contrived I know not what League with the English, to make some disturbance in
favor of them, was seized and imprisoned in the Castle de Lo^hes.

John Xancoins Or, Sancoins.
Receiver General, convicted of misdemeanour, and of having detained sixty
thousand Crowns, was banished for ever, his Goods consiscate, and the fair
Houses he had built, bestowed upon the Count de Dunois.

Alenson, for it required all that time to find out proofs, the King convened
his parliament and his Pairs at Montargis to make his Process. They labored
three Months in it, he being at Baugency. The business not going on with that
expedition as he desired, he removes the Assembly to Vendosme, where he
intended to be present. At last by a Sentence of the Tenth of October, they
condemned the Duke to lose his Head, and confiscated all his Estate. The King
gave him a pardon for his life: but took the best of his Lands, and sent him
back Prisoner to Loches.

December of the same year was the last of brave Arthur's days, Earl of
Richmond Constable of France, who had likewise been Duke of Bretagne a year and
an half by the death of Peter the Simple, second Son of his eldest Brother. He
had no child, and so the Duthy went to Francis his Nephew, Son of Richard Earl
of Estampes his younger Brother. Charles of Anjou Earl of Main had the Office
of Constable.

The same year the Twenty seventh of June, Alphonso King of Arragon and
Sicilia, passed into the other World. At his death he left the Kingdom of
Naples (then called Sicilia on this side the Fare) to Ferdinand his Natural
Son. Rene of Anjou finding this a fair opportunity to pursue his right against
him, before he could be well settled, sent John Duke of Calabria his Son into
those Countries. This Prince guided by the destiny of his Predecessors, had
very prosperous beginnings, and an unfortunate end.

Constantinople, the Duke of Burgundy had for two or three times made show as
if he would employ his Forces and Person against the Insidels. We may fee in
Oliver de la March the Vows which he and the Lords in the Assembly of Bruges,
made on the Peacock at a stately Banquet; all this vanished into Air together
with the Wine and Mirth of the Feast.

Pius II. (this was Aeneas Sylvius) succeed in his Project, which was to unite
and engage all Christendom against the Turks. In order to which he had convened
a General Assembly at Mantoua, where appeared Ambassadors from all Sovereign
Princes, and the War was resolved upon with great designs, but without any
effect. The French Ambassadors returned but ill satisfied, the Pope not
condescending to favor Rene in his pretense to the Kingdom of Naples, but
threatening to Excommunicate the King upon the score of the Pragmatick,
whereupon John Dauvet Attorney General of the Parliament, made Protestations,
and appealed to the future Council.

The Duke of Tork had for the second time vanquished and taken King Henry
Prisoner; afterward, Queen Margaret with the aid of the Scots, slew that Duke
in Battle and delivered her Husband, but Edward Son of that Duke having brought
other Forces, tried fortune once more, and defeated the Queens Army under the
Walls of York. Then Henry being fled into Scotland, and Queen Margaret into
France, he was Crowned King in the year 1461. This was the first Act of the
Tragedy between the Houses of York and Lancaster, that of York wore the White
Rose, and Lancaster the Red.

Burgundy to send him back, telling him he nursed and hugged a Serpent, which
when well warmed in his Bosom, would one day make him feel his mortal Sting. He
sometimes proceeded even to threaten the Duke, and stirred up diverse of his own
People against him; who finding himself so harrass'd, sent at last a smart
Message desiring him to consider whether he would maintain the Peace of Arras
or not.

For this time therefore, the King left him quiet: but two years after his
Counsel or his own Resentment pressing him, he was about to go and fetch him
with an Army; However he changed his mind again, and thought it were better
punish him by advancing Charles his second Son to the birthrights of
eldership, according to the power the Kings of the first and second Race had
had. Which no doubt he would have put in execution, had not the Pope strongly
dissuaded him, or perhaps if he could have had time enough to dispose the minds
of the French Nation to admit of such a change.

Meun on the Yeurre Or, Eurc.
in Berry, he had notice that his Domestics had plotted to take away his life.
The poor Prince after that thought he saw nothing but poyniards and poison. His
apprehensions were so great, that not knowing from what hands he might take his
food without danger, he refrained from eating some days, after which it was not
in his power, when he would have done it, to swallow any thing. So that he died
of hunger the Two and twentieth of July about the midst of his Sixtieth year,
and near the end of the Nine and thirtieth of his Reign.

Never Prince had greater Traverses or more potent Enemies, nor overcame them
more gloriously. After he had driven those out of France that attempted at his
Crown, he sound a more dangerous Enemy in his House, that attempted on his
Life, He might have been called Happy, had he had another Father and another
Son. He was affable, debonnaire, liberal, just; He tenderly loved his People,
and spared them as much as it was possible, rewarded those that served him very
largely, took particular care of the Justice and Policy of his Kingdom,
labored greatly for the reformation of the Church, and was so religious he
would not charge it with any Tenths. But being of somewhat too soft a temper,
he was governed and led away by his Favorites and Mistresses too much; and in
his latter days became apprehensive, jealous and suspicious to the extremest
degree.

He had three Bastards by his Mistresses, and eleven Legitimate Children by his
Wife Mary Daughter of Lewis II. Duke of Anjou, four Sons, and seven Daughters.
Of his Sons two only survived him, which were Lewis and Charles. As for
Daughters, Radegonde died betroathed to Sigismond eldest Son of Frederic V.
Archduke of Austria; Yoland was Wife of Ame VIII. Duke of Savoy, Catharine of
Charles Duke of Burgundy, Jean, or Joan, of John II. Duke of Bourbon, and
Magdelain of Gaston Prince of Viana, and Earl of Foix; another Jeane, and Mary
Twin-Sisters, did not outlive the age of Infancy.

LEWIS XI.
King LIVE.
Aged XXXVIII. Years.
POPES,
PIUS II. 3 years under this Reign. PAUL II. Elected the 29th of August 1464.
S. 7. years wanting one Month. SIXTUS IV. Elected the 9th of August 1471. S. 13
years, whereof 12 under this Reign.
Daulphine, made it plainly enough known what his Friends and Subjects were to
expect from him. He ever Governed without Counsel, most commonly without
Justice, and without Reason. He thought it the finest Policy to go out of the
great and beaten Road of his Predecessors, to change every thing, were it from
better to worse, that he might be feared. His judgment which was very clear,
but too subtle and refined, was the greatest enemy to his own and his Kingdoms
quiet, having as it seems, taken pleasure in putting things into disorder, and
throwing the most obedient into Rebellion. He rather loved to follow the bent
of his own irregular fancies, then the wise Laws of the Land; and made his
Grandeur consist in the oppression of his People, in the pulling down of the
great ones, and the raising up of others from the very dust and nothing. This
is what another calls putting their Kings, horse de page, i.e. out of their
Minority; he should have said putting them out of their Sense, and their Reason.

The Creatures of the late King formed a Party in favor of Charles his second
Son (they named him the young Lord) which perhaps tended to exclude the Eldest.
He therefore stood in need of diligence and power to prevent it. The
information given him by the Count du Main, not so much out of affection, as
of hatred to the Count de Dammartin, who had been his Rival in the favor of
Charles, caused him to mount on Horseback the soonest he could; And the Duke
of Burgundy and his Son accompanied him with four thousand Horse, chosen out of
ten Thousand.

He went directly to Reims where he was Crowned the 15 th of August by John
Juvenal of the Vrsins. Before he received the Sacred Unction, he would be made
a Knight by the Duke, then distributed that honor to 117. Lords. At the end of
the Feast, the Duke kneeling down beseeched him to forget the injuries which
had been done to him, upon occsion of the discontents that had been betwixt his
Father and himself. He granted him that request: but he excepted against seven,
and under pretense of that number pardoned not any one.

He made his entrance into Paris the last day of August, followed by thirteen
or fourteen thousand Horse. The feastings being ended the Duke returned into
Flanders, the Count went on Pilgrimage to St. Claude's in the Franche-Comte,
and the King to Amboise to see his Mother. She died in a short time after, to
the great regret of the wisest, who could have wished that the respect he had
for her, might for a longer time have been as a Bridle to the voilence of her
Son.

He was much delighted at Plessis les Tours, the Count found him there at his
return, to whom he gave the Government of Normandy, and 12000 Crowns by
Establishment: But it was only a Paper-security, and seeming marks of
Friendship, which were accepted for no other then they were given. These two
Princes resembled each other too little, and knew one another too well to love
on either side; and indeed from that time the Count treated secretly with
Romille Vice Chancellor of Brittany, and gave him his Commission Sealed.

Lewis was entered into his Kingdom, he Governed himself as in a conquered
Country. He destituted all the Officers of the Royal Family, of War, of
Judicature, and of the Treasury, treated all the Creatures belonging to the
King his Father very ill, took delight in destroying all he had set up, gave
nothing but Berry to his Brother for his whole Apenage or Portion, set the Duke
of Alenson at liberty, and put the Count de Dammartin into the Bastile,
restored the Count of Armagnac to his Lands, loaded the people with Taxes,
stripped the great ones, and offended all the Clergy.

Aeneas Sylvins; and never Pope did struggle more to enlarge it bounds of right
and reason then the same, when he was Pius II. The Pragmatique was a Curb very
troublesome to his undertakings; He made so many applications to the King that
he allowed of a Declaration in November 1641. to abolish it. The Court of Rome
transported with an insolent joy, did immediately cause that Constitution to be
dragged along the Streets: But it was not yet time; for the oppositions of the
University hindered the effect of the Declaration, and the King never troubled
himself to have it put in Execution, because the Pope had failed of his word in
many things. John Gefrey Bishop of Arras had the Cardinals Cap as a recompense
for having negociated this affair with the King.

Ferdinand in the Kingdom of Naples, so that John de Calbria the Son of Rene of
Anjou, after various revolutions, was utterly driven thence. The Kings
entreaties could obtain nothing from the Holy Father in favor of those Princes
of his own Blood: But Pius thinking to slatter him, confirmed the Title of Most
Christian to him, which had been already derived to him with more honor from
his Ancestors, and exhorted him to a Croysade against the Turks, presenting him
with a Sword on the Blade whereof were some Latin Verses engraved, which
invited him to that expedition.

Henry King of Castille, and John King of Arragon. This last had by a Treaty of
accommodation, given Catalogna to Charles Prince of Viana, Son of his first
Bed, and therefore his principal Heir: His Mother in Law harrass'd him so much
that he once more fell out with his Father and took up Arms. He was again
defeated and taken Prisoner. The Catalonians making an insurrection in his
favor, forced his Father to set him at Liberty: but the same day of his
deliverance he Died of a Morsel which his Mother in Law had caused her own
Physician to give him.

After his Death the Catalonians being revolted against John, and having
degraded him, as the Murderer of his Son Charles; The King of Castille
assisted them. It was not the zeal of justice that led him to it, but the
desire of Siezing those places in Navarre which were for his purpose.

Mean while John that he mught have Men and Money in this pressing necessity,
had engaged the Counties of Roussillon and of Cerdagne to the King of France
for 300000 Crowns, Gaston de Foix Brother in Law to the Castillian, and Son in
Law to the Arragonian brought these two Princes to refer their differences to
the judgment of the King, who then was at Bourdeaux to treat of the Marriage
of Magdelin his Sister, with Gaston de Foix Count of Viana.

When he had heard the reasons of either party from the mouths of their
Ambassadors, he pronounced his Sentence of Arbitration: but it satisfied
neither the one, nor the other any more, then his enterview with Henry King of
Castille, satisfied either the French, or Spaniards. These scoffed at the
Niggardlyness, and mean and simple countenance of King Lewis, who was clothed
only in coarse Cloth Short Habits were ridiculous to persons of Quality.
, had a short and straight Garment on, and wore a Madona of Lead in his Cap;
The others had an indignation at the Castillian Arrogance, and the Pride of the
Count de Lodesme Favorite of Henry. But it is true that their King
condescending, as he ought, to the Majesty of France, passed over, not only the
River Bidasso, which seperates the two Kingdoms, to come to the King, but
likewise advanced two Leagues within his Dominions, and came even to the Castle
of Vterbia, where they conferred together.

At his return from this Voyage, Lewis found that the Lords de Crouy Father and
Son, had so well managed the mind of Philip Duke of Burgundy, with whom they
could do any thing, that he consented to render up to him the Cities of the
Sum for the 400000 Crowns. The business was of importance, and indeed for
fear the Duke should find out some excuses to retract his word, he caused the
money to be immediately sent to Hesdin, and went thither himself.

The surrender being executed, he would show himself in the Low Countries,
where his Sovereignty was but little acknowledged. He visited Arras, was
received at Tournay, and went as far as l'Isle, where the Duke came and saluted
him. The City of Tournay, which had never owned any other Dominion but that of
France, sent three Thousand Citizens forth to meet him, each of them having a
Flower-de-Luce embroidred with Gold just upon his Heart.

Lewis Duke of Savoy waited for him at St. Cloud to make complaints of the
disobedience of Philip his young Son, who more sprightly then Amedea his elder
Brother, had gained the affections of the Nobility, and was making his way to
invade the Crown. The King commanded Philip to come to him; he immediately did
so upon the Faith of a safe conduct, which hindered not his being Arrested, and
then his sending him Prisoner to Loches. He was detained two years, to give his
Father time to settle his affairs, and authority, and establish his eldest Son
in the Succession.

The hatred betwixt the King and the Charolois was augmented more and more.
There are five or six principal causes taken notice of. The surrender of the
places in the Sum, the kind reception the King made the Lords of Crouy, whom
the Charolois had driven from his Fathers Court and Country for that reason;
moreover the Kings endeavors to lay a Tax or Gabelle upon Burgundy, contrary
to the Articles of the Traty of Arras, and the favor he manifested to the
Count d'Estampes, who was accused to have intended to poison the Duke and his
Son.

de Morvilliers a Man vehement and bold, went on the Kings behalf to forbid the
Duke of Bretagne to Style himself any more Duke by the Grace of God, to Coin
any money, or to raise any Taxes in his Duchy. The Duke taken unprovided acted
cooly, and promised all; but demanded time to Assemble the Estates of his
Country; and in the mean while he diligently negociated with the Burgundian by
Romille, and with all the Grandees of the Kingdom whom he knew to be highly
discontented. The Habits of Friars Mendicatns, especially of the Cordeliers,
served to make the Messengers of these intrigues pass securely up and down.

The Charolois had chosen Gorcum in Holland for his ordinary residence, the
Bastard de Rubempre slunk privately into that Port with a small Vessel, being
disguised like a Merchant, to Sieze and carry away alive or dead this Romille
the Engine of all these designs, or perhaps the Count de Charolois himself.
However it were, the Count having discovered it, caused him to be imprisoned,
and gave notice thereof to the Duke his Father who was going to Hesdin to
Confer with the King.

Upon this intelligence the Duke retires in have, his People gave out that
there had been a design to Sieze upon the Father and the Son both at the same
time, the Preachers entertained their Auditors with it, and Oliver de la March
Made mention of it in Terms which hugely offend the Kings Honor. To justify
himself against these reproaches, the King sent Morvilliers his Chancellor and
some Lords to make great complaints to the Duke, and demand reparation. The
Chancellor did it in such high words, and Sovereign expressions, that he seemed
to design rather to exasperate then to compose differences; And indeed the
Cound de Charolois said to one of the Ambassadors at their departure, that
before one year were past, he would make the King repent it.

The King thought he had time to subdue the Breton before Philip, whom Age
rendered unwieldy, could Dream of stirring. He therefore called the Grandees of
the State together at Tours to make them know what reasons he had to undertake
it; Charles Duke of Orleance, first Prince of the Blood, whould needs speak
there of the disorders of the Kingdom, as his Age, his Reputation, and his
Rank, obliged him to do; but his Remonstrances grated the Ears of the King, and
were received with anger and contempt; In so much as he died for grief within
two th of January.

In hatred toward that good Prince, and in prejudice of the pretensions he had
to Milan, the King had a little while before acknowledged Francis Sforza for
Duke of Milan, and with that had not only given up to him all the right the
French had to the Seigneury of Genoa: But had also remitted and given him
Savona which he yet held, declaring to all the Princes of Italy, that whosoever
should assist the Genoese against Sforza, should be his enemy. So that Sforza
by the support of his great name, made himself master of Genoa and of all that
Signeury.

Orleans says that the River of Loire was Frozen this year in the Month of
June. If this prodigy were true, we must needs conclude it proceeded from a
natural cause, since Chronology demonstrates to us that the thing upon which he
would have it to be a Miracle, could not happen in that time as he has put it.

The Breton having dispatched his Ambassadors to Tours, to demand the Term of
three Months, carried his practices on so cunningly, that his League was ready
for their purpose, before the King had discovered any steps of it. The Dukes of
Bourbon and Alenson, all the other Princes of the Blood, except the Counts
d'Estampes, de Vandosme and d'Eu, almost all the Grandees, and all the late
Kings old Captains were in it, amongst others the Duke of Nemours and the
Counts of Armagnac, of St. Pol, of Dunois, of Dammartin who made his escape
from the Bastille through a hole, the Marshall de loheach, the Lords D'Albret,
de Bueil, de Gaucour, and de Chaumont d'Amboise. They called it a League For
the Public Good, because the Princes gave it that fair pretense.

While the King was at Poitiers, the Bastard d'Armagnack Siezed his only
Brother Charles, and carried him into Bretagne. All the zealous Servants of the
Deceased Charles his Father flocked in to him, and got him to write a Manifesto
to all the Princes of France, inviting them to unite with their Party for the
easing of the People, and the reformation of the Kingdom.

After the King had attempted in vain to reclaim them by fair promises, and
flattering words, he went to strike the first blow at them, who had the first
declared themselves. These were the Dukes of Bourbon and Dammartin who had
begun the War in Berry, Bourbonnois and Auvergne.

All Berry submitted, except Bourges which was guarded by the Bastard of
Bourbon, Rion in Auvergne waited a Siege, and sustained it. John Duke of
Nemours, the Count d'Armagnac, and Charles Sire d'Albret brought a considerable
reinforcement to the Duke: nevertheless he gave Ear to a Treaty with the King,
promising to summon his Confederates to a Peace, and to abandon them, if they
would not accept of reasonable conditions. Nemours gave his positive word to
the King to side with his Party, but he kept it not; and the King kept the Oath
he made to himself to be revenged in time and place convenient.

Charolois had taken the Field with the Duke his Fathers leave, who had assured
him, when they parted that if he fell into any danger, he should not want an
Hundred Thousand Men to bring him out again. He knew likewise that this Count
had fifteen Hundred men of Arms, eight Thousand Archers, and a great equipage
of Artillery and Wagons, that he had made his Rendevous before Paris, and that
the Duke of Bretagne and Monsieur were to join him.

Charolois sent the fairest pretense in the World before him, the Abolition of
Imposts and the public good. He burned the Seats of those Officers at all the
places of Receipts, and tore their Registers, paid the expenses of his
Soldiers, and kept them in good Discipline. If this good order could have held
all had been his own, or if the Breton had come at the time appointed, they had
been Masters of Paris, there being few Soldiers in it, and many male-contented,
and lovers of Novelties.

The fear of losing Paris made the King leave his other game, to get to Paris,
before the Charolois: As soon as he had repassed the Loire, the Duke of
Bourbon, Dammartin, Nemours, and Albret broke their words with him, and having
gotten together ten Thousand men, marched to join with the other Confederates.

The Lords of the League were all to be at St. Denis toward the end of the
month of June, the Charolois waited for them ten or twelve days, and in the
interim attempted the Suburbs of Paris by several Skirmishes. When he found
none stirred in his favor, and that he had no certain news of them, nor of the
Bretons march, he was in great perplexity and thought to retire back again.
Nevertheless the Vice Chancellor Romille, a Normand and very subtle, showing
him from time to time Letters from his Master, which he wrote upon blanks
Signed before, wrought so far that he engaged him to pass the River Seine over
the Bridge at St. Cloud, to go and join the Breton toward Estampes where he
thought to have met him. He quartered that day at the Village of Lonjumeau, his
advanced Guard, at Montlehery. The King returning from Berry kept the same
Road, and came to Quarter at Chastres a League on this side of Montlehery.

Both Armies were mightily surprised to find themselves so near each other. The
Kings design was to slip aside, and reach to Paris without hazarding a Battle;
but Peter de Breze Grand Seneschal of Normandy, concerned that he should ask
him whether he had not given his Hand and Seal to the Princes, engaged them to
fight, where he was killed one of the very first. Thus happened it to be a
rencounter rather then a Battle. It was on Tuesday 16 th of July near
Montlehery, from whence it took

Both Armies, to speak properly, had the worst, and neither of them any
advantage. The Kings left Wing, and the Burgundians right were broken; and in
the rout the fright was so great that there were run-aways both of the one and
other Party that posted it, for fifty Leagues together without baiting, or
looking behind them, each of them declaring they had lost the Battle on their
^^de. The two Chiefs fought Valiantly in person, the Burgundian was twice near
being taken Prisoner or slain*

In the Evening, the King tired with being on Horseback all the day, was
conducted by the Scotch-men of his Guards to the Castle of Montlehery. His men
seeing him no more believed him to be dead; And the Count du Main, and the
Lord de Montauban withdrew themselves with Eight Hundred Lances.

The Burgundian Army being half broken, all in a Consternation, fearing a new
Engagement the next day which they could not have sustained, the Principal
Officers were in deliberation to dislodge that night, and go toward Burgundy.
Fear is an evil Counselor, all were of that opinion, the Lord of Contay only
hindered that retreat, which would have turned to a rout. The next day they had
certain intelligence that the King was decamped, and gone to Corbeil, and a few
hours after they were assured the Breton was arrived at Estampes. Thus the
Field was left to the Charolois, which filled his head with so much pride that
it may well be said that day was the cause of all his misfortunes.

The next day the King fearing to be hemmed in, descended directly to Paris
along the Seine. The same night he supped in the company of the principal
Ladies of that City, to gain their hearts by the power of that insinuating Sex,
and to have a Party amongst the Beauties to oppose the intrigues of those that
were for the interests of the Princes. He also highly commended the Fidelity of
the Citizens, and to allure the People he caused to be proclaimed in all the
Suburbs an abatement upon Wines, from a fourth part to an eighth part, and a
general revocation of all Imposts, the five great Farms only excepted.

These favors being against his will did not last long, no more then the
establishment he made of a Council of eighteen persons, six of the Parliament,
six of the Body of the University, and six of the chiefest Citizens, by whose
Counsel and advice he promised to be governed, according to the remonstrances
of the Clergy, the Parliament and the University. The danger past he kept
nothing of all this but a mortal hatred against those that had made the
proposition, and particularly against the Bishop who first mentioned it in the
name of the rest. This was William Brother of Allen Chartier, a man of great
virtue, and hugely zealous of the public good.

Normandy to raise men and Money.

In the mean time the Count de Charolois marching to meet the Breton took the
House d'Estampes to refresh his Soldiers and dress the wounded which were to
the number of almost two Thousand. At the end of three days the Breton arrived,
having with him the Counts of Dunois and Dammartin, the Marshall de Loheack,
the Lords de Bevil, de Gaucour, and d'Amboise. 800 Men at Arms, and six
Thousand Light Horse.

It happened one day that Monsieur, a young Prince who had but a faint heart;
seeing the wounded men who were carried thorough the Streets of Estampes, and
the sick that crawled up and down, let fall some expressions which signified
his repentance for that enterprise. The Count de Charolois heard it: and
perhaps he heard likewise that the Bretons, upon the rumor that had been
spread how the King was slain in the Battle of Montlehery, had consulted of a
means to rid themselves of him, that they might govern the new King alone: upon
which he imagined that he might be left betwixt the Hammer, and the Anvil; and
in this apprehension he sent to Edward King of England to treat of an Alliance
with him, and desire to have his Sister Margret. His design was but to
entertain him with hopes, that he might make no League with the King; for he
mortally hated the House of York, and was for the interest of Lancaster;
nevertheless by over-acting the dissembler, he engaged himself so far as to
complete the marriage, and took the Order of the Garter.

Estampes, they resolved to return before Paris, to try a second time whether
they could move them to declare themselves for the public good. Having
therefore foraged the Country of Gastinois, they passed the Seine over a Bridge
of Boats between Melun and Montereau. At this passage John of Anjou, Duke of
Calabria and Lorrain, the Son of good King Rene and a great Captain, joined
them with the Forces of both Burgundy's. He had but eight hundred Horse, but of
the very best, and amongst his Foot, which were but few, five Hundred Swisse,
the first that were seen in France.

When all the other Lords were come with their Forces, there were near a
Hundred Thousand Horse in that Army. The Burgundian had his Quarters at
Charenton, and was lodged in his Castle of Conflans The Trenches are yet to be
seen.
, the Dukes of Berry and Calabria at St. Maur, and the rest at St. Denis, and
the places thereabouts.

In this multitude of principal Officers, there was no Head considerable enough
to command this vast Body; they staid three days before Paris without doing any
thing. Perhaps they might have forced it by assaults, had they undertaken it,
for there were but five hundred Lances, and some Bands of Archers, however they
rather furnished themselves, then starved the City to a Compliance.

It is true, they narrowly missed the gaining of it by Treaties and Intreagues.
For some out of a desire to see the Blockade at an end, and the rest for fear
of some sad event gave Ear to certain Letters brought them by the Heralds from
the Brother of their King.

They sent Deputies to him from the Chiefest of the Clergy, the Parliament, the
University, and the Citizens* The Bishop was Speaker. At their return,
notwithstanding the contrary orders of the Count d'Eu who was Governor, it was
concluded at their Town Hall, that they should desire the King to Assemble the
Estates, that the Princes might come into Paris in small companies, and that
they should be furnished with Provisions for their money. The King being
informed thereof returned to Paris the 28 th of August and broke off this
project.

Had he staid two days longer, he might perhaps have found the Princes in Paris
and the Gates shut against him. Had that happened he had resolved to have retired
to Lewis Sforza Duke of Milan his good Friend, who had sent him a relief of
seven or eight Thousand Men that mightily harrassed the Duke of Bourbons
Country.

September, which was held at Mercers Grange. From that hour there was nothing
but bargaining to debauch people, the Confederates grew jealous of each other,
that Party disunited, and the Kings grew strong and better fortified, and
Confirmed.

It was resolved the Council of Sforza Duke of Milan should be followed, which
was to dissolve the League at what price soever, and for that purpose to grant
to every one in particular almost whatever he demanded. The King had very near
made an agreement which each of them, excepting only about the Appenage for his
Brother; they being obstinately bent to have Normandy allowed him for that
purpose. He could not consent to the dismembring that fair Province: but in the
mean time having information that the Duke of Bourbon who made War in that
Country, having been by some intelligence introduced into the Castle of Rouen,
had made himself Master of that City, and that all the Province inclined to the
same resolution, allured with the desire of having a Duke as Bretagne had, who
found themselves very well under him: he was induced to grant them what they
held already.

th of October. The Count de Charolois had the Cities of the Sum, redeemable
only after his Decease for two hundred thousand Crowns, and moreover the
Counties of Guisnes, of Boulogne and of Pontieu. The Count de St. Pol who
Governed him, had the Constables Sword; To the Count of Armagnac, and to all
the rest they restored their Lands, and those Offices they were dispossessed
of, and withal they gave them Pensions and employments: but in such a manner as
sowed the Seeds of discord amongst them. The Duke of Bretagne made them pay the
charges of his Army and his Journey. The Public, which served for a
Stalking-Horse to this War, and who had born all the expenses, gained no
advantage, save only that it was promised, That there should be named Six and
Thirty Notables, or prime Men, twelve of the Nobility, twelve of the Clergy,
and twelve of the long Robe, to consult of Methods to ease the People, and
redress the disorders of the State.

de Vincennes, which he had put into the hands of the Count; and there Monsieur
rendered Hommage for his Dukedom of Normandy. Two days after the Count took his
journey toward Flanders, the King conducting him as far as Villers le Bell, and
at the same time the Duke of Bretagne went with Monsieur into Normandy to see
him take the possession of it.

The good success of Francis Sforza's Counsel did soon appear; the King gained
the most valiant of their Commanders to be for him, put some of them into
jealousies and divisions, sought occasions to strip others, and in time lighted
on fit opportunities, which entangled them in great troubles and perplexities.
The Count de Charolois was gotten into one that was bad enough, to wit, a War
with those of Liege: he needed but to encourage them, by blowing up the Flame,
and assisting those inveterate people in their furious hatred.

Bourbon, Nephew by his Mother to Duke Philip of Burgundy, they had expelled
him the Country, because he did not live like a Prelate, and the Burgundian had
undertaken to restore him. Those of Liege and those of Dinant sent to declare a
War against the Charolois when he was on his March toward Paris.

For that time the Duke his Father with the assistance of the Dukes of Cleves
and Guelders, compelled them in a few days to buy a Peace. But a while after
upon the flying report that the Count was killed at Montlehery, they reassumed
their Arms with more fury, relying upon the promise the King had made to give
them assistance, and that he would make no Peace without them. Those of Diant,
a City Famous and enriched by their works in Copper, burst out into a Thousand
outrages against the Charolois, even to the calling him Bastard, and hanging
him in Effigy.

Meuse, and the rest abandoned to extreme misery. The Liegois who came to their
relief, terrified with the smoke of this Fire, desired a Truce for a year, till
the month of January the year following, and gave up three hundred Hostages.

Bretagne would monopolize Monsieur to himself alone, and enjoy all the favors
he could confer in Normandy. John Duke of Calabria and the old Servants of
Charles the VII. had their pretenses too; divisions grew amongst them, one may
guess whether Engines were then wanting to blow up the Sparks. They made John
Duke of Calabria believe that the Breton had plotted to convey away Monsieur
into Bretagne. Duke John gives notice hereof to the Normands, the noise is
spread all over the City, the Foolish people take it for a truth, run to the
Mount St. Catharine, where Monsieur was waiting till they had made all ready
for his reception, sets him upon a Horse, and forces him to make his entrance
Tumultously and without Ceremony. The Breton durst not appear and was
constrained for his own safety, and to avoid that fury, to retire into the
lower Normandy, whose Cities were in his hands.

Caen, where the Duke consented that those places which he held, should be put
as in Sequestration into the hands of Oder Daydic-lescun, since Count of
Cominges.

Whilst the King was in this Country, the same Duke of Bourbon who had put
Normandy into the power of Monsieur, labored to get him out again, and put it
into the Kings possession. In all his life the Duke of Burgundy felt not a more
sensible displeasure, then to find that Prince whom he had loved above all the
Men in the World, turn his back upon him so soon, and ruin his own designs.

Louviers and the Pont de Larche being surrendered to the King, those of Rouen
demanded composition the 10 th of January, and their miserable Duke denuded of
Friends, Money, Heart and Counsel, escaped in pitiful equipage, and thought
himself happy in finding a shelter at the Bretons. Thus Normandy kept her Duke
but two Months. The King could not pardon the passion they had shown to have
one. It cost the lives of a great number of the most considerable in that
Country.

The War with the Liegois detained Count de Charolois so, that he could not
prevent this revolution, and old Age hindered Duke Philip his Father from
stirring in it so early as he would have desired. He held only a Correspondence
with the Breton, and strove to Animate King Edward, whose Daughter he had
demanded in marriage to make a descent in France.

During the noise which was spread every where, of this irruption, and the
murmurings of infinite numbers of discontented persons, the King amused the
people with the hopes of easing them, having Summoned an Assembly des Notables
at Paris, out of which were chosen 21 Commissaries who began to set themselves
about it in the Palace the 16 th of July. The Count de Dunois presided; It was
he alone who amongst so many Princes had followed it; out of that Laudible zeal
he has transmitted to all his posterity, to procure the public good.

There were more Propositions made, no doubt, then they intended to practice,
and fine studied speeches; This is what they call in France, de Belles actions,
brave actions.

Paris alone, swept away above forty Thousand People, and frighted away a much
greater number; In so much as the King desiring to re-people it, by an Edict
called in all sorts of Nations and People, even such as were banished, or
Criminals, to whom, besides the Abolition, he gave Privileges and Franchises.

Pragmatique subsisted yet, Pope Paul II. sent as Legate to the King, John
Joffridi Cardinal Bishop d'Alby to get the revocation verified; who employed
John Balue Cardinal Bishop of Angiers, to carry the Letters from the King to
the Chastelet and the Parliament. They passed at the Chastelet without
opposition: but in the Parliament he found John de Saint Romain Attorney
General who opposed him to his face; and the University went to the Legate to
signify their Appeal to the next Council, and after entered it into the Register
at the Chasteler.

Paris being as it were the Kings Bulwark against the Grandees that loved him
not, he ordained that all the Inhabitants, even the Ecclesiastics should
enroll themselves under the Banners of their Principals, and Sub-Principals,
that is to say, of Colonels and Captains, and should provide themselves with
good Arms. At one Muster which was made the 4 th of September, there were found
to be between 70 and 80000 men, between the ages of 16 and 60 years. In another
which was made the following year they counted 84000.

th of July in the year 1467. Philip Duke of Burgundy called le Bon (i. e. the
Good,) ended his days at Brussels in the 72 th year of his Age, and the 45 th
of his Domination. He yielded not in power or riches to any King but the
French; but had not his like in Goodness and Magnisicence. And indeed he was
adored by his people, respected by all the Princes of Christendom, and dreaded
even by the Infidels. The Count de Charolois Succeeded in his great Dominions,
not at all in his Goodness and Wisdom. He was Rash, Presumptuous, Quarrelsome
and Bloody: But withal Valiant, Undaunted and Indefatigable in War, and who
within himself observed exact justice and right toward his own Subjects.

Liegois, whom the King had wrought to break the Truce, and he assisted them
yet, notwithstanding he offered to forsake them, if the Duke would forsake the
Breton, whom the King held already, as it were by the Throat, being entered into
his Country with thirty Thousand Men. The Duke would do nothing of this; but
hastened to make an end of the War with Liege. Now the Liegois having lost a
Battle when they came to relieve the City of St. Tron, did submit themselves to
any conditions he would require, excepting firing and plundring. He caused the
Heads of 20 or 30 of the most guilty to fly, together with the Towers and Walls
of the City of Liege, changed the Magistrates and the Laws, and drained them of
great Sums of Money for his expenses. This was in the Month of November.

The people of Flanders, especially the Gantois who had mutined after the Death
of his Father, humbled themselves likewise before their victorious Prince, and
sent him all their Banners to Bruges.

In the Month of October, the King received advice that the Duke of Alenson,
who made one in every discontented Party, was joined in that of Monsieur and
the Duke of Bretagne, and had given them up all his places, by means of which
and of those that yet remained in their possession, amongst others Auranches,
Bayeux and Caen, they held almost all the lower Normandy. The King willing to
tread him down first in his way to the others, did presently cause his Army to
march into the Countries of Perch and of Mayn, and arrived at Man's himself.

Paris, against the King in the League for the public good, had been the
mutation of Officers. For this reason, before his march against the Leagued
Princes, he made this celebrated Ordinance of the 21th of October, This order
of not being destituted is very Ancient; it is to be seen in the Capitularies
of Charles the Bald, and in an Ordinance of Philip Valois, quoted by du Moulin.
which bears, That considering that in his Officers consists under his
Authority, the direction whereby are Policed and managed the public affairs of
the Kingdom, and that thereof they are Essential Ministers, as members of that
Body, whereof of he is the Head, he would therefore free them from all doubts
they had of falling into the ineonveniences mutation and destitution, and
provide for their security. And therefore he Ordained that thenceforward there
should be no Office disposed of unless it were vacant by Death, or by voluntary
resignation, or by forfeiture, judged and declared Judicially by a competent
Judge.

His Army lay all the rest of Autumn without doing much, for as subtle as he
was, he suffered himself to be amused by the Breton, with the hopes of an
accommodation. Nevertheless he did not wholly lose his time. Toward the end of
the year, he Debauched Rene Count du Perch Son of John Duke of Alenson, who
betraying his own Father, delivered the Castle of Alenson up to him, which in
those days was reckoned for a very good place. The Breton forsook the Town. And
sinding Monsieur and the Duke of Bretagne astonished at so unexpected an
accident, he employed the Popes Legate to let them know that he would refer all
his Deputies to the judgment of the General Estates; And for that purpose
summoned them together at Tours the first day of April.

Normandy being united to the Crown, could not be dismembered to be given to his
Brother: That that young Prince should be exhorted to be satisfied with twelve
thousand Livers yearly Rent in Lands for his Appenage, and 60000 Livers Annual
Pension, but this not to be a President for the futureSons of France. That the
Breton should surrender the places in Normandy, and if he would not obey this
Ordinance they should make War upon him with all their Forces, and to do this
they proffered their Lives and Fortunes.

He caused this to be immediately made known to his Brother, and to the Breton;
and at the same time his Army, led by his Admiral, entered Bretagne, took
Chantoce and Ancenis, and penetrated a great way into the Country, whilst
himself, after he had visited his good City of Paris, was gone toward the
Frontiers of Picardy to make use of some Engines to endeavor to disjoyn the
Duke of Burgundy from them.

At that time the said Duke having vanquished the Liegois, had sent to entreat
him to leave his Friends in Peace, otherwise he should be obliged to Succor
them; And indeed he advanced by long Marches for that end: but mean while they
being affrighted, though nothing appeared which could oblige them to
precipitate themselves so soon, concluded their agreement, and complied with
the resolution of the Estates.

The King failed not to give speedy notice of it to the Burgundian, but he
would believe nothing; even the Herald from the Breton who carried him the
News, ran the hazard of being hanged as a Party Suborned, because he had seen
the King in his journey. At length he met with so many demonstrations that he
must give Faith.

He encamped in great order along the Sum (He was the first that renewed the
Roman Method, to enclose his Forces in a Camp entrenched.) Notwithstanding
those precautions the Kings Army was so strong, and his Soldiers so Animated
that he might easily have forced him had he undertaken it: but he would rather
try a less hazardous way, and gave him six Score Thousand Crowns of Gold to

Catalonians notwithstanding the Kings Sentence, and the accommodation of the
Castillian, had chosen the foregoing year John Duke of Calabria for their
Sovereign, as well for his valor as the pretensions the House of Anjou had to
the Kingdom of Arragon. He made a War in that Country with the Kings assistance
three years together, having sometimes good success, and sometimes bad: but in
the year 1470. When he had routed the Army of John King of Arragon who besieged
the City of Peralta, he Died of a Burning Fever in Barcelona.

Lewis had a Genius that was marvellously Subtle, Insinuating and Intriguing:
He knew it perfectly well, and had conceived that if he could but confer with
the Burgundian, he could difunite him from the other two, or at least cast the
Seeds of jealousies amongst them. He therefore negociated for an enterview, and
by the advice of Cardinal la Balue, went to find him at Peronne where he was,
without taking any Guards: but only the Cardinal, the Duke of Bourbon, the
Count de Saint Pol, and two or three other Lords, thereby to show an entire
confidence.

The Duke had lodged him in the City. Soon after there arrives three Princes of
the House of Savoy, Philip Lord of Bresse, the Count de Romont, and the Bishop
of Geneva, then the Marshall of Burgundy, the Lords du Lau, and d'Vrfe, and
some others, all Enemies to the King. Du Lau had been otherwhile his Favorite
but afterward had been clapped in Prison whence he made his escape. The sight of
these People put him in such fear, that he desired the Duke to lodge him in the
Castle; This was to go into the Trap, and give himself up a Prisoner.

Before his going to Peronne, he had sent Ambassadors to Liege, to stir those
bustling People to take up Arms, and he had taken no care to countermand it.
Now the Mine was sprung earlier then he would have had it; for at the first
word those impetuous People went forth out of hand, took the City of Tongres
immediately, where they Seized their Bishop, tore in pieces five or six of his
Canons, and slew some Burgundians.

Peronne to be shut up, and hardly could retain his wrath, from a revenge upon
the King himself. Three days together the King was in mortal Trances, he saw
himself in the hands of his Enemies justly provoked and enraged, and who might
have gained all by loosing him, amidst People that hated him to the very Death,
and in a House at the foot of that Tower where Hebert Count de Vermandois had
heretofore put Charles the Simple to Death. In effect he had been lost had he
not found out the means to gain some of the Dukes Domestic Servants (amongst
others Philip de comines) who softened the Spirit of the Duke their Master. He
would not withdraw himself from his Precipice but by making a new Treaty with
the Duke, by which he agreed Monsieur should have the Counties of Champagne and
Brie, and promised to follow the Burgundian to the destruction of the unhappy
Liegois, with what numbers of men he should desire. He carried only some
Guards, and 300 Soldiers.

Although the City of Liege were dismantled and without Guns, they nevertheless
Sunday the 30 th of October which they believed to be a day of rest amongst
Christians (as if there were any Religion in a War) they were Attacked about
Dinner time, and made but little defense. One great part of the People fled
over the Bridge that crossed the Meuse into the Forest of Ardennes, where more
then half of them perished by hunger and cold, the rest got into Churches, or
hid themselves in their Houses.

Fearconstrained the King to rejoice at the unhappiness of his miserable
Allies, to applaud the great actions of the Duke of Burgundy, before his own
People and in his presence, and make Courtship to his own Vassal. Four days
after he managed it so, by means of those whom he gained to be for him, that he
was permitted to go, to cause the Treaty of Peronne to be verified in the Court
of Parliament: for without that, as Philip de Comines says, the Treaties were
at no value. The Duke having made him some ill-favored excuses, for having
brought him thither, conducted

After the Kings departure he caused about a Thousand, or twelve Hundred of
those miserable wretches to be drowned, that had been taken in their Houses at
Liege and set fire to the whole City, excepting the Churches and three hundred
Houses about them which were preserved to lodge the Clergy.

The Parisians could not refrain from Scoffing at the craft of the King, which
brought him into this Trap at Peronne, he contrived to turn their discourse
upon another Subject, by sending to their Houses to take away all their Deers,
Goats, Cranes, Swans, Cormorants, and other Creatures which they kept for their
pleasure, as likewise all such Birds as were taught to whistle and speak.
Perhaps they had instructed some Parrot to say Peronne.

At his parting with the Duke, he had asked him what he understood he was to do
in case his Brother would not be contented with Champagne for his Apennage: the
Duke answered that if he would not take it, and that the King could otherwise
satisfy or content him, he would leave it to them two. He failed not to take
his advantage of these inconsiderate words. He would not have his Brother be so
near a Neighbor to the Burgundian, his Interest was to place him at the other
end of the Kingdom to break off their Communication. That young Prince, Weak
Oder-Daydie Lord of Lescun a Gascon and vain, who would needs be a Prophet in
his own Country; by his means he was persuaded to renounce Champagne, and
accept of Guienne with the City of Rochel.

This change was the loss of that young Prince; The Cardinal de la Ballue, in
whose hands the Treaty of Peronne had been Sworn, with much regret suffered it
to be altered, whether out of love to Monsieur, or that he would have had the
King still in some perplexity. This good Prelat and William de Hoeraucoux
holding Intelligence with the Burgundian, wrote to Monsieur to dissuade him,
and represented many things to him for his advantage, but contrary to the Kings
intentions. Their Letters having been intercepted and they Seized, they
ingenuously confessed their practices. The King sent the information to his
Brother; who suffering to be overcome by his Carasses, accepted of Guyenne, and
came to meet him at Tours.

The Bishop was shut up in an Iron Cage, a punishment he well deserved, since
he was the first inventor of it. The Cardinal was conveyed to the Bastille,
where he remained twelve years, the Pope demanding him as liable only to his
Justice, and the King pressing the Pope to let him have Judges assigned him
within the Kingdom to hear his cause.

Monsieurs Heart from the Countries on this side, allured him with a great
Match in Spain. Henry King of Castille had a Daughter named Jeane, but whom the
Castillians held for a Bastard, because he was esteemed impotent; in so much as
they had constrained him to declare the Infanta Isabella, who was his Sister,
his Heiress. The King sent the Cardinal of Arras to demand this Isabella for
Monsieur: But the Lords of the Country having stolen her away, and married her
to Ferdinand Infant of Arragon, he seeks to have Jane, which Henry agreed to. A
Matter for a long War if Charles had lived.

The first day of August the King being at his Castle of Amboise, instituted an
Order of Knighthood in honor of St. Michael, and limited the number of Knights
to 36, yet was it never filled up in all his Reign.

The French particularly Honored St. Michael as the Tutelary Angel of that
Monarchy; And a better could not be pitched upon to tread down the Pride of the
English, who carr'd Dragons in their Ensigns, then that Prince of they
Celestial Militia, who is painted with a Dragon under his feet. And indeed, it
had been reported that he was seen at the head of our Army's sighting against
them for the French.

He imagined by means or virtue of this Collar, that he should have drawn all
the Grandees of the Kingdom within his clutclies when he held this Chapter. And
therefore the Duke of Bretagne refused it, and the Duke of Burgundy doing yet
worse, received the Order of the Garter, and wore it to his Death.

The Breton had in his service one Peter Landays his Treasurer, a man of Low
Birth, but very knowing and able to countermine all the Artisices of Lewis XI.
It was he that led him to all these evasions, and emboldned his Master to
withstand all his devices, and his threats. Thus, what ever endeavors he could
use, though he were on his Frontiers with an Army, he could never disunite him
from the Burgundian, but only obliged him by a Treaty made at Saumur, to
renounce all offensive Leagues against the Kingdom.

1470. John the Natural Son of Lewis Duke of Orleance, left this world aged 70
years, having diverse years before left the Court because of his almost
continual pain of the Gout, which the hardships in the Wars had brought upon
him. This Prince, valued in all things, says Comines, having made himself as
able a Counselor as he was a Captain, was one of the principal instruments God
made use of to drive the English out of France. Therefore the Princes of his
Family gave him the County of Dunois, King Charles that of Longue-ville, the
Office of Great Chamberlain, and the Lieutenancy General of his Army's and
strong Forts; A power of so great extent that it has been communicated to none
but himself in the third Race.

Breton to make, had most respect to Edward of York King of England, and
Brother in Law to the Burgundian, of whom it was hourly reported, that he was
coming to Land at Calais. He was wholly prevented by the Earl of Warwick, who
in revenge of some injuries received from him, set himself to carry on the
interests of the House of Lancaster, and had even Debauched the Duke of
Clarence his Brother.

He had the foregoing year defeated his Army, and afterward took him Prisoner.
Then Edward having escaped, beat him in his turn: So that he was forced to save
himself in France, about the end of the Month of May this year. From thence
returning into England with the Succors the King le^t him, he changed the
Scene a second time. For all slocked to him, according to the Genius of that
Country, which loves change, and Edward wholly forfaken, fled into Flanders to
the Duke of Burgundy his Brother in Law. Then King Henry who was in the Tower
of London was set at Liberty, and Warwick and Clarence took upon them the
Government of the Kingdom.

Though the King still resented in his Heart the affront received at Peronne,
nevertheless being of a fearful Spirit, and the length of any enterprise
putting him out of patience if the success were not as swift as his desires: he
would have lived in peace, if the Constable and those that were about him, had
not excited his resentment to draw him to a rupture. They feared, and the
Constable most of all, that a Peace making them appear useless, the King might
think of retrenching their great allowances, and his stirring mind, if it were
not employed abroad, might put him upon great alterations at home in his Court.

Besides these motives, there was also an Intrigue of the Bretons and the
Constables in favor of Monsieur. As they desired to strengthen him against the
King, they had inspired him with a desire of marrying the only Daughter of the
Burgundian; And because they knew the Father would not easily consent to it,
they believed they should sooner bring it about by force, then by friendship,
and therefore they resolved to engage the King to make a War upon him.

The Bias they took for this was to assure him that they had Infallible
Intelligence how to surprise the Dukes Towns, and make his Subjects revolt in
the very Heart of Flanders. Upon the hopes of these great advantages, he sent
an Usher of the Parliament to Summon him even in the very City of Ghent, to
give satisfaction to the Count d'Eu, from whom he detained some Lands,
belonging to the County of Pontieu. In stead of appearing upon the Summons, he
levied Soldiers at half Pay, but having been at this charge three Months,
seeing no Body moved, he thought it was only a huffe, and dismissed them.

The House of Burgundy spared their People so much, that they kept up no
Militia, nor Garrisons in their Towns, they thought that by Treating their
Subjects well they were Guard good enough. However when he had laid down all
his Arms, he received diverse informations that all was ready to overwhelm him.
John de Chaalons Prince of Orange, and some of his Domestic Servants for sook
him; Baldwin one of his Bastard Brothers (he had eight) Plotted to poison him;
the Breton renounced his alliance, and the Constable Seized upon the City of
Saint Quentin. Then he that had feared nothing, began to apprehend every thing.
He got together with much ado three hundred Horse, with which he advanced, to
cover his other Cities on the Sum: But upon sight of him those of Amiens
turned their backs and received the Kings Forces. Abbeville would have done as
much if Desquerdes had not hinderd it.

He retired therefore to Arras with more have then he went forth, and sent a
private messenger to the Constable to pray him not to push things forward to
extremity. He received for answer, that unless Monsieur would declare for him
he could not be served in it: But that he was ready to embrace his defense, if
he would give his Daughter in Mrrriage to him. A Note from Monsieur conveyed to
him in a piece of Wax, assured him the same thing; and the Breton gave him
intelligence that all his Towns, even Bruges and Ghent were upon the point of
revolting, and that the King was resolved to besiege him, whithersoever he went.

But the more they will force him, the more he stands out against them. Not
being followed so closely, as he might have been by the King, he resumes his
Courage, gathers up Men, takes the Field, and having gained Pequiny, presents
himself before Amiens, and Fired his Guns at the Town to invite the Constable
to give him Battle. But finding the great numbers of men coming which the King
got together at Beauvais, he retreated back, and wrote a very Submissive Letter
to him, which in gross discovered the Artifices of those that Animated the King
against him. The King who found he was as little secure as the Duke amongst
such double dealing People, agreed to a Truce for a year the 12 th Day of May.
St. Quintin remained the Constables, and was at last the cause of his ruin.
The Treaty Signed, the King went into Touraine. Monsieur to his Apennage of
Guyenne, and the Burgundian to Flanders.

During this War, Edward of York with a Moderate assistance which the
Burgundian and secretly furnished him withal (for he apprehended to offend the
Earl of Warwick) had by the favor of the Duke of Clarence his Brother, whom he
had regained by the intrigues of a Woman, reenters England gained two Battles,
one against Warwick who was killed on the spot, the other against young Edward
Son of King Henry and the Queen his Mother, in which that Prince was slain. The
Queen became a Prisoner to the Conqueror, whom afterward King Lewis redeemed
by a ransom of 6000 Crowns. Thus Edward re-establisht himself in his Throne,
and maintained it till his Death.

Sigismond Duke of Austria having need of Money, which that House has ever
been in great scarcity of, till the time of the Emperor Charles V. engaged his
County of Ferreie for a Notable Sum to the Duke of Burgundy. The Duke puts
Hagembach, who laying great exactions, was the first cause of the Germans
hatred toward his Master.

Sixtus the IV. (this was Francis de la Rovere) Elected in the Room of Paul II.
to follow the example of his Predecessors, Solicited the Christian Princes to
unite themselves against the Turks. For this purpose he sent the Cardinal
Bessarion a Greek by Birth and a person of great merit, to the King of France
and the Duke of Burgundy. The Cardinal having seen the Duke first, the King was
so much offended at it, that he made him wait a long time before he would admit
him to his presence, and giving him Audience he rallied with him, and treated
him as a Grecian Barbara Greca genus retinent, quod habere solebant.
Beard.

The Truce displeased the Duke who had made it by compulsion; neither was it to
the good liking of Monsieur, nor the Breton, nor the Constable; thus all four
sought to reunite themselves rogether. The marriage of Monsieur, was the only
tie that could be secure, the Burgundian promised it, though he had no mind to
it; and upon this foot they renewed their League.

The Constables soliciting the other Princes to enter into it, the Duke of
Bourbon gave notice of his practices to the King, who wisely dissembled it,
contriving to be quit with them by the same method. For he every day pared away
somewhat of his Brothers Apennage, threw one rub one day and another the next,
Debauched his Friends from him, corrupted his Servants, and got them to reveal
all their Masters secrets.

By the Treaty of Constans, John Court of Armagnac had been restored to his
Lands: the King had caused them to be again Seized on in the year 1468. And had
given them to Monsieur with the Government of Guyenne; Monsieur being
discontented had caused that Count to return, put him into possession of his
Estate, and by his means, and with the assistance of the Counts de Foix, and
the Lord de Albret, he raised Men, either that he might not be Surprised, or to
undertake something.

Monsereau and Widow of Lewis d'Amboise, and had for Confessor a certain
Benedictine Monk Abbot of St. John d'Angely, named John Favre Versois. This
wicked Monk poisoned a very fair Peach and gave it to that Lady, who at a
Collation put it to steep in Wine, presented one half of it to the Prince, and
eat the other her self. She being tender died in a short time; the Prince more
robust sustained for some while the assaults of the Venom, but how-ever could
not Conquer it, and in the end yielded his Life to it.

Phenomena's of the Heavens to the accidents here below, might have applied to
this same a Comet of extraordinary Magnitude, which was visible four score days
together from the Month of December. It Is Head was in the Sign of the Balance,
and it had a long Tail turning a little toward the North.

In Spring the King drew near toward Guyenne; the Monk had perhaps reiterated
his Dose. However it was, Monsieur died the 12 th of May. In the mean time the
Burgundian passionately desiring to recover St. Quintin and Amiens, was entered
into a Treaty with the King, who promised to restore it, and to leave the
Counts of Nevers and St. Pol to his Mercy: and the Duke reciprocally did oblige
himself to abandon Monsicur and the Breton to him.

Neither of these Dreamt of keeping their Word of Faith. The Duke Signed the
first, the King deferred from day to day, expecting what would become of his
Brother: when he had certain news of his Death, he scoffed at the Duke, and
Seized Guyenne again into his own hands.

Although in many actions he had not too much of the Fear of God before his
Eyes: nevertheless he had great Devotion toward the Saints, enriched their
Churches, went several Pilgrimages every year, particularly to places
Consecrated to our Lady. He Ordained on the first of May that at the sound of
the great Bell at Noon, every one should kneel down and say the Ave Maria. The
same day after the procession, William Chartier Bishop of Paris Died suddenly,
not without suspicion that some had contributed toward his Death.

Philip de Comines quitted the Duke of Burgundy, whose Domestic and Subject he
was, to go into the Service of the King his Sovereign Lord. If the Motive
thereto had been Honest, no doubt but it would have been explained by him who
has reasoned so well on every thing else.

Who could express the rage the Duke of Burgundy was in when he Learned the
Death of the Duke of Guyenne? He entered into Picardy with a Torch in one hand
and his Sword in the other. Hitherto burnings had not been practiced by either
Party: nevertheless he made a Bon-fire of all the open Country, and Sacrificed
all that fell under his power to his Friends Ghost. Nesle taken by assault
endured all sorts of cruelties, because the Inhabitants had killed a Herald at
Arms who went to Summon them, and two men besides during a Surcease which had
been allowed them to Treat in. The reverence to the Altar could not save those
innocent people who fled to the Church for refuge; and such as escaped the
Sword were all hanged, or had their hands cut off.

His blind fury ran aground at the Siege of Beauvais. The want of attacking it
roundly at first, made him lose six Weeks time and two Thousand Men. It is
Memorable that upon a General Assault which was given the Thursday 9 th of
July, the Men within being ready to give ground, the Women conducted by one
Jane Hatchete, did wonders, repelling the Enemy with showers of Stones,
Wildfire, and Lead melted with scalding Rozen. The Effigies of that Woman is
yet to be seen in their Town Hall, grasping a Sword in her hand; and there is a
procession the 10 th of July, which is the Day on which the Siege was raised,
where the Women march first, the Men following after.

Burgundian Ravaged all the Country of Caux, took Eu and St. Valery: but was
repulsed before Diepe, then before Rouen, and having threatened Noyon, he
retired to Abbeville.

From Guyenne the King passed into Bretagne to force the Duke to renounce the
League, and surrender the Monk to him who had Poisoned Monsieur. For
Odet-Daydie had Seized him and transferred him to Nantes. The Monk was found
dead in Prison, the Devil, as was said, having broken his Neck the Night before
that day wherein they were to pronounce his Sentence.

This was what the King desired, that so the Proof of the Crime might perish
with the Poysoner; and it was more easy now for the Breton to avoid the heavy
strokes of his power by the ordinary craft of his Landays. He granted him a
Truce the 10 th of September, and remained still in Poitou, till it was
converted into a final peace. Which was brought about by the Mediation of
Odet-Daydie, whom he allured to his Service by great rewards.

He knew better then any Prince in the World how to gain Men, discover his
Enemies secrets, distract them with jealousies, divide the most united: but in
his mirth he could not hide his secrets, every thing came to light, and he was
likewise more subject to commit faults, then able to repair them; which he
strove to do by Methods, more frequently bad then good.

Burgundian accepted a Truce. In the Month of February the Duke of Alenson who
had a troubled and unquiet mind, for having contrived I know not what League
with him, was made Prisoner and conveyed to the Castle of Loches, and from
thence to the Lowre. The following year the Parliament by a Sentence of the 18
th of July, Condemned him to loose his Head. The King his Godson gave him his
Life, and Seventeen Months after took him out of Prison, and put him into a
Citizens House at Paris under a good Guard,

John V. Count of Armagnac who had been once more driven from his Country after
the Death of Monsieur, had again Siezed upon his City of Leytoure, by certain
correspondence, and had there surprised Peter de Bourbon Beaujeu, Governor of
Guyenne. He was straightly besieged in that place, by the Kings Army commanded
by the Cardinal of Arras. It Is said, that having capitulated with him, that
good Prelate broke his Faith; so that the City was invaded during the
Suspension, and the Count miserably Murth'red in his House. His Brother Charles
was brought Prisoner to Paris.

During the Truce the Burgundian wont to conquer the Duchy of Guelders. Duke
Arnold had either sold or given it to him, disinheriting his wicked Son Adolph,
who had a long time held his Father Prisoner, and was himself so now by the
Burgundian at Ghent.

This new Acquisition gave him the Appetite to increase on the German side: He
flattered the Emperor Frederick with the marriage of his Daughter to his Son
Maximilian, and was even willing she should give him her promise and a Diamond.
With this Lure he brings Frederick to Mets, thinking by his Authority to make
himself Lord of that Town (which did not Succeed) and got his promise, that he
would raise his Dukedom to a Kingdom. With these hopes he went awhile after to
him at Treves, carrying along the Regal Ornaments, and made him a Feast with
more then Royal Profusion: But the Emperor meant the Marriage should be first
accomplished, and the Duke would sign the Contract in Quality of King. They
could not agree thereon; And the Emperor left him there without taking his
leave.

Perpignan, whereof John King of Arragon was repossessed by Intelligence, it
was only the Town, for the Castle held out still for the French: Their Army
went thither after the taking of Leytoure. King John besieged in the City
though Aged above Seventy years, defended himself bravely for two Months
together, till his Son Ferdinand came to his assistance and relieved him.

The Twelfth day of August Nicolas d'Anjou Son of John of Calabria who had
Succeeded to the Duchy of Lorrain after the Death of his Father, Died of the
Plague at Nancy. Thus his Cousin Rene of Lorrain, Son of his Aunt Yoland
d'Anjou, and de Ferry, who was Son of Antony Count of Vaudemont, restored the
Dukedom to their House whence it came.

For about four or five years past, the Constable played double betwixt the
King and the Burgundian, and incited them the one against the other. He thought
their broils was his only safety: but both offended with his duplicity, agreed
his ruin at the price of his head and his plunder, if they could but catch him.
He had some hint of it, and broke the project by the many reasons he gave the
King in writing. But after he had obtained his pardon, he again offended him
more grievously then ever: For he Seized on the City of St. Quentin, and which
was worse had the impudence to confer with him well Armed upon a Bridge, with a
Barrier betwixt them as he had been his equal.

Burgundians ambition was insatiable. He had invited Edward of the House of
York to make a descent in France, where the Burgundian promised to do as much
by his correspondence as they with their Forces: and nevertheless instead of
waiting for them, he went and ruined his Army before the Town of Nuz, building
great designs upon the taking of this place which lies on the Rhine. The
apparent reason why he laid that Siege, was to re-settle Robert de Bauiere in
the Archbishopric of Cologn, whose Channons had refused to admit him, and for
their Chief had taken one of their Colleagues, to wit Herman Brother of the
Landgrave of Hesse.

Rene was good, liberal and devout, so was he inconstant and variable, of
Courage tame and weak. His Sons and Grand-sons being all dead, there remained
only his Daughter Yoland mother of Rene Duke of Lorrain: but that House was at
distance from him, and such as were near, made him believe that having received
so many troubles from her, he ought not to love her, and inclined him according
to their interests, to give his Succession one while to the King of France,
another while to Charles Count du Maine his Nephew, Son of his Brother of the
same name, another time to the Duke of Burgundy. And this is the reason of so
many several Wills and diverse Donations made by him on that Subject.

It is believed that he caused one to be written in Letters of Gold and Adorned
with Miniature, whereby he made the King his Heir to the County of Provence. It
is certain that this year 1474. he instituted Charles du Maine in all his
Lands, reserving only the Duchy of Bar, which he left to his Daughters Son
Duke Rene. Now the following year when he saw the King had Seized his City of
Angers and the Castle of Bar, for the Portion, said he, of Mary d'Anjou his
Mother, he changed his mind, or pretended so, and to make him afraid, said he
would bestow it upon the Duke of Burgundy: but the King being purposely
advanced as far as Lions, hindered him, and thereupon happened the defeat of that
Duke, as you shall see.

Whilst he was battering his Head against that potent Body of Germany which is
all of Iron, the King accumulated Enemies on that part against him, especially
the Swisse, whose alliance he had gained with the Cities of Basle, and
Strasburgh, and others on the Rhine, Sigismund Duke of Austria, Rene Duke of
Lorrain, and even the Emperor Frederic. Sigismund with the aid of the Swisse,
reenters the County of Ferrete, and caused Hagenbac's head to be cut off for
the Concussions he had use^ ^ene Duke of Lorrain sent to declare War against
him even before Nuz, by a Moorish Servant who belonged to the Lord de Craon;
and Frederick Armed all the power of the Empire to force him to raise the
Siege. Nevertheless durst he not attack him, though he were four times more in
number. The Bishop of Munster alone had brought thither 1200 Horse and 60000
Foot, all clothed in Green, with 1200 Wagons.

Roye, Montdidier and Corbie: but neither this multitude of Enemies, nor the
Winter long and sharp, nor the loss of his Towns, could not make his
stubborness Flexible, which held him still to that Siege for ten Months from
its beginning.

In the Month of June Edward King of England caused his Army to Land at Calais
which took up three Weeks time. Whilst he was putting them ashore, he sent two
or three dispatches to him, prayed him, and pressed him to come and join with
him, the Duke making now one delay, and then another. The Mediation of the
Apostolic Legate, and of the King of Denmark, who was in a City near at hand,
was a plausible pretense for him to withdraw from that dangerous enterprise
with Honor, but he obstinately refused it. In the end when he saw it was too
long a business, though he was within ten days of taking the City by Famine, he
consented it should be put into the hands of the Legate.

That done he comes post to find the English at Calais, leaving his Forces in
Barrois, so shattered that he durst not let them be seen. He conducted the King
all along the way to Peronne, and from thence went to see the Constable at St.
Quentin, who gave him his word he would deliver that City and all his other
places up to the English; the Duke assured them of it: But when they would have
approached, he caused them to Fire upon them. It is hard to express, whether
was then greatest, their amazement or their rage; the Duke having spent a great
many words to Interpret this in the best Sense, returned to Barrois to recruit
his Forces.

The English People give Money willingly to make Waron France.
Edward was a Voluptuous Prince, very Fat and naturally slow, who sought only
to cram his Purse, and who having undertaken this War, rather to screw money
from his Subjects, then to acquire Dominion or Honor, had brought over with
him some of the Fattest London Citizens such as loved their ease mightily, that
so their weariness and toil might make them sooner willing to desire a Peace.
It happened therefore, that during the Burgundians absence, the King by force of
intrigues, of flattery, and withal some Presents, whereof the English are very
greedy, persuaded that Prince, and his Council, to hearken to an accommodation.

The procedure of the Burgundian, who had made them expect too long, and which
was worse the double persidious dealing of the Constable, and the approaching
Winter, they having no one place to shelter themselves in, gave them a
plausible pretense to do so.

In few days the Deputies for the two Kings agreed upon conditions; It was a
Merchandized Truce for nine years, the Burgundian, and the Breton to be
comprised, if they would; 73000 Crowns of Gold ready Money for the English, and
the Marriage of his Daughter with the Dauphin; for whose maintenance King Lewis
would allot the Revenue of Guyenne for nine years, or 50000 Crowns ayear, which
should be carried to the Tower of London to the King of England.

Edward. He spoke loud, he thundered, and braved him: But neither his fury, nor
his reproaches having done good, he turned short home again. The Truce agreed,
whilst the Kings were to sign the Treaty, the King of England came with his
Army to lodge within half a League of Amiens. The King sent him 300 Wagons
laden with the best Wines, and gave order they should permit as many English as
desired to come into Amiens, and that nothing should be spared to make them
welcome; Which lasted three or four days.

It was afterward resolved the two Kings should have an enterview on a Bridge
which was erected at Pequigny upon the Sum, with a Barriere grated betwixt
them. And there they ratified the Peace the 29 th of August. That done, the
King of England with all the Lords of his Retinue repassed the Sea, very well
satisfied with the good Wines, and the sine French Gold, there having been
16000 Crowns distributed in Pensions amongst such as had most Credit with their
King.

The Burgundian showed himself a little refractory till in the Month of October
he accepted of a Truce. In the mean time his Choler discharged it self upon the
young Rene Duke of Lorrain whom he stripped of his Dukedom, all but Nancy,
which defended it self above two Months.

Then the Constable who thought to have played upon all the three Princes,
promising to each of them his Town of St. Quentins, found himself exposed as
the Butt for all three to Shoot at; and unhappily for him, his Wife, who was
Sister to the Queen happened to Die. This Lord so powerful, who wanted neither
for Servants, nor Money, nor strong Holds, wanted both Courage and Brain all of
a sudden; and fearing all the World, durst not Trust any one. In fine, he
retired into the Burgundians Country, whom he guessed the most exorable, and
who in effect gave him security to go thither.

He was no sooner gone out of St. Quentin but the King Seized it, and gave
notice of it to the Burgundian, Summoning him to deliver up that Infidel in
Exchange of that place, conformably to an Article of the Truce between them.
The Burgundian was then before Nancy, which was necessary for him to keep
Lorrain in awe, and to join the Low Country to the Duchy and County of
Burgundy. For fear therefore, lest the King should disturb him in that
Conquest, he caused the Constable to be Seized at Mons, whence he was
transferred to Peronne, and ordered his People to deliver him, but not till a
certain day remote enough, in which time he believed he should take Nancy, and
then promised himself by that space he might revoke his order. But the place
defended it self so well that he could not master it within the said time, and
nevertheless his people delivered up, the Constable with his Letters, sealed
Writings, and other pieces to convict him.

Bastille, the 2 d of December, examined by some Commissary's, condemned to
Death by the Parliament, and Executed in the Greve the 19 th of the same Month.
A Lesson Written in Letters of Blood for such as would make themselves a Terror
to their Princes.

Perpignan had endured a year and a halfs Siege, and a Famine to the very
Eating of Leather, it Surrendered to the French about the end of this year; and
thus the Country of Roussillon remained once more in the French hands.

January following was Published an Edict of the Kings, which enjoined all the
Bishops to go to their Diocesses, on pain of a Seizure of their Temporals, to
prepare themselves for a Council, which he said was necessary. He likewise
Ordained that all such as came from Rome should be obliged to show the Papers
they brought: All this to frighten the Legate the Popes Nephew, (it was John de
la Rovere) who would undertake too much.

Lorrain being Conquered the Burgundian cast his thoughts upon many other
Provinces; King Rene made him hope for Provence, he disposed of the Estates of
Savoy almost as much as of his own, the Duchess adhering to him, fearing lest
he should bring the Uncles of her Pupil to invade that Duchy: From thence he
went into Italy where he had an Alliance with the Duke of Milan, and a great
ascendant by Fame, over all the petty Princes of that Country.

But before this he would needs compel the Swissers to stoop to his Laws, where
he went so much resolved, hating them besides already, that he refused their
most humble Submissions, and the offers they made to enter into his alliance,
and to renounce all others, even that with the King. An Invasion they had made
upon the Lands of James of Savoy Count de Romont served him for a pretense to
Attack them; the quarrel between them and that Count proceeded from a very
small occasion, which was for a Cart Load of Sheep Skins he had taken from
them. Against this Rock it was then that his querellous Ambition went to make
Shipwreck, and dash it self in pieces. They were as yet but Peasants and very
little known: but who had all the Strength and Force of a Natural Valor, never
yet softened by the Luxury of their Neighbors.

th of April he lost his Infantry, and his rich Equipage at Granson, the 20 th
of June all his Forces even to the number of 18000 Men before Morat; and in
fine, the 5 th of January being the Eve of Twelfth-day, his own life, and the
Grandeur of his House before Nancy.

Morat, Duke Rene who was come thither with the Swisse and the Germans; and by
his Valor had contributed much to the Victory, went and retook his City of
Nancy. The Burgundian after that unfortunate day, finding all his Allies
abandoned him, and his Subjects began to despise him, was fallen sick with
Spite and rage; from which not being recovered to his full Senses, he
obstinately continued against all reason to undertake afresh the Siege of that
place, though he had but 3000 Men only, and it was in mid-Winter.

His great Confident was the Count Nichole de Campobasse a Neapolitan, who was
come into his Service after the Death of Prince Nicholas Grandson to King Rene.
He it was that had the whole superintendance of the Siege. This Traitor hindered
him from advancing, causing all things necessary to be wanting. He had Sworn
the destruction of his Master, and even bargained openly enough for his Life
with all his Enemies. In the mean time the Duke of Lorrain arrives with 20000
Swisse and Germans; and the Kings Army was in Barrois: thus this unhappy Prince
was environed with Enemies on every hand. He had no more then Twelve Hundred
men in a condition to fight; he was resolved to it nevertheless to his utter
misfortune. In the beginning of the Battle, Campobasse retires with 400 Horse
which he commanded, and left ten or twelve Men to Assassinate him upon his
being Routed, which he took for certain; in effect, the Burgundians held th
year, and had ruled Eight only.

They guessed they knew his Body by several marks, and the Duke of Lorrain went
in a Mourning Habit; and with a Golden Beard, after the manner of the Hero's,
to besprinkle him with Holy water, and then caused him to be Interred at Nancy.
Nevertheless being much beloved by his own Subjects, the People imagined he had
saved himself, and for very shame had gone and hid himself in a Hermitage,
whence they said he would return again after seven years Penance. In so much
that many lent money upon condition to be repaid when he appeared again. His
Atrabilary humor, and a certain person that had been seen in Suabia who
resembled him much in Shape, Hair, Voice and Countenance, gave color to this
report.

Mary, aged almost Twenty years. All the Forces of this Puissant Family had
been cut off in these three great Battles, his Captains and Noblemen almost all
taken; There were no Garrisons in their Towns, no Money in their Coffers, but a
Tumultuous and amazed Council, People astonished and disobedient, and a Potent
Enemy well Armed, subtle, and who spared nothing.

Thus every thing had soon passed under the Dominion of the King, if he would
have taken the method propounded for the Marrying that young Princess with his
Son, or to some other Prince of the Blood. And truly if he had bestowed this
wealthy Heiress upon Charles Duke of Orleance, Count of Angoulesme, whom she
ardently desired, all the Low-Country's would have been to this day united to
France; For that Prince had a Son that attained to the Crown, which was Francis
the I. But he so perfectly hated that House of Burgundy, that he would
anihilate it, making account to take away all such Lands as appertained to the
Crown, and to make the rest fall into the hands of some German Princes his
Allies.

As to the first, he brought it to pass almost entirely, and without much
difficulty there being no Governors left that were Proof against his Bribes, or
the fears of loosing their Estates. The Burghers of Abbeville surrendered first
to his Men whom he had sent before him. When he appeared in Picardy, William
Bische, a man of low condition, raised by the Deceased Duke Charles, gave him
up Peronne: Others delivered to him Han and Bouchain, St. Quentin, Roye and
Montdidier were taken by themselves.

While he was at Peronne, there came Ambassadors from the Princess Mary to
desire Peace of him, and offer all obedience to him, and the Marriage of their
Sovereign with the Dauphin. He neither accepted nor refused the conditions: but
obliged them to facilitate the Peace, to acquit Philip de Crevecoeur
Desquerdes, of the Oath he had made to the House of Burgundy, and to order him
to deliver the City of Arras to him. This Desquerdes having already Treated
secretly with him, entered into his service, and caused Hesdin, Boulogne and
Cambray, likewise, to be also surrendered up to him. Hesdin staid till it was a
little battered only for form sake, and then conditioned. The City of Boulogne
resisted but little more. Bertrand de la Tour d'Auvergne, from whom the
Burgundian detained it. The King would keep it himself, and in exchange gave
him the County de Lauraguez.

The City of Arras had likewise taken an Oath: But soon after they repented,
and would have called in some Forces that were at Doway, remainders of the
defeat at Nancy. Those of Doway, whose Pride had not yet been humbled, having
adventured to March by open daylight, were cut off in the plain Field, and the
Lord de Vergy who conducted them was made Prisoner.

The King afterward went to besiege Arras: His wrath went no less then to raze
it to the very Foundations: Nevertheless the Supplications of Desquerdes
obtained composition: but it was not observed toward the rich Citizens: To get
their Fleeces they took away their Lives.

On the other hand the Prince of Orange having for the second time reconciled
himself to the King, persuaded the Estates of the Dukedom, and the County of
Burgundy, partly by reason, partly by force, to submit themselves to his
Obedience. Which he did the more easily for that Vergy the most powerful and
the most zealous Lord of those Countries, was yet a Prisoner.

They had given that Prince hopes of his having the Government of both the
Burgundy's, and to restore some certain Lands to him which Duke Charles had
made him lose by a Sentence given in favor of his Uncles the Lords of
Montguyon; and besides he had this for a Cover of his persidiousness, and made
use of it as a Lure to the Estates; That the King did not Seize upon these
Country's to detain them, but only to preserve them for the Princess against
the Swiss and Germans. They soon found how it was when he had gotten
possession; For he declared the Title he had, to wit that of Reversion for want
of Heirs Males to the Duchy, and that of Donation to the County, which he
pretended had been given to the Crown of France by Count Otho V. of that name,
when he married his Daughter with Philip le Long.

The greatest disorder in the affairs of the Princess of Burgundy, was caused
by the Gauntois. As soon as they were assured of the Death of Duke Charles,
they renewed their Commotions, slew their Magistrates, made themselves Masters
of the Person of their Princess, and as they were induced with great Pride and
little understanding, they would needs do every thing, and did nothing but
mischief.

She had in her Council the Margret Sister to King Edward.
Duchess Dower, Philip of Cleves Lord of Ravenstein, the Chancellor Hugonet,
and the Lord d'Imbercourt. They likewise called in the Bishop of Liege, the
Duke of Cleves, and the Son of the Count de St. Pol. They were all divided
about the marriage of the Princess; Ravastein desired to have her married to
his Nephew, the Son of the Duke of Cleve: The Chancellor Hugonet, and the Lord
d'Imbrecourt to the Dauphin, and the Gauntois to some German Prince.

The Deputies from these were gone to the King of France in behalf of the
States of Flanders, and said they had full power to negociate a Peace. The King
showed them maliciously some Letters from the Princesses Council, which
mentioned the quite contrary. Their brutish Pride believed the Council played
upon them, and prompted them immediately to revenge. As soon as they were
returned to Gaunt they laid hold on Hugonet and Imbercourt, made Process
against them under pretense of some concussions, and cut off their heads, not
being moved with the humble Prayers and Entreaties, or the abundant Tears of
their Princess, who with disheveled Hair came to the place of Execution to
Implore the Lives of her two faithful Servants. With the same fury they took
away Ravastein and the Duchess Dower from her: gave her a Council of their own
choosing, and drew Adolph of Guelder out of Prison to command their Forces.

Ever since the War for the Public Good, the King had always had a Mortal
desire for revenge against James de Armagnac Duke of Nemours. This Lord after
the Death of the Count d'Armagnac, had retired himself into the strong Castle
of Carlat in Auvergne; in the year 1476. Peter de Bourbon-Beajeu had order to
take him. He could not have compassed it by force, he makes use of fraud,
giving his Faith he should have no hurt; yet nevertheless he brings him to the
Bastille.

About seven or eight Months after, the Parliament had orders to proceed
against him. Those men of honesty could not find any thing charged upon him
sufficient to make him Guilty, the King sends them to Noyon the 20 th of June,
to teach them their Lesson, and put out of their places such Counselors as
refused to conclude he deserved Death. The rest returning to Paris, Chancellor
Peter Doriole presiding, they condemned him the 4 th of August to lose his
Head, and the same day the Sentence was put in Execution. The King would have
his two Sons, who were yet but Children, stand under the Scaffold, that their
Fathers Blood might run down upon their Heads.

Flemmings and the Duke of Bretagne earnestly Solicited the King of England
not to suffer the Heiress of Burgundy to perish without assisting her; but the
King amuzed him still with the Marriage of the Dauphin to his Daughter, and
spared neither Presents nor Pensions to all that were about the King, who
besides was over-burthned with Fat, too much addicted to his pleasures, and who
feared dangers greatly, because he had greatly suffered.

His Brother George Duke of Clarence, having meddled too much in his affairs, or
for some other cause which was never known, fared but very ill; he caused him
to be drowned in a But of Malmesey.

In these times, Oliver le Daim the Kings Barber who made himself a man of
great importance, had taken a Commission to reduce the City of Gaunt, thinking
he had much Credit amongst them, because he was a Country man's Son of those
parts. The Gauntois baffled him as he deserved. Retreating thence he by
surprise got the Kings Forces into Tournay, that from thence he might molest
the Flemmings. The Gauntois having taken Arms went Headlong to attack this
place: But they were ill handled, and Adolph de Gueldres killed in their
retreat. This was about the beginning of July.

Maximillian Son to the Emperor Frederic to whom she had plighted her Faith in
her Fathers Life time. The Marriage was Consummated at Gaunt about the end of
July. He was so poor that his Wife was forced to be at the charges for the
wedding, for his Equipage, and the maintenance of his Servants.

At first she got no advantage by a Husband who had no assistance from his
Father very covetous, nor his Uncle Sigismond rich enough in money, but of a
very poor Spirit. Nevertheless upon the consideration of his Father, who was
Emperor, the King being entered into some Conferences with him, found it fit to
grant him Truce for a year, and to restore to him Quesnoy, Bouchain, and
Cambray, which were in the Territories belonging to the Empire. Others say they
drove out the French Garrisons, and rendered themselves to Maximillian.

The Lord de Craon, this was George de la Trimoville, who commanded the Kings
Army in Burgundy, treated the Prince of Orange ill, and did not restore him to
his Lands, as the King had promised, notwithstanding he had express orders.
This was the cause that the Prince joined himself again with Claude de Vaudrey
and some other Noblemen of the Country, and led away almost all the Province
from him. It is true that the Battle he afterward lost nigh Montguyon brought
back the Duchy: but the War did not end there as to the County. Amongst other
events the Lord de Craon shamefully raised the Siege before Dole: The King was
so angry, that for this, and his plundrings, he set him aside, and put Charles
d'Amboise Chaumont in his place.

This man laid the foundation of the first League which the Kings of France
have had with the Swisse. He stipulated that the King should give a Pension of
20000 Livers yearly to the Cantons, and as much to some particular people, for
which they should furnish him with six Thousand men to be paid by him, and
should give him the first Rank amongst all their Allies, at which they made
some difficulty, because the Duke of Savoy had ever held it.

The Truce being expired, Maximillian caused some Forces to enter Burgundy, who
more by the Factions of the People that regretted their ancient Princes, then
by their own proper strength, took Beaune, Chastillon, Bar, Semur, and diverse
other places, with so great facility, that if the Emperor Frederick had
assisted his Son never so little, he had at that time re-conquered all the
Duchy. The Lord d'Amboise who had money and men in abundauce, chased them
almost as easily out again, as they gotten in; and thereupon the Truces were
renewed for some Months.

The Kings of France had for a long time had a good number of Gentlemen
Pensioners, to attend and to Guard them: King Lewis increased the number, and
gave them a Captain.



Italy had divided it self in two Factions, one for the Pope and Ferdinand King
of Naples, the other for the Duke of Milan with the Venetian and the
Florentines. At Florence there were two Potent Families, that of the Passi most
ancient, and that of Medecis richest; The latter as then Governed, and the two
Brothers Julian and Laurence were the Heads.

Passi, under the secret protection of the Pope, conspired to assassinate them
at Church upon Sunday 26th of April. Julian was Murdered, Laurence saved
himself in the Sacrary; The Populace being raised, ran upon the Passi, and
exterminated all of them. The Conspirators who had gotten themselves into the
Palace to Seize it, were shut in there, and Hanged up at the Windows; amongst
others, the Archbishop of Pisa; and they imprisoned a young Cardinal Nephew to
the Pope, who was found to be Innocent. Now the Pope, upon pretense of
revenging the Honor of the Ecclesiastics, commenced a rude War on the
Florentines, both with the Fulminations of the Church, and with material Arms
and Forces.

The King endeavored an Accommodation, but being unable to effect it, he took
part with the Florentines, and sent Philip de Comines to them, who only brought
some Succors from Savoy, and Milan. He had no mind to employ his Forces in so
Foreign an Expedition; but to frighten the Pope, he spoke of calling a
Council, and continuing the Pragmatick. For this purpose he convened all the
Prelates, and the Deputies of the Universities of the Kingdom at Orleans, and
dispatched a Noble Embassy to the Pope (Guy d'Arpajou Vicount de Lautrec was
the principal) to demand of him, that he should off the Excommunication he had
thundered against the Florentines, and that they should severely punish all the
Accomplices of that Conspiracy.

The Composed by John de Troyes*
Scandalous Chronicle has noted, That in this year in a Monastery of
Benedictines in Avergne (it was that of Issoire) there was found a Monk both
Hermaphrodite.
Male and Female, who made use of either Sex, particularly of the Femininr; as
appeared by proving great with Child.

Chaumont got first into the Field, and scowred all the Franche-Comte, even to
the City of Dole; Which having been taken by the Teachery of the German Forces,
who entering therein to relieve it, introduced the French, was sacked and
destroyed, and remained some years Buried under its own Rubbish.

At the same time Maximilian with his Army besieged Terouenne. The Kings, which
was commanded by Desquerdes, going to its Relief, the Besiegers raised their
Siege to encounter them. The Shock was given near the Village of Guinegaste.
Desquerdes at first made the Flemmings give ground: but pushing it too far, the
Counts of Nassaw and de Romont, rallied some Companies, and put the French to a
Rout: The Field remained to Maximillian, though much more covered with the dead
Bodies of his own Men than of Enemies; and this day regained him some
Reputation in his Affairs.

Normand Captains took 80 Vessels laden with Wheat, which the Flemmings were
bringing from Prussia, and all their Fleet of Herrings; an inestemable damage
to that Country.

In these times arose the power of the great Czar of Russia, or Muscovy. Russia
had heretofore many Princes: But they were as Slaves to the Cham of those
Tartars, who Inhabit the other side of the Volga. Duke John shook off that Yoke
of Slavery, and besides Conquered diverse Cities in Russia Alba, who obeyed the
Duke of Lithuania, and reduced to his Command the Great and Famous City
Novogorod Capital of Russia; then that of Mosco, which takes it is Name from the
River on which it is Situate, and gives it to all this State.

Rene was Dead, which happened the 10 th of July in the year 1479. The King not
openly permitted Charles II. Count de Main to put himself into possession of
Provence, according to the Sea above in the year 1474.
Testament we have before mentioned, but likewise interposed his Authority with
the Provensals to Enthronize him in that County, being perhaps well assured of
what happened two years after.

Chinon during the Month of March, he was on a Sudden deprived of his Speech
and all manner of Knowledge. At two days end, he recovered both the one and the
other: But his Body remained so Weak and Languishing, that he could never
regain his perfect Strength.

The Legate Nephew to the Pope, took his time upon occasion of this Malady, to
intecede for the Cardinal de la Ballue, who on his part did so cunningly feign
a Retention of Urine, that the King believing he would not live long, and
making conscience to let him die in Prison, set him at Liberty toward the end
of November, upon condition he should leave the Kingdom, which he did, and
retired to Rome.

Revenge, jealousy, and distrust, which are the Signs of a weak and ill
tempered Soul, increased upon his Spirits, whilst he decreased in Strength. He
was afraid that if they thought him incapable to act, they would usurp the
Government; the Duke of Bourbon being the only Prince almost, that had the
Qualities requisite for such a Pretension; he fell into so much hatred against
him that he caused his Lands to be Seized, and sought out some colorable
occasion to ruin him.

At the same time, whether he could not confide in his natural Subjects, or for
some other reason, he disbanded the Franc's Archers, and in their stead raised
Companies of Strangers, especially Swissers.

Maximilian for Seven Months, to Commence in August. The following year it was
prolonged a Twelvemonth more.

Mahomet II. caused the Island of Rhodes to be Besieged by the Vizier Messite
one of his Captains, and sent almost (...) the same time the Bassa Gedue Acmet,
to make a Descent on the Coast of Calabria. The first after he had lost ten
Thousand Men, and spent three Months time, shamefully raised the Siege: but the
other took Otranto by Assault the 27th Day of August, and struck a Terror
through all Italy.

Charles Duke of Burgundy, whose thoughts had only been for War, desiring to
imitate the Roman Discipline, had begun to keep and to exercise his Men in
Camps. The King after his example caused one to be made in a Plain near the
Pont de Larche, retrenched and closed up with Wagons. He gave the command of
it to Desquerdes and put in 10000 Foot, Pikemen and Halberdiers (for experience
had taught him in the Wars with the Swiss and Liegois, that those were the
best Weapons, or Arms, for the Infantry) 2500 Pioneers, and 1500 Lances. After
these Soldiers had remained there a Month only he disbanded them, and took off,
as I believe, the 1500 thousand Livers tax which he had ordered for their
maintenance.

Being returned to Tours he fell into the like Fitts of fainting as before. His
Servants having vowed him to Saint Claude, he went thither on Pilgrimage, and
left the General Lieutenancy of the Kingdom to Peter de Bourbon Lord of Beaujeu
his Brother. Never was such a Pilgrim seen, the Countries he passed felt his
Devotions, he marched accompanied with six thousand Soldiers, and did always
some terrible thing or other in his way.

In this he seized Philibert Duke of Savoy and brought him into France; that
young Prince dying the next year in the City of Lions, and his brother Charles
succeeding him, he declared himself his Guardian. For since the decease of Duke
Ame IX. their Father, he had always had a great hand in the affairs of Savoy,
upon pretense that these young Princes were his Sisters Children.

Italy, Mahomet being on the point to begin again the Siege of Rhodes, and to
send a new Army to Otranto, dyed at Nicomedia the third of May. Now whilst
Empp. yet Frederick III. And, Bajazet II. Sons of Mahomet, K. 31. Years. See
below in An.
his two Sons Bajazeth, and Zizim were contending for the Empire between
themselves, the Pope and King Ferdinand took the courage to besiege Otranto,
and the Turks whilst the division betwixt their Princes lasted expecting no
succors, surrendered upon composition. A short while after, Zizim having been
defeated twice, fled to Rhodes where expecting to find an Asylum, he fell into
captivity. For the Knights for a Pension of 50000 Crowns which Bajazeth
promised to pay them yearly, detained him Prisoner, and with the Kings
permission sent him to the Castle of Bourgneuf in Auvergne, where he remained
some years treated honorably enough.

Lewis; he still kept his wife at distance from him, and these last years he
continued her in Savoy, he bred his Son like a Captive at Amboise amongst
Servants, lest he should grow too high-spirited, and always took along with
him the first Prince of the blood, Lewis Duke of Orleance, not suffering any to
cultivate his mind by any Education. He married him this year to one of his
daughters named Jane, a most wise Princess: but ugly and Lame, and one whom the
Physicians assured incapable of bearing any Children. Perhaps themselves had
taken a course for that purpose.

Claude he fell again for the third time into his fits of Swooning. He caused
himself to be carried to Clery, where he had built a Church to his good Our
Lady; And there he received some relief, but which lasted not long.

December Charles d'Anjou Count du Main being sick at Marseilles, whereof he
dyed the next day, by his Testament instituted King Lewis his universal Heir in
all his lands, to enjoy the same; he and all the Kings of France, his
Successors, recommending most earnestly to him to mantain Provence in it is
liberty's, Perogatives and Customs.

Rene Duke of Lorraine Son of Yoland d'Anjou, reclaimed against this
institution, maintaining that it could not be made to his prejudice; the King
on the contrary justified it to be good, because Provence is a Country ruled by
written Law, according to which any person may dispose of his own in favor of
whom he pleases; besides the Counts of Provence had always called the Males to
their Succession to the prejudice of the daughters. Palamedes de Fourbin Sieur
de Souliers, who managed the Mind of Charles made him find these reasons to be
good; and for this he in recompense had the Government, or, to say better, the
Sovereignty of Provence during his whole life.

Mary of Burgundy began to be settled, that Princess going ahunting fell from
her horse and died of it at Gaunt the 25th. of May, with the fruit wherewith
her womb was pregnant. In four years she had borne three children, Philip,
Margret, and another that had but a short life. The death of Mary brought
trouble and disorders afresh amongst the Flemmings; Her Husband had so little
Authority because of his Covetous Poverty, amongst those people who were wont
to have Princes extremely Liberal and Magnificent; that he was forced to suffer
that the Children he had by her, should remain under the guard of the Gauntois.

After a great famine which had afflicted France during the year 1481. there
followed an Epidemical Sickness altogether extraordinary, which seized upon the
Great as well as the Little ones. It was a continual and violent Fever, which
set the Head on fire, whereby the most part fell into Phrensies and died as it
were Mad.

William de la Mark called the wild Boar of Ardenne, incited and assisted by
the King, Massacred most inhumanely Lewis de Bourbon, Bishop of Liege, either
in an Ambuscade, or after he had defeated him in Battle; and soon after himself
being taken by the Lord de Horn brother to the Bishop successor to Lewis, had
his head cut off at Mastrict.

Desquerdes had even the last year made himself Master of the Town of Air at
the price of 50000 Crowns bestowed on the Governor: From this advantageous
Post which bridled the Flemmings, he made them incline as well by cunning too
as force, to treat of the Marriage of Margret Daughter of their deceased
Princess with the Dauphin Charles, though she were hardly two years old, and
Charles almost twelve. The Gauntois Ambassadors having seen the King at Clery,
made report to their Council of the Kings intentions. He demanded for her dowry
only the County of Artois; and they would needs add to it those of Burgundy, of
Masconnois, Auxerois and Charolois, thereby to weaken their Prince so much,
that he might never be able to bring them under his Yoke.

France till the April following, and the Wedding was celebrated at Amboise at
the end of July.

Edward King of England, who upon the faith of the Treaty of Pequigny had ever
flattered himself that the Dauphin should Marry his Daughter, and held himself
so well assured that he made her be called the Dauphiness: seeing himself
bafled by the French, and scoffed by his own Subjects as one foully imposed
upon, was so moved with shame and grief, that he died the 4th. of April,
delivering France from the apprehension of many mischiefs he might have done
them during the Minority of Charles VIII.

He had two Sons, Edward and Richard, and five daughters Married to Noblemen of
that Country. He had also had two Brothers, George Duke of Clarence, and
Richard Duke of Gloucestre. You have seen how he put the first to death upon
some ill grounded suspicion; Now thus the other revenged it upon his Children.
Edward before his Marriage to her by whom he had them, had clandestinely
espoused a woman who was yet living. The Bishop of Bathe who Married them,
reveals it to Richard, who being easily persuaded that Edward's Children were
not Legitimate, Seized upon his two Sons, the Eldest of them being but Eleven
years of age, and named Edward V. put to Death five or six of the greatest
Lords, who plainly foresaw his ill intents, and then having dispatched these
Two young Princes out of the World, and made their Sisters to be declared
Bastards, he set the Crown upon his own Head, all Christian Princes, even Lewis
XI. himself having this deed in horror.

It is pleasant to read in History what the fear of Death and of losing his
Authority, made King Lewis do during the last years of his Reign; The dancing
of young Lasses about his House, and the Bands of Musicians that played on
Flageolets which were brought from all parts to divert him; the Processions
ordained over all the Kingdom for his Health, the public prayers to God to
hinder the blowing of certain Winds which incommoded him, a great heap of
Relics which were sent for by him from all Corners, even the St. Ampoulle, or
Holy Oil, with which he seemed as if he would Arm himself against Death; the
great sway his Physician James Coctier had over him, who grumbled at him as he
had been his Servant, and squeezed from him 55000 Crowns and many other Boons
in five Months space; the Baths of Childrens Blood, which he made use of to
sweeten his sharp and pricking Humors; in fine, his voluntary Imprisoning
himself in the Castle du Plessis le Tours, where none could enter but through a
Wicket, the Walls thereof being Armed with Iron Spikes, and lined Day and Night
with Cross-Bow-men.

Every hour he was upon the Brink of his Grave, and nevertheless he strove to
persuade them that he was well, sending Embassy's to all Princes, Buying up all
manner of Curiosities of Foreign Country's, and making it appear he was alive
by the Bloody effects of his Vegeance, which could not die but with him.

Francis Martotile a Native of Calabria, Founder of the Order of Minimes, whom
he caused expressly to come into France, upon the Fame of those wonders God had
wrought by his Ministry. He Flattered him, Implored him, fell on his Knees to
him; He Built too Covents for his Order, the first within the Park de Plessis
les Tours, the second at the Foot of the Castle de Amboise, that he might
prolong his days: But this good Man in answer talked to him of God, and
Exhorted him to think more of the other Life then this.

Feeling himself grow weaker every day, he sent for his Son from Amboise, gave
him excellent Counsel, exhorting him to be Governed by the Advice of the
Princes of the Blood, the Lords and other Notable Persons; not to change his
Officers after his Death; to ease his Subjects, and reduce the Leveys of Moneys
to the Ancient orders of the Kingdom, which was to raise none but by consent of
the People. He had increased the Taxes to 4700000 Livers, a Sum so excessive in

He died in fine the 29 th Day of August, and accordingly as he had ordained
was Interred at Nostre-Dame de Clery for which he had a particular Devotion.
The Course of Life had lasted Sixty one years complete, his Reign 22 years and
one Month.

Comines describes him to us as very wise in adversity, very able to penetrate
into the Interests and thoughts of men, and to allure them and turn them to his
ends; infinitely suspicious and jealous of his power, most absolute in his
will, who pardoned not, mightily oppressed his Subjects, and yet withal this,
the best of Princes in his time.

He had caused above 4000 people to be put to Death by diverse cruel Torments,
and sometimes pleased himself in being a Spectator. The most part were Executed
without Form of Process or Trial, many Drowned with a Stone about their Necks,
others precipitated passing over a turning Plank, whence they fell upon Wheels
armed with Spikes and sharp Hooks, others stifled in Dungeons; Tristan his
Creature and the Provost of his House being alone both Judge, Witness, and
Executioner.

Besides his Devotion, at least in appearance, his persuasive and attracting
Eloquence, his Mavelous craft in setting his Enemies at variance with one
another, and unravelling their quarrels again, his Liberality in recompencing
the Services done for him when they hit his fancy: we must not deny two things
worthy of praise in him at the Latter end of his days; one that he would not
suffer an Ambassador which Sultan Bajazet sent to him, to come nearer then
Marseilles, not believing one could be a Christian and have Communication with
the Enemies of Jesus Christ; the other that he had undertaken to reduce all the
Weights and Measures to one Standard, and to set up a General Custom in all the
Provinces of the Kingdom.

I will add a Third, that he resolved and intended that exact Justice should be
dealt to all particular People. He Instituted two Parliaments, that of
Bourdeaux, which had been promised by Charles VII. and that of Burgundy. The
Letters Patents for the first are Dated the 7 th of June 1462. that of the
second the 18 th of March 1476.

If he suffered not his Son to be brought up to good Learning, it was because
he apprehended to make him too knowing, or hurt his delicate and tender
Complexion by the Labor of Study. It was not that he despised it, or was
altogether ignorant of it, as some have believed, since Comines says, That he
was well enough Read, that he had had another sort of breeding, then the Lords
of that Kingdom, and that according to Gaguin, he understood Books, and had
more Erudition then Kings were wont to have. Add, that he much increased the
Royal Library which Charles V. had begun at Fountainbleau, and which was
transferred to the Louvre by Charles VI. That he kindly received and favored
those Learned Men who had made their escape from Greece after the taking of
Constantinople; That he took delight in alluring some out of Foreign Country's
with great Presents, amongst others the Famous Galeotus Martius; And that he
gave himself the Trouble to complete the reformation of the University of Paris
by the care of John Boccard Bishop d'Auranches, and a Cordelier named Wesel
Gransfort a Native of Groningue. Besides it is certain that the Kings of
France, and particularly those of the third Race, have all been instructed in
good Learning and loved it, excepting Philip de Valois.

He married two Wives, to wit, Margret Daughter of James I. King of Scotland
Anno 1436. being Aged but 14 years, and then Anno 1451. Charlotte Daughter of
Lewis Duke of Savoy. The first he loved not much by reason of some secret
imperfection, neither had he any Children by her. She died in the year 1445. He
would have visited the Second as little, had it not been for the desire of
having an Heir; he had three Sons by her; of which Charles only Survived him
who Reigned, (diverse even suspecting that this had been supposed) and three
Daughters, Lowise, Anne and Jane; Lowise died young, Anne was wife to Peter de
Bourbon Lord of Beaujeu, and as for Jane, the Father constrained Lewis Duke of
Orleance to Espouse her, and to Consummate the Marriage, whereof he made his
secret Protestations.

CHARLES VIII.
Called The AFFABLE, AND THE COURTEOUS, King LV.
Aged XIII. Years, II. Months.
POPES,
SIXTUS IV. one year under this Reign. INOCENT VIII. Elected the 29th of August
1484. S. Eleven years wanting one Month. ALEXANDER VI. Elected the 25th of
August 1493. S. II. years and some days, when reof five years under this Reign.
de Beaujeu his Daughter, without mentioning the Regency, because his Son was
entering into his fourteenth year. Two Princes of the Blood, Lewis Duke of
Orleans, and John II. Duke of Bourbon, disputed it with her, and maintained
that King Charles ought to be counted a Minor, seeing the weakness of his
Complexion, and his not being well Educated, his Father haing always kept him
shut up in the Castle of Amboise, bred amongst inferior Servants. Lewis
pretended to it as first Prince of the Blood, but himself was not yet come to
Majority; and the Duke of Bourbon, as having married the Kings Aunt, and
esteeming himself more worthy and proper for it then a Woman, who in France
were not thought capable to Govern, since they were not held fit to Reign. The
three Competitors not able to agree whose right it was, referred the contest to
the General Estates, and the Kings Coronation to the following year.

one Prince, some by another: but they were all such as belonged to the former
Court, and bred up to ill Maxims, who having learned naught but what was indeed
Evil, could produce nothing that was really good.

January the Estates Assembled at Tours. The King attended by the Princes of
his Blood, and all that were Eminent in the Kingdom went thither, William de
Rochefort his Chancellor opened it the fourteenth of the Month in the great
Hall belonging to the Archbishop. It was there ordained that the King, since
he had attained the Age of fourteen, should be reputed Major; That he should
preside in the Council, the Duke of Orleans in his absence, and in case he
failed the Duke of Bourbon. That the Dame de Beaujeu should have the Government
of the young King, for whom a Council of Twelve persons should be chosen,
consisting of Princes of the Blood, and others of the most considerable in the
Nation. In the mean time the Constables Sword was given to the Duke of Bourbon;
Governments and Pensions bestowed upon the Duke of Orleans and the rest of the
Princes.

Never had they so fair an opportunity to rectify abuses, and raise up strong
Bulwarks against all oppression. But the President of the Estates, many
Ecclesiastics, the Deputies of the City of Paris, and some others suffered
themselves to be deluded, Sailed and Steered by the Court-gale and Compass, and
betrayed the public cause. They could not however hinder them from annulling
most of the Acts made by Lewis XI. from exclaiming against his excessive gifts,
from setting a Brand-mark upon the memory of those that had been the Executors
of his injustice, nor from discharging the People of a great part of their
Taxes and Soldiers Quartered upon them.

Oliver Or, Oliver the Devil, a name suitable to the nature of the Beast.
le Diable, Barber to Lewis XI. and John Doyac. This Oliver had changed his
Surname very suitable to his behavior, into that of Daim, and bare the Title
of Earl of Meulanc. Doyac was a Fellow of the same stamp, and yet his Master
had made him Governor of Auvergne. The first was trussed up on the Gallows, the
second lost his Ears, and was Whipped first at Paris, then at Montferrand in
Auvergne, the place of his Nativity. There were perhaps others more Guilty, but
there were none more odious; and besides they had spoken ill of the Princes.
Doyac having secured his money, regained his Credit upon the Expedition into
Italy, having been very serviceable in contriving to convey the great Guns over
the Hills.

Francis II. Duke of Bretagne had one about him of the very same Metal, as
impudent, and much more wicked yet then these; but withal more crafty and able,
Peter Landais a Tailors Son of the Suburbs of Vitre. He governed his Prince
above fifteen years, and had raised up People of his own Quality, and some of
his Kindred to places of Trust, amongst others the Guibez Sons of his Sister,
for which cause the Lords did much envy him. But this was only whispered from
one to another all the time the Duke was in Health and Vigor, but when his
Senses began to grow weak and fail him, it proceeded to Intrigues, and then to
Factions to ruin him; Especially when he went about to support himself by
Crimes, and had cruelly suffered the Chancellor John Chauvelin, and James de
Lespenay Bishop of Renes to be starved in Prison.

It happened therefore that in the time they were holding the Estates at Tours,
the Lords of the Country assumed the confidence to try to force him away from
the Duke: but having missed their enterprise, he let loose all the Authority of
his Prince against them, and reduced them to the troublesome necessity of
defending themselves. The Duke of Orleans who was then at Tours, having a
design in his Head of acquiring Bretagne by marrying the Dukes Eldest Daughter,
goes Landais having de Beaujeu his Enemy, who presently espoused their cause.
This fire lying hid for some years under its ashes, did at last break forth to
the ruin of Bretagne.

th day of June King Charles was Crowned at Reims with the accustomed
Ceremonies and Magnificence.

Being returned to Paris, the Duke of Bretagne sent a complaint to him for
having supported the Rebellion of his Subjects. The Dame, according to her
Father's wonted Method, in stead of returning him an answer, Debauched his
Ambassadors from his Service; These were the Lord D'Vrfe whom she made Grand
Escuyer, and Poncet de la Riviere on whom she bestowed the Mayoralty of
Bourdeaux.

de Balue after his being set at Liberty, went to Rome, and as that Court is a
Region of perpetual Intrigues, he Succeeded so happily therein that in short
time be got great Credit and some good Benefices. He moreover prevailed with
the Pope so far, that after the Death of Lewis XI. he sent him into France as
Legate a Latere. He made his entrance with so much arrogance that he made use of
his faculties before ever he had the Kings consent, or had presented them in
Parliament to be examined whether they contained nothing contrary to the Rights
of the Crown, and the Liberties of the Gallican Church.

The Parliament offended at this bold undertaking forbid him to take upon him
the Characters of his Legation; or to exercise the power: Notwithstanding the
Kings Council, after he had showed his reasons, and made his necessary
Submissions, gave order he should be received in that Quality with the usual
Respect and Honor, and that he should exercise his Functions. Which he did for
some days, when hearing news of the Death of Sixtus, he returned on his way to
Rome, with a Present only of a Thousand Crowns in Gold, which the King gave him
toward defraying the Expenses of his Journey.

de Beaujeu usurped all the Authority. She turned out all those from the Kings
Service as were not at her Dvotion, and brought in d'Vrfe, Riviere and Graville
prime Chamberlain, who watched, and as it were beleaguered the young King.
These Folk wanting some brave daring Hero to oppose the Duke of Orleans, did
likewise keep Rene the Duke of Lorrain at Court, to whom they restored the
Duchy of Bar, till such time as the King should be of Age, to do him right for
the County of Provence, assigned him a Pension of 36 Thousand Livers per Annum,
and a company of an Hundred Lances.

During these disorders in France, the Scene was wholly changed in England.
Henry Earl of Richmond, after the Battle in the year 1471 where Henry VI. Lost
his Crown and Liberty, endeavoring to make his escape into France, was by
Tempest thrown upon the Coasts of Bretagne, where the Duke Seized on him and
detained him Prisoner in favor of Edward, or rather to engage that King to
protect him always against Lewis XI. And indeed Edward never forsook him;
whatever advantage Lewis could propound to him, and which was more, paid him
fifty Thousand Crowns yearly for his Pension.

When Edward Died he gave him his full Liberty, and withal assisted him with
Money and six Thousand Men, wherewith he put to Sea, having a Strong Faction in
England, whereof the Earl of Buckingham was Head. Now it happened that a Storm
having scattered his Ships, the Confederacy was discovered and Buckingham
Beheaded with most of the great men who were concerned in it; So that he
returned and Landed in Normandy, and from thence got back into Bretagne,
waiting for a better opportunity.

King Richard desiring to have him at what price soever, profer'd Landays so
much Money, and such considerable assistance in time of need, against the
Breton Lords, that this Perfidious and Mercinary Soul, promised to deliver him
up to his People. The Earls Friends in England got a hint of this bargain, and
gave him Notice, at the very nick of time when it was to be put in execution.
He immediately departs from Vannes under pretense of going to wait upon the
Duke who was at Renes, then striking into another Road, made his escape with
four more to Angers. He was so closely pursued by Landays Men, that he slipped
thorough the passage but one hour before they came to the place.

The King was then at Langeais who received him very kindly. And a great number
of English Landing every Day in the Ports of France to join with him, he gave
him some broken Companies that were in Normandy, with which he adventured over
into England.

In fine having gained the Victory over Richard who was slain in the Field, be
ascended the Throne, which he pretended did belong of Right to him, as being
the Eldest of the House of Lancaster. He was indeed of that Family, but at a
remote distance, as being but the Son of a Daughter of the Duke of Somerset's
and of Edmond who was Son of Owen Tudor a Gentleman of Wales and Catherine of
France, who after the Death of King Henry V. her Husband, was clandestinely
Married to him.

Orleans, the Duke of Bourbon likewise to whom the Constables Sword without any
power, was more an injury or burden then an Honor, made a new party against
the Government. The Duke of Bretagne, Charles Earl of Angoulesme, the Duke of
Alenson and John de Chaalon Prince of Orange who was Son of a Sister of the
Duke of Bretagne entered into it: Charles Earl of Dunois was the primum mobile.

The Duke of Orleans was the first that spoke, and being retired to Beaugency
demanded an Assembly of the Estates. They immediately carried the King thither.
He besieged him in the place, and forced him to an accommodation, wherein it was
agreed that the Earl of Dunois should retire to Ast belonged to the Duke of
Orleans.
Ast in Piedmont. After that they got the King to March against the Duke of
Bourbon, who finding him on a sudden in the midst of his Country, accepted of
such conditions as they would impose.

Bretagne. The Duke of Orleans having sent all his thither for the Dukes
Service, the Dame sent the Kings thither also in behalf of the Lords. Landays
prompted as we may believe by his wicked Genius, pursued the utter Destruction
of the Lords with all his might, and would not recede in the least from the
Sentence he had obtained that they should lose both their Castles and their
Heads.

He had raised a great Army for this purpose, who had Ordersto Besiege Ancenis
a place belonging to the Marshall de Riux; The Lords had taken the Field to
prevent it. The Armies being in sight of each other, some good minded People,
made the Chief Commanders of the Dukes Army so Sensible, how heighnous it would
be in them to spill the Heart Blood of their own Friends and Kindred, for the
sake of the most profligate wretch in the whole World, that they embraced each
other mutually, and agreed to join their Supplications to the Duke, that he
would be pleased to Establish a Council made up of the Princes of his own
House, together with the Lords of the Country for the Administration of his
Affairs.

Landays having intelligence of this, was possessed with such fury, that he
caused a Patent to be drawn in the Dukes name, which declared all the
Commanders of his Army, which had entered into that capitulation with the
Rebels, Criminals de Lesae Majestatis, and their Estates consiscate. The
Chancellor (his name was Francis Christian) refused to Seal it, notwithstanding
the Dukes reiterated order; But on the contrary being Summoned by the Lords to
bring Landays to Justice he took several informations, upon which a Decree was
made to take the Body of Landays.

Nantes excited by some Emissary's and their own hatred toward him, got in
throngs into the Castle, crying out for Jusstice upon Landays, and at the same
time the Chancellor was compelled by the Lords to wait upon the Duke, and
beseech him to give leave that he might be arrested, and brought to his Trial.
The Duke to avoid greater danger, took the miserable wretch by the Hand, who
had secured himself in his Chamber, and delivered him up to the Chancellor,
expressly commanding him they should not touch his Life, for he granted him
pardon for whatever Crime they might convict him of: But as that Prince was
weak, they had no regard to his injunction. They made quick dispatch with
Landays, the Gibbet was the last step his Ambitious Pride raised him to. Being
found guilty of Concussions, Depredations, Murders and other Crimes, he was
Hanged at Nantes the 18 th Day of July.

Maximilian was Elected King of the Romans, at Francfort the one and Twentieth
of February, and Crowned at Aix la Chapelle with Charlemains Crown the 12 th of
April. He had surprised the City of Terouenne, for which cause the Marshall
D'Esquerdes made a rude War upon him. He pressed him so hard that he was forced
to write to all those Cities in the Kingdom as had obliged themselves for
Guaranty of the Treaty he had made with the King, complaining of this injustice
done him by that Lord and the Dame de Beaujeu in the name of the King. The
Letter was brought by one of his Heralds, whom the King being then at Beauvais
caused to be Guarded in his Journey; It was Read in the Town Hall of Paris, but
he received no other answer then what it pleased those about the King to
dictate.

He was as little successful in the Cavalcade he made thinking to surprise
Guise, which Garrison did infinitely molest the Country of Hainault. Having
furnished Terouenne, with provisions, he came into Cambresis: But the
Mareschals Desquerdes and Guy still pursuing him, and Poverty pinching him yet
more then his Enemies, he durst not undertake any thing. Every thing failing
him his Germans Disbanded, and he retired to Melines where he caused his Son to
be kept and Educated.

Bretagne felt for the loss of his Landays: nevertheless he was forced to
contain himself, and grant an Abolition or Indemnity to all the Lords for fear
of intailing a Cruel and Bloody War upon his Country: but all that precaution
would not serve turn. The time was come to put a Period to that Estate, and I
know not what fatallity hurried them to it by unavoidable accidents. The Dame
de Beaujeu being informed that the Duke of Orleans was forging some design
against her, made him to be commanded to come to Court; he came upon the second
Summons he received: but the next Day being the 5 th of January, he went into
the Country, upon pretense of Hawking, and took his flight into Bretagne.

The good reception he met with from the Duke, the power he gave him there, and
the strict knot of Friendship he tied with Guibe one of the Nephews of the
Deceased Landays who commanded the greater part of the Dukes Gendarmerie, gave
both suspicion and fear to the Breton Lords. The Kings Council knowing their
apprehensions, offered them all assistance imaginable to help them drive out
both the Duke of Orleans and the rest of the French from their Country of
Bretagne.

The wisest amongst them were not for Engaging so great a power in their
quarrel as would sooner or later swallow up all if called in: But the rest
imagining they could easily Limit and Curb them by Articles of Agreement: This
opinion carried it, they made a League with the King upon these conditions;
That he should bring into the Country no more then four hundred Lances, and
four thousand Orleans and his partisans should quit the Country: That he should
neither take nor Besiege any place without the consent of the Marshall de
Rieux, nor should lay any claim or pretense to the Duchy.

Whatever was in the Treaty expressed, yet the Kings Council were persuaded
that Bretagne appertained to him, by virtue of a Cession which the Heirs of
Pontieure had made to Lewis XI. Nay, even some Bretons who loved to swim in
deep and large Waters, and hoped to find fairer fortunes in the Court of
France, confirmed them in this opinion; And it was for this design they led the
King to the Borders of that Country.

Amboise he had private notice that the Count de Dunois was returned from Ast
notwithstanding his commands to the contrary, had got to Partenay in Poiton,
which he Fortified; that being there he was making a League for the Duke of
Orleans, and that he had drawn in the Earl of Angoulesme, the Duke of Lorrain,
the Lords de Ponts and de Albret. He cajoled these two last with the hopes that
they should marry the Duke of Bretagne's eldest Daughter, and the Duke of
Lorrain was tired with the put off's they had so long used toward him
concerning the Succession of the House of Anjou.

Orleans had left at Court, plotted together to carry away the King, who would
have warranted them, and as they said, had entreated them to do it, being quite
wearied and distasted with the imperious Government of his Sister: This would
have ended the Quarrel to the Dukes advantage: but the contrivance having taken
Air by a Valet, the Bishops of Periguex and Montauban (these were Gefroy de
Pampadour, and George d'Amboise Comines and some others who had the management
of it were Arrested.

Comines having been a Prisoner near three years (of which time he was shut up
eight whole Months in an Iron Cage) was condemned by Sentence of the Court of
Parliament, to lose the fourth part of his Estate, and to remain a Prisoner for
ten years, in one of his Houses. The Bishops were set at Liberty, at two years
end by the intercession of the Legate.

At the same time the Earl of Angoulesme, and the Lord de Ponts made Guyenne to
rise, where Odet-Daydie Brother of Odet Earl of Cominges, held Saints,
Fronsac, la Reoule, Dags and Bayonne, and the Duke of Orleans Levied Forces in
Bretagne. The Towns in Guyenne surrendered at the first sight, and naming of the
King; the Lord d'Albret had got some Men together to assist them, but he durst
not appear. The King having made his entrance into Bourdeaux the Seventh of
March, returned to Poitiers; Partenay capitulated as soon as they were
Summoned. That done he divided his Army into four, who fell upon Bretagne in as
many several Quarters, and himself in the mean time remained at Laval to see
what progress they could make.

Ploetmel, Vannes and Dinan; and then it was that the Lords too late perceived
the error they had committed in bringing them into their Country.

After this they laid Siege to Nantes. The Duke was in the place with all the
Soldiers he had left him, and had dispatched the Count de Dunois to the King of
England to crave assistance. This Count being twice or thrice forced back by
tempestuous weather, Armed the common People of the Lower Bretagne, the number
of them amounting to above Sixty Thousand Men, and was so fortunate that with
this confused multitude he terrified the French, and put a Relief into the
Town, which afterward valued not the Siege; about six Weeks after they were
wholly delivered from them.

The Lord d'Albret had likewise raised three or four Thousand men to aid the
Breton, whose eldest Daughter they had promised him. But the Lords of the Royal
Party blocked him up so closely in his Castle of Nontron upon the confines of
Limosin, that he was fain to capitulate and Disband his Forces. The King
conceiving he had absolutely gained him to his Service, gave him a Company of
an hundred Lances.

Desquerdes by correspondence surprised the Cities of St. Omer and Terouenne,
and defeated the Forces of Philip de Cleves Ravestein, whom they had drawn
thither by a pretended bargain for the City of Bethune; the Duke of Cleves and
the Count de Nassaw fighting on Foot were taken Prisoners. In the foregoing
Month of March, the Lord de Montigny Brother of Count Horn the bravest of his
Captains, thinking to take Guise by assault was wounded with a Pike in the
Suburbs, of which he Died in a few days.

Ghent had declared themselves Capital Enemies to Maximilian, because he had
taken his Son from them and removed him to Malines; By their example Bruges,
and most of the Towns in Flanders rose up against him, because he burdened
them too frequently with his exactions.

July of this year 1487. Charlota Queen of Cyprus, Widow of Lewis of Savoy who
was Son of Lewis and Brother of Ame IX. Dukes of Savoy, ended her miseries with
her Life at Rome, where she had subsisted twelve years on the Bounty of the
Popes. She was Daughter and Heiress of John II. King of Cyprus; after whose
Death her Husband and her self enjoyed that Kingdom three years: but his
Bastard James drove them out thence with the help of Melec-Ella Sultan of
Egypt, to whom this Crown was Tributary. All the endeavors they could use to
regain it proved vain and unsuccessful. Lewis Died the first in the year 1482.
Charlota retired to Rome. After her Death the right to that Crown fell to
Charles II. Duke of Savoy, her Cousin, and so passed to all his descendants,
not only because she Adopted him and made him a Donation of her Kingdom, but
because he also was her next of Kindred and Heir, being the Son of Anne of
Cyprus Daughter of King Janus or John I. But Catharine Cornaro a Venetian,
Widow of the Bastard who Died in the year 1473. had given and resigned that
Kingdom, by what Tittle I do not know, to the Seigneury of Venice; The Great
Turk wrested it out of their possession in the year 1557.

Flanders that on the second of February Maximilian, being at Bruges the
Inhabitants ran to their Arms, made him Prisoner, and put diverse of his
Creatures to Death. The Pope Excommunicated the mutineers: but the Kings
Attorney General stood up against it, maintaining that the Flemmings had no
other Sovereign but the King who owned them in what they had done.

Neither the threats, nor Forces of the Emperor Frederic did avail for the
delivery of his Son: they had resolved to give him up to the King of France:
when they were just upon the point to do it, this poor Princes Tears, and the
Solemn Oaths himself made to them, and which were confirmed by several Lords,
that he would forget all their injuries, did at last subdue the fury of the
Brugois, so that they set him at Liberty. When he was out of their hands he
retired into Germany to his Father, and left the Government of his Son Philip
and his Lands to Albert Duke of Saxony.

The Emperor Frederic desiring to render him more fit to take in second
marriage one of the Daughters of Ferdinand and Isabella, who had interceeded
for his Liberty at Bruges, dignified Austria with the Title of Arch-Dutchy,
which till then was a Stranger and unknown in the Western parts.

Breton. In the Month of February the King sitting in Parliament ordered a
Summons for the Duke of Bretagne and the Duke of Orleans, to appear at the
Table to Marbre. Which was sent by the Provost of Paris, accompanied with a
Counselor of that Court, and the Prime Usher, and all advantages of defaults
were taken against them.

The Marshall de Rieux and some Barons of Bretagne, finding he went much
farther then the terms of the Treaty did allow, Petitioned him not to go on,
and profer'd to send the Duke of Orleans out of the Country together with all
the French belonging to him, who in effect showed themselves willing to lay
down their Arms and retire to their own dwellings, provided they might be left
in Peace. The Dame thinking she was now above all danger, imprudently replied
that the King would have no Rival or Equal; that he would not stop there, but
proceed to the end of his enterprise.

This discourse laying his intentions clearly open, they took another
resolution and reconciled themselves with their Duke, who gave them an
Instrument of Oblivion or Abolition the Twentieth of June. The Marshall de
Rieux declaring openly for him, received some of his men into Ancenis, and took
upon him the command of the Army: as for Rohan and Quintin his Brother, they
adhered to the Royalists. The Lord de Laval was not suffered to remain Neuter
as he would fain have done: they forced him to deliver up Vitre to the King;
Dole was taken and sacked.

The Duke of Bretagne's affairs had a good aspect for those two or three Months
that the King was at Paris. Rieux regained Vannes, d'Albret brought him a
Thousand Horse, and the King of England sent him some Foot. In retaliation the
Kings Army commanded by la Trimoville taking the Field in the Month of April,
took Chasteau-Briand and razed it, gained Ancenis, then Besieged Fougeres, a
Rich place and of great importance, which surrendered, and after that St Aubin
du Cormier.

The French and Bretons Forces Leagued together, joined in one Body to go to
the relief of Fougeres contrary to the wise Counsel of the Marshall de Rieux.
Being on their March they were informed the place had Capitulated, and Saint
Aubin du Cormier likewise; The Kings Army commanded by la Trimoville,
apprehending they would go and retake St. Aubin, marched up to them. The Battle
was fought near the Borough of Orange, between Renes and St. Aubin, the 28 th
July. La Trimoville obtained the Victory, the Duke of Orleans and the Prince of
Orange, who alighted and fought for the Bretons, were made Prisoners, six
Thousand of their Men being slain.

de Beaujeu did soon after set the Prince of Orange at Liberty, he having
Married her Husbands Sister, and made him Lieutenant for the King in Bretagne:
But she kept the Duke of Orleans with great care, in the Castle of Lusignan,
and afterward in the great Tower at Bourges.

Some days before this Battle, there had been another fought in the Air: Great
Flocks of Jays, and multitudes of Pies grappled so furiously with their Bekes
and Claws, against each other, that a Vast deal of ground was quite coverd with
their Dead Carcasses.

The fidelity of the Breton Lords was sorely shaken by this rude Shock. The
Vicount de Rohan encouraged to declare the pretensions he had to the Duchy, as
being the Son of Mary, Sister, and as he alleged, partly Heiress of Duke
Francis I. caused Dinan and St. Malo's to fall into the Kings hands; this last
place was plundered. But Renes very courageously told the Herald that came to
Summon them, That they would sooner choose to be nothing, then to be unfaithful.

The Duke thus ill handled by the blind Baggage Fortune, was advised to
endeavor an accommodation with the King. To effect this he sent the Count de
Dunois, and wrote to him with that submission not usual from the Dukes of
Bretagne. The King had great pretension to that Duchy, and demanded the Noble
Guardianship of the Daughters; they agreed upon Arbitrators to judge the right
of it: But in the mean while he consented to a Peace with the Duke upon
condition he should not marry them without his leave; that he should renounce
all Foreign Leagues and Alliances; and should let him keep those places he had
Conquered in that Country. The Treaty was agreed in the Castle of Vergy in
Anjou where the King was at that time, and Signed at Coiron by the Duke.

Soon after the Duke grown very old, overwhelmed with Sorrow, and hurt with a
fall from his Horse, died at Nantes the 9 th day of September, having Reigned
two and Thirty years. By his Will he appointed the Marshall de Rieux Guardian
to his Daughters, with whom he joined Odet-Daydie Earl of Cominges his Gossip
and Intimate Friend, and allotted Frances de Dinan Dame of Chasteau-Briand to
be their Governess. They were two, Anne and Isabeau; the latter Died about two
years after. At this time they retired to the City named Guerrande.

Lorrain after the Death of the Breton, reconciled himself to the Court upon
hopes of obtaining some assistance toward recovery of the Kingdom of Naples.
Opportunity presented it self very fairly, most of the Barons of that Country
being revolted against King Ferdinand by reason of his Tyrannies, and invited
Rene to come and take possession of that Crown. His Holiness Pope Innocent
VIII. did favor him, whose Galleys with Julian de la Rovere Cardinal of St.
Peter's, waited for him a long time in the Port of Genoa, and the French Nobless
showed a great deal of eagerness to follow him. But those that Governed the
King thwarted this Prince as much as they possibly could, as envying him the
Glory of this Conquest. So that making too long delay, the Pope makes an
agreement with Ferdinand, and such as had fallen off cast themselves upon his
Mercy, which did but ill Succeed with them; for he made them all Prisoners, and
Alphonso his Son coming to the Crown, commanded their Throats to be cut. The
Prince of Salerno wiser then the rest, would not trust to it, but retired to
Venice, resolving to seek out some abler Protector. The Lorrianer withdrew into
his own Country greatly confounded and ashamed, and much sunk in his Reputation.

The Bretons being somewhat at their ease on the French-side, were embroiled
amongst themselves about the Marriage of their Duchess Anne. The Marshall was
obstinately bent to have her married to the Lord d'Albret to whom the Father
had promised it in Writing: But Montauban her Chancellor and the Earl de
Cominges thought it too inconsiderable a Match, and too weak to restore the
Affairs of that Duchy, being ruined himself, the King having Seized on all his
Towns in Gascongny; and besides the Princess had no manner of inclination for
him; So that as soon as ever she had attained the Age of puberty, she made her
protestations against that promise, which were declared to him personally.

The Count de Dunois opposed it as much as they; but for another end; He aimed
to have her Married to the Duke of Orleans, whereas the rest designed her for
the Archduke Maximillian. Their Disputes grew so high, it had like to have
come to blows. The Duchess got out of the Mareschals hands being assisted by
her Chancellor and the Count de Dunois. The Marshall waylaid her, thinking to
stop the journey: but his respect made him desist, and leave her, her presence
having disarmed him.

Fearing to be Besieged in Redon by the French, she would needs retire to
Nantes: the Lord d'Albret and the Marshall refused to admit her, but only with
her Family-attendance: upon this refusal she goes to Renes, where the
Inhabitants made her a Solemn reception. Thus there were two Parties
Cantonized, the one at Renes with the Duchess, the other at Nantes with the
Marshall, who was her Guardian, and Authorized by the Orders of the defunct
Duke.

During these Garboils, the King seizes upon the Ports of Breast and Conquet;
and it was put to the question in the King's Council, whether he should
complete the Conquest of that Country by force of Arms. The Courtiers did all
advise and desire it, the Chancellor Rochefort alone dissuaded them,
representing that a Most Christian King ought not to measure his Conquests by
his Sword, but his Justice; That it were most shameful to dispoil a Pupil, one
that was innocent, of his Kindred, and his own Vassal in that Duchy, which he
might have by Marriage, a much more honest and more easy Method to obtain his
desired ends. This remonstrance and perhaps the Arrival of six thousand
English, with whom she garrisoned her Towns, put a stop to their present
acting, to the great regret of the Dame de Beaujeu who had already got a Grant
of the County of Nantes.

Innocent VIII. Successor to Sixtus IV. whether out of a design to make a Holy
War against the Turks, or perhaps to draw a good Pension from Bajazeth,
obtained of the King's Council, that Prince Zizim should be put into his Hands,
upon a condition he should not send him out of Rome, but should always have him
guarded by some Knights of Rhodes. Peter Vaubusson Grand Master of the Order,
had a Cardinals Cap for managing this Affair. For some time after the King had
delivered him up to the Popes Agents, came an Embassy from Sultan Bajazeth to
demand him, offering in exchange all the Relics that were at Constantinople,
to recover the Holy Land at his own Expenses, and to pay him a very great
Pension.

Bretagne, upon diverse Ruptures there were diverse Negotiations. There had been
some French and Breton Arbitrators appointed: but they being thought too much
interested or dependent, it was judged fitter to make choice of two that were
not so; and to this purpose the King and the Duchess agreed upon Maximilian of
Austria, and the Duke of Bourbon, a Prince of great Integrity, and withal no
great Friend to the Dame de Beaujeu. The Deputies of both Parties being met at
Francfort, it was agreed by Provision, that the King should restore all the
Places to the Duchess, excepting Saint Aubin, Dinan, Fougeres, and Saint Malo,
which were to be put under Sequestration into the Hands of the two Arbitrators,
who should surrender them up to those, to whom the Duchy should be adjudged to
belong of Right; That in the mean time they should put out all the Soldiers
both French and English: That the two Parties should produce their Titles
before certain Lawyers appointed to examine them in Avignon; and that the
Deputies should meet again at Tournay the five and twentieth of March
following, to hear the definitive Sentence, which should then be given by the
Arbitrators.

In the midst of all these Goings and Comings, there was another secret Treaty
carrying on, of which the King's Council had not the least suspicion, which was
the Marriage of Maximilian with the Duchess, and this was so far advanced that
in the Year 1489. this Duchess married him by his Proxy* who was the Earl of
Nassaw.

The thing was kept secret a long time; and yet nothing of what they agreed on
at Francfort was put in Execution: So that the King, whether he had discovered
the Marriage, or was tired at the tedious delay of the Arbitration, took up
Arms again, and caused his Forces to March to besiege the Duchess in Renes:
but they were countermanded for what Reasons I know not.

England and Germany, she had but very weak returns. Maximilian a Poor and a
Cold Lover, did not bestir himself as he should have done for so fair a
Mistress, he never furnished her with above two thousand Men. In the mean time
Bretagne was invaded on all Hands by the French; and the Lord d'Albret enraged
to see himself supplanted by a German, gave them up the City of Nantes, upon
condition of some compensation promised him for those Pretensions he had to the
Duchy; This claim was derived from his Wife Frances of Bretagne Daughter of
William Vicount of Limoges, youngest Son of the House of Pontieure.

During these Disorders, nothing could be more facile then for the King to have
taken away the Duchess by force: However he was advised to try Maximilian's
way, rather then force, and to Marry the Princess, and so gain her by
composition: Of an Enemy therefore he became her Lover, and sought to win her
by Courtship and Allurements: but she was haughty in her Misfortune, she could
not resolve to break her Faith, nor bestow her Heart upon a Prince that had
treated her so ill, and who had too much Power not to violate, in a short time,
the Laws and Liberties of Bretagne.

The Duke of Orleans had acquired a great deal of Credit with her, the King
desiring to make use of him to conquer her high Spirit, and besides being
persuaded thereto by some of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, goes one Day and
takes him out of the Tower at Bourges without consulting the Dame de Beaujeu,
who had kept him Prisoner two Years and some Months. This Duke by the Mouth of
the Count de Dunois, and with the help of Prince of Orange, and the Marshall
de Rieux, who was reconciled to the Duchess, omitted no Courtship, nor Reasons
of State to persuade her in favor of the King. She resisted for a while, but
in fine the great negligence of Maximilian, and he pressing necessities added
such force to their Arguments and Reasons, that she yielded, and with a Sigh
gave her self up a Sacrifice for the Safety of her Country.

Bretagne, the Contract of Marriage was perfected at Langeais in Touraine the
sixteenth of December, and the Nuptials consummated the same Day. By the
Contract either of the Parties, in case of Death, did reciprocally yield up all
the Rights each of them had to the Duchy; and the King made a Separate Treaty
with the Estates of that Country for the Preservation of their Laws and their
Privileges.

Some time before this Marriage was spoken of, the great Authority of the Dame
de Beaujeu diminished a little, and gave way to the favor of some of the young
King's Domestic Officers; which she did the more cheerfully undergo, because
her Husband was become Duke of Bourbon by the decease of John his eldest
Brother which happened in 1488.



Bretagne, they were to consider of sending back Marguerite of Austria.
Maximilian cruelly affended at this double Affront, cried out Treachery, and
accused Charles of having forfaken his own Wife, to ravish the Wife of his
Father in Law. Henry King of England jealous of the growth of the French
Manarchy, and perceiving too late the Fault he had committed in suffering
Bretagne to be lost, leagned himself with him, and both agreed to join their
Forces that they might fall upon Picardy.

English failed not to land at Calais at the Time prefixed, and laid siege to
Boulogne: but finding his endeavors signified little, that Maximilian came not
to join his Forces as was promised, and withal heard the Rumors of a dangerous
Faction in England, he found it safest to retire again, and took an hundred and
fifty thousand Crowns for the Charges of his Army, and for some Moneys he had
lent to Francis II. Duke of Bretagne, Father of the new Queen.

Maximilian in the mean time not having sufficient Forces, made use of Craft,
he Surprised the Cities of Arras and Saint Omers by intelligence, and by Night
entered into Amiens, from whence he was vigorously repulsed. His Anger being a
little evaporated, he consented they should get a Truce of the King for a
Twelvemonth in the Name of his Son Philip; but he would neither be comprised
nor named in it.

The Kingdom of Granada, after a War of eight Years successively, was entirely
conquered by the taking of her Capital City. Boabdila the last of their Kings,
having sustained a Siege of eight Months, surrendered it to Ferdinand and
Isabella the second January of this Year 1492. Thus ended the Dominion of the
Moors in Spain, where it had lasted near eight hundred Years: but not their
Nation, nor their Mohammedan impiety, which the Severities of their Inquisition,
and their repeated Proscriptions could not wholly extirpate but with much
difficulty.

Now as if every thing had contributed to Fill and Crown the House of Spain
with Honor and Riches, that they might transfer it to the House of Austria, it
happened almost at the same time, when they finished this War, thae Christopher
Colombus discovered the new World or that Hemisphear opposite to ours. That
great Sea-Captain a Genoese by Nation, having found by a Relation in Manuscript
of a certain Mariner, and by Arguments drawn from the disposition of the
World, and roundness of the Globe, composed of the Sea and Land, that there
were habitable Countries in those Parts opposite to these which we inhabit,
after he had in vain applied himself to diverse Princes, obtained with much ado,
three Vessels of Ferdinand and Isabella to go and seek out that which he did
imagine might be found.

He loosed from Cadix in the Month of August of the Year 1492. And sailed so
far that he discovered the Islands of Florida, from whence he returned into
Spain in the following March, bringing back with him convincing Marks and
Tokens of his discovery, and the infinite Riches of those Countries. The
Spaniards were pleased to name them the West Indies. An hundred Years before
this, two Venetian Captains named Zeni, had found out the Northern Estotiland.

Spain, Pope Alexander VI. who was by birth an Arrogonian, gave to Ferdinand
and Isabella, and to all their Successors Kings of Castille, all the Lands
discovered and to be discovered beyond a Line that was to be drawn from the
Arctick to be Antarctick Pole, distant from the Azores about a hundred Leagues
toward the West and by South, upon condition he should send some honest and
learned Men thither to instruct those People in the Christian Religion. Saint
Bennet's Order had the Honor of the first Mission; One named Dom N. Bueil a
Catalon was sent thither with twelve Priests, and sowed the first Seeds of
Faith there.

Spain, the young King Charles VIII. did of his own good Will, surrender the
Counties of Rousillon and Cerdagne to Ferdinand, without requiring the three
hundred thousand Crowns, for which Sum they were engaged: but only a Promise
that he should be a friend to France. The World was amazed and scandalized at
this sudden and unexpected Generosity. Common Fame laid the blame of it upon a
Cordelier Friar by Name Oliver Maillard a famous Preacher in those days, and
Confessor to the young King. It was reported that being suborned by Ferdinand,
who sent him Barrels of Silver in stead of Wine, and having associated himself
with John Mauleon another Monk of the same Order, to help carry on this
Intrigue, this last being Confessor to the Duchess of Bourbon Heretofore Dame
de Btaujeu.
, they publicly affirmed that King Lewis XI. being on his Deathbed, had given
Order for the restitution of these Counties, and that his Soul would have no
rest till it were performed; That with this Theme and by these Suggestions the
two honest Fathers (some add a third Man Saint Francis de Paulo) cast so much
terror into the Soul of that Lady, and of Lewis d'Amboise Bishop of Alby, who
had been Tutor to the King, that they persuaded and engaged him to make this
fine Restitution.

German Princes and the Swisse becoming Mediators concerning the differences
between France and the House of Austria, a Conference was agreed upon to be
held at Senlis, where the Deputies from the Emperor Frederic, from Maximilian
his Son, and the Arch Duke Philip his Grandson, concluded with the King's
Deputies to put an end to all Disputes; That the King should send Marguerit
back to the Arch Duke her Brother, that together with her, he should render up
the Counties of Artois and Burgundy: but that he should retain the Castles
belonging to the four Cities in Artois till four Years were expired, and that
then Philip being in majority, should come and swear and ratify the Peace.

Beginning of the War of Italy.
Ever since the Year 1492. there had been some discourse set on foot of the
Rights and Title the King had to the Kingdom of Naples, and Arguments used to
inflame that young Prince with the Love and Desire of so fair a Conquest.
Salerno and those Gentlemen that were banished from Naples having taken
Sanctuary in France, made the first propositions. Afterward Ludovic Sforza was
the principal Agent, and brought the King to a determinate resolution for this
Enterprise, which cost Italy it is liberty, and a vast deal of Money, Blood and
Trouble to France.

The whole third of this design, which he spun with incredible Artifice, tended
to no more but to make him possessor of the Duchy of Milan. To bring this to
pass he had Married his Sister to Maximilian King of the Romans, and had
secretly taken the investiture of that Duchy, as vacant by default of Hommage
and other Duties not tendered: but this he must wrest from John Galeas Son of
his eldest Brother who held it by a just Title. This was a young Man of little
Courage whom he already kept as his Captive, having chaced away his Mother
Bonne de Savoy Sister to the Kings mother, who had forfeited her Reputation by
her Gallantries in her Widdow-hood: but he had married a Wife as Courageous as
Beautiful, who being Daughter of Alphonso Duke of Calabria, Son of Ferdinand
King of Naples, was able with the assistance of her Brother to retard the
Execution of his malicious designs.

This was the motive which obliged Ludovic to stir up the King to the Conquest
of Naples, to ruin, or at least to Embarrass that House which was alone able to
prevent him. He had the City of Genoa under his subjection, (which nevertheless
held of the Crown of France, the Kings Favorites having obtained the
investiture for him for eight Thousand Crowns,) in his Alliance Hercules d'Est
Duke of Ferrara his Father in Law, Bentivoglio Lord of Bologna and some other
Lords.

In those Days there were five great Governments or Powers in Italy, two
Republics, Venice and Florence; this holding more of a Democracy or Popular
State, the other an Aristocracy or Government by Nobles, the Church or Pope,
the King of Naples, and the Duke of Milan; Venice was Governed by their Senate,
none of her Citizens daring to raise themselves above the rest. At Florence the
Medici had usurped all the Authority, after they had extirpated the Passi;
Peter the Head of the Family behaved himself with unsufferable haughtiness.

Lewis Sforza, as we have told ye, Governed the Milanois, a Man that was
perfidious, sanguinary, crafty, and very aptly Surnamed the Moor; not only
because his Skin was tawny, but likewise because he exceeded the Africans in
Treacheries and Disloyalty. In the Holy See was then sitting, or rather
intruded, Alexander VI. who disposed of all things at his pleasure, and to say
truth, he had paid for the tripple Crown.

It will suffice, to give you his just Character, to say in a word, that never
any Mohammedan Prince was more Impious, more Vicious or more Faithless than he;
and if any one did ever surpass him in his abominations, it was Caesar Borgia
his Bastard Son.

At Naples Reigned otherwise Fernand, or Ferrand.
Ferdinand Bastard of Alphonso King of Arragon. He had two Sons, Alphonso and
Frederic; And Alphonso had a Son named Ferdinand as was his Grandfather, Aged
twenty or two and twenty years. This last seemed to be of a good disposition,
and gained the Love of the Nobility and People: but his Father and Grandfather
were held in execration amongst all their Subjects for their Taxes, Monopolies,
and bloody Cruelties; the son exceeding the Father as much in wickedness, as
the Father exceeded all other Princes. Besides, all these Potentates had no
Religion, but by their Actions and in their Discourse professed a most
Villainous and Brutish Atheism; but withal pretended to great Wisdom and the
finest Politics.

Stephen de Verse his Chamberlain and Seneschal of Beaucare, and William
Briconnet his Treasurer General, and Bishop of St. Malo. By their means this
War was undertaken: but Briconnet having afterward more thoroughly considered
and weighed it, bebecame of a quite contrary opinion.

Two years was it absolutely resolved upon, then laid aside, then again under
consideration and debate. There was not Wisdom enough in the Kings Council, no
money in his Coffers, no assurance of his Allies; for in Italy he had none for
him but the Traitor and perfidious Ludovic, in whom no prudent man would put
any confidence; but underhand there were against him the wise Venctians, and
openly or barefaced Pope Alexander, and Peter de Medicis.

Upon the rumor of this War, Ferdinand King of Naples sent to the King to
January in the year 1494. being aged Seventy two. His Son Alphonso more wicked
then himself, and more unfortunate, took the Scepter.

After many delays, the King pressed by the continual Solicitations of
Ludovic, to which were likewise joined those of the Cardinal of Saint Peter's,
etc. an irreconciliable Enemy to Pope Alexander, left Paris in the Month of
July, having given the Regency to Peter Duke of Bourbon, during the time he
should be out of France. He remained a while at Lions in great uncertainty what
he should do, then again at Vienne: from thence he passed to the City of Ast
where he sojourned near a Month, whilst they drew his Cannon over the Mountains
with much difficulty. In that place he was like to die of the Smal-Pox.

For two Years past had the Princes of Italy, those great Men in War and
Politics, so much vaunted by their Historians, taken notice how this Design
was forming, which could not but prove fatal hereafter to the liberty of their
Country, and for the present invade their Peace and Power; and yet they had not
Skill or Prudence enough to divert a Prince, who was but young and guided by a
Council without Brains, nor Courage enough to meet and fight his Forces which
were but inconsiderable: So that there is reason to believe that God had sealed
their Eyes, tied their Hands behind them, and raised up this young King to
chastize them. Indeed Hierosme Savanarola a Dominican had a long time before
filled all Italy with predictions of his coming, and affirmed that he had a
Commission from Heaven to Dethrone the Tyrants.

For this great Enterprise he had belonging to himself but sixteen hundred
Gents-Darmes, each with his two Archers on Horseback, his two hundred
Gentlemen, three or four hundred Horse lightly armed, twelve thousand Foot,
half Swisse and half French: but withal a great number of young Lords and
Nobility who went Volunteers, all very fit and useful for a Day of Battle, but
not any wise proper in Affairs that required length of time, as not able to
undergo Hardship, nor be under Command.

Alphonso was resolved to carry the War into Ludovic's Country, to this effect
he had sent an Army into Romagnia, commanded by young Frederic his Son, and
another by his Brother Frederic toward the Coasts of Genoa. Frederic goes on
Shore at Rapalo, thinking thereby to make the Genoese rise by the intelligence
of those that were Banished: but the Duke of Orleans who commanded the French
Fleet, beat the others in the Post which they had fortified, and Daubigny
having with some Forces outmarched Ferdinand and stepped in before him, prevented
his getting into Romagnia.

These successful beginnings engaged Charles the more. He parted from Ast the
sixth day of October.

At Turin he borrowed the Duchess of Savoyes Rings, and at Casal the
Marchioness of Montferrats, and pawned them for twenty four thousand Ducats.
Ludovic with his Wife came to receive him at Vigeue, and accompanied him as far
as Piacenza.

He arrived at Pavia the thirteenth of October. There he found Duke Galeazo
very ill of some Morsel his good Uncle Ludovic had caused to be given him.
Being at Piacenza he heard of his Death, and then Ludovic who had accompanied
him thither, took his leave of him to go and reap the Fruit of his Crime, and
make sure of the Duchy, without any regard to Galeazo's Son as yet but five
years old.

1494. Empp. Maximilian R. 25. years and Bajazeth.
The French trembled with rage that this wicked Wretch should bring the King to
be witness of a Parricide upon the Person of his For the King and this young
Duke were Sons of two Sisters Daughters of Savoy.
Cousin-German. They thought it much more just and safe to revenge this Death
upon that Tyrant, and to conquer the Duchy of Milan, and the City of Genoa,
then to run to the farther end of Italy, crossing above an hundred Leagues
through the Enemies Country, in the midst of Winter, without Money and without
Provisions, to seek out a Kingdom which would be impossible to keep, unless
they could first be Masters of Genoa and the Milanois. Such was the sentiment
of Desquerdes a great Soldier; and had he lived, had so much Credit with the
King as would no doubt have persuaded him to take that Course, but he died at
Lions. Ludovic's Intrigues who had gained Stephen de Verse, overthrew all that
good Counsel; and the King went forward, taking his march by Tuscany.

The taking a small Castle by storm on the Confines of the State of Florence,
and afterward the Fort of Serezanella, which capitulated, and then the defeat
of some Succors which Paul Vrsinus was bringing, did so astonish Peter de
Medecis, that he consigned four Places into the King's Hands, which were even
the very Keys of that Country, to hold them for some certain Time, and
consented that he should borrow Two hundred thousand gold Crowns of that City

Ludovic had fancied to himself that the King would put those places into his
hands, pretending that two of them belonged to the City of Genoa; And for this
purpose lent him twenty Thousand Ducats: The Council having fairly denied him,
he retired, but left some of his Emissaries about the King to watch their
opportunities, and dispose things for his advantage. His fingers itched to get
Pisa; One day while the King was in that City, his men had persuaded the Pisans
to fall on their Knees as he went along to Mass, and cry out for Liberty. The
young King was moved with Pity, and the Master of Requests who went along
before, assured him that what they craved was Just; Thus without considering
that City was none of his, he granted them their desires.

The Florentines at all times French by inclination, taking their opportunity
of the Kings approach, banished Peter de Medecis from their City by a Sentence
of the Senate, and recovered their Liberty. He retired to Bologna, and from
thence to Venice, with so little Credit that one of his own Factors refused to
let him have a Piece of Cloth he sent for.

The 17 th of November the King entered into Florence, his Army in Battallia,
and himself Armed at all points, his Lance upon his Thigh. The Florentines
partly by force, partly out of good will, treated upon and agreed a
Confederation with him, which was proclaimed in all the Cities of Italy, with a
Manifesto, declaring that the King was come thither only to chase away the
Tyrants, and from thence to carry his Arms against the Turks, the capital
Enemies to Christendom.

Picus Mirandolus, that mavelous Prodigy of all sorts of Sciences, Died in
Florence the same Day the King made his entrance.

The very same hour he went forth, the City of Pisa threw off the yoke of the
Florentines, the People pulled down their Arms, and erected the Kings Statue in
the room of them.

This prodigious success of the French, their great train of Artillery which
was drawn by Horses The Italians drew theirs only with Oxen.
* and so well managed, that in a few hours they could shatter and beat down the
strongest Walls, as likewise their Combats which was no Childrens play like the
Italian fighting, bred a Terror over all. Young Ferdinand soon retreated from
before Aubigny even to Rome, and his Uncle Frederic getting out of the Port at
Legorne, retured to Naples. All cried out Vive France, the places about Rome
strove which should first surrender, and the Vrsini made their Peace with the
King.

Then his Holiness, to his great regret, entreated Frederic to withdraw his
Forces, and himself was constrained to let the King make his entrance into
Rome, he being retired to the Castle St. Angelo.

th of December) and disposed of his Soldiers and Artillery in all the public
places; So that Alexander fearing to be taken by force and deposed, as he well
deserved, capitulated with him, and condescended to what ever he desired.
Amongst other things he let him have five or six of his best places for a
certain time, the investiture of the Kingdom of Naples, Caesar Borgia his
Bastard Son, who was called the Cardinal of Valentia, for Hostage, and Zemes or
Zizim, the Brother of Bajazeth, to make use of him against the Turks.

Roman Church, and purging the Holy See of a Tyrant who defiled with all the
abominations imaginable the House of God.

The eight and Twentieth of January the King went from Rome, continuing his
march toward the Kingdom of Naples. Being at Velitri the Cardinal Bastard Son
of the Pope who was an Hostage, slunk away from him and returned back to Rome.

At the same place Antony de Fonseca Ambassador from Ferdinand King of Arragon,
seeking some pretense for a Rupture, made sharp complaints for that the French
invaded the Empire of all Italy, and urged that when his Master treating with
King Charles had promised not to oppose him in his Progress, meant it only in
relation to the Kingdom of Naples; whereas the King had taken diverse places
from the Florentines and from the Holy See. The French replied smartly. And the
dispute growing hot, the Ambassador tore the Treaty in pieces in the Kings
presence, which so inceased them, that they could scarce forbear doing the like
to his person.

Alphonso's flight. That King finding himself mortally hated by his Subjects,
whom both he and old Ferdinand had Treated most cruelly, resigned his Crown
which he had not worn a year, to young Ferdinand his Son, and retired to
Messina in Sicilia, where he shut himself up in a Monastery to do penance all
the rest of his Days. They were not many, for before the end of that year he
ended his life, Dying of the Gravel, which made him Languish with most grievous
Torment.

Alphonso's fears and astonishment was so strange that although the French were
yet above sixty Leagues distant, he fancied they were in the very Streets of
Naples, and that the Trees and Stones cried out France. His wife begging him to
stay but only three days, that she might say she had been one whole year in her
new Kingdom, he would not allow her that little satisfaction, but said he would
throw himself out of the Windows if they offered to detain him any longer. He
made so much have to fly thence that he took none of all the vast Riches with
him, which he had heaped up in his strong Castles.

The misfortunes of this House, or rather the Judgments of the Almighty God
followed the Son as they had done the Father and Grandfather. Ferdinand came
and had posted himself at the passage de Cancello near the Abbey of Saint
Germans, to defend the entrance into the Kingdom. As soon as ever the Marshall
de Rieux drew near to attack him, he quitted it, and all his Forces Disbanded.
John James Trivulcio a Milanese by Birth, but who having been Banished by
Ludovic was Listed in his Service, came over to the Kings Party, and gave him
up Capoua: which gave example to all the rest to do the like; the City of
Naples shut her Gates against him; in a word, he retired to the Island of
Ischia, leaving the defense of the Castles of Naples to his most considing
Officers.

The two and twentieth of February the King made his entrance into that City,
the People triumphing at his Victory, and receiving him as if he had been their
founder and deliverer. The Castles did not hold out long. Thus in four Months
this young King marched thorough all Italy, was received every where as their
Sovereign Lord, without using any Force, only sending his Harbingers to mark
out his Lodgings, and Conquered the whole Kingdom of Naples in fifteen days,
excepting only Brindes.

Greece was almost ready to follow the same Dance with Italy. Bajazeth Siezed
with the extremest Terror, had drawn away all his Garrisons to strengthen his
City of Constantinople, the Gr^ecians were ready to cut the Throats of all the
Turks, and the Turks cast their eyes toward Zemes or Zizim, and wished he were
their Sovereign. The jealous Venetians and the Pope made this design miscarry
amidst all those fair hopes, they poisoned that Prince before he was resigned
into the hands of the French; And withal gave the Turks notice of all the
correspondence the King held in those Countries. Which cost the Lives or Ruin
of above fifty Thousand Christians, whom the King was to have furnished with
Arms to have Siezed diverse maritime Towns, at the time he was to pass into
Greece.

This Bright Sunshine of Fortune did so dazzle the young King and all his
Council, who had but little Sense or Judgment, that they scarce minded or took
care of any thing. Several Cities that had set up the Standard of France,
returned to the Arrogonians, for want of sending some body to receive and take
possession for the King; the Favorites on whom he bestowed the Governments,
squandred away the Ammunitions, his Soldiers lived at discretion, and his Lords
became insolent. The People were not eased, no justice was done to those
Gentlemen of the Angevin Faction, who had been thrown out of all their Estates;
So that the Love they had at first for the French was soon converted into
hatred, and made them forget the sorrows under the foregoing Tyrannies.

Venetians labored to form a League against him, comprizing the Pope, the
Emperor, the Archduke his Son, Ferdinand King of Arragon, and Ludovic Sforza;
so many Heads could not readily be brought to agree together, it required near
a whole years time to adjust them; And the League they thought to contrive to
obstruct his going into Italy, could now only serve them to turn him out again.
At first Ludovic would by no means side with them, on the contrary he
endeavored his utmost to hinder them: but having attained his own ends he was
the most zealous to promote and hasten it. It was concluded about the end of
Lent, and published upon Palm Sunday in presence Turkish Ambassador. The
Venetians and the Pope his good Friends, would needs gratify him with that
joyful news before he took his leave.

The information the King had thereof put him upon thoughts of his return: but
yet ere he went he would needs make his Triumphant entrance into Naples the
Thirteenth Day of May. He was on Horseback in an Imperial Habit, a Crown upon
his Head, the Globe in his right Hand, and a Scepter in his Left, under a
Canopy born by the greatest Lords of that Country, and the People shouting
aloud and crying Long live the August Emperor! With this Ceremony he was
conducted to the great Church, where he received anew their Oaths of Fidelity.

He left in all four Thousand men to defend that Kingdom, and the Country
furnished him with twice as many. Gilbert de Bourbon Duke of Montpensier had
the Title and power of Viceroy, a good man, but of little judgment, and one
that loved his ease so much, he seldom rose from his Bed till Noon; Daubigny
the Office of Constable and the Government of Calabria, George de Sully that of
the Duchy of Tarente, Gratian Guerre a Gascon, that of Abruzzo, Stephen de
Verse the Duchy of Nola.

He parted from Naples the Twentieth of May. The Pope had offended him too much
to stay his coming, he went from Rome and retired to Orvieto. But the King did
not fail to restore all those places he held belonging to the Church. As soon
as he was gone some distance, the Colonnas lately so zealous for his Interests,
turned their backs upon him; the Florentines alone out of a desire to regain
their own, offered to maintain his quarrel, and to furnish him with a good
force to convoy him: but he refused both the one and the other, and again
confirmed the Liberty of the Pisans.

He lost twelve or fifteen days time at Pisa and at Sienna, during which the
Confederates Army had leisure enough to Assemble. Perhaps he waited for news
from the Duke of Orleans, who remained yet in his City of Ast, with orders to
bring him a re-inforcement of eight or nine Thousand men. But Lewis who had
some pretensions to the Duchy of Milan, having found a fair opportunity to
surprise the City of Novarre had amuzed himself there, leaving the King exposed
to great danger; And indeed it Succeeded but ill with him, for Ludovic Besieged
him in it before he could have time to furnish it with Victuals.

Though the Kings Army were very weak, yet being on it is March he sent a
re-inforcement of some Companies which came to him from France, commanded by
Philip de Savoy Earl of Bresse, and another besides who were in eight Galleys,
to execute an enterprise upon the Genoese. The Fregoses, Enemies to Ludovic and
the Adornes, made him believe it very easy; but it fell out very ill, the
Genoese Rapalo, and the Earl of Bresse who was advanced into the very Suburbs,
retreating with a great deal of shame.

The Confederates had in their Army near forty thousand sighting Men; Francis
Marquess of Mantoua commanded them in Chief: the King had not above nine
thousand at most: yet they durst not attack him in the Mountains, but waited
for him at his descent, near the Village of Fornoua in a Valley of about a Mile
and a half wide, where he was necessarily to pass.

Fornoua is a Village about nine Miles on the other side of Piacenza; The King
being come to Lodge there, (the little River of Tar was between the two Armies)
sent to the Confederates to demand Passage, and receiving no Answer, he
resolved to make Way with the Sword. Theyca me to Blows on the Sixth of July,
the Confederares in less then a quarter of an Hour, were beaten back to their
very Camp with the loss of three thousand of their Men; The Field was the
Kings, and this important Victory, which did not cost him above fourscore Men,
and a small part of his Baggage, secured him the Way to Ast. He arrived there
the Fifteenth of the Month, very much harassed and tired, not so much by the
Enemy, who followed him at a great distance, as the Difficulties of the Ways,
and the Scarcity of Provisions.

Ast to Quiers and to Turin, the Florence Ambassadors solicited him for the
Restitution of their Towns. He commanded those Captains that held them to
surrender them: but he was so easy and so little absolute, that very far from
obeying him, they presumed to sell them, some to the Pisans, and the rest to
the Venetians.

The Confederates after the Battle of Fornoua, had sent part of their Forces to
the Siege of Novarre. The Duke of Orleans had not turned out the useless Mouths
soon enough, and had suffered himself to be cooped up in hopes the King would
soon come and deliver him. But as he had not obliged him overmuch, and besides
had more Passion for a new Amor he had begun at Quiers, then for the War, he
made no great haste, but left him to suffer the extremest Famine.

Vercel with that Design. His Army increasing every day, the Enemies were
afraid and hearkened to a Treaty. Whilst that was concluding they permitted the
Duke of Orleans, and three Days afterward his whole Garrison more then half
Hunger-Starved, to crawl out of the City, which was left to the Charge of the
Inhabitants, upon condition, that if they did not agree upon the Treaty, the
Duke should return and put himself into the Castle, which some Men of his had
still in their keeping.

Some few Days after, the Treaty being almost perfected, there arrived a Party
of sixteen thousand Swisse who came to the French Army. The Duke of Orleans
insisted highly to give Battle to the Enemy, the gaining of it would at least
have been so of all the Milanois. He had been satisfied in his Desires, had
there not been more apprehension of the boldness of the Swisse, then the
Enemies Army; for being double their own Number, they might have seized the
King's Person if they would. This consideration made them think it more
Prudence to conclude with Sforza; They restored Novarre to him, and the Port de
la Spezzia; and he promised to furnish a certain number of Ships and Men for
the Conquest of Naples, to give Passage through his Countries, to pay the King
four score thousand Crowns, and fifty thousand to the Duke of Orleans, to make
Restitution of the eight Galleys taken by the Genoese at Rapalo, and to admit
the French to Equip their Fleets in that Port.

The King's impatience was so great, he had not leisure to stay till the
Execution of this Treaty; as soon as it was Signed, he went away with all speed
to Lions to Dance, Masquerade, and make Love. Sforza observing him so wholly
taken up with his Pleasures, not in a likelihood of returning thither
suddenly, did not perform one Article of the Treaty.

Ferdinand King of Naples, did for his part, take the Advantages he ought of
his Absence, and his Carelessness. All the Princes that were in the Italian
League contributed to restore him to his Kingdom: The Pope and Cardinal Sforza,
practiced to gain the Cities for him by their Intrigues, especially that of
Naples. The King of Arragon his Relation sent him two Armies; One for the
Land-service, commanded by Ferdinand Gonzales, the Vulgar called him Gonsalvo,
who assumed the Name of the Great Captain; the other for Sea-service, by
Villamiarmo. The Venetians did likewise set two Armies on Foot. Grimani, was
Chief of that at Sea, and Francis de Gonzague of the other; but this arrived
not till the end of the Year.

These crafty Politicians imagined that this conjunction would in time give
them the whole Empire of Italy, for Ferdinand engaged Brindes and Otranto to
them, and soon after Grimani seized upon Monopoli, Mola, Siponte and Trani. The
French could hardly save Tarenta; the City of Cajeta revolted, and penned them
up in the Castle.

On the other side Frederic and Gonsalvo made themselves Masters of Regio, of
Saint Agatha and Seminaro. Aubigny shut them up in Seminaro, they sallied forth
to remove him and lost the Battle. This might have proved the Total ruin of
Frederic, had Aubigny pursued his Point home: but he fell Sick by the
intemperance of the Climat, or his own Intemperance, and the French Affairs
languished with him.

Ferdinand was more Fortunate at Sea. So soon as he appeared upon the Coast
with some Ships of his own, and some belonging to the Spaniard, Salerna and
Malfus Or of the Egg
set up his Standard: the Citizens of Naples who had not dared to stir Malfy.
for three Days together, upon the fourth besought him to send some Men on
Shore. Montpensur was so imprudent as to March out of the Town to attack them;
No sooner was he out, but they shut the Gates at his Heels, and scarcely could
he, by going a long way about, get entrance into the Castle del Ovo Or of the
Egg
again. From thence he descended again into the City with his Sword and
Flambeau in Hand, and strugled mightily to recover it: but the Revolters
opposed him with Retrenchments and Barricado's, which they wrought upon with so
much diligence both Night and Day, that they cooped him in the Castle. This
happened at the same time as the Battle of Fornowa.

After three Months Siege and continul Skirmishes, Montpensier wanted
Provisions, and was informed at the same time, that the relief which was coming
from France by Sea, meeting with great Storms, was driven to Legorne and there
dispersed. In this extremity he capitulated with the Enemy to deliver up the
Castles in a Months time if he were not relieved.

In the mean time he bethinks himself, but very late, to send to Aubigny, to
dravv all his Forces together and come to disengage him; Aubigny could not go
in Person being yet sick, he sent Percy who cut four thousand of the Count de
Matalonas Men in pieces near Eboli. Ferdinand was so much dismayed, that he
had thoughts of Flying: but the Neapolitans, and the Colonnas, whom fear of
Punishment had made desperate, labored so much, as to make him change his Fear
into Percy coming thither, found their Intrenchments so well guarded, that he
could not approach the Castle whereupon he returned to Nola.

Mean while Stephen de Verse, whom the King had made Duke of Nola, being gone
into France, did earnestly solicit they would provide for the maintaining of
that Kingdom: the Ambassadors from the Florentines, the Cardinal of Saint
Peter's, etc. and Signor Trivultio joined their Entreaties; and the French, even
those that had advised against the first Attempts for this Conquest, declared
all with one Voice, that it now concerned the Honor of the Nation to preserve
it, and not suffer the Great Monarch of France to be braved by those Bastards
of the House of Arragon. Every one desired this, excepting those that managed
the Affairs, particularly the Cardinal Briconnet, who either by intelligence
with the Pope, or out of Sloth and Cowardice, hindered the rest from acting.
The King might be angry with them if he pleased, nothing went forward.

Naples, the reproaches of the French, and those of his own Conscience, obliged
the King to resolve upon a new Effort, for the Affairs of Italy. He parted from
Tours, where he left the Queen his Wife, came to Saint Denis to take his
Farewell of the Holy Martyrs, advanced to Lions, and gave out his Orders every
where; then when it was believed he would have passed the Mountains, he
returned Post to Tours, whither the Charms of one of the Queens Maids attracted
him as it were per-force. These grand Preparations amounted to six Vessels
laden with Provisions and Men for Cajeta.

Ludovic had persuaded the Emperor Maximilian to enter into Italy, to embrace
the Defense of Pisa, which he thought by this means to get into his own Hands.
Upon this Expedition it was that the Pisans pulled down the King's Statute to
set up the Emperors in its stead. As for the rest of this Enterprise, no more
then in all his others, he showed neither Valor nor Perseverance, and to speak
the Truth, he minded no more, but only to make his Musters complete, that he
might get the Pay, and then drew off again like a Hireling.

The French Affairs declined from Bad to Worse, Aubigny was Sick still, Percy
marred his greatest Success by his unsufferable Pride, the Germans Mutined for
want of Pay, and the Garrisons were quite unfurnished. And to complete these
Misfortunes, Montpensier suffers himself to be shut up in Atella by three
Armies, of Venetians, Spaniards, and Arrogonians, and for want of Provisions
capitulated to Surrender the whole Kingdom in one Month. The other Chiefs,
especially Aubigny and Guerre, refused to obey him in the execution of this
Infamous Treaty. As a Punishment for this Stubborness, Ferdinand banished both
him and all his Soldiers into the Maritime Countries, where the Pestilential
Air destroyed most of them. Of five thousand Men he had with him, hardly did
five hundred escape, and Montpensier himself died at Puzzoli of Sickness or of
Poison.

From Atella, Gonsalvo Or Consalvo.
passed to Calabria, reduced Manfredonia and Cosenza, and Besieged Daubigny in
Gropoli. That generous Captain defended himself so bravely that he made an
honorable composition; they gave him leave to carry back his Forces into
France, with Colors Flying: but the surrender of Cajeta was comprehended in it.

Nothing was left the French of this glorious and sudden Conquest but a
villainous Disease, which cannot handsomely be named. The Spaniards having
gotten it in the Islands of Florida, where it is almost Epidemical, had brought
into and infected the Kingdom of Naples with it; the Women whom they had
spoiled with this Venom, communicated it to the French.

Cajeta was Surrendered, King Ferdinand Died, and Frederic his Uncle ascended
that mournful Throne with the good wishes and acclamations of all his Subjects.

Ferdinand King of Spain (his own people called him so, and the French in
railery John Gipon Or Jack Short-Coat.
,) made an Inroad toward Narbonna in favor of Ferdinand King of Naples.
Charles d'Albon Saint Andre, Lieutenant for the King in Languedoc, did not only
repress them, but in ten hours forced the City of Salses in sight of their
Army. The Spaniards fearing they might draw the whole burden of the War upon
themselves, entered into a Conference which toward the end of the year produced
a Truce for some Months.

Naples, sometimes to receive Hommage and Tribute of Frederic, at other times
to agree with the Pope who was Lord of the Fief, then to begin with the
Milanois, and give the conduct to the Duke of Orleans. To this purpose Levies
were made amongst the Swiss, and the Cavalry advanced as far as Ast: but the
Duke refused that employment. Several consultations were held afterward, some
resolutions taken, but no effects; though the several and various interests of
the Italian Princes did call every day for the Kings return, and opened the
Gates wide enough for his re-entrance.

Italians, made him lose the relish of all these Conquests; nay even of those
amongst the Beauties, so that he now thought of nothing but how to lead a quiet
and Christian life.

He therefore turned himself wholly toward God, and applied himself to the
reforming of his State. He heard the complaints and causes of his Subjects,
deposed corrupt Judges, studied to restore Justice to its Ancient Rules and
Methods, without Charges or Bribes, considered how to lessen the Taxes and
bring them down to twelve hundred thousand Crowns, which should not be Levied
but by consent of the Estates, and that upon extraordinary occasions, and
intended to defray his Housekeeping and ordinary expenses, out of his own
Revenue and Demeasnes and the ancient Duties belonging to the Crown.

Amboise, where he was building; one Day the 6 th of April about two hours
after Noon, being in a Gallery, from whence he was looking upon some that were
playing at Tennis in a dry-Ditch, he was Siezed with an Apoplexy, which made
him fall down backwards. The Courtiers and Officers beholding him in that
condition, laid him down in the same place on a pitiful Bed-matt, where he
expired about Eleven at night, and forsook him to ride in all post have to the
Duke of Orleans his Successor. Many believed he was poisoned with an Orange.

He Reigned fourteen years and a half, and had lived seven and twenty and nine
Months. Of three Sons he had by Anne of Bretagne his Wife, not any one of them
attained the fourth year. He was but of an ill shape, of low Stature, Weak and
Sickly. His Shoulders were round, his Face deformed, his Speech slow and
broken, yet were his eyes quick and sparkling, his thoughts sudden and sharp on
great occasions, but not lasting; he showed much Goodness, Humanity and
Courtesy to all, but had so little Spirit, and was so careless that he was but
little obeyed. We do not find that in his whole Life he ever turned away a
Domestic Servant, or ever offended any one of his Subjects with a harsh word.

The next Day after his Death, happened that of Jerosme Savanarolla the
Dominican, a generous Victime for Liberty and the truth. He had foretold,
either by his strength of reason and judgment, or by Divine revelation, all
those grand revolutions in Italy; Church.
He boldly Preached the Reformation of Princes, and of the Court of Rome;
asserted that God had led the King by the Hand, and defended the Liberties of
his Country against all those Factions that started up against it, an
Infallible token of a good Man.

For which the Pope having Excommunicated him, the Cordeliers exclaiming
against him in their Pulpits, Sforza and the Venetians Soliciting his Death,
the Magistrates of the contrary Faction, caused him to be burnt alive.

In the fifteenth Age.
The Council of Constance had labored successfully enough toward taking away
the Schism caused by those who contended for the Papacy: but they left the
Seeds of a division almost as dangerous between the Church and the Popes.
Councils.
The Church stood in need of Councils to prevent the like disorders for the
time to come; and to have the Holy Canons observed; but they could not allow
there was any other Sovereign Tribunal but their own, or other power that could
control their Excess. So that when they came to mention the reformation of
manners, Pope Martin and the Court of Rome, who apprehended they would search
that wound to the Quick, closed up the Council which ended the two and
twentieth of April in the Year 1418. and referred that Business till another
time.

They could not however hinder them from resolving that there should be
Councils held from time to time, the first to begin within five Years from
their breaking up, and afterward one in every seventh Year; That the place
should be assigned by the Pope, with the Consent of the Council, and upon his
refusal by the Council themselves a Month before their rising; That all the
Prelates without any other Summons, should be obliged to appear, and all
Princes invited to assist either in Person or by their Proxies.

Pursuant to this Decree, there was one assembled at Pavia, about the Month of
November in 1423. which having continued a Year, not being very numerous, nor
hoping for more, because of an almost universal Plague and War, dissolved,
having first assigned another for the next seventh Year to meet in the City of
Basile.

That began on the Nineteenth of July in Anno 1431. and lasted eighteen Years,
the three first almost in continual Broils with Eugenius IV. the four following
Years in pretty fair correspondence, the last eleven in an open War, and in
fine went and expired at Lauzanna, whither Felix whom they had elected Pope,
transferred it, to renounce the Papacy.

Let me note, en Passant that this Felix, whilst he was Amadce VIII. Duke of
Savoy, instituted the Military Order of Saint Maurice about the Year 1434.

We have observed how during these disorders the Gallican Church being
assembled at Bourges Anno 1438. not only owned the Council of Basile, and would
not give their consent to transfer it to Bologna, as the Pope had ordained: but
made that constitution so equitable and Canonical, entitled the Pragmatique
Sanction. The Council approved it, and gave it as much applause as it
afterward met with Contradictions and Attacks from the Popes; who could never
rest in quiet till they had abolisht it. Nevertheless maugre all their
endeavors it kept in being till the Year 1516. when it was suppressed by the
Concordat.

In the eight and twentieth Session of the Council of Basile, there was made
one of the most just and necessary Decrees in the World; but which shocked the
gainful Interests of too many People to be in force or observed any long time.
It did forbid that any either at Rome, or elsewhere, should take any Money,
etc. for Elections, or Confirmations, Presentations, Collations, Provisions,
Institutions, Installations, and Investitures of all sorts of Benefices,
Monasteries, and Ecclesiastical Offices, even of Cathedral Churches and
Metropolitans; neither for Sacred Orders, Benedictions, or upon sending the
Pall, nor upon account of Bulls, the Seal, Common or Petty Services, first
Fruits, whether under pretense of Custom, Privilege, or Statute to the
contrary, or in sine by what Title, or under any Color whatsoever: Ordaining
that such as contravened, whether in giving, or else in taking any thing,
should incur the Penalties of Simoniaques, and should have no right to that
Benefice where into they should have intruded themselves by such corruption;
And if even the Pope, who was the most obliged to observe the Ecumenical
Decrees of the Councils and the Holy Canons, should infringe this Decree, he
should be accused in Council.

Church.
In the same Council it was ordained, that the triennial Possessor of a
Benefice, should not be disturbed in his enjoyment of it.

As to the particular Councils of the Gallican Church, we can find but three,
one of the Province of Tours, celebrated by the Archbishop John Bernardi in
Angers Anno 1448. for restoring of the Discipline; One of that of Reims Anno
1455. by the Archbishop John Juvenal, des Vrsins in the City of Soissons for
the same end, and one at Avignon by the Legate Peter de Foix Archbishop of
Arles, Anno 1457.

Some perhaps would in this Rank place the two Assemblies of Bourges called by
Charles VII. the one where the Pragmatick was framed, the other with whom he
consulted to which of the two Popes they were to adhere, either to Nicholas or
Felix; and that which was held at Lions Anno 1447. whither the Deputies of the
Council of Basile resorted, and the Ambassadors from the German Princes, and
likewise the Electors of Treves and Colen to regulate the Conditions, upon
which Felix should renounce the Papacy.

Heresy's.
Neither any of Nickclif's, nor the Hussite Sectaries spread so far as to
infest France, or at least did take no rooting there: but in the Year 1412.
there sprung up a Sect in Picardy who were called Men of Intelligence, whereof
a Friar William de Hildernissen a German of the Carmelites Order, and one Giles
le Chautre a Secular, were the Evangelists. This Giles said he was the Savior
of Mankind, and that by him the Faithful should see Jesus Christ, as by Jesus
Christ they should behold God the Father: That the Devil and all the Damned
should one Day be saved; That the Pleasures of Love, being simple acts of
Nature, were no Crimes, but a fore-tast of Paradise; That Fastings, Penance,
Confession and Ceremonies were but useless things; That the time of the Old
Law, was that of God the Father, the time of the New Law, that of God the Son,
and that there would shortly be a third, which should be the time of the Holy
Ghost, and therein all Mankind stould be set at Liberty; That their Actions
contributed neither to Salvation nor Damnation, for that Our Lord Jesus Christ
had abundantly satisfied for the whole World. These with many other Whimseys
they openly taught. The Carmelite was forced to retract them at Bruxels, at
Cambray and at Saint Quentines, where he had dogmatized, before Peter Dailly,
who about that time was created Cardinal.

The Court of Rome did likewise place in the number of Heretics, another
Carmelite named Thomas Connect a Breton by birth, and caused him to be burnt
alive in the Year 1431. though many believe that the Evangelical Liberty he
took to reprove the abominations of the Prelates, and the Confidence he had in
carrying on his reformation to the very Springhead of Corruption, was all his
Crime. However his Sermons were so powerful, that they wrought a wonderful
Change where ever he went, moveing even the wanton Women so much, as to sell
their very Clothes and Jewels to bestow in Alms, and throw all their amorous
Toys and Ammunition into the Fire, that they might be no longer tempted with
those Vanities and dangerous Triflcs.

A certain French Priest going to Rome at the time of Jubilee in Anno 1450. ran
the same hazard as the Carmelite, because he affirmed he had lived four years
without eating. They believed it to be either an Impostor, or a Compact with
the Devil, and he was banished after they had first whipped him.

We find that in the Year 1453. one William Edeline Doctor in Divinity, and
Prior of Saint Germans en Lay, was condemned by Sentence of the Bishop of
Euureux to perpetual Imprisonment, for having abused a Woman of Quality; and to
effect this, it was said he had made a Contract with the Devil, had worshipped
him in the shape of a Ram, and had often been transported through the Air, to
those Nocturnal Assemblies, which they called their Sabat.

We read likewise in the Bourdelois Chronicle, that Anno 1435. in the time of
Peter Berland Archbishop of Bourdeaux in that Country, was discovered a grand
Cabal of those Wretches, called Witches: that many of them were thrust into
Prison, some of them were burned, and the rest poisoning themselves, left their
Carcasses to be served as the others. This Archbishop was a Peasant by Birth,
and but little Polished; nay, as I guess, more Scrupulous then Wife or
Intelligent, since he opposed the Pragmatick; but yet he led a pure and
innocent life.

Disputes.
There was War still betwixt the Jacobins and the Cordeliers, as between two
opposite Powers, and mutually jealous, each of them watching an opportunity to
Church.
take advantage of his Adversary. In the year 1460. one James de la Marchea
Cordelier having preached at Bresse in Lombardy, that the Blood of Jesus Christ
whilst it was poured out of his Veins at the time of his Passion, had lost the
Hypostatical Union, and that therefore during those three Days it was neither
Divine nor Adorable: a Jacobin Inquisitor of the Faith, cried out it was an
Heresy, commanded him to revoke that Proposition, and caused a Friar of his
Order to preach in contradiction to him. The dispute grew warm, and then it was
no longer the Opinion of two private Persons, but of both the whole Orders; the
Devout took part with either according to their Affections and Interest, the
People were cabaled and were divided, as it is usual, though they never
understood the Question in debate.

Pope Pius II. fearing the consequences of these partialities, commanded the
Generals to send the most learned of their Friars to him that he might hear
their Arguments and Reasons in this Point. This question was bandied three
whole Days before the Pope, and in the presence of the Cardinals, the Bishops
and the most Famous Doctors in Law, who are more numerous in that Court, then
the Divines. The greatest part of that Assembly, and the Pope himself inclined
to the Opinion of the Jacobins: but having need of the Cordeliers to preach up
the Croisade, which ran much in his mind, they referred the decision of this
Contest to another time, which is not come to this very Day; and in the interim
the Holy Father made a Constitution, which forbid them, upon pain of
Excommunication, and being rendered incapable of all lawful Functions, to
Mention, Preach, or Teach in Private or Public, any thing concerning this
Question, or to maintain, that either the one or the other of these Opinions is
Heretical. Nevertheless there have been some Schoolmen in the last Age, who
out of a strange Itch of raking together all these Niceties and Punctillios,
much fitter for Sophisters then solid Divines, have thrust this Question into
their large Volumes: And there are besides some People of such a depraved
Taste, and so ignorant of all Antiquity, that they do more delight in reading
this Rubbish then in perusing the Holy Fathers or the Councils.

For this little advantage, the Jacobins frequently met with great rubbs and
checks upon the Point of the Conception of the Virgin; They from time to time
renewed the attack upon this question: but they were ever routed and beat from
their ground. It happened in the year 1497. that one of their Doctors having
Preached at Rouen, that she had indeed been purified not preserved from the
Original stain, was cited before the University, and condemned to recant it
publicly. The Faculty of Theology proceeded farther, they made a Decree to
receive or admit no more Doctors hereafter, that did not first Swear to profess
and maintain that the Virgin was conceived without any blemish or stain. A
great victory for the Cordeliers to have thus obliged their Adversaries to
swear what they never intend to believe or practice.

Alms being the only Revenue of the Mendicants, they endeavored to engross the
Confessions and Burials of all Seculars to themselves, that so they might get
pr ofit both by the Living and the Dead. They had two advantages above the
Ordinaries, the first was the Union of their Community, all laboring with one
mind, and never quitting the design they have once propounded to themselves;
the Second the exterior mortisied and singular Fashion of their Habits: So that
the Churches belonging to those Monasteries were ever crowded with throngs of
People, and the Parish Churches almost deserted, the Sheep forsaking their
natural Shepherds and the solid Food of their true Nursing Fathers, to run
after the others Spiritual dainties.

In the year 1409. when the (...) came to know they had a Pope of their own
Order, which was Alexander V. they seemed as it were transported, and out of
their Senses, hurrying through every street, so verily did they imagine they
should dispose of his power to their own advantage. And indeed he did grant
them all they desired, and amongst other favors a Bull to the four Orders
Mendicants, which augmented their Privileges to such an excess, that the
University of Paris opposed it, and lopped off all those from their Body that
made use of them. The Jacobins and Carmelites renounced all right to it; but
the Cordeliers and Augustins stood up for them. The King was fain to interpose
his Authority: Proclamation was made by sound of Trumpet at the Doors of their
Covents, forbidding them either to Preach or to Confess: So that Pope John
XXIII. revoked that Bull, and the Council of Constance annulled all those
abusive Privileges. Church.


They did not desist from carrying on their Enterprises, and maintained that
one is not obliged to be at the Parish Church Masses upon Sundays and
Holy Days, nor to make Offerings to the Curates upon those Days; that such as
were obliged to have Masses sung, whether for the Living, or for the Dead, did
not acquit themselves of that Obligation if they had it done by the Curates
only, for as much as he was bound to do so by his duty: That the Law of God did
enjoin the paying of Tithes indeed, but that it matters not to whom they are
paid, provided they are bestowed for pious Works; That Saint Francis did
regularly once a Year descend into Purgatory, and take forth all those that
died in his Habit or of his Order; That the Friars Minors might hear
Confessions without approbation of the Ordinary, and provided they made
Confession to them, they were not obliged to confess to their Pastor, no not
once a Year. The Council of Basile condemned these Propositions as erroneous,
and tending to destroy the Hierarchical Order.

The Devotion of the Rosarie, and of the Virgins Psalter, instituted by Saint
Dominique, but afterward disused and neglected, were restored by the Preaching
of the blessed Alain de la Roche a Jacobin, particularly in Saxony, Belgica,
and the lesser Bretagne, and soon after confirmed by Pope Sixtus IV. You may
remember to this purpose, that Lewis XI. ordained in his time, the Devotion to
be paid to the Virgin at Noon upon the ringing of a Bell. Nor must we forget
now in the Year 1475. he commanded the Feast of Saint Charlemain should be
Solemnized, which had been otherwhile ordained by Pope Paschal upon the request
of the Emperor Frederic I. and afterward received and approved by all the
Western Churches.

Monks.
Innocent VII. Pope of Rome, approved the Rule of the third Order of Saint
Dominique. Lewis Barba Patrician of Venice, Abbot of Saint Justinas at Padoua,
reformed the Order of Saint Bennet in 1408. and instituted the Congregation of
Mount Cassin. Anno 1419. Saint Bernardin of Sienna attempted to reform the
Order of Saint Francis, and to bring them to a more strickt Observance, which
divided it as it were in two They are called of the great and the little
Observance.
Branches, that of the Observantines, or the narrow Sleeves, and that of the
Cordeliers Conventuals, or of the great Sleeves. Some Years after, to wit, in
1425. the Blessed Collect Boilet Native of Corbie, a Holy Sister of Sancta
Clara, did likewise reform the Monastery of Nunns of her Order; She died at
Ghent in the Year 1447. On the contrary the Rule of the Carmelites, as too
austere, was qualified and moderated by Pope Eugenius III. in Anno 1432. in the
same manner they hold to this Day who are called Mitigated.

The Brangling, Cobweb, Scholastic Controversies still kept the upper hand in
the University. Their Latin was gross, and had only the Termination, but not
the Phrases, and pleasing Air of the true ancient Roman Tongue. The Greek was a
greater Stranger yet then the Latin, and more barbarous: but both of them began
to be refined and polished, the Latin a little before the middle of this Age, in
imitation of Petrarque and other Italians, who after him set themselves upon
the Study of Elegancy; and the Greek about the Year 1460. when the learned
Grecians sheltred themselves in diverse Parts of the West, after the taking of
Constantinople. Gregory Tiphernas came to Paris in Anno 1460. and presented
himself to the Rector to teach the Greek Tongue, and have that Reward allowed
by Holy Decree which was granted. Hermonyme of Sparta came soon after, and
taught that Language to John Reuclin in High- Dutch is Smoke, in French and in
Greek Capnos, whence he took the name Capnion.
Reclin, who took the name of Capnion: then Janus Lascaris arrived, and by his
politeness gave a great Gusto to all the most learned Men. After that many
showed their Parts, as Poets, Orators, and Grammarians in both these Tongues.

The Credit of the University appeared very eminently at the time of the second
Schism as well as in the first. Who was, as we may say, the chief Promotrice
of the Pragmatick Sanction, so holy, and to this very Day, so much regretted by
good People.

We have hinted how the Cardinal d'Estouteville reformed the abuses of this
Body in the Year 1452. and how Lewis XI. gave Order to John Wesel a Cordelier,
to labor to banish thence those obstinate contests which were between the
Realists and the Nominals; Wesel having therefore Assembled the Principal
Officers and Heads of the University, with their Consent and Advice contrived
an Edict, dated Church.
the First of March in the Year 1473. at Senlis, which forbid Teaching any more
the opinions of the Nominals, and comma nded that all such Books of theirs as
were in the Libraries should be chained up, lest any should come to peruse
them, or transport them from that place.

There were few Learned men in France, but like Bees came out of this fruitful
Hive. Amongst the Divines you have John Gerson, whom we have mentioned, who
lived a long time in this Age, and retired to Lions, where he Died in Anno
1419. The Cardinal Dailly, Peter de Versailles Bishop of Meaux, Thomas de
Courcelles Canon of Amiens, a powerful and most admirable man for his Doctrine,
but yet more valuable for his modesty, who drew diverse of the Decrees of the
Council of Basil; William Forteon, and Stephen de Bruslefer of the Order of St.
Francis, John Siret Prior General of the Carmelites, Martin Magistri Doctor of
Sorbonne, and William Chartier Bishop of Paris who was maintained in the
Schools by Charles VII. And was a Good and Holy Man, and a great Clerk.

Amongst the Curious in humane Learning, I find Alain Chartier Brother of
William, out of whose mouth proceeded so many good Sayings, and grave
Sentences, that Margaret Stuard Lewis the Dauphins Wife, finding him one Day
fast asleep in a Hall where she was passing through with her Train, would needs
do him the Honor to bestow a kiss upon him. I find one Charles Ferdinand, who
being Born blind, gave himself nevertheless so much to Study, that he acquired
a great deal of Reputation for his knowledge in Humane Learning, in Philosophy,
and in Divinity. He took on him the Habit of St. Bennet in the Abbey de la
Couture at Manse. There was likewise Judocus Badius Famous for many of his
Commentaries, John Bouteiller advocat in Parliament, Author of the Sum
Rurale, Robert Gaguin General of the Order of the Mathurins, Library Keeper to
Charles VII. and after sent on diverse Embassies. John de Rely Bishop of Angers,
who was Confessor to Charles VIII. and harangued at the Estates of Tours for
the three Orders. Octavian de Saint Gelais, of the illustrious Family of
Lusignan, who was Bishop of Angoulesme, and began somewhat to Purge and
Beautify our French Poetry. I may add Peter Reuclin and Picus Mirandolus
without borrowing any thing from Germany or Italy, since themselves in their
Writings own they had drank in that Fountain of all Arts and Sciences, our
University.

Trithemius relates that in the year 1456. there came a young Spaniard thither
named Ferrand de Cordule Doctor in Divinity, who astonished the whole
University by his prodigious Learning; for he knew all Aristotle by rote,
together with all the Law Books, also Hippocrates, Gallen, the principal
Commentators on all those Authors, the Greek, the Latin, the Hebrew, the
Arabian, and the Caldean Languages.

Judicial Astrology, much sought into and Studied, but very little understood,
was in vogue, and had great access in the Closets of King Charles VII. and
Lewis the XI. Seven or Eight of their Prognostics are to be seen concerning
each of those Kings; and it is affirmed, but perhaps not till after the events,
that they did foretell several particulars that came to pass. The most Famous of
them was Angelo Catto, a Native of the Duchy of Tarentum, whom Lewis XI. made
Archbishop of Vienne. The Author of the Memoirs Printed and added to Comines.
of his Life, writes, that going to King Lewis XI. who was then hearing Mass at
Tours, he foretold the defeat and Death of Charles Duke of Burgundy, the very
day it happened at Nancy. But if that had been true, Philip de Comines who
Dedicates his Memoirs to him, would never have omitted it.

Printing was brought to Paris about the year 1470. by three Germans, Martin,
Vlric and Michael, very able men in that new Art. In the beginning they used
Characters that imitated writing Hand, then Square or Roman Letters, and some
time after the Gothique or Lombard Letters, and at last they came to the
Italick and Roman Character.

Physic was likewise Cultivated with more success then formerly. The Doctors
of that Faculty knowing that an Archer of Bagnolet very much subject to the
Gravel, was condemned to Death for some Crime, Petitioned the King that he
might be put into their hands to try an experiment whether they could cut him
and draw forth the Stone or Calculuos matter. Their operation Succeeded very
happily, and the Archer survived a long time after in good and perfect Health.

During this whole Age France did not furnish the Church with any one Canonised
Saint: but there were many Illustrious Prelates. The most remarkable of those
that wore the Sacred Purple, were Peter Dailly Grand Maistre of the College
Church.
of Navarre, then Bishop of Cambray, John de Roquetaillade Cardinal Archbishop
of Rouen, Vice Chancellor to the Pope and his Legate at Boulogne; Renold de
Chartres Archbishop of Reims, William d'Estouteville who was Legate in France
and reformed the University, Peter de Foix Archbishop of Arles who had been of
the Order of St. Francis, Lewis d'Albret Bishop of Cahors, who was named the
delight of the'Sacred College, John Joffredy Bishop of Arras, then of Alby,
John de Balue Bishop of Euvreux, and William Briconnet Bishop of St. Malo's,
who all signalized themselves in the greatest affairs, the six first being of
noble Parentage and rare Learning, Joffredi and la Balue of mean Birth; that
Son of a Peasant, and this of a Tailor in Saintonge; the former considerable
however for his Erudition, but la Balue only by his Intreagues and his
Fourberies. The Cardinal de Foix was he that founded the Famous College
bearing his name at Thoulouse, with five and twenty Bourses to maintain
Scholars; We have had a very Learned Prelat from thence, whose name will be
sufficiently made known to all posterity, without expressing it here.

Amongst the Bishops we may observe James and John des Vrsins, Brothers and
Successively Archbishops of Reims, Martin Gouge Son of an Inhabitant of
Bourges, who was Bishop of Clermont, and to ennoble himself assumed the name de
Charpagnes; These three lived in the time of Charles VII. whose affairs Martin
administered, and held the Seals till the time of his Death, which happened in
Anno 1444. Andrew Espinay Archbishop of Bourdeaux, had great Credit and
Employments under Lewis XI. Lewis d'Amboise Bishop of Alby, John de Rely of
Angers, and Octavian de Saint Gelais of Angoulesme heretofore mentioned, were
considerable to Charles VIII.

The Clergy were but little vexed with Tenths during this fifteenth Age, as
well for the great respect which Charles VII. had for the Church, as because
things were as yet so uncertain, that the Pope who had ever raised them at
discretion, could no longer do it without the Kings consent, nor the King
without the Popes permission or allowance, which neither of them did willingly
grant to each other: However in time they found out an expedient to share the
Dole between them, and strick the Ball very regularly each in his turn.

LEWIS XII, Surnamed The JUST, AND THE Father of the People.
King LVI.
Aged XXXVI Years complete.
POPES,
ALEXANDER 5 years during this Reign. PIUS III. Elected the 22th of September
1503. S. 26 Days. JULIUS II. Elected the last day of October in the year 1503.
S. 9 years and 4 Months. LEO X. Elected the 11th of March 1513. S. 8 years and
near 9 Months, whereof one year and 10 Months under this Reign.
LEwis Duke of Orleans Succeeded to Charles VIII. as being the nearest to him
of the Masculine Line, and his Cousin in the third and fourth degree. His Age
was ripe, his Temper very Humane, Sweet, and Just, his Prudence tried, and his
Ministers honest and disinteressed. The long Imprisonment he suffered had made
him more merciful, and his Adversities had taught him more wisdom. He proved
the better King by having been so long a Subject; and had Learned to moderate
the severities of Sovereign commands, by having undergone and felt the weight
of them.

The 27 th of May he was Crowned at Reims, the first of July he was Crowned at
St. Denis, the day after he made his entrance into Paris; and by a Decree of
the Council took the Title of King of France, and of both Sicilia's, and Duke
of Milan. This Duchy belonged to him by Right of Valentine his Grandfather.

From the first day of his ascending the Throne, he incessantly labored for
the felicity of his People, easing them from the burden of Imposts, and taking
great care that Justice should be Administered duly to them. As to the first he
diminished the Taxes year after year, though they were already easy enough;
Because he knew the Princes Exchequer to be like the Spleen, the less it is the
more healthful the Body of the State does ever find it self. He did so much
abhor new impositions, that wanting Money for his War in Italy, ho chose rather
to expose the Offices belonging to his Revenue to Sale, then to take any thing
from his People. However in length of time he found that such Venality caused
those evils he would avoid; and therefore would he have taken that off again,
had he survived but a year or two longer.

As to the distribution of Justice, he Created diverse Companies of Judges, out
of pure zeal to have it equally administered, and without any pecuniary
Interest, which ever since has been the only end of all such Creations. He
settled that called the Grand Council, which had been before projected by
Charles VIII. He made a Parliament for Normandy at Rouen, to whom he first gave
the Title of perpetual Exehequer, and three years after he did the same for
Provence in the City of Aix.

He made most excellent Ordinances for the abbreviating of all Process; but
there happening to be some Articles that touched the Privileges of the
University, that great Body stirred in it with too much heat. The tumult had
proceeded to a Sedition, had not the King made have to get to Paris: His
presence quelled the hottest Heads amongst them, and banished the Rector.

Venice and to Florence; and three Months after he received theirs who brought
him complements and excuses. King Frederic and Duke Ludovic sent none to him,
he being their declared Enemy.

From that hour diverse negociations were set on foot. Those Potentates were not
become much wiser for all the dangers they had undergone; they busied
themselves more about their little particular revenge, then to preserve the
common Liberty of Italy. Alexander had reconciled himself with the Vrsini, but
he hated King Frederic to the Death, for having denied to give his Daughter to
Borgia his Bastard; and the Venetians sought to ruin Ludovic, because he
hindered their aggrandizing, and had a design upon the City of Pisa, which they
endeavored to appropriate to themselves. As for the Florentines they had an
extraordinary passion to recover their Towns, and made a War to that end.

Thus all the three blinded by their interest, did eagerly Solicit the Kings
alliance. An occasion proffered it self wherein the Pope might oblige him;
which was, that desiring to break his marriage with Jane Daughter of King Lewis
XI. he wanted a Commission from him to take cognizance of that affair; And to
obtain this he gave the Duchy of Valentinois to his Bastard, who straightway
laid down his Cardinals Cap. The Pope sent him into France with a Bull which
named three Judges for the Kings Tooth, these were Philip de Luxembourgh
Cardinal Bishop of Man's, Lewis d'Amboise Bishop of Alby, and Peter Bishop of
Sent who was a Portugueze. The Bastard would have played the Sir Politic,
and said, he had not brought the Bull, the King informed to the contrary gave
him a sour look, and assured him he would go forward. He was therefore forced
to produce it.

He had likewise brought a Cardinals Cap for George d'Amboise Archbishop of
Rouen, who managed all Affairs; In recompense the King made him Marry Charlota
Daughter of Alain Lord d'Albret, and Treated a League with him, by which the
new Duke He called himself Duke of Valentinois.
was to serve him toward the recovery of the Milanois, and he afterward to
assist him in dispossessing all those petty Lords who detained the Cities of
Romandiola.

We must observe that about Two Ages before this, when the power of the Popes
was much weakened, such as were then Governors of the Towns belonging to the
Holy See, had usurped the absolute Sovereignty of them, and that they might
possess them with some apparent Title, had obtained the Seigneury, or Lordships
thereof from the Popes, under the Title of Vicars or Lieutenants, upon
condition of paying them a certain Tribute yearly: but since then had taken no
care to satisfy the same, and had sometimes even taken up Arms against the
Popes. The Polentines Citizens of Ravenna had usurped Ravenna and Cerviae: but
the Venetians had taken them into their hands. The Malatestes had made
themselves masters of Cesena but that returned again to the Holy See by the
Death of Dominique the last of that Branch dying without Children. The Riari
did yet hold Imola and Forli, Pandolphus Malatesti Rimini; Astor Manfrede
Faenza; John Sforza Pizaro; as the Bentivogles did Bologna, and the Baillons
Perugia.

Jane, was declared Null by the Commissioners upon clear proof that Lewis XI.
had forced him to it, though in truth he consummated it afterward. Being at
liberty he Married Anne of Bretagne Widow of his Predecessor and his first
inclinations. The Nuptials were kept the Eighteenth of January. The people of
Paris who alone of all the People in France had received much favor from Lewis
XI. highly murmured that the King should repudiate his Daughter, and there were
some scrupulous Doctors that blamed him in their Pulpits: but Jane patiently
underwent that affliction, and gave her self up entirely to God, spent her days
devoutly in the Nunnery of the Annunciation in the City of Bourges, where she
put on the Sacred Vail.

Italy, he bethought himself of securing the friendship of his Neighbors,
first of the King of England, then of Ferdinand and Isabella, and afterward of
the Archduke Son of Maximilian. Ferdinand and Isabella withdrew their Forces
out of Italy, and rendered those places to Frederic which they held in Calabria;
the Archduke by the Treaty recovered his Towns of Artois, upon condition he
should do Homage to the King for that County, and for that of Flanders and of
Charolois. And this he really did at Arras bare-headed and un-girt, in the
hands of Guy de Rochefort Chancellor of France, who was covered and sitting in
a Chair.

Maximilian, because he was engaged with Sforza, for which he had received
great Sums of Money, and had also sent an Army to enter the Duchy of Burgundy:
but the Count de Foix having easily repulsed them: And Ludovic not having a
stock of Riches large enough to satisfy his covetous indigence, he was soon
persuaded to make a Truce for some Months.

The Florentines in the mean while, and the Venetians composed their
differences by means of the Duke of Ferrara whom they chose for Arbitrator: but
Ludovic embroiled himself so much with the Venetians, that they made a League
with the King to pluck his Feathers. They were to have for their share of the
Milanois, all the Towns without the River Addo: and they imagined that they
should soon have the French Kings part likewise, who would sell it, or suffer
it to be lost by ill Government and their Divisions, as they had done the
Kingdom of Naples. But they were mistaken in the account, and found soon
afterward, that as to the matter of Princes and Estates, the next Neighbor
being ever an enemy,

This wretched Ludovic with all his Crast and Fineness in Politiques, had not
one friend, no not so much as the Duke of Ferrara his Father in Law; he was
fain to have recourse to Maximilian and to the Sultan Bajazeth; the ones
assistance was slow, very costly, and not very certain, that of the other was
infamous and odious.

July the Kings Forces entered into the Milanois on the one hand, and those
belonging to the Venetians on the other. In Fifteen days Ludovic lost all his
Country; the Venetians took all beyond the Addo: the French went no less
swiftly on, Novarre and Alexandria defended themselves but ill and were sacked,
Mortara capitulated, Pavia sent their Keys. The City of Genoa followed the
Dance, the Adornes and the Fregoses being at Daggers draw who should deliver it
up first; In fine, none kept their faith to Ludovic, neither the People, nor
Commanders, nor Cities.

In this revolution he sent his Treasures and his Children into Germany to the
Emperor Maximilian: thither he retired also himself, having first well provided
the Castle of Milan. After his departure the City received the French with joy;
Bernardin Curtio whom he believed to be the faithfullest of his Creatures, took
Money of the King, and sold the Castle to him which was held inexpugnable. A
Treachery which appeared ugly, yea even horrible to the very Purchasers, and
which loaded and clothed the seller with so much shame, that he dyed with it
about Ten or Twelve days afterward.

The King who was then at Lions went immediately to Milan. He made his entrance
in a Ducal Habit: and Sojourned about three Months in that Country. He
presently took off a fourth part of their Imposts, allowed liberty of Hunting
to the Nobles which they had not before, and thinking to make them more
affectionate to his Service, distributed a considerable part of his demeasnes
amongst them, particularly to Trivulcio, on whom he likewise bestowed the
Government of all the Duchy.

Italy, excepting Frederic, Congratulated his good Success; and the Florentines
engaged to assist him in the Conquest of Naples, upon condition he would help
them to recover Pisa again for them.

Caesar Borgiae; he lent him Forces with which he regained the Cities of Imola
and Forli. In which last was Cathrine Sforza Mother and Tutoress of the Riari,
whom he led away Prisoner to Rome.

Milanois, retarded his progress. Ludovic lay in wait to re-enter, there were
few French in the Towns, the Nobility were offended at the Pride of Trivulcio
their equal, at his too great passion for the Party of the Guelphs, and that
upon some hubbub he had killed some with his own hand in the open Market place;
And the people were Scandalized at the Liberty the French took with their
wives. Ludovic well informed of all these particulars, and having regained the
affections of the Milanois, returns with fifteen Hundred men at Arms who were
all Burgundians, and twelve Thousand Swisse whom he had raised with his Money,
not being able to obtain any Aid of Maximilian.

Upon his Arrival the People receive him with open Arms, the City of Coma
having chaced out the French. Trivulcio perceiving so sudden a change, leaves
Milan in the night time, and very humbly retires to Mortara with his Cavalry.
All places surrender themselves to Ludovic, excepting the Castle of Milan, and
some of those which the Venetians held.

This Ebb notwithstanding did not run very low: Lewis de la Trimoville, whom
the King sent with a very good Army, meets him near Novarre which had newly
Surrendered. The Swisse which this unfortunate man had in his Service, being
gained by those that were in the French Army, refused to give Battle, and
retired Novarre; he was forced to follow them. All that he gained of them, was
that they promised to Guard him to some place of safety. But next day the
eighth of April, he was discovered disguised like a private Soldier in the
midst of them, (perhaps themselves made signs to know him by) and sent to the
King at Lions. He caused him to be removed from thence to Loches, where he was
shut up till his Death ten whole years, with a severity so unusual and contrary
to the mercy of that good Prince, that it was thought to be a Visible
punishment from Heaven. The Cardinal Ascagne his Brother was also delivered
into the hands of the French, by the Venetians who happened to light upon him.

The Swiss upon their return home, Siezed upon the City of Bellinzonne, which
shuts up the passage to the Mountains on that side; so that holding this place
they could fall into Milan when ever they pleased. At first they would have
parted with it for a very small matter of Money; but after they had found of
what importance it was, no proffer could be so considerable as to make them let
it go out of their hands.

Milan the Heads of ten or twelve of their Chiefs, and a Sum of two hundred
thousand Crowns. Upon Holy- Friday, a day of Mercy, the Cardinal d'Amboise
received the Amend Honorable of those People in the Town Hall, and pardoned
their Crime, in the name of the King. The other Cities were Taxed, but
according to their faculties, and at such moderate Sums, that they were rather
Subsidies then any punishment.

Maximilian, hindered his Forces from drawing out of Milanois, to go about the
Conquest of Naples. Whilst he was treating to renew the Truce with him, he sent
a Party of them under the conduct of the Lord de Beaumont, to subdue the City
of Pisa in favor of the Florentines, and another Party commanded by Yves
d'Allegre to Caesar Borgia to assist him in turning out the Vicars of
Romandiola.

As for Beaumont, having been beaten off upon three assaults at Pisa, finding
his Swiss Mutined, and the Florentins not very diligent in supplying him with
provisions, as they had engaged to do, he leaves that City at Liberty, and
takes his march toward Milan.

Borgia without striking one blow drew into his Nets, the Cities of Pesaro and
Rimim; Fayano maintained a Siege three times, but at the last their courage
failed and it Surrendered; But this was not till the year after. The protection
which the King granted to Bentivogle, and the Florentins, kept him from laying
Hands likewise Bologna and Pisa, as he had a great mind to do.

This year the 25th of February on St. Mathias day, Charles Son of Philip
Archduke of Austria, and of Jane of Spain Daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella
came into the World, and near the same time the little Prince Michael went out
of it, as it were to yield up the Birthright to him. This Michael was Son of
Isabella eldest Sister of Jane and Wife of Emanuel King of Portugal, who died
before her Child. The Pope gave Emanuel permission to Marry the Third, who was
named Margaret.

Centenary Jubilee ended this fourteenth Age. After it had been Celebrated at
Rome, Alexander sent it into the Provinces, and made use of this Pious juncture
to animate the Christian Princes to league themselves against the Turks; who in
favor of Ludovic had made cruel irruptions in Friuli; Whilst the Venetians
were employed in the Milan Wars, and withal had taken from them the City of
Modon and Coron in Peloponese.

It seemed as if Heaven invited the Christians to this enterprise; for during
the Years 1500 and 1501 all Germany and the Low Countries saw the shapes of
Crosses of all Sizes not only in the Air, but likewise on their Clothes,
especially on their Linen, as their Shirts, Night-caps, Napkins, and Sheets.
They were of a confused Color, and most times appeared Bloody, and could not
be scowred out with Soap, but vanished by little and little. So many Authors of
those Countries testify this Prodigy, that it may be believed without too much
Credulity. Nor would it be an impossible thing to deduce some reasons for it
from ordinary causes; And we may boldly say that they were so disposed by the
Sovereign Master of the Universe, who fore-seeth all things, that the effects
which they produce, though they be purely natural, may however, when they draw
our Eyes to consider the singularity of them with attention forewarn us of his
Holy will, or presage what is to come.

King Lewis had strength enough to have Conquered the Kingdom of Naples without
help: And yet he was so ill advised as to share it with Ferdinand King of
Arragon, and thus allowed of a Partner with him in Italy, where he was absolute
Master. Ferdinand's division was Puglia and Calabria; the King had Naples,
Terra del'Avoura and Abbruzzo.

Ferdinand had for a long time devoured all that Kingdom in his hopes; for he
pretended that Alphonso the Great, Brother of John his Father, could not give
it to Ferdinand his Bastard: but he concealed this desire of his with a
profound dissimulation, in so much as although he had shared in the Spoil of
the unfortunate Frederic, he still made a show as if he would assist him,
thereby to have the fairer opportunity to oppress him. To this purpose he sent
the great Captain to him, who under pretense of securing some places of safety
for a Retreat upon occasion, made them give him two or three of their best
Towns, which he detained when the Treaty with the French came to be declared.

Daubigny, the Count de Gajazza, and the Valentinois commanded the Kings Army
by Land, Philip de Cleves Ravestein commanded that by Sea, which rendevouz'd at
Genoa. Frederic having no aid but from Fabricia Columna Constable of the
Kingdom, did make no long resistance. When the French had forced Capoua, where
seven or eight Thousand Persons were Massacred, and Naples and Cajeta terrified
at the cruel fate of that City had afterward surrendered: he came to a Treaty
with Daubigny and Nemours, whereby he agreed to give up all those Towns in the
division made for the King within six days. They suffered him to keep the
Island of Ischia for six Months, to retire whither he pleased, and to take away
any thing out of the Castles of Naples, excepting the Cannons belonging to
Charles VIII.

Being reduced to this condition, having no Kingdom, and his relation Ferdinand
having betrayed him under color of assistance, he thought he had no other game
to play but to cast himself upon the Kings mercy. He had a safe conduct given
him to go into France; where he was received with much Humanity, and obtained a
Pension of thirty Thousand Crowns, which was continued to him even after the
French were driven again out of Naples.

In the French Army there were a great many young Princes and Lords that went
Volunteers: Amongst others Lewis eldest Son of Gilbert Earl of Montpensier. It
is related of him that going to pray to God over his Fathers Tomb at Puzzeoli,
reflecting in his thoughts upon the miseries he had endured, and the deplorable
manner of his Death, his blood was so moved thereby that he was put into a
Fever of which he Died at Naples, thereby demonstrating that to be a false
belief and observation, That Love ever descends toward our Posterity, but
never ascends to our Parents.

Gonsalvo on his side had as little trouble in Conquering the other part of the
Kingdom. Frederic had put his Son Alphonso into Tarenta, which he thought
impregnable, having left the care of his Son, and of the place to the Earl of
Potentianne, and Leonard Bishop of Rodes. These two Captains finding no hopes
of Succors, capitulated in good time, and promised to surrender the place in
four Months. Had they held it but six, the quarrel that happened between the
French and Spaniards had saved it, and with it their young Prince. This
surrender completed the Conquest of the Kingdom. Gonsalvo had sworn to that
young Prince upon the Holy Eucharist, that he would give him the liberty to
retire whither soever he pleased: yet after all he detained him and sent him
into Spain to Ferdinand, who indeed treated him with much more humanity, then
he could expect after so much Treachery.

Rauestein went with the Fleet against the Turks; King Ferdinand though he were
entered into the League, refused to send his Ships. The want of good
intelligence between the French and the Venetians, turned this expedition to
their great shame. The French having Attaqu'd Metelin's Capital City in the
Island of the same name, lost a great number of their Brave Men there: at their
return a Tempest horribly shattered them; and such as were forced into the
Islands belonging to the Venetians, found them a more faithless and ruder Enemy
than the Turks.

Maximilian, that he might have from him the Investiture of the Duchy of
Milan. About the end of September the Cardinal George d'Amboise who was called
the Legate (the Pope having given him that Commission in France) went upon that
Errand to wait upon him in the City of Trent with a stately Equipage, his Train
consisting at least of Eighteen Hundred Horse. The Emperor demanded with great
instance the freedom and release of the Sforza's; he agreed to that of the
Cardinal Ascagnia, and had his word reciprocally for a prolongation of the
Truce, and the Investiture, but which should be only for the Kings Daughters,
not for the Sons.

Charles his Grand Son. The Archdukes Ambassadors being come to the King at
Lions, that Marriage was agreed upon the Tenth of August, it was again
confirmed by the Archduke and Jane of Castille his Wife in the Month of
November in their passage thorough France into Spain.

They were magnificently received at Paris; the Archduke took his Seat in
Parliament in quality of Pair of France. The King and Queen entertained them at
Blois Fifteen days together, and caused them to be conducted to the Frontiers
with all imaginable honor, even with the power of granting Pardon in every
City they passed thorough.

Naples had not been well expressed, there soon arose a Debate for the Country
called Capitanata, This word is corrupted from Catapanat* a name which one
Catapan, General for Basilius the Greek Emperor, gave to this Country.
of very great importance, because of the Toll for Cattle which were brought
thither to Graze in Winter; the French would have it to be a part of Abbruzo,
the Spaniards of Puglia. From words they proceeded to blows, the Spaniards more
haughty, although the weaker, began the brawl in several places. The two
Generals, the Duke of Nemours and Gongales conferring together concluded a
Cessation to bring the controversy to an amicable composure: but the Spaniards
soon broke it again by diverse Acts of Hostility. In so much as the King, who
was then at Ast, sent to the Duke of Nemours a command to make downright War
upon them, since they had already violated the Peace two several times.

He was gotten into Italy to endeavor and take care for the preservation of
his Duchy of Milan, and the Florentins his Allies, and suppress the horrible
Tyrannies of Coesar Borgia, called the Duke of Valentinois. For as to the
former Maximilian had broke the Truce, the Swiss threatened him with an
irruption into the Milanois, unless they might have Bellinzzone settled upon
them, which was already in their hands, and the Venetians did openly enough
show their hatred against him. And for the latter, there was a League made
betwixt the Vitellozzi, the Vrsini, John Paul Baillon, and Pandolphus Petrucci,
to restore Peter de Medicis, to the Signory of Florence; as for Coesar Borgia,
he brought all the Petty Princes of Italy into despair, not sparing the King of
France's Allies.

Vitellozzi with grievous Menaces to Surrender up the Towns to the Florentins,
and by this means gained so great Credit and Interest at Court, that the King
believing him a very necessary instrument for his Affairs, renewed the Alliance
with Alexander VI. which drew the hatred of all Italy upon him, and perhaps the
Curse of God; with

Whilst he was in Lombardy, the Genoese invited him to honor their City with
his Presence. He made his entrance in great Pomp the Six and Twentieth of
August, and after he had tarried there Ten days returned into France.

The War in Naples and settlement of that Conquest, which seemed almost
perfected, required him not to have left Italy so soon: but he relied on the
Truce which he thought was certainly consented to by Maximilian, though indeed
it was not concluded.

In a short time the Spaniards were driven almost out of all the places of
Capitanata, Puglia, and Calabria, and Goncales found himself shut up in
Barletta without Provisions or Ammunition. The War had been at an end if the
Venetians had not speedily furnished him, or if d'Aubigny had been believed; he
would have brought the whole Army to have forced him there: but the Duke of
Nemours divided them most unluckily into several bodies to besiege the other
Towns; and in the mean while Gonsales wisely timing his Affairs, recovered
himself.

France, conferred with the King at Lions, and treated an accommodation
touching the business of Naples, by which it was agreed; that Charles the Son
of Philip, but one year old, should be Married to Claude the Kings eldest
Daughter, which Queen Anne very passionately desired: that for her Dowry she
should have the Kingdom of Naples; that in the mean time the Kings should enjoy
their Divisions, and that the Country which was in Debate should be Sequestered
in the hands of the Archduke. The Ambassadors from Ferdinand his Father in
Law, whom he brought with him, and Nemours obeyed: but Gonsales refused to
submit to it, unless he had an express Order from Ferdinand.

A reinforcement of two Thousand Germans which he had newly received from
Maximilian, the assurance he had that the Pope and the Venetians declined the
Kings interest, and the Information given him that four thousand French which
were set on Shore at Genoa, had disbanded by the failure of the Treasurers, who
believing the Peace was concluded had kept back their Pay, raised his courage,
and he assured himself of being owned, provided his success deserved it.

Till then the French had the advantage, but fortune turned her back upon them
on a sudden, the King neglecting to make the necessary provision, relying upon
the Archdukes faith, and the Spaniards recruiting his Forces during this
mock-Peace. Besides all this the rashness of the French Generals who
imprudently engaged the Enemy, and fought with more of fury then conduct, lost
all; d'Aubigny who ought to have drawn things out in length, and waited the
French Supplies, made have to fight the body of their Army Commanded by Hugh de
Cardonna, Emanuel de Benavide, and Antonio de Leva. This was on the one and
twentieth April near Seminara in Calabria; and in the same place where a few
years before he gained a memorable Victory, he now met a contrary fate.

His defeat did in some manner oblige the Duke of Nemours to try his fortune,
and endeavor to vanquish Gonsalvo before this General should be joined with
the victorious Army. He fought him near Cerignoles in Puglia the eight and
twentieth of the same Month, and had yet more misfortune then d'Aubigny, for he
was slain upon the place: and d'Aubigny had made his escape to Angitola. It Is
true he was immediately besieged there, and in few days forced to capitulate,
and agree that all his Men should quit that Kingdom, himself remaining a
hostage till that were fully performed.

After this Gonsales had nothing that could hinder him from going whither he
would. Naples opened her Gates to him the thirteenth of May, and received him
with acclamations of Joy, the French Soldiers that were there retiring into the
Castles. The Cities of Capoua and Aversa followed the example of Naples. Amidst
this grand revolution, the constant fidelity of Peter Caracciole Duke of Malfy,
deserved singular commendation; he refused all the advantageous conditions
which Gonsales proffered him, and chose rather to lose all his Lands, and go
out of that Kingdom with his Wife and Children, then to be wanting in his Faith
to the French.

The Chasteau Neuf, or New Castle did not hold out long, Peter de Navarre
having made a breach by springing of a Mine, the Garrison was so astonished at
this unknown new-thunder which burst out of the Earth, that they surrendered
del'Ovo held three Weeks longer, and was likewise taken by the same invention.

You may therefore observe that in this War Peter de Navarre a Soldier of
Fortune, bearing the name of his own Country, taught them the way of filling a
Mine with Gunpowder, to blow up their Walls, whether of his own invention, or
rather he bringing it to greater perfection. For it was said that he had seen
it practiced by the Genoese at Serazenella, when they besieged it upon the
Florentins in the year 1487. where the Mine having only cracked the Wall,
because it was not deep enough, nor enough charged, they had laid aside this
invention as of little use or effect: But that he having observed their
mistakes, and the cause why it miscarried, corrected them and had found the way
to make them very useful.

There yet remained several places in possession of the French, as Aquilea, and
the Rock of Evander, some others in Abruzzo, and Venouza in Puglia, where the
brave Lewis d'Ars and the Duke of Malfy had put themselves in after the Battle
of Cerignoles. Also Rossana, Matelona, Sanseverina, and two or three other
Cities belonging to the Lords of the Angevin Faction; still held for the Party:
And as the Battle of Cerignoles was rather a rout then a defeat, Yves d'Alegre
had carried off four thousand Foot, and four hundred Men at Arms, whom he had
quartered about Cajeta to refresh themselves.

This place being strong and withal a Seaport to receive Succors from France,
Gonsales went and laid Siege before it to shut up that back door: d'Alegre
immediately put in all the men he had left him, and defended himself well
enough till the Arrival of the French Army.

The Archduke at his parting from Lions was gone to visit the Duke of Savoy
his Brother in Law. He was not afraid upon the receipt of all this news to
return to the King at Blois: This was a great Testimony of his good conscience
and integrity, or a very bold and confident dissimulation. He omitted nothing
that might seem to justify him, sent away immediately to Gonsales, and wrote
earnestly to his Father in Law. In fine, he demeaned himself so fairly, that
the King believed he acted with sincerity, and prayed him not to apprehend that
he would tax him with it, For if his Father in Law had committed a piece of
Treachery, he would in no wise act like him, but would rather a Kingdom should
be lost, which he was able to regain, then to lose his honor which can never
be retrieved.

Ferdinand would not yet clearly discover his intentions to his Son in Law: he
designed to hold him in suspense that he might hold the King so too, lest he
should make have to relieve the Castles of Naples and Cajeta which still held
out. But when Philip had made known to him by a Courier that he should not
leave the Court of France till he had fully satisfied the King in this matter,
he sent ambassadors thither who diowned his proceedings, as having exceeded his
Commission (which however was not true). And after this thinking to gain time
by new Forberies, they made a new proposition, which was to surrender the
Kingdom to Frederic: but the King would hear nothing from a Prince in whom
there was no Faith, and commanded them to depart the Kingdom. As for the
Archduke, he treated him still civilly, and suffered him to return into
Flanders.

France, the King had resolved to shock Ferdinand with all his might and power;
And to this purpose he set four Armies on Foot, three at Land, and one for the
Sea. The greatest of the Land Armies commanded by la Trimoville, and composed
of eighteen thousand Foot, and near two thousand Men at Arms, were to recover
the Kingdom of Naples; and the other three to attack Spain. The first commanded
by the Lord d'Abret and the Marshall de Gie were to make an irruption toward
Fontarabia; this consisted of five thousand Foot, Swiss, and French, and about
one thousand Men at Arms. The second conducted by the Marshall de Rieux almost
twice that number, had order to enter by Roussillon. The third was a Naval Army
who at the same time were to scower the Coasts of Catalongne, and of the
Kingdom of Valentia, and take care that nothing should be conveyed from Spain
to the Kingdom of Naples.

La Trimoville who was upon the march with his Forces moved slowly; for most
part of the Italian Lords that had taken money of the King to furnish him with
men at Arms failed him, only the Florentins helped him to two hundred. Besides
there was no secure passing them at Rome without an agreement with his
Holiness, who being diversely influenced by the ambition of his Son, and his own
apprehensions, had much ado to come to a resolution. He at last declared he
would be Neuter, and that both the Kings should have liberty to pass through his
Countries and raise men there, though they knew him to be a Spaniard by
inclination as well as by Birth, and that underhand he favored Gonsales in
all he could.

French Forces were in the Territories of Sienna, la Trimoville was Siezed with
a Malady which put him out of the condition of L^ading them. He being disabled,
the King gave that command to Charles de Gonzaguez Marquess of Mantoua, whose
Faith seemed so weakly founded, being a reconciled Enemy, that the King himself
had forbid the Florentins but the year before to take him for their General.
When they were near Rome, the Death of Pope Alexander happened by a strange
accident, but which deservedly deprived him of his Life, and over-turned the
vast designs of his Son.

This Bastard having a desire to enjoy the spoil of Cardinal Adrian Cornet, had
made an appointment with the Pope to go and Sup with him in his Vineyard Or
Vignola, pleasant Gardens etc.
, and had caused some Bottles of exquisite Wine to be brought thither, but
which were mixed and prepared to poison their Host. Now it happened that the
Father and the Son being Arrived very early, and very thirsty, by reason of the
heat of the Season, asked for some drink, and whilst the Servant who was privy
to the secret was gone out of the way, another Valet gave them some of that
same Wine. The Father who drank of it pure, died the very same day, which was
the Seventeenth of August, the Son who was more vigorous and had mingled it
with water, had time to make use of remedies, and being wrapped up in the belly
of a Mule recovered: but such a languishment remained upon him as would not
suffer him to act when his affairs most required it.

Naples. The Cardinal d'Amboise who was at Milan, being come with great speed
to Rome for the Election of another Pope, conceived a design of getting it
himself, and finding that the City of Rome was in great trouble and full of
Soldiers, because of the Faction of the Vrsini, who would be revenged on the
Duke of Valentinois, and that of the Collonnas who protected him, he thought he
might make use of the Kings Forces, and staid them some time near that place:
but by the same means he imposed upon the Sacred College the necessity of
Electing him to the Popedom, which he desired more for the Kings sake then his
own. Now Julian de la Rovere Cardinal of St. Peter's had the same ambition as
the other: but not being able to compass his own Election by reason of the
Vicinity of the French Army, and the Tumults that were in Rome, he had so much
craft as to persuade him that he ought not to suffer those Forces to approach
nearer then within six Leagues of Rome.

The College being at Liberty Elected Francis Picolomini Nephew of Pius II.
who took the same name as his Uncle. This Pope was in a Dying condition and
could not survive above two or three Months at most: So that the Cardinal de la
Rovere had only as we may say deposited the Papacy in his hands, being assured
he could not fail to have it after his Death. And notwithstanding he made the
Cardinal de Amboise believe, that it should be infallibly for him, that so
might he cause his Forces to March.

The new Pope in effect lived but six and twenty days: But it was for the
advantage of the Cardinal de Rovere; For the Cardinals, the very same Evening
they entered in Conclave, named him almost all with one Voice, so well had he
persuaded them that he would restore the honor of the Holy See, and the
Liberty of Italy.

Borgia, these are in short his adventures. Under the Papacy of Pius III. he
was like to have had his Brains beaten out by the Ursini and the Colonnas, who
were reconciled to fall upon him; hardly did he make his escape into the Castle
St. Angelo. The King of France had taken him into his protection, which gave
occasion to the Ursini who had received money of him, to fall off, and
treacherously side with the Spanish Party. In recompense this perfidious man
breaks his faith with his Protector, and did likewise make an agreement with
his Enemies. But his alliance brought them no great advantage; For immediately
Perugia, Piombino, Urbin, Pezaro, Camerino, Senigalia, which he had invaded,
returned to their Lords; Those of Romandiola, persevered in his obedience, till
news was brought them, that he was hid in the Castle St. Angelo, denuded of
Forces and Friends. Then some of them rendered themselves to the Pope, and
others to the Venetians.

He had four places left yet which he offered to confide in the hands of Pope
Julius, who at first showing himself very generous, would not accept of them,
and suffered him to retire whither he pleased: but having afterward bethought
himself, he sent and caused him to be dragged out of a Galley at Ostia where he
was Embarked, and detained him in Prison, till he had got those places out of
his hands. Then he allowed him to go to Gonsales, who having kindly received
him sent him however into Spain, where he was confined to a perpetual
Imprisonment. He made his escape thence about three years end, and took refuge
under John d'Albret King of Navarre, his wives Brother: And in fine, Anno 1516.
he was slain in a Fight or rencounter by a private Gentdarme who knew him not.

Montoua substituted in the place of la Trimoville, was prosperous enough. He
made a Bridge over the Gariglian, and under the favor of his Cannon passed his
Army in sight of Gonsales who had bragged that he would hinder them. But the
very same day the French Captains conceived some mistrust of his conduct,
because it seemed to them he spared the Enemies, when if he had followed his
blow he had utterly defeated them, and had regained the whole Kingdom. There
were some likewise that accused him of holding secret intelligence with the
Spaniards; for which reasons finding himself to be suspected, he feigned
Sickness to have an opportunity to withdraw. He took with him a good part of
the Italian Cavalry, all the remainder that were of that Country dispersed, or
went to serve the Enemy.

French conferred the command upon the Marquess de Salusses. Gonsales being
encamped on a Moorish ground, called otherwhile Palus Minturniae, within a
League of their Bridge, put them to a full stop, and made them pass their
Winter in very cold and untenentable Lodgings.

The inconveniences of the Season almost ruined their Army, and the sharkings
of the Commissaries to whom the ruin of Armies is profitable, completed it.
The best of their Officers died of Sickness, and on the contrary the Enemies
increased their numbers by the additions of the Vrsini. The Marquess
understanding they had passed the Gariglian to come and attack him, he
retreated to Cajeta.

Gonsales besieged him immediately; the Marquess finding a Horrible Famine
would sooner be with him, then any relief, made his capitulation the first Day
of the year 1504. It imported that the Soldiers might go free away either by
Sea or Land, and that all Prisoners should be delivered up without Ransom.
Gonsales interpreting this in his own Sense and Mode, excluded such as belonged
to the Kingdom of Naples. Lewis d'Ars would not be comprehended in this Treaty,
but retreated with Trumpets sounding and Colors flying quite through all Italy.

The cause of these Misfortunes was laid at the Doors of the Financiers, John
Heroet Intendant of the Finances, was condemned to Banishment, with so much the
greater Justice, as being in the King's Favor, he nevertheless had a greater
Love for Money, (which is the real, and only true Sovereign of those people)
then for the Honor of so good a Master.

The three Armies which Lewis had sent against Spain, put him only to expenses
without any Progress. The Naval one scowred the Coast of Castille and Valentia,
then retired to Marseille; and for the two Land ones, that which was commanded
by Alain d'Albret and the Marshall de Gie, only saluted the Walls of
Fontarabia, then disbanded thorough the Contests of the two Chiefs, and perhaps
out of the little affection the Lord d'Albret had for the King's Service, by
reason of the Differences formerly between them in Bretagne, when they courted
the Duchess Anne; such as remained went to join the third which besieged
Salses. These having battered the Place forty Days together, King Ferdinand
arrives with thirty thousand Men, which made them raise their Siege.

After this there was a Truce between the two Kings, as to their Countries of
France and Spain, by the mediation of Frederic. Ferdinand made him believe that
he was ready to restore the Kingdom to him, if Lewis would consent, and
propounded to bestow his Sister in Marriage upon Alphonso: she was Widow of
Ferdinand the Young, King of Naples.

Spanish Fourbes and Intrigues, were so great as cast him into a fit of
Sickness which brought him to extremity. The Queen believing him dead, thought
of retiring her self into Bretagne, and sent away her Equipage. The Marshall
de Gie having stopped it incurred her indignation; she could never forgive this
in him, who was born her Subject, and prosecuted him Criminally with that heat,
that the King was forced to send his Process to the Parliament of Toulouze, as
the most severe in the Kingdom, where notwithstanding they could find no Color
to condemn him to any other Punishment, but to be banished from Court.

The Spaniard using still the same Artisices, had sent his Ambassadors into
France together with those of the Archduke his Son to Treat of a Peace. But as
they offered nothing that was satisfactory, they were dismissed: and the King
made an Alliance with the Emperor, and with the Archduke.

By this Treaty they confirmed the Marriage of his eldest Daughter, or of the
Second, in case the Elder died, with Prince Charles; which he caused to be
signed by Francis de Valois, his presumptive Successor to the Crown, and other
Princes of the Blood, and Grandees of the Kingdom. The Emperor gave him the
investiture of the Duchy of Milan, for him and for his Children, as well
Males, if he had any, as his two Daughters, provided he paid 120000 Florins
payable in two Six Months, a pair of Gold Spurs every Christmas Day, and an
assistance of five hundred Lances, when the Emperor should go to take the
Imperial Crown at Rome.

Frederic King of Naples, who was now fully undeceived of the fraudulent hopes
given him by Ferdinand; and shortly after toward the end of the Year, happened
that of Isabella Wife of Ferdinand, a great and generous Princess; and indeed
the Spaniards lift her above all other Heroines.

Castille, and the Alliance of Henry King of England, whose eldest Son Arthur
had married his Sister Catharine, began to create some fears in Lewis, some
confidence in Maximilian, and some kind of jealousy in Ferdinand himself, who
perceived that his Son-in-law would not leave the Administration of Castille to
him, as Isabella had ordained by her Testament.

By these motives the King and he made Peace, which they fastened with some
Ties. Ferdinand married Germain Daughter of John de Foix Vicount of Narbonne,
and of Mary the King's Sister, who gave him his share of the Kingdom of Naples
in Dowry, upon condition it should all fall to her Husband if she died the
first, but should return to the King if she survived, and brought no Children.

Naples, and the Gentlemen of the Angevin Faction, were restored to their own,
the Queen Widow of Frederic went out of France, and retired to Alphonso Duke
of Ferara her Relation.

Philip from passing into Spain with his Wife. The Castillans soon flocked to
this Young Prince, Handsome, Liberal, and who had married their Sovereign;
Ferdinand was forced to give way to him, and to go out of Castille, never to
return so long as Philip lived. Very happy yet, that he left him the Indies and
the Kingdom of Naples; whither he made haste, because Gonsales would have put
it into the Hands of Philip, finding he could not usurp it for himself, as he
could heartily have desired.

France, and other most notable Persons, having considered the Inconveniences
that would flow from the Marriage of the King's Eldest Daughter, with Charles
of Austria, assembled of their own proper mouvement, as they said, in the City
of Tours where the King was, and entreated him to give her to Francis Duke of
Valois his presumptive Heir, which he granted them forthwith, and they
contracted the two Parties the eight and twentieth day of May. A fresh Affront
which Maximilian might add in his Red-Book, where he wrote down all those
Injuries the French had done him: Like such as lay aside a great many Wares,
but can never find Money to pay or fetch them away.

The following Month he sent to Summon the King, to perform what he had
promised by the Treaty, which was to restore the banished Milanese, the fifty
thousand Florins for the Investiture, the five hundred Lances to attend him
into Italy, whither he desired to go to take the Imperial Crown. The King
satisfied him in all things, excepting the Payment, which was not yet due: but
underhand he supported the Duke of Guelders against the Archduke, and put some
jealousy into the Heads of the Pope and the Venetians; insomuch as they prayed
the Emperor not to enter into Italy with an Army.

The Pope having discovered the Genius, and the Conduct of these Princes, being
Proud and Presumptuous, believed himself to be above them all in Understanding,
as well as in Dignity; that therefore he could awe them with a Nod, lead them
as he pleased, and in the end destroying them by one another, drive them both
out of Italy, and govern alone himself; And they on their Parts were weak
enough to believe they could do nothing without him, and so by their fears
increased his Power.

He made the King set a great Value upon the Power he gave him, to dispose of
the Benefices in Milanois, and the two Cardinals Caps, the one for the Nephew
of the Cardinal d'Amboise, the other for la Trimovilles: and therefore for
this, he in return obtained that the King should employ his Forces to recover
Bologna for him out of the Hands of John Bentivoglio. This Lord finding himself
assaulted by him who had ever been his Protector, entreated him at least to
interceed with his Holiness, that he might have the liberty to go out of the
Town,

Julius did not seem to be a jot the better pleased with the French, but on the
contrary he despised the King and the Nation, though he had very great
obligations to them besides. For in the time of Pope Alexander his Capital
Enemy, he found his Refuge in France, and a great deal of kindness from Lewis
six years together: but far from bearing in mind so many Favors, this good
Prelate, when his Brain was pretty well warmed with Wine, it evaporated in
Discourses injurious both to the King and Kingdom of France. The King and
Courtiers were not wanting in their returns by reparties, so much the more
picquant as they were Ingenious, and which left their tormenting Stings in his
haughty and implacable Soul.

Genoa, where his Emissaries by their contrivance, turned a Commotion which
happened betwixt the Nobility and the People, into a downright revolt against
the King. The mutinous Rabble being at perpetual Discord with the very insolent
Nobless, chose eight Tribunes, under whose Authority they took those Places,
which Lewis de Fiesque held along the River, and far from restoring them as the
King commanded, besieged Monaco, so that Ravestein not thinking himself secure
at Genoa went thence, and then they Elected a Duke, who was only a simple Dyer,
named Paul de Nova.

The Pope had omitted no underhand Devices to excite this Rebellion. The
Emperor on his Part had blown up this Flame as much as it was possible; and yet
both the one and the other left these Wretches in the Perils they had drawn
them to. They had raised a Fort to defend the Passage into the Mountains which
surrounds their City, and had posted themselves near it with all their Militia.
The King presenting himself with twenty thousand fighting Men, Mastered it at
the first Assault, and put their Army to a Rout; which astonished them so much,
that they brought him the Keys of their Town without any Composition.

April, he made his Entrance in Arms, having his Back and Breast-piece on, his
Sword drawn in his Hand, all the People crying out for Pardon and Mercy, and
the Women and Children clothed in White, casting themselves down at his Feet.
Their Crime was expiated only by the Blood of Demetrius Justinian, of Paul de
Nova, and a fine of three hundred thousand Ducats, which was laid out in
building of Castles to bridle them. The King's Clemency pardoned all the rest,
and made them experiment the truth of that Devise, which he had on his Coat of
Armor the Day he made his Entrance. It was a King of the Bees surrounded with
his Swarm, with these apt Words: Non utitur aculeo Rex cui paremus.

Italy, to have made a mighty Progress which way soever he would have turned
his Sword: but he was so fearful of displeasing the Pope, and of drawing the
Innundation of all Germany upon Milanois, very much exasperated against him by
some Speeches of Maximilians in their Diet, that to avoid all jealousy, both in
the one and other, that he designed any Enterprise, he disbanded his Forces; He
had likewise returned immediately into France, had he not waited for King
Ferdinand, who desired to confer with him.

The Archduke Philip died in the five and twentieth of September in the
foregoing Year, being eight and twenty years old. By his Testament he left
Charles his eldest Son under the Protection of King Lewis, and desired him to
take the Guardianship; which he generously did, and had so great and particular
a care of his Education, assigning him Philip de Crovi-Chevres a most ingenious
Lord, for his Governor, that he made him much more able and knowing, then
consisted with the benefit of France.

Jane de Castille his Wife, who before had her Mind a little discomposed, was
so concerned at his Death, that she lost all her Wits and Reason; she being
therefore incapable to Govern, Ferdinand parted from Naples, where he had been
to take Possession, to come and administer the Kingdoms of his Grandson.

In his Passage he conferred with the King at Savonna; each of them treated the
other with all imaginable Honor, and Token of reciprocal Affection. King Lewis
went first to visit Ferdinand in his Galley, Ferdinand came to see him in his
House, putting themselves thus into one another Power without any precaution.
They Swear upon the most Holy Sacrament to keep the Peace: but the Event made
it apparent, that on Ferdinand's Side it was but feigned; he stood no longer in
need of the Friendship of Lewis; the jealousy of the Archduke which had before
troubled him was now vanished with his Life.

The German Princes were much heated in the Diet of Constance against the King:
they were made to believe that he despised them, and that the Army he had
Marched over the Mountains to Chastize the Genoese, were to invade all Italy.
In this belief they had promised the Emperor to set a Potent Army on Foot: but
when Intelligence came that he had Disbanded his, they grew Cool on the
sudden, and refused to furnish the Soldiers they had promised.

Upon the Report of their great Preparations for War, the King, the Pope, the
Swisse, though otherwise Enemies amongst themselves, reunited to hinder the
Emperor from coming into Italy. And in effect, when he would have passed Trent,
with five or six thousand Men, a very small Appareil for so much Noise as he
had made, the Venetians shut up the Passage against him. He was very much
disgusted and enraged, but more yet when Bartholomew d'Alviane their General,
having defeated some of his Troops, was received into their City in Triumph.

It was enough for them to have stopped his Army, after that they agreed to a
Truce with him for a Year. The King was extremely offended that they had done
it without his participation, and that they had excluded the Duke of Guelders;
and this Affront made up the measure of fifteen or twenty others he had
received. The Pope, the Emperor and Ferdinand hated them no less for different
Causes, and particularly because they had encroached upon each of their
Territories: but it was very difficult to get all these Princes, who had such
different Interests, to enter into the same League.

Truly there was neither Security, nor Advantage for King Lewis, to associate
either with Ferdinand and Maximilian, who had ever been, and could not but
always be his Enemies, nor with the Pope, who mortally hated the French Nation,
and who besides had the ambitious thoughts in his Head of over ruling all
Italy. There was no Amity nor Confederation that he could trust to but the
Venctians; And there were none but they that would suffer him to be in those
Countries, provided he attempted nothing against them, and would let them enjoy
their Usurpations. Nevertheless when he proposed this in his Council, without
whose Advice he never resolved on any thing, all those that were there present
shaping their Opinions, so as to make them suit with the hatred A Prince the
will have sincere advice, ought wholly to conceal his Sentiments; for as soon
as that is guessed, they never give Counsel that contradicts him.
he had declared against the Venetians, rather then grounding them on the
Reasons of sound and good Politics, were of a contrary Opinion. There was none
but Stephen Poncher Bishop of Paris, who not able to make his Fidelity stoop to
that unfaithful complaisance, argued vehemently and rationally that France
could not have better Confederates in Italy than they, and that the Society of
all the rest was ruinous and destructive.

The Advice of the Multitude, and Passion of the King, which would have been
very just in a private Person, made him commit that oversight, to join and
clubb with his most Mortal Enemies, for the ruin of the Venetians by the Treaty
of Cambray.

Thither under Color of accommodating the Differences between Charles the
Emperors Grandson and the Duke of Guelders, came first Margaret Widow,
Duchess of Savoy, and Sister of the defunct Archduke, and the Cardinal
d'Amboise; then the Spanish Ambassador arrived as Mediator, to whom the other
two did not communicate the main Secret, till they had agreed upon all that was
betwixt them, because they suspected Ferdinand. They concluded then, to make
War upon them inseparably to recover those Lands they detained from them: That
the Pope should admonish them, upon pain of Excommunication, to restore them,
and that the Emperor should give the King the Investiture of the Duchy of
Milan pure and simply for him, for Francis Duke of Valois, and for all their
descendants.

The Spanish Ambassador would not Sign till he had a New Order from his Master,
nor the Pope neither till the Venetians should have refused (so much their good
Fortune had blinded them) to give him up Facnza and Rimini, for which he would
have abandoned all the rest.

Venetians came to the knowledge of it sooner by the Effects, then by
information or other discovery. Those People before so insolent and daring,
were greatly astonished when they found at the same Time, the King on the other
side the Mountains with forty thousand Combatants, beginning a War upon them,
and the Pope thundering them with his excommunications, which makes mighty
impressions upon Peoples Hearts, when they are sharpened and seconded by the
terror of an Enemies Sword.

The King having passed the River Addo, pursued their Army so close that he
fought them the fourteenth day of May, and gained that memorable Battle de la
Giera d'Adde, near the Village d'Aignadel, within four Miles of Caravaz. All
their Infantry were cut off, and their General Alviane having lost an Eye, was
made Prisoner.

In fifteen days time the Kings, without scarce striking a Blow, conquered all
the Places they detained from him. He might also have taken Vicenza, Padoua,
Verona, Treviso, and all those that belonged to the Empire, or to the House of
Austria, had he not had more Justice than Ambition lodged in his Heart. He sent
back the Deputies of all those Cities, who brought him their Keys, to the
Emperor, who took them into his Obedience, and sent in some Garrisons.

The Pope had sent an Army of ten or twelve thousand Men into Romagnia, it was
commanded by the Cardinal de Pavia, by Francis Maria de la Rovere Son of his
Holinesses Brother, and by the Duke of Ferrara, this having the Title of
Gonfalonnier of the Church, and the other of Duke of Vrbin, by the adoption of
Guido-balde de Montfeltre Brother to his Mother. King Ferdinand had only a
Small Navy in the Golse, and watched to make his Advantage, as he did of the
Labor and expense of the French.

Aignadel, put the Signoria of Venice into such a consternation, that
dispairing of being able to keep any thing in the Terra Firma, they resolved to
shut themselves up close in the Islands of their Gulf; and in this despair,
commanded the Governers of all Places that belonged to the Pope, or to
Ferdinand, to open the Gates to them, and recalled their Magistrates from
Verona, Padua, Vicenza and others upon which the Emperor had any Pretensions.
Thus those three Potentates by the Valor of the French, rather then by their
own Strength, recovered all that had been usurped by the Venetians; and the
Ambition of that Republic, because they had not bounded it, saw their Signory
contracted in a Moment, within the very Shoars of their Canal. I have read
likewise in the Memoires of those Times, that the King drawing his Army near,
caused some Vollies of Random Cannon-Shot to be made against the City of Venice.

However it were, thinking he had done all, he retired to Milan, and sent the
Cardinal d'Amboise to the Emperor, who having made him wait a long while, and
having consumed all the Money he had scraped together in his Hereditary
Estates, and amongst the People of the Low Countries in superfluous Expenses,
was with much ado got thither upon the earnest Solicitations of the Pope, who
desired to have him in Italy to Counter-ballance the Power of the King. He
assigned him a day whereon he was to be at Guardia, which is on the Confines of
the Valley of Trent and Milanois, to discourse with the King: but because in
the mean Time the Inhabitants of Treviso had denied Entrance to a Governor whom
he sent thither, and set up the Venetian Colors, he made his Excuse upon this
fresh Accident, that he could not be at the Rendezvous.

This resistance of Treviso, made the Venetians find they had with too much
have abandoned what they possessed in the Terra Firma. This grain of Hope and
Comfort dispelled their fear, Maximilian's slowness gave them time to take
breath, and their Courage began to rouse after they had by repeated
Supplications, the meanest and most abject that can be imagined, mollified the
Pope so much as to admit and hear their Ambassadors, whatever Instance or
Arguments the Emperors and the Kings could urge to the contrary. But nothing
was so favorable to the Recovery of their Affairs, and to the Ruin of the
Emperor, as the Kings departure, who notwithstanding promised to assist him
with five hundred Men at Arms: for whilst he neglected to take Order for the
preserving his Places, and minded not to gain the Affection of the People, nor
Curb and keep them in Awe by strong Garrisons, they had partly per-force,
partly by Surprise, regained the most important City of Padua; This was about
the time the King returned into France.

Venice, and crush that Republic in the very Head: but this was neither the
Popes nor the Kings intention; but by delaying it too long, he had not the
opportunity to do it, the King and Ferdinand having called home their Naval
Forces. Besides it concerned his Reputation to recover Padua, in which the
Confederates, but particularly the French assisted him pursuant to the Treaty
of Cambray. He laid Siege to it with six and thirty thousand Foot, 1800. Men at
Arms, and a thousand Light Horse: but there were in the Town twelve thousand
Foot, two thousand Horse, two hundred Sons of Noble Venetians Volunteers, every
one of them resolved to be buried in a City, the preservation or loss whereof
decided the Fate of the Republic. And indeed they defended themselves so
bravely that the Emperor decamped the seventeenth day of the Siege, and having
disbanded almost all his Troops, retired greatly enraged with the Confederates.

Nevertheless a more strict Alliance between the King and him, was again
cemented, he wanting his Assistance to get satisfaction of Ferdinand, who kept
back all the profit of the Administration of the Kingdoms of Spain. They both
referred this difference to the Council of France, which ordained that
Ferdinand, in case he had no Children, should have the Administration of
Castille; but should annually pay fifty thousand Ducats to the Emperor, and as
much for the maintenance of the Pupil.

Venetians, notwithstanding the Kings and the Emperors remonstrances, and took
off their Excommunication, having imposed what Conditions he pleased upon them.
He was daily more and more alienated from the King, and every Hour forged some
complaint or other against him for things of no consequence, and most commonly
without any just Grounds. On the contrary the King sought all means and
opportunities to regain his Good Will; but his Care and good Offices proved
ineffectual as to that purpose, his Holiness creating him Enemies in every
Corner. For at the same Instant he solicited the Swisse against him, by his
Instrument Matthew Schiner Bishop of Sion, whose vehement Harangues moved and
agitated that Savage People, as a Storm of Wind blows the Leaves: He likewise
animated the Young King of England Henry VIII. who mightily d^sir^d to
signalize his Name and Advancement to the Crown, by some Glorious Enterprise.
To which he was likewise prompted by Ferdinand his Father in Law, who desired
to embarass the King, fearing he should tear the Kingdom of Naples from him.
Henry's Father was dead the Year before about the one twentieth of April.

A small occasion of Interest served to bring Julius into the Field. Alphonso
Duke of Ferrara, had some Salt Pits at Comachio, and the Pope was in possession
of those of Cervia. This last had wont to vend his Salt in Lombardy; but
Alphonso Augustine Ghisi Farmer of the Popes Salt Pits, having complained of it
to his Holiness, he commanded the Duke to break off this bargain with the King,
and upon his refusal, began to make War upon him, with design as it appeared,
to embroil the King, and have an occasion to quarrel with him.

The Swisse on their Side sought to make some brawl, they demanded some old
Debts, and an Augmentation of their Pensions of twenty thousand Livers yearly.
It had been no more then ^his Sum alone, all the time of Lewis XI. and now was
raised to sixty thousand. The addition they pressed for, was not considerable,
considering the great danger they could put Milan into: but they proceeded in
such an insolent manner, that the King believed himself obliged in Honor to
refuse them. He would also let them see that he could do well enough without
them, having engaged the Valleys of Sion, and the League of the Grisons to his
Service. They were so offended at this his slighting them, that they devoted
themselves entirely to the Pope, under this specious Title of Defenders of the
Holy See, for a thousand They had 5 thousand from the King.
Florins Pension for each Canton.

The Lord de Chaumont Governor of the Milanois, going to the Assistance of the
Ferrarois, drove the Venetians out that Dukes Country, and by the taking of
several Places brought their former Terror again upon them.

Thereupon the ^ive and twentieth day of May, died at Lions George d'Amboise,
the wise and prudent pilot of France, a Minister without Covetousness or Pride,
a Cardinal with one single Benefice, who having no other aim for Riches, but to
increase the Public Store, heaped up for himself a Treasure of Benedictions to
all Posterity. Every one mourned him, excepting Julius who alone rejoiced, for
having ascended the Holy Chair, as he had done by Steps not altogether
Canonical, he apprehended lest if the King had become strongest in Italy, this
Cardinal might have made his Process and degraded him for it.

It might be thought that his hatred being now no longer enflamed by that
Object, should have extinguished of its self; but on the contrary, being now
freed from those Fears which somewhat daunted him, it broke forth with all its
Violence, and yet without any ill Effect for that time. For his Army having
twice approached Genoa, could not make them stir, a re-inforcement having been
timely put in, and Chaumont shut up the Passages to Milan, so carefully against
the Swisse, that having in vain attempted to get thorough in several Places,
they returned again.

Julius, appointed an Assembly of the Gallican Church at Tours, about the end
of September, to know how far in Conscience he might proceed upon such an
Occasion. The Assembly having considered eight Questions which he caused to be
propounded, answered as to the substance of them, that this was a just War,
Rome, for Provisions of Benefices, or carry any Money out of the Kingdom.

Of all the Potentates in Italy, there were none but the Duke of Ferrara, the
Florentins, and the Bentivogli dispossessed of Bologna, that took his Part; The
Venetians were openly in League with the Pope, who for above a Twelvemonth
past, had renounced the League of Cambray; King Ferdinand likewise, having
received from him the investiture of the Kingdom of Naples for a white
Palefroy, without payment of the forty thousand Ducats, as his Predecessors
were wont to do. He did not however declare himself so soon, but acting the
Mediator between the one and the other, he pretended to appease the Pope, to
animate him the more, dived into the Kings and the Emperors Secrets, and amused
them with diverse propositions.

The only considerable Ally that stood for the King, was the Emperor, who being
always indigent by his continual Expenses, and delaying his Affairs from Diet
to Diet, where the Pope by his Intrigues easily blasted all his Designs,
especially in the matter of getting Moneys, was not at all advanced in his
business against the Venetians: yet however he being obstinately bent to bring
them to reason, notwithstanding all the Intercessions of the Pope, was obliged
to hold himself strictly united with the King. Who for his own part flattering
his Ambition, proffered to assist him with all his Forces to reduce the City of
Rome, and all Italy to his Obedience, excepting Milan, the Duchy of Ferrara,
the Seigneuries of Genoe, Florence, and the Kingdom of Naples. Thus both the
one and the other, to pull down the Pride of Julius, concluded between
themselves to assemble a General Council, for the reformation of the Church, as
well in it is Head as in it is Members.

France, which they named Coqueluche, because it clowded the whole Head, with a
drowsy yet painful heaviness; It caused likewise great Pains in the Stomach,
the Reins and the Calves of the Legs, with a burning Fever, attended with
dangerous Deliriums, and a Disgust of all sorts of Food. Few People were exempt
from it, and a great many Died of it.

Julius, and not utterly ruin him, as it was in his Power for above two Years.
He had forbid Chaumont from attacking the Lands belonging to the Church: this
did not keep him from excommunicating that General, and the Duke of Ferrara
likewise.

A few days after, Chaumont had a fair opportunity to take him in Bologna,
where he had rashly engaged himself: but in stead of besieging the Town
smartly, he suffered himself to be amused with Propositions for an
accommodation several days together: in which time the Venetians and Turks came
with some Forces and freed him from that Peril.

Julius commanded his Generals to besiege Ferrara, and to facilitate the taking
of it, first to attack the little City of Miranda belonging to the Children of
John Picus, who had in no manner offended him. This Siege not going on with
speed enough to his Mind, he goes thither himself notwithstanding the Frost and
Snow, having no regard, neither to his Age of seventy Years, nor to the Dignity
of his Sacred Tiara. He hastened on the Works, ordered the Batteries, encouraged
and pusht on the Soldiers, sometimes by Caresses, otherwhile by Threats; And
the Town being taken on composition, the nineteenth of March, he was carried
into it thorough the breach.

The King's Reputation being much declined in Italy, by the taking of Miranda,
he sent fresh Troops thither, and Orders to Chaumont, not to spare Julius any
longer. Chaumont followed him so close at the Heels, that he constrained him to
retire to Bologna, and from thence to Ravenna: but thereupon this honest
General happens to die at Corregio, and amidst the weakness caused by his
Sickness, was so touched with Scruples of Conscience, that he sent to beg
Absolution of the Pope. The Command of the Army fell to Trivulcio because of
his Office of Marshall, and the King confirmed it, till he could send Gastande
Foix his Nephew, who was as yet but twenty Years of Age.

King Ferdinand was pressed by both Parties, to declare himself, he was
unwilling to Arm against the Emperor, being Grandfather to the young Prince,
the insolence of Julius shocked him, the Kings Power was ever formidable to
him; and whatever the event of this War might be, he almost equally feared,
both the one and the other. So that he thought it fitter to endeavor an
accommodation, and engaged those three Potentates to send Ambassadors to
Montoua, that they might find out some expedients.

Stephen Poncher Bishop of Paris, a Prelate of rare Prudence and great
Learning, went thither in behalf of the King, Matthew Lang Bishop of Curs for
the Emperor: Many things were propounded: the French Ambassador yielded and
complied in several Points, but the more he gave ground, the more the others
flew off.

Curs, to come to him at Ravenna; He thought to gain him by force of Promises,
and the splendour of a Cardinals Cap, which he had newly communicated to eight
other Prelates very considerable for their Learning or Credit, of which number
was Matthew Schiner, to fortify and support himself by their Suffrages against
the Council, with which he was threatened. But the Bishop who more valued the
Dignity of his Character then the Roman Purple, did not mind his Proffers, but
treated him with unheard of haughtiness. For he obliged him to come and meet
him as far as Bologna, sat on a like Chair as his, and would confer with none
but himself, leaving it to his Gentlemen, to treat with those Cardinals the
Pope had sent to him. Withal he kept firm to the Interests of the Emperor and
the King, and returned without concluding ought.

Trivulcio therefore began the War anew, and took Concorda. Approaching Bologna
with the Bentivoglios, the Pope retired to Ravenna, and left the guarding of
Bologna, to the Cardinal of Pavia his Francesco Alidosi.
Favorite, and to Francis Maria, Duke of Vrbin his Brothers Son, his Forces
being in the Place, and the Venetians in the Vicinage: but this could not stay
nor hinder the inconstancy of the Bolognese, nor the impetuosity of the French.
Upon his way, he met with three Mortal Displeasures, the first was the News,
that the Bolognians had driven out his Soldiers; the second, that his Army was
dispersed; the third, the Duke of Vrbin his Nephew stabbed, almost in his
sight, the Cardinal of Pavia in Ravenna, upon some Quarrel between them; and in
those Cities thorough which he passed, he saw the Indiction, posted up, for a
General Council at Pisa, the first of September.

It was of the sixteenth of May, made at the requisition of the Kings and the
Emperors Procurators, in execution of the Decree of the Council of Constance,
and in the Name of nine Cardinals, three of them having signed it, these were
Sancta Croce, Cosenza and Saint Malo: their Names Bernard de Carvajal, Francis
Borgia, and William Briconnont, who happened to be then at Milan. The King and
the Emperor approved this Indiction, by their Letters Patents, of the following
Month of July.

In this consternation, seeing no Security for himself even in Rome, if the
Kings Victorious Army should pursue him, he cast about for an Accommodation:
but as soon as he knew that the King tired with the importunate Scruples of his
Wife, had sent Orders to Trivulcio, not to make any Attempt upon the
Territories of the Church, he showed himself more stubborn and more implacable
then ever.

July, he assigned a Council at Rome, in the Lateran Palace for the nineteenth
of April following, declared Null the Convocation of that of Pisa, and cited
the three Cardinals to appear before him, within threescore and five Days,
upon default whereof they should be degraded of their Dignities, and deprived
of their Benefices.

The Kings negligence and the Chimerical irresolutions of the Emperor heightened
his Courage. For the Emperor ever slow and wavering, omitting at first to press
the Business home, had not so much Credit as to make his Prelates go to Pisa;
the King managing this serious Business, as it were but in Sport, sent thither
but fifteen of his Bishops of France and Milan, together with some Abbots,
Doctors, and Procurators of the Universities; and the Council was not opened
till the twenty-ninth of October, they being troubled to obtain leave of the
Florentins, under whose Seigneury Pisa then was, who had at length reduced it
by force about two Years before this. The Cardinal de Sancta Croce was
President there, Odet de Foix Lautrec the Guardian, and Philip Dece an
excellent Lawyer the Advocat.

Pisans had little respect for this Assembly, and the People, whether of
themselves, or by the secret Instigations of the Popes Emissaries, or the
Florentins, who apprehended the furious resentments of the Pope, did often
quarrel with the French Soldiers. The Fathers took such an Allarm upon it, that
at their third Session they transferred it to Milan, where they were no better
received nor longer in quiet.

Julius relied much upon the Assistance of Ferdinand, and the Venetians; the
twentieth of October, he concluded the League with them, which they named Holy,
for the Peace of the Church, said they, the abolishing the Council of Pisa, the
recovery of the Lands belonging to the Holy See, and the expulsion of all those
out of Italy, that would hinder the Execution of those things.

January of the Year 1512. the Army of the Holy League, commanded by Raimond de
Cardonna Viceroy of Naples, besieged Bologna, and the Citizens of Brescia
introduced the Venetians into their City, where they put in fifteen hundred
Horse, and eight thousand Foot in Garrison, who besieged the Castle. But now,
behold, the young Gaston de Foix General of the Kings Army in those Countries,
more sudden and more terrible then Thunder, overthrows them and all their
Designs. For on the tenth Day of the Siege, whilst the Snow fell so thick, as
to prevent the being observed, he entered into Bologna, to the great
astonishment of those Old Soldiers, who raised their Siege confounded and
clothed with Shame.

From thence marching toward Brescia, with six thousand chosen Men, he on his
way defeated John Paul Bailloni, who commanded part of the Venetian Army. Then
entering into the City by the Castle, he forced their Works, and the
Intrenchments they had made, strewed the Streets with eight thousand of their
Slain, and drove out the Venetian Troops. These three grand Exploits performed
in less then fifteen Days, raised this Prince above all the Captains of his
Time.

Notwithstanding all these Advantages, the Pontifical League being reinforced
every day with some remainders, the Florentins renounced their Amity with
France; the Report was spread of a sudden Irruption of the Swiss; and the
English were just upon breaking with the King; for the Pope had intoxicated
them, with the vain Glory of defending the Holy See, and the Fumes of all sorts
of delicious Wines, whereof he had sent them a whole Ships loading, together
with Hamms, Sauciges and Spices, to give the Wine a better relish or gusto, and
make them the more desirable.

Gaston, that he should give Battle to the Army of the League, during the
Torrent of his good Fortune. The Enemies themselves presented it to him, being
approached near Ravenna, to make him raise the Siege which he had undertaken
Easter Day the eleventh of April. Their Forces were equal, the shock very
bloody, in the conclusion the Commanders for the League some of them being
fled, and the others taken, the Victory turned to Gaston's Lot. But as he was
pursuing too eagerly, a Body of four thousand Spaniards, who made their retreat
in good Order by the way betwixt the rising Ground, and the River Ronca, he was
surrounded and slain with the thrust of a Pike, and his Cousin Odet de Foix
Lautree grievously wounded,

This gross was not pursued, the rest were all cut in Pieces or made Prisoners,
Ravenna afterward Sacked, and some Neighboring Cities, put into the Hands of
the Cardinal Sanseverin Legate from the Council of Pisa, as likewise the
Cardinal Julian de Medicis the Popes Legate, Ferrand d'Avalos Marquess of
Pescaro, and Peter de Navarre, who had all been taken in the Battle.

After this it was expected there would have been an Universal Revolution in
Italy, in favor of the French. In effect their fright was so great in Rome,
that the Cardinals in a Body went to implore the Pope, to make a Peace with the
King. Ferdinand and the Venetians having brought him a little to heart again,
he fell to practice his wonted Artifice, which was to amuse the King with
Propositions of an Accommodation, and to engage the Queen to act, who by
Motives of Conscience, Caresses, Intrigues, and Importunities often disarmed
him and made him relent.

With this his trouble in Mind occasioned by the death of his Nephew, the
misunderstanding which arose between the Cardinal Sanseverin, who was Legate,
and la Palice, who had the Title of General, the little obedience the other
French Captains yielded to this last, and the ill-timed good Husbandry, or
sparingness of the Treasurer, Play Master to the Army, did not only render that
Victory fruitless, but occasioned the loss of the Duchy of Milan. For the
Treasurer disbanded a considerable part of the Forces, and la Palice left
Sanseverin but six thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse, and led the rest into
Milan. There being encamped at Pontevica, a Place proper to relieve Milan,
Cremona, Bress, and Bergamo, four thousand Lansquenets, which made up two
thirds of his Infantry, and had been raised in the Territories of the House of
Austria, were recalled by the Emperor Maximilian at that instant when the Swiss
were entering into that Country.

In few Words, the French reduced to two or three thousand Men, did wholly
abandon all Milanois; Maximilian Sforza was restored to that Duchy by the
Swiss, who declared themselves Protectors of it. The City of Genoa revolted,
and created a Duke, which was Janus Fregosa: Almost at the same time the King
of England sent a Herald, to declare a War against the King; and the Emperor
who had so often protested, never to separate from him, forsook him, and knit a
new Alliance with Julius.

Amidst this rout amongst the French, the Council of Pisa, who were retired to
Milan, made their escape to Lions. During the time they had been at Milan, they
held four or five Sessions, in which the Fathers had Summond Julius to name
some free Place for the Council, and to meet there in Person, to justify
himself, had declared him suspended of the Papal Administration, and forbid to
pay him Obedience.

The Council of Latran, much more numerous and better authorized, thundered with
more force, especially after the Emperor had owned them. In their third
Session, which was upon a Friday the sixteenth of November, a Bull was read
which condemned the Council of Pisa, their Abettors and Adherents, and
confirmed the Excommunications and Degradations, which Julius had fulminated
against the Cardinals and Bishops who composed it; As also their Letters
Monitorie of the fourteenth of August, whereby he put the Kingdom of France
under interdiction, excepting the Duchy of Burgundy, and tranferr'd the Faires
from Lions to Geneva. In the Fourth, which was the eleventh of December there
was read a Decree which adjourned the King, and the Prelates, Chapters, and
Parliaments, to appear before him within sixty Days, and to show their Reasons,
why

Empp. Maximilian, And Selim II. after he had slain Bajazeth his Father, R. 8.
Years.
The Lure which King Ferdinand had made use of, to engage the Young King of
England his Son-in-Law, in a War against France, was the Promise he had made
him, to assist him with all his Forces to conquer Guyenne. Upon this assurance,
the English by the end of May, landed a great Army near Fontarabia: but
Ferdinand had of a long time formed the design of conquering Navarre, so that
in stead of joining with him, he falls upon that unhappy Kingdom, nothing
concerned in the Quarrel, and took occasion upon the apprehensions of their
Army, to invade it the more securely, and easily.

King John d'Albret had not dared to arm himself, for fear of giving him that
Pretense he desired to oppress him; So that as soon as he appeared on the
Frontiers, he coward-like retired into Bearn, and abandoned the whole Kingdom
to him, excepting only some Fortresses.

When Ferdinand had usurped Navarre, he sought out some Title to it, that he
might still hold it. He could find no other, but the right of War, and a Bull
of the Popes, which left it as a Prey to the first Occupier, because John,
said, he, Pisa, and an Ally of the King of France Enemy to the Holy See. But as
to the right of War, unless they mean the Force Barbarians, Ferdinand had none
at all, since John had no way wronged him, and was so far from taking Arms
against him, that on the contrary, he proffered him free Passage through his
Kingdom. And as to the other Point, that Bull so much alleged, is no where to
be found: but could it be produced, it could give no right to a Crown which is
held only from God; and if it could give any, it was published, say the
Spaniards, in the Month of July, and the Invasion was made in June. Which is to
chop off a Man's Head, and then pronounce his Sentence.

The Succors which the King sent to John his Ally being ill conducted did him
no Service. The Duke of Longueville Governor of Guyenne, and Charles Duke of
Bourbon who commanded them, could not agree. The King sent Francis Duke of
Valois thither; His Authority stifled their Discord, he entered into Navarre, in
dispite of the Duke of Alva, who was encamped at Saint John's de Pied de Port,
and laid Siege to Pampelonna; but the want of Provisions, and Inconveniences of
the Season, constrained him to De-Camp at the end of six Weeks.

Ferdinand having reaped what Fruit he could hope for by this War, did
willingly make a Truce with the King.

About these Times, began the Reign of the Cherifs in Africa, by one Mahomet
Benhemet, who, saying he was descended of the Blood of his Great Prophet, and
having Sanctified himself in the Opinion of the People, by a tedious and long
Solitude, animated them with a furious Zeal, to Make War upon the Christians,
and those Moors that had made Alliance with them, and by the help and means of
his two Sons, conquered the Kingdoms of Fez, of Morocco, and of ^remissen.

Julius had no bounds, he had framed a Decree in the Name of the Council, to
transfer the Kingdom of France, and the Title of Most Christian, to the King of
England. When he was just on the Point of publishing it, the Heavens taking
pity of him, and of all Christendom, called him cut of the World the three and
twentieth of February. He died of a lingering slow Fever, contracted, as they
said, through Grief, for that he could not persuade or incline the Venetians, to
make an Agreement with the Emperor; So violent were his Passions, much fitter
for a Turkish Sultan, then the common Father of all Christians.

John de Medicis Son of Laurence, who was but thirty six years of Age. He took
the Name of Leo X.

There were two Opinions in the Kings Council, the one to make an Accommodation
with the Venetians; the other to regain the Emperor. Stephen Poncher Bishop of
Paris was of the first, such as would be complaisant to the Queen stood for the
second. This Princess passionately desired to marry Renee her second Daughter
to the Archduke Charles; and this Advice had carried it, if she would at that
very time, have given her up to Maximilians Hands to breed her, and had not
obstinately resolved to keep her near her self, till she were marriageable.
Ferdinand on the other side, fearing lest the Venetians should renew, and join
in friendship again with France, endeavored to reconcile them with Maximilian,
and propounded to get Veronna to be restored again to them: but the Emperor
demanded prodigious Sums of Money, and very crabbed Conditions; So that the
Venetians not being able to come to an Agreement on reasonable Terms with him,
condescended to a League with the Kings.

Ferdinand, he believed he might recover the Duchy of Milan. He gave
Commission for this to la Trimoville, the most renowed of his Captains,
together with sixteen thousand Foot, one thousand Men at Arms, and two thousand
Light Horse, to whom the Venetian Army commanded by Alviane, newly delivered by
the French, were to join in case of need.

At his arrival, though he had not much more then the half of his Men, it
spread so great a Terror through Italy, that all the Places in Milanois
surrendered to him, excepting Coma and Novarre, in the last of which Duke
Francis Sforza put himself, with five thousand Swisse. At the same time the
Fleet which consisted of nine Galleys and some Ships, having appeared on the
Coast of Genoa, the Fiesques and the Adornes drew near to Genoa with four
thousand Men, and having beaten some Soldiery, whit which Duke Janu Fregoso
thought to hinder their Passage from the Mountains, chaced away that Duke, and
restored that Seigneury to the Obedience of the King, having caused Antonio
Adorno to be created Duke, to administer in his Name.

La Trimoville had besieged Sforza in Novarre and made a Breach: but he durst
not make his Assault, because the said Breach, was hardly large enough, and
there was another Body of Swisse, coming to relieve the besieged. There were
two Opinions that divided the Officers, la Trimoville thought it best to go and
meet the Swisse, John Jacques Trivulcio on the contrary to avoid fighting, and
wait for the French Troops, that were marching to re*inforce them. The
plurality of Votes made them resolve to pursue the first, and for that purpose,
Trivulcio with the Vanguard should go and take his Lodgment upon that Road,
whilst la Trimoville should remain yet some time longer before Novarre with the
Rear-Guard, to expel the Swisse, if they endeavored to make any Sallies. But
having some Lands of his own in the Place they had assigned him to take his
Lodgment, and besides being proud and haughty, his Pride and Avarice made him
turn another way, and take his Lodgment near la Riota, in a Boggy Ground, and
cut up and down with deep Trenches, so that the Horse could be of no Service,
nor be able to help the Foot.

Swifse that were in Novarre, therefore marching forth in the Night, which
could not have been imagined, and having joined the others, came with much fury
to charge the French Army at the first birth of Day. Their Charge was received
with the like courage; Fifteen hundred of their Men were slain, and as many
wounded: nevertheless they gained the Victory, and hewed all the German
Infantry in pieces, together with the Gascons. La Trimoville wounded in the
Leg, retreated with all his Cavalry to Vercel, and from thence to Susa.

The burden of the War fell afterward upon the Venetians; they maintained it
well enough: but all those Cities that had given themselves up to the French,
returned, and submitted themselves to the mercy of Sforza, and were chastized
for their defection, by great Fines which served him to pay the Swisse.

The Adornes who had not yet held the Government of Genoa above one and twenty
Days, having not wherewith to support themselves, after such a revolution, made
their best advantage of it; They assembled the People, and having declared,
that they would not maintain an ambitious Government, to the great hazard of
their Country, withdrew themselves out of the City, most of the People and
Senate conducting them forth with Tears and Wishes for their return. By the
interest of Cardonna General of Ferdinand's Army, and upon the Popes
recommendations, Octavian Fregosa was ^etled in that Principallity, and not
Janus who was formerly expelled.

Hitherto Maximilian, although he had abandoned the King, had not yet formally
declared himself; When he found the opportunity so fair, he enters into open
hostility against him; and then was France in more eminent danger then it had
of a long time been. For on the one side, the Swisse extremely puffed up by the
Victory at Novarre, entered by the Duchy of Burgundy, and he with the King of
England fell upon them in Picardy.

Swisse besieged Dijon with five and twenty hundred Men, to whom the Emperor
had joined the Nobless of the Franche-Comte, and some German Horse commanded by
Vlric Duke of Wirtemberg. La Trimoville having defended it six Paris, than to
render it more violent by thus putting it to a stop. He enters upon a Treaty
with them, and managed it so wisely, as to send them back into their own
Country, obliging himself that the King should pay them six hundred thousand
Crowns, and should renounce the Council of Pisa, and the Duchy of Milan. He
had no express Order to make these conditions: but thought he might be allowed
to do it for the saving of all France, and thereupon gave them up six Hostages,
two Lords, and four Citizens. The King refusing to ratify this Treaty, their
Heads were in great danger. Only the fear the Swisse had of losing the great
Sums of Money he proffered them, saved the Lives of those innocent Persons.

July, the Emperor and the King of England had besieged Terovenne with above
fifty thousand Men. The French Army happily enough, threw a Convoy of
Provisions and Ammunitions into the Fossez: but at their return not standing
well upon their Guard, they were Charged and put to the rout. The Battle was
fought the eighteenth of August, near Guinegaste There have been two Battles at
Guinegaste.
, it was named The Battle of Spurrs, because in this Fight the French made more
use of them, then of their Swords. The more Valiant notwithstanding showed
great Personal courage, which they paid for; the Duke of Longueville, and the
Chevalier Bayard were hemmed in, and carried away by the English. Terovenne
capitulated fifteen Days after. The two Princes not being able to agree who
should have it, commanded it to be dismantled, against the express Terms of the
Capitulation, and burnt it all excepting only the Churches. Tournay fearing the
like Fate, surrendered in good time to the Kings of England, who built a Citadel
to bridle them.

About the same Time, James IV. King of Scotland, the only Ally the King had
left him, having marched into England, to make a Diversion, was beaten by the
English Army, and slain upon the Spot, the seventeenth of September.

he should be at variance with the Pope, and should maintain a Council against
him. She still making a noise in his Ears, upon these two Points, he was
ofttimes forced, to keep Peace within Doors, to lay down his Arms, when his
Affairs were most promising, and in a fair way of bringing Julius quickly to
reason. In fine, being quite tired and overcome by her Importunities, and the
remonstrances of his Subjects, whom she stirred up on all Hands, he renounced
his Council of Pisa, and adhered to the Latran Council, by his Procurators; who
caused his Mandate to be read in the eight Session, the fourteenth of December,

The Cardinals de Sancta Croce and Sanseverin, went to Rome, to cast themselves
at the Feet of Pope Leo, and presenting themselves in the Council, in the
Habits of simple Priests, craving pardon on their Knees, acknowledging they had
justly been degraded by Pope Julius, and detesting the Assembly of Pisa as
Schismatic, were restored to their Dignities, and took their Places in the
Sacred College. After these submissions, the Pope seemed in appearance, to be
satisfied with the King: but did not omit underhand, to incite the Emperor to
make War upon him, that he might be so much embroiled as not to have leisure to
return into Italy.

Anne survived but few Days after this reconciliation, which she had so
infinitely desired; She died the ninth of January at the Castle of Blois. Her
Husband loved her so entirely, that his Heart bowed under this Asslication, he
put on Black for Mourning, shut himself up for several Days in his Closset, and
turned all the Fiddlers, Comedians, Jugglers and Buffoons, out of the Court.

Having no Children, he with great tenderness bred up Francis Duke of Valois,
whom the Laws of the Kingdom appointed necessary Successor. Queen Anne out of a
hatred she had ever conceived, for Louisa Mother of this Prince, had hindered
his Marriage with her Daughter Claude; The King would have it consummate the
eighteenth day of May, at Saint Germains en lay.

Himself had as then, no thoughts of re-marrying: but the Duke of Longueville
who was Prisoner in England, and endeavored to make a Peace between the two
Crowns, having talked of a Marriage between the King, and Mary the Sister of
King Henry, the good Prince hearkened willingly to it, out of the desire he had
to settle his People in Peace, and the King of England inclined thereto, as
perceiving the Fourberies of Ferdinand his Father in Law, who had disappointed
him three several times.

London on the same Day, being the second of August. The King of England was to
hold Tournay, and Lewis obliged himself to pay him six hundred thousand Crowns
at two payments, as well for the Expenses of his War, as for the Arrears of the
Pension that had been promised by the Treaty of Pequigny, and confirmed by that
of Estaples in 1492. In this Sum they had deducted his Wives Portion, which
was four hundred thousand Crowns. The Marriage was completed at Abbiville, the
tenth Day of October.

Valois, who was all fire and flame for the fair Ladies, did not want some
Sparks for this new Queen, and Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, who loved her
before this Marriage, and followed the Court of France in Quality of Ambassador
from England, had not extinguished his first Flames. But the remonstrances of
Arthur de Gouffier Boisy, having made the Duke of Valois consider, (whose
Governor he had been) that he was going to play a ticklish Game, and had reason
to apprehend the like from the Duke of Suffolk, the weaned himself of his
Folly, and caused every Motion of that Duke to be narrowly observed.

The good King's Grave was not far distant from his Nuptial Bed. As he was
raising a Potent Army to re-pass the Alps, making himself secure of Fortunes
favor; since he had gained the King of England his most dreadful Enemy, a fit
Hostel des Tournelles at Paris, and brought him so low, that he died of it the
first day of January Anno 1515. He was fifty three years of Age, and had
Reigned seventeen.

His Humor was open, gay and easy, he loved to hear the Truth, and that of
things even concerning himself without showing any Anger, unless it reflected
on the Honor of some Ladies; of whom there were not many Stories to relate, the
Queens severe Chastity, and his great and manly Soul, above those triflings and
vain divertisements that begets so much Corruption, having made them keep
themselves mightily reserved.

He pleased himself in reading of good Books, and cherished and advanced
Learned Men: but more those that were able to instruct and do him Service, then
such as could only flatter, and please the Ear with their soft difcourses.

Never Prince loved his People so much, nor was so much beloved as he. As he
spared them as much as he could himself, so he took care they should not be a
Prey to the Grandees and Sons of War. He had so well regulated the last, that
often times the Provinces would request it as a Favor and Advantage, that he
would send them Companies of his Men at Arms. He was more then once observed to
have Tears in his Eyes, when he was forced to lay some little Subsidy upon
them; and upon the prospect he had of what would be squandered and wasted in
Luxury and vain Prodigallity by Francis I. after his death, he sighing said,
Ah! we labor in vain, this great Boy will spoil all.

Two Male Children he had by Anne of Bretagne, died in the Arms of their
Nurses. There were only two Daughters left, Claude who was married to Francis
I. and Renee, who in Anno 1528. was by that King married to Hercules Duke of
Ferrara, a petty Prince whom he made choice of purposely, that he might not be
able to contend with him for the Duchy of Bretagne.

FRANCIS I, CALLED The Great KING, AND THE Father of Learning.
King LVII.
Aged XX Years and about four Months.
POPES,
LEO X. near seven Years under this Reign. ADRIAN VI. Elected the 4th of
January in the Year 1522. S. 1 Year, and above eight Months. CLEMENT VII.
Elected the 29th of November 1525. S. 10 Years and above 10 Months. PAUL III.
Elected the 13th of October 1534. S. Years, and one Month, whereof 12 Years and
a half under this Reign.
Capetine Race, that the Scepter, for want of Male-Children in the direct Line,
passes in a collateral Line. Lewis I. Duke of Orleans had two Sons, Charles who
was Duke of Orleans after him, and John who was Earl of Angoulesme. Lewis XII.
was the Son of Charles, and from John, came another Charles, who was Father of
Francis I. who succeeded to Lewis XII. He was crowned at Reims the five and
twentieth of January, and took the Title of Duke of Milan with that of King of
France.

When this Prince appeared on the Throne in the Flower of his Youth, with the
Meene and Stature of a Hero, with wonderful dexterity and address in all the
noble Exercises of a Cavalier, Brave, Liberal, Magnificent, Civil, Debonnaire,
and well Spoken, he attracted the Adoration of the People, and the Love of the
Nobility; and indeed he had been the greatest of Kings, if the too high Opinion
of himself, grounded upon so many fair Qualities, had not inclined him to
suffer himself to be entangled in the Snares of Women, and the Flatteries of
Courtiers, who corrupted his Mind, and made it spend its self most in outward
vain Glory, and superficial appearances.

His first Cares were to seek the Alliance and Amity of the Princes his
Neighbors. The King of England taking yet to Heart, the Infidelity of
Ferdinand his Father in Law, continued the Peace with him on the same
Conditions, as he had made with his Predecessor, and to last during both their
Lives. The King sent back Queen Mary to him, who afterward married the Duke of
Suffolk. The Archduke likewise being thereto obliged by the Flemmings, who in
no wise would have a War with France, and besides judging there might be danger
to let things stand, without any Colligation between France and England, sent
the Count of Nassaw Ambassador to him: who after he had rendered the Homage due
for the Counties of Artois and Flanders, treated a perpetual confederation
between the two Princes.

Renee the Queens Sister; It was stipulated under terrible Oaths, and great
pains of refusal on either Part, for which Francis staked down the Faith of
several great Lords, and twelve of his best Cities for security. The Conditions
were, six hundred thousand Crowns of Gold, and the Duchy of Berry for her, and
for her Children; That she should renounce to the Succession of Father and
Mother, namely to the Dutchies of Milan and Bretagne, and that the King should
be engaged to assist the Archduke with Men and Ships, to go and take
Possession of the Kingdoms of Spain, upon the Death of Ferdinand his
Grandfather.

It would have been very easy also, for the King to have confirmed the League
made by his Predecessor with the Venetians: but Ferdinand refused the
continuation of the Truce, unless upon the same Conditions as the last, which
was, that he should not meddle with, or touch the Duchy of Milan. Which the
King not having accepted of, the said Ferdinand, the Emperor, the Swisse, and
Sforza Duke of Milan, made a League which imported; That to compel the King to
renounce that Duchy, the Swisse should attack France by the way of Burgundy;
That in order to it, they should receive three thousand Ducats Monthly, from
the other Confederates; and that King Ferdinand should fall with a powerful
Army into Guyenne or Languedoc. The Pope for whom they had left room in this
League, did not enter till the Month of July, when he found that the King who
had kept this design concealed all the Winter, marched in good earnest to pass
the Mountains.

Upon his access to the Crown, he supplied the Offices of Constable, and
Chancellor with two Persons, whereof one caused great mischiefs to France in
this Reign only, and the other was the occasion of such, as were felt then, and
perhaps may last to all the following Ages. He gave that of Constable to
Charles de Bourbon, who afterward stirred up great Troubles against him, and
that of Chancellor to Antony Duprat, at that Time, first President of Paris,
who to furnish the Prodigal and conquering Humor of a young King with Money,
suggested to him the Sale of Justice, by creating a new Chamber of twenty
Counselors, in the Parliament of Paris, and so proportionably in all the
others, to augment the Tailles, and lay new Imposts, without waiting the
Consent or Grant of the Estates, as was the ancient Order and Practice of the
Kingdom.

Lions, where he staid some time, till Trivulcio and the Lord de Morete, with
the Mountainers whom the Duke of Savoy had sent to them, could find a Passage
over the Alps for his Troops, which were arrived in Dauphine. For the Swisse,
who had posted themselves at Suza and those Parts, hindered their way by Mount
Cenis, and the Mount of Genevra, which begin both in that Place. The Popes
Army, and that belonging to Ferdinand, were encamped on the other side of the
Po, toward Piacenza and Parma, and Prespera Columna, had come and lodged
himself with a thousand Horse in Villa Franca, which is within seven Leagues of
Saluzzes, where he thought himself very secure.

When with incredible difficulty, and by mere strength of Arms, Trivulcio had
made them sling and hoyst the Artillery over the tops of the Mountains, and
from thence with no less toil, let them down again in the Country of Saluzzes,
the King's Forces passed the Alps at Dragonniera, Roquepavier and other Passes
which are nigh Provence. La Palice who was passed one of the first, having
correspondence Villa-Franca, used so much Skill and Celerity, that he surprised
Prospera as he was sitting down to Table, and made both him, and all his,
Prisoners. Some days before Emard de Pry, with five or six thousand Men, was
gone to Genoa, to attack Alexandria, and some other Towns on this side the Po.
Octavian Fregosa had at the same time treated with the King, who left to him
the Signeury of Genoa, to be, not a Duke, but only Governor in his Name.

These tidings brought to Lions, the King parted from thence the fifteenth day
August, accompanied by seven Princes of the Blood, and an infinite number of
Great Lords, having beforehand left the Regency to Louise de Savoy his Mother,
who was styled Madame. As he was going forth, arrives an Ambassador from
England, to let him know from his Master, that he ought not to pass into Italy,
for fear of disturbing the Peace of Christendom: which only served to discover
the inconstancy of that Prince, and the jealousy he had, left a young King
should outstrip him in the Race of Honor, who had lived a much longer time.

King Ferdinand's Menaces signified as little, as the King of Englands
Remonstrances. He was but too well pleased, that the first Efforts and Attempts
of this new Conqueror were to fall upon Italy, and not upon Spain. And
therefore as soon as he was certain of his March that way, he disbanded the
greatest part of his Forces, and little cared for that League he was entered
into, for the defense of Milan.

This Shock, or Surprise of Prospera Colomna's being very considerable, because
Swisse: who after having burnt Chivas and Verceil retired to Novarre, whilst
the King was assembling his Troops at Turin. He immediately set forwards to
follow them without delay, being informed how they began to disagree, and
judged he had a fair opportunity either to vanquish them during their disunion,
or to treat the more advantageously with them.

And indeed some of their Chiefs began to give ear, to the Propositions that
were made by him: but knowing he was come to Verceil, they dislodged from
Novarre, and retired to Galerate. He followed the same Pace, and got into all
their Towns without striking one Blow.

Being thus repulsed, and at variance with each other, they set a Treaty on
Foot, by the mediation of Charles Duke of Savoy their ancient Allie. He
obtained them all the satisfaction they could hope for, that is to say, great
Sums of Money as well for their Pensions, as to make good the Treaty of Dijon,
and a very fair settlement in France for Duke Sforza, in recompense for his
Duchy of Milan. But thereupon arrives a re-inforcement of ten thousand Men
from their own Country: who desiring to have their share in the Honor and
Spoil, as well as their Compagnons, whom they found very rich, broke off all
and led them back to Milan.

This did not however take away all hopes they might be pacified, by adding an
overplus Sum, to stop the Months of the most Troublesome and Active: but one
Day, when all seemed to be at an end, and the King was ready to send Money for
performance of the Articles, the Cardinal of Sion, whilst they were all met to
make the final Conclusion, begins to Harangue them with so much earnestness,
that he made them take up their Arms, to come and Charge the French, who were
lodged at Marignan, within a League of Milan, and expected no less then such a
sudden Onset.

Therefore the thirteenth of October about four in the Afternoon, they came and
Charged the French Vanguard with impetuosity, who having been forewarned,
received them much better then they imagined; they could not however hinder
them from gaining the enclosure of their Camp, and some Pieces of Canon. But
the King hastening to that part with the Flower of his Nobility and
Gentdarmerie, prevented them from piercing any further. Never was there a more
furious scuffle, not heavier Blows: the Fight lasted four hours in the Night:
naught but their over weariness made Truce between them, till break of Day, but
did not part them; many of both Parties lying down by each other all the Night.
The King with his Armor on, rested himself upon the Carriage of a Gun; where
the great Thirst his toil had brought upon him, made him relish even a little
Water mixed with Dirt and Blood, brought to him by a courteous Soldier in his
Morion.

Gascon Cross-bow Men. The Day appearing, the Swisse returned to the Assault
with more vigor then the Night before: but the Cannon broke their Battallions,
the Bullets and Arrows made a great Slaughter, then the Horse sallied and ran
over them: some of their Companies were driven into a Wood, who were all cut in
Pieces.

About nine in the Morning, the rest thinking themselves vanquished, because
they had not been able to Vanquish, and withal observing Alvaine approach with
the choice of his Venetian Cavalry, began to make their retreat toward Milan;
none endeavoring to pursue them, excepting Alvaine, who thinking to Charge
them in the Rear, soon found by their fierce resistance, that they dreaded
their Italian Lances but little. This was all the Share he had in this Battle,
whatever the Authors of that Nation are pleased to relate.

The French kept the Camp, covered with ten thousand dead Swisse, and three or
four thousand of their own Men, but of the bravest, and for the most part
Gentlemen. Francis de Bourbon Brother to the Constable, the Prince of Talmont
only Son of Lewis de la Trimoville, Bussy d'Amboise Nephew to the Cardinal of
that Name, the Count de Sancerre, and eight or ten other Lords of Note were
slain there. Claude Duke of Guise, who commanded the Lansquenets in the absence
of Charles Duke of Gueldres his Maternal Uncle, was trod under Foot; a German
Gentleman his Esquire saved his Life, at the expense of his own, by covering
him with his own Body, and receiving the Blows they made at his Master.

This ill Success begot new discords between the Swisse, those that would have
agreed with the King, demanded Money of Sforza that they might be gone; they
knew well enough he had none, and thereupon they returned by way of Coma, which
the King had left open for them. The rest followed them the next day: but left
fifteen hundred of their Men with Sforza to maintain the Castle, together with
five hundred Italians he had there, promising in a short time to come back to
his assistance: as likewise on his side the Cardinal of Sion going to the
Emperor for the same purpose, vowed to return again speedily: So that upon this
assurance, he shut himself into the Castle with one John Gonzague, Jerome
Moron, and some Milanese Gentlemen. The City surrendered the next day to the
King: but he judged it was not convenient for his Majesty to enter into it
(...) had the Castle likewise, which he ordered should be Besieged by the (...)
and Peter de Navarre.

As soon as he came first into Italy, the Pope had feignedly begun to Treat
with him: After the Battle of Marignan, he was in so great haste thorough fear,
that he treated without disguise, not waiting the Resolutions of the Swisse
Diet, nor the Emperors, who earnestly conjured him not to do so. Amongst other
Articles, the King took into his protection his Person, the Ecclesiastical
Estate, Julian and Laurence de Medicis, and the Estate of Florence; obliged
himself that from that Time forward, the Milanese should be furnished with Salt
from Cervia; consented free Passage should be allowed for the Viceroy of
Naples Forces to retire; promised not to assist or protect any of his
Feudataries against him. Reciprocally the Pope was to withdraw the Soldiers he
had sent to the Emperor against the Venetians, and surrender Piacenza and Parma
to the King, and Modena and Reggio to the Duke of Ferrara.

The Constable not relying solely upon the Success of those Mines, with the
which Peter de Navarre had vaunted to take the Castle of Milan in a Month, made
use of Money, which does its effect more certainly then Gunpowder, and
corrupted some Captains: so that they began to Mutiny. The Swisse Cantons,
assembled at that time at Zuric, were just sending away a powerful Relief to
Sforza, and the Pope who had not yet concluded his Treaty, would not have
failed to join his Troops, and those of Naples: but Moron who was all the
Council the unfortunate Sforza had, persuaded him to make a Composition with
the King.

He yielded him all his Rights to the Duchy, conditionally he should have a
certain Sum of ready Money to pay his Debts, thirty thousand Ducats Pension to
be paid him in France, or given him in Benefices with a Cardinals Cap, and
several other Conditions for his Servants, and such as had been of his Party.
The Treaty signed, he came out of the Castle, and was conducted into France by
some Lords; little bemoaned for being fallen from that high Degree of
Sovereignty, because the exravagancy of his Mind, and his more then brutish
Vices, had rendered him unworthy of it.

The Castle being surrendered, nothing more opposed the Conqueror. Hugh de
Cardonna with Ferdinand's Army retired to the Kingdom of Naples; and the Pope
dissembling his displeasure for the restitution of those Places he had been
obliged to make, went to Bologna to confer with the King face to face.

He arrived there the nineteenth of December, and the King two days after; On
the Morrow he rendered him Obedience, his Chancellor Antony du Prat pronounced
the Words bare-headed, and on his Knees; the King standing by covered,

There it was that the young King, for vain hopes, and by the Advice and
Counsel of his Chancellor, condescended to abolish the Pragmatick, and to make
the Concordat; Whereby the Pope conceded to the King the right of nominating to
Bishoprics and Abbeys in all the Territories of the Kingdom of France and
Dauphine; and the King granted to the Pope, the Annates of those great
Benefices upon the foot of their current Revenue, which were augmented above
the one half, since the discovery That having made Money more plentiful.
of the Indies. The Holy Father, very free of other Folks Money, made him a
Present of two Tenths upon the Clergy, and the Title of Emperor of the East.
But the King refused the last.

At the same Time, the renewed Alliance with the Swisse was concluded,
notwithstanding the Contrivances of the English. It was upon these Conditions,
That they should serve France with, and against all, excepting the Pope, the
Emperor and the Empire; That they should surrender the Valleys of Milanois;
That the King should pay them six hundred thousand Crowns; and should continue
to them their Pensions. Five of the Cantons did at that time refuse to Sign to
this.

Milan, where he left the Constable with seven hundred Men at Arms, and ten
thousand Foot Soldiers, he parted from Bologna the fifteenth of December, and
by great Journeys came to his Mother and his Wife who staid for him at Lions.

Ferdinand, and the King of England his Son in law, in so much as they (...)
common Consent to make a War upon him, both in Italy and France at the (...)
time. To which the King of England was inclined with the more heat and
^^erness, as being incensed, for that the King hindered him from governing the
young King and the Kingdom of Scotland, by such People as were dependant on him.

But as they were taking their Measures for this Design, it happened that King
Ferdinand, as he was going to Seville, died in the little Village of
Madrigalet, the two and twentieth of February of a Dropsy, occasioned by a
Beverage, which Germain his Wife had given him, to enable him to get Children.
Guichardin making his Elogy, says there was nothing to be reproved in him, but
his not observing or keeping his Word; and that as for the Avarice they
reproach him with, it was manifest at his Death, he was not stained with it;
because he left but very little Money in his Coffers: He adds that this Calumny
proceeded from the corrupt judgment of Men, who more applaud the Prodigality of
a Prince which oppresses and grinds his Subjects, then the good Husbandry of
One, that thriftily manages their Substance as a good and careful Father of his
Family ought to do.

He left the Government of Arragon, to his Bastard Son Bishop of Saragossa, and
that of Castille to Francis Ximenes Cardinal Bishop of Toledo. His Daughter
Jane was Distracted still, and shut up in a Castle, where she clambred along
the Walls, and crawled up the Tapistry Hangings like a Cat.

Four Months after, on the six and twentieth of June, John d'Albret, who might
have made some stirrs in the Kingdom of Navarre, whence Ferdinand had turned
him out, ended his Days in a Village in Bearn. Catharine de Foix his Wife
survived him but eight Months. Their Son Henry aged but fourteen years,
inherited the Title of that Kingdom, of which he had nothing left him, but the
little Parcel on this side of the Pyreneans.

Ferdinand gave King Francis the opportunity and desire of marching his Armies
into the Kingdom of Naples, which in this juncture was half revolted He
imagined that Charles having need of him for a Passage, that he might go and
take Possession of the Spanish Dominions, and withal, being under the
apprehension of some trouble in the Succession to the Kingdom of Arragon, the
ancient Laws thereof not allowing the Daughters, nor any descended from them to
come to the Crown, durst not hinder him in this Enterprise, and would even be
obliged to let him have the Kingdom of Naples.

But he did not know, that though Charles himself should have consented the
Politics of Italy could never suffer it, what Affection soever they might seem
to show him. In effect the Pope underhand procured the English, the Swisse,
and the Medicis to break his Measures. The Emperor on his side, being entered
into Milanois with twenty thousand Swisse, of the five Cantons, ten thousand
Germans, and four or five thousand Horse, amongst whom were the Cardinal of
Sion, and the banished Milaneses, after the having refreshed and relieved Bress
and Verona, which were straightned by the Venetians and the French joined
together, passed the River Addo in the beginning of the Spring, ravaged all the
Country between that River, and those of the Po and Olli, and gave so much
Terror to the French, that they were ready to abandon Milan, and likewise fired
the very Suburbs, by the malicious advice of the Venetians, who ever hated the
Milanese, rather then out of any real Necessity.

Swisse, who were come to the Constable, knowing the brutish Avarice of that
Nation, and that he had no Money to pay his own, he on the sudden decamped and
repassed the River Addo.

He remained there some Weeks, giving still much dread to the French, because
their Swisse refused to Fight the Swisse that were in his Army: and at length
even retired: but at three Weeks end, most of his Troops moulder'd to nothing
for want of Pay, his Swisse returned by the Valtoline, and three thousand of
the Germans and Spaniards went over to the Constable.

It was not doubted, but the Pope had been of intelligence with the Emperor for
this irruption, since Marc Anthony Colomna appeared in his Army;
Notwithstanding the King could not believe it, so well was he persuaded of his
Affection, and faithfully observing the Treaty, permitted him (...) dispossess
Francis Maria of the Duchy of Vrbin, to bestow it on (...) Medicis his Nephew,
although he had put himself into his Protection.

If the Grandeur of King Francis, Young, Warlike and Rich^ were formidable to
the Italians, they beheld another Springing up, now, who astonished them much
more. I speak of Charles Heir to Spain, Naples, Sicilia, and the Low Countries,
and who being in a fair Way of succeeding to the Empire after his Grandfather,
could not fail when once he had attained to it, of desiring to reunite Italy
to the other as being indeed the Head. Now they found that to drive out those
two great Powers, who held it at both ends, there was no way to do it; That to
keep the Balance steady between them, was to undertake an impossibility, and
besides it were to expose themselves to be the Theater and Prey to Foreign
Arms; and to cast themselves all on one side, were to bring in an Absolute
Master, and slavery beyond all redemption.

That it might not look as if the Concordat made between the King and the Pope,
were a simple convention between two particulars, the Council of Lateran having
caused it to be read in their last Session, which was the fifteenth of
December, confirmed it by their Authority: but the Clergy of France, the
Universities, the Parliaments, and all understanding and good Men opposed it by
their Complaints, Remonstrances, Protestations and Appeals to future Councils.
However at two Years end they were fain to submit to absolute Authority, and
Register the Concordat in Parliament. Thus under Color of taking away the
Inconveniences of Elections which might well have been remedied, they
authorized others which are insinitely greater, and can never have any Redress.

The Council of Charles of Austria, found it was necessary for his Affairs that
he should renew the Alliance with King Francis, thereby to have free Passage
into Spain. This was done by the Treaty of Noyon the sixteenth of August,
between the Lords Arthur de Goussier Boisy, and William de Crovy Chovres, who
had been Governors of two Kings, and the first Grand Maistre of the Royal House.

It was agreed amongst other Articles; That Charles should marry Louisa the
Kings Eldest Daughter, or upon her default the second, if another were born, or
if no other were born, Renee the Queens Sister; who for her Dowry should have
that part the King pretended to the Kingdom of Naples, with reversion in his
Favor in case of want of Issue; That Charles should pay an hundred thousand
Crowns yearly, for the maintenance of this Daughter; That he should give up
Navarre within six Months to Henry d'Albret; If not that after the expiration
of that term the King should be permitted to assist him; That the Emperor
should be admitted into this Treaty, if he would come in; That if he rendered
Verona to the Venetians, they should pay him two hundred thousand, Crowns, and
that the King should give him an Acquittance for the three hundred thousand,
which King Lewis XII. had lent him to make War upon them.

Rocandolf, to revictual Verona, which the French and Venetians blocked up, he
dispaired nevertheless to keep it any long time, because all the Avenues were
shut. For this reason, he rather chose, according to his covetous Humor, to
surrender it to Lautree, who restored it to the Venetians for the Sum
mentioned by the Treaty. After this he wholly laid aside the Fancy of further
Conquests in Italy, and he moreover permitted the five Cantons, who had refused
the Confederation with France, to accept of it as well as the other eight.

By all ways and means the King desired to gain the Pope, for his Designs in
Italy. And for this reason, he assisted him with his Forces against Francis
Maria de la Rovere, who made War upon him to regain his Duchy; for this Lord
upon the hopes of Booty, had drawn into his Service, the Troops of either
Party, that had been disbanded after the giving up of Verona. Moreover his Wife
being delivered of her first Son the last day of February, he would needs have
Laurence de Medicis, who was come into France to marry Margaret Daughter of
John Earl of Auvergne, Boulogne and Laraguez, hold it at the Font, in the Name
of the Pope his Uncle. This Couple died both within the Year, and yet left a
Daughter named Catharine, who afterward was Queen of France.

The War of Vrbin lasted some eight Months, the Spanish Troops having been
regained by force of all-powerful Money by the Medicis, Francis Maria was
apprehensive, left they would deliver him into their Hands, and retired to
Mantoua. The Emperor continued the Truce for five Years with the Venetians, for
twenty thousand Crowns, they were to pay him each Year; and the King desiring
to fasten and secure the Confederation with the Pope by some fresh Ties, gave
up into his Hands again the writing, whereby he had obliged himself to
surrender Reggio and Modena to the Duke of Ferrara.

Christendom enjoyed a most Universal Calm, when She was troubled with two of
the most horrible Scourges, or Plagues, that did ever torment Her. Selim the
Turkish Sultan having conquered Syria, laid Ismael Sophy's Power in the Dust,
extinguished the domination of the Mamalucs in Egypt, by the utter defeat and
death of Campson the last Egyptian Sultan, vaunted that in quality of Successor
to Constantine the Great, he should soon bring all Europe under his Empire; and
at the same Time the Bowels of the Church began to be torn and rent, by a
Schism that hitherto no Remedies have been able to take away.

The first Evil, gave occasion for the birth of the second. Pope Leo desiring
to oppose all the Forces of Christendom, against the furious Progress of the
Turks, had sent his Legates to all the Christian Princes, and formed a great
Project to attack the Insidels, both by Sea and Land. Now to excite the Peoples
Devotion, and get their Alms Augustins in Germany: Nevertheless Albert
Archbishop of Mentz, either of his own Head, or by Order from Rome, allots and
gives it to the Jacobins. The Augustins finding themselves wronged in their
Interest, which is the great Spring, even of the most Religious Societies,
Camplain, make a Noise, and fly to Revenge. Amongst Martin Luther, of Islebe in
the County of Mansfield, Doctor and Rcader in Theology, in the University of
Witemberg, a bold Spirit, Impetuous, and Eloquent; John Stampis their General
commanded him to preach against these Questors. They furnished him but with too
much Matter: for they made Traffic and Merchandise of those sacred Treasures
of the Church, they kept their Courts or Shops rather in Taverns, and consumed
great part of what they gained or collected in

Perhaps it would have been better done to prevent these Disorders, only to
have reremoved the occasion of his clamor; but the thing seemed not worth
while, to trouble their Heads about it. In the mean time the Quarrel grew high,
and was heated by Declamations, Theses, and Books on either side. Frederic Duke
of Saxony, whose Wisdom and Virtue was exemplary in Germany, maintained him and
even animated him, as well for the Honor of his new University of Witemberg,
which this Monk had brought in reputation, as in hatred to the Archbishop of
Ments, with whom he had other disputes. He at first began with proposing of
Doubts, then being hard beset, and too roughly handled, he engaged to maintain
and make them good, in the very Sense they condemned them in. They had neither
the Discretion to stop his Mouth, or seize upon him: but threatening him before
he was in their Power, he takes shelter; and then keeping no more Decorum, he
throws off his Mask, and not only declaimed, against the Pope, and against the
Corruptions of the Court of Rome, but likewise opposed the Church of Rome, in
many Points of Her Doctrine.

And truly the extreme ignorance of the Clergy, many of them scarce able to
read, the scandalous Lives of the Pastors, most of them Concubinaries,
Drunkards and Usurers, and their extreme negligence gave him a fair advantage
to persuade the People, that the Religion they taught was corrupt, since their
Lives and Examples were so bad. At the same Time, or as others say, a Year
before, to wit in Anno 1516. Ulric Zuinglius Curate at Zuric began to expose
his Doctrine in that Swisse Canton; and since almost every Year, new
Evangelists have arisen, in such Swarms, that it would be difficult to number
them.

Charles of Austria, the Lords de Chevres and de Boisy met at Montpellier to
determine them: but the Death of de Boisy, made that great Work be left
imperfect; William his Brother Lord de Bonnivet, much less wise then he, held
the same Rank in the Kings Favor, who made him Admiral of France.

John Jacques Trivulcio lost it, and died for Grief at the Borough of Chastres
under Montlehery. Lautree his antagonist, had given the King an ill impression
of him, upon his being made a Burgher amongst the Swisse; and his Brother and
others of his Kindred putting themselves into the Venetians Service.

There had been some Seeds of division sowed, between the King of France, and
the King of England: their Counsels, before things grew to a greater height,
thought sit to unite them by a new Alliance. The Admiral therefore going to
London, made a Treaty to this effect; That the King of England should give his
Daughter, as then but four years of age, to the Daufin not yet completely one
year old; That there should be a defensive League between the two Crowns, and
that Tournay should be restored to the King of France; who should pay two
hundred and sixty thousand Crowns for the Expenses the English had been at
there, and three hundred thousand more in twelve years time, besides that he
should acknowledge to have received other three hundred thousand for the Dowry
of the little Princess. The King not having the Money ready, gave six Lords in
Hostage, and by this means got Tournay. It was likewise agreed that the two
Kings should have an entre-view at their convenient time, between Boulogn and
Calais.

In Maximilian's Council, it was judged more proper for the Grandeur of the
House of Austria, to give the Empire to the Archduke Charles his Grandson,
then to Ferdinand his younger Brother, to whom for the same reason King
Ferdinand his Grandfather would not leave his Kingdom of Arragon, who bred him
in his own Court. And therefore Maximilian treated with the Electors, to get
them to design him King of the Romans: but before he had accomplished that
affair he died at Lints in Austria, aged sixty three years, the two and
twentieth day January in Anno 1519.

After his Death, King Francis and Charles declared themselves Aspirers or
Competitors for the Imperial Crown, without showing however the lest picque
against one another. Of the Capetine Race none but Charles Earl of Valois, had
hitherto desired it. The Swisse denied Francis their Intercession with the
Electors: the Pope pretended to favor him, but he was not either for one or
other Francis, it was to get the Suffrages from Charles, and by this Intrigue
to turn their Eyes and Thoughts toward some other German Prince. The Electors
for the same reason were in suspense a good while: at the beginning the
Palatine, Triers, and Brandenburgh, seemed to be for Francis, and the latter
promised to gain the Archbishop of Ments his Brother likewise. But when he had
singer'd his Money, and it came to give their Votes, Ments pleaded stoutly for
Charles, and Brandenburgh seconded him; Triers kept his Word. The reputation of
his Victories in Italy spoke advantageously for the King, and the War the Turks
threatened Germany withal, ought to have made him more considerable then
Charles, who had as yet done nothing, and promised but little more. But he was
not of the German Nation: besides, the more he seemed to merit, the more they
feared he would reduce the German Princes to a low condition, as his
Predecessors had reduced those of France; and if there were apprehensions of
oppression on either Hand, it did not appear so visibly on Charles's side, nor
seem to be so near in likelihood from him, who was five years younger then the
other, and of no very promising Genius. In fine, upon all these considerations,
and with three hundred thousand Crowns, brought even a year before into
Germany, and not distributed but to good purpose, Charles carried it, and was
elected at Francfort the twentieth of June, being at that instant in Spain,
whither he was gone almost two years before.

Though King Francis set a good face upon it, yet this refusal went to his
Heart, and he could not but imagine that Charles being Master of so many great
Estates, would revenge the Injuries done to his Grandfather, and those of the
House of Burgundy. For this reason he applied himself with more care to gain
the friendship of the Pope, and the King of England: but the Pope followed
Fortune, and invested Charles with the Kingdom of Naples, notwithstanding the
constitution of his Predecessors, which forbid that the said Kingdom and the
Empire should be in the same Hand.

Charles of Austria, hastened the enterview of the King, and Henry of England;
This was done in the Month of June between Ardres and Guines. The two Kings
equally Pompous and Vain, made their magnificence appear to the highest
profusion. Francis expended more there then the Emperor did at his Coronation,
and put his Nobless to great inconveniences, who ever imitate their Princes,
but more readily in their Excess, then in their Wisdom. This enter-view was
called the Camp of Cloth of Gold. After they had saluted each other on
Horseback, they went into a Pavilion erected expressly, with two or three
Ministers of State belonging to either King, and there talked a few Moments
about their Affairs. That done they left the care thereof to them, and spent
ten or twelve days together in Feastings and Tournaments at Nights. Francis
returned to Ardres, and Henry to Guines. Before they parted they confirmed
their Treaty by solemn Oath upon the the Holy Communion, which they received
together.

But soon after Francis, who too credulous built already on the Amity of the
English, might plainly perceive what stress he was to lay upon so jealous, and
so inconstant a Foundation. Charles V. coming from Spain by Sea to the
Low Countries, that from thence he might go to Aix to take the Crown, passed
first over into England, and saw Henry with less splendour, and perhaps more
Fruit then he. For the King of England promised him, that in case any
Difference happened between him and Francis, he would be Arbitrator, and declare
himself Enemy to him that would not stand to his Award or Judgment.

His Intention was not to join with either the one or the other, but to keep
himself in the midst, and be sought to by them both, giving them to understand
that he could make the Balance sway to that side he turned to; As he seemed to
point out to King Francis at their late enter-view, at Ardres, where over his
Tent Empp. Charles V. R. 38 Years. And, Solomon Son of Selim R. 47 Years.
Door, he had caused the Figure of an Archer to be placed with these Words, Qui
l'accompagne est Maistre.
He that accompanies or joins with him is Master. This was the Method he used
all his Life.

The two and twentieth of October Charles was crowned at Aix la Chapelle, and
assigned a Diet at Worms for the Month of January following. In the mean time
not staying for the Judgment of of the Assembly, being at Colen he condemned
Luther's Books to the Fire as Heretical: but this so hasty proceeding he made
more Friends and Defenders, then Enemies. In revenge Luther without respect
either for Pope or Emperor, was so confident as to burn the Book of the
Decretals, which he asserted to be contrary to the Word of God, in several
Passages he had extracted from them.

Spaniards grew angry that their King had left them to go into Germany,
andbesides they could not endure the Government of the Flemmish; for after the
Death of that memorable Cardinal Ximene, he left the Administration of Affairs
to the Lord de Chevres. They complained that those Strangers heaped up all
their fairest Pieces of Gold, and that they took into their Hands, or sold the
greatest Offices, and the richest Benefices; amongst others the Archbishopric
of Toledo, wherewith the Lord de Chevres had provided his Brother. Some
Grandees of that Country, who thought to do their business in the absence of a
Prince, whom they esteemed of little Courage, kindled the Fire, and made a
League which they called la Sancta Junta; Toledo and the greatest Cities came
into it, and the Chief Officers that commanded their Forces, were John de
Padillia and Antonio d'Acugno Bishop of Zamora.

They had a Design of giving the Kingdom of Arragon to Ferdinand Son of that
Frederic, that died in France, and to make him come in with some Color, would
marry him to Jane the Frantic Mother of Charles V. whom they siezed upon; but
whether he doubted the event, or stood upon the Honor of keeping his Faith, he
rejected the proposition and would not stir out of the Castle, where Charles V.
had left him. In the mean while the Vice-Rois of Castille and Arragon, with the
rest of the King's Servants, having armed themselves against the Rebels, lopped
off by little and little the Branches of that Party, and then felled it almost
quite down, by the defeat of their united Forces, and the deaths of Padillia,
and the Bishop, both slain in that Battle.

Now whilst the Vice-Rois had drained the Garrisons of most of the Places in
Navarre to defend themselves against the revolted, it had been easy for King
Francis to have regained that Kingdom: but he did not dream of it till the
Spring following, and then he sent an Army thither commanded by Andrew de Foix
Lord de L'Esparre Brother of Lautree, who recovered it all in few days. He met
Pampelonna, who stood out till he battered them, and then surrendered upon
Composition.

Innigo de Loyola d'Ognez a young Gentleman of Guipuscoa, who had put himself
into the Castle with some other Volunteers, was wounded upon the Walls with a
Splinter, by a Cannon Shot which broke his Thigh, and made him Lame all his
Life. After which being retired to his own House, he was touched with a most
fervent Zeal and Devotion, and was afterward Institutor and Head of the great
and famous Company, or Society of Jesus, which has extended it self into all
the Parts of the World.

L'Esparre instead of satisfying himself with Navarre, and putting it in a good
Posture, entered upon Castille, and besieged Logrogne. The Vice-Rois who
returned from subduing the Rebels, and who nevertheless would not have thought
of assaulting him, if he had not first fallen upon their Country, marched
Saint Colombe, having cashiered part of his Men, that he might put half by
his false Musters into his Pocket, he found himself too weak, and retired near
Pampelonna. And there he committed a second Fault, greater then the first: for
without staying for a re-inforcement of six thousand Men, who were coming to
him out of France, he rashly gave them Battle; and was beaten for his Pains,
and so grievously wounded in the face, that he remained blind.

Pampelonna and all the rest of the Kingdom was lost in as short a time as it
had been reconquer'd. The Emperors Council, to prevent the Revolts of the
Nobility of the Country, affectionate to their Natural King, caused all the
Castles to be demolished, and dismantled all the Towns, excepting Pampelonna,
du Pont de la Reine, and d'Estella.

Noyon, since the six Months were expired: but there were otherguess Subjects
of hatred between Charles and Francis. For this last complained that Charles
did not pay him the hundred thousand Crowns, as he had promised by the Treaty
of Noyon, for the maintenance of his Daughter, and by consequence, that he had
no mind to complete the Marriage, That his Agents had spoken ill of him in the
Diets, and in the Courts of the Princes of Germany; That he had debauched
Philbert de Chaalon Prince of Orange from him; and that he cabaled in Italy to
put the Duchy of Milan in disturbance. Charles on the contrary, was angry that
he had taken under his Protection William Duke of Gueldres, a sworn Enemy to
his House and to the Low Countries, and said that he unjustly detained from him
the Duchy of Burgundy.

Francis was the more forward to undertake, because he levied Subsidies as he
pleased; whereas Charles could get no Money without a great deal of trouble,
the Kingdoms of Spain, and the Low Countries, having yet in those Times all
their Liberties and Privileges entire: but then he was a much better Manager,
and made but very few idle Expenses.

In such a disposition were they toward each other, that nothing could be able
to prevent them from coming to Daggers-drawing, but a third Party. The King of
England kept himself Neutral enough, and designed only to be Arbitrator. The
Pope did not do the same, for he first Treated a private League with the King,
wherein he obliged himself to assist him for the regaining the Kingdom of
Naples for his second Son, upon condition he should bestow a part thereof upon
a Nephew of the Holy FAthers, and that the other Part, during the Minority of
the young Prince, should be governed by a Legate from the Holy See, Parma and
Piacenza which Julius II. had possessed himself of, though unjustly; Others
said it was that he was angry they did not receive his Bulls at Milan with
submission enough, nay that sometimes they rejected them with scorn.

Whatever it were, he entered into a League with the Emperor for the mutual
defense of their Countries, to re-establish Francis Sforza in the Duchy of
Milan, and to recover the Duchy of Ferrara for the benefit of the Holy See, to
which it appertained. The Lord de Chevres who was then at the Diet of Worms,
having heard of this Treaty which was made without his knowledge, died of grief
repeating these Words often, Ah! what a World of Mischiefs! His Brother the
Archbishop of Toledo, whom he had taken along with him, went out of this World
sometime before him.

The King being at Remorentine in Berry, upon Twelfth day, as he was sporting,
and in jest attacked the Count de Saint Pol's House with Snow-Balls, who with
his Companions were defending it with the same Artillery; it infortunately
happened that a Firebrand thrown by some hot-brained fellow, hit him on the Head
and grievously wounded him, for which they were forced to cut off his Hair. Now
he having a very large high Forehead, and besides the Swiss and Italians
wearing short Locks and long Beards, he found this Fashion more pleasing to his
Fancy, and followed it. His example made all France copy this Mode, who held
it till the Reign of Lewis XIII. when by little and little they shortened their
Beards, and let their Locks grow, till at last they left neither Hair on the
Cheeks nor on the Chin, and Nature not being able to furnish them with a stock
so thick and long, as they fancied would be most becoming, they have thought it
best shave their Heads, and wear Perruques of Women's more delicate and longer
Hair for Ornament.

de Chevres. Robert de la Mark Lord of Sedan and Duke of Bouillon, having
suffered disgrace in the Court of France, because of the many Robberies
committed by his Gentsdarmes, went to the Emperors, whither he was enticed by
the Bishop of Liege his Brother, a man very powerful there. Now it happened that
the Emperors Council received an Appeal from a Judgment, which the Pairs of his
Duchy of Bouillon had given in a certain Cause between the Lords de Simay and
d'Emery; Robert being turbulent and impetuous, took this for an Affront to his
honor, and would revenge it.

He came therefore to the King at Remorentin, who was under cure of his Wound,
and his Wife having beforehand prepared the way, reconciled himself to him,
and put himself under his Protection. At his departure thence, he was so rash,
as to send a Challenge of Desiance to the Emperor in the Diet at Worms, and
afterward Florenges his Son with three thousand Men, besieged Vireton in
Luxembourgh.

Immediately the King of England undertaking to be Mediator, sends to Francis,
whom he took to be the chief Promoter of this Challenge, to entreat him not to
commence a War; Francis takes his Advice, and commands Florenges away from
Vireton; but the Emperor did not take this for satisfaction; he would not have
it said, that a Man whose Ancestors had been Domestic Servants to the House of
Burgundy, should have braved him impunitively. He raised a great Army, the
command whereof he gave to Henry Count of Nassaw, who took four or five little
Places from Robert, and caused some Soldiers of the Garrisons to be hanged on
the Battlements. After this the Emperor being in some measure satisfied,
granted him a Truce of forty Days.

At the same time the Lord de Liques a Hennuyer Of the Country of Hainault.
, seized upon the City of Saint Amand in Tournesis, under pretense of some
Dispute he had with Lewis Cardinal of Bourbon, who was the Abbot. He afterward
besieged Mortain, which he said belonged to him. The Captain who was in it,
gave it up upon Condition to have his Life and Goods spared: but the Emperors
Men ransacked the Garrison; Then the Governor of Flanders laid siege to Tourney.

The King could interpret these Undertakings, for no other then a Declaration
of War: however the Emperor would not own them as yet, having the like Design
upon many other Frontier Places which he intended to execute without mentioning
a Word; and besides he dreaded the King of England, who would needs be
Mediator, and therefore wished both the one and the other to send their
Deputies to him at Calais, there to make known their difference, giving them
plainly to understand, that he would declare himself an open Enemy to him that
should refuse.

They were therefore obliged, either of them being afraid to have him their
Enemy, to send Ambassadors to him. Those from the King, were James de Chabanes
la Palisse Marshall of France, the Chancellor du Prat, and John de Selve,
first President of Parliament, who went to attend Henry at Calais. At first
those on behalf of the Emperor demanded no less then the Duchy of Burgundy,
and that the King should acquit him of all Homage, as well for that Country, as
for the Counties of Flanders and Artois, because the subjection as Vassal, said
they, did injury to the Imperial Majesty.

Calais, the Count de Nassaw with the Emperors Army passed the Meuse and
besieged Mouzon. The Soldiers that were in it frighted to see themselves
exposed and laid open to a Battery that was on the Hill, compelled their
Commanders to demand composition. There were two of them, who were so
imprudent, as to go both together to Nassaw to make it, and by this oversight
they had no Terms, but what were very disadvantagious.

The Chevalier Bayard behaved himself much more generously against the Attacks
of the same General, for he not only defended himself like a brave Soldier, but
made such a Division by counterfeit Letters between Nassaw and Sickingben, who
commanded that part of the Imperial Army on this side the Meuse, that he made
them raise their Siege.

It appears to me, if I have rightly observed, that in this Siege the Enemies
made use of that sort of Artifice or Engines, since called Bombes, which are
great Granados, long, or round, laden with Gunpowder, and shot out of a
Morter-piece that they may fall in some certain place, where they work a double
Mischief, both by the weight of their fall, and the great violence of the
Powder, which is set on fire by a Fusee, so disposed that in a Moment it causes
the Bombe to burst, after it is fall, and breaks and tears all that is either
above it, nor near hand about it.

In this Retreat Nassaw having fired all in his way, putting Men, Women and
Children to the Sword, especially in the City of Aubenton, gave the first
beginning to Burnings, and Massacrings of Innocents.

The King having drawn his Forces together, had his revenge for this Affront of
the Emperors; he regained Mouzon, burnt and dismantled Bapaume, reduced
Landrecy and Bouchain. Then with his whole Army passed the Scheld over a
Bridge, made for the purpose, to seek out the Emperor, who with his own was
come to Valenciennes: but he staid not for him, retiring from thence under the
favor of a very thick Fogg.

Charles de Bourbon; for he gave the command of the Vanguard to the Duke of
Alenson, first Prince of the Blood, and who had married his Sister, but a Man
of shallow understanding and uncertain Courage. Which is more, he slighted the
good Advice he gave him, to fall upon the Emperor's Army in their Retreat, when
no doubt he might have put them into great disorder. In his whole life he never
met again with so fair an opportunity, though he sought it every where; it
seemed as if Fortune displeased that he would not lay hold of her Favor then,
had sworn to avoid and fly from him, and never make him the like happy proffer
again.

The Grave, Tacit and Haughty Humor of Charles de Bourbon, did not suit well
with the King's, which was Pleasant, Free and Open: And withal Madame mortally
offended that he disdained the Love she had for him, pushed on her Resentments
all the ways imaginable, till in the end, she had her revenge upon him at the
expense of her Son and the whole Kingdom of France.

An old Tradition, but which has more the countenance of Falsehood, then of
Truth, says that this Princess desiring to marry the Constable, had persuaded
the King this Match would be greatly to his advantage; for since he could have
no Children by her, the rich Succession of that House of Bourbon would by
consequence revert to him, according to some agreement or pact made with Lewis
XI. That the King was allured by this advantage, and having one day spoken of
his Mother to the Constable, that Prince who had an Aversion to her, made some
reply that reflected on her Honor, at which the King was so offended that he
gave him a Box on the Ear.

The Admiral Bonnivet having feigned a March toward Pampelonna, turned short
by Saint John de Luz, and besieged Fontarabia; which surrendered after the first
Assault the eighteenth of October. The Deputies from the King and the Emperor
were still at Calais, with the King of England, laboring to adjust their
Differences, and take away all such stumbling Blocks as might occasion the like
hereafter. They were agreed upon every thing, having covenanted that the
Emperor should raise the Siege of Tournay, and recall his Troops out of Milan,
thereupon came news of the taking of Fontarabia; and he refused to ratify the
Treaty, unless they would restore that place to him.

This would have created no trouble, if as soon as they had taken it the wise
counsel of Claude Duke of Guise had been followed, who would have had it razed
and the materials brought to Andaye, right over against it on the hither Shore
of the River Bidasso. But Bonnivet full of the vain desire to perpetuate the
Glory of his Conquest, which he exalted as high as that of any Kingdom,
persuaded the King to preserve it; and by this means a Fantastical and
Ambitious Minister involved the Kingdom of France in a War of eight and thirty

The King was encamped on the Banks of the Scheld, when the Courier brought him
the Treaty of Calais: He remained there some Days* but finding the Floods so
great, and the Ways so bad, that it was impossible for him to relieve Tournay,
he retired into Picardy, having left part of his Men with the Constable and the
Duke of Vendosme, who took Hesdin, and some Castles of small Importance. Being
at Compiegne, he sent Word to Champroux, who commanded in Tournay, to make his
Composition the most honorably that he possibly could, as he did the first of
December, after a three Months Blockade and Siege.

In Italy the Pope and Emperor not having been able to make Genoa and Milan
revolt by the Intrigues of the Banished, proceeded to open force. Lautrec who
was Governor of Milanois, was come into France, to complete his Marriage with
the Daughter of N. d'Albret d'Orval; and the Marshall de Lescun his Brother
supplied his place. This Man furnished the Pope with a pretended Cause, who
could find out no just one to break with the King. His Brother and himself
being haughty and severe, had proscribed many of the Milanese: Jeremy Moron,
who had been Senator of Milan under Lewis XII. and mightily cherished by that
King, was of the number, being picqued for that Francis I. had refused to make
him Master of Requests. Lescun having notice that these Exiles were assembled
together at Reggio, went thither with fifteen hundred Horse, and endeavored to
surprise the Town. The Pope made loud Complaints in the Consistory, and
protested that Francis having violated the Alliance that was betwixt them, he
thought himself no longer obliged to keep it: but he would Genoa, and that he
had an Army in readiness to enter upon Milan under the command of Prosper
Colomna and Frederic Gonzague Marquess of Mantoua, whom he had inviegled from
the Service of the King of France.

The Tricks and Stratagems of the Exiled were ineffectual, as well as the
Voyage of the Popes Galleys. Manfroy Palavicini one of their Chiefs was taken,
when he thought to take Coma; and Octavian Fregosa took such good care of
Genoa, that nothing stirred.

In the mean time the King perceiving that he must have a War on that side,
sent Lautrec thither. This Lord knowing the prodigal Humor and negligence of
the King, refused to go till he could have the three hundred thousand Crowns to
march along with him, which had been assigned him: but Madame and those that
governed the Treasury, promised him so positively, even with the most Sacred
Oaths, to send them immediately after him, that he condescended, and parted
without them. And then indeed, just what he feared, happened, the King having
lost the sight of him, lost the remembrance of him too, and Madame, who hated
him, diverted that Fund to other uses.

The Enemies had besieged Parma, Lescun had thrown himself in with five
thousand Men, but two thousand forsook him. Lautrec knowing he was in danger
advanced to the River Taro, which is within seven Miles of it to relieve him.
At the same time News was brought to the Enemy, that the Duke of Ferrara had
taken Friul and Saint Felix, and that he might come and get both Reggio and
Modena from them: upon this apprehension they raised their Siege, and returned
to Saint Lazare. Their Germans for want of Pay, abandoned them in their March;
and in this disorder there had been an end of their Army, if Lautrec had but
followed and charged them smartly.

He was accused for having committed another Fault likewise. The Enemies having
passed the River Po, had lodged themselves in the little Town of Rebecque,
situate on the Oglio four Miles from Pontevique, which is Land belonging to the
Venetians. They believed themselves to be in security there, because the
Venetians, though Confederate with the King, would not open their City Gates to
the French: but they were mistaken, for they suffered Lautrec to enter. This
General having a Strength equal to theirs, had infallibly defeated them, had he
but drawn near their Camp and pent them up close; for by this means they could
not have had room to draw up in Battalia, nor could they have staid there above
two or three days, wanting Ovens to bake their Ammunition-Bread: but he amusing
himself with fi^ing upon them from Pontevic, they quietly stole away in the
Night, and repassed the Oglio.

Hitherto they had given ground to the French: but now their Strength
increasing, they are going to give them Chase: The ten thousand Swisse which
the Cardinal de Sion had obtained of the Cantons for defense of the Pope and
the Holy See, after long deliberation whether they should follow him into
Milanois, because that was to contravene their Alliance with the King, did at
last join them near Gambara.

There happened at the same time another thing very prejudicial to the French.
The Lords of the Leagues had sent Couriers to command the Swisse, both of the
one and the other Army, that they should return, for that it was scandalous to
the Cantons to have their Ensigns set up publicly in two Camps, that were
Enemies to each other. Now those that carried these Orders to the Confederates
Army, were corrupted and stopped in their Journey: but the others went on directly
to the French Army, and delivered those Commands to such Swisse as were there.
So that they immediately withdrew, and the most part without saying Adieu: but
not so much out of Obedience, as hopes they should get some Money of the
Confederates, Lautrec receiving none from France, nor being able to raise
enough in Milanois to satisfy them.

With what Forces he had left he got to Cassan, having left a Garrison at
Cremona and at Vulgarly Pisqueton.
Pizzigton, then after the Enemy had passed the Adda under the favor of the
little Town of Vaury, which they seized upon, he retired to Milan: but he held
it not long. For they being come to lodge at Marignan, one Day the nineteenth
of November, when they believed they could not stir out of their Quarters, nor
draw their Cannon, so bad was the Weather, so rotten and deep the Ways, while
he was walking about the Streets unarmed, and his Brother Lescun in Bed, tired
with his former Day's labor, he was amazed when toward the Evening, they
attacked the Suburbs and gained it, the Venetians that had the Guard there,
basely abandoning it. At the same time the Burghers of the Gibeline Faction,
let them into the City: but the Spaniard revenged the French, and made that
faithless Town pay dearly for their defection, plundring them for eight days
together.

He then drew together round about the Castle all the Men he had, and after he
had put Men enough into it, instead of charging the Enemy, whilst they were in
disorder and separated, he resolves to retire the same Night to Coma, and
thence to the Country of Bergamo. Soon after Coma was taken by the Marquess of
Pescara, Parma abandoned by the too precipitate Order of Lautrec, and Piacenza
delivered by her Citizens to the Confederates.

The over-joy for so much good Success moved Pope Leo so much, that the very
Night he received it, he was seized with a kind of a Feavor; of which, or of
some other more hidden Cause he died at Rome, the first Day of December. Now he
having projected this War, and furnished Money for maintaining of the Army, it
might be judged that upon his Death the French should have recovered their
advantage, seeing they had still in their Hands all the best Places in the
Duchy, the Castle of Milan, Cremona, Piacenza, Novarra, Alexandria, seven or
eight strong Forts, and the City of Genoa; the College of Cardinals troubling
themselves so little with those Affairs, that the Duke of Ferrara easily
regained all the Towns that Leo had taken from him, Francis Maria the Duchy of
Vrbin, and moreover that of Camerin, which he wrested from John de Varane, and
Baillon the City of Perugia. But the Affront they received at Parma, being
beaten off by a very few Soldiers and People half armed, gave other Towns the
greater Courage to resist them; After which the two Armies rested near sixs
Week without undertaking any thing, the French for want of Men, and indeed both
of them for want of Money.

Conclave: the Cardinals elected Adrian Florent Cardinal Bishop of Tortosa, a
Hollander by birth, who had been Tutor to the Emperor, and at that time
Governed Spain; all the World, nay they themselves after it was done, wondering
how, out of I do no know what giddy Fancy, they should go so far off for one
that thought but little of them, as indeed till now, they had as little thought
upon him. He came not to Rome, till the twenty ninth day of August following.

Whilst the Armies lay quiet, Prosper Colomna took great care for every thing
that was necessary to preserve Milan, both for the Fortifications and the
Provisions, as also for Soldiers, and principally to dispose the People to make
an obstinate Defense. Which he did as well by the hatred he increased in them
against the French, representing the Severities they had used toward them; and
the extreme Resentment and Revenge, their Nature would prompt them to, if they
should ever regain that Place, from whence they had been so shamefully beaten
out: as by the Affection he inspired them withal, for Francis Sforza second Son
of Ludovic and Brother of Maximilian. For the deceased Pope Leo had designed,
by the Emperor's consent, to restore him to his Father's Duchy, but he was yet
at Trent, expecting a Levy of eight thousand Germans to conduct him thither.

Upon this, notwithstanding the Cabals of the Imperialists, the discords
between the Cantons, some of them being for the King, others for the Emperor
and the contrary interests of the particular Chiefs amongst them, they had
granted the King in one of their Diets, a Levy of twelve thousand Swisse, who
marched into Lombardy by Mount Saint Bernard, and Saint Godards Mount, under
the conduct of Honorius, Bastard of Savoy, Grand Maistre of France, and Galeas
de Sanseverin Grand Escuyer. Soon after John de Medicis came into the King's
Service also, and joined his Army with three thousand Soldiers.

With two such considerable re-inforcements, and raising of some Italian
Troops, Lautrec thought he might do Wonders against the City of Milan, if he
posted himself about it in the Neighborhood, either by cutting off their
Supplies and Provisions, or by assaulting them in that consternation he
believed the People would be in upon his approach. When he had been there
already some Days, and his hopes to gain it, either by Famine or by Assault,
were reduced to the Forms of a long Siege, he had information that Francis
Sforza having left Trent, with his Lansquenets, and crossed Veronois and the
Mantouan Territory, was arrived at Piacenza, and that the Marquess of Mantoua,
had joined him with his Horse to convoy him to Pavia, where he was to wait a
favorable opportunity to get to Milan. Then he decamped, and posted himself
upon the Cassine, which is within three Leagues of Milan to hinder his Passage,
and put the Venetians into Binasque for the same purpose.

When he had been there some while he had news that his Brother was returning
from France with Money and some Infantry which were Landed at Genoa: he sent
four hundred Lances, and seven Thousand Swiss to Guard him. Lescun came to
Novarre, whose Castles still held out for the French, and turning their great
Guns upon the Town, played upon it so suriously that he entered it by force upon
the third Assault. But this delay of some days favored the passage of Duke
Sforza, who marching by an uncouth Rode got into Milan, and infinitely
increased the Courage of the Inhabitants, and their hatred against the French,
by the remembrance of the mild Government of the Dukes his Predecessors.

When he was gone from Pavia, Lautrec caused it to be besieged; It was better
furnished with Men then he expected, his Soldiers were beaten off upon all
their Assaults, and the great Rains which made the Tesin to overflow, and its
Stream become so Rapid that they could not bring up any Boats, famished his
Army. He decamped therefore and advanced as far as Monce, to receive the Money
sent him from France. While the Treasurer that brought it was at Aronca, and
could not get forwards because a Party of the Enemy had lodged themselves upon
their Way; the Swisse impatient to receive their Arrears, demanded leave either
to be gone, or to fight the Enemies Army, without considering that they were
entrenched in a Place, where nothing could be gained but Blows. Lautrec finding
he could not withold them any longer, neither by his Promises, nor the
consideration of the Posture they were in, hazarded the Battle, wherein he
foresaw all the disadvantage would fall upon them.

The Enemies were posted in a Farm, which they called la Bicoque, three Miles
from Milan, where there is a very spacious House, and Gardens round about it
enclosed with deep Ditches, and Fields parted in diverse places with Water
Channels, which are derived and brought thither according to the Custom of that
Country, to water their Grounds. Prosper Colomna, who thought the Victory
secure, stood his ground waiting their coming.

Lautrec assaulted them on three Sides, himself on one Hand, his Brother on the
other, and the Swisse in the place of most Difficulty, and to gain their
Cannon. The two first did no great Matters; as for the Swisse they attacked
with fury, but the height of the Fossez stopping them, the Artillery made them
fall in heaps, and the Arquebusiers who were placed amongst the Wheat, taking
them in Flank, they were well paid for their rashness, by the death of three
thousand of theirs, so that they were constrained to retire, and having
rejoyned the French, they together returned very orderly to their Quarters at
Monce.

The next Day their Blood being cooled, and Lautrec having passed the Addo Or
Addua.
near Tressa, they even took their walk homewards through the Territory of
Bergamo, so disheartened and baffled in Courage, for having met with such
unconquerable resistance, that for diverse Years, they did nothing worthy of
their ancient Valor: but indeed became more pliable, and much more manageable
then before.

For Lautrec, having put things in Order at Cremona, he retired into France to
solicit for a supply of ten thousand Men, which the Admiral Bonnivet was to
transport to those Countries.

Prosper besieged Cremona, and Lescun who was in the Place, believing it could
be no prejudice to his Honor, if he made such Composition as should secure the
King's Affairs without hazarding ought, capitulated to leave the Place within
forty Days, which expired the six and twentieth of June, with Arms, Colors
flying, and his Artillery, if within that time, there did not come an Army that
should pass over the River Po by force, or should take some considerable Place
in the Duchy of Milan. He likewise promised that all the others held by the
King in Milanois, should be evacuated, excepting the Castles of Cremona of
Novara, and of Milan.

The time being come, he got some few days more to be added, having purposely
started new Difficulties about the evacuation of some Castles, which being
settled, he executed the Treaty, and came back into France. Before he departed
he had the further displeasure of being informed how Prosper Colomna with his
Army had made himself Master of Genoa, and made Antony Adorna Duke; the City
was surprised during a conference of capitulation, which is a very dangerous
time, and opportunity. This last Blow taking away all hopes from the King of
being in a capacity to gain any thing in Milanois this year, he recalled those
Forces he was sending, and who were already got into Astesan.

Though the miscarriage indeed proceeded from his own Negligence in not sending
Supplies till too late, amusing himself in Hunting, Dancing, and amongst the
Ladies: nevertheless John de Beaulne Samblancay Surintendant of the Finances,
suffered for it. Madame enraged that he should dare to justify before the King,
that she had diverted the three hundred thousand Crowns designed for Lautrec,
resolved to ruin him: The Chancellor Duprat Minister of her revenge, and who
besides had some jealousy of the Credit of that grave old Man, whom the King
called his Father, ordered a Commission to try him, who condemned him to be
hanged.

In the mean time, they made use of all Ways and Means to get in Money. Then
did they begin to alienate the Sacred Demeasnes of the King, they continued to
sell Offices of Judicature, to create great Numbers of new ones, without which
the Monarchy had been upheld eleven hundred years together, to raise the
Tallies, and to lay several new Imposts. Public report accused the Chancellor
for advising all these things which bred so much disorder, who to flatter the
Covetous humor of a Woman, and the ostentation of a Young King, furnished them
with expedients and confidence to overthrow all the Ancient Laws of the
Kingdom, whereof by his Office he was Guardian and Defender.

Guyenne and in Picardy. The Emperor going into Spain through England, had
prevailed with Henry to take his part, against Francis. Arriving in Castillia
he soon suppressed the remainders of the Santa Junta, punishing some few of the
Seditious, pardoning the rest, and rewarding such as deserved it: Particularly
Ferdinand of Arragon who had refused to be Head of the League. He did him great
Honor, and Married him to German de Foix, Widow of his Grandfather King
Ferdinand who was extraordinary Rich, but almost past the Age of Childbearing.

With the Forces that were remainders of this insurrection and some others he
made up an Army which besieged Fontarabria, and the King of England Landed
another at Calais, having first sent a Herald to defy the King at Lions. This
being commanded by his Brother in Law the Duke of Suffolk, joined with the
Count de Bures Governor of the Low Countries, who had one of twelve thousand
men: but both these made no progress, and the English were diminished one half
in five Weeks time after they took the Field.

Solomon the Turkish Sultan, who Succeeded his Father Selim II. two years
since, was now lodged upon the Ramparts of Christendom. For the preceding year
he took the City of Belgrade in Hungary, and this year he wrested Rhodes out of
the hands of the Knights of St. John's. It was believed Pope Adrian might have
saved it, if upon his Arrival in Italy, he would have sent thither the fifteen
hundred Foot he brought along with him, instead of ordering them to March, as
he did, into Milan. For they might have got in by the help of the Venetian
Fleet then on those Seas, and by the favor of those Winds which wasted in
several other Vessels.

It were difficult to name a Siege more Famous then this same, either for the
dreadful numbers of the besiegers, for the brave resistance of the besieged, or
the many and furious Assaults. There were above fifty Mines and twice as many
Countermines about this place; It was battered with above six-score thousand
Canon Shot, so that most of it was blown up into the Air, or beaten down to
dust. The Turkish Army consisted of two hundred thousand Men, of whom above
fifty thousand were Slain, and as many perished by Sickness.

The fifth Month of the Siege, the Knights having no more Gunpowder left, no
Pioneers Solomon, which was to go forth with Bag and Baggage, and all their
Galleys and Vessels that were in Port. He made his entrance upon Christmass-Day.

Peter de Villiers-l'Isle-Adam, to whose conduct and Heroic Virtue the
greatest Honor of this Generous defense was due, setting Sail with his Knights
and four thousand of the Inhabitants as well of that as of the Islands
depending on it, retired to Candia, where he Wintered. From thence he went to
Sicilia, and three months after to Rome; the Pope giving those Knights his City
of Viterbo for their Retreat. Six Years after, in Anno 1530. they placed
themselves in the Island of Malta; The Emperor bestowed it upon them to cover
his Kingdom of Silicia, and they accepted it with the consent of all other
Christian Princes, in whose Territories their Order had any Lands, or
Possessions.

Rhodes being partly occasioned by Pope Adrian's Fault, it concerned him in
Honor to repair it. Therefore upon that consideration and to make his name
glorious, he employed all his cares to procure a Peace, or at least a Truce
betwixt all Christian Princes, that so they might make War upon the Insidels
with their united Force. Francis would yield to nothing but a Truce, and that a
very short one, this did not suit with the Popes designs. So that not being
able to overcome him by his Exhortations, nor by the threats of the English,
nor upon the consideration that he made himself odious to all Christendom, he
would needs bring him to it by Force, and thus of a Common Father he became a
Partial and open Enemy.

Prompted with this Spirit he acted so powerfully with the Venetians that he
broke them off from his Alliance, and made a League with them, the Emperor and
the King of England to thrust him out of Italy. The King had therefore all the
great powers of Christendom against him: nevertheless his passion to recover
Milan did so overruled his mind, that he was resolved to go thither in Person
at the Head of his best Men, had not the Conspiracy of the Duke of Bourbon
which he happended to discover kept him back; And though this did strangely
embarass him, yet he sent Bonnivet thither with an Army.

For diverse years past Madame had sought all opportunities of doing some
displeasure to Charles de Bourbon, and the Chancellor and Admiral employed
themselves most willingly to gratify both her passion and their own. For
Bonnivet Auvergne. It did not satisfy Madame that she had deprived him of the
Chief Functions of his Office, and hindered his Marriage with Renee the Kings
Sister; she had process against him likewise in Parliament to strip him of the
Duchy of Bourbon, and the other great Estate of Susanna, his Wife, who Died
without Children in the year 1521. The Succession whereof as she pretended did
belong to her as the next Heiress.

Indeed she was Daughter of Margaret and Philip who was Lord of Bresse, and
afterward Duke of Savoy; and that Margaret who was Daughter of Charles I. Duke
of Bourbon, and Sister to Peter who had the same Duchy after John II. his
Brother, and was Father of this Susanna, above mentioned. As for Charles de
Bourbon, he was Son of Gilbert Earl of Montpensier, who was Son of Lewis, Uncle
of Duke Peter, and by consequence he was farther removed than she. But, besides
that he made it appear by very ancient Titles, by Solemn Judgments and Decrees,
and by many Examples, that the Lordship of Bourbon was a Feif Masculin; he
showed likewise how in his Contract of Marriage with Susanna, he was
acknowledged the right Heir of that House, and as for the other Estate, there
was a mutual donation between him and his Wife, by virtue whereof he enjoyed
it. It Is true that Susanna was then in minority, and not authorized by the
Judge, but she was authorized sufficiently by the presence of King Lewis XII.
the Cardinal d'Amboise, and four or five and twenty Princes, Bishops and
Eminent Lords.

He believed his cause would have been very good in any other times, and
against any other Party: But as soon as they Commenced this process, he
imagined it was before resolved and concluded, and that he must Infallibly be
cast before Judges who were all Creatures of Madame's or of the Chancellor. And
this last Affront, which reduced him to extreme inconveniences, blinded him so
with rage and revenge, that without any consideration of what he was, and what
he might come to be, he casts himself into the Emperor's Arms, having Treated
with him by the assistance of the Lord de Beaurien, Son of Adrian de Crovy
Count de Rieux. The King of England came into this Treaty. It imported; That
all three were to share France betwixt them; That Bourbon should have the
Ancient Kingdom of Arles with the Title of King; and as a Seal to this
Alliance, the Emperor should give him his Sister Eleonor, who was the Widow of
Emanuel King of Portugal. Bourbon had a particular pretension of his own Head
to Provence, because Rene Duke of Lorrain had yielded up the right he had to
Anne of France the Mother of Susanna, and Anne by her Will and Testament had
given it to him.

Now while the King was at St. Peter le Monstier on the Confines of Nivernois
and Bourbonnois, two Normand Gentlemen Matignon and d'Argouges,
Houshold-Servants belonging to the Connestable, discovered all their Masters
correspondence to him. He would needs be satisfied from his own Mouth, saw him
in the City of Moulins, and told him his whole mind. The Connestable owned that
he had been Solicited by the Count de Rieux, but stiffly denied that he had
given any ear to it. They would perhaps have laid hands on him if they durst:
But indeed the attempt would have been dangerous, in the midst of his own
Country; for he was mightily beloved by the People and the Nobility, and the
King had but four thousand Foot with him, and five hundred Horse: so he only
commanded him to follow the Court.

The Connestable taking his Litter under pretense of some indisposition, went
easy Journeys. At la Palice he had news that a Decree was made the -- of
August, which put his Estate under Sequestration: thereupon he dispatches
Huraut Bishop of Autun his Confident to the King, to beseech him to stopped he
execution of it, and to assure him that this favor would bind him for ever to
his Service: but he was informed they had stopped the Bishop six Leagues from
that place. Then flying from the King's indignation, he retired to his Castle
of Chantelle where all his richest Goods were; And there having intelligence
that four thousand men were coming to besiege him, he went forth by
Torch-light. When he had Rode a little while he stole away from his own People,
who followed Francis de Montagnac Tenzane thinking it had been their Master,
and made his escape attended only by one Esquire named Pomperan, to the
Franche-Compte. From thence he passed into Germany; then through the Valley of
Trent to Mantua, and from that place to Genoa to conferr about the Affairs of
the War with Charles de Lanoy Viceroy of Naples, who had the general Command
of the Armies after the Death of Prosper Colomna, which happened about the end
of this year 1523.

In France, Conspiracies with Strangers against the State never do any mischief
when once they are discovered; this bred a great deal of astonishment, but
produced France: No body followed him, excepting his domestic Servants, and
five or six of his particular Friends: So that the Emperor who at his first
Arrival, had given him his choice either to stay there to command his Army, or
to go into Spain to complete his Marriage, when he perceived that his revolt
effected nothing, feared he should have only a proscribed Person for his
Brother in Law, and persuaded him it were better he should stay in Italy.

We need not doubt but he had formed diverse designs in several Provinces of
France: but no Commotions appearing, the King, either out of Policy or good
nature, did not make strict inquiry who were his Accomplices. There were not
above seven or eight taken into Custody, amongst others St. Vallier la
Vauguyon, and Emard de Pry. St. Vallier was Tried, and Condemned to lose his
Head: but being in the (Greve, the place of Execution) on the Scaffold, instead
of the mortal stroke, he received his pardon. It was said that the King sent it
not to him, till he had robbed his Daughter Diana, as then but Fourteen years
of Age, of the most precious Jewel she had; a very easy exchange for those
that value Honor less then Life, or make it consist in the Sunshine of a
Favor rather envied then innocent.

It was now almost a year that the Lord de Lude had bravely defended Fontarabia
against the Spaniards Assaults; He was so distressed by Famine that it was time
to throw in Provisions; the Marshall de Chastillon who was ordered to do it,
Died by the way. La Palice happily performed it, and having drawn out the Lord
de Lude, and the Garrison who had suffered great Fatigues, he put in all
Fresh-men, and for Governor Frauget a Captain of Fifty men at Arms. Or complete
Horse Men.


About the end of the Spring, an Army of twenty four thousand Spaniards came
and fell into Guyenne by two or three several ways, and afterward joined
Bayonne, to besiege it. The City being weak, their fears were great: however
Lautrec getting in amongst them revived their Hearts and cheered them; so that
they drew off after three days battering it. However they did not lose their
labor, for bending all their Force against Fontarabia, Frauget tamely
surrendered it upon their first Assault; for punishment whereof he was degraded
of his Nobility on a Scaffold in the City of Lions; Cowardice not being worthy
of death, but of Infamy.

Neither the Emperor nor the King of England did use that diligence they ought
in so great a design, as that of tearing all France in pieces. The Emperor did
not furnish Bourbon with those Forces he had promised to seize upon the Duchy
of Burgundy, but only twelve thousand Foot; who having no Horse were easily
beaten off from the Frontiers of Champagne by the Earl of Guise, who was
Governor there.

The English did not land till the Month of September, the Duke of Norfolk
being their General: Their Army and that of the Count de Bure made up together
near forty thousand men. Lewis de la Tremouille to whom the King had committed
the Guard of that Frontier, having but few men could only Garrison the Towns.
They left Terouanne, which they had designed to attaque, on the left hand, and
taking their March between that City and Monstrevil, came before Hesdin.
Knowing the Valiant Pontdormy was got into it, they went farther on, passed the
Sum at Bray, took Roye and Montdidier, and brought a terror even upon Paris,
which was again revived by the coming in of Charles Duke of Vendosme, with some
Horse. After all they withdrew again upon the first frosty weather: yet not
all, above one third of the English leaving their bones there to pay their
Charges.

When they were entering Picardy Bonnivet passed the Mountains. The Emperor, the
Pope and the Venetians had declared against the King as we have said,
nevertheless this great League having but few Forces, Bonnivet soon Conquered
all the Milanois to the Tesin. Prosper Colomne did not imagine that the King
having so many Irons in the Fire in France, should have thoughts of sending an
Army into Italy: He was much amazed when they informed him that Bonnivet was
come over the Hills. He appeared at the River Tesin with those few men he had
to obstruct his getting over: But it being Foordable in many place, by reason
of the great Drowths, he soon had notice that the French were on the other
side, and retreated with his handful of men.

It was said that if Bonnivet had used that diligence which was requisite, he
might have overtaken and cut them all in pieces: Or at least if he had not
amused himself three or four days at Pavia, he had made himself Master of
Milan. This delay gave Prosper time to provide: So that Bonnivet lost his time
in Besieging it, Winter came, the Plague crept into his Army, and that of the
Confederates increased. He was therefore fain to give ground in his turn, and
retire to Biagras, six Leagues on this side of Milan. He chose that Post
because he might safely wait there for a new re-inforcement, having the whole
Country behind at his own disposal.

During these Transactions Pope Adrian died the fourteenth of September, and
the Cardinal Julius de Medicis cousin German of Leo X. and Son of Julian, but
born out of Wedlock, was elected by the contrivance and other devices and ways
usual in the Conclaves. He took the name of Clement VII.

This year began the Chastisement of those who professed the new Reformation
Preathed by Luther. The Protestants reckon for first Martyrs (for so they call
them) one John le Clerc, native of Meaux a Wool-comber, and two Augustine Monks
of the Country of Brabant le Clerc was Whipped and Brandmarkt on the Shoulder
with a Flower de Luce at Meaux, for having said that the Pope was Antichrist;
and was afterward Burnt at Mets for having beaten down some Images. The two
Monks suffered the like death at Bruxels; Luther Sung their Triumphs, much
gladder to be their Panegyrist than their fellow Sufferer.

Bonnivet Subsisted near upon two months in his Post near Biagras: But when the
Enemy had surprised Vercel upon him which cut off his Provisions, and forced
Biagras, he was constrained to retire toward Turin. Charles de Bourbon Chief
of their Army followed him in the Rear. Bonnivet having a Wound in his Arm, got
away before for fear of falling into his hands, and hastening forwards in a
Litter, left the charge and care of the retreat to Bayard and to Vendenesse
Brother of La Palice. They acquitted themselves generously, but both of them
were Slain by Musket Shot.

It is said that Bayard finding himself so wounded in the Reins that he could
sit no longer on Horseback, caused his men to set him on the ground with his
Face turned toward the Enemies, and that Bourbon finding him in this posture
and condition, and telling him that he very much bemoaned and pitied him; he
answered, That it was rather himself was to be pitied, for having taken up
Arms against France, which had given him Birth, and had so tenderly bred him.
That

The rest of the Army being not pursued, retired toward the Alps, the Swiss
returned to their own Country by the Valley d'Aoste, the French by Turin. Near
Suse they met Claude Duke of Longueville with four hundred men at Arms, and
heard they were making new Levies of Swiss to come and join them. And thus it
was that King Francis never sending his Supplies in time, and always in small
Parties, was at vast expenses, and did not do his business thoroughly. After the
departure of the French Forces the Confederates easily regained those places
they yet held, the Castle of Novara Surrendered to Sforza, Loda to the Duke of
Vrbin, and Alexandria to Ferdinand d'Avalos Marquess of Pescara.

It is observed that in this War of Italy they began to make use of such great
and ponderous Muskets, that two men were fain to carry them one after the
other; they loaded them with round Pibbles, and fired them lying upon a Rest.
These were the Ruin and Destruction of the Men at Arms, who before this, feared
nothing but the Canon.

Notwithstanding all this ill Success, Madame did so well manage and prepare
the Kings mind in favor of Bonnivet, that he laid all the blame upon the blind
Baggage Fortune, and received him into as great Favor as he had been before;
Thus this Favorite governing him almost absolutely, inclined and persuaded him
to raise a huge Army and to go in Person to carry on this War, imagining that
if he succeeded the Honor would be attributed to his Councils, if not, then
the Kings disgrace would wipe out the Stains of his former Misfortunes.

Clement the VII. in the beginning of his Pope-ship, had sent Legates to the
Emperor, the King and the King of England, to bring them to a Peace, or at
least to a Truce. The King would have a Truce for two years, the Emperor a
Peace for ever, the King of England neither a Peace nor a Truce, because Thomas
Woolsey Cardinal Bishop of York, had put it into his head, that by the
correspondence and means of Charles de Bourbon, he might be able to make good
the pretensions of his Ancestors to the Kingdom of France.

With this prospect he made a new Treaty with the Emperor, wherein it was said;
That Bourbon entering into France with his Forces of Italy, the King of England
should furnish him with one hundred thousand Crowns a month, from the first of
July, to the last day of December; unless he rather chose to land there himself
there with a good Army; In which case the Governors of the Low Countries
should furnish him with what Artillery was necessary and four thousand Foot;
That at the same time the Emperor with his Spanish Forces should make an
Irruption into Guyenne; That the Pope and the Princes of Italy should be
invited to contribute toward the expenses: That Bourbon should be restored to
all his Lands, and that he should have the Kingdom of Arles, but that he should
own the English to be King of France. He absolutely refused this last condition
as the Pope and the Venetians to contribute any thing; As to the remainder the
Treaty held good.

For immediately Bourbon having drawn together all the Forces the Emperor had
in Italy, entered into Provence with thirteen hundred Foot, and three thousand
Horse. His design was not to Stop there, he intended, after he had taken La
Tour, or the Tower, of the Port of Toulon, the City of Aix and some others, to
Lions, from thence into Berry, imagining the Nobility of his own Countries, The
Countries of Forez, Beaujolols, Bourbonnois, La March, and Auvergne, were his
Lands.
would flock to him and increase his Army, that the People very much oppressed
with new Impositions, would cast themselves into his Arms, and that by thus
taking off the payment of Taxes and Subsidies, he should deprive the King of
the chief and true Sinews of War: But the Emperors Council, who aimed at their
Masters ends, not at Bourbons, obliged him in despite of his former project, to
besiege Marseilles.

He there found a strong Garrison and men well resolved; his Attaques did not
advance much in six weeks time. In the interim the King had leisure to set his
Army on Foot, which he had not designed to raise till the following Spring, and
to send part of them into Provence, under the Conduct of La Palice. He seized
upon Avignon, Scoffing at the Enemy, who had neglected this City, and from
thence when he heard the King was Marching with the other part of the Army, he
advanced to Salon de Craux. Bourbons was ruined by the length of the Siege, and
the want of pay; for the English had paid him but for one month, and the
Emperor could not Supply him with those German Recruits he had promised him;
wherefore having notice that the King was parting from Avignon to come and
Assault him, he re-imbarqued part of his Cannon, and retired in great haste.

The least success carried King Francis much further then either prudence or
the uncertainty of events could warrant: Being informed that Milan was wholly
destitute of Forces, and withal knowing that the Estates of Castille had
refused money to the Emperor, that the Confederate Estates of Italy would not
aid him, and that the King of England had raised no Soldiers, although it were
now the month of October: he resolved to follow Bourbon by long Marches, and
persuaded himself that if he could but either reach him, or get before him,
nothing could be able to hinder him from regaining that Duchy.

The most knowing of his Officers approved not this resolution. They considered
it was upon the coming in of Winter, for mid- October was past, that they left
France exposed to the Incursions of the English, the Flemmings, and the
Spaniards, and the concealed Practices of Bourbon. Many did likewise think it
an ill Omen to this undertaking, that he was clad in Mourning for his Wife, who
died the twenty eighth of July: But he stopped all their mouths, by saying
openly that they did not please him by speaking against it; and knowing that
his Mother was hastening from Avignon to dissuade him, he avoided meeting her,
but left her the Regency of the Kingdom.

The advantage both of the one and the other Army consisted in their diligence,
it was who should be the nimbler. The King arrived at Vercel at the same time
the Enemies got to Alba, whence they got in two days to Parma, having marched
six and thirty miles in one day. They had resolved to keep Milan, and were
Encamped at Binasque: But upon the approach of his Vanguard, they abandoned
that City to retire toward Loda. His old Commanders were of opinion he should
not leave off pursuing them, for they were put to their last Shifts, and showed
themselves half conquered, throwing away their Arms as they marched, and if
these were but dispersed, there had not one place been left them but Pavia and
Cremona, with the Castle of Milan, which wanting Provisions, would have
Surrendered in a short time. Bonnivets advice was contrary, and carried it; The
King left La Trimouille with six thousand men in Milan to Besiege the Castle,
and went to lay Siege before Pavia the 27 th. day of October.

The Revolution of these Affairs in Milan appeared much greater then they were
at Rome: Pope Clement began to treat a new Confederation with the King in
Secret, and in the mean time propounded a Truce to both the Princes. The
Emperor who was then in Spain, having heard his Envoy, to whom the Regent had
given passage through Provence and Languedoc, did not reject it; for he saw the
King of England, instead of lending him money, demanded that again which he had
advanced; and the Venetians fearing the increase of his Power or the Kings
Forces, denied to renew their Alliance with him: But the King flatly refused
it, as if it must have robbed him of an assured Conquest. He thought himself
already so certain of Milan, that he made a Detachment of ten thousand Foot,
and six hundred men at Arms, with some Horse of his own Army, under the Conduct
of John Stuard Duke of Albany, to go and Conquer the Kingdom of Naples; and
soon after he sent again four thousand more to Savonna, commanded by the
Marquess de Salusses, to make War upon those of Genoa.

Italians deny it, that it was upon the Solicitation of Pope Clement, not that
he would have had Francis hold that Kingdom and the Milanois together (for that
were to have placed the Holy See between two Bars) but because he hoped to
procure some great matters for himself, by the help of the French Forces.
Perhaps the King fancied that Lanoy who was the Viceroy, would quit all other
Interests to preserve that, and that he would draw all his men out of Milan to
follow the Duke of Albany, but he not only did not fear that so small an Army
could take a Kingdom where there were so many strong places, but he ceased from
all apprehensions concerning Pavia, and refused to hear any more of a Truce.

At two months end the Siege was found to be no more advanced then the first
day: The Garrison was strong, the attaques feeble and languishing, there was
often want of Powder and always want of Order. In the mean time Charles de
Bourbon returned from Germany with a Supply, of ten thousand Foot and a
thousand Horse from the Frenche-Compte, and joined Lanoy's Army near Loda.
These made up together seventeen thousand Foot, seven hundred men at Arms, and
as many light Horse, besides the Francontois. With these they resolved to try
all manner of ways to put some relief into Pavia, which however was in no
danger yet, unless it were from their own Garrison, who were ready to Mutiny
for want of Pay.

Pavia and Milan, almost in the midway, a little place called Castle Saint
Angelo, which would have cut off their Provision, had they left it behind them.
Bonnivet having confided so Important a place to an Italian, he wanting either
courage or sidelity, quitted the Town as soon as they began to Batter it, and
retreated into the Castle, which he Surrendered the same night.

After the taking of so Important a Post, the wisest Captains were of opinion,
the King should raise the Siege and retire to Birasque. They remonstrated to
him that the Army of the Enemy being not paid, would disperse within fifteen
days, that his own was a third part weaker then they made him believe, that two
thousand men who were coming to him by Savona were cut off by the way, that the
three thousand Italians of John de Medicis Disbanded themselves since their
Commander in Chief being wounded upon an Assault, was carried out of the Camp,
that six thousand Grisons had left him upon pretense of going back to defend
their own Country, where James de Medequin a Milanese, Captain of the Castle de
Muz, had purposely, and perhaps by their own Agreement, surprised Chiavenna,
which is as it were the Key. All these Arguments and Reasons were too weak to
draw him from thence: Bonnivets obstinacy, and the shame he fancied it would be
to quit his design, after he had with so many Magnificent Speeches proclaimed
that he would take the place or die before it, obliged him to stay there, and
as we may say bound him Hands and Feet to deliver him up to his ill fortune.

There was not above two hundred paces distance betwixt the two Armies. The
Enemies could keep theirs together no longer for want of pay, and withal they
observed there was nothing but confusion in the Kings, and that the flatteries
of the Favorites swayed more then the Councils of the oldest Captains; this
made them take the resolution to go and present the King Battle, who was lodged
in the Castle of Mirabel in the midst of Pavia Park, and if he refused it, to
enter into the Town, draw forth the Garrison that could hold out no longer, and
leave a new one in their room.

The night of the 23 d. or 24 th. of February, they drew near the Park Wall,
and having thrown down about threescore fadom of it, marched directly to
Mirabel, this being a little before the break of day. Although the Kings Guns
were planted in a place of advantage; yet could they do but little Execution
during the obscurity; but when it grew light they began to thunder upon their
Rear, insomch as it broke their Ranks, and made them run into a Hollow way. The
King observing this disorder from his Camp which lay high, was transported with
joy; at the same instant, word was brought him that the Squadrons of the Duke
of Alenson and Philip de Chabot-Brion had defeated a great body of Spaniards
and taken four Pieces of Canon; Then believing they were half routed, he
imprudently went out of his Camp, where they durst never have set upon him, and
goes on to charge them.

Fernand Castriot Marquess of Saint Angelo: but the Arquebusiers they had mixed
with their Horse, put his to a Stop. Then comes Bourbon and Lanoy who rallied
their own and gave a furious charge. The Duke of Alenson, who covered the
Swisse with four hundred men at Arms, betook himself to flight and retired to
Lions, where some days after he died with grief and shame. The Swisse lying
open, made but a poor Fight, and then withdrew, the Lansquenets, or German
Foot, who were but three or four thousand, Fought to the last moment, and were
all cut in pieces. All the Storm fell then upon the King; His Horse being
killed under him, he defended himself on Foot some time without being known.
But meeting and knowing Pomperan, he surrendered himself to him.

The Baggage and Cannon were taken, eight thousand of his men killed upon the
place, amongst others Lewis de la Trimouille, the Marshall de la Palice,
Francis Earl of Lambesc Brother to the Duke of Lorrain, Aubigny, Sanseverin,
and Bonnivet, this last too late, as it was said, for the good of France, and
diverse other Lords of Note. Together with the King were taken the Marshall de
Lescun, Rene Bastard of Savoy, these two died of their Wounds, Henry d'Albret
King of Navarre, Francis de Bourbon Earl of Saint Pol, the Marshall de
Montmorency, Florenges, Brion, Lorges, Rochepot, Montejam, Montpesat, Langey,
Curton, and a great number besides.

Upon the noise of this event the Garrison that was in Milan, forsook it
immediately and all the Duchy fell to the Imperialists. The next day after the
battle, Lanoy fearing the Soldiers might Seize upon the Kings Person to secure
their Pay, conveyed him to the Castle of Pisqueton and Committed the Guard of
him to Captain Alarcon.

One cannot well conceive the diverse effects the news of this great event
produced all over Europe; It caused infinite joy in the Court of Spain,
jealousy in that of England, an universal affliction to France, together with
a mavelous consternation; which was not much less amongst the Italians, who
with all their great wisdom and politiques saw themselves exposed as a prey to
the Conqueror. The French, besides the particular sorrow every one resented
for the loss of some Kindred or dear Friend, did likewise participate in the
common Calamity, and apprehended lest France, having none to defend her; now
they had lost their King, the Flower of their Nobility, and best Soldiers,
should be Invaded by the Emperors Forces, Bourbons, and the King of Englands.
The Venetians very wise in Adversity did endeavor their utmost with the Pope
to form a League against this Torrent. They were of opinion to raise ten
thousand Swisse immediately, to join a good body of Horse with them, to exhort
the King of England for his own interest to come into a League with them, and
to inform and instruct Madame in all these points who would not fail to
contribute her utmost Cares.

The Pope consented to all, and had given order for a Courier to go into
England: but the Spaniards having gotten the wind of it, gave him such great
assurance he should have whatever conditions he desired of the Emperor; that
as he was very irresolute, and besides feared to be put to expenses, and never
knew how to time his business, he recalled his Courier, changed his mind, and
made a League with the Emperor. The Treaty made, he obliged the Duke of
Albany, whom till then he had amused in Tuscany, to Disband all the Italian
Troops he had, and Ship all the French at Cornet Port, to send them back to
their own Country, lending him some Galleys for that very purpose, those the
Regent had sent not being sufficient to Transport them.

The Emperor having received the News of Pavia with great Moderation, in so
much as he would not suffer them to make Bonfires, saying there was greater
reason to Mourn for such Victories over Christian Princes then rejoice, it gave
some reason to hope that he would make the same use of the advantage he had
over his Prisoner in moderation toward him. And indeed, when he propounded to
his Council after what manner he should Treat him: His Confessor pleaded that
he ought to release him generously and without conditions, because it would be
a most Christian-like Act, worthy of a great Emperor, famous to all Posterity,
which would make the King really his inferior, and become ever obliged to him,
and would tie him more Strictly then any Treaty they could make with him. But
Fredric Duke d'Alva, and after him all the rest of the Council, being of
opinion

He therefore sent the Lord de Beaurien into Italy to propose to the King, who
was yet in the Castle of Pisqueton, the conditions he desired for his release:
That he should renounce to the Kingdom of Naples, and the Duchy of Milan; That
he should surrender up to him the Duchy of Burgundy which was the Patrimony of
his Ancestors; That he should give Provence, Dau^ine and Lyounois to the Duke
of Bourbon, to be joined with his other Lands, and make them an independent
Kingdom; That he should Satisfy the King of Englands demands. To which Francis
replied, That a perpetual Imprisonment would be less severe to him then those
conditions; That they were not in his Power, because they shocked the
Fundamental Laws of France, to which he was Subjected; but that he offered to
take in Marriage Eleonora the Emperors Sister, to hold Burgundy in Dower and
Hereditary for the Children that should be Born of that Marriage, to restore
the Duke of Burbon to all his Lands, and to give him his Sister Margaret, Widow
of the Duke of Alenson, to satisfy the English in Money* to pay a Ransom such
as King John had paid, and to lend him a Land Army and a Fleet whenever he
would go into Italy to receive the Imperial Crown.

If the Regent mother to the King was troubled with grief, she was much more so
with Fear; She apprehended to lose the Regency, which Paris and the Parliament,
very ill satisfied with her conduct, would have put into the hands of Charles
de Bourbon Duke of Vendosme: But that Prince, either out of discretion, or
fear, which in this circumstance made it virtue and merit, seeing his Family
already too hateful in the Kings Eyes, refused to take it upon him. He went
himself to the Regent at Lions, where she had called an Assembly of Notables to
get them to confirm her Authority.

As for the King of England he at first expressed a great deal of joy for the
Kings being taken, and dispatched one to the Emperor, to persuade him to enter
into Guyeme, assuring him that at the same time he would make an Irruption
toward Normandy, and proffered to send his Daughter that he might Marry her,
according to some Propositions that had passed between them. But on the other
side he sent to the Queen Regent of France, to let her understand he was not
unwilling to unite himself with France, for the deliverance of their King. And
that which inclined him to it was not so much the neglect the Emperor showed
in leaving his Daughter, and seeking the Daughter of the King of Portugal, as
the Impressions of the Cardinal Woolsey his grand Governor, who was enraged
for that the Emperor since he had overcome his difficulties, cared no more for
him, nor wrote any more to him with his own hand, nor Subscribed himself Your
Son and Cousin, as he had done before.

The Jealousy and the Evil Dispositions, that Cardinal infused in his Masters
mind against the Emperor, were one of the first helps toward the saving of
France. For the King of England who had equipped a Fleet to land in Normandy,
dismissed it without demanding his Expenses of the Regent, and made a League
with her to preserve the Crown of France entire, so that the King could not
dismember it to gain his freedom; and he promised to assist him with men, and
to lend him moneys when ever need required.

The King had been now above two months in the Castle of Pisqueton, and neither
Lanoy nor the Council of Spain could yet resolve upon the place where they
might safely keep him. For the Kings Galleys were at Sea which hindered them
from carrying him to Spain: And if they kept him in those Countries it was to
be feared their half mutinous Soldiers, should seize upon him, and let him
escape. They would willingly have had him to the Kingdom of Naples: but having
not many men, they apprehended the Pope or the Venetians might attempt to
rescue him on the way.

Amidst these Difficulties Lanoy found an expedient, which was to make him
consent or think it best to go into Spain: To this purpose he endeavors to
persuade him that if he did but discourse with the Emperor they would soon
agree together, and that in case they could not, he would bring him back into
Italy. The King who ardently desired it, believed it, and not only commanded
the French Galleys that were cruising to let him pass: but likewise so ordered
it that the Regent lent six to the Viceroy, who pretending to Sail toward
Naples, transported him into Spain, this was about the middle of the Month of
June. He was Madrid far from the Sea and the Frontiers, with the Liberty of
going forth to take the Air when ever he pleased, but always surrounded with
Guards, and mounted upon a Mule.

He had thought that upon his arrival he should see the Emperor: but notice
was given him that it would not be convenient, till they had first agreed upon
all Articles; and that those might be treated upon he gave leave to the
Marshall de Montmorency to return into France, and permission to Margaret the
Kings Sister to go into Spain. In the mean while he a granted a Truce till the
end of December, for fear, said he, left some new difficulties should arise:
but in effect to Suspend any Enterprises of the Italian Potentates, and their
League which should have put Milan into very great danger, had they bestirred
themselves well in this juncture.

And truly this translation broke all those measures the Pope and the Venetians
would have taken with the Regent, and put them into an extreme Consternation.
It did no less allarm Bourbon and Pescara, having been done without
Communicating of it to them. They wrote very sharply to the Emperor concerning
it, and with Invectives against Lanoy, whom they accused of cowardice and pride
together, for having, said they, by his timidity like to have made them lose
the Battle, of which notwithstanding he pretended to claim the whole honor.
Besides Bourbon apprehending with great reason lest the two Kings, if they
conferred together, should agree to his prejudice, did not so much look after
the affairs of Milan, as his own, and had no patience till the Galleys that
carried the King were returned, that he might go aboard and hasten to find the
Emperor.

The intentions of the Italian Princes, in driving the French out of Milan, was
not to introduce the Spaniards there, but to restore Francis Sforza; and yet
the Emperor carried himself as absolute Master, and the unfortunate Sforza
was, to speak properly, no more then the Treasurer who paid the Soldiers at
the expense of his poor People. Jeremy Moron who was his Chancellor and his
principal Counselor, sought therefore to set his Master and his Country at
Liberty; the Pope and the Venetians proffered to contribute toward it; all
these together imagined they might make advantage of Pescara's discontent, and
propounded to make him King of Naples, the opportunity being favorable whilst
Lanoy was in Spain, and all the Forces almost Disbanded. The Pope who was
Sovereign Lord of that Fief, joins in this business and approves of it.
Pescara pretended to give Ear, but acted the Scrupulous and the man of Honor,
doubting whether he might serve the Sovereign Lord, which was the Pope, to the
prejudice of the Lord the present Occupier, which was the Emperor. To resolve
this, they were fain to consult, under feigned nams, all the most eminent
Lawyers of those times. At last he seems to yield, and to treat a League with
the Pope, the Regent and the Venetians, for this enterprise.

When he had found out the whole intrigue he discovered it to the Emperor and
confirmed his relation of it, by the confession even of Moron, who imprudently
surrendered himself into his own Hands: He afterward redeemed his Life for
twenty thousand Crowns, Thereupon Pescara took an occasion to deprive the
unhappy Sforza of his Duchy; he gained all his strongest places by a wile, and
then shut him up in the Castle of Milan with a circumvallation. But he dyed at
the beginning of December, before he could reap the Fruit of his
perfidiousness. He was a man had neither Soul nor Heart, of a quick and
piercing Wit; but Crafty, Malicious, and who instead of Honor was stored with
naught but Arrogance.

The Regent labored Incessantly for the Liberty of her Son* Margaret Duchess
of Alenson being arrived in Spain in the month of September, propounded the
Marriage of the King with Eleonora Sister to the Emperor: But that Princess
had been promised to Bourbon, who earnestly demanded her, and thwarted the
whole Treaty with his interests, which were difficult to be adjusted. So that
Margaret was forced to return without effecting any thing, leaving however
Francis de Tournon then Bishop of Embrun, Gabriel de Gramont Bishop of Tarbes,
who were since Cardinals, and John de Selve First President of Parliament, to
continue the Negotiation.

This Princess had scattered so much money in those Countries, that she gained
some of the Emperors Council, and most of the Kings Guards, with whom she
Moron's design, in which the Regent had some hand, caused him to be more
closely confined then before. The King conceived so much grief for this hard
usage, and for that in the six months time he had now been in Spain, he could
not once come to see him, that he fell very Sick. Then the Emperor fearing he
might lose his advantages together with his Prisoner, made his Interest his
Civility, and gave him a visit. It was very short, but full of tender
Expressions, Consolations, and hopes of sudden Liberty; So that the King took
courage and comfort, and by little and little recovered his health.

When this danger was over, the Emperor was not over hasty to perform those
Promises he had made. Twice was he upon the point of Marrying his Sister
Eleonora to Charles de Bourbon: Notwithstanding he was advised to keep her
still in reserve to make an Alliance with the King if it were needful, and
indeed he was obliged to do so when he left feared it. For having information
of a great League, and very great Forces raising by all t he Potentates of
Italy, the King of England and the Regent, he considered the Marquess of
Pescare was dead, Milan ready to revolt, his Forces dissipated or in Mutiny, no
Commanders for his Service in those Countries; and that therefore the
Confederates might turn him out of all there before he could put things in
order. These Motives made him condescend to a Peace, and to set his Prisoner at
Liberty, but in such a manner as according to common opinion, was neither just,
nor Honorable, nor Advantageous.

The Envoyez of France who had full power from the Regent, as she had from
Madrid with the Emperors Council, in which they on either part disputed the
Rights of the two Princes, especially that of the Emperor to the Duchy of
Burgundy, concluded the Treaty the Thirteenth of February, which was,

That the King should marry Eleonora with two Hundred Thousand Crowns for her
Dowry, and should marry the Daughter of that Princess to the Dauphin when she
came to Age; That he should be conducted to Fontarabia and set at Liberty the
Tenth of March, and that his two Sons or at least the Eldest, or in lieu of the
Second, twelve Lords should enter into Hostage for security of what he
promised. Which was amongst other things; to pay the Emperor Twenty Hundred
Thousand Crowns in Gold for the Ransom of his Person; To yield to him the
Duchy of Burgundy with the Cities of Noyers, and Chastel-Chinon, the County of
Charolois, the Vicounty d'Aussonne, and the Prevoste of Saint Lawrence in all
entire Sovereignty: Moreover the homage of the Counties of Artois and Flanders,
and his pretensions to the Estates of Naples, Milan, Genoa, Ast, Tournay,
L'isle and Hesdin; To get Henry d'Albret to renounce the Kingdom of Navarre,
and if he could not oblige him to it, not to assist him; To restore within
Forty days the Duke of Bourbon and all those that had followed him, to their
Lands. As likewise to give Philibert de Chaalon his Liberty, and his
Principality of Orange, and to Michael Antony his Marquisate of Saluces; To
afford no assistance to the Duke of Guelders, and to procure that his Cities
upon his death, should return to the Emperor; To pay the Arreares of the King
of England's Pension, which amounted to Five Hundred Thousand Crowns. To lend
the Emperor when he should go to take the Imperial Crown in Italy, twelve
Galleys and four great Vessels, and to pay him Two Hundred Thousand Crowns
instead of the Land Army he had promised him.

Moreover the King engaged upon his Faith, that if he could not procure the
full execution of all these Articles, he would voluntarily return to his
Prison, and disengage his Promises at the price of his own Person. Whatever
promises he made, the wisest Spaniards, nay even those of the Emperors own
Council, unless such as had a particular hand in the contrivance and management
of this Treaty, never believed that he intended to perform it, and presaged
that their Prince after all, would reap no other benefit but the reproaches of
all Christian Princes, and an immortal War with France. And indeed his
Chancellor Gatinare absolutely refused to Sign it, and protested he would not
so much abuse that Office the Emperor had bestowed upon him, to the prejudice
even of the Emperor himself.

When after his refusal the Emperor had signed the Treaty with his own Hand, he
visited the King at Madrid; and from that day till the time of his departure,
they showed to each other all the marks and tokens of a sincere and cordial
affection. Infanta Eleonora, whom Francis betroathed that very day, Eat
together, discoursed in private of their Affairs, and were often in public
observed to laugh and discourse familiarly.

The Eighteenth of March, Lanoy and Alarcon with Fifty Horse, brought the King
near Fontarabia to the brink of the River which parts France from Spain. The
same day Lautrec Governor of Guyenne brought the Kings two Sons, the Eldest
being scarce eight Years old, to the hither Shore. A great Boat lay at Anchor
in the middle of the River. At the same time the Spaniards put the King into a
small Bark, and the French the Kings Sons into another, and at the same time
they exchanged them, making them pass over the great Boat, whence they received
them into their little Barks on the further side. So soon as the King was got
to Land on this side, he mounted a Turkish Horse and spurred away, if he had
feared some surprise, to Saint John de Luz, where he found his Mother and his
Sister.

At his getting out of his Prison which had confined him Thirteen Months, he
fell into the Captivity of a fair Lady, Anne de Pisse-leu, whom his Mother
brought purposely thither to divert him after his tedious Melancholy. He
afterward honored her with the Title of Duchess d'Estampes.

As soon as he was in France, he began highly to complain of the Inhumanity of
the Emperor, and say; That promises made under Imprisonment are Null; That a
Vassal is Criminal who forces his Lord to give him his Oath; That the Laws of
the Land would not permit him to dismember any part of it. He spoke thus to the
Ambassadors that were about him, he wrote likewise to the Pope, the King of
England and the Venetians. The Assembly of Notables he called at Cognac said
the same, and the Estates of Burgundy did absolutely refuse to change their
Lord, though in appearance he pressed them to it, as much as he could.

Then the Emperor trembling with Rage and Shame, perceived that his evil
Council with his own greediness had deceived him: and hearing that all Italy
was but ill disposed toward him, he sent away Bourbon with his Galleys giving
him Money, and the Government of Milan, to which he joined the hopes of adding
the Title of that Duchy, when he should have utterly dispoliated Sforza, if he
could convict him of the Crime of Felony.

He likewise sent Hugh de Moncado to the Pope to endeavor to satisfy or
rather amuse him, and commanded him to pass thorough France with order to go no
farther if the King would give him up Burgundy. Ever since the Treaty of
Madrid, there had been a League in hand with the King of England and the
Princes of Italy, which sometimes was laid aside and then again revived: when
the King was informed by Moncado that the Emperor was absolutely resolved to
have the Duchy of Burgundy, and no other condition in exchange, he was
constrained to conclude it, for fear they should comply with the Emperor.

It was proclaimed the Twenty Eight of June at Cognac, between the King, the
Pope, the Venetians, the Florentins, and Sforza, to procure the Release of the
Kings Children, restore the Kingdom of Naples to the Holy-See, and maintain
Sforza in the Duchy of Milan, the King reserving nothing to himself in Italy
but the City of Genoa. Lanoy who had followed the King to solicit the
execution of the Treaty of Madrid, seeing the quite contrary took his leave and
retired, having first summoned him to return to his Imprisonment according to
his Parole given.

All seemed to favor the Confederates, the People of Milan were revolted upon
the cruel and proud avarice of the Spaniards, their Troops were all shattered
and reduced almost to nothing, and the Marquess du Guast had not sufficient
authority to restrain them. But of all the Members of this League, there were
none but the Venetians that did in part perform their Obligation; the Pope
proceeded slowly and ambiguously, Sforza suffered himself to be amused by the
Spaniards Artifices, and the King aiming at nothing but to disengage his
Children, did not carry things on Vigorously. Besides he hardly ever acted any
thing but by fits: the pleasures of Women and Hunting made him forget all
business; He never gave any Orders but when it was out of Season, and when he
had begun to repair the fault at a double expense, he would let all fall again
and give over in a moment.

Thus his Army conducted by the Marquess de Salusses, could not get thither
till September, and his Galleys from Marseilles did not join early enough with
Doria's to regain the City of Genoa, and prevent Bourbons Landing. But which
was the worst, Francis de la Rovere Duke of Vrbin General of the Venetian
Forces out of certain jealousies for the future, and old resentments of time
past against the House of the Medicis, who had otherwise deprived him of his
Duchy, and who still reserved some pretensions, would not by any means advance
the Popes Affairs too much.

He might with ease have relieved the Castle of Milan, the Burghers would have
Seconded his Design and driven out the Spaniards had they been assisted, but he
left them exposed to the violence of their cruel hosts, who miserably saccaged
them, and tormented them so grievously, that many to escape out of their hands
gave themselves a voluntary death. Afterward those People that belonged to the
Pope and Sforzas men pressed him so earnestly, that he could not refuse to
approach Milan, and either besiege the City, or force the Circumvallation about
the Castle: But Charles de Bourbon being got in with Eight Hundred men only, he
decamped by Night, and obliged the other Commanders to follow him; in so much
as Sforza reduced at last to the extremest Famine, Surrendered the Castle the
Twenty Third of July to Charles de Bourbon, not renouncing to the Duchy
however, and reserving a certain Revenue to himself, and the liberty of going
to the Emperor to make out his own Justification.

In all the rest of this War the Duke of Vrbin behaved himself after the same
manner, he by his Malicious delays retarded the reduction of Cremona which had
Capitulated, made them lose the opportunity of forcing Milan after he had
received a re-inforcement of Fourteen Thousand Swiss, and Five or Six Thousand
French whom the Marquis de Salusses brought him, and that of taking Genoa, for
which Andre Doria required but Fifteen Hundred men, which he would never send
him.

The Colomnes Enemies of Pope Clement, and incited by the Imperialists had
taken up Arms against him, he had raised men likewise to defend himself, then
suffering himself to be lulled asleep by a deceitful Peace, he disbanded them.
About the end of October they got into Rome with Three or Four Thousand Men
gathered together: the Cardinal Pompey Colomna having conspired to kill him and
invade the Holy-See, which had been Executed, if he had not timely made his
Escape into the Castle Saint Angelo. Having miscarried in this, they plundered
his Palace and even Saint Peter's Church, then besieged him in the Castle. Hugh
de Moncado who was apparently the contriver, or abettor of this Conspiracy,
became the mediator for an Accommodation. Which doing he constrained Clement to
Treat with them, to renounce the League for Four Months, and to withdraw his
Forces. Five Weeks after, that is to say about the end of November, he being
ashamed of his base Cowardliness, excommunicated the Columnas, and degraded the
Cardinal Pompey. In the mean while Lanoy who returned from Spain had time to
bring Soldiers from Naples.

Toward Hungary there happened a great and mischievous business to the House
of Austria; They would fain have made the World believe that Francis had
occasioned it, and that it was he had drawn the Infidels into those Countries.
Solomon falling upon that Kingdom, the young King Lewis was forced by the
General of his Army (he was named Paul Tomore a man of Quality, and one who
having a long time born Arms, was turned Monk of the Order of Cordeliers, and
then promoted to the Archbishopric of Colacse in the Upper Hungary) to give
him Battle. It was upon the Twenty Ninth of August in the Plains of Mohac's,
where he was overcome and drowned in the Neighboring Marshes. All the Flower
of his Nobility were Slain there, and afterward the whole Country overrun by
the Turks, and drenched with the blood of near Three Hundred Thousand of his
poor Subjects.

That was but the beginning of the Calamities of that unhappy Kingdom,
Ferdinand the Emperors Brother founding himself upon the Right and Title of
Anne his Wife Sister of King Lewis (who had likewise Married his, named Mary)
and upon certain Contracts made by his Predecessors with the Kings Mathias and
Ladislaus, prevailed to be Crowned King by part of the Hungarians, and John de
Zapols Vaivod of Transylvania Earl of Scepus was elected by the other Cabal.
This being the weaker had recourse to the protection of the Turk: which
occasioned a long series of misfortunes and desolations in Hungary, equally
plagued and rent in pieces by the Barbarians, and those that said they were
their Kings.

Amidst the uncertainties of the Emperors Affairs concerning Milan, he had
proffered a Ten Months Truce to the Confederates; whilst they were trotting
backwards and forwards to Rome, Venice and France about this same, he received
news that his Fleet was safely arrived in Italy, and that Fourteen Thousand
Lansquenets Germain Foot.
, which George Baron of Fronsberg had raised at his expense (this was the third
time he had done him the like Service) were entered into Milan. By this means
his Affairs being in a good posture, he spoke no more of an Accommodation.

Naples; and the Confederates to make a diversion Assaulted that Kingdom by Sea
and Land. The Count de Vaudemont, who had his pretensions to it, as being
descended from Rene Duke of Lorrain, who had the Rights and Title of the House
of Anjou, commanded the Sea Forces, and Rance de Cere the Land Army for the
King. The Popes irresolution and covetousness ruined all their Progress in that
Country: for it hindered the providing of those things that were necessary for
their subsistence; and on the other hand the King failed in furnishing almost
every thing that he had promised. Thus the Land Army wasted for want of
provisions, and all the Fleet gained upon the Coast was soon lost again.

Upon this, the Pope had Information that Charles de Bourbon was marching
toward Rome: he was so terrified that he made a Truce of Eight Months with
Lanoy Viceroy of Naples, without knowing whether Bourbon, who depended not
upon Lanoy, would accept of it.

He had made account that the Army of the League which was in Milan, would hold
him still in play, or if he should march out that the others would follow him
every where: but that Prince not knowing how to satisfy the grievous outcries
and complaints of the People whom he had eaten to the very bones, nor the
Mutinies of the Soldiers, who were every moment ready to fall upon him, in this
extremity and despair of all things resolved to go forth and seek out a
Subsistence for them. He therefore passed the Po the Twenty Ninth of January,
leaving Antonio de Leve at Milan with Eight Thousand Men for the defense of the
Duchy.

There were some believed his design was to seize upon the Kingdom of Naples,
that to this end he held correspondence with the King, that by private Agents
he was reconciled to him, and that from France they were to furnish him with a
certain Sum every Month to maintain his Army: but that the said Money not
coming, and their heat and insolence increasing daily, he was constrained to
promise them the plunder of Florence or Rome.

There is great probability it was a thing of mere necessity, and that the Duke
of Vrbin contributed more then a little toward it, having an aching Tooth to be
revenged of the Pope who still gave the Title of Duchess of Vrbin to his Niece
Catharine, and the Florentines who detained from him Montfeltra and some other
Lands which Pope Leo X. had taken from him, and engaged to them. Indeed, it was
said that Duke had promised Bourbon not to oppose his March if he went that
way, and Guichardin assures us that if the Pope would but have restored
Montfeltra to him, it would have obliged that Duke to serve him after
anotherguess manner then he did.

Now Bourbon having sojourned forty days in the Neighborhood of Piacenza, was
encouraged, say some, by the Duke of Ferrara, who turned two Months before to
the Emperors Party, to March directly to Florence or to Rome. The Pope was so
fickle, and so easy to believe what he desired, that although he knew he was
entered into Romagnia: nevertheless he dismissed his Forces, and relied upon the
assurances Lanoy (perhaps deceived himself by Bourbon) gave him, that the said
Prince would go no farther.

He soon found the contrary, for Bourbon being entered into Tuscany, and not
daring to attack Florence, by reason all the Confederates Forces were about it,
resolved to go and fall upon Rome. Upon the noise of his March, the Pope leaves
all things entirely to the Conduct of Rance de Cere, who not having time to
raise good and able men, picked up Five or Six Thousand amongst the Estafiers or
Lacqueys, and Grooms belonging to the Cardinals, such rescals as were much more
likely to affright then defend a City.

Wherefore the Fifth of May, Bourbon who had encamped himself in a Meadow near
Rome, sent to demand passage through the City, and receiving no other answer but
a denial, the next morning he went headlong and made an Assault at Peter. He
was twice beaten off, the third time a Musket shot laid him dead on the Earth:
but his Soldiers after two hours dispute, forced the Borough. About Evening
they passed the Bridge over the Tiber, and entered into the City, mad with
revenge, and the desire of plunder. The Pope instead of retiring into some
place of Safety, as he might have done, shuts himself up in his Castle Saint
Angelo with Thirteen of his Cardinals.

Whatever can be imagined of Barbarity, Impieties, Sacrilege, Cruel and Horrid
acts, excepting Fire, were committed upon the sacking of this great City. It
lasted two whole Months, during which time, the Spaniards, who say they are
such good and sound Catholics, did much outdo the Germans, who openly
professed they were of Luthers Sect, and sworn Enemies of the Papacy.

Although the King of England had been one of the warmest Promoters of the
League against the Emperor: nevertheless because it was not concluded in his
Island, as he desired it might, he had not hitherto contributed any thing
toward it, but remained neuter. Now Cardinal Woolsey having suffered himself
to be enticed by King Francis, under whose protection he hoped to shelter
himself against the general hatred of the English, in case his Master should
happen to die, propounded a Marriage between the King, or his second Son, and
his Masters Daughter, and contrived to conclude on which of the two she should
be bestowed, there should be an Inter-view betwixt Boulogne and Calais.

Upon this assurance a new Confederation was made between them toward the
latter end of April. Wherein it was agreed, That the King of England should
renounce all claim to the Crown of France, upon the payment to him, of Fifty
Thousand Crowns Pension Yearly; That in the following Month of July, they
should commence the War in Italy, the English with Nine Thousand Foot Soldiers,
the French with Fifteen Thousand, and Horse and Artillery proportionable; That
they should make known this League to the Emperor, and Summon him to deliver up
the Children of France, and enter into the Peace of Italy; If not, within one
Month afterward they should declare a War against him.

After this Confederation the News of the Popes being taken coming, the King
made another with the Venetians the Fifteenth of May; That they should jointly
maintain Ten Thousand Swiss, and pay them alternatively by the Month; That the
King should send Ten Thousand Foot under the Conduct of Peter de Navarre, and
that the Venetians should entertain the like number of Italian Infantry.

The Imperial Army was near Thirty Thousand Men, Hugh de Moncado and Dugast
having brought thither all the Forces from Naples. Had they found a General fit
to employ or Command so great a Body, they might have given Law to all Italy:
but these were nothing but Mutiny and Confusion, and they were so fleshed with
the City of Rome, it was impossible to get them out thence. The Viceroy and
the Marquess Dugast fearing lest the Foot Soldiers should fall upon them, fled
away by Night: the Prince of Orange remained and had the Title of General, but
no Power; the Army would take Orders from none but themselves.

So that the Duke of Vrbin had a fair opportunity to come and deliver the Pope;
and yet he made so many delays, pretending sometimes one excuse, then another,
Advancing, Retreating, ranging about, that at length the Pope reduced to
extremity Surrendered himself the sixth day of June; and because it was upon
conditions impossible for him to perform, amongst others to pay down four
hundred thousand Ducats ready money, and to deliver up Places which were not in
his disposal, he remained a Prisoner six whole months and in great misery under
the custody of Captain Alarcon a Spaniard, who formerly had the custody of King
Francis.

During all this his Estates being guarded only by the People, for as much as
they were interested, the Venetians his Allies Seized upon Ravenna and Cervia,
with the Salt Pits; Sigismond Malatesta on Rimini, the Duke of Ferrara upon
Reggio and Modena; and the City of Florence which was almost brought under they
Yoke of the Medicis, threw it off and returned to their Popular State of
Government.

The Debaucheries of the Soldiers, the Nastiness of the Germans, and the
excessive heats of the Weather, had Engendered a Plague in Rome, so that those
Robbers dying in heaps, part of them went into the Field to take the Air. The
Confederates Army diminished apace likewise, and were retired toward Orvietta,
Perugia, otherwhile named Trasimene.

In the mean time the Holy Father was in great danger, as well because the
Plague was got into the Castle Saint Angelo, and had taken off some of his
nearest Household Servants, as because the Spanish Captains would carry him to
Cajeta with his thirteen Cardinals, and from thence he apprehended to be
transferred into Spain. The Emperor desired it most passionately, and indeed
they had conveyed him thither, if the Prelates and Spanish Lords had not made
him know they thought it contrary to Christian Piety, thus to detain in Prison
and like a Slave mis-use and treat the Head of all Christendom. I cannot
imagine, after all, how they could be reconciled with, or judge of the
proceedings of their Prince, who commanded public Processions to be made in
Spain to ask of God the deliverance of the Pope, as if himself had been two
different Persons, that is, in Italy a Barbarous Persecutor, and in Spain a
Zealous Servant to the Holy See.

The Union between the Kings of France and England becoming more strict, and
the Emperor having refused to Surrender the Pope and the Children of France,
they were resolved to carry the War into Italy with all their Forces. The King
of England was to furnish thirty thousand Crowns in Gold per month for the
payment of ten thousand Lansquenets, very good men commanded by Lewis de
Lorrain, Count de Vaudemont; and Cardinal Woolsey being come to confer with the
King at Boulogne, brought over three hundred thousand Crowns to lend him, if he
had any need of them.

The seventeenth of September the King having called an Assembly of the most
Notable Persons of the three Estates of the Kingdom, for their Advice what he
should do touching the deliverance of his Children, offered to return to
Prison, if they judged he were so obliged to do, rather then act or undertake
any thing prejudicial to the State. The twentieth of that Month each of the
three Orders separately, answered, That his person was the Kingdoms, not his;
That Burgundy was a Member of the Crown, whereof he was but U^u^ructuary; That

Lautre^ had been named General of the Armies for the League according to the
desire of the King of England, but against his own will, foreseeing by
experience of times past, that when once they had engaged him in that
employment and he gone afar off from them, they would furnish him with nothing
either in time, or in quantity sufficient. He passed the Mountains in the
beginning of the Month of August with part of the Army. And till the remainder
were come he Besieged the Castle of Bosco in the Alexandrian Country, where a
thousand men were in Garrison, which he forced to Surrender at discretion. From
thence he went before Alexandria which he likewise constrained to Capitulate;
then to Pavia which not Submitting in due time, was taken by Assult and
Saccaged, and the Governor made Prisoner. This was Lewis de Barbiana, who was
named Earl of Beljoyeuse.

At the same time Andre Doria a Genoese, but General of the French Galleys, and
Caesar Fregosa with French Forces brought Genoa under the King's Obedience; and
Alphonso Duke of Ferrara forsaking the Emperors Alliance took that of France.
He was absolutely sixed by the Honor the King did him, promising Renee Sister
of the late Queen Claudia to his Son Hercules, who notwithstanding did not
Marry him till ten months afterward, which was in July 1528.

They did not omit in the mean time to Treat about a Peace with the Emperor.
The Ambassadors of France, England, Venice and Sforza, were at Burgos for that
purpose: Not being able to incline him to reason, they took their leaves,
Heralds from the two Kings declared War against him. The Emperor having sent
those Ambassadors twenty Leagues distance from the Court set Guards upon them,
then some while after he released them and caused them to be conducted to
Bayonne. The King treated his Ambassador in the same manner, he confined him to
the Prison of the Chastelet, and let him out a few days afterward.

Now the Emperor in his reply to the Kings Herald, amongst other things said
the King had broke his Faith, and besides he bragged how two years before
French Ambassador, that it were more expedient and brave to decide their
quarrels man to man in single combat, then to trouble all Christendom, and
Spill the Blood of so many poor Innocents not concerned in their disputes. The

He caused therefore a Scaffold to be set up in the great Hall of the Palace,
where sitting in his Royal Robes, attended by his Princes, and in presence of
all those Ambassadors that were then about his Court, he sent for him that
belonged to Spain (this was Nicholas Perrenot de Granvelle a Native of mean
extract in Franche Comie, but a man of Brain) and caused a Cartel, or challenge
to be read before him which gave the Emperor the Lie, and demanded he should
assign the place for Combat, and that he would bring the Weapons thither. The
Ambassador excusing himself from carrying this Challenge, he sent a Herald to
acquaint the Emperor with it, and the King of England at the same time sent
him the like defiance by a Messenger of his own.

Some while after the Emperor sent back a Herald to the King with his answer.
The King placed himself in the same posture to receive it: but being informed
he would appoint no place, till after the King should have diengaged his word
and his Children, he commanded him not to speak: And thus all those challenges
proved nothing but fine Theatrical Shows.

It had been agreed between the Kings of France and England, that this latter
should attaque the Emperor in the Low Countries: But his Subjects having an
aversion for a War against the Flemmings, because it destroyed their Commerce,
he rather chose to lend the King thirty thousand Crowns per Month, and treated
a Truce for all Merchants trading between the Low Countries, France and
England, to have free liberty for a year.

Upon the News of Lautrec's marching into Italy, the Emperor had sent an Order
to set the Pope at Liberty, but first to endeavor the tying him to strict and
harsh Conditions. The Treaty for his freedom being concluded with Moncado, whom
the Emperor had by provision made Viceroy of Naples, in the room of Lanoy who
was lately dead, he would not trust himself there till the next day, but that
very night slipped away disguised like a Merchant, having before caused his
Hostages to evade who would have run a great risque.

Lautrec had regained almost the whole Milanois, and might in a short time have
mastered Milan, if the Kings express orders had not enjoined him to give up all
the Places to Sforza, and to go to Rome to deliver the Holy Father. When he was
entering upon Romagnia he heard that he was escaped, and that the Imperial Army
upon the report of his March had quitted Rome to go and defend the Kingdom of
Naples. The Plague had devoured above two thirds of that Sacrilegious Army, and
it was observed that within the compass of one year there were not two hundred
reamining, but which in diverse manners had felt the refentments of Divine
Vengeance.

He pursued these Robbers by long Marches, and having overtaken them at
Abbruzzo presented Battle to them. They dislodged in the night with great
disorder and retired into Naples. It was believed that if he had followed them
in at their heels he might have expected good success from their Fears: but he
amused himself in taking of other Places, and then, when he had missed of so
fair an opportunity, he laid Siege to Naples.

Sicilia with their Fleet, which was got together at Leghorn. But they were
disabled by a Tempest which so grievously shattered the twelve Galleys equipped
by the Venetians that they were forced to put in at Corsu to Refit. Rance de
Cere and Andrea Doria with the Kings Ships, made a descent at Sardinia, put the
Viceroy of that Island to a rout, though he had double their Number, and
entered Pell-mell with him into the City of Sassary, which they Plundered.

This S uccess was the occasion of great Misfortunes: For the Soldiers
overglutted with Eating, died most part of the Disenterie; The King Plunged
over Head and Ears in Pleasures became more negligent in sending Supplies to
Lautrec: And Andrea Doria having some disputes with Rance de Cere, it happened
that this last finding more favor then the other at Court, the thoughts
thereof Aggravated all those other little discontents he had formerly met with
from the French.

French should give up the City of Savonna to that State, because that being
the better Port would ruin Genoa, and make the City become Desert: But the King
absolutely denied him both the one and the other. Being therefore Malecontented
in his Soul at this refusal, and for their not paying him the Prince of
Orange's Ransom, he carried his Galleys back to Genoa, under color of having
been so weatherbeaten, that they stood in need of reparations.

The French Army lay Encamped before Naples from mid- April, Lautrec thinking
to have it by Famine, and for that purpose was so pressing with Andrea Doria,
that he sent him the Kings eight Galleys, and eight more which were his own;
all under the Command of his Brother Philippine. Upon their Arrival they took
three great Vessels laden with Corn, which they were conveying into City. It
was believed that if the Venetian Forces had come in time, and had not employed
themselves, as they did, to recover some Cities in the Golf for their
Seigneury, which they had lost in the time of Lewis XII. Philippine and they
together might have so effectually blocked up the Port that no Provisions
should have been carried in to Naples, which began to feel some want.

The Spaniards did not however get much by the bargain in making such have to
engage Philippine, before the Venetians came to join him. Hugh de Moncado had
put a thousand Select Arquebusiers* on Board their Fleet thinking to do great
things: Notwithstanding Philippine gained Victory, Moncado the Viceroy of
Sicilia was there Slain with above twelve hundred of their Bravest Men.

This great Success much heightning the hopes of Lautrec, did much increase his
Negligence, many things were already wanting in his Army, first water to drink,
the Enemies having Poisoned that little which was good: In the second place
Forage for their Horses; from whence followed another inconvenience, for having
sent his Horse to all the Neighboring Towns; those belonging to the Enemies
were then strongest, and fetched diverse little Convoyes into Naples, and
likewise cut off his Provisions. Besides this they sent the Plague into his
Army, by some People who carried Clothes thither which were Infected; and to
all these was added Manifest Defection of Andrea Doria, and all those of his
House.

Lautrec foreseeing that his discontent would burst out with some great
execution, dispatched William de Bellay Langeay to the King to let him know
that his Affairs absolutely required he should give all satisfaction and
content to a man that was so necessary. Langeay passed through Genoa, heard the
complaints and demands of Doria, and reported them to King. He had been
pacified, would they have restored Savonna to the Genoese: but the Marshall de
Montmorency who was in favor, being interested there, for the Imposts that
were paid in the Port of Savonna belonged to him: The Chancellor who flattered
him, when the business was brought before the Council, rejected the Proposition
as Extravagant, treated Doria as a Proud and Insolent Person, and brought it to
a Resolution of Seizing upon him.

The order for it was given to Barbesieux of the Family de la Roche-Foucaud
with the Title of Admiral in the Levant Seas, and the Command of fifteen
Galleys, and some Vessels, whereon they Embarked five or six thousand men for
the Siege of Naples. But the business was not carried so secretly but he had
some hint of it, he retires from Savonna where he then was to Genoa. Barbesieux
went to confer with him, told him what Commands he had. Doria answered That he
had taken good care he should not put them in Execution, and promised to give
up the Kings Galleys: but he caused them to be Stolen away basely by Antany
Doria, and withdrawing to Portofin prefected his Treaty with the Emperor with
conditions very advantageous.

Barbesieux was constrained by this change to remain some while in the River of
Genoa, and to leave near three thousand of his men to bridle that City. He was
again stopped almost three weeks by the Pope to besiege Civita-Vecehia, and in
the mean while Philippine having received orders from his Brother, quitted the
French, and before he went away put some Provisions in to Naples, which he
could not have done if Barbesieux had been there.

Peter de Navarre. Two thirds of Lautrec's Army were already destroyed by
Sickness which no more sparing the Chief Commanders than it did the private
Soldiers, had carried off the Count de Vaudemont, Charles Bastard Brother to
the King of Navarre, and many other Persons of Note. It had some days before
Seized likewise upon Lautrec; his Officers advised him to retire to Capoua, and
made it appear that Naples would fall of its self, having no other places on
the Land that could Support it: But he had Vowed either to take it, or die in
the Attempt. His Stubbornness made the last a truth: For his Distemper
increasing put an end to his Life and his Enterprise the sixteenth day of the
Month of August.

After his Death the Marquess de Salusses took the Command of those Languishing
Forces, and continued the Siege for some days, not with any hopes of taking the
City, but to wait for Rance de Cere and the Prince of Malfe, Or Malfy.
that he might be able to make his Retreat to Capoua.* That City being gained
by the Enemy, he retired into Aversa; They pursued him without Intermission,
and having defeated a Party of his men upon their Retreat, and got a great many
Illustrious Prisoners, amongst others Peter de Navarra, they blocked both him
and all his up in that place. Being wounded with a Culverin Shot in the Knee,
he Capitulated, promising on his part to do what lay in his Power to procure
the Surrender of such Places as the French held in that Country, by which means
he obtained Life and Liberty for the Garrison to retire, but not for himself;
For he remained a Prisoner of War and died soon after; as did likewise fifteen
or twenty Eminent Lords, and above four hundred Officers or Gentlemen. The
Prince of Malfe who had taken part with France and Rance de Cere a Roman
Barron, kept Barletta and some other Maritime Places till the Treaty of Cambray.

A little before the Death of Lautrec, the Duke of Brunswic had undertaken to
bring twelve thousand Lansquenets and six hundred Horse to the relief of
Naples. And the King had given five hundred men of Arms, as many Light Horse,
and six thousand Foot to the Count de Saint Pol to oppose him in his Passage.
The Count being informed, that Brunswick for want to Pay, was returned back
again, staid in the Duchy of Milan, and having joined the Confederates Army
regained some Places: but most of his Troops Disbanding for the same cause as
Brunswic's he did not great Exploits.

In the mean time Andrea Doria knowing the French Garrison in Genoa being
reduced to a samll number, had Quartered themselves in the Castle by reason of
the Plague almost Depopulated the whole City, approached with his Galleys, and
Landing only about six hundred men, made himself Master of the place. The
French Navy fearing to be shut up in the Harbor, left it in all hastle, and
retired to Savonna. The Castle held out some Months, and was not Surrendered
till the following year.

When Andrea Doria, by his Treaty with the Emperor had obtained the sole
Authority in Genoa, he made use of it very generously to restore it to its
Liberty; And without attempting or designing to make himself Sovereign of his
Native Country, as the Medicis did in theirs, Established a form of
Government, almost the very same at it is yet to this day. He thought such an
act of eminent Virtue (above the Power and reach of time or Fortune to destory)
was a much safer way to gain Immortal Fame, then with injustice to acquire a
petty Sovereignty, which every little accident might have overthrown, and which
he could not have maintained without continual trouble and hazard.

The Lutherans and the Sacramentaries gained upon the minds of those that were
lovers of Novelties, by their Writings and Emissaries who crept into the
Universities and amongst the curious. The Chancellor Duprat lately made
Cardinal and Archbishop of Sens, assembled a Provincial Council of his seven
Suffragans in the Augustine Convent at Paris, where he made diverse excellent
Decrces to stop the progress of those Opinions, and to reform the Clergy, whose
dissolute behavior had given rise to those Scandals. The year after, Lewis
Berquin of Artois for Preching Luther's Errors, was burnt in Paris the two and
twentieth of March.

This very year 1528. were forced the first Seeds Englands Schism; The Cardinal
Woolsey to be revenged of the Emperor who had deluded him and despised him, as
likewise to oblige King Francis who slattered his ambition and his avarice, had
persuaded his Master that his Marriage with Catherine of Arragon was not good,
it being against the Law of God that a Woman should marry the two Brothers, for
when Henry took her Arthur; that therefore the Pope must declare it null, and
that afterward he might marry with Margaret the Kings Sister, Widow of the
Duke of Alenson. In effect the Irons were put into the Fire, and the Pope, as
things then stood betwixt him and the Emperor, hearkened most willingly to it,
and commissioned two Cardinals, Campejus and Woolsey to he judges of the matter
upon the place. He also sent a Bull to Campejus which dissolved the Marriage,
with order nevertheless not to deliver it, nor to let it be seen but as a
Secret: But finding the Emperors Affairs succeeded better then his own, and
that he would make him repent it, he sent to Campejus to Burn it, and to
wira-draw the business. After which Catherine refusing to own those two
Cardinals for Judges, and appealing to the Holy See, before whom the
Ambassadors from the Emperor and the Archduke Ferdinand protested likewise a
Nullity of all that they could judge, his Holiness removed and brought it
before himself; which enraged the King of England beyond expression.

Mean while Woolsey repented he had carried it on so far, because he perceived
now that Henry who so earnestly desired the Divorce, had no inclination to
marry Margaret of France, but a Damoiselle of the Queens his Wife, with whom he
was Furiously in Love. She was called Anne Bullen, was Imbued with the opinions
of Luther; Henry observing therefore that he retarded the business instead of
helping it forward with dispatch, let him fall into disfavour; and immediately
every one turned their backs upon him. This proud Cardinal who used ordinarily
to say the King Or rather I and my King.
and I, saw himself forsaken of all his Friends, displaced from his Office of
Chancellor, then Banished to his Bishopric, afterward made a Prisoner,
persecuted all manner of ways, and reduced to the extremest misery. In fine,
the following year as they were bringing him from York to London to answer to
such Treasons as were laid to his Charge, he dyed, as it has ever been desired
those proud Ministers may die and fall, who abuse the Authority of their
Masters.

French Army in the Kingdom of Naples, the Spaniards reduced all the Towns and
Places at their ease. In Milanois the Confederates Army commanded by the Duke
of Vrbin regained Pavia, which Dugast had taken: but the Count de Saint Pol was
surprised at Landriana by Antonio de Leva who marched out of Milan, not above
five Leagues from it. In the midst of this danger his Lansquenets proved
Turn-Coats, his Italians abandoned him, he was overcome and made prisoner. All
his Horse and his Vanguard made their escape to Pavia.

After this Defeat there was a kind of tacit Truce between the Princes. All
would have a Peace, the King out of desire to get home his Children, the Pope
upon the consideration of his many former miseries and sufferings, and the
Emperor because he had obtained what he desired.

About the Month of June it was first concluded at Barcelona between the Pope
and the Emperor, very advantageous to the first, because the other had a most
eager desire to go and receive the Imperial Crown at Rome. The principal
Conditions were that the Emperor should give his Bastard Daughter to Alexander
de Medicis, That he should re-establish that Family in Florence with the same
Power and Authority it had before they were driven from thence; and that he
should procure those Cities and Places to be restored which belonged to the
Church. On the other hand the Pope received him as Homager for the Kingdom of
Naples upon the presenting him annually with a white Horse, and gave him power
of nomination to the four and twenty Cathedral Churches which were in
controversy; with this he also granted him a fourth part of the Fruits and
Revenues of the Church, as well in his own Lands, as in those of the Archduke
Ferdinand, to be employed in making a War against the Turks.

In the following Month of July, Margaret Aunt to the Emperor and Louisa Mother
of the King, meeting at Cambray to Treat of a Peace between the two Crowns, did
conclude it likewise in presence of the Ambassadors from the Pope, the King of
England, and the Venetians; It was published the Fifth day of August. The
Articles were almost the same as those at Madrid, excepting that the King
retained the Duchy of Burgundy, to which the Emperor reserved his Rights and
Actions to be pursued by fair and friendly methods and proceedings. It was
likewise agreed he should revoke the Sentence of Condemnation pronounced
against Bourbon, and that he should restore all his Goods moveable and
immoveables England as from him, and for security of the remaining 400000. he
should engage to him the Lands which Mary of Luxemburgh had formerly in
Flanders, Brabant, and Haynault, and which she brought to the House of
Bourbon-Vendosme. Moreover that he should redeem the Flower de Luce, (this was
a Jewel of Price which Duke Philip the Good had pawned to the King of England;)
whom he should likewise satissie in the Emperors behalf for the Sum of 500000
Crowns in Gold, which he had promised to that King in case he did not Marry his
Daughter. As for the Venetians and Florentines the Allies of France, they were
comprised in this Treaty, after such a manner that they were left to the
discretion of the Emperor.

Although the King of England was discontented that it had been concluded
without his knowledge: nevertheless standing in need of the King for the
vacating of his Marriage, he forgave him the 500000 Crowns, and gratified his
Son Henry whose Godfather he was, with the redemption of the Flower de Luce.
In return the King so ordered it that the Doctors of his Universities and those
of Italy held favorable Consultations touching the Divorce.

Whilst the Treaty was on Foot, the Emperor leaving Spain Landed at Genoa the
12 th of August with a great Fleet which carried Ten Thousand Men, and at the
same time Felix of Wirtembergh entered by Land upon Milanois with a like number.
The Potentates of Italy did all bow down to this Power, and the Pope himself
came to Bologna to receive him. But the Emperor informed of Solyman's irruption
in Hungary, durst not use all his Power to oppress them; but on the contrary
yielding to their Entreaties, he resettled Francis Sforza in the Duchy of
Milan, and agreed with all the other, from whom he drew vast Sums of Money.

Florentines who remained exposed to the resentments of the Pope, because they
refused to submit themselves to the Medicis, who were but private Citizens no
more then the rest. The Emperor lent him his Forces to Besiege their City, who
having defended themselves for Eleven Months, in vain imploring the help of
France and their ancient Confederates, Surrendered upon Composition the Fifth of
August in the following Year, and were reduced under the Dominion of the
Medicis, although by the Treaty it was said that the Pope should Establish no
Government that should be contrary to their Liberty.

Solomon snatched away the best part of Hungary. The pretended King John had
called him to his aid, making himself his Subject and his Tributary: but the
Tyrant instead of putting him into possession of the Kingdom, took for himself
the Cities of the five Churches, Alba Royal where were the Sepulchers of their
Kings, Buda, Strigonium, and Altemburgh. After these Conquests he laid Siege to
Vienna: but in a Months time the scarcity of Provisions and the approach of
Winter made him dislodge. He raised his Siege the Fourteenth of October after
he had lost near Threescore Thousand men, and took his March toward
Constantinople, threatening to return the next year with a much greater force.

Those that adhered to the doctrine of Luther acquired this year the Surname of
Protestants, because there having been a Decree made by the Archduke Ferdinand
and other Catholic Princes in the Diet of Spire in favor of the ancient
Religion, and to hinder the progress of theirs, they protested against it, and
appealed to the Emperor, and to a General or National Council.

Ausburgh Confession because they presented it to the Emperor in the Assembly
which was held in that City, to endeavor to pacify and allay the differences
in Religion. Luther had composed it in Seventeen Articles, Melancton explained
and enlarged them.

The Affairs of Hungary and Germany not permitting the Emperor to be long
absent, the Pope gave him the Imperial Crown at Bologna with the same
Ceremonies as if he had been at Rome. The Emperor affected to pitch upon the
Twenty fourth day of February for this great Ceremony, as being his Birthday,
and the day likewise of the taking of King Francis at Pavia. Having sojourned
there till the Two and Twentieth of March, he returned into Germany, and before
he left Italy erected the Marquisate of Mantoua to a Duchy, in favor of
Frederic Gonzague, who merited a greater Title, if

They had much ado in France to make up the Twelve Hundred Thousand Crowns
promised by the Treaty of Cambray, for the Release of the Kings Children. The
Marshall de Montmorency carried them to Endaya, and the first day of June
exchanged them for the two Princes, in the same place, and in the same manner
as they did the Father. The King went to meet them as far as Verin, which is a
Nunnery in the Launds of Bourdeaux near the Mount de Marsan.

In the same place he Married Eleonora the Emperors Sister who had sent her to
him with his Sons. The year following in the Month of March she was Crowned at
Saint Denis, and the City of Paris graced her with a Magnificent Entry. This
Princess aged thirty Years and rather ill-favored then handsome, never
possessed the heart of her Husband: but that she might be considered, gained
the respects of the Marshall de Montmorency who at that time governed the King
and the Kingdom.

The Catholics and Protestants had agreed in the Assembly at Ausburgh to call
a Council that might put an end to their differences, and the Emperor had given
his assent, because he would make use of this Proposition to awe the Pope. In
effect he was so alarmed at it, that he wrote to the Kings of France and
England, that he would do all they would desire, provided they hindered the
Council. In the mean time the Catholics of Germany finding their Religion
endangered, made a League amongst themselves in the Month of November. Which
gave occasion to the Protestants to frame one likewise at Smalcalde about the
end of the following Month.

Ferdinand to be Elected King of the Romans, who was already so of Hungary and
Bohemia (it was upon the Fifth of January in the Diet of Colen) without having
any regard to the oppositions of John Duke of Saxony, and the Remonstrances of
other Protestant Princes; who being yet more alarmed upon this Election, sent
to the Kings of France and England to implore their Assistance. They willingly
granted it, and Entered with them into a League, but only to defend their Lands,
and the Rights and Liberties of the Empire. The English promised to furnish
them with Fifty Thousand Crowns monthly, if they were Assaulted, and the French
deposited an Hundred Thousand Crowns in the hands of the Bavarian Princes to
Levy Men in case they found reason for it, or were necessitated thereto.

During the calmes of Peace, to the Love for Ladies he joined the Love of
Learning. The good King Lewis XII. had caused him to be bred in the College of
Navarre; and although he had made but a very small progress in the Latin
Tongue: nevertheless the little smattering he had gave him a great Gusto for
the Sciences: especially Astronomy, Physic, Natural History, and Law. He kept
near him the ablest men in all the Kingdom, who studied to make handsome and
Methodical discourses to him upon all those parts of Learning, most commonly
whilst he sat at Dinner; sometimes in his Walks or in his Closet; and he
improved so well by those entertainments, that he became as knowing as the
greatest Masters.

In acknowledgement of those Inestimable benefits, he raised many of them to
Offices, and showred Presents and Pensions upon the rest. Nor did they advance
his Affairs a little by their Services, and render his Name Illustrious to the
Eyes of all Nations by their Works; so that in spite of Fortune he gained most
Renown, though his rival flourished with more Success. He instituted the Royal
(or Regis) Professors at Paris for the Sciences and for the Tongues. He had
likewise a design to Build a College and to settle a Fund of Fifty Thousand
Crowns Revenue for the breeding and maintenance of Six Hundred Gentlemen. He
got together a huge number of Manuscripts of Ancient Authors, which make up
that precious Library, which is the rarest Treasure of our Monarchs of France.
In a word, he merited the glorious Surname of the Father, or Patron, and
restorer of Learning.

The long and tedious Wars, and his Imprisonment, had accustomed the Nobility
to all sorts of Violence and Crimes: He caused the Grand-Jours, or Sessions to
be held at Poitiers (this is an extraordinary Tribunal of Judges Commissioned
Rion in Auvergne in the Year 1545.

Toward the end of July there was a Hairy Comet observed in the Heavens, which
was visible all the Month of August. The vulgar imagined it foretold the death
of Louisa of Savoy, the Kings Mother, who might justly boast she brought him
twice into the World, once when he was born, and again when by her care she
delivered him from his Captivity. She died at Grez in Gastinois the two and
twentieth of September, as she was Traveling to her Castle of Remorantin in
Berry, after a long fit of Sickness she had endured at Fontainebleau.

From the end of the Year 1528. to the beginning of the Year 1534. the wrath of
Heaven was so great against France that there was a perpetual irregularity in
the Seasons, or to speak truth Summer alone usurped the place of the other
three; insomuch as in five years there had not been two days Frost together.
These tedious heats enervated, as we may say, and decayed Nature, making her
impotent: she brought nothing to maturity. The Trees put forth their Blossoms
immediately upon their Fruit, Corn did not multiply in the Fields, and for want
of Winter there were such multitudes of Vermin and Insects that fed upon it at
its first tender sprouting up, that the Harvest yielded not enough for Seed
against the next Season for Sowing. This scarcity caused a general Famine, then
came a Disease which they named Truss-Galant; after that a dreadful Plague, so
that these three destroyed above a fourth part of the People.

Anno 1532. The King made a Journey into Bretagne, and there after the
deliberation, which he procured with no small trouble, of the Estates of the
Country Assembled at Vannes, he United that Province to the Crown, and would
needs have his Son Crowned Duke at Rennes, and bear their Arms with those of
France and Daufine. The Patent for this Union bears date at Nantes in the Month
of August of this Year 1532.

During the six years of Peace, the Emperor labored in Settling and Composing
his Affairs in Germany, which were much embroiled by the different Sects; in
opposing the designs of Solomon; and more yet in contriving ways and means to
ruin the Affairs or at least blast the reputation of King Francis. This year
he went to the Diet at Ratisbon, where at the request of the Princes of the
Empire, he reformed the Imperial Chamber, and obtained of them and the Cities a
very great Supply against the Turk, who was making ready to fall upon Hungary
with innumerable Forces by Land, and upon Italy with a powerful Fleet by Sea.

He made use of this occasion to demand of the King that he would lend him
Money, and his Complete Horsemen.
Gentdarmerie. He answered, as touching the Money, that he was no Banker, and
for his Horsemen, that they were the strength of his State, and that he lent
them no more then he would his Sword, but would fight at the head of them that
he might have his share in the Honor or in the Danger.

But because the Imperialists proclaimed it was a shame that both he and the
King of England, should stand idle, or with their Hands in their Pockets amidst
the danger that threatened all Christendom, they made a League whereby they
engaged betwixt them to set Four-score Thousand Men on Foot, with an Equipage
suitable and convenient to Attack the common Enemy; and the King in particular
proffered to defend Italy, which the Emperor had denuded of all his Forces, in
case the Turkish Navy should land there.

The year was much advanced when Solomon appeared upon the Frontiers of Hungary
with Two Hundred Thousand Men. Germany notwithstanding their Divisions made a
greater effort then ever; They opposed him with an Army of Ninety Thousand
Foot, and Thirty Thousand Horse all modelled Troops. The Emperor was at their
Head, and this was his first Expedition, which gave him a gusto for the Trade
ever afterward. One Battle would have decided the Fate of either Empire, and
made one sole Master of the Universe: But neither the one nor the other durst
run the hazard of so great an Event, there were only some Combats between
detached Bodies. Solomon withdrew first, Charles V. afterward in so great have
that he staid not to drive the pretended King John out of Hungary, as he might
have done. Before his return into Spain, he went to Bologna where he conferred a
second time with the Pope.

Francis and King Henry. These Princes desiring to confer with each other about
their Affairs, met in the Month of October at Saint Joquevert, between
Boulogne and Calais, according as they had appointed the foregoing year. Henry
came to Boulogne to visit Francis, who returned him his Visit at Calais. Both
of them were much dissatisfied with the Pope particularly Henry, because he
refused to appoint him Judges upon the place to take Cognizance in the matter
of Divorce. They treated therefore a League defensive with and against all, and
projected to demand of the Pope, one his Assistance to recover the Duchy of
Milan, the other a Bull for the dissolving of his Marriage, otherwise they
would withdraw their Kingdoms from his Obedience till a General Council, the
only Name whereof as they well knew, made him even tremble. But the news they
received af Solymans retreat, somewhat allayed those Propositions, and
delivered Italy from that approaching War they had threatened it withal.

The Pope and Emperor saw each other at Bologne with the same Demonstrations of
Amity, as the first time, but with much different Sentiments. The Emperor
pressed him to call a Council, because he had promised the Germans one, to
renew a Confederation with all the Princes of Italy, for their common defense
against the French, and to bestow his Niece Catherine He called her so, though
she were only the Daughter of Laurence Son of Peter his Cousin German.
upon Francis Sforza. He likewise was earnest with him to cast his Spiritual
Thunderbolts against the King of England for having Divorced himself from his
Aunt Katherine.

As to the first, the Pope not finding himself irreproachable, but much hated
of the Italian Princes, because he had oppressed the City of Florence, which
was the place of his Nativity, could not be induced to grant it, but replied in
general terms he must Communicate the thing first to the other Princes of
Christendom. As to the second he gave his consent, and made a League for some
Sforza could be. The Cardinal de Tournon, and de Gramont were then upon the
Negotiation with him about this Alliance. The Emperor could not believe the
King would so much Debase and Vilify the Noblest Blood in the World; He was
much amazed when the two Cardinals showed him the Powers they had for it. Then
went he away very ill satisfied with his Holiness, though to appease him he
promised to give him content in what he demanded against the King of England,
and Embarquing at Genoa about the end of February, he passed into Spain.

Henry made most Vehement instances to Francis, that he would Impetrate of the
Pope, he might have Judges appointed on the Place. The two Cardinals whom we
have mentioned, being arrived at Bologna, the fourth of January in the year
1533 obtained of his Holiness that he would defer the Judgment of that
business, till the King and he should had seen one another at the place
appointed for that Meeting. They had agreed upon the City of Nice: but the Duke
of Savoy making too many Difficulties, the Pope consented, not without much
Repugnance, that it should be at Marseilles, and that they should come there in
the Month of October.

The Amorous Impatience of Henry could not attend till then, he caused his
Marriage with Catherine to be Dissolved by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Espoused Anne Bullen in the presence of four or five Witnesses only. He was
Emboldned thereto by the three Thomases who governed him, these were Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, Cromwell Lord Chamberlain and Privy Seal, and Audley
Lord High Chancellor. The thing being done he gave notice of it to King
Francis, entreating his assistance for what he demanded of the Pope, and to
keep the business Secret.

It could not be kept so Private, but that in one Months time both the Pope and
the Emperor were made acquainted with it. Both of them were Netled and Incensed
to the greatest Extremity, in-so-much as the Pope Pronounced the Sentence of
Excommunication against Henry; and nevertheless he refrained from Publishing it
upon the Kings request; who on the one hand being obliged to Henry, and on the
other desiring to be firmly united to the Pope, sought out some way for an
Accommodation. However he promised nothing to King Henry, saving that he would
do him all the good Offices he could without prejudice either to his Religion
or his Conscience. And indeed the Pope desired that he would not press him in
that concern beyond his Duty and the rules of Justice* Anne Bullen was
delivered of a Daughter who was named Elizabeth. This was in the Month of
September of this year 1533.

The tenth of October the Pope arrived at Marseilles in the Kings Galleys, who
took him in at the Port of Pisa. Some days before John Stuard Duke of Albany
had brought thither Catherine de Medicis, whose Maternal Aunt he had Married;
John de Bellay Bishop of Paris and afterward Cardinal, Harangued his Holiness
in most Elegant Latin. The next day after he had made his Entrance into the
City, the King made his, with his Queen. The Nuptials between Henry and
Catherine were Celebrated the seven and twentieth of the Month, with as great
Joy as Magnificence. The Pope and the King spent several days together, being
Lodged in two Houses just opposite, the Street betwixt them, but joined by a
Timber Gallery, so that they went to each other unseen, and could treat of
their Affairs with the greatest Privacy.

Upon this occasion the King did not forget his usual Magnificence, but rather
Surpassed it very much. He Loaded with exquisite Presents and great Pensions
all those Cardinals that were with his Holiness: But he made the Beauty of his
mind and Eloquence outshine the luster of his Gifts, and that whole Court was
satisfied, that if there were a richer Prince in the World, yet there could not
be any one that made a more generous use of his Riches, nor that accompanied
his favors with so much wit and so much kindness as he.

The two and twentieth of November the Pope and he parted very well pleased
with all their Negociations, excepting that the King had extorted from the Pope
four Cardinals Hats for four Relations of his Favorites: these were John le
Veneur Bishop of Lisieux Grand Almoner of France, Claude de Giury Paternal
Uncle to the Wife of de Brion, Odet de Coligny but thirteen years of Age, Son
of Montmorency's Sister, and Philip de la Chamber Brother by the Mother to John
Duke of Albany. This last took the name of Cardinal of Boulogne, he being
descended from that House by his Mother.

As to the rest there was no new League made between the Pope and the King,
contrary to the expectation of the whole World. The Pope promised only to do
all he could in favor of Prince Henry He was called Duke of Orleans*
his second Son to obtain the Duchy of Milan of the Emperor for him: And as to
the business of the King of England, the King could not prevail with the Pope
to revoke the Excommunication, but only that he would not Publish it till he
had first tried by all manner of persuasions to bring that Prince again to
reason. To this intent he forthwith dispatched John du Bellay Bishop of Paris
into England, to exhort him not to depart from the Communion of the Roman
Church.

This wise and able Prelate having obliged King Henry to promise him that
point, provided the Pope on his part would forbear publishing the
Excommunication, went Post to Rome to carry this good News, and demand time, to
reclaim and fix that inconstant and stubborn Spirit. The Imperialists could not
prevent him from procuring it, but they caused it to be limited to a much
shorter space then was requisite. Du Bellay therefore sent back a Courier into
England, with order to return by such a certain time; Now the day being come,
but not the Courier, the Imperialists pressed the business so hotly, that
although he represented that the Frosts and Snows and other Inconveniences of
the Season and Way might hinder and retard him, and desired another respite
only for six days: Yet the Pope refused it, and doing in one Meeting what he
ought not to have done but in three, he Pronounced the Sentence and caused it
to be affixed in the usual places.

Two days after the Courier arrived, bringing very ample Powers, by which King
Henry Submitted himself to the Judgment of the Holy See, provided certain
Cardinals whom he suspected abstained from being his Judges, and that they
would send Commissioners to Cambray to take Information, and hear those proofs
he would offer. The Holy Father perceived then the Fault he had committed by
his Precipitating a thing of that Importance, and could well have desired to
find out some remedy: But the time was past, his fatal hand had given the blow,
which made so desperate a Wound as wholly cut off England from the Communion of
the Church of Rome. For Henry transported with fury that he had posted him up
at Rome, withdrew himself absolutely from all obedience to the Pope, declared
himself Head of the Anglicane Church, and persecuted severely all those that
opposed this change.

It is observed that if the Pope had deferred the Judgment but ten Months,
death would have disengaged him from all these Intricacies, and cut this knot,
by taking Catherine out of this World, as it did in January following.

Catholic Faith, was then like to be sorely shaken by two strong Temptations;
the one was the King of Englands Summons Soliciting him to break with the Pope
to preserve the strict Colligation that was between them: the other the
Induction of his dear Sister Margaret, who would needs have persuaded him to
call in Philip Melancthon, and give him Audience concerning the means he had to
propound for accommodating the differences in Religion. But, as to the first he
replied in Substance to the King of England, A Friend even to the Alter: And
for the second the Cardinal de Tournon put by that dangerous blow, and
fortified the Kings mind so well, that he would never after give the least Ear
to any of those Reformers, but in time did also wean his Sister from that
Fondness she had, and hankering after Novelties.

Each day Accumulated more and more cause of Quarrel and War between the King
and the Emperor. This last had great Jealousy of the Enter-view at Marseille,
and the Marriage there Solemnized; He likewise thought himself highly affronted
for that the King was entered into the League of the German Princes Confederated
at Smalcalde; and he was no less so for his assisting of the Dukes of
Wirtemberg in the Diet of Ausburgh where their cause against his Brother
Ferdinand was Judged, who detained their Lands; as also for that William Langey
by his Contrivances and his Persuasive and Powerful Eloquence, broke the League
of Scwaben, which had lasted for seventy years to the great advantage of the
House of Austria.

King Francis on his part complained of a very Bloody and cruel injury. He had
in the number of his Esquires a Gentleman of Milan named Francis de Merveille,
who had gained much wealth in his Service: And knowing that he would be willing
to make some show of it in his native Country, he sent him to Milan in quality
of Secret Ambassador: Merveille was so vain as not to conceal his Employment,
the Emperor knew of it and made complaint to Sforza with Threats, who promised
to give him Satisfaction. Now it happened either by chance, or otherwise, that
some People of that Country made a Quarrel with Merveille, and some body was
killed in the Fray. The Duke fails not to lay hold of this opportunity to
content the Emperor, and under color of Justice, but without any form, causes
his head to be cut off by night and in the Prison: This happened a little before
the Kings journey to Marseille.

In pursuance of the Kings League with the Confederates of Smalcalde, Philip
Landtgrave of Hesse, Espoused the Quarrel of the Dukes of Wirtemberg (who that
he might have Money to prosecute the same, engaged Montbelliard to the King)
and declared War against Ferdinand; over whose Army having gained a Notable
Victory, he re-Established them in their County, and obliged Ferdinand to allow
all Liberty to the Protestants (the Sacramentaries and Anabaptists not
Comprised,) Upon which condition they acknowledged him King of the Romans.

The Landtgrave had promised Francis to go into Italy, which however he did
not; and this King with the Design of renewing a War, set up a Militia in all
his Provinces, which he distributed in seven Bodies of Six Thousand Men each,
they were named Legions. This institution lasted not long, it would have
rendered the People too Powerful, and the Government too weak.

The twenty fourth of September died Pope Clement. Two days after the Cardinals
being assembled in Conclave elected Alexander Farnese named Paul III.

At this time John Cauvin or Calvin, aged twenty four, or five years, began to
expose his Doctrine, more conformable to that of the Sacramentaries, than to
that of Luther, and which went much farther, for it did not only touch upon the
inward belief, but overthrew all the Exterior and the Ceremonies. He was a
Native of Noyon, Son of Gerard, who was the Bishops Secretary; A Man very
studious, of a sharp and penetrating Wit, a Melancholy and Sickly Temper, an
angry and passionate humor, no very smooth Tongue, but an Eloquent and Fluent
pen, and who was often reproached that he coverd a Violent ambition, and extreme
obstinacy, with the Veil of great Modesty, and Humility.

Bourges, from a certain German named Melchior Volmar who taught the Greek
Tongue, and was entertained by Margaret Queen of Navarre, Sister of King
Francis; A very generous Princess, who having a great love for Learning, had
suffered her reason to be prevailed upon by these Broachers of Novelties. It is
held that he laid the first foundation of his Sect at Poitiers, and there
instituted the form of the Lords Supper or Mand^cation, that from thence he
sent three of his Companions into diverse Parts to sow his Dogmatisms, and that
himself retired to Nerac to Gerard de Roussel, and James le Feure of Estaples,
who were there sheltred under the protection of Queen Margaret, and had already
established secretly in that little Court, a form of a Church almost the same as
he intended to bring forth into the World.

He stayed but a few Months at Nerac, and passed into Italy to see Renee de
France Duchess of Ferrara, who was imbued with the same opinions as Margaret.
Then when Geneva had expelled her Bishop and the Catholic Religion, he there
established the Seat of his residence; And from thence he sent his Disciples to
Preach his Doctrine over all France and the Low Countries, exposing them to all
sorts of dangers and deaths, which he kept himself far enough off from the fire
of Persecution, and hazarded nothing but his Paper and Ink.

This same year 1534. and the following was acted that Bloody and Horrible
Tragedy of the Anabaptists in the City of Munster. Those Phanaticks thinking to
Establish their Whimseys by subverting the Lawful Power, had chosen for their
King a Tailor named John of Leyden. Their Bishop besieged them, and reduced
them to extremity of Famine, But whilst they resolved obstinately to Perish,
rather then yield, he was let into the Town by one of that Mock-Monarchs
Camerades, took him and the chief Ministers of his fury, and having led them
some time about the Neighboring Countries as objects of Derision, put them to
death with exquisite Torments.

Francis in the beginning of the Year 1535. for reparation of these Injuries,
caused a general Procession to be made at Paris, whereat he assisted with great
Devotion holding a Torch in his hand, together with the Queen and his Children,
afterward making diligent search for the Authors of that Scandal, he committed
half a dozen to the Flames, who were burnt in several places, but for every one
he put to death there sprang up hundreds of others out of their Ashes.

These proceedings could not be pleasing to the Protestant Princes his good
Friends. Wherefore the Emperor failed not to stir them up to a resentment
against him, to accuse him of Cruelty for burning their Brethren, and impiety
since at the same time he thus severely handled those that professed a new
Reformation of Christianity, he had Turkish Ambassadors in his Court. And
indeed he had much ado to justify himself toward them, and in all this whole
year could obtain nothing from them.

The Death of Merveille was either a pretense or a real cause for a War against
Sforza, that he might get footing once more in Milanois: Charles Duke of Savoy
denying him passage thorough his Country, drew that Tempest upon his own head,
unless it were perhaps the Kings design first to attaque him, for he had many
other causes of resentment against him. He complained that Beatrix of Portugal
his Wife and Sister to the Emperor, inclined him to consider the Emperor his
Brother in Law, more then him who was his Nephew; That he had dared to take the
Investiture of the County of Ast from that Prince, which was the Patrimony of
the House of Orleans. That for pledge of his Faith he had given him Lewis
Prince of Piedmont his Eldest Son, and in the mean time had refused to accept
his Nephew of him, the Order of Saint Michael and an established Company with
Twelve Thousand Crowns Pension; As likewise to let the Pope have the use of the
City of Nice for the enterview that was at Marseille; That he had possessed
some Lands of the Marquisate of Sallusses which were a Fief mouvant of Daufine;
That he refused him the Homage of Foucigny; That he rejoiced in his Letters to
the Emperor at his being taken Prisoner at Pavia; That he had lent the Duke of
Bourbon Money since his revolt.

But above all these there was the right of Convenience, which led the King to
seize upon those Territories to facilitate his Conquest of Milan, and to
prevent his exchanging them with the Emperor for others higher up in Italy; For
the Dukes Enemies reported that the bargain was in hand. And therefore he
underhand Montmeillan, Veilland, Chivas and Vercel, for which he offered Lands
in France, and to complete the Marriage of his Daughter Margarite with Lewis
Eldest Son of the Duke, accordingly as they had agreed eight years before.

Now though all these were great occasions of Offense to the King, yet he took
no other to quarrel with him, but that which he would have taken formerly in
the Year 1518. which was that he should do him Justice concerning the
Succession of Louisa his Mother who was Sister of that Duke and the late
Philibert his Predecessor. During the Life of that Princess he pursued this
business by no other ways but by Treaty; and it may well be believed he would
have it sleep still, if the reasons we have hinted had not engaged him to
awaken it now again.

He therefore sent William Poyet President of the Parliament of Paris, to the
Duke to make his demand for a free Passage and his Rights. As for the Passage,
the Duke, at lest in outward appearance, showed himself very ready to grant it,
and to furnish him with Provisions paying for them; And for the other point, he
proffered to make an amicable Agreement, and to leave the Kings and his own
Pretensions to Arbitrators. Which the King taking for a denial declared War
against him in the Month of February of the year 1535.

He had already begun to make him feel his Indignation, by giving Orders
underhand to the Officers and Magistrates of Daufine, to make Incursions upon
his Countries, by obliging the Holy Father to Suppress the Bishopric of Bourg
which had been newly Established in his Favor, and by assisting those of
Geneva against him. The Inhabitants of that City pretending to hold of the
Empire, had a long time sought to free themselves from the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop; and for this purpose had twice or thrice helped themselves by the
Protection of the Cantons of Bearne, and Friburgh, who had made them their
fellow Citizens. In fine they absolutely Revolted, and Expelled their Bishop;
his name was Peter de la Baulme.

The Duke having besieged them, the King sent several small Supplies, but who
were all defeated: and yet the apprehension he had of the Beranois made him
raise the Siege. Immediately the City, chiefly at the Instigation of two
Sacramentarian Ministers, i. e. Farel and Viret, changed their Religion and
Government, and put themselves into the same State almost as they remain in to
this day. The Bishop transported his See to Anecy.

After these Flashes of Lightning the mighty Thunderclap broke forth: The
Admirable Brion entered his Countries with the Army raised to fall upon Milan.
At the very report and Noise of his March all the Places of Bress, and those of
Savoy on this side Mount Cenis, opened their Gates to the French without any
opposition. The Duke was wholly un-provided of Forces; he could do no other
till the return of the Emperor but only temporise, and in the mean time defend
himself by Submissions and Respects, which are but feeble Arms against a Potent
and an Angry Prince, when he intends to make Advantage of his Wrath.

July of this year 1535. Anthony Duprat Cardinal Archbishop of Lens Legate in
France, and Chancellor, died in his Castle of Nantouillet; Much Tormented with
Remorse of Conscience, as his Sighs and Speeches made manifest, for having
observed no other Guide or Law (he that was himself so great a Lawyer) but his
own Interest and the Passion of his Sovereign. It was he that took away the
Elections to Benefices, and the Privileges of many Churches, that Introduced
the Sale of Offices in Courts of Judicature, that taught them boldly to lay all
sorts of Impositions in France, that divided and distinguished the Kings
Interest from the good of the Subjects, and who Established this Maxim so false
and so contrary to Natural Liberty: Qu'il nest point de terre Sans Seigneur, i.
e. That there is no Land, without its Lord. The Office of Chancellor was given
to Antony du Bourg, who was likewise a Native of Auvergne and President in
Parliament.

As to the Emperor, he having foreseen that Clouds and Storms were gathering
together from all Quarters against him by the King, the King of England, the
Princes of Italy, and those of Germany, that he might have some pretense to Arm
himself Powerfully, he gave out that he was going to make War upon the Famous
Chairadin Surnamed Barbarossa, who Infested all the Coasts of his Kingdoms of
Naples and Sicilia.

That Pyrate was a Native of Metelin, he had a Brother named Horue, their
Father a Christian Renegade and Poor. From their Youth these two Bothers had
used Piracy, having but one Brigantine between them both, then Increasing in
Vessels, in Men and Money, they passed into Mauritania, where engaging
themselves in a War that was made betwixt two Brothers for the Kingdom of
Algiers, under pretense of Assisting the one, they made themselves Masters of
both the City and Country. Horue being the Eldest bore the Title of King, and
Conquered Circella and Bugia likewise, and Dispossessed the King of Tremisen:
but in the conclusion he was Vanquished, and Slain in the Rout by the People of
that Country, joined with the Spaniards with whom that King was allied.

Chairadin Barbarossa his Brother Succeeded him, and became very formidable in
the Levant Seas, in-so-much that Sultan Solomon gave him the Command of his
Naval Forces. There were two Brothers at Tunis Sons of King Mahomet who
disputed for the Crown, Araxide and Muley-Assan, this last although the younger
had taken the Scepter by his Fathers appointment: the other to avoid his
Cruelty, fled to Constantinople and Implored the Protection of the Grand
Seignor. Barbarossa taking advantage of this occasion, appears before Tunis,
pretending he had brought him back to restore him, though, indeed, he left him
in Prison at Constantinople. By this wile he so deceived the People that he was
received into the City and drove Muley-Assan thence. This man had recourse to
the protection of Charles V. who undertook to re-establish him.

Charles landed therefore in Africa with an Army of above Fifty Thousand Men,
took the Fort of Goletta which he kept for himself, settled Muley-Assan in
Tunis, beat Barbarossa at Land, gave him chase by Sea, and delivered Twenty
Thousand Christian Slaves; then upon the fourteenth of August he Weighed Anchor
and set Sail for Sicily, where in few days he Arrived. Having so journed there
near three Months, he passed to Naples about the end of November.

Savoy, to comfort him for the losses he had sustained by the French, and of
his eldest Son Lewis, who died in Spain. These words were but a weak support
against those evils which increased upon him every day. For the Bernois having
declared War in January 1536. drove out the Bishop of Lausanne, Seized upon
that City, the Country of Vund, Gex, Genevois and Chablais, as far as the
Drance, the Valesans on their side Invaded the rest of Chablais from that River
all above; Those of Friburgh got Possession of the County of Romont; and the
French Army Marched at the same time to enter into Piedmont. John de Medequin
Captain of the Castle of Muz afterward Marquess of Marignan, and some other of
the Emperors Commanders whom the Duke had sent to Guard the Pass of Suze came
there too late. Antonio de Leva having visited Turin and found it was not yet
Tenable, was not of opinion that the Duke should venture to wait for the French
there. He went out therefore on the twenty seventh of March with his Wife and
his Son, and having Embarked his richest Goods and Artillery ^n the Po,
retired to Vercel; Turin Surrendered the third of April.

Whilst the Emperor was yet in Sicily, he had News of the death of Duke Francis
Sforza, which happened in the Month of October, not leaving any Children by his
Wife, who was the Daughter of Elizabeth his Sister and Christierne This King
was put out of his Kingdom and could not recover it.
II. King of Denmark. Now the Duchy of Milan being under the Power of the
Emperor, knowing the great Passion the King had for so excellent a Duchy he
made use of it as a Lure, to amuse, and lead him in a Slip, if we may so
express it, all the rest of his Life.

Gravelle his Chancellor had told Vely the Kings Ambassador, that his Master
would not dispose of that Duchy till he had received Information from him, how
he intended to demean himself in these three particulars; the first was in the
War against the Turk, the second the reduction of all the Christian Princes to
the Catholic Religion, and the third the settling of a Firm Peace throughout
all Christendom. He added that the Emperors desire was rather to bestow that
Duchy upon the Kings third, then upon his second Son, and demanded that the
second might accompany him to the Siege of Algiers.

These two last Conditions did not please the King; Upon the other three Heads,
he made such Replies as ought to have Satisfied the Emperor. He demanded the
Duchy for Henry Duke of Orleans his second Son, and offered to give four
hundred thousand Crowns of Gold for the Investiture. On this Foot he Vely that
he should press the Emperors Resolution: But that Prince gave only general
Words, and in the mean time put his Affairs in good Order, for he made the
Marriage between his Bastard and Alexander de Medicis who was one likewise, and
Confirmed him in the Government of Florence; He made a new Confederation with
the Venetians, induced thereto by the Fame of his Victories in Africa, and by
the persuasions of the Duke of Vrbin General of their Armies. He sent to his
Sister Mary Widow, Queen of Hungary, to whom he had given the Government of the
Low Countries after the death of Margaret Widow of Savoy his Aunt, as likewise
to those with whom he had left that of Spain, to make the greatest Levys of Men
and Moneys they possibly could: and himself on his part labored to get store
of Money in Sicily and Naples, and to increase those Forces he brought out of
Africa.

Now with promising hopes he led on Vely and the Kings Envoys even to Rome. In
the Month of April he made his Triumphant entrance, and Sojourned there
thirteen days. There it was they Discovered his ill intentions and inclinations
toward the King, for after the Pope and he had conferred together about their
Affairs, he prayed him to Assemble his Cardinals, and before them with Hat in
hand, he made a long harangue full of Invectives, Complaints, and Menaces
against King Francis; and would needs give them an account of all Transactions
between them from the time of Lewis XII. he accused him of having ever broke
the Peace, failed in his word, disturbed Italy and Germany, and unjustly
dispossessed the Duke of Savoy. He concluded by saying, That of three things the
King must choose one; Either to take the Duchy of Milan for his third Son upon
certain conditions, whereof one was, that he should restore the Duke of Savoy
to his Lands; or to accept of a Single combat between them Personally with what
ever Weapons he pleased, upon some Bridge, in an Island, or a Boat, upon
condition that the Victor should employ his Forces according to the appointment
of his Holiness, to reduce the Heretics and oppose the Infidels: Or to
resolve upon a War that should be so Bloody as to ruin one of the two.

The King slighted these proud boasts, but replied to the Accusations by an
Apologetique Letter which he addressed to the Pope and Cardinals, and which in
very modest terms, but very Pithy and Energetical, clearly satisfied every
point the Emperor had touched upon, and retorted all the blame upon himself.

In the interim diverse overtures were made between the Pope, the Emperor and
the Ambassadors, to prevent these two Princes from coming to an absolute
rupture. The Admiral de Brion had conquered all Piedmont to the Douere, and
found himself in a posture and condition to have conquered all the rest, for
they were terrified, and Antonio de Leva who had taken the field and joined the
Duke at Vercel, had not as yet got all his Forces ready. Notwithstanding the
King upon what Vely wrote to him, that the Emperor (this was before his
Harangue) had given him notice by Gravelle he would give up Milan to his second
Son, sent the Cardinal of Lorraine into Italy to conclude that business which
he presumed was in much forwardness.

The Cardinal left order in the name of the King that Brion should not pass the
Douere, and also promised Antonio de Leva that he should not pass the Sesia;
and though he was informed by Veley, whom he met at Sienna, whither he followed
the Emperor, of what had fallen out since at Rome, he forbore not, being a
confident man, and one that thought nothing difficult, to speak again of it to
the Emperor, and to put him in mind of his former promise. The Emperor owned
that he had given his word for it, but that the King having continued to
prosecute his War against the Duke of Savoy, he was no longer obliged to
perform it.

After this reply the Cardinal sent the King word he ought to provide well for
his own defense: Nevertheless the Pope who ardently desired to reconcile the
two Kings, would not give over, but represented to each of them the Strength of
the other much greater then indeed they were, thereby to incline them to a
Peace. Wherefore the King not willing to begin the Rupture, commanded Brion to
undertake nothing, but withdraw his Forces into Daufine, after he had well
provided and Garrisoned the Places, unless Antonio de Leva did pass over the
Sesia.

On the contrary the Emperor not only prepared himself for War, but likewise
endeavored to stir up all the World against Francis. He dispatched an England
to desire the Amity of King Henry, and protest that all his resentment was
buried in Queen Catherines Grave, who died this year in the Month of January.
And although Henry had answered but very coldly, he notwithstanding promised
himself and grounded his hopes upon the inconstancy of his humor, that if he
once saw France invaded he would not forbear attempting somewhat upon the score
of his ancient pretensions.

He had likewise made use of all sorts of Calumnies and false reports
concerning the Germans, to render the King very Odious. He made them believe
they were mortally hated in France, that they were persecuted, that they burnt
them alive, and that the King not only endeavored to kindle Discords amongst
them, that so whilst they were grappling and pulling one another by the Ears,
Solomon his faithful allie might Invade the Empire of Germany: But that he
likewise maintained These were perhaps beggars or poor Soldiers to get Plunder.
Rascals hired on purpose to set Fire on their Borroughs and Towns.

In effect this year there were a sort of People, not known by whom, nor for
what they were set on, who burnt several, as well in France as Germany, and
especially the City of Troyes. William du Bellay-Langey a man of Quality and a
good Soldier, but whose Eloquence did much greater service then his Valor,
composed an excellent Treatise in Latin and High Dutch, which was scattered
over all those Countries; and as well by that means as by the testimony of
Dutch Merchants, who affirmed they had been kindly used in France, he disabused
them, but not without much ado.

After the Emperor at the head of two great Armies had made Solomon first
retire, and then forced Barbarossa to fly, he breathed nothing but War. His
Flatterers, who corrupt the minds of the wisest Princes by their excessive
praise, promised him no less then the Empire of all Europe, the Poets and
Panegyrists assured him of it, and the Diviners and Astrologers, no less
confident or impudent in their Lying Prognostics, had so boldly foretold it
should certainly come to pass, that it had made Impression in feeble minds, and
Credulous Spirits.

Amongst whom the Marquess de Salusses was one, who thinking to prevent
destiny, that the Emperor might seem to be obliged to him for doing that
Voluntarily which he fancied necessity must at last bring him to, went over
secretly into his service: But being as Treacherous as Shallow-brain'd, he
remained yet a while amongst the French to ruin their Affairs. Some have said,
that the hopes they gave him, that the Emperor would adjudge the Marquissat of
Montferrat to be his, which was Litispendente between him, the Duke of Savoy,
and the Duke of Mantoua, tempted him to that Infamous baseness.

The Duke of Savoy expected that the Emperor would employ his Forces to restore
him; and he already began to think his Affairs seemed to mend. For John de
Medequin Marquess de Merignan, and Antonio de Leva, besieged Turin, and the
King had sent to his Generals to abandon all their Conquests in those
Countries, excepting Turin, Fossan and Cony. It was ordered in a Council of War
that Fossan should be Fortified. The Marquess de Salusses who had the charge of
it, far from hastening the work, retarded it all he could. He diverted the
Pioneers, Provisions, Powder and Ball; Then when he perceived his Treason began
to be discovered, he retired to his Castle of Ravel, fathering his retreat upon
the disobedience of the French Officers.

From thence he gave Intelligence of the poor condition of the place to Antonio
de Leva, who leaving Ten Thousand Foot and some Horse before Turin, under the
Command of James de Scaleng, came and laid Siege to it; and yet the purchase
came not so cheap as he imagined, for after he had to his own cost tried the
Valor of the besieged, he agreed they should hold the place a Month, at the
end whereof they were to Surrender if not relieved.

In expectation of the day for this Surrender Leva would needs try, but in
vain, to attempt Roques-Parvieres, and Chasteau-daufin. Some days before this
the Emperor Arrived at Savillan, where the Marquess having quite thrown off his
Masque, went and waited upon him; he made him his Lieutenant on the other side
the Mountains.

There it was that the Emperor, of his own head, and contrary to the Advice of
his Eldest Officers, amongst others Antonio de Leva, who fell down upon his
knees before him to dissuade him from it, resolved to enter into Provence. He
had little less then Ten Thousand Horse, and above Forty Thousand Foot of the
best Soldiers of those times. The Five and Twentieth of July the Feast of Saint
James the Apostle Patron of Spain, and the same day of the year whereon he
Landed at Tunis, this great Army passed over the River of War which divides
France from Savoy, and lodged at Saint Laurence's the first Borough of
Provence. A short while after it was followed by a Fleet commanded by Andreas
Doria, which furnished them with Ammunition and Provisions.

The Emperor Vaunted he was the Legitimate Lord of Provence, as well by the
Cession he said he had of Charles de Bourbon, as by other Rights and Titles. He
thought to find some Correspondents there (at least he pretended he had) the
People amazed and surprised, and places so weak, that he should easily make
himself Master of them, or oblige the King, if he appeared to defend them, to
give him battle.

But the King would by no means hazard that in his own Country: he fortified
those places which were capable to resist, as Arles, Marseilles, Tarascon, and
Beaucaire, drew the Inhabitants out of those places that were defenseless, as
out of Aix and Antibes, caused all things to be spoiled thorough the whole
Country, burnt the Mills, beat down the Ovens and spoiled the Corn, Wine, and
such Forage as they could not carry off.

That done, he divided his Army in two Bodies; The one he lodged within a Camp
well entrenched, and which within Fifteen days was made defensible. The
Situation was chosen near Cavaillon in a large Meadow between the Rhosne and
the Durance, and the general Command thereof he gave to the Marshall de
Montmorency. With the other Body himself lodged at Valence above Avignon, to
second the first, and give a second Battle, if there were occasion.

After the Emperor had sacked the City of Aix, it was in his Council resolved
to Attaque Marseille. The Siege was begun the Twenty Fifth of August. His
Vanguard Marching thither met near Brignoles a Party of Five or Six Hundred
Men, who m Montejan and Boissy Knights of the Order had caused to advance
somewhat too desperately, thinking to surprise the Enemy. They were all cut off
and their two Chiefs made Prisoners. This was all the exploits that vast Army
did, excepting the forcing a few Country Fellows in a Tower, who were hanged.

The News of this Accident carried to the King at Valence, was followed with
another which was worse, I mean the loss of Guise, of which we shall soon make
mention: but the sorrow both for the one and the other was Stiffled by a third
incomparably more sensible; which was the death of Francis his Eldest Son, a
brave and generous Prince Nineteen Years of Age, who falling sick at Valence,
and yet making them Convey him by Water to his Father, died at Tournon the 12
th day of August.

The Count Sebastian de Montecuculy a Ferrarese was accused for having given
him Poison in a Cup of fresh water as he was playing at Tennis in Valence. This
Italian being taken upon suspicion and put to the wrack confessed the Crime, and
declared, whether convinced by his Conscience, or forced by the extremity of
Torture, that Antonio de Leva and Ferdinand de Gonzague had wrought upon him to
commit it, not without reflection upon the Emperor himself indirectly: but the
Imperialists with great indignation retorted this, so base an action, upon
Catherine de Medicis, saying she would needs have this Eldest Son to be removed
out of the World before her Husband that she might be Queen of France. However
it were, the King being at Lions caused Process to be made against Montecuculi,
who was drawn in pieces by four wild Horses. Henry his second Son took the
Title of Daufin, and left that of Duke of Orleans to his other Brother Charles
who before was Duke of Angoulesme.

There were Seven Thousand Men in Marseilles, and thirteen Galleys in that
Port, who made the Emperor sensible upon two or three Attempts, that there was
nothing to be expected but blows. In like manner Arles was found to be well
Fortified in those places where his Maps had represented it weakest. Mean while
Provisions failed him, the Peasants and Mountainiers, fell upon all such as
strayed never so little from the Camp, the King sent out Parties that cut off
their Forage, and took those Convoys of bread and biscuit which they sent him
from Toulon, his Germans surfeited and burst themselves with Grapes and other
Fruits: so that want, turmoiles, and sickness diminished them above one third
in a Months time, and laid Antonio de Leva, the bravest Commander they had, in
his Grave, who died languishing thorough Grief. On the contrary the Kings Swiss
and Six Thousand Germans.

At the same time that he entered into Provence, the Count de Nassaw entered
Picardy with an Army of Thirty Thousand Men. The City of Guise was carried by
Assault, the Castle that might have held, tamely Surrendered, for which the
Commanders were branded with infamy. But Peronne besieged the Tenth of August,
maintained very furious Assaults and dreadful Batteries, by the Valor of the
Marshall de Florenges, the Count de Dammartin, and a great number of the
Neighboring Gentry. When it was ready to fall, the Duke of Guise supplied them
with Men, and Ammunition which he conveyed to them over the Marshes. After this
the Besiegers having again made two Furious Assaults, in which they left their
Scaling Ladders and a great many of their bravest Men in the Ditches, retired
the Tenth day of September, which was the very same, or the next day after the
Emperor packed up his Bag and Baggage and marched out of Provence.

The Siege of Peronne, the taking whereof seemed near at hand, did strangely
Alarm the Bourgeois of Paris. The great care, and courage of the Cardinal du
Bellay their Bishop, and to whom the King had given the Title of
Lieutenant General of their City and the Isle of France, dispelled the
apprehensions they had both of the Enemies and a Famine: For he caused all the
Corn and Wine within Six Leagues round to be brought thither, which so stored
them that they had plenty sufficient to furnish that vast multitude, and above
Thirty Thousand Soldiers Paris, if not surprised, is not so easily famished as
some might Imagine. In retribution the Parisians proffered him a store of Brass
Guns, and to maintain Ten Thousand Soldiers as long as the Enemies remained
upon the Frontiers.

Never was there a more Melancholy Spectacle then the retreat of the Emperors
Army, miserably shattered without being able to come to any Battle. The Roads
from Aix even to Frejus were all strewed with Arms, Horses, Baggage, dead
Corpse, and men dying, Montmorency was mightily blamed for not pursuing them.
Those that excuse him say, that at that very juncture the King received news of
the extreme danger Peronne was in, which obliged him to draw out a great part
of his Forces to go and Succor them. However Four or Five days after he had
Information that the Enemies were returning into Flanders, and the thing being
taken into deliberation the second time, the Emperor making some days stay at
Frejus, it was concluded to be the safer and more prudent method, not to force
the Lion that was running off to turn head, and make them feel the effects of
desperation.

His retreat over the Alps was difficult and Bloody, the Daufins Light Horse
harcelling him perpetually in his March. He at length Arrived at Genoa the
second of October, and his Army passed thence into Milanois commanded by the
Marquess du Guast. Governor of those Countries; who en passant put Garrisons
into the rest of the places belonging to the Duke of Savoy. Thus that
unfortunate Prince saw his Estates shared betwixt his Enemy and his Friend,
having scarce any thing left for himself but the City and Castle of Nice where
he made his residence.

After the Emperor had remained at Genoa about Fifteen days, he went on Board
his Galleys the Eighteenth of November and sailed toward Spain. He was no more
fortunate at Sea, then he had been on Land; a furious Tempest overtook his
Fleet, and sunk Six of his Galleys and a couple of great Ships, the one
carrying his Plate, the other his Horses: after all which, without doubt, he
was fitter for Consolations, then Panegyricks.

The fear they had conceived in Italy, left he should Conquer France, had as
soon as he was gone, armed several petty Princes and Lords, whom the great
States, that durst not openly declare, maintained and encouraged underhand.

The King gave them Guy Count de Rangon to be their General; their place of
Rendezvous was Mirandola. They set ten thousand men on Foot, with whom they
attempted Genoa: a Supply of Eight Hundred Arriving during the time of their
Assault made the business miscarry. As they were marching toward Ast the
Spaniards raised the Siege of Turin, and suffered them to take Carignian,
Raconis, Carmagnola, and most of the Marquisate of Salusses.

de Saint Pol with Six Thousand Lansquenets whom the King drew out of his Army,
ruined the Country of Tarentaise, and regained Chamberry which the Inhabitants
of that Valley had surprised: but Bury whom the King had made Governor beyond
the Mountains in place of Brion, was hemmed in and taken with Twelve Hundred
men, by the Marquess du Guast, in Casal which he had just surprised. Humieres
was sent to Command in his stead with a Re-inforcement of ten thousand
Lansquenets, of whom Christopher Duke of Wirtemberg was General.

Upon the noise that the Emperor was going to swallow up all France, James King
of Scotland remembering the ancient Alliances of his Nation and Predecessors,
took Shiping with Sixteen Thousand men to come to his Assistance without the
least Entreaty; The Wind beat him back three several times to his own Coasts:
At length he got with some Vessels to Diepe, from whence he rode post to the
King, but met him on this side Lions upon his return. In acknowledgment of this
so kind, and nobly free, assistance, the King could not refuse him Magdelin his
Eldest Daughter; though that Prince had before betroathed a Daughter of the
Duke of Vendosmes.

The Nuptials were celebrated at Paris the first day of the Year 1537. but she
Died of a Hectic Fever within the same year, and James Married Mary Daughter
of Claude Duke of Guife, and Widow of Lewis Duke of Longueville. The King of
England did not much like this double lincking himself to France by two such
Matches: which was one of the main causes that made him fall off from King
Francis, and close again with the Emperor the more easily, for that Catherine
of Arragon his repudiated Wife was dead, and he had caused Anne Bullen to be
Beheaded, on the Green within the Tower for Adultery, whether true, or supposed.

Perhaps too he would have made him feel the Resentments of his Anger at that
very time, had he not been involved in troubles at home, for some Nobles and
some English Prelates, prompted with Zeal to prevent a Schism, and withal
apprehending some danger to their own Persons, after the example of his
Chancellor Sir Thomas Moor, and John Fisher Bishop of Rochester whose Heads he
had unjustly brought to the block; had made a Holy League and taken up Arms
against him. And although he had dispersed their Forces or sent them home again
by granting them conditions of advantage: nevertheless he feared they might
break out afresh, and therefore was contriving underhand to surprise their
Chiefs; who had just cause to repent, as it most frequently happens upon the
like occasions, to men who dare not rather resolve to die with their Sword in
hand.

There was so little Rain and such great heats during the whole Spring and
Summer of the Year 1536. that it begot a prodigious drowth; most of the Wells
and Springs were dried up, the Marshes and Ponds quite parched, and the waters
of most great Rivers grown so shallow and weak as scarce able to drag along
their Languishing Streams, being generally foordable in all places, and in many
passable dry-foot.

The Kings Council thought it necessary to do something that might pull down
the Emperors Vanity, and withal show the Injustice and the Nullity of the
Treaties of Madrid and Cambray. To this purpose the King sitting in his Seat of
Justice in Parliament the Nineteenth of January, attended by the Princes and
Pairs, after his having heard James Capel Attorney General, who made it appear
that the Provinces belonging to the Crown were Inalienable, that he could not
give away the Sovereignty of Flanders and Artois, and that Charles of Austria
(they gave him only that Name) being still a Vassal to the King for those
Counties and for Charlois, had committed the Crime of Felony: It was Ordained,
That he should be Summoned by a single Edict peremptory and once for all, at
the nearest place of safe access, to answer the Attorney General upon his
Conclusions, of the Forfeit, Reversion, and Reunion of those three Counties;
and in the mean time, the King declared all the Vassals in those Countries
acquit and discharged from their Oaths to him, from all Faith and Homage and
enjoined them to serve the King upon the Penalty of Forfeiture of their Fiefs,
and to be Proclaimed Rebels, whereof publication to be made upon the Frontiers.

The Heralds went therefore to Summon Charles by posting up Papers and making
Proclamation. He replied fuming with rage, that since they recalled him into
France he would return thither with such powerful Justifications as would
Adrian de Crouy Count de Roeux, having drawn together the Commons of the
Low Countries, came and ransacked the Frontiers of Picardy.

This proceeding of the Kings was variously spoken of; but none could approve
of the Alliance he made with Solomon the Enemy of Christendom, as well to
defend himself against the Emperor, as in hatred to the Venetians, with whom he
was extremely offended, for having despised his Amity and the offer he made to
share Milanois with them.

One might nevertheless in some Measure excuse this League of a Christian King
with an Infidel, not only by the example of the Kings of Spain Grandfathers of
this Emperor, who had contracted the like with Mohammedan Kings, but even by
that of the Emperor himself, who had endeavored earnestly to do the same with
Solomon; so that he was no less guilty in that particular, but less prevalent
or skilful, or less fortunate then Francis.

The Kings attempts did not answer this grand Arrest, or Decree, of his
Parliament. He took only Hesdin and Saint Paul, and having spent his first
Fire, returned in the beginning of May to Paris, leaving his Army with the
Count de Saint Paul, and order to Fortify the City of the same name, where
they put three Thousand Men in Garrison.

So soon as he was retired the Enemies being Assembled, forced that City, and
received that of Monstreuil upon Composition: but they could gain nothing at
Terouenne, the Dauphin and Montmorency having got their Troops together timely
enough to Relieve it, as they did. During this Siege, a Conference was held at
the Village of Bommy, at the solicitation of the two Queens Eleonora of France
and Mary of Hungary, where the Deputies agreed upon a Cessation of all
hostilities for three Months in the Low Countries, that they might endeavor to
bring about a Peace.

Some believed the King accepted of it to Transport all his Forces into Italy,
pursuant to the Treaty made with the Turks, who at the same time were to fall
upon the Kingdom of Naples. In effect the Emperor Solomon did himself lead an
Army of One Hundred Thousand Men into Albania, from whence he sent Lusti-Bacha
and Barbarossa to Cruise upon those Coasts, and discover the Country, resolved
to follow them as soon as they had gained any Port: but when he found that the
King was making War in Flanders, he returned with great Indignation that he
should break his word with him.

As for Barbarossa, having no certain News of the King, he was fallen upon the
Island of Corfu belonging to the Venetians, where finding the Places too well
provided, he ruined the open Country and carried Sixteen Thousand Souls into
Captivity. The same Summer King Ferdinand received two great Foiles by the
Turks, the one at Belgrade in Hungary, the other before a City in Dalmatia,
where his two Armies besieging those two places were shamefully defeated.

In the Interim it happened in Piedmont, as well by the little esteem the
Soldiers had of Humieres, as the particular quarrels amongst the other
Officers, and the Mutinies of the Lansquenets, the French Forces were
dissipated: Humieres was retired into Pignerol to wait for Supplies from
France, and had quitted the Field to Du Guast, who had retaken several Towns,
and almost the whole Country of Salusses. The Marquess whom we told you had so
unworthily forsaken the French Party, was killed with a Cannon Bullet at the
Siege of Carmagnoles. His death so enflamed the fury of the Soldiers that they
forced the Place; and Du Guast to revenge his death hanged the Captain.

The Love of Liberty, could not be so soon effaced out of the hearts of the
Florentines. One that was of Kin to the new Duke Alexander, named Laurence de
Medicis, slew him in his own Chamber whither he had allured him with the hopes
of meeting a certain Lady for whom he had a great passion: but flying as soon
as the blow was given, the Cardinal Innocent Cibo Son of a Sister to Leo X. who
was then at Florence, and Alexander Vitelli Captain of the City Guards, set up
a young man of the House of the Medicis in the place of Alexander, where he
maintained himself in spite of Strossy and other Zealots for their Liberties.
His name was Cosmo, and descended of one Laurent Brother of the Grand Cosmo. To
gain the People he promised them at first that he would have from the City but
Twelve Thousand Crowns for his Maintenance: but when he was well established he
raised it to Twelve Hundred Thousand. As for Laurence de Medicis, after he had
wandered in diverse places, because Cosmo had Venice by two Assasins.

Christierne III. King of Denmark introduced Lutheranisme into his Kingdom, and
turned out the Bishops, but kept the Canons that he might have the bestowing of
Prebends. He did the same in Norway which he had Conquered. Some years before
King Gustavus Erecson had made a like change in Sweden.

The King being informed that his Affairs went on very ill in those Countries,
that du Guast besieged Humieres in Pignerol, and that before the years end he
would drive the French quite out of Piedmont, resolved to prevent it, and in
some measure satisfy Solomon, to go thither in Person. At Lions being fallen
sick of a slight Fever, he gave order to the Daufin and to the Marshall de
Montmorency to march beforehand with the Army. At first coming they forced the
Pass of Sufa guarded by ten thousand men, a famous exploit in War, drove Du
Guast to Quiers, and got several advantages which drew the King himself
thither, with great hopes of recovering Milanois.

His Army was found to be above Forty Thousand Men, the French were in good
Heart, the Enemy affrighted, and their Places ill provided: but it was the end
of October, he apprehended the inconveniences of the Season, the length of some
Siege, the Irruption of the Flemmings, and the uncertainty of accidents so
fatally experimented before Pavia. So that making a specious pretense of the
having given his word to the Queen of Hungary that he would not do any thing
that should obstruct the Peace, he upon the mediation of the Pope and the
Venetians granted a Truce of three Months for those Countries beyond the
Mountains, and prolonged that with the Low Countries for the like time. This
was Proclaimed at Carmagnoles he present, the Eight and Twentieth of November.
Both Princes got by it, to the loss of the unfortunate Duke of Savoy, because
either of them remained in Possession of what they were seized on. The King
made Montejan his Lieutenant General in that Country, and William du Bellay
Governor at Turin.

France, he honored Montmorency who was a Marshall and Grand-Maistre, with
the Constables Sword the Tenth of February. He also raised Annebaut and
Montejan, to the Offices of Mareschals of France which were vacant, the one by
the promotion of Montmorency to that of Constable, the other by the death of
the Marshall de Florenges who ended his days soon after the Siege of Saint
Quentin. These Offices were limited to the number of four only, which the
Kingdom increasing, have likewise been increased to three or four times as many.

The same year the Chancellor Anne du Bourg lost his life by a strange
accident. Being with the King who made his Entrance into Laon, there was so
great a crowd of Horses, that he was thrust off from his Mule, and trod under
foot, whereof he died. His Office was given to Charles Poyet Son of an Advocate
of Angiers, and then a President in Parliament.

There was a second Conference at Locate to Treat of a final Peace. The
Deputies could agree to nothing but a prolongation of the Truce for six Months:
but the Pope who ardently desired to reconcile the two Princes, fearing left
their Division should hinder the effects of a great League, which he, the
Emperor, and the Venetians had concluded at the beginning of the Year against
the Turks, dispatched two Legates to them, and solicited them so earnestly,
that both of them resolved to meet at Nice, and to accept of those Offices of
Mediation which he proferr'd.

He came the first thither about the end of May, the Emperor almost at the same
time to the Port of Villa-Franca, and Francis with the Queen his Wife to
Villa-Nuova some days after. The Duke found himself mightily perplexed, the
Pope desired to Lodge in the Castle, and that the Garrison might be drawn out,
the Emperor would have had it so: but the King advised the Duke underhand to
beware of it, for that he would else disoblige him. He followed the Kings
Counsel, and went to visit him the third day of the Month, the Emperor took
some jealousy upon it: and yet for fear of loosing him, Treated him the better
in all appearance.

The Pope therefore Lodged in the Town, the Emperor held Conference with him in
a Tent under the Castle, the King saluted him apart, but the Princes saw not
each other. Was it that the Pope desiring to treat under Hatches the Octavian
Farnese with Margaret the Emperors Bastard, and that of his Niece Victoria with
Anthony Eldest Son of Charles Duke of Vendosme, kept them thus assunder,
fearing lest the one should discover what he was negotiating with the other, or
else perhaps it was that the Emperor apprehending if he saw the King he must be
obliged to promise him in express words the Duchy of Milan, and the Pope
knowing it might possibly let the King understand it was only to amuse him.
What ever it were, this Conference produced nothing but a prolongation of the
Truce for Nine years: but the Emperor promised the King to see him at
Aigues-Mortes in Languedoc before he returned to Spain.

It was Queen Eleonora who procured this Enter-view. The Emperor came and Dined
in the Kings-House, the next day the King went to Visit the Emperor in his
Galley where he was entertained in like manner. The subject of their
entertainment was not known: but they were observed to embrace so closely, and
show such Signs of Amity for two days they were together, that the most
sharp-sighted were deceived, and imagined it was in good earnest.

Three Months after the King was grievously Tormented with a troublesome Ulcer,
which happened in that part the Physicians name the Sutura, or Seame between the
Testicles. This, they said, was the effect of some ill adventure he had with
the beautiful Ferronniere one of his Mistresses. This Woman's Husband enraged at
that abuse which the Courtiers reckon only a piece of Gallantry, contrives to
go to some lewd place and Infect himself, that he might spoil her and Convey
his revenge thus to his Rival. The unhappy Woman died, the Husband recovered by
timely Remedies, the King had all the bad Symptoms, and his Physicians
treating him rather according to his Quality then his Distemper, he had some
Relics remaining upon him all his Life, the Malignity whereof did much
discompose the sweetness of his disposition, and made him Melancholy,
suspicious and hard to be pleased; but to say truth, more exact, sparing, and
sticking closer to his business.

Latin, but in French.

If the Emperor continued to heap his marks of Affection on the King, it was
but to hinder him from embracing the Protection of the Ghentois. They were
revolted because of some new Imposts which Queen Mary Governess of the
Low Countries had laid upon them, particularly upon Wines, and had Massacred
some of her Officers; after which expecting no pardon, they went on to that
Degree, that this Year they sent Deputies to the King to Entreat he would
receive them as their Sovereign Lord; and they promised, provided only that he
would own them, to hazard Fifty Thousand Men in Battle against the Emperor. But
this same King that had with so great formality newly confiscated Flanders and
Artois, not only accepted not of their submission for fear of violating the
Truce, but also by an excess of generosity gave the Emperor notice of it.

The Rebellion growing in strength day by day, it was to be apprehended that
all Flanders would follow the example of Ghent, and that the King of England
might accept what the French had refused. Nothing but the presence of the
Emperor was capable of allaying this furious heat: but the danger was too
eminent to pass thorough Germany where it would have been in the power of the
Protestant Princes to have stopped him; and it was no less to have gone by Sea.
He entreated the King therefore to allow him passage through France, and to
obtain it he began to Lure him with the Duchy of Milan. In the Council every
one was for granting him passage, but not without having a writing under his
hand, and good Securities. The Constable de Montmorency, by what motive it is
not known, was not of that opinion, and argued that he ought not to be setter'd
by any Conditions; This Sentiment appearing full of generosity highly pleased
the King, who was the most generous Prince in the World, and it was followed.

The two Sons of France and the Constable went as far as Bayonne to meet the
Emperor, and offered to go into Spain as Hostages, which he refused. The King
himself, though indisposed, went to Chastelleraud, where they embraced, caused
him to be received in every City with the same honor, and suffered him to
exercise the same Authority as himself; For he held the Chapter of his Order
Saint Andrews day at Bourdeaux, he granted Pardons, and emptied the Prisons in
many places.

Paris the first day of January, the Parliament went in a Body to compliment
him, the Sheriffs bare the Canopy of State over his head, the two Sons of
France being on either side: the Constable marched before with his Sword drawn
in his hand, he released all Prisoners, and the City presented him with a
Silver Figure of Hercules as bigg as the Life. At his leaving of Paris the King
accompanied him to Saint Quintin, and his two Sons to Valenciennes. He promised
to go and visit him in Flanders; and moreover granted him free passage for a
Thousand of his Italian Forces which he ordered to come into Flanders, and
furnished them with Provisions.

The City of Ghent unfortunately abandoned by the King their Sovereign Lord, to
the wrath of Charles, was so severely Chastised, that she had reason to repent
the having given him birth. His Army being entered as it had been by Assault, he
caused Five and Twenty or Thirty of the Principal Burghers to be Executed,
proscribed a far greater number, Confiscated all their public Buildings, took
away their Artillery, their Arms, and their Privileges, Condemned them to
above Twelve Hundred Thousand Crowns Fine; and that they might never rise
again, built a Citadel and left a strong Garrison to awe them, which of the
greatest City in Europe has made a vast Solitude, or Wilderness.

Hitherto the Emperor had amused the King, so that out of the highest
complaisance, he remained upon the Frontiers of Picardy whilst he oppressed
the Ghentois; but when he had nothing more to fear, he began to faulter, and
apply Conditions and Restrictions to his promise. The King finding he objected
some difficulties on behalf of the Princes of Italy, because in effect they
desired a Duke of Milan of their own Nation, consented he should keep that
Duchy, provided he would give the Low Countries, and the Counties of Burgundy
and Charolois in Dower to his Daughter, who should Marry the Duke of Orleans.
The Emperor demanded that before any thing else were done he should restore the
Duke of Savoy to all his Lands, that he should declare himself a Friend to his
Friends, and Enemy to his Enemies.

Then the King finding himself deceived, entered into so great suspicion of the
sidelity of all those that governed him, that he resolved to get out of their
Nets and Snares: and then some who observed him to be of this humor, failed
not to give him a secret account of and advice against their proceedings.

The first that Sufferd by it was the Admiral de Brion: Three men had at that
time engrossed all the Kings favor, the Constable, the Cardinal de Lorraine,
and Brion. The first was so Powerful that all addressed themselves to him,
Governors, Ambassadors, Cities, the Parliament it self who called him
Monseigneur, i. e. My Lord. The second was beloved by the King for his
generosity, and for the credit he had at Rome, he was the only man in France
who treated the Constable (from He wrote to him Monseieur the Constable when
others styled him Monseigneur.
high to low, and) as a great Prince treats a Gentleman: The third had rendered
himself very agreeable, and moreover was favored by the Ladies, particularly
by the Duchess d'Estampes, who put him in a way to have got the Start of both
the other in a short time. These, though they hated one another, yet both
united to set him beside the Cushion, and contrived a secret Accusation against
him for having ill managed the Kings Affairs in Piedmont.

He, instead of justifying himself by humble and submissive Language, spoke
arrogantly to the King, and said his Innocence feared no examinations, or
Scrutiny. He therefore sent him Prisoner to the Bois de Vincennes, and
appointed four and twenty Commissaries chosen out of several Parliaments to
make his process: they set about it at Melan, the Court being at Fountainbleau.
The Chancellor Poyet was pleased and hugged himself at it, and would needs
preside out of an interessed complaisance: He chose rather to do mischief then
not make himself a necessary instrument. So that he behaved himself more like a
party then his Judge, every foot interposing Orders and even threats from the
King, to biass and bring the proceedings to what he aimed at. So that Brion,
though he were not found guilty but of some small Exactions upon the Fishermens
Boats, was degraded of his Offices, and declared unworthy to hold any for the
future, condemned to pay a fine of seventy thousand Crowns, and shut up in the
Bastille.

Anne de Pisselieu Duchess d'Estampes his near Kinswoman, obtained an Order
from the King that his Process should be reviewed by the Parliament of Paris;
Who by a Decree of the fourteenth of March 1542. declared him absolved of the
crimes de peculat, or purloining the Kings Treasure, and exaction, by
consequence quit of his Fine, or Amercement: But as his courage was haughty,
the affront received His devise was a Baloon with these words, concussus Surgo.
stung him so deep, that he was never well afterward, but dyed of grief in the
year 1543. Annebaut had his Office of Admiral.

The following year Poyet had his turn, John de Bary la Renaudie a Gentleman of
Perigord, had a great process against du Tillet a Clerk of the Parliament: the
la Renaudie demanded an Order of Evocation, to remove it to another Court, the
Duchess d'Estampes pressed the Chancellor to Seal it, and interposed the
Kings Authority: but whether he thought it not just, or otherwise, he refused
it. The King took it very ill he had not obeyed his Orders, and the Duchess
Animated him so highly and raised so many complaints against him on all hands,
that he sent him Prisoner to the Bastille the second day of August, and Ordered
that they should make process against him.

For this purpose there were taken out of diverse Parliaments a certain number
of Judges, whom himself approved of: The proceedings very long and often
Interrupted lasted till the year 1545. when by Sentence of the three and
twentieth of April, he was deprived of the Office of Chancellor; declared
disabled of holding any Office Royal, condemned to pay a hundred thousand
Livers Fine, and to be confined five whole years in such place as it should
please the King. The Judgment was pronounced in the Audience of the
Grand-Chamber the Doors being set open, he present and bare-headed. This done
he was shut up in the great Tower of Bourges, from whence he could not get out
till he had given up almost all he had for his Fine. At last he dyed in the
City of Paris, oppressed with poverty, Ignominy, and old Age; So unhappy that
even in this his Lamentable condition he was not pitied.

When he was Imprisoned the King gave the Seals to Francis de Montolon
President in parliament, a Person of rare probity, a virtue hereditary in his
Family.

The Constables favor did not last long after the loss of Poyer; the King
forbid him the Court in the year 1542. and would never recall him so long as he
lived. In the time of this his retirement he built the castle of Esc ouan.

Common same attributes the cause of his disgrace to the Council, he gave for
the Emperors passing through France, which proved not so much to the Kings
advantage as was imagined. Perhaps the Cardinal of Lorrain and the rest of his
Enemies made use of that reproach to give his Master an ill opinion of him: Or
perhaps the King conceived some jealousy at his sticking so close to the
Dausin who by embracing the interests of that young Prince, opposed the raising
of the Duke of Orleans, and by secret Combinations, hindered the Emperor from
giving him his Daughter with the Duchy of Milan; which he could not do without
holding Correspondence with Strangers: and indeed it was said, that he in
Clandestine manner Suffered the Courtiers of that Prince to travel thorough
France. Whatever it were, the King began to think it dangerous to have men of
too great parts in the Administration of Affairs, and therefore committed them
to the Cardinal de Turnon and the Admiral Annebaut, Persons of no Extraordinary
Genius or Sagacity, but of affections less Interested and wholly devoted to him.

Ghent, Martin Duke of Cleve came to demand the investiture of the Duchy of
Guelders. You must know that Charles last Duke of Guelders dyed Anno 1537. and
William Duke of Cleve and Antony of Lorraine, as kindred of the Defunct, had
pretensions to that Duchy; The Lorrainer was the nearest, being the Son of a
Daughter of that House, notwithstanding the Estates of the Countries called in
William to be their Mainburgh, he survived but one year, and Martin his Son
took the Administration. Now the Emperor who desired to join this piece to the
Low Countries, having denied him the investiture, he came into France and put
himself under the Kings protection; who made him Marry Jane Daughter of Henry
d'Albret King of Navarre.

Chastelleraud, with such Profusion as cost the poor People dear, by increasing
the Gabelle, and therefore was called the Salted Nuptials. But the Bride being
but eleven years of Age, the Marriage was not consummated, and the Fathers and
Mothers never having consented, caused it to be dissolved.

The years 1540. and 1541. were spent almost in nothing but intrigues and
Negociations. After the truce of Nice the King of England bestirred himself
mightily, he feared lest by the mediation of the Pope, the two Kings should
agree together to fall upon him. He might the Justlier apprehend it, because
his cruelty had drawn the hatred of most of his own Subjects upon him. For he
had Invaded and broken open the Monasteries, even those of the Nuns: which much
incensed their Parents who were forced to maintain them; he had taken away all
Abbey-Lands, Abolished the order of Malta, and caused the Memory of St. Thomas
of Canterbury to be Condemned, and his Sacred Bones and Relics to be Burnt.
Having therefore reason to fear, he courted the Emperor and the King diverse
ways; He offered the first to Marry his Niece Widow of Sforza Duke of Milan: to
the other he propounded to assist him in the recovery of that Duchy, and
promised to declare whenever he should desire it. Another while he proffered
the Emperor to give his Eldest Daughter, she was named Mary, to the Brother of
the King of Portugal: but he would not Marry her as Legitimate, for would he
have bestowed her as such, the King would willingly have taken her for his
second Son.

As for the Emperor, he employed all his intrigues to three ends, the one was
to recover the good Will of the Protestant Princes, another to make the Turk
believe there was a good and perfect Correspondence between him, the King of
France, and the King of England, and the third to amuse the King with new
offers he made to give the Low Countries, under the Title of the Kingdom of
Belgica, to Charles Duke of Orleans whom he called his God-Son. The King gave
no Faith to this Proposition, and replied, that he did not demand his
Hereditary Countries, but should be contented to have his own again.

But Solomon was so allarmed at this pretended Union of the three Kings, that
he flew out against Francis, called him Ungrateful and Fickle-pated, and had
like to put Rincon his Ambassador to death.

If the Emperor had his hands full of business with the Protestants of Germany,
his Brother Ferdinand had yet a harder task with the Turks in Hungary. John
Earl of Sepus had agreed with Ferdinand Auno 1536. upon condition that the part
he then was possessed of in the Kingdom, should be his during Life with the
Title of King, and that after his death it should be reunited to the other:
but contrary to his word he Married with Jane Daughter of Sigismond King of
Poland, and had a Son by her when he died. After his Decease, which happened in
the year 1540. Ferdinand would Seize upon that part, the Widow to maintain her
Son had recourse to the Turk; thus broke out that Flame of War again which
completed the ruin of Hungary. For in the year 1541. Roquandolf General for
Ferdinand, lost a great Battle near Buda, against the Bashaw Mahomet; Then
Solomon himself coming with a dreadful Army, Seized Treacherously upon the
Widow and the Orphan, and the City of Buda which they held.

Hungary, but he was laboring an Accommodation with the Protestants: to whom,
after several Conferences he granted a second Interim, and Reciprocally having
given them very ill Impressions of King Francis, he obtained all he desired
from them. For the Diet promised him great Supplies against the Turks, declared
the Duke of Cleve an Enemy to the Empire, engaged to contribute to the
Restoration of the Duke of Savoy, and forbid all Subjects belonging to the
Empire from Listing themselves in the Kings Service.

With all this, instead of Marching toward Hungary to make head against
Solomon, he carries the War into Africa against the Pirat Barbarossa, which
many interpreted a flight, rather then an attaque. He Landed and laid Siege to
Algiers the two and twentieth of October. But the Winds, the Storms, and the
Rains, as if they had Conspired with the Infidels, defeated him in his
Enterprise, and made a War ten times more cruel and destructive to him, then
Mankind could have done. The Tempest sunk or forced aground an Hundred Ships
and Fifteen Galleys, and cast all his Mariners either into the Gulf of the
Seas, or Barbarians, who Murdered them without mercy, the rest in danger to
perish thorough hunger, their Victuallers being either sunk, or scattered at
too great a distance, or their Provisions utterly spoiled; in a word, so hardly
were they handled; that no History affords an example of any Fleet or Army so
rudely Treated, or that suffered so terrible a defeat as this same. Of four and
twenty Thousand men that were on Shipboard, he brought not Ten Thousand back
into Spain, who were besides half dead of hunger and other Miseries they had
undergone.

Caesar Fregosa and Antony de Rincon, committed by the Spaniards. He was
sending the first to Constantinople to preserve his Amity with Solomon, with
whom the Emperor made use of all the Contrivances imaginable to bring him to a
disgust of the King: the other to Venice to endeavor to unlink that Signeury
from him, and persuade them to enter into a League with France. Both these were
points very prejudicial to the Imperialists: the Marquess Du Guast a man
without Faith, knowing these two Ambassadors were coming in a Barque down the
River Po, to go to Venice, caused them to be watched by some Spanish Soldiers;
who concealing themselves in small Boats close under the Shore, killed both of
them, took their Watermen, and some of their Servants, whom Du Guast shut up
in a Prison at Pavia: but most of their Train who were in another Barque ran
aground, and made their escape.

Langey Governor of Piedmont was informed of this Assassinate by them, and this
was fully confirmed by the Testimony of the Watermen, whom he craftily got out
of Prison, and even by some of those very men Du Guast had employed in the act.
All Christian Princes were informed of it, and had it in horror. The King
demanded reparation of the Emperor, who declined and answered only by
Recriminations. This was a most just and necessary cause for a Rupture; besides
it was well known the Spaniards had Murdered many other of the Kings Subjects
and Envoyez in diverse places, and daily practiced Corruptions and Intelligences
to Surprise some place or other. So that since a War could not be more
dangerous nor destructive, neither more expensive to the King, then such a
bloody and insiduous Peace, he resolved to declare it against the Emperor, if
he did not give satisfaction within a time limited.

And yet whilst he was on his Voyage to Algiers, he had so much generosity as
not to undertake any thing against him: but the year following he sent to defy
him in out-rageous terms and with bloody reproaches, having beforehand
commanded public Prayers, and a general Procession to be made, to appease the
wrath of God and implore his assistance.

After the death of Rincon, Paulinus Iscalin, afterward called the Baron de la
Guard, then but a Captain of a Company of Foot, a man of Fortune, but of great
Wit and Courage, went on the behalf of the King to Solomon, to desire him to
send his Fleet upon the Coast of Provence, and oblige the Venetians to enter
into the League they had made against Charles V. Paulin at his return did
solicit the Senate of Venaic, from whom not being able to obtain any thing, he
went a second time to Constantinople, and pressed so earnestly, that he had an
Audience of Solomon himself; who made answer that the year was too far spent,
but the year after he would not fail to fulfill the desires of the King his
Brother.

In pursuance of the Declaration of War, the King to attaque his Enemy in five
several places, set five Armies on Foot, one about Luxembourg Commanded by the
Duke of Orleans his second Son, under the conduct of Claude Duke of Guise; One
about Perpignian, by the Daufine, to whom he gave Annebaut and Anthony
Desprez-Montpesar for Council; Another led by Longueval and Mortin Van Rossen
Marshall of Guelders into Brabant; A fourth wherewith Charles Duke of Vendosme
was to scower the Frontiers of Flanders; And a fifth in Piedmont, whither it
Marched under the Marshall Annebaut. This having been kept there above two
Months Idle, had Orders to come into Roussillon to Strengthen the Daufins,
which consisted of Five and Forty Thousand Men, and all the Flower of the
French Nobility.

They had made the taking of Perpignian appear to the King a thing very easy
to be effected, because in truth the Walls were nothing worth, the Towers did
not flank it, and he imagined at least that if it were not presently gained,
the Emperor would come to its Relief and venture a Battle: but the design
having taken Air, the Emperor furnished the Place so well with Men and
Artillery, that French Forces, a Flux got into the Army, and those rolling
Torrents that pour down from the Mountains upon the first Autumnal Rains,
threatened to overwhelm them all if they remained any longer. All these causes
concurring the King sent to the Daufin to decamp in the beginning of October;
He obeyed unwillingly.

The Duke of Orleans succeeded better then his Brother, he signalized his first
Campaign by the taking of Danvilliers, Ivoy, Arlon, Montmedy, and Luxemburgh it
self: but as if he had been glutted or tired with his good Fortune, I cannot
tell upon what motive he quitted his Army in the Month of September, and went
to wait on his Father then at Montpellier. After his departure the Enemy
regained Luxembourgh and Montmedy: but the Duke of Guise having drawn some
Forces together, took the last of those Places again from them.

English and Scots, about their Limits or Borders. These at first gained a
Battle, then lost a greater, after which James V. their King, fell sick and
died the Thirteenth of December. The tuition of Mary his only Daughter by Mary
of Lorrain, was in dispute between James Hamilton Earl of Arrain, who favored
the English and the novel opinions, and David Beton Archbishop and Cardinal of
Saint Andrews, who stood for the Catholic Faith, and for the French. This last
said, the King by his Will had left it to Four Administrators, whereof he was
one: but Hamilton seized upon the Pupil, and betroathed her to Edward the Son
of King Henry. Nevertheless the Scots would not suffer she should be carried
into England.

The Inhabitants of Rochel, of Marennes, and of the Islands, were revolted upon
the endeavoring to settle the Gabel in those Countries. The King at his return
from Languedoc passed that way to suppress that Commotion. About the end of
December he entered with his Forces into Rochel, and caused great numbers of the
Seditious Islanders to be brought before him bound and chained. After he had
put them into an extreme Consternation, he suffered himself to be overcome with
Compassion: and from a Scaffold, where he was Surrounded by the Grandees of his
Court, he heard, the most humble Request they made him by their Advocate, and
which they seconded with doleful Cries for Mercy; and after he Bourgeois. His
incomprehensible goodness

The Princes and Emperor of Germany had so often demanded a Council that in the
Year 1536. Pope Paul III. had Indicted one at Mantoua for the Two and Twentieth
of May the following Year. From that time he had Prorogued it to 1538. then to
1539. at Vicenza: but had yet suspended the Celebration for as long time as he
should find fit. In the Year 1542. he was obliged by the vehement pursuit of
the Emperor, who pressed him, because he was so earnestly pressed by the
Princes of the Empire, to assign one in the City of Trent, which he did by his
Bull of the One and Twentieth of May. He believed this Consideration might
serve to bring the two Kings to a Peace: but the War growing still hotter
betwixt them, there came so few Bishops to Trent, that 1543. forced to recall
the Legates he had sent thither, and refer the Celebration of the Council to a
more pacifick opportunity.

In France and Spain they were making greater preparations for War than ever.
The Spaniards furnished the Emperor with above four Millions of Gold; John King
of Portugal who was Marrying his Daughter Mary to Philip his only Son, gave him
very great Sums, and the King of England promised him no less.

This inconstant Prince, who could never long agree even with himself, being
offended for that Francis would not renounce his obedience to the Pope, and for
intermedling too far about the Affairs of Scotland, had made a new League

That he might be able to withstand so dreadful a Storm, the King laid an
impost upon the walled Cities, for the Maintenance of Fifty Thousand men; which
ended not with the War, as he had promised, nor was revoked till under the
Reign of Francis II.

The Emperor going into Germany went by Sea to Italy, whither he also carried
Ten Thousand Spaniards in some large Ships and Galleys. He could not upon the
Popes earnest request, refuse to confer with him: They met as Bussetta between
Parma and Piacenza. The Holy Father endeavored to persuade him to give up
those two Cities to the Holy-See, and invest his Grandson Octavius Farnese with
the Duchy of Milan, since the Italian Potentates would never consent that he
should retain it for himself. The Emperor gave him only general words, and cut
the Conference off very short, for fear of giving jealousy to the King of
England, who was subject enough to misinterpretations.

That Muley-Assan whom he had restored to the Kingdom of Tunis, being hardly
beset on all hands by the Turks who had taken from him diverse of his places,
came to Genoa to kiss his hand and crave some Assistance. Whilst he was
absent, one of his Sons named Amida, usurped the Kingdom. The unfortunate
Father having given him Battle with some Forces scraped together, was
vanquished, and taken with two more of his Sons by the Rebel, who put out his
Eyes, reproaching him for having served his own Brothers so. Afterward this
Parricide being driven out of his Kingdom by the Governor of Goletta, (where
nevertheless he got the Mastery again some while after) Muley-Assan made his
escape out of Prison, and took refuge amongst the Spaniards.

Antony, become Duke of Vendosme by the Death of his Father Charles, to
revictual Terouane. Then himself lead his greatest Forces toward the
Low Countries, where he thought to make a considerable Progress, while the Duke
of Gueldres held the Emperors in play.

So that about the end of May, though he were indisposed, he put himself in the
head of his Army, which was joined with the Troops of Antony Duke of Vendosme.
He roved for some Weeks all about the Country of Artois, and having often
changed his Mind, sometimes to Fortify L'Illiers and Saint Venant, another
while to besiege Avenes, he fixed at last upon the Fortifying Landrecy on the
other side of the Sambre. After he had given the necessary Orders, he came to
encamp at Maroles, then to refresh and repose himself at Reims, where he had
caused the Ladies to come to divert him.

Whilst he was at Maroles, the Daufin employed part of the Army for the taking
the Castle of Emery, which is on an Island in the Sambre, and the Town of
Maubeuge: but a while after he forsook them. The Duke of Orleans likewise
entered into Luxembourg, regained all the Country which had been taken after his
going away, and amongst other the Capital City which gives it the Name. The
King was there in Person, visited the Place, and notwithstanding its vast
Circumference, and odd Situation, would have it Fortified. Such as were knowing
in the Trade were against the doing of it: but because it was like to be a work
of great profit to him that should have the ordering of it, there was an
Engenier

In the mean while the Emperor having passed out of Italy into Germany, came at
first to attack the Duke of Cleve, and by the taking his City of Duren which he
sacked, and perhaps by the Assistance of his own People whom he had corrupted,
frighted him and all the rest of the Country so terribly, that he came and
craved his Pardon, and promised to quit his Alliance with the French, and the
Title of Duke of Guelders, satisfying himself with that of Administrator. Which
was so suddenly done, that the Duke had not time to stay for the Assistance the
King was sending to him.

Solomon did not fail of that help he had promised him, for by Land he fell
upon Hungary, and took from Ferdinand the Cities of Strigonia and Alba: and by
Sea he sent an Hundred and Thirty Galleys to the King, commanded by Barbarossa,
who after he had filled the City of Ostia and the Coast along the Popes
Territories with Terror and Amazement, without doing them any mischief, because
the Paulin being with him, took them into the Kings protection, cast Anchor on
the Coasts of Provence the Fifth of July. Francis de Bourbon Earl of Enghien,
joined him with two and twenty Galleys, and both of them in Conjunction
besieged the City of Nice the fifth day of August.

The City having been Battered from the tenth of the Month to the twentieth,
the Governor Andrea de Montfort abandoned it, and carried all into the Castle,
which being Built upon a Rock and generously defended, feared neither Mines nor
Guns. Besides the French had taken so little care to furnish themselves either
with Ammunitions or Provisions for the Mouth, that they soon found want of it,
and were forced to borrow Powder and Ball of the Turks.

When Barberossa therefore perceived that he lost his Reputation and Men before
this Place, and that moreover Andrea Doria and the Duke were coming to Relieve
it, he raised the Siege, and retired to the Coasts of Provence. He staid there
all the Winter, not without committing many Barbarities upon the very French
themselves, whom he held in scorn for their negligence and want of care, even
to the Treating the Count d'Enghien by the name of Youth, and little pretty He
was but 20 years old.
Minion. In the Spring he asked leave of the King, (who wanted not much
entreaty) to let him be gone, either being very little satisfied with the other.

The Siege being raised, Enghien brought back his Land Forces to this side the
Var, and took post to find out the King, upon a report spread abroad that there
would be a Battle to Relieve Landrecy. After his departure the Duke of Savoy
and the Marquess Du Guast employed their Army in taking Montdevis and in
Fortifying Carignan. There was only a Garrison of Swiss in Montdevis, who
Capitulated: but Du Guast brutish and perfidiously put them all to the Edge of
the Sword.

Boutieres had abandoned Carignan, and begun to demolish the Fortifications, Du
Guast seized upon the Place, Repaired it, and put in a Garrison of Four
Thousand men, and three Thousand more at Quiers to assist them in Case of
necessity. The King not being satisfied with the Conduct of Boutieres, who had
forsaken a place, which Commanded a good part of the Country on the one side,
and the Plain even to Suza, recalled him, and gave the Command of all beyond
the Mountains to the Count d'Enghien.

When this Prince Arrived, Boutieres was besieging Yvree and was just upon the
taking it: he was very unwilling another should bear away the Honor of a
Conquest so near at hand, wherefore the Prince having sent to him for some of
the Forces to Convoy him, he goes and meets him with the whole Army, choosing
rather, if we may say so, to let the Prey escape, then that another should have
the Quarry.

After the Emperor had subdued the Duke of Cleves, had received a body of
twelve Thousand English, and reinforced his Army to the number of fifty
Thousand Fighting men, he came and laid Siege to Landrecy. The King had put
Captain la Land into the Place with two Hundred Horse, and three Thousand
Foot, and had ordered the Lord Desse to assist him: but the Fortifications were
new and apt to crumble and be beaten down, and the Frosts intermingled with
cold showers did equally incommode the Besiegers and the Besieged, who stood in
mire up to the Mid-Leg.

The Attacks were weak and faint: the Emperor thought to gain the Place by
Famine. In effect they suffered much, but when they could scarce hold any
longer after a brave resistance of two Months, the King went from la Fere upon
the Oyse, and putting himself at the head of his Army, approached within two
Leagues of the Besiegers. The Emperor believing he would give him Battle, drew
his Forces from the further side of the Sambre, and joined them with those on
this side; so one side of the place remaining open and free, the King Relieved
the Garrison and provided it with all things necessary, then having executed
what he desired, he made his Retreat by Night very securely, and put his Army
into Garrisons on the Frontiers.

Four or Five days after his departure, the Emperor likewise marched off: but
not willing to loose all his time and pains, and to recompense his not taking
Landrecy, he seized upon Cambray by Correspondence of the Bishop, who was of
the House of Crouy, put in a Garrison, as a bridle upon the Town, and Built a
Citadel to curb them, which was Erected at the Citizens proper Charges, making
them believe it was to preserve them from falling into the hands of the French.

1544. Four great Eclipses were Visible in our Hemisphere, one of the Sun which
happened upon the Four and Twentieth of February, and the other three of the
Moon. The first being in the same Month was not a Total one, but at the two
others which were seen in July and November, the whole Disque of that great
Luminary of the Night was quite obscured. During these frightful events in the
Heavens, His device was inter Eclipses Exorior.
Francis, the first Son of Henry the Dausin, came into the World the Twentieth
day of January.

The beginning of this Year found William Earl of Fustemberg a German before
Luxemburgh, which he blocked up with Twelve Thousand of his Countrymen; For,
upon I cannot tell what discontent, whether real or affected, he had quitted
the Service of France for that of the Emperor. The Prince of Melfy having order
from the King, marched that way with his Forces, and with so brave a
Resolution, that Fustemberg durst not stay for him, but retired. The Frosts
were so excessive sharp, that it turned the Wines into Ice in the Vessels,
which they were fain to cut with Axes, and the Lumps were sold by the pound.

In Piedmont the Count d'Enghien young, valiant, and who with an Army of well
disciplined Men sought only an opportunity of Fighting, having taken all the
Posts about Carignan, began his Blocade there the first day of February. The
Marquess Du Guast, that he might put in some Supplies, thought to Seize upon
Carmagnoles, the Count got thither before him, and left him no possibility of
saving the Place but by hazarding a Battle. The Kings Council having given the
Count leave to venture it, he observing that Du Guast was on his March to pass
over the Po, prevented him and passed it first himself to meet him; Thus the
two Armies came to engage nigh the Borough of Cerizolles the Fourteenth of
April which was upon the Easter Monday.

The Victory fell entirely to the French, they Slew two Thousand of the Enemies
upon the Place, took their Artillery, their Baggage, great quantity of
Ammunitions, four Thousand Prisoners, without the loss of any more then two
Hundred men in all. The Lord de Boutieres who returned into Piedmont upon the
rumor there would be a Battle, Terms, Montlue, and de Thais, had the greatest
share in the honor of that day. The first Commanding the Vanguard, the second
the Light Horse, the third the Forlorn-hope, and the last the French Bands,
that is to say the Infantry.

The nobless of the Court, whom a desire of honor had brought thither in post
have, showed that day very great feats of Valor. The next day some were
Knighted in the Field of Battle; amongst others, Gilbert Coiffier Paternal
Great Grandfather of the Marshall d'Effiat.
la Bussiere a Gentleman of Auvergne, who having bravely Fought in the first
Ranks, received this honor from the hands of the Count d'Enghien, as likewise
from Boutieres and de Thais. Which I mention that we may know the Customs of
those times, and observe that Knighthood might be Conferred upon the same man,
by several Persons one after another.

The Marquess wounded in the Knee escaped to Milan with Four Hundred Horse
only. Amongst his Equipage were found several Chariots full of Shackels and
Padlocks designed to have chained the French withal; so certainly did his pride
make him confident of Victory.

The fruits of this days success were the City of Carignan, and all the
Marquisate of Montferrat, excepting Casal. Milan had followed it had the King
but sent Supplies of Men and Money: but so far was it from this, that he
recalled Two and Twenty Ensigns of Foot, who made up Twelve Thousand Men, of
whom he stood in need for the defense of the Kingdom, being informed that the
Emperor, who had made a League with the English, was drawing a vast Army
together near the Rhine, and that both were to fall upon France at the same
time.

And indeed the Kingdom found it self this year in great danger, these two
potent Princes had divided it betwixt them, and had projected to join their
Armies before Paris to saccage that great City, and from thence ravage all to
the Loire. They would have made up together Fourscore Thousand Foot, and two
and twenty Thousand Horse. It is certain that if the Emperor had come directly
to Paris he had found Francis all in disorder, for having promised himself
Luxembourgh would make a long resistance, he had not much hast'ned the coming
of the Swiss. But the good Fortune of France had so disposed things, that being
tempted by the facility he found in his March of taking Luxembourg, which
Francis d'Angliure d'Estauges Surrendered very lightly, then afterward the
Castle of Commercy (the City was burnt) Ligny, and Brienne, he fixed upon the
Siege of Saint Disier the three and twentieth of June.

Saint Disier, contrary to the expectation of all men, resisted six Weeks, by
the Valor of that la Land, who had before so generously defended Landrecy.
That brave Captain was there slain upon the Rampart; the Count de Sancerre whom
the King had joined with him, took the Command as Chief. He finding himself at
the end of his Ammunition, obtained a suspension of Arms for Twelve days,
which being expired and no Assistance coming he Surrendered the Place.

From thence the Emperor sent notice to the King of England that he was
Marching toward Paris, and Summoned him to be there according to Agreement.
But the King of England, by his Example, having resolved also to Conquer some
Places, sent him for answer, that he would advance, as soon as he had taken
Boulogne by the Sea Coast and Monstreuil. He was then before Boulogne with
twenty Thousand men, and the Duke of Norfolk his Lieutenant before Monstreuil
with ten Thousand English, and twelve Thousand Flemmings whom the Counts of
Bures and de Roeux had brought thither. The Emperor not being able to make him
remove from thence, desired at least he would allow him, (his Army being much
weakened) to save his honor by a Truce; To which he consented: but for his own
part refused to hear of such a thing. He had a mind to let them see that of
himself he was able to make Conquests in France.

In the mean while the Emperor descended along the Marne, and entered so far
into Champagne, that the Forces of the Daufin watching him close, and cutting
off his Provisions and Forage on all Sides, he found himself in very great
danger of Perishing with his whole Army. There were at that time two Parties at
Court, one for the Daufin, the other for the Duke of Orleans, This last saved
him, Anne de Pisselieu the Kings Mistress, opposite to Diana de Poitiers who
was for the Daufin, loved the Duke of Orleans mightily, and studied his
Interest to the prejudice of his Brothers, that he might be her support when
the King chanced to fail her. This Woman, too Credulous, looking on the Emperor
as already Father in Law to that Prince, revealed all the Secrets of the Kings
Council to him, and it was she who brought it so to pass, by means of Nicholas
de Bossu Longueval, that he made himself Master of Espernay and of
Chasteau-Thierry, where he met with Provisions in abundance, without which all
had been lost.

Fear had like to have depopulated all Paris when it was known that he was in
Chasteau-Thierry, and that his flying Parties came as far as Meaux; some fled
to Rouen, others to Orleans; all the Roads were thronged with Carts laden with
Household Goods, Women and Children; and that which increased the disorder was
a many Herds of Rascals that Robbed these poor People. The King sent Claude
Duke of Guise to Paris to encourage them; and himself came thither soon after.

But the Emperor instead of approaching it, took to the left and went to
Soisson^. Being lodged in the Abbey called Saint John de Vignes which is in the
Suburbs, the propositions for a Peace were set on Foot. A Jacobin Monk of the
Noble House of the Guzmans in Spain, mentioned it first to the Kings Confessor.
The Daufins Party would have none, those for the Duke of Orleans pusht it on
with extraordinary importunity, the King sided with the Latter. The Deputies
being therefore Assembled at Crespy in Luonnois concluded it the eighteenth of
the Month of September.

The Principal Articles were that the Emperor within two years, should at his
own choice, either give his Daughter, or the Daughter of Ferdinand to the Duke
of Orleans, and for Dowry, the Duchy of Milan, or else the Low Countries, and
the Counties of Burgundy and of Charolois; That if he gave Milan, he should
keep the Castles of Milan and Cremona, till a Child were born of that Marriage:
That the King should renounce to the Kingdom of Naples, and to Milan, in case
the Emperor gave the Low Countries to the Duke of Orleans: That he should
restore the Duke of Savoy to all his Lands: but that he should retain the Towns
so long as the Emperor did hold Milan and Cremona: That what had been taken
Nice (the Emperor had taken but one place, and the King above twenty) should be
resigned by either party; as likewise all those which had been taken in France
and in the Low Countries.

This Place being more Advantageous to the Duke of Orleans then to France, the
Daufin who could not Suffer either the Aggra^dising of his Brother, nor the
damage of the Kingdom, made Protestations against it in the Castle of
Fontainebleau, in presence of the Duke of Vandosme, the Count d'Enghien his
Brother, and Francis Earl of Aumale, He was Duke of Guise after the death of
his Father, and Aumal was soon aftererected to a Duchy.
the second day of December. The Kings People of the Parliament of Toulouze did
so likewise, as to what concerned the Rights of the Crown, and the Translation
of the Subjects to another Prince.

That which hastened the King to conclude this Treaty, was not alone the
instigation of the Duke of Orleans, but likewise the unwelcom news he received
of Boulognes Capitulating, and the extreme danger Monstreuil was in. The
Marshall de Biez defended the last most Stoutly though it were nothing worth:
but his Son-in-Law James de Coucy Vervin, a young Fellow easy to be scared, as
having no experience, Surrendered Boulogne most unworthily before it was in
danger, and when the Daufin was within two days March of the Place to Relieve
it. Nor did he forgive him for it, having ever a strong conceit that he had
given it up to favor the Duke of Orleans. Monstreuil was saved, because the
Peace being concluded at Crespy, the Count de Bures and de Roeux, who were
joined with the Duke of Norfolk, had very express Orders to retire.

The Daufin who had used great diligence to come to the relief of Boulogne,
finding it Surrendered, made an attempt in the Night upon the Basse Ville, which
was enclosed only with a Ditch, without any Wall, and yet nevertheless where
the English had put their Cannon and Equipage. He gained it very ^asily: But
for want of good Order, his men falling upon the Baggage, the English came down
from the upper Town, and though much inferior in Numbers, beat and drove them
out: but not all, for there were four or five hundred remained dead upon the
place.

This project failing, the Marshall de Bi^z had orders to raise a Fort upon
the point of Land which lies right over against the Old Tower, Vulgarly called
the old man of Bullen.
to hinder the entrance into the Harbor: but they having no Water there, and
it being impossible the Soldiers could abide in it, by reason it lay exposed
to all Wind and Weather, they built another that faced the Basse-Ville, or
lower Town, in a place called Outrea^, but made it so small, that after three
Months labor, they were fain to fill up the Trenches to enlarge it.

Scotland being Embroiled by the King of England, who, whatever it cost him
would have the Heiress for his Son, the King took a care to assist the young
one and the Queen her Mother. The Earl of Lenox, in the year 1543. carried some
Forces thither which he sent: But that Spark having gamed away the Money which
was for Payment of their first Muster, went over to the King of England's
Service, who bestowed his Niece upon him. In his room were sent the Lord de la
Brosse a Gentleman of Bourbon then Lorges Earl of Montgomery Captain of the
Scotch Guards, with some Soldiers.

Some Vando^s were still remaining in the Valleys of the Alps, between Daufine
and Savoy. There were of them in the two Buroughs of Merindol and Cabrieres,
the first being part of the County of Venisse, the other in the Territories
belonging to the King. Since Luther's starting up they began to Preach
publicly: About the year 1536. the Parliament of Provence whereof Anthony
Chassane was then Premier President, had made a Decree for the punishing them
This had been put by several times: but this year 1545. John Menier d'Oppede
who succeeded Chassan^ that dyed suddenly, being moved either out of Zeal, or
because one of his Tenants went away to Cabrieres without paying his Rent,
undertook to Execute it. He raised Forces, and joining them with such as the
Vice-Legat of Avignon was pleased to furnish him withal, went to Exterminate
those miserable creatures, and made a general Massacre of all of them, without
distinction of Age or Sex, excepting only such as made their Escape to the
Rocks.

The preceding year Anthony Duke of Lorraine had left this World: this year
Duke Francis his Son followed him; leaving a Son named Charles aged but two
years. Anthony was fain to use great skill to preserve and poyse himself
between the King and the Emperor. He Married one of his Daughters to Rene de
Chaalons Prince of Orange, and Francis his eldest Son, to Christina Daughter of
Christierne II. King Denmark, and Dorothy Sister to the Emperor; The King had
conceived great jealousies upon it; Nevertheless his conduct was so prudent,
and his proceedings seemed so cordial in his Laborious undertakings to procure
a Peace between him and the Emperor, that at length he was fully satisfied in
him.

The Council was earnestly demanded for by the Emperor and by the Germans: but
the Catholics desired a general one, and the Protestants a National where the
Pope should not be Judge. In the year 1542. Paul III. had indicted it at Trent;
And nevertheless for diverse causes he delayed the opening of it till the
thirteenth day of December in this year, which was the third Sunday in Advent.
The Orders for the Convocation were directed to the Emperor and the King by
Name: but to all other Princes only in general.

When the King found he could not recover Boulogne either by force or by way of
Treaties, he believed the best means to regain it would be to attaque the King
of England in his own Island. He therefore sent Orders to Captain Paulin to sit
his Galleys at Marseilles and bring them to the Mouth of the River Seine, got
ten great Genoese Ships, diverse of which perished at the entrance into that
River, and joined all the Good Vessels he had in any of his Harbors. But
intending to Treat the Ladies at Dinner in his great Carrack which was the
stateliest Vessel belonging to the Sea, the Cooks by their carelessness set it
on Fire, utterly consumed it, and much damnified all those that lay about her
by the discharging one hundred Guns she had on Board. Which greatly disordered
the Feast, and gave an ill presage of that expedition.

The Admiral Annebaut had the Command of the Fleet. He went to seek out the
English upon their own Coasts, and Seized upon the Isle of Wight. The English
after some small Firings retired between that Island and Portsmouth, in a place
surrounded with Banks and Rocks, where there was but one narrow Channel to go
in. It was not thought sit either to fortify the Island, nor to fall upon them
in a place of such advantage: but to Land on their Coasts in sight of King
Henry, who was come down to Portsmouth, to see what passed, and send forth his
Men of War. They made two or three Landings with a great deal of Noise, but
Annebaut perceiving they would not come forth, and his Provisions being spent,
he turned his Prow toward France and arrived there about the end of July.

The Marshall de Biez advanced little against Boulogne, though the King
himself to push the business forward were come with Charles Duke of Orleans his
second Son to the Abbey of Forrest-Moustier, which is within ten Leagues of it
between Abbeville and Monstrevil.

The Wound which Francis Duke d'Aumale received in a Salley made by the
Enemies, is a thing very remarkable; He returned from the Engagement with the
Iron head of a Lance and a piece of the Wooden Truncheon sticking in his head,
which entered at the Angle betwixt his right Eye and his Nose, and came out
behind between the Nape of his Neck and his Ear. The Chyrurgeon, whose name was
Ambrose Pare, was forced to draw it out with a strong hand and Instrument; and
yet he most happily recovered.

In the mean time Contagious distempers got into the Kings Army, and the Duke
of Orleans a Prince of great hopes, dyed the eight of September at
Forrest-Moustier, whether of Venom or of some Poison that was thought to have
been given him by some Creatures of his Brothers. For they could not endure the
King should cherish him so much as he did, and be angry that the Daufin
notwithstanding his command to the contrary kept correspondence with the
Conestable Montmorency, whose return they desired, because their Master
earnestly longed for it.

The death of this Prince broke all the bonds of Concord (if there were any)
between the King and the Emperor. The Envoyez carrying the News of it to the
latter, and asking how he intended to dispose of the Duchy of Milan, he
plainly told them that he to whom he had promised it being no more, he thought
himself disengaged of his promise.

He declared his intention with so much the greater confidence, as finding his
Affairs against the Protestants in a very good posture; some of whom, as
Maurice one of the Dukes of Saxony, had taken his Party; Frederic the Elector
Palatin had Submitted; John Frederic Duke of Saxony, and Philip Landgrave of
Hesse who had declared War against him, did not well agree together, in-so-much
as their vast Army, which at first was Seventy Thousand Foot, and Fifteen
thousand Horse, were almost dwindled to nothing; and that his own increased
daily by the Supplies sent him from the Pope and the Princes of Italy, and
those Forces he drew out of the Low Countries, his Hereditary Lands, and from
the Catholic Princes.

A Peace was equally desired by King Francis, and by the King of England: The
first was not in very good health, his Army wasted by Sickness, and he
apprehended those great Forces which Charles V. raised to quell the Protestant
Princes of Germany, might fall upon him. Henry had neither Men, nor Money, and
feared that a Foreign War might favor such as had a mind to rise at home.
Upon these considerations, they named their Deputies about the end of April,
who meeting at a place between Ardres and Guines, after six weeks debate,
concluded the Peace upon the eight day of June, by which the King of England
promised to restore Boulogne within eight years: and the King was obliged to
give him eight hundred thousand Crowns of Gold, to be paid by one hundred
thousand each year.

The residue of this same King Francis employed in visiting and furnishing his
Frontiers, fearing lest the Emperor should attempt something upon him: as no
doubt he would, had the Protestants Submitted so early as he expected. Francis
was advised to assist them to keep the War out of his own Kingdom, and maintain
it in his Enemies. He might do it with honor, they were his Allies; he might
in Conscience do it, since the Emperor by his Manifesto's declared he designed
nothing against their Belief, but their Rebellion: Nevertheless the Scrupulous
Counsel of the Cardinal de Tournon diverted him; and even to let them know they
were to hope for nothing from him, engaged him to express his wrath against
such as were Professors of their Religion, by kindling the Flames of
persecution throughout all his Dominions. Great numbers of those miserable
Creatures were Burnt, many redeemed themselves from Fire and Faggots by Singing
Palinodia, and the more Sagacious by a timely Flight.

February in the year 1547. Henry King of England, aged fifty seven years,
ended the Third of his Life, which his incontinency had horribly knotted and
entangled by the Multiplicity of his Marriages, and the terrible change he made
in the Anglicane Church. He had six Wives Catherine of Arragon, Anne Bullen,
Jane Seymour, Anne of Cleve, Catherine Howard, and Catherine Parre. He was
divorced from the first and the fourth, saw the third die in Childbed, and
caused the second and the fifth to be Beheaded for the crimes of Adultery, the
sixth survived him and Married Thomas Seymour Admiral of England. By the first
he left a Daughter named Mary, by the second another named Elizabeth, and by
Jane a Son named Edward, as then nine years of Age, who came to the Crown
immediately after him.

The rumor of the Emperors Arms gave astonishment to all Christendom, the
Pope himself Trembled for fear lest having Subdued Germany he should pass into
Italy. When Francis had therefore well considered the consequences of the ruin
of the Protestants, he changed his mind and made a League with them, obliged
himself to receive the Eldest Son of the Duke of Saxony, into France, and in
particular permit him the exercise of his Religion, promised to send an Hundred
Thousand Crowns to his Father, and as much to the Landgrave of Hesse, till such
time as he could assist them with Forces.

In the mean while his trouble for the death of King Henry increasing his
inveterate distemper, changed a lingering Feavour that was upon him into a
continued one, and stopped him at the Castle of Rambouillet, where he finished
his life the last day of March, by an end worthy of a most generous Prince, and
a most Christian King.

He earnestly recommended to his Son the diminishing of the Tallage which he
had raised too much, not to recall Montmorency to continue the Cardinal de
Tournon, to whom he willed a Hundred Thousand Crowns, and Annebaut in the
Administration; told him that the Sons ought to imitate the Virtues of their
Fathers and not their Vices; that the French being the best people in the
world, deserved so much the more to be well Treated, as they refused their King
nothing in his necessity; and many other things which the Prince buried in
Oblivion before his Father was laid down in his Grave. If he would have had
these last things put in practice, he should have made those that were to be
his Sons

Magnificence and State Attended him to his very Tomb: his Funeral was made
with extraordinary Pomp; Elven Cardinals were present, which before had never
happened. He was publicly by Proclamation in the Palace-Hall, declared, a
Prince Clement in Peace, Victorious in War, the Father and Restorer of good
Learning, and the liberal Sciences.

He never had his Parallel in liberality, in magnificence and in clemency; very
few to compare with him in Valor, Eloquence and useful Learning. He would have
been a great Prince in all things, had he not sometimes suffered himself to be
prepossessed by the Evil Counsels of his Ministers, and a passion toward
women. Those to render themselves all-powerful, set up his Authority above the
Ancient Laws of the Kingdom, even to an Irregularity of Government; the Women
he loved being vain and prodigal, changed his Noble desire of Fame, to
fastuosity and vanity, and made him often consume in idle expenses the Money he
had designed for some great enterprise.

The Ten last Years of his Life, the anxiety of his distemper made him so good
a Husband, that although he had made several stately Buildings in diverse
places, As at Chambord, at the Bois de Boulogne, near Paris, at
Villers-Costerez, at St. Germains en lay Fontainbleau, and the Louvre.
had employed great Sums in purchasing rich Furniture, many Jewels, excellent
Pictures, and curious Books; though he had bestowed Pensions upon all the brave
Soldiers, and truly learned men he could meet with, and had maintained a War
against all the powers of Europe for almost Thirty years: yet at his death he
left all his own Demeasnes clear of all Engagements, Four Hundred Thousand
Crowns of Gold in his Coffers, and a quarter of a years Revenue ready to be
paid in. On the contrary his Son, in the thirteen years he reigned, though he
sold a great many Offices newly created, raised the Imposts a third part
higher, and gave nothing to his Favorites, was yet indebted fifteen or sixteen
Millions; a great Sum in those days.

I had forgot to note that he had chosen for his Devise, or Impress, a
Salamander in the fire, with this Motto Nutrisco and Extinguo, I am nourished
by it, and I extinguish it; and that he Erected into Dutchies and Pairries, the
County of Vendosm for Charles de Bourbon in 1514. that of Guise in favor of
Claude de Lorrain in 1527. that of Montpensier for Lewis de Bourbon in 1538.
The same year, out of affection to Francis of Cleve, he likewise gave the Title
of Duchy to that of Nevers, which was before made a Pairrie by King Charles
VIII. Anno 1459. Till then no Erection of such great Dignities had been made,
but to supply the number of the Six ancient ones; wherefore the Parliament made
a grave and serious remonstrance to the King to hinder that of Guise: but he
desired to gratify with that honor a Prince, whose extraordinary virtues
raised him almost equal to those of his Blood.

He Married two Wives, Claude Daughter of Lewis XII. and of Anne de Bretagne in
the year 1514, and Eleonora of Austria Sister of Charles V. in the year 1530.
By the first he had three Sons and three Daughters, whereof none remained alive
but Henry who Reigned, and Margaret that was Married to Emanuel Philibert Duke
of Savoy. Queen Eleonora brought him no Children. After his death she retired
into the Low Countries to the Emperor her Brother, who in Anno 1555. carried
her into Spain. She died at Bajadox, in the year 1558. Aged about Threescore
Years.

HENRY II.
King LVIII.
Aged about XIX. Years.
POPES,
PAUL III. Two Years and above 7 Months under this Reign. JULIUS III. Elected
in February, 1549. S. 5 Years, 1 Month and a half. MARCELLUS II. Elected in
April, 1555. S. 22 days. PAUL IV. Elected in May, 1555. S. 4 Years 2 Months
and a half.
HENRY came to the Crown upon the same day of the Year that he came into the
World. The Robes and other preparations for the Ceremony of his Coronation not
being got ready before Mid- July, he received not the Sacred Unction till the
Five and Twentieth of that Month, by the hands of Charles de Lorraine who was
Archbishop of Reims. Claude Duke of Guise, and Frances de Cleves Duke of
Nevers, preceded Lewis de Bourbon Duke of Montpensier, though a Prince of the
Blood, because their Pairres being more Ancient by some years, the first
represented the Duke of Guyenne, the second the Earl of Toulouze, but
Montpensier the Earl of Champagne only.

This King had been without defects, as he was without disquiet, had his Soul
been framed as completely as his body. His noble Stature, his Serene and goodly
Visage, his pleasing aspect, his dexterity in all brave exercises, his agility
and bodily strength were not attended with that firmness of Mind, Application,
Prudence, and the Sagacity requisite in one that is to command. He was
naturally good, and had inclinations to do justice: but he never possessed
himself, and because he would do nothing, he was the cause of all those Evils
they Committed who governed him.

Emperors, Charles V. and Solomon.
The Constable de Montmorency whom he immediately called to Court, Frances Earl
of Aumale, who was Duke of Guise after the death of his Father, and James
d'Albon Saint Andre, whom he made Marshall of France, had the best share in
his Favor. He considered the first as his principal Minister, the two others
as Favorites: but all even the Queen her self, bowed before his Mistress; This
was Diana de Poitiers Widow of Lewis de Breze, and whom he had made Duchess of
Valentinois. She meddled with all, she could do all. That it might be known she
Reigned, he would have it appear in all his Tournaments, on his Household
goods, in his Devises, or Impresses, and even on the Frontispieces of his Royal
Buildings, by placing every where a Crescent, with Bows and Arrows, which were
the Symbols of that unblushing Diana.



Under a new Government there is a new face of Court. They left Frances Oliver
in the Office of Chancellor, whereof he was very worthy: but they took away the
Administration from the Cardinal de Tournon, and Annebaut, Bayard one of the
Secretaries was Imprisoned, and Villeroy his Compagnon deprived of his
Employment; James du Tiers, and Claude Clausse Marquemont were put in their
Places; as in that of John du val Tresorier de l'Espargne, Blond de Bochecour,
whose Wages or Salary was augmented to thirty Thousand Livers, a certain
presage of the future wasting of the Finances Revenue or Treasury.
. They likewise took away the Office of Grand Master of the Artillery, or
Ordnance from Claude de Tais to give it to Charles de Cosse Brisac, the Lord
amongst all the Courtiers the most lovely, and the most beloved by the Kings
Mistress.

Longeval accused to be of Intelligence with the Emperor, redeemed himself by
selling his fair House de Marchez in Laonnois to Charles de Lorrain, who soon
after was made Cardinal. Of Twelve Cardinals that were then in France, the new
Ministers, to be the more at large and at their own ease sent Seven of them to
Rome, upon pretense of Fortifying the French Party for the Election of a Pope,
when Paul III. who was near Fourscore years old, should come to die. Annebaud
to satisfy to an Edict which they had purposely made, that one man could not
hold two great Offices, was forced to quit that of Marshall, wherewith Saint
Andre was gratified.

Francis I. had increased the number of Mareschals even to Four: but finding
that the multitude debased that great dignity, he had resolved to reduce them
to two, so that at this time there were but three. They added a fourth, which
was Robert de la Mark Sedan Son in Law of Diana. They made process against
Odard de Biez likewise Marshall of France, and against Vervin his Son in Law.
They were not Condemned till the year 1549. Vervin lost his head; His Father in
Law an Honorable old Man, and by whose hands Henry being then but Dausin would
needs be made a Knight, was shamefully degraded of his Office and the Order of
Saint Michael. He died of Grief in the Fanxbourg Saint Victor, whither he had
permission to retire.

The Earldom of Aumale was erected to a Duchy in favor of Frances Eldest Son
of Claude Duke of Guise.

The Duchess d'Estampes having no more support at Court, and seeing her self
despised by all the World, even of her own Husband, chose one of his Houses for
her Retreat, where she yet lived some years in the Exercise of the new
Religion, to which her Example, and Liberalities drew a great many People.

All the Kings Revenues being too little to satisfy the Covetousness of the
new Ministers* they sought to have Advice what to demand of him; but the Genius
of the French, nor their Parliaments, being yet used to suffer Monopolies and
Farmers, they employed Accusers, or Informers, who brought the richest
Delinquents to Justice, that they might enjoy their Spoils by Confiscations or
by Compositions.

As to Things without Doors, the Pope desired to have a defensive League with
the King; and for that end had sent the Cardinal Saint George Legate into
France, to give the King thanks for having promised his Natural Daughter Diana,
but nine Years old, to his Grandson Horace, and to negociate a more strickt
Alliance with him. The King gave no Positive Answer to the last Proposition,
his Affairs not being as yet in good Order, and they suspecting his great Age,
and the Fidelity of his Children. And indeed, he was at the same time treating
with the Emperor to get the Duchy of Milan, for John Lewis Farneze his bastard
Son.

The King and the Emperor labored separately and distinctly with the Turk, the
one to have a Peace with him, the other to incite him to fall upon Hungary,
Francis. Now as on the part of France, they neglected a while to send any News
to Constantinople, or even give notice of the death of that King; the Emperor
meeting no Obstruction, obtained a Truce of Solomon for five Years, paying him
thirty thousand Crowns Tribute Annually, and making him believe he held a very
good Correspondence with the French, and that they would have no more to do
with the Port. Nevertheless Solomon desiring still to preserve his Amity with
France, would needs without being required, have the King to be comprised in
the Truce of Hungary, as if he had been absolutely a Party contracting. It is
to be observed that in the Writings or Instrument of this Truce, Solomon styles
Charles V. only simply King of Spain, and the King of France, the most serene
Emperor of France, his most dear Friend and Allie.

The Sixteenth of July, the King being returned out of Picardy, where he had
been to visit the Frontiers, saw at Saint Germains en lay the famous Duel
between Guy Chabot Jarnac, and Francis Vivonne la Chasteigneraye, they
quarreled about some certain intrigues of the Women's, Jarnac had given the Lie
to Chasteigneraye upon some villanious reproach of his concerning his Fathers
second Wife. He challenges him to fight; the King permitted it, causes the
Lists to be made ready, and would needs be a Spectator with the whole Court. He
fancied Chasteigneraye would have the better, whom he cherished; and yet it
fell out that Jarnac though much weakened with a Feavour that tormented him,
brought him down with a back blow he gave him on his hams. They parted the
Combatants: but the vanquished not able to undergo so much shame in the Kings
Presence, would never suffer the Chyrurgions to bind up his wound, but dyed of
rage within a few days. The King was so concerned at it, that he swear solemnly
never to permit the like Combats.

In the Month of August the Grands Jours, or extraordinary Court of Justice,
began to be held in the City of Tours.

The troubles continued in Scotland. The English were obstinately bent to have
the young Queen for their King Edward, and had gained a furious Battle against
the Scots, and after it taken several places. The King sent therefore an Army
into Scotland Commanded by Desse Epanvillers, who was accompanied by Peter
Strozzi and Dandelot Brother to Chastillon. They settled the Authority of the
Queen Dowager, stopped the Progress of the English, and the year following
brought the young Queen into France, she was but six years of Age.

Two Months before the Kings Coronation news came into France, that the
Protestant Princes of the League of Smalcalde, were vanquished by the Emperor
in the Battle of Mulberg the twenty fourth of April; That John Frederic Duke of
Saxony their chief head, and a Prince of great worth was taken Prisoner in the
rout; that the Emperor had caused him to be Condemned to lose his Head, and
having with much ado given him his life, he detained him in Prison, and had
deprived him of his Duchy to invest his Consin Maurice with it, who was of the
same House of Saxony, and of the same Religion: that all the great free Cities,
excepting Magdenbourgh, had submitted; that the Landgrave of Hesse had been
forced to comply with his Commands, and that going to wait upon him by virtue
of his faith given in writing under his own hand, and his Parolle given to
Maurice his Son in Law, he caused him to be held Prisoner. His Ministers to
color his Treachery, put by mistake a W. instead of an N. in a certain word,
so that it signified without perpetual imprisonment, instead of without any
imprisonment.

These mighty advantages and success gave the King some Jealousy, and put his
Holiness in great fear. This last was besides much irritated against the
Emperor for what happened at Piacenza. He had first given to Peter Lewis Farneze
his Bastard Son, the Duchy of Camerino which was taken from Guidobaldo Duke of
Urbin, Son of Frances Mary de la Rovere. This establishment did not seem good
enough, he soon after exchanged with him for the Cities of Parma and Piacenza,
which he adorned with the Title of a Duchy. Now this Peter Lewis using his
principality, as if it were a sovereign right to violate all manner of right,
it happened that three of the principal Citizens of Piacenza and of the
Gibeline Faction, whom he had taxed in great Sums, conspired against him,
entered into the Old Citadel, upon pretense of coming to Petition him to take it
off and discharge them, when they had notice by the firing of a Pistol their
Signal, that their Confederates had seized on the Gates, slew him and his
Steward about Eleven of the Clock after he had Dined. The Blow being given they
called Twelve of their friends

The Gibelines in the mean while took up Arms, drove out the Garrison, and gave
notice of it to Ferdinand de Gonzague, whom the Emperor had made Governor of
Milan in the room of Du Guast who dyed in disgrace. Ferdinand presenting
himself with a Hundred Men armed Cap-a-pee, was received into the City, took an
Oath of Fidelity in the Emperors name, and put in Ten or Twelve Hundred Men;
and shortly after he likewise endeavored to surprise Parma. Now as the Emperor
was not well pleased that the Pope had given these two Cities to his Son,
because they were, said he, of the Duchy of Milan, and withal knowing that
Prince sided with the French Party underhand, and that he had a finger in the
Conspiracy of Lewis de Fiesque, who perished in trying to surprise Genoa: it
was believed with great reason that Gonzague had contrived or at least
encouraged and favored that Tragical Conspiracy.

The Seigneory of Venice took the Allarm so hot, that they created a Proveditor
on Land to take charge and care of the Frontiers, which they had never wont to
do but in a time of extreme peril. The Pope was struck to the very heart, and
resolved to embrace all ways and means to revenge his blood they had so
cruelly shed.

Peter Lewis had left three Sons, Alexander who was a Cardinal, Octavia who had
Married a Bastard of the Emperors, and Horatio Duke of Castro who sought to
Marry the Kings. The first and the third followed the resentments of their
Grandfather: but Octavio diverted and hindered them, employing his Wife to that
end who possessed that old man, and kept him so fast bound that he could not
get out of her Snares and Fetters. Thus having seized on Parma, he made no
difficulty of accepting a Truce for six Months with Gonzague, upon Condition
however that he should have a Months time either to refuse or confirm it.

Before this a Treaty was in hand between the King and the Pope for a Defensive
League; both of them apprehended lest the power of the Emperor, increased by
the defeat of the Protestants, should fall upon their heads. The King, did with
much eagerness seek to preserve the Alliance of the Turk: besides his
Ambassador in Ordinary, which was d'Aramon, he sent thither the Baron de
Fumeil, and then also the Sieur d'Huyson to endeavor to break the Truce
between Charles V. and Solomon, and to get him to draw his Sword against
Hungary. They assured him that the King in that Case would not sail to do him
the Office of a Friend, having an excellent Militia and better paid then ever,
Fifteen Thousand Lansquenets and Seventeen Thousand Swiss ready to March,
besides his Legions and other bands of Gascons and Italians, and forty Galleys
he had built, a Supply worthy to be offered to so great a Prince.

A very fair opportunity presented it self at the same time, but which could
last only two Months, a Tumult in the City and Kingdom of Naples, who were
risen to hinder the settling of the Inquisition, a dreadful Monster to all such
as have been born and bred up in Liberty, even to the wisest, and the most
Christian. The Banished proffered to seize upon Naples, Capoua, Aversa, Nola,
and to enter the Country with Twelve Thousand Men. The Pope list'ned to those
Propositions, and the Cardinal Farneze propounded to the King that those
Banished should be seconded with an Army of Twenty Thousand more, provided he
would but pay them four Months, and pressed him instantly to have recourse to
the Turk, and desire Forty of his Galleys to fall upon the Coasts of Naples.

Now his Holiness being in this disposition against the Emperor, and knowing
withal that his Partisans who were the stronger in the Council of Trent, had
conspired to diminish the Pontifical Power, to raise and augment the Imperial,
and to satisfy the Germans, who cried out that all the abuses of the Church
proceeded from the Court of Rome, took a resolution under a pretense the Plague
was at Trent, to transfer the Council to Bologna. The King sent the Bishops of
France thither: but the Emperors were resolved to stay at Trent, and the others
as obstinate not to return to that place; which occasioned a mighty confusion.

Upon this the Kings Agents would needs have the Pope to consider, that he
disobliged all the Germans, as well Protestants as Catholics by transferring
the Italy, and gave up the Game to the Emperor, that Prince winning their
affections by insisting on what they desired, that it should be held at Trent;
And therefore they were of opinion that he should consent to what they
demanded, but upon conditions which would be impossible: which was that be
should engage all the Protestants to pass their words they would subscribe to
what should be there decided. His Holiness did not follow this advice, but
chose rather to suspend it till the Year 1550.

The Emperor thinking to appease the troubles about Religion in Germany,
published an Edict, which ordained all persons to follow a certain Form of
Doctrine and Ceremonies, until a general Council had determined all those
differences. It was called the Interim. It contained 26 Articles, whereof two
were favorable to the Protestants, those were a liberty of Marriage for their
Priests, and the use of the Cup for the Laity. This accommodation pleased
neither the one, nor the other Party, nor was received but by force and
compulsion.

The Emperors ill will toward the King, discovered its self but too much by
several tokens, particularly the death of Volgesperg, Mentel, and Volfius,
German Captains, whom he seized upon in their houses, and caused them to lose
their heads by the Hangman, making it criminal for that they had raised some
Troops to assist at the Kings Coronation. He would at that very time have given
him a taste of his good affection by declaring an open War, had he not been
hindered by three grand Obstacles, one of them being his indisposition, for he
was much tormented with the Gout, perhaps complicated with some other
distemper, for which he used Guajacum; the other that he durst not so soon
leave Germany, held in obedience merely by his presence: and the third that
Solomon in the instrument of the Truce, had comprehended the King in these
terms, that he was not only his Friend, but also a Friend to his Friends, and
Enemy to his Enemies.

Henry King of England had ordained that his Son Edward should succeed him to
the Crown, that he failing Mary should attain to it, and after her Elizabeth
whom he had by Anne Bullen. He had left the Government of the Kingdom and of
young Edward to twelve Lords: but the eleven yielded up their authority to
Edward S^ymour Earl of Hereford and Duke of Somerset his maternal Uncle, who by
this means was Regent or Protector of England. This Duke being imbued with the
Opinions of Zuinglius, labored in such sort, with the help of Thomas Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury who was a Lutheran, that by an Ordonnance of
Parliament held in the Month of November, he caused the exercise of the
Catholic Religion to be abolished, and introduced another Medly of the
Opinions of Calvin and those of Luther.

Champagni, Burgundi, and Lyonnois, making his entrance into all the Cities
with Prodigious Magnificence, especially into Lions. He proceeded even to
Piedmont, and every where carefully stored his Frontier Towns, in case Philip
the Emperors Son who was just gone into Italy, should have some untoward
design: but he stayed little there. Moulins the Eighteenth of October, he
Celebrated the Nuptials of Anthony de Vendosme with Jane d'Albret Daughter of
the King of Navarre, whose former Marriage with the Duke of Cleve was easily
vacated, as not having been consummated.

After the defection of that Francis Marquess de Salusses, who, (as we have
seen before) perished at Carmagnoles, King Francis would not seize upon the
Marquisat of Salusses, which was forfeited to him and confiscate for the Crime
of Rebellion and Felony, but had invested his younger Brother named Gabriel in
it. This being dead without Children, and there remaining no lawful Heirs of
that House, as I believe, Henry seized upon the said Fief as holding of
Daufine; to which it remained United till the Year 1587. that Charles Emanuel
Duke of Savoy seized it, as having some pretensions upon it.

During the Kings absence, a furious flame of Sedition was kindled over all
Guyenne, because of the Gabel and Garners for Salt set up amongst them by
Francis I. and the violence committed upon that Score, by the swarms of
Officers and Satellites, against those poor people. The Commotion began in
Saintonge by some Villagers who beat and hunted them away; their number
increased to Sixteen Angoulmois who seized upon Angoulesm^, as the former did
upon Saints; then they quitted those places to scour about the Countries,
committing all the cruel and villainous acts such brutish souls were capable of.

These two Kennels of Bloodhounds being joined were received into Bourdeaux by
the Populace, constrained the Captain of the Castle and him that commanded the
Town, the Presidents and Counselors of Parliament to march in the Head of them
in Sea* men's habits, and inhumanely Massacred Tristan de Moneins Lieutenant to
the Governor of the Province. It was par^ly his own fault, for he was so
imprudent as to come to Bourdeaux without bringing a sufficient number of the
Nobless with him, he amused himself with commanding his Soldiers to outface
and make mouths at those People, and then afterward went out of his Castle du
Ha to the Mair^ to Treat with those Furies.

After they had spent their first fire, they dispersed in a few days. The
Parliament English; the Kings Counsel therefore thought requisite to amuse them
with fair words, and to promise them a general Amnistie, and the revocation of
the Gabelle: but having put all in good order, he failed not to send the
Connestable and the Duke d'Aumale thither with two small Armies, each
consisting of Four or Five Thousand Men to punish them.

The Duke passed by Saintonge, Poitu and Aulnis, without exercising any great
severities, and came to Langon: but the Connestable descending from Languedoc
whereof he was Governor, along the Garonne with a courage whetted by revenge,
for the Murder of Moneins who was his Kinsman, was not so mild. For having
joined him at that place, and marching to Bourdeaux, he caused thirty fathom of
their Wall to be broken down that he might enter at the breach; which was on
the Tenth day of August when he was within, he first disarmed the Bourd^lois,
and placed his Canon and his Soldiers in the Markets and at the opening of the
Streets, then caused present process to be made against the whole City, by
Stephen de Neuilly Master of Requests. This man extremely violent At the Treaty
of Crespy, h^ gave a box on the Ear to the Jacobin who acted for the Emperor.
, by Sentence of the Twenty Sixth of October declared it guilty of Rebellion,
and therefore all their Privileges forfeited of Majoralty, Sheriffalty, and
Jurisdiction, Condemned them to maintain two Galleys for the Governor, to
furnish the two Castles with ^mmunitions, and to pay Two Hundred Thousand
Livers as a Fine, besides took away their Bells, suspended the Parliament,
which was so for a whole year, Ordered their Town Hall should be razed, and a
Chapel built on the same place where they should pray for the Soul of Moneins;
that the Jurats with an hundred of the most noted Citizens should dig up the
Corpse of that Lord with their Nails, and bear him, each having a Flamb^au in
his hand to St. Andrews Church. About Five Thousand Burghers assisted at this
Funeral Pomp, carrying all Wax-Candles, and making a stop before the
Connestables door, cried out for mercy, and confessed they had deserved a more
heavy punishment. Besides all this he put above an hundred to death, most part
being of the principal Citizens, and Officers belonging to the place. This
great severity ^lienated the affection of the people from him, as the tender
humanity of the Duke of Aumale gained it, so as from this very time that
Lorrain Branch began to reign in their hearts.

Some while after, the King who was benign and easy, following the counsel of
that Prince, did in many particulars moderate the rigor of the Sentence,
preserved the Townhouse, gave Pardon to many that were Condemned, and restored
the Bells and Privileges again to the Bourdelois. Charles IX. his Son gave
them more ample ones. After Bourdeaux had been humbled in this manner, the
Provost belonging to the Connestables going thorough all the Provinces, laid
hold on several of the most Seditious, amongst others Three of their Chiefs,
viz. a Gentleman who had his Head cut off, and two Chiefs of the Commons who
were broken upon the Wheel, with a Crown of red hot Iron clapped upon their
Heads.

Germains, was one occasion of these Feastings. He was named Lewis. The
Figure-Flingers foretold wonders of him, and yet he lived but two years. The
divertisements of the Carneval succeeded that of his Christ'ning; then in the
Month of July the King and Queen made their Magnificent Entrance into Paris,
after her being Crowned a^ Saint Denis. To this Ceremony they added Tiltings,
running at the Ring, Balls, great Entertainments, and all the vain past-times
that an ingenious and opulent idleness could invent, to delight and glut the
Eyes of the Women and multitudes of People.

When the Court was weary of these Sports, the Scene of it was changed, and a
fit of Piety succeeded their Gallantry. They made a general Procession to
Nostre-Dame, whereat the King was present. This was to testify by a public
Act, the Zeal he had to maintain the Religion of his Ancestors, and to punish
all those that would disturb it. Which he confirmed by the horrible Executions
of great numbers of those miserable Protestants who were burned in the Greve
Common place of Execution.
. They were haled up by a Pully and an Iron Chain, then suffered to fall down
in the midst of a great Fire, which was repeated several times. He would needs
feed his own Eyes with this Tragical and Melancholy Spectacle; and it is said,
that the horrible and mournful Shricks of one of those poor wretches left so
lively an impression in his imagination, that all his life long, he had from
time to time a very frightful and terrifying remembrance of those dreadful
groans. However that were, it is certain the smell of those Carcasses thus
roasted, got into the Brains of a great many People; who on the one hand
beholding their (False) constancy as our Author falsely terms it.
(false) constancy, and on the other the scandalous dissolute living at Court,
named this Justice a Persecution, and their punishment a Martyrdom.

The 12 th of June the Alliance was renewed with the Swiss, but not without
much opposition of the Protestant Cantons, exasperated for the burning those of
their Religion.

English were contriving better measures to invade Scotland, there happened some
division between the Duke of Sommerset and the Earl of Warwick, and between the
Nobility and the People. This Juncture being favorable to France, the King
would lay hold of it to recover Boulogne. He armed powerfully by Sea and Land,
went before the place in person, and gained four or five Forts the English had
built round about it. Then Autumn coming he Blocked up the Tower d'Ordre,
meaning to return in the following Spring.

Pope Paul having lost all hopes of recovering Piacenza from the hands of the
Emperor, or even to preserve Parma in his Family, resolved to reunite this to
the Demeasnes of the Church, and to give the Duchy of Camerino to his
Grandson Octavio. Octavio positively denied to accept of this exchange, and
wrote to the Cardinal Farneze his Brother, that rather then consent to it, he
would Surrender up Parma to Frederic de Gonsague. The Cardinal showed the
Letter to the Pope, who was so moved with wrath, that his whole Body fell into
a strange fit of trembling, and afterward into a violent Feavour, whereof he
died within three days. The Cardinals after three Months practices and
juggling, Elected John Maria de Monte, who assumed the name of Julius III.

English not having Forces sufficient, would not stand off too long, but came
to a Treaty of Peace, which was concluded between the City of Boulogne and the
Fort d'Outreau the 24 th of March. They promised to resign Boulogne upon the
payment of four hundred thousand Crowns of Gold, to wit, the one half when the
French entered the Town, the other moiety six Months after. Scotland was
comprised in this Treaty, and those places the English had Invaded, were to be
restored to the Queen-Regent.

The House of Guise obtained great augmentations: Duke Claude and John Cardinal
of Lorrain his Brother being dead, Francis Duke of Aumale took his Fathers
Title, and Charles who was called the Cardinal de Guise, that of his Uncle, and
his Benefices. This same raised his power mightily, and that of his whole
House, not so much by his merit, though he had a great deal, as by his
complaisance to the Kings Mistress. He had so much power that he caused Peter
Lizet the first President of the Parliament of Paris to be displaced: He had
dared to affront him, by refusing to Treat him as a Prince: but was forced
Victor lez Paris. John Bertrand second President was put in his place.

Soon after Diana caused the Seals to be taken from the Chancellor Olivier,
whose probity did not suit with her conduct; and because he stood upon it not
to lay down his Title of Chancellor, which by the Laws of the Land cannot be
taken away but with his Life, She obliged the King to grant the Commission and
Office of Keeper of the Seals, and to give it to Bertrandi: who by this means
left that of first President to Giles le Maistre, who had before succeeded him
as second.

Though Faggots were lighted every where against the Protestants, yet the
Inhabitants of Merindol and Cabrieres presented their Petition to the King,
demanding Justice for the Violence done against them under pretense of a Decree
of the Parliament of Provence, which they durst never have undertaken, had it
not been upon an assurance of the support of those that governed, and even by
their instigation, particularly the Connestable, who thought to involve the
Cardinal de Tournon as principal Author of that Massacre, he being his Capital
Enemy.

The business was first brought before the Kings Great Council, then the King
took it upon himself, and afterward referred it to the Grand Chamber of the
Parliament of Paris. The Cause was Pleaded at Fifty Audiences, or Hearings,
with great heats and vehement solicitations. After all this noise, there was
none but Guerin the Kings Advocate in the Parliament of Provence, who paid for
all those that had contributed to this Massacre; He was Beheaded in the place
called the Greve at Paris.

The Historian of Provence relates how on the day he lost his head, his Picture
or Effigies appeared in the palm of his wives hand, traced in lines of blood,
and was seen by great numbers of people during several days. Lewis Adhemar Earl
of Grignan, and Governor of Provence, who had given Commission to d'Oppede to
Levy Forces in his absence, was like to have lost his Lands. D'Oppede was sent
away absolved, having done nothing but by good order from the King: but he
survived not long after it; and the Huguenots were revenged on him, by giving
out that he died of an inward fire which cruelly burnt up all his Bowels.

Banquiers and of the Datary of the Court of Rome, touching the resignation of
Benefices, were come to that pass, that all the Clergy of France complained of
it. The King redressed this by an Edict; and Charles du Moulin, the most
resolute of all the French Lawyers, wrote a most Learned Book against the
Petites Dates, but which being very vehement, raised so great a Storm against
him amongst the Catholic Zealots for the interests of the Pope, that for fear
of being Treated as an Heretic, he retired into Germany where he kept himself
private till the rupture which happened between the King and Pope Julius III.

The Pic's Or Picus's.
Lords of Mirandola, being at variance amongst themselves for the possession of
that County, Paul III. had endeavored to reconcile and agree them, and not
able to compass it, had sequestered it in the hands of King Francis. That King
had restored it to Lewis Pic. Galeot Pic his Nephew assassinated his Uncle and
Usurped it; then fearing his other Relations would revenge this parricide,
retired to King Henry II. and had admitted a French Garrison into the place;
and also as it was reported, had agreed upon an exchange for some other Lands
in France. However it were, the King used it as a City properly his own, and
made it his place of Arms, and his Assemblies in that part of the World.

The King wanted some occasion to interrupt the Progress of the Emperor, he was
overjoyed to meet with this which follows, D'Aramon his Ambassador made use of
all industry with Solomon, who was returned from the Persian War, to break the
Truce of Hungary; and he wanted not considerations and motives to incite him to
it; for the Emperor had in Barbary taken the Cities of Mahadia Or Africa.
, and Monester, from the Corsair Dragut, one of the Grand Seignior's Captains,
and King Ferdinand held secret intelligence with Friar Georges, Monk of the
Order of Saint Poll a Hermit, who by the testamentary institution of John
Hungary, governed the Affairs and Country of Isabella and Stephen her young Son.

Solomon had given orders to take that Monk dead or alive: the Monk having
notice of it, retired and had cantonniz'd himself in some strong Castles he had
purchased and provided, from whence he began to make War upon the Queen. He was
reconciled and fell out again with her two or three several times, and as he
apprehended the power of the Turk, he privately made an agreement with
Ferdinand, and persuaded the Widow to restore Transylvania to him, upon
conditions very advantageous both for him and the Pupil, if they had been
observed. But soon after Ferdinand fearing this man's inconstancy, or rather
that he would force him to make good what he had promised, sent word to John
Baptist Castalda General of his Forces to make him away, which he Executed by
the hands of some Assassines who went and Murdered him in a House of Pleasure
to which he was retired.

Solomon could not suffer that Transylvania, for which John had rendered him
Homage, should be possessed by Ferdinand. He powered a very numerous Army in
upon that side, and almost totally Invaded it. The Imperailists did not fail to
publish that the King of France had drawn him thither: but we find by the
Memoirs of those times, that he did his utmost to dissuade him from making War
in Hungary, because the common danger reunited all the German Princes with the
Emperor, and it was his interest to divide them. And therefore he could rather
have wished that Solomon would have made use of his Sea Forces, and landed in
Puglia to facilitate an enterprise the French then had upon Sicily.

All these things make it evident that the King had firmly resolved to concern
himself in the business of Parma, by other ways and means then mediation or
accommodation, and that it was not the Duchess of Valentinois that made him
enter upon that War, that there might be occasion to bestow some employment
upon Brissac, whom she loved infinitely. It is true that at that Ladies
request, or perhaps to keep him at distance and absent from her, he made him
Governor of Piedmont in the place of John Caracciol Prince of Melsy, whom he
recalled to Court; and to make up the Complement of good fortune for Brissac,
it happened that the said Prince returning into France, died at Suza, and left a
vacancy for a Marshall, which the King immediately conferred on him.

It sufficed the King to assist his Allies without directly breaking with the
Emperor: wherefore he sent to Brissac to make use of some indirect means to
that end. Brissac therefore disbanded a part of the Forces in Piedmont who had
order to File away toward Parma over the Milanois under favor of the Truce
two by two, sometimes three, without any weapons and by easy Journeys.
Gonzague mistrusting the Craft and Contrivance, set Guards upon the ways, who
Massacred the greatest part of them, so that there came not above four or five
hundred to Miranda, who went over by the Mountains at Genoa.

During this assay, the Pope strove to persuade the King to abandon the Duke of
Parma, and the King endeavored to gain the Popes good Will that he might take
him into his Protection. But as the first had sharply replied to the Kings
Remonstrances, threatening him with his Ecclesiastical Thunder, the French
Ambassador raising the Tone of his Voice, declared that the King would for no
consideration whatever relinquish his Allies, especially the Duke of Parma.
Moreover he protested that during those troubles he would not send his Bishops
of France to Trent; that he did not own that Council to be general and
Legitimate, but for a combination contrived and carried on for the interests of
some particular people. This Declaration being made, he retired to his house,
and soon after quitted Rome. Two Months afterward James Amiot Abbot of
Bellozane went on the Kings behalf to Trent, to make the very same
protestations to that Assembly, which the King called Consessus, not Concile.
The Prelates did however hold their Sessions, and made diverse Decrees. The
rumor of the Protestant Princes Army dispersed it in the Month of April the
following year.

In the mean time the King judged it the highest piece of folly to furnish the
Enemy wherewith to make a War, forbid upon grievous penalties all his Subjects,
to carry either Gold or Silver to Rome, or any other place under the obedience
of the Pope: but at the same time he made a most severe Edict, Dated the Five
and Twentieth of June at Chasteau-Briand, for the discovering and punishing Who
observed from that very time, as they have experimented ever since, upon the
like occasions, that no time can be so bad and rude to them, as when the Court
of France is embroiled with that of Rome.

A little before this the Pope had sent into France Ascanius de la Coma his
Sisters Son to make his last Essay to dissuade the King from protecting Parma
and Miranda. Ascanius was received at the Court with the same civilities they
give to Princes, and amused a long time with put offs, and delays, whilst those
of Parma prepared themselves when he returned to Rome without having obtained
any thing, Gonzague besieged Parma, and John Baptista de Monte the Popes Nephew
Miranda. Thus the War was begun between the Pope and the King.

The Enemies being strongest in the Field, Horatio Duke of Castro, and Strozzi
General of the Italian Bands, durst not go to attaque them: but they made such
terrible havoc about Bologna, that the Pope moved with the cries of his
Subjects, sent to his Army to hasten to their assistance. Thus they raised the
Seige, and fifteen days after they began it anew; but however with as little
success as at the first time.

When Aramon had disposed Solomon to a rupture, he returned into France to get
fresh and more punctual Orders. As he was going to Constantinople, he found the
Turks Navy being put to Sea, had En passant taken and pillaged the Fort of Goza
at Malta, and that they were gone to Besiege Tripoli in Barbary, which was held
by the Knights of that Order. The grand Master prayed him to go and find out
Sinan Bassa who commanded the Fleet, to divert him from it, and persuade him to
the Besieging of Africa (or Mahadia) for the which he had express orders: but
Sinan who knew this a more easy Prey and Conquest then the other, would not
believe him, but kept him as it were by force, till the place had surrendered.

At the same time the Kings Navy consisting of near Forty Galleys, and
commanded by the Prior of Gapoua, after they had cruised upon the Coasts of
Spain, were come to block up Andrea Doria and the Emperors Galleys in Nice and
in Villa-Franca. They might easily have forced him had not they fallen into a
strange hurly-burly, (about I know not well what) amongst themselves, which
made the Prior retire to Malta, under pretense of going to serve his Order,
they being without a Chief. In the mean while Doria received a recruit of Men
and Galleys, and by that means escaped the greatest danger he ever was in.

It appeared to the King that the Emperor was so embarass'd on all hands, as
there could be no danger now in Marching against him with Ensigns displayed,
for besides that he had the Turks on his back, the Princes of the Empire were
upon their Guard against him, fearing least he should undermine their liberties
and had openly refused to Elect his Son King of the Romans, because they would
not have two at the same time. They had likewise declared that though his
Brother should lay down that Title and Quality, as he endeavored to oblige him
to do they would do nothing in it. Withal, he was in no good condition as to
his health: repeating at that time his seventh Remedy by way of Diet to rid him
of his noxious and peccant humors; and there was great probability he would
for the future be much more in his Bed, then on his Horseback.

Taking therefore his measures hereupon, he resolved to a War against him, and
sent to Brissac to begin the rupture in Piedmont, by taking of some places, to
Francis de Cleves Duke of Vendosme to enter into Artois and Hainault. The
Season was already far advanced, the two last only ransacked ten or twelve
Leagues of those Countries, and raised some small Forts. Vendosme failed in a
design upon Arras, which was discovered by one of his Spies who had made
himself drunk in a Tavern, but Brissac took Quiers and Saint Damian. At the
noise of this Gonzague quitted the Siege of Parma, and assembling all his
Forces near Ast, resolved to give him Battle: but the brave countenance of
Brissac who presented it several times, made him of another mind.

At Sea Otherwise Capt. Paulin.
, the Baron de la Guard General of the French Galleys, having met with four
great Ships fraighted with rich Goods, took them; and in the Month of December
the Count de Carces who commanded in his absence, pursued fourteen large
Vessels, which were carrying the Goods and Furniture belonging to Ferdinand
King of Hungary and the Queen his Wife, to the Port of Villa-Franca, Doria who
Convoyed them with his Galleys, not daring to come near to assist them.

But on the German side there was something else contriving of much more
importance. You may remember how the Emperor by a cavil rather besitting a
little Cheat then a great Prince, had laid hands on the Landgrave of Hesse: he
had kept him Prisoner now almost five years, the intercession of the German
Princes, and Duke Maurice his Son in law, having been ineffectual to the
obtaining his liberty. Notwithstanding the Emperor made use of Maurice to
reduce the other Protestants; and that Prince had held Magdeburgh besieged
almost a year, the only great imperial City remaining that had not yet bowed
under the Yoke. The King being made acquainted of his inward discontent,
Treated a League with him, with Albret Marquess of Brandenburg and some other
Protestants. The Catholic Princes were glad, and lent a helping hand. It was
concluded in the Month of October of the Year 1551. but was not ratified till
the Month of January in 1552.

By this Treaty it was agreed that the King should send a great Army into
Germany in the Spring; That he should pay certain Sums of Money to maintain
that Army under Maurice and the other Confederates, and that to re-imburse
himself of these Charges, he should as soon as possible seize upon Cambray, or
else Mets, Toul and Verdun, which he should keep in Quality of Vicar to the
Empire.

Before the Year expired, the Holy Father growing weary of the War, was
considering of an accommodation with the King, and sent one Legate to him, and
another to the Emperor, to conjure them to hearken to a Peace. The Legate that
came into France made several propositions. They all tended to the resigning
Parma into the hands of his Holiness, who proffered to restore the Duchy of
Camerino to Octavio; they were not favorably received, because they were no
ways advantageous to the interests of the King; for he did not so much regard
the satisfaction of Octavio, as the having the City of Parma at his own
devotion, and by that means having footing again in Italy, traverse all the
Emperors projects.

About the end of this Year, having no Money to defray the expenses of his War,
he made diverse Edicts in order to engage part of his Demeasnes, to create those
Courts, or Seats of Justice named Presidiaux, to erect the Chamber des Monnoyes
to a Sovereign Court. He also got Silver Plate of all such as would lend him
any to convert it into Testons, which were Coined in a certain new invented
Mill made upon the Seine; and he levied an Impost of twenty Livers upon every
Steeple, upon Jewels, and Church Fabrics, not excepting even the Mendicants.
The Duchess of Valentinois, as it was reported, had a good share of this
Collection; However it were, some of the Cordelier and Jacobin Preachers could
not hold their Tongues, and had made much more noise about it if they had not
been chastised.

Manifesto's and their Arms appear together. Maurice using much Craft and
entertaining the Emperor with propositions of Peace, Marched with so much
celerity, that he wanted but little of surprising him at Inspurk. He was fain
to escape by night very shamefully and much affrighted, flying to Carinthia
even as far as the Frontiers of the Venetians, with so much dread, that for
several days he knew not what he did.

The King on his side likewise took the Field. Before he went out of the
Kingdom he went into his Parliament, where by an excellent discourse he
recommended to them to have a great care of the Kingdom in his absence, and
declared that he left the Regency to the Queen his Wife: but She would not let
them verisie the Commission, because he had too much limited her Power, and had
made the Chancellor Bertrandi almost equal in authority, a creature of the
Duchess of Valentinois.

The first thing he did, was to seize upon Lorrain and the young Duke Charles,
Son of the Deceased Duke Francis and Christierne Sister to the Emperor; He
brought him into France to be bred with the Dausin, and gave the Government of
the Country to the Count de Vaudemont; then he took the Cities of Mets, Toul,
and Verdun, who little suspected such a surprise. It was noised that the
French; and they owe that obligation to the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal his
Brother, who did all that lay in their power to facilitate these Conquests, not
regarding the inconvenience it would be to the head of their House; for the
raising and settling their fortunes in this Kingdom made them have an interest
quite different from his.

The Kings design was to have seized also upon Alsatia, his Army entered upon
it, and refreshed themselves there: but the Citizens of Strasburg, more jealous
then those of Mets, stood upon their Guards, and sent him Provisions, to take
away all pretense for his coming into their Town. Haguenau and Visburg opened
their Gates to him.

In the mean time Maurice, who had restored almost all the Cities and Princes
of Germany to their Liberties, fearing for his Father in Laws Head, which the
Emperor threatened to send to him, if he accepted not of the conditions offered
him, was obliged to hearken to a Peace. It was concluded by the Treaty of
Pashaw, where besides the releasing of the Landgrave, many other things were
allowed and agreed in favor of the Protestants. They may very justly call that
Treaty the true Foundation of their Evangelick Liberty, which they have fully
enjoyed ever since that time: but showed so little acknowledgment to the King,
that there was not the least mention made of him, at which Albert of
Brandenburg showed himself very much concerned and angry for some time, that he
might have the better pretense to plunder and pillage. At first the King could
not believe that Maurice had any thoughts of treating without him: but he was
soon confirmed by an Envoy from that Prince himself, who came to make his
excuses.

The Electors of Ments and Triers, and some other Princes of Germany, finding
him penetrate so far, sent to entreat him, since he had no other design but to
be the Protector of the German Liberty, and that they had recovered it, not to
undertake any thing against the Empire, nor to advance any further. He was a
little surprised at this Compliment, and yet dissembled his displeasure; he
answered them that he was very well content since they were so, and that his
Arms had the effect they desired. Wherefore at the same instant that he might
not distaste them, and also having information that Mary Queen of Hungary
Governess of the Low Countries, ransacked and burnt the Frontiers of Champagne;
he took his way toward France: but first to have his revenge for the mischiefs
that Queen had caused, he Marched into Luxemburg where he took Rochemars,
Danvilliers, Yvoy and Montmedy, and the Marshall de la Mark the Castle of
Bouillon, which the Emperor had taken from his Grandfather one and thirty years
before. After these exploits, and toward the end of July, he lodged his Men in
Garrison on the Frontiers of Picardy to refresh them, and put them in a
condition to withstand the great Effort for which the Emperor prepared himself.

Whilst he was yet in Germany, he had intelligence that his Agents had made a
Truce for two years with the Pope: which assured the possession of Parma to the
House of Farneze.

The greatest affront the Emperor could receive, was that in his time, and when
he appeared to be most potent, the three Cities of Mets, Toul and Verdun,
should be dismembered from the Empire. It concerned his reputation to regain
them within the very same year, and to that end, he went about to raise the
greatest Forces that ever he yet had in all his life, without considering, so
much his passion hurried and transported him, that the Season was very far
spent, and that neither his Men nor his own health which was very much
impaired, would be able to endure the Rains, the Frosts and Snows. After he had
therefore secretly agreed with Albert, he came and laid Siege to Mets the
Eighteenth of October with an Army of an Hundred Thousand Men; and at the same
time the Count de Raeux entering Picardy, after having burnt Noyon, Roye, Nesle,
Chauny and the Royal House of Folembray, assaulted Hesdin and took it by Storm:
but the same year the Duke of Vendosme recovered it.

The terror the Parisians were in lest the Count de Raeux should come and sack
their City, destitute of Defense or Forces, caused the King (to free them from
the like apprehensions in time to come) to command it should be fortified on
that side toward Picardy, but at the Charge of the Citizens.

Mets was large, but weak and ill fortified, the Duke of Guise notwithstanding
undertook to defend it against all the Emperors Forces. He was accompanied with
a great number of Princes and Lords, and had with him all the Flower of the
Nobility, and Five Thousand chosen Men. He was forced to his great grief to
beat down all the Suburbs, and many fair Above 30 were beat down both without
and within the Town.
Churches that were in them; amongst others Saint Arnolds, to which was joined
an Abbey Royal, and wherein were to be seen the Monuments of seven or eight
Princes of the Corolovinian House.

As to the rest, the good order and Method he took concerning the Provisions,
the Ammunitions, and the Guarding of the Place, his indefatigable care, his
industry and his courage, gave the Emperor much more trouble then he imagined,
and by making him limit there his Ne plus ultra, acquired that Duke a never
dying Fame.

The faithless and artificious Albert, after he had some time entertained the
French, (with intention to have surpised Mets) declared himself openly for the
Emperor, after his having surpised the Duke of Aumale: but the Siege advanced
not the more for that. It lasted two Months with great damage, and breaches
made by their Canon, yet durst not the Besiegers give an assault. In the mean
time the severities of the Winter, and the tedious fatigues, joined with the
Valor of the French, did so ruin the Emperors Army, that having lost Thirty
Thousand Men, he raised the Siege upon the first day of January, and retired to
Thionville.

It was the most melancholy object in the World to see his Soldiers so
benumbed with Cold, they had not so much as the strength to run away, but
yielded themselves up to any that would take them. The French instead of
beating out their Brains took care to warm them, and save their lives by all
manner of comfortable Remedies. The Duke of Guise made his generosity appear no
less on this occasion, then his Valor had before appeared in the Siege, he
Vanquished his Enemies in a manner by so much the more Noble and Glorious, as it
made even those to Celebrate his Victory who were overcome by it.

Toward Italy, Ferdinand de Sanseverina Prince of Salerno, having been ill
treated by Peter de Tolledo Viceroy of Naples, had put the King upon thoughts
of a Design against that Kingdom, assuring him that as soon as the French Army
appeared near Naples, the City would rise. To do this the King caused the
Famous Corsair Dragut to go upon those Coasts and chase away the Galleys of
Andreas Doria from that Port, which he performed having pursued him and taken
seven of his Vessels. If the Prince of Salerno to whom the King had lent his
own, head been there at this time of their consternation, he might certainly
have entered into Naples: but not arriving till three weeks after, Dragut
returned discontented to Barbary, and the Design mis-carried.

So long as this War lasted, Solomon failed not every year to send a Naval
Force to assist the King in his Attempts. Those always did great mischief upon
the Coasts of Sicilia and Naples: but brought little advantage to the French,
only the hindering of Doria from molesting of Provence, and giving them trouble
at Siena, and in the Island of Corsica.

As to the Affairs of Piedmont, though Ferdinand de Gonzague after the Truce
made between the King and the Pope, had withdrawn and joined to his Army all
the Forces he had in the Duchy of Parma: nevertheless he did nothing all that
Spring besides the taking three or four petty places; for which Brissac had his
revenge by the surprising of Alba, a place very important, and by the Conquest
of Verrue and some other places.

The King wanted some Post or Place in the midst of Italy and on the Seacoast,
to keep the Pope in awe and fear, to make it his rendezvous from whence he
might attaque the Kingdom of Naples, and to receive the Turkish Navies. They
chose Sienna for this purpose, situate in Tuscany, and possessed of a Territory
of fifteen or sixteen Miles about it, wherein there were twelve or fifteen
small Towns. They had hitherto governed themselves as a Republic under
protection of the Emperor: but were divided into four Factions, mortal Enemies
to each other. During their Division, Hurtado de Mendoza, whom the Emperor had
settled there for Governor, persuaded the silly people to build a Citadel, to
defend and preserve their liberty from all invasions of the Gentry, and
Ambushes of the Duke of Florence, who was indeed ready to fall every hour upon
them, had he not feared to offend the Emperor.

When he had thus curbed them, he began to exercise an insupportable Tyranny de
Tournon who was at that time retired to Venice. The King sent Three Thousand
Men to Eneas Picolomini, Martin Bandin, and two more Sienois to deliver their
Country, or rather to bring it under his own power. Nicholas de Vrsini Count de
Petigliani, having set open his Castle to them, which was almost the only
passage into the Country, they drove the Spaniards out of Sienne, razed the
Citadel, and seized upon all the places of that Seigneory, excepting Orbitello,
whither the Spaniards made their Escape.

Soon after the King sent the Cardinal of Ferrara thither in Quality of his
Lieutenant General, and then Paul de Terms to Command his Army under the
Authority of that Cardinal. Terms in a short time drew Twelve Thousand Foot
together for the defense of that Seigneory, and carefully stored all the places.

Mets, caused Terouane to be assaulted. All the people of the Low Countries
out-vied each other and contributed their utmost, to ridd themselves, said
they, of a Wolf which lay in the midst of their Sheepfold. Desse defended the
place: when he was slain, Francis de Montmorency the Constables Son, took up
the Command, he defended it yet a while, but the Ramparts being beaten to Dust
by 142000 Canon-shot, while he was capitulating without having first made any
Truce, the Enemies forced those that kept the Breach, and put all to the Edge
of the Sword, even to the very Children. Immediately the City was demolished by
the Flemmings to the last Stone. The Spaniards saved the Governor and a few
other Captains, in acknowledgment of the Noble Usage they had found from the
Duke of Guise at Mets. The Lands belonging to its Bishopric were afterward
shared between those of Boulogne and Saint Omers. Nothing is left of it now,
but some few Footsteps of its Situation which may still be seen.

At his departure thence the Emperor gave the Conduct of his Army to Emanuel
Philibert Son of Charles Duke of Savoy. This young Prince did from that time
strive to render himself worthy by his virtues to recover what Fortune had
taken away from his Father. He signalized his first and maiden attempt by the
taking of Hesdin. The Marshall Robert de la Mark who had undertaken to defend
it with a great number of young Lords, as little skilful as himself in the Art
of defending such a Place, not knowing how to resist the thundering of the
Canon, demanded to capitulate. Whilst they were treating, a Priest from within
intending to do some exploit with a Granado, by misfortune set fire to a Mine,
which made a large Breach in the Wall. Horatio Farneze Duke of Castro was
buried in the Ruins with Fifty more; the Imperialists made an assault there
and forced the Castle, the Garrison was cut in pieces, la Mark made Prisoner,
with many Lords and other Officers, and the place wholly razed.

The King imagining those places would have held out much longer, had wasted
all the Spring and part of the Summer in Balls and Carousals at the Marriage of
his Bastard Daughter with Horatio Farneze, so that his Army came but late into
the Field. When it was joined near Amiens with that under the Constable, it
consisted of Fifty Four Thousand Foot under One Hundred and Fourteen Ensigns,
of Ten Thousand Horse, and one Hundred Pieces of Canon. With all this mighty
Force, he did nothing but follow the Duke of Savoy from place to place, to
endeavor to bring him to a battle. He could not besiege Bapaume, because there
was no water near it. The Inhabitants had filled and covered up all the Wells
round the Country. From thence he went to attempt the City of Cambray, by some
Volees of Canon shot; they would very willingly have been set at liberty: but
this would only have changed the Yoke, and therefore they held it as good to be
under the Emperor still. The Constables sickness, contracted by his fatigue, or
vexation that he could do no feats with so gallant an Army, put an end to this
Campaign.

Piedmont was like a School of War where the French and Spaniards exercised
themselves in diverse Combats, Enterprises, and Besieging of small places: but
de Brissac had established so exact a Discipline, that the Soldier even in a
Conquered Country, durst not take the least thing away without the good will of
the owner. The ransom were settled on either side, according to the quality
and office of the party taken. No War was made either against Husbandman or
Merchant, but only upon such as bore Arms. The Peasant ploughed and reaped
between the two Camps, and with folded arms would stand quietly at his own
Door and see them fight in Parties, and cut one another Throats fairly in the
midst of his Village.

Charles Duke of Savoy, having lost all hopes of being restored to his Estates,
found no other end of his misfortunes but in that of his life, which ended at
Vercel the sixteenth of September: a Prince debonnair, frank, liberal, just,
fearing God, and who perhaps had not been altogether so unfortunate, could he
have been a Man of less honesty.

We shall hereafter pursue the War of Sienna: but in the mean time we say it
was the occasion of that of Corsica. This Island was very proper to hinder the
passing of any Forces from Milanois, which were embarked at Genoa to be
transported to Tuscany. The Banished who were in great numbers, especially John
Petro de Bastelica d'Ornano, put this design into the French-Mens heads, and
introduced them into most places of the Island. The pretense was that the King,
as Sovereign Lord of Genoa, whereof Corsica was a dependence, had a right to
it, and that the Genoese had not only favored the Emperor, but likewise had
committed several Acts of Hostility against France. The City of Boniface, which
is the Capital of that Island, resisted a long time, and stoutly, at the end
they capitulated. Dragut Raise had put Six or Seven Thousand Turks ashore to
assist Paul de Terms, who Commanded for the King, in making that Siege, after
which he re-imbarqued. As soon as he was gone, Andrea Doriae regained all those
places before Winter came, excepting Boniface and Two or Three more.

France and England held pretty good Correspondence, when Death cut the Third
of young King Edward's Days. It was believed to proceed from a slow Poison, and
John Dudley Duke of Northumberland was suspected Guilty of that Crime, he
having suggested to him to institute Jane of Suffolk for Heiress to the Crown;
however when Queen Mary brought him to his Trial, that was no Article of his
Accusation. This Jane was Granddaughter by the Mother to Mary Sister of Henry
the VIII. and was Married to this Dukes Son.

Now from what cause soever proceeded the Malady of Edward, it is certain that
the foresaid Duke and the Emperor, each for himself, took their measures upon
his approaching death. For the Emperor began to make applications for the
Princess Mary, who by the last Will of King Henry VIII. was to succeed to the
Crown; and the Duke being pusht on with the Ambition to have his Son Reign, or
out of an apprehension that Mary would turn all things up-side down, as being a
Catholic: persuaded young Edward that being in Majority, (after the Mode of
the Kings of France, who are so at thirteen years and a day old) he might
dispose of the Succession, by naming a person who was of the Blood, especially
since the right of Mary and Elizabeth was doubtful, those Princesses not
passing currently for Legitimate.

The King of France advertised of the Emperors proceedings, and the Designs of
the Duke of Northumberland, believed it his own interest to support the latter:
he therefore sent an Ambassador to Edward, who encouraged and confirmed the
Duke in the pursuit of his project, and indeed he went thorough with it; And at
first there was some likelihood of a happy Issue, for according to the last
Will of King Edward, and the Opinion of the Great Officers who are ever of the
same mind as their Sovereign, Jane was designed and appointed to be Queen, and
after the Death of Edward proclaimed and received in the Tower of London, and
Mary being the weaker retired into the County of Norsolk.

But as the people of Ranks and Degrees in the Kingdom were displeased at the
great wrong done hereby to the Lawful Heirs, and the Spanish Gold and
Catholic Party stirred them mightily against it: a world of the Nobility and
Soldiery flocked from all quarters to Mary. So that when the Duke of
Northumberland Jane, took and held her Prisoner: after which most of those that
were with the Duke forsook him, and some that staid seized upon his person and
carried him to London.

Mary came thither and made her entrance into the Tower, the possession whereof
was then necessary to such as were to be owned Kings of England. When She was
once absolute Mistress, She cemented her Throne with the Blood of Jane, her
Husbands, her Fathers, and almost all her Kindred; and after that She spilt
much more to restore the Catholic Religion: which brought the Estate into such
Convulsions as had like to prove mortal, and all for an advantage of a short
duration.

The more She established and fixed her Authority, the more Philip Prince of
Spain, pressed the consummation of his Marriage with her. Though She had very
great imperfections both of Body and Mind, being infirm, ugly and old,
nevertheless he had conceived some love, not for her Person, but for her
Kingdom. On the contrary, the King turned every Stone in private and laid every
rub in his way to prevent him from attaining his ends: but Philips Party acting
more barefaced and with the charming Power of Money, proved stronger then all
those private obstacles the King could contrive against it. So that he was
betrothed by Proxy the Ninth of June; and himself passing over into that
Country with Six Thousand Soldiers, Married her the Five and Twentieth of
July; a day he expressly designed, as being the Feast of Saint James the Patron
of Spain. He staid in England till the Month of April of the following year,
and was Spectator of the Tragic Actions of his Wife to revenge her self for
the Conspiracies were hatched hourly against her, some upon the score of her
Religion, others in hatred of her Marriage.

All this year till the Month of June, there had been as it were a tacit
suspension of Arms between the King and the Emperor: during which Cardinal Pool
near of kindred to Mary, whom the Pope was sending to England as his Legate to
re-establish the Catholic Religion, had undertaken to Treat the Peace. He had
got both their words, that they would reciprocally lay aside many of their
pretensions: but when the Bell was to be sounded, each of them stood up stiffer
and at a greater distance then ever before. The Emperor would willingly have
accepted of a Truce, and it would have been very advantageous to him, by giving
the Low Countries time to settle, and if we may so say, to soulder themselves
with England: but for the same reasons it was not so to the King; and moreover
his Honor nor Interest would allow him to suffer the Siennois to be excluded,
as the Emperor did absolutely require.

Besides, he had Information that the Emperor was very much indisposed both in
Body and Mind, that the Gout had deprived him of the use of one Arm, and
contracted the Sinews of one Leg, that the same cause that made him impotent in
his Members, joined to the bad success of his Affairs, and perhaps complicated
with some relicts of his Mothers Frenzy, had so invaded his Brain, that he
could seldom sleep, and did nothing else almost by day and night, but take
Clocks and Watches asunder, and put them together again, his Chamber being full
of them. Upon these reports, which were for the most part true, the King
thought he should have an easy bargain of it, and took a resolution of
carrying the War into his Country.

He therefore set on Foot an Army of Fifty Thousand Men, and divided them into
three Bodies, Commanded one by the Constable, another by the Duke of Vendosme,
and the third by the Marshall de Saint Andre; the two last having taken some
Forts of little concern, joined with the Constable before Marienburgh which had
surrendered to him.

Some years before Marienburgh was but a little Village where Queen Mary made
her Rendezvous for hunting. The Situation seemed so pleasant and so convenient
to her, that She built a new Town there. The King having it in his hands went
on to fortify it; and to make the Road more secure from thence to the little
City of Maubert-Fontaine, which is the nearest toward France, he likewise
fortified the Villa ge of Rocroy.

Marienburgh, he went and joined the Duke of Nevers, who had pierced through
all the Ardennes; he met him near Givets, these are two Buroughs so named just
opposite to each other upon the Banks of the Meuse. From thence he went to
Besiege Bovines whilst the Duke Besieged Dinan. Bovines was sacked for having
dared to withstand an assault of an Army Royal; Dinan capitulated and they put
Two Thousand Men in there to preserve it from the violence of the skulking
Soldiers: but in the night the Germans, angry they were robbed of their
Pillage, scaled the Walls, broke open the Gates, and put both the Garrison and
Inhabitants to the edge of the Sword. Perhaps they were not overmuch concerned
at it, because they had returned a brutish and most insolent Answer, when they
were Summoned on behalf of the King.

Then the Emperor finding himself much better in health, takes the Field: the
King desiring to engage him in Battle, assaults, forces and razes a great
number of Towns and Castles, Maubege, Bavay famous for its Antiquity, Mariemont
a Castle of pleasure of Queen Mary's, and the little City of Bins with the
magnificent Castle which She had built. He caused these two last places to be
burnt, to be revenged for their having set fire to his Royal House of
Folembray. There was a personal hatred betwixt these two for certain slighting
and spiteful words, and I know not what kind of Songs which had been made on
either side.

After he had thus overrun and ravaged Brabant, Hainault, Cambresis, and the
Country of Namur, he entered upon Artois and Besieged the Castle of Renty, which
did great injury to the Country of Boulonnois. The Emperor came to relieve it,
and to put some into the place with the more ease, would have seized upon a
Wood the situation whereof must have been of great advantage to him. Upon this
followed a sharp Fight which was on the thirteenth of August between the
Villages of Marque and Fauquemberg, where the conduct and courage of the Duke
of Guise, who was engaged in it, did signalize it self above all the other
Chiefs. The Emperor having the worst of it, was advised to sound a retreat.
Some pieces of his Canon and Two Thousand of his Men remained in the Field of
Battle. However the King for want of Provisions, raised the Siege, and after he
had sent once more to defy the Emperor, discharged a part of his Army and
returned to Paris, giving what Soldiers were left to the Duke of Vendosmes
Charge.

This Prince had no little task to cover the Frontiers, for the Enemy who were
thought to be gone into Winter Quarters, took the Field again, and made a show
of Besieging Dourlens, then Abbeville ransacked the Country as far as Saint
Riquier, from thence went up along the River of Autie, and feigning to have
their Eye upon Monstreville, set themselves upon fortifying the Village of
Mesnil which lies in a Marsh, upon the little River of Canche, a little beneath
old Hesdin which they had demolished the year before. The Duke of Savoy would
have it called Hesdin-Fert FERT. These are the symbolical Letters of the House
of Savoy.
, adding to the name of the place the Devise of his House, to make known that
he was the Founder of it.

This Campaign ended the exploits of the Emperor. He was too much wasted and
weakened by continual defluxions, to be any longer capable of undergoing those
fatigues, and make head against a youthful King whom he always found on
Horseback. Besides the misunderstanding that was between him and his Brother,
gave him much more trouble then his distemper and corporal pain. This younger
Brother, besides that he was not contented with his share, but demanded some
augmentation, was in great wrath that he had mowed the Grass under the Feet of
his Son Maximilian King of Bohemia in the design he had to get Mary Queen of
England: for the Emperor had pretended to aid him, and in the mean time got her
for his own Son Philip. This wrangling went so far, that Maximilian's Nephew
had like to have made War upon him; He sought the Alliance of the German
Princes for this very purpose, and hearkened to the Kings Envoyez who proffered
him his. However the mediation of their common friends appeased that Domestique
Quarrel.

The same night the Battle of Renty was fought, came news to the Camp of the
Battle at Mercian in Siennois, which much allayes the Emperors trouble and
grief, and the joy of the French. Now before we speak of this Event we must in
gross relate the success of that War. At the beginning the Duke of Florence,
who equally feared the Imperialists and the French, and would prevent the ruin
of his Medium to compose the difference; which was out, that Sienne should
remain free in its dependence on the Empire, and amity with France. But the
Pope whose Interest he made use of, did not act cordially. The Holy Fathers aim
was to bring that Estate under the power of the Emperor, because he made him,
or at least left him room to believe and hope that he would invest Fabian Son
of his Brother Baldwine with it: therefore of his own head he added one
condition to those of the Duke of Florence, which she well knew the Siennois
would never accept; which was, that a Cardinal, to be named by him, should be
put into the City, to serve as Chief for that Republique, with a Garrison of
Twelve Hundred Men.

The Emperor on his part was not sorry this Negotiation broke off, that he
might have an employment for Peter de Toledo, and remove him from being
Viceroy of Naples, where his ill Conduct had caused most dangerous Tumults
about the business of the Inquisition. This Lord had not been a Month in
Tuscany but he died: Garsias his Son took the Command of the Imperial Army,
Duke Cosmo having refused it.

Paul de Terms Commanded then in that Country for the King. The Imperialists
having Twenty Thousand Foot in that Mountainous Region, gained most of the
places, as well along the Seashore as the Valley of Chiana: but they got
nothing but Blows at Montalcini. Thereupon they had notice the Turks Fleet was
at Sea, and that on the other hand Brissac had gained great advantages in
Piedmont; this news obliged them to send back the best part of their Forces to
the Kingdom of Naples, and into Milanois.

Cosmo was much astonished: he saw himself forsaken by the Imperialists, after
he had broken with the King. It was believed he would then willingly have
complied, had they known how to press him in that juncture: but they gave him
time to recover himself of his first fears, and resolve to stand it out come
what would.

In which he was the more confirmed, for that the great Turkish Fleet Commanded
by Dragut and joined with the French Galleys, of whom the Baron de la Guard was
General, having made a descent upon the Coasts, and in the Island of Elbe, took
only some little places, and durst not attaque either Piombino which is on the
Terra-firma, nor the Fortress of Porto-Ferrario which he had built in the
Island. From thence that Armada passed to Corsica carrying thither Terms and
the greatest part of the French Commanders and Nobility who quitted Sienna,
imagining there was no further danger.

These passages happened in the Year 1553. but in 1554. the King sent thither
Peter Strozzi, newly made Marshall upon the Death of Annebaut, to Command his
Forces in the place of Paul de Terms. This employment was procured him by the
Queen to whom he was related, but by obliging her Cousin she ruined the Kings
Affairs. For as Strozzi was a mortal Enemy to the Medicis, Cosmo fancied he had
expressly made choice of him to renew the intrigues for the liberty of the
Florentines, and to encourage them to shake off their Yoke, so that being
exasperated to the highest degree, he observed no measures, but openly declared
against the French and against Sienna.

The Cardinal of Ferrare who had the intendance General of the Government for
the King at Sienna, took likewise some umbrage and Jealousy at this Mareschals
Arrival, who notwithstanding endeavored to condescend to him in all things:
insomuch that from that Minute, he grew very careless, neglected to carry on
those practices and negotiations France then had, as well at Rome, as with the
other Princes of Italy, and let slip all those means and opportunities
wherewith they might have kept things still in very good order and condition.

Cosmo had chosen for General of his Forces John Jacques Medequin Marquess of
Marignan, who embraced this opportunity to make the World believe he was of the
House of the Medicis, though he were but the Son of a Maltostier, or
Tax-gatherer. Having invested Sienna by the taking of several small places
round about it, The Emperor remanded him to give him the Government of Milan,
which he took from Ferdinand de Gonzague. The Duke had much ado to get lieve to
keep this General with him till the Siege were over. The Emperor therefore
substituted Gomez de Figueroa in the stead of Gonzague; who being Piedmont to
decline very much.

The first three Months the Duke of Florence had the disadvantage: Ascanius de
la Corn one of his Commanders, thinking to surprise Clusio lost Twelve Hundred
Men, and was made Prisoner by a double dealing intelligence; Strozzi defeated
Medequin in a Ren-contre near Petia, where he slew him Two Thousand Men; Then
having received a great re-inforcement brought him by Octavia Farnese and the
Count de Miranda, he regained one of the Bastions of Sienna which Malatesta had
surprised by treachery, and ransacked over all the Dukes Country to the very
Gates of Florence.

But this fortune changed immediately: Leo his Brother who was just Arrived
with Twelve Galleys, with which he lay at Port-Hercole expecting a
re-inforcement that was to come from Provence, was slain by a shot from behind
a Hedge, as he was viewing the ill favored Castle of Scarlin. Then himself
coming to relieve Marcian besieged by Medequin, lost a Battle near that City.
The sault was laid upon his presuming to make a retreat in the open daylight
before an Enemy stronger then himself, the cowardice of the Count de la
Miranda, who sled at the beginning with all the Cavalry whom he commanded as
Colonel, and the treachery of some Italian Companies of his Vanguard who
proved to be Turn-Coats. He escaped to Montalien, where he rallied up what he
could of those shattered Forces, and did yet give the Florentines a great deal
of trouble.

He had entreated the King to let him have some good Officer to be his Second,
particularly to Govern the City of Sienna; He sent him Blaise de Montlue,
whether of his own Choice, or named by the Guises; which was the ruin of that
Republique, for the Constable considering him as the Creature of his
adversaries, did not care he should Succeed, and so sent no relief that way. He
came into that Country much about the time when Leo was slain before Scarlin.

During all this Reign there were diverse changes made amongst the Officers of
the Finance and Judicature, and great number of Creations, all to get Money,
the thirsty Ministers inclining the King to draw the purest Blood of the Nation
to satisfy their greedy appetite. The Parliament of Paris seemed to have too
much power, and sometimes opposed their injustice, they made it Semestre, (that
is one half to sit and attend Six Months, and then the other, alternately) and
almost doubled the number of the Judges, who till then were not above one
Hundred, taking in the Six Masters of Requests, and the Twelve Dukes and Pairs.
The Edict for this was not verified, and yet it took place: but within three
years after, when they had sold all those new Offices, they suffered the two
parts to be joined again in one.

By another Edict they augmented the number of the Kings Secretaries, who were
Sixscore already (that is to say, more by half than was necessary) and added
Fourscore, so that in all there were Two Hundred.

By another, yet, they set up a Parliament in Bretagne, composed of four
Presidents, two and thirty Counselors, two Registers, two Advocates, and an
Attorney for the King. They divided it into two Semestres See a little above.
, in one of which the Officers were necessarily to be Natives of that Province.

Necessity extorted from the Ministers, for those of Guyenne, what compassion
toward those people had never been able to obtain. Observing there was a great
deal of danger, and yet a much greater expense in settling the Gabelle in that
Province, they took it off, but constrained the people to pay Twelve Hundred
Thousand Crowns to redeem themselves from that vexation.

Strozzi at Marcian, the Marquess de Marignan being Master of the Field, took
most of the places belonging to that little State, and laid a formal Siege to
Vienna, which he had before invested. Blaise de Montluc kept up the Spirits of
the Siennois, and withstood the Attaques of the Enemies near Eight Months, as
he particularly relates in his Memoires, and Commentaries. At length his
provisions failing, extreme Famine forced him to capitulate. This was upon the
One and Twentieth of April.

faith, he soon subjugated and fettered that unfortunate City, and gave it to
his Philip, who in Anno 1558. yielded it to the Duke of Florence, retaining
only the maritime places. And indeed the chief Citizens foreseeing or guessing
the Imperialists would not make good the Treaty, went out with the French
Garrison, to the number of Eight or Nine Hundred, and retired to Montalcino. In
that City they chose them Magistrates, and preserved the Form of their
Republic, till the time of the Peace betwixt France and Spain, in the year
1559.

Brissac Besieged Valfenieres in Piedmont, and the Spaniards were in the Field
to relieve it, when the Battle of Marcian was fought. The news thereof
heightened the courage of the Enemies very much, and it was to be fear^d it
might cast a great damp upon the spirits of the French; so that he found fit,
by the advice of his Council of War, to raise the Siege.

Some time afterward, having given the Enemy a repulse, and thinking he had
put all Piedmont in a condition of safety, at least for some Months, he formed
a great design. It was to have gone straight forward resolutely to Sienna with
a Body of Eight Thousand Foot, (he had Fifteen or Sixteen Thousand of the best
in the World) to fall immediately upon the Besiegers, and force one of their
Quarters to put Provisions into the City. But the jealousy his great
reputation gave to those that Governed the Kings Mind, would not permit him to
execute so brave an exploit. The Constable, though related to him, did not wish
him well, he having obtained the Government of Piedmont by the Craft of the
Duchess of Valentinois, and without his knowledge, nay even in despite of him,
who was then upon the point of endeavoring to have it for his Nephew Gaspard
de Coligny Chastillon. The Duke of Guise highly esteemed him, and yet as the
brave cannot well endure one another, he very often took occasion to quarrel,
and thwart him; Thus to ruin his reputation and fame, they ruined the Kings
Affairs in Piedmont.

And yet all these obstructions could not hinder him from taking this year
Vercel and Ivree, nor when he had fortified Saint la, from completing a design
he had contrived upon Casal, by the intelligence of a Schoolmaster, whom the
desire of Gain had wrought upon to show them a certain place where they might
scale it. It was upon a Shrove-tide Festival, when Figuerba, and all the
Nobility of the Spanish Army were come thither to make a Carousel. The City
being taken Figueroa cast himself into the Citadel: the Marshall caused it
immediately to be battered, and in a few days forced it to capitulate.

Mary and the Cardinal Pool her Cousin, fearing lest the quarrel betwixt the
two Kings should embroil the English in a War, earnestly desired to procure a
Peace between them. Their great instances engaged them to send Deputies betwixt
Calais and Ardres to treat. They Arrived there the one and twentieth of May.
For their accommodation several Tents were set up, containing a large Hall in
the midst of them, having four Gates, one to the East for the Popes Legates,
one at the West part for the English Ambassadors, one in the South for those of
France, and one on the North for the Emperors. The two Princes, according to
the Proposals made by the English, agreed well enough about the referring all
their differences to the judgment of the Council: but the King declaring he
would not restore the Duke of Savoy till the Emperor surrendered up Navarre to
Jane d'Albret, and Piacenza to the Farneses, the Assembly broke up without
concluding any thing.

Neither the one nor the other were very well prepared for a War, so that this
Summer past without any great exploits. The Imperial Army after several Marches
and Skirmishes, employed themselves in fortifying the Borough of Corbigny upon
the Meuse, which they named Philip-Ville. Martin Van Rossen Marshall of Cleves
who commanded it dying of the Plague, the Prince of Orange succeeded him in
that employ.

Beyond the Alps, after the capitulation of Siena, they likewise took the
Port-Hercole. The French succeeded ill at the Siege of Calvi in Corsica. The
Marshall de Brissac took Vulpian, and though but little assisted by the Court,
made head bravely against the Duke d'Alva who succeeded Figueroa. This Duke
could bring Five and Twenty Thousand Men into the Field; notwithstanding he
received an affront before Saint Ia, being forced to raise his Siege.

May Henry d'Albret King of Navarre died at Hagetmar in Bearn. The King had a
great desire to seize upon the rest of that petty Kingdom, and to give Anthony
de Bourbon, who had Married the Heiress some Lands in exchange: but Anthony
hast'ned to go and take possession of it, and his Wife found means to preserve
it, notwithstanding the persuasions and treachery of her Officers. The King was
so fretted at it, that he dismembered Languedoc from his Government of Guyenne,
to bestow it on the constable; he refused to give that of Picardy, which
Anthony surrendered upon his going away to Lewis Prince of Conde his Brother,
and gratified Coligny with it.

After his departure, it happened that la Jaille being gone to make incursion in
Artois with a party of the Arriere-band, was upon his return cut in pieces by
Hausimont Governor of Bapaume; a slight shock which yet so terrified the French
that they put their Men in Garrisons.

About the same time the Diepois having Information that two and twenty great
Flemmish Vessels were returning from Spain laden with rich Goods, went and
laid in wait for them about Dover, and not staying to fire at them, went
directly aboard. Their Vessels were little and low, the other large and high
built, so that they mauled them with Shot and Granado's from above. The Fight
lasted six hours hand to hand, at length some of them took Fire which burnt
half a dozen of either Ships, and parted them sooner then otherwise they would
have done.

Jane Queen of Spain, Widow of Philip the Fair, and Mother of the Emperor
Charles V. died in Spain the Twelth of April, Aged 73 years. She had been
locked up as one distracted ever since the death of Philip her Husband, however
the Estates still reserved the Title of Queen of Spain for her, which in all
public instruments was joined with that of the Emperor her Son.

This Great Prince finding his Body grown weak, and his head crazy, not being
any longer able to support either the heavy burden of worldly Affairs, nor his
own decayed Cottage, Resolved in a Council of Women, (these were his two
Sisters) to renounce his Sovereignty. Having therefore sent for his only Son
Philip King of England to come to him, to whom the year before upon his
Marriage, he had already given the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicilia, and since
that also the investiture of the Duchy of Milan: he assembled the Estates of
the Low Countries at Bruxels the Five and Twentieth of October, and there he
Created him first Chief of the Order of the Fleece, then he resigned up those
Provinces to him. A Month after in the same City in presence of the Governors
and Deputies of his other Estates whom he had called thither for that purpose,
he yielded up and remitted to him all other his Kingdoms and Seigneories, as
well in Europe as in the new World. He had nothing now left him but the Empire,
which he held yet a year, hoping to oblige his Brother Ferdinand to resign
that up likewise to his Son.

In the Month of March of this same year, Pope Julius III. ended his life,
Marcel II. who was Elected in his place, held it but one and twenty days, and
they Elected the Cardinal John Peter Caraffa, Aged fourscore and one year old.
He was Son of the Count de Matalone in the Kingdom of Naples, and they called
him Theatin, because he had been Archbishop of Theati, and had there instituted
the Order of Clerc's Regulars who took their name from that City. Many, because
of the resemblance of the habit, have confounded the In Spain they call the
Jesuits Theatines.
Jesuits with them.

His religious life and austere manners, which made the World afraid of a
severe reformation, were immediately changed into a proud and a luxurious
huffing vanity. He was of a haughty heart and a stubborn Spirit, and yet
suffered himself to be circumvented by his Nephews, and led any way as they
pleased. Amongst the rest, he had two Sons of his Brothers, these were Charles
who had born Arms for the French under the Marshall Strozzi, and Alphonso
Count de Montorio, greatly desirous to raise themselves; the first very proud
and rash, the second more mild and moderate. To this he gave the Government of
the Church Lands, and to the other a Cardinals Hat. The Uncle and the Nephews,
for diverse injuries received, hated the Spaniards, and by a necessary
consequence all those of that party, especially the Duke of Florence and the
House of the Colonnas, who besides all this have ever been averse to the power
of the Popes.

de Sancta-Fiore Chief of the House of the Sforza's, seeing Sienna was
surrendered, and the power of the French much enfeebled on that side the Hills,
drew two of his Brothers out of the French Service, Charles one of the two by a
notorious piece of Treachery, had caused three of the Kings Galleys to be
brought to Civita-Vecchia, and his Brother Alexander pretending he had bought
them of him, seized them and conveyed them to Naples, having gotten them out
from thence by the invention of the Cardinal Sforza his Brother who surprised a
Letter from the Count de Montorio to the Governor of the City, containing an
order that they should suffer them to go forth.

His Holiness thought himself extremely offended at this Violence committed in
one of his own Ports; and at the same time the Cardinal Caraffa showed him
undeniable Evidence, (whether such as he had really discovered, or whether he
had contrived them himself to engage them to a quarrel) of a horrible
Conspiracy framed by the Spaniards against his Holiness; which much increased
the old Gentleman's choler. The Cardinal Caraffa having buzzed this in his
Brain, caused Camilla Colonna to be put in Prison, accused for having tampered
in this damnable Design, opened the Pacquets of the Duke d'Alva, where he
attested he had found good proofs of it, stopped an Envoy of Philip King of
Spain's, raised Soldiers, and by fore seized upon Palliana and Neptuna, places
which belonged to the Colonnas.

In this juncture a favorable opportunity presented for the recovery of Siena,
the scarcity of Provision was such that the people were raving mad for hunger,
and whatever care the Duke of Florence could take to send Wheat thither, they
could hardly get enough for fifteen days. So that if the Pope had but lent his
Forces to the French, and those had joined with such as they had in Garrisons,
and that Octavio Farnese who Commanded some Forces for the King in Tuscany,
would but have gone heartily about it, they might infallibly have regained that
City, by only carrying of bread to those unfortunate inhabitants. But Mendoza,
who at that time acted a Viceroy of Naples, expecting the Arrival of the Duke
of Alva, approaching the Frontiers of the Church with Ten Thousand Men, the
Pope was so much frighted, that he chose some Cardinals to endeavor to make a
Peace between the two Crowns; and in the mean time commanded Octavio to dismiss
the Forces he had at Castro and Petigliana which caused Octavio, who was
retired to Parma, to quit the service of the French, make a Treaty with the
Emperor by the mediation of the Duke of Alva, and send the Collar of the Order
back to the King.

The Holy Father would perhaps have rested there, if the Cardinal Nephew by
force of Arguments, representing those outrages the Spaniards had offered, and
persuading him that both his own person and all his House were in danger to be
destroyed by the cruel Treacheries of those Renegado Apostates, had not made
him take a resolution of Excommunicating, and declaring War against them,
though he had neither Soldiers, nor Friends, nor Money, and at most but two or
three years of life, without either Strength or Vigor. And thus it is, the
Popes are sometimes the Victimes of their Nephews, and for their sakes,
sacrifice their quiet, the Treasures of the Church, and the Peace of Italy, nay
sometimes even of all Christendom.

France was his only refuge; the Potentates of Italy are wont to flatter the
French to get their help for the Executing their Vengeance, or to make their
own advantages, then turn their backs upon them when they have gained their
ends, or if they find themselves in the least danger, they slip aside with the
earliest, French behind plunged in the Bogg and exposed alone to all the peril.
When the Pope therefore sent to the King to demand his assistance, and in
requital promised his toward the Conquering the Kingdom of Naples, the wisest
were not of opinion that he should give ear to those Propositions. They
considered besides that France was drained of Money; that they had work enough
to defend themselves against the powers of Spain, Germany, and the
Low Countries, with whom they should speedily find England joined; that it
would be a hard task to preserve Piedmont, and therefore not fit to undertake a
Foreign

They considered these things very well, but there were none so bold as to
remonstrate them to the King. They would not oppose the Cardinal de Lorrain who
embraced this business that the Duke of Guise might have the Command of the
Army in Italy. The Constable himself was content not to approve of it without
opposing it. He was well enough pleased that those Princes who stood in his
way, should go and embarass themselves in an enterprise which would carry them
out of the King's sight, and which could not but succeed ill, and turn to their
own shame: but he did not foresee that it should prove more unfortunate yet to
him then to them.

Thus was it that all the King's Ministers, some by a cursed Court-craft or
Policy, others out of an irregular ambition, engaged this Prince to that
doleful Alliance. It was rough-drawn at Paris, and finished at Rome by the
Cardinal de Lorrain. The King sent him thither expressly; and he desired the
Cardinal de Tournon might be joined with him, whom he took along as he passed
thorough Lions, though he were of a quite contrary opinion and publicly
protested that it was against his will they made use of him in so ruinous a
business.

These Cardinals being arrived at Rome in the Month of October, Signed the
League Defensive and Offensive between the King, the Pope, and the Holy See, in
all the Estates of Italy, excepting Piedmont. It was therein agreed, that
toward the expenses of the War the two Princes should deposite Five Hundred
Thousand Crowns at Venice, the King Three Hundred and Fifty Thousand, and the
Pope one Hundred and Fifty Thousand. That they should begin it either in the
Kingdom of Naples, or in Tuscany, as should be judged most convenient. That the
King should send Twelve Thousand Foot into Italy, Five Hundred Men at Arms, and
as many Light Horse, which should be Commanded by a Prince. That the Pope
should furnish Ten Thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse; that he should bestow
the investiture of Naples upon a Son of France, provided it were not the
Daufin: (but he retained a good Portion for himself, and much Lands and
Pensions for his Nephews and Friends.) That the Duke of Ferrara, and in his
absence a Prince whom the King should name, should have the General Command of
the Armies.

This League was held secret for some time, the Cardinal de Lorrain at his
going to Rome, had by his fair words, drawn in Hercules de Ferrara to be an
Allie: but his eloquence had not the same power over the Venetians. The
Cardinal Nephew did likewise employ motives of interest and those of fear. He
propounded to give them Ravenna in pawn, and Puglia when it was conquered,
threatening in case they did not make a League with him, to call in the Turks,
which they dreaded above all things: but all this could not move them.

On the other hand King Philip foreseeing the Pope would by his Sentence
endeavor to deprive him of the Kingdom of Naples, and Excommunicate him,
prepared to assemble all the Cardinals together at Pisa, to declare the
promotion of the Pope not Canonical, and by that means invalidate all that he
should do to his prejudice. He had thirteen or fourteen very sure on his side,
without reckoning such others as he might gain besides. In the mean time the
Duke of Alva, informed of those Treaties, after he had taken order for the
Affairs of Milanois and Piedmont, passed by Sea into Tuscany, where he
conferred with the Duke of Florence, and from thence went to the Kingdom of
Naples.

At the same time, the King who had resolved upon the rupture, wrote to his
Ambassador at Constantinople (his name was la Vigne) that he should speak of it
to Solomon, as if he did it for his sake, and by that means endeavor to
procure a considerable assistance. Solomon much pleased to find that a new
flame was breaking forth in Christendom, promised wonders, and made his Fleet
put out to Sea. But it served the French only to clear themselves in some sort:
For an Agent of the Kings, named Codignac, who was discontented, going over to
the Spaniards, had given the Turks some jealousy upon the Kings designing to
make himself Master of Italy, as if he from thence intended to pass into
Greece, as Charles VIII. would have done; and to increase their apprehensions
he discovered to them I know not what kind of ancient Prophesies, which
threaten that the Franc's They call the Western Christians Franc's in
opposition to the Turks who are Slaves.
shall overthrow the Empire of the Crescent.

Mary Queen of England and Cardinal Pool, the King and the Emperor were
inclined and at last brought to agree upon a general and trading Truce for five
years. It was treated at Vaucelles near Cambray, the fifth of February in Anno
1556. The Emperor contributed much to it,

When the Cardinal Caraffa heard of this Truce, he made a great complaint to
the King, that they had abandoned the interests of his House, that they left it
exposed to the vengeance of the Spaniards and the Florentines. He demanded that
for security the King would at least be pleased to put those places into the
hands of the Pope, which were yet left him in Sienna. He imagined that by this
means he should be sought to by those Princes, and that they would be glad to
buy his amity: and when the King had refused them, he importuned his Uncle so
much that he condescended he should go Legate into France, to dispose the King
to break the said Truce.

He came in a proud Equipage: but concealing his Design, and giving out it was
to labor for a Peace between the two Crowns; He saluted the King at
Fontainbleau, made him a Present of a Sword and an Hat which had been
Consecrated.
blessed by the Pope, and entertained him in private with his grand Designs.
The King was very irresolute: but in the end the Legates vast promises, and the
opinion he possessed him with, that nothing was able to resist his power, and
withal the artificial address of Valentinois, who had already made Alliance
with the Guises, by giving one of her Daughters to the Duke of Aumale, with the
intrigues of the Queen who desired a War in Italy to employ her Kinsman the
Marshall de Strozzi there, thrust him into the Precipice, and made him resolve
to declare a War against the Spaniard. But before this, the Council thought
expedient to send to the Emperor and to King Philip, to admonish them to recall
the Duke of Alva and his Forces out of the Territories of the Holy-See. They
had already taken diverse places there, and even the City of Ostia, which the
Nephews had neglected to provide.

The Legate made his entrance into Paris with the Magnificence usual on such
Ceremonies. At Court and in the City he showed himself a Cavalier to the
Nobility, a Gallant in the Ladies Company, of a merry humor amongst the gay
people; made Courtship to the Duchess of Valentinois, and gave her
extraordinary fine Presents both from his Holiness, and from himself. The Queen
being brought to Bed of Twin-Girls, he had the honor to be Godfather to one of
them, and gave her the name of Victoria, as expressive of the great advantages
the League between the Pope and the King would acquire in Italy: but soon after
this presage vanished with the life of that Princess.

In the mean time, whilst the Army they were to send into Italy was making
ready, they gave Strozzi orders to assist the Pope, to whom they sent Three
Thousand Men under the Conduct of Montluc, who made the Duke of Alva retire
from the Neighborhood of the City of Rome. Then when they had fathomed
Philip's intentions by his haughty reply, they judged it was high time the Duke
of Guise should pass the Alps.

At the beginning of March a Comet with a flaming Train was visible in the
Eight Degree of Libra, and lasted but twelve days only. The Emperor fancied
this Phenomenon called him to the other World, so that not being able to gain
his Brother to a consent of yielding the Empire to his Son, he Commissioned
some Ambassadors to carry his Renunciation to the Electoral College. However
they went not till two years after, because of the War new breaking out between
the two Crowns, and Three of the Electors were dead.

Empp. Ferdinand Brother of Charles V. R. 8. years. and Solomon.
That done he Embarked at Sudburg in Zealand, about the beginning of
September, and went into Spain where he retired into the Covent of Saint Just
of the Order of the Hieronymites, which is in the midst of a delicious Valley,
surrounded with high Rocks, in the Province of Estramadura, eight Miles from
Placentia, near the Borough of Scarandilla. It is believed this was otherwhile
the place of Sertorious his retirement. He reserved no more to himself of all
his great Train, and his large-possessions, but twelve Men, a little Horse to
ride out for Pleasure and Air, and one Hundred Thousand Crowns Pension for his
life. As he had forsaken the Court and his Power, they

Guise being brave, courteous and liberal, all those that were indeed brave
either amongst the Soldiery or the Nobility followed him. In the beginning of
January, Brissac accompanying him as far as the Po; he attaqu'd Valentia,
because the Spaniards had refused him passage and gained it. At the same time
the Admiral de Coligny tried an enterprise upon Doway, and having failed
overrun Artois and burnt the little City of Lens. Thus the Truce between the
two Crowns was broken.

Valentia being taken, Brissac and all the chief Officers of Piedmont would
have had them push forward into Milanois, quite unfurnished of Soldiers, and
much startled: but the Kings express Orders would not allow the Duke to follow
that advice: and it was to be feared if he staid there, the Pope might agree
with the Spaniard. This consideration, and perhaps the instigation of the
Cardinal his Brother, obliged him to march directly to Rome in full hopes of
conquering the Kingdom of Naples, to which their House ever had pretensions.

He could not persuade the Duke of Ferrara, who was to have had the general
Command of the Armies for the League, either to quit his Country, nor to let
him have his Soldiers. He was received at Rome, and by the Holy Father with
great honor, after which diverse Councels of War were held, and brave and
honorable Propositions made, but there was nothing in a readiness to execute
them.

The Nephews had provided nothing that was necessary; they had little Money,
and less heart to disburse it. It was believed also, and the Duke of Guise was
of that opinion, that at the very time he entered into Italy, they had made
their accommodation with the Spaniards, and that they had given him the trouble
of coming as far as Rome only to make their conditions the better and get the
greater securities. Whilst he was in Rome, the Pope created ten Cardinals, some
out of favor, others to strengthen his party with friends, and the rest for
Money. These Ceremonies kept the Duke there during the whole Month of March, so
that he was not with his Army till the Ninth of April.

He entered into the Kingdom of Naples upon the vain promises of the Caraffa's,
attaqu'd Campiglio which he forced, and afterward a Civitelle, where the
French impetuosity ran eground. In the interim the Duke of Alva was fallen upon
the Lands belonging to the Church, and having taken many little places held
Rome as it were invested: the Excommunications the Pope cast upon him, and the
Colonna's, broke no heads; he was forced to cry out help! and call back the
Duke of Guise. He returned therefore into Romagnia, and there, though nothing
else succeeded well, he received, (good luck for him) the news of the
unfortunate Battle of Saint Quintin.

The Truce being broken between the two Crowns, Philip thought it concerned his
honor not to omit any thing that might evince the Reputation of his Courage
and Power. He raised an Army of Fifty Thousand men, and moreover knew so well
how to manage the spirits of the English, that although at first they had
limited him with many restrictions, and had no mind to concern themselves in
his Affairs beyond their Island, nevertheless they suffered themselves to be
induced to take up his quarrel. Queen Mary sent to declare War against the
King, a Herald brought him the defiance to Reims. He received it with disdain,
as coming from a Woman; and knew how to oppose and match her well enough with
another. I mean Mary Queen Regent of Scotland, who gave her so much work in her
own Country, that instead of Thirty Thousand Men she promised her Husband
should be landed in France, she could not send thither above Ten Thousand.

The Duke of Savoy who was Governor of the Low Countries, and commanded
Philips Army, having for a whole Month feigned to Attack several Towns,
sometimes in one place sometimes in another, came the third day of August and
lay down before Saint Quentin, which was unprovided of Men and but ill
Fortified. The Admiral de Coligny had only the time to Force his way in
thorough the Enemies Camp, with about Six or Seven Hundred Horse, and two
Hundred Foot.

Sum with the Kings whole Army designing to send some into the Town thorough
the Marshes: but this was done with so much precipitation, that there hardly
got in Five Hundred with Dandelot his Brother, Colonel of the French Infantry.

After this exploit, the Constable retiring in sight of the Enemy, in the open
daylight (it was the Tenth of August the Feast day of Saint Laurence)
embarrassed with Baggage, and Victuallers, or Sutlers, weaker by one half then
the Enemy, particularly in Horse, was so briskly charged by the Duke of Savoy,
between the Villages of Essigny and Rizeroles, that he had not leisure to give
necessary orders. His Cavalry were put to the rout, his Infantry stood firm,
but were all Massacred. He was made Prisoner, and with him Montberon his young
Son, the Dukes of Montpensier and de Longueville, the first wounded in the
Head, Ludovic de Gonzague since Duke of Nevers, the Marshall de Saint Andre,
the Rhinegrave Colonel of the Germans, ten Knights of the Order (there were in
all not Forty) and three Hundred Gentlemen. There were Six Hundred likewise
slain, besides three Thousand Foot and Horse, amongst whom was found John de
Bourbon Duke of Enghien. They took almost as many Prisoners. The Enemies lost
not in all above Fourscore or a Hundred men.

This was named the Battle of Saint Quentin, from the City, or of Saint
Laurence, because of the day it was fought on. The Valor and Prudence of the
Duke of Savoy, and the brave exploits of Count Egmont, were the principal
causes of the Spaniards Victory, one of the most renowned and glorious they
ever gained, and the most doleful and fatal to France of all they ever lost
since those of Crecy and Poitiers. The Duke of Nevers, the Prince of Conde, the
Count de Sancerre, Francis eldest Son of the Constable, and many other Officers
of note, made their escape with the greatest part of the Cavalry, and being
retired to la Fere, did happily enough provide for the security of the Frontier
Towns.

The fright and terror was greater yet then the loss. We know not what it might
have produced if the Duke of Savoy had marched directly to Paris, or if a
design he had upon Lions had been well managed: but as to the first Philip
would not suffer him to march in any further, fearing lest under those
advantageous circumstances, a certain negotiation that he had set on foot the
preceding Winter, should end in an Accommodation with the King, which would
have restored him to his Country, and by consequence have unhinged him from the
Spanish Party. And as for the enterprise upon Lions, the Baron de Polvilliers
who was to have favored it with Fifteen Thousand Germans, did but only enter
into Bresse, and marched out again immediately.

The Duke of Savoy was therefore much against his will, forced to stick to the
Siege of Saint Quintin. King Philip came thither in Person fifteen days after,
which was upon the seven and twentieth of August, and brought Ten Thousand
English, and as many Flemmings. France had been lost if they had pursued their
point; and indeed Charles V. having received the news of this important
Victory, asked the Courier if his Son were in Paris. The Admiral having staid
too long by three or four days to Capitulate, saw the Town stormed at five
several breaches, and was taken Prisoner with Dandelot his Brother, who got
away the following Night.

Philip's Army passed the remainder of the Campaign in taking the Catelet, Han,
and Noyon, and about the end of Autumn was wasted away about the one half, the
English being withdrawn their haughtiness not agreeing with that of the
Spaniards, and the Germans for want of pay. A good part of these came over to
the Kings Service.

During the Universal trouble which flowed from the loss of Saint Quintin, the
Religionaries had the Confidence to Assemble in the Night time at Paris in a
House at the upper end of the Street Saint Jacques. One named John Masson was
the first that was Instituted Minister in this City in the year 1555. The
People who observed them coming out thence fell upon them, and took above a
Hundred, amongst whom were Persons of Quality, nay even some Maidens belonging
to the Queen. They were charged with strange Crimes, it was said they Swiss
Protestants, who interceeded for them. The King standing in need of their
Swords, was obliged to relent somewhat of his severity.

Amidst the fear and dispiritedness all France lay under, particularly Paris,
it is believed that if but only a Thousand Horse had appeared on this side the
Oyse, that great City would have remained a desert. They labored hard
therefore to fortify it, the King gave Orders to raise Twelve Thousand Swiss,
and Eight Thousand Germans, sent to all French Men, Nobles, or not, who had
formerly served in the War, to come to Laon to the Duke of Nevers; to Brissac
and the Governor of Mets, to send him part of their old Companies; and to the
Duke of Guise, that quitting all other designs, he should return with his Army.

He was likewise advised to have recourse to Solomon. La Vigne his Ambassador
made instant Suit to that Prince, to lend him two Millions of Gold, and send
his Naval Force to him, but with Order they should Winter in his Ports of
France, because they lost the best of their time in going and coming. As to the
Money, Solomon excused himself by Pleading that they were forbidden by their
Law This is their ordinary excuse.
to lend any to Christians, for which reason he had already refused it to King
Francis: but for his Fleet he promised he would send a very powerful one, very
well Equipped, to act jointly with the Kings, or else separately, as they would
appoint, or desire.

Whilst these things were negociating in the East, the great Cities of France
opened their Purses freely enough to the King, Paris furnished him with Three
Hundred Thousand Livers, and the rest in proportion; Fifty Lords of note
proffered him to keep and defend Fifty Places at their own expense. It was then
he really found that the This is what his Father told him at his death.
French are the best People in the World, and that it was both hard-heartedness
and ill Polity, to vex them by extraordinary Imposts, since they would bleed so
freely for the necessities of the State.

When the Duke of Guise had received the Kings orders to return, he Counseled
the Pope to make his Accommodation. The Holy Father made it honorably as he
could wish in such a juncture. For it was agreed they should surrender up all
his Places to him, that he should absolve the Duke of Alva and the Colonnas,
and that that Duke should ask his Pardon in the name of King Philip.

The King had foreseen that the Duke of Ferrara would also make his
Accommodation; wherefore that he might not do it without his participation and
to his prejudice, he sent him word he approved of it. The Caraffas base and
perfidious Friends, did already Treat with the Spaniards to Invade the
Ferrarois, and to share it between them. The Duke d'Alva made his entrance into
Rome upon the very same Horse, with the same honors, and as great
demonstrations of joy expressed by the Nephews, as the Duke of Guise had done.

This Duke having sojourned ten or twelve days in a Castle of Strozzi's near
Rome, whilst the Pope was making his Treaty, took Shipping at Civita-Vecchia
with Two Thousand Select men, and some of his best Officers, and left the
Conduct of the rest of the Army to the Duke d'Aumale his Brother, who brought
it back into France by Bolonnois, Ferrarois, the Country of the Grisons and
Swisserland.

The return of the Duke of Guise seemed to have brought back with him the
Courage of the Kings drooping Council and of his flying Forces. They proposed
to give him the Title of Viceroy, which being thought too ambitious, they gave
him that of Lieutenant General of the Kings Armies, within and without the
Kingdom, which was verified in all the Parliaments. After he had saluted the
King, he had order to go to Compiegne and draw the Army together. Thus did the
ill-fortune of France prove to be his good fortune, and the falling of the
Constable his exaltation.

The King now wanted nothing but Money, for this he Assembled the Estates at
Paris the sixth of January in the year 1558. since King John's time they have
served for little else but to increase the Subsidies. It was this time thought
fit to divi de them into four, distinguishing the third Estate from the
Officers of Justice

One cannot too often or in too large Characters make mention of a couple of
Edicts which were made this year; The one to retrench the abuses of Clandestine
Marriages; The other to secure the Lives of Poor Infants born out of Wedlock.
This ordained that Women and Wenches who had concealed their great Bellies, and
could not make proof that their Children had received Baptism and Burial,
should be Condemned to Death as Convicted of Murder, and making them away. The
other vacated all Marriages made by the Children of any Family without the
consent of their Father and Mother, unless the Sons when they so contracted
were above Thirty years of Age, and the Daughters Five and Twenty. And to put
the stronger curb upon the amorous fancies of young giddy People, they added
the Penalty of Disinheritance.

The particular Interest of the Constable procured this last Edict. His eldest
Son had engaged himself with the Damoiselle de Pienne, a very beautiful Woman
and of a good House, by verbal Contract; The Father who desired to disengage
him from her, to match him with the Kings natural Daughter, widow of Horatio
Farnese, had for this purpose applied himself to the Pope, and had sent his Son
to Rome to solicit that Affair; but finding the too rigid Pope, put off the
decision and delayed him, he was advised to seek his remedy in France, and
impetrated this Edict of the King. And that it might effectually serve his
turn, he had caused to be added to it, that seeing it was founded upon the Law
of God Honor thy Father and thy Mother.
, it should have a retroactive effect, or retrospect.

Now his Son having declared in Court that the promise he made to the
Damoiselle, was but conditional if his Father would consent, which he would not
do, the Parliament declared that the Engagement was null and of no value; after
which he Married the Kings natural Daughter. This Wedding being over, the
Constable went to Saint Quentin, where he lost the Battle, his Liberty, and his
favor almost to boot.

Guise, whose success surpassed the very hopes and expectation of all the
World; In eight days time, being from the first of January to the eight, he
had taken Calais, and in a few days more the Town of Guisnes, which was razed,
and that of Hames. The Governor of Calais was kept Prisoner with Fifty Persons
of Note, but all the rest were turned out, both Soldiers and Inhabitants.
Edward III. had done the very same to the French, when he gained it from them
two hundred and ten years before.

Thus were the English wholly expelled out of France, they not having one foot
of Ground left them; and this was the fruit they reaped by the Alliance their
Queen had made with Spain; upon which the Pope said very ingeniously, That the
loss of Calais was the Dower of that Princess.

Such as were enviers of the Duke endeavored to diminish his Fame, by
attributing the first design of this enterprise, some to the Constable, others
to the Admiral, which might well be true: but their mouths were stopped when
about the latter end of the following Spring, he gained the strong Town of
Thionville, which covered and secured Mets, and enlarged the Frontiers on that
side. It surrendered the two and twentieth of June, the Marshall de Strozzi was
slain in the Trenches by the shot of a great Arquebuse, or Musket discharged
on a Rest. His Staff was bestowed on the Lord de Terms.

The rumor of his great exploits was not likely to comfort the Constable in
his Captivity, or rejoice his friends who saw him eclipsed by a young Prince,
whose virtue captivated Fortune, as it did the Affections of the people and men
of the Sword. From this Hour the jealousy that was between those two Houses,
proceeded to the forming of two contrary parties in the Kingdom, as we shall
find.

Whilst he was in Luxemburgh, the Marshall de Terms esteemed a great Soldier,
took Dunkirk and Bergue, ravaged all that Coast, and at his return besieged
Graveline at that time but little fortified. Hearing Count Egmont was marching
toward him with an Army twice stronger then his own, he repassed the River Aa,
at low water: but Lamoral doubling his pace and getting over much higher, was
then before him, and forced him to give Battle near the Seaside. The multitude
of the Enemies and the horrible Tempests of Canon-shot poured by English Ships
which happened to lie on that Coast, overwhelmed the French who fought as
desperadoes. Almost all of them perished, and Terms was taken Prisoner.

This check did again heighten the glory of the Duke of Guise, as if he had
been the only man in whose hands the Kings Sword could be prosperous. But that
which raised his Authority yet higher, was the Marriage of the Queen of Scots
his Niece with the Daufin. The Nuptials were solemnized at Paris the Four and
Twentieth of April; and the Ambassadors who were sent into Scotland with the
Deputies, harangued before the Estates so effectually, that they granted the
Daufin the Crown, and the rest of the Regal Ornaments; which the English had
denied to Philip.

In the Month of February the Ambassadors of Charles V. carried his
Renunciation to the Flectors assembled at Franckfort, who upon the Fourteenth
of March transferred the Empire to Ferdinand, and swore faith and obedience to
him. The Pope approved not this Election, and maintained it was null as well as
the Rennnciation of Charles V. because they had not the approbation of the
Holy-See either for the one or the other; for he pretended they had no right of
Election but in case of death only; and besides the Princes that had Elected
him had forfeited that power by their Heresies. His head was so possessed with
this opinion, that he did all he possibly could to make the King of the same
mind, and renew a League with him against the House of Austria. And though he
could find no body that would support him in this Sentiment, he persisted
therein notwithstanding to his death, which happened in the Month of August of
the following year. But Pius IV. his Successor, confirmed the Imperial Dignity
to Ferdinand.

His Brother Charles V. after he had lived two years in the solitude of Saint
Just, was seized with a desperate Ague, which carried him off the one and
twentieth of September, the Fifty Ninth year of his Age. A Comet that appeared
the thirteenth of August in Berenices hair, the Tail turned toward Spain, was
as a Flambeau lighted to lead the way to his Funeral Pomp.

The Summer come, the two Kings took the Field with the two most numerous
Armies that had been on foot in all this Age, and encamped near each other,
Philip on the River of Antie, and Henry along the Sum. They lay there almost
three Months without having any other Ren-contre besides one Skirmish, because
they were then upon propositions for an Accommodation. The Popes Nuncios made
the first mention of it, the Constable and the Marshall de Saint Andre, whose
favor was in a languishing condition at Court, got Philip to give some Ear to
it, making use for that purpose of the interest of the Duke of Savoy, who could
no way be restored to his Estates but by a Peace. Christierne Duchess of
Lorrain, equally obliged to either King, as Aunt to the first and nearly Allied
to the second, having newly given her Daughter Claudia to the Duke his Son,
promoted it with much industry, and went with all the Messages to and fro; so
that at length she brought it to a Conference between their Deputies, where her
self and her Son assisted as Mediators. Which proved a great reputation and
honor to them both in all the Courts of Christendom.

Two Months before, which was in October, the Constable was freed from his
imprisonment upon his parole, and came to wait upon the King at Amiens, who
received him with inexpressible demonstrations of affection, even to the making
him lie in his own Bed. It is said, that this Lord having had notice the Kings
affection toward him declined very much, recovered it again by the Credit of
the Duchess of Valentinois, he seeking her Alliance, and treating of a Match
between his Son Danville, with Antoinetta, Daughter of Robert de la Mark and
Frances de Breze, who was the Daughter of that Duchess.

He had already agreed with the Spaniards on all the Articles of Peace: but
fearing lest he might alone be charged with the reproach of a Treaty so
disadvantageous, he contrived it so that the King upon the winding of it up,
should join with him the Cardinal Lorrain, Marshall de Saint Andre, John de
Morvillier Bishop of Orleans, and Claude de l'Aubespine Secretary of State.

The Conference began in the Abbey of Cercamp the fifteenth of October, and
from that time the two Kings dismissed their Forces. The difficulty concerning
Calais, was the greatest Remora, Queen Mary would by all means have it again,
the King would needs keep it. Thereupon that Princess happened to dye without
November was the day of her decease, and the sixteenth that of the Cardinal
Pool her dear Cousin, who had taken great pains to restore the Catholic
Religion in England. About this time the two Princes made a Truce for two
Months, then their Deputies parted.

Elizabeth succeeded Mary, pursuant to the Will of Henry VIII. Philip did yet
for some time carry on the interest of Elizabeth, then abandoned them, lest
they should prejudice his own. He had likewise some design of Marrying her, or
at least to get her for his Uncle Ferdinand's second Son: but the King who had
great reason to hinder that Alliance, and not suffer Elizabeth to take that
Crown which he believed did belong to his Sons the Dausins Wife, so ordered it
that the Pope received the Envoy sent by that Princess to him, but ill, and
treated her as illegitimate. This injury made her determine openly to embrace
the Religion of the Protestants, who made no doubts concerning her, and to
repeal all Acts made by Mary, and corroborate and revive those of Edward and
put them in force.

January at Cateau in Cambresis, where in few days they came to a final
agreement on all the Articles. Elizabeth fearing to be left alone, sent her
Deputies thither also.

By the Treaty between France and Spain, that of Crespy and the preceding were
confirmed. The two Kings mutually restored all they had taken from each other
for eight years past. The King restored the Duke of Savoy to all his Lands and
Estates, yet still reserved the right he had: but whilst that could be examined
by Commissioners on either part (which was to be done within three years time)
he kept by way of pawn or Security Turin, Pignerol, Quiers, Chivas, and
Villeneuve of Ast. Moreover he quitted all those he held in Tuscany to the Duke
of Florence, and those in Corsica to the Genoese; gave his Sister Margaret in
Marriage to the Duke of Savoy with Three Hundred Thousand Crowns in Gold, and
his Daughter Isabella to King Philip with Four Hundred Thousand.

The people who always desire Peace at what price soever, testified a great
deal of joy. The Constable and the Marshall de Saint Andre stood in need of it
to recover their former favor, which was in the wain: but the Guisian party,
the sage Politiques, the whole Nobility, highly blamed it, as a manifest
juggle, or Cheat, whereby France was looser of one hundred ninety and eight
strong places for three only which were given them, these were Han, le Catelet,
and Saint Quentin.

When Queen Elizabeth found the Treaty went forward, and the Deputies for King
Philip, who pretended to manage her concerns, but acted very coldly, obtained
nothing for her advantage or interest, She would needs Treat upon her own
single account. She got little more by it. It was agreed that the King should
either render up Calais to her, and the re-conquer'd Country, or if he liked it
better, pay her the Sum of Five Hundred Thousand Crowns; which being referred
to his own choice, there was no doubt but he would keep that place which is the
Key of his Kingdom.

During the Treaty, the Spaniards, God knows for what design, exhorted the King
very zealously to exterminate the new Sectaries, and hinted that there were
many of them even in his Court its self, and of great quality, amongst others
Dandelot, about whom they found some Books of that sort, when they took him at
Saint Quentin. Upon which the King sent for him, and asked him what he thought
of the Mass: Dandelot made him a very criminal reply, which enraged him so
greatly, that he was almost in the mind to have killed him. He commanded him to
be made a Prisoner, and put Blaise de Montluc into his Office, a creature of
the Duke of Guises. The Constable his Uncle had very much ado to get him out of
Prison, and restore him.

It was suspected to be the Effect of a certain Conference held between the
Cardinal de Lorrain and the Cardinal de Granvelle; that by this Stratagem the
first had a design to weaken the Constable by ruining his Nephews, or to render
France to Daggers-drawing, and of stirring up a Faction by making the
Religionaries grow desperate, believing they would join in a body when they
could find a person of quality to head them, such as was Dandelot or the
Admiral his Brother.

This year that question was decided at Venice which the Spaniards had moved to
the French concerning precedence, or rank. Doctor Francis Vargas had been there
in the quality and with the Function of Ambassador for Charles V. Emperor and
King of Spain. After the abdication of the Emperor, and about the end of the
year 1556. Philip recalled him, giving notice however to the Seigneory that he
would send him again suddenly. During his absence Loyola whom he had left in
his stead, pretended to hold the place of Ambassador for the Emperor: the
French Ambassador (this was Dominique Bishop of Lodeve) would have no such
thing allowed, and bestirred himself so that Loyola durst never appear at any
Ceremonies.

In the year 1557. Vargas being returned again, pretended to keep the same
station he had before, saying he had never been revoked: but he of France
maintained he had, since he had had his Audience of Conge, and received the
Present given to Ambassadors; that moreover Charles V. had absolutely divested
himself of the Empire, without reserving to himself one inch of its Lands, and
that therefore he had now nothing to negociate or trouble his Brain withal, but
the looking after and managing his Clocks. The business was off and on for
almost a whole year: then happened the shock at Saint Quentin which much
startled the minds, and turned the thoughts and cares of the Ministers of
France to things of a more important and pressing nature. The Venetians
grounded their doubts upon Charles V. being still Emperor: but when that
pretense came once to be removed by the Election of Ferdinand which was in the
year 1558. they had no apparent reason to hesitate. They knew well enough the
King had most reason on his side, but they durst not own it: and would very
fain have referred it to the decision of the Pope, saying it belonged not to
them to make themselves Judges between two such great Princes.

The pretensions of Philip was not as yet to gain the upper hand of France, but
only to hang up the dispute upon the hedge, and stand on equal terms. The
Venetians had made a Decree in the Council des Pregadi, that the Ambassadors of
both Kings should be present at none of their Ceremonies, till the controversy
were first judged at Rome, so greatly did they apprehend to offend Philip:
Nevertheless when they observed the Kings Affairs began to look with a
promising face again, and Novailles Bishop of Dacqs the Ambassador from France,
pressed them without intermission, and by strong Arguments and Reasons, and
threatenings to be gone: they at length revoked the Decree, and ordained that he
of France should hold the first rank, according to ancient custom and usage.
They sent for him therefore to assist at the Ceremony they made upon the day of
the Visitation, being the second of July. This was eight days before the death
of the King.

The Peace being made all relented and grew soft and slack in France, the
Constable was already more then Septuaginary, besides ever unfortunate in War;
the Marshall de Saint Andre brave in his Person, but softened by luxury and
voluptuousness; the King, if we may so say, dared by the Hawk, and baffled as
who had beheld his Kingdom in extreme danger: the Guises laden with Honor,
and glad there was no occasion to keep them at too great a distance from the
Court, where they were omnipotent especially, since the Marriage of their Niece
with the Daufin.

Some have reproached them, perhaps without any reason, that from that time
they began to entertain secret Correspondencies with the Spaniard, or at least
to have a great deal of Complaisance for him that they might outdo the
Constable in this very point too, who seemed to have relinquished much of the
Interests of France for his own. Whatever it were, the Government at this time
changed their Maxims in two points, whereof one was touching the Affairs of
Italy, the other the Alliance with the Turks. For they resolved as to the
first, not to intermeddle with it any more: And for the other to renounce it
wholly likewise, as a thing very prejudicial to Christendom, of little benefit
and very scandalous to France, and which hindered the Princes of Germany from
reposing an intimate confidence, and joining in a strickt tie with them.

Ausburg, to assure them he never had any real Alliance with the Turks, and
that he was resolved to renounce it Totally. The Agents of the House of Austria
endeavored to make good advantage of this Compliment at the Port: Solomon
could believe nothing, till he had received certain News of the Peace between
the two Crowns. Then he released Ferdinands Ambassador whom he held in Prison,
and immediately made a Peace with his Master; and yet to make it appear he had
still some concern for France, he obliged that Prince, to be a Friend to his
Friends, and Enemy to his Enemies.

The five and twentieth of January, the Pope displeased with the ill-behaviour
of the Caraffa's his Nephews, and principally because they attempted to hold
him in Captivity, after he had declaimed against them with all his might in a
Consistory, stripped them of all their Offices and Dignities, and expelled them
from Rome; which furnished Pius IV. his Successor with a pre-judgment to make
Process against them, though he were indebted to them for his Pope-dome which
he gained by their contrivance. The Cardinal Caraffa was strangled in the
Castle Saint Angelo, John Count de Montebel his Brother, and the Count d'Alifan
Brother of the Wife to that John, had their Heads cut off. A lesson

There was neither City, nor Province, nor Profession, where the novel opinions
had not got footing; men of the Gown, men of Learning, and the Ecclesiastics
themselves, against their own Interest, suffered themselves to be charmed with
them; punishments did but make them scatter and increase and inflame their Zeal
the more. So that several of the Parliament, some out of a more tender and
merciful nature, others because they had embraced them, were of the mind to
moderate those to severe prosecutions. The King knowing this, sent for Giles le
Maistre first President, and two others, with the Procureur, or Solicitor
General, and commanded them to execute his Edict of Chasteau-Briand with the
utmost severity.

Le Maistre makes report to the whole Company of the Kings Commands, as they
were arguing upon that Subject, and most voices inclined toward a mitigation,
the business being in good forwardness, behold the King having notice, (as it
was presumed, from Le Maistre) comes into the Parliament, this was on the Tenth
of June, and makes them continue the debate before him. His presence did not so
much daunt them, but that three, amongst the rest Anne de Bourg Councellor
Clerc, proceeded boldly to deliver their Sentiments upon the principal points
of Religion, and concluded by demanding a Council, and that in the mean time
Executions might be suspended. He had the patience to hear them to the very
last Argument, and then to make the Clerk read over the Result of all. Having
thus discovered their opinions, he gave order to seize upon Du Bourg and Du
Faur in the place, and afterward sent to take the President, Ranconnet and the
Counselors Paul de Foix, and Anthony Fumee, all which were carried to the
Bastille. The President du Ferrier, the Counselors Viole Du Val, and Regnaute,
had met with the same treatment could they have been found. Never did that
August Assembly receive so great and so shameful a rebuke and blemish. They
appointed Commissioners for Trial of the Prisoners. The Tragical accident which
intervened three Weeks after, put some stop to those vehement prosecutions.

The Court being filled with all manner of Mirth, Divertisements and
expressions of Joy for the Nuptials of the Kings Daughter, which was celebrated
by Proxy the Seven and Twentieth of June, and there being Tournaments and
Carousels within Lists made cross the Street Saint Antoine, from the Palace
Royal des Tournelles to the Bastille: Death, as we may say, having placed
himself in Ambush amidst those pastimes and pleasures, gave a blow as fatal as
un-foreseen, which converted all those gaudy Liveries into Mourning Weeds.
About the end of the third days tilting, which was the Thirtieth of June, the
King had a great desire, (who had before broken several Lances with a great
deal of dexterity,) to Just or Tilt again with his Beaver open against the Earl
of Montgommery Son of the Lord de Lorges, one of the Captains of his Guard du
Corpse. The Earl excused himself as much as he could, but he would absolutely
have it so; now it happened

The stroke was so great that it threw him backwards on the ground, and
deprived him both of knowledge and speech. He never recovered them more; which
may convict of falsity those different discourses, which both the one side and
the other, did put into his Mouth, suitable to their diverse interests and
passions. Notwithstanding he survived yet near eleven days* and breathed not
his last sigh, till the tenth day of July. He was in the fourth Month of the
one and fortieth year of his Life, and the thirteenth of his Reign.

About the end of June the Duke of Savoy was come to Paris, accompanied with
the Duke of Brunswic, the Prince of Orange, and an Hundred Gentlemen of
Quality; He had been received with extraordinary Civility by the King, who met
him at the Foot of the great Staircase in the Louvre. When he found they
dispair'd of the Kings Life, he so much pressed the consummating of his
Marriage, that it was performed in Nostre Dame without any Pomp the ninth of
July. Margaret his Wife was in the seven and thirtieth year of her Age.

They blamed King Henry of too much Indulgence, or to speak better, too great
weakness toward his Mistress and his Favorites, but they applauded a generous
bounty in him to his Domestics, a great moderation and sweetness, an agreeable
Conversation, and a mavelous facility of expressing himself as well in
public as in particular. He might have been praised likewise for his love to
Learning (for indeed he cherished it) if the dissolutions of his Court,
authorized by his example, had not perverted the best and choicest Wits to
Compose Romances full of

Most of those Vices which ruin great States, and draw down the wrath of
Heaven, reigned in that Court; their gaming was seen in Triumph, Luxury,
Impudicity, Libertinage, Blasphemy, and that curiosity as foolish as impious,
to look into the Secrets of what is to come, by the detestable Illusions of
Magic Art.

Catherine de Medicis after a ten Years Barrenness, brought this King ten
Children, as many of the one as of the other Sex, the Eldest at this time being
but seventeen Years old. One of the Sons, and two of the Daughters died in
their Cradle. There remained four Sons and three Daughters. The four Sons were
named Francis, Charles, Alexander and Hercules; the names of the two last were
changed at their confirmation, Alexander was named Henry, and Hercules changed
for Francis. The three first reigned after each other, and all four died
without Children. The three Daughters were Isabella, Claude, and Marguerite;
Isabella Married Philip II. King of Spain, Claude Charles III. Duke of Lorrain,
and Marguerite Henry de Bourbon who was then King of Navarre, and afterward
King of France. He had besides two Illegitimate Children, Diana whom he Married
to Horatio Farnese, then to Francis Eldest Son of the Connestable de
Montmorency, and Henry who was Grand Prior of the Order of Malta, and Governor
of Provence.

The End of the Second Volume.
A Chronological Abridgment, OR, EXTRACT OF THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.

By the Sieur de Mezeray.

TOME III.

Beginning at King Francis II. and ending at the end of the Reign of Henry IV.

Translated by John Bulteel, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, Samuel Lowndes, Christopher Wilkinson,
William Cademan, and Jacob Tonson, MDCLXXXIII.

FRANCIS II.
King LIX.
Aged XVI Years and VI. Months.
POPES,
PAUL IV. 27 days under this Reign. PIUS. IV. Elected the 26 of December 1559.
S. Five Years, and eleven Months and a half.
France after the death of King Henry II. as soon as he was no more, the
Factions which were formed during his Reign, began to appear, and by an
unluckly fate met with, to fortify themselves, differing Parties in Religion,
great numbers of Malcontents, lovers of Novelties, and which was more and
worse, Soldiers of Fortune, who having been disbanded would needs get
themselves some employment at what rate soever.

On one side were to be seen the Princes of the Blood and the Constable, on the
other the Princes of the House of Guise; betwixt these two Parties, the Queen
Mother who was bargaining to make her best Market, and sided sometime with the
one, and then with the other: In the midst of all these a young King, as weak
in mind as in body, exposed to the first occupier, and the prize contended for
the Government of the Kingdom.

As for the Guises, they were Five Brothers, the Duke, the Cardinal de
Lorraine, the Duke d'Aumale, the Cardinal de Guise, and the Marquess d'Elbeuf:
we are not to make any reckoning of the three last because they acted nothing
but by the inspiration and motion of the other two. The Duke drew his Party to
him by the Reputation of his Valor, his Liberality, and his Affability, the
Cardinal de Lorraine by his Eloquence and his Learning. They were,
notwithstanding of very different humors, the Duke moderate, just, undaunted in
dangers, the Cardinal hot, undertaking and vain, puffed up with good success,
but trembling and faint-hearted at the least frowns of Fortune.

Amongst the Princes of the Blood, there was Anthony King of Navarre, Lewis
Prince of Conde, the Duke of Montpensier, and the Prince de la Roche-sur-yon.
Anthony was a voluptuous and fearful Prince, and more considerable for his
Quality then his Power; Lewis was Valiant, Hardy, and one the greatness of
whose Courage, and meanness of whose slender Fortune, made him fit to undertake
every thing. Anthony did not stand firm but abandoned his younger Brother: to
his Lutheran. His Brother followed the Opinions of Calvin.

The Guises seized upon the Kings Person, because he had Married their Niece
Mary Steward Queen of Scotland, and upon the favorable pretense of the
Catholic Religion; The others made sure of the Malcontents, the disbanded
Soldiers, and the protection of the Religionaries, whose despair was yet much
greater and stronger then their numbers.

The Marshall de Saint Andre, a Lord as brave as witty and polite, but very
Luxurious and over-head and ears in debt, devoted himself wholly to them, and
promised the Duke to bestow his Daughter upon which of his Sons he pleased,
with all the Estate belonging both to him and his Wife, reserving only the
clear revenue during their term of Life; This he did fearing to be devoured by
his Creditors should he ever happen to be expelled the Court.

The Constable a great temporiser, and who had wont to be prime Minister of
State, could not stoop now to be Inferior. He admitted the flatteries and
caresses of both Parties: but at length adhered to the Guisians, in hatred to
the novel opinions, being persuaded by his Wife, and second Son, that the Title
he bare of the first Christian Baron, would not allow him to linck himself with
those who did impugn the Catholic Religion.

The Duke of Montpensier and the Prince de la Roche Sur-Yon, though both of the
House of Bourbon, were led by the same motives, and did not so much respect the
proximity of Blood, as the name of the Ancient Church, and the King, from whom
they would not start aside for any other Consideration whatsoever.

A motive directly contrary to the Constables, cast the Admiral de Coligny and
his Brother Dandelot, Colonel of the French Infantry, on the side of those
Princes who favored the new Religion, of which they were thoroughly convinced
and persuaded, besides that they had the Honor to be Allied to the Prince of
Conde. For he had Married Elenora de Roye, Daughter of one Magdelain de Mailly,
who was their Sister by the Mothers side, she and they being Born of Louisa de
Montmorency, who was first Married to Frederic du Mailly This Marshall was
Coligny, Gaspar. under Francis I.
, Then to the Marshall de Chastillon Father of these two Lords.

When King Henry II. received his hurt, the Queen Mother was in suspense a day
or two whether to join with the Constable or the Guises. She looked upon both
the one and the other as her Enemies, being all Allied to the Duchess of
Valentinois, whom she hated mortally, though in her Husbands Lifetime she
feigned to love her even to the height of confidence. But she thought her self
much more affronted by the Constable, then the Guises, because it was he that
had last adventured to contract an Alliance with that Woman, Besides the Guises
utterly abandoned her, notwithstanding the repugnance of the Duke d'Aumale who
was her Son in Law: and withal they promised this Queen so much Service and so
great Submission, that she resolved to stand by them; To which me may add that
being Uncles to the young King, as they were, it might perhaps have been out of
the reach of her power or interest to have set them aside.

When the Constable perceived his Game was near lost, he sent in all post have
to the King of Navarre to press him to come and take that Place and Authority
his Birth justly claimed under the young King: but that Prince who was slow and
irresolute, and who withal did not much confide in him, because he had once
advised the deceased King to seize upon the remainder of his petit Kingdom, did
not make much have. This signal fault, and after this his strange
irresolutions, and the weakness of his Conduct during all this and the
following Reign, may be accounted indirectly amongst the principal and main
causes of all the Troubles and Misfortunes that befell the Kingdom of France.

Wherefore the Guises having gained the Mastery at Court, the King declared to
the Parliaments Deputies when they came to wait on him; That he had committed
the direction of his Affairs to them, that is to say, the Intendance or
Oversight of all the Affairs of War to the Duke, and that of the Finances, or
Treasury to the Cardinal. Being thus established, they considered of removing
out of the way all those that might be obnoxious. They left the Constable and
Mareschals of France no more Commission but to Bury the late King, and sent the
Princes of Conde and de la Roche Sur-Yon into Spain, the first to carry the
Collar of the Order to King Philip, the other to get the Treaty of Peace
confirmed. They likewise banished the Duchess of Valentinois from the Court:
but first obliged her to restore and deliver up the Jewels and the rich
Furniture and Chenonceaux to accommodate the Queen Mother, in exchange for the
Castle of Chaumont upon the Banks of the River Loire.

Desiring by embellishing the face of their new Government with a show of
Goodness and Justice toward the public, to condemn the Government past, they
took the Seals from Bertrandi Cardinal and Archbishop of Sens, whose reputation
was not of the best, and restored them to the Chancellor Ol vier, a person
really of a much more then ordinary merit and of great probity: but who soon
perceived they had recalled him to servitude rather then to a freedom of
function in the highest Office of the Kingdom.

The Queen Mother in the mean time persuaded the King to discharge the
Constable, and on her own score, reproached him for having said, That of all
the Children which King Henry had, there was none resembled him but a natural
Daughter of his.

She desired also that the Cardinal de Tournon night be recalled, because She
would make use of his Counsel, which she thought would be the more sincere, he
being engaged to neither party. The Guises agreed to it, and indeed it would
have been difficult for them to hinder it, besides they believed they might be
confident of him, he being a capital enemy to the Constable.

The King of Navarre crawled along by easy journeys, and made a halt at
Vendosme. The Princes of Conde and de la Roche Sur-Yon went even to that place
to solicit him to come to Court. He came at length, but too late, the Guises
had taken care he should be ill received, they did not assign him Lodgings
suitable to his Quality, he must have laid on the Floor had not the Marshall
de Saint Andre lent him his; and as soon as ever the King saw him, he told him
he had given the administration to his Uncles de Guise.

Notwithstanding all this unworthy treatment, his friends exhorted him to stand
his Ground: the Guises bethought them of a Stratagem to make him quit the Spot.
They read before him in full Council some Letters from the King of Spain, of
whom the Queen had demanded assistance against the Factious wherewith she was
threatened; The Letters imported, that in case there should be any found so
audacious as to control the Government the King had established, he offered
his whole power to chastise them. The Navarrois easily apprehended that this
might be a plausible color and pretense for him to invade his Country of
Navarre, and was counseled to go back with all possible speed to put things in
good order: but that he might leave the Court with some kind of reputation, he
got the Commission to conduct the new Queen of Spain to the Frontiers.

He went not however till after the Kings Coronation. This Ceremony was
performed the one and twentieth of September with great Pomp in the City of
Reims, by the Ministry of the Cardinal de Lorrain who was Archbishop thereof.
At their departure from thence he conducted the Queen to Navarre, being
accompanied by the Cardinal de Bourbon and the Prince de la Roche Sur-Yon. He
delivered her up to King Philips Deputies, those were the Cardinal de Burgos,
and his Brother the Duke de l'Infantado; and because it was said she should be
conducted into the Territories of Spain, and yet the delivery of her was at
Roncevaux which is within the limits of Navarre, he drew up a Protestation that
it might be no prejudice to him, and that from thence they might not make it a
consequence, that the Kingdom of Navarre was a Province dependant on Spain.
After this the Spaniards in recompense for his pains and care, gave him fair,
but empty hopes, to do him right concerning his Kingdom. He nibled at this
Bait, and the Queen Mother amused and tempted him with it as long as he lived.

In the preceding Month of August, King Philip had left the Low Countries, and
was gone into Spain by Sea, where he chose his residence for all the rest of
his life. His Father had tenderly cherished the Flemmings, and had most happily
made use both of their Councils and Arms: but he being bred in the imperious
Air of Spain, could not agree with a people that were free, and such as could
prodigally expose both their lives and fortunes for their Princes service, but
yet would not suffer themselves to be robbed of them. He left as Governess over
them Margaret his natural Sister Wife of Octavian Duke of Parma, with whom was
joined as chief Counselor Anthony Perenot de Granvelle a Cardinal, originally
a Franc-Comtois, but haughty and arrogant as a Spaniard. At his Arrival in
Spain he caused a great many to be burnt in his own presence at Seville and
Valladolid of those they call Lutherans, both Men and Women, Gentlemen and
Ecclesiastiques, as likewise the Effigies or Fantosme of Constance Ponce
Confessor to Charles V. who attended that Emperor till his death. We must not
wonder that he scrupled no more the defaming of his Fathers Memory, since, if
we will believe some, he would have made his process too, and have burnt his
bones for the Crime of Heresy, nothing hindering him from it, but this
consideration that if his Father were an Heretic, he had forfeited * his
Estates, and by consequence had no right to resign them to his Son.

Some weeks before the departure of the Navarrois, there were two Edicts made,
one of them to forbid the wearing of any Firearms, or even long Cloaks or
large Breeches that might conceal them: The second revoked all alienations of
the Demeasnes. Both the one and the other were made at the desire of the
Guises, the first for the security of their Persons, the second that they might
prejudice or gratisie whom they pleased. And indeed they gained many of the
great ones by this means; as they likewise made themselves many creatures by
the creation of Eighteen Knights of the Order of Saint Michael. Which so
debased and vllified that Order, formerly preserved with great care by the
Kings of France, that it was in raillery called the Collar for every Beast.

With the same design and that they might have Governments and Offices enough
for themselves and for their friends, they obliged the King to declare that he
would suffer none hereafter to hold two at one time. The Admiral had the
Government of the Isle of France and that of Picardy, he resigned the latter
very cheerfully, believing they would bestow it on the Prince of Conde: but the
Guises disposed of it in favor of Brissac, whom they intended to bind to their
own Party. The Constable endured a pulling by the Ears before he would lay down
his Office of Grand Maistre of the Kings Household; when he perceived that after
fair warning they were going to use force, he surrendered it to the King, who
conferred it upon the Duke of Guise. All he could do was to obtain an Office of
Marshall of France, which was created extraordinary, for Francis his eldest
Son.

After the Coronation they carried the King to Bar. The Duke of Lorrain his
Brother in Law being come to salute him there, he by Letters Patents renounced
the Sovereignty he had of Barrois, in favor of that Prince.

The Novelty and pretense of a Reformation in an Age that so much wanted it,
opened the hearts of the French to the new Religion, and on the other hand the
necessity there was to pluck up this Darnel and the like Weeds; furnished those
that governed with a fair occasion and opportunity to make themselves
formidable, even to the most innocent, who in such junctures, fear lest they
should be looked upon as Heretics how little soever tainted.

The young King believed that to execute his Fathers will, was to extirpate all
such as opposed the Catholic Belief: to this end he Created in each Parliament
a particular Chamber, or Court, that took Cognizance of no other matter. They
were named Chambres Ardentes Burning Courts.
, because in effect they burned without Mercy all such as were convicted: and
there needed no other proof but the finding them at some Nocturnal or
Clandestine Conventicle. The President Saint Andre, and the Inquisitor His name
was de Mouchy, born in a Village of the Diocese of Noyon, and his Spies were
called Mouchards. i. e. Eavesdroppers, or setters.
Demochares labored with great diligence at Paris, and sought them even in the
bottom of Cellars, upon the intelligence of their Spies, amongst others a
Tailor and two Goldsmiths who had been of that Religion.

Two young Men of these Mouchards, or Informers deposed, that in those midnight
Assemblies they did eat of the Pascal Lamb, and Roasted Pigg, and afterward
put out the Lights, and mingled in an unclean manner with those they first
happened to meet, nay one of them affirmed that upon the like occasion it fell to
his lot to encounter an Advocates Daughter of the Place Maubert, at whose House
they held such communion. This calumny was spread abroad by the populace, told
in the Louvre, and brought to the Ears of the King and Queen, and though these
Witnesses had been convict of falsehood by the Chancellor, that did not

Thus the Religionaries being pursued and punished every where, especially in
the great Cities, as Aix in Provence, Toulouze, Poitiers, and Bourges, began to
think how to defend themselves. They first made use of the Pen, and scattered
about several Libels which tended to make out, that Kings ought not to be
accounted Majors sooner then other Men; That in the mean time it belonged to
the Estates to assign them a Council; and that the Princes of the Blood ought
to have the first place and rank; that the Laws of the Land did not admit
either of Women, or Strangers; That the Guises were not natural French Men;
That besides they had pretensions upon Anjou and Provence, and even to the
whole Kingdom, saying they were descended from Charlemain; That therefore the
trusting them with the Government was to hazard the whole State. They added
many reasons and examples, to prove the administration of Cardinals had ever
been very prejudicial to France; That Francis I. though he made use of them,
yet never admitted them into the Council when it concerned the Affairs of Rome;
and that experience had fully enough demonstrated that the Venetian Polity,
which excluded all Ecclesiastiques from the management of Affairs, was very
wise, and very prosperous.

These Books wanted not forr eplies. Du Tillet one of the Registers in
Parliament made one, which at that time was torn to pieces and silenced by the
multiplicity of smart answers: but in another Season had the fortune to be
revived and brought in credit by the Chancellor de l'Hospital, and cried up as
it had been a Law of the Land.

They then were laboring in good earnest for the Execution of the Articles of
Peace. The Marshall de Brissac with much regret gave up the City of Valence,
and those in Piedmont. Those that held Thionville and the places of Luxemburgh,
went out with curses in their Mouths against those Ministers that made that
Treaty; nor could any heart be so hardened as not to be touched at the
lamentations and sad cries wherewith the Corses and Siennois endeavored to
move Heaven and Earth to compassion, when they had notice the French abandoned
them to their severe Masters. The Siennois made the last attempt their
dispairing impotency could prompt them to, for the defense of their liberty:
but in a short time, they fell under the weight of the Spanish Forces, who to
complete the measure of their misery, delivered them over to the Duke of
Florence, reserving however the maritime Towns.

There were at Court great numbers of persons of every Province, especially
Martial Men, who demanded either their pay, or some reward. The Cardinal de
Lorrain who had the management of the Treasury, was mightily importuned and
pestered with them, and moreover he apprehended some Conspiracy amidst the
multitude. Wherefore he caused an Edict to be published which commanded all
such as followed the King and Court only to solicit and beg some thing of
him, they should forbear and withdraw, upon pain of being trussed up on a
Gibbet, which for that very purpose was set up in the public place. This rude
treatment turned great numbers of those against him, that had formerly served
in the Armies.

A Quartan Ague tormented the King for some Months, which made him incapable of
applying himself to business, besides that he was naturally very weak. When he
came to be cured, many pustules appeared on his livid Face, which signified
some internal indisposition. He was therefore carried to Blois for change of
Air; whilst he staid there, some in that Country, by whomsover employed, sought
for young Infants that they might have their Blood, as they gave out to make
the King a Bath. For which reason many will needs have it that he was infected
with Naaman's Disease.

In the mean time they zealously prosecuted all such as were imprisoned for the
matters of Religion. They began with the Counselors of the Parliament of Paris
formerly mentioned. Anne du Bourg having fenced a long time for his life by
several Appeals, to the Metropolitan of Sens, then to the Primate of Lions, for
he was an Ecclesiastic and a Priest, in the end threw aside his Mask and
boldly declared that he professed a Belief contrary to that of the Roman
Church. The Zealots of his opinion had pushed him on to this resolution. They
imagined that being a man of eminent condition, of rare merit, and great
virtue, at least, as to his Morals, his example would take a mavelous
impression, and for Andre, and finding notwithstanding he still appeared, he
threatened him that God would restrain and compel him to keep away. Now some
days after, it so fell out, that this President going from the Palace, was
assassinated and shot with a Pistol, and it was currently reported the first
President was in danger of the like. The Authors of this Murder could never be
discovered, tho Robert Stuart being vehemently suspected, was put in Prison.

This incident exasperated those that Governed in such sort, that Du Bourg was
condemned to death, and after he had been degraded of his holy Orders, was
burnt in the Greve, they having first strangled him. He went to his death with
so much joy and so great show of piety, that his Execution was so far from
striking any terror, it begot compassion in every one, and inspired many with
this persuasion, that the Belief so good and so understanding a man professed,
could not possibly be bad. The other Counselors Eustace de la Port, Paul de
Foix and Lewis de Faur, were severally condemned to retract, and suspended from
their employments for some time: but the heat of these prosecutions being over,
the Parliament restored them. Anthony Fumee alone was fully and wholly absolved.

As for the other Prisoners which were in great numbers, the reiterated
commands from Court, heightning the severity of the Judges, they soon emptied
all the Goals. They were all sent to death or banishment. As for Rohert Stuard,
being able to find no favor, or yet the least recommendation in his behalf
from the young Queen, who disowned any thing of Kindred or Relation to him, he
endured the greatest torments of the Rack without confession, and by that means
was cleared.

About these times the ordinary and mean people of their own heads, or by the
suggestions of some Zealots, bethought themselves of setting up Images at all
the corners of the Streets, especially that of our Lady; they adorned them,
lighted Wax Tapers before them, and met together in Crowds singing the Litany
and other Prayers. And if any one passed by without saluting them and staying
there, or if they forgot to put something into the Box, he was taken for a
Lutheran, and beaten and dragged in the Mire, nay sometimes to a Prison. The
wiser Churchmen, who considered that those sacred Rites and that worship was
not to be used in such undecent places, nor by people of that sort, took away
asmany of those Images as they could and placed them in their Churches.

Margaret de Lorrain Mother of Queen Mary Stuard, Governed the Kingdom of
Scotland for her Daughter, assisted by Henry Clutin-Loysel who was sent thither
from France. She being disturbed by the Religionaries, of whom James (a Bastard
of the Kings) Earl of Murray was head, they dispatched to her a supply of Three
Thousand Men commanded by la Brosse a Bourbonnois. Loysel was recalled and in
his place they sent Nicholas de Pelve Bishop of Amiens, with whom they joined
some Doctors of the Sorbon, to endeavor to reclaim those that were gone astray
either by instruction and persuasion or else by compulsion.

These Forces had orders when they should have subdued the Rebels, to March
directly into England and conquer that with the assistance of the Catholics,
for the benefit of Queen Mary who pretended she was Heiress thereof, and had
already taken the Arms into her own Coat. Elizabeth having information of it,
perhaps by the Admirals means, furnished the Rebels with Twelve Hundred Men,
and those together in one Body besieged the Port of Lies, within half a League
of Edinborough. La Brosse and Sebastian de Luxemburg Martigues put themselves
into the place to defend it. There were gallant feats of Arms acted by either
party, during this Siege. At last both sides being tired with the War, made up
a Peace. In which it was agreed, that all their differences and disputes should
be judged and determined by the general Estates of the Country, and that the
King of France and the Queen his Wife should quit both the Arms and the Title
of Kings of England.

Pope Paul V. who longed for nothing so much as to establish the Inquisition
over all Christendom, made his Exit out of this World eight days after King
Henry II. The Roman People, in hatred for his having put that Yoke upon their
necks, broke his Statues, and pulled down his Arms in all places where they
could come at them. The intrigues Vargas Ambassador from Spain, and the
Caraffa's together kept the Sea vacant for above three Months: at the end
whereof was Elected the Cardinal de Medequin, Brother to the Marquess de
Marignan, by the ways and methods usual in their Conclaves. Of whom it may
truly be said, that he added the greatest luster to the sacred purple it ever
had, by bringing his Nephew the great Saint Charles Boromeus into the number of
Cardinals.



Although the Prince of Conde, the Admiral and Dandelot his Brother were
notoriously imbued, and tainted with the Novel Opinions, and favored to the
utmost of their power those that did profess them, they had not as yet dared to
declare themselves their Chiefs. In the end those miserable people being
prosecuted with all extremity united together, to extinquish those flames that
were kindled to consume them: but they did not restrain themselves to the
defensive only, their despair carried them far beyond those bounds and limits.

A Gentleman of Angoumois by name George Bary la Renaudie, one who had been
formerly condemned for some Crime, was entrusted by the Principals to go to all
the Churches of those pretended Reformed People, and persuade them to send
their Deputies to Nantes about the time when the Parliament of Rennes was to be
transferred thither. He acquitted himself so well, that there came to him at
the day appointed to the number of above one hundred and fifty.

When they had heard his harangue, and weighed the opinions of several Divines
of their Belief, who affirmed they might take up Arms in their own defense, and
make way for a free access to the King to present their Remonstrances: they
Elected for their Chef Mu^t as concealed'under Hatches*
private or nameless Chief the Prince of Conde, and under his Authority la
Renaudie; and resolved that in every Province should be chosen a certain number
of Un-Married Men, who under such Chiefs by them named, should go to Amboise,
upon a day assigned; that they should there present their Petition to the King,
and seize upon the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal de Lorrain, that they might
be brought to Trial by process before the Estates. But who could give security
or answer for them they would not have killed them out of hand, and have made
themselves Masters of the Queen-Mothers person and the King himself? This was
certainly all laid to their Charge.

The design was kept so private, that the Guises had advice of it from Foreign
Countries sooner then they discovered it in France. The time drawing near, la
Renaudie who forged a thousand fine imaginations upon the event of this
project, could not hold his tongue, but opened the whole mystery to an Advocate
of his own Religion named des Avenelles, with whom he lodged at Paris. The
Advocate discovered it to l'Allemand Vouze a Master of Requests, and l'Allemand
carried him to Court to declare particularly all what he had learned of la
Renaudie.

Upon this news the Guises first provided for the security of their own
persons, and without the least noise called all their trustiest friends about
them, gave order for the preservation of the great Cities, caused the Prince
and the Admiral to come to Court, granted an abolition of all things past to
the Religionaries, excepting to those that had conspired; and at the same time
set Guards of Soldiers and Men belonging to the Provosts upon all the Roads
leading to the Conspirators. The Duke got the Title of Lieutenant General of
the Kingdom confirmed to him, as well whilst the King should be present, as
absent, and established a Company of Musketeers on Horseback, all select Men,
who were constantly to attend the Kings Sacred Person.

Blois, and went to the Castle of Amboise, as well because that place was
stronger, as to break the measures of the Plotters. In the mean time the Duke
of Guise sent the Kings Orders into all the Provinces, with exhortations to the
Nobility, and Officers of War, to arm themselves for the preservation of the
State, and to the Governors to seize upon all such as should be found in Arms,
whether on Foot or on Horseback upon the Road of Amboise. The Prince of Conde
who was going to Court, met the Lord de Cipierre at Orleans, by whom he was
informed how the enterprise was discovered: but this hindered not his Journey
forward, nor la Renaudie (a selfwill'd fellow) from pursuing his design. But
the Court having changed their station, he was fain to change the Rendezvous
appointed for his Gang, and this was it that made them miscarry in the
execution of the contrivance.

Castelno de Chalosses, one of the chief Ringleaders, with Raunay and Mazeres
were at Noze. James de Savoye Duke of Nemours took the two last as they were
imprudently walking without the Castle: but Castelno and the rest got in. He
besieged them there, and being unable to take them by force, drew them out by
fair promises; for he gave them his word he would carry them to the King and no
hurt should be done to them, neither should they be confined to Prison. But as
there is no security in the faith of that Man that is not able to warrant it He
that cannot warrant it, ought not to promise it.
, as soon as they were come to Amboise they were cast into a Goal, and Nemours
thought it a sufficient excuse to say, I cannot help it.

La Renaudie who was in Vendosmois, made his Men advance with all speed to
disengage Castelno, whose surrender he knew not of: but as they Marched in
small parties and by ways through the Forests, the people set there by the
Kings Order to watch them, easily slew them, or took them Prisoners, and tied
them to their Horse-Tails to lead them to Amboise, whither they no sooner came
but they hanged them up immediately on the Battlements of the Walls, Booted and
Spurred. The day after la Renaudie was killed in the Forest of
Chasteau-Renaud, but he first slew Pardillan his Cousin, to whom the King had
given command to go ahunting after the Conspirators with two hundred Horse. His
Body was for some hours hanged upon the Bridge at Amboise, with this writing,
Captain of the Rebels, then quartered, and the quarters set up in diverse places.

The Guises pressed the Chiefs might be dispatched, the Chancellor was of
opinion they should suspend that till they had found the bottom and main drift
of the enterprise, and to appease the fury of those exasperated spirits, it
would be fit to grant a Pardon to such whose blind zeal had misled them,
provided they would return to their own homes, in small parcels of two or three
in a Company. But whilst they were contending for Mercy and Clemency against
the rigor of Justice and Law, a Captain of the Conspirators named la Motte,
made an attempt to surprise Amboise, which stopped the Chancellors Mouth, and let
loose the raynes of persecution to the utmost severity. A Command was given to
take all such as had been in Arms either dead or alive, though they should be
returning to their own homes.

They pardoned very few of those they had in Hold; there were hanged, drowned,
and beheaded near Twelve Hundred, the Streets of Amboise were overflowed with
Blood, the River choked up with dead Corpse, and the Marketplaces planted full
of Gibbets. The Chief were Executed the last, the Queen Mother, her three Sons,
and all the Court Ladies gazing out of the Windows, beholding this Tragical
Spectacle as a divertisement. Not one of them would own or confess that the
Conspiracy aimed at the Kings Person, but only against the Guises. Raunay and
Mazeres confessed upon the Rack that la Renaudie had told them, that if it had
succeeded the Prince of Conde would have declared: Castelno stoutly denied it,
and upon their confrontation gave them very significant reproaches.

Some writings in Ciphers seized in the Custody of la Bigne Secretary of the
Conspiracy, and the Examinations of certain Captains that had Command amongst
them, gave them light enough to believe that the Prince of Conde and the
Admiral were concerned: but the proofs not being clear, and the Evidence only
upon hearsay, and those that had orders to search the Princes House, finding
neither Men nor Arms there, he demanded leave to purge himself in full Council
before the King. The Queen Mother being willing to admit him, he made a
discourse full of Reason and Eloquence to justify himself concerning that
attempt; and afterward gave the lie to all that durst say he was guilty of it,
and offered to Fight them himself, renouncing his Quality, only for that
purpose. Guise out of a most profound dissimulation applauded his generosity,
and told him, he was also ready to maintain his Innocence: but in private he
notwithstanding was of opinion he ought to be seized on. The Queen Mother did
not judge it convenient, whether she feared the Guises might make themselves
too absolute, if they could but pull down the only Prince that was able to make
head against them, or that she apprehended lest such a detension should produce
some act of desperation, which might prove more fatal then the foregoing
Conspiracy.

The danger over, they wrote Letters in the name of the King to all the
Parliaments, Governors and great Cities, giving them an account of the eminent
danger the King had escaped, and the signal Service the Duke of Guise had
rendered him. The Parliament of Paris giving Credit to it, bestowed upon him the
glorious Title of Conservator of the Country. In the mean while the Coligny's
observing they were looked upon with a very evil Eye at Court, withdrew
themselves, and the Queen ordered the Admiral to go and quiet those Commotions
that were beginning in Normandy, and to enquire and search out the real causes
that he might make report thereof to her.

The horror of this Conspiracy, and so much blood as had been spilt in
punishing it, so deeply wounded the Heart of Francis Olivier who had a tender
and most humane Soul, that he fell sick upon it and died. The Cardinal de
Lorraine had cast his Eye upon John de Morvilliers Bishop of Orleans: but the
Queen prevented him, and desired the King to give that Office to Michael de
l'Hospital; at least she made some body tell him, that he owed that favor to
her, although the Cardinal would needs persuade him it came by his means;
l'Hospital did afterward make it plainly appear the Obligation was from the
Queen, by his so closely sticking to her Interest.

The Cognizance of all matters and Crimes relating to Heresies had hitherto
belonged to the Parliaments, who five years before had contended mightily to
preserve the same. Now, as there were many Counselors and of the most Learned,
who were imbued with those Novelties, the Cardinal de Lorraine got all such
causes to be transmitted to the Bishops by an Edict of the Month of May, at
Ramorantin in Berry: To which the new Chancellor consented, to prevent a
greater evil, the Inquisition, which that Cardinal and the Court of Rome
endeavored to introduce in France, with the same power it has in Spain.

In France they had hitherto called those that professed the new Religion
Lutherans, though in many points they did not follow the Doctrines of Luther.
Some did more properly name them Sacramentaries, because they denied the
Reality of the Body of our Lord in the Holy Sacrament. This year they applied
the name of Huguenots to them, which sticks upon them still. The Origin of it
is uncertain: there are those that say it took its birth at Tours, and they
derive it from the name of Hugon, because those Novators made their Midnight
Assemblies at the Gate Hugon, or because they went abroad only during the
darkness, like Goblins or Spirits, by them called King Hugon, and which
according to the fabulous reports of those People, stalked about the Streets of
that Town in the Night time. For my own part, I think I have good Proof that it
comes from a Fidgenossen or Fidnos, then Huguenots.
Swiss word which signifies League, but corrupted by those of Geneva, and from
thence it Traveled into France with the Religionaries themselves, who were so
called in those Countries.

After Queen Catherine had Fortified her self by the Councils of the Chancellor
de l'Hospital, she was precautioned as well against the Guises as against the
Princes of the Blood; And as she would always keep to that Maxim of her House,
as a Rule to walk by, Divide and Reign, she studied to continue the troubles,
that she might still find a Party to rely upon, and make them balance one
another. And if either side grew too ponderous, she put more weight into the
other Scale to bring them to an equalibrity. Thus observing the absence of the
two first Princes of the Blood, and the Coligny's, who were gone to their own
homes, left the Guises in too great Credit, she began to lend a more favorable
ear to the Huguenots, and even to read some Writings they addressed to her for
their justification.

With the same prospect, or to dive into the designs and interests of the
Grandees, she Summoned them all to Fountainbleau upon the twentieth of August,
under color of taking their advice upon the present State of affairs, as it
was otherwhile France.

The Constable, the Admiral and Dandelot went thither with a Train of Eight or
Nine Hundred Gentlemen. The Assembly lasted only four Sessions; They were held
in the Queen Mothers Closset, the King being present.

The first day, the King and then the Queen his Mother, having in few words
declared the occasion of their being called, which was to find out some remedy
for the Troubles caused by differences in Religion, and to root out those
abuses that sprung up so fast in all the Orders, conjured those that were
present to give their opinions and speak their thoughts without passion or
interest. The Chancellor did more at large lay open what the distempers and
disorders were, and the Remedies they might apply.

When he had ended, the Admiral advanced and falling on his knees before the
King, presented him some Petitions, not signed by any one, but which he said he
had received in Normandy, which implored the Kings mercy, and begged he would
put some stop to the prosecutions against the Reformed, and allow them some
Churches and the free exercise of their Faith.

Thereupon John de Montluc Bishop of Valence being desired to give his advice,
spoke with more freedom (then any Enemy of the Church of Rome durst have done)
of the abuses and vices of the Clergy, particularly the Bishops, Forty of them
having been seen at one time together at Paris, wasting their precious time in
sloathful idleness or forbidden pleasures; praised the devotion in singing of
Psalms and Hymns in French, rather then wanton Airs and Songs; Blamed the
severity Inflicted upon People guilty of no other Crime, but a persuasion of
what they believed to be really good; and concluded it best to refer the
decision of those Controversies to a National Council, there being little hopes
of a General one, and the reformation of the disorders in the State to an
Assembly of the Estates General. Marillac Archbishop of Vienne spoke to the
same purpose, and added several things too picquant against the Guises.

The Cardinal de Lorraine a Prelate of a sublime Eloquence, took the
Counterpart against these two Bishops, and by weighty reasons showed there was
no need of any Council, and that the Prosecution ought to be carried on against
the Sectaries. As to the other point, he was of opinion to call the Estates
together. He also gave an account in gross of the Administration of the
Treasury, as his Brother the Duke of Guise of his Conduct in the Government,
justifying himself against the Calumnies imputed to him; especially his having
Armed the King, against his Subjects by setting up a Guard for him, as he had
done, for which he laid all the blame on those that were the Authors of the
late attempts and disturbances.

The result of all was an Edict the Four and Twentieth of August, which
Summoned the Estates of the Kingdom to meet in the City of Melun upon the Tenth
day of December, and ordained the Bishops to come to the King the Tenth of
January to such place as the King should prescribe, to consult of a fit time
and place to hold a National Council, in case the Pope by affected delays did
continue to defeat their hopes of the General one, so often promised. Moreover
the Governors were enjoined to watch there might be no factious Meetings, and
to su spend their pursuits for matters of Religion, if no other Crime were
complicated with it. This was to begin a Toleration. Things being thus
regulated, every one had order to retire home.

Great was the Alarm at Rome when they heard mention made of holding a National
Council in France; Pius IV. omitted nothing to dissuade the King from it. He
represented to him, as a great grievance, that the Gallican Church would
re-establish the Pragmatique, and by consequence the Elections, whereby the
Royal dignity and prerogative would be much eclipsed and diminished: He
entreated the King of Spain to interpose his Interest and Credit with him to
prevent a mischief he reckoned so prejudicial to his Pontifical Authority: And
all these Engines proving too weak to obtain a revocation of those resolutions
taken in Council, he could find no other expedient to avoid it but by a General
Council. He was a while in suspense, whether to call one wholly new, or whether
he should continue the same his Predecessors Paul III. and Julius III. had
Prorogued. All considered, the advice for continuation seemed best; And he
caused publication to be made that the Council should re-commence on Easter Day
the following year.

Anthony and Lewis de Bourbon did not appear at the Assembly of Melun: for two
Months before Anthony was retired to Gascogne, and his Brother was gone to
visit him. Being there in much greater security, they settled their Affairs,
and projected the means and methods to make themselves the stronger, and set
aside the Guises. These having many faithful and trusty Servants, Spies well
paid, and all rewards and punishments in their own hands, quickly discovered
their Stratagems, and blasted them before they could be ripe for Execution.

The Princes made use of one named la Sague, an Imprudent man, who Communicated
his Secrets to a Camerade of his, with whom he had born Arms in Piedmont. This
Fellow whispers it to the Marshall de Brissac, who tells it to the Duke of
Guise: So that as la Sague was returning into Gascogne, he was Seized with a
great many Letters. Fear of the Rack, or hopes of reward untied his Tongue:
Himself put them in the way how to read some of them, by wetting the Paper,
where before there was no Footsteps of any Writing appeared. The most Criminal
were those from Francis de Vendosme Vidame of Chartres, an Enemy to the Duke of
Guise; so he was laid hold on and shut up in the Bastille. Some time after he
was transferred from thence, but under a strong Guard, to his own House, where
he Died of grief, if not by the Debauchery of his Youth.

Bouchard who was Chancellor to Anthony, without any other instigation but his
own faint-heartedness, did likewise reveal all the practices of the Prince of
Conde, and the means he made use of to engage his Brother. He thought hereby to
secure himself: but they Seized upon him, and put him in Prison at Saint John
d'Angely, where he was kept very close, that they might have his Evidence when
time Served.

There appeared in the mean time diverse Commotions in the Provinces, which
showed that the whole Body of the Religionaries were on the point of making a
general rising; for in Normandy, whither the Admiral had been dispatched, they
met and Preached Publicly. The two Brothers Anthony and Paul Richend Mouvans,
endeavored to make themselves Masters of Valence, of Montelimard, of Romans in
Dauphine, and of the Cities of Aix and Arles in Provence: but the Lord de
Maugeron made them fail in their enterprise; Anthony was slain in a tumult at
Draguignan, Paul made his escape into Swisserland.

In like manner Charles du Puy Montbrun making use of the Religionaries in his
dispute for the Government of Dauphine at la Mothe Gondrin, was routed by his
Adversary, and ran away stark naked, yet got safe to the Swiss Country.

Maligny of the House de Ferriere, who belonged to the King of Navarre
attempted also to Seize upon Lions, causing his Soldiers to Ship in man by man;
and he had completed his work if N. Dapchon Abbot de Savigny who was Governor
in the absence of the Marshall de Saint Andre his maternal Uncle, had not
discovered his Plot and put the Bourgeois in Arms. Maligny was glad to make his
escape, and the Abbot apprehending some worse Event, set open the Gates that he
might be gone quietly. The Marshall de Saint Andre going thither to search
into the bottom of the design, caused above fifty of those rash undertakers to
be executed.

The Princes promised themselves a much stronger Cabal in the Assembly of
Estates then the Guises: nevertheless their Friends were of Opinion they ought
not to rely upon that, but come so well Armed to Court, as to be in a Condition
either to drive them thence, or make them perish there. To this purpose they
had given orders on all hands: but their Letters and practices having taken
Air, the Guises made use of the Kings Name to fortify themselves, sent for all
the Established Company's, and put forth a Declaration, to all Governors of
Provinces, commanding them to punish the disturbers of the public Peace
according to the utmost severity of the Edict, with power to Suspend and
displace such Officers as had connived or showed any indulgence toward the
Factious. Besides all this, they sent to command the Princes to come to Court,
only attended with their Household Servants, to justify themselves of such
matters wherewith they were charged; so that to speak truly, they left them but
a very ill-boding passage to enter, much more like a Prison Door then a Gate of
the Louvre.

They resolved however to come. The Cardinal de Bourbon their Brother being
deceived first, was an Instrument to deceive them; withal the Dignity of their
Birth seemed an inviolable safe conduct to them. So that the King of Navarre
refused seven hundred Gentlemen of Poitou, who offered to attend him, and above

In his Journey he received notice from several hands, that the Guises having
scared the King and the Queen Mother with the pretended Conspiracy revealed by
la Sague, were more Masters at Court then ever, and had put them upon the
extremest resolutions. However he went forward not duly weighing the wise
Councils of Marillac Archbishop of Vienne, who having endeavored all that was
possible to diswade him, died with Grief, and the fear he justly had conceived
lest the Guises, whom he had already highly offended, should revenge themselves
upon him.

The Sixteenth of October, the King with the Queen Mother, the Princes of
Montpensier and de la Roche Sur-Yon, the Guises, and all the great ones of the
Court, went to Orleans, after he had quartered his Gent-darmerie, and other
Soldiers in all the Cities Forty Miles about, and disarmed the Citizens of
Orleans, for the most part tainted with the new opinions, and suspected to have
intended to deliver it up to the Prince of Conde, as they did two years after.
He forthwith sent Messengers into several Provinces to lay hands upon all such
as the Guises had a mind to involve in the Conspiracy; an ill omen for the
Prince of Conde.

And indeed as soon as he and his Brother were Arrived, and had saluted the
King, Philip de Mailly Breze, and Francis le Roy Chavigny, Captains of the Life
Guards, Seized him and Conveyed him to a House in the Market place called
l'Estape The Staple.
, at the Corner whereof they had raised a kind of Bastion of brick with a
Platform, defended by several Small Cannon.

The King of Navarre his Brother was not secured, but perceived he was very
narrowly observed, and forsaken by all, excepting the Admiral, and the Cardinal
de Chastillon his Brother, who faithfully accompanied him. Dandelot more
apprehensive, had retired himself to his Wifes Estate in Bretagne. The Dame de
Roye Mother in Law to the Prince of Conde, was likewise Arrested, some few
days after in his own House, and carried to the Castle of Saint Germains en
Lay. So was Hierosme Grollot Bailiff of Orleans, accused of holding
Correspondence with the Religionaries; and Bouchard Chancellor to the Navarrois
was brought from Saint Jean d'Angely, as a material Witness that knew the most
for the Conviction of the Prince.

The Order for seizing the Prince was proposed by the Marshall de Brissac, who
boldly exposed himself to all for the Guises, the King signed it, and after him
the Chancellor, though with regret. The Chancellor, Christopher de Thou a
President in Parliament, and two Counselors, with the Procuror, or Solicitor
General Bourdin, and the Register Du Tillet, went to interrogate him; He
refused to answer them, and said he owned no other Judges then the whole Body
of Parliament, together with the Pairs Or Peers.
, and the King there presiding.

But this appeal and all such others he made afterward, were declared null by
the Kings Council, and upon the Solicitor Generals Petition it was ordered,
that he should answer or that he should be held as fully Convict, and that in
the mean time the Witnesses should be re-examined, whereupon he demanded
Council, they assigned him two Advocates of Paris, Peter Robert and Francis de
Marillac. He was afterward confronted with Witnesses which were brought in
from all Parts; and then saw himself in most eminent danger. But the Queen
Mother found her Authority in no less hazard: for the Guises who thought
themselves already above all by the approaching ruin of their Enemy, began to
slight and despise her of whom they stood no longer in need.

Grollot being Condemned to die, his Sentence was looked upon by all Men, as a
prejudication and forerunner of the Princes. Now upon the Seventeenth of
November the King being ahunting, that he might not be present at the Execution
of this unhappy man, was seized with a heaviness in his head, which in some
days turned to an imposthume voiding it self by his Ear. The first Five or Six
days the Distemper did not appear so dangerous in the mean time they carried
on the Process against the Prince, with so much have and precipitation, that
stepping over many formalities, they Condemned him to loose his Head. The
Sentence was signed by the greatest part of the Counselors of State and Men of
the Robe, excepting the Chancellor, and the President Guillard de Mortier, who
observing the increase of the Kings malady, were so crafty as to spin out the
Guises, there was not one but the Count de Sancerre who refused it,
notwithstanding three express Orders from the King.

At the same time this terrible Sentence was forging, the Physicians, who in
the case of Persons of so eminent a quality, never give their Judgment clearly
till the extremity, declared that the King was very near his end. Then did the
Guises do their utmost to oblige the Queen to have the King of Navarre secured
likewise: but she having taken advice of the Chancellor, could not resolve to
give her consent. That prudent Minister made her very sensible how the
detention of those two Princes would necessarily leave and confirm all the
Authority in the hands of the Guises, whereas she ought to get it all to her
self, and overruled both Parties, by keeping them in equal balance.

And indeed both of them dreading her became her suppliants, the Princes for
their Lives, which she had at her disposal, the Guises for their Grandeur which
she could soon pull down with the assistance of the Princes, and submitted
themselves to such Conditions as she pleased. Anthony promised under his hand
to yield the Regency to her, which belonged to him as first Prince of the
Blood, reserving only the Title of Lieutenant General; and the Guises swore to
serve her for and against all.

Things being in this posture, the King gave up his last gasp of breath the
Fifth day of December. He was Aged Sixteen years, ten Months and a half, of
which he had Reigned only one year and five Months, wanting five days. He had
no Child by Mary Stuart his Wife, who the year following returned into her
Kingdom of Scotland.

His Servants, because of the Innocence of his manners and disposition, called
him The King without Vice, a Title much more glorious then any other can be
bestowed, when it has for it is Foundation not the imbecility of mind and
understanding, but Wisdom and Virtue.

His death happening favorably for the Princes and for the Montmorancies, gave
an occasion to their Enemies to say it had been hastened by Ambrose Pare his
Chyrurgeon, who was a Creature of the Constables, and had injected Poison into
his Ear. Others, but a long while afterward, observing the perverse ambition,
and the Conduct of Queen Catherine de Medicis, suspected her as guilty of that
Crime, as well as of the death of the Daufin Vide in the Reign of Francis I.
King LVII.
Francis his Brother in Law, and of Charles IX. his second Son. Those that
judged with more modesty, found the cause to be in himself, and said that
having been generated of corrupt blood, his Mother conceiving him after ten
years sterility, which proceeded from a suppression of... he had ever been
indisposed, especially in his Head, which did at no time discharge it self by
the ordinary Channels, so that the pituitous matter corrupting there, caused
that Imposthumation whereof he died.

All the Court Grandees were so busy about the contriving of their own
Affairs, that neither his Mother, nor his Uncle took any care for his Funeral.
Of so many Lords, and so many Bishops as were then at Orleans, there were none
but Sansac and la Brosse who had been his Governors, and Lewis Guillard Bishop
of Senlis (who was blind) that conducted his Corpse to Saint Denis. His Heart
was left to the Church named Saint Croix at Orleans.

The Guises excused their not attending it upon the necessity there was for
them to stay with their Niece to comfort her.

But they were not exempted from reproach, such as had more sense of Honor
then Ambition, much blamed them for not paying that little devoir to him from
whom they had received so much honor. And indeed, some body tacked a Paper
upon the Pall that covered his Coffin, wherein were these words, Taneguy du
Chastel, where art thou? This Taneguy, as was well known, tho banished from
Court during the Reign of Charles VII. his Master, came generously back again
thither to make a Funeral for that King at his own charges, showing his
gratitude thereby and making it appear to all the World that his thankfulness
for the favors he had received, were above his fear of the resentments of
Lewis XI. a mortal Enemy to the memory and Servants of his own Father.

The Constable who had been sent for several times, but crept along slowly by
little Journeys, having heard the tidings of the Kings death, doubled his pace,
and Arrived the Eight of the Month of December at Orleans. Entering into

As for the Prince, though he had free liberty as soon as ever the King
expired, nevertheless he refused to go out of Prison, till he knew who were the
prosecutors against him and who his accusers. There were none durst undertake
to play so desperate a Game; and the Guises replied, that all had been done by
express Command of the King, but did not produce any Order by virtue whereof he
had been so prosecuted. So that Thirteen days afterward he came forth, and
went to Ham in Picardy, attended with Honor and respect by those very men,
that had served as Guards upon him in his Confinement.

CHARLES IX.
King LX.
POPES,
PIUS IV. Five Years under this Reign. PIUS V. Elected the 7 January, 1566. S.
6 Years 3 Months and 24 days. GREGORY. XIII. Elected the 13. of May, 1572. S.
13. Years wanting one Month, whereof two years under this Reign.
Francis II. being near the time of his complete Majority, might possibly
extinguish, all the Factions, were now by his death changed into a just fear of
finding them rather more enflamed, and heightened from a Sedition to a Bloody
War; wherefore the Tumults increasing every day, they made have to Assemble the
Estates, from whom the silly vulgar expect a redress of all their grievances
and troubles.

The first Session was held the Thirteenth of December in a great Timber Hall
expressly built in the place called l'Estape. The Chancellor begun it with a
Speech becoming his gravity. He blamed the violent proceedings in matters of
Religion, told them the only means to reclaim such as went astray, was a good
exemplary Life, and sound Doctrine, exhorted them earnestly to lay aside the
injurious names of Lutherans, Huguenots, Papists, and desired every one to
forbear all hatred, and own no passion but for the public good, in which
consists the benefit of all particular Persons. There was nothing else done at
this first meeting, only the three Orders were sent to confer together about
their Papers and Instructions.

Some who were inspired with a bolder zeal, had a mind to confer the Regency
upon the King of Navarre, but withal to leave the Education of the young King
to his Mother, to set bounds to the Government, and make choice of a good
Council for the management of all Affairs of State. The Queen Mother took the
Allarm; caused the Kings Council to make a Decree, which forbad the Deputies to
intermeddle with the Government, and made use of so many intrigues, that the
Navarrois, a Prince very inconstant and irresolute, was persuaded to confirm
what he had promised her during the Imprisonment of his Brother.

January was the second Sessions of the Estates. The three Orders made their
Harangues: John de Lange Advocate of Bourdeaux, spoke for the Third Estate,
James de Silly Earl of Rochefort, for the Nobility, and John Quintin a Canon of
Autun and Doctor en Decret, for the Clergy. The two first laid great stress and
weight upon the Vices of the Ecclesiastics, the cause of all the disorders;
The last endeavored to defend them, retorted all upon the new Sectaries, and
reflected particularly upon the Admiral, who demanded reparation. Quintin was
obliged to do it in a set Speech at the closing up of the Estates.

Whatever accord there could be between the Navarrois and the Regent, yet there
was danger that the Estates, if they considered their power, might put some
Fetters upon this Woman who was a stranger, and besides they began to perceive
that the Princes were forming parties, and tried to foist in certain
propositions for their own interests, or concerning their private quarrels.
Amongst others, the King of Navarre put them upon calling for an account of the
Finances, and a particular of all the Gifts bestowed in the Reign of Henry II.
himself proffering to surrender all that were given him.

This touched the Constable and the Marshall de Saint Andre, more then the
Guises, as having expended more in the Kings Service then they had gained. The
Regent soon perceived where it pinched, and joining them to her self upon this
consideration, easily adjourned the Estates to the Month of May, and the City
of Pontoise, and ordained, that she might be at less Charge and trouble to
bribe them, that there should come but two Deputies from each Government.

In the Month of February the King being come to Fountainbleau, the Prince of
Conde appeared there with a slender attendance, that he might give them no
jealousy. The next day being admitted to the Privy Council, and having spoken
of his innocence, he asked the Chancellor whether there were any proofs against
him; the Chancellor answered No, and all the Princes and Lords having testified
that they were satisfied of his innocence, the King commanded him to take his
Seat. The Council did after make a Decree which declared him wholly innocent,
and sent him back to the Parliament of Paris to get a more Authentic one, as
he did in a few days afterward.

The courage of the Guises did not sink upon the rise of their enemies: they
were supported by the Catholic Party, and the Catholics by them. It is most
certain but for them the old Religion must have given place to the new Sect.
The Regent favored them in show, that they might not fly out to extremes. In
the mean time the Navarrois desiring to enlarge his power, began a quarrel by
demanding to have the Keys of the Kings House brought to him, not to the Duke
of Guise, that honor being his due in respect of his Office of Grand-Maistre.
The pretense was but slight, but the King of Navarre carried it on so high,
that he was upon leaving the Court with all the Princes of the Blood and the
Constable, to come to Paris and deliberate concerning the Government of the
State. What did the Queen? She regains the Constable, and that he might have a
plausible excuse to break their intended project, prevailed with the King to
command him, in presence of the Four Secretaries of State, not to forsake or
leave him. So that the Navarrois apprehending they might perhaps do well enough
now without him, was advised to stay, and came to an agreement with the Queen,
who augmented his power of Lieutenancy.

From that time the Constable began to fall off from the Princes of the Blood.
The same proposition concerning the repetition of gifts, being renewed in the
particular Estates of Paris, he was made believe it was chiefly aimed at him,
because he had in truth received an Hundred Thousand Crowns under Henry II.
whereof he had given no account. To the apprehension he was under of being
obliged to repay this Sum, were joined the several exhortations of his Wife,
the Duchess of Valentinois, Honorat de Savoy Count de Villars his Brother in
Law, his Son Henry Lord of Danville; all which under the specious pretense of
preserving the Catholic Religion, persuaded him to enter into a League with
the Duke of Guise and the Marshall de Saint Andre; the remonstrances of the
Prince, the Coligny's his Nephews, and his Son the Marshall, esteemed one of
the wisest Lords in the Kingdom, were not so prevalent as to hinder it. The
Huguenots named this Union the Triumvirat.

These Brouilleries had hitherto retarded the Kings Coronation. When these
three Lords were thus united, they carried him to Reims, where he received the
Crown the fifteenth day of May from the hands of the Cardinal de Lorrain
Archbishop of that See. The Duke of Guise, pursuant to the ancient Order of
the Kingdom, which gives place according to the dignity of their Lands, or
antiquity of Peerage Pairies.
, not according to their birth, did there precede the Duke of Montpensier a
Prince of the Blood; the Queen-Regent having so adjudged it, though on the
other hand she would have Alexander His name was after changed to Henry, and he
was King.
Monsieur her second Son, Navarre, who had a more eminent Title: which was not
so practiced at the Coronation of Francis II.

It had been agreed by the Treaty of the general Peace, that within three
years, the right of the Kings pretensions to the Territories of the Duke of
Savoy, should be Examined and settled by Commissioners on either part. King
Francis II. and the Duke had named Deputies for that end in the year 1560.
Anthony Seguier President in Parliament, and Anthony de Chandon Master of
Requests, who were for the King, made Six Demands. 1. The County of Nice, which
they said was a Member of the County of Provence. 2. The Cities of Turin, Cony,
Montdevis, Albe, Querasque, and Savillan. 3. The County of Ast which had been
given in Dower to Valentine de Milan, Wife of the Duke of Orleans. 4. The
Dependancies of the Marquess de Salusses specified in an Arrest, or Decree of
Parliament in the year 1390. 5. Homage of that Duke for what he held in
Daufine, on this side Guyer le Vif and elsewhere, in Focygny, and in Genevois;
and the inheritance of Louisa Mother of Francis I.

They produced their Titles, and their Pleas; the Deputies for the Duke their
exceptions and their answers: but seeing on either side they acted rather as
Advocates then Judges, they could not agree upon any thing, and made their
reports severally, and diversely.

The Duke could not therefore obtain any thing till the year following, when he
was so earnest with the King, that by Letters Patents of the eight of August,
he commanded that they should restore to him, Turin, Chivas, Quiers and
Villa-Nuova d'Ast, excepting only the Ammunitions and Artillery, in exchange
for Pignerol, Savillan, and Perugia.
Perouse with all the Lands within their Limits. Imbert de la Platiere
Bourdillon, the Kings Lieutenant beyond the Alps, started many difficulties,
sent warm Remonstrances to the Council to prevent the Execution of that Order,
and would not obey till after three express Commands, and upon the most solemn
and authentic discharges that could be imagined. Which yet would have availed
but little, if the Dukes had not paid all the Arrears that were due to the
French Garrisons in the said places, and had not moreover lent a Hundred
Thousand Crowns to the King.

The Ambiguous conduct of the Regent fomented the Troubles. On the one side she
feigned to give a favorable ear to the Huguenots, for she permitted John de
Montluc Bishop of Valence, and Peter du Vall Bishop of Sees, to Preach even in
the Kings Family, such Doctrine as was very much like theirs; She wrote a long
Epistle to the Pope, wherein she said that till there were a General Council,
they might safely be admitted to the Communion of the Roman Church, since they
held or taught nothing contrary to Holy Scripture, or the seven first
Ecumenical Councils, She set forth an Edict which commanded all men to leave
them in peace, and released from Prison, and called home from Banishment all
such as had been prosecuted upon that single account. (This was the first they
ever had in their favor;) and on the other side she incited the Constable to
complain aloud and openly of these things thus done to the prejudice of the
Roman Church.

Honor would not allow the Constable to join himself openly with the Duke of
Guise, whilst the Prince of Conde continued to be his Enemy; wherefore he
begged the Queen to make an accommodation between them. Both of them being
therefore commanded to come into the presence of the King, the Princes,
Cardinals, and great Officers, the Duke of Guise Addressing his Speech to the
Prince, assured him he had no way contributed to his imprisonment: the Prince
replied, he held him for a Rascal and a Traitor whoever were the Author of it;
the Duke answered he believed so to, and that this did no way concern him. This
past, the King Commanded them to embrace, and promise each other a sincere and
cordial amity. An instrument hereof was drawn up in writing which was signed by
the two Secretaries of State.

The Parliament was in such a heat against the Edict the Queen had obtained in
favor of the Huguenots, because they had sent it only to the Presidials and
not to them, that they made a Decree quite contrary: Whereupon the King made
another in July referring the Cognizance of all Crimes of Sedition and unlawful
Assemblies to the Presidial Courts, and those of Heresy to the Judges
Ecclesiastical, by whom the Parties convict should be delivered up to the
Secular Power; who should not however condemn them to any thing above
banishment.

Huguenot Ministers. The Cardinal de Lorrain was one of the chief Promoters,
whether to hinder the National Council which did not at all please the Court of
Rome, or to make ostentation of his learning and eloquence. The Ministers did
likewise promise much advantage to themselves: for by this means they were made
equal with Bishops, whereas in a Council they could have had no place. Besides
they thought themselves able enough to throw Dust in the Catholics Eyes: and
they reckoned they must needs have the better of it, seeing the two Bishops of
Sees and of Valence, who were of the most knowing Prelates, leaned toward them.

Pontoise in May, began to fall to work. Whatever the Regents Emissaries had
been able to do, there was yet so much of the ancient French spirit left in the
heads of the Deputies, as would not suffer them to let a Woman have the
Regency: the King of Navarre was forced to go thither himself to let them know
he had yielded up his right, and together with the Marshall de Montmorency
Governor of the Isle of France, entreat them, they would speak no more of it.
This was not sufficient, but for fear they should bring it again upon the
Stage, it was judged necessary to dismiss the Assembly till the Month of
August, and to appoint it might be held at Saint Germain en Lay, where they
did meet.

The King was present there sitting on his Throne, the Queen Mother at his left
hand with her Daughter Margaret, and somewhat lower the King of Navarre, the
Cardinal de Bourbon and the Prince of Conde; before these on the right hand
were the Constable, on the left the Chancellor, the Duke of Guise as grand
Chamberlain, lay at the Kings Feet. The Cardinals pretended to take place
before the Princes of the Blood, and had often had it in other Assemblies: but
it was now judged otherwise in favor of those Princes. The Cardinals de
Chastillon and d'Armagnac did acquiesce: and the old Cardinal de Bourbon
remained there also, who having the right of birth before the Prince of Conde,
had likewise the precedence: but the Cardinals de Tournon, de Lorrain, and de
Guise, would not submit to it, and so withdrew.

The Admiral being the person that had persuaded the King of Navarre and the
Deputies of the Estates, to confirm the Regency to the Queen Mother, She would
in recompense, whilst She stood in need of him, favor the Huguenot party; and
according to that Air wherewith She had inspired the Court, or to intimidate
the Clergy and incline them to give Money, it was observed that in this
Assembly every thing was turned against the whole Body of them. Those that
spoke in the name of the third Estate, and the Nobility mentioned, no other
thing but their irregularities and disorder, and concluded, (as the Heretics
ever do, and all such as have more Policy then Religion) not so much to reform
them, as to retrench their vast Riches, and take away their Temporal
Jurisdiction, and adjudg the possessions of Religious Rents to the King. They
added, that a National Council ought to be called, and in the mean time did
tolerate the Religionaries to Preach with all freedom in such Temples, where
the King should appoint, and give leave.

After these Harangues they considered and debated the propositions contained
in the Deputies papers and instructions: wherein some Reglements were made by
way of satisfaction. But the Regent did not forget to take those advantages
which the Council of Kings is ever wont to draw from such Assemblies, that is
to say, great Sums of Money. For the Clergy having a hot Allarm, gave consent
they should raise four Tenths in Six years, and the third Estate five Solz upon
every Tierce of Wine that was carried into any Walled Town. An impost that has
increased ever since that time to this very day.

The day for the Colloquy being come, there met six Cardinals, and four Bishops
at Poisy, with a good number of the Most Learned Theologues, amongst others
Claude d'Espences and Claude de Saints; that which made the number of these
Prelates there so great, was their being sent for to advise about the place and
time for a Council, and to deliberate concerning the public Affairs of the
State. Now before the Ministers were come, they had propounded several things
amongst themselves in order to restore the Discipline, supposing, as it was
true, that the corruptions thereof had given rise and birth to the present
heresies: but they came to no result of any importance.

Theodore de Beze, Augustine Marlorat, Francis Morel, who compiled the first
Articles of their Religion, Peter Martyr and John Viret. The King and the
Regent were present with the Royal Family, the Princes of the Blood, the
Bishops, Cardinals, Council of State and the Grandees of the Kingdom both of
the one, and the other Religion, all seated according to their Qualities and
Degrees within a place enclosed with rails: the Doctors were behind the Bishops
upon low Forms. The Ministers would have gone within the Enclosure, but they
were excluded, and remained without, and standing.

Though the Colloquy was appointed upon the Tenth of August, it did not however
commence till the Fourth of September. After the Chancellor had opened it, the
Cardinal de Tournon desired since the thing was new and without a President, he
might deliberate or consult of it with the Clergy. The Queen Mother would not
allow it, and commanded de Beze to speak: for they had resolved to treat of and
handle the questions by discourses and harangues, not by argumentations de
Lorrain and Beze had to show their Eloquence.

We may say of de Beze on this occasion to say no worse, that he had neither
the prudence, nor the moderation he ought to have shown. For upon the point
touching the Holy Sacrament his zeal transported him to such expressions and
discourses as horribly grated the Catholic Ears, saying that the Body of Jesus
Christ was as far distant from the Eucharist, as Earth is from Heaven. The
Prelates trembled with horror of the expression, the Cardinal de Tournon made a
great deal of noise, and called him Blasphemer, in so much as Beze was ashamed
of it, and endeavored to excuse himself to the Queen, and filed his rough and
grating Proposition a little smoother.

It had been resolved to reduce all the dispute to two heads, the one of the
true Church, the other about the Eucharist. The Sixteenth of September the
Cardinal de Lorrain made a discourse as learned as it was eloquent, and full of
solid reasonings both upon the one and other point; which he concluded with
this, that there could be no reunion of the Sectaries with the Church, if they
did not believe the reallity of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist. The
other Prelates rising up applauded this proposition, declared they would live
and dye in that belief he had explained, and besought the King and Queen to
persevere, and to defend it, protesting they would break off the Colloquy if
the Ministers refused to yield that point.

It was continued nevertheless for sometime longer. The Four and Twentieth of
September Beza strained hard to reply to the Cardinals discourse, then entered
into dispute with the Catholic Doctors, as did his Companions afterward each
in his turn. Father Jacques Laynes a Spaniard, and Superior General of the
Jesuits, whom the Cardinal de Ferrara the Popes Legate (who arrived not till a
good while after this Conference was begun) had brought along with him, would
not confer with the Ministers: but treated them with the epithets of Wolves,
Monkeys, and Serpents, and boldly told the Queen that it did not belong to her
to hold Assemblies for matters concerning Religion, especially since the Pope
had convocated a Council. The disputes were not discontinued for all that till
in fine the alteration having so exasperated and heated their spirits, that
they were capable of nothing but downright quarrelling, they broke up the
Conference the five and twentieth day of November.

de Lorrain had chiefly promoted this, who having some kind of correspondence
with the Lutherans of Germany, thought to make himself head and as it were Pope
of that Party opposed to the Roman Church, which however as to the exterior
differs not much; and in this prospect had promised them to engage the
Ministers of France by this Colloquy, to subscribe to the Ausburg Confession.
And indeed toward the end of the Colloquy there came some Lutheran Ministers
to Paris, and the King of Navarre overpersuaded by the Lawyer Francis Baudouin*
Tutor to his Bastard-Son, joined with that Church: but seeing those of France
held at too great a distance, and made the difference too wide, the Cardinal de
Lorrain dispairing to bring his ends to pass, became equally an utter enemy
both to the one and the other.

As in this Colloquy the Huguenots had for the first time, the liberty allowed
them to dispute the controverted Articles of Religion: they thought they might
have every where that of exercising it, and began to open their Temples in
every Rome, to be instant with the Pope and Cardinals, for obtaining the
Communion in both Species, and the allowance to pray to God in French; which
she could not obtain, perhaps because as she demanded it openly, she obstructed
it underhand.

The Triumviri could not endure the great credit the Admiral was in, and
retired from Court, making Religion the pretense of their discontent. The King
of Spain who affected the Title of Catholic, expressed a great deal of Anger
for that they favored the Huguenots, and particularly against the King of
Navarre, thereby to have a Salvo Conscientiae not to do him right concerning
his Kingdom, and a pretense to intermeddle with the Affairs of France: to which
he was invited by some of the most eminent, in whom the passion to govern and
to supplant their Enemies, was more prevalent then love to their Native
Country, or the honor of this State.

A short while before a Priest was taken going into Spain with a Petition to
King Philip in the name of the Catholics, together with certain very dangerous
instructions; He was carried to the common Goal. The Parliament considering the
quality of the persons involved in this business, durst not search too deep,
but thought fit only to condemn him to make amend honorable in full Audience,
bare-head and his feet bare, with a Torch lighted in his hand, and to be shut
up between four Walls in the Convent of the Chartreux.

Likewise a Batchellor of Sorbon named Tanquerel, having maintained some
Thesis, wherein he asserted the Pope had an absolute power over all Kings, as
well in Temporals as in Spirituals, and that therefore he might depose them if
they deserved it: the Parliament ordained that he should make amend honorable;
and because he absented himself, it was said the Beadle of the Faculty should
do it for him in the School of the Sorbon before a President, two Counselors,
and the Solicitor General, and in presence of the Dean and Doctors, who were
enjoined to be there, upon pain of forfeiting all the Privileges to them
granted by the Kings.

The Holy Fathers greatest fear was lest he should lose his Authority in France
by a National Council, the interest of the King of Spain was to gain some
Authority by rendering himself necessary, and that of the Regent to preserve her
own and increase it. The King of Navarre shared in this with her, and therefore
they could never well accord: but all the rest endeavored to adjust themselves
with that Prince. The Constable served as mediator to reconcile him with the
Duke of Guise, and he to bring him to a correspondence with the Pope and the
King of Spain. His Sentiments concerning Religion were a great obstruction,
nevertheless they had the Art to manage him so well that they brought him to
their bent.

They propounded to him first, if he would repudiate Jane d'Albret his Wife, as
he might lawfully do, said they, because she was an Heretic, that then he
should be Married to Queen Mary Steward, who would bring him the Kingdoms of
Scotland and of England, and when they found he could not resolve upon that
Divorce, they gave him verbal assurances that the King of Spain would give him
up the Island of Sardinia, which they described to him as a Country abounding
in all things of delight and use, in recompense of Navarre. This charming
illusion was the bait that drew him into their snare.

January of the Year 1562. the Regent who desired to support her self by the
Huguenots, got an Edict in their favor, containing amongst other things the
revocation of that in July, permission for them to Preach in all parts of the
Kingdom, excepting in Walled Cities, namely in Paris. An Assembly of the
Notables authorized it; the Parliament of Paris verified it, not without great
difficulty, and with this Clause, in consideration of the present juncture of
the times, but not approving of the new Religion in any manner, and till the
King should otherwise ordain. The other Parliaments prescribed several
modifications.

When the Triumviri had absented themselves, the Admiral appeared most powerful
at Court, and was effectually so for some days: but he afterward lost himself
in the Queens good opinion, by his own fault. For too much prosperity having
made him lay open his heart too much, he would needs make it appear to her the
strength of the Huguenots was much greater then in truth they were, demanding
Temples for Two Thousand One Hundred and Fifty Congregations.

Now he and the Prince of Conde, observing withal a potent League was preparing
to attack them, believed it was lawful to join the German Princes to their
party, since their Adversaries had taken the Spaniards into them. The Duke of
Guise and the Cardinal his Brother having notice of it, labored with great
assiduity to prevent such assistance: themselves went to Savern to discourse
with the Duke of Virtemberg, from whom the Prince hoped to get a considerable
party. They craftily feigned a great propensity to Luthers Doctrine, and made
him believe that if they had but some good correspondence with the German
Princes, who generally were of that Church, they would bring both the
Catholics and The Huguenots followed the Doctrines of Zuinglius and Calvin.
Zuinglians to reason, and by that means restore the Church to Unity. The Duke
of Wirtemberg was cajolled with this specious pretense, and sell from the
Huguenots the more readily, for that in truth the Lutherans hate them but
little less then the Roman Catholics do themselves.

Beginning of the War for Religion.
At his return from Saverne, the Duke of Guise having sojourned some days at
his Castle of Joinville, was desired by his Confederates to come speedily to
Paris, because the Huguenots being countenanced by the Regent, the Prince of
Conde, the Admiral, and their Governor the Marshall de Montmorency, would
needs be uppermost. They were permitted to Preach in the Fauxbourg Saint
Merceau and in that of Saint Antoine, the Chevalier du Guet, or Captain of the
Watch, had order to Guard them with his Archers, and they had disarmed the
people of Paris, for fear they should run open-Mouth upon them; which had so
raised their courage, that the Priests could not carry the Holy Sacrament along
the Streets without danger of an up-roar.

Fauxbourg Saint Marceau, where they broke open the Church Doors of Saint
Medard, pulled down the Images, killed diverse persons, and dragged the Priests
most shamefully to Prison, because some Catholics had abused a man, whom they
sent to bid them leave off jangling their Bells, which hindered their hearing
the Minister. The Parliament having taken Information upon complaint of either
party, found the Huguenots guilty, and punished their insolency with the death
of two or three of them.

Now the first day of March, as the Duke of Guise was passing thorough the
little Town of Vassy, it happened that some quarrel arose between some that were
of his Train, and the Huguenots who held their meeting in a Grange, and he
going thither to pacify them, was wounded on the Cheek with a stone. His
people seeing his face all bloody, their rage grew to such a height, that they
slew near threescore of them, and wounded above two hundred. This is what the
Huguenots have called the Massacre of Vassy, and which in effect proved as it
were the first signal to all those bloody Wars for Religion which afterward
afflicted this unhappy Reign, though it were a pure accident, without any
design or fault in the Duke of Guise.

After he had taken with him the Cardinal his Brother in his passage by Reims,
he came to Mantueil: his friends came to him in Crowds, and the Constable sent
to Complement him. In the mean time the Prince of Conde was gone to Monceaux,
to make Complaint to the King about the Murders at Vassy. The Regent found her
self mightily perplexed, She promised the Huguenots to do them justice, wrote to
the King of Navarre who was at Paris, to provide for the safety of the King and
Kingdom, sent for the Duke of Guise to come to Court without any Company, and
enjoined the Marshall de Saint Andre to repair to his Government of Lyonnois.
But the Navarrois sharply reproved the Huguenot Deputies who carried him the
complaints from those of Vassy; the Duke of Guise replied that he was busy and
could not yet appear at Court, and the Marshall told the Queen to her face,
that in the posture things then stood, he could not abandon the Kings Person.

Guise came to Paris attended by a Thousand or Twelve Hundred Horse. His
Enemies would have made it a Crime de Laesae Majestatis for having Marched in
by the Gate Saint Denis, thorough which the Kings make usually their Entry, as
likewise because the Prevost des Marchands, and the Eschevins who went out to
meet him made him a Speech, and the People made loud Shouts and Acclamations as
to the King.

It is not credible the Queen had any suspicion that the Duke aimed at the
Crown: but she imagined that he and his Confederates intended to snatch the
Government out of her hands. This apprehension putting her into extreme
trouble, she had recourse to the Prince of Conde, who was retired to his House,
and wrote several Letters to recommend her Son to him, as likewise the
Kingdom, and her self with expressions so affectionate and so full of
Compassion, hinting that the Confederates kept her in Captivity, as gave him
just cause to arm himself, though he had not had the least inclination to it.

Their principal aim was to bring the King back to Paris, that they might have
him entirely at their devotion. The Prevost des Marchands who was for them,
came to Melun to request it of the Queen, and demand the Parisians might have
their Arms again restored, to defend themselves against the Huguenots. The
last particular was granted, and the other was promised in time convenient;
mean while the Confederates so contrived it that the Commission for the
Government of Paris was given to the Cardinal de Bourbon, the Marshall de
Montmorency being suspected by them.

When the Parisians had recovered their Arms again, the Prince of Conde was
the weaker and durst not Challenge the upper hand, or dispute the Wall with the
Triumvirs: but to salve these sores, a Composition was made by means of the
Cardinal his Brother: That the Heads of both Parties should leave the Town at
the same time. He therefore retired to his House de la Ferte-Aucou near M^aux,
and the Duke of Guise went to Fountainbleau where the King was, carrying so
great a Convoy along with him, that he made the Queen quickly sensible his
Forces were much more numerous then the Princes.

She was gone thither, amidst her irresolution which she ought to choose, either
to cast her self into the Arms of the Prince and follow him to Orleans, for he
was to be there upon her first notice, or to suffer her self to be carried to
Paris by the Confederates. Either of these made her a Captive, the first was
the more odious, because of the great peril she would have put the Catholic
Religion into, and the latter appeared to her the more dangerous.

Cloud. His approach put the Parisians in Arms, as if they might have been
besieged by a handful of Men, and gave occasion to the Confederates to let the
Queen know it was necessary to remove the King to Paris, lest he should fall
into the Huguenots hands. The King of Navarre carried her this unwelcome
Message, and she seeming to hesitate, he told her plainly that if she were not
pleased to go along with them, she might stay behind. She had not leisure to
consider upon it, but must follow or else loose the Party: for at the same
moment they carried the weeping King to Melun, the next day to Bois de
Vincennes, and then to Paris.

Thus were all Addresses from that Queen fruitless, and all the prudent
Counsels of the Chancellor de l'Hospital, which tended but to prevent a Civil
War, that he foresaw would be inevitable as soon as ever the King was in the
hands of either Party.

Conde, partly out of spite and revenge for having been deluded by a Woman,
(for so he guessed it,) partly anger to see his Enemies Masters of the Kings
Person, and fear likewise of being left to their Mercy, or suffer the zeal of
his Friends and the Huguenot Party to grow cold, ran post have with two
thousand Horse to Orleans, where Dandelot had slily seized upon one of the
Gates the day before, which was the first of April.

This was as it were the place of Arms and Capital Seat of all his Party. Now
to keep them in Unity and under good Discipline, the only bonds necessary to
all establishments, he took an Oath from all that were there; That they would
remain united for the defense of the Kings Person, and of the Queens, for the
reformation and the benefit of the State; That they should lead a Life without
reproach and Christian-like observe the Laws of the Land and Military

He afterward wrote to all the German Princes, setting forth the cause of his
taking up Arms, and then sent the Queen Mothers Original Letters, to persuade
them thereby to send him some Assistance, and lend a friendly and helping hand
to redeem both the King and her from their Captivity. At the same time he
published a Manifesto to all the Kingdom to the same purpose, and some days
after sent after it the Copy, whether real, or supposed, of a League made
between the Pope, the King of Spain, and the Guises, to exterminate all the
Sectaries of the new Religion.

France: for the Kings Council, thinking to dis-unite, or lull them asleep by a
deceitful security, put out a Declaration upon the very same day directed only
to their Bailiffs and their Lieutenants, which confirmed the Edict of January,
granted Indemnity for all that was past, forbid the molesting or doing them any
injury for matters of Religion, and gave them the Liberty of exercising the
same in all places, excepting within the City and Suburbs of Paris.

When the Prince had declared himself, the Officers that took his part, and the
Huguenots of themselves, seized upon several Cities, as Man's, Angers, Vendosme,
la Charity upon the Loire, Angoulesme, Lions, Valence, Romans, and almost all
those in Daufine, a great number of those in Guyenne, and Languedoc: In
Normandy, upon Rouen, Caen, Dieppe, Havre de Grace, Bayeux, Saint Lo, Vire,
Falaise, and many others. Matignon the Kings Lieutenant in that Province under
the Duke of Bouillon who was Governor, saved Granville and Cherbourg. This was
a signal Service, for those Ports would have given an easy entrance to the
English.

Their own Authors blame them for it, and say, that by this furious zeal, they
drew upon them the Peoples hate and Massacres.
Wherever the Huguenots were Masters, they utterly abolished the exercise of
the Catholic Religion, overturned the Altars, broke the Images in pieces,
burned the Relics, and cast the ashes into the Air, Tormented and Massacred
the Monks and Priests, not observing that equality and moderation herein, which
they expected should be measured to themselves, but rendering their Party
execrable to the People by the horrible profanation of all things Sacred. The
Prince neither by Entreaties, nor by Remonstrances, nor even by punishment, had
power to stop their fury, which he knew must be very prejudicial to his cause.
And indeed they were even with them in many Cities, where they Massacred huge
numbers, as particularly at Cahors, Sens, Amiens and at Beauvais; and their
pulling down and plundering continuing, the Parliament by a Decree of the last
of June, enjoined all persons, to fall upon them and destroy and slay them in
all places wherever they should find them, as People that were mad, and
declared Enemies both to God and Man.

Though all the Kingdom were in a flame, the Chancellor a right good Frenchman,
endeavored to remedy that evil he could not prevent, and sought ways for an
Accommodation, which did not seem impossible to him, since their Forces had not
yet engaged, nor any Blood as yet been drawn but what was spilt in Tumults and
Seditions. The Queen considered likewise, finding the Huguenots Masters of so
many places that the Triumvirs might seize upon the rest, and so both her Son
the King and she, might be wholly stripped of all: and therefore she sent the
Baron de la Guard to find out the Prince, and entreat him earnestly to come to
Court, assuring him that whatsoever had been done against the Protestants, was
much against her will, and that with his Assistance she would endeavor to
repair it.

The Prince began to listen to it, and was inclined to condescend, when news
was brought him, that the Huguenots coming out of Church at Sens, were all
Massacred, and their Houses saccaged by the Soldiers, the fault whereof was
charged upon the Cardinal de Lorrain, Archbishop of that City. The Prince
having heard the particulars said to his People that they must hope for nothing
now but from God and their own Courage; They then caused white Cassocks of
Cloth to be made for all their Cavalry, and endeavored to animate and keep up
their Spirits by Printing several little Books, some for their Justification,
others to bespatter the House of Guise, and particularly the Cardinal de
Lorrain.

January should be observed, that there should be Justice done for such as were
Massacred, and that the Triumviri should quit the Court. They to repel these
Attaques, presented a Petition that there might be no other Religion in France
but the Catholic; That all Servants belonging to the King, all Governors,
Officers, Magistrates, etc. should make a public Profession of it, or be
deprived of their Employments. That all such as had laid violent hands on
things Sacred, should be punished for their Sacrilege: That no man should bear
Arms, but such as were Commissioned by the King of Navarre, upon which
Conditions they offered to retire from Court.

Toury, where either came accompanied with about Fifty Horse, and all the
necessary precautions. The King of Navarre was with the Queen. The Gentlemen
belonging to them (who were kept at Eight Hundred paces distance left they
should chance to quarrel) could not be restrained from running to embrace each
other, weeping to express both the joy for their present meeting, and the
sorrow for that fate which threatened to change this friendship into a Scene of
fury, and these Salutations into the necessity of cutting suddenly one another
Throats. In sine, the Queen could not gain her ends. The King of Navarre and
the Prince picqu'd each other with reproaches, and the Conference broke off.

The Prince had a good part of the Nobles and Soldiery for him. The
Confederates had the Parisians, the Name and Person of the King, which are
necessarily followed by the Great Officers and Parliament. The Six and
Twentieth of June the Parliament declared all such as had seized those Cities
before mentioned, Rebels, and guilty of Treason. However they excepted the
Prince of Conde, as if it must have been supposed that the Huguenots detained
him by force.

The Armies on either part took the Field: and these being the one in the
Country of Orleannois, the other in Dunois, the Queen made one Essay more which
was like to have succeeded to the destruction of both the Factions. She
proposed to the Prince, by the advice of Valence, to make the Guises and the
Constable quit the Court if he would lay down his Arms, and come and put
himself into hers and the King of Navarres hands. The Prince running
inconsiderately into this toil, goes to the Queen at Talsy as soon as ever he
heard the By this word is meant, the Duke of Guise, the Constable, and the
Marshall de Saint Andre, and by Confederates, they and the King of Navarre.
Triumviri were retired, and by a second imprudence promised to leave the
Kingdom, if they returned not to Court.

The Admiral de Coligny and the other Chiefs of his Party, mightily in pain and
disquiet both for him and themselves, came the next day, and made him sensible
he could not in honor engage his word to the prejudice of what he had promised
them, and was in Conscience bound to make good; and thus they obliged him to
recall it at the next Conference which was held the following day, and brought
him back again to his Army. Every one admiring the Queen Mother had not taken
the whole Covey as she might easily have done with one fair draught of her Net;
which she could not possibly have forborne had it been for her Interest so to do.

Huguenots had seized were too many for their Forces, and kept them scattered
at too great a distance from each other: they soon lost most of them again
together with a great many of their Men, Blois and Angers were forced with all
the Cruelties attending the fury of a Civil War, Man's and Tours were abandoned.
The Duke of Aumale who Commanded the Kings Armies in Normandy (for the Duke of
Bouillon was suspected of Huguenotisme) recovered all the places about Rouen,
and the Duke of Estampes Governor of Bretagne, Valongne, Vire, Saint Lo, and
Bayeux. At Vire were the greatest Cruelties committed, because the Huguenots
had been most cruel there.

During the Negotiations and the many difficulties there are in Cementing
together the several Members of a new made Party, where most times three break
off whilst they are soddering one: the heat of the Princes zealots began to
grow cool. Most part came to him full of resolution, and with the hopes and
expectation of being led on to Battle immediately, expecting that a few moments
either would give them Victory, or a brave and glorious death: but when they
found things were drawn out in Length, many desired lieve to return; so that
being unable to keep them longer together there with him, he sent John de
Partenay Soubize to Lions, John de Hangest-Yvoy to Bourges, the Count de la
Rochefoucaud Ango^lesme, Dandelot into Germany, and Briquemault to England, the
two last to hasten those Supplies which had been promised him in those
Countries.

Navarre and the Duke of Guise, went to besiege Bourges; the other commanded by
the Marshall de Saint Andre, was sent to Poitiers. This last place was taken
by Battery, in fewer days then the Soldiers had to pillage it; it was gained
on the first day of August. The other was reduced by Composition the Nine and
Twentieth of the same Month. They had sustained near upon a Five Weeks Siege,
and might have held it longer, if Yvoy who defended it with Two Thousand Men,
had not suffered himself to be prevailed upon either by fear, or the cajoleries
and allurements of the Court. And indeed, he soon after quitted the Party and
retired to his own home.

Bourges being taken, most part of the Chief Officers were for going directly
to Orleans, where they might have cooped up the Prince, and by that means cut
off the greatest head of the Faction. The Queen would not have it so, the Duke
of Guise himself thought the enterprise too difficult, and favoring the
Parisians in what they most desired, was of opinion they should lay Siege to
Rouen. The Army Arrived there about the Twentieth of September; and just in a
nick of time to hinder that Progress the Huguenots might have made with the
help of the English. For on the same day a Treaty of Confederation was signed
between Queen Elizabeth and them at Hampton Court, specifying that she should
furnish them with Six Thousand Men, one half to be put into Havre de Grace,
which should be delivered to her, and which she should keep for the King, and
was to serve for a place of retreat and refuge to the Huguenots, which in a few
days afterward was Executed.

The Fort Saint Catherine was taken by Storm. The City maintained their
Attaques with all possible Resolution. They proffered them such composition as
was reasonable enough; and for three several times the Queen Mother hindered the
Duke of Guise from giving the Assault, being persuaded by the prudent Coun sell
of the Chancellor, that nothing can be more prejudicial to a Sovereign then to
make Conquests upon himself, and pillage his own Cities. But when they found
the Besieged did continue to reject with Stubbornness those favors and that
mercy they were importuned to accept, the Kings Council gave the Duke lieve to
let loose the Reins to Victory. He therefore gave a general Assault the Five
and Twentieth of October. Their resistance was not equal to their obstinacy,
they abandoning all at the first Shock. The Soldiers pillaged them above eight
days together, which proved the more cruel, because they were extremely rich.

Montgomery, who had a Galley lying there ready upon all occasions (it was one
of the Kings which happened to put into Rouen when the Huguenots mastered the
Town) soon got aboard of it with his Friends together with the English. The
Slaves to whom he had promised their Liberty, rowed with such force that it
slid quite over the Chain they had laid cross the River at Caudebec.

They hanged up John du Bose d'Esmandreville President of the Court of Ayd^s,
two Counselors belonging to the City, Marlorat the Minister, and Eight or Ten
Captains: amongst others du Cross who had been Governor of Havre de Grace, and
delivered the place up to the English.

By way of Reprizal or Retaliation, the Prince caused the Heads of some
Catholics to be cut off that were in his Hands, amongst others John Baptist
Sapin Councellor of the Parliament of Paris, and John de Troyes Abbot of
Gastine, who were taken in Vendosmois, as they were on their way to Spain from
the King. Giles leu Maistre first President of the Parliament, revenged the
Death of Sapin who was his Nephew upon some unfortunate Huguenots that were
Prisoners in Paris, whom he sent to the common Place of Execution. These
retaliations had gone on to infinity, if the Captains of the Catholic Party,
(who apprehended the like Reprisals, should they have fallen into the Enemies
power) had not engaged their Chiefs to desist from such kind of Process, and to
make good the usual Rules of War and Martial Customs, and Laws.

The Five and Twentieth of October the King of Navarre had been wounded in the
Trenches, (while he was making water) by a Musket shot in his left Shoulder.
The City being taken, he would needs be carried in his Bed by his Swiss
Soldiers, to make a Triumphant entrance thorough the breach. His wound was not
Mortal: but his too assiduous entertainment of the Damoiselle du Rouet, (one of
those Sirenes the Regent employed to enchant that poor Prince withal) heated
his blood too much; after which his impatience to be Cured making him venture
by Boat to Paris, he was seized with a Trembling, and afterward fell into a
cold Sweat, the Symptoms of approaching death, as indeed it proved; for the
Boat stopping at Andelis, he there resigned his last breath the Seventeenth day
of November, showing himself in this last Act, as he had done in all the other
Four, wavering and irresolv'd between the Catholic Religion, and the
Confession of Ausbourg: but discovering enough the bad opinion he had of the
Government, by an express order he gave to fore-warn his Wife from coming to
the Court, to stand well upon her Guard, and Fortify her places.

The trouble the Prince was in for the bloody Conquest of Rouen, was yet
augmented by the unwelcome News brought him from Guyenne. Duras had raised Five
Thousand Men for him in that Country: this Army of Fellows picked up at random
and most Robbers, living without order, were charged by Montluc and cut in
pieces near the Borough de Vere between Perigueux and Sarlat. Which brought
the Prince two great dis-advantages, the one that he lost this considerable
Supply, the other that Montluc's Forces, having nothing else in those Parts to
fear, joined with the Kings Army some days before the Battle of Dreux.

There have been many Volumes Printed of all the Minute passages, in every
Province, particularly in Guyenne, Languedoc, and in Daufine, the surprising,
taking and retaking of Towns, a World of little Fights and Skirmishes, the
Barbarities and Massacres committed on both sides, the Insolences and furious
rage of the People, which, to say the truth, they were but too much and too
highly provoked unto by the Huguenots in diverse places. I shall therefore only
observe in gross that Sommerine for the Catholic Party, made a rude War in
Provence against his Father the Count de Tendes, who held with the Huguenots.
That in Daufine the Baron des Adrets having taken up Arms for these, and the
Count de Suse for the other, pursued each other by turns very close and
smartly, and that the Baron made himself Terrible by his enormous Cruelties,
Precipitating, Massacring, and Drowning without Faith or Compassion such as
resisted him in any place; That Tavanes a zealous Catholi^k having retaken
Chaalon and Mascon, preserved for a time, all Burgundy from being any further
involved in the Civil War; That Normandy was all laid waste and desolate, the
higher by reason of the Sieges of Rouen, and Havre, and the lower by the Count
de Montgommery, and the Breton Troops which the Duke d'Estampes had brought in
thither to make head against him; That Joyeuse preserved one part of Languedoc
in the Ancient Religion; That Montluc, as we may find in his Commentaries,
rendered the King great Service in Guyenne, but that he exceeded the bounds even
of severity it self against the Huguenots.

I shall add that their Party had the disadvantage almost every where, unless
in Languedoc where they held all the best Cities, excepting Toulouze, which
intending to seize upon in the Month of May, they were drove thence after an
obstinate Fight of many days, and the loss of Three Thousand of their Men, not
reckoning about Two Hundred more who were dispatched to the other World by
several sorts of Death and Torments; That at Lions they defended themselves
against Tavanes, and afterward against the Duke of Nemours, who besieged that
City the one after the other; That above Fifty Thousand of theirs were Slain,
as well in Battle, as in Tumults, Seditions and Up-roars; and that wherever
they were strongest, they broke or melted all their Shrines, Reliquaires and
sacred Vessels of Gold and Silver, which the Prince Coined into Money with the
Arms and Effigies of the King, and this made Money much more common in France
then ever it had been known before this War.

The dread the Pope was in lest they should hold a National Council in France,
obliged him to assemble the General Council of Trent. The Cardinal de Lorrain
went thither this year upon the fifteenth of November with great equipage,
accompanied by forty Bishops and a good number of the most learned Doctors. His
Holiness had some reason to take the Allarm upon it: the power of this great
Cardinal gave him so much jealousy, that he called him the Pope on the other
side the Mountains; And apprehended hended he would bring the Doctors of the
Ausbourg Confession into the Lists. For Inspruc, he had conferred with the
Emperor. So that the Pope as if he had be^n to deal with the greatest enemy of
the Church, Mustered up all his Forces, sent for all the Bishops in his own
Dominions, where they are very numerous, borrowed even of his Neighbors, and
prayed the King of Spain to assist him with his to strengthen his party in the
Council, that he might be able to make head against those of France and Germany.

Though Philip had lost his cause at Venice about precedence, he failed not to
revive it again in the Council. Claude Ferdinand de Quinones Count de Luna his
Ambassador, before he would come to Trent, had demanded of the Pope what place
he should have there: the Pope instead of giving a direct answer, eluded and
referred the decision of that right to those Legates who presided for him in
the Council. The Cardinal de Gonzague, who was chief of them, found an
expedient to satisfy the Spaniards, and not much prejudice the French. Which
was that the Ambassador of France, should keep his place next the Emperor, and
in their Congregations, he of Spain, should by provision only, have one apart
by himself, either next to Ecclesiastiques, or on a Seat distinct just opposite
to the other Ambassadors. The Cardinal de Lorrain, out of the apprehension he
had lest this dispute should break up the Council, obliged Lansac the Kings
Ambassador to accept of this condition, and to allow the Count should have a
Seat apart near the Secretary to the Council. He took this place therefore, and
having Commanded his Orator to speak, went out the first of any for fear of
some dispute at the Door.

But the difficulty was not determined as to the other Assemblies, particularly
the Sessions of Council, and at solemn Mass, where the Seats were not placed in
the same manner: so that the French demed the Spaniard the like favor there.
The Legates durst not decide it of their own heads: but when they had received
Orders from the Pope to give him the like rank at all ceremonies, they
contrived another expedient. Upon Saint Peter's Day the Fathers of the Council
being at Chapel, there appeared a Seat between the last Cardinal, and the
first Patriarch, and the Spanish Ambassadors sat there. They had likewise
given private Order to have two Censers that they might give the Incense to the
French and him at the same time. The French would not suffer it, the Divine
Service was interrupted, the Legates, the Ambassadors, and some Bishops, to
prevent the scandal, endeavored to find a Medium which was, that they should
omit the giving of Incense, etc. that day.

After this Council, the same controversy was renewed at Rome, by Lewis de
Zuniga Requesens Great Commander of the Order of Saint James, Ambassador of
King Philip; Henry Clutin de Oysel who was so for the King, courageously
maintained the right of France. The Spaniard caused diverse expedients to be
propounded, whereby he aimed to preserve an equality: but they were all
rejected by the French, who would not only keep his ancient place and station,
but would have the Spaniard do so too, that is beneath him. So that the Pope
after he had vainly sought to find out expedients, did most solemnly adjudge
the precedence contended for to belong to the French, and maintained him in the
possession of it. Which was performed on the day of Pentecost in the year 1564.
Requesens having protested against this Judgment, and not appearing at the
Celebration of that Festival.

Spain have many times disputed for the Precedence with those of France, though
for the most part to their own shame, as well at Rome, as in other Courts of
Princes, till in our days, the most August King Lewis XIV. upon a contest
happened in England between his and one from Spain, obliged Philip IV. expressly
to renounce it by an Authentic Instrument in Writing.

The 12 th of November, Dandelot Arrived at Orleans with Twelve Cornets of
Reisters making Six and Twenty Hundred Horse, and Twelve Ensigns of
Lansquenets, under them near Three Thousand Men, whom the Landegrave of Hesse
had furnished him withal, and some few days before Duras had brought in the
Remnants of the Battle de Vere.

This Crime of bringing strangers into the Kingdom, was in some sort excusable
in them by the example of the contrary Party, who had first caused both Horse
and Foot to be raised in Germany by the Rhingrave, and Count Rocandolf who were
Protestants, and had likewise called in some Spaniards, which they might very
well have let alone, since there were above an hundred Catholics in France for
every Huguenot.

Paris, believing that upon the first and sudden fright they might force them
before the Triumviri could return, or put the Queen in so much dread that she
would be brought to a more reasonable accommodation. The event made the vanity
of this Design plainly appear: he could not so much as take the little Town of
Corbeil; and besides when he was lodged at Arcueil and other neighboring
Villages, the Queen engaged him in diverse Conferences, wherein she pretended
mildly to yield to him in diverse points, to hinder him from falling upon the
Suburbs, till the Parisians were recovered from their terrible consternation)
and to debauch his best Officers; amongst which number was Genlis who retired
to his own home, but yet remained ever a Huguenot.

When he had considered therefore that it was a foolish enterprise to take
Paris for Corbeil, he decamped the 12th day of December, and took his March
toward Normandy, to join with the English who were at Havre, and receive some
English Money to pay his Germans ready to Mutiny. The Triumviri followed him so
close that at his seventh or eighth halt, the two Armies found themselves
engaged to give Battle near the City of Dreux the twentieth of December.

In the beginning the Huguenots had some advantage, they defeated the main
Battle of the Catholics, took part of their Cannon, and even the Constable,
being wounded with a Pistol Bullet in the Face: but they afterward falling
upon the Baggage, and their gross of Reserve which consisted of twelve hundred
Reistres, disbanding likewise to get their share, the Catholics had their full
revenge.

The Duke of Guise in appearance commanded only his Company of Gentdarmes, and
a Body made up of some friends of his who were Volunteers: and yet his desert
and quality made his advice and counsel pass for Orders. The Marshall de Saint
Andre led the Vanguard; the Duke who stood on a rising Ground and reserved
himself for the Crowning of that Day, beholding the Enemies scattered, and
scarce keeping any order, detached some parties from that Body to charge the
Infantry who were defrauded of their Cavalry: then Marching himself turned upon
their Horse and put them to the rout. The Prince of Conde who never gave
Ground, was taken Prisoner by Danville the Constables second Son; the Reisters
trotted away into a Neighboring Wood: the Admiral joined them with Four
Hundred Horse whom he had rallied; and with these was resolved, if the Germans
had but had so much courage, to have begun the Charge afresh the next day.

They Counted Eight Thousand dead upon the place, as many almost of the one
party as of the other. The Field of Battle remained to the Duke of Guise, who
did not judge it fitting to pursue the Admiral, but left him to make his
retreat toward Orleans; whither they caused the Constable immediately to be
carried fearing he might be rescued from them. In the Fight the Marshall de
Saint Andre (being by a great Body of Horse, made Prisoner of War while he
pursued the Victory too eagerly) was killed with a Pistol-shot by a Cavalier
named Bobigny-Meziere Son of a Register belonging to Paris, whom he had used
too ruggedly in some Ren-contre.

The Duke of Guise rendered all imaginable honor to the Prince of Conde, they
supped and lay together with so many demonstrations of amity, that one would
have guessed they had laid aside and forgotten all their quarrels to live
together like Cousin-Germains They were Sons of Brother and Sister.
as they were in entire confidence, as they had before done under the Reign of
Henry II.

When the main Battle of the Royal Army was first defeated, there were some
run-aways that rode Whip and Spur even to Paris, Proclaiming that all was lost.
Of these was d'Ossun, who had acquired the name of brave in the Wars of Italy;
and indeed the rage he fell into afterward when he found his mistake had so
betrayed his courage as to blemish the Luster of all his former Actions,
himself condemned himself to death, and underwent the execution of his own
Sentence by an obstinate resolution never to eat or drink more.

Upon the first news the Duchess of Guise who had a numerous Court about her,
found her self abandoned in a moment; and as for the Queen without being
overmuch moved or concerned, She only said, well, we must then pray to God in
French, and began highly to caress those that were friends to the Prince and
the Novel Opinions. But next day the contrary being certified by a Cloud of
Eyewitnesses, and Letters from the principal Officers, the crowd about the
Duchess of Guise was greater Huguenot Cabal played the Diver, the Catholic
one took the upper-hand and clapped their wings and crowed, the Queen ordered
Bon-fires to be made, though with some reluctance, and gave with all the
apparent willingness she could counterfeit, the command of the Army to the Duke
of Guise, on whom the Army themselves had already conferred it.

Paray, he descended into Vendosmois, and crossing the Loire at Baugency,
lodged his Men in the Countries of Soulogne, and in Berry, where he knew the
Duke of Guise would have Lodged his, in order to the Siege of Orleans which was
resolved upon.

Having left his Brother Dandelot in the City with Two Thousand Soldiers, as
many Inhabitants well armed, and a great number of Nobility, he repassed the
Loire at Gergeau, and takes his way toward Normandy. In that Country he
ransomed diverse little Towns for Sums to entertain his Men, received the Money
from England, and Mustered his Forces. Being invited by the Huguenots of Caen,
he besieged the Castle wherein was the Duke of Elboeuf Brother of the Duke of
Guise, and N. de Bailleul Renouard, whom he had taken at discretion, had not
the important news from Orleans obliged him to return that way.

Guise had laid Siege to it the sixth day of February 1563. The Queen was at
Bangency, and had shut up the Prin^e (whom she still lugg'd along with her) in
the Castle of Onzain. Already the Suburbs were lost with ^ight hundred of the
besieged, already the Bridge-Tower was gained; and the Huguenots in such
consternation they could expect no help but some sudden blow from Heaven or
from Hell, when a Gentleman named John Poltrot Mere, prompted by a fatal and
detestable Zeal for the defense of his Religion, watching his opportunity when
the Duke of Guise, who had been to meet his Wife, returned to the Siege mounted
upon a Mule and slenderly attended, shot him with a Pistol into the shoulder,
whereof he died six days after; In so much reputation, even amongst his
Enemies, as to be allowed the most generous Prince of his time, and the best
head in Christendom, endued with all the heroic virtues, and scarce tainted
with any vice, either as Prince, or Courtier.

The Murderer after he had rid hard all night, thinking he was far enough from
thence, found himself by daybreak; at the Bridge d'Olivet Half a League from
Orleans.
, his Horse being tired, he went into a House to repose himself, where the same
Morning he was taken by one of that Dukes Secretaries.

Interrogated what were the Motives, who the Instigators made him commit that
Crime? he said, as to the first, his zeal for Religion had pushed him on to
destroy him whom he judged to be their Persecutor: touching the other point he
varied much, accusing sometimes one, sometimes another: but in all his Answers
and Confessions, and at his very death, he taxed the Admiral. That Lord, to
little purpose, purged himself by public Writing, and made oath he detested
that Act; In vain he Petitioned the Queen by Letters, not to hasten the
Execution of that Assassin, that he might be confronted with him: the House of
Guise believed he was Guilty: and whether he were really so, or not, the
Children of that Duke took the most bloody revenge that we read of in any
History of the World.

The Admirals request to the Queen seemed reasonable enough; nevertheless
Poltrot being carried to Paris the sixteenth day of March, was in few days
judged, the Parliament condemned him to the same punishment as those that
attempt the Sacred Person of a King; which was to have his Flesh torn off with
red hot pincers, and drawn to pieces by four Wild-Horses. The same day the Duke
of Guises Corpse was brought to Paris, deposited at the Chartreux, from thence
born to Nostre-Dame with great lamentation and the real mourning of the whole
City, and then inhumed in the Sepulcher of his Fathers at Joinville. Charles
Duke of Lorrain made a solemn service for him at Nancy, and the Pope another in
his Chapel at Rome, with Funeral Orations, which certainly might be very noble
without any mixture of Flattery.

The justice and moderation of that heroic Soul appeared yet more eminently in
the last moments of his Life: for he justified himself of the Massacre of
Vassy, expressing a deep Sorrow that that accident should have given occasion
for a

And indeed, while he was yet living, she had begun to Treat about it, first at
Saint Mesnin with Eleonora de Roye Wife to the Prince of Conde, whom she
caressed extraordinarily, giving her even hopes that her Husband should have
the Lieutenancy as the King of Navarre his Brother had before: Then with the
Prince and the Constable in the Isle aux Boeufs near Orleans, to which place
they both were brought under strong Guard. And as the Constable stood stiff not
to allow of the Edict of January, and the Prince was as resolute on the
contrary, the Queen permitted the Prince to go into Orleance to communicate
with the Heads of his Party.

The Ministers insisted that at what price soever, he should maintain the Edict
of January. The Officers who were weary of the War, and himself who already
longed to enjoy the sweet Air of the Court, and the softer pleasures of Women,
relaxed in many things, and contented themselves with a more moderate Edict. It
allowed such as were Lords High Justices to have a place for public Preaching
in their Territories, and to others that have mean or low Justice, to have
private ones in their own Houses, only for themselves and Family, provided
withal they did not dwell in Buroughs or Parishes that held of any other
Justice Or Jurisdiction.
but the Kings. Moreover it gave them Liberty to Preach within such
jurisdiction, whence appeals may be made to the Parliament without any other
Medium; as likewise in such Cities where they had enjoyed that Liberty till the
fifteenth day of March last; and together with this it also contained a general
Amnisty, a discharge to the Prince for all the Royal Money he had taken, or
caused to be taken, and an acknowledgment whereby the King owned that he was
his faithful Kinsman and affectionate to the good of the Kingdom, and that all
those that had followed him had acted nothing but with honest intentions and
for his service.

The Queen did so earnestly press the conclusion of this Treaty, that it was
Signed on either part the eighteenth of March before the Admiral was returned
from Normandy. He made bitter complaint to the Prince for having so ill managed
the interest of his Party in a juncture of time when he might have mightily
improved it: but the thing was done, and those complaints served for no other
purpose but to evaporate his Choler. The Edict was published in Parliament
about the latter end of March. That of Toulouze delayed till they were
commanded more then once, and moreover constrained to revoke all the
diffamatory Decrees they had made against the Counselors belonging to that
Body, and against the Capitous.

The Soldiery that were at Orleans, having first celebrated their Communion in
the Church called Saint Croix, Marched out of the City. They did the same in
many others which they held in diverse places, leaving them in a most desolate
condition, having ruined their fairest Churches. Commissioners were sent into
the Provinces by the King to restore the Huguenots to their own, and put the
Edict in Execution: but the most part made all the difficulties in it they
possibly could, excepting such as they could gain by force of presents.

If this liberty of Conscience which was allowed them, were a just cause for
the Clergies complaint, an Edict made in the Month of May, at Saint Germain en
lay for the Alienation of a Hundred Thousand Crowns Sol of their Revenue in
fund, which was executed with great severity, made their complaints rise much
higher and louder.

de l'Hospital to still their outcries a little, granted them power to buy the
same again, and caused another Edict to be published whereby it was ordained
that the Tenths should be paid to them, which without doubt proved very
effectual toward the strengthening and fixing the Catholic Religion; for had
the Huguenots been exempt from those payments, the

The Duke of Guise being dead, and the Peace made, the Queen lived somewhat
more at her ease. Nevertheless four grand Affairs did yet perplex her mind; the
Princes conduct, Havre de Grace which was still in the hands of the English,
the dissatisfaction of the Parliament of Paris, and the eager pursuit and
solicitation of the Duchess of Guise and her Children to have justice done
them for the death of their Father.

Sardinia, wherewith she had enchanted the King of Navarre his Brother: but
Eleonora de Roye his Wife happening to die, she endeavored to chain him to the
Court with the Charms of a voluptuous life, and the tempting beauty of one of
her Maids of Honor, who having refused nothing to serve her Mistress, found
her self incommoded for nine Months after, and was for a time the discourse and
entertainment of the Court, where the like accidents affords matter for more
sport and divertisement then scandal. The Widow of the Marshall de Saint
Andre, upon another Motive, which was the hopes of Marrying him, endeavored
likewise to inspire him with love, but entertained in her own Breast so great a
passion for him, as made her purchase her own satisfaction, at the Price of her
Lands at Valery, which she bestowed upon him.

The Admiral observing that these Debaucheries, in the head of the Party,
decryed even all the Party it self, and fearing withal left there should some
new beauty appear whose persuasive Eloquence might prove more powerful then his
Preaching Ministers, made him such earnest Remonstrances, that he obliged him
to break all those Bonds and Fetters of idle and pernicious wandering loves, by
tying a second time the sacred conjugal Knot, taking to his lawful Bed Frances
Sister of Leonor Duke of Longueville.

Every thing was in a readiness for the recovering of Havre by force, for it
was a plain case that Queen Elizabeth intended to keep it as a recompense for
the loss of Calais. After she had therefore refused to surrender it, a War was
declared against her by a Herald, and the King being at Gaillion, Brisac began
the Siege; the Constable and his Son the Marshall came thither fifteen days
after. The French went about it with much resolution, the Huguenots with more
forwardness yet then the Catholics, to take away that reproach laid at their
doors of having introduced those Forraigners into the Kingdom.

Ambrose Earl of Warwick was Governor there with a Garrison of Four Thousand
Men. The assailants pressed hard upon them from without, and the Plague made so
rude a War and such havoc amongst them within, as killed forty or fifty of
them every day, and had cast down above two thousand on the Bed of Sickness,
and of sorrow for being now useless: but that which amazed Huguenots whom their
Queen had so much assisted were become their roughest Enemies. These
considerations forced them to surrender the place the twenty seventh of July,
with all the Artillery and Ammunitions belonging to the King, and all the Ships
and Goods belonging to the French. The next day there appeared a Supply of
Eighteen Hundred Men within sight of the Port, which in few days had been
seconded with a Navy of Threescore great Ships Commanded by Admiral Clinton:
but finding the Capitulation concluded he returned again.

English revenged themselves for this loss upon the Merchants Ships. That was
all they could do, as being unable to commit further mischief upon France after
the loss of Calais, but only to turn Pirates. They continued this War at Sea
for some Months: after which they consented to a Truce, which was converted
into a Treaty of Peace the ninth of April in the year 1564. wherein it was said
that either of them should preserve their rights and pretensions. This was to
be understood with respect to the English, as to the City of Calais, which King
Henry II. by a Treaty made in Anno 1559. was obliged to restore within eight
years, during which time nothing was to be attempted on either part. Now the
French pretended the English had violated this condition, and had therefore
forfeited their right as to the recovery of Calais.

During this Siege King Charles entered upon his fourteenth year. The
Declaration of King Charles the wise, which perhaps was never well understood,
will that the King be declared in Majority at fourteen years; and it was the
Queens intent to do it at the soonest, thereby to arrogate to her self the
whole authority under the name of the King, and exclude the Prince and the
Constable. Now by common right the age of majorities ought to be full and
complete. The Chancellor de l'Hospital, the Queens only Council in these
matters, persuaded her there was no necessity to wait the plenitude of fourteen
years, and said that in a favorable account, the year commenced was reck'ned
complete: but whether he suspected the Parliament of Paris would not be of that
sentiment because they might justly doubt whether it would be favorable or
prejudicial to Charles VI. he was of opinion they should carry him to the
Parliament of Rouen to pass this Act.

August; and at the same time he caused them to pass an Edict, which was after
verified in all the other Parliaments, ordaining that the Edict he had made for
Liberty of Conscience, should be observed till such time as the Questions
should be decided by a Council, or else by him should otherwise be ordained;
That whosoever should violate the same should be Treated as a Rebel; That all
Persons should lay down their Arms, and renounce all Leagues and Communication
with Strangers.

The Edict of the Kings Majority was not Registered in the Parliament of Paris
but with great difficulty. They sent to make great Remonstrances to the King by
their First President accompanied by two more of their Members; He represented
it was contrary to the Custom of the Kingdom to carry any Edict to another
Parliament before it was passed in that of Paris, which represented the Estates
General, which is the Court of Paris, the most August Throne of their Kings,
the true Parliament of the Kingdom, whereof the rest are all but little
Sprouts. The King whose countenance and voice they had composed to a studied
Severity, answered them, that they were to obey, that they should meddle no
more with public Affairs, and that they should lay aside that old and vulgar
Error, That they were the Tutors, or Guardians of their Kings, defenders of the
Kingdom, and keepers of the City of Paris. The Deputies having made their
Report to the Court, they were equally divided; Peter Signier President in the
Grand Chamber, and Dormy President aux Enquestes, carried their Division, to
the King, who ordered that the Edict should be Published and Registered without
delay, and that all the Presidents and Councillors should be present upon pain
of Interdiction.

The King would not return to Paris till the Parliament had obeyed. The Mother,
the Widow and the Children of the Duke of Guise with a great train of
Mourners, came to him at the same time to demand Justice upon the Authors of
the cruel Murder of that Prince; It was well enough known they pointed at the
Admiral. Some time before the Prince of Conde, and the Marshall de Montmorency
had declared they would maintain his Innocence with and against all; and
because he had some suspicion of the Parliament of Paris, the King had taken
the business upon himself, and then referred it to the Grand Council, whence he
had withdrawn it again to bring it before the Parliament. It was not possible
to go thorough with it without raising a Civil War again: and therefore they
found it expedient to suspend the prosecution for three years.

Before the Peace, the People of Toulouze had Mutinied against the Parliament
upon occasion of some wall which they were making to enclose the Palace. Their
thundering Decrees could not stop the Insolency of those whom themselves had
nursed up in Blood and Licentiousness, by letting loose their rage against the
Huguenots. Diverse of their Members ran great hazard of their Lives in those
furious Tumults; which afforded a specious pretense to the Cardinals d'Armagnac
and de Strossy, to Teraide, Negrep^lisse, and Fourquevaux to make a League, by
which they were engaged amongst themselves, (after they had Communicated the
thing to the Lord de Joyeuse) to stand united for the defense of the Religion
of their Ancestors, against all Rebels, Sectaries, disturbers of the public
quiet, and that in each Seneschauss^e; (or Jurisdiction of a Seneschal) they
should take an Account of what Arms there were, and how many fit to bear them.
The Articles were drawn with consent of the Solicitor-General, and by a Decree
according to the good pleasure of the King.

This was in my opinion the first League that was openly made amongst the Kings
Subjects for the business of Religion. By this example diverse others were
formed in several Provinces; and out of all these at least from the disposition
this Imprinted in the minds of the People, that great League was framed which
gave Henry III. his death, and infinite troubles to his Successors.

During this apparent calm, the Chancellor labored in contriving most
excellent Reglements for Polity and Justice. All Curates were declared exempt
from Lodging and Providing, or quartering of Soldiers. There was an Edict that
such as were Plaintiffs in Law, should lay down a certain Sum before they were
admitted to plead: but the Parliament made great opposition, and, in fine,

Another in the Month of December established a Court of Judicature for
Merchants, composed of one Judge and four Consuls, who were chosen out of a
Hundred Citizens called together by the Prevost des Marchands, and the
Eschevins, to determine upon the place (and without any formal and tedious
proceedings) all disputes or demands concerning Trade and Commerce, to the
value of Five Hundred Livers absolutely and Soveraignly, and above the said Sum
by way of Provision upon giving Security; The Appeal to be made to the
Parliament. After this Example of Paris, Ten or Twelve of the chiefest Cities
in the Kingdom would needs have the like Jurisdiction, and found it to be very
good and useful. In effect, if there were one in every City, and the
Sovereignty of their Power extended to give Judgment as far as a Thousand
Crowns, it would prevent frauds, dry up deceit at the Root, and rid them of all
those paltry Splitters of causes, who long so much to have a finger in the rich
Merchants purse and to taste of that fruit of Trade.

December, the Council of Trent was closed, where the Cardinal de Lorraine, who
Composed and Sung their Acclamations, (though according to ancient Custom, it
was rather the Office of a Deacon then of a great Archbishop) seemed not to
have regarded the Honor of France as he ought, forasmuch as I know not upon
what considerations, he named only the Emperor in particular, and in gross the
Christian Kings and Princes, although in the Address of the Bulls for
convocation, the King of France was by name expressed as well as the Emperor.

The one and Thirtieth of the same Month, which was the last day of the Year,
was so likewise of the Marshall de Brissac, one of the greatest Warriors of
his Age.

Paris, amongst many Rules contained therein to prevent delays in Suits of Law
and reform their Decrees and Judgments, it was ordained that the year, which
till that time in all Civil Affairs had still taken its beginning at Easter,
should from thenceforward be changed and begin upon the first day of January
according to the usage in the Church.

This was observed the following year in the Kings Council and the Chamber des
Comptes: but the Parliament, which is as it were Guardian of the Ancient Orders
of the Kingdom, opposed it, and could not be persuaded to follow this
Reformation till after the Assembly at Moulins, to wit, in the year 1567.

By virtue of an Edict given at the Instance of the Queen at Saint Maur des
Fossez, bearing that the void places in the City of Paris, namely that of the
Palace des Tournelles, should be sold for the benefit of the King. She caused
that Palace to be pulled down together with that of Angoulesme very near the
other, under color of abolishing the very Memory of that fatal place where her
Husband was wounded to death: but in truth to avoid, I do not know what
sinister accident, with which she seemed to be threatened there. She gave part
of it to the public for a Horse-Market, and sold the remainder to private
Persons to build Houses: and then began to Erect the Palace of Tuilleries.

Although the Factions seemed to lie asleep, notwithstanding the Heads of both
Parties, turned every Stone underhand to keep their Friends firm to them, to
maintain the Zeal and Courage of their Parties, and to strengthen themselves
with Foreign assistance. The King of Spain was privately courted by several of
the Catholic Chiefs, who were very willing thereby to support themselves, that
he should have some hand in the management of the Affairs of France. Upon their
Solicitations he sent a Solemn Embassy to the King, amongst whom were likewise
Deputies from the Duke of Savoy, and the Duke of Lorraine: to persuade him to
depute some in his behalf at Nancy, where the Assembly of Christian Princes was
assigned to consult about the most necessary means and ways to make the
Council of Trent to be received, and owned, and to extirpate all Heresies out
of Christendom: but the Queen Mother who foresaw the consequences of this
demand, illuded it by many delays, and sent the Ambassadors back again with an
ambiguous and indeterminate answer.

Charles du Moulin, the most profound of all the French Lawyers, put forth a
Consultation, wherein he undertook to prove that the said Council was Null and
Vicious in all its parts, contrary to the Ancient Decrees, prejudicial to the
dignity of the Crown, and the Liberties of the Gallican Church. The zealous
Catholics would not let this attempt, of so profane a Fellow, escape
unpunished, but having accused him in Parliament of dangerous opinions and
sentiments concerning matters of Faith, got him confined to a Prison: but the
King by a Decree of Council set him at Liberty, with an injunction to write no
more without his express Order and Permission, and forbid the Parliament to
take any Cognizance of this matter.

The Five and Twentieth of July, the Feast day of the Apostle Saint James the
great, Emperor Solomon and Maximilian, II. R. 22 years, and 3 Months.
the Emperor Ferdinand I. Brother of Charles V. died at Vienne of a lingering
Fever, attended with a Dropsy: He had lived Sixty one years, and governed the
Empire Seven yeaers. Maximilian his Eldest Son, who was already King of the
Romans, succeeded him.

Huguenots, and the different dispositions of Men's minds, or having some more
secret design under deck, thought good to take a Progress with the whole Court
to every City in the Kingdom, taking along with her the King, Alexander He was
13. years old.
Monsieur the Elder of his Brothers, and leaving Hercules the youngest at Bois
de Vincennes. The Prince of Conde had retired himself to his House de Valery.

Champagne, Barrois, Bourgongne, Lyonnois, Provence, Languedoc, Guyenne, making
solemn Entries in all the great Cities, and arrived at Bayonne the Tenth day of
June of the following year 1565.

de Lorraine and the Marshall de Montmorency Governor of Paris and the Isle of
France, was very near breaking out into another War. The King had forbid all
his Subjects wearing of any Arms, the Cardinal notwithstanding had a License
under the Great Seal, to have a Guard that might bear them. The Marshall knew
it well enough, but he expected the Cardinal should send to Compliment him upon
it, and the Cardinal pretended that it belonged to the Marshall to pay him
that Civility. Now when upon his return from the Council of Trent the Cardinal
would have passed thorough Paris with the Duke of Aumale his Brother, and the
Duke of Guise his Nephew, the Marshall de Montmorency knowing he drew near the
City, sent to Command him by a Prevost des Mareschaux, to make his men give up
their Arms; the Cardinal went on, the Marshall well Accompanied goes to meet
him, charged him in the Street Saint Denis. (The Duke d'Aumale was gone by
Saint Martins Gate.) The Cardinals People were scattered here and there, and he
escaped into a Shop with his Nephew. At Night they went all to the Hostel de
Clugny, which was the Cardinals House.

The next day the Marshall passed and repassed in a bravado before his Door.
The City of Paris being just on the point to rise: the Prevost des Marchands,
on behalf of the Parliament, endeavored to find out some means for an
Accommodation between them. He prevailed with the Cardinal to go out of Town,
and with the Marshall to permit that Princes Guard to wear their Arms,
according to the Kings License, a Copy whereof he showed. The Duke d'Aumale,
nevertheless hovering about Paris with a numerous Train of Friends whom he had
called to him, the Admiral was likewise sent for by the Marshall his Cousin,
and brought a Thousand or Twelve Hundred Gentlemen along with him; and thus
both Parties being in Arms, it was feared every Moment they would charge each
other: but the King having heard the Complaints of both sides, sent a Command
they should lay down their Arms, to which they obeyed.

The Queen Mother being so nigh the Frontiers of Spain, desired to see her
Daughter Isabella She was called Peace because she was Married to King Phil.
1559. as a pawn for the Peace.
de la Paix, Wife of King Philip II. The King sent his Brother the Duke of
Anjou to meet her, who being attended with the Flower of the French Court,
passed over the River Marquere, which is beyond Saint John de Pied de Port, and
parts the two Kingdoms, met the Queen at Arvanis, and accompanied her to Saint
Sebastians, where Ferdinand Alvara de Toledo Duke d' Alva came and waited on
her with a great Attendance.

He brought the Order of the Golden Fleece for the King: who went to receive
his Sister at the Banks of the River Bidasso, and there gave his hand to help
her out of the Boat. The Queen Mother had past over the River, whether so
agreed upon, or impatient to embrace her Daughter, whom they set upon a
Palfrey, Monsieur, and the Cardinal de Bourbon walking on each side, and so led
her to Bayonne where she remained about Three weeks with her Mother.

During that time, all what the Luxury and Pomp of the Court of France, which
surpasses all others in those profusions, could invent and contrive for Balets,
Feastings, Carousels and Bravery, were employed to let them see theirs was as
stately and proud, and much more ingenious then that of Spain. The Queen Mother
would have had it thought this residence of the Court at Bayonne was only to
divert her Daughter: but her design was quite another thing; For under pretense
of going to visit her by means of a close Gallery purposely built from one
House to the other, she every Night held Communication with the Duke of Alva;
and the event did afterward plainly discover that all those Conferences tended
to make a secret Alliance between the two Kings, to extirpate the Protestants.

Huguenots who had piercing Eyes and quick Ears, imagined the Duke of Alva had
advised the Queen to draw them all together to some great Assembly and dispatch
them without Mercy. They said, likewise that he let these words fall, That the
Head of one Salmon, is worth more then all the Frogs in a Marsh; and they
believed that even at the Assembly of Moulins, the Queen had then given the
fatal blow if all things necessary thereto had concurred as she desired. Now
whether these things were true or imaginary, it is certain, they lost all that
little Credit and Confidence there had been between them, so that they could
never afterward take any measures with her, and thus the Spaniard attained the
end he aimed at, and so greatly desired, which was to maintain an
irreconciliable Division in France.

The Court at their departure from Bayonne passed by Nerac where they restored
the Exercise of the Catholic Religion which Queen Jane d'Albret had banished
thence, visited afterward Agenois, Perigord, Angoumois, Poitou and Anjou, and
from thence going up the River of Loire, came and concluded the year in the
City of Blois, and assigned an Assembly of the Grandees of the Kingdom, and the
first Presidents of the Parliaments in the City of Moulins for the Month of
January in the following year, 1566.

This was Memorable for the Famous Siege of Malta, which was fiercely Attaqued
by the Turks four Months together, and yet more Valiantly defended by the Grand
Master John de la Valeta Parisot, and his brave Knights. Mustapha, Bassa of
Buda, landed on the Island the Seventeenth day of May. Piali Bassa was Admiral
or Captain Bassa, the renowned Dragut and the old Occhiali, whom they called
Louchali, both terrible for their Piracies, came and joined the Fleet with more
Ships belonging to the Corsairs of Africa, Garcias de Toledo Viceroy of
Sicilia, had promised Relief to Parisot in the Month of June: but he performed
it not till September, the Fort Saint Elmo being then taken, and that of Saint
Michael and du Burg being both reduced to Powder; so that it was the
indefatigable Courage of the Knights that saved it rather then his Assistance.
The Barbarians after they had lost four Months time and labor, Seventy Eight
Thousand Cannon Shot, Fifteen Thousand Soldiers, and Eight Thousand Mariners,
retired in great Confusion. The following year they seized without resistance
upon the Island of Chio which was in the possession of the Justiniani, a
Genoese Family.

1566. Solomon enraged that his Force and Arms had so unfortunately split
against that Rock of Malta, would revenge it upon Hungary, and fell upon it for
the Fifth time. It was his last Expedition. Having besieged Ziget a place built
in the midst of a Lake indifferently deep, and which consisted of two Towns and
three Castles, he died of an Apoplexy the fourth day of September Emperor
Maximilian II, and Selim. II, Son of Solomon. Reigned 8 years 2 Months.
which was the second Month of the Siege. Mehemet his Grand Vizier concealed
his death with so much Artifice, that his Janisaries knew nothing of it till
the place was taken by Storm; which was but three days after. The generous
Count de Serini, who was Governor thereof, finding himself reduced to the last
Castle, and environed on all sides with Flames (for the Turks had set Fire to
those Fortifications of Wood) Spanies, and Seven Thousand Janissaries.

Moulins, the Chancellor having represented how the King had spent almost two
years in visiting his Kingdom to find what disorders the War had produced,
declared that the greatest and indeed the source of all others, Or distinct
Courts of Judicature.
of Parliament, and reduce it to its first institution, to give honorable
Salaries to the Judges, that they might take no more either Spices, nor
Vacations, nor Presents, upon pain of destitution; that they might be only
Triennial in each Parliament, and before they went off, to give an account of
their Conduct before certain Censors chosen for that purpose.

Upon these excellent Propositions (and many more besides, which may well be
desired but little expected ever to be put in practice, the Presidents of
Parliament, and Counselors of State having delivered their Opinions and
endeavored to outvie each other, to show their capacity) was made that
celebrated Edict of Moulins, given at Paris the tenth of July, which in the
whole contains 86 Heads, some whereof were to confirm the Edict made at Paris
two years before, and that of Rousillon which explained it; the other to make
some certain Regulations in matters of justice. Amongst others, that a Debtor
Artic. 48.
though he have not engaged his person, may be detained Prisoner, if he do not
make satisfaction within four Months, after Judgment signified to him, and be
confined till either he has paid or delivered up his Goods; that in the Civil
no proof by Artic. 54.
Witnesses shall hereafter be received or held valid for any Sum above an
hundred Livers; that all substitutions Artic. 57.
made before the Ordonnance of Orleans which went to infinity, should be
restrained to the fourth degree, (this Ordonnance had reduced them for the
future unto the second;) That they shall be published in Court and Registered in
the next Registers Office belonging to the King; that donations between persons
living should be insinuated within four Months in such Registry's nearest to
the habitation of the parties, upon pain of Nullity.

Moulins, they patcht up an accommodation between the Guises and the Colignis.
There being no clear proof the Admiral had any hand in the Murder of the Duke
of Guise, and having purged himself by Oath, the King enjoined them to embrace,
forget and lay aside all enmities on either part. Which was performed between
the Admiral on the one side, and the Widow of the deceased Duke of Guise, and
the Cardinal de Lorrain on the other. The young Duke was not there, he being
gone to make his first Campaign in Hungary, from whence he returned not till
the latter end of this year.

In the same place the reconciliation betwixt the Cardinal de Lorrain, and the
Marshall de Montmorency was likewise made; the former having declared that it
was not in contempt of the Kings Authority he had omitted to produce his
Letters Patents which allowed him to go abroad armed; the latter that the
Method he had proceeded in was not with any manner of design to affrout him,
but purely to observe the Kings Edict, as he was in duty bound by his Office.

In this year must be placed the beginning of the Civil Wars in the
Low Countries, which lasted till the time of the Peace of Munster, without any
relaxation save during the Truce which was obtained by Henry IV. The fear and
dread of the Inquisition was the principal cause of it. It was extremely
detrimental and ruinous to the Flemmings, for besides the too violent
severities used against those that were tainted with the new Opinions, it
wholly interrupted all Commerce, and frighted away the Germans, Danes and
English from the City of Antwerp and other maritime Towns of the Low Countries.
The Clergy were but little less aggrieved by the erecting of Seven Bishoprics
dismembered from the Metropolitans of Reims, Triers, Colen, and the Bishoprics
Liege and Munster, because they united to them the richest Abbeys of the
Low Countries and put in Prelates wholly devoted to the Council of Spain. So
that under pretense of maintaining the ancient Religion, they labored to set
up an absolute and unlimited power, over those Provinces, who owed no further
obedience then according to their Laws and Privileges.

The procedure of the Cardinal de Granvelle, who treated the Grandees of the
Country very imperiously, exasperated them yet more. Diverse Conspiracies were
contrived against him, the fear of which forced him to retire to Besanson: but
his Spirit Reigned in Flanders still, and persuaded the Council of Spain, not
to abate in the least, but proceed and carry on the work with the utmost
severity. The Council of State of the Order of the Fleece, and Governors of the
Provinces, wherein Margaret Duchess of Parma Governess of the Low Countries
presided, thought good to send Egmont into Spain, to represent the ill
Consequences that would attend the publication of their too severe Edicts. He
returned with fair words and great caresses: but Philip sent Orders to the
Governess to publish the Council of Trent, and set up the Inquisition.

The States of Brabant opposed it, the Religionaries heated the people, the
Governess apprehending a revolt, was constrained to put forth a Declaration
which revoked the Inquisition, and would not suffer the Council to be published
but with restrictions conformable to the Privileges of the Country.

But the Populace, for the most part pre-possest with the Doctrine of the
Sectaries, were not satisfied with that, but threatened to fall foul upon the
Nobility: in so much as the Lords of the Country dreading their fury, or
pretending so, assembled at Gertrudemberg, and made a League amongst themselves
for the preservation of their Liberties. The Governess being much amazed at
this Conspiracy, the Count de Barlaimont who hated them mortally, told her they
were only a Company of Gueux Or Beggars a nick name given the reformed.
. The Conspirators hearing of it, took that Epithet, or word, for the name of
their Faction, and began to wear upon their Coats the figure of a wooden
Porringer or Dish, with this Inscription, Servants of the King, even to the
Budget. Immediately, as if that had been the Signal for their rising, the
Religionaries broke loose in every part of the Country. They began to hold
Assemblies, to destroy and break in pieces all what the Catholics esteem most
sacred, and to seize upon some Towns, as the Huguenots of France did formerly,
with whom they had kept intimate correspondence for several years.

Spain touching the Method to extinguish this Flame, Philip chose that of the
Duke d'Alva as most suitable to his mercyless humor, and his desire of
absolute authority; which was to use the utmost severities to quell those
Tumults, and not to receive the people to any kind of Mercy, till they had
given up their Privileges, their Estates, and even their Lives to his
discretion. Wherefore, after he had pretended for three Months together, that
he would go personally thither, to settle that people, he sent the Duke of Alva
with Orders to execute those sanguinary resolutions of which he was the Author.

He Marched by Savoy, Bress, the Franche-Comte and Lorrain, with the Forces of
Milanois, and of the Kingdom of Naples. Whilst he was yet in Italy he advised
Queen Catherine to arm on her part to exterminate the Huguenots, at the same
time as he would destroy the Gueux. In effect she raised six thousand Swiss,
and ordered the Governors of Provinces to send the Companies already on foot
(called d'Ordonnance) and to levy new ones, but it was under pretense of
Coasting the Duke, to observe and hinder him from undertaking any thing upon
the Frontiers of the Kingdom.

Before he left Spain the Marquess de Bergue, and Floris de Montmorency
Montigny were arrested, having been sent on the behalf of the States of the
Low Countries to make their Remonstrances to King Philip. The first died either
of grief, or some morsel prepared for the purpose, the second had his head cut
off, though both of them were very stanch Catholics, which made it apparent
that the Council of Spain intended no less against the liberty of the
Low Countries, then against the new Religion.

Alva's Army kindled the flame of Civil War again in France. The Huguenots
seeing them march imagined, That the Pope and the House of Austria had
conspired their ruin; that this design was evident, because they every day
restrained them more and more of that liberty which had been granted them by
Edicts, so that it was almost reduced to nothing,

These were in substance the complaints they carried twice or thrice to the
Prince of Conde and Coligny; who having met them two several times, still
answered them, that they must endure any thing rather then take up Arms again;
That a second disturbance would make them become a horror to all France, and
the particular object of hatred to the King, in whose mind it would make so
deep an impression of prejudice against them, in his blooming youth, as nothing
hereafter would be able to blot out. But when one of the Chief Persons about
the Court had given them certain notice, that it was resolved on to seize upon
the Prince and the Admiral, the first to be detained a perpetual Prisoner, the
other to be brought to the Scaffold: Dandelot the boldest of them made them
resolve not only to defend themselves, but to attack their Enemies by open
force, and to that purpose drive away the Cardinal de Lorrain from the King,
and cut the Swiss in pieces: this was their first aim: but no man alive, nay
not themselves could have told to what height their success might have carried
them, had it proved such as they desired.

The little City of Rosoy in Brie was Assigned for Rendezvous of the Nobility
of the Party, on the eighth and twentieth day of September. The Prince with the
Admiral, Dandelot and the Count de la Rochefaucaut, seized upon it without any
difficulty, there being Arrived several Gentlemen from diverse parts, one by one
till they made up the number in all of Four Hundred Masters. They had a mind to
surprise the Court which was then at Monceaux, on the Feast day of Saint
Michael when the King was to have held the Chapter of his Order: but the Queen
having Information that they were upon their March, immediately retired with
the King to Meaux. And to give her Swissers time, who were quartered in the
Neighboring Villages, to get into the Town, she sent the Marshall de
Montmorency to amuse the Prince of Conde who was making ready to Charge them,
and had no doubt cut them all off as they lay then scattered. The Marshall
having demanded what business brought them thither? carried back a Petition
from them, which they had drawn up to present to the King.

Meaux, because they could not convey him thence without hazard of a Battle,
whereof the event must be uncertain. The Chancellor said the same, and added,
that if once both parties drew their Swords, there could never be any more
accommodation, for the King would have an eternal resentment, and the Huguenots
who had offended him, be under the perpetual necessity of keeping still in Arms
against him. The ill-favored destiny of France was more prevalent then those
prudent Councils: they rather adhered to what the Cardinal de Lorr^in said, and
so the King was by night persuaded to take his flight toward Paris. He was
placed in the midst of his Swiss, who covered him on the right and left,
together with eight hundred Horse belonging to his Train, more likely to hinder
and embarass, then to fight.

At the first birth of day, when he had Marched four Leagues, the Prince
appeared with four or five hundred Horse well armed. The Constable fearing an
Engagement, sent the King away before with two hundred Horse out of the common
road; so that he got safe to Paris that very night. The Princes Cavalry, who
knew nothing of this fell upon the Swiss: but having often struggled to break
in amongst them found them stand so firm, that he only followed them to
Bourget, disturbing them now and then in their rear.

The Princes party rested four days at Claye waiting for an answer to their
Petition. In the interim Forces came to them from several parts, with which
they designed to seize upon the Avenues to Paris, particularly Montereau
Faut-Yonne above, and Saint Denis below, which lies near the River of Seine,
and commands all the Country on that side. In the former they placed a
Garrison; the Prince himself lodged in the latter. In his March he burnt all
the Mills between the Gates of the Temple and Saint Honor, but without any
other effect save only that it increased the Kings Anger and the Parisians
hatred.

French from cutting one another throats. The first nevertheless would
relinquish nothing in prejudice of the Catholic Religion, and always stood
upon it with the Huguenots that the Edict of Pacification which they urged, was
but provisional. Thus wrangling upon that point, which was indeed the most
essential they broke off all Conference.

Some Troops being come out of the Provinces to the Huguenots, they seized upon
the Bridge at Poissy, and of Argentueil, and a great many small Castles on the
other side the River with whom they made a communication by means of certain
Pontons, (or Bridges) which they had at Saint Ouins: so that they commanded and
beat about all the roads to Normandy, the Countries of Perch, Main, and
Anjou, and stopped all provisions which come in vast quantities to Paris from
those quarters. The people began therefore to cry out against the Constable, as
if he had some correspondence with the Admiral his Nephew, and their murmurs
not ceasing, even after he had retaken all those Posts, he was so netled that
they should suspect his fidelity, that he resolved, though he had ever been a
wise Cunctatour, to go forth and drive the Enemies from all their Lodgments.
They held three, Saint Ouin, Aubervilliers, and Saint Denis which lay between
the two others.

He did not believe that they durst stand him in the Field, having but a
handful of Men, for they were in all but twelve hundred Foot, and fifteen
hundred Horse, mightily harassed and most of them ill armed, having instead of
Lances only some kind of Poles they got at Saint Denis which they armed with
Iron heads. I do not reckon the five hundred which Andelot had at Poissy, who
could not come to the Fight because the Pontons at Saint Ouins were sunk by the
Kings Soldiers. The Royal Army consisted of sixteen thousand Foot, and three
thousand Men at Arms, without including the City Companies, who did much more
increase their number, then their strength.

The day before having resolved to attaque them, he caused them to be harcelled
all the day and all the night long by fifteeen hundred Horse, as well to
discover as to tire them. The following day being the tenth of November, he
Marches out with his Forces, having told the Parisians that very day should
show proof of his fidelity, and that they should not see him again but either
dead or victorious. His Son the Marshall broke in amongst the Enemies and
covered the Field with their slain: but as for himself the Body he Commanded
was routed, and he abandoned by most of his Men. However he did not forsake
himself, but did all that belonged to a General, and a resolved Cavalier, till
he was wounded in six places, the last of which was mortal: This was a
Pistol-shot which Robert Stuard discharged in his Reins. D'Anville his Son and
the Duke of Aumale disengaged him. Night put the Combat to an end and saved the
Huguenots who were defeated on the right Wing, and very much shaken in the left.

But few of the Infantry fell upon the place, of which the most were Huguenots,
and six or seven hundred Cavaliers, amongst whom were near two hundred
Gentlemen, as many of the one as of the other party.

Dandelot Arrived from Poissy, and passed over the River at Saint Ouins upon
those Pontons which he weighed up from the bottom of the water and patched
together. He was of Opinion that to stop the report which was spread abroad of
their defeat, it were fit they should draw their Forces up in Battalia, and
with them he with a mavelous resolution charged the Enemies to the very Walls
of Paris. From the top of the Walls and Envoy of the Grand Signors who beheld
the Fight, observing them return so often to the Charge, said to those that
stood about him; That if his Master had but Six Thousand Horsemen equal to
those white Coats, he would soon conquer all Europe.

The Field and Spoil was the Catholics, but the Honor was the Huguenots; who
without Cannon and being so small a number had withstood the effort of a Royal
Army that had Paris to back them. The Constable died the next day of his
wounds, with a courage truly heroic, and a virility of strength in his almost
decrepit age. It is said, That a Cordelier importuning him with his tedious
exhortations, he desired him to leave him in peace, telling him, That he had
not l^v'd four score years, without learning to die a quarter of an hour. At
his Funeral Pomp France.

The Queen very glad to be ridd of him who alone did in a manner limit her
power within bounds of reason, would not fill up that Office of Constable, but
that she might retain the general Command of the Armies in her own hands, gave
it to her Son the Duke of Anjou, who was not yet fourteen years of age, and
placed trusty people about him to dispose both of his person and that great
Command as she directed.

The fifth day after the Battle the Huguenots fearing they might be overwhelmed
by those of Paris, took their March toward Montereau to meet John Casimir Son
of Lewis, Elector and Count Palatine, who brought them an Army from Germany.
The Royal Army did not pursue them, but kept within Paris, there being since
the death of the Constable no General as yet appointed.

The Queen Mother had by Lansac and Bochetel Bishop of Rennes her Ambassadors,
declared to the Protestant Princes of that Country, that in this War Religion
was not at all concerned, (since the Huguenots were allowed all manner of
liberty) but the Regal Authority, which they directly opposed; so that the
Electors William Duke of Saxony and Charles Marquess of Brandenburg, had denied
the Prince to make any Levies in their Territories, but had allowed it to the
King. The Palatine being also prepossest had for a while kept back those
Forces, his Son was to command: but being afterward otherwise informed by an
Envoye who accompanied Lansac to the Court of France, and who upon his return
saw the Prince of Conde, he exhorted his Son to go on with his March.

Montereau fifteen days to wait for the Troops which their Chiefs were raising
in several Provinces; as the King had likewise ordered his part to increase his
Army. Those that were raised for them in Poitou, Angoumois, and Saintonge had
for Commanders, Francis de la Rochefoucant, Claude de Vaudre-Mouy, Giron de
Luzignan Bessey, and Francis de la Noue, whose wisdom and probity was held in
admiration amongst the very Catholics. In their favor the City of Rochel by
means of Truchard their new Maire, and perhaps by the connivance of Guy Chabot
Jarnac who was Governor for the King, entered into their party, whereof it has
been as it were the strongest Tower and Asylum for sixty years together.

In their March la Noue being detached to get Orleans for them, managed the
Business so well, that with the help of the Inhabitants who were of the
Religion, he made himself Master of it the eight and twentieth of September,
and forced out the Governor who had cantoned himself at the Porte-Baniere. From
Orleans they Marched toward Montereau, and forced Ponts Sur-Yonne. The Admiral
having joined them there with a gross of Cavalry, would try the City of Sens:
but he there found the young Duke of Guise, who having seasoned his courage in
the War of Hungary, endeavored to let him see that he should find in him an
Enemy as brave and more dangerous then his Father.

Those of Languedoc were employed by James Crussol d'Acier in taking the
Castles of Nismes and Montpellier, they having the Towns already by means of
the Inhabitants. Those of the Countries of Foix, Albigeois, and Lauraguais,
conducted by the Vicount Boucicaut Montclar, Paulin, Serignan, Caumont, Rapin
and Montaigue.
, (those were seven Gentlemen bearing that Title) having joined him, assisted
him in the taking some places about Avignon and in Daufine. From thence they
went to Orleans, where by their Arrival they freed the Princess of Conde and
the Wives of the other Chief Commanders from the great fear and trouble they
were in, who having but few Soldiers, were every hour under some apprehension
of being taken with the Town it self.

As for the Forces of Auvergne, Forez, and Beaujolois, led by Poncenas and
Verbelay, they received a check in the Country of Forez from Terride la
Valette, and Monsalez, who were bringing some Levies out of Guyenne to the
King: but however they made a shift to get clear. Poncenas upon another
occasion in the night, was killed by his own Men.

The Duke of Newers who had an Army of twelve or thirteen thousand Men, six
thousand being Swiss, and the rest made up in Piedmont and Italy, took as he
was on his way the City of Mascon whereof la Love was Governor: but as he was
passing thorough his own Duchy of Nivernois, he met with some Huguenot Horse
of the Garrison of the little Town of Antrain; he charged them, and pursuing
them in their retreat, was wounded in the knee with a Pistol-shot, which made
him lame all his life after, and much exasperated against the Huguenots.

Huguenot Army at their departure from Montereau took their March thorough
Champagne by Chaalons, passed the Meuse and went into Lorrain. They were five
or six days in great pain that Prince Casimir appeared not, and no less
afterward, when upon his first Arrival he demand d an Hundred Thousand Crowns
the Prince had promised to pay him when he could join him. At this time happened
what had never till then been known; the Princes Soldiers, even to the very
Snap-sack boys, freely disbursed to make up part of the said Sum; and thus one
Army paid the other, which consisted of six Thousand five Hundred Horse and
about three Thousand Foot.

France. They took the Garrisons of Joinville and Chaumont, passed the Marne,
and crossing the Bishopric of Autun, came to the head of the Seine, the Forces
under the Nevers, not being able to hinder their passage over it. From thence
they steered their Course by Auxerre, Chastillon and Montargis; whence they
extended into la Beausse. The Prince having been at Orleans to receive those
Troops were brought him from Guyenne, marched Twenty Leagues in one day to lay
Siege to Chartres. He thought when he should have taken this Town, he might
promise to himself, it being one of the Granaries of Paris, that he might
return to Block up that City its self: so deep the Imagination was imprinted in
him, that he should never attain the ends he designed, but by mating that great
City by Famine, and other inconveniences attending War.

The enterprise proved more difficult than he expected. Antony de Lignieres was
got into Chartres with a Strong Garrison, and had put all things in good Order;
If nevertheless he had at first, (which he did not till the latter end) turned
the River another way which wrought their Mills, the Besieged would soon have
wanted bread.

During this Siege the Conferences for a Peace were again set on foot, the
Cardinal de Chastillon going to Longjumeau treated a long while with Charles de
Gontaud Biron Marshall de Camp Or Field Marshal.
, and Henry de Mesme Master of Requests; In so much as the English Ambassador
and the Ambassador from Florence becomeing friendly Mediators, it was agreed
upon the second day of March. The Edict was verified in Parliament the twenty
sixth of the same Month. This confirmed

The more quick-sighted amongst the Huguenots were not for making this Peace,
which scattered them so wide assunder, and exposed them to the mercy of their
Enemies, without any other Security but the word of an Italian Woman; and
indeed they named it the Boiteuse The Lame Peace.
, i. e. Lame, and the Mal-assise, alluding to Biron who was Lame, and Mesme who
was Lord de Mal-assise. But the Prince protested he was constrained to it,
because the greatest part of his Forces disbanded, the Nobility were returning
to their own Homes which were exposed to Pillage, and the Germans might perhaps
have sold them for want of pay. The Parliament of Toulouze did not verify it
till after they had four express Commands, nor before they did cut off the head
of Rapin whom the Prince had sent thither to press the Verification, having
raked up some old Crime against him upon which they made his Process in great
have.

In consequence of this Treaty, the Huguenots raised the Siege of Chartres, and
gave up several Cities they had taken, amongst others Soissons, Orleans,
Auxerre, Blois, and la Charity upon the Loire. Rochel refused to obey, and
after their example many others. Prince Casimir led back his Forces into
Germany, and went to Heidelberg to give an account of his expedition to his
Father the Elector. He there found William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, who
having made his escape from the Low Countries, implored his Assistance for the
maintenance of their Liberty and his Religion against the Duke of Alva.

The Cruclties of that Duke, the Deaths of the Counts of Egmont and Horn, the
Troubles of the Low Countries, and the Foundation of the States of Holland, by
the Mavelous Conduct, and un-shaken Courage of that Prince of Orange, are the
noblest Subjects for History that can be met with in all these latter Ages. And
indeed it has been Treated on by several Authors and of so great Merit, as
they have almost equaled the grandeur of the Theme, and Matter. We shall
observe only as the most monstrous Philip King of Spain being informed the
Infant Don Carlos his only Son and his presumptive Successor (who indeed was of
a roving Spirit, untractable and very dangerous) held Correspondence with the
Confederate Lords of the Low Countries who endeavored to draw him into
Flanders, clapped him in Prison and deprived him of Life, either by Slow Poison,
or by stifling him; and in a short while after upon some kind of jealousy,
Poisoned Elizabeth de la Paix his Wife, making her Perish with the fruit then
in her Womb, as Queen Catherine made it appear after the Secret Informations
she had taken, and by the Domestic Servants belonging to that Princess when
they were come back into France.

In the time of Peace, one of the Admirals principal Cares was to increase the
Navigation and the Trade of France, chiefly in those Countries of the other
Hemisphear, as well for the Credit of his Office, as to plant Colonies there of
his own Religion. He had sent the Chevalier de Villegagnon to Florida, as
believing him fixed in the new opinions: but this man failed him in his
promises, and rudely handled those of that Profession. Afterward in the year
1562. he dispatched John Ribaud thither with two Ships, who Sailing a quite
different Course then the Spaniards had wont to do, most happily Landed at
Florida. When he had made discovery of the Country, Treated an Alliance with
the petty Princes, and given Names to several Capes, Rivers and Gulphs, he
built at the end of the Straight at Saint Helens, a Fort, which in honor of
the King was Named Fort Charles, and leaving a Lieutenant there together with
some Soldiers well armed, returned into France, after he had promised to come
again to them as soon as possible, to bring a reinforcement and refreshments.

Not being able to make good his word, by reason of the Civil War that happened,
their Provisions failing they shipped themselves. In the midst of the Voyage they
were so pressed with hunger, that they killed one of their own Crew who was
Sick, and fed upon him. An English Vessel who fortunately met them, supplied
their wants, and carried them into England.

The Admiral not knowing they had quitted the Fort, fitted out three Ships at
Haure de Grace to go and relieve them. Rene Laudonniere Commanded this Fleet:
he landed at the Golfe to which Ribaud had given the name of May, and made an
Alliance with some Petty Kings of the Barbarians: but it happened, that whilst he
was Sick, part of his men debauched by some that were Factious, forced him to
permit them to go to New Spain to seek for Provisions, where having taken a
huge Vessel fraught with Riches, wherein was the Governor of the Havana, they
were afterward surrounded and seized in that Island, and all sold or carried
into Spain.

This Piracy gave the Spaniards a fair pretense (who were already grown very
jealous that the French began to settle in those Countries) to fall upon them,
and allow no quarter. They pretended those Territories belonged to them,
affirming they were the first Discoverers. But in truth a Venetian Named
Stephen Gaboury, prompted in Emulation of Christopher Columbus to seek out new
Countries under the auspicious favor of Henry VII. King of England, had found
out and landed upon those Coasts even in the year 1496. long before there Ponce
de Leon, who was indeed the Person that gave it the name of Florida, because he
went first on Shore there upon Palm Sunday.

When Laudonniere was ready to return, he spied Seven Vessels at Sea: this was
John Ribaud a very good Seaman; but an ill Soldier and much worse Captain, who
was made choice of by the Admiral as very affectionate to the Interests of his
Party. The Spaniards had at the same time sent one Peter Melandez with some
Ships to hinder the French from taking root there. Ribaud quitting his Fort
which he left but slightly furnished with Men, went on Board his Ships to Fight
them. When he was out at Sea a Hurrican, a strange kind of Storm very frequent
about those Coasts, forced and beat all his Fleet in pieces against the Rocks:
His men getting to Land with their Long-Boats, fell into the Hands of the
Spaniards; who having taken the Fort, slaughtered them all with a more then
Canibal Cruelty, tearing them piecemeal, and plucking out their Eyes. They
said they treated them after that manner, not as Frenchmen, but as Lutherans.
Laudonniere having picked up as many as he could with the Boats he had ordered
to creep along the Shore, set Sail for France.

Spanish, not minding to take any Revenge for this Massacre, a private Person,
by Name Dominique de Gourgues Native of Mont de Marsan in Gascongne, a man of
Heart and great Resolution, offended for that the Spaniards having otherwhile
taken him Prisoner in the Wars of Italy had put him in their Galleys, undertook
to avenge both his own Injury and that of France. With part of his Estate which
he sold, and what his Brother, President of the Generality of Guyenne, lent
him, he equipped some Vessels with Two Hundred Soldiers, and a Hundred Seamen,
went and Landed in Florida, and joining with the Barbarians of the Country who
mourned and groaned under the Oppression of the Spaniards, attaqu'd and by
Storm took the Fort Charles, and two more which they had raised in two places
at some distance. In them were above Eight Hundred men. The Barbarians beat out
the Brains of such as thought to escape into the Woods, and he caused all the
rest to be hanged who Surrendered at discretion, with this Writing, Not as
Spaniards, but as Pirates.

Upon his return into France, the Avenger of his Country, and the Deliverer or
Redeemer of Florida, instead of Elogy's and Rewards, met with Accusers, and a
mortal danger: the Ambassador of Spain demanded his Head, and the Council was
ready to give it him; so that he was forced to hide himself, till after the
Peace, when the Admiral and his Friends brought him off from all trouble.

Peter Bertrand Son of Blaize de Montluc, gained no less Honor in his
Enterprise, but had less a fortunate Success. He had a design to build a place,
either by fair means or by force in such a post as he should find most
convenient in the Kingdoms of Manicongo, Mozambique, or Melinda, to serve as a
Retreat for the French to carry on the Trade of Africa, and the East Indies, as
the Portuguese did. For this purpose he fitted three great Vessels and some
Barks, with Twelve Hundred Soldiers. His younger Brother Fabian, and a Cadet of
the House of Pampadour, accompanied him.

A Tempest having cast him upon the Coasts of Madera, his men would needs go on
Shore for fresh water: the Portuguese received them with Cannot shot, and made
a Salley to cut them off. Bertrand enraged that they should thus violate the
common right of Mankind, and the Alliance between the two Crowns of France and
Portugal, Lands Eight Hundred Men, goes directly to them whilst his Brother cut
off their Retreat, and so Slew them all. At the same time he Marched toward
the City which bears the same Name as the Island, puts his Cannon in Battery,
forced and sacked it: but as he was Assaulting the great Church, where part of
the Garrison yet defended themselves, he received a wound in his Thigh whereof
he died in a few days after.

Thus was that Enterprise interrupted, which would have been no less useful
then glorious. All those that went along with him ran great hazard of their
Lives, when they were come back into France. They were fain to hide or keep out
of the way a long time: the Credit and Interest of Montluc, nor the power of
the Admiral, who stood up stoutly for every thing wherein the Honor of the
French was concerned, had much ado to secure them against the Complaints and
Instances of the Portugal Ambassador, who prosecuted them before the King's
Council as Pirates.

The intention of those that made the Peace of Chartres was not to keep it, but
to take their advantage better than they had done before. So that it could not
last long. The Huguenots contravening to the Treaty, retained several places,
amongst others Sancerre, Vezelay, Montauban, Castres, Millaud and Rochel, which
they Fortified in all have. They manifestly had Intelligence with Queen
Elizabeth, and with the Princes of Germany: and the Admiral had particular
Correspondence with the Prince of Orange. A Normand Gentleman Named Coqueville,
had raised Seven or Eight Hundred Men in the Country of Caux to carry to him:
but being charged and then invested by the Marshall de Cosse in Saint
Valery's, they threw down their Arms, and Coqueville was Beheaded.

Huguenots enjoy either Peace, or their Liberty of Conscience: they were more
in danger than in the time of War. In three Months time above Two Thousand of
them were killed in diverse Places, either by their particular Enemies, as Rene
Lord de Cipierre, Son of Claude de Savoye Count de Tend, and Thirty Persons of
his Train, whom Gaspard de Villeneure Marquess d'Ars, Massacred in Frejus, as
he returned from Nice, whether he Savoy his Kinsman; or by popular Tumults, as
at Amiens near a Hundred People, at Auxerre an Hundred and Fifty, many at
Blois, at Bourges, at Issoudun, at Troyes and in twenty other Places. But
nothing seemed more cruel than what the People did at Ligny in Barrois, where a
Huguenot upon a Holy Day having refused to comply in some trivial Ceremony, and
committed some little Indecency, was haled out of his House by the populace in
the Magistrates presence, and burnt upon a pile of Wood which they fetched from
his own dwelling.

The Prince was then at Noyers in Burgundy a Castle of his Wives. A Soldier was
surprised measuring the Fosse and the Wall to Scale the place; and that design
being detected, the Queen ordered those forces to go into Burgundy which were
raised for the Besieging of Rochel, and to take him by Force, since they could
not catch him by craft. At the same time as they aimed at his Person as Head of
the Party, so they used all means imaginable to divide the Huguenots, and
unlink those from him who appeared most zealous to follow him.

On the contrary he endeavored to keep them United, and make them all speak by
his Mouth. He sent Teligny, then Jacqueline de Rohan his Wives Mother to Court,
to Supplicate the Queen Mother to maintain the Peace and the Edicts: but that
was what he ought never to have hoped for, when he could not but observe that
if any one were of his opinion he was called Libertine and Politician, as much
as to say one that had no true Love to Religion, and that the Chancellor de
l'Hospital who gave pacifick Counsels, was discharged from Court and confined
to his House at Vignan near Estampes, as suspected to be a Huguenot: and
indeed, his Wife, his Daughter, and his Son in Law were so. The Seals were
given to John de Morvillier Bishop of Orleans.

Hardly was the Princes Mother in Law gone from Court, when he had News that
some Forces by secret Order were drawn about Noyers to surround him, and that
if he staid four or five days longer, he would have no way left him to make
his Retreat. Coligny penetrating into the designs they were contriving against
them, came to the Castle of Tanlay belonging to Dandelot his Brother. From
thence going to the Prince, both of them parted from Noyers with a Convoy of a
Hundred and Fifty Horse only, in the midst of whom (a Melancholy Spectacle)
were their Wives and Children, the most of them as yet in their Nurses Arms,
or not out of their hanging Sleeves.

The better to conceal their Retreat, the Prince wrote a long Letter of
Complaints and Remonstrances to the King, declaring he would wait for an answer
to it; In the mean time he hastened forward, and passed the River of Loire at a
Ford right against Sancerre. Scarce was he on the other Shore, when the
Burgundian Troops who pursued him, appeared on the hither side at Saint Godon.
The River was at that time Fordable, but the next day it swelled so high, that
it left them no passage to get over to follow him. Which the Huguenots cried up
for a Miracle.

Blaise de Montluc Governor of Guyenne, and the King's Lieutenants of Limosin
and Perigord, were up in Arms to intercept his Passage, and the Marshall de
Vielleville upon the rumor of his March came to Poitiers to know what business
led him thither. He out-stript them all by his diligence, and Arrived at Rochel
the Eighteenth of September. The Queen of Navarre Jane d'Albret came there soon
after with her two Children, Henry Prince of Bearn, and Catherine. The Cardinal
de Chastillon who was at his Castle of Brosle in Beauvoisis, not being able to
get to his Brother through so many of the Enemies Provinces, made his escape by
Sea into England.

There is reason enough to believe that the Prince, or rather the Admiral, who
was the primum Mobile of the Party, had taken his measures long before: for the
Huguenots Captains Flocked to Rochel from all Parts as if appointed at that
very time, and Queen Jane brought him near Four Thousand Men. Dandelot who was
in Bretagne had gotten about the like number together out of the Provinces of
Normandy, Main and Anjou, who were joined by Montgomery, la Noue, and some
others. All these together after some Ren-counters they had with Sebastian de
Luxemburg Martigues, passed the River, Montgomery having very luckily lighted
on a Ford for them; the Duke of Montpensier who Commanded the King's Forces in
that Country, nor Martigues ever offering to obstruct it.

Lorraine to the utmost, whom they supposed to be the Author of the War, and
their sworn Enemy. The Manifesto for his taking up Arms which he published at
the same time, expressed the very same thing; It was necessary to set up some
mark to Level at, not daring in the least to pretend any Controversy with the
King, or the Queen his Mother.

On the other side, an Edict was set forth by the King, whereby he promised to
take all the Huguenots of his Kingdom into his Protection as much as any other
his Subjects, and assured them they should have due Justice done for all the
Injuries had been Committed against them, provided they would quietly remain in
their own present dwellings. But afterward when the Queen and the Cardinal de
Lorraine perceived that this favor was interpreted by them as an Artifice
which tended to oppress them separately one after another, did but the more
animate them to run after the Prince from all Parts: they put forth another
quite contrary which prohibited the exercise of any other Religion but the
Catholic, and commanded all Huguenot Ministers to leave the Kingdom within
Fifteen days. By a third, all such of them as held any Offices or Employments,
were enjoined to Surrender the same up to the King. The Parliament added in the
Verification, That no Person from that time forward should be admitted into any
Office, that did not first make Oath to live and die in the Catholic Religion.

During the Month of October the Prince and his People got themselves into
possession of most of the places in the Countries of Aulnis, Saintongne,
Angoumois, and Poitou, excepting Poitiers. They had proved happy in all their
enterprises, if their Forces to the number of twelve Thousand Men who came from
Daufine, Languedoc, and Guyenne, Commanded in Chief by Dacier, had not received
a shrewd Check at their Marching out of Perigord. Mouvens a valiant Soldier,
but too presumptuous, had lodged himself alone with three Thousand Men, upon
some pick he had with Beaudine Brother to Dacier, the Duke of Montpensier who
was gone into that Country to hinder their joining with the Prince, gave
Brissac order to fall upon him, whilst himself would Skirmish with Dacier that
he might not relieve him. Dacier knowing how things stood, sent to Mouvens not
to stir out of his Quarters that day, for there he could not be forced: but he
did not observe those Orders, for Brissac making as if he retired, Mouvens
would needs be going that day, so that he fell into an Ambuscade laid ready for
him in his March. He was there slain with a Thousand of his Men, the rest saved
themselves in the Neighboring Woods. Dacier picked up a Thousand of them the
day following, the remainder were scattered or knocked on the Head by the
Peasants.

The Prince going as far as Aubeterre to meet Dacier, it was then Montpensier's
turn who before pursued him, to retreat to Chastellerand. When the Duke of
Anjou Arrived at the Kings Army, they were found to be four and twenty Thousand
Foot, and four Thousand Horse; the Princes were less in number by a fourth
part, but all resolute men, who having forsaken their Families and Estates, had
no other hopes but in the keeness of their Swords.

So that the Prince relying on their Valor, sought all opportunities to give
Battle; The Duke of Anjou avoided it for the same reason, but was in honor
obliged to keep the Field. The severities of the Winter Season could not
persuade them to go into Quarters, till at length their men overcome by the
extremity of Cold, refused to contend any longer with the Frosts and Snowes.
Above Eight Thousand on both sides died by the many inconveniences they met
withal.

The Prince wanted Money, without which he could not long maintain his Forces,
to plunder was both very odious and casual, what those Huguenots that staid at
home could contribute to the Cause (so the Party called it) was inconsiderable.
In this great necessity, they were mightily relieved by a Loan of Sixteen
Thousand Crowns of Gold disbursed by the Rochellers, and a Hundred Thousand
Angelots Angels of Gold.
, with some Cannon and many Thousand weight of Powder sent them by Queen
Elizabeth upon the instance of the Cardinal de Chastillon.

Rochel, they equipped a small Fleet of Nine Vessels and some Frigates, who went
out to make prize of the trading Ships belonging to Bretagne, Normandy, and
Flanders, having the Ports of England to friend whether they might with
security shelter themselves and the Prey they gained, which showed that Queen
did by consequence approve the Huguenots taking Arms, and engaged in their
cause against the King.

Both Parties had sent to have Men raised in Germany, the one in the Countries
of the Catholic Princes, the others inthe Protestants; those for the King were
soonest ready. Which were Five Thousand Five Hundred Horse Commanded by diverse
Captains, of whom Frederic Marquis of Baden, the Rhinegrave Philip, and
Christopher de Bassompierre, were the principal. The Princes Levies were
conducted by Wolfang de Bavaria Duke of Duke-Ponts. The Duke of Aumale with Six
Thousand Men, and the Duke of Nemours who was gone to join him with the
Catholic Forces of Lyonnois and the Countries adjacent, had orders to stay in
Lorrain to hinder his passage.

Anjou, and that of the Princes (we shall call it so since all Orders were
given in the names of the Princes) took the Field again. The Royal one was
newly reinforced with Three Thousand Men, brought by the Count of Tendes from
Daufine, that belonging to the Princes was Marching to meet the Troops of the
Vicounts conducted by Piles. The Duke of Anjou, who from Conflans in Limosin
had passed Vienne to come Vertueil, knowing they marched to Cognac for that
purpose, and that as soon as they had joined with those, they would return
toward the Loire to wait the Succors of the Duke of Deux-ponts, resolved to
get the Start of them and pass over the Charente.

The Huguenots held the Bridges of Jarnac and Chasteau-neuf, and their Forces
were lodged much at large in the Country along the River side. The Duke not
able to gain Jarnac at first brush, went to Chasteau-neuf. There were but Fifty
Men in it, who immediately surrendered. Armand de Gontaud Biron repaires the
Bridge with such diligence that half the Kings Army were got over by break of
day, which was the Thirteenth of March. The Admiral having notice, sent Orders
to his Foot and Baggage to file off before toward the Borough of Bassac,
whilst the Horse could draw together from their distant quarters. The sluggish
delay of some Troops who were not on Horseback till about Nine a Clock,
engaged them to the Combat. La Noue who closed up the Rear-Guard with Four
Hundred Horse, was rudely handled at the first Charge; Dandelot did second him,
but yet at the second which was much fiercer, he was beaten off his Horse and
taken.

In the mean while the Royalists having made themselves Masters of Bassac, the
Admiral sent word to the Prince who was retreating with his Vanguard, that he
wanted his presence, and the Prince who never ^an from danger, came back upon a
round Trot. He fell stoutly upon the first he met; but when all the Kings Army
was come up, he was surrounded. His Horse being wounded, falling under him, he
presented his Gantlet to a Couple of Gentlemen, Argence, and Saint Jean, who
gave him their Faith. Having set him down at the Foot of a Bush (his Leg being
broken with a kick of a Horse) comes Montesquiou upon a hand Gallop, Captain of
the Duke of Anjou's Guards, who had left his Master to do this worthy exploit,
and kills him with his Pistol.

This act which in the midst of the Scuffle would have appeared brave, being
done in cold blood, was looked upon by good Men as an execrable parricide, and
worthy the punishment due to such as attempt any of the Royal blood. The Duke
of Anjou neither blamed nor owned it; but suffered the Princes Corpse to be
carried, whether by chance, or in derision, upon a she Ass to Jarnac. He
afterward gave it to the Prince of Bearn, his Nephew who caused it to be
Interred in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors at Vendosme.

After his death the Royalists gave the Huguenots chase till Night approached,
but there being none but the Cavalry engaged the Slaughter was not so
considerable as the Victory. There fell not above Six Hundred of the Princes
Party, amongst whom were above an Hundred Gentlemen, and Twelve or Fifteen
Lords. The number of Prisoners did far exceed the Slain. The Royalists lost
about two or three Hundred of theirs, whereof seven or eight were Persons of
Note. The Admiral and his Brother, with the Horse of that Battalion he
Commanded, directed their Course toward Saint Jean d'Angeli, and got thither
the same day. Jarnac, and breaking down the Bridge, from thence retired to
Cognac.

To the same place came the other Commanders, with the broken Remnants of the
Horse that were left of the Van and the Rear-Guards. The Queen of Navarre a
Princess endowed with Courage above her Sex, came thither likewise with great
speed, bringing the Prince of Bearn her Son with her, as also the Eldest Son of
the Deceased Prince of Conde; both were named Henry. Her generous exhortations,
and the presence of those two Princes, did somewhat revive their shaken
resolutions and drooping Courage.

Saints, Coligny and his Brother came to them, and there it was resolved they
should refresh themselves and wait the success of the Sieges of Cognac and
Engoulesme, wherewith the Duke of Anjou had threatened them.

The noise of this Battle of Jarnac was much greater than the advantage. The
King arose at Midnight to have the Te Deum Sung, gave notice of it to all the
Neighboring Princes, and sent the Colors they had taken from the Huguenots to
his Holiness, as if they had fought his Battles. The Duke of Anjou, though
Conqueror, met with such as knew how to deal with him, he attaqu'd Cognac in
vain, where they had Seven Thousand Men in Garrison, and the Intelligence he
thought would have prevailed in Engoulesme failed his purposes. So that he
withdrew into Perigord, to maintain his Forces; and this was about Mid- April.
Blaise de Montluc, and Francis d'Escars had besieged Mucidan: he sent Brissac
thither, who redoubled the Assaults, but was unfortunately Slain there. As the
Lord de Pampadour his Friend, had been some days before. The Place Surrendered
upon Composition, which was but ill observed: for the death of those two brave
Lords had so enraged the Catholic Soldiers, that violating the Faith of the
Treaty, they revenged it by the Massacre of the whole Garrison. These cruel
In^idelities were much used during this whole War.

At this very time, Dandelot having a little refreshed the Huguenot Forces, who
were yet near Four Thousand Horse, besides their Foot, made an incursion by
Poiton, as far as Clisson. At his return he was seized with a Pestilential
Fever, whereof he died at Saints. The Princes gave the Command of Colonel of
the Foot to James de Crussol Daceir, the King did the like to Philip de
Strossy, Son of Peter, who had been Marshall of France, and was near of kinn
to the Queen Mother.

The last day of February the Duke of Deux-Ponts parted from Savarna, and had
taken his March by Alsatia and Lorrain: he had Seven Thousand Five Hundred
Reistres, and Six Thousand Lansquenets; William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange,
whom the Duke of Alva had thrust out of Flanders, and Lewis his Brother, came
and joined him with some Troops of Horse, and Fifteen or Twenty French Captains
of Daufine, with Six Hundred Horse, and Eight Hundred Vrquebusiers they had
picked up about Strasburgh.

The Duke d'Aumale finding he was unable to make head against him, followed him
in the Rear almost as far as Cisteaux. When they had passed the Saone at
Montier, he left them that he might get before them and wait their passage over
the Loire, where he was to join the Duke of Anjou's Army which lay at Gien. But
the Duke des Deux ponts Duke of Zwee-Brughen or Two-Bridges.
, passed it at a Foord near Pouilly, and also took the Town de la Charity, a
place very weak in those days, but of great Importance, upon the same River.

As soon as the Admiral knew he had passed the River, he drew out a Party of
his Forces to go and meet him, having left the care of all Affairs in Guyenne
to la Noue, and sent Montgommery into Gascongne, as well to reconcile the
Vicounts, whom the ambition of Command had set at variance, as to stop the
Progress Montluc and Terride were making in Bearn. The Queen of Navarre had
inveigled all that Country to be of the New Religion. She pretended to be
absolute Sovereign there, and yet many of the Nobility adhered rather to the
King, than to her.

The Duke of Anjou in the mean time advanced to Limoges, and placed Guards upon
all the Passages of Vienne; but the Forlorn of the Duke de Deux-ponts Marched
over the Bellies of them. Thus after a three months March, this Army of
Strangers Arrived in Safety; but the Duke des Deux-ponts who was very
corpulent, and laboring under the relics of a Quartan-Ague, died at Nessun,
Limoges, the Eighteenth day of June. By his Will he left the Conduct of his
Forces to Volrad Mansfeld; and within four days after they were joined in a
body with the Admirals.

The two Armies being near, that of the Princes, about Saint Yrier, the Duke of
Anjou's at Roche-labelle, they had so great a Skirmish, as had almost engaged
them to a general Battle. On the Royalists side, Strossy was taken Prisoner,
Roquelaure, and Saint Leu, two valiant Captains were killed, with four Hundred
of their Men. After which the Duke of Anjou put his Army into Garrisons, and
discharged the Nobility, with Orders to return again about Mid- August.

During all which time, there happened nothing Remarkable but the Siege of Niort,
by the Count de Lude, Governor of Poitou, and of la Charity by Sansac, where
neither of them gained any thing but blows: but Teligny seized upon
Chasteleraud, and forced the Castle of Luzignan, no less Famous for the Fables
of Mellusine, then for the reputation it had of being impregnable.

Montgomery was sent into Bearn, to recover it for the Queen of Navarre: for
the Count de Terride had very near subdued it all. Having therefore gotten some
Forces together in Languedoc, passed the Garonne and Ariege, surprised the City
of Tarbes in Bigorre, he entered that part of the Country where Terride at that
time Besieged Navarrins. At the Noise of his approach, Terride makes up his
Bundle, and retires to Ortez: Montgomery besieges him there, and forces him to
Surrender. He had four Barons of that Country with him, Saint Colombe,
Pordeac, Goas, and Favas, who were comprised in the Capitulation; but
Montgommery caused them all to be Poniarded, having more regard to the Orders
Queen Jane had given him to use them as Traitors, than to his own Honor and
Faith.

But for the discord which was between Terride and Montluc, and between the
latter, and Danville Governor of Languedoc, he had not entered so easily into
that Country, or at least had never got out again. However Montluc not to
remain idle, borrowed some Companies of Danville, with which together with
those la Valette had Raised, he forced the City of Mont de Marsan, where
another Favas Commanded, a Native of S. Macaire. Whilst this Captain was
Treating with him, he caused the Castle to be stormed on the back part, and put
all to the Edge of the Sword, in revenge for the death of the Four Barons.

After the taking of Luzignan which was followed by that of S. Maxian, and
Mirebeau, the Admirals thoughts were to seize upon Saumur, which he would
fortify to have that convenient passage on the Loire, and carry the War the
fourth time to the Gates of Paris. Unfortunately for him, he changed his
design, and besieged Poitiers a great City, above two Leagues in circumference.
The young Duke of Guise whom the Duke of Anjou had sent to succor Luzignan,
puts himself into it with the Marquess de Mayenne He was afterward Duke.
his Brother, and great numbers of the Nobility, and gained to himself no less
Glory than his Father had done formerly by defending the City of Mets. The
Count de Lude Governor of Poitu, was likewise gotten in with six thousand
Soldiers; but there were very little Stores and Provisions, for so many Mouths.

The Siege began the five and twentieth of July, the Attaques the Besiegers
made upon them did not give them so much trouble, as the want of Food, Forage,
and Mills did put them to. In the mean time Montluc having drawn his Forces
together, laid Siege to Chastelleraud to make a diversion. The Admiral was glad
of such a fair pretense to raise his Siege from before Poitiers, where he lost
both his time and reputation. He decamped the seventh day of September, and
approaching near Chastelleraud, put in four hundred Arquebusiers, who entered by
the Bridge conducted thither, and covered by the Cavalry of his Vanguard.

Upon his Arrival the Catholics drew off their Cannon, and afterward their
Men with so much diligence, that their Army was lodged at la Celle, which is
six Leagues from thence; and on the other side la Creuse, before he knew they
moved, he followed with a resolution to attaque them; but finding them in a
Lodgment where he could not bring up his Cannon by reason of the Marshes he
repassed the Creuse and Vienne, and came and lodged at Fae la Vineuse.

When Monsieur had remained fifteen days at Celles and Chinon, and his Forces
(whom he had given leave till the fifteenth of October, and those of Poitiers
whom the Duke of Guise had refreshed in Tourain) were returned to his Camp: he
Vienne drawing toward Loudun: As soon as the Admiral had notice thereof, he
decamped from Faye, and went toward Mirebeau. Monsieur instead of following
him, gets before, and taking a cross way, meets him near Montcontour, which i^
a Castle upon a high Ground, with a small Town lying on the descent, at the
foot of which Hill runs the River of Diue, scarce fordable though but narrow.

Betwixt this River and that of La Thoue, the Admiral had encamped his Army,
extending it a little more toward the small City of Ervaux, about two Leagues
thence. Monsieur having passed over above the head of the Diue, the two Armies
put themselves in Battalia with intention to fall on. That of the Huguenots was
led to fight by necessity and despair, the tedious length of the War being
ruinous to their Families and to their Party; that under Monsieur out of a
desire of gaining honor, and because they reck'ned themselves the third part
stronger.

With these intentions they were ranged in those fair and spacious Plains,
intersected with several Valleys, and rising Grounds, which are of much use in
a day of Battle. It is observed, that the Ground the Catholic Army stood on
was called Champ-Papaut, and that which the Huguenots possessed, Champ
Piedgriss. Both the one and the other, although they had divided their Armies
into Vanguard and Batalia's, had notwithstanding disposed their Men in such
sort, that they might all fight at the same time.

The Engagement began about eight in the morning, upon a Monday the third of
October, and lasted two hours. The flight of the French Foot on the Huguenots
side, the ill condition their Horse were in, the good order Tavanes put
Monsieurs Army in, and the Valor of the French Nobility who accompanied that
young Prince, gave the Catholics an entire Victory. Their Enemies lost only
three hundred of their Horse, but with them four thousand Lansquenets, and five
thousand of their French Infantry, almost as many Camp-Boyes, all their
Artillery, and the greatest part of their Baggage, without which an Army can
scarce subsist long. The Lords de la Noue and Dacier were taken Prisoners. On
the Catholic side few of their Foot were slain, but above six hundred Horse
most of them Reisters. Almost as many were wounded. The Admirals German Horse,
conducted by the Counts Ludovic and Mansfeld retreating in excellent order,
stopped the pursuit of the Catholics, and got to Ervaux, and from thence to
Parthenay, which is six great Leagues from Montcontour. They arrived there at
ten a Clock that night, and the day following went to Niort.

The Wisdom and Courage of the Admiral never showed it self so much as in times
of adversity: the greatest difficulties enlightened him, and dangers made him
become more firm. Besides that great shock, which would have made any other let
go the helm, he had reason to expect attempts against his own person from all
hands: the Parliament of Paris had Condemned him to death, and promised to
those that could bring him before them either alive or dead, fifty thousand
Crowns in Gold for a reward, which should be paid by the Town Hall of Paris*
The Vidame of Chartres and the Earl of Montgommery, were also condemned to lose
their Heads, and all three Executed in Effigy at the Greve. About that time a
discovery was made that one of his Valets de Chamber, named Dominique d'Alva,
would have poisoned him; The wretch was hanged, with a Writing which styled
him, Betrayer of the Cause of God, his Country and his Master.

The same night the Battle was lost, having held a Council with his Officers,
he sent to the Princes of Germany, the Queen of England, and the Swiss, giving
them an account of what had passed, diminishing the loss as much as he well
could, and craving assistance both of Men and Money, because upon their success
depended the welfare of all other Protestants. These orders dispatched, he
retired toward Niort to refresh his Men in Saintonge, the Countries of Aunis,
and Gascongne, making account to provide the places so well in those Countries,
as should hold the Royal Army in play, and allow him time to recruit his own.

The King did not wholly succeed as he projected: for the Garrisons in Poitou
finding themselves at too great a distance from any relief, agreed together to
retire, crossed over Berry, and went to la Charity upon the Loire, which Sansac
had Besieged two several times in vain. The Baron de Mirembeau surrendered
Luzignan upon composition, Partenay was abandoned, soon after the Army was gone
thence, and Niort likewise, when the Lord de Mouy who undertook to defend it,
was slain by a Pistol-shot discharged at him by Francis de Louviers Not mistake
him for the Count de Montrevel whose surname is la Baume.
Moreuel. This devoted Assassin went from the Catholic Camp to the Huguenots
to kill the Admiral, and not finding an opportunity, would needs execute it
upon this unfortunate Lord, and then made his escape to the Duke of Anjou as
then at Chandenier.

The Protestant Forces who retired to la Charity, had accommodated themselves
with diverse little places in Berry and Nivernois, nay even in Soulogne and
Beausse, whereby they commanded all the roads of Lions, Paris, and Orleans.
Those of Languedoc and Daufine, had cantonized themselves in Auvergne at
Orillac. Some of their Commanders had surprised Nismes in Languedoc, by an
Aqueduct, the Grate whereof they broke open, and others in Burgundy were become
Masters of the City de Vezelay by means of scaling-Ladders which they set up
just at the break of day, the most opportune and dangerous hour for attempts of
that kind. Sansac Besieged them twice in the last, but without success.

The best counsel the Catholics could take after the Battle of Montcoutour,
was to pursue the Princes Forces without intermission, and so utterly disperse
and break them: but that old Maxim, That we must leave no Garrison of the
Enemies behind, being not well understood, made Monsieur fall upon the Siege of
Saint Jean d'Angely, the loss of which he imagined would be the ruin of the
Huguenots in all those parts. Captain Piles of the House of Clermont was in the
place with many of the bravest Officers, and Two Thousand Soldiers. The Siege
being formed, the King came to the Camp upon the sixteenth of October.

The resolution, the valor, and the indefatigable labor of the besieged,
rendered the place much more difficult to be gained than its fortifications; at
first nothing less was talked of, but putting all those to the Sword that were
within; But when upon several assaults they found it would cost them too much
time and blood to get it by force, they offered them conditions, to which they
refusing to give any ear unless upon a general Treaty, they began one, and
immediately news was sent to all the neighboring Protestant Princes, that the
Peace was concluded and even ratified, thereby to hinder those Levies they had
commanded for their assistance, and to allay the heat of such as were
cantonized in the Provinces.

They perceived the craft of it at the very first beginning of the Treaty,
forasmuch as it was plainly declared the King could grant them only a liberty
of Conscience, and not the exercise of their Religion. And at the same time
they intercepted Letters, written by the Cardinal de Lorrain to Paris; which
imported that they had undertaken this Treaty only to amuse them in expectation
of an Answer from the Pope and the King of Spain.

All the defense of the place was on the Land-side, the besieged half dead with
over-labour, and their Ammunitions spent; they could hold out no longer, yet
thought it no way safe to surrender themselves: so that they had resolved to
^alley out by night, and force through the Enemies Guard to get to Angoulesme,
or lose their lives in the attempt. But the Catholics were yet more tired and
sick then they of this Siege which had lasted two Months, and by Sword or
Sickness had destroyed them above Ten Thousand Men; amongst others Sebastian de
Luxemburg Count de Martigues who was killed in the Trenches by a Musquetshot.

They therefore renewed the Propositions of Capitulation. The besieged had some
confidence in Biron Marshall des Camps for the King, who was a Huguenot by
inclination, but a Catholic for his interest. It was agreed they should go
forth Bag and Baggage, with their Horse and Arms, and Ensigns furled, that they
should be convoyed into a place of safety, whither themselves should choose,
but not bear Arms against the King in four Months time. There Marched out but
only eight hundred Foot and one hundred Horse. The Duke of Aumale's Forces
having plundered them, though it were in a Military fury, and wholly against the
Officers wills, who could not possibly prevent it; yet this infraction gave
Piles a fair pretense to hold himself quit of the Capitulation, and immediately
put himself into Angoulesme.

Huguenots in Poitou and Saintonge but Angoulesme and Rochel. They found
themselves beset in the last after they had taken the Islands about it, with
Marans and Beauvoir; and the place it self was put to great inconveniences by
Sea, as well as by Land; the Baron de la Guard having brought eight Galleys
thither from the Levant Seas. Nevertheless they recovered themselves by means
of their Ships and Piracies, also by the presence and courage la Noue, and the
Count de la Rochefoucaud; so that they regained Marans, Lucon, and the Sands
d'Olone, where they found a rich Booty, and afterward ran over all Poitou. To
put some stop to them, the King was forced to send Puy-Galliard Governor of
Angers thither with a small Army.

Jean d'Angely, the Admiral who had appointed the rendezvous for his Forces
near Saints, parted from thence the eighteenth of Oc^ober, resolved to go into
Bearn to join Montgommery's to his own, afterward to pass thorough Gascongne
and Languedoc, ascend into Daufine and Vivarets, where Montbrun and some other
Chiefs of that Party had promised him considerable recruits of Arquebusiers,
then passing by Burgundy come to la Charity, and maintained himself as well as
he could till the Arrival of the Reisters and the Lansquenets, which he
expected from the Count Palatine, and the Prince of Orange. This latter had
left the Army a long while before the Battle of Montcontour, to go into Germany
and hasten those new Levies.

Drone near Brantolme, that of ^'Isle near Mucidan, the Veser over the Bridge
that bears the same name, then the Dordogne at Bourg which they surprised,
deceiving d'Escars who had lined all the Shore with Soldiers, and the Lot at
Cadenac; so that they arrived in the neighborhood of Montauban about Mid-
November, where they refreshed themselves some days, and met with some Money
which had been gathered for the Cause, as well out of the Plunder of Churches,
and ransom of Prisoners, as the collected contribution of their Brethren. With
this they paid the Reisters some Musters.

Toward the end of November, they made themselves Masters of the Passage over
the Garonne by taking of Aiguillon, which is on the confluence of the Lot, with
that River. The disagreement that continued between Danville Governor of
Languedoc, and Montluc Lieutenant for the King in Guyenne, proceeding from the
haughtiness of the first, and the incompatable and tetchy humor of the second,
gave them fair play in those Countries. And indeed, they had designed to take
an opportunity by this devision to seize upon Guyenne and the Cities above the
Garonne and the Dordogne, even Bourdeaux it self: but Montluc having made them
lose a great deal of time, by breaking down a Bridge they had set up near
Aiguillon, they changed their design. The Method Montluc did take to execute so
important a piece of Service, was, by letting loose some Mill-Boats that were
chained to the sides of the River, and suffering them to drive down with the
stream; The force thereof was so violent that it broke down the said Bridge.

When the Huguenots had rebuilt a new one, and Montgommery who was at Condon,
rich with the spoil of Gascongny and Bearn, had joined them, they Ascended
along the River Garonne, and lodged themselves in the Neighborhood of
Toulouze. They set fire to all the Farms and Counselors houses thereabouts, in
whose Ashes the Soldiers with flaming Firebrarnds wrote Revenge for Rapin Vide
before in March, 1568.
. The terror of these dreadful Incendiaries, and the incursions they made to
the very Suburbs* struck that great City with amazement and horror, Joyeuse
who was within with eight thousand new raised Men, not being able to dispel
their fears, nor daring to stir out of the Town.

Rochel by Piles, they Marched farther into Languedoc. Being near Castres they
met with five or six hundred Horse more which came from the same place,
conducted by Baudine and Renty, who were weary of staying at Rochel without
Pillage. They drew near the foot of the Pyreneans, whence they brought some
Companies of Bandits, then coasting along the Seaside they repassed the Aude,
not far from Narbonna, and rested in those Countries till the end of January.
Afterward they directed their March by Beziars, Pezenas, and Montpellier,
whose Garrison gave a check to some of their Men that came too nigh. La Love
their Field Marshal was killed as he lay fast asleep in a Lodgment.

They after this went to besiege Lunel, whence they were repulsed, took up at
Nismes both Money and refreshments, from that place Marched toward the
Vivarets, reposed themselves for some days at Aubenas, passed the Rhosne by
Pousin which they held, and under the favor of a Fort, which Montbrun (sent
before by the Princes for that very purpose) had built on the other Shore, then
coasting Montelimar, and having sojourned a while in Daufine, took their course
toward the Country des Fores, where they surprised the City of Saint Estienne.

John, younger Brother to Montgommery, seized the Bridge called Saint Rambert
upon the Loire, and Briquemaut sent by the Princes, brought them from la
Charity fifteen Companies as well Foot as Horse, which made up fifteen hundred
Horse and two thousand Foot. Their Army being thus reinforced descended into
Burgundy, and having given the Allarm to Chalon, surprised Arnay le Duke by
means of a long March they made in one day for that purpose.

The King's Council could never have believed it possible they should March
securely by so many Cities, strong Forts, over Rivers, narrow steights in
Mountains, and such hilly and uncouth Countries; or that they could have the
strength and good fortune to break thorough so many Garrisons of their Enemies
and Multitudes of People risen up in Arms against them, who night and day lay
in wait to destroy them, and at the same time endure the severity and
inconveniences of a sharp and uncomfortable Winter, the difficulties of the
ways, and the opposition of Seven or Eight Provinces. Besides they relied upon
a Negotiation for a Peace, to which end there was a perpetual sending backward
and forward from the time of the Surrender of Saint Jean d'Angely: so that they
were much amazed to find they were come so nigh and upon their March directly
for Paris, threatening to execute the same vengeance as they had done in the
Voicinage of Thoulouze. Then that peril they had neglected whilst they were in
distant Provinces, appearing greater by how much nearer it approached, they
gave Orders to the Marshall de Cosse to draw the King's Forces together, and
go forth to meet them.

In all this long and toilsome March, the Princes had maintained their Forces,
as well by the plunder of above fifty small Towns which they had taken, and
twice as many which they had ransomed, as by the reinforcements of Horse that
came to them, and a great number of Arquebusiers of those Countries thorough
which they Marched, serpenting and turning every way to receive such as desired
to join with them, and who being scattered here and there, could never of
themselves have made their way thorough those Crowds of common people who rose
up in Arms in every part against them.

But after all, they notwithstanding lost greater numbers than they could pick
up: for those that had been in Poitou, as soon as they drew near their own
habitations retired thither and desired to stay at home both to repose
themselves and to protect and defend their Families. The incommodities of the
Winter, the fatigues of the March, the wants they met withal in their Lodgments
or Quarters, where most commonly there was neither Bread nor Wine, (for the
Peasants fled) the continual attempts made upon them by the Catholics, not
sparing so much as any one that strayed never so little from the main Body, had
made them lose above six thousand. Of five hundred English they had at first
amongst them, but twelve were left, above the one half of their Reisters were
dead, and the rest were most of them disarmed, for not being able to have
Carriages in so tedious a March and thorough such rugged ways, the greater part
had left their Corselets and Head-pieces behind them; with all their Horses; as
likewise those that belonged to the French, were grown so poor and weak they
could scarce support themselves. And as for the Foot, their condition was not
much better, for a great part of them were but raw Soldiers (in those times
they named them Bisongnes,) but they had this advantage, most of them were
mounted upon little Naggs, that they might be enabled to make long Marches and
yet be little tired.

The Marshall de Cosse having about Orleans drawn the Royal Forces together to
the number of thirteen or fourteen thousand Men, passes the Loire at Desise and
Marched directly toward the Princes, imagining that being so tattered and out
of sorts as they were, he need but only attaque them, to defeat them. He soon
changed his opinion, when he found upon a great Skirmish between the two Armies
near Arnay le Duke, that they would put him to half the trouble at least. After
this he would run no more hazards, but let them go quietly toward la Charity,
contenting himself with coasting along by them upon the right hand.

During these times there were diverse other exploits performed in the other
parts of this Kingdom, but the most observable about Rochel. The Baron de la
Guard, Puy-Galliard, and Puy-Taille, pressed mightily upon those that were
retired La Guard and Puy Taille having besieged Rochefort situate upon the
Avenues of the Islands, were drove thence by la Noue; whom notwithstanding they
soon afterward forced to take shelter in Rochel. Afterward Puy-Galliard with
an Army of ten or twelve thousand Men, took all the Forts the Huguenots had
seized in Poitou after the surprizal of Marans; and to streighten them the
more, he built one at Lucon upon the Avenue to the Marshes. La Noue who
understood the consequence immediately laid Siege to it, Puy-Galliard draws all
his Men together again whom he had distributed in the higher Poitou, and
Marches up to him, but loses the Battle between Sancte Gemme and Lucon.

La Noue follows his blow, Besieges Fontenay, and receives it upon composition.
He afterward regains Oleron, Matennes, Soubize and Brouage. In those very days
Brouage was of great importance for its situation upon a Canal very difficult
to enter, and wholly surrounded by Salt-Marshes, which produce the greatest
Riches of that Country; it was begun to be fortified by James de
Ponts-Mirembeau, who being Lord thereof, would have given it the name of
Jacopoli. All the Catholics of those quarters were forced to retire to Saint
John d'Angely: The Baron de la Guard having kept the Seas a while with his
Galleys, brings them back into the River of Bourdeaux. To stop the further
Progress of the Huguenots, it was resolved Prince Henry Daufin of Auvergne Son
of Lewis de Bourbon Duke of Montpensier should go into that Country, and he was
preparing himself for that expedition when the news of the Peace discharged him
both from that trouble and expense.

The Army of the Princes had passed the Loire and advanced toward Paris,
between Montargis, Bleneau, and Chastillon sur Loing. The King's was come to
the Valley of Aillan as it were to stand betwixt them and home, and barricade
the way to Paris: when after a Truce of some days, the Negotiation for a Peace
often broken, and as often renewed again, finally succeeded to a Treaty of
Peace; which was concluded the fifteenth of August, notwithstanding the
Remonstrances Spain to obstruct it; for he apprehended least after a Peace, the
two Armies should be United to fall upon the Low Countries.

The King, the Queen his Mother, the Princes of the Blood, those of the
Council, and all the Grandees about him, swore to it solemnly at Saint Germain
en Lay. On the Huguenots part, Beauvais la Nocle was dispatched to carry the
News to Rochel and Guyenne, and Teligny to the Army; where it was Proclaimed
the one and twentieth of the Month, and sworn to by all the Protestant Nobility
expressly assembled. Five days after it was so likewise in the Catholic Army
which Marched toward Lorrain to Convoy the Germans home again and dismiss
them. That of the Princes went as far as Langres, when they caused theirs to be
conducted to Pot a Mouson by the Marquess de Renel: they then returned toward
la Charity, and from thence crossing Linosin and Angounois, they proceeded to
Rochel, having Count Ludovic with them.

That which was most particular in this Edict, besides the Articles in the
former, was, That they allowed them to Preach in the Suburbs of two such Cities
as should be Assigned them in each Province; That they should be admitted
indifferently in the Universities, Schools, Hospitals and Spittles; as also in
all public Offices, Royal, Seigneurial, and belonging to Cities and
Corporations. Moreover, that they should have the Liberty to except against an
Appeal from a certain number of Judges in all Parliaments, in some more, in
others fewer, and generally from the whole Parliament of Thoulouze, to the
Requests of the Hostel, who should be Sovereign Judges in those Cases; That to
take away all possible suspicion, doubt or jealousy, they should keep as Pawns
for security in their own hands, the Cities of Rochel, Montauban, Cognac, and
la Charity, upon condition the two Princes and twenty Gentlemen with them would
oblige themselves jointly, and swear to surrender them up in the same condition
at the expiration of two years. It was likewise stipulated that they should
restore to the Prince of Orange and Ludovic his Brother, the Principality of
Orange, and all other the Lands belonging to them in France, together with all
their Titles and Writings that had been taken from them.

The reasons that inclined the Huguenots to this Peace were manifest, the long
and tedious absence from their Families, the eminent and perpetual dangers they
were in, the utter ruin of their Estates and Goods, as well by the Invasions
of

The Motives which led the Court to this agreement, were variously guessed at
and talked of. The Queen Mother would have it believed that she had considered
the prayers of the Princes of Germany, and the Emperor's Advice. Some fancied
she made this Peace, that she might have leisure to think upon the Marriage of
her Son; others that she condescended to it out of the jealousy she had to
find the Spaniard concerned himself so much in the Affairs of France, not as a
friend only, but as one interessed, and apprehensive that having subdued the
Low Countries, he might endeavor to bind the French in the same Fetters. Many
believed with good probability, that this Princess a great lover of
Divertisements and Pleasures, was quite wearied with such continual troubles
and melancholy consultations, and the eternal danger she was in.

And indeed, never any one that was more fond of, or did more delight in the
soft Past-times of the Galanteries, Dancing, Hunting, Feasting, and all sorts
of Sports than she. Wherever she went, she always carried a complete Equipage
of the most voluptuous Divertisements in her Train, and particularly two or the
Balls and Music must be sure to go on, says Montluc. The sound of the Violins
must not be stifled by the Martial Trumpet, the same Teams dragged along the
Machines for their Plays, and their Engines for War; and in the same Lists were
to be seen the Sons of Mars cutting each others Throats, and the fair
Offspring of Venus at their Carousels where the Ladies freely tasted every
pleasure.

Others more penetrating believed that her designs tended to disarm the
Huguenots, tired with the miseries of War, and by degrees calm and lay all
their jealousies asleep, that they might the more easily be led into their
snares which time and opportunity might direct her to contrive hereafter for
them, if perhaps she had not long before resolved which way to bring it about.
The event seems to confirm this suspicion, though it is very probable that the
many Accidents, different Interests, and various Humors and Minds of those
that contributed to such a terrible Council, made them often shift and change
their Methods and Resolutions.

She had two excellent Lures to deceive and decoy the Queen of Navarre and the
Admiral, and consequently the whole Party; I mean a War against the Spaniards
in the Low Countries, which all the Huguenot Chiefs blindly gave credit to,
because they desired it with passion; and the Marriage of Margaret the Kings
Sister with Henry Prince of Navarre. This last had been already propounded, but
the great Love the Duke of Guise had for that Princess was some obstacle. The
King who was extreme Choleric and Violent, having observed it, commanded Henry
d'Angoulesme his bastard Brother to kill him, when he went out to Hunt; the
Duke having a hint of it, was advised to avoid the anger of the King by
Marrying at soonest, as he did, with Catherine de Cleves, Widow of Anthony de
Crouy Prince of Portian.

Some Months before Lewis de Vourbon Duke of Montpensier, had for his Second
Wife Married in the City of Angers, Catherine Sister to that Duke. The Cardinal
de Lorrain negotiated this Alliance to gain the said Prince, who before was
much an Enemy to their House, though at the same time he had a mortal Aversion
to the Huguenots.

It was high time likewise to Marry the King who was in his One and twentieth
year. His Mother with vast and Chimerical designs rolling in her Head, had some
thoughts, thereby to acquire the Kingdoms of Scotland and England, of getting
for him Mary Stuard his Brothers Widow. Then finding Affairs did not succeed
well with her, she next made her Address to gain Queen Elizabeth for him, and
propounded a League with her in Order to a Conquest of the Low Countries. This
Negotiation lasted near two years, at the end whereof, Elizabeth having made
answer, That the King was too great and too little, That is to say, too great a
King to go and dwell in England, and too young for her who was Eight Elizabeth,
daughter of the Emperor Maximilian II. a good and virtuous Princess, but whose
Innocence, for she was scarce 16, and whose Simplicity could create no
jealousy in her.

The Match had been propounded the foregoing Year. The Marriage being
contracted by Proxy, he sent his two Brothers, and with them the Duke of
Lorraine, the Duke of Guise and of Aumale to receive his Spouse at Sedan, and
himself went to Mezieres where the Archbishop of Trier put her into his Hands.
The next day being the Six and Twentieth of November, the Nuptials were
Celebrated in the same place.

At his return from thence being at Chantilly, he gave Audience to the
Ambassadors of the Protestant German Princes, who came to Congratulate with
him, for the Peace he had granted his Subjects, and to exhort him to maintain
it, showing him plainly by many reasons and examples the Error and mistake of
those who aver, that the Calm of Peace and a diversity of Religions are
incompatible, and cannot be maintained or made to live quietly together in the
same Kingdom.

With this year ended in Spain the War with the Moors, after it had lasted
above three years. The obstinate remainders of the Moors mixed with some Jews,
were revolted, and had created a King; then, he being Slain, another. The
Marquises de Montdjeu, and de loz Velez Commanded in the beginning of this War:
John of Austria Bastard Son of Charles V. and then the Duke of Sesse continued
it, and afterward Lewis Duke d' Arcos finished it. This last was the Chief of
the House of Ponce de Leon.

England much in her Head, or at least she feigned so, the better to lull and
blind the Huguenots, and hinder Queen Elizabeth from lending them Assistance;
She therefore makes a fresh overture of Marriage between that Princess, and her
Second Son the Duke of Anjou. Now whatever intention she had, she neither
spared cajolleries, nor addresses, nor advantageous offers to the Queen, nor
caresses and presents to her Ministers to win their Hearts. They proceeded even
to the Treating about the Conditions; there was but one they could not agree
upon, that the Duke might have the exercise of the Catholic Religion in
England, at least in his own Chamber. This difficulty put the business to a
stop till the Massacre on Saint Bartholomews, which broke it absolutely off.

In these years, 1570. and 71. was that memorable War between the Turks and the
Venetians for the Island of Cyprus. Selin who succeeded Solomon his Father,
having a design to build some Mosques and some Hervan-Sarays or Hospitals, his
Mu^ty had told him that he might not do it but with the Spoils conquered from
some Christians. Consulting then which way he should bend his Force, the desire
he had to possess a Country that produced excellent Wine, after which he was
very Liquorish, made him determine to Conquer the Island of Cyprus, which bears
of the best in the World. His pretense to break with the Venetians who were in
Possession, was that they allowed those Pirates to harbor in their Ports, who
plied and robbed upon the Coasts of Asia and Syria, and that their Governors
did not show him that respect they ought. He likewise added, as some kind of
Title, which those Barbarians however do but little regard, that the Kingdom of
Cyprus was a Dependence on that of Egypt, which his Predecessors had Conquered
from the Mamalukes.

The Bashaw Mustapha who Commanded Selim's Army, Landed on the Island with
Fifty Thousand Men in the month of July, and laid Siege to Nicosia a
Mediteranean City Seated at the Foot of the Mountains and very well Fortified.
The Venetians set out an Hundred nimble Galleys and Eleven great ones: but the
Plague having destroyed above one half of their People that manned them, and
the Bashaw Piali General of the Turkish Galleys, being in those Seas, they
durst not go near the Island. So that after a Siege of Eight and Forty days,
the City was taken, and Nicholas Dandolo who Commanded was Slain at the taking
of a Fort. Mustapha ordered his head to be cut off, and planted upon the top of
a Pike within sight of Famagusta.

In the mean time, Marc Antonio Colonna and Doria, this General of the King of
Spain Galleys, the other of the Popes, had joined the Venetian Armada; and lay
Caramania, together making up above Two Hundred Galleys and great Vessels: but
Doria failed them at need, and upon the News of the loss of Nicosia, carried
back his Fleet to the Kingdom of Naples.

In the following Spring, Famagusta, the Capital of Cyprus, and the best Port
in the Island, was assaulted. Marc Antonio Bragadin defended it with
extraordinary Valor, and did not Surrender it till the utmost extremity.
Mustapha enraged at his too long and too great resistance, satisfied his Faith,
and cruelly caused him to be flayed alive, after they had cut off his Nose and
Ears. Bragadin appeared more invincible yet under his Torments than in his
Fighting, and Triumphed over the Treachery and Cruelty of his more than brutish
Enemy by his generous Sufferings.

At the instant pursuits of Pope Pius V. at length a League was concluded
between him, the King of Spain, and the Venetians, their Vessels or Fleet
together made up Two Hundred Twenty Five Galleys Sottili, Or Light Galleys.
Six Galleasses, and Twenty Five great Ships. Whilst the Chiefs were
contending with each other about Place and Authority, Famagusta was lost. Don
John of Austria Bastard Son of the Emperor Charles V. Commanded the Forces of
Spain, Marc Antonio Colonna the Popes, and Sebastian Venier those belonging to
the Venetians. Don Juan was declared Generalissimo, and in his absence Colonna
was tohave the same Authority. Venier having craftily engaged Don Juan to enter
the Gulf of Lepanto, otherwise called the Gulf of Corinth, a famous Battle
ensued, the most Memorable that ever the Christians Fought upon the Sea. It was
within the Straight between those little Islands named the Echinades, and the
main land, some Threescore Miles off the Promontory Actium, so Famous by that
Battle which decided the Roman Empire, betwixt Octavius Caesar and Marc Antony.
The Arm of the Almighty was stretched out against the Infidels, they were
wholly vanquished. One Hundred and Seventeen of their Galleys taken, above
Twenty sunk, Five and Twenty or Thirty Thousand Men swallowed up in the Sea,
near Four Thousand made Prisoners, all their Chief Commanders either Slain or
Drowned, excepting the Bassa Perthaw who made his escape to Lepanto in a
Skiffe, and old Louchali ^lluzzali.
who got off with Two and Thirty Galleys. So great an advantage ought to have
produced many others: but it was so ill pursued, by reason of the
misunderstanding amongst the Confederate Christians, that the Venetians were at
last constrained to have recours^ to the mercy of the Barbarians, and Treat a
Peace with them.

Tuscany and Lombardy, which almost wholly ruined the City of Ferrara, there
followed most furious Floods of Waters in several Countries. The Rhosne quite
drowned the Suburbs de la Guillotiere at Lions, and its Streams by their rapid
Violence, having torn away a Rock from the Mountain near the chops of the
Sluice, made a Bank against themselves, which stopped their Passage, and forced
them to flow back against the usual current, so that the Mills along that River
had their Wheels turned the contrary way.

The Winter was so hard from the end of November in the Year 1570. till the end
of February following, that during those three whole Months, it Froze the
Rivers so much that they drove Carts upon them, and blasted the Fruit Trees,
even in Languedoc and Provence, killing their very Roots.

Notwithstanding the Edict of Pacification, new occasions of quarrel and strife
arose every day between the Catholics and the Huguenots, under color of
remedying it, the King dispatched to Rochel the Marshall de Cross, and a
Master of Requests, who conferred with the Heads of the Huguenots: but as it
appeared afterward, it was but only to make them the more tame and gentle and
confiding. And indeed at this very time were those two Baits thrown out above
mentioned, the Marriage of the King's Sister with the Prince of Navarre, and
the design of making War upon the Spaniards in the Low Countries. The Admiral
passionately desired it, as well to Revenge the affront he received at Saint
Quentins, as to uphold the Protestants, and restore the Princes of Nassaw, that
so they might be enabled to give each other mutual assistance.

These Seeds of deceit thus cunningly sown amongst them began to allay their
Suspicions, the Huguenots Deputies followed Cosse to Court, and received all
manner of Satisfaction, though at that time the King's Council were framing a
terrible design, but he feigned a most profound Tranquillity. The King made his
Entrance into Paris the Fifth day of February by Saint Denis Gate, without it,
he on a Scaffold heard the Harangues of the Sovereign Companies, and Body of
the City. The Twenty-Ninth of the same Month the Queen was Crowned at Saint
Denis.

Huguenots into the Trap, by all the alluring and specious semblances proper to
decoy the most wary and jealous. They began kindly to use all such as they
guessed to be joined by Alliance, or Interest, or Amity with them, on the
contrary they slighted and rejected all those that were their Enemies or
suspected by them; Their Deputies carried back all the imaginable tokens of
affection and good usage. The King interceded with the Duke of Savoy to restore
those Lands belonging to Jacqueline Countess d'Entremont, which that Duke had
seized, because she Married the Admiral contrary to his Commands, being Widow
of Claude Batarnay Anton, who was Slain in the Battle of Dreux.

So many favors did a little startle the Admiral, he sends Count Ludovic of
Nassaw to the King, to pry into his disposition and Treat concerning the
Low Country War. The King expresses an incredible Joy, and would needs have him
come Incognito for fear of giving Jealousy to the Spaniards. He found the King
at Fontenay in Brie, who welcomed him with a Thousand Caresses, pretended to
lay open his whole Heart to him, and gave him up his Castle of Orange, where
till that time, he had kept a French Garrison. And to succeed the better with
the Admiral they made use of the Credit of Teligny his Son in Law toward him,
a young Gentleman upon whom he had bestowed his Daughter merely for the esteem
he had of his great Wisdom.

Teligny therefore carried him word that the King had resolved to give his
Sister Margaret to the Prince of Navarre as a pledge of his promises to all the
Huguenot Party, and that he had taken a Resolution to free himself from the
Captivity of his Mother and his Brother the Duke of Anjou; against whom he had
indeed conceived so much Jealousy, that he could endure him no longer. This
Machine, as we may term it, drew in the Admiral, he came to Court in the Month
of September, and with the greater boldness they being then at Blois, and
Chastillon.

At the same time the Cardinal his Brother then in England, preparing to take
Shiping for his Return into France was Poisoned by one of his Valets de Chamber
with a perfumed Apple. The discovery of which Crime came not to light till two
years after, when the same Fellow being Surprised at Rochel where he served as
a Spy, was Condemned to be Hanged, and Confessed the Fact at the Gallows.

Scarce had the Admiral been five Weeks at Chastillon but the King sends him
word his Presence was necessarily required to assist about the Treating of a
League with England, and to renew the Alliance with the Protestant Princes of
Germany. This second time he had yet a more favorable reception then at the
former, they heap Caresses, Presents and other advantages upon him; The
Courtiers murmured at it, the Clergy trembled with indignation to behold him
who had destroyed and burnt so many Churches, stand in the highest rank of
Favor, the People cried out, the King was in the high Road to Huguenotism, and
the Guises themselves, though they had a hand in the design, apprehended lest
the King, who did not overmuch love them, should turn all this dissimulation
into a Storm that might at last fall on their Heads.

After he had sojourned for some time at Court, they gave him his Liberty to be
gone for the second time, but the King Corresponded with him by daily Letters,
Anjou that made the Huguenots afraid, it happened that to take away those
Jealousies and Suspicions the King had of him, and which might have produced
most dangerous effects, the Queen Mother began her Practices to obtain the
Crown of Poland for him, which she undertook by the Advice and Intrigues of
Montluc Bishop of Valence. For although Sigismund Augustus their King was yet
Living, it was time to think of another, he being very Infirm and having no
Children.

When by many oblique turnings and windings they had Conveyed this News to the
Huguenots Ears, they were wrapped with Joy, and assumed a much greater
Confidence. Then the Queen of Navarre entirely satisfied and assured came to
Court to make up the Match for her Son. Pope Pius V. to prevent this Marriage
Portugal to demand this Princess in Wedlock, and from thence passed into France
to make that Proposition to the King, and to exhort him to enter into the
League against the Turks.

The Portuguese put a just value upon this Alliance, and proceeding generously
made known to the King that he desired no other Dowry, but only that he would
renounce that with the Turks. The King made answer that he was engaged
elsewhere for the Marriage of his Sister; He excused himself likewise to the
Legate upon all those other things the Holy Father demanded, but conjured him
to assure his Holiness of his filial obedience, and gently squeezing his Hands
added these words. O that I might be permitted to explain my self more!

At the same time Jane Queen of Navarre, over-perswaded by the Admiral who was
but too much so himself, came to Court; It was then at Blois. The Jane had
consented it should be performed at Paris, in a certain form, not much
differing from that of the Roman Church, the Articles were Signed the Eleventh
day of April. There wanted nothing but the dispensation from Rome because of
their near Parentage, to complete the Nuptials.

Amidst these Transactions Ludovic returns to Court, he was more hugged and
soothed then ever. The King promised him he would send the Admiral into the
Low Countries with a powerful Army, there was a division made of those
Provinces how they should be shared between France and the House of Nassaw;
they drew together Six Thousand Soldiers, with a great Train of Artillery for
that Strossy and the Baron de la Guard upon the Coasts of Bretagne to hinder
any Supplies that might come from Spain to the Duke of Alva; they dispatched
the Marshall de Montmorency into England to Treat about an Alliance with Queen
Elizabeth, Schomberg into Germany to exhort the Protestant Princes, and Francis
de Nouailles Bishop of Dags as Ambassador to Constantinople to stir up the
Turks to fall upon the Coasts of Spain.

The Cardinal de Lorraine and the Cardinal de Pelleve were already gone toward
Rome, upon pretense of being there at the Election of a new Pope, for Pius V.
died the first day of May. In his Life time he refused the dispensation for the
Marriage of the Prince of Navarre, with Madam Margaret; Gregory XIII. his
Successor, less rigid, or better informed, easily agreed to it. The Wedding day
was therefore assigned upon the first of June: but upon some difficulty started
by the Cardinal de Bourbon, it was put off to the Eighteenth of August. In the
mean time the Queen of Navarre having overheated her self by hurrying about to
get all things ready, happened to die, not without suspicion of being poisoned by
a certain pair of scented Gloves she bought at a Perfumers, who was a Milanese
and one of a very ill-favored Reputation.

Though the Admiral held himself secure upon the faith and word of the King, he
could not however resolve to expose himself in Paris to the Mercy of that
populace furiously exasperated against him, and in the midst of his most mortal
Enemies. But here the last bait was made use of and proved so taking, he could
notwithstand it. The King dismisses Prince Ludovic whom till then he had
detained in Court, gives him a good round Sum of Money and two Officers of
great Note, i. e. la Noue and Genlis, who were in great Credit with the
Admiral, to go and try whether by Intelligence they could secure some places of
the Low Countries. Ludovic Surprised Mons, la Noue Valenciennes, whilst many
other Cities in Holland and Zealand took part and stood up for the Prince of
Orange.

He judging this to be certainly an open War between the two Crowns did no
longer hesitate, but came to the King and into Paris, where hitherto he durst
not trust himself. That which assured him more yet, was a permission allowed
Genlis to Levy Four Thousand Men to go to the Relief of Mons. However they no
sooner entered into Haynault but they were defeated, and their Leader taken by
the treachery of the French themselves.

Navarre and the Prince of Conde Arrived at Paris the Twentieth day of July,
bringing a great Train of Noblemen with them, as well of such who desired to
appear at the Nuptials of the first, as others who had been assistant at the
Prince of Conde's with Mary of Cleves, which was Celebrated in the Castle of
Blandy near Melun. This Mary was one of the three Daughters of Francis de
Cleves Duke of Nevers, and Sister to the Dutchesses of Nevers and Guise.

The exceeding Caresses they made them were so extravagant and so visible; that
if God had not blinded both their Eyes and their understandings, they might
easily have perceived those Knives they were every hour whetting to cut their
Throats. The Rochellers sent Messenger after Messenger to advise the Admiral he
were best to withdraw himself out of that Gulf of Paris, that it was a tempting
of God too far by confiding in a King who was violent and passionate even to
the height of fury, and an Italian Woman, who had endeavored the destruction
of all that was great in the Kingdom. But he replied that he would sooner
resolve to be dragged through the dirt and mire of Paris, then by his leaving it
give any the least occasion for a fourth Civil War. It was upon the same foot
of Resolution that he stood up so obstinately for the Surrender of the Four
Places of Security above three Weeks before the Term was expired. There was
only Rochel that refused to obey, under pretense of their Privileges. The
Marshall de Montmorency much clearer sighted then the Admiral, feigned himself
sick and disordered with his England Voyage, and obtained leave to retire to
his House at Chantilly.

The King of Navarre was betroathed the Seventeenth of August, and Married the
day following: the Cardinal of Bourbon tied the Nuptial knot on a Scaffold
erected before the Church Door of Nostre-Dame, according to a Form agreed upon
betwixt them. The said King having Conducted his Mistress into the Quire, by a
Gallery made purposely through the body of the Church, retired while they were
saying Mass. When that was ended he returned, and having

But during all this loud noise of Voices and Violins they deliberated on what
manner to execute their bloody Butchery* What the first Project was in the
Kings Council is not well known, amongst whom were the Queen Mother, the Duke
of Anjou, the Count de Raise, and Birague Keeper of the Seals, (for Morvilliers
to whom they were given in Custody when they dismissed the Chancellor de
l'Hospital, had discharged himself of them into his hands)

It is said the first Resolution for this Massacre, chiefly upon the Instance
of the Duke of Guise, and his Partisans, was taken at Blois in the very Chamber
where that Duke himself was Massacred Fifteen years after* and that some
difficulties arising they held another Council in the House of Gondy at Saint
Cloud, whereat the Duke of Anjou presided, who afterward (being King Henry
III.) was unhappily Murdered in the very same place, and as some affirm upon
the very same day.

The Queen Mothers aim was quite different from the Kings, and from that of the
Guises; it was believed that Vindicative Woman, with the Count de Raise her
intimate Counselor, had a Prospect far beyond theirs. For she thought, that by
causing the Admiral to be assassinated (which the two other Councils had
resolved) the Montmorency's would stand up to revenge that Injury, and fall
fowl upon the Guises, whom they would certainly Judge to be the Authors of it;
That these two Parties should be left to grapple with each other; Then when
good store of Blood had been drawn and either had half destroyed the other, the
King should Salley out of the Louvre with his Guards, and exterminate them
both, as Seditious Traitors; That after he had thus destroyed them he would
remain absolute Master, Reign according to his own fancy, and set himself above
all Laws of the Kingdom.

Now whether this were true, or no, that Morevel who had before Assassinated
the Lord de Mouy, was employed to make away the Admiral. On Friday the Two and
Twentieth of August he posted himself for this purpose at the Cloister S.
Germain de l'Auxerrois in a Chamber of the House belonging to Peter Pile o^
Villemur a Canon of that Church, and who had been Tutor to the Duke of Guise.
He takes his stand and fits his gears at a low Window that was barred with Iron
and faced the Street called des Fossez S. Germain; and as the Admiral came from
the Louvre on Foot, and was going to his own House in the Street de Betizy,
walking slowly, because he was reading some Papers, he made a Shot at him
Guises men.

The King who was playing at Tenis with that Duke in the Louvre, falls into a
rage, throws down his Racket and leaves off his play: but the Project did not
take as they imagined, for the Admiral without showing any great concern
withdrew to his own House, and neither the Huguenots, nor the Montmorencies ran
to their Arms. The King of Navarre and the Prince only went to beseech the King
he would give them leave to go out of Paris for their own Security: but both he
and the Queen Mother played their Game so cunningly and covered the business so
well with their deceitful pretenses, promising to bring the Assassin to
exemplary punishment, and naming Judges to take immediate Information, that it
calmed the just fears of those two young Princes, and obliged them to stay.

Afternoon the Admiral having Informed the King that he had somewhat to tell
him which was not to be trusted to the knowledge of any other but himself
alone, the King went to visit him at his House accompanied by the Queen Mother,
the Duke of Anjou, Duke of Guise, Count de Raise, and some others. After some
general discourse, he entertained him near an hour, and seemed to take much
delight in what he told him concerning the War of the Low Countries; In fine he
carried his dissimulation on so far that the Queen had some jealousy of their
great Intimacy; and asked her Son what it was the Admiral had told him in
private; to which he replied, with an Oath, that he had advised him to reign by
himself, and make himself Master of all Affairs.

The same day, as if he had indeed earnestly desired to have the Assassin
apprehended he caused all the Gates of Paris to be shut up, except two, and
under color of securing the Admiral from all popular Commotions and Attempts
of his Enemies, Reinforced his Life-Guards with Four Hundred Men, quartered
his Regiment within the City, and gave charge to Cosseins, who was their Mestre
de Camp, to set a Court of Guard of his best French Soldiers before the House
of the Admiral, and another of Swiss within it. He had likewise wished all the
Huguenot Gentlemen to Lodge thereabouts, and made the King of Navarre believe
that he apprehended some rising on the Guisian part, for which reason he
desired him and the Prince to come and remain in the Louvre with the bravest of
their Men, to strengthen and defend him in Case of necessity.

The Admirals friends held diverse Councils in his House upon the accident of
his hurt: John de la Ferriere Vidame of Chartres had from the very first given
his opinion that they should Convey him to Chastillon, and that they were yet
strong enough to beat their way through the common Rabble before they were in
Arms: but the Admirals repugnance, and the contrary Remonstrances of Teligny
his Son in Law, who opposed every one that showed the least suspicion, or gave
Council tending to the securing themselves, made them lay aside those
Resolutions. Now the Vidame, plainly perceiving by the muttering of the People
and diverse other Indications, that danger was very near at hand, returned once
more to the charge, and insisted the more upon it, because the Admiral found
himself somewhat better and might endure a Horse-Litter.

This was apparently that which hastened their ruin: for a Gentleman who was
present at this Consult, went immediately to the Palace des Tuilleries to make
his Report to the King, who had called his Council together in the Queen
Mothers Closet. The Duke of Anjou, the Duke of Nevers, the Bastard
d'Angoulesme, the Keeper of the Seals Birague, the Counts de Tavanes and de
Raise were of it. There upon the Report made by the Gentleman, it having been
considered, that if the Admiral escaped, they should fall into greater
perplexities then ever, it was concluded that both he and all the Huguenots
should be dispatched, excepting the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde. It
has been said, that at the first they spoke only of the Chiefs and principal
Men; but that the King, after he was with much ado persuaded to resolve upon
it, added swearing in his wonted manner; Well then, since it must be, I will
not have one left alive to reproach me with it.

They then gave out Orders to Execute such their Resolution that same Night;
and the Duke of Guise was made the Chief Manager, as well because the People
had more Confidence in him, as because he was animated with the Resentment of
the death of his Father, and had drawn together a great number of People Armed
for that purpose. Wherefore about Ten a Clock at Night he sends for Swiss
Captains of the Five little Cantons, and some of the French Companies, orders
them to put themselves all in Arms, and to John Charon Prevost des Marchands,
as also to Marcel who was newly out of that Employment, to Arm the Citizens,
and first draw them together within some Houses, then bring them into the
Market places, to light Flambeaus in all their Windows, to wear a white Scarf
or Linen on their left Arm, and a Cross of the same upon their Hats, and when
they were in readiness then to begin the Butchery at a Signal given them, by
Ringing out the great Bell belonging to the Palace, which is not wont to be
used but upon some extraordinary Occasion of rejoicing.

The Orders given, he returned to the Louvre, where the Queen Mother, the Duke
of Anjou, Nevers and Birague, used their utmost Endeavors to resolve the King's
Mind, for the nearer he came to the Moment of Execution, the more he was
troubled in his Soul, so that the very Sweat ran down his Forehead, and his
pulsation was like one in a Fever. They had much ado to force a positive and
precise consent from him: but as soon as ever they had obtained it, the Queen
Mother hastened the Signal above an hour, and caused the Bell to be rung at
Saint Germains de l'Auxerrois as the Alarm agreed upon. When he heard this,
and the report of some Pistols fired at the same time, he was so moved that he
sent orders they should forbear a while longer: but word was brought back that
they had proceeded too far; and indeed the Duke of Guise had caused both the
Admiral and Teligny his Son in Law to be Massacred in their Lodgings, and the
fierce Woolfs being unchained and let loose ran to every House, and filled all
with Blood and Slaughter.

To draw the Picture of this Horrible Massacre in little, it lasted seven whole
days: the three first, which was from Sunday the Feast of St. Bartholomew till
Tuesday, in it is greatest fury; the other Four till the Sunday following with
somewhat more of abatement. During which time were Murdered near Five Thousand
Persons by diverse sorts* of Deaths, and many by more then one, amongst others
Five or Six Hundred Gentlemen. Neither the Aged, nor the tender Infants were
spared, nor Women great with Child, some were Stabbed, others hewn in pieces
with Halberts, or Shot with Muskets of Pistols, some thrown Headlong out of
the Windows, many dragged to the River, and diverse had their Brains beaten out
with Mallets, Clubs, or such like Instruments. Seven or Eight Hundred had
thrust themselves into the several Prisons, hoping to find shelter and
protection under the Wings of Justice: but the Captains appointed for this
Execution, caused them to be haled out and brought to a place near la Valee de
Misere (or the Valley of Misery) where they beat out their Brains with a
Pole-Axe, and then cast them into the River. A Butcher going to the Louvre upon
Tuesday, told the King that he had dispatched an Hundred and Fifty the Night
before, and a Gold-Wyre drawer often boasted, showing his Arm, that he had
killed Four Hundred for his share.

The most Eminent of the Massacred, besides the Admiral and Teligny were the
Count de la Rochelfoucaud, the Marquess de Renel Brother by the Mother to the
Prince de Porcean, the Baron de Lavardin, Beaudine Brother of Dacier, Francis
de Nonpar Caumont la Force and his Eldest Son, the brave Piles, Francis de
Quelleve, Pontivy, Brion, Puviant, Pardaillan, Montalbert, Valavoire, Guerchy,
Peter de la Place First President of the Court des Aids, Francour the King of
Navarres Chancellor and Lomenie Secretary to the King. Who could believe it? of
so many Valiant Men, not one died with his Sword in Hand besides Guerchy; and
of Six or Seven Hundred Houses that were plundered, but only one that made
Resistance.

The Earl of Montgomery and about a Hundred Gentlemen, who either more
suspicious, or more happy then the rest, had Lodged themselves in the Fauxbourg
Saint Germain, hearing the hideous noise that was made all over the City, and
being privately informed of what passed, could not possibly believe it: they
fancied that the Guisians together with the people had Attaqued the Louvre, and
ran to the Waterside to crose over by Boat: but perceiving some small Vessels
full of Soldiers making toward them, (for they could not find the Keys of the
Gate Bucy soon enough) and the King himself from the farther side of the River,
with his great Fowling-piece, endeavoring to bird them, they fled back to
their Lodgings, and getting immediately on Horseback, most of them without
Boots, some even in their drawers, made their escape with all possible speed
into Normandy.

Louvre it self were not spared. After they had disarmed and hunted them out of
the Chambers they lay in, they cut the Throats of them all one after another,
and exposed their Bodies stark naked at the Gate of the Louvre, the Queen
Mother being at a Window feasted her Eyes with the horrid Spectacle.

This deluge of Blood swallowed up many Catholics likewise, who were
dispatched by Order of the Higher-Powers, or at the Instigation of some
particular Persons. It was enough to make them Huguenots, if they had Money, or
a wished for Employment, or vindicative Enemies, or impatient heirs. Some
called this Massacre The Paris Matins, as they had formerly called that in
Sicily, Anno 1281. The Sicilian Vespers.

Whatever diligence they used to find out the Huguenots, there were more
escaped then were killed for number. Diverse saved themselves by Money, by
Friends, by good hap, and by their craft; the Duke of Guise in his own Hostel
sheltred above an Hundred of those he believed he might bring over to his
Party; And the King spared the Lives of some who were so only out of Interest.
The Montmorencies, Cosse, and Biron were in the black List: but Montmorency's
absence, he being at Chantilly, secured the Lives of his Three Brothers, the
Prayers and Tears of the beautiful Chasteau-neuf, Monsieurs Mistress, saved
Cosse his Allie, and Biron Great Master of the Ordnance, having loaded and
levelled or appointed some Culverins at the Gate of the Arsenal, stopped the
impetuous Torrent of the Massacrers, and let in some of his distressed Friends;
amongst others James second Son of the Lord de la Force, who being then but Ten
or Twelve years old, had craftily hid himself between his Fathers and his
Eldest Brothers Corpse, Murdered in bed where they all three lay together.

When the Admiral was killed, they threw his Body down into the Court, the Duke
of Guise who stood below, wiped the Blood off which covered his Face to know if
it were he. After that an Italian cut off his Head and carried it to the Queen
Mother, who causing it to be Embalmed, sent it to the Pope, as the Huguenots
say. The Populace fell upon the unhappy trunck of his Body; They first cut off
the Hands and Privities, then left it on a Dunghill; in the afternoon they
return to it again, dragged it three days about the Streets, then to the River
side, yet did not throw it in, and at last to Montfaucon, where they hung it up
by the Feet with an Iron Chain, and made a Fire underneath, which half consumed
it. This miserable Relick hung there till the Marshall de Montmorency got some
to steal it away in a very dark Night, and laid it to rest in his Chapel at
Chantilly.

About Noon on the Sunday the Massacre first began, a white-thorn growing in
the Churchyard called Saint Innocents, half withered and stripped of all its
Leaves, put forth great store of Blossoms. This wonder much heightened the
frenzy of the People: the Fraternities Marched along with Drums beating, and
strove who should Massacre most Huguenots in a day; the King himself would
needs see that Prodigy. Most People would have it to be a Miracle, and those of
either Religions interpreted it to their own advantage. The less credulo^s
attributed it to the nature of the Tree, which does many times Blossom when
ready to die. We might say that the same cause which heated the Peoples Brains
and excited them to so much violence and fury, was that which heated this Tree
likewise, whether proceeding from Vapors out of the Earth, or the Influence of
the Stars and Planets from above.

It had been resolved in the King and Queens most private Council, to charge
the Guises with all the Malice and Odium of these Massacres, and report that
the Admirals Friends intending to revenge the hurt he had received, it begot so
furious a Sedition that the King could not allay or hinder it; and to this
effect they had agreed and appointed that they should retire to their own homes
as soon as ever the Chiefs of the Huguenots were dispatched. Upon this Foot the
King had written to all the Governors of Provinces, commanding them to assure
the People he would not break the Edict of Pacification; and in one Letter he
said expressly, That he was joined with the King of Navarre, and the Prince of
Conde, to revenge the death of the Admiral, his Cousin. But the Guises
apprehending, as they had reason, lest the Queen Mother should some time or
other lay this Crime to their charge to ruin them, insisted so resolutely upon
it, having the power in their own hands, the Catholic Nobility, the Duke of
Montpensier, and the Parisians to back them, that they obliged him to change
his Note, and to send word every where, That what had been done, was by his
Order, to prevent the effects Navarre and the Prince of Conde.

Wherefore upon Tuesday the Third day of the Massacre, after hearing of Mass to
return solemn thanks to God for the precious Victory obtained over Heresy, and
commanded Medals should be Coined to preserve the Memory thereof, he went and
sat on his Royal Seat of Justice in Parliament, where he owned the whole
Action. Some days after he sent orders to that Assembly to employ all the
Authority of the Law to justify it* and to that end to proceed immediately
without delay to make Process against the Admiral, and his accomplices.

de Lesae Majestatis, Chief Head and principal Author of a Conspiracy against
the King and his Kingdom, ordained that his Body, if it could be found, if not,
his Effigies, should be drawn upon a Hurdle, and hanged upon a Ga^lows at the
Greve, from thence carried to the Gibbet at Mont-faucon, all Pictures of him to
be mangled and trampled under Foot by the Hangman, his Arms dragged at a
Horses Tail about the Streets of Paris, his Estate Confiscated, his Children
declared Plebean and Ignoble, Intestable and unworthy to hold any Office,
Dignity, or Estate in the Realm, his House of Chastillon razed, and an
Inscription set up there graved on a Copper Plate containing this whole
Sentence and Decree against him. It was added that from thence forward upon the
Four and Twentieth day of August should be yearly observed a general Procession
to render thanks to God for the discovery of that Conspiracy.

Briquemaut an old Gentleman, and Arnaud de Cavagnes a Master of Requests and
Chancellor of the Cause, being taken, after the Butchery, in a House where
they a while concealed themselves, were declared his accomplices, and Condemned
to the same punishment. They were drawn upon a Sledge to the Greve, and
Executed together with his Fantosme made of Straw, in the Mouth of which they
did not forget to stick a Tooth-picker. The King and Queen Mother stood at a
Window in the Town Hall, and beheld the Execution through a Tiffany Vail.

Two days after the King had been in Parliament, he put forth an Edict whereby
he assured the Huguenots, that what had been done, was not in hatred to their
Religion, but to prevent the wicked designs of the Admiral; and therefore that
every one of them should keep quietly in his own abode, and not make any
public Assemblies: but at the same time he wrote to the Governors of the
Provinces and Cities, that they should take the very same Course, and Treat
them as they had been at Paris.

During two Months, this horrible Tempest run over all France, more or less
Bloody, according to the disposition of the Countries and their Governors. It
was not so violent in Burgundy and Bretagne, because there were few Huguenots;
nor in Languedoc and Gascongne, because they were strong enough to defend
themselves: but it was very rough and cruel at Meaux, Troyes, Orleans, Nevers,
Lions, Toulouze, Bourdeaux and at Rouen, causing above Five and Twenty Thousand
Men to Perish in the Red Sea of their own Blood. At Thoulouze they hanged Five
Counselors of Parliament, in Scarlet Robes, upon an Elm in the Palace Yard.

Matignon and the Vicount d'Ortez did generously refuse to stain their Hands
with the Blood of their own Countrymen: the first preserved those of Alencon,
the other those of Bayonne. The horror of the Massacre brought back a great
many to the Roman Church: but the danger once over, most of them fell off
again, These and some others who timely foresaw the threatening Storm saved
themselves in diverse places; Sanc^rre, Rochel, Montauban, and the Sevenes,
proved places of refuge to a great number.

The very Morning of Saint Bartholomews day, the King had with his own Mouth
told the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde that he pardoned them, provided
they changed their Conduct and Religion. Afterward the whole Court labored
for their Conversion: the Example and Conferences of Rosiere a Minister of
Orleans afforded a very specious color and pretense for the King of Navarre
Catherine the Dowager of Conde, and the Princess Death, Mass, or the Bastile.
This Thunderclap beat down his haughty Spirit, and compelled him to follow the
Examples of the rest. They were all absolved of the Crime of Heresy by the
Cardinal de Bourbon; and that they might not be able to Retract, they were
obliged to write themselves to his Holiness.

The Court of Rome and the Council of Spain were filled with unexpressible Joy
upon the Tidings of the Saint Bartholomew: the Pope went in Procession to Saint
Lewis Church to render thanks to God for that so happy Success, and a
Panegyrical act thereof was represented before King Philip, under the Title of
The Triumphs of the Church Militant. Both the one and the other of them
believed this bloody Butchery would have brought the Protestant Party very low,
and that their fall would make their own power rise to the desired pitch.
Indeed if the King had but had an Army in readiness, he might with ease have
made an end of the Huguenots: but he believed these Massacres had so quelled
them, that it was to no purpose to maintain one for that; Besides he must have
been obliged to give the Command of it to his Brother the Duke of Anjou; and
his growing too great was the only thing he had to fear.

Whilst the Queen Mother by the Advice of Birague and de Raise her Confidents,
who apprehended a War, as being ^itter to manage Intrigues, then draw a Sword,
amuses her self by Wyles and Artifices to subdue the remainders of the
Huguenots: those that had escaped the Bloodhounds resumed their Courage:
Rochel labors to Forti^ie it self; Montauban encouraged by the fortunate
Success of the Vesins, who with Five and Twenty Horse defeated two Hundred and
took Montluc's great Standard, shut up their Gates against the Kings Soldiers;
their Chiefs seized upon several little Places in Quercy, and Fifteen or Twenty
Castles in Rouergne, Lauraguez, Albigeois, and Foix; Millaud and Nismes in
Languedoc took the bit in their Teeths, some small Towns in the Mountains of
Vivarets and the Sevenes, Barricado themselves, and Anthony de Pleix Gremian
Seizes upon the City of Sousmieres.

Against so many Heads as sprung up afresh on every side the Kings Council took
the Sword again in hand, and raised three Armies. With one of them la Chastre
had order to besiege Sancerre; with the second Danville undertook to reduce the
Rebel Cities in Languedoc; and the third Commanded by the Marquess de Villars
Admiral of France, to subdue those in Guyenne. As for Rochel, they thought fit,
before they made use of Force, to make use of Mildness and Craft, as fearing
lest their despair should cast them into the Arms of the English. They sent
first therefore Biron to be their Governor, whom they guessed would be
acceptable to them, then when they had refused him, they forced Francis de la
Noue with Arguments of Knives and Daggers, to go thither and reduce them. They
did not receive him in quality of the Kings Servant, but as General to Command
their Army; which the King was content with, upon condition that if he could
not incline them to make a Peace, he should forsake them upon his first Summons.

Thus began the Fourth Civil War again. The Huguenots escaped from the Butchery
had scattered their fears amongst all the other Protestants. The City of
Strasbourg doubled their Guards, the Swiss made great Levies, and secured all
their Avenues, the German Princes and the Queen of England formed new Leagues
together: the Council therefore found it necessary to allay their Suspicions,
and palliate the Cruelty and Heynousness of the Fact. To this end they
dispatched Ambassadors to them, with relations well contrived, and forged, and
artificial propositions; they renewed the Treaty for Conquest of the
Low Countries with the Prince of Orange? they endeavored to soothe and sweeten
Queen Elizabeth, desiring her to be God-mother to the Kings Daughter, which she
accepted; and they began a third time to propound a Match between her and the
Duke of Alanson: which many attributed to the Queens vain Imaginations, who
being informed by certain Fortune Tellers, that all her Sons should Reign, by
consequence if it were in France, they must all die after one another,
struggled to alter the course of Fate, by seeking other Kingdoms for them in
Foreign Parts, and proceeded so far therein as to desire the Kingdom of Tunis
of the Turk for this last.

November a new Phenomena began to be observed in the Heavens, which seemed to
be a Star, because it was very Bright, was fixed to one certain place like the
real Stars, appeared at the same height and held the same motion. It made the
Figure of a Lozenge, with those of the Thigh and Breast of the Constellation
named Cassiopea. At first it equaled in magnitude the Planet Jupiter: but
diminished by little and little, and at Eighteen Months end quite disappeared.
The Huguenots interpreted this wonder to their advantage, and one of their
Poets dared to say, it was the Asterism of the Apotheose of the Admiral.

As soon as it began to appear in France a new Disease broke forth, indeed a
very strange and odd kind of Malady, for at every Tenth Year, it still doubled
its violence, causing most horrible Contorsions, and Dislocating every Joint,
till the year 1606. that it began to be less frequent and less cruel and
tormenting then before. It was called the (Billious Evil, or) Colic of Poitou,
because it reigned chiefly in that Country.

Huguenots did but little. La Chastre succeeding ill in his Attaques upon
Sancerre, at the end of Three Months, turned the Siege into a Blocade. Danville
instead of taking Nismes, as the Cities of Lions and Thoulouze did heartily
wish, because they paid and maintained his Army, set upon the little City of
Sous-Mieres, whether with design not to succeed, or otherwise, I know not: for
he knew very well they plotted the Ruin of his House, and he put as little
Confidence in the Kings Council, as they did in him. He therefore ruined his
Army before it, and raised the Siege after he had lost Two Thousand men, with
Henry de Foix Count de Candale, slain upon an Assault. This Lord had Married
his Sister, and brought him Twelve Hundred Gascons. Villars and la Valette
cleared Gascongne of several small Garrisons: but could not take Cossade, and
were constrained to disband their Troops, who lived so licentiously, that the
Commons rose up in Arms to fall upon them.

The greatest efforts were at the Siege of Ro^hel: Strossy and Biron had
invested it the preceding year, all the Forces of the Kingdom were come
thither, and Monsieur himself Arriving there in the Month of February, had
brought along with him, all that were bravest and greatest about the Court, the
Duke of Alencon Montpensier, all the Guises, the Duke of Nevers, and even the
King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde and the Marshall de Cosse, for fear lest
they should make some stir elsewhere in favor of the Huguenots. After several
fruitless Conferences, after that la Noue, not being able to persuade the
Rocheliers to submit, was come out of the Town, and they had chosen Six
Captains in his sted, Monsicur began to express his mind by the roaring Mouths
of his Cannon, having Four-score in Battery against them.

In this Siege it was made more manifest then in any other of these last Ages,
that there is nothing which the persuasion of (...) and Religion does not
overcome, and nothing that can overcome it. It lasted Eight Months, to reckon
from the time of the Blocade, the Baron de la Guard had begun within a Month
after Saint Bartholomew; the City during that time sustained Five and Thirty

The People labored with so much heat, that they raised a double Terrass and
dug a deep Retrenchment at the place where they battered the Town, before
they could make their breach; Besides their men were perpetually making
Sallies, the Women went along every where with them, some to Fight, others to
carry necessaries and refreshment, carry off and dress the wounded, and gather
up the Spoil, others again to throw kettles of scalding Liquor, or Oil, melted
Pitch, red hot Iron Hoops, Bricks, Stones, Timber*Loggs and the like upon the
Assailants heads.

Their Courage did not fail them, though the Assistance from England which
Montgommery was to have brought, failed them. After a long expectation, in mid-
March they appeared, but very Slender, for as much as the Marshall de Raise, as
well by the Intrigues he forged in England, as the Pensions the King bestowed
on Queen Elizabeth's Councillors, had notably hindered him from obtaining
B^ll-Isle. But hearing the Count de Raise was coming against him, with a dozen
Ships, he quitted it, after he had plundered it, and retired to the Isle of
Wight.

The Count de Raise, under pretense B^ll-Isle wanted some Lord to defend it,
managed his Interest so that the King by his Sovereign Authority, caused it to
be subtracted and dismembered from the demesne of the Abbey of Saint Croix de
Quimperlay, and erected it to a Marquisate to bestow it upon him.

During all the Siege of Rochel, those within enjoyed a perfect health, they
had established a very good order for the distribution of their Provisions, so
that they had enough for two Months longer when they were delivered; For though
they were but meanly furnished with Corn; they had great Stores of Flesh and
Salt-Fish, and the Sea showing her self Charitable and Merciful to that Town,
which she has ever looked upon as her Nurse-Child, threw upon the Owze
infinite quantities of Shel-Fish for the Subsistence and Relief of the Poor. On
the contrary, the Besiegers were under all sorts of inconveniences, the
neglect of discipline, and the desolation of the Country round about them, had
caused extreme scarcity of Provisions and Forage in their Camp, and a most
terrible Infection, which bred frequent and contagious distempers.

But the complement of all those Evils was their general Division, which held
the Royal Army in perpetual agitations, and ready to cut one another Throats
like Cadmus his Soldiers. There were of three sorts of People, the
Malcontents, the Gentlemen were most of them so with the Queen Mother who
governed all by two or three Strangers, Covetous, Proud and without Faith; the
Faithful, these were the Huguenots who had not quitted their Religion, but to
avoid the ruin of their Houses or for some Interest at Court, had followed
Monsieur; and the New ones, whom the fear of being Massacred had forced to go
to Mass, though they did not believe in it.

Out of some of each of these was a Club or Party made whom they named the
Politiques, and these had together agreed that without any more mention of
Religion, they would demand the Reformation of the State, and expulsion of
Strangers. Amongst the Catholics, the Montmorencies, Biron and Cosse were the
Chief Heads: these were linked together above a Twelve month before the Saint
Bartholomew. The Duke of Alencon a Prince ambitious and unquiet, despised for
his low Stature and his ill Mien, had desired to be one, and having in his
tender Youth taken some Impression of the New Religion from those that Educated
him, had tied himself in strickt Amity with the Admiral, believing by that
means to make a Party strong enough to equal the Credit of the Duke of Anjou,
and get some share in the Gov^^^ment; To which he was thrust on by the Ambition
of his Favorites, and by his Sister Margarets Spleen, much offended the Duke
of Anjou slighted her after he highly cherished her.

Diverse considerations proceeding from jealousy, suspicions and fear, had
withheld the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde from joining with him
whilst they were at Court: but they came on with more boldness when they were
in the Camp. Henry de la Tour Vicount de Turenne, at that time a Catholic and
already very knowing and subtle, though but young, was the contriver of their
Association. Being all hot headed rash young Men, many Designs were propounded
as strange as bold. The King having had some hint, gave order to Pinard
Secretary of State, to enjoin the Duke not to leave the Camp upon pain of
Incurring his Indignation; The Duke sending him back without any answer,
because he would not produce his Order, the Kings Council took such an Alarm,
that the King apprehending some dangerous surprise, wrote to the Duke of Anjou
to hasten the taking of Rochel, because he had need of his Forces about his
Person. This was the cause he made so many Assaults unseasonably, and lost so
many Men.

Now as both the one and the other were in an extreme Perplexity, Arrives the
News from Poland, which opened them a way to go off with Honor. The Bishop of
Valence had gained the Affections of the Polanders, by means of Balagny his
na^ural Son, before the death of King Sigismond, the last Prince of the House
of Jagellons. When he was dead, which happened the Seventh of July in the year
1572. he parted from Paris the Seventeenth day of August following and went
thither himself. The Queen Mother and the Duke of Anjou apprehended nothing
Anjou was Elected King: but as the Heads of two of those four Factions that
were amongst them, were Calvinists, they obliged the French Ambassadors to
promise them several Conditions in favor of that Religion; particularly that
they should leave all those Cities at Liberty which were Besieged.

Upon the News of this Election and the Arrival of the Polish Ambassadors who
came to fetch their new King, the Duke of Anjou made them give some fresh
Assaults, and then renewed the propositions for accommodation: The Rochellers
refused to hearken to any thing unless all the other Cities of their Party were
comprehended, and they were fain to yield to them in this point, unless for
Sancerre, whose Surrender was hourly expected. The Articles were all resolved
upon the Five and Twentieth of June, the Ratification was brought back some
days after with an Edict of Pacification, which was more restrictive by much
then the preceding ones, for it allowed only Liberty of Conscience, but no
public exercise, excepting in the Cities of Rochel, Nismes, and Montauban*

It was not in their Power to obtain the same advantage for Sancerre; the King
under color it belonged to a particular Lord, whose right he could not
infringe, refused to grant them any more but the Liberty of Marriages and
Christnings. So that although for four Months past the scarcity of Provisions
grew daily to a most-horrible Extremity, yet they resolved to perish rather
then not enjoy the same Conditions which the rest had. They fed upon the most
unclean Creatures, and upon such Herbs as Beasts themselves refuse to taste, as
also Parchment and Leather; and to say all in a word, they surprised a Father
and a Mother feeding upon their own Daughter that had been starved to death:
Whilst they were in this most lamentable State, and yet would not think of a
Surrender, the Ambassadors from Poland, who Arrived in the beginning of
August, got composition for them: but they had no other advantages for their
Religion, then what was general. So that the Cruel and Voluntary death of Two
Thousand of those unhappy Wretches, served only to Signalize to all future Ages
their too long and fatal obstinacy.

In the Treaty of Rochel, it was Stipulated that the Rochellers should entreat
the Duke of Anjou to come into their City: but that he should not enter. So
that after the most eminent had been with him to request it, he dismissed his
Army and went on Board his Galleys, visited the adjacent Islands, thence Sailed
to Nantes and so returned to Court, being every where received in quality of a
King. Thus ended that Famous Siege, where the King lost Twelve Thousand Men,
and a great many Persons of Note, the most remarkable being Claude Duke of
Aumale who was Slain with a Cannon Shot.

The Polish Ambassadors who were Twelve in number, and for their Chief had the
Bishop of Posna, Arrived at Mets the Five and Twentieth of July, made their
Solemn entrance into Paris on the Third day of September, and the Tenth
Castellans of the Kingdom, was opened and read aloud by one of the Ambassadors.
The King having given them very many civil thanks rose from his Seat and went
to embrace the King of Poland his Brother, the other Princes and Noblemen then
present went afterward to Congratulate him and pay their Respects; He kissed
the Duke of Al^ncon and the King of Navarre, and treated the others with more
or less Ceremony according to their quality.

I shall say nothing of the Feastings and Balets wherewith the Queen Mother
entertained them: those are the Abortives of Luxury and Prodigality, the
remembrance of which ought to last no longer then the smell of the meat, and
noise Poland made his entrance into Paris by the Gate Saint Amoine with a
Suitable Magnificence. It was looked upon as an ill Omen that his Heralds
mistook in their blasoning the Arms of his New Kingdom.

Charles who had taken up a strong Resolution he would Reign himself, and
withdraw that Authority he had imprudently committed to his Mother, hastened his
departure with great impatience, every hour seeming a tedious year: but the
more he pressed, the more delays the other still sought out. It was not the
delights only of the Court, his Mothers tenderness, the almost Royal Authority
his Command had placed him in as Generalissimo of the Army's, and the hope of
succeeding to the Crown, which ever seemed near at hand, because the King had
no Child, that detained him in France: the violent Love he had for the Princess
of Conde, was a stronger tie then all these. The Duke of Guise who had Married
the Sister, soothed and served him, though to no purpose, in his passion, and
by that means had gained the Princes favor so entirely that he could not have
lived a moment without him.

Seven or Eight days were past and the King of Poland went not, though all his
Equipage were ready and his Goods laden. The King attributes it to the Guise
withheld him still upon hopes of a sudden enjoyment, and offered him Fifty
Thousand men to defend him from the wrath of his Brother. At Three days end
the King verily believing the Queen his Mother was the cause of his delay, and
that it was to hatch some dangerous Conspiracy, caused his Closet Door to be
rudely shut against her, and resolved to prevent their designs by some others
which no doubt would have been very Tragical.

The Peril was Evident both for her and her Son, yet notwithstanding she could
hardly resolve to part with him. The King would needs Conduct him to the
Frontiers, rather to hinder him from Cantonizing himself in any of the
Provinces, then out of any Affection. He could not accompany him so far as he
desired, but was forced to stop at Vitry in Partois: for in a few days after
he had menaced his Mother, he was seized with a lingering but Malignant Fever,
which made him very giddy in his Head, and sick at Heart almost every Minute.

The Queen Mother with the Duke of Alencon and the King of Navarre Conducted
him as far as Blamont in Lorraine. There the Mother and the Son took their
Leaves of each other, amidst their Embraces, Sobbs, Sighs and Tears, she most
imprudently let fall these words, Farewell my Son, you shall not stay there
long; which being overheard by several, and quickly divulged, did much
increase the sinister suspicions they had of the Kings Malady, though others
attributed it to his constitution which was of adust Choler, and to the
violent exercises he used as Hunting, Riding the great Horse, playing at Tennis
Five or Six hours together, hammering and forging of Iron: which had so
overheated his mass of Blood, that he slept but little, and had sometimes Fits
like those that so much afflicted Charles VI.

King Henry after his departure from Blamont, having Traveled cross all
Germany, Arrived at Miezrich the first City of Poland, about the end of the
Month of January. He had in his Train the Dukes of Nevers and Main, the
Marquess d'Elbcuf, the Count de Raise, lately made Marshall of France, Roger de
Saint Lary Bellegarde, Ten or Twelve other Lords of Note, and above Five
Hundred of the bravest Gentlemen, besides these, several Men of the Gown,
amongst others Bellievre Ambassador of France to him, Vincent Laure Apostolic
Nuncio, and Pibrac the Kings Attorney in the Parliament of Paris.

All the Princes through whose Territories he passed, strove to pay him the
honor due to his Birth and Dignity: there was none but Frederic Count Palatine
of the Rhine, that Treated him otherwise. That Prince one of the gravest of his
time, desiring to make the young King and his bloody Council know, the
Injustice of the Massacres, received him after a manner not much obliging, and
took pleasure in putting him into some apprehension of a most terrible Revenge.

At first that Noble and Majestic Air which outwardly appeared in all his
Actions, and the Profusion he made with both hands, got him the passionate Love
of the Nobility, and adoration of the People: but soon after the
discomposedness of his Mind proceeding from Vapors of the Spleen, his
Melancholy for not receiving so early as he wished the News he expected from
France, a disgust of the Manners and Conversations of those People, rendered him
un-easie to himself and to his Subjects. He sought for solitude in his own
Closet, communicated himself to none but his Favorites, was sad and silent:
but that which aggravated Anne Sister of the Deceased King, ill-favored and
old, whose dis-agreeable aspect did but more increase those Flames in his
Breast; first kindled at Paris by the bright Eyes of the charming Princess of
Conde.

There was some likelihood that his departure from France would contribute
much toward the calming of the Affairs in the State; That the fears of the
Huguenots who dreaded him and his Favorites, ceasing, their emotions would
cease likewise; That the Queen Mother having none now to rely upon would be
forced to obey in her turn, and that her Italians who excited the public
hatred, and perverted the Just and Ancient Laws of Government to Introduce a
new and Tyrannical Power, would loose their Credit and Interest. But on the
contrary the Huguenots believing themselves the Stronger, had not laid down
their Arms in Languedoc, but being confirmed and encouraged in their Assembly
of Millaud, and afterward in those of Montauban and Nismes, they became more
audacious in their demands than if they yet had their Admiral at the Head of
Thirty thousand Men to fight their Battles; And besides the Duke of Alencon and
the Politiques believing they were now Masters of all by the absence of the
Duke of Anjou, would needs dispose of things as they pleased.

The Duke d'Alencon ready to embrace any Enterprise without consideration, and
to give it over as lightly without thinking, forged several in his own head:
but chiefly two amongst the rest, the one to undertake the Lieutenancy of the
War in the Low Countries against the Spaniards, and the King would gladly have
sent him thither to ridd his hands of such a turbulent and restless Spirit; the
other was to demand the General Lieutenancy as the Duke of Anjou had it. The
Marshall de Montmorency was of opinion he should stick to the latter, and
earnestly desired it for him, with such persuasive Arguments and Reasons, that
the King thought fit to grant it.

Anjou out of the Kingdom, studied to break his measures, and desired the
Lieutenancy for the Duke of Lorrain, who had Married the Fondling of all her
Daughters. Now when she found the King had promised it to the Duke of Alencon,
she contrived the Matter so well, that instead of a Patent, he only made a
Declaration by word of Mouth, and gave Letters under the Privy Seal to some
Governors, showing thereby plainly enough he meant to recall his Word, as he
soon after did, and conferred that eminent Title upon the Duke of Lorrain.

In the mean time the Duke of Alencon had contracted a most particular tie with
the Huguenots, and had promised to take them into his Protection. The King of
Navarre, and the Prince of Conde were entered into this League, the Politic
Catholics were likewise joined with them. Tore and the Vicount de Turenne
managed the intrigues, and all of them together demanded an Assembly of the
general Estates. The Queen Mother, that she might amuse them, had assigned an
Assembly of the Notables at Compiegne, to deliberate whether it would be
expedient to call them; and when they saw they could not make their Party
strong enough at Court, they resolved to retire to Sedan; where the Duke of
Bouillon had promised to give them reception.

Huguenots had promised themselves so great advantage by the Duke of Alencon,
that they had resolved to take up Arms over all the Kingdom at the latter end
of the Carnaval, Rochel it self was born along with this Torrent, and had for
that purpose elected la Noue for their General. This Man the Night between
Shrove-Tuesday and Ash Wednesday, surprised Mesle and Lusignan by Escalado, as
Giron de B^ssay, who brought Twelve hundred Men from Bearn, took Fontenay, and
the Lord de la Case in Saintonge, Royan, Talmont, and four or five other little
Places. In Daupfine Montbrun seized upon Lorial and Liwron, the which he
repaired. In Normandy Coulombieres and some Gentlemen of the Country, upon the
hopes of greater Troubles at Court, and of having the Duke of Alencon shortly
with them, seized upon Saint Lo; Montgommery, who being hated in France, and
unwelcom in England, kept himself close, and under shelter of the Islands of
Jersey and Guernsey, sided with them, took Carentan and Valognes, and set all
the Country thereabouts under Contribution.

March, that la No^e had made the Huguenots resolve to take up Arms, it was
likewise resolved that John de Chaumont Guitry should draw near Saint Germains
en Lay, with as many Horse as he could get privately together, to receive and
bring with him the Duke of Alencon, and the two Princes. But it happened, by
whose fault it is not known, that Guitry anticipated the Assignation by at
least Ten days; so that the Duke of Alencon being fearful and irresolute, could
not determine with himself to forsake the Court so suddenly, and la Mole his
Favorite judging so great a design could not be long concealed, went and
discovered it to the Queen Mother. About Midnight behold an Alarm over all the
Court: The King sends for the Duke of Alencon, and the King of Navarre, the
first tells all, not caring what became of those he had employed: The other
taxed neither him nor any Friend. They give out there is a Design upon the
King's Person: The Men of the long Robe especially, and the Women hurry to
Paris all Night, and the Queen her self to render the Princes more odious,
flies in great disorder: However the King went not till the next day, and
lodged himself at the Bois de Vincennes, whither he carried the Duke of Alencon
and the King of Navarre, not yet as Prisoners, but carefully observed.

Thus the Huguenots fell very short in their accounts; and besides, in a Month
after they set out Three Armies to destroy them in the Provinces of Normandy,
Poitou, and Languedoc. Matignon Commanded the first, the Duke of Montpensier
the second, the Prince Daufin his Son the third. Montpensier went and cooled
his heels before Fontenay: but Matignon invested Montgommery in Saint Lo's,
from whence making his escape, he pursued and besieged him in Donfront so
straightly that he constrained him to Surrender, giving him assurance for the
lives of his Men, but nothing more then ambiguous and random Promises for his
own. This fell out, four or five days before the Death of the King.

From thence Matignon returned to the Siege of Saint Lo, carrying him thither
to persuade Coulombieres who was within to Surrender: but the other reproached
him of Cowardice, and put himself courageously in the breach, and his two Sons
on either side of him, not above Fourteen or Fifteen years of Age, both having
Javelins in their hands, to Sacrifice, said he, all his Blood for the Truth of
the Gospel. He died there with his Sword in hand: but Fortune or Pity saved the
lives of his two Sons; Guitry afterward making his Courage submit to his
Prudence, gave up Carentan, and Lorges Son of Montgommery was detained
Prisoner, but escaped by the favor of one of the Catholic Commanders.

As to Languedoc, the Queen Mother who was more bent against Danville, than
against the Huguenots themselves, had contrived to ridd her self of that Lord,
by the means of James de Crussol Duke d'Vzez his Capital Enemy, before the War
began in those Countries. Some intercepted Letters, giving him notice thereof,
he designed to make himself Master of the Province: but proceeded so slowly,
that he could only seize upon Montpellier, Lunel, Beaucaire, and Pezenas. He
was not the less noted for it at Court: Martinengue showed an Order to all the
Province, whereby the King dismissed him of his Government, and forbid the
People to own him, or the Soldiers to obey him.

In the Spring time, when the Humors overflow, the King's Distemper which had
been as it were laid asleep during the Winter, awaked and made the Queen
sufficiently understand it was high time to seize upon and secure all those
that might oppose or disturb her Regency, particularly the Mareschals de
Montmorency and de Cossee. To this end she ordered a Commission to be given to
Christopher de Thou first President, and to Peter Hennequin a President
likewise, to inform themselves diligently about the Conspiracy of St. Germains,
thereby to involve them.

La Mole a Favorite to the Duke of Alencon, and the Count de Coconas an
Italian, whom he had lately introduced to the Acquaintance and Confidence of
that Prince, were arrested. The first denied all, the other flattered with the
vain hopes of getting his Pardon, and a great Reward besides, told a great deal
more than indeed he knew. The Duke of Alencon and the King of Navarre were also
examined: The first answered like a Criminal stuttering and trembling; the
other more like an Accuser than one accused, with such reproaches as put the
Queen Mother out of Countenance.

At la Mole's was found an Image of Wax, which one Cosmo Rugiero a Florentine
and famous Quack, had made for him to Charm a young Damsel with whom he was in
Love. The Queen Mother would needs have it be believed that it was Coconas with
him. It was said, that two Princesses who were in love with them, caused their
Heads to be stolen, and Embalmed them to preserve them as long as they could.
Another of their Accomplices was broken upon the Wheel, and Rugier sent to the
Galleys. The Queen Mother very credulous in Matters of Divination and Sorcerers
released him some time after to make use of him in his Art.

The Mareschals de Montmorency and de Cosse were highly accused by those
wretches when they were put upon the Rack: nevertheless a Presumption of their
own innocence did so far blind them, that they repaired immediately to Court to
justify themselves, not considering that those are ever guilty who are in the
hands of their Enemies, and that under their circumstances, Imprudence is the
most Bastille, the Parisians expressing so much Joy, that they received them
with Shouts, and provided Eight hundred men to be a Guard upon them. There was
an Order likewise to Conde, who was at Amiens in his Government of Picardy: but
he went out of the Town in a disguise, and having met in his way with Tore a
Brother of the Marshall de Montmorencie's, escaped to Strasburg, where he
abjured the Catholic Religion in the open Church, and resumed the Protestant.

King Charles after the Siege of Rochel, having taken the Government of Affairs
into his own hands, showed himself very desirous to ease the People, and maugre
the advice of those whose pretext for Oppression was the public Necessity, he
discharged them this year from a Third of the Tailles, and kept up but three
Companies of the Regiment of Guards about him. He had resolved to turn all
those out of his Court that were advisers for the Massacre, though he otherwise
mortally hated the Huguenots, to leave the administration of Justice to his
Parliaments, that of War to his Mareschals, and only to himself reserve all
Affairs of State, to humble the Houses of Guise and Montmorency, and to lay
aside all his vain Divertisements of Hunting, Gaming, and Women, to apply
himself to Business, and at his spare hours to the Study of the Noblest
Sciences, as his Grandfather the great King Francis had formerly done.

It were to be wished that Sovereigns would be as much concerned to complete
and carry on the brave Designs their Predecessors often Project when they are
dying, Charles conceived all these, he consumed by a slow fire, and visibly
melted and wasted away more and more every moment; at length the violence of
his Distemper cast him upon his Bed in the Bois de Vincennes the Eight day of
May. The Queen Mother to color that violence wherewith she had Usurped the
Government with some lawful Title, labored to have the Regency left to her.
Whilst he had yet any remainders of strength and vigor left, he would allow
her no more but only some Letters to the Governors of Provinces, which
imported, that during his Sickness, and in case God should dispose of him, he
would they should obey her in all things till the return of the King of Poland:
but when he was brought to extremity, and in that condition wherein every thing
becomes indifferent to him that is leaving the World, she caused other Writings
to be drawn, which authorized her their Regent, obliged him to declare to the
two Princes that such was his Will, and managed her Business so effectually,
that the Parliament and the Magistrates of Paris, sent their Deputies to
entreat her to accept of the Regency.

Nature did struggle most wonderfully during the two last Weeks of this King's
life, he started and stretched himself with extreme violence, he tossed and
tumbled incessantly, the Blood burst out of every Pore, and from every channel
of his Body; After he had suffered thus a long time, he sunk into a weak and
fainting condition, and gave up his Soul between the third and fourth hour
Afternoon, on the Thirtieth day of May, being the Pentecost. He had lived Five
and twenty years wanting One

He was of a becoming Stature, only a little stooping, carried his Head
somewhat awry, had a forbidding and piercing look, high-nosed, his color pale
and livid, black Hair, his Neck somewhat long, round chested, his whole Body
well shaped, save only his Legs were of the biggest. He prided himself in his
profound Dissimulation, and the skill of knowing Men's Natures by their
Physiognomy. His Courage was great, his Spirit lively and cleer-sighted, his
Judgment penetrating

Those that governed him had imprinted a most wicked custom of Swearing in him,
which he turned into his ordinary Language; they had likewise taught him to
reprove and taunt his Grandees and Parliaments: Had he lived, themselves must
have felt the Effects of their wise Instructions. To divert him from applying
himself to Business, they had made him by Custom in love with Hunting, Music
and Poetry, and endeavored to draw and allure him to the Debaucheries of Wine
and Women: but observing once that Wine had so invaded his Understanding as to
make him commit some Violence, he abstained from it all the rest of his life;
And for Women, having met with some inconvenience from some belonging to his
Mother, he took an Aversion, and meddled but little with them.

He made Poems which were well enough for those times, and often held Academy
with five or six Poets: it is believed he would have quitted those Amusements
for more solid Exercises if he had lived. He delighted so much in Hunting, that
at Table, nay, when in Bed, the freak would often take him to call his Dogs.
He composed a Book of Hunting or Venery, which he dictated to Villeroy.

He had no Children by Queen Elizabeth of Austria his Wife, but one Daughter
named Mary-Elizabeth who died in Anno 1578. aged Six years. The Mother some
while after the Death of her Husband retired to Prague in Bohemia, where she
died Anno 1582. It is observed as a Pattern of her Goodness and Justice, that
she would never sell any Offices belonging to those Countries assigned France
would rather have occasion to commend in their Natural Princes, than in
Strangers.

King Charles had also a Natural Son by Mary Touchet, Daughter of John Touchet,
Particular Lieutenant in the Presidial of Orleans, and Mary Mathy, whom he had
Married to Francis Balsac d'Entragues, Governor of that City. This Son born in
the year 1572. bare the same Name as his Father, and was first Grand Prior of
France, then Count of Auvergne and de Lauraguais, and after Duke of Angoulesme,
and Earl of Ponthieu.

He erected two Dutchies and Pairies, the Marquisate of Mayenne in the Country
of Main, for Charles de Lorrain Brother to the Duke of Guise, the County of
Ponticure in Bretagne for Sebastian de Luxembourg, the Vicounty d'Vzes in
Languedoc for Anthony de Crussol; As simply Dutchies, the Vi-county of Touars
in Poitou for Lewis de la Trimouille, and the Seigneury of Rouanais for Claude
Gouffier Boisy.

The same Vices of Wantonness, Luxury, Impiety, and Magical Abominations which
reigned under Henry II. triumphed over Charles IX. with an uncontrouled
License: But besides those Disorders, Treacheries, Poisonings, and Assassinates
became so common, that it was made a Sport to take away the life of any man, if
they could reap but the least advantage by it. I do not speak of that
Murdering and Bloody Spirit which had possessed the Minds of men divided in
Opinions of Religion.

Before this Reign, it was wont to be the Man's part both by Example and
Courtship, to persuade and tempt the Women to Galanteries: but now since
amorous intrigues were joined with the greatest Mysteries of State, the Women
ran after the Men: The Husbands laid the Bridle in their Necks either out of
Complaisance, or Interest, and besides those that delighted in Variety, found
their own Satisfaction in this liberty, which instead of one Wife furnished
them with an Hundred.

As to Magic, it is certain the Queen Mother had puzzled her Brain, with those
impious Curiosities; She was so fond as to wear Characters and Spells about
her. There are some yet preserved in being, which are marked upon a thin Skin,
supposed to be of a Still-born Child. People of vain and light Fancies were
easily inclined to follow her example: A Priest named des Escheles, who was
Executed at the Grove, for having conversed with Evil Spirits, accused Twelve
hundred more of the same Crime. So says my Author, I know not whether we may
believe him; for such as have once filled their heads with these Crude and
Melancholy Imaginations, thinks every little Trick to be the Operation of
Demons and Sorcerers.

Interregnum of Three Months.
Charles his Eyes were closed up by the cold hand of Death, the Queen Mother
wrote to all the Governors that he had left her the Regency, and obliged even
the Duke of Alencon, though a Captive as he then was, to give his Declaration:
But it was admired that in a Postscript she gave an account of the Sickness
and Death of the King, saying, She did thus to take away all such Scruples, as
some might have conceived.

The same day she dispatched a Courier into Poland, and the next day a second,
to give notice thereof to her Dear Son, and entreat him earnestly to return as
soon as he possibly could. Those from the Prince of Conde had got the start of
hers, and given so hot an Alarm at Cracovia, that the King being narrowly
observed, it might be thought no easy task to steal away from so many Eyes as
were upon him.

The Queen Mother in the mean time was put to no little trouble to preserve her
Authority amidst that great Confusion of Affairs, and the general Hatred of all
Men. Her Enemies having lost all respect, together with their fears, defamed
her with biting Satyrs, the People talked insolently of her Conduct; and these
Universal Murmurings made it plainly appear that all were ready to run open
mouth upon her. Notwithstanding all this loud noise did not much startle her,
she having the Heads of every Faction in her Power and Custody: The Mareschals
were strongly guarded in the Bastille by City Companies, who every day relieved
each other: And for the two Princes, she had removed them from the Bois de
Vincennes to the Louvre; where she not only secured them by Soldiers, who
carefully watched their Motions, and by Windows double barred, about all their
Lodgings; but also by the Charms of her beauteous Maids, into whose Apartment
they had liberty of access at all hours, to make their Chains seem the lighter,
and the time of their Captivity less tedious and rude.

Matignon had with much regret put Montgommery into her hands, the Parliament
was commanded to make his Process. The Death of King Henry II. which she
desired to revenge upon this Nobleman, was rather his Misfortune than his
Crime, what he had acted during the three Civil Wars, was pardoned by the
Edicts of Pacification, so that they could charge him with nothing but this his
last taking up of Arms; nevertheless, in his Sentence they added, That it was
for carrying the English Colors when he came to relieve Rochel. He was
Condemned to be Drawn in a Tumbrel to the Greve, and there to lose his Head,
his Posterity to be degraded of their Nobility.



This great example of Severity, was rather to intimidate the factious about
the Court, than the Huguenots: for after the Saint Bartholomew, nothing could
frighten them. The Juncture was very favorable, but they had no Princes nor
Persons of Quality to Head them, they wanted Money, and the People in their
great Cities, as Nismes, Montauban, and Rochel would not confide in the
Nobility. And to say truth, most of the Gentry sought but to be hired, if they
could but have Money enough bid for their Service.

She did not think fit to attaque them toward Poitou, nor Guyenne, they being
there too numerous and strong; but she renewed some Negociations with la Noue
and their other Chiefs, which concluded in a Truce for the Months of July and
August. During that time they had leave to hold at Millaud a general Assembly
of the Provinces of Guyenne, Daufine, and Languedoc, to consult of some
Expedients for the Treating of a general Peace.

Gramont had been sent into Bearn to reduce it to the ancient Religion. Being
in the Castle of Haguenau, where he assembled the Nobility, the young Baron of
Arros surprised him there in the boldest manner that can be possibly imagined.
This Gentleman prompted to so desperate an Undertaking by the Persuasions of
Gramont Prisoner.

The Army of the Prince Daufin being entered into Daufine, a Party of his
Vanguard was cut off at the Bridge de Royans by Montbrun, who afterward
failed in an Enterprise upon Die. The Prince Daufin had a Design to clear that
Country of all those Places the Huguenots held there, he gained two or three of
them, then ran himself aground before Livron, a little paltry Place situate
upon a Hill in the Diocese of Valence; He laid Siege to it about mid- June, and
was forced to raise it again about a Month after.

Danville, whose irresolutions at last determined upon the Apprehensions of the
Dangers and Ambuscades the Queen Mother was ever contriving against him, to
make an Union with the Huguenots; the other by the Prince of Conde, who being
gotten to Heidelberg, easily obtained of the Elector Palatin, that Casimir his
youngest Son should raise some Horse and Foot for him, provided he would
advance ready Money; without which, neither Virtue, nor Religion, nor Skill,
can do any thing in that Country.

The News of this being brought into France, did marvellously encourage the
Huguenots, and made the Assembly of Millaud Elect him for their Chief General,
a Declaration whereof they sent him to Neuf-Chastel in Swisserland, in which
they did not forget to hint to him that he must be obliged to follow the
reiglements of the Assembly, and act nothing without the advice of a Council
they would appoint for him.

La Noue found to his cost that his Prudence had been overreached by a too
great desire of a Peace: for during the Truce, the Duke of Montpensier having
recruited his Army, which was much increased by the Normandy Forces, had like
to over-whelm the Rochellers. He took all the little Places in Poitou, and
after them the City of Fontenay it self, even in a time of Conference about
Capitulation. This blow did very much astonish the Rochellers, Fontenay being
the Key of all the Commodities they fetched out of the Lower Poitou; and yet it
wrought no more than the Exhortations of la Noue, to rowze them up to do their
utmost for their own Preservation, so agreeably were they flattered by the
Queen Mother with the vain hopes of Peace.

In the other Provinces they made a better defense. In Languedoc they surprised
the City of Castres, and in Agenois, though very weak, they would not let
Clairac nor Mont^^anquin be torn from them, their Courage fortifying those
places, as the Divisions of Cosse and la Valete, betwixt whom the Queen had
shared the Government, weakened the Catholics Army.

The Couriers from the Queen Mother arrived in Poland the Fourteenth and the
Fifteenth of June. The King took his Bed the better to consult on what he was
to do; There were two things propounded, the one to delude the Polanders, and
to get out of that Country at soonest, according to the pressing desires June,
got to Peizna, the first Town in Austria, and from thence to Vienna.

His evasion being known, the Polanders ran in multitudes to his Palace, a
Troop of Four hundred Horse spurred after, but could not overtake him. The
French that were left behind at Cracovia ran the hazard of being knocked on the
Head, the Senate being assembled, gave order to stop the chiefest of them:
Nevertheless, Charles Danzay, whom Henry had appointed for Ambassador to
Denmark* coming to them, and giving some Reasons for his so sudden Departure,
allayed their first fury. Then by the friendly Assistance of some Palatins whom
the King had Charmed by his worthy Qualities, he so well managed those fiery
Spirits, that they sent him back all his Equipage and Domestic Servants,
humbly entreating him to return again, which he excused upon the Information he
said he had received, that the Prince of Conde was ready to enter upon France
with an Army of Thirty thousand Germains.

He spent Six days at Vienna, the Emperor entertained him with as great
Affection as Magnificence: Being glad he had quitted the Crown of Poland, to
which he aspired, and that the House of France let go an advantage which made
Isabella Widow of Charles IX. and advised him to let Peace enter with him into
his Kingdom, showing him it would be the only means to obliterate the horrid
Idea's of the Massacres out of the Minds of those People, and to lay all the
fault and load thereof upon the late King's Counselors. The Emperor's two
Sons, Rodolph King of the Romans, and the Archduke Ernestus, conducted him to
the Frontiers of Friuli; He chose that Road to avoid all Attempts of the
Elector Palatin, and the reproaching sight of the other Protestant Princes.

All what Ingenuity and Magnificence could contrive that might appear curious
or obliging, was made use of by the Venetians to Honor the greatest King of
all their Allies. In every City belonging to them, he was received as
Sovereign. Four Senators clothed in Scarlet Velvet Robes, received him at the
side of the Gulf, presented him as many Boats lined with the same, and one for
himself enriched with Gold and Azure, and hung within-side with Cloth of Gold
on a blew ground, carrying him to the Island Moran, famous for Glass-work,
where he lay that Night. The next day they put him aboard the Bucentauro, a
Vessel never used but upon great Ceremonies, about which flocked a world of
Gondola's, amongst the rest Two hundred not so much adorned by the riches of
the Gold and Silver Ornaments about them, as the Beauty of those fair Ladies
that sat in them. The Duke at his Landing in the City, presented him the
Canopy of State born by Six Procurators of Saint Mark, and conducted him to the
Palace they had prepared for him.

During Nine days he Sojourned at Venice, the Dukes of Savoy, Ferrara, and
Mantoua, who were come thither on purpose to honor him, accompanied him every
where: The Seigneury defrayed both him, and all his Train, and caused a Hundred
young Gentlemen to serve him all the while. He went to the Senate to see the
Method of their Balotting, was placed above the Duke, and performed all acts of
Sovereignty. After this he saw the Arsenal with much Admiration, but the Ladies
with more Pleasure, and even the Curtesans, whom he found as Divertising as
they were Beautiful: But some one amongst them was too Prodigal of a Favor
which he repented all his life the having accepted it.

After those Nine days of Enchantments (so he called them) he took his farewell
of the Senate, and was accompanied by four Senators to Rodigino, the last place
of the Signoria. From thence he was conducted to Ferrara, by that Duke's
Cavalry, then having staid there Two days, he Embarked on the Po and went to
Turin: But first passed by Mantoua, at the entreaty of Duke William Brother to
the Duke of Nevers. Don Juan of Austria Governor of Milan, paid him the same
Honors in Cremona, and the other Cities of that Duchy where he passed; as if
he had been King of Spain himself.

He remained at Turin Eight or Nine days. The Duchess Margaret his Aunt, one
of the wisest and most accomplished Princesses of her Age* gave him the same
Counsel the Emperor had done, and the Duke presented Damville his Kinsman to
him, whom he had sent for expressly upon his Parol, that he might restore him to
his Favor. That Affection the King had otherwhile had for this Lord, revived
again: He made him lie in his own Chamber, and willingly gave ear to his Advice
for granting a Peace to the Huguenots, to ruin them afterward by such
Projects as he propounded, and to take all the Government of State Affairs into
his own hands. But the Queen Mother having some hint of it, sent Chiverny and
Fifes, who soon destroyed all he had been Building in the King's Mind, and
represented him so odly, that the King would have had him seized. The Duchess
finding this, gave notice of it to the said Lord, and the Duke sent a strong
Convoy along with him to Nice, whence his Galleys carried him into Languedoc.
When he found he was got clear, he Vowed he would never see the King more, but
in a Picture, nor did he break his Vow.

The becoming Civilities of the Duke, and kind Caresses of the Duchess, whose
graceful Presence, Wit and Royal Qualities, had yet preserved some Empire over
the French, and even over her Nephews, were not useless to them. The King was
pleased, and being picqued with Generosity and Justice, promised to render up
Pig^orol, Savigliani, and Perugia to the Duke, who made it appear plainly to
him, that he could not detain them any longer, unless he chose rather Lions,
lest the Huguenots of Daufine should interrupt his Journey. He accompanied him
in Person, and staid there some days, but was called away again before he had
obtained the accomplishment of his Promises, having word brought him of the
Death of the Duchess his Wife, whom God called into the other World the
Fourteenth of September.

Henry III. King LXI.
Aged XXIII years, almost complete.
POPES,
GREGORY XIII. Ten years and Seven Months under this Reign. SIXTUS V. Elected
the 24th of April, 1585. S. Five years, Four Months, Three days; whereof Four
years, Twenty five days under this Reign.
September when King Henry arrived at Pont de Beauvoisin, the place which parts
the Territories of France, from Savoy. The Queen his Mother went thither to
meet him, and presented the Duke of Alenson, and the King of Navarre to him, to
be disposed of as he pleased. He received them with extraordinary coldness,
though they saluted him with the greatest Humility; Some hours afterward he
granted them Pardon and Liberty, but it was only in appearance, for he
appointed Guards who secretly observed them; and there were certain Ladies, who
ever held them in their amorous fetters, and denied them nothing, that they
might dive into the secrets of their very Souls. In the same place he made
Bellegarde a Marshall of France: he had promised him this Office whilst he was
in favor, but now he was not so; he could not keep that post above Fifteen
days, Du Gua had set him besides the Cushion, and got into his place.

One might, to speak properly, call the Reign of Henry III. the Reign of
Favorites, The softness of his Soul, and his carelessness left him wholly in the
hands of those People, who went on to enervate all that little virtue that was
left in him, and to dissolve him in voluptuousness: So that they obscured the
luster of all those brave actions, had been attributed to him, and would have
put the whole World in doubt, whether he had ever any real share in them, had
not some rays of truly Royal qualities, darted sometimes through all those
mists and foggs, and kept up his Reputation, Quelus, Maugiron, and St. Maigrin
were his first Minions: Afterward St. Luc, Arques, and the young la Valete,
then Terms, since named Bellegarde, and some others.

The Queen Mother was ravished to see him in those hands, because at first they
gave her an exact account of his most secret Thoughts, and whilst they amused
him, either in the Antichamber amongst the Ladies, or in his Closet, where he
spent whole days in consultation about the trimming of a Suit of Clothes, or
the fitting of a Ruff, the retained almost all the Authority, not foreseeing
that by little and little they would draw the greatest part even from her,
together with the affection of her Son.

Now that they might the more entirely posses him, they did persuade him not to
communicate himself so frequently to his Subjects as his Predecessors had wont:
but to keep himself behind the skreen, like the Eastern Monarchs, and not be
seen by French from making Remonstrances to him, and to make them understand,
that there was no other Law but his Will. Thereupon they wrought him to have a
high opinion of himself; deafned and confounded him with their flatteries, and
puffed him up with an opinion, that he was the greatest Prince in the World; that
he infinitely surpassed all the preceding Kings, that he had showed himself an
absolute Master in Politiques, even in his first Essay, and Apprentiship, and
that the prudence of the most knowing and experienced Statesmen, was but mere
ignorance in comparison of his.

Inebriated with these flattering persuasions, he established new forms of
Grandeur, set on foot again the Regiment of Guards of Ten Companies, (Charles
IX. a little before his death, had reduced them to three) caused Banisters to
be set round his Table, went rarely abroad in public, and always shut up in a
Litter, or a Boat adorned with Gold and Painting in his Promenade, upon the
smooth-faced River of Soane, and allowed the Grandees no more that credit of
recommending the little ones to him, no not themselves, but by the credit and
access of those Minions. There were no Favors but for them, they set all
Offices and Governments at a high price, to wrest them out of the hands of such
Noble Persons, who by the eminent Services of their Fathers, or their own
Merits had justly acquired them; A great many of the best qualified, finding
they were but little regarded, retired from Court male-contented; and then the
Favorites being at large, introduced that pernicious invention of Acquittances
for Money due, but never paid, etc.
Acquits Comptants, with which they have so often, and with impunity pillaged
and wasted the Kings Exchequer.

The Agents from the Duke of Savoy did mightily press for performance of the
Kings promise, the Council were divided upon it. The Duke of Nevers, Governor
for the King beyond the Alps, who was gone to the Bathes d'Acqui in Mon^^^rrat
for his wounds, sent a long Remonstrance to the King, to dissuade him from it.
His main Reasons, were the Right of Convenience, and Self-Interest, which he
confirmed by the examples of many Princes, who never did restore what was more
advantageo^s, if kept. The King much applauded his Zeal, but however, whether
prompted by generosity, and the honor of making good his Word, or that he
really thought Savoy, and ordained Henry Grand Prior of France his
Bastard-Brother, and Fises Secretary of State, to go and make the said
Evacuation. As for the Duke of Nevers, he not only demanded a discharge of his
Government beyond the Alps, and an Act, importing, That nothing of this
restitution should ever hereafter be imputed to him, nor to his; but likewise
made his protestations in the Council established in those foreign parts, and
in the Parliament of Grenoble, and obtained a Decree, that his Protest should
^e Registered in those Courts, and an In^^rument for his discharge should be
allowed him.

At the beginning of his Reign, the King made several excellent Regulations for
the Officers of his House, for those that were to come into his Chamber, the
times to give Audience, and Petitions to be presented to him. Touching these
last, he ordered the Petitioners should draw them Ticket-wise in few words,
which he would answer himself, then deliver them to a Secretary of State for
their dispatch. These Orders held but a short while, he grew weary of observing
them, and they left off presenting any Placets or Tickets to him, w^^n they
found it was but time lost, in addressing themselves to him, when such Grants
were disposed of by another power.

There were two parties in his Council, the one, who above all things labored
for Peace, and the Reformation of the State; the other were for exterminating
the Huguenots, at what rate soever. The Chancellor de L'Hospital had been once
the Head of the First, Paul de Foix, Christopher de Thou First President, and
Pibrac succeeded him in those Sentiments and Inclinations; Morvilliers was of
the Second, a very good Man, but addicted to new Devotions; and one that
followed the motions of Foreign Cabals, which having their rise in Spain, and
at Rome, made Religion subservient to the exaltation of their own Power. This
Second Party being found conformable to the interest of the Mother-Queen was
the more prevalent, and made them resolve on a War against the Hugnenots.

In Poitou, Montpensier besieged Lusignan, he could not take it till four
Months after, and demolished it. In Daufine his Son attaqued the little Town of
Pousin, which interrupted the commerce between Lions and Marseilles, by the
River Rhosne, as Livron hindered it by Land. The place being reduced to
extremity, St. Romain gets into it

Being just on the point to besiege Livron, the Queen Mother ordered the
Command of the Army to be given to the Marshall de Bellegarde: This was
because she would not have all the power in the House of Bourbon, and withal
she thought by this means to break off the correspondence and amity which was
between Bellegarde and Damville, whom she had undertaken to ruin. It was for
this purpose she carried the King to Avignon, the better to stir up Languedoc,
and entangle the said Lord in some artificial Negotiation.

In this perplexity and confusion of Affairs, Galantry was the most serious
occupation of the Court. By this means the Queen Mother bred and maintained
continual jealousies between the King of Navarre, and the Duke of Alenson; and
thought likewise to captivate the King her Son with Beauties Fetters. The Dame
de Chasteauneuf his ancient Mistress, and two other Maids belonging to the
Queen Mother, seemed to have some little share in his Heart: but it was the
Princess of Conde that Reigned in full possession there. He had resolved to
Marry her, and to that end, labored to vacate her Marriage with the Prince for
his crime of Heresy; for she continued still a Catholic, ever since the
dismal St. Bartholomew.

Though the Queen had neither persuasive Language, nor power enough to prevail
with him to lay aside this design; yet death came to her aid, and cutting the
thread of that fair Princesses Life, put an end to that pernicious prosecution,
leaving great cause of doubt to the more suspicious, how it should just fall
out at that very nick of time. The grief the King resented, was almost mortal;
he mourn^d three whole days without either eating or drinking. And when they
had prevailed with him to live, not by consoling him, but by pretending to
increase his sorrows; it was some time before he would cast his Eyes on any but
the most melancholy Objects, dark Rooms, dejected Countenances, wearing even at
the taggs of his Rubans, and on his Shooe-knots little Deaths-heads; then after
a while recovered himself all on a sudden, rowzed up his drooping Spirits, and
was so much ashamed of his own effeminate weakness, that he endeavored to
persuade the world, there must have been some enchantment in it.

Lions. During his stay at Avignon, the Court was afflicted for that of the
Cardinal de Lorrain. Some said, it came by a grievous cold he had taken by
walking barefoot in the Procession of Penitents; others imagined, it was from
the steams of some poisoned Flambeaux carried purposely before him.

1574. December. Emp. Amurat II. Son of Selim. II. Dead the 13 th of December. R.
Twenty years, and One Month. And Maximilian II.
Bellegarde in the mean time did not much advance before Livron, he was forced
to detache a party of his Men to go and make head against Montbrun, who very
much harassed Daufine. On the other hand Damville had besieged and taken St.
Gilles, whence the thundering of his Cannon was heard in Avignon; and
afterward having taken Aigues-Mortes by surprise, he threatened to pass the
Rhosne; insomuch as the King finding his Presence in that Country, only made
his Authority seem despicable, returned by way of Lions.

As he passed along the Camp that was before Livron, the besieged railed and
called after him in outrageous Language, and he had the displeasure of not
being able to revenge the insolency. His Forces were so shattered, that he gave
Orders to raise the Siege, spreading a report, that he wanted them to attend
and assist at his Coronation. Thus he stumbled at the very entrance into his
Kingdom, and gave his own A^thority and Power so rude a shock, as made it ever
after in a weak and staggering condition.

Lions about mid- January, arrived the 12 th of February at Reims, and was
Crowned three days after by the Cardinal de Guise, the Sea being vacant. The
Duke of Guise who was yet in Favor, had the precedence of the Duke of
Montpensier. This latter being come within two Leagues of Reims, resolved to
carry it this time, received an Order from the King, which forbid him coming
any nearer. The next day the King Married Lovisa, Daughter of Nicholas, Earl of
Vaudemont, paternal Uncle of Charles II. Duke of Lorrain; the Cardinal de
Lorrain had when living, made the first proposal for this Match.

When the King had made his entrance into Paris with his new Spouse, the
Deputies for the Protestant and Politic Party, came thither to discourse
concerning a Peace, having first consulted by their Envoyez, with the Prince of
Conde, who was at Basil. They demanded Right might be done them upon Ninety two
Articles, many of which sounded very boldly; but those that shocked most, were
the holding of the General Estates, the lessening of the Tailles, and reducing
them to the same Standard they were in under Lewis XII. and that exemplary
punishment should be inflicted upon Atheists and Blasphemers, and the Laws and
Ordonnances put in execution against Pailliardise, which provoked, and called
down the wrath of God upon France. This malicious censure rendered the Huguenots
more execrable at the Court, then either their Rebellions, or their Heresy.

These Conferences which lasted above Three Months, and the several
Negotiations, wherewith they endeavored to amuse the Rochellers and Damville,
were so far from healing all the suspicions, fears, and animosities in the
minds of either party, that they rather more increased and envenomed them. So
that the War continued every where. In the neighborhood of Montauban which was
invested by the Catholics, and delivered by Choupes, who marched thither with
the Forces of la Noue: In Auvergne, where Montal was defeated and slain by a
Dame, whom we may equal to the Amazones (this was Magdeline de Saint Neciaire
Vulgarly Senetaire.
Widow of Guy de Saint Exupery Miraumont, always followed by Threescore of the
bravest Gentlemen, who strove to do prodigious feats of Arms to merit her
favor); In Perigord, where Langoiran surprised, and cruelly sacked the City of
Perigueux; In Languedoc, where Damville did as much at Vzez, and at Alez; and
in Daufine where Montbrun gained a Battle against Gordes his enemy near Die,
and besieged him in that Town.

Some days after, going forth to meet some Forces that were coming to deliver
him, he was himself defeated, taken, and sent to the Parliament of Grenoble,
who made his Process, and condemned him to lose his Head. This was in
punishment for his having plundered the King's baggage, and making this
insolent reply to those that blamed him for it, That Gaming and War made all
men equal. Francis de Bonne Lesdiguieres, Daufine, and raised himself to a much
nobler height, by restoring a strict Military Discipline, then the other had
ever been able to do, by permitting all manner of Licentiousness.

I shall pass over in silence, those disturbances the Government of the
Marshall de Raise occasioned in Provence, and the two Factions which troubled
that Province, Carcistes, from the Count de Carces, Lieutenant for the King,
who was their Head; the other, Rasats Because he razed or shaved them to the
quick by his exactions.
, who opposed his exactions. Nor shall I mention some exploits of Montclue,
whom they had newly made a Marshall of France; For they were inconsiderable;
and after that, the ill-favored wound in his Face, by a Musket shot, at his
besieging of Rabasteins, for which he wore a Vizor-Masque, the Huguenots
dreading him no more then a Girl.

The Senate of Poland besought the King, with all the respect and deference
imaginable, that he would be pleased to return into that Country, if not, they
would proceed to the election of another. Pibrac, whom the Queen Mother had
sent thither to get the term prolonged, found they had passed a Decree, of the
Fourteenth of July, signifying that the Crown was vacant as by death, and that
the Estates should proceed to a new Election. Finding they were resolved upon
it, he thought it more becoming and decent to retire, then be spectator of the
affront they were going to do his Master. In the Diet they were divided into
two parties, whereof the one elected the Emperor Maximilian, the other
Sigismond Bathory, Prince of Transylvania, upon condition, he should Marry
Anne, Sister of the deceased King. This last more diligent then his Rival,
posted immediately to Poland, Married the Princess, and got himself into
Possession, which would have occasioned infinite troubles, if death had not
prevented it, by snatching Maximilian out of the World.

A Court overflowing with voluptuousness, and where all was steered by other
hands then the Sovereign Pilots, could not but be mightily agitated by the
continual intrigues of busy Women, and of Favorites. Du Gua and Souvre were
then the Alenson and the King of Navarre at variance, and to scatter some seeds
of jealousy between the King and his Wife, for fear she should make her self
Mistress of her Husbands Affairs, pursuant to the Councils of the Duke of
Guise. They had likewise frequent counterscuff^es with the brave Bussy
d'Amboise, Favorite to the Duk of Alenson, and with the Queen of Navarre, who
upheld the courage of that Prince, upon whom they were eternally putting their
little tricks.

It happened about this time the King fell sick, they made him believe he was
poisoned Navarre, and commanded him to rid his hands of that mischievous Man,
so he termed him: but instead of obeying him in his revenge, tho that were to
bring him one step nearer to the Throne, he abhorred it, and left the King the
time to repent it.

de Montmorency ran great risque of his Life: those that had been the occasion
of his confinement, having just cause to fear he would resent it, if he got out
of the Bastille, resolved to thrust him out of the world, that they might fall
no more under such apprehensions. To this end, they reported, that Damville,
who alone could deter them from so damnable an attempt, was dead: Indeed he was
very sick of some morsel, which had been given him: and upon this rumor, they
persuaded the King to give order to Souvre, to strangle the Marshall in
prison: but Souvre, though they assured him of being made Captain of Bois de
Vincennes, after the feat done, made so many delays, that they had certain news
of the recovery of Damville, and so durst not lay violent hands upon his
Brother.

The Duke of Alenson, out-braved by the Favorites, had plotted to get away:
the King having notice of it, causes both him, and all those that were
suspected to have given him such advice to be seized; but the next day, upon
the Queen-Mothers intercession, pardoned him, and to complete the favor, did
likewise set the other prisoners at large. That done, as if he had nothing more
to fear, he gave himself wholly up to idleness, passed the Nightime in
Feasting and Balls; the Morning in adjusting his Clothes or placing his
Furniture to the best advantage, and invent new modes; the Afternoon in
divertisements amongst the Ladies; and the Evening in Gaming.

While he lived in this great security, the Duke his Brother deceives those
that were commanded to watch him, and slipping away one evening, the Fifteenth
of September, reached the City of Dreux, where Bussy, who had forsaken the
Court, brought him a great deal of company. At his going away, he declared
himself an enemy to the House of Guise, and openly protested to revenge the
death Molle his Favorite. Amongst the Clothes in his Wardrobe, he kept a
Doublet belonging to the last, and had sworn he would wear it on a day of
Battle. If the Duke of Montpensier would have joined with the Duke of Nevers,
or have lent him his Forces, he might have hindered from passing the Loire, and
getting into Berry. For all Montpensiers refusal, he had a great mind to charge
them, and marched with great speed to intercept him; but the Queen Mother sent
a Courier with an express Order under her own hand, which commanded him not to
pursue them any further: she fearing her Son might perish in the Fight.

Upon the noise of the Duke of Alensons evasion, great numbers of the Nobility
flocked to him from all parts, amongst others, Ventadour, Turenne, and the wise
La Noue. In the mean while, the Prince of Conde had finished his Treaty with
Casimir, who raised him Eight thousand Reisters, and Six thousand Swiss; upon
this conditition, Mets, Toul, and Verdun for him.

Tore having contributed Fifty thousand Crowns toward these Levies, they could
not refuse to let him have Two thousand Reisters German Horse.
and Five hundred Foot, to carry the Duke of Alenson by way of advance: but the
Duke of Guise, Governor of Champagne, charged and defeated them near
Chasteau-Thierry. He was there wounded in the left Cheek with a Musket Shot,
the scar remained all his lifetime; a very Glorious mark of Honor to the
Catholics, and very becoming in a Ladies Eyes also, who believe, that such as
are brave in the Field of Mars, are ever so in the Camp of Venus too. Tore made
his escape to the Duke of Alenson in Berry, by the swiftness

It was suspected that the Duke of Alensons evasion was contrived by the
Queen Mother, thereby to keep up two parties in the Kingdom, and render her
self necessary between both. The Huguenots growing every day more suspicious,
imagined she had sent him amongst them to divide, and so to ruin them. However
it were, most of the great ones were very well pleased with it, and she had
employment enough cut out for her self, as she desired. She therefore presently
hies after him, taking along the Mareschals of Montmorency and Cosse, whom she
had released from their imprisonment, to make use of that credit they had with
him. Montmorency prevailed so far by his interest, as to bring the Duke to the
Castle of Champigny, belonging to the Duke of Montpensier, where she cajoled
him so finely, that he consented to a truce of Six Months, beginning from the
Two and twentieh of November. That done, she returns to Court, leaving the said
Marshall there, to dispose him to a final accommodation.

It was agreed by this Truce, that the King should give to the Duke by way of
security, the Cities of Angoulesme, Niort, Saumur, Bourges and la Charity; and
to the Prince of Conde, Mezieres. The Governors of Bourges and Angoulesme,
having refused to be diseised of their places, the Queen Mother returns again
to her Son, Cognac and St. Jean d'Angely in exchange; after which, the Truce
was published the Two and twentieth of December.

There was however nothing as yet that tended to a Peace: the King made great
Levies both of Men and Money; but the City of Paris, instead of furnishing him
with the sums he desired, paid him with Remonstrances, which relished of
reproaches, and did but too evidently let him know, the little esteem they had
of his Government. Some Bourgeois however paid Taxes, not so much out of good
Will, as the fear they had of the Reisters, and to exempt their Countrey-houses
from quartering of Soldiers, wherewith they were menaced.

Conde and Casimir in Lorrain all the month of January, at the end whereof,
being tired with the variety, and uncertainty of such Propositions as were made
them; they descended into Bassigny, crossed over Burgundy, within sight of
Langres, Dijon, and Beaulne, passed the Loir, at Marsigny les Nonains, and
extended themselves between that River, and the River of Allier, having gained
the Bridge de Vichy. Auvergne avoided that

The Duke of Mayenne, who commanded the Royal Army, durst not approach the
Princes any nearer then within two days march. When the King perceived, they
were resolved to come directly to Paris, he recalled his own, and quartered
them about it: but this remedy which he thought sit to provide against their
fears, excited the Parisians complaints, they fall a crying out, that they
ought not thus pursue the only Brother of the King; and that it was a high
piece of cruelty, to drive a Son out of the House. To these outcries were
added the Duke of Montpensiers refusal, to take upon him the Command of the
Royal Army; the little zeal the Grandees expressed to serve the King in this
occasion; and a much more surprising accident then all these, which was the
evasion of the King of Navarre, about the end of February.

This Prince having a long while suffered himself to be flattered with the
hopes of the General-Lieutenancy, and the deluding charms of some Court Sirens,
escaped at last from Senlis, whither he was gone, under pretense of a
Hunting-match, and retired to Poissy, from thence to Alenson, afterward to
Vendosme. Two hundred Gentlemen Guyenne, where his quality of Governor, and
that of Prince, did secure him of all the Nobility, and the best places, upon
his first arrival. Laverdin had promised him to seize upon Man's and Chartres,
by the assistance of Roquelaure, Lieutenant of his Company d'Ordonnance.
Fervaques was to have done the same at Cherbourg; but both of them failed of
their Enterprises.

Bourbonnois, joined the Duke of Alensons near Moulins, the Eleventh day of
March, and both of them mustered in the Plain de Souze, where the Prince having
made an excellent harangue to the Duke of Alenson, with that Eloquence which is
natural to the Princes of that House, resigned the Command of the whole Army to
him.

It consisted of above Thirty thousand of the best Men that one should see;
notwithstanding with these great Forces, no great matter was undertaken. For
the mavelous dexterities of the Queen, which the Huguenots termed
Enchantments: the extravagant and changeable humor and designs of the Duke
d'Alenson, and the usual rough temper of the Reistres, made them halt at every
step: Withal, great discords were crept in among their Chiefs; for the
Consistorial Huguenots would not conside in the Duke of Alensons Council,
wholly composed of People, both interressed and persidious. The Duke had taken
some jealousy upon the King of Navarre's going away; the Prince of Conde was
no less troubled, that he was not the Chief Commander of that Army, which had
been the fruits of his own labor and care: And Damville, who had formed his
Tetracby in Languedoc, apprehended to see his Authority, swallowed up by the
Princes, and which was more, the Money he had for his own purposes, collected
in Languedoc, and which his Wife had with much care and covotousness locked up
as prisoners of the better sort in her own Coffers.

All joined together, they might have had whatever they desired, the Duke of
Alenson might have obtained a good part of the Kingdom for Appenage, and the
Princes such Governments and Pensions as they would; the Huguenots a firm and
solid Peace, Alenson, as appeared at the Conference they had at Moulins,
concerning a Peace: However, nothing was there concluded; but only the sending
of some Propositions to the King, by John de Laffin Beauvais, and William
Dauvet Darenes.

After the Council had examined them with great deliberation, but without any
fruit, the Queen Mother returned a second time to her Strayed Son (so she
called him) who was in the Abbey of Beaulieu, near Loches in Touraine, taking
along with her the Marshall de Montmorency, in whom that Prince had a great
deal of confidence, and a great Troop of very fine Women, whom she set forth in
all her Negotiations, as Lime-twigs, or Nooses, to catch those with whom she
Treated.

Prince Casimir obstructed the accommodation for some time, he obstinately
persisting to have the Government of Mets, Toul and Verdun, in chief, and would
have had the Churches belonging to the Catholics to be in common for the
Huguenots, without the trouble and charge of building any others. The
Queen Mother having discoursed him in private, found an expedient to stop his
Mouth and satisfy him by promising great sums of Money to make him desist from
those demands: So that the Treaty was finished the Ninth of May, and Signed the
day following. The Edict

It were much more advantageous for the Huguenots then the precedent ones, for
it allowed them the free exercise of their Religion (which from that time
forward was to be called The pretended Reformed Religion) over all the Kingdom,
without exception either of time or place, provided they had the permission of
the Lords of those places; allowed them places for burial of their dead,
especially that of the Trinity at Paris: Moreover, the faculty of being
admitted to all Offices, and into Colleges, Hospitals, and Spittles; Forbid
the making any search or inquisition after such Priests and Monks as were
Married amongst them, and declared their Children Legitimate, and capable of
succeeding and inheriting their Estates and Movables; expressed great sorrow
and regret for the Murders committed on the St. Bartholomew, exempted the
Children of such as were then Massacred, from the Arrier-ban, if they were
Gentlemen, and from Tailles, if they were Plebeian, revoked all Sentences given
against la Molle, Coconas, John de la Hay, Lieutenant General in the Presidial
of Poitiers; as also those whereby they had condemned the Admiral Brequemaut,
Caevagnes, Montgomery, Montbrun, and others of the Religion, owned the Prince
with Damville and his Associates for his good Subjects, Casimir for his good
Allie and Neighbor, and accounted all what they had done as done for his
Service. Granted to the Religionaries (that they might have equal justice done
to them) Chambers My-Parties Or Court^ Half Protestants, half Catholics* like
our party Juries.
, in each Parliament, and for places of security, Beaucaire, and Aigues-Mortes
in Languedoc, Perigueux, and le Mas de Verdun in Guyenne, Nions and Serre in
Daufine, Issoire in Auvergne, and Seen la Grand Tour in Provence.

They promised also to Prince Casimir, the Seignieury of Chasteau-Thierry in
Principality, a Company of an hundred Men at Arms, the Command of Forty
thousand Reistres, Twelve thousand Crowns of Gold in Pension, Seven hundred
thousand Crowns Conde, the effectual enjoyment of the Government of Picardy,
whereof he had the Title already, and Peronne for his place of Residence. The
conditions for the Duke of Alenson were the best, they gave him in augmentation
of his Appenage, the Countries of Berry, Tourain, and Anjou, with the right of
nomination to consistorial Benefices, as his Brother Henry formerly had; and
besides an hundred thousand Crowns Pension.

Casimir, to whom they had assigned the Bishopric of Langres for Quarters,
where he lived, German-like, while waiting for his Pay. They sent Peter de
Gondy, Bishop of Paris to Rome, to ask consent of his Holiness, to alienate as
much as amounted to Fifty thousand Livres Rent, of the Demeasnes
Ecclesiastical: the Holy Father agreed to the Demand, and gave a Bull, directed
to the Cardinals of Bourbon, Guise, and Est, and to some other French Prelates,
the Parliament verified it, but without approving that clause, which mentioned,
That the distraction should be made, even manger In despite of their Teeth.
the Possessors.

Emp. Rodolph II. Son of Maximilian, who died in October, R. Thirty five years,
Three Months. And Selsin II.
The Duke of Anjou, (so we shall name him henceforward, whom we have hitherto
called Duke of Alenson) after the Peace, made his residence at Bourges, where
Bussy d'Amboise, Fervaques, Laffin, Simiers, and some other Favorites of his
obliged him to stay for their own advantage, or for their security. Toward the
end of October, he was prevailed upon to go to Court, by the persuasions of the
Queen Mother, and came to salute the King at the Castle d'Olinville, near
Chastres. The King received so much joy by this visit, that he gave notice by
Letters Patents of it to all his Kingdom. Bussy would not follow his Master,
but went and settled his Habitation in the Castle of Angiers, choosing rather,
said he, to play the King in that Country, then the Waiting-man, or Valet at
Court.

As soon as they had thus withdrawn the Duke of Anjou, they began to continue
the ruin of the Huguenots, to form powerful Leagues, as well within the
Kingdom, which we shall presently mention, as without, by communication with
Don Juan of Austria, whom King Philip was sending Governor to the
Low Countries, and with the Popes Legate. Juan and the Legate arriving at Court
on the very same day, and from different places; the first incognito, and the
other in great state, had access, and very private Conference with the Kings
Council, and yet more particularly with the Duke of Guise. The Queen-Mothers
aim was in the first place, to take off the King of Navarre, and the Prince of
Conde from the party, and in order to this, she was resolved to make a journey
into Guyenne, and discourse with them: but whether she found they were not so
disposed as she desired, to be deluded by her, or not, she did not go.

In the mean time these two Princes, who had no secure retreat for their
Persons, endeavored to make sure of some; the Prince with more Craft then
Faith, or fair Play, seized upon Brouage, having ordered some Companies to slip
in; then upon Mirembean himself, who was Lord thereof, whom he forced to put
him in possession of the place, promising however to render it again within
three Months. In effect he did render it to him, but soon after, seized it the
Second time upon some jealousy, either real or pretended. The Rochellers took
the allarm, and the Court fomented their suspicions so much, that the Mayor
sent to desire the Prince not to come to Rochel; but the Ministers and People
made them change that resolution, and ordered, that he should be invited,
provided he brought no more then his ordinary attendance. Thus the Court
plainly perceived he was not so absolute over the party, as he would have made
them believe.

The late conjunction of the Duke of Alenson with the Religionaries and
Politiques, and the advantageous Peace granted to them, produced that mightly
Faction, to which the Authors of it gave the name of Holy Union, and the vulgar
that of The League; or to say better, revived and fagotted together, all the
other particular ones, which had been already formed in diverse parts, under the
Reign of Charles IX. For the Lords during those troubles, had taken the
confidence to make Treaties and Confederacies amongst themselves, without
asking permission of the King; and the People arrogated to themselves, the
liberty of giving their Oaths to others besides their Sovereign, justifying
themselves by presidents, drawn from the Huguenots, who indeed showed them
first the example. Thus they framed one in Languedoc, between the Cardinals de
Strossy and Armagnac, and some Lords of that Country; another again in
Bourdelois, of which the Marquis de Trans, of the House of Foix was General;
another much greater, whereof Montluc advised Charles IX. to be the Head. There
were also certain Fraternities joined in Burgundy, which to speak properly,
were a kind of a League; Besides that in Limosin, in the Vivarets, and some
other Provinces; the People armed to defend themselves against all Soldiers of
either party. Charles IX. that if he would not consent to the Massacre on St.
Bartholomews, there was a League ready formed should execute it without him;
and it is certain, that upon the apprehension there was of King Henry's being
stopped in Poland, several Associations were made in the Provinces, to preserve
the State and the Catholic Religion.

So that it was but only the joining and cimenting all these distinct parties
together, to make up the great Body of the League. The zealous Catholics were
the instruments; the new Religious Orders, the Paranymphs and Trumpeters; the
Grandees of the Kingdom, the Authors and Heads. The easy temper of the King
gave way to its growth, and the Queen Mother lent it her helping hand. She was
not prompted to it by any zeal for Religion, nor for any love or kindness
toward the Guises, but out of her mortal hatred to the Huguenots; above all
other Reasons, because they earnestly desired, she should give an account of
her Administration, and bawled open mouthed against the disorders of the Court,
and the enormous Vices of the Italians, especially against the new and
vexations Tolls and Faxes those strangers invented every day.

The Pope and the King of Spain were the promoters of it, this because the
Huguenots were in friendship with the Gueux, the Rebels in the Low Countries,
and he apprehended lest the Duke of Anjou grown more powerful, might affect to
embrace the Sovereignty of those Provinces, or that the King of Navarre, young
and valiant, would endeavor to wrest that Kingdom out of his hands, which he
so unjustly detained from him; the other, because he feared the Huguenots might
become so strong, as would oblige the King to hold a National Council; and
believed withal, that if he could but exterminate them in France, he might very
easily attain his ends, and trample on all the Protestants elsewhere.

Now the League appeared first in Picardy. The People in that Country,
ignorant and devout, but hotheaded, easily took fire, upon the apprehension
was spread on purpose amongst them, how the Prince of Conde would plant his
Religion in that Province, if he came to make his Residence at Peronne,
pursuant to the Treaty of Peace. James de Humieres, Governor of Peronne,
Montdidier, and Roye, great in Estate and Credit, induced the Nobility, and
most of the Cities in that Province to sign it; and Aplincourt, a young
Gentleman of his kindred, took the Oaths of the Inhabitants of Peronne. The
Duke of Guise, and the Duke of Mayenne engaged Champagne, and then Burgundy to
do the like; Lewis de la Tremouille prevailed in Poitou, being offended with
the Huguenots, who now and then surprised some Castle of his; withal desirous
to impugn the Count de Lude Governor of the Province. In fine, this Faction
which had this taken root in every Province, did on a sudden shoot forth such
thick and lofty branches, that it both covered and eclipsed, nay, almost
stifled the whole Regal Authority.

When the Huguenots demanded with such instance the Estates-General, they
believed verily they should have had the stronger party, as they had at
Orleans. They reck'ned, besides the Deputies of their own Religion and that
Faction, they should also have the Politiques, whom the Duke of Anjou's
Interest, and the enemies to the present Government would introduce. They knew
not that the Duke of Anjou was tempted from them, nor did they consider they
had not their Admiral de Coligny (that overruling Genius, who at a pinch could
work with new and unknown Springs and Engines, of a wonderful effect) nor that
fraternal unity, without which, no great design can ever prosper.

Thus it was not very difficult for the Queen Mother, and the Guises, employing
their Practices and Moneys in the Provinces (which the Italian Maltostiers
willingly furnished, because they apprehended to be called to account for their
depredations, by the Estates:) to obtain the election of Deputies wholly at
their devotion, and to chalk all their business for them, according to their
own private Instructions, which they sent into the Provinces; insomuch as it
was openly said, that they ought not to keep their Faith with Heretics, the
Huguenots, but break the Edict which they had extorted by force; which some
began to confirm by effects: Honor d'Albert, called Captain Luynes, having
turned Tore out of the City du Pont St. Esprit, and put a Garrison into the
place, to secure that passage over the Rhosne.

By mid- November most of the Deputies were come to Blois, made their
Complements to the King, the Queens, the Duke of Anjou, and the Chancellor,
met each Order apart, elected their Presidents, the Clergy, Peter d'Espinac
Archbishop of Lions, the Nobility, Claude de Beaufremont, Senescey; The Third
Estate, Nicholas i'Hullier, Prevost des Marchands at Paris; spent the rest of
the Month in regulating St. Nicholas Church: After which, the several
Governors were called upon according to their ranks.

December, in the great Hall belonging to the Castle. The King after he had
saluted them by pulling off his Bonnet, and a little inclination of his Head,
made a handsome and eloquent Speech; wherein having represented the grievances
of the Nation, and the great need there was of healing those wounds and
fractures, he protested that all his Desires and Thoughts tended thereunto, as
the only safe harbor for his Reputation and Happiness, and exhorted them to
join Hearts and Hands with him in so good a work, assuring them, upon the
Faith, and Word of a King, that he would cause all such Orders and Regulations
they should think fit to make in that Assembly, to be inviolably observed, and
put in execution, and would never give or allow of any dispensation

His Harangue did not appear more eloquent and moving, then that of his
Chancellor Birague was tedious and ridicule; For after some excuse for his old
age, and his ignorance of the Affairs Why did he meddle with them?
of France, because he was a stranger, he spun out a long discourse of the
power of the King, and tired his Auditory with the fulsome praises of the
Queen Mother, then concluded, by demanding Money, to which they were but very
little disposed.

The Sentiments of the Estates were neither agreeable to the intentions of the
King, nor those hopes the Huguenots had conceived. In these Assemblies, there
were always some old Stagers, who put the rest in mind of the ancient and
natural Rights of the People, against which, they cannot imagine there lies any
prescription; These Men obliged the Archbishop of Lions, to demand of the
King, the Ratification of all those points which had been resolved upon by the
Three Orders. The King fancied this was done by some contrivance of the Authors
of the League, who desired he should give up part of his Authority to the
Estates, that so they might receive it from their hands again.

Guise, which did the more easily affect him, when he considered what proffer
that Duke made him, to hinder him from going into Poland; and he must from that
very time, have conspired his ruin, if he believed there were any Truth in
certain Memoires, which were spread about, and which they said, had been
carried to Rome by an Advocate in Parliament, named David, when he went to
solicit for the Popes Bull, to settle Paul de Foix in the Archbishopric of
Thoulouze. They contained diverse Reasons to be urged, to persuade the Pope to
degrade the House of Capet, who had usurped the Crown, and to re-establish in
the Throne the Charlemain (that is to say, the Guises) and withal, the way and
means to execute so great a design.

Some would needs believe, those Memoires were supposed, and the most equitable
think, if they were real, they were only the product of that Advocates black
melancholy, exasperated by some damage he had suffered from the Huguenots.
There is great likelihood, that either the Minions, the Huguenots or the
Queen Mother, all mortal enemies to the Guises, had forged them: as it is most
certain they reported, and set on foot many other calumnies to render them
odious. And truly the Guises, were not behind hand, in flinging the like dirt
upon them: and for this reason we must not give too much credit to the Writings
and Relations of those times, unless we

However it were, the King finding the Estates grew hot upon the matters of
Religion, and that they were upon the point of demanding a Head for the League,
and about to name one to him, who without doubt, must have been the Duke of
Guise, he would needs be so himself, and Signed it with his own hand, made all
the Grandees Sign it, and sent it to Paris, and into the Provinces, with Orders
for all persons to do the same. Thus of a King, he became chief of a Cabal, and
of their common Father, an enemy to one part of his Subjects.

This was not enough, the more vehement, who by virtue of their popular
outcries, and pretended grievances, are wont to draw on others; mightily
pressed for a Revocation of the Edict, and sounded an Alarm to War by the
months of Versoris and Bigot, two Deputies, the first for Paris, the other for
Rouen; and also the Bishops, as well for the same end, as for the interest of
their own Grandeur, demanded the publication of the Council of Trent. The
Chapters opposed this last point, and the particular Deputies of the King of
Navarre, and Prince of Conde, protested a nullity, if they revoked the Edict of
Pacification.

Soon after, the Estates having besought the King, not to suffer any other
Religion but the Catholic; he clearly answered, that it was his intention,
that he had so promised to God on the Holy Sacrament of the Altar. That he
would have his Subjects forwarn'd to give no Faith to whatever he might do or
say to the contrary, and that if he were reduced to that condition, he would
not keep his Oath, but till such time as he could recover strength sufficient,
and the opportunity to break it. The Deputies for the Huguenots much astonished
at these words, and the resolution of the Estates, made their protestations
against them, and the greatest part of them retired Blois, and went to give a
hot alarm to Rochel, and in Languedoc.

Whatever resolution the King showed, nevertheless he so much feared the losing
of his Rest, and angmenting the power of the Guises, that he would needs have
the Estates send to the two Princes, and to Damville, to invite them to come to
the Assembly; and in the mean time, that he might have some Warranty from the
public, for the War which was now to begin; he desired to have the Advice and
Opinion of the chief Lords, and of his Principal Counselors in Writing. They
all concluded that it was just and necessary: not perhaps that they really
believed so, but they thought it was his desire to make it, or at least to
pretend such desire, to get some round sums of Money from the Estates.

He demanded two Millions of Gold for the said Expenses, and the Favorites
made use of all the Engines and Tricks imaginable, to get this grand Elizir.
The Third Estate, who knew too well that they must pay for all, could never be
persuaded to consent thereto, no more then to the alienation of the demeasne;
concerning which, Bodin having proved with a freedom, Confidence and Liberty
truly Gallican, that the funds of the Demeasne appertained to the Provinces,
and that the King was but the simple Usager, he so fully persuaded the Assembly
to be of this Sentiment, that they answered Bellievre, whom the King sent to
them about it, That

January, at the same place, and in the same order as the First. The Archbishoy
of Lions Orator of the Clergy, and the Baron de Senescey, of the Nobility,
began their harangues Orleance: but here they let him kneel almost half an
hour, their Deputies standing all the while, and bare-headed. They had
commanded this last (it was Versoris) to beseech the King to make all his
Subjects conform to one Religion by fair and gentle methods, and without War,
to desire he would grant the Election for Benefices absolutely without any
reference to the Kings Will, to touch home and roundly upon the
Maladministration of the Finances, and to make great instance for the
punishment of those that had risled and squandred the Treasure; as also to
insist upon the expulsion of Strangers from the Government, and touching the
dispensation of

After this Session, and when the Estates had taken some pains about their
Papers, the League brought it to this resolution, That the King should be
desired to forbid the exercise of any other but the Catholic Religion. The
thing passed by plurality of the Governments, not by the Votes of the Deputies;
neither was it carried by more then two Suffrages; and soon after those of
Paris fearing the first Pence would be levied upon the City Rents, would have
retracted.

The Huguenots having notice of what passed, set up a counter-League, whereof
the Prince declared himself Lieutenant, under the Authority of the King of
Navarre, and published a manifesto much more bloody then any yet had appeared,
and which plainly showed his vehement humor, his frank and daring courage, and
the zeal he had for his Religion.

Whilst he armed in Poitou, the King of Navarre armed himself also in Guyenne,
but either of them so slenderly, that it was rather to make Incursions then
Expeditions of any consequence. The enterprises they had formed upon several
places failed; John Favas a Native of Bazas, to secure himself after a horrible
assassinate, he had committed there, delivered up that City to the King of
Navarre, and made himself of that party; and also to give him a more sincere
proof of his affection, took Reole some few days after: but Marmanda derided
that King, who rashly besieged it with a handful of Men.

The Edict of Pacification being revoked, and all their threatenings and
intrigues proving ineffectual as to the Princes; they set two Armies on foot,
to make quick dispatch of them. The Command of one was given to the Duke of
Anjou, extremely incensed against the Huguenots, because some had made him
believe, that whilst he was amongst them, they had an intention of delivering
him up to the Reistres, nay even to attempt his Person; and that the Prince of
Conde made sport with him, and acted him in his posture, when running at the
Ring. The Duke of Guise demanded the Conduct of the other: but the Duke of
Anjou's enmity, and that jealousy the King had of him, denied him that Honor,
and placed it upon the Duke of Mayenne his Brother.

This Duke was first in the Field, made the Prince quit his ground, and drove
his Men even to the Gates of Rochel; Then proud for having thus beaten them
into their strongest Sanctuary, he went into Guyenne. His Forces being much
tired and weatherbeaten Navarre; which being expired about mid- April, he took
the Field a Second time, but yet without any great progress, till the Two and
twentieth of May, when he Poitou to reinforce his Troops, and wait for fresh
Orders from the King, who but unwillingly made this War.

April the Duke of Anjou besieged la Charity with Twelve thousand Foot, and
Three thousand Horse; the Dukes of Guise, Aumale, and Nevers were his
Lieutenants, la Chatre his Marshall de Camp, and to say the truth, his
Director. The place was invested so suddenly, that James de Morogues who was
Governor of it, could not possibly get in any Soldiers, so that having but One
hundred and fifty Men to defend three breaches; he capitulated, after he had
sustained two Assaults.

La Charity rendered up, the Duke of Anjou and the Duke of Guise rode post to
Blois, to tell Stories of their brave exploits to the Ladies, who had bestowed
Scarfes upon them. The Duke of Nevers in the mean time besieged Issoire in
Auvergne, situate upon the torrent de la Couse. A Gentleman whose name was
Chavagnae Commanded within: Matthew le Merle, Son of a Wooll-comber of Vzez,
but advanced to be a Captain during these Troubles, had surprised it three
years before. This Merle was gone to the Sevennes to pick up some Men to
relieve it, but he staid so long, perhaps obstructed by some bags of the Kings
Money thrown in his way, that the place was forced to surrender at discretion.
That done, the Duke of Anjou with the Duke of Guise, returned back to Court,
which was then at Blois, leaving the Command of his Army to the Duke of Nevers.

The Affairs of the Huguenots could not be in a worse condition; the whole
party was full of Divisions, of Jealousies, and of Cabals; the Lords of the
King of Navarres Court, could neither agree amongst themselves, nor with him,
because he gave too much credit and Faith to Lavardin, who was known to be tied
to the Queen-Mothers Interest; insomuch as La Noue forsook that King, and
Turenne and the rest served him, not without much Anxiety and suspicion.

There was also a mortal feud between the Prince and the Lord de Mirembeau,
about the business of Brouage; a scurvy misunderstanding between the said
Prince and the Rochellers, for the nomination of a Maire, and other points
concerning the liberties of that City: Eternal Picques between the Bourgeois
and the Nobless, and every moment some quarrel between the Commanders of their
Forces; withal, most strange disorder and licentiousness amongst their
Soldiers, who were horribly ungovernable, as well because of the want of Pay,
and the little authority of their Captains, as by the mixture of their
Politiques, the most part Atheists, and addicted to all manner of Vices.

Mayenne observed in that party, gave him the prospect of subduing Rochel; and
also to that effect and purpose, to hinder all Trade and Provisions from coming
to them by Sea, by taking the Islands and Brouage, as by Land he had already
got most of the Towns and Castles that furnished or stood them in any stead.
The Rochellers were jealous of the growing greatness of Brouage: The Count of
Montgomery who was Governor of it, had by his debauches consumed the Soldiers
pay, and tormented the Inhabitants grievously: Captain Lorges his Brother, with
his Regiment, vexed and plundered the Islands; so that both the one and the
other desired a change, that remedy of the unthinking vulgar, who ever believe

The King had equipped a Navy for this Siege, the Prince and the Rochellers
prepared one to hinder it; Clermont Commanded it, as Lansac did the Kings. Both
these met in the canal of Brouage, that for the Huguenots was beaten, by not
keeping out at large, Five Galleys brought thither by the young Montlue,
tearing them in pieces with their Guns during a calm. In the mean while the
Besiegers pressed upon them at Land, and the King was come to Poitiers to
encourage his Men. Their amazement was so great in Rochel, that all the
Suppliesthey endeavored to send thither, were either taken or put to flight.
When the Besieged were almost at the greatest extremity; the rumor was, that
the Duke of Anjou after the taking of Iss^ire, was coming to reinforce the
Siege with that Army which breathed nothing but Blood and Slaughter: the fear
they were in, that they should have no quarter, made them hasten the
capitulation, and the Duke of Mayenne fearing that Prince would rob him of the
Honor of his enterprise, granted them Conditions favorable enough.

The King of Navarre who had taken the Field to succor them, finding the
business was decided, desired to raise up the spirits of his party again, by
some famous exploit, and if he could possibly, give battle to that victorious
Army: but they were already gone to refresh themselves, having no Orders to
undertake any more.

Many were of that judgment, that if they but pushed on their advantages
against the Huguenots, in the confusion they were then under, they had been
laid flat on the ground: For it was not in their power then to set an Army on
foot; their Officers Damville over-perswaded by his Wife, and by his
Secretaries, whom they had bribed, and withal picqued, for that the Huguenots
did not respect him enough, had drawn his Sword against them in Languedoc, and
besieged Montpellier. But was indeed upon the point of receiving an affront;
For Chastillon had bravely pierced through his Army, and thrown Three thousand
Men into the place, and would have given him battle the next day, if the news
of the Peace had not prevented.

It could not be certainly known what the true Reasons were, that induced the
King to make it in a juncture that seemed so favorable, unless it were his
apprehensions of the Reisters coming again to ransack and waste his Kingdom,
and of the Rochellers giving themselves up to the English; or else the
intrigues of the Duke of Anjou, who infinitely desired to go into Flanders, and
draw the Army after him, or his own weak and uncertain temper, not able to
undergo the burden, and difficulties of any weighty Affair.

This Fifth Treaty of Pacification was concluded at Bergerac, between the King
of Navarre and the Duke of Montpensier. The Edict was drawn up at Poitiers, in
the month of September, and verified in Parliament, in the beginning of
October. It was different from the last, in that it restrained the exercise of
their Religion, to the limits of the preceding ones; removed it Ten miles from
Paris; forbid it in the Marqulsate of Salusses, and the County of Venaisin;
exchanged Montpellier for Beaucaire with them, and did not restore them
Issoire. The Consistorians, who had much more obstinacy then knowledge, could
hardly be brought to allow of this restriction; but the Chiefs, who better
understood the state of their Affairs, accepted it as very advantageous, and
the Prince caused it to be proclaimed by Torch-light at Rochel.

There must have been, to make it firm and lasting, a Will and Resolution in
either party, to keep and maintain it, and to this end they should have
renewed, and restored a real confidence, and true faith in each other: but as
the first being wanting, the other became impossible; they presently started up
a thousand doubts and difficulties concerning the execution: and it was the
delight and interest of the Queen Mother, to be brangling and trucking with the
one and the other, to keep the Authority in her own hands, and to show her
dexterity in disintangling those snarles and knots, which she her self most
commonly had tied.

The King her Son had learnt of her to make excessive expenses; and as he had
some noble inclinations for great things, he easily addicted himself to show
his State France being an unexhaustible Fountain of Riches, the greatest
prodigality could never incommode him. It is almost incredible what excessive
Sums he lavishly squandered away, and in what magnificent wantonness he wasted
them. He played, and lost one night Fourscore thousand Crowns; he went often in
Masquerade; he was seen to run at the Ring in a Ladies Dress, with all the
trinkets and gew-gaws of a proud gossip; he made one Feast amongst many others,
where the Women waited and served at Table in the habits of Men, clad in Green,
all the Guests wearing the same Livery; and the Queen his Mother requited him
with another in the same kind, where the fairest Ladies about the Court, acted
the like parts with their white Bosoms open, and their Hair disheveled.

The poor People paid for all these follies, and mourned many years for a
divertisement, that lasted perhaps but some few hours. The Kings Coffers were
empty, and they must have recourse to the worst methods for the filling them
again, particularly, the creation of new Offices, which the Italian furnished
with Titles, and persuaded him, that such a multiplication was an excellent
means to get Money, without violence to any man, and to render the Kings power
more absolute, by filling every City with Creatures of his own, and such as
would be tied fast to his interests through fear of losing their employments,
and so aid him in suppressing his Subjects, and force them to lie quiet, and
submissively under the feet of Power.

Italy, a band of Comedians, whose Plays consisting of amorous intrigues, and
agreeable inventions, to stir up, and soothe the softest passions, proved most
pernicious corrupters of Modesty and Virtue, and Schools of impudence. They
obtained Letters Patents for their establishment, as they had been some
excellent Society: The Parliament rejected them as vagabonds, or such Cattle
whom good Morality, the Holy Canons, the ancient Fathers, and even our own
Kings had ever esteemed infamous, and forbid them to act, or endeavor any more
hereafter the obtaining of such License or Patent; and notwithstanding, no
sooner was the Court returned from Poitiers, but the King would have their
Theater opened again.

This year appeared the greatest Comet that had been ever seen, it took up
Thirty degrees in length, embracing the Signs Sagitarius and Scorpio, the Tail
turned toward the West; it was observed from the Eighteenth of October, till
about the end of November. An Astronomer found it to be of the same height as
the Planet Venus.

March, John de Morvilliers, Bishop of Orleans, a great Statesman died at
Blois, and in the Month of July, the Marshall de Montluc at his House of
Estillac in Agenois. Armand Gontaud had the Mareschals staff, vacant by the
death of Montlue, and quitted his Office of Great Master of the Ordnance, which
was given to Philibert de la Guiche, one of the Kings Favorites.

There was open enmity between the King, the Duke of Anjou and the Duke of
Guise: The great courage of this last, and weakness of the other two, made him
almost their equal. Their hatred broke into quarrels between their Favorites.
Quelus, who was one of the Kings Darlings, challenged Entroguet, who was the
Duke of Guises, and took for his Seconds Livarrot and Maugiron, who was
likewise in favor. Rybeyrac and Schombert. Till this time, Seconds had only
served for witnesses of a combat: but an itch of fighting came upon these, and
this one bad example has lasted to this very day. Maugiron was killed upon the
spot. Quelus was brought back wounded in Sixteen places, whereof he died in a
Months time. The King loved both these so infinitely, that he kissed them when
dead, caused their flax-Locks to be cut off, and treasured them up carefully,
assisted Quelus to his very death, serving him with his own hands, and erected
a stately Mausoleum for them both in St. Paul's Church.

Some time after he likewise caused the Body of St. Maigrin to be interred
there, and Statues of all the three to be set upon their Tombs; the rabble
broke them down, and dragged them to the River on the day of the barricades.
This St. Maigrin was also one of his Minions, whom the Duke of Mayenne caused
to be pistoll'd at his coming out of the Louvre, for having vaunted he was in
favor with the Duchess of Guise.

For this reason the other Minions, who apprehended the like Treatment, if they
played with such rough Gamesters, never ceased exasperating the King by their
stories and reports concerning these Princes, and seeking by all manner of ways
to ruin them. Being thus pusht at, they considered how to defend themselves:
and when they had examined, and found their own strength, and the Kings
softness, they did not stop at the defensive, but carried things to a far
greater height then their most daring thoughts durst ever make them hope to
attain.

Whilst the Queen Mother was in Guyenne, whither she went to confer with the
King of Navarre, under pretense of carrying his Wife to him, whom he little
valued, and by whom he was not esteemed much more; the Duke of Anjou Treated
with United Provinces, this was on the Tenth day of August; and was assured
moreover, that Charles de Ganre Inchi, Governor of Cambresis, would deliver up
to him the Citadel of Cambray, for the Queen of Navarre his Sister, had gained
that Lord the year before, in a journey she made to the Spaa.

We must now relate what had been transacted in those Provinces for some years
past. The Duke of (...) them near Five years, during which time he exercised
most unexpressible cruelties; insomuch that he bragged, that the very
Confiscations of the Estates of those he had butchered, amounted to Eight
Millions of Gold yearly; and the number of People who had suffered by the hands
of the Hangman, was Eighteen thousand. He was recalled in the year 1513. by
King Philip, and Lewis de Requesens, Grand Commander of Castille put in his
place. This last gained a Battle at Mouker-Heyde near Nimeghen, wherein Ludovic
de Nassau was slain, this was in Anno 1574. He afterward assembled the
Estates-General to raise some Moneys; but far from granting any, they firmly
united together to desend their liberty: and they took so much hearty grace
upon his death, which happened some Months afterward, as to seize upon the
Government, which was then left in the hands of the Council of State, till the
arrival of a new Governor, Don Juan of Austria.

In the mean time the Spanish Troops having mutined, plundered the wealthy City
of Antwerp, where they got so much booty, that some private Soldiers were seen
to play for Ten thousand Franc's in one night. The Catholic Provinces fearing
they might be plundered in the same manner, united by a Treaty made at Ghent
This was called the Pacification of Ghent.
with those of Holland and Zealand. Now before they received, or admitted Don
Juan, the Estates would have all the Spaniards sent out of the Country, and
the Treaty of Ghent to be confirmed; Don Juan feigned to agree to those
conditions, and entered the Country in Sheeps clothing, but soon changed it
for the Foxes skin, seizing upon Namur, Charlemont, and Mariemburgh.

Then the States armed against him, drove him back into Luxemburg, called in
Matthias the Emperors Brother, whom they chose for their Governor, and the
Prince of Orange for his Lieutenant. But by the jealousy of the Catholic
Lords, thwarting the wise Councils of Orange, Don Juan had time to receive the
Forces brought him by Alexander Farness Duke of Parma, with which he gained a
signal Battle at Gemblours, over the Army of the States, and afterward the
Gueux having turned Ghent, broke, and pulled down all the Images in their
Churches: So that the happy success of Don Juan, and the attempt of this
insolent rabble, gave occasion to some Lords already discontented to form a
Third Party, whereof Montigny was Head, and to draw both Artois and Hainault to
join with them.

The same Lords finding that the States had Treated with Queen Elizabeth, who
sent Casimir to them with some German Forces, moved with apprehension of the
great danger their Religion was in, resolved to Treat with the Duke of Anjou,
to which the States did likewise incline; being induced thereto by the
practices of the Prince of Orange, who had great suspicion of Casimir.

Bussy's braving his Favorites every day. Now these Picques and Controversies
rising higher on either part, he caused his Brother to be laid hold on in the
Louvre, and set Guards upon him: but they did their Duty so negligently, that
he escaped out of their hands, being let down by a cord into the Trench under
the Louvre, and went to the Abbey St. Germain, where Bussy waited for him, and
had made a hole in the Wall of the City. From thence they got to Angers, and
after they had sojourned there some weeks, advanced to Mons in Hainault, to
conclude the Treaty which was before prepared by one of his Secretaries.

He promised to assist the States with his Forces and Means, to raise Six
thousand Foot and Three thousand Horse, to maintain them at his own charges for
Three Months, and to endeavor to bring the Queen of England, the King of
Navarre, and Casimir into this Alliance. Reciprocally they promised him, that
wherever he should be personally, he should Command in Chief with the General
for the States: That if they accepted of any Lord, other then the King of
Spain, they would prefer him before all; That forsecurity, and a retreat for
his Sick, they would give him Quesnoy, Landrecy, and Bavais; That if they could
obtain a good Peace, they would repay his disbursements, and give him a reward
worthy of his Grandeur.

Matthias had his party amongst the States, and amongst the Nobless; the Prince
of Orange had all the power in the Provinces of Frise, Holland, Zealand, and
Vtrect; Don Juan of Austria was Governor for the Spaniard, but declared an
enemy by the States; Prince Casimir was there in the behalf of Queen Elizabeth;
the Duke of Anjou, as their Ally and Protector. Imbise had seized upon Ghent,
and Prince Casimir with his Forces was got into those parts, as it were to
cantonnize himself: The Catholic Lords of Artois and Hainault floated between
all parties, desiring to preserve, if it were possible, their Liberty, and
their Religion. So that there were Five Armies feeding upon, and laying wast
that unfortunate Country.

That belonging to the States was of Thirty eight thousand Foot, and Eight
thousand Horse; That under the Duke of Anjou, much inferior for number, to
what had been promised him by Treaty. He besieged Bins, and battered it so
furiously, that it surrendered the Fourteenth day, being the Sixth of September.
The civility he showed Maubeuge: but the insolence of his Soldiers in the
Field, caused those of Quesnoy and Landrecy to be shut up against him. For
vexation of this inexecution, and because Casimir kept still in Ghent, he would
not join with the States Army; to whom however, he had already sent Three
thousand Men, Commanded by la Noue, but retired into France, having first sent
to the Archduke Matthias, and the Council of the States, to let them know the
reasons for his departure, and give them an assurance of his return.

The greatest part of his disbanded Troops went into the Service of the
male-contented Lords. Some Months after, Don Juan of Austria happened to die; the
King, his Brothers jealousy, made all his designs miscarry, and perhaps
hastened his end by some potion, as he had the end of Escovado his Secretary and
intimate Confident in Spain, by cutting the thread of his Life with a keen
poniard.

His loss caused so great a consternation in his Army, that if that of the
States had fallen upon them, they might with ease, either have forced, or
dispersed them: but Maximilian, Crook-Back, who Commanded in Chief, happening
within Six weeks after, broke all that little Union there was between the Lords
of the Country, who fell from the common interest of the public good, to
seek their own private advantages.

During this expedition of the Duke of Anjou into the Low Countries, the King
languished still in unactive idleness, wherein he was entertained by
Villequier, and Francis d'O, his Son-in-law. This last was Surintendant des
Revenue, or Treasury.
Finances, a Man wholly given up to Luxury, who put the King daily upon making
new Edicts, called Bursaux For his Purse.
and by carrying him to the Parliament, forced them by his Presence to verify
the same. This was one of the chief causes of the ruin of this Prince, the
People observing so frequently, that from his Court, whence nothing but good
and wholesome Laws should have proceeded, there came nothing now but Edicts of
Oppression and Severity, did by little and little lose the Respect and
Affection they had born him, which the Heads of the League took advantage of,
and confirmed their aversion and contempt of him. Toward which, the insolence
of his Favorites did not a little contribute, by setting themselves above
Princes, making the Grandees follow them, and absolutely disposing of all
Affairs.

Sebastian, King of Portugal having lost a great Battle against the Moors, as
may be seen in the History of that Country, and never appearing aftewards,
whether he were slain there or otherwise: Henry his great Uncle, who was
Cardinal, and Archbishop of Evora, took the Crown, which belonged to him, as
being the nearest Prince of the Blood. We must know that Sebastian was the Son
of Prince John, Son of King John III. Son of King Emanuel; That this Emanuel,
besides King John, had three other Sons, Lewis Duke of Beja, the Henry of whom
we speak, and Edward Prince of Portugal, and two Daughters, Isabella, who was
Mother of Philip II. King of Spain; and Beatrix, who was Mother of Philibert
Emanuel, Duke of Savoy; That Lewis had a natural Son, named Don Antonio, Prior
of Crato; That from Edward sprang two Daughters, Mary, Wife of Alexander
Farnese, First of that Name, Duke of Parma, and Mother of Rainutio; and
Catherine, Wife of John, Duke of Braganza.

Henry was very infirm, and almost Septuaginary, all those who pretended to the
Crown after his death, began from that time to make their parties and interest,
and proclaim their Titles. Wherefore, omitting the Pope, and the Abbot de
Clervaux, who showed by some old Titles, that the said Kingdom had submitted to
their Sense and Homage, there presented themselves Philip King of Spain,
Philibert Emanuel Duke of Savoy, Rainutio Farnese, Catherine Wife of John of
Braganza, and Anthony Prior of Crato.

As for Philipebert, he yielded it King Philip, who was issue of the eldest of
Emanuels two Daughters, and demanded only they should have a regard to his
Right, in case Philip died before him. They said that Rainutio, his Mother
being dead, as she then was, could not dispute it with Catherine, he being one
degree remoter then she. The question remained therefore between Philip and
Catherine; It was most certain that Philips Mother, had she been living, would
have been excluded by Catherine, but as she was dead, her Son Philip pretended
they ought not now to have any regard to that, but that he and Catherine being
at equal distance, (for both of them were Germain to Sebastian) he was to be
preferred, because he was the Male.

As for the right of Anthony, King Henry made no account of that, because he
had a perfect hatred for him, and his Father, as it was said, had by his Will
declared him illegitimate: nevertheless, all the People, the Clergy, and the
Friars, (excepting only the Jesuits, who were persuaded that the grandeur of
the House of Austria was the main and truest support of the Catholic
Religion) were entirely for him.

Amongst the Contenders Queen Catharine de Medicis was also a Stickler, perhaps
to make the World believe she was of a Family good enough to pretend to the
succession of a Kingdom. And thus she founded her right, Alphonso III. King of
Portugal about the year 1235. Married one Matilda Countess of Bolognia, then
did repudiate her to take a Wife much younger; She said, he had a Son named
Robert by that Matilda: but to his prejudice and wrong had left the Inheritance
to the Children by this second Wife; That from the said Robert came the Counts
of Bologna, from whom she was descended. But this derivation, besides the
injury it did to all the Kings of Portugal from the time of Alphonso, and to
all the Pretenders that were issued from them, as necessarily qualifying them
Bastards and Usurpers, was false in the most essential point, for Matilda had
no Child by Alphonso, and Robert was Son of a Sister to that Queen.

Coimbre, who ought to know better then any others, the Laws and Customs of
those Countries, was that of Catharine Wife of the Duke of Braganza. And indeed
the Nobility and the Estates, to whom the resolution of all Questions of such
importance do most properly belong, inclined that way: but Henry was so weak he
durst not declare in her favor, but engaged himself for Philip, and that the
more readily as finding the Duke of Braganza grew slack; withal his Confessor
persuading him that the glory of God and the advancement of the Catholic
Religion required it.

January in the year 1580. having Reigned seventeen Months. Philip who had
prepared himself to make good his Title by force, did immediately order the
Duke of Alva to enter Portugal with a good Army; Anthony was already proclaimed
King, but could not make head against him; the Forces he had got in haste
together being raw unexprerlenc'd Men, were worsted the first time, and quite
dispersed the second. So that having nothing left him on Land, and the Sea
beating him churlishly back every time he endeavored to set sail, he was
forced to disguise himself under a Monks Hood, and hide himself for eight
Months in several places, the Portuguese not discovering him, though Philip had
promised fourscore thousand Crowns, to any that would produce him. At length
finding his opportunity he embarked on a Vessel which transported him into
Holland, from whence he came to the Court of France.

All the Islands of Azores, excepting that of St. Michael which submitted to
Philip, remained still firm to his Party by means of certain Monks who were
mightily increased there. These Islands are usually called Terceres from the
third which is the greatest of them all: there are nine in number.

As to the Duke of Braganza, he agreed with King Philip, who gave him the
Office of Constable of the Kingdom: but in our days his Grandson John happily
raised himself again, and was restored to the Crown, according to a wonderful
Prophecy, which may be seen in the first Volume of the Annals of the Cisteaux
Chap 5. of the year 1142.
, i. e. White Friars, composed by a Religious Spaniard of that Order, some
years before that miraculous Revolution.

The Order of St. Michael had been in great reputation and request under four
Kings: but during the Reign of Henry II. the Women had made it Venal: and in
those Francis II. and Charles IX. Queen Catharine had rendered it so
contemptible that the Nobility never demanded it but for their Servants, or
Valets. This year the King, without abolishing the former, instituted another
named the Order of the Holy Ghost L'Ordre du Saint Fsprit.
, to which it serves as a necessary disposition. He declared himself Sovereign
Head, and for ever united the Sovereignty of it to the Crown of France. He
solemnized the Feast on the first day of January in the Church of the Augustins
at Paris, with his accustomed Pomp and Magnificence. The number of Knights was
limited to an hundred, who were to be nobly descended for three Races, not
comprising the Ecclesiastics, which are four Cardinals, and four Bishops, and
the Officers. Commanders, having resolved according to the example of the
Spaniard, to attribute to every one of them a Commandery over the Benefices;
The Pope and Clergy refused to consent thereto, nevertheless the name they
still retain, and the King in lieu of it, assigned to each of them a Pension of
one thousand Crowns to be paid out of his Treasury.

There is probability he instituted this Order in honor of the Holy Ghost, as
a remembrance that upon the day of Pentecost he received two Crowns, first that
of Poland, and then that of France: but an Author tells us he had taken this
Model from the like Order instituted by Lewis King of Sicilia upon the same
motives, Anno 1532. As for the Political Reason, he may have done it with the
like design as Lewis XI. did that of St. Michael, i. e. to destroy the Leagues
in his State, and even to convert the Chiess of the Huguenot Party by the
splendor and allurement of so desirable a Mark of Honor.

The Negotiation of the Queen Mother with the King of Navarre at Nerac, took
her up more time then she imagined. The Prince would conclude nothing without
the advice of the whole Party, whose Deputies he called together at Montanban.
She inveigled some of them by the artificial charms of those Ladies she carried
along with her: But Queen Margaret who counted all things lawful to revenge her
self on her Brother for expelling her his Court, took care to gain the heart of
Pibrac, who was her Mothers Counselor. That great Man's Wisdom foundred upon
this Rock, so that acting only as she directed, and contrary to the designs of
the Queen her Mother, he explained and worded many Articles in favor of the
Religionaries, procured them many advantages, and even several places for
security.

The Conference ending with the Month of February, the Queen would needs make
Languedoc and Dauphine. In those Provinces she showed much kindness to the
Politics and the Male-contented, having a prospect of making use of them
toward the Duke of Alens^n, if her Son Henry should chance to die without
Children. From thence she traveled into Provence where the disturbances were
still kept on foot between the Rasats and the Cacistes; the latter had the
Nobless, the former the Populace and the Parliament for them.

The real cause of those Broils was the Government of the Province, the
Marshall de Raise who had obtained the gift of it Anno 1515. was so little
beloved that he was forced to give it up to the Count de Suse. This Man being
placed there by his means found as little pleasure and quiet as the other: so
that the Marshall got it to be committed to the Cardinal of Armagnac, who
being aged and decayed could not well bridle the Factious. Henry Grand Prior of
France, the Kings Bastard Brother, had a great mind to that Government, and
therefore stirred up, and blew these Coals of Dissentions. The Queen finding
there was no other way to extinguish them, gave him what he desired.

Savoy came out of respect to wait upon her at Grenoble, and engaged her to go
as far as Montluc in Bresse, to confer with Bellegarde. This Marshall
discontented with the Court had seized on the Marquisate of Salusses, and
perhaps had some private Treaty with that Duke who had highly obliged him upon
many occasions. In effect when he died, which fell out the following year, the
Duke endeavored by diverse means to detain the places in that Marquisate to
which he had several pretensions, and stirred up such as were Governors there
for the King, to cantonize, or at least favored them: but as he durst not
assist them openly, they were forced to let go their holds after some
resistance. At this time the Queen had not leisure enough to unravel those
intricate Affairs; for receiving information how the Favorites made themselves
absolute Masters of the Kings mind during her tedious absence, she left
Bellegarde, and returned with great diligence to Court.

Anjou who had been absent ever since his escape was just come thither, and
lived in very good correspondence with the King. He had taken this resolution
without consulting his Bussy d'Amboise who staid behind in Anjou. This proud
and haughty Spirit continued there braving and despising all the World, taking
pride in triumphing over the Ladies as well as their Husbands, till at last the
Lord de Montsoreau killed him in his Castle de la Coutanciere, at which place
he had compelled his Wife to make him an Assignation; this was in the Month of
July.

England with two Gentlemen only, to make love to Queen Elizabeth. This
Princess was so shaped or formed, that though she loved passionately yet could
she not admit of such love again as to be a Mother without the greatest hazard
of her life: for which reason she never did intend to take a Husband, and yet
refused none, thereby to keep her Enemies in awe with the noise of her
Alliances, and gain her self friends upon the prospect of such fair hopes. The
Duke was so well received, and treated by her with so much freedom and privacy,
that all such as did not know her well, believed the Match indubitable. And
indeed it was her interest to have it thought so, thereby to encourage that
Princes Friends in assisting him to gain the Sovereignty of the Low Countries;
not so much for love to him, as to prevent their falling under the absolute
power of the King.

Savoy had agreed to share the Conquests of the Swiss Countries with the King
of Spain, and that he was to begin by Geneva, which those Cantons had received
into their Alliance, forasmuch as it is by that Road they can both send
Supplies into France and receive it thence: the King was advised upon the
earnest solicitation of the Catholic Cantons themselves, to take that City
under his protection, left any other should seize upon it. To this purpose a
particular Treaty was set on foot between him and the Swiss, which was
Negociated at Soleurre by Nicholas de Harlay-Sancy.

There were none now left amongst the Huguenots but the common People and
Consistorians who had any great zeal for their Religion: as for the Grandees,
theirs was but Faction, the Prince of Conde was almost the only Man that was
fully persuaded to be of their way. Wherefore he had but little interest with
the Politiques, nor even with the King of Navarre, and made his Party by it
self, as well because he was disgusted that the said King had to his prejudice
given his Lieutenancy to the Vicount de Turenne, as because he being in himself
a serious and honest Gentleman, avoided all libertinage, and had a horror for
their frauds and impious practices.

In the King of Navarres Court, nothing was to be seen but Intrigues, Amors,
and Enterprises; to say all in a word, Queen Margaret was the Soul of it. The
King de Turenne; but that Prince considering the necessity of his Affairs above
all things else, showed the Letter to them both, and spared neither caresses
nor entreaties to keep the Vicount with him who pretended he must by all means
retire.

Now this Woman enraged to the greatest extremity, had no other thought but of
revenge: to this effect making use of the same means she had so often seen
practiced by her Mother, she instructed the Ladies about her to take all the
brave ones about her Husband in their amorous toils, and they did spread the
Nets so cunningly that himself was ensnared by the beauties of Fosseuse, who
did but too well practice the Lessons taught by her Mistress. These were the
real Firebrarnds of the sixth Troubles; and for that reason it was called The
Lovers Wars.

Navarre having broken some pieces of Gold, sends two halves, the one to
Chastillon, the other to Lesdiguieres, who Commanded for that Party in
Languedoc and Daufine, with an Order to begin the War, whenever he sent them
the other two halves; and at the same time sends Men of Credit into diverse
Provinces, for the execution of above threescore several Enterprises.

It seems this Resolution had not been communicated to the Prince of Conde:
nevertheless it so fell out that he acted at the same time as if it had been by
agreement with the rest of the Party. He passionately desired to enter into
possession of the Government of Picardy: it had been promised him by two
Treaties, and he was daily put in hopes of it; In fine, his patience was tired,
he would do himself right, and formed private Intelligence and designs upon
seven or eight of the best places in that Province. That which he attempted
upon la Fere succeeded by the assistance of Liramont de Mouy, and some other
Gentlemen, all the others miscarried.

As little success had the Partisans of the King of Navarre, unless upon
Montaigu in Poitou, and upon Cabors. This City belonging to his Wives Estate
(for she was appenaged with the Counties of Quercy and Agenois) refusing to own
him, he was resolved to do himself right: though he knew Vesins was within the
place with two thousand Soldiers, he was not afraid to assault it, and to make
use of his Petard, a new sort of Artillery which then began to be employed.
When by this invention he had made a Gate fly open, he found Vesins ready to
oppose him, who received him very bravely. This Lord was killed upon the first
charge: his death however did not so daunt his Men but they defended themselves
yet four days more from Street to Street. At last all were forced, and the City
horribly sacked, and overflowed with the Blood of its Inhabitants, in revenge
of that of the Huguenots, which they shed in the Massacres of St. Bartholomew.

The other Efforts of that Party manifestly discovered their weakness, which
proved to be greater then could have been imagined. For the disarmed Provinces,
as Normandy, the Isle of France, Champagne and others, refused to contribute
toward this War; the Rochellers not thinking it very just, remained quiet, by
the advice even of the Wise la None; Chastillon could not stir up above three
Cities in Languedoc, which were Lunel, Aigues-Mortes, and Sous-Mieres; and if
Nismes did enter the Lists, it was only because the Catholics did Harass them.
It is true that Captain Merle took Mandes: but it was rather upon his own
private account then the Parties, for he had all the Plunder, and the Party got
nothing by it but hatred for his horrible Robberies.

On all hands the Huguenots had the disadvantage: the Marshall de Biron put
the King of Navarres whole Forces to a full stop, then drove them into their
Holds. He defeated three thousand of his Men in a Combat near Monterabel (in
which the two Sons of the Marquess du Trans of near Relation to that King, and
yet both Catholics, were slain) and beat back the rest to the very Gates of
Nerac. It is said he fired some Volees of Cannon against the Walls, from the
top whereof Queen Margaret beheld the Skirmish; whereat that Princess was so
much offended, she would never pardon him. The Count de Lude in the mean while
took Montaigu in Poitou, the defense whereof was truly much greater then the
goodness of the place; The Duke of Main cleared almost all Daufine, which
brought Lesdiguieres so low, that another such Campaign would have beat him out
of the Country; and the Marshall de Matignon reduced the Town of la Fere in
Picardy, of which the Prince had designed to make a second Rochel.

After he had been six weeks before the place he granted them very good
Composition September. The Kings two Favorites Arques and the young la Valete,
who was afterward named Joyeuse, Espernon and a many Lords were come to the
Siege in great Equipage, and Provisions were brought from all Quarters in
abundance: from whence it was called The Velvet Siege. The Duke of Aumale
Governor of Picardy, and the Duke of Guise, arrived there toward the latter
end, and would have wrested the Honor from Matignon, for which he stored up so
great Resentment, that ever after upon all occasions he studied to thwart them
and break their Measures.

Nothing gave the King more apprehension then the going abroad of the Prince of
Conde: who had left la Fere about the end of March to solicit the aid of
Protestant Princes. In England he saw Queen Elizabeth, at Antwerp the Prince of
Orange, in Germany Casimir, and some other Princes: yet could obtain no
assistance but from Casimir, upon condition of certain places he promised to
give him for security. Upon this assurance he returns by Swisserland and
Geneva, amidst a World of dangers, being taken and stripped in the Territories of
Savoy by some Bandits, who knew not who he was. Lesdiguieres generously
furnished him with Money and an Equipage: nor was his Presence useless to him
there toward the bringing that Nobility to submit to his Command, and thereby
confirming his Authority.

The only hopes of the Huguenots was therefore in an Army of Reisters; the King
dreaded it above all things, and France trembled at the very name of those
cruel Plunderers who had so often preyed upon them. This makes the Queen Mother
and the Duke of Alencon mediate a Peace: the King of Navarre desired it as his
only refuge, and the Duke procured it, that he might be able to carry the whole
force both of the one and the other Party into the Low Countries.

For the States having resolved to declare that the King of Spain had forfeited
the Soverainty of those Provinces, as they did the following year in their
Assembly at the Hague, had sent their Deputies to this Duke, being then at
Plessis lez Tours: with whom they made a Treaty; In which they owned him for
their Prince and Lord, him and his lawful Sons, with the same rights as their
preceding Lords; upon condition that if he had several Sons, they should have
liberty of choosing which of them they best liked; That he should preserve the
ancient Alliances, Rights, and Privileges of the Provinces, should give no
Offices or Employments but to the Natives of those Countries, and do in such
sort that the Provinces might ever be linked to France, but without being
either incorporated, or united to the Crown.

This Treaty Signed, he posted into Guyenne to Negociate the Peace: the place
de Fleix belonging to the Marquess de Trans. In this place, by the care and
industry of the said Prince, with the Duke of Montpensier, and likewise the
Marshall de Cosse, whom the King sent after him, they came to an agreement
toward the end of November in the explanation of certain Articles of the
former Treaty of Peace, which they confirmed by this same. They likewise
granted some places to the King of Navarre, and to satisfy the passion of his
Wife a revocation of Biron, from whom they took away the Lieutenancy of Guyenne
to bestow it upon the Marshall de Matignon which she demanded for him, whose
sober and staid gravity seemed very proper to allay the quick and fiery temper
of the Gascons.

The Thirtieth day of August 1580. Philibert Emanuel Duke of Savoy ended his
Mortal Pilgrimage, and left his Estates, which he had happily recovered by his
Valor, and his most prudent Conduct, to his only Son Charles Emanuel, who

France was at the same time afflicted with two cruel Diseases, the Coqueluche
and the Plague; the first, as we formerly noted having tormented this Nation
twice already, was very painful, and sometimes mortal, but lasted not above six
months; the other killing most that were therewith infected, continued its
violence five or six years, ransacking sometimes one Province, sometimes
another, so that before it ceased above the fourth part of the People died of
it.

After the Duke of Anjou's quitting of Flanders, their Discords and Confusions
daily increased, whereupon the Archduke Matthias, whom the States had called in
to Govern, retired again. The Duke of Parma, who had the Command of the Spanish
Army after the death of Don Juan of Austria, defeated a Party of Casimirs
Keisters, and so beset the rest, that they were glad to accept of quarter and
return into Germany: at which Casimir, who was then gone into England to see
Queen Elizabeth, was so much ashamed, that he goes directly home not daring to
pals by way of the Low Countries. After their departure the Duke of Parma
besieged Maestric; He took it by Storm at four Months end, and in the mean time
Negociated it so well with the Male-contented Lords, that they returned to the
obedience of King Philip, and brought in the Provinces of Ar^ois and Hainault,
with the Cities of L'Isle, Douay, and Archies.

On the opposite, the Provinces of Guelders, Zutphen, Holland, Zealand, Frise,
and Vtrect, then the Cities of Bruges, Ypres, and others united more closely
together for their mutual defense. From thence came the name of the United
Provinces. The Parma fell into after the taking of Marst^ie, gave the States a
little breathing time, and la Noue though he had but three thousand Men, made
Head most bravely against all their Enemies.

As the Spaniards took Groeningben from the States, on his side he took Ninoue
from them, and in the said place the Count of Egmont with his Wife: but shortly
after this generous Commander was defeated in a Rencounter near the Castle of
Ingel-Monster, and fell into the hands of the Spaniards, who set him not at
liberty till the year 1585. and that upon the payment of an hundred thousand
Crowns Ransom.

Huguenots met not with so much difficulty, neither for the verification in
Parliament, nor for the execution, as the former ones had done: Huguenots,
their Zeal grew much more temperate, and indifferent. The King taking the right
course, gave them assurance that they needed to fear no hurt from him, but
might expect much good; That he would do them equal justice, but that he would
bestow no Offices or Employments upon them, nor any Governments, but keep all
Dignities out of their reach. Withal he endeavored to reclaim them by wise
and Christian like Instructions and Arguments, which method converted more of
them in four years time, then the Sword or Hangman had compelled in forty; and
if they had continued the same way of proceeding, this Opinion of Conscience
would no doubt have given place to the sense of Honor.

During this calm, the King instead of fortifying himself, grew still weaker,
and was enervated by idleness and vain pleasures. Since the death of the
Princess of Conde, he had but little inclination to Women, and his Adventure at
Venice gave him another bias. His three chief Favorites were Arques, the young
la Valette, and Saint Luc: the last forfeited his favor by endeavoring to
cure him of his depravation by an illusion which was very ingenious: the other
two remained in full power, with no other Rivals but themselves, and
individually enjoyed the affection of the King, who called them his Children.
He was not satisfied with having erected the Vicounty of Joyeuse to a Pairie
for d'Arques, and the Territories of Espernon which he bought of the King of
Navarre for la Valeste, he would needs honor them with his Alliance, by
Marrying them to his Wives two Sisters, promising to each four hundred thousand
Crowns in Dowry. In effect Joy^use did Marry one, and his Wedding was kept with
such profusion, that it cost the King near four Millions.

To repair these idle Expenses, they were forced to have recourse to new
Edicts; He made no fewer then nine or ten all at once; there were even two and
twenty in less then two Months time, themselves finding the reasons for the
same, and confidently assigning their Merchants and their Tailors upon thos^
Funds. Wherefore the Parliament thinking it behooved them to prevent the
throwing thus away the poor Subjects Money, strenuously opposed the
Verification of them, and Christopher de Thou first President, had once the
courage to answer them, That by the Laws of the Land* which is the public
safety, such things could not, nor ought not to be done.

The States of the United Provinces, found themselves in great perplexities,
their chief Cities were all in combustion through the diversity of Religion,
their Armies without Commanders, and their Soldiers without pay. During this
confusion, the Parma took the City of Breda which belonged to the Prince of
Orange, after Avenues up against the French. Which was ^easible enough, for
having Artois, Hainault, and the City of Dunkirk, there was nothing left to do
it but the gaining of Cambray: and to that end he had besieged it.

The first exploit of the Duke of Anjou was therefore to endeavor the delivery
of that place. Upon the rumor of this Enterprise, which his friends had spread
abroad for his advantage, great numbers of Volunteers, fifteen or twenty Lords
of note, diverse Captains with their Adventurers, nay even established complete
Companies came to him; he had four thousand French Horse, and ten thousand
Foot. The Duke of Parma drew all his Forces together, and stood six hours in
Batalia, to make him believe he was resolved to keep his ground; yet when he
perceived Vat^nciennes. Thus the Town was freed, the Duke received in Cambray
as chief Sovereign of the Castle, and Protector of the Liberties of the
Country, giving his Oath to them upon the Altar of No^tre-Dame, and afterward
in the Town Hall. He then drove the Enemies out of Sl^ce and Arleux, and
battered the Walls of Catea^-Cambresis with so much fury, that he forced it to
surrender at discretion.

And this was all the effect of that blustering Expedition: after these
Exploits the heat of his Volunteers began to cool; and his Army consisting of
independent Parcels, there soon grew as many quarrels as there were several
Captains. So that finding it too perilous to engage himself further, or join
with the States Army who England to wait upon the Queen his Mistress, between
whom the Articles of Marriage were almost agreed upon.

The Courtship went so far that the Queen bestowed a Ring upon him as a pledge
of her faith: but the Caballers against this Alliance, and her Women who knew
the

It happened at the same time that some English Priests and Religious People bred
in the Seminaries of Do^ay and Reims, founded the one by the King of Spain, and
the other by the Guises, contrived diverse Conspiracies against that Queen, in
execution of the Popes Bull who Anno 1570. had Excommunicated and deprived her
of her Edmond Campian a Jesuit. The Duke of Anjou expressed a great deal of
discontent that before his Eyes they should draw those Catholic Priests to
Execution, and the Queen her self was in great pain and trouble: so that amidst
all this hurry no mention was made of the Marriage: and yet either of them
being willing it might be believed abroad in the World, spent almost two Months
in Mirth and noble Entertainments, which at a distance was gues^ed to be their
Wedding Festivals.

When he left the Low Countries, above the one half of his Army being
dispersed, the remainder marched into the County of Flanders by way of Calais,
and joined with that of the States. The Duke of Parma not being able to hinder
this conjunction, besieged Tournay. The Princess of Espinoy in the absence of
her Husband, giving out Orders Captain like, and fighting like a brave Soldier,
defended it for two Months space, and had perhaps saved the place, if the
Citizens, enchanted with the Spanish Catholicon, had not obliged her to
capitulate.

The Prince of Orange and the States pressing the Duke by several Messages to
return, he took leave of Queen Elizabeth, who conducted him as far as
Canterbury, and would have the Earl o^ Leicester, and her Admiral Howard, and
an hundred Gentlemen, accompany him to Flanders. He took Shipping at Dover the
Tenth of February, and in two days he arrived at Flessing^e, where the Prince
of Orange and d'Espinoy waited for him, the next day he went to Middelburgh,
and was transported by Boats to Antwerp on the River Scheld.

The States who were there assembled, made him a most stately Entrance, and
first inaugurated him Duke of Brabant, the Prince of Orange putting on the
Ducal Hat and Mantle, which was of Crimson Velvet lined with Ermins: then
declared him Marquess of the holy Empire, the Consul of Antwerp putting a Gold
Key into h^s Hand, which he immediately returned. From that time he began to
Govern, but with little satisfaction, as having heard amongst the Articles of
his joyful entrance, which were read to him at his Coronation; That he was to
Rule them, not according to his own will and pleasure, but according to Justice
and their Privileges.

In the mean while having also to do with Enemies who thought all ways they
could put in practice lawful, he ran two great hazards. The Eighteenth of March
Orange was wounded with a Pistol Shot in his own House, as he rose from Table
by Jareg^y, a Servant belonging to a broken Banker, who was said to Don Juan of
Austria. He recovered of his Wounds: but the revenge was like to have fallen
upon the Duke of Anjou. The Flemmings fancied he had a design of establishing
his new Dominion by a general Massacre, and grounded their suspicion upon this,
that those Frenchmen who Dined that day with the Prince of Orange presently
killed the Assassine, as if by taking away his life they would prevent all
possibility of discovery who the Authors were that had encouraged him to commit
the Crime: but the young Prince of Orange causing him to be searched, found
Spanish Letters in his Pockets which plainly told them who he was.

While the Prince was under Cure, the Duke made his Entrance at Bruges and at
Ghent; in this last City he received the Ornaments of Earl of Flanders. Some
days after he discovered the horrible Conspiracy of Nicholas Salsede Son of
another Salsede Spaniard, and a fugitive from his Country for some Crime, who
had taken up his habitation in France. It was he that had made War against the
Cardinal de Lorrain in the Country of Messin, for which he was Murdered on the
bloody St. Bartholomews. The Son was also banished from France for having burnt
a Gentleman of Normandy in his own House who had accused him about false Money.
This Fellow therefore pretends to devote himself to the service of the Duke of
Anjou with a whole Regiment raised at his own expense: but the Prince of Orange
who had ever a watchful Eye, discovered that he held some Intelligence with the
Duke of Parma. Thereupon they seize him, as likewise one certain Francis Basa
an Italian, also a B^nquier named Baldwin and some others. It was said they had
plotted to seize upon diverse places to deliver them up to the Prince of Parma,
and had formed some attempt upon the Persons of the Duke of Anjou, and the
Prince of Orange.

The bottom of this mystery could never be certainly known, because Basa after
his having for fear of the Rack or otherwise, discovered very strange things,
Murdered himself in Prison, and the wretched Salsede varied two or three times
upon his Interrogatories, and involved so many Persons in his Crime, who were
known to be Innocent, that no certain Judgment could be drawn from his
Confessions. It was believed he did so, on purpose to be carried to Paris, in
hopes the Duke of Parma Bellievre conducted him thither with so much precaution
that he deluded the Dukes Spies and frustrated the expectation of the Criminal.

The King caused him to be examined diverse times by his Parliament Men, and
placed himself in a Chamber near at hand to over-hear what he would say: he
sung the same note as he had done in Flanders, which startled the King so much
that he knew not whom to confide in any longer, seeing no body about him but
such as were accused. The Parliament condemned him to be drawn by four wild
Horses. The Sentence being pronounced, as they were leading him to the Chapel,
there was, as some affirm, a certain Friar on the Steps who whispering somewhat
in his Ear, made him retract all what he had confessed, thereby leaving the
Judges and the King in greater perplexity then ever.

Anjou's Army could not be above four or five thousand Men this Campaign, which
he divided into three small Bodies to cover the out-skirts of the greater
Cities. That of the Duke of Parma though consisting of more then Thirty
thousand, could take but four or five small Castles, which were of no great
importance; For besides that he was obliged to leave the one half of his Forces
to Garrison his places, when he would have invested Bruxels he was assaulted by
famine, Artois and Hainault being so eaten up that they could furnish him with
no Provisions; and then when he attempted to get into the Country of Waes, the
Duke of Anjou shut up the passage, after which diverse contagious Maladies, the
inundations of Waters by breaking of the Dykes, and such like inconveniences,
constrained him to go into Winter Quarters.

The passion the Queen Mother had for conquering new Kingdoms, had prompted her
to cast her Eyes upon Portugal; But not succeeding in her pretended claim, she
fancied she might accumulate the Right and Title of Anthony with hers. And for
this reason she had drawn him into France, where the King received him with
much honor, and gave a smart reply to the Spanish Ambassador, who made great
instance he might be turned out thence, that France had ever been the refuge of
the unfortunate, and that he should never be persuaded to violate the sanctity
of an Asylum, so inviolably maintained by all his Predecessors. He therefore
permitted his Mother to raise Forces in his Kingdom to pursue her Rights, and
to Equip as many Vessels as she pleased; which she labored in with great
application all the whole year 1581.

Azores, to declare for Anthony, were grown so insolent of their power that
they disturbed all by their Tumults, and did nothing but put the People into
such rage and heats, as produced no good. The Governor whom Antony had sent
thither (it was Emanuel de Sylva his Favorite, whom he created Count de
Torres-Vedras) was more frantic, and much more wicked yet then they: So that
Landerean, whom the Queen had sent with Eight hundred Men till the rest of the
Army was in readiness, endeavoring to give him moderate Council, he set all
his Engines at work to ruin him, even to the suborning of Rascals to
assassinate or poison him.

French Navy parted from Belle-Isle in the Month of June, Strossy was Admiral,
Brissac Vice Admiral, Saint Soulene a Poitevin commanded a Squadron. Don
Antonio went in this Fleet together with the Count de Vimiosa, the only
Portuguese Lord that stuck to him in his misfortune. They landed in the Island
St. Michael, the only one of all the nine which held for the Spaniard, forced
eight hundred Men that would have hindered their coming ashore, defeated Noguera
a Spanish Captain who had drawn three thousand Soldiers together, and marched
directly into the City Elgade: but Anthony instead of Storming the Castle which
would have made him absolute Master of those Islands, and would have given him
the opportunity and advantage of intercepting their India Fleet, wherewith he
might have maintained the War two or three years, amused himself in playing the
King amidst the acclamations of the lightheaded Populace; and in the mean
while the Spanish Navy arrived, Commanded by the Marquess de Santa Crux, who
cast Anchor under shelter of the Castle d'Elgrade, to wait an opportunity of
fighting them.

The French Forces out-numbred them both for Ships and Men: but there was no
less disorder and misunderstanding amongst them, then jealousies and quarrels,
there being many Volunteers on board, most of the Captains having set out their
July, there were scarce twelve of their Men of War that did their duty, the
rest came not within Shot, and Saint Soulene stood quite away with eighteen
Sail without the least fighting (for which he was tried in France, and for his
base cowardice degraded of his Nobility.) The Battle notwithstanding was very
bloody lasting two whole hours, the Ships being grappled with each other,
France was overcome and taken, Strossy was in the same Ship wounded in his
Knee; the rest freed themselves and retired, many of them toward France, and
some to the Terceres, where Don Antonia was gone to secure himself before the
Fight.

The Marquess de Santa Crux stained the honor of this brave Victory by an
unbecomming and barbarous cruelty: when they presented Strossy to him on the
Deck of his Ship, he caused him in cold Blood to be killed by his Halberdiers
and cast overboard: and as for the Prisoners*which were to the number of three
hundred, amongst whom were fourscore Gentlemen, after he had led them in
triumph into Villa-Franca, which is the capital City of the Island St. Michael,
he doomed them all to death as Enemies of the common Peace, Favorers of Rebels
and Pirates. The Gentlemen had their Throats cut, the rest were hanged within
two soot of the ground, and the French Priest that Confessed them was
dispatched after the others.

Landereans Forces and seventeen French Ships; Anthony continued at the
Terceras till toward the end of Autumn, when fearing to be blocked up in
Winter by the Stormy Weather, or in Summer by the return of the Spanish Fleet,
he sailed away for France. This time being both poor and unfortunate, he met
with a more cold Reception then before, when he was able to scatter his rich
Jewels amongst the Grandees at Court, and give large promises to all the World.
However he did not lay aside all hopes of recovering his Kingdom: in Anno 1588.
with the assistance of Queen Elizabeth, he made another attempt, which
succeeding but ill, he retired again into France, and spent the rest of his
life there, under the protection of King Henry IV.

de Chattes with eight hundred Men only to the Islands Asorez. He had at the
same time to deal with the malignity of Torres-Vedras, and the Forces of the
Spaniards. The extravagant Torres-Vedras ruined all his generous designs, and
perished himself, being taken in the Mountains, and executed by the common
Hangman: but the Spaniards gave quarter to Chates and his Men. The barbarous
and proud Islanders were handled as they deserved: all their Estates
confiscated, and their Persons reduced to slavery. The Ecclesiastics and Monks
who had been the most active, were the most rudely punished; This appears by
the Brief of Absolution obtained by Philip of the Pope for having put two
thousand of them to death, as well in those Islands, as in Portugal.

Julian Calender, (that is to say reformed by Julius Caesar) for the Bissextile
adding forty five minutes of an hour beyond the course the Sun makes in four
years time, these put together made a whole day in 133 years; which at the long
run would have perverted the Seasons and the Celebration of Easter, for the
Equinoctial in Spring, which they had computed to be on the One and twentieth
of March, was already fallen to the Eleventh of the same Month, so that at
length Easter would have happened to be in Winter, and Christmas in the Summer
time. Several Popes had designed to find some remedy, Gregory XIII. having set
the most famous Astronomers at work for this purpose, retrenched ten days of
this year 1582. and Ordained from thenceforward that in every 400 years there
should be three days of Bissextile cut off, to wit, one day of each of the
first hundred, to begin from the year 1700. The Protestant Princes rejected
this method, as being Ordained by a Power they would not own: but the Kings
Council approved it, and the Parliament Decreed it should take place this very
year, and that the Tenth of November should be accounted the Twentieth.

This year died three very considerable Persons, Lewis Duke of Montpensier
surnamed the Good, Arthur de Cosse Marshall of France, and Christopher de Thou
first President. This last had Achilles de Harlay for Successor in his Office.

Francis Prince Dauphin who was called Duke of Montpensier after the death of
Lewis his Father, and the Marshall de Bison, had brought to the Duke of Anjou
in the Low Countries a re-inforcement of seven thousand Foot, and twelve
hundred Horse, and himself had raised some Companies of Reisters. This was his
last Stake and Hand: all his Credit and Friends were now drained, he had in
this War consumed the whole Revenue of his Appenage, which was above Fifty
thousand Crowns, and engaged himself for three hundred thousand more. The four
Millions which the States raised for their Expenses in War, went all out in
fruitless Pensions, so that they there was not forty thousand Francs left clear
to him. Besides this, he was placed amidst two Religions which shocked each
other most furiously, and both shocked him, amidst the hare-brain'd and
suspicious Flemmings, his own discontented Captains, the murmurring common
People devoured by the Soldiers, the out-crying-Soldiers*starving for want of
Bread, having worse Enemies amongst the surly Flemmings then the very
Spaniards, the contempt and disobedience of both the one and the other Nation,
and the secret Practices of the Prince of Orange.

Spanish Council and his own darlings had instilled upon the least good
success, made him deaf to all he asked, and hardened him to an utter denial. The
King of Navarre profer'd the King to carry the War into the very heart of
Spain, to employ of his own for that purpose five hundred thousand Crowns, for
which he would engage his Patrimonial Counties of Rovergne and L'Isle. Moreover
to prevent all jealousy, he would make up his Army only of Swiss and such
Reisters as were allied to France, and of French both of the one and the other
Religion; Offered withal to leave the Command of it to some French Marshall
of the Kings own choosing, and to send him Madam his only Sister, and the Prince
of Conde's Daughter for Hostage. These Propositions did but give him more
Umbrage, both of the one and the other, because it hinted some joint interest
and common concern between them: as on the other hand the threats which
sometimes broke loose from the Duke of Anjou's Tongue in the height of his
anguish, enraged the Favorites the more, and gave them some thoughts of
contriving his ruin there, to prevent his revenge, in case he returned.

So that when he sent to demand succors of the King, they obliged him to
answer, That he should put himself in a condition to receive them, that he
should make himself strongest for fear of being turned out by those Merchants,
as the Archduke Matthias had been; and what they counseled him on purpose to
destroy him, the Queen Mother advised him to do to preserve him, pressing him
to seize upon the best Places, and to settle his Sovereignty upon some solid
foundation.

Those that Governed him more particularly were People without Honor and
without Faith, amongst others Quinsay his Secretary, Fervaques and Ourilly his
Son in Law, a Youth, Son of one S^rgent de la Ferte near Blois, whose Lute,
Voice, Dancing, and other qualities more worthy of the esteem and affection of
some Lady then a great Prince, had brought him in very great favor with his
Master. These People ever keeping him at defiance with the Duke of Montpenseir,
and other Persons of Worth and Honor who would have been able to dissuade him
from all unhandsom or unjust actions, spurred him on perpetually with motives
sometimes of revenge, sometimes of interest, to seize upon certain Places, of
which they promised January.

Dunkirk, Dixmude, Denremond, Vilvoord, Alost, and Meenen: but failed upon
Ostend and Bruges. The Undertakers were taken at Bruges and confessed the whole
Conspiracy: even that the Duke was to seize upon Antwerp, and the Person of the
Prince of Orange, to force him to give back those Writings, by which he had
obliged himself to leave him the Counties of Holland and Zealand. Those of
Antwerp had also scented the Plot, and put themselves in Arms: nevertheless the
Dukes Orders being to seize upon the Port of Kornebergh the nearest Gate to his
Palace, that same day being the Eighteenth, and news of what had been done in
those other parts coming to him late at night, he durst not defer it any longer.

Wherefore notwithstanding the entreaties of the Prince of Orange, he went out
of the City with his Guards and two hundred Horse he had then about him,
pretending to go to see his Army which was encamped near at hand. As he was
passing along he makes a halt upon the Bridge, that so his Guards upon the
Signal given might seize the Kornebergh Gate. Those Gentlemen that marched
before him, turned back on a sudden, beat off the Burghers, and set Fire to
the next House as their Beacon to the Army. In less then three quarters of an
hour there were seventeen Companies of French, and six hundred Lancers within
the City, crying out Kill, Vive the Mass, and, the Town is our own. But the
Burghers who were prepared for it, come out of their Houses, chain up the
Streets, make strong Barricades, set Courts of Guards in the Market places and
Carrefours, and the Women fly to the Windows with Stones and such like
Artillery. Fervaques, who with a hundred Horse thought to creep along the
Rampart into the place before the Citadel unseen, meets at St. Georges Gate
with five hundred Men well barricado'd who put him to a full stand; Two
Companies of Foot which he set on to force them thence, were beaten off: in the
mean time his retreat is cut off behind, so that he can neither go forward nor
backward. The Prince of Orange coming thither, goes directly to him, masters
him and leads him away Prisoner with his hands bound behind him.

His defeat greatly encouraged the Burghers. All without distinction either of
Religion, Sex, or Condition, animate each other against the Common Enemy. The
French are worsted every where, they betake themselves to flight: the
precipitate haste of those that fled out of the Town, with that of the Swiss
who strove to come in to assist, made an embarras at the Gate; they crowd more
and more, and stisle one another. Several after they had run from place to
place about the Rampers* finding no way to get out, and being closely pursued,
were glad to leap down from the Wall. The Duke of Anjou beheld them with a
great deal of pleasure, thinking Swiss and retire, leaving fifteen hundred of
his Men, whereof three hundred were Gentlemen, stark dead upon the place, and
two thousand shut within the City.

The Prince of Orange and the mercy of the Burghers saved the lives of these
last: for so soon as there was no more resistance, they endeavored to secure
them, assist the wounded, and withdraw those that lay in heaps at the Gate,
some of them yet gasping for life; and even within three days after sent those
Prisoners to the Duke with a great deal of civility. Fervaques only ran great
hazard: the People who believed him to be the Author of that infamous
Treachery, would have torn him in pieces, if the Prince of Orange under
pretense of strictly guarding him, had not locked him in a Chamber within the
Castle strongly barred with Iron, and placed two Files of Soldiers at his Door.

The attempt failing, the Duke of Anjou touched at least with shame and
confusion if not with remorse and repentance, retired to the Castle of Berken
with the rest of his Forces who yet made up ten thousand Men, and from thence
wrote Letters to the Deputies of the States, wherein having reminded them of
his Services, and much exagerated the contempt and unhandsome treatment he had
received from them; told them the indignities done to him that very day, had
put his People out of all patience, and cast them into those disorders, for
which he was extremely troubled; That he had not yet in the least changed the
good will he had by so many effects expressed toward them, of which he was
desirous to give them notice, entreating they would send him an account of
their last Resolutions, that he might take his measures by their Answer.

The States resolved some Deputies should be sent to him, and Orange obtained
they should suffer Provisions for his Army to be carried after him. This favor
having lasted but two days, he thought of gaining Dendremond, but those of
Antwerp hindered his passage over the Scheld, and when afterward he would have
taken his way by Vilvoord, those of Malines let go their Sluices: so that his
unfortunate Army was constrained to expose themselves to a march through that
great Tract of Water, not without loss of above three hundred Men. In fine
after they had trudged near thirty leagues with incredible difficulties, though
it was but seven leagues distant by the direct road, they arrived at
Dendremond, which served them as the second Plank after their Shipwreck.

England, and the King himself, for the honor of the French Nation, mediated
and interposed to allay the fury of the Flemmings, and palliate the fault of
the young Prince. So much was effected by their Negociations, that the States
fearing he should give up to the Spaniard those places he yet held, agreed with
him by a Provisional Treaty: That he should have ninety thousand Florins to pay
his Army, provided he would retire to Dunkirk, and remain there whilst they
endeavored an Accommodation; and in the mean time surrender Dendremond and
Dixmude.

Eiendhoue: but Biron who commanded them, being ill seconded, and withal
unprovided of every thing, was not in a condition to perform it, but had enough
to do to struggle for two whole Months together with his necessities.
Nevertheless the Duke of Parma durst not attaque him in his Camp near
Rosendale. Mean while the Disorders increased daily in those Provinces thorough
the contrariety of Sentiments, and diversity of the Interests of the States
Deputies, who agreed in nothing but their outcries against the French.
Therefore after the Duke of Anjou had for two Months languished in his
melancholy abode of Dunkirk, expecting their ultimate Resolution in vain, he
Embarked the Eight and twentieth of June, to come to Calais.

Ghentois blinded by their obstinate hatred against the French and the
Catholic Religion, shut up Birons passage, whereby he might have gone to the
relief of Dunkirk, so that it surrendered upon Composition; and after that
Neuport, Furnes, Dixmude, St. Vinochs Bergh, and Meenen fell into the hands of
the Spaniards. These losses redoubled their outcries, and mutinies in Ghent
and Antwerp, in so much as the Prince of Orange not finding himself any longer
secure in Antwerp, prudently retired into Zealand with all his Family the Two
and twentieth of July, having first assigned the States General to meet at
Middeburgh.

A Month after, Biron went likewise out of the Country with his Troops, and led
Anjou who was in Cambresis. He made signs as if he would have raised more: but
this was only to have some pretenoe not to come to Court, though the King had
sent for him. His last act had covered his face with so much shame and
confusion, that he avoided the sight of all Mankind, wandering from place to
place like one berest of his senses, and was not able to admit his own Mother
into his presence, who went on purpose to seek him out. Thus did he waste the
last six Months

But himself troubled with Hypocondriacal Vapors, (which affect the Brain,
render the Mind feeble and inconstant, possess it with fantastical and airy
Visions) had suffered himself to be led away with a humor of Devotion as
little serious as unbecomming his Dignity. A Cloister was his most usual
Retreat, Processions and Fraternities his most frequent Exercise, and
Pilgrimages his greatest Expeditions; From these Devotions he would often in an
instant leap into his pleasures afresh, and had even found out the art to blend
them together; During the Carnaval he went by day about the Streets in
Masquerade, and at night into the Houses, where a thousand youthful frolicks
were acted; then in Lent he went in Procession with the Penitents.

This year he erected a Fraternity at Paris, named Penitents of the
Annunciation, because he began it on that day. They marched by two and two in
three Divisions, of blew, black, and white, covered with a Sack, or Frock of
those colors, having a Vizord on their Faces, and a Whip in their Hands, or at
their Girdle. The Cardinal de Guise carried the Cross, all the Grandees of the
Court, even the Chancellor and Keeper of the Seals, were of them: but not one
of the Parliament would be present, lest they should seem to countenance and
authorize this Foreign Novelty.

The People were too well acquainted with the disorderly and licentious lives
of the Courtiers, to be moved with these superficial shows of Devotion: and
moreover those loads of Oppression laid upon them by the Minions in new
Imposts, creation of Offices, and violent Taxes, which were raised (a thing
unusual in this Kingdom) without any Verification of the Sovereign Courts,
whetted the most slanderous Tongues and Satirical Pens both against them, and
against their Master. Joyeuse and Espernon levelled at the Duke of Anjou whose
grandeur was an obstruction to their vast designs, and the Guises were agreed
with them on this point; Espernon shocked the Guises, and was shocked by them
upon all occasions: but Joyeuse would hold in with those Princes, because he
had Married a Wife of that Family, or rather because he desired to make himself
Head of the League, and gain the support of so strong a Party. The Queen Mother
had a mortal hatred both for the Guises and for the Minions, but she declining
in her power, found her self under the necessity of making use both of the one
and other to ascend again. She trod the same path to her dying day; yet she
endeavored to preserve the Duke of Anjou whom either of them sought to ruin,
and studies to bring him once more to the management of Affairs for her own
ends, though she were resolved not to let him hold it long. Such was the
disposition of all Parties then.

The King himself had put the first thoughts of dividing his Kingdom betwixt
them, into the heads of his brace of Favorites, as if they had been his own
Children. Joyeuse had conceived a design to get Languedoc, and to join the
Comtat of Avignon to it; and to this effect was resolved by the Authority of
the King, to oblige his Holiness to Excommunicate the Marshall de Montmorency
as a protector and favourer of Heretics, and to give him the Comtat in
exchange for the Marquisate of Salusses. Now that he might not refuse him this,
he had contrived an intrigue to seize upon it, by means of William Patris
Bishop of Grace Favorite of the Cardinal d'Armagnac the Popes Legate in those
Countries: but the Mine being discovered Patris was assassinated by order from
Rome.

Joyeuse did not give over the pursuing of his point, and finding he could get
nothing but ambiguous answers from Rome, he resolved to go thither himself to
negociate this Affair with the Pope, imagining that the splendor of his
favor, and the gallant propositions he would offer for the exaltation of the
Pontifical Authority, would obtain all he desired. He was magnificently
received at Rome: Lewis Cardinal d'Est presented him to his Holiness, he
respected him as the Favorite of a very potent Monarch: but for the rest did
not comply with any of his demands, except a Cardinals Hat for the Archbishop
of Narbonne his younger Brother.

The King stiling him his Brother in his Letters of Recommendation, the
Venetians upon his return rendered him as much honor as if he had been a Son of
France, the Dukes of Ferrara and Mantoua treated him in the same manner, and
all the Cities of France where he passed made him their Compliments as they
were ordered to do: nevertheless the vexation of mind he brought home with him
for the Popes denial, or as some others will have it, an unfortunate trick of
youth, cast him into a long fit of Sickness, which made him so lean, and so
ill-favored, that it was some time ere he durst appear before the King, with
whom during this interval his Rival had gained so much advantage, that he might
easily have quite supplanted him, had he not feared

Queen Margaret was then at Court, where she could not forbear making feuds and
practicing her wonted malice. A Courier whom the King sent to Joyeuse in Italy,
James de Harlay Chanvallon, said she kept certain Ladies about her that were
her Confidents, whom he called precious Vermin; then some few days after
commanded her to go to her Husband, and upon the Road, sent a Captain of his
Guards who searched her very Litter, pulled her Masque off her Face, and seized
upon two or three of her Domestic Servants and brought them before the King
with two of her Dames. He examined them each apart concerning the manner of
Life and Conversation of his Sister, then sent them to the Bastille.

The King of Navarre could easily not resolve to receive his Wife thus defamed;
he pressed the King to chastise her himself if she deserved to suffer such
Indignities, if not to clear her of those Scandals: the King without offering
to make out any de Matignon having invested him in Nerac by privately conveying
Garrisons into all the places thereabout, forced him to receive her.

The Expenses of the Favorites were excessive, and the depredations of the
Finances, even by those very Men that managed the Treasury, much greater yet.
This ill Husbandry begot such an extreme scarcity of Money, that often times
there was not enough to furnish the Kings Table, and if we may so say, the
Pottage-Pot stood often topsey-turvey. His Flatterers pretended the People
loved him so infinitely, that whenever he did but signify his wants, all (...)
untie their Purse Strings to assist him; It was for this purpose, but under
(...) ^our of redressing the present Disorders, that he the precedent year, had
sent to visit the provinces by Persons of Credit and Probity, who with smooth
and fine Harangues, concluded always with a touch upon that String, but to very
little purpose.

Germain en Lay, thinking thereby to gain the good will of the People, and let
them know that if he had sent Commissioners, it was not so much for his own
Interests, as to hear their Complaints and do them Justice.

Chiverny had introduced that fraudulent practice amongst them ever since he
had had the Seals, endeavoring thereby to procure both Employment and
Authority to himself, as not having so much (...) he desired in Affairs of
State.

The Clergy were not forgetful in demanding the re-establishment of Elections,
and the publication of the Council of Trent: as to the first point, all those
that thought it much easier to acquire favor and interest, then merit and
learning stood up against it: and for the second the Chapters, Parliaments, and
the Kings Council made Head and opposed it; so that they obtained neither the
one nor the other. As for the rest, the King established four Councils, i. e.
the Council for Foreign Affairs, the Council of State, the Council de Finances,
(or the Treasury) and the Privy Council. They were composed of Men of the
Sword, of the Church, and of the long Robe, to whom he prescribed even the
fashion of their Garments both for Winter and Summer, and assigned them two
thousand Livers per Annum Wages.

The remaining part of the year was spent in settling these Regulations and
diverse France has never had any other effect but the multiplying of Abuses and
Grievances. In the mean while the Three and twentieth November died the
Cardinal Rene de Birague, aged Seventy four years, who said of himself, That he
was A Cardinal without a Title, a Priest without a Benefice, and a Chancellor
without the Seals; (for in the year 1578. he had given them up to Chiverny) One
might have added, A Judge without knowledge in the Law, and a Magistrate
without any Authority, because in truth he had no learning, and bowed his Head
like a tall Reed to every blast of Court wind, having more respect for a Valet
in favor then to all the Laws of the Kingdom.

A famous Ingenier named Louis de Foix, Native of Paris, but Originally of the
Country whose name he bare, began this year to build the Phare at the mouth of
the Bourdeaux, near the ruins of another Tower which was named the Tower of
Cordouan. Two years before he had done great service toward the Trade of
Bayonne. The Sea had brought such vast quantities of Sand into the old The
Country word for the Mouth of the River.
Boucaud of the River Adour, that she had forsaken that, and had made her self
a new one, but longer and more tortuous, by which she discharged her self into
the Sea at Cape-breton: He forced it by strong Banks, to take the former way,
which is much the more commodious and in a direct line.

The greatest apprehension King Philip lay under, was, lest the Low Countries
should give themselves up to the King of France, rather then fall again under
the tyranny of his Governors. Every one desired it, the honest Frenchman, to
remove the Civil War out of the Kingdom, the Favorites in hatred to the Duke
of Anjou, and the Huguenots to avoid the mischiefs threatened by the League.
This was it made Philip endeavor and try by all means and ways to set France
on fire first to prevent them from doing so in his own Countries. It is said,
that having found amongst the Papers belonging to Don Juan of Austria some kind
of Treaty between that Prince and the Duke of Guise, he threatened the said Duke
he would reveal his secrets to the King, unless he would contract the like
private Intelligence with him, and would at the same time have obliged him to
take up Arms: but could not engage him to the last particular neither by his
Menaces, nor by his Prayers.

Having missed his end tha^ (...) he took another quite contrary one: and would
needs make the Huguenots ri^e, a^^ressing himself to the King of Navarre
profering to give him fifty thousand Crowns a Month, and two hundred thousand
for advance. That King gave Ear to him for a while: but on a sudden repented
it, and gave information to the King.

This was because they had put another design into his Head. Gebard Truchses
Archbishop of Colen, had Married and struggled hard to keep both his Wife and
his Bishopric too: which induced him to embrace the Religion of Calvin, whose
Principles allow the joining those two things together, which are not
compatible in the Roman Church. It concerned the reputation of the Protestant
Party to maintain him in his Archbishopric: the King of Navarre fancied
therefore that it might prove a considerable business to unite all the Princes
of that Religion to undertake his defense,

His design was by all applauded, but seconded by none: so that Gebard, who in
the beginning had some advantage, being forsaken by all the World, even by
Casimir, who was busy about getting the possession of the Palatinate after the
death of the Lewis his elder Brother, was turned out of all the places he held,
and retired to the Hague in Holland, experimenting at leisure and to his own
cost that a Wife without an Estate is a thing much more inconvenient then a
Benefice without a Wife.

Spain continually pres^^d the Guises to rivet themselves more closely to him.
And to engage them, he let them see a Treaty of Montmorencies which was then on
foot: who being pushed at by Joyeuse, (he undertaking to thrust him out of
Languedoc) had indeed made application for his secret protection. Besides the
Favorites shocked them every hour, and stripping them day by day of their
Offices and Governments, hurried them to despair: nevertheless considering the
inconveniences and peril such are liable to who take up Arms against the King,
they could not yet resolve to play so dangerous a part.

Though the Duke of Guise knew that the Duke of Anjou hated him to death, yet
he forbore not to tempt him with diverse Propositions, for it would have been or
infinite advantage to have had a Son of France at the Head of his Party. The
Duke of Anjou listened for a while to his profers: but when it was least thought
on or Carnaval, which fell out this year about the latter end of February: but
he staid not above seven or eight days at Court, and then returned to
Chasteau-Thierry.

May. After which accident he yet languished twenty days more with a slow
Fever, then gave up his Soul the Tenth of June. He carried with him to his
Grave the Tears and Sighs of those unhappy People who had assisted him in the
War of Flanders: for he died in Debt Three hundred thousand Crowns, and the
King would rather vainly expend two hundred thousand on his Funeral then pay
one Penny of his Debts.

Many imagined that his Death was not Natural, and said this was the first Act
of that Tragedy whereof Salsede had made the Prologue. Now that which gave most
credit to such Discourse, was two horrible attempts which were set on foot at
the same time; One against Queen Elizabeth by a Natural Englishman named
William Parry, who had undertaken to kill her in her Park, but he was detected
and punished; the other upon the Prince of Orange, who was unfortunately killed
by Pistol-Shot in his own House, Balth^zar Gerard a Native of the
Franche-Comte, and an Emissary of the Spaniards. Philip the eldest of that
Princes two Sons, being then in the Spaniards hands, where he was held a long
time, the States gave the second, named Maurice, the Government of Holland,
Zealand, and West-Frise, together with the Admiralty, though he were scarce
Eighteen years of Age.

Monsieurs Life gave the Queen Mother work enough, put some stop to the
ambition of the Guises, and lulled the King of Navarre asleep, his Death quite
changed the whole Scene and Interests of those Factions. It seemed already as
if the succession of the Crown were open, the whole World knew the King was
incapable of getting Children by reason of his debility proceeding from a
Distemper which made him shed his Hair. The Queen Mother who little valued the
Fundamental Laws of France, would needs call the Children of her Daughter by
the Duke of Lorrain to the Crown; she had sounded the Kings mind upon it, and
endeavored to persuade him, that there remained but little of the Blood Royal
(...) sixth degree, which must needs become very cold and languid at that
distan^^, that the Bourbons were no more of his Parentage then by Adam and Eve,
and that it would be more natural to leave the Succession to his Nephews, then
to Persons so far off. There is some likelihood she might have succeeded in her
intentions, had the Duke of Lorrain and his Son, but inherited as much courage,
and as many noble qualities as the Duke of Guise was Master of.

This Man seemed to take no notice of her design, but made her hope he would
serve her in all things: but as he loved himself better yet then the elder
Branch of his own House, he consulted his own proper advantage. Now because he
had no right or title of his own to intermedle in the Affairs of the Kingdom,
he thought it convenient to make use of the Cardinal Charles de Bourbon, whom
he possessed with the opinion that he was presumptive Heir to the Crown, as
being nearer by one degree then the King of Navarre his Nephew, representation
taking no place in a Transversal Line, so that this good Man hated his Nephew
as his Rival, and hugged and looked upon the Duke of Guise as a powerful Friend
who helped him to make out his Right.

The King was well informed of all these practices by the King of Navarre, and
the more he found them desirous to keep that Prince at distance, the more he
thought it his Interest to draw him nearer: but to remove and take away all
manner of pretense they could have whereby to render him odious to the
Catholics, he would willingly have brought him back into the bosom of the
Church, before he called him to Court. To that end he sent the Duke of Espernon
to him, who strove to persuade him by Arguments of Interest, which ordinarily
are most prevalent with Princes: but his Ministers and the Consistorians
deterred him from it, and perhaps he apprehended the King did not proceed
sincerely, and that they only felt his pulse, to try whether they could Plessis
Mornay to satisfy their Congregations, whom this Conference had hugely
allarmed, caused it to be published to the great displeasure of the King, and
the disadvantage even of his own Master.

For the Leagued began to report that Espernon was not gone thither to convert,
but to confirm him in his Heresy; that he took a pride in continuing obstinate
in his Errors; and that the King chalking him out the way to oppress the
Catholic Princes, he would certainly if ever he attained the Crown overturn
the ancient Religion. They bawled much louder yet when they were made
acquainted that by his means the King was agreed with Montmorency, at the very
time he was raising Men to fall upon that Marshall, and that shortly after for
his sake only, had prolonged the time for restitution of those places which had
been given to the Huguenots.

Their Emissaries made this found high amongst the People, the Preachers
thundered it in their Pulpits, the Confessors whispered it in the Ears of their
Penitents, and their Libels insinuated the same to all their Readers. To these
supposed subjects of Declamation, they cast in the Protection of Geneva, the
Order of the Garter sent by Queen Elizabeth to the King, and a pretended League
made by the Protestants at Magdeburgh for the defense of Gebard Truchses. Then
after they had stained the honor of the King by all the inventions they could
think of, they highly recommended the Piety, Courage, and goodness of the
Lorrain Princes, whom they termed Bucklers of their Faith, and the Fathers of
their Country and People.

Paris, then in the Provinces. The Duke of Nevers was he who labored most to
shape it into some form and regular method. In a few months it grew formidable,
and in a condition to declare: nothing was wanting to complete their Authority
but a confirmation from the Pope: Father Claude Matthew a Jesuit, carried the
Platform and Memoirs of it to Rome, the Cardinal Pelve presented it to his
Holiness, and the Spanish Cardinals did second it, or hugged

Besides the cause of Religion, the extraordinary oppression of Impost favored
it extremely: all other pretenses and practices of the Grandees had been of
little efficacy to move the People, had they not been grievously molested. The
loads that lay upon them were insupportably heavy in comparison of those in
former Kings Reigns; the King had made Edicts for more then fifty Millions, of
which not so much as two ever came into his Coffers; and the Gifts in this year
1584. amounted to five Millions of Gold. Wherefore to satisfy the People upon
their menacing Complaints, he suppressed sixty four Edicts which had been
verified in Parliament, abated seven hundred

Observing how the Guises by their caresses had gained the favor of the
People, he affected during some Months to appear Popular; he showed himself in
public and with a smiling and gracious Countenance, caressed the Deputies from
the several Cities, and the principal Bourgeois of Paris, assisted at the
Fraternities and solemn Masses, but this borrowed Humor was soon spent, and he
shrouded himself within his Closet as before.

Espernon with some of the Council, had made a Party to seize upon the Duke of
Guise: he had notice of it and retired to his Government of Champagne, carrying
his Nephew along with him: the Cardinal his Brother followed soon after. The
Spanish Agents took advantage of this juncture, and never let them rest, till
they had made a secret Treaty with them. It was negociated at Joinville, and
concluded the last day of December of this year 1584.

It contained a Confederation and League Offensive and Defensive between King
Philip and the Catholic Princes, for them and for their Heirs, to preserve the
Catholic Religion, as well in France as in the Low Countries. That when the
Death of Henry III. should happen the Cardinal de Bourbon should be installed
in the Throne, and that all Heretical Princes relapsed should for ever be
excluded; That in such case the new King should renew the Treaty made at
Cambray in 1558. should banish Trent to be observed, renounce both for himself
and his Successors all Alliance with the Turk, hinder the Cities belonging to
the Low Countries to be put any more into the hands of the French, and aid the
Catholic King to reduce Cambray and the Rebel Cities; Reciprocally the
Spaniard should furnish the French Princes with fifty thousand Pistols per
Month, and should advance them four hundred thousand from six Months to six
Months, for which the Cardinal de Bourbon should be accountable if he attained
to the Crown.

Spain caused several others to be paid to the Duke of Guise, which he
scattered about with a free hand to gain those of whom he stood in most need.
There were few, yea, very few indeed, in all France that were not to be bought,
could he have paid down but the price demanded: but as all the Gold of India
had not been sufficient to purchase and satisfy all that were Venal, there
happened to be multitudes who enraged that they had been neglected, or less
valued then others whom they esteemed much beneath themselves, turned the other
way, and became sworn Enemies to this Guisian Faction.

After the States of Holland had wasted a great deal of time in deliberating
under whose Dominion they should seek a shelter, that might be able to guard
and secure them from the oppression of the Spaniard, having lost the Cities of
Bruges and Ghent, and the Duke of Parm^ holding Antwerp invested, they sent
some Deputies to the King to entreat he would accept them for his Subjects. The
Spanish Ambassador employed all his Efforts to hinder them from being admitted
to Audience: however he could not: the King heard them, received their
Propositions in Writing and promised to return his Answer. Then did the
Spaniards press the Duke of Guise to declare himself, and could have no more
patience with him till he had thrown his Masque aside.

When therefore he had put the Cardinal de Bourbon, (the best Card in his Hand)
into Picardy having been to fetch him at Gaillon, whence they carried him to
Peronne: he put forth a Declaration the Eighteenth of March, not Signed by any
one; then observing little credit was given to it, because it had no name, he
put forth a second, bearing that of the Cardinal de Bourbon, together with the

At the same time the Duke played his Game; Verdun and then Toul were surprised
by Guitaud: but they failed at Mets where the Duke of Espernon had put things
in good posture. Himself secured Chaalons and Mezieres, the Duke d'Aumale most
of the Cities in Picardy, Brissac that of Angiers, Entragues secured himself of
Orleans, the Duke of Mayenne of Dijon, and some others in Burgundy by himself,
and of a great many Cities and Castles in Daufine by the Nobility of the
Country, whom he had charmed with his magnificence and civility. The City of
Bourdeaux barricado'd her self to drive out Matignon, but that wise and prudent
Lord, making use first of his Entreaties till he had drawn his Men together,
then of his Commands when he found himself the stronger, caused the Barricado's
to be pulled down, and so seized upon some of the most Mutinous, whom
notwithstanding he pardoned. Some few days after he craftily allured Vaillac
Governor of the Castle Trompette to come thither, and forced him to surrender
the place.

Dariez second Consul of Marseille, had promised in the absence of the first,
to make himself Master thereof; the Duke of Nevers was to have had that
Government, and to faciliate the Enterprise, had sent four of the Duke of
Florences Galleys thither crowded with Foot-Soldiers, who had cast Anchor
without the Chain of that port, expecting the Signal for execution. Now Dariez,
by means of one certain Boniface, Nostre-Dame de la Guard: yet did not carry
the business on, or follow his first blow with vigor, but kept up the
Commotion for three days without completing his design: In the mean while a
notable Man named Francis Bouguier, who had great credit with the Marseillois,
having got all his Friends together, besets him in a Court of Guard, and
carries both him and Boniface away Prisoners to the Town Hall, so that the
Grand Prior coming the next day with the Count de Carces, they brought them
forthwith upon their Trial. In one day they were Examined, Condemned, and
Hanged by Torch-light.

The Duke of Nevers came to Avignon, as was conjectured, to encourage in the
Enterprise; yet some have thought his Voyage had another motive; Being of a
tender Conscience, he desired, say they, before he engaged farther in the
League, to Matthew the Jesuit, (called the Courier of the League) made two or
three Journeys one soon after another to Rome, to obtain a Bull for it; in
default of a Bull he demanded a Brief, and in default of a Brief a Letter only,
that the Duke of Nevers might have a sight of it in the Vice-Legats hands. This
was the occasion, as some believe, of that Princes going to Avignon: but Father
Mat hew lost all his labor, he could neither obtain Brief nor Bull.

Nevertheless there is a Letter to be seen, lately made public, making mention
that the Pope did not think good they should attempt upon the Life of the King,
but only secure his Person, to seize upon his Places under his Authority;
whence two things may be deduced, (if at least it were not an Imposture of that
Couriers to engage the Duke) the one that the Pope at the bottom did not
discountenance the League, although he durst not declare himself for fear of
the consequence and because of the uncertainty of the success; the other that
the League had made some proposition against the Person of the King, and that
the Duke of Nevers was not ignorant of it. However it were, the Enterprise of
Marseilles failing, he made a Journey to Rome, and from that time, as some
write, or within a year afterward, utterly renounced the League; and thus
having offended his Brother in Law the Duke of Guise, he necessarily became his
Enemy.

Espernon and his Partisans would have them attaque the League without
intermission and without any quarter; on the contrary such as did dread the
Duke of Guise, or hated Espernon, were of opinion to temporise. The King at
first followed Espernons advice, but soon after falling into his natural
softness, and persuaded by his Mother, he relaxed so far, as to g^ve Commission
to that Princess to go to Espinay, find out the Duke of Guise, and Treat with
him.

His Order was she should oblige him to lay down his Arms before she entered
upon any Negotiation, on the contrary the Duke of Guises design was to gain
time that he might draw his Forces together. Which he craftily practiced for
ten or twelve days together: then in short told her neither himself nor Friends
would quit their Arms till they were satisfied in their demands, and
immediately took Horse to meet his Reisters who were then upon the Frontiers.

Scarce was he out of sight when Rubempre, either for not being well paid, or
for being so by both sides, labored to debauch the old Cardinal de Bourbon
from him; no sooner had he a hint of it but he returned in post-haste to
prevent it. In the mean while the King of Navarre puts forth Manifesto's, to
show the justice of his Cause, in one of which he offered the Duke of Guise to
decide this Quarrel between them two, Navarre, that he had no contest against
him, and that he only concerned and interested himself for defense of the
Catholic Religion.

These Manifesto's however had a great effect upon the Spirits of such as were
not then engaged to either Party, and brought in great numbers; and besides the
Forces of the League were beaten and dispersed in diverse Provinces, the Duke of
Montpensier cut off five hundred Men commanded by the Baron de Drou, who lived
at discretion in his Duchy of Chastelleraud; the Duke of Joyeuse beat along
before him the Troops of the Duke d'Elbaeuf, from Touraine even to Normandy,
where they were totally dispersed; and Espernon getting on Horseback, as soon
as he was cured of an Imposthume above his Jaw on the left Cheek, pursued four
thousand Men, who had their Rendezvous about Orleans, so smartly, that they
could never form themselves into a Body.

The heat of those who had declared for that Party began to cool, the
Volunteers to retire to their own homes upon pretense of an approaching Peace,
the Kings Servants to draw many by secret practices, and the Huguenots to raise
Forces underhand by the Kings tacit permission. The Guises perceiving that
such Negociations were ruinous to them, and that it was for those very ends
they spun out the Treaty to such length, addressed a Petition to the King,
demanded an Edict against the Religionaries, and protesting they were joined
together for no other purpose, and thereupon rashly break off the Conference,
mount their Horses, and put new warmth and spirit into their Party, principally
those who dwelt in great Cities, and such as were of the Clergy who had most
dependence upon Rome.

The King whom they had made believe that the whole Party was unhinged and
scattered, fell from the greatest security into the greatest consternation. He
sends the Queen Mother Order to conclude with them upon any terms whatever. For
this a Conference was held at Nemours between her and the Duke of Guise.
Espernon would needs be present, fearing lest his Head, or his proscription
should be one Article of the Treaty; and this necessity of the times made that
haughty Spirit stoop, though contrary to his usual custom: but the Duke would
take no advantage unless it were to show him more civility, and more respect;
with design perhaps either to get him on his side, or else render him suspected
by the King.

They did not only give the Heads of the League that Edict they demanded
against the Religionaries (this was in the Month of July) and the full command
of the Armies Chaalons, St. Disier, Reims, Toul, Verdun, Soissons, Dijon,
Beaune, St. Esprit, Rue in Picardy, Dinan and Concarneau in Bretagne. To the
Cardinals of Bourbon and of Guise, the Dukes of Guise, of Mayenne, and
d'Elboeuf, each of them a Company of Arquebusiers on Horseback for their
Guards; an hundred thousand Crowns to build a Citadel at Verdun, and double
that Sum to pay off the Men they had levied in Germany; as likewise a discharge
for what Moneys they had taken of the Kings.

Hitherto the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde had lain quiet without
stirring in appearance: the publication of this Agreement gave them cause, to
League themselves anew with the Marshall de Montmorency, whose ruin must
necessarily have followed theirs, and to send also into Germany for the raising
of Lansquenets and Reisters.

Now the King being just ready to be crushed betwixt two potent Parties, who
were going desperately to engage each other, could think of no other expedient
to avoid that destruction, but to draw the King of Navarre to him, to serve as
a Bulwark against the League. He therefore sent some Deputies to tempt him a
second time; but he could not be wrought upon, neither to return to the
Communion of the Church of Rome, nor to suspend the Exercise of his own
Religion for six Months, much less to surrender the Cities he held for
security; He only promised to meet at a Conference with the Queen Mother, when
they could agree upon the place of Interview.

Though Orders were given out to prosecute the Huguenots in all parts of the
Kingdom, nevertheless in several Provinces the Governors knowing the Kings
intentions, did not much press the execution of the Edict: Montmorency and
Chastillon restrained Languedoc; Matignon made no great haste to do any thing
in Guyenne, but only took care to prevent the King of Navarre from making any
stirs. The Huguenots had no other general word but Vive le Roy, and white
Scarfs with the Flower-de-Luce for their Liveries. As to the rest they were
weak enough every where, unless it were in Daufine and Poitou. In Daufine
Lesdiguieres who had put all things in order in good time, Chorges, Montelimar,
and Ambrun, and in Poitou and Saintonge the Prince found himself in a capacity
to besiege Brouage.

Whilst he lay before it news was brought him how three Captains had seized on
the Angers, having by a base and cruel piece of treachery killed the Governor,
who was their Friend: but they were immediately besieged by the Citizens, then
by Brissac and Joyeuse. The Prince thought it would be a noble exploit to gain
a place at that time so considerable, he would needs go himself with the best
part of his Forces: but not willing to abandon the Siege of Brouage, he left a
small Naval Army there in the Canal, and fifteen hundred Men in the Trenches;
to which we may add that the Inhabitants of the Islands offered to defend them
in case of necessity. He had hopes the Vicount de Turenne would in a few days
bring four or five thousand Men more out of Limosin, and that he would
undertake the management of the said Siege in his absence.

Now being eleven days in giving his Orders, and above fifteen in his march, he
found the Castle of Angers, wherein there was but sixteen Men, had capitulated
two days before his arrival. His want of diligence which made him lose so fair
an opportunity, had almost utterly ruined him too. For having amused himself
two days in attempting the Suburbs of Angers, and two more in composing some
quarrels between certain Gentlemen, he found when he thought to repass the
Loire, six great Boats filled with Soldiers upon the River, and five hundred
Horse on the other shore, who were disposed to cut off his Men as fast as they
should venture to get over. He knew likewise that Brissac coasted him, and that
Joyeuse was at his Heels; in so much that being beset on all sides, he was
forced to divide his Army into small Parties and let them get off as well as
they could. Most of them shifted away securely enough, but all the Carriages
and his Bagage was left in the Highways, or in Woods and Hedges: the Chiefs
with very few in their company slipped happily by the Enemy, some one way, some
another without the loss of so much as one. As for the Prince, going down by
the Country of Main into the Lower-Normandy, he took shipping between
Auranches and St. Malo's, passed over to Jersey Island, and from thence into
England.

The unfortunate event of this Enterprise made the Forces that were before
Brouage disperse as soon as the Marshall de Matignon approached; and likewise
those under the Vicount de Turenne, who disbanded them for fear of being
embarrass'd between the Duke of Mayenne's Army which entered Poitou, and that of
Matignon. So that in those parts the Huguenots had no more left but two
thousand Men commanded by Laval one of the Sons of Dandelot, together with la
Boulaye, who after they saw the miscarriage of the design upon Angers, were got
over the Loire in

Conde, and commanded them to leave the Kingdom, did yet more increase their
consternation. There were many abjured, according to a form prescribed and
drawn up by the Bishops, and many who repaired to the King of Navarre. This
Prince finding that all was like to fall upon his Shoulders, laid aside all
former jealousy against the Prince of Conde which some Flatterers had
possessed him withal, and joined more strictly to him then ever.

Some Months before a Thunderblot from the Coast of Rome was levelled at the
Heads of both those Princes. Sixtus V. succeeded Gregory XIII. who died in the
Month of April. He was of a haughty Spirit, and one that delighted to attaque
those that were highest thereby to exalt his own name and power: so that
consenting to the Requests and instant desires of the League, which his
Predecessor had constantly Henry, heretosore, King of Navarre, and Henry Prince
of Conde, (whom he styled the Bastard and detestable Generation of the
illustrious House of Bourbon) Heretics, Relapsed, Heads, Abettors and
Protectors of Heresy, and as such fell under the Censnres and Peins contained
in the Holy Canons, and therefore deprived of all Seigneuries, Lands and
Dignities, and incapable of succeeding to any Principality, namely to the Crown
of France, disengaged their Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity and
Allegiance, and forbid them to pay any Obedience, upon pain of being involved
in the same Excommunication.

This Thunderclap which one would guess should have been fatal, proved less
hurtful to them then to the Holy See. For it excited not only the Huguenots,
but even Catholics zealous for the ancient Truths and Liberties of France, to
search to the very bottom what Authority this was that Popes had over
Sovereigns, who sound Rome imagined and pretended. Besides it gave the
Excommunicated Princes an occasion to show the bravery of their courage; for
they sound means to post up a Paper in the very Streets and Carefours Rome,
containing their oppositions, and appeal from that Sentence, viz. for the
Temporal Concern to the Pairs of France, and for the Crime of Heresy, to the
future Council; Before whom they cited the Pope, and declared him Antichrist
if he did not appear. This Bull did likewise awaken the King with some
apprehension, lest it should be an attempt to dethrone him; he put a stop to
it, and would not suffer it to be published in the Kingdom. It were to be
wished he had so ordered things as to have obliged the Pope to revoke it
absolutely, as the Council of King Charles IX. did oblige Pius IV. to revoke
one he had sent out in the year 1563. against Queen Jane d'Abret.

Guise commanded one toward the Frontiers of Champagne, to prevent the coming
in of any succors from the Protestants of Germany; with the other the Duke of
Mayenne entered Saintonge. Matignon joined him with those he had raised in
Bourdelois: but instead of strengthening him he clogged and thwarted him
continually, not only because he he had private instructions from the Court to
do so, but for spite another should have command in his Government.

All the places of Poitou and Saintonge were greatly dismayed at the Princes
absence, and the King of Navarre on his part extremely perplexed, for that his
own Wife had revolted against him: However she not acting in consort with the
Court, it was not difficult for him to drive her quickly away. She retired into
Auvergne with some Gentlemen; There she ran diverse Adventures, and remained in
that Country till her Husband recalled her to make her consent to the
dissolving of their Marriage.

As to the Duke of Mayenne, Matignon was so stiff in his opinion they ought not
to undertake any thing during the Winter, that they separated their Forces as
soon almost as they were joined. The Duke went with his into Perigord to clear
it of some paltry Retreats which sheltred a company of Robbers, and the
Marshall led his own back again to Bourdeaux, to defend that Town from any
attempts of the King of Navarre, or rather the Dukes.

February, Matignon besieged the Castle de Castles upon the Garonne, at the
request of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and sent word to the Duke of Mayenne it
was high time to advance toward those parts. The Duke after he had taken some
small Castles, which are not so much as mentioned in the Maps, passed the
Dordogne at Souillac with a design of besieging Montauban: but when he
understood it was too well sortified, he fell upon certain pitiful beggarly
places, without name and without defense.

In the mean while the King of Navarre made them raise the Siege of Castles,
and the Prince being returned from England with ten good Ships, and fifty
thousand Crowns lent him by Queen Elizabeth, disengaged Rochel which was in a
manner blocked up, and surprised Royan which yielded him two hundred thousand
Crowns contribution yearly.

The Sixth of March, though amidst the greatest hurry of his Affairs, he
Married Charlota Daughter of Lewis de la Trimouille, and by that means brought
into his Party the Duke Claude his Wives Brother, and all the Friends of that
potent House.

The Duke of Mayenne lost near two Months time in waiting to surprise the King
of Navarre when he should come on this side the Garonne, or go to visit the
Contess of Guiche, with whom he was desperately in Love; and to that purpose had
distributed his Horse in several Posts all along his way.

During this the Prince undertook to ruin the Harbor of Brouage; and in
effect, he sunk so many Hulls of old Ships, that he choked it, and made it, as
it is yet to this day, very difficult and dangerous to enter.

Matignon does a second time lay Siege before Castles. When he was just upon
the point of taking it, the Duke of Mayenne runs thither to rob him of that
honor, which increased their enmity and feud. The Marshall pretended Sickness
that he might not see the Duke: who in the mean time making his approaches to
Montsegur, which hindered all commerce and passage into Limosin, Perigord, and
Quercy, fell realy sick, and was carried to Bourdeaux, leaving to him the
command of his Army. During his absence Montsegur surrendered the Fifteenth of
May upon composition, which was

June the Army lay idle, because Matignon jealous the Duke should be in
Bourdeaux, returned immediately and dismissed the Companies d'Ordonnance. When
the Duke was well again, they jointly besieged Castillon: the Siege was long,
toilsom and difficult, the Soldiers being dissatisfied abandonned the Trenches,
the Generals were fain to lie themselves there twenty days successively. In the
end the place was taken; they made good their capitulation with the Soldiery,
but a certain number of the Inhabitants were sent away to the Parliament of
Bourdeaux, who condemned them to the Gallows.

The same year the Vicount de Turenne regained it one fair night, forcing his
way with a Petard: which gave the Huguenots occasion to brag that they with two
pounds of Powder and in one quarter of an hour, did what the League could not
but in two Months time, and with twenty pieces of Cannon.

This was all, the greatest Captain of the League could perform in nine Months.
Perhaps it was no fault of his; He had no Money, for the Clergy within three
Months time were grown quite weary of furnishing them, and the Pope contributed
nothing but his Benedictions. He wanted Equipage, Artillery and Provisions,
Ammunition,

He knew this but too well, and therefore, even trembling with rage, he
demanded to be dismissed and pressed it so home that he obtained it. The Duke
of Guise did in vain urge him by all imaginable Arguments to prevent it; he
could have wished he would have remained in those Countries either for the
reputation of his Party, or for fear he should gain the affections of the
People of Paris, and deprive him of the voluntary Empire he had acquired over
that spacious City.

Whilst he was in Guyenne, the Duke of Guise made use of the Army he had on the
Frontiers of Champagne, to seize the Cities of Raucour and Douzy upon the Duke
of Bouillon; On the other side the Duke d'Aumale having armed the Picards,
(passionate Leaguers) seized on the City of Dourlens, and of Pontdormy, which
is a passage upon the Soan below Pequigny.

The Favorites jealous to see the whole power of the Sword in the hands of the
Guises their Enemies, desired the King he would likewise give them such
Command; which he granted the more willingly as intending to raise them, and
turn the affections of the Soldiery that way, who do more cheerfully follow
plentiful Tables, and favor, Auvergne, Vezelay, Givaudan, and from these
Countries pass into Daufine: this Employment was designed for the Marshall
d'Aumont; Joyeuse courted it so eagerly that the King could not deny it him

d'Espernon, and withal a Government as well as to Joyeuse, who had already
that of Normandy. The Government of Provence becoming vacant by the death of
the Grand Prior, he instantly provided him with it. This Grand Prior had
harbored a mortal resentment against a Gentleman named Altovity. One day
spying him at a Window of an Inn, it was at Aix, he goes directly up into his
Chamber, and runs his Sword quite thorough his Body; Altovity feeling himself
mortally wounded, lost all Respect with his Life, and plunged his Sword into
the Priors Belly.

Paris had furnished two hundred thousand Crowns for this War, this lasted but
eight days, the alienation of fifty thousand Crowns Revenue belonging to the
Clergy, very little longer, no more then forty thousand Crowns Rent of the
Demeasn. They would have raised more upon a creation of new Offices, and they
sent twenty seven Edicts at once to the Parliament, which were the Lees and
Refuse of such as had been invented by the Italian Brokers for twenty years
past. But these were all rejected, and this attempt served only to discover the
weakness and the injustice of the Government.

The Swiss and the King of Denmark in the first place, then the other
Protestant Princes of Germany, sent to the King a solemn Embassy, to desire him
to grant a Peace to the Huguenots, pursuant to the Tenor of the Edicts of
Pacification. Knowing not what to reply, he for some time avoided the sight of
those Ambassadors, and went to Dolinville, having given Order that some
Noblemen should go meet and conduct them to Paris; Then from Dolinville, under
pretense of some indisposition, he went to the Waters of Pougues, and from
thence even to Lions. But being pressed by their continual instances, he was
constrained to return, and in fine he gave them an Answer, but very crude and
very disobliging, whether to satifie his Honor, or not to discontent the
League, I know not.

He endeavored during these delays on the one hand to appease the fervor of
the League, making them great profers, and on the other to bring back the King
of Navarre, representing to him that his absence from the Court would keep him
from the Crown, and gave the Leagued too much confidence and advantage: but he
could gain nothing neither of him nor of the Leagued. These having held a
general Council of their Party at the Abbey of Orcam near Noyon, refused those
places of security and other great advantages he offered them. At their
departure thence the Duke of Guise attaqu'd the Duke of Bouillon, and invested
the City of Sedan, as being one of the principal Heads of the Huguenots, and
giving the Reisters passage through his Countries. However the Queen Mother,
who Negociated eternally betwixt the two Parties, procured a Truce between
them, imagining that by this obligation she might incline the Duke of Bouillon
to serve the King toward the Protestant Princes, and hinder their Army from
entering into the Kingdom.

Joyeuse he could reckon amongst his Exploits nothing but five or six paltry
Places; after which Winter coming on he put his Forces, half diminished by
Sickness, Thoulouze, he left the conduct to Laverdin, and came post to Court.

The Duke of Espernon was more fortunate then so. The Parliament of Aix had
taken the Government of ^^ovence, and Vins having got some Forces together,
offered him his service. He had an opposite Party, of Huguenots and
Malcontents, of whom Francis d'Oraison Vicount de Cadenet, and the Baron
d'Alemagne, were the Heads. Now it happened that Vins pursuing them with too much
heat, and besieging the Castle of Alemagne, was defeated by Lesdiguieres who
came to their relief; which did marvellously help Espernons business, and gave
him so much advantage over either Party, that he became both the Arbitrator and
Master, at least for that present time.

Winter approaching, he returned to the King, leaving the Command to Bernard
Lord de la Valete his eldest Brother, who had it already in Daufine; where he
was no less active to ruin the Party of the League, then that of the
Huguenots, by turning out such Governors as either of them had placed there.

December the Queen Mother had a Conference with the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde at St. Bris, which is within two Leagues of Cognac: She had
according to her custom, carried in her Train a good number of the finest Women
of her Court: but this time the Princes avoided the Nets she thought to spread
for them by those alluring Charms, stood firm in maintenance of their Religion
till they might have the judgment and determination of a National Council, and
demanded the rupture of the League: the Queen on the contrary declared that the
Kings positive resolution was that there should be but one Religion in his
Dominions.

The Guises perceived plainly that the Kings main Resolution was to ruin them,
and although he did not love the Huguenots, nevertheless he would tolerate them
as an indirect opposition to their progress; wherefore they caused him to be
decried by their Emissaries and by their Preachers as an Abettor of Heretics,
and proclaimed every where, because he had courted the King of Navarre for an
Accommodation, that he conspired with him to oppress all the good Catholics.

The inferior People, who the more ignorant they are, the more they must be
meddling still with matters of Religion, grew hot enough of themselves; the
Directors and Confessors animated the Citizens, who were both foolish and
credulous, at their Confessions, or by the Persuasions of their Wives, and
entertained them with Congregations, Confraternities, Paradices and Oratories
which they adorned with Plate and Jewels, Images and Agnus Dei, and with
Processions which they caused to come thither from Brie, Champagne, and
Picardy. These all made their entrance into Paris clothed in white Linen,
bearing Wax Candles in their hands, from whence they called this year, The year
of white Processions.

It was not so much woundred at to see the People led away thus with false and
pretended Devotions, as that the King authorized them by his example. He went
perpetually on Pilgrimage to diverse parts of the Kingdom, walked in Procession
on foot in the Streets of Paris in the habit of a Penitent, wore a String of
huge Beads, or Chaplet, at his Girdle, each Bead being carved like a Deaths
Head, shut himself up in certain Oratories with the Hieronimites (whom he had
sent for out of Spain* or with the Feuillants, who were Bernadines of a new cut
begun in the Abbey of that name within the Diocese of Rieux in Languedoc. He
built Cells for the first in the Bois de Vincennes, and lodged the others in
the Fauxbourgh Saint Honor, upon one side of the Garden of the Tuilleries.

Amidst these pious Divertisements, he amused himself likewise in carving of
Images, casing them, and setting them up in some Closet. He had another Pastime
also, which was to buy and breed up little Dogs, such as are wont to be the
vanity and delight of Ladies, in which he expended above a hundred thousand
Crowns a year, and little less in Monkeys and Perroquets. There were a world of
People that followed the Vide, The Memoirs of Sully, Vol. 1. Fol. 79.
a Panier or little round Basket on a Scarf full of little Spaniels and the
like Creatures, which he often cherished with his Voice, and by stroaking them.

Espernon raised to the highest degree of favor, from which Joyeuse began to
decline, was ever pushing on the King to destroy the Guises, and they in
retaliation having conspired his ruin, framed diverse Projects for it. He had
so much craft as to persuade the King they were all Contrivances against his
Sacred Person; and by that means prevailed he should ever keep above him that
famous Band of Forty five Quarentecinq.
, whom he chose himself, perhaps for that very end which the event will show
us. They were all Gascons, whom the desire of making their own fortunes, had
fitted for any undertaking, Lognac being their Captain. It is credible that the
knowledge the Guises had of those intentions, did the more engage them to that
unhappy necessity of fortifying themselves against an Authority that was to be
employed to ruin them.

France forbore not to pass the Wintertime merrily in Feasts and Ballets.
Their greatest grief was they could not complete one Ballet of a great
invention, which the Queen Mother brought from Guyenne, because they wanted
Money. The little Court of Navarre, which was then at Rochel, did likewise make
a great effort, and swelled, if we may so express it, like the Frog in Esops
Fable, that they might not fall short of the Kings in those sumptuous
Divertisements.

During these jollities came news of the Tragical Death of Mary Steward Queen
of Scotland, whom Queen Elizabeth her Cousin German, caused to be beheaded, by
the common Executioner the Eighteenth of February, after she had kept her
Prisoner eighteen years. The indiscretion of her Friends were no less the cause
of her misfortune then the horrible wickedness of her Enemies: for as the first
sought with violent passion after some plausible pretense to ruin her, the
other furnished them with diverse, by contriving every hour some odd design, and
even conspiracies against Queen Elizabeth, so that they made her perish by
their over much care and endeavors to save her.

Sentence had been pronounced against her three Months before Execution: During
which time the King omitted neither to persuade, nor to entreat Queen
Elizabeth, to forbear that fatal stroke no less prejudicial to all Crowned
Heads, then shameful to France, whereof Mary was Queen Dowager. The Leagued
however forgot not to caluminate the King for this very business, and to accuse
him of connivance with Elizabeth, and at the same time made use of the horror
of that Act to animate their People the more against all the Religionaries.

Joyeuse who was now become one of the hottest Heads of the League, went and
made War in Poitou: He there surprised two Regiments of the Prince of Conde's
in the Borough de la Mothe Saint Herais, and after they had surrendered at
discretion, cut them all off; He then took St. Maixan, and Tonnay-Charente, and
that done returned to Court, that he might not wholly lose the remainder of his
favor.

But ill-fortune followed him close at Heels. Being in the Kings Closet,
relating his brave feats of War, one of his Men came and told him the King of
Navarre had defeated one part of his Army, and pursued the other as far as la
Hay in Touraine. Some few days after Catharine the Wife of Henry Earl of
Bouchage his Brother, who was Sister to the Duke of Espernon, sinking into the
Grave under the burden of her pious Austerities, the Husband renounced the
World, and thrust himself into a Convent of Capucins. The Duke was very
sensibly affected with it; but that which vexed him most, was that the King
redoubled the marks of his affection toward his Rival, by Marrying him to
Margaret de Foix, who having some Alliance with all the Princes of Christendom,
had been sought for by many. She was Daughter of that Lewis de Foix Count of
Candale, slain at the Siege of Sous-Mieres, and Mary Daughter of the Constable
de Montmoren^y.

Luneburgh upon the offensive Answer the King returned to their Ambassadors,
were agreed to send a powerful supply to the Huguenots whose general Rendezvous
was in Alsatia. Never had they taken Arms with so much heat, Mothers carried
their own Sons to the Officers to be enrolled, the Sisters sold their very
Rings to fit them out, and the Country Peasants filled them with good cheer
wherever they met them.

Strasburgh, the Army was found to be twenty nine Cornets of Reisters, making
six thousand Horse, five thousand Lanskneckts all Pikemen, and sixteen thousand
Swiss. Four thousand were already gone into Daufine to reinforce Lesdiguieres
who were all cut in pieces near Vizilles by la Valeta, d'Ornane, and Mesplez.
There were besides this two thousand Foot and four thousand French Horse raised
by the Duke of Bouillon, without counting two thousand Men more of the same
Nation, who joined them soon after, and eighteen hundred brought by Chastillon.

To this huge Body there wanted only a Head sufficiently authorized to conduct
it, Casimir retained the general Command that he might appoint as he found fit:
but not able to go in Person, placed in his stead Fabian Baron de Dona a
Gentleman born in Prussia, and trusted the Conduct of the Lasquenets with one
Doctor Scrogel. The Duke of Bouillon was Lieutenant General amongst them for
the King of Navarre, Anthony de Vienne Clervaut Colonel of the Swiss,
Chastillon of the French Infantry, and John de Chaumont Guitry Marshall de
Camp. Dona had a great many good qualities, but little credit with the
Soldiery, Scrogel had yet less, the Duke of Bouillon not much more, as being
yet so very young; the other Captains had eternal quarrels with each other; nor
did the Court omit to foment those seeds of Division, and to cast in new ones,
which caused the destruction of that Body made up of such different pieces.

Guise, who came to him at Meaux, he was forced in despite of his unwillingness
to resolve upon the War. It was named The War of the three Henry's, because he,
the King of Navarre, and the Duke of Guise were all of that Name. To this end
he sent for all his Commpanies d'Ordonnance, who were to the number of near an
hundred and threescore Bands, made Levies within his own Kingdom, and without,
and divided his Forces into Three Bodies. One he gave to the Duke of
Montpensier, another Guise, to guard the Frontiers of Champagne, and reserved
the other to go in Person, and defend the passage over the Loire against the
Germans.

The King of Navarre, after the first defeat of Joyeuses's Forces, was come to
Montsoreau in Touraine, to receive the Count de Soissons, whom he had drawn to
his side, upon the hopes of Marrying his only Sister. He had designed to have
gone from thence to meet the Germans, but his Council thought it much better he
should go back into Guyenne, to give order for the security of his Places, and
then return, by the favor of those Provinces who were friends, and so march as
far as Burgundy to receive those succors.

The Confederate Army, so were the Germans called, having cleared their passage
thorough the straits of the Mountains Vosge, It Is the proper term.
which the Duke of Lorrain had encumbred, eesily entered into the Country: but
when they were so got in, showed their own weakness but too much, by all those
rebukes they received before the meanest Castles.

The Duke of Guise showed the like: He had vaunted, how upon the least sound of
his Trumpets he would bring Threescore thousand Men under his Banner; and
Lorrain and himself could raise, (together with the help of their best friends)
amounted not to Ten thousand Men: But indeed his courage supplied that defect
of numbers.

When the Confederate Army had ravaged Lorrain for a Month together, after
several deliberations full of confusion and tumult; they took a resolution to
come and pass the Loire, without having any regard to the entreaties of the
Duke of Bouillon, who would have employed them for the regaining of those
Places wherewith the Duke of Guise held him as it were continually besieged.
They sojourned Ten days at Bassigny, from thence advanced toward the head of
the Seine, and passed it above Chastillon, and L'Yonne at Mailly: but disorder
and mutinies being already crept in amongst them, they refused to pass the
Loire at the Foord de Nuvy, as the King of Navarre had desired, and which would
have been very easy for them, the Waters being extremely low; They chose rather
to descend into Beausse, because the Reisters might run scouring about at their
pleasure, and the great abundance of Corn and Forage would afford them
wherewith to refresh themselves.

France so miserably ravaged by Five or Six Armies at the same time. The Duke
of Joyeus^ led one into Guyenne, the King of Navarre had another there;
Matignon a Third, Montmorency and Lesdiguieres each of them one; the first in
Languedoc, and the other in Daufine. The Prince of Conty, brother to the Count
de Soissons, gathered Forces in Anjou, and the Country of Main to make up
one. The King had his own, whom he went to about mid- October. It consisted of
Eight thousand Horse, half French, and half Germans, Ten thousand Foot raised
in the Kingdom, and Eight thousand Swiss. With these he lined the shoars of the
Loire, and effectually prevented the enemies from finding such another
opportunity as they had already lost, to pafs over the same.

Near Montargis they had some hint of the great Victory obtained by the King of
Navarre. After that Prince was returned into Guyenne, the Duke of Joyeuse had
express Order from the King to follow him close, and to hinder him from joining
his Forces together to meet the Reisters. To which purpose the King had given
him a re-inforcement of Ten thousand Men, and ordered Matignon to join him with
all those he could draw out of his Government. This Marshall had perhaps, a
desire rather to annoy, then to assist him in gaining of Honor: yet it is
certain he was within two days march of him, when that young Lord, intoxicated
with the praises of his Flatterers, and the loud boasts of his zealous
Preachers, hastened to give Battle, and overtook the King of Navarre, between
the little Rivers of Drougne and l'Isle.

The two Armies drew up their Battallions in the Plain near Coutras; this was
about Eight of the clock in the Morning, upon the Twentieth day of October. The
shock lasted but half an hour; the Princes running speedily in upon them,
rendered Joyeuses great squadron of Lances useless, and pressed so hard upon his
amazed Gents-d'Arms, that they could never come to do execution, but were soon
cut in pieces. The Infantry lost their courage when their Cavalry were lost,
they presently gave ground, were routed, and most of them put to the edge of
the Sword, in revenge of la Mote Saint Herais. The Duke of Joyeuse having
generously taken a resolution to dye by the Cannon, fell into the hands of two
Captains, who killed him in cold Navarre had not above Five and twenty or
Thirty of his Men missing. The Prince of Conde was thrown off his Horse with a
rude thrust of a Lance, which did much incommode him. It was the act of the
brave St. Luc, who not able to make his escape, and fearing to be roughly
treated by the Prince his capital Enemy, laid him thus on the ground, and
having first forced him to ask his life, afterward surrendered himself prisoner.

The valor of the King of Navarre signalized it self much more in this days
battle, then did his Conduct in improving the advantages of it: Since very far
from drawing directly toward the foreign Army, as the Prince of Conde would
have had him, undertaking (if they would let him have Men) to go and seize upon
the passage at Saumur: he lets his victorious Army separate, contenting himself
with taking an Oath of his Captains, that they should meet again the Twentieth
of November, on the confines of Angoumois and Perigord, to march toward the
Reisters. He only retained Five hundred Horse, and taking the Count de Soissons
along with him, pierced into Gascongne, whither the violent Love he had for the
fair Countess of Guiche, attracted him as it were perforce.

The news of the victory of Coutras had not those effects, or that influence as
might well have been imagined, either on the Court, nor in the Confederate
Army; the King showed little sorrow, perhaps, because all that perished in that
Fight, were of the Leaguers: He made however a magnificent Funeral for Joyeuse;
and as for the Forces of the Confederate Army, they were so discouraged by the
length of their March, and for that they heard the King of Navarre had turned
his back upon them, in^^ead of coming toward them, that they had little joy of
the news.

Their Reistres mutined from time to time, and the Swiss, who in the beginning
appeared very zealous, treated an accommodation for themselves in particular,
promising to retire into their own Country, if they would pay them Four
hundred thousand Crowns.

That which made them in such haste to be gone, was the defeat of the Reisters
at Auneau; this is a small City in Beausse, enclosed with ill-favored Walls,
but which has a pretty good Castle. The Baron de Dona had lodged himself in
the City, and Guise was always in the rear of this Army with Three thousand
Men, having sent back the Duke of Mayenne into Burgundy, and Aumale into
Picardy, that they might cover the places there from any surprise of the Duke
d'Espernons. The twenty fourth of November, a little after Midnight, the
Captain of the Castle gave his Foot entrance into the Town; Reisters
barricado's, who having only Pistols, could not defend themselves against
Muskets and Pikes. There were near upon Two thousand of them killed in the
Streets, or in their Lodgments, and all their Baggage plundered. Dona with as
much courage as good fortune, pierced, he being the Tenth, thorough the
enemies, before they had shut up the City Gates, and so saved his Person, and
his Great Cornet.

This Army half defeated, and ready to be forsaken by their Swiss, pursued
their march by going up the Loire. They received a second check at the Bridge
of Gien; Espernons approach struck so great terror in the Lansquenets, that
Five and twenty of his Arquibusiers disarmed Twelve hundred of them. The
remainder kept on their march by Morvan: but they discomposed themselves by the
fatigues and difficult ways of those Countries, so very much, that they hardly
kept together in any warlike Order. This extreme misery forced them to accept
of an accommodation offered them by the King* Chastillon refused to be
comprehended, and retiring with an hundred and twenty Maistres, and an hundred
and fifty Arquebusiers, before the Articles were Signed, got to the Vivarets,
having also beaten some Troops of Mandelots, Governor of Lions, who would have
barred their way to Rivirieu.

Reistres and Chiefs of the Confederate Army were splendidly regaled at
Marsigny les Nonains, by the Duke of Espernon. Going from thence, they divided
their Forces into two Bodies, part of them crossed the Country of For^z, and a
corner of the Duke of Savoy's territory, who allowed them passage: The others
took their march by Burgundy and the Franche Comte, with such diligence, that
they deceived the Marquess du Pont, and the Duke of Guise who watched them, and
got into the County of Montbeliard. Some Companies slipping from thence into
Lorrain, gave occasions to those two Princes to sack that Country most
horribly, and to put above Ten thousand People to the edge of the Sword.

Conty did with much difficulty get into the Country of Main, marching with a
small Train, and his white Cornet folded up in his Valise, and lodging in
Gentlemen's Houses as a private Person. Clervant trudged away with his Swiss,
and the Duke of Bouillon to Geneva; they both languished to death in a short
while after; common report accused the Feast at Marsigny for it. The Count de
la Mark, younger Brother to the Duke, died before in France, upon his march
with the Confederates Army.

The Duke of Bouillon His name was Robert.
had only one Sister named Charlote, to whom he left his Estate, but he
ordained by his Will, that she should not Marry without the consent of the King
of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Montpensier, and substituted
to her, that Duke and his Son, the King of Navarre, and the Prince
successively, upon condition, that neither she nor they should not innovate any
thing in the Religion. He named la Noue Executor of his Will and Testament,
made him Guardian

Robert de la Mark Ma^levrier, Uncle to the Pupil, said he had a Right by a
tacit Substitution in favor of Males, which he affirmed to be in that House:
The King of Navarre had an interest to marry this Heyress to a Prince of his
Religion: the Duke of Montpensier as the nearest Heir, would have put Garrisons
into the places to secure them; and the Duke of Guise strugled to get it by
force of Arms; yet notwithstanding, demanded the Heiress for his Son.

He was the most dangerous of all the Competitors: Six weeks after the death of
the Duke, he attaqu'd this petty Estate, made grievous havoc about Sedan, and
besieged Jamets. The first three Months he did but invest it, afterward he
besieged it more closely, and then again the valor of those that defended it,
enlarged that Siege to a Blockade. In fine, La Noue being arrived in that
Country, found it safest to surrender it upon composition, the Town only, not
the Castle, which yet held out a long time, and surrendered in fine to the Duke
of Lorrain: but this was not till a little before the death of King Henry.

Guise, through out all Christendom: The Pope presented him with a Sword, graved
all over with Flames, marks of his zeal and valor, and the Duke of Parma with
a Suit of Armor, and this Elogy, That it belonged to none but Henry of
Lorrain, to call himself Head of the League. All Paris echoed with the loud
noise of his victory Reisters: but amidst this popular applause, he had one
mortal displeasure, that the King sought every occasion to pluck him down, and
lift Espernon his Enemy to the highest pitch of Grandeur.

The Duke of Joyeuse had had the Government of Normandy, and the Admiralty;
when he was slain at Coutras, the Duke of Guise pretended to have some relic
of his Shipwreck, and therefore earnestly demanded the Admiralty for Brissac:
But the King, after he had given him some fair hopes, invested the Duke of
Espernon with that Office, and the Government of Normandy; as also that of
Caen, and Havre de Grace; and likewise gave him all the spoil belonging to
Bellegarde his Cousin, mortally wounded at Coutras, i. e. the Government of
Angoulesme, of Xaintonge, and the Country of Aulnis.

The Duke of Guise was more stung and pierced that the Favors were done to his
Enemy, then for the denial to him. Wherefore in a great Assembly of the Princes
of his House, and the Chiefs of the League whom he had summoned at Nancy,
January, of the year 1588. It was resolved, that they should make a Petition to
the King, wherein amongst other Articles, "He should be summoned to join more
openly with the Holy League, to put away both from his Presence, and from all
Offices and Governments, such as were enemies to the Public, and abettors of
Heresies, which should be named to him, to cause the Council of Trent to be
published; to establish the Holy Inquisition; to command the Clergy to redeem
their alienated Lands; to consign such places as they should name, into the
hands of certain persons, where they might build Forts; and to maintain an Army
on the frontiers of Lorrain, to hinder the Germans from returning any more.

Espernon having had contest in the Council with Peter d'Espinac, Archbishop
of Lions, and Villeroy Secretary of State, even to the giving them outrageous
Language, made the King lose those two most important Servants, who Declared
when occasion offered.

The League was not a little strengthened by it; as the Huguenots party was much
weakened by the death of the Prince of Conde; amongst whose Virtues one cannot
tell whether it were Courage, or Liberality, Generosity, or love to Justice, or
Courtesy March at St. Jean d'Angeli, his ordinary Residence, being poysonn'd
by his own Domestique Servants.

Charlota-Catherina de la Trimouille his Wife in this crime, and made Process
against her, so far, that she had lost her life, had she not proved to be great
with Child. It was of a Son, of whom she was happily delivered the First day of
September, six Months after the death of his Father. She was afterward still
detained in the same place till King Henry IV. ordered her to appear before the
Parliament of Paris who declared her innocent, and caused all those proceedings
to be burnt, as being injurious, and not to leave any footsteps for slander.

It was now above a year and half since the King resolved to make an exemplary
punishment of the Heads of the League, who had stirred up Seditions, and
contrived strange Designs, even, as he verily believed, against his own Person.
They were called the Seize (i. e. the Sixteen) because they Abetted and
Governed that Party Paris. The Duke of Guise had left Forty or Fifty Gentlemen
with them in his behalf, to give them Orders, and take care for their defense;
and these had provided Arms, and raised Money privately, to be employed upon
occasion. These People informed of the Kings intentions, sent to the Duke of
Guise, to implore he would come to their assistance. He was then departed from
Nancy, and come into Picardy, to justify his Cousin the Duke d'Aumale in that
Government. For having held it by provision in the lifetime of the Prince of
Conde, he would not resign it after his death, whilst the Duke of Espernon, on
whom the King had bestowed it, endeavored to wrest it out of his hands.

While the Duke of Guise was at Soissons, the King dispatched Believre to sound
his intentions: but some important Affair having called that Minister back to
the King, he went away without concluding any thing, and promised he should
hear news of him within three days; and indeed he wrote twice, but sent his
Letters by the Post, instead of an Express Courier, so that the Duke might
plausibly pretend he did not receive them. During these transactions, the
Sixteen pressing the Duke earnestly to come to their aid, because the danger
was very nigh, he parts from Soissons with only Philibert de la Guiche, Grand
Master of the Ordnance, who went to seek him on behalf of the King, and arrives
at Paris on Monday the Ninth of May about Noon. He alighted at the Filles
Repenties, where the Queen Mother at that time was.

She leads him immediately to the Louvre amidst the crowd and acclamations of
the on the Kings part, and in justifications, and most humble submissions on
the Dukes part. In the Afternoon they had again a long Conference in the Garden
of the Tuilleries, the Queen Mother making the Third betwixt those two.

Paris was full of unknown Faces, the Streets and Houses of knots of People
buzzing, and of confused murmurings, and hollow whispers, which betokened an
approaching Tempest. Things could not rest long in such a turbulent posture:
the Duke was not ignorant they bargained for his Head, and the King was told
the League designed no less then to make him a Monk, and that the Duchess of
Montpensier showed the very Cizers which were prepared to shave him. This was
because he had affronted that Widow, by discovering some secret defects of
hers, in his Discourses. An Outrage, much more unpardonable in respect of
Women, then any thing beside that can be attempted, or that can be done against
their Honor.

The Tenth day of May the King therefore gave Command, all strangers should
depart the City of Paris, and ordered the Houses should be searched, against
which the Parisians making some resistance, he took occasion to send five or
six thousand, as well French as Swiss into the City, by the Gate St. Honor,
which was opened to them by two Eschevins.

The honest Bourgeois could have been glad the King might still be Master: yet
they did not approve, that to seize upon Fifteen or Twenty guilty persons, he
should put the Capital of the Kingdom in danger of being plundered, or turning
Rebels: and therefore they did not second this so well as they might else have
done. He posted City Companies, and Companies of his Soldiers in diverse places:
The first did him little service, the others were beaten off, or hemmed in by
the Leaguers, who were well prepared for this Attaque. The commotion began near
the University, thence got into the City, where about three or fourscore Swiss
were knocked on the Head; then Afternoon over all the whole Town; the
Barricado's being carried on from Street to Street, till they had brought them
as far as the Louvre, and made the Sentinel retire.

Guise had any other design but to defend himself and his friends, it must be
granted, that he wanted either Courage or Conduct; for after that part of Paris
which is called the Ville had taken Wildfire, had he followed his blow, he
might have surrounded the Louvre, and seized on the Kings Person. But he did
not press on that opportunity as he might: On the contrary, being picqued with
generosity, he went to disingage the Soldiery, and sent them back disarmed to
the Louvre; then some hours afterward returned their Arms again, and entered
upon Treaty with the Queen Mother.

But the next day he was much amazed to hear, that whilst she flattered him
with the fairest hopes, the King following her Council, or perhaps his own
Fears, had made his escape in great disorder, by the new Gate to the Garden of
the Tuilleries, and from thence to the Monastery of the Feuillants, where he
took Horse. That night he went and lay at Trapes, near Versailles, and the next
day at Chartres; his Officers followed in a great hurry: The Queen Mother staid
at Paris, not to pacify those disturbances, but to keep things in such a
tottering posture, that they might ever stand in need of her Mediation and
Interposition.

From Chartres the King wrote to all the Cities and Governors; the Duke of
Guise from Paris to his friends and partisans: The Style of the former was
languishing and fearful; on the contrary, that of the Duke of Guise and the
League, Victorious and triumphant. They said the day of the Barricadoes, was a
day resplending with the protection of the Lord of Hosts, and conjured the
other Cities to join with them, as Members to their Head.

To make themselves most sure of Paris, they set aside the ancient Prevost des
Marchands, and the Eschevins, seize upon the Bastille and the Arsenal; as in
the Provinces they seized on several Towns, the Duke of Aumale upon all in
Picardy, excepting Boulogne, which he attempted in vain three times; the
Cardinal de Guise on Reims and Chaalons, as their friends would have made
themselves Masters of the greater part of those in Normandy, if the Duke of
Montpensier, who was gone to take possession of that Government, had not
prevented them.

The Queen Mother ceased not to Treat with the Duke of Guise, to which end she
made use of the Duchess of Montpensier, whom she cajoled with the hopes of
Marrying the old Cardinal de Bourbon. These two joining together, persuaded the
Duke of Guise to reconcile himself to the King; and for this purpose, obliged
the Leaguers, after they had made Processions to appease the wrath of God, to
go in the Habits of Penitents to Chartres to crave pardon of the King. They
were conducted Henry de Joyeuse, who was called Father Angel, representing our
Lord at his going to Mount Calvary, with all the Trinkets, and Persons they
employed in those days, to act the History of the Passion. Thus travested, they
went to seek the King, who was then at Church, and coming before him, cast
themselves upon their knees, and with a loud voice cried out for Mercy.

For the same end the Parliament sent their Deputies some few days after, to
let him know they were most sensibly afflicted and concerned to find he had
forsaken his Louvre, and to beseech him to return, and avert his just vengeance
from falling on the Heads of his Subjects. He answered to the First, that if he
designed to ruin the Parisians, as they would have made the People believe, it
was in his power to reduce them to ashes; and to the Latter; that he would
Treat the Inhabitants of Paris, as Children that had offended their Father, not
as Slaves.

After Dinner, having sent again for the Latter, he charged them to threaten
the Parisians, that he would take away their Sovereign Courts, if they
persisted in their Factious humor. Then three days afterward he sent a Master
of Requests to the Parliament, to assure them he was resolved to assemble the
Estates-General before the expiration of the year; that he would carefully
endeavor the Reformation of his Kingdom, and assure them of a Catholic
Successor.

It is not certainly known what motive obliged him to engage so far; but the
Duke of Guise judged it fit to press him upon that point. He therefore caused a
Petition to be presented to him in the name of the Princes, of the City of
Paris, and of all the good Catholics, who did beseech him, to send for that
purpose the Duke of Mayenne into Daufine with one Army, and to march himself
into Guyenne with another, leaving the Command of Paris to the Queen Mother; to
forget the Barricadoes, and other irregularities; to confirm the Election of
the Prevost des Marchands, and the Eschevins; and above all, to put away the
Duke of Espernon, and la Valete his Brother, who countenanced the Heretics.

Those enemies Espernon had in the Kings Council, greedily embraced this
occasion to annoy him; the Queen Mother clubs with them, and all together, made
such an impression on the King, that he sent him word, He must stay a while
away, and not come near him or the Court. The Duke did not take himself to be
out of Favor for all this: He came to wait upon him at his return out of
Normandy; the King would not admit him to the Council, but Commanded him to
retire to his Government of Angoumois. Before he departed, he surrendered up
that of Normandy, Montpensier.

One would have thought his absence might have calmed the Tempest. In effect,
the King showed himself more willing to come to an accommodation, but this
appeared to be only a design to get some places out of the hands of the League,
especially Havre and Orleans. It was upon the score of Havre that he went to
Rouen, but Villars, who held it, a haughty Man, and who had engaged his Word to
the Duke of Guise, soon cut off all his hopes of gaining it. As for Orleans,
Entragues who was Governor thereof, did not positively deny to give Obedience
to the Orders brought him by Schomberg, to render it to the King. The Duke of
Guise was then just on the point of concluding his Treaty with the King; when
he heard they were dealing with Entragues, he made great instance that City
should be one amongst the rest which he demanded for security. The King
resisted a long time upon this particular, at last he was forced to condescend
to it: but afterward, by a subtilty more ingenious then becoming a great
Prince, he said they had mistaken in transcribing the Order from the Secretary;
and that it was there the City of Dourlans, not Orleans: and this contest was
one of the main subjects which led him to the greatest extremities, against the
Duke of Guise.

July, which besides that City, granted to the Princes of the League, Bourges,
Dourlens, and Monstreuil, withal, left in their keeping for Four years, those
places that had been given them by the Treaty of Nemours: permitted those
others who had declared for them, to remain in the same condition they were in:
Continued their Prevost and Eschevins des Marchands at Paris for two years
more, and allowed them many other things of good advantage.

At the same time appeared at Sea, that formidable Armado of Philip of Spain,
which he set forth for the Conquest of England. They had been seven years about
preparing and equipping it, and every year he laid out above a Million of Gold
for the expenses. The King apprehending that the Leaguers, if he ran them into
despair, might get them to land upon the coasts of France, durst no longer deny
those things they asked of him. He gave them that Edict which bare the specious
name of Reunion. By which renewing his Coronation Oath, he swear to root out
all Schisms and Heresies, and never make any Peace or Edict in favor of the
Huguenots; ordained likewise all his Subjects of what quality soever, to swear
the same; and that his death happening, they should acknowledge no Prince for
their King, who was an Heretic, or abettor of Heresy; Declared Rebels, and
Criminals de Lesae Majestatis, those who refused to Sign this Edict, and
approved all that had been done the 12 th. and 13 th. The Barr^cado's,
of May, and since, as well at Paris, as in other Cities, as being done out of
pure Zeal for the Catholic Religion.

He swear this Edict with an appearance of great joy; all those that were of
his Council, and of his Court, did the same thing, excepting the Duke of
Nevers, who refused the Oath three or four times, till the King enjoined him to
it upon pain of disobedience. The Parliament did forthwith Register and make
publication of it, and all the great Cities received it. This done, the King
returned to Chartres, toward the end of the Month, and the Queen brought
thither the Duke of Guise, and presented him to the King. There appeared in
their countenances, and in their discourse, and in either of their proceedings,
so many marks of Confidence, and a cordial Affection, that the whole Court was
overjoyed at this reconciliation, and the most cautelous believed it might be
unfeigned.

At this time the King of Navarre was returned from Bearn to Rochell, and
sought to gain the favor of that City: where indeed he had no very great
credit, during the life of the Prince of Conde. Lesdiguieres was buisy in
Danfine, curbing the Cities of Gap and Grenoble with Ports; he mated Grenoble
so effectually, that they demanded a Truce for six Months. He and Montmorency
had also besieged the Pont Saint Esprit, when the Edict of Reunion was
brought to him. It made the Marshall put up his Sword, but hastened la Valete
to make a League Offensive and Defensive with Lesdiguieres.

There was nothing in Daufine that made head against the last, but only Charles
de Simiane d'Albigny: nor did he spare any thing to gain his amity, he offered
to give him his Daughter in Marriage, to share his Authority between them, and
to leave it solely to him at his death. These advantageous proffers had less
power and influence over the Spirit of Albigny, then that zeal he was confirmed
in for the Religion of his Ancestors: he ever constantly resisted him, but not
with so much success as courage.

Provenceaux in the mean time were risen up against Valete; the Kings private
Orders, the Parliaments hatred to the Duke of Espernon, and the ambition of
Vins, who pretended to that Government, did but too much animate those Spirits,
whose Blood is soon heated, and easily incited to a commotion. The supplies
which came to him from Daufine, did but little service, when the Parliament had
once set him beside the Government; most of the Gentry, and all the Cities
abandoned him, excepting four or five petty places, which he maintained till
the death of the Duke of Guise, when the face of Affairs were changed by the
Kings changing of his mind.

August, the Duke of Espernon saw himself in most dreadful danger: his kind
fortune and great courage drew him out of it. Having staid some days in the
Castle of Loches, after his leaving the Court, before he resolved to go to
Angoulesme, the Mayor of the Town had order from the King to oppose his
entrance; and not able to do so, because Espernon had prevented the Courier, he
undertook to seize him in the Castle This Castle is distinct from the Citadel.
or the Kings House where he lodged. He entered therefore with Ten Men well
armed, under color of bringing a Courier to him: but running rashly into the
Wardrobe, instead of going directly to his Closet, he mist his prey, and
perished with his Brother-in-law, who crept in through a hole to come to his
aid. The other Conspirators and their friends, who had taken Arms in the City,
apprehending to be overborn by the Soldiers, who came thundering in to the
Dukes assistance, and the Duke to be starved to death: having not eaten in
Thirty hours, this fear and that necessity made an accommodation between them,
and obliged them to stand to it.

Villeroy was taxed, as having abused, or contrived Letters under the Signet to
destroy Espernon; but the King clearly owned the business. He was grown so
peevish, that toward the end of the same Month he dismissed the Chancellor de
Chiverny, Villeroy, and Pinard, Secretaries of State; and Pompone de Bellievre,
Sur-Intendant des Finances. At the same time he heaped Favors upon the
Leaguers; for he put the Seals into the hands of Francis de Montolon, Advocate
in Parliament, whom they revered, because of his servent zeal for the
Catholic Religion. He also declared the Cardinal de Bourbon the nearest of
kin to his Blood; In effect he was so, but not the fittest to succeed; and he
permitted the Clergy to furnish Five hundred thousand Crowns toward the
expenses of the War. Now that the said Body Ecclesiastical might raise it,
without alienating their Fund, he consented to the erection of an alternate
Receiver, and two Comptrollers of the Tenths, hereditary in each Diocese.

This Fund was ordained for the maintenance of two Armies which he had raised.
He gave the one to the Duke of Mayenne, and the other to the Duke of Nevers:
but this was upon the refusal of the Duke of Guise, who by advice of the
Archbishop of Lions, resolved to remain at Court, and got a constant and
certain Fund settled to keep his Table of Grand Maistre.

de Bourbon Machabeans, and say they had saved the people of Israel. Besides
this, the Duke of Nevers, and Lognac, Captain of Nevers, because he
irreconcileably hated the Duke of Guise, and Lognac, because having in some
manner succeeded to the Kings favor after Espernon, as Second with Bellegarde,
Cosin-Germain to that Duke, well knew that the House of Guise, always enemies
to the Favorites, would not suffer him long in that post.

They labored on both sides to gain the Deputies for the Estates. The
over-confidence of the League was a little humbled by the defeat of Philips
Armado, which France and England. That Invincible Fleet, so they called it,
after it had been tossed, beaten, scattered every where by continual tempests,
and then by the English and Hollanders, having lost near Ten thousand Men, and
above Threescore Ships; had much ado, torn and shattered as it was, to recover
the Ports of Spain. The King was at Chartres when he received the news of it;
and it was this perhaps which emboldned him to go to Blois, where his presence
was necessary, to see and take notice of the Deputies, as they repaired thither.

September being come, but very few of the Deputies, the Assembly was put off
till October, and the first Session was opened on a Sunday the Sixteenth

Before the opening of this Assembly, the King knew by the tenor of their
Papers or Instructions, that there was a party made to diminish his Authority,
and augment that of the Estates; wherefore he gave notice in his Harangue,
otherwise very eloquent, and very pathetique, of his resentment against the
Duke of Guise; for which that Prince made such violent complaint to him, by the
mouth of the Archbishop of Lions, that he was obliged when he gave it to be
Printed, to retrench, and alter many things, which were but the deeper
imprinted in his Heart.

At the Second Session which was the following Tuesday, he swore to the Edict
of Reunion, and ordained, that it should be observed for a Fundamental Law of
the State, and would have the Three Orders swear to it with one voice; the
Clergy laying their hands upon their Breasts, as the others hold theirs aloft.
This done, he protested he would forget all that was past, and charged the
Prevost des Marchands Paris of it.

Guise as a dangerous Rival, all whose actions seemed by his interpretation, to
tend to the ruin of his Authority; he was netled that they should force him to
swear to the Edict, that the League had constrained the Count de Soissons (for
he had quitted the King of Navarre) to take Absolution of the Pope,
notwithstanding they made all their effort, though in vain to hinder his
Holiness from granting it, and that when the said Count had brought his Letters
of Pardon to the Parliament, a Tailor with a Crew of the most hotheaded
Leaguers, went to the Palais and so frighted the Counselors, that they durst
not proceed to verisie it.

He was yet more stung and offended for that the Estates made great Complaints
against the Government, demanded the suppression of new Offices, an abatement
of the Tailles and Imposts, the punishment of Financiers and Favorites, and
used all manner of practices to moderate and clip the Sovereign Power, and set
up the Laws. Which did not only proceed from the Factions of the League, but
also the unanimous desire of the People, who imagining the King would ere long
lose either his Life or Senses, (for Miron his chief Physician had imprudently
said that the one or the other would come to pass within a twelvemonth) thought
it now necessary to make so strong and high a fence against him that should
next succeed to the Crown, that he might never be able to force the same, nor
bring such heavy Oppressions upon the Subjects as France had groaned under ever
since the Reign of Francis I.

The Huguenots prompted by the same Spirit, endeavored likewise to restrain
the Power of the King of Navarre in an Assembly he had Convocated at Rochel.
For apprehending he might change his Religion, they demanded Protectors in each
Province, and Chambers or Courts of Justice to hear their Complaints, and do
them Right. He had much ado to avoid the first, and hinder them from making
choice of Prince Casimir for their Protector General: but as to the second he
was forced to grant it, and set up of those Chambers in five or six Cities;
However he revoked them two years after when he came to the Crown.

The Duke of Mayennes Army made little progress in Dausine, because he staid at
Lions to decide some Controversies there were for the Government of the City,
between Mandelot and the Son of Villeroy; they spent all their Fire against the
Fort of Oysans which Lesdiguieres had built in their way: this scurvy Redout
resisted thirty days before they would capitulate. In like manner that under
the Duke of Nevers in Poiton was consumed in taking some small places of no
importance. They lay before la Ganache, when they received the news of the Duke
of Guises death.

Trent did greatly distaste and perplex him: the demand of the Estates that
their Instructions or Memorials should be conclusive, appeared yet ruder to
him; but he took the Deputation they made to oblige him expressly to declare
the King of Navarre incapable of succeeding to the Crown, to be altogether
insupportable.

During these times the Duke of Savoy, a Man of high courage, and a genius much
greater then his State, did not forget to do his own business. Believing the
Kingdom of France was going to be dismembered, he thought he had more right then
any one else to get his share, as being almost the only Male Prince, though by
the Female side, that was then remaining of the Blood of the great King
Francis, and withal having some pretensions upon the Marquisate of Salusses
and other Lands on this side the Alps. However he would not varnish his design
with that pretense, but rather chose the fair Masque of Religion: In effect
Lesdiguieres being very powerful having taken Chasteau-Daufin, and being
leagued with la Valete who had the Government of Salusses, there was some
danger lest Calvinisme might from thence step into his Countries, and become
the most prevalent under favor of so pernicious a Neighborhood.

The Duke Armed therefore, feigning he designed against Montferrat; and la
Valete being so embarrassed in Provence that he could do nothing on this side,
he seized about the end of September upon the City of Carmagnoles, and invested
the Castle. The Lieutenant surrendered it in few days after; Salusses, Cental,
and all the other small Ravel. The Joss was very great to France, as well
because there was in Carmagnoles an inestimable Magazin of all sorts of Arms,
and four hundred pieces of Cannon, as because that Country was the only passage
the French had left them to get into Italy.

Now as in all misfortunes we still lay the blame on them we most hate, the
King failed not to accuse the Duke of Guise for this, though he appeared to be
altogether innocent: for he was so far from corresponding with the Duke of
Savoy, at least at this very time, that he was at great variance with him.
Therefore he profer'd to pass the Alps and tear this Usurpation again out of
his hands, and engaged the Estates to declare a War against him.

Guise, even so far, as to seal the same with a solemn Oath upon the sacred
Mystery of the Altar, both having communicated, as it was said, at the same
Table, either of them taking one half of the same consecrated Wafer. But
immediately after, the remembrance of things past, the fear of what was to
come, and the neverceasing reports of the Quarente-cinq Forty-five.
, who craftily intermixed calumnies with truths, bad him repent his weakness,
gave him new fire to his indignation, and made him once for all determine to
put him to death.

Those of his Council and amongst his Servants who had any sense of honor and
d'Aumont would have him brought to Trial, and forfeit his Head if he deserved
it; Grillon Mestre de Camp of the Regiment of Guards refused to assassinate
him, but offered to make him draw his Sword, assuring the King he would kill
him or forfeit his own Life.

The contrary advice notwithstanding took most with the King; and this not so
much for any strength of reason as the present disposition and humor he then
was in which this exactly suited. For we must know that during any great
Frosts, such as were at this very time and had lasted above three weeks, he was
hugely tormented with vapors from the Spleen, which rendered him extreme
chagrin and severe. Those that were well acquainted knew it very dangerous to
offer to disturb him at such Seasons; and it is held, that Chiverny and Miron
had often hinted to the Duke, that if he played his Game with him whilst he was
invaded with those black and pricking fumes, he would certainly repent it.

This resolution could not be kept so private but it was known to many Persons;
the Duke had notice from above a hundred by word of Mouth and Writing; they
quoted even the very particular circumstances, and all his Friends pressed him
to retire, the Archbishop of Lions, only, was of a contrary sentiment and
prevailed above all the rest. He made him believe that all those reports and
the notices given him came from the King to fright him away, so to ruin his
Reputation, and afterward make his Process in his absence. This Prelat was
since reproached that he had thus exposed the life of his Friend, only out of
fear lest if he left the Court, the King would have hindered his promotion to
the Cardinal-ship, which he hoped would be done at Rome after St. Lucies-day.

Christmas Holidays, and gave order all the Council should come thither early
the next Morning being the Three and twentieth of December. The Council sat in
a Hall of the Castle near the Kings Chamber, who had his Apartment in the
second Story, the Queen Mother making use of the first.

The King had caused little Cells to be built upon one side of his Chamber, in
those he placed his Quarente-Cinq Forty-five.
about four hours after midnight, leading them thither himself with a small
Wax light. In the morning about Eight of the Clock, the Duke being come to the
Council-Hall with the Cardinal his Brother, the Archbishop of Lions, and some
others, the King sends for him to come speak with him in his Chamber; Nine of
those Forty-five who were placed at the entrance of the passage, fall upon him,
some catch him by the Collar, others hold him by the Arms and Legs, give him
twelve or fifteen stabs with their Daggers, he shakes them, drags them along,
and used all the efforts of an invincible despair, till being thrust into the
Reins with a Sword, he falls down at whole length with these words, Ab! thou
Traitor!

Immediately the Marshall d'Aumont seizes the Cardinal and the Archbishop in
the Council Hall, and shuts them up in a Garret; others in diverse places lay
hold on the old Cardinal de Bourbon, the Duchess of Nemours, the Prince de
Joinville, the Dukes of Nemours and Elboeuf, de Hautefort, St. Agnan,
Bois-Daufin, Brissac, la Bourdaisiere and Picard the Dukes Secretary. At the
same instant almost Richelieu Grand Prevost de l'Hostel enters the Council
Hall, bawling out they would have murdered the King, and lays hands on the
President de Nully, la Chappelle Morteau Prevost des Merchands, two ^sehevins
of Paris, and Vincent le Roy Lieutenant Civil of the City of Amiens. The rest
ran forth in great confusion. Some made a shift to get to Orleans; such as
could not make their escape, because the Gates were strongly guarded, were
forced stay behind, and cover their apprehensions with a seeming joy.

Those that had slain the Duke, dreading lest the Cardinal should another day
demand satisfaction for his Blood, solicited the King with so much vehemence
that he consented likewise to his death. Two things amongst the rest moved him
to determine it, the one was they reported he spit forth all the injurious
language, reproaches and imprecations that a despairing fury and rage could
possibly express; the other was that having found the Popes Legate easily
inclined to allow of his justificatio ntouching the death of the Duke, he
imagined it would be no hard task to obtain his remission for the Murder of
the Cardinal. Du Guast a Captain in the Regiment of Guards, provided four
Soldiers for this execution, each of them being promised an hundred

Richelieu caused the Bodies of these two Brothers to be burnt, and their Ashes
to be scattered in the Air lest the People should make Relics of them.
Pericard redcemed his life and liberty at the price of all his Masters secrets:
but neither threats nor caresses could extort the least syllable from the
Archbishop that might stain the memory of his Friend; and yet the King, either
because his fury was spent, or because he had formerly loved him; would not
have them take away his Life.

Few People boasted of having a hand in this action, either out of shame, or
for sear of a future revenge. It will not be amiss to observe two things; the
one, that such as had the greatest obligation to the House of Guise, were the
main Instruments of their destruction, the other that these Princes were drawn
into the snare under the public faith, and by the like most subtle and
artificial dissimulations, as they had joined in to decoy those of the House of
Bourbon and the Admiral de Coliguy, at the Massacre in the year 1572.

Such as were most clear-sighted did from that very time judge this must be
attended with terrible Consequences: the King himself began to perceive it,
when after the Murder of the Duke of Guise going to the Queen Mother to let
her know what had past, saying to her, Madam, now I am King indeed, she asked
him whether he had taken order to secure Paris, and hinder the People from
rising in all parts of the Kingdom, and made him sensible as well by her
countenance as her discourse, that he was not yet in the condition he thought
himself. And then again when he found the Legate, Guise, came now and declared
he had incurred Excommunicatio Majorem for that of the Cardinal: but much more
yet when he came to know that not one of those Orders he had sent abroad had
succeeded, they not being able to seize upon any one of the Heads of the League.

For the Duke of Mercoeur who was at Nantes, had diligent notice given him by
the Queen Louisa his Sister, and prevented their taking of him. Likewise the
Duke of Mayenne received a Courier at Lions sent him by Roissieux a Gentleman
belonging to his Brother, and not finding the People of that Town in a
disposition to protect him amongst them, he went to Chaalon in Burgundy, made
himself Master of the Citadel, and from thence hastened to secure Dijon. The
same Roissieux made them of Orleans take up Arms who besieged Entragues their
Governor in his Redoubt at the Gate Baniere.

The Sixteen, having kept the news private till they were secured of the Gates
of Paris, held an Assembly in the Town Hall, where they chose the Duke of
Aumale to be their Governor. For the first two or three days being yet
uncertain of the events, they put this color upon their Revolt, that it was to
maintain themselves in perfect unity against all such attempts as might be made
in prejudice to their liberties, and the Catholic Religion; but when they
heard and found Orleans had declared, and Mayenne in Burgundy, they were no
longer afraid to withdraw themselves from the Kings obedience, whom they now
called only Henry de Valois.

Parisians against the King, the declamations of the Pulpiteers, the lewd
Songs, the infamous Discourses, the bloody Satyrs, wherewith they mangled his
Reputation, and I might omit, were it not too great an injury and breach in
History, what the Faculty in Divinity, esteemed the leading one of all
Christendom, asserted, upon a Consultation held with them, That the French were
discharged of all Oaths of Fidelity and their Duty of Obedience toward Henry
de Valois, and that they might with a safe Conscience take up Arms against him,
which drew somewhat after it of a most terrible Consequence.

The first President Achilles de Harlay and many more of the Parliament
directly opposed these Phrensies, and endeavored to moderate their overheated
Spirits. Bussy le Clear otherwhile a Fencer, and then a Procureur in
Parliament, had the confidence to come into the Grand Chamber, and cause a List
to be read over of such as he said he had Order to Arrest. When they had named
the first President, and ten or twelve others, all the rest of the Company rose
up and followed them most generously to the Bastille, marching by two and two
along the Streets to move the People to compassion. In effect they were ready
to run to their Arms, but their Preachers hindered it, by giving them to
understand that all this was done for the maintenance of Religion and the
public safety. Bussy kept those he had a mind to in the Bastille, as the first
President, and some others.

The same day he seized upon many more in their Houses, as well such as
belonged to the same Company as to the Chamber des Comptes and the Cour des
Aides: but most of them got out again the same day or soon after, having given
their Oathsagainst the King. Some realy changed Parties, others dissembled till
occasion presented to evade, but many believed that they should be better able
to serve their Country by returning to their places in the Parliament. Of those
was Barnabe Brisson who supplied the Office of first President, and the next
day held Audience with Doors wide open, having made his protestation before a
Notary, that he did it by compulsion to save his own life and all his Families.
The League likewise changed the whole Bar as they pleased; Molle was chosen
Solicitor General because the People earnestly demanded it for the reputation
of his great Probity.

Council of Forty Persons. They afterward obliged them to receive the Petition
of Catharine de Cleves, Widow of the Duke of Guise, who desired leave to take
information concerning the death of her Husband, and Commissioners to make
Process against such as should be Convicted. The Parliaments, the Chambers
Assembled, having heard the Solicitor General's motion admitted and granted
her Petition, and named two Counselors to manage and carry on the said Process.

The King, against all these attempts, opposed nothing but a little Parchment
and Wax, multitudes of Letters which he sent every way, and several
Declarations, at first very soft and gentle, then somewhat more vigorous; One
amongst others which commanded the Duke of Aumale to go out of Paris,
interdicted the Parliament, and all other the Kings Judges to exercise any
Jurisdiction; then another which declared the Dukes of Mayenne and Aumale, and
all the revolted Cities, guilty of the Crime de Lesae Majestatis in the highest
degree, and deprived them of all Offices, Honors, and Privileges; In
pursuance whereof he made an Edict which transferred the Parliament and the
Chamber des Comptes to Tours, as he afterward did that of Rouen to Caen, and
the University and the Presidial of Orleans to Beaugency.

It was thought that if he had but mounted on Horseback and appeared at the
Gates of Orleans or Paris, who lead the dance to all other Tumults, he had
stifled them with ease: but he was grown so effeminate thorough idleness that
he could neither perform any thing with vigor, nor keep himself any competent
time steady to the same resolution. He stirred not from Blois, but continued
the Estates there, whom he persuaded himself would suddenly find out some
remedy for all the grievances and troubles in the Kingdom.

In the mean while the Leaguers and Friends of the deceased Duke, drew after
them almost all the People of the whole Nation, already too much prepossessed
with illfavour'd sentiments against him. Even those very Persons who ever had
abhorred Faction and Rebellion, finding he had caused a Cardinal to be
Massacred, imagined he struck at the Catholic Religion it self, the manner and
circumstances of those Murders gave a horror to all the World; even the King
of Navarre, though le Plessis Mornay hindered the Rochellers from any public
Expressions of it, for fear they might be reproached for approving that
ambiguous act by any solemnity.

It could never be certainly known whether the Queen Mother had any hand in it,
there being only conjectures both for and against it: but it is certain the
King did never afterward communicate any affairs to her. So that thinking Life
a burden without any Authority or Power, being overwhelmed with Age, for she
was Seventy and two years old, but much more with trouble and sorrow to see
that fate, maugre all the obstructions she had contrived, brought her greatest
Enemy so near the Crown; and withal being pierced to the heart that the
Cardinal de Bourbon, when she would needs visit him upon his Bed of Sickness
and languishment, cast that bloody reproach in her teeth, Ah, Madam, is it thus
you have brought us all to the Butchery: she fell sick and died of it the Fifth
of January. Her death was esteemed a thing very indifferent, causing neither
joy, nor sorrow; and her memory would have vanished with her breath after all
the noise and stirs she had made for thirty years together, had she not brought
down too many curses upon France to be so soon forgotten.

A second time the King made the Estates swear to the Edict of Union, to show
he was a Zealous Catholic. After this they presented their Papers to him,
which he began to examine for some days. The Fifteenth and Sixteenth of the
Month he heard their Harangues: which were full of fine words, sound Reasons,
wise Expedients, but their Tongues and Hearts were very far asunder, so that it
was nothing but a Scene where each one acted a part quite different from what
he was indeed.

Now they sending him notice from all parts of new Commotions, and finding most
of the Deputies retired without taking leave, he dismissed them all, upon the
Twentieth day of the Month; and that they might carry with them into the
Provinces some Marks of his Bounty, to the Nobility he gave Brissac and
Bois-Daufin their liberty, and to the Third Estate that of three or four
Deputies whom Richelieu had seized on. But all of them made him an ill
requital, reserving only the injury in memory, but not the favor and pardon.
Moreover he granted and caused several Articles of their Instructions or
Memorials to be proclaimed, amongst others an abatement of the fourth part of
their Tailles; of which in truth there was above a third part of non-value, and
never could be raised.

From Blois he caused all his Prisoners to be transferred to the Castle of
Amboise: but the Duke of Nemours, of a bold and active Spirit, found the
invention to escape disguised like a Kitchen Scullion, and got to Paris without
stop or stay. The last day of the Month he had news that the Citadel of Orleans
had surrendered to the Bourgeois. He had hoped that the Duke of Nevers whom he
recalled from Poitou, would have relieved it: but after the taking of la
Ganache, his Forces being all

He heard almost at the same time that Paris had drawn in all the Towns and
Passages round about them, excepting Melun; That Dreux, Crespy in Valois,
Senlis, Clermont in Beauvoisis, Pont Saint Maixence, Amiens, Abbeville,
Rouen, and all those of Normandy, excepting the Pont de L'Arche, Diepe, and
Caen, had set up the Colors of the League; That Bois-Daufin had stirred up all
the Country of Man's; That the Duke of Mayenne was Master of all Burgundy,
excepting Semur and Flavigny; That Lions had cast their Rider and chose for
Governor the Duke of Genevois; so they called the Duke of Nemours.

As to Bretagne, the Duke of Mercoeur did not make them move as yet, because
the King his Brother in Law amused him with the hopes of giving him that Duchy
after his death. Stephen Duranti First President of Toulouze, and James Dafis
Attorney General, contained that City near a Month: but at last Urban de Saint
Gelais Lansac Bishop of Cominges, a Man equally ambitious and violent, made it
revolt, and put the Populace into such a fury that they inhumanely massacred
those two Magistrates, dragged their dead Bodies thorough the Streets with the
Kings Effigies, and hanged them on the Gallows.

The Parisians, and the Duchess of Montpensier, who could not well agree with
the Duke of Aumale, invited the Duke of Mayenne to Paris: as soon as he had
settled Burgundy in good order, he begins his Journey thither to satisfy them.
All Champagne was of his Party, but only Chaalons, for the Inhabitants having
received information of the death of Guise before the Governor had any notice,
which was Rosne, assembled together and turned him out. From thence he went to
Sens where his presence was requisite to fortisie his Friends, then to Orleans,
where he found the Citadel surrendered to his Party, afterward to Chartres, who
received him with extraordinary Paris, where he arrived the Tenth day of
February.

That vast number of People were yet so furiously enchanted with the memory of
the Duke of Guise, that they would needs bestow the Title of King upon this
Brother, but he did not find himself sufficiently bottomed to accept of so high
a Dignity. He considered that besides the divisions it would necessarily have
begot betwixt him and the other Chiefs, who were content to be his Companions,
but not his Subjects, the Spirits of the Authors of that grand Revolution,
tended rather to establish a Democracy then a Monarchy. Wherefore he presently
labored to diminish their Power: increased the Council of Forty, with fourteen
more wholly at his own devotion, and admitted not only all the Princes of the
League, but likewise the Presidents, the Kings Attorneys and Sollicitors in
Parliament, the Prevost des Merchands and Eschevins, that he might carry things
by Multitude upon occasion. Then not able to endure this curb by any means
breaks it quite the following year when he was going to give the Battle of Yury.

Lieutenant General of the State and Crown of France: but he gave them little
thanks for it, because they limited his Power to the meeting of the General
Estates which was to be upon the Fifteenth of July. His Commission was verified
in Parliament the Seventh of March, and he took the Oath before the President
de Brisson. They caused new Seals to be made, a great one for Council Affairs,
and a little one for the Chanceries and Parliaments; either of them had on one
side the Flower-de-Luce, as was usual, but on the other an Empty Throne, with
these words about it, The Seal of the Kingdom of France.

Now to make a real Union of this Party, as they had the name, and to link all
the Cities to them that had declared already and intended to declare, he made
an excellent Reglement, which being sent into the Provinces, brought others
into him. Especially Laon, where John Bodin the Kings Attorney in that Court,
prevailed so by his Interest and Eloquence that it was accepted, having made it
clear that the joining of so many Cities ought not to be called Rebellion, but
Revolution, that this was a just one against an Hypocrite and Tyrant King, that
Heaven it self seemed to authorize it, because States have their periods as
well as Men, and the Reign of Henry III. ought to be the Climacterical to
France, he being the LXI. King since Pharaemond, who, according to the Vulgar
Account, was the first King of the French.

To this pretended Order, succeeded a general Disorder, an universal Robbery
thorough the whole Kingdom, seizures of Goods, sales by outcry, Imprisonments,

March, the King not finding himself secure at Blois, retired to Tours. He
first took out his Prisoners from the Castle of Amboise, sent the Cardinal de
Bourbon to Chinon whereof Chavigny an ancient Gentleman was Governor, the
Prince of Joinville (who from henceforward was and called himself Duke of
Guise) to Tours, and the Duke d'Elbaeuf to Loches. The Duke of Mayennes
Affairs, as we may say, did do of themselves. For even in the Month of February
the Cities of Aix, Arles, and Marseilles, offended at the Kings restoring la
Valete to that Government, took the Oath for the League: but he in the mean
while passed his time at Paris, where he and his Officers consumed in fruitless
Expenses the Moneys assessed Huguenots Estates.

While that Duke was in the greatest hurry of his Affairs, it happened that four
or five of his Friends and Intimates being in debauch with some Ladies of
Pleasure in the Hostel de Carnavalet, one of them seeing him pass by ran after
him, and haled him in almost by force: he did not stay above half an hour with
this Company, yet made a shift to get and carry that away with him, that forced
him to keep his Chamber several weeks after, but being in haste, he had time to
take only palliative Remedies. So that the venom remaining still in his Blood,
rendered him more slow, lumpish, and melancholy, and in his Person stupefied the
activity of his whole Party.

In the Month of March, John Lewis de la Rochefoucaut Count de Randan,
debauched Rion, and part of Auvergne whereof he was Governor; he had drawn the
whole Country after him, if some Lords, as Rostignac, Saint-Herem, Allegre,
Fleurat, Canillac, and Oradour, amongst whom d'Effiat, having the Kings
particular Orders had acquired great credit, had not opposed their courage and
skill against his Interest and Faction.

The Duke of Mercoeur having balanced a while, debauched likewise all Bretagne,
excepting only Vitre; the Nobility of the Country were cantonized there against
him, and whilst he besieged it, Renes escaped from him. Gefroy de Saint Belin
Bishop of Poitiers, and the Mayor and some other Leaguers stirred up that Town,
which however did not yet declare for the League.

Limoges remained under obedience of the King. Pichery retained the City of
Angers in despite of Brissac who had put them upon rising, and reduced them by
means of the Castle where he commanded. Matignons prudence defeated the
Conspiracy of the Leaguers, who were beginning to Barricade themselves at
Bourdeaux: but he durst not search it to the quick, the Combination being too
general, and so thought it sufficient to hang two or three of the most Zealous.

Since the King of Navarres return to Rochel, he had taken Maran, and then
Niort by Escalado. Some few days after happened the Murder at Blois, but that
made no alteration in the conduct of his Affairs; neither did it oblige him to
discontinue his War. The Cities of Loudun, Thouars, Monstreuil, L'Isle
Bouchard, and even Chastelleraud it self, opened their Gates to him. From
thence he advanced as far as Argenton in Berry to aid the City which held for
the King, against the Castle that stood for the League. Which gave so much
jealousy to la Chastre, that he declared for the League, and made the City of
Bourges declare with him.

The happy progress of this Prince and his Proximity, gave the King some reason
Nevers who apprehended Huguenots and Catholics might bring Religion into
danger, dissuaded him with all his might, and there were withal great
obstructions on either hand. On the Kings part, the fear of farther offending
the Court of Rome, and scandalizing the Catholics, the Conscience of so soon
violating an Oath twice reiterated before the Estates, and the shame of being
forced to call into his assistance him whom he had so roughly persecuted. On
the King of Navarres part, the just suspicion lest they should sacrifice him to
appease the fury of the League, (for this King that invited him was himself one
of the principal Authors of the bloody St. Bartholomew) and the constraint of
stooping to the Favorites, who sported with the lives of those that did not
bow the knee before them. Notwithstanding Du Plessis Mornay and some others by
their prudent management removed all these Obstacles, and accommodated every
thing between these two Kings, upon condition the Treaty should not be divulged
till the King should think it fit.

It contained an agreement of a Truce for a year, during which time the King of
Navarre should aid him with all his Forces, and should give him up all such
places as he should take from the common Enemy; Reciprocally the King should
give him the Pont de Ce upon the Loire, and one place in every Bailiwick as a
retreat for his sick Men.

When the Legate had discovered this new Confederation, he employed all his
power and interest to incline the Duke of Mayenne to an Accommodation, even so
far as to offer him Conditions much beyond the power of his Commission. The
King finding he did but only lose time, that in the Dukes Army they gave him no
better Title then the Tyrant, the Massacrer, and dethroned Henry, and that the
Duke was at Chasteaudun, within three days Journey of Tours, he caused the
Truce to be proclaimed, though with a great deal of repugnance.

There were at Rome some Envoys on his behalf to solicit for his Absolution,
and others in behalf of the League to oppose it. The thing was found to be much
more difficult to obtain of the Pope, then he had imagined; In that Court the
Blood of a Cardinal is not so lightly valued, and Pope Sixtus who gloried in
trampling upon Crowned Heads, would be sure not to let slip this opportunity of
magnifying his own power. He demanded before any further proceedings, that they
should set the Cardinal de Bourbon and the Archbishop of Lions at liberty:
Charles d'Angennes Bishop of Man's, had made him believe the King would grant
him this: but when in stead of a compliance, that Prelat entertained him with
excuses and ragione di stato, and at the same time they were informed by
Letters from the Legate, of the Kings Confederation with the Head of the
Huguenots, the Pope lets fly a Monitory the Fifth of May, by which he demanded
and commanded to set the Cardinal and the Archbishop in Coena Domini, of which
he could not be absolved but by the Pope himself, unless at the point of death,
and upon giving security to make satisfaction; cited him to appear personally
at Rome within sixty days, allowing him twenty days for each Admonition, and
disanulling all Indulgences, Faculties, and Privileges to the contrary,
granted by the Holy See either to him or to any of his Predecessors.

This Monitory was published in Rome, and affixed upon the Church doors of St.
Peter's, and St. John de Latran the Three and twentieth of May, and the Month of
June following in the Cathedral of Chartres, in that of Meaux, and some other
Churches in France: but the King still pretended cause of ignorance. He
notwithstanding had well enough foreseen this thing, and the apprehension he
had of it hastened him to satisfy the King of Navarre by giving him a passage
upon the Loire. Du Plessis Mornay by his Address brought it so about as in lieu
of Pont de Ce, a very ill-favored place, he gave him the City of Saumur,
whereof his Master gave him the Government.

This security being granted, the two Kings met about the Thirtieth of April
about the hour of One in the Afternoon at Plessis Les Tours in the Park, he of
Navarre was come to the Bridge de la Motte, which is a Rivolet a quarter of a
league beyond Tours, and had brought part of his Forces which were quartered
about two leagues beyond that, but would venture no farther. Nevertheless
d'Aumont and Chastillon having informed him that such mistrust displeased the
King, pressed him so home that they prevailed with him to pass the River of
Cher and come into the Park. His old Captains trembled both for anger and for
fear, lest the King, said they, in a season wherein treachery may be so
advantageous to free himself out of that Labyrinth whereinto another had drawn
him, should have agreed for his Absolution at the price of this Princes Life,
and destined his Head a present to the Pope to accompany the Admirals.

The same day to dispel their fears, he returned to his lodgment: but the next
day by six in the morning, and without giving them notice, he repasses the
River with only one Page, and came to the King as he was rising. The two
Princes spent all that morning and the next, in consulting of their Affairs.
Their resolution in gross was to attaque Paris the principal head of the
League, and that which gave motion to all the rest. They reckon they should for
this purpose have the Forces of the Huguenot Party, and great numbers of the
Nobility, a powerful assistance which the King expected from England, and a
levy of twelve thousand Swiss whom Sancy was gone to raise in the Protestant
Cantons. After they had remained together two days, Navarre went to Chinon to
bring forward the rest of those Troops he

In the Provinces the two Parties had had diverse Rencounters, Sautour a
Royalist besieging Mere upon Seine, Hautefort who qualified himself Lieutenant
General for the Union in Brie and Champagne, charged him, killed, or caused
most of his Men to drown themselves in the Marshes.

But the advantage which the Duke of Montpensier, Governor of Normandy, gained
over the Leaguers, was much more considerable: He had besieged Fala^se, Brissac
brought four thousand Gautiers to its relief, he marches out to meet them and
cut them all off near the Village of Pierresite, which is within two leagues of
Falaise, and afterward went and rooted out the whole Nursery of them at
Vimoutier, Bernay, and la Chapelle-Gautier, where part of them were knocked on
the Head, part scattered, and the rest constrained to lay down their Swords,
and fall to the Plough-share.

These were all Peasants that for two years had held those places, not for any
particular Party, but to defend themselves from the robbing Soldiery, and from
the Taxgatherers, greater Villains yet then the Men of the Sword. Their first
place of meeting was in the Parish of la Chapelle-Gautier, whence they had
their name: they were to the number of ten or twelve thousand. Happy if they
had not admitted two Gentlemen amongst them, who did engage them in the
quarrels of the Grandees, for which they had not the least concern.

At parting from Chasteaudun the Duke of Mayenne did not go directly to Tours,
as it seems he ought to have done; but turns himself to some other Enterprises.
The one was upon the City of Vendosme: he took it by the treachery of Francis
Maille Benehard, to whom the King of Navarre had given the Government, and in
the same draught of his Net caught all the grand Council who lodged there.

He had another, to surprise the Duke of Espernons Cavalry, who were quartered
about St. Ouin, and to have taken Prisoner Charles de Luxembourg Count de
Brienne his Brother in Law, that he might exchange him for the Duke d'Elboeuf.
For we must know that the Duke of Espernon was come back to the King with a
good Party of Soldiers, and had quartered his Foot at Blois to defend it from
the fury of the Duke of Mayenne, who threatened to lay it level with the ground,
and sow it with Salt in revenge of the death of his Brothers. The Cavalry of
the Count de Brienne were wholly cut off, and he hemmed in and then made
Prisoner in St. Ouins: but the King left him there not much caring to exchange
him. This happened some few days after the Enterview of the two Kings.

The King of Navarres absence made way for the Duke of Mayenne soon after to
attempt upon the City of Tours. Perhaps the secret correspondence he held with
May with his Army, and after a march of thirteen Leagues, got the next day by
Ten of the Clock in the Morning so near the Suburbs, that the King, who was
gone out to walk toward Marmoustier, did narrowly miss of being surprised by
some light Horsemen.

The Duke a great Temporiser, lost half the day in light Skirmishes: it was
near four in the Afternoon, when having felt their pulses, he roundly attaqu'd
the Fauxbourg St. Symphorien, and carried it in less then half an hour. Which
made it seem probable, that if he had done so at the very first, he might have
taken the Town wherein he had a great Faction: but toward the Evening
Chastillon arrived with the King of Navarres Forces who lay not far from Tours,
and entrenched himself in an Island right over against the City.

Upon this the Duke reflecting that he had but few Horse, and that his Foot
were all new raised Men, that the King of Navarre would soon return in Person
with that part of his Troops who were remaining at Chinon, judged it safest to
make a retreat, and dislodged without noise at the first break of day, taking
his march toward Anjou to gather up in that Country, and in Perch and Main,
those Companies which the Gentlemen of the League had raised there.

This first Effort of the League having succeeded so ill, the Nobless, who
before gave the King for lost, perceived now he would be able to defend
himself, and hastened to come to him with great diligence. Then having room to
march into the Field which way he pleased, he desired the King of Navarre to
draw his Forces to Boisgency to make an essay upon Orleans, sent the Count de
Soissons into Bretagne to secure the City of Renes, and himself made a
Cavalcade to Poitiers, thinking to confirm that City to his own Service, which
as yet did vacillate betwixt both Parties. But Orleans stirred not for the
approach of the Navarrois Army; the Count unfortunately sell into the hands of
the Duke of Mercoeur, who made him Prisoner in Chasteaugiron within three
leagues of Renes; and the King did not find in Poitieres that kind disposition
they had given him hopes of.

He returned therefore to Tours, where he began afresh to fall into his wonted
idleness, still flattering himself with some accommodation with the League:
when the King of Navarre took the liberty to wait upon him, and rowzed up his
sloth by so many arguments of danger and honor, that he forced him to mount
on Horseback, desiring of him but only two Months labor and activity to set
him at rest all the remainder of his life.

Two messages of good news did likewise help to awake and spur him forwards,
one the defeat of the Lords de Saveuse and de Brosse; the other the gaining of
a Senlis. Saveuse and Brosse were Brothers, and of the bravest, indeed,
Picards, and the most zealous Leaguers; who as they were bringing two hundred
Lanciers to the Duke of Mayenne, were charged by Chastillon in that part of la
Beausse near Bonneval, where yet the Cross of Saveuse is to be seen. He slew a
hundred of them, and took fourscore Prisoners, whereof the most part died of
their Wounds. Amongst others Saveuse, who refusing any manner of help or
consolation, let his Soul sally forth together with his Blood, detesting the
Murder at Blois, and spending his last breath in praising the heroic virtues
of the Duke of Guise.

As to the affair of Senlis, Tore who had great influence over that City,
because of the Voicinage of Chantilly, having reclaimed them to the Kings
service, the Duke of Aumale would needs set upon it with some Parisian Forces,
and four thousand Men brought him by Balagny, who called himself Prince of
Cambray. Now the very same day they had capitulated to surrender, la Noue and
the young Duke of Longueville who had drawn together some Ten thousand Men to
go and meet the Swiss raised by Saney, and some Lords of Picardy, whose Houses
Balagny had ruined, resolved to succor it.

They briskly attaqued that Citizen-Camp, and found no great resistance, for
they defeated and routed themselves upon the very first sight of their Army.
There fell about two thousand of them upon the place, and almost as many in the
Woods of Chantilly, who were knocked at Head by the Peasants, and a thousand
Prisoners with all their Bagage and Artillery.) Mayneville and Chamois lost
their lives upon the spot. Aumale made but one continued Stage in running to
St. Denis, where he picked up some small fragments of his defeat. The Victors
marched along by the very Gates of Paris, throwing in some Volees of Cannon,
which carried to the Hales, and afterward they put Provisions into Vincennes
which held yet for the King.

Montpensier finding Paris much startled at this grand rout, pressed the Duke
of Mayenne to come and take some course, otherwise all would be lost. He came
therefore within fifteen days having first reduced the City of Alencon. When he
had held some Consults with the Sixteen concerning the present state of
Affairs, he went to regain the City of Montereau which had surrendered to the
Duke of Espernon, then immediately descended along the Seine, and encamped near
Paris to cover it. For already the Kings Army was before Pontoise; and took it
upon composition after Hautefort was slain, and Alincourt the Governor,
grievously wounded in the Shoulder.

The Evening of the Capitulation, the King had notice that the Foreign
Assistance Swiss, two thousand Lansquenets, and some Poissy. By this means his
Army amounting to above Thirty eight thousand Men, the opinion of the King of
Navarre and the younger Captains (though contradicted by the old ones) made
them resolve to attaque Paris by main force. So that the King extended his Army
from St. Cloud (where he lodged in the House of Gondy, even to the Gate of
Nuilly, and the King of Navarre his from Vanvres to the Bridge of Charenton.

The Duke of Mayenne had enclosed the Suburbs on that side with great
Retrenchments, and distributed his Men about to guard them. La Chastre was to
defend those of St. Germains, St. James, and St. Marcel, and himself those of
St. Honor, St. Denis, St. Martin, and St. Laurence, in case the King should
bring any Forces on that side. He had not above ten thousand Soldiers: but the
Duke of Nemours was on his march to bring him the like number, and he expected
three thousand from Lorrain, and some Cavalry from diverse parts of the Kingdom:
sufficient Supplies, but not so near at hand, as was their danger.

Upon sight of the Kings Army, the Royalists who were numerous in Paris, the
Cowards, and such as had a great deal to lose, did almost all declare
barefaced for an Accommodation, and they were already observed to run from
House to House to exhort their Friends to follow their example. The
apprehensions of a most bloody punishment did chil the Spirits of the hottest
Leaguers and turn their zealous hearts into lumps of Ice, to little purpose did
their declaiming Pulpiteers endeavor to encourage them, and keep their Souls
from fainting with false reports, pretended to be sent them from all parts of
the Nation: there was great danger lest upon some general attaque, which was
resolved to be made on the Second day of August, their Swords should fall out
of their trembling hands, and more yet, lest whilst they were engaged in Fight,
the Royalists should charge them in the Rear, and set open some Gate for the
Assailants entrance.

The Duke of Mayenne rather then come to such a dangerous extremity, had made
his Party to go forth with four thousand Men all resolved to die like him, to
run headlong upon the Enemies Lodgment and solicit fortune de la guerre (who
sometimes shows a kindness to the generous in despair) either to lead him safe
by the hand out of that dismal Storm, or bury his high and noble designs in a
most glorious death.

He was yet in this extreme resolution, when an accident as dreadful as it was
unfore-seen, snatched him from the very brink of the Precipice. A Jacobin Monk
Friar Jacques Clement, a Native of the Village of Sorbonne near Sens, aged
Paris, and lately made a Priest, (otherwise dull and ignorant enough) of a very
melancholy temper, and susceptible of those black vapors and imaginations
formed in the brain by adustcholer, unhappily undertook to deprive the King of
life. In what manner and by whom he was induced to this, is a matter of too
great importance to be discoursed without more certainty and light then I could
ever find: but this is plain that if he were not prompted by any other to this
design, there were some at least much pleased he had undertaken it, and who
gave him instructions and an opportunity, since they brought him acquainted
with the Count de Brienne, and some other Royalist Lords Prisoners in the
Bastille, and gave him ^ Passport of that Counts, and a Letter of Credence
from the President de Harlay for the King, but which was counterreit.

La Guesle Solicitor General, going from his House of Vanvres with his Brother
to St. Cloud, met him upon that Road, and learning from him that he had
business of great importance to deliver to the King, caused him to get on
Horseback behind his Brother, and carried him to St. Cloud. Were it brutality,
strength of courage, or an assurance of his pretended glory of Martyrdom, never
was so undaunted a Fellow seen as this pestilent Monk: he supped merrily with
la Guesles Servants, was not concerned at all the questions they put to him,
and rested all night in a profound sleep. The next morning being brought by la
Guesle into the Kings Chamber, he goes up to him without any dread, speaks to
him without hesitation, presents him certain Letters, and as he was reading,
takes his time, draws a Knife out of his Sleeve and plungeth it into his Belly.
The King feeling himself wounded cries out, plucks the Knife out of his Wound,
and gives him two blows, the one on the Forehead, the other in his Cheek. La
Guesle draws his Sword, strikes the Monk imprudently upon the Forehead with the
Pummel, and two or three of the Qu^rente-cinq more imprudent yet, kill him upon
the place. When they had found whom he was, the Grand Prevost caused his Body
to be torn asunder by four Horses, burnt the Quarters, and threw the Ashes into
the Air.

At first the Wound did not appear to be very dangerous: but as soon as they
had de Bourbon and the Archbishop at liberty. While he was entering the second
time upon his Confession, he fell into a swoon, then utterly losing his speech,
he expired about four in the morning, the Second day of August, which was the
next after his being wounded.

The preceding Evening, the King of Navarre informed of the danger he was in,
came to visit him, the frequent sits of fainting he fell into every moment,
would not allow him to make long discourses: but when dead, the several
Factions made many different ones for him according to their Interests. The
Catholics reported he exhorted him to abjure his Heresy, and to profess the
true Faith; the Huguenots on the contrary, that he desired them to refer those
Disputes to the Convocation of the Estates General; some others, that he
conjured them to remain united, and pursue the Revenge for his Death: but it is
most certain that he embraced him several times, and that he called him his
good Brother, and his lawful Successor.

They carried his Corpse to St. Cornille de Compeigne, where it reposed till the
year 1610. when it was brought to St. Deuis with that of the Queen his Mother
which was at Blois, to accompany the Funeral Pomp of Henry the Great. Both of
them were placed in the Mausoleum of the Valois. Benoise Secretary of the
Closet, a faithful Servant, caused his Heart and Bowels to be buried in a
private place of the Church of St. Cloud, then when Henry IV. had restored
France to its perfect Peace, he placed an Epitaph there which is yet to be
seen, and founded an Anniversary for him.

Henry III. ceased to live in the Eleventh Month of the Nine and thirtieth year
of his Age, and the second of the sixteenth of his Reign. He had no Children by
Queen Louisa his Wife, she survived him till the year 1601. and the Forty
seventh of her Age. She made choice for her retirement of the Castle of
Moulins, which was part of her Dower, where she passed the remainder of her
days in the continual exercise of Piety and Christian Virtues.

With this King ended the Branch of the Valois, who had Reigned One hundred and
sixty one years, (accounting from Philip IV.) and furnished France with
thirteen Kings, most of them Magnificent, Liberal, Valiant, Religious, and
Lovers of Polite Learning: b^t, to say the truth, not over-fortunate in War;
who notwithstanding have acquired to this Kingdom by good Conduct, rather then
by force, Daufine, Burgundy, Provence, and Bretagne: and chaced the English
wholly out of France, after a War of an hundred and thirty years together, with
various success and fortune.

But, who began to burden the People with Tails and Impositions, (little known
in the Reigns of their Predecessors, unless in cases of urgent necessity, by
grant of the Estates, and only for a time) who have alienated the Sacred
Demesns of the Crown, permitted Plebeians to possess Fiefs, taken away
Canonical Elections of Benefices, introduced the Venality of Offices, and even
of Nobility, multiplied Officers of Justice, and of Finance, composed great
numbers of Reiglements and Ordonnances, changed the ancient Militia of the
Kingdom to entertain Soldiers upon pay, levelled the power of the great Lords,
called Women into the Court; and in fine made many other changes, whereof we
must refer the Judgment to the Sages whether they be more profitable, or
prejudicial to the State.

Henry IV. King LXII.
POPES,
SIXTUS V. near thirteen years under this Reign. URBAN VII. Elected the 15th of
September 1590. S. only twelve days. GREGORY XIV. Elected the fifth of December
1590. S. ten Months ten days. INNOCENT IX. Elected the 29th of October 1591. S.
two Months. CLEMENT VIII. Elected the 30th of January 1592. S. thirteen years
and one Month. LEO XI. Elected the first of April 1605. S. twenty seven days.
PAUL V. Elected the 16th of May 1605. S. fifteen years, and near nine Months,
whereof five years under this Reign.
HENRY IV. King LXII. Aged Thirty five years and eight Months.

France of a Prince that came to the Crown from a degree so remote as was Henry
King of Navarre in respect of King Henry III. to whom he was of Kin but in the
tenth or eleventh: nevertheless it was the Sentiment both of the People and the
Lawyers, that this succession in a Masculine Line, extended to infinity. And
indeed those that would have excluded him did not make this distance beyond the
seventh degree any part of their pretense, but the defect of his Religion and
they believed they had so shut up all the Avenues by the Edict of Reunion,
which the Estates General and the deceased King had twice sworn, and by Pope
Sixtus his Bull, that they imagined he could never attain it, even though he
were converted.

During the night between the Second and third of August whilst his Predecessor
was in his greatest agony, he held several Councils tumultuarily in the same
House with his most cordial Servants; then when he saw he was giving up the
ghost, he retired to his quarters at Meudon, followed at first by a good number
of the Nobility, who accompanied him out of curiosity rather then affection.
And there being locked up in his Chamber he consulted sometimes with one,
sometimes with others, showing great confidence to all, but generally
suspecting every one.

Some, though but a very few, swore fealty to him without any Condition. Biron,
the most considerable, and the most imperious of all those that were there,
believing the Kingdom was going to be dismembered, as it had been at the end of
the Carlien Race, made known he desired to have the County of Perigord for his
share. The King commanded Sancy to offer it to him: but Sancy, who could not
claim the like advantage for himself, did so picque him with generosity, as he
renounced that demand, and went along with him to the Swiss Soldiers, to
persuade them to remain in the Service of the new King. The fear they had of
losing their pay, was a strong charm to hold them by; however some of them
disbanded.

This was a great advantage for the new King: but as to the rest he was without
Money and without Credit, the Princes of the Blood had neither the power nor
will to serve him: the old Cardinal de Bourbon was his Concurrent; the Cardinal
de Vendosms ambition gave him jealousy; the humor of the Count de Soissons
agreed but ill with his; the Prince of Conty Brother to those two Princes, was
of little effect, by reason of his deafness and his other natural defects;
Montpensier their Cousin, the richest and most powerful of them all, was well
enough content he should be King, and never would have endured any other: but
he desired he would abjure his Religion.

Huguenots, and the Huguenots themselves apprehended he might change his
Religion. A suspicion which they had long before conceived, and which they
began to look upon as an approaching truth, when they saw him ready to step
into the Throne.

Thus did he not know whom to advise with: every resolution seemed perilous*
he found it as greatly inconvenient to declare himself immediately a Catholic,
as to persist in his Huguenotism, and the medium between those two Extremes was
attended with the inconveniences of both. Whilst these different thoughts were
rolling in his Head, there met an Assembly of Nobility, right against his
Lodging, where it was resolved it should be declared to him, that the Quality
of Most Christian, being essential to a King of France, they did beseech him to
take up the Crown with that Condition. The Duke of Longeville undertook to
carry him this Message: being come to the Door he fell upon some
Considerations, and gave ground, but Francis d'O supplied his place, and
delivered it boldly.

The following night, the King held Council with five or six of his most
intimate Friends to give an Answer to the Nobless, who at the same time were
all Assembled in the House of Francis de Luxembourg Duke of Piney. It was
resolved in the Kings Council, that happen what would, he should yet persevere
in his Belief; In the Assembly it was Decreed they might acknowledge him upon
these Conditions; That he should instruct himself within six Months; That in
the mean time be should forbid the Exercise of the new Religion; That he should
admit none to Commands or Offices that did profess it, and should suffer the
Nobility to send their Deputies to the Pope, to make him understand and allow
of the Reasons which obliged them to remain firm to his Service. He readily
condescended to all these points, excepting the second, in compensation whereof
he promised to restore the Exercise of the Catholic Religion over all, and the
Clergy to their Livings.

There were diverse that Signed this Accommodation with regret, and some who did
absolutely refuse it* amongst others Espernon and Vitry: This last threw
himself into Paris, and for a while gave himself to the League: the other
having protested he would never be either Leaguer or Spaniard, asked leave to
be gone, yet allowed some days for the new King to raise the Siege of Paris
with honor. Was it that he feared lest this Prince, to whom he had very lately
done ill Offices near Henry III. would show him some foul play, or rather
borrow some great Sums of Money never to be repaid? Whatever Motive it were,
his example was cause that the greatest part of the Army disbanded, for which
the King had such a Resentment against him all his whole life as was the
occasion of great mischiefs.

On the Leagues side, the Parisians, when they knew of the death of the King,
considering rather the greatness of that peril had been so near them, then the
enormity of this detestable Parricide, made p^blick Rejoycings, lighted
Bonfires, set up Tables in the Streets, threw aside their black S^arves, and
put on green ones, running dessperately from the Town to the Trenches, and from
the Trenches into the Town again.

Mean while in the Morning about Ten of the Clock was fought that famous Duel
between John de l'Isle Marivaut and Claud^ de Maroles, both very brave Sword
Men. The latter much more skilful, though a great deal younger, had generously
accepted the others Challenge. They chose for their Field of Battle, the Plain
behind the Chartreux, Maroles directed so well, that he ran Marivaut into the
Eye with his Lance and killed him. He gave his Corpse to his Friends, being
satisfied with his Sword and Horse as Trophies of his Victory.

When the Parisians were a little recovered of their first Transports, they
were all of this mind, that they ought not to admit of an Heretical Prince to
the Throne of St. Lewis. This Resolution appeared so plausible and so
Christian-like, that it was embraced even by those that had always detested the
League as a Faction. And indeed this drew great numbers of People that were
truly pious and considerable throughout the Kingdom to their Party: with whom
they joined till the Kings Conversion had satisfied their Consciencies, and
secured the Catholic Religion, which certainly must have run a great hazard,
had they not obliged him to change. But on the other hand Henry III. against
whom the fury of the People was bent to revenge the death of the Guises, being
now out of the World, their heat was abated of a sudden, and those angry
Spirits having that Object no longer in view, did not act with the same passion
and violence.

The Duke of Mayenne considering all these things, perhaps with more slowness
then is requisite in such great and such pressing occasions, knew not what to
resolve upon; His Friends advised to have him be declared King, so to collect
and unite the scattered Members of his Party, and although this Advice did not
please the Sixteen, nor Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, yet had the thing been
done, they must then have consented. Others would have him agree with the King,
who offered him Conditions very advantageous, and did almost promise to share
the Kingdom with him. Another sort pressed him to declare to the Catholics of
the Royal Army, that all his Resentments being extinguished by the death of
Henry III. to which he did not in the least contribute, he had now no other
Interest in that Cause but for Religion; and that therefore he should entreat
they would all join with him, and oblige the King of Navarre to return into the
bosom of the true Church, or if he would not come in, to elect another of the
Blood Royal whom they should think fit. He embraced neither of these three
ways, but following that of the Quarante and Bourgeois, he resolved to Proclaim
Charles Cardinal of Bourbon King, which however was not done till four or five
Months after.

In vain therefore did the King essay by diverse ways to make him submit: he
could get no other Answer, but that he would hearken to no Conditions till he
had set the Cardinal at liberty, and did himself return unto the Church. In the
mean time observing the Duke debauched many of his Captains from him, as well
by the temptations and caresses of the Parisian Gossips, as by his secret
Bribes, he resolved to decamp and march into Normandy to secure himself of
those Cities whose Governors had not hitherto declared for the League. This was
in truth, to go and gather those Sums that were due, and to receive the English
succors: but he first accompanied the Corpse of his Predecessor to St. Comille
de Compeigne, and in his way took Creil upon Oyse, Meulanc on the Seine,
Clermont in Beauvoisis, and Gisors.

He was after this forced to give his Nobility leave to go and take care of
their Harvest: but he sent part of his Troops with those of Picardy commanded
by the Duke of Longueville, another with those of Champagne conducted by the
Marshall d'Aumont, and even some Companies into Angoulmois with the Duke of
Espernon, that it might be thought he went not into those Countries but by his
Order.

The more affectionate to the public Liberty, said it belonged to the Estates
General to decide a Question so important; and, indeed, the King had assigned
them at Tours in the Month of October, and the Duke at Paris in the Month of
November, though neither the one nor the other did it out of any other end but
to amuse the People. They did not forget on either part to give notice to all
the Princes their Friends of what had happened, and to seek their assistance.
They were both of them near the same Age, both very valiant, the Duke of
Mayenne till then in reputation as the better Commander: but he soon lost it,
wanting celerity, which is one of the main qualifications.

In effect, he was slow in resolving, much slower yet in execution, negligent
in pursuing his advantages, heavy of Body, a great sleeper, and a huge
Trencher-man. His Secretaries and Officers were stupefied with the same
Laziness; There were Pacquets of great importance lay oft-times two or three
days on his Table and never opened. Those that managed his Moneys were prodigal
and ill Husbands, so that he never had enough at a time of need. His sloth
tired the more active, and his sullen gravity, not to say pride, distasted his
most zealous and faithful Partisans, as his suspicions and eternal jealousies
disgusted and offended such by whom he might have been very much assisted. The
King on the contrary, was not sparing of caresses so long time in Bed, as the
Duke was sitting at Table, with this sparing and srugal even to excess; yet
handsomely bestowed what he could not well refuse.

As for the two Parties, that of the League was much the greater, for they had
the generality of the common People, most of the biggest Cities, all the
Parliaments, except Renes, and Bourdeaux (and this last did not own him till a
year after) the better part of the Ecclesiastical Order, the assistance of
Spain, the encouragement of Rome, and all the Catholic Princes (but the
Republic of Venice, and the Duke of Florence): yet there was no union amongst
their Chiefs, nor Authority sufficient in their General to fasten and hold all
these different untackt pieces together, who were more opposed by each other
then by the King himself.

The Royalists Party had almost all the Nobless, the Officers belonging to the
late Court, all the Protestant Princes to Friend, and the Huguenots with their
old Soldiers enured to hardships and trials, ready to expose all, that they
might get a King of their own Religion; and indeed, they did render him most
signal service, and would have done him much greater yet, if a suspicion of his
Conversion had not tied up their hands. As for the Nobility, having no pay,
they served him as it were by turns, a Month or six weeks together was the
most, then they returned to their own homes,

He had but three thousand French Foot left, two Regiments of Swiss, and twelve
hundred Horse: with these he descends into Normandy along the Seine. N. le
Blanc-Rolet, a Man of courage and judgment, Governor of Pont de l'Arche, was
the first that declared, and came to meet and bring him the Keys of the place,
Emar de Chates gave him the same assurance for Diepe, and Gaspard de Polet la
Verone for the City and Castle of Caen. These favorable successes engaged him
to the Siege of Rouen, Aumale and Brissac were within with twelve hundred
Horse, nevertheless the People beginning to waver, and not knowing how to rely
either upon their conduct, or their valor, the Duke of Mayenne judged it
necessary to go thither himself.

He had near four thousand Horse, and fifteen thousand Foot; for Henry Marquess
de Pont Son of the Duke of Lorrain, after the taking of Jamets, was come to
join him with a thousand Horse, Christopher de Bassompierre with four Cornets
of Reisters, Nemours with three thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse,
Balagny with two thousand Men, and the Duke of Parma had sent him as many. The
King did not believe this Army could have been ready so soon, nor that they
would march this way. When he found they came directly to him, he decamped from
before Rouen, and went and took the City of Eu: but he was much astonished when
they came and told him they had passed the Seine at Vernon.

He then perceived he had no other course to take, till he could get his
Nobility and Friends together, but to retire under the Walls of Diepe; and
perhaps he might not have had time to do this, if the celerity of the Duke of
Mayennes Army had not been retarded by the absence of their Chief: for he was
gone post from Mantes to Beins in Haynault, to confer with the Duke of Parma.

When he returned, he designed to coop the King up in that corner; and to that
purpose took all the little places round about it. By this means he thought
first to invest him, and afterward wholly overwhelm him: which appeared so
feasible and undoubted, that he sent word every where, even into Spain, that he
held the Bearnois pent up in a place from whence he could not escape him,
unless he would leap into the Sea.

The Parliament of Tours had so great a dread of it, that they sent Deputies to
propound to the King to associate the old Cardinal de Bourbon to the Crown, and
the King himself startled by the timorous Councils of such as were about him,
and apprehending lest the Barks that descended from Rouen, and those Vessels
the Duke of Parma was preparing at Dunkirk, should invest him by Sea, as he was
already by Land, took it into consideration whether he ought not to go away for
England while the Coast was clear. The plurality of Votes had carried it on
that side, if the bold Remonstrances of the Marshall de Biron, who could do
every thing with him, had not made them reject that mean-spirited Advice.

He lodged himself therefore at Arques, which is a Borough with a Castle
situate upon a rising ground, within a League and a half of Diepe, between the
two little Hillocks that shut up the Valley where runs the River of Betune, of
whose Mouth the Sea makes the Port of that City. The Duke Lodged on the Hill at
the right hand, and attaqued the Suburb du Polet, whence being repulsed, he lay
still three days together without attempting any thing. The fourth he made a
great effort to gain the Kings Retrenchment; but having lost five hundred Men,
he retired, and rested quiet two days more, after which having decamped and
taken a march of seven or eight Leagues, he returns of a sudden to Polet, and
began to batter it, but it was at Picardy.

Besides his slowness and uncertainty, there were other clogs no less heavy,
that hindered him from moving with that force and promptitude requisite in such
great Enterprises: his Germans and Swiss refused to fight, unless he would
first pay their Musters; and they were hourly ready to fall together by the
Ears with the French, upon such picques as are ordinary betwixt different
Nations. Besides all the Commanders of his Army, taking the Kings surrender or
flight to be unavoidable, ^ell already into disputes about the sharing of the
Kingdom. The Marquess du Pont believed the Crown was his due, the Duke of
Nemours, the Duke and the Chevalier d'Aumale scoffed at his Pretensions, and
being possessed against each other with the like jealousies, as against him,
did narrowly watch each others motions. This was Mayenne and the League, and
gave the Royal Party so mean an opinion of them, and so good a one of
themselves, that after this very day they made no difficulty, not only of
standing their ground in any place, but of following and seeking them with
unequal Forces.

Before we enter any further into this confusion of Troubles, it will be sit to
note the disposition of France both within and without, in respect of the two
Parties. Pope Sixtus had declared for the League, because the first news he had
after the death of Henry III. reported they were absolute Masters of the whole
Kingdom, and he believed that depending upon him, they would let him make such
a King as should entirely submit the Crown to the Crosier.

The King of Spain would not determine this grand Quarrel, which he might very
easily have done, had he at first commanded the Duke of Parma to enter France
and to join with the Duke of Mayenne: but his interest was to ruin the Kingdom
by their own Contentions, and then snatch up some fragments for himself. Upon
this prospect, he never sent but slender assistance to the Duke, but with sair
promises joined to a great deal of ostentation. And indeed the Duke never had
any sincere amity for, or strict tie with him, but knowing, as he thoroughly
did, his intentions, the Forces they lent did often give him more fear and
embarass, then they did him service.

The Seigneury of Venice and the Duke of Florence had an interest that there
should be a King in France to balance the overgrown power of the Spaniard, who
too much Henry IV. at first dash, notwithstanding the oppositions of the Popes
Nuncio and the Spanish Ambassador: and the Florentine profer'd to lend him
three hundred thousand Crowns, provided he would make a Match for Mary de
Medicis with one of the Princes of his Blood.

The Duke of Lorrain pretended to the Crown for his Son the Marquess du Pont:
but in an Assembly of some Deputies of the Cities in Champagne, at Chaumont, in
Bassigny, where he made his demand of it, not one gave him their Vote; and his
Son whom he sent into France with some Forces, acquired so little reputation,
and had moreover such ill fortune amongst the Women, that he carried back
nothing, as it is said, but the Crown of Venus.

The Duke of Savoy had no less pretensions then the said Marquess, he derived
his Title from his Mother, Daughter of the great King Francis, and that
supported with the Alliance of Spain: However knowing himself too weak to carry
the whole Kingdom, he would only have laid his hands upon Provence and Daufine;
and to that effect sent to the Parliament of Grenoble, whom he thought pretty
well disposed to favor him by the care of Charles de Simiane d'Albigny, to
make out his right to them, and incline them to own him. But he met with no
great satisfaction: the Parliament replying that his demand concerned the whole
Kingdom, that therefore he ought to make it to the Estates General, in whose
determination they would absolutely acquiesce.

As for the Provinces, the Duke of Mercoeur was Master of the better part of
Bretagne; Normandy, Picardy, and Champagne were almost all Leaguers; Burgundy
was kept quiet under the commands of the Duke of Mayenne, excepting that in the
following year the Count de Tavanes a Royalist took some Castles there, from
whence he made War upon the Vicount his Brother, a passionate friend to the
Duke of Mayenne. The greater part of Guyenne obeyed the Kings commands, there
being none but the Cities of Again, Villeneure, and Marmande, as also some
Castles in Agenois and in Quercy, who were of the opposite Party. The Duke of
Mayenne had no doubt drawn all that Province after him, had he bestowed the
Government upon Biron, and not on the Marquess de Villars his Wives Son, who by
her importunities made him commit that gross mistake. As to the rest the
Marshall de Matignon had retained Bourdeaux, Anne de Levis Count de la Voute
Limoges, some others Perigord and Quercy, and the Duke of Espernon Angoulmo^s.
Poitiers on the contrary remained scot-free.

The Country along the Loire was much embroiled: Berry and Orleannois, as also
Main, Perch, and Beausse, held for the League; Touraine and Blesois for the
King. Montmorency had secured for him that part of Languedoc whereof he was
Master, having sent him a promise of the Constables Sword: but he would not
break that Truce he had made with Joyeuse; who held the Cities of Narbonne,
Carcassonne, d'Alby, Rodes, and even that of Toulonze, which is capital of the
Province, with some other lesser places.

In Provence, the Parliament and la Valete made War against each other, more
out of private animosities then affection to either Party. The Duke of Savoy
concerned himself for his own Interest; but this year he was employed against
the Swiss, and in the pursuit of a design he had conceived of taking the City
of Geneva. The Duke of Nemours held Lions, and Vienne; and d'Albigny Grenoble
and some petty Towns for the League; Lesdiguieres Head of the Huguenots, and
Alfonso Dornano Head of the Catholic Royalists, being allied together,
mastered almost all the rest of Daufine. In Auvergne the Count de Randan a
zealous Catholic, had made sure of Limagne; but on the contrary most of the
Lords of the Province, as we have before hinted Vi^^, in March preceding.
, resisted him stoutly.

The Parisians who thought the taking of the Bearnois (so they called him)
infallible, were mightily surprised, when they saw he (after the having
received a supply of four thousand English the evening before the day that the
Duke of Mayenne decamped from Diepe) having made a long march, came on
All Saints day attaqu'd and forced their great Retrenchments of the Fauxbourgs
Or Suburbs St. James.
Saint Jacques and Saint Germains, then the Fauxbourgs themselves, with so much
vigor, that he might have entered the Germains, and thence at leisure
contemplated the tumults and hurry he caused in Paris.

Bourgeing Prior of the Jacobins, was taken in the Trenches of the Fauxbourg
Saint Jacques, with his Armor on and fighting courageously; they conveyed him
to Tours where the Parliament condemned him to be drawn by four Horses, upon
the Depositions of some Witnesses, whether true or false, who gave Evidence
that he had incited Jacques Clement to kill Henry III. which he ever constantly
denied, and died so.

The Duke of Mayenne knowing the King drew toward Paris, sent the Duke of
Nemours thither with all expedition, who did not arrive till toward night; the
next day he came himself with the gross of his Army. Upon the noise of his
arrival, Fauxbourgs into the Field, and having stood there three hours in
battalia, went to Linas. From thence he went and took Estampes, and Janville,
then Vendosme. Maille Benehard who was Governor, not having the discretion
either to surrender it in time, or defend it bravely, was there beheaded.

He marched afterward to Tours, where he staid but two days, and went to
attaque Man's. In it there were twenty Companies of Foot, and one hundred
Gentlemen; Bois-Daufin commanded there. They had caused all the Suburbs to be
burnt down, as if resolved to defend themselves to the utmost extremity, and
yet at the first Cannon Shot glancing upon their Wall, they made Composition,
which the more honorable, by so much was it the more shameful. In fine, in
Anjou, Main, and Touraine, the League could preserve only the Town de la Ferte
Bernard. The King left that, it being of more importance to employ his Arms for
the reduction of Normandy.

In the Month of September, Pope Sixtus had chosen the Cardinal Caetan to go
Legate into France. His Orders were, To take care they should provide France
French; To that effect to go directly to Paris, where the Ambassadors of Spain
and Savoy were to meet, to hear all the Propositions should be made to him, to
show himself wholly disinteressed, to engage for no Pretender, to hear even the
King of Navarre, if there were any hopes of reconciling him to the Church, with
honor and dignity to the Holy See. After these Instructions given, the Pope
received Letters written to him by the Duke de Piney, (deputed to his Holiness
on behalf of the Royalist Nobility) assuring him he was upon his Journey
toward Rome to give him a good Account of that Body; this caused him to stop
his Legate for some weeks: but the League importuned him so much that he was at
last obliged to let him go.

Lions the Ninth of November, so fraught with an opinion of his great Power and
Conduct, that he thought to dispose of all France at to his own pleasure, and
unravel all the grand Affairs with those little Intrigues, and trivial
Subtilties they make use of in deciding those amongst themselves at Rome. So
having refused the offer the Duke of Nevers made him of his City (which ever
since the death of Henry III. he had kept neuter betwixt both Parties) and
without giving notice of his coming to the Catholic Lords who were with the
King, but only to the Duke of Mayenne, he caused his Brief to be published
containing the subject of his Legation, and afterward came to Paris.

de Bourbon, the Duke was possessed with some apprehensions, lest the Pope and
the Spaniard had agreed to make some other Person King, and by consequence make
him lose that Authority he would preserve under the name of that Cardinal, and
therefore to prevent that danger, he made haste before the arrival of the
Legate, to have him solemnly declared King; and in effect he was proclaimed so
in all the Cities of that Party by virtue of a Decree of the Council for the
Union verified in Parliament; and from that time Justice, and all other public
Acts, began to be administered in the name of Charles X. the Title and the Power
of Lieutenant General still reserved to the Duke.

There were then four different Factions in Paris, (besides that of the
Royalists who durst not too openly discover themselves;) That is the Party
called the Politics, because they considered the State much more then
Religion, for which the greater part being less concerned then for their own
proper interest, believed the stronger side was ever the most just: and wished
the King might become so, but in the mean while never declared for him. The
second, was that of the Lorrain Princes, consisting of their Friends and a
Party of Zealous Catholics; The third, were the Spanioliz'd, (if we may use
this Phrase) whom the luster of Peruvian Gold had fettered to King Philips
Interest: and the fourth a sort of People too amorous and fond of liberty, who
aimed to set up a Government whereby absolute Authority might be restrained
within the bounds of Laws. This latter did not long subsist, the other three
(though Enemies amongst themselves) conspiring to make them odious and to
destroy them: in so much as not knowing which way to turn, they quickly joined
with the Spanish who received them with open Arms.

In the beginning the Spaniards promised themselves their own hearts desires
from the charming power of their Pistols: they did not know they had to do with
People that were ever craving and never satisfied. Wherefore when Mendoza the
Ambassador (imagining he had made a Party sufficient) propounded in Council
that they should choose the King his Master for Protector of the Holy Union. The
Duke was hugely surprised, and after he had consulted with his ablest Heads,
made Answer, that the Legate being so near, it would be thought a Crime to
resolve upon so weighty a business without first communicating of it to him.
This reply piqued the Spaniard much; and they were quits with him, for some
days after, when he demanded Money, they paid him with the very same evasion.
In this manner being all jealous of each

The Duke sensibly touched with the reproaches of the Parisians, for having
kept his Army three weeks about the Town without doing any thing, takes the
Field the Two and twentieth of November. He gains the Bois de Vincennes and
some other Castles upon Composition, laid Siege to Pontoise which defended it
self but very poorly, this was in the beginning of January, then went to
attaque Meulanc. He promised himself after the taking of this last place, to do
the same by Pont de l'Arche, and by that means keep the River of Seine open
from Paris even to Rouen. It was Meulanc, the difficulty was to take the Fort,
which is an Island joined to the two Shoars by two Bridges.

As then the King was in Normondy, where he had reduced almost all the places,
Alencon, Argentan, Domfront, Lisieux, Bayeux, Falaise, and Honfleur. There were
none but the two last that sustained a Siege; the first was taken by assault
from the Castle, (the Mote which was its chiefest strength being frozen up) and
was miserably sacked; the other capitulated as soon as the King had blocked up
their Harbor, by which they daily received refreshment sent them by Villars
from Rouen.

Now when he was informed the Duke was before Meulane, he hastens thither with
part of his Men, puts relief into the Fort, then some few days after comes
again with his whole Army. Now the Duke being well lodged in the Borough, and
he much incommoded in the Field by the great Frosts, resolved to draw him out
thence by attaquing Poissy, which lies a League above it. He immediately gains
the Town by Escalado, and falls a battering the Bridge: The Duke runs thither
upon the noise of the Cannon, and could no way stop their fury but by breaking
down two Arches of the Bridge. The King having done what he desired, went and
laid Siege to Dreux.

During this the Legate was arrived at Paris. He there received the Compliments
of the Magistrates, and all the distinct Bodies Corporate of the City,
presented his Bull in Parliament who verified it without any modification, and
went afterward thither himself in great pomp, believing there remained nothing
more for him to do but to take possession of the Sovereign Authority. But as he
would have placed himself in the Kings Seat, which is in the corner under a
Canopy, the first President pulled him gently by the hand, as if to show him
respect, and sat him on the Bench below him. The Parliament of Tours having
seen his Bull, and observed it was directed to the Kings Enemies, forbid he
should be owned for Legate; that of Paris

The King making much ado with his demanding a Conference to be instructed
(writing however quite contrary to the Protestant Princes) many of the Leaguers
February, wherein they condemned these Propositions, That it was lawful to
agree with the Bearnois, to own him upon condition he became a Catholic, and
to pay him Taxes and Subsidies. The Legate at the same time wrote his Circular
Letter the first of March, to all the Bishops, forbidding them to appear in any
Assembly for that purpose, and withal took a new Oath of the Prevost des
Merchands, Eschevins, Quarteniers, Diziniers, and Captains of each Quarter, or
Ward, to persevere in the Holy Union to the last moment of their lives. This
was done in the great Augustins after solemn Procession.

The Ambassador of Spain was not so discouraged upon their first denial to own
the King his Master for their Protector, but he would needs attempt it a second
time, which had no better success then the former. He likewise offered the Duke
a very great supply: but he who would readily have accepted it in the
beginning, apprehending it might be to stifle his Authority by a greater, told
him he should be satisfied with five or six thousand Men, and the remainder he
would rather have in Money.

During the difficulties created by their Agents on this Subject, he goes to
the Duke of Parma, and procured of him fifteen hundred Lances, and five hundred
Arquebusiers on Horseback, Armed with Breast and Headpiece, they were called
Carabins, all commanded by Philip Count of Egmont, a young Man growing in
Reputation, but who as yet was more rash then valiant.

With this Re-inforcement having no less then four thousand Horse, and ten
thousand Foot, he marches to the relief of Dreux, and passed over the River
Stine at Mantes. The King having notice of it raised the Siege and came to post
himself at Nonancour; The same night he arrived there, his Council resolved to
give Battle, though his Army were less in number by a third part then the
Enemy. It was not the Dukes design to engage him, but only to put some Men into
Dreux, as he might with ease, all the Avenues being left open: but the King
decamping from Nona^cour to draw somewhat nearer the River Eure toward Yvry,
that so if the Enemies attempted to pass over, he might fight them separately,
the Leaguers imagined he was flying. Then Egmont presses the Duke to follow and
fall upon him, and while the Duke knew not what to resolve, brags he would
attaque him with his own Party Parisians, who reproached his sloth,
constrained him to pass the River Eure, and engaged him in Combat.

Those that called ^olowd for Battle fell into a sudden consternation when they
saw the Kings Forces, who far from running away came directly toward them, but
there was now no way left them to avoid it. The next Morning being on Wednesday
the Fourteenth of March, the two Armies ranged themselves in Batalia right
against Yvry, in that great Plain which lies in the midst of a Peninsula
between the Rivers Aure and Iton, and the Eure which receives them both. In
less then half an hour the Army of the League was utterly defeated, the great
Squadrons of their Lancers broken with the others Swords and Pistol Shot, their
Lansquenets cut in pieces, and most part of their Frenchmen killed upon the
place. The Swiss only stood their ground: but when they saw they were about to
break their Batalions with great Guns, they lowred their Pikes and surrendered
their Colors; which were immediately restored to them again by the generosity
of the King, who desiring to oblige the whole Nation, wrote a very civil Letter
to the Cantons.

The Duke of Mayenne, after he had performed all the Duties of a great
Commander and brave Cavalier, drew part of his Men over the Bridge, then caused
it to be broken down, and with that remnant escaped to Mantes. The Inhabitants
were willing to receive his Person, but not quarter his Troops, but made them
go thorough ten by ten. Nemours, Aumale, and some other Chiefs, with what they
could rally, retired to Chartres over the Plain.

The Duke attributed the loss of this Battle to his Flemish Men at Arms, who
were heavy and unskilful, as well the Men as their Horses; to the temerity of
Count Egmont who commanded them; to the mistake of the Vicount de Tavanes, who
being short-sighted, ranged the Squadrons so near each other that there was not
space enough in the intervals for the Reisters to wheel about and draw up again
in the rear of the rest; and above all to the cowardice of those very Reisters,
who having at first given ground, fell into the Dukes Squadron, and continuing
still to wheel off during the whole fight, fell upon the others likewise and so
put them into disorder.

For fear of being pursued he had broken down the Bridge of Yvry: and there
happened the greatest slaughter of the run-aways, the Reisters defended
themselves a while in the Borough, but were all knocked on the Heads. The King
having past the River at the Ford of Anet, was come to Lodge at Rosny, which is
a League beyond Mantes: His approaches startled the Inhabitants of that Town;
the Duke perceived by their looks there would be little security for him there,
and for that reason retired speedily to St. Denis.

The Plain of Yvry was not the only place wherein destiny, to speak like the
Vulgar, declared for the King: the same day it gave him in Auvergne another
advantage of great importance, and such as wholly confirmed his Affairs in that
Province. The Count de Randan had surprised the Town of Issoire, and built a
Citadel, the Gentlemen Royalists, and the Citizens of Clermont, who in hatred
to those of Rion, Florat Seneschal of Auvergne, Commanded on this occasion;
Randan comes to relieve the Citadel, and invested both him and his Party in the
Town.

The Lords of that Country, amongst others Rostignac the Kings Lieutenant, the
Vicount de Lavedan, the Baron de Chaseron, the Marquess de Curton who commanded
the little Army, and d'Effiat, came to disengage their Friends. This could not
be without a Battle: it was very obstinate, but, in fine, the Leagners were
overthrown. It cost them five hundred Men, whereof there were an hundred
Gentlemen* and amongst the rest the generous Count de Randan, who being taken
Prisoner died of his Wounds in Issoire. Those of the Citadel, having heard of
this defeat capitulated, and the Victors returned in great triumph to Clermont.

The Duke of Mayenne was no sooner parted from Mantes, but that City and that
of Vernon turned their backs upon him. It was said, that if he could but have
left a good Garrison there, he had stopped the King upon the Banks of the Seine,
and made his Victory vanish; In effect he had neither Implements nor
Ammunitions to make a Siege, nor could he keep the Nobility with him any
longer, who upon the rumor of a Battle came in all haste to him without any
Equipage.

The Wise la Noue was of opinion he should go directly to Paris, where the
Victory of Yvry had wonderfully raised the courage of his Friends, and
depressed that of the Seize: the Marshall de Biron, most prevalent in the
Council of War, and d'O Surintendant of the Finances hindered it; The first, as
it was said, because he feared lest the King, whom he treated as his Scholar,
should free himself, if we may so say, from the power of his Ferula, and have
the less regard of him, if his business came to be dispatched so soon; The
second because he desired rather to reduce Paris by violent means. For he
judged that in case it were so, the King would have just cause not only to take
away the Cities Revenue, but likewise extort great Ransoms from them, and lay
such Imposts as he pleased. Now whatever motive he had, he rested fifteen days
at Mantes, in which space the League did a little recover out of their
astonishment, calmed the Peoples fears, and repaired their leaks.

Their Chiefs, that they might gain more time, made some Proposals for an
Accommodation. Villeroy first entered into Conference with Plessis Mornay in the
Castle of Suindre near Mantes, the Legate procured another at Noisy le Sec,
between the Cardinal de Gondy and the Mar^schal Biron, and was also present
himself. All very ineffectually for them, because the King, without any delay,
prepared himself to besiege Paris.

Lagny, Provins, Monstereau, Bray on the Seine, and Melun. Some false
intelligence put him upon attempting the City of Sens: but he was repulsed by
Chanvallon with the loss of three hundred Men. From thence he came and seized
on the Castle and Bridge of Saint Maur des Fossez the Five and twentieth day
of April, having fifteen thousand Foot, and little less then four thousand
Horse.

Then Paris found they were blocked up. That innumerable and confused multitude
of People, without Heads, at least not absolute, without foresight, without
Discipline, who apprehended no danger, because they understood it not, and who
relied upon their great numbers and strength, had made no provisions for the
Belly, nor for War, neither had the Chiefs taken any care to provide against
either public or private necessities. When it came into their thoughts it was
too late: the Countries about them had no Corn nor Forage, all the Bridges
beneath the City were in the Kings power, and the Marne could furnish them with
little, because the Harvest that year had been very ill in Champagne. They had
scarce any other Stores but three thousand Muids of Corn, and ten thousand
Muids of Wine which Givry suffered to pass the Bridge of Chamoy, for a present
bestowed upon him of ten thousand Crowns, and out of a secret Complaisance he
had for Mademoiselle de Guise, with whom he was mightily smitten.

Mayennes Orders and their Necessity conferred the Government of the City on the
Duke of Nemours his Brother by the Mother, a young Prince of an active boldness
and great vigor. He had then no Men of note about him but the Chevalier
d'Aumale, brave, but wild and untractable, and of Soldiers only twelve hundred
Lansquenets, as many French, and a thousand Swiss: but he drew Vitry thither
with an hundred and fifty Masters, and Berdnrdine de Mendoza Ambassador from
Spain, sent for a hundred Horse. In the City were the Princesses of Nemours,
Montpensier, d'Aumale, de Guise with her Daughter, and some other Ladies of
Quality, the Spanish Ambassador, the Archbishop of Lions Keeper of the Seals
for the League, the Legate with all his Train, and diverse French Prelates,
besides the Cardinal de Gondy, who though more Royalist then a Leaguer, would
not however forsake his Flock in their necessity, but very charitably relieved
them.

It would be very difficult to say which was greater, either the vigilance and
cares of the Governor, or the zeal of the Parisians; In a short time they had
made great quantities of Powder, repaired the breaches in their Walls, cast up
Breast-works and Mounts, covered the Suburbs with great Intrenchments, fixed
Chains in every Street, filled great numbers of Barrils with Earth to make
Barricado's, planted Posts

The Parisians on their part gave the very Furniture of their Kitchins to found
their Cannon, each House provided a Labourer to work upon their Fortifications,
paid all the poor that put their helping hand, exercised their Soldiery three
times a week; and which is more considerable admitted a Garrison amongst them,
and saw their Country Houses ransacked and destroyed without murmurring.

Most of the Handicrafts-men and all Foreigners were gone out of the City, the
great Hostels were empty, the substantial Citizens had sent their Families
away: yet there remained two hundred thousand Souls, and but Provisions for one
Month only, (at the rate of a pound of Bread a day for each Person) besides
fifteen hundred Muids of Oats and an hundred Muids of Pulse.

The King in the first place mastered the Bridges of Charenton and Saint
Cloud, (six young Parisians defended themselves three whole days in the
Bridge-Tower of Charenton) took Vincennes, besieged St. Denis, and placed
Garrisons of Light-Horsemen in all the strong Houses for seven or eight Leagues
round about; whence they beat the Roads night and day, that nothing passing by,
the City might in short time be reduced to Famine. This method after seven or
eight days trial, seeming too tedious, he endeavored to draw the Besieged to a
Battle, and for that purpose ordered an attaque upon the Fauxbourg Saint
Laurence: but there experimenting their brave defense, and by some other great
Skirmishes observing they had yet too much vigor to be forced within their
Barricado's, and their Commanders too much prudence to hazard themselves in the
Field, he returned to his former design of famishing them.

The Duke of Mayenne was gone to beg some assistance in Flanders, where he had
enough to do to endure the pride and affected slow pace of the Spanish Council.
In the condition he left Paris he did not believe it could hold out one Month,
and not being able to relieve it but by the aid of the Spaniards, he feared he
should lose it in saving it, and that they would deliver it only to get it for
themselves. At the same time also happens the death of the old Cardinal de
Bourbon, who ended his days the Ninth of May at the Castle of Fontenay in
Poitou, under the guard of the de la Boulaye. The King had put him into this
Lords custody after the taking him out of the hands of the Lord de Chavigny,
who was both old and blind, at the very time when the Lords of the League were
bargaining with that good Man to set him at liberty.

This fresh accident put him to great trouble, he was in need of a King to fix
the Eyes and Veneration of the People, he foresaw the Spaniard would press him
to choose one, and he knew the difficulties that would arise on that side, as
also from the Chiefs of his own Party who hindered him from attaining it: all
his study was therefore to find out plausible delays to put off this Election,
and he did succeed therein as he desired, but such proceeding ruined his Party.

The Heads of the League had wisely beforehand disposed the People so, as that
this death should cause no alteration. The Faculty of Divinity consulted by the
Prevost des Merchands, and by some noted Bourgeois, had made Answer, That Henry
of Bourbon could not, because of the scandal, and danger of his relapsing, be
admitted to the Crown, if King Charles X. or any other lawful Successor should
happen to die, or yield him up his right, or if even the said Prince should
obtain Absolution, and that those who died for so holy a Cause, should gain the
Palm of Martyrdom, and be Crowned in Heaven as brave Defenders of the Faith.

At five weeks end the Duke of Mayenne could get of the Duke of Parma but four
thousand Foot, and two hundred Lances, with which having joined some two
thousand French whom he picked up, or who were sent him by Balagny, he advanced
as far as Laon. Immediately the King goes from his Camp with five and twenty
hundred Horse, thinking to meet him in the Field and charge him: the Duke had a
hint of it, and making use (this time) of great celerity, got under shelter of
the Walls of Laon. Whilst the King was harrassing him, St. Pol being detached
privately with eight hundred Horse and some Foot, and having gotten together a
pretty good Convoy of Provisions, conducted it along the Banks of the Marne,
and put it into Paris before the King could get back to his Camp to prevent him.

During the Siege, the War went on variously in the Provinces, I shall mention
only the most remarkable passages. Francis de Roussel May-David surprised the
Castle of Verneuil, and likewise made himself Master of the City after a very
bloody sight, in which John de Dreux Morainville was slain, who was said to be
the last Male of the House of Dreux, Issue of Lewis the Gross, by Robert, fifth
Son of that King. Lansac had a design upon Man's which was discovered, and his
Troops defeated at Memers (where they waited to see the event) by Hertre
Governor of Alencon. He was more unfortunate yet in another Enterprise upon the
Town of Mayenne: having taken it and holding the Castle besieged, the same
Hertre and Montataire put him to the rout, and cut off or took above twelve
hundred Men of two thousand he commanded.

The Leagued Gentlemen of Bretagne surprised the City of Sable and attaqued the
Castle: Rambouillet (whose Wife had been taken Prisoner in that place)
entreated the Nobless of the Country to assist him. His two Brothers with as
many as they could get together fell upon the Besiegers; the first charge was
but with little success; but at the second (when they had gotten some Cannon
and a Reinforcement of a thousand Men, sent them by Rochepot Governor of
Angers) they broke thorough their Barricado's, pierced even into the Bass-court
of the Castle, and followed them so close as they betook themselves to their
Heels, but not breaking down the Bridge, the greatest part were killed or taken
Prisoners.

In Languedoc, Montmorency armed slowly, thinking by such coldness to make them
send him the Constables Sword, which other considerations withheld. Albigny
and Lesdiguieres made War in Daufine by taking and re-taking several Forts from
each other. The latter being the stronger marched sometimes toward Lions to
assist Maugiron who held one of the Castles of Vienne for the King, and had St.
Chaumont for Antagonist. He likewise went frequently toward Provence to help
la Valete. Montmorency also passed the Rhosne diverse times: but that was to
endeavor to lay hands on some places to enlarge his Dominion.

Provence was miserably rent and distracted by three or four Factions, not
reckoning the Royalists. The Duke of Savoy had his; the Countess de Sault, and
the Count de Carees each theirs. That of the Duke seemed to be the most
predominant, and to draw the two others to his Interests; but the the Countess
(it was Christierne d'Agu^rre Widow of Lewis d'Agout Count de Sault) a Woman of
great courage, and of a high spirit, would not introduce him into the Province,
but to make her de Carces likewise, not being able to stand upon his own Legs,
gave that Duke footing only that he might be enabled to make head against la
Valete. For he imagined that being prime Lord of the Country, and Lieutenant of
the Forces by Authority of Parliament all the Authority there ought to devolve
on him. The Parliament was also mightily divided between these three Factions,
and moreover some of the Officers belonging to them, had left them to follow
the Kings Party and that of la Valete his Governor. These had withdrawn
themselves to Manosque where they affirmed they were the true Parliament.

During the first heat of these Commotions, the Dukes Money and Practices gave
Marseilles and Aix, being all for him. A great Assembly of the Clergy and
Nobility which was held at Aix in the Month of January, resolved to put the
Province under his Protection, and deputed a Bishop and the eldest Consul of
the City to him; and after that the Parliament Ordained likewise that he should
be called in to defend it; To which they added that the Estates of the
Bigarrats (so they named the Royalists) should be confiscate.

As to the rest, it were folly to engage in a Relation of all the several
Intrigues, and Exploits of so many Parties, who changing every moment both
their Designs and the management of them, did not well know themselves what
they would have or do; I shall therefore not mention them, no more then those
of several other Provinces. Only of Bretagne let me say that the Prince de
Dombes rudely repulsed the Duke de Mercoeur, took Hennebon, Montcontour and
Lambale: but could not engage him to a Battle. I shall likewise take notice of
the great change at St. Malo's, because it was a place of great importance.

Honorat de Bueil des Fontaines Governor of the Town, lodged in the Castle
which Charles IX. The Malouins being persuaded that he had plotted to introduce
a strong Garrison into their City, and set the wealthiest Merchants at Ransom,
conspired to rid their hands of him. Having therefore corrupted a Valet de
Chamber of his, they scaled the Castle on the Fourteenth of March in the night,
and it so happened that he was killed with a Carbine Shot at a Window, whether by
chance, or designedly, I know not. After which they plundered his Goods, then
got the Duke of Mercoeur to justify them, and fell in with the League, yet
they warily refused to admit of any Soldiers, but kept the Castle themselves.

The Affections of considering Men, as well as fortune and success, began to
dispose their minds by little and little to favor the King. Pope Sixtus better
informed Mayennes, did well foresee that he would have the better, and indeed,
he received into Rome, then to his Audience, the Duke de Piney deputed from the
Catholic Nobility, notwithstanding the threats and protestarions of the
Spanish Ambassador, and had sent Order to his Legate in France, that he should
make no use of Excommunication, but try all ways of prudence and gentleness to
bring back the King.

The People began likewise to be made sensible of the real goodness of this
Prince, as he had already taught them to dread his courage. And the Duke of
Nevers, who had hitherto remained as it were Neuter in his own Town, after his
having considered of all the methods likely to convert him, judged none could
be either more certain or more Conscious, then wisely to thrust himself between
the Huguenots and him, to divide him from them, and so draw him mildly toward
the Catholic Church. With this design he came about the beginning of July, and
brought in great numbers of the Gentry by his Interest and Example.

It was about the same time the King recalled the Chancellor de Chiverny, and
restored the Seals to him: Montholon had discharged himself of them after the
death of Henry III. fearing he might be engaged to Seal some thing in favor of
the Huguenots, though he still remained of the Kings Party; in which he this
year died, honored by good Men with the Surname of the French Aristides. After
his demission the Seals had been managed by the Cardinal de Vendosme, then put
into the custody of Ruse Secretary of State, but without any power of using
them save by Order of the Marshall Biron who had a hand in every thing.

About the time of his return, the City of St. Denis surrendered, and a design
the Leaguers had contrived upon Senlis miscarried. St. Denis having consumed
all their Stores, wherewith it was as little provided for as Paris, made their
Composition; which was advantageous enough, because the King desired to lodge
there. As to Senlis, Bouteville who was Lieutenant to his Cousin Tore there,
walking one night upon the Rampart overheard some People beneath in the Fosse
who spoke very low, and perceived they planted a Ladder against the Wall: he
rouls down a huge Stone from the Parapet which beat the Ladder in pieces and
broke the Thigh Bone of one of them; this Fellow not able to get away revealed
the whole Conspiracy. They found twelve Soldiers concealed in the House of a
Chanoine, who were all Hanged, and with them twenty seven, as well Priests as
Monks, in their Ecclesiastical Habits.

There flocked People from all parts to the Siege of Paris: some that till now
had been irresolute, were brought in for fear of sinking with a Party they
believed could never rise again, others in hopes of Plunder, believing Paris
would be left a Prey, Conty brought the Forces of Poitou, Touraine, Anjou and
Maine; Humieres sent a Party of those of Picardy; and the Vicount de Turenne
being recovered of a great fit of Sickness, was brought in a Litter at the head
of a thousand Horse and four thousand Foot.

The King was not without great disquiets, the interests and desires of the
Catholics and Huguenots were very different for the gaining of Paris. The
former as we have observed, wished he might get in by an Accommodation; the
others would have it by force. All agreed in this one point that they were much
dissatisfied with him, because the Catholics urging him to become a Convert,
and the Huguenots to revoke the Edict made against them by Henry III. he could
not as yet satisfy either the one nor the other, so that from complaining they
fell to caballing and conspiring.

In this perplexity he had about the end of May given a Passport to some
Deputies of Paris, to find out the Duke of Mayenne and exhort him to Peace: but
by what motive I know not, presently recalled it again. A Month after finding
the Siege drew out in length, and the disturbances caused by the two Parties in
his Army, increased more and more, he consented to a conference betwixt the
Legate and the Marquess de Pisany newly returned from his Embassy at Rome. It
was held in the Hostel de Gondy It is now the Hostel de Conde.
in the Fauxbourg St. Germains: but the Propositions on either part were so far
distant, that the Cardinal de Gondy who was present, could find no medium to
bring them any thing near a conclusion.

After the first fifteen days of the Siege, the People beginning to find some
scarcity, they made a review of all Provisions in every House, and they
commanded all those Spanish Ambassador underhand made of Pensions to the most
Factious, and publicly to the Rascality, of some handfuls of half Sols,
stamped with the Arms of Castille, spent their time in singing and dispersing
Songs of false news which Madam Montpensier forged from day to day to amuse the
Citizens.

At six weeks end, which was the midst of June, Wheat came to be at double the
price, and a fortnight after failed them all of a sudden. Then their hunger
spoiled their Mirth and turned their lewd Songs into sighs and groans. The poor
subsisted some days with Bread made of Bran, then fed upon Herbs, whereof they
found good store in many Gardens. Those to whom they had committed the
oversight of these things, had not taken timely care to send away such People
as were unserviceable, whose number amounted to above five and twenty thousand.
These were poor Peasants, or Handycraftsmen; to whose lot the bitter Potion
first did chance to fall.

One day great Crowds of them were gathered together at the Gate St. Victor,

The said time expired, their Miseries began to grow greater then before: they
bethought them of husking and grinding of Oats to make Potage; and because Wine
failed in the Cabarets, they invented and distributed I know not what kind of
Beverage made with Oatmeal and Roots.

In the Month of July Bread rose to a Crown the pound weight, the A Measure
about Twelve Bushels.
Septier of Wheat above sixscore Crowns, one Sheep a hundred Livers, and other
things in proportion. Amongst the Poor, Dogs, Cats, and Mice were greater
dainties, then

For want of Aliments, they were fed with Processions, particular and solemn
Vows imposed upon them, Prayers of forty hours long, Sermons twice a day,
several Fraternities and Spiritual Assemblies, withal various and false coined
Intelligence, and approaching hopes, which though prepared for them a thousand
several ways to fit their Palates and stay their Stomachs, proved
notwithstanding so thin a Diet as afforded but slender nourishment: There are
strange things related of this Famine; Perhaps they may have added somewhat to
the truth of the Stories: but certain it is above ten thousand People perished
for want of Food. And yet of these poor Wretches, some were so persuaded of the
justice of their Cause, and the glory of Martyrdom, that they crawled to the
Gates of the Churches there to surrender up their Souls to Almighty God; others
were so cowardly, they rather chose to starve in their own Houses then die
bravely with their Swords in hand. Some few only leaped over the Walls, and
stealing thorough the Enemies Guards, retired to certain Officers who were
their Friends.

These being for the most part some Servants of the Kings, did implore his
Clemency with such repeated importunities, that he gave leave for three
thousand of those wretched Ghosts to come out of the Town, diverse whereof were
choked, so soon as the compassionate Soldiers gave them Bread to eat. The said
Commanders perceiving by this, that the King would not use the extremest
severity, took the confidence to let some numbers of them daily pass by, when
they were upon the Guard; nay many did even send in small refreshments to their
Acquaintance, to their old Landlords, and most particularly to the Ladies; and
by their example the common Soldiers conveyed Meat, Bread, and runlets of Wine
over the Works; in exchange whereof they received good Cloth and rich Stuffs at
an easy rate. It is believed that this Indulgence made Paris subsist some
weeks the longer for it.

July, when being assembled at the Palais, they took up Arms and began to cry
out Peace or Provisions. It is certain that if Nemours and Vitry had not ran
presently thither, all were inclining that way. The Seize, made such grievous
complaint to the Parliament, that they condemned a couple to the Gallows; it
was a Father and his Son, who were both Hanged on the same Gibber, the
miserable fruit of Civil Wars.

The dangers of this day of Peace or Provisions, struck so great a fear into
the Chiefs of the League, that they consulted about a Conference for a Peace.
Whilst they were deliberating upon it, the King to spur them forwards, attaqu'd
their Suburbs and gained them all in one night. The Cardinal de Gondy and the
Archbishop of Lions, having secured themselves of a Passport, the sixth day of
August, went and waited on him at St. Anthoine des Champs, where they found him
surrounded by great numbers of the Nobless. They set on foot again (with many
notable additional Reasons) the Proposition they had already made to him by
other hands, That he would grant them a Truce, so as they might go to the Duke
of Mayenne and dispose him to treat jointly with them. The King on his part
proposed to them that if they would make their Capitulation to surrender within
ten days and sign it immediately, he would condescend to their demand. That
time seemed too short for them, so they returned without concluding any thing.

Some Captains had been often of opinion to attempt Paris by main strength, but
the King was ever averse to it: for besides that he was not certain to carry
it, he feared, if his Men should force their way, the Huguenots in revenge of
the St. Bartholomew, might put all to Fire and Sword, that such a deluge must
destroy some of his best Friends there, and the greatest and richest Treasure
of his Kingdom be rifled in one day, whereof none should reap any benefit but
the rapacious Soldiery. For these reasons, and because he promised himself day
after day to reduce it by some Confederacy from within, or at least by Famine,
(for his Parasites made him believe it yet in much worse condition then in
truth it was) he either durst not, or would not run so great a hazard.

He held himself so secure of gaining his ends, that without making any
Efforts, or troubling his Head about the assistance they expected, he diverted
himself in seeking Louvre. By his example, most of his Officers having little
or no employment, spent their time in the like Conquests, and such as could not
otherwise have any, bought Parisian Ladies of Pleasure; who disabled some in
the service, and corrupted the faith of many others.

The same day of the Conference at St. Anthoine, the Duke of Mayenne arrived at
Meaux with five or six thousand Men, most of them Cavalry, drawn out of
Lorrain, Champagne, Cambresis and Picardy. From thence he sent word of his
arrival to the Parisians, and gave them hopes of the sudden coming of the Duke
of Parma; who for two Months did not move, whether foreseeing that in his
absence the Prince of Orange would overrun part of his Conquests of the
Low Countries, or feared King Philip would appoint him a new Successor, or that
he doubted the success of this Expedition. However it happened they were fain to
send a very express and reiterated Order out of Spain to make him march. He
took for this purpose Twelve thousand Foot, three thousand five hundred Horse,
and fifteen hundred Wagons laden with Ammunition, departed from Valenciennes
the sixth day of August, and advanced to Meaux by prefixed Stages, encamping
after the Roman mode, in such places as he had caused to be exactly surveyed,
and which he compared with his Maps at every turn.

The King who thought he never durst have stirred out of the Low Countries, nor
engage himself so far in France, was much astonished when he had certain notice
of his arrival there, the Two and twentieth of August, and that having reposed
his Army four or five days, he was come to lodge at Claye. After he had held
several Councils, and heard their diverse opinions upon so important a business,
he raised his Siege the Nine and twentieth of the Month, with intention to
challenge him to Battle, and oppose his Attempts.

There was above Chelles a place very commodious and very advantageous to
Encamp, the two Armies had the same design of seizing on it: The Kings Light
Horse beat off those of Parma; and there it was that the said Duke (having from
an eminence beheld and observed the number and disposition of the Royal Army)
changed the desire he once had of fighting them, and instead of the Musket and
Pike, made his Soldiers take up the Matock and Spade, to entrench with all
speed in the neighboring Marish.

Now to demonstrate that he did not act at random, but that he walked by the
just Rules of Military Art, he had publicly reported, and even told the
Herald the same thing, who was sent from the King to defy him to Battle, that
he would oblige Paris, and would open one of the Rivers, by forcing a Town even
in his sight. After therefore, the two Armies had remained six days close by
each other, upon the seventh, there happening a great Fog, and the Duke having
first seized on the chief Posts near Lagny, he attaqued that place by Cannon
Shot, the River betwixt. The breach made, in a short time he throws a Bridge of
Boats over, gives an assault, and gained it so soon, that the Troops which the
Marshall d'Aumont was leading about by the Bridge at Gournay, within two
little Leagues below it, could not get thither time enough.

It then seemed as if the chance were turned: the Parisians who had fasted so
long, had Provisions in abundance brought them from Beausse by Carts; and on
the contrary the Kings Army, (for the taking of Lagny deprived him of the River
of Marne, and the valiant Duke of Nemours scowring the Country cut off all
Convoys by Land) began to feel some want, and were three or four days without
any Ammunition Bread. Then the Soldiers fell a murmurring and were ready to
mutiny, the Chiefs accuse one another for the ill managment of the Siege of
Paris, the Nobility desire to be dismissed since there was no likelihood of a
Battle; the hatred between the Catholics and Huguenots grew hotter and higher;
as did the jealousies between the Servants of the present King, and those
belonging to the former Court, who ever kept a Cabal by themselves, and did
their utmost to discredit each other upon all occasions.

Thereupon the King called a Council to know what he must do amidst these
Disorders. He met with nothing but confused advice, apprehension and disunion;
so that it was no time to take a resolution, but a necessity to decamp. He
turned therefore toward Senlis, passed the Oyse at Creil with more
precipitation then should have been upon a good retreat, and after an endeavor
to compose them again by the taking of Clermont in Beauvoisis, he puts a part
of them into the Towns about Paris, sent the rest with the Nobility into the
Provinces, and could not keep with himself above seven or eight hundred Horse.

When he had passed the Oyse, the Dukes of Parma and Mayenne came out of their
Intrenchments. It is said the former had the curiosity to visit Paris
incognito, whither Vitry conducted him, and observing the Fauxbourgs quite
ruined, the Shops empty and unfurnished, most of the Streets deserted, the
People with dejected looks and meager Faces, a melancholy silence in all parts,
in stead of the mirth and jollity

After this the two Dukes spread their Forces over the Country of Brie, and
regained all the little places. They would willingly have opened the Seine as
they had unstop'd the Marne; the Duke of Parma to that effect besieged Corbeil.
He thought it would be a work but of five or six days: but wanting Powder, and
the Governors of the places for the League supplying him but unwillingly, and
in small Parcels, it took him up a whole Month. In the mean time his Soldiers
gorging themselves October: but that done he begins his march toward the
Low Countries, not to be staid by the most earnest entreaties of the Duke of
Mayenne. He was much dissatisfied with his sloth and jealousy, however he
left him Eight thousand Men, and promised to return the following year with
greater Forces, advising him to hazard nothing in his absence, but to entertain
the King all along with Treaties of Peace.

Before his departure he had the displeasure of seeing his Conquest of Corbeil
lost in one night, which had cost him so many Men, and so much time. Givry
Governor of Brie with his Troops which were in Melun took it by Escalado. The
King having drawn his together, followed him in his rear to the Arbre de Guise.
At his return, being come to refresh himself at St. Quentin, he there learned
that Charles de Humieres his Lieutenant in Picardy, had gained the City of
Corbie by the Petard and Escalado, killed the Governor, and put the Garrison to
the edge of the Sword. The Public suffered there an irreparable loss, by the
destruction of the most part of the rare Manuscripts which were in the Library
of St. Peter's Abbey.

Lorrain conquered Villefranche upon the Frontiers of Champagne, but raised his
Siege most shamefully from before Saint Menehoud. As to Bretagne, the Naval
Force of Spain being entered into the Channel of Blavet, put five thousand Men
ashore commanded by Juan d'Aquila, who after he had razed a Fort built there by
the Prince of Dombes, and then in conjunction with the Duke of Mercoeur forced
the City of Hennebond, erected two great Forts at the chops of the Channel,
with design to maintain so important a Post.

Lesdiguieres became absolute in Daufine, by the reduction of the City of
Grenoble. Isere divides it in two parts, which are joined with a Bridge, he
gained that by Escalado which lies at the Foot of the Hill, less then the other
by two thirds: but Albigny stopped him for three weeks at the end of the Bridge,
and might have hindered him from passing further, if the People tired with the
War had not forced him to Capitulate. It was expressed in the Articles, That he
should have three Months time to choose his Party, and that if he took the
Kings, he should hold his Government. He waved the advantage, and chose rather
to keep to what his Religion and Promise engaged him to.

The King of Spain was satisfied, that if he could but wrest Provence out of
the hands of the French, he should be Master of the Mediterraneum, and break
their Alliance with the Turk, their Communication with Italy, and their Trade
into the Levant: he therefore gave a Fleet of forty seven Galleys to the Duke
of Savoy, and allowed him to make Levies in Milanois and the Kingdom of Naples.
Whilst this Fleet was preparing the Duke raised a Land Army, which he intended
to be of Ten thousand Foot and two thousand Horse. With these he entered into
Provence, being invited thereto by a famous Deputation of that Country who
waited upon him at Nice. When he arrived at Merargues, he took Horse with seven
more, and rode post to Aix the next day. The City made him a more solemn
Reception then ever they had done to any Prince; and some days after appearing
in Parliament, he by a solemn Decree had the Title given him of Governor and
Lieutenant General of the Province under the Crown of France.

Both the Kings Party and that of the League were equally tormented with
Discords and Factions. In that of the League the Duke of Savoy, the Duke of
Mercoeur, and the Duke of Joyeuse, drew to themselves, the one Provence, the
other Bretagne, and the third Languedoc. The Duke of Mayenne had conceived a
cruel jealousy for the Reputation of the Duke de Nemours, the affection the
City of Paris bare to him, and for that their common Mother supported and
seemed willing to make this younger Brother become his equal. Wherefore he
flatly denied him the Government of Normandy; and after this there never was
any more real trust or confidence between them* on the contrary these two half
Brothers watched each other as they had been sworn Enemies, and endeavored all
they could to break one another measures.

On the other hand the Seize having it in their Heads to unite together all the
great Cities of the Kingdom under a Republican form of Government, and for that
purpose relying upon the power of the Spaniard, who notwithstanding had quite
another aim then theirs, fell into a hatred of the Duke of Mayenne, as well
because he opposed their design, as because he had dissolved the Council of
Forty, and did not

Amongst the Royalists were more Factions yet, not all so violent, because
every one had some respect for the King. Of the Catholics as well as Huguenots
which were about him, there were two sorts, some who pressed for his change in
Religion: Huguenots, whereof Plessis had greatest Authority, not having yet
been able to obtain an Edict of him in favor of their Religion, and finding he
inclined by little and little toward the Catholic, resolved they would
strengthen themselves with Foreign Aid. And in this Prospect engaged him to
demand some both in England and Germany, so to beset, and keep him closer
united with the Protestant Princes.

He met likewise from abroad with another great cause of discontent. Pope
Sixtus V. had conceived a very high esteem for him, an extreme contempt for the
League, and a private hatred for the Spanish Government, which was much more
dreadful to him then all the Heretics. He had heaped up five Millions of Gold
in the Castle St. Angelo, the Spaniards importuned him to open his Chests for
relief of the Catholic Party, but he refused absolutely, and that with words
as sharp as their demands were arrogant. Thereupon he happened to die the Seven
and twentieth of the Month of August; His Successor Urban VII. who proved to be
of the same mind, lived but thirty days, and 'twas suspected the Spaniards
shortened the lives both of the one and other. Gregory XIV. who was elected in
the place of Urban, being a Milanese by Birth, and perhaps apprehending, as he
was very timorous, that they might soon dispatch him after his Predecessors,
espoused the passions of his King, and publicly engaged himself by promising
assistance of Men and Money to the

Chevalier d'Aumales upon the City of St. Denis, the other the Kings upon
Paris; they both miscarried. The Chevalier was by night gotten into St. Denis,
by means of some People, who having passed the Fosse upon the Ice, screwed open
the Gate, and let down the Drawbridge. When he was come into the midst of the
Town, Dominique de Vic, who was newly made Governor, goes forth into the
Streets with ten or twelve Horse, making a huge noise, as if great Company were
with him. He puts the Assailants to a full stop, then feeling their Pulses, a
little, afterward charged them so smartly, that he beat back two hundred Men
who were soremost, upon the Body that came behind; Then all betook them to
flight; The Chevalier with fifteen or sixteen of his, lay dead in the Street,
not without some suspicion of being killed by his own Party. This was in the
night between the second and third of January the Eve of St. Genevieue, not
very favorable to the Parisians.

As to the Enterprise upon Paris, the Twentieth of the same Month, sixty of the
most resolute Captains, disguised like Peasants, and leading Horses laden with
Meal (for the City began to grow in want) had order to seize upon the Gate St.
Honor. Fauxbourg, would have followed, and these again would have been backed
by twelve hundred Men, then the Swiss should have marched with several Wagons
laden with Pontons, Ladders and Hurdles to scale it in several parts. At the
same time the King stood at the entrance of the Fauxbourg to give Orders; but
finding the Gate St. Honor filled up with Earth, he judged his Design had
taken wind and retired.

The City of Paris being hourly threatened with the like dangers, the Duke of
Mayenne was forced to bring in a Garrison of Spaniards; However to avoid
reproach, he would not order it of himself, but referred the business to the
Parliament; who concluded after great Debate and Contentions, it should be so.
By virtue of their Decree he put four thousand into Paris, and five hundred in
Meaux; a sufficient number to make good his Command, but not so many as to make
them Masters there.

Chartres. The Garrison was but two hundred Soldiers, but there were three
thousand Citizens, who believing they did maintain the Cause of God and of the
Virgin, made the Siege much longer and much more difficult then was expected.
He was twice or thrice of the mind to raise it: Chiverny who was concerned for
the recovery of that place, because he had the Government of the Chartrain, and
all his Estate lay thereabouts, was the only Man that obliged him not April.

The Duke of Mayenne could not make a diversion by attaquing Chafteau-Thierry;
the taking whereof was very easy: the Governor, who was the Son of Pinard
Secretary of State, defended himself so ill, that he was accused of Treason.
His Father and himself were hugely put to it, and got out of the Briars rather
by the intercession of Friends then any justification of themselves.

The length of the Siege of Chartres, as doubtful at five weeks end, as the
first day, emboldned the Tiers Party, to hold up their Heads. The young
Cardinal de Bourbon, a vain and ambitious Prince, was Head and Author of it. He
thought the good Catholics (tired with the tedious delays the King made for
his being instructed) would confer the Crown on him as being the nearest Prince
of the Blood, and in this imagination had made a Cabal, and sent to Rome to
treat with the Pope concerning that matter.

At the same time his Brother the Count de Soissons, was contriving another,
which would have mightily perplexed the King, and made him forfeit his Credit
amongst Huguenots. The Countess of Guiche offended because the King did not now
respect Catharine his Sister, and so well managed the intrigue, that their
Wedding was ready to be consummate: but the King having discovered the designs
of either; that of the Cardinal de Bourbon by means of the Cardinal de
Lenoncour, who revealed all his secrets; that of the Princess by the treachery
of a disgraced Chambermaid, took such effectual order as removed all his
apprehensions.

The Negociations for Peace began anew after the taking of Chartres. Whilst
Villeroy was setting them on foot, there was an Assembly of the Heads of the
League, who all met either in Person, or by their Deputies, in the City of
Reims, to settle their concerns and the methods for making Peace or War. A
Peace would have blasted all their ambitious pretensions; and they could no
longer carry on the War without a King, nor maintain and support a King without
the assistance of Spain. To this effect they deputed the President Janin to
that Prince; who gave him favorable Audience twice, and afterward sent him to
confer with one of his Ministers: By whose discourse the President discovered
the intentions of Philip, which were, to Assemble the Estates General that they
might bestow the Crown of France upon him that should Marry his Daughter
Isabella, as the nearest Princess of the Blood Royal; upon which condition he
promised to send such numerous Forces into France, as should drive out the the
King of Navarre, and withal offered ten thousand Crowns per Month to maintain
the Duke of Mayenne.

He founded his hopes upon the charms of his Gold, the affections of the Seize,
and the Cabals of the Friars Mendicants, and other Religious Orders very
powerful, and at that time devoted to Spain, by whose means he hoped to gain
the greater Cities. The Pope aimed at the same thing, and treated the Seize as
Men of great importance. He fancied the time was now come to suppress all
Heresies; and that his Popeship might not lose the glory of it, he resolved to
join his Spiritual with the Temporal Power to destroy them. He put forth two
Monitories, the one he Excommunicated them, if within fifteen days they did not
withdraw from the Obedience, Territories and their Attendance on Henry de
Bourbon, and within fifteen more deprived them of their Benefices. By the
second, he exhorted them to do the same, if not he would turn his Paternal
goodness and love into the severity of a Judge. In both of them he declared
Henry of Bourbon Excommunicate, Relapsed, and as such fallen from all right to
his Kingdoms and Seigneuries. Marcellin Landriano the Popes Referendary, was
the Bearer of them, and contrary to the sentiments of the Duke of Mayenne,
published them in all the Cities of the League about the end of the Month of
April.

To the same end the Pope raised Eight thousand Foot and a thousand Horse, of
whom he made his Nephew Hercules Sfondrata General, and to make him the more
Montemarcian In the Marca of Ancona.
with most solemn Ceremony in the Church of Sancta Maria Major.

About this time the Marquess de Maignelay who had promised the King to return
to his Obedience with la Fere upon Oyse, whereof he was Governor, was
assassinated in the midst of the City, by the Vice-Seneschal of Montelimar
named Colas, and the Lieutenant of the Duke of Mayennes Guards, who left the
Government of it to Colas. The King going to Compeigne to favor this
Reduction, very angry it was prevented, came back to Mantes. From thence he put
in execution an Enterprise he had upon the City of Louviers. It was taken at
noon day by the Marshall Biron; Raulet having greatly contributed to this
Exploit, had the Government of it. Fontaine-Martel Governor of the place, and
Claude de Saints Bishop of Evreux, were taken Prisoners. Martel redeemed
himself by paying a Ransom, the Bishop for being too hot, was detained in
Prison and there died.

The Popes Bull had scarce any other effect, but to excite the Huguenots to
demand an Edict, give an opportunity to those of the Tiers Party.
third Party to advance and strengthen their Cabal, and provoke the Parliaments
of the one and the other Party to make bloody Decrees. The Chamber of Chaalons,
a Member of that which was sitting at Tours, by a Decree of the Sixth of June,
cancelled and revoked them as null, abusive, scandalous, seditious, full of
Impostures, contrary to the Holy Decrees, Canons, Councils, and the Rights of
the Gallican Church, ordained they should Landriano should be apprehended, ten
thousand Livers Reward to whomsoever should deliver him to Justice, forbidding
all the Kings Subjects to lodge or harbor him; as likewise to carry either
Silver or Gold to Rome, or to solicit the Provisions or Expeditions of
Benefices; And an Act to be given to the Solicitor General for the appeal he
was to bring to the next Council legally Assembled.

The Kings Council were divided into two parts; the one sat at Tours, where the
Cardinal de Vendosme presided; the other at Chartres with the Chancellor de
Chiverny; the King assembles them together at Mantes, to deliberate on so
important an Affair. After he had heard their opinions, he puts forth a
Declaration in the Month of July, Landriano as they should in justice see
cause, and exhorted the Prelates to meet and advise together according to Holy
Decrees, that the Ecclesiastical Discipline might not be lost, nor the People
destitute of their Pastors.

On the other hand he thought convenient, notwithstanding the vehement
oppositions of the Cardinal de Bourbon, to grant a Declaration in favor of the
Huguenots, which revoked all Edicts that had been put forth against them, with
the Judgments that had ensued thereupon, and restored, revived and confirmed
all the Edicts of Pacification: (but then added these words) by provision only,
and until such time as he should be able to reunite all his Subjects by a
happy Peace. This clause served as a Vehicle to make it pass in the Parliament
of Tours.

As to the business of the Bulls, this Company thundered louder yet, then the
Chamber at Chaalons, and out-vying them, declared Gregory an Enemy of the
Churches Peace and Union, Enemy to the King and State, adhering to the
Conspiracy of Spain, favourer of Rebels, and guilty of the Parricide of King
Henry III. On the contrary that of Paris pronounced, That this Decree was null
and of no force, made by People without power, Schismatics and Heretics,
Enemies to God, and destroyers of his Church, ordered it should be torn in full
Audience, and the Fragments burnt on the Marble Table by the Executioner, of
the Haute Justice.

The Clergy also assembled at Mantes, pursuant to the Kings Declaration. They
were to examine the Popes Bulls, and to settle some Orders for the Provisions
of Benesices. As to the first point the Assembly made a Decree, which declared
the said Bulls to be null, unjust, suggested by the Enemies of the Kingdom,
protesting notwithstanding that they would not depart from their obedience to
the Holy See. Bourges; this was Renauld de Bealne, made a motion of creating a
Patriarch in France, and he believed his Quality of Primat (in the absence of
the Archbishop of Lions who was for the League) would acquire him that Dignity;
others propounded to summon a National Council. The King was very glad they
mentioned those two Expedients which would frighten the Pope, but he indeed
would allow of neither the one nor the other; so that nothing was resolved upon.

Soon after this Assembly was transferred to Chartres, because the Duke of
Mayenne Mantes and the Prelates that were there. Noyon: He invested it the Four
and twentieth of July. Three Reliefs that endeavored to get in being beaten,
and the Vicount de Tavanes, who commanded one, taken Prisoner: the Duke of
Mayenne resolved to put in some himself with all his Forces. He had Two
thousand Horse, and eight thousand Foot, who showed the greater eagerness to
fight, because the Kings Army were fewer by a third part: but the Spaniards
refused to follow his motions, and obliged him to pass the Sum for security.
The Besieged finding themselves abandoned, parlied, and made their Composition
to quit the place the Eighteenth of August if they were not relieved. The day
being come they surrendered.

Provence. The Marsellois had refused the Duke of Savoy, and then received him
by the practices of the Countess de Sault the Second day of March. His success
did not answer the reputation of his Forces. It was but an ill presage of his
Expedition, the defeating a Body of his Army commanded by the Count de
Martinengues at Esparton de Palieres. He had blocked up Berte with several
Forts; La Valete too weak to relieve it, called Lesdiguieres to his aid, these
two joined together, razed them: but Lesdiguieres being recalled into Daufine
for fear of the Popes Forces who were passing that way, the same Martinengues
and the Count de Carces blocked it again.

The Duke of Savoy was then gone into Spain, whence he brought fifteen Galleys
laden with Ammunition, and a thousand Natural Spaniards. He landed them at
Cieutat, and put his Galleys into the Port of Marseilles: but found things
mightily changed there since his departure. One Lewis de Casaux who had raised
his Credit in that City by means of the Money the Duke had given him to
distribute, and by the practices of the Countess, found so much relish in
ruling the Roast, that he became absolute Master of Marseille, so that he alone
made their Consuls. The following year he put Lewis d'Aix into the Office of
Viguier Or Ordinary Judge.
, and joined him in his Government. He made the People believe the Duke would
reduce them to slavery, and awe them with two Citadels, whereas they ought to
preserve their Town for a most Christian King who was to be chosen by honest
Frenchmen, and that he had order from the Duke of Mayenne to look after it.

The Duke spared nothing to gain him: he ordered his Galleys to retire to Genos
Marseillois, threw and squandered away a great Aix to press forward the Blocade
of Berre. The Count de Carces, by Intelligence with the Inhabitants, got three
hundred Men privately into the place, Mesplez who was Governor of it, beat them
back and drove them out with incredible valor, and surrendered not till the
Twentieth of August: but it was after the enduring two assaults, and giving so
many proofs of his virtue, the the Duke, who had been Spectator, offered him
the General Lieutenancy of his Army, if he would have entered into his Service.

There ended the Conquests of the Duke of Savoy: after this he met with nothing
Amadea his Bastard Brother, who had six or seven thousand Men, (some being of
the Popes Forces) very ill Soldiers, had besieged the Fort of Morestel, which
would have contributed much toward the regaining of Grenoble; He there
suffered a notable loss. Lesdiguieres having drawn his Men together, was not
satisfied he had made him (...) his Siege, but went and attaqued him at
Pontchara where he was intrencht, broke in upon him, routed him, killed three
thousand of his Men upon the place, the Eighteenth of September, and the day
following took two thousand Italians at discretion who were fled into the
Castle of Avalon. His Soldiers massacred three hundred, the remainder he sent
packing to their own homes with white Staves in their hands.

In the mean time a kind of feud was crept in between the Duke and the Countess
de Sault: he believed she obstructed his designs, and she imagined he despised
her, because he had refused to give her the Government of Berre for her Son. La
Valete on the one side, and Casaux on the other, both for their own ends,
increased that Discord, and made him be ill thought of by the People, who
greatly suspected him, Arles by means of Biord Lieutenant in the Seneschaussee.

Now when he perceived he could be at no certainty with the Countess, he caused
both her and her Son to be apprehended: but she was so fortunate as to make her
escape in the habit of a Swiss, and her Son like a Peasant, and took Sanctuary
at Marseille. He would needs have her again per force, and to that end
surprised the Abbey St. Victor: but Casaux who desired no better opportunity to
render him odious to the People, constrained his People to dislodge and retire
out of Cannon-reach.

To complete his misfortune he received another shock. He besieged Vinon which
hindered the bringing of Corn to the City of Aix, the Town lay as it were open,
there being in many places nothing but a bare Wall of dry Stones laid upon one
another, but Mesplez was in it, and that was a good Bulwark. This brave Captain
la Valete time to come to his December.

Afterward, many of the places that had sided with the Duke, renounced him.
However he persisted in his design, and the engaging himself in greater
Expenses, though he found by the loss of six or seven thousand of his Men slain
in several Rencounters, and a million of Gold thrown away in Presents, that it
was very difficult, though he were brave and the Prince the most discreet and
most liberal in the World, to get any advantage against so many great Warriers,
with such unexperienced raw Soldiers as his were, or fix the inconstant humor
of the Provencaux.

Guises evasion, who made his escape from the Castle of Tours where he was
Prisoner. This young Prince had for this purpose made choice of the day called
the Assumption of our Lady about noon, when the City Gates were shut as is
usual all the Dinner time; Having corrupted one part of his Guards and deluded
the other, he was let down from the top of a Tower by a Rope brought to him in
the belly of a Lute, to which a Stick was tied cross that he might sit securely
thereon in his descent to the Strand. He found Horses laid ready for him on the
farther side of the River, and spurred away to St. Avertin a League off from
Tours, where Maison-forte Son of la Chatre attended with fifty Horse, and
convoyed him to Selles, and some days afterward to Bourges.

It was believed the Ladies about Queen Louisa, who were then at Chenonceaux,
had greatly contributed toward this escape, and Rouvroy in love with one of
them was suspected to have granted her this one favor upon promise of another.
The Parliament would have put him to infinite trouble, had not Souvray Governor
of Tours, befriended him mightily in his justification before the King.

As the King was much alarmed, dreading the great name of Guise, and the
growing fortune of a young Prince, who was said to resemble his Father in all
things; so the League was overjoyed; they made Bonfires every where, and the
Pope gave public Thanks to God for his deliverance. But the jealousy the Duke
of Mayenne conceived caused the fears of the one, and the promising hopes of
the other quickly to vanish; He apprehended his Nephew would easily acquire the
same good will and fondness of the People they had shown to his Father,
therefore did not reckon him a new Reinforcement but a new Trouble and
Competitor: nevertheless he sent la Feuillade to congratulate his escape, and
carry him some Money, desiring they might

The Prince of Conty and the Vicount de la Guierche, both Lieutenant Generals
in Poitou, the Prince for the King, and the other for the League, fought to
extremity. La Guierche met with diverse shocks, whereof the greatest was at the
taking of Montmorillon, where he lost his Cannon and all his In^^ntry, (he had
left them there having shamefully raised the Siege of Belac) a Month after he
himself unfortunately perished: for running to the rescue of his Castle of la
Guierche, (nigh Loches in Touraine) which was surprised by a Gentleman named
Salerne; the Lords d'Abin, and de la Roche-Posay, who had notice of his march,
got five hundred Gentlemen together, and with those charged him so briskly,
that all his people fled; and as he thought to save himself in the Ferry-boat
on the Creuse, so many men jumpt in after him, that they sunk in the River and
were all drowned.

Bretagne was not only vexed by the French, but by Strangers too. The Duke of
Mercoeur had brought in the Spaniards, and given them the Port of Blavet for a
retreat, where in a short time they so well fortified themselves, that it was
very apparent they intended to settle there. The King had likewise ordered
Three thousand English to go into that Country, sent over to him by Queen
Elizabeth, besides those that were landed at Diepe for the Siege of Rouen.

The Prince de Dombes, with this re-inforcement, went and besieged Lambale;
when it was at the point of Surrendering; the Besieged reassumed Courage, and
the Besiegers lost theirs all of a sudden, upon the death of the prudent la
Noue. He being got on the top of a Ladder to see what they were doing within
the place, was wounded in the Head of which he died; Bemoaned equally, almost,
by Friend and Enemy, a very great Soldier, and which was more, a very honest
Gentleman. His Son inherited his good qualities. He had been Prisoner four
years in the Low Countries, and being upon his deliverance now come to rejoice
with his Father, found the last Duty he could ever pay him, was to attend him
to his Grave.

Both Parties were now expecting their Foreign Supplies: the Duke of Mayenne
went to Verdun to receive some Forces from the Pope; they were in bad
condition, their Foot ruined with the Dysentery, and their Horse strangely
harassed and partly dismounted. Those from Germany who came to the King, almost
at the same time, were not so; there were Eleven thousand Foot and five hundred
Reisters, these Levies being made at the Expenses of the Queen of England, and
the free Towns of Germany, under the favor of George Marquess of Brandenbourg,
Casimir Prince Palatine, with some other Princes, and by the Negotiation of the
Vicount de Turenne. The King going to meet them with Two thousand Horse,
ordered them to be Mustered in the Plain of Vandy on Michaelmas-day, and from
thence went directly with the news of this conjuction to the Dukes of Lorrain,
Mayenne, and Montemarcian, who durst not Verdun. The latter being withal in
great disorder upon the Italy, of the sickness of Pope Gregory his Uncle, who
died the Fifteenth of October.

Sedan. The Dukes of Lorrain, Montpensier, and Nevers sought to gain the
Heiress for their Sons, the first by force, the other two by friendship: but
besides that the difference in Religion was an obstruction to all the three, he
thought it would make them too powerful on that Frontier. And therefore chose
rather to bestow her on the Vicount de Turenne, whose Estate was far distant
from thence, and to whom he should thereby acquit himself of those great
obligations he owed him. He therefore honored him with the Staff of Marshall
a of France, that he might not appear too unequal to match her, then went
himself into Sedan to conclude the Marriage. The Marshall the night before
that of his Nuptials, surprised Stenay by Escalado; from whence he afterward
made a brisk War against the Duke of Lorrain.

The Marriage Consummate, the King took his way to Noyon, and from thence at
the instance of the Queen of England, who apprehended lest the Spaniards should
settle themselves upon the Coasts of Normandy, he sent the Marshall de Biron
to lay Siege to Rouen. The Duke of Aiguillon, Son of the Duke of Mayenne,
Governor of that Province for the League, was but lately gone thence, and had
left the absolute Government to the Marquess de Villars. This Lord had about
him Philip Desportes Abbot de Tyron, a no less crafty Courtier then delicious
Poet who had disposed him to admit of Propositions for an Accommodation, in
hopes the King would let him enjoy the Fruits of his Benefices in that Country.
Now those that had obtained the grant of them from the King, caused his demands
to be rejected with disdain; In revenge whereof, he prevailed with Villars to
break the Treaty, and possessed him with quite contrary Sentiments. Thus a
private Interest often, or twelve thousand

Martins day Birons Forces approached near Rouen. He had besides his French
three thousand Englishmen, commanded by the Earl of Essex Favorite to Queen
Elizabeth, whom he had been to meet by Sea as far as Boulogue. They would at
first needs show some little bravado, and fired their small Guns: but they were
soon beaten off by a stout Salley: and the Marshall being as yet too weak,
went and took Gournay and Caudebec. That done he comes again before Rouen, and
endeavored to turn the little Rivers of Robec and Aubete another way, on which
the Town Mills were placed; he succeeded as to the former, but not the latter.
In the mean time the Citizens of Rouen intending to show themselves more brave
then those Paris, made many great Sallies: to let the Besiegers know, it would
be no easy It was said of the Parisians they knew better how to fast then
fight.
then to fast.

The Duke of Mayenne found himself at this time in the greatest distress that
ever he was in during his whole Life; Having no Forces to oppose so powerful an
Army as the Kings, he saw the loss of Rouen before his Eyes, afterward that of
all Normandy, then of Paris, and by consequence of all France. Those that were
to help him, gave him most trouble; the Duke of Nemours diverted one part of
his Forces to erect a Sovereignty about Lyonnois; the Duke of Guise labored to
make himself Head of the Party as his Father had been, and the young Nobless
did already run after him, as the Seize owned him for their Chief.

Above all this he dreaded the Spaniards, who told him plainly they would let
him perish, if he employed not his Interest and Credit to make the Crown fall
to the Infanta. They bragged withal they had a way to attain their ends in
despite of him; which was to divide and share the Kingdom amongst the Grandees,
and the most renowned Captains, and draw the chiefest Cities to them by giving
them their liberty: so that France had been reduced to the same condition as
Germany; a tempting bait both for the Lords and for the People.

But nothing lay so heavy upon him as the Seize, he hated them to the utmost,
and was in the same measure hated by them; Nor did they let slip any
opportunity to decry his Conduct, sent frequent Complaints, Remonstrances, and
Deputations to him, regarded not his Orders, no more then he did their
Memorials, wrote of their own Heads to the King of Spain, to offer him the
Crown, had engaged their Cabal to take a new Oath of Union, which did exclude
all the Princes of the Blood from the Throne, and forced all those that would
not take it, amongst others the Cardinal de Gondy, to depart the City. Nothing
was left to make them Masters, but to rid their hands of a part of the
Parliament, who observed them night and day, and crossed their designs. The
Duke of Mayenne was no less afraid then they were, foreseeing clearly enough,
that sooner or later, that first Parliament of the Kingdom would return to the
King, and draw the People after them: he was therefore well enough pleased the
Seize diminished their Authority, and hoped that by dashing so fiercely against
each other, they would both be destroyed to his advantage.

The thing happened as he wished, but with a Consequence quite different from his
intention. The Parliament had absolved one named Brigard, whom the Seize had
accused of holding intelligence with the Royalists: the most zealous of that
Faction resolved upon revenge. To this end they created a secret Council of ten
amongst Brisson, Larcher Counselor in Parliament, and Tardif Counselor at the
Chastelet, who broke their measures, and who besides were particular Enemies to
some of them. They first attempted to do it by some Assassins, but those
Hirelings, as it frequently happens, having discovered this Plot to the Parties
themselves, to gain a double Reward; they resolved to act more openly. They
drew up, therefore, a Sentence of Death against those three, and wrote it above
the Names and Signatures of several eminent Citizens, which they had got upon
another pretense. With and by virtue of this Warrant they seized on them in
diverse places, carried them to the little Chasteles, and Hanged them all three
in that Prison; The President Brisson was the first. A Catastrophy unworthy so
excellent and so learned a Man, yet ordinary to such as float betwixt two
Parties.

All the remaining portion of that day they scattered diverse odious Reports
about the Town to blast their Memories: the following night they caused their
Bodies to be carried to the Grew where they hanged till the next night. But
observing the People gazed on the sad Spectacle rather with the Eyes of pity
then indignation, they began to consider the horror of the Fact and apprehend
the Revenge. Some of them were of opinion to seize the Duchess of Nemours,
that she might be security for them against the Duke her Son; Others to
complete the Tragedy would rid themselves of him if he came toward Paris, and
after that elect a Chief that depended wholly upon them. The Spaniards did
believe they would have gone thorough with this last Act, and if so would have
supported them: but cared not to be the first should approve an attempt, the
justification whereof depended on the event.

Laon, to hasten and deliver them from that Tyranny, crying out the Knife was
at their very Throats. Diverse Considerations kept him a while in suspense: he
feared lest despair should force the Seize to cast themselves upon the
Spaniards, lest the Duke of Guise should support them, or lest their Cabal
should be strong enough to shut up the Gates against him: nevertheless
perceiving their courage failed, that they did not put themselves into a
posture Paris.

One Band went out to meet him, having at their Head Boucher Curate of St.
Benoist who was to deliver the Message: but the Duke passed on and would not
hear them. Another being more resolute determined to kill him; and there was
one that even profer'd to strike the first blow, but the rest would not promise
to second him. After some days inquiry in Paris being well informed how matters
stood, he sent to Bussy to deliver up the Bastille: This false Bravo had
neither resolution enough to defend it, nor wit to declare for the King, of
whom he might have had good Composition; he basely capitulated, yet would needs
march forth with Drums beating and Colors flying: but had provided no place
for his retreat, and therefore lodged with all his Booty in the Street St.
Anthoine.

The Duke having let some days slip without undertaking any thing, the Seize
thought themselves secure, being withal informed that the Parliament durst not
make Process against them: when on a sudden the Duke with his own hand draws
December to apprehend them in their own Houses. They could catch but only four
Anroux, Emonot, Ameline, Louchard.
of them who being carried to the Louvre, were immediately hanged on a Gallows
by the Executioner; the other five made their escape, and after they had lain
concealed some time, retired to the Low Countries. Bussy, one of the number,
got off fairly: Six Spanish Soldiers whom he kept at home to guard him, did by
the resistance they made, give him time to evade, but could not carry any of
his rich Plunder with him. He withdrew to Bruxels with his Wife, where he died
very old; He was yet to be seen in the year 1634. having always a String of
huge Beads about his Neck, talking little, but magnificently of the great
Designs he had missed.

Afterward, the Duke, whether he dreaded the despair of the remainder of the
Seize, or rather would seem to despise them, sent a Pardon or Abolition to the
Parliament for the rest that had any hand in the said Crime: and because the
mischief had been hatched in their private Assemblies, he forbad the like upon
pain of death and razing such Houses where they should meet. Thus this potent
Faction, who had so much loved the Duke of Guise as they had almost raised him
to the Throne, was dishonored and ruined by his Brother. One cannot deny but
it was much for the advantage of the King, with whom it was impossible they
should ever comply or agree: but indifferent People believed that by ruining
them the Duke had, as it were, cut off his left Arm with his right.

He wrote to all the Governors of Provinces, to justify his Proceedings, and
to render that Faction odious, and that he might unite them more closely to
him, he did oblige them to swear they would never forsake him; That they would
not favor the Election of a King without his consent; That they would approve
of all the Treaties he should make with any one; and that they would hold no
private intelligence Spaniards. At the same time the Parliament being wholly
destitute

The City of Rouen was well provided, well fortified, and very well resolved to
make a vigorous defense; The Marshall de Biron had but just invested it upon
the Kings arrival the First day of December. The Duke of Parma had sent to
offer assistance to the Besieged in behalf of King Philip, even before the Duke
of Mayenne had demanded it; yet was he not so forward to do it as he pretended,
he was loath to leave the Low Countries, remembering how during his absence the
former year, Maurice had taken five or six Towns from him: but he received such
precise Orders from Spain, that he parted from Bruxels toward the end of
November, with an Army of Ten thousand Foot, three thousand Horse, forty pieces
of Cannon, and two thousand Wagons of Bagage, where he had all sorts of Tools
and Ammunition: for he would trust to nothing but his own prudence and
foresight. The Duke of Guise went to meet him as far as Landrecy, and the Duke
of Mayenne to Guise, where all three had a long Conference together.

Before he proceeded any further, the Duke of Parma made them give him the City
of la Fere upon Oyse to put in his Artillery, and there left four hundred Men
in Garrison. This was not all, Diego d'Ibarra Ambassador of Spain declared the
intentions of his Master, who demanded the Crown for the Infanta, whom he
profer'd to Marry to some French Prince. There were several Conferences upon
that Subject at la Fere, between the Ministers of Spain and those of the Duke
of Mayenne. Janin who was chief of the Dukes, endeavored to elude the said
demand, by objecting very considerable difficulties, particularly the holding
of the Estates, then the immense Sums to carry on the War: but the Spaniards
without hesitation, agreed to

The Forces of these Dukes amounted together to more then Six thousand Horse,
and Fifteen thousand Foot. The King knowing they were upon their march, brought
the first news of himself to them with Three thousand Horse, and at his first
coming beat up the Duke of Guises Quarters who had the Vanguard near
Abbeville. He Aumale, where he would needs defend a Defile, or narrow Passage.
His presence of mind, his courage, and the night coming on, brought him off
from the greatest danger he had ever met with in his whole Life; and if he were
blamed for engaging himself as a Volunteer, he was commended for extricating
himself like

While the Dukes were much in pain how to deliver Rouen, it happened that during
the Kings absence, who had taken the best of the Cavalry with him, Villars and
the Inhabitants of the City relieved themselves. The Six and twentieth day of
February Catharine, beat back or kill all they meet with, burn the Huts and
Tents, ruin their Works, fill up the Trenches, put Fire to the Powder, carry
away five great Pieces of Cannon, and Nail up the rest. They remained Masters
of that Quarter till the arrival of Biron: who hurried thither from Dernetal
with the Nobility, followed by the Swiss and Lansquenets. He charged them
without taking any view: but their Horse stood firm yet a while, gave the Foot
time to retreat, and afterward made their own in good order. Biron was shot in
the Thigh with a Musket Bullet, five hundred of the Besiegers slain in the
place, and an hundred carried Prisoners into the Town, the most part Men of
note.

When these tidings were brought to the Dukes, they had just been resolving in
their Council to march all night, and fall the next Morning upon the Quarters
of Dernetal. The design being much advanced by the event of this furious
Salley, the Duke of Parma would needs have them complete so infallible a
Victory: but the Duke of Mayenne, whose jealousies and suspicions made him
incompatible with his Friends no less then with his Enemies, and irresolute in
good fortune as well as in bad, urged several Reasons against it, with so much
obstinacy, that Parma was forced to yield to them. They therefore only put
Eight hundred Men into the place, then retired, and made their Army repass the
Sum.

Villars in so profound security, that he ran at the Ring without the Walls in
sight of the Enemy. But when the meaner sort of People began to be in want of
Money to buy them Bread, when the Bourgeois who had made their Vows to our Lady
of Loreta for their deliverance, found themselves shut up closer then ever,
when those which had showed themselves the most zealous, began now to join in
Conspiracies with some of the Kings Party: Villars gave notice to the Duke of
Mayenne that he should be constrained to Capitulate, if by the Twentieth of
March he were not relieved.

The Dukes repassed the Sum therefore at the Foord of Blanquetaque, and
having marched above thirty Leagues in four days, came within three Leagues of
Rouen at the day prefixed. The King would needs put himself in a posture to
fight them; and with that design drew all his Forces to him that were on the
other side of the Water: when finding they were in a very ill condition, he was
obliged to raise the Siege, sent up his Boats to Pont de l'Arche, and Conveyed
away his Bagage, standing to his Dernetal, to defy the Enemy by so

This time also, the jealousies that were amongst the Chiefs of the Enemies
Army, Montemarcian and the Duke of Mayenne against the Duke of Parma, hindered
them from venturing upon so fair and promising a Game. It was Parma's Advice to
fall on, and had he been alone, he would have done it without any great hazard,
said he; but the Duke of Mayenne refused to second him, and the next day
engaged him to besiege Caudebec, to get the Stores of that Corn that was in it,
and to open the River; Then after they had with facility taken that, he was as
obstinate for the posting themselves at Yvetot, to cover that Conquest. The
place was very unlucky to them, they had not been there long when the King cut
off their Provisions, and posting himself between l'Islebonne and their Camp,
harcelled them perpetually by great Skirmishes.

The disadvantages they received in two or three several trials, making them
perceive they might possibly be forced in that place, they decamped silently by
night, and came to Caudebec. There they found themselves yet more straightened
then before. They wanted not only Provisions, but even Water; Distempers ruined
their Men: the Duke of Parma, the Duke of Mayenne, and the famous George Baste,
who commanded the Horse, were all three in the Straw; the first for a Musket
Shot he received on his Arm in besieging Caudebec; the second by some Relics
of his old Adventure at the Hostel de Carnavalet, which broke out again by the
Fatigues of War; and the third with a double Quartan. Add to this that Biron
was every hour upon the backs of them; He surprised one of their Quarters of
Light-Horse-Men, and all the Money they had in store for payment of their
Forces. It was said, (and even his own Son reproached him with it) that if he
would then have put on roundly, he might easily have defeated the whole Army,
but that he waved the opportunity, as fearing so great a blow would have put an
end to the War and to his Employment.

The extremity of this danger put the Duke of Parma upon the invention of a
Masterpiece to bring himself out of it. He built two Forts right against each
other on the brink of the River, with Redoubts which commanded on the Water,
and great Retrenchments which advanced toward the Kings Army: withal he
caused a great many Pontons to be made ready at Rouen, and covered five and
twenty or thirty Boats with strong Timbers and Planks to wast his Cavalry,
which were brought thither in the night time when the weather was most dark: By
this means French Forces to pass over, first the Foot, Spanish Infantry, Wallon
and Italian, whilst his Son with a thousand Foot and four hundred Horse, made
good that side they were leaving, and covered their retreat. The greatest
trouble he had was to ship the four pieces of Cannon he had planted in the Fort.

As fast as the Troops got over they put themselves upon the march. The King
was much astonished when broad daylight showed him their Trenches empty; he
forthwith sent two thousand Horse by Pont de l'Arche, believing they might
overtake them at their passage of the River Eure. They caught only five hundred
Foot, whose sloth or weariness made them lag behind the rest at Neufbourg,
these surrendered at discretion: but Parma made so gread speed, that he got in
four days from Caudebec to Charenton, where he passed the Seine upon a Bridge
of Boats, and did not think himself secure till he was in Brie.

As for the Duke of Mayenne, he retired to Rouen, and sojourned there near six
weeks, putting himself for the second time into the Doctors hands. The King
having totally raised the Siege, and kept only Three thousand Horse, and Five
thousand Foot, pursued the Duke of Parma to the very Frontiers, fearing lest he
should seize upon some place.

The Duke of Mayenne was very near dying under the Discipline of his
Chyrurgeons: the Spaniards believing he could not recover, and thinking that
from thence Paris: which highly displeased him, and made their concealed
intentions appear more plain to him, then any thing else had done. Now when
they perceived his recovery, they repented of having too openly discovered
themselves, and endeavored to sooth him by new caresses, and fairer profers
then before. And he on his part knew how to dissemble as well as themselves:
but intended for the future to order his Affairs by other measures then theirs.
In this mind he essayed to make a new Party with the Cardinal de Bourbon, upon
whose Head he promised to set the Crown. I cannot tell how far this intrigue
was carried on: but there is great likelihood the Dukes irresolution hindered
the prosecution of it.

During this universal disorder, the Royal Authority was very languishing: for
the great Cities had their designs for liberty, the Lords and Governors for
Soveraignties,

It was justly to be feared by him, that if the Estates should at last elect a
King, all the Princes of Italy, and the rest of the Catholics, might own him,
(they being concerned only to have a King in France, not whether it were he in
particular before any other) and lest the Pope, who had some obligation to the
Spaniards for his promotion, should continue to assist the League; (This was
Clement VIII. for Gregory XIV. died, and Innocent IX. his Successor Reigned but
a short time.) Besides he wanted Money, and was vexed to be no more but the
Companion of his Subjects. These Considerations inclined him to find out some
way for an Accommodation with the Duke of Mayenne; They entered upon it without
much difficulty, and without taking in the King of Spain, or communicating it
to the Lords of either Party, as knowing too well those People did not at all
desire an end of the Troubles.

Villeroy and Duplessis were made choice of for this Negotiation. They came to
this Agreement, That the King should take six Months time to be instructed by
such ways and means as should be no prejudice either to his Dignity, or his
Conscience; That the Nobility of his Party should send a Deputation to the
Pope, to desire his Authority for it; That in the mean time they should
endeavor to make a Peace, and that he should be owned by those Princes that
were united. They afterward further agreed, That the Huguenots should enjoy
those Edicts had been granted to them before the year 1585. That the Exercise
of the Catholic Religion should be restored every where; That the Gentdarmerie
and Infantry, should be regulated; That the Tailles and Imposts should But when
it came to treat of the interests of the Duke of Mayenne, the Propositions
seemed so excessive to Duplessis-Mornay, that he dissuaded the King from giving
ear to them.

Villeroy forbore not to enter again into Conference with the Marshall
d'Aumont, and the Marshall de Bouillon, and to attend the King, who was very
well satisfied with his franc and loyal proceeding. The fruit of these
Conferences, which lasted two Months proved more then a little for the benefit
of the Catholic Religion: for the King promised that he would forthwith send
the Cardinal de Gondy and Pisany, to Rome; which did not overmuch please the
Huguenots.

This Treaty being grown public, because too many People would concern
themselves in it, strangely alarmed the Spaniards and all the other Chiefs of
the League. The King and the Duke of Mayenne had both like to be abandoned, the
latter by all his Partisans, the other by his Huguenots. There were some
amongst these who thinking to bind the King yet faster, lest he should forsake
them, fortified themselves with the Queen of England and the Hollander, and
would needs have given them France. A proof hereof was evident by the
Enterprise of du Fay his Chancellor in Navarre: who having gotten a Commission
for the fortifying of Quilleboeuf, had scarce raised his Works Breast-high,
when he would needs Cantonize himself there, and denied entrance to Bellegarde,
to whom the King had given the Government thereof. Two or three Envoys from the
King did in vain employ both their Persuasions and Menaces to make him lay
aside so desperate a design: his ambition had taken too high a stand to be
brought down so easily; he expected a supply of Eight hundred English: but two
days before the arrival of them, he fell sick either of melancholy or
otherwise, and perished in the midst of his attempt. He was so mightily
possessed with the humor, that death it self could not wean him from it, for
he gave order they should bury him in one of the Bastions there, as if
intending still to keep possession.

So soon as he expired, Bellegard entered into it; Villars thought he might
carry the place upon this change, and before it were defensible. The Duke of
Mayenne and he besieged it with four thousand Men: but it was either so well
defended, or so ill attaqu'd, that at the end of fifteen days they were
constrained to decamp, for fear of being beaten by the Count de Saint Pol and
Fervaques, who were coming to relieve it with Twelve hundred Horse and fifteen
hundred Foot.

Villars going to this Siege, had surprised the little Town du Pont-Audemer.
Whilst he was busy in fortifying it, Bose-Rose, one of his bravest Captains,
offended at his arrogance, and some scurvy language he had given him, seized on
the Fort of Fescamp, and Cantonized there. This Fort was upon a Rock, near
thirty fathom high toward the Sea, which washes the foot of it twice a day,
but never rises to the top but twice in the year; and it was at one of those
Spring-Tides that Bose-Rose surprised it by Escalado. Villars flew thither
immediately to recover it, and not able to draw him thence, he blocked it up by
two Forts; wherewith at last he reduced him to extremity: but Bose-Rose thought
it much safer to cast himself into the Arms of the King, then to compound with
one he had so much offended.

After the raising of the Siege of Rouen, the greater part of the Kings Army
was gone into Champagne, he besieged Espernay, and out of the apprehension of a
relief to come, would needs cover himself with a Circumvalation, which retarded
the Siege near three weeks. The Marshall de Biron was slain in the approaches,
by a Cannon Shot which took off his Head. He had been Chief Commander in seven
Battles or great Combats, in each of which he had received some Wound. A Man
very considerable in the Cabinet Council as well as the Campaign, who would be
ignorant of nothing, had a hand in every thing, and fenced with the Quil as
dexterously as with the Sword.

As soon as the Battery had made a breach, the Besieged Capitulated. Provins
Meaux being much stronger, the King did not Parisians drew from thence by the
Marne, he built a Fort in the Island It was called, Pillebadand.
of Gournay, which lies upon that River within four Leagues of Paris, and gave
the Government thereof to Odet de la Noue, whose incorruptible fidelity
answered his favor with most exactly guarding the said Passage.

Upon the Frontiers of Bretagne, the Princes of Conty and of Dombes being
joined, received a very Signal loss: they had besieged the City of Craon
situate upon the River of Oudon: the Duke of Mercoeur came to its relief,
assisted by Bois-Dausin Main, and by the Marquess de Belle-Isle Son of the
Marshall de Raise. Now the Princes for want of good Intelligence, had let the
Duke pass the River, and get into a very advantageous place for Battle, whilst
they chose a very bad one for themselves; then not able to resolve to fight,
they made their retreat in the open day, and committed many other oversights
which occasioned their defeat. This happened the Five and twentieth of May. They
lost twelve hundred Men, all their Cannon, which was left by the way for want
of Harness, and afterward the Cities of Chasteau-Gontier, Mayenne and Laval.

The Marshall de Raise, after the death of Henry III. not seeing clearly into
the depth of Affairs, nor knowing which Party to side with, was retired to
Florence, and had advised his Son to join with the strongest; which made him
take part with the Duke of Mercoeur to secure the great Estate he had in
Bretagne; though others imagined it was a fancy he had for the Duchess, that
engaged him to it.

June, Henry Prince of Dombes lost his Father Francis Duke of Montpensier, Aged
Fifty years; he inherited his Name, his vast Estate, and the Government of
Normandy which the King bestowed on him, as he did that of Bretagne on the
Marshall d'Aumont. This last regained the City of Mayenne, after a fifteen
days Siege: but lay two Months before Rechefort with the loss of a great many
Men and not able to take it, the inconveniences of the Winter, and the Duke of
Mercoeur coming to the relief of the place. Rochefort was a Castle upon a Rock
of Slat on the bank of the River Loire, five Leagues beneath Angers, right
against the Rock de Gausie, a place remarkable in former days, and ruined
during the War with the English. Two Brothers Surnamed de Hurtaud who held it
for the King, put it and themselves into the Party for the League, that they
might be justified for making Sardiny, a rich Partisan, their Prisoner, and
screwing a Ransom of Ten thousand Crowns from him, though he were a Roy^^^st.

It was about the same time that Rene de Rieux Sourdeac being invested in Breast
by the Nobility and Commonalty of the Country, after a four or five Months
blocade, beat them so in several Sallies, partly by stratagems, partly by
courage, as forced them to dislodge, and even to buy a Truce, which he sold
them at the rate of Eight per Annum. Within a Month after he gained a Victory
at Sea Normandy, which were come from Fescamp to seize upon the Harbor of
Cameret, from whence they would have annoyed that of Breast; These advantages
did hugely contribute to the keeping that Country under obedience of the King.

All Guyenne was so, excepting that Emanuel Desprez Marquess of Villars, Son of
the Duke of Mayenne's Wife, and Henry Lord of Montp^sat Brother of Emanuel,
held some small places in Perigord, in Limosin, and in Agenois, Again,
Villeneuve, and Marmande. These Brothers the foregoing year had been beaten
near the Abbey de Roquemadour in Quercy by Anne de Levis Ventadour, and Ponts de
Losieres Temines, this Governor of Quercy, the other of Limosin; who slew them
seven hundred of the four and twenty hundred they had got together, and took
their Cannon and

The Marshall de Matignon commanded in this Province, when there happened a
dangerous division by means of Paul d'Esparbez Lussan. This Gentleman had
purchased Blaye of Guy de Saint Gelais Lansac, a great Waster of his Estate.
The Marshall said it was with his Money, and that Lussan was but his Agent
therein: but when he would have come in, Lussan flatly denied him entrance, and
offered to repay him his Money. The Marshall not able to bring him to Reason,
renders him suspected of holding Correspondence with the League, and retrenched
his pay. Lussan did not much value that, but begins to raise Contribution upon
the River with four great Vessels, which he made Men of War. Whereupon the
Marshall having excited the Complaints of the whole Province against him,
obtained an Order from the King to drive him thence by force, and laid Siege to
Blaye. Lussan withstood it three Months, after which finding himself hard
beset, he calls in the Spaniards to his aid, and with their help defended
himself so well that he kept possession of the place.

They missed but little of getting some footing in the Province by Bayon upon
an Enterprise they had contrived against that City, by means of a Merchant of
the Franche-Compte named Chastean-Martin, who inhabited there, and a Physician
named Rossius. It was very near succeeding, when la Hilliere who was Governor
of the place, discovered it, luckily surprising an ill instructed Footman who
brought Letters from Fontarabia. The Merchant and the Doctor were Hanged.

Amidst the confusion of three or four Parties in Provence, that for the King
began to be predominant, especially when the Duke of Savoy was defeated at
Vinon. After that la Valete pursued him roundly to the very Gates of Aix, and
destroyed all the Farms round about it. Then to draw him out into the Field, he
laid Siege to Roquebrune, Frejus, which lies within a League. Now as he was
ordering the repair of some February; a great loss, both for his singular
Virtues, and the Affairs of the King. That part of the Parliament who were
retired to Sisternon, took up the Government till the King should otherwise
dispose thereof.

His death dispersed the greater part of his Troops, and caused divisions
between the Provenceaux and the Gascons, concerning whom should succeed him.
The Gascons desired the Duke of Espernon, and were the stronger: so the others
pretended to acquiesce, and all sent to the King to demand him. The King had
not love enough to bestow so considerable a gist upon him: and feared lest his
haughty and ambitious Spirit might lead him to Cantonize himself in that
Province which was both Maritine, and Neighbor to the Duke of Montmorency, and
the Duke of Savoy. Nevertheless when he perceived he was sitting himself to go
and take possession of it, and that his refusal would serve to no end, but to
cast him on the Enemies side, he sent him his Commission with very obliging
Letters, but took from him the Office of Admiral, which he gave the young
Biron, and underhand ordered Mesplez a Gentleman of Bearn, and also others of
the most authorized amongst the Gascons, and Royalists of Provence, to cross
him in his Government, till such time as he could find an opportunity to force
him out.

The Affairs of the Duke of Savoy were but little the better for the death of
la Valete. The Sixteenth of February, the Inhabitants of Arles killed their
first Consul Riviere, while he was endeavoring to introduce some Savoyard
Companies into the City, and certain Gentlemen Royalists went and assassinated
Biord, Lieutenant to the Seneschal, a great Partisan for the Duke, who was
retired to a Farm of his own thereabout. Some Months after the third Consul
raised the City of Arles, and rejoyned them to the Parliament of Aix: but did
not restore them to the interests of the Duke.

This Prince having no strong Holds in the Province but Berre, and Grace, and
of Aix, which was neither a Frontier, nor a Seaport, nor upon any River, took
his farewell of the Parliament the Thirtieth of March, and carried away all his
Luggage and his Forces to Nice, having notwithstanding made them fair promises
of a speedy return. The Parliament of Aix in his absence took up the Government
of the Province, and got Letters Patents for it from the Duke of Mayenne.

When he departed the Country, Lesdiguieres was called in by the Parliament of
Sisteron. Having therefore made a Truce with the Duke of Nemours, he came into
Provence toward the end of May, refused that demanded by the Parliament of
Aix, took all the little Castles about Aix, and toward Antibes, ran over all
the Country, beat the Duke who ^ad undertaken to come to the relief of Aix, and
much straightened both the City and Parliament. But when he was just upon the
point of reducing them, Nemours broke the Truce, took the Fort des Eschelles,
and gained Maugiron who commanded for the King in Vienne. He would not however
leave the Government to him, fearing lest he that had once changed, might have
a fancy to do so a second time. The noise of this progress recalled
Lesdiguieres into Daufine: when he was there he tried all manner of ways to
draw him to a Battle; he could never engage him to it: yet by hunting him from
place to place, in time, dispersed his whole Army.

July, the Duke of Savoy took Antibes at discretion. La Valete had formerly
treated a League with the Venetians, the Duke of Florence, and the Duke of
Mantoua, to carry a War into the Country of Savoy; They obliged themselves to
furnish him an Hundred thousand Livers per Month, as soon as he should
Lesdiguieres got to be accepted in his stead, and acquitted himself as well as
the former could have done. He passed the Mountain Genevra the Six and
twentieth of September, divided his Army into three Bodies, the one to attaque
Perouse, the other Pignerol, and the third which he commanded in Person, the
Pas of Suza. He succeeded only in Perouse, where he gained all the Passages
that were convenient for Carriages, and those of the Valley of Quieras proper
for the passage of his Foot Soldiers. Moreover he fortified Briquieras in sight
of the Duke of Savoy, took the City, and then the Castle of Tavours, and made
the Duke retire who was coming on to relieve it; then having provided for the
security of his Conquests, he returned to Winter in Daufine.

The Duke d'Espernon passing with Three thousand Men along the Frontier of
Languedoc, found there the Duke of Joyeuse who besieged Villemur on the Tarn,
(at the request of those of Toulouze, who by that means designed to prevent the
incursions of them in Montauban.) The rumor of his march made the Besiegers
hastily dislodge: but as soon as he was gone some distance, Joyeuse forced, as
one may say, by his ill destiny, renewed the Siege. The Marshall de
Montmorency, fearing his power would become too great, made up a Body of his
choicest Men, giving the Command to Lecques, Chambaud, and Montoison. Messilac
heretofore named Rostignac, Auvergne, joined them with some Horse. All these
together October. At the same time they made the onset, Temines who had thrown
himself into the place with a good number of the Nobility, made also a great
Sally; They forced the Dukes Retrenchments, put his Men into disorder, rout
them, knock a great many on the Head, make as many more drown themselves in the
Tarn, and even the Duke himself, the Bridge falling under him by reason of the
multitude of run-aways.

This news begot an incredible consternation in Toulouze, and after every one
had bemoaned both the general and his particular loss, they were to consider of
choosing another Chief. The defunct Duke had yet two Brothers, but both of them
devoted to the service of God, the one a Cardinal, the other a Capucin, called
Father Angel. The first who was very well versed in the conduct of Affairs,
would willingly have undertaken that part of the Government, but he excused
himself as to the command of the Army; It was conferred upon his Brother who had
otherwhile exercised that trade: yet did he not accept of it without a great
deal of difficulty.

The Duke of Espernon arrived in Provence toward the end of August; his
entrance was very glorious, the People receiving him every where with
acclamations of joy. He employed the Months of September and October in settling
himself in the Province, and in clearing it of several Castles, and Dens of
Thieves. The Month of November was spent in Parlies and Negociations of Peace,
though very ineffectually; after which he went to attaque Antibes, and took the
City upon Composition, and the Castle by Escalado. But while thinking himself
to be already absolute Master, he treated the Provencial Subjects with
haughtiness, and the Conquered without mercy, while he built Citadels in
Briguoles, and in Saint Tropez, whose Inhabitants were great Royalists; the
jealous and impatient Spirits of those Countries were extremely alarmed; the
Kings Agents by their secret practices put more fuel to their fire; and the
Dukes revenge begot in their hearts the most cruel and furious hatred that has
been heard of in these latter Ages.

The Spaniards incessantly demanded the Convocation of the Estates General, the
Pope had delegated in France, by Commission in form of a Bull, Philip de Sega
Cardinal Bishop of Piacenza, to be assisting at the Election of a Catholic
King, and such a one as they should judge to be most capable of opposing the
Undertakings of the Navarrois. King Philip had resolved to send an Army into
France of Thirty thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse, to support him who
should be elected, as designing him to be a Husband for his Daughter.

December died in Arras the Duke of Parma, as he was drawing his Forces
together, and the King had advanced as far as Corbie to hinder his entrance
into the Kingdom. This great Soldier had languished a whole year of Poison,
(said the more suspicious) given him by the Ministers of Spain either by order
of King Philip, or out of some private hatred.

We do not well know whether it affected the Duke of Mayenne with joy, or
grief: but it is certain that after the being acquainted with this news, he
took as much care to assemble the Estates, as he had formerly used to retard
it; and presently made four Mareschals of France, who were la Chastre, Rhosne,
Bois-Daufin, and Saint Pol, and gave the Command of Admiral to the Marquess de
Villars. Was it to add more Dignity to that Assembly, or to impose the
necessity on them to elect him King? For these great Officers would not have
suffered they should confer the Crown on any other but their Creator.

The Duke of Guise and the Duke of Nemours ^ormed each their Cabal in Paris,
and expected to have the like in the Estates. The Politics having found their
own strength, con^idently held their Assemblies, where they made Propositions
for an Accommodation with the King of Navarre; and it had passed in an Assembly
of their Town Hall, to send to him for a free Commerce, if the Duke of Mayenne
had not hastened thither to prevent it. This was by advice of the Seize: but he
showed never the more kindness to them for it, on the contrary he rejected all
the Petitions they presented to him, for which reason they spit their Venom in
diverse biting and horribly defaming Libels; which did in truth extremely decry
him, but rendered the Authors yet more odious.

de Biron had held; and the King was equally afraid of disobliging all the
Pretenders, for the first that had forsaken him would have dissolved the whole
knot.

His Domestic inquietudes did no less discompose him. The Count de Soissons
not able to suffer any longer those delays of his Marriage with the Princess
Cath^rine, went to Pau to complete it: but the Parliament of Bearn shut their
Gates upon him, and placed Guards about the Princess. She took her self to be
highly affronted by these proceedings, and complained bitterly to her Brother
of the insolence of those Men of the Gown, (so she expressed it.) The King
desiring to compose her disordered mind, wrote back to her in very affectionate
terms, and ordered her to come to him at Saumur, where he was to be in the
Month of February.

January was published a Declaration of the Duke of Mayenne verified in the
Parliament of Paris, which after an ingenious and eloquent Apology for all he
had done, invited the Princes, Pairs, Prelates, Officers of the Crown, Lords and
Deputies, to join with the Party for the Holy Union, and to meet in the
Assembly of the Estates on the Seventeenth of February, there without passion
or interest jointly to make choice of some good Remedy to preserve both Church
and State. About ten days after appeared an Exhortation of the Legates to the
same end, which spoke much plainer then the Dukes, saying, They must elect a
King both by profession and in reality most Christian and most Catholic, and
who had the power to maintain both Church and State. This pointed to the King
of Spain clearly enough.

This Paper of the Dukes having been perused by those Lords who were about the
King, some (amongst others the Duke of Nevers) thought convenient, since he
invited them to come to Paris, to return him some Answer which might engage him
to a Conference. This Expedient was seconded by all with so much eagerness that
it would not have been in the power of the King, if he had so desired, to
hinder it. The Proposition was therefore drawn up the Seven and twentieth of
the Month, and delivered to a Herald to carry it to the Duke. The Deputies
went to their Devotions the One and twentieth at N^stre-Dame, then heard a
Sermon preached by Gilbert Genebrand Archbishop of Aix, who showed, That the
Salique Law was either positive or changeable at the pleasure of the
Legislator, which is the Body of the French People.

The Assembly was opened the Six and twentieth in the Hall of the Louvre: the
Duke began it by a Harangue which the Archbishop of Lions had composed for him;
the Cardinal de Pelleve spoke for the Clergy, Senescay for the Nobility, and
Honor du Laurent the Kings Advocat in the Parliament of Provence, for the
Third Estate. The Clergy had a pretty good number of Prelates of note with them,
amongst the Nobility there were few Gentlemen considerable, and the Third
Estate was a compounded Rabble of all sorts of People, hired by the Duke of
Mayenne, or by the Spaniards. Of these three Bodies, there being none but that
of the Nobility for the Duke, he assayed to add two new ones, contrary to the
ancient Order of the Kingdom, i. e. one of Lords, and the other of Members of
Parliament, and Gown Men: but the three Orders fiercely rejected this Novelty.

The second day of their sitting, a Trumpeter brought the Proposition from the
Catholic Lords attending the King: which imported, That if those of the Party
for the Union would depute honest and worthy Persons, to such place as should
be agreed upon, between Paris and St. Denis, to consult of the best means to
put an end to all troubles, they were on their parts ready to send likewise.
The Trumpeter desired to speak with the Duke, who was then in Bed a little
incommoded, and failed not to make known to enter into Conference directly or
indirectly with the King of Navarre, or with any Heretic, but were content to
do it with the Catholics of his Party, and that for the good of Religion, and
the public Peace.

Paris with a Guard of Four hundred Horse, and went to Soissons to discourse
with the Duke of Feria, John Baptista Tassis, and Doctor Inigo de Mendozza,
Ambassador from Spain. They propounded directly the Election of their Insanta,
and spoke of it as a thing both easy, just, and honorable; The Duke demanded
a powerful and effective supply, and they sed him with Chimeras; in so much as
they fell to reproaches and gross language: but the Dukes extreme necessity
constrained him to suffer it, and to conceal his Resentments no less then his
Designs.

At his departure from Soissons, he went and joined their Army which was
commanded by Charles Count Mansfeld. With those he brought, they did not make
up above Ten thousand Men: these Forces being too few to free Paris, stuck to
Noyon and took it at three weeks end. That done, Mansfeld marched his Men back
to Flanders: where Prince Maurice cut him out so much work, that in all the
whole year he had not so much spare time as to think once upon those of France
again.

In the Month of February the King went to Tours. Three grand designs led him
thither, the one to make up the Marriage of his Sister with the Duke of
Montpensier, another to Treat with the Duke of Mercoeur, and the third to
contrive it so with the Members of his Parliament that they should take off the
modifications they had made in the Edict by him granted to the Huguenots. He
found so little disposition in Peoples minds, that not one of those three
things did succeed. Moreover, as misfortunes seldom come singly, it happened that
at the very same time when the Enemies were ready to take Noyon, the ill effect
reached even to Selles in Berry, which Biron besieged by his express Order, and
at the request of the Parliament of Tours; For the King having need of all his
Forces to cover Picardy, sent to him to raise his Siege, and to bring his Men
away with all speed.

Huguenots, to fall into Conspiracies: these only to Cantonize themselves, the
others to seize upon his Person. They did now no longer scruple to make
Assemblies and Cabals, and the chief Lords of his Council told him without
ceremony or disguise, they would quit him if he did not quit his Religion. The
Cardinal de Bourbon was the Bell-weather that led the Flock, and put him to
most trouble: by good fortune for the King, it happened that I know not what
sharp humor made an Ulcer in his Lungs, and bred a Ptisique in him, which
rendered him less capable of pushing on

There were two ways might draw the King out of his Troubles: the one to remain
firm in his Religion, and arm himself with patience and courage; the other,
without doubt the better, to embrace that of the Catholics, who were for
numbers a hundred to every Huguenot. The first was extremely long and tedious,
full of difficulties, and dangers almost insuperable: the Catholics threatened
to go from him if he would not go to Mass; he scarce had sufficient to set an
Army on foot; the Gentry grew weary of exhausting their Wealth, and shedding
their Blood for an Heretical Prince; and if in this juncture, they had elected
another King, certainly they would all have acknowledged him.

All these considerations and apprehensions, made deep impressions on his
Spirit: it was believed the Providence of Heaven made use of these to dispose
him to choose the better way. He began therefore to give hopes of his
Conversion; and so soon as he had opened his mind on this point, there were
some Huguenots themselves who assured him, whether they really believed so, or
did it out of Complaisance, that one might obtain Salvation in any Religion
that believed Jesus Christ Crucified, the Creed of the Apostles, and observed
the Precepts contained in the Decalogue.

While the Duke of Mayenne was yet at Rheims, whither he was gone to hold
Conference with the Princes of his Party, the Duke de Feria Ambassador
extraordinary from Spain with his other two Colleagues, arrived at Paris,
accompanied with a great Guard of Horse and the principal Lords of the Party,
whom the Duke of Mayenne had sent to meet him. The Estates complemented him by
certain Deputies: some days after he came into the Assembly, where he Harangued
in Latin, and presented them some Letters from King Philip, which were
Superscribed thus, To Our Reverend, Illustrious, Magnificent, and Well-beloved,
the Deputies of the Estates General of France. The Cardinal de Pelleve was
ordered to Answer them.

There were three Chairs stood under the Canopy, one in the midst covered over
with a Carpet of Violet Velvet powdered with Flowers de Lys of Gold, and raised
higher then the rest, but empty, to show it waited for the King; in that on the
right hand sat the Cardinal de Pelleve, who besides his being President of the
Clergy with the Archbishop of Lions, did likewise preside in the General
Assemblies in the absence of the Duke of Mayenne; the Duke of Feria sat upon
that on the left hand.

In the mean time the Catholic Royalists pressed the Conference so heartily,
that no private obstructions of the Duke of Feria, nor of the Sixteen, could
hinder but that some Deputies on either side agreed upon it. Being therefore
gone to take a view of some places about Paris, they chose that of Surene as
being less ruined then the rest. They met there upon the Nine and twentieth of
April, and took Paris, the Royalists remained upon the place.

Those waiting the return of the Duke of Mayenne who seemed loath to enter upon
this matter, let slip some Sessions without any proceedings, then adjourned the
Conference for eight days; notwithstanding a Truce or Suspension was agreed for
ten days. At first a difficulty arose which had like to break off all; those of
the League would not suffer that Rambouillet should be present, because the
Duchess of Guise accused him of having a hand in the death of her Husband;
Rambouillet on the contrary, insisted upon his staying since he was come,
fearing lest his exclusion should imply a tacit owning of what they charged him
with, and the Blood of that Prince be required of him and his Posterity. He
therefore positively denied the Fact and offered to purge himself by Oath: upon
which the Deputies of his Party stood up so resolutely for him that he was not
excluded.

It is very remarkable, that the King having heard how some did even charge him
with that death, took the pains to write a Discourse which was perused by the
chiefest he never was the Author of so tragical and so cursed a Council. He
instanced amongst other things, that the late King telling him how a great Man
who pushed him on to do that action, had in a Letter written to him on that
Subject put in these four Latin words, MORS CONRADINI, VITA CAROLI. He the
King of Navarre replied in the presence of many Persons of Honor still living,
Yes, but, Sir, this Party has not told you all the History, for the death of
Conradin The death of the Duke of Guise was that of Henry III.
, was the ruin of Charles.

For the particulars of what passed in the Conference at Surene, they are to be
seen in the Records that are published. The Archbishop of Lions, and he of
Bourges, made very Eloquent Discourses on either side, to show, the one that
they could not acknowledge an Heretical prince, the other that they ought to
obey him; and this last summoned the Leagued Catholics to join with them for
instructing and converting the King: but these stood stiff not to receive, nor
have any communication with him till he were truly converted, and the Pope had
received him into the bosom of the Church.

This Resolution expressed with great freedom and assurance brought over that
Prince who wavered before, in so much as he gave his positive word he would
become a Convert, to those Princes and Lords that were about him, and demanded
a Conference for his instruction: to which he invited all the most learned of
his own Party, and of those for the League to meet the Fifteenth of July; Not
that he pretended the performance of his promise should depend upon that, but
only as a ceremony and form becoming such an Act.

Spaniards, had then made the Proposition which they did a Month after in
behalf of the Duke of Guise, it is most certain that all had gone that way,
even in despite of the Duke of Mayenne, for he had not yet made his Faction
strong enough, as having been too long employed at Rheims.

He was newly come from thence, very melancholy, and dissatisfied with the
Princes of his own House, who were more vexed with him: so that they had parted
as irresolv'd and as much dis-united as ever, each of them with vast and
confused thoughts, and very little abilities to put them in execution.
Nevertheless there was enough to console him for his misfortunes, had he known
how to improve the opportunity; for the King apprehending the Estates might
nominate one before himself were Converted, offered to give him then, the same
advantages the Spaniards promised him only for the future.

He had no other aim when he consented to the Conferences but only to amuse the
Royalists: but the event was quite contrary, it gave the King great advantage.
The Seize on the one hand, and the Huguenots on the other, did in vain
endeavor to interrupt them, they were too much engaged: from Surene they were
transferred to la Raquete, then to la Villette. They ended and broke up in this
latter place, because the Leaguers would conclude on nothing more, but that
they referred the judgment of the Reduction of the King to the Authority of his
Holiness, who only, said they, had the power of opening the Gates of the Church
to him; and the other rejected this Proposition, because that would be to
submit the Crown of France to the disposal of the Pope.

During the time these Conferences held* the suspension of Arms was continued,
and brought the People to an absolute longing after Peace. The King having
observed this effect, would allow it no farther but for three days, but in
exchange offered a Truce of six Months. The Legate and Spaniards expressing
great aversion to it, the Duke of Mayenne durst not accept of it. The Spaniards
on their side having already suffered the Spirits of their Party to grow cool
in the Estates, disgusted them wholly by their odious Propositions: for
Mendozze labored to prove the right of the Infanta, and to demonstrate that
the Crown appertained to her. His discourse was very unacceptable: Feria
afterward imagining that they had rejected it because the French abhorred the
Government of a Woman, caused Tassis to propound, that the Catholic King would
Marry the Infanta to the Archduke Ernest, who should Reign jointly with her,
as if it would not have been more eligible to admit of one Stranger to sit in
the Throne of France then to crowd two in at the same time.

Mayenne to make him such answer French Prince, and that he would be pleased to
honor them with his Alliance by the Marriage of the Infanta to him. Now after
the Spaniards had spent some days in deliberating on this Proposition, Feria
replied by the Mouth of Tassis, that the King his Master would furnish them
with all the assistance they should desire, provided the Infanta were declared
Queen upon this condition she should Marry one of the French Princes whom that
King should choose, the House of Lorrain therein comprehended.

This Overture dazzled most of the Deputies, and if at that time the Ministers
of Spain, without so many Ceremonies, had but named one, the Assembly would
have agreed to it: but whilst they were standing upon their gravity, and
expected to be courted to what did n^ in any wise belong to them, this
opportunity slipped thorough their Fingers. Three Princes aspired to this
nomination, the Duke of Nemours, and the Duke of Guise, each for himself, the
Duke of Mayenne for his eldest Son; and sometimes when he found any difficulty,
he thought of proposing the Cardinal de Bourbon; then after diverse agitations
of mind, he found there could be no better Resolution taken then that which in
effect was worst of all, and that was to take none at all.

Whilst he floated amidst these Uncertainties, the Parliament of Paris being
Assembled upon the Rumor then on wing of the Election of the Infanta, made it
appear they are infallible when concerned for the Fundamental Laws of the
Monarchy, of which they have ever had a tender and useful care. For they made a
grand Decree, Ordaining, that Remonstrances should be made to the Duke of
Mayenne, that he would look to the maintaining of those Laws, and hinder the
Crown from being transferred to Strangers, and declared null and illegal all
Treaties that had already been, or might hereafter be made for that purpose, as
being contrary to the Salique Law. Conformably to this Decree, John le Maistre
who held the place of First President, went and delivered the Message boldly,
and showed him how the Government of Women in France, even that of Regents, had
never produced any thing but Blanch de Castille, and that of Catharine de
Medicis, the principal and almost the only cause of these last Troubles.

During these Transactions, the King causes Dreux to be besieged, he took the
Spaniards finding by the Decree of Parliament, and the loss of this City, that
the Affairs of the League were beginning to decline, did the more press them
for the Election of a King; and at last, in a Council they held with the Duke
of Mayenne, named the Duke of Guise. Never was any Man's astonishment like to
that of the Duke of Mayennes; the trouble of his Soul appeared thorough all the
coverings of dissimulation. His Wives indignation was greater yet then his, she
would have overturned all rather then obey that mere Boy, as she called the
Duke of Guise. In this pressing occasion, when he knew not what to reply,
Bassompierre found out an Expedient for him, which putting the business off for
a while, did in the end dash it utterly in pieces; and that was to demand eight
days time to give notice of it to the Duke of Lorrain his Master.

During this delay, the Duke of Mayenne set all his Engines at work, sometimes
with the Duke of Guise, to dissuade him from accepting this nomination, as a
thing ruinous both to him and all the House of Lorrain, sometimes with the
Spaniards, to let them know it was not yet the Season for it, and in fine, with
the Estates to incline them to his Sentiments. His attempts proved altogether
ineffectual upon the two first, especially the Spaniards; of whom it was
reported, they had endeavored to persuade the Duke of Guise his Nephew to kill
him, as being the only Remora to his Advancement. But as to the Estates, he
played his part so successfully amongst them, that they consented to the drawing
up an Answer the Twentieth day of July; By which the Duke and the Lorrain
Princes most humbly thanked the Catholic King for the honor he did their
House, protesting they would ever persevere in their acknowledgments and a
willingness to serve him, and declared they were ready to promise before the
Legate to persuade the Estates of the Kingdom to approve the said Election, when
there should be Forces sufficient to maintain it, and when they should have
agreed to such Conditions as were reasonable to be secured to the Chiefs of the
Party.

Hereupon great Contests arose between the Partisans of the Duke and those of
Spain, these requiring they should go on with the Election, the others that it
should be deferred. The Spaniards heard all without once opening their Mouths;
in the end finding their Votaries were fewer by a third part then the other,
they let go their hold. And which was more, the Duke, without any regard to
their Requests, concluded

Many Prelates, some Doctors, and even three Curats of Paris, (of whom one was
he of St. Eustache, named Rene Benoist) being sent for to St. Denis the Two and
twentieth of July, the King came thither the next day and entered into
Conference with them, to satisfy himself, as it were, of certain scruples yet
remaining touching de Bourbon was not so, that any other Bishop besides the
Pope, had right to give him Absolution; the contrary notwithstanding was
allowed, maugre his underhand dealings, and vehement Remonstrances. The
formulary of his Confession of Faith was drawn up, and the day appointed to
make it the following Sunday. Some Prelates out of an ignorant Zeal had thrust
in certain trifling things which were not very necessary: the King whose
judgment was solid, could not relish such trash; wherefore they pared away all
that was not essential to Faith; and yet they sent it as it was first drawn up
to the Pope, the better to persuade his Holiness of his entire Conversion.

The Ceremony was performed in St. Denis Church, by the Archbishop of Bourges,
as may be seen in the Memoirs of those times, seven or eight Bishops being
present and all the Grandees of his Court, even Gabriela d'Estree; who had not
a little contributed to the Conversion of the King, having already conceived
great hopes he would Marry her.

The same night all the Fields, from Montmartre (whither he went after Vespers
to visit the Church of the Holy Martyrs) to Pontoise, were enlightened by great
numbers of Bon-fires: which was soon after imitated by the Cities of the Royal
Party, and accompanied with Feastings, Dancings and all other Tokens and
Expressions of public Rejoicing. From that very day, the People of Paris
showed plainly it was purely their aversion to Huguenotisin had engaged them to
reject this Prince, for they ran forth in multitudes to this Ceremony,
notwithstanding the prohibition of the Duke of Mayenne, and on a sudden
changing that hatred they had for him into a real affection, began to call him
their King, and not the Bearnois, as they had hitherto done, scoffing at all
the declamations of their Preachers, who strove to make them persevere in their
former Sentiments.

The Duke of Mayenne rejoicing also, or pretending to rejoice at his
Conversion, Treated with him about a Truce for three Months; and both of them
agreed to send to the Pope to get his Absolution, without which the Duke would
by no means hearken to a Peace; His intentions an^ interests, as he protested,
being no other but to preserve the Catholic Religion, and Union with the Holy
See.

Immediately the King named the Duke of Nevers and four or five other Persons
of rare Merit, as well Churchmen, as some of the Robe, for this Negotiation,
and the Duke of Mayenne on his part chose the Cardinal de Joyeuse, and the
Baron de Senescay, but he dispatched them not till three Months after; and in
the mean time suffered himself, I know not how to be re-engaged with the
Spaniards by a new Oath he took, never to depart from the Holy Union, not to
Treat with the King of Navarre, whatever Act of a Catholic he should perform,
and to proceed to the Election of a most Christian King; upon Condition they
would furnish him with Twelve thousand Foot, six thousand Horse by them
maintained, and some other Conditions.

But at the same time, fearing lest they should contrive some new Projects with
the Estates, he sent part of the Deputies back into the Provinces, under color
of informing the People of the present posture of Affairs. As for the residue
of this Assembly, they remained in Paris till the Reduction of the City, being
maintained by the King of Spain, who allowed them Eight thousand Crowns a Month.

He could not so easily get off from the Le^a s instances, who demanded the
Council of Trent might be received entire by the Gallican Church. Although the
Parliament and the Chapters opposed it, he was fain to give him this
satisfaction by a Declaration, which was delivered to the Estates: but he
eluded the Execution, having first drawn this Assurance from him, That if there
were any thing relating to the Immu^ities and the Franchises of the Kingdom
that ought to be maintained, his H^liness being required to allow the sim^,
should make no denial or difficulty.

A^ercoeur raise his Sie^e of Most o nour, drew the Royalists from that of
Poitiers, which B^issac most valiantly defende^, and ^reed the Ca tle of
Cavours from the Duke of Savoy: This Prince had been handled very ill by
L^sdiguieres, and had likewise the misfortune some Months before to lose
Roderick de Toledo General of the Milanese and Neapolitan Forces sent him by
the King of Spain, who was utterly defeated and slain at the descent of the
Mountain which extends toward the Douere near the Village of Salbeltran.

Espernon had missed of surprising Marseille, but reduced Arles, and from
thence came the Five and twentieth of June to encamp before Aix: where he built
on the Hill St. Eutrope which commands the Town, a great Fort, or rather a
Camp; for the circumference was so vast, that his whole Army lodged in it. It
seemed also as if he would make it a Counter-City, having created two Consuls
who wore Hoods and managed the Government of it.

He thinking to force Aix by this means, did not punctually observe the Truce,
but doubled the Garrison in his Fort, and continued to stop all their
Provisions. The King who could ill suffer that a Man he did not love, should
establish himself by force in that Province, made up a private Party to
dispossess him. He chose Les^iguieres to be the Head, and joined six Gentlemen
of Provence with him, Oraison, St. Cannat, Valavoire, Crotes, and Buoux, who
were Governors of the places of Manosque, Pertuis, St. Maximin, Digne and
Forcalquier.

The absence of the Duke d'Espernon, who was gone to Pezenas in Languedoc, to
confer with the Constable de Montmorency, and the hatred the Provenceaux bare
against him, did marvellously favor their Enterprise. As soon as Lesdiguieres
had sent to, de Carces, excepting Buoux who refused to open his Commission and
remained in the Dukes Service. The day appointed, all by consent, drove out the
Gascons and the Espernouists from their places; and the Count de Carces and
those of Aix broke the Truce.

Escarrevaques and Souliers his Father in Law, did likewise stir up the People
of Toulon, and besieged the Citadel, which they took by the help of two hundred
Slaves, Signarc who commanded there, fell by the Sword with all his Garrison:
but Esgarrevaques his Enemy, was first wounded by a Musket Shot of which he
died.

Upon the rumor of this Rising, Tarascon, and almost all the other Towns
declared against Espernon: nothing was wanting to complete the Enterprise but
to shut up his Passage by the Rhosne and the Durance, so that he should not
have been able to return into the Country: but they not minding to give Orders
for it in due time, he got again into his Fort, and became strong enough to
make them feel the smart of their imprudence.

When the Truce above mentioned was concluded, the greater part of the Prelates,
Counselors of State, and such as were of the Parliament, nay even some of the
Deputies of the Estates, had secretly tendered their Respects to the King,
either Personally or by the mediation of some Friends. While the King was
hovering about Paris, one day the Seven and twentieth of August he being at
Melun, they happily discovered an Assassin Suborned by some Leaguers, who had
undertaken to kill him with a Knife. His name was Peter Barriere a Native of
Orleans, Aged Twenty de l'Hostel made his Process: there was not sufficient
proof against him, and the Torture of the Rack could not force him to own any
thing: but the Confessor who stood by him at his death, prevailed with him to
discover all. He was condemned to have his Hand cut off holding the Knife in
it, his Flesh to be torn with red hot Pincers, then broken alive, and after he
was dead, to be burnt, and his Ashes scattered in the Air.

The King had frequent notice of the like Conspiracies, most part contrived by
Monks or Churchmen: and therefore a Peace was the only Sovereign Remedy that
could allay the madness of so many Frantic Spirits, he most earnestly desired
to compass it, and offered the Duke of Mayenne, quite ruined as he was, greater
advantages yet then he had done when his Affairs were most flourishing: but
that Duke would not Treat till the Pope had given the King Absolution; and
besides he had not Strength enough to break those Bonds the Spaniards had cast
upon him; he Treated therefore at the same Instant both with the King and with
them.

Lions Burgundy, imagining perhaps that he of the two Kings with whom he should
agree, might leave him that Country in Sovereignty. His Brother the Duke of
Nemours, was become very absolute in that Government, having begirt and
over-awed that great City by five or six places he held about it: but by the
same means, and by reason of certain new Imposts which he laid by Advice of a
Ferrarese, a Fellow of a seared Conscience, he became most odious to the
People; In so much that the Archbishop of Lions sent thither by the Duke of
Mayenne, having underhand heightened their Discontents, and blown the Coals,
carried it on so far that the Citizens took up Arms, and seized on the Person
of the Duke of Nemours confining him to Pierre-Encise; but he got nothing by
it: for they afterward stood Neuters, not submitting to any Orders but their
own, till their entire Reduction, although for form-sake they owned him as
Lieutenant to the Duke of Mayenne.

People of honest Principles judged Nemours worthy to be so used, for his
having Machiavel, which makes Princes become Tyrants, and the People Miserable:
but all the Heads of the League perceiving by this President what usage they
were to expect from the Duke of Mayenne, did now study nothing but the best
methods to secure their own Places, and to surprise others to make the better
Accommodation with the King.

Normandy to receive Bose-Rose (who commanded the Fort of Fescamp) to his
obedience. While he was at Diepe, the Wife of John de Montluc Balagny Governor
of Cambray, came to him by night to demand a prolongation of the Truce, till
the Agreement with her Husband should be declared. He Treated upon these
Conditions, That he and his should have Cambray, and Cambresis in full
Sovereignty; That the King should take him into his Protection, and should
allow him certain Pensions; and for this Balagny should acknowledge him only by
kissing his Hand.

The joy this brought him, was soon disturbed by those bloody Reproaches the
Queen of England made him for his change of Religion. When from Diepe he went
to Calais, thinking to find some Agents from that Queen to begin a Treaty, he
met nothing but Letters from her full of bitterness, and found she would recall
her Forces out of Bretagne.

He had much ado to pacify her, but much more to endure the presence and
overfree Discourses of the Deputies from the pretended Reformed Churches, whom
he had allowed to hold a General Assembly at Mantes, whither he returned at his
departure from Calais. He looked kindly upon them, received their Memorial,
named Commissioners to examine it, and offered them satisfaction upon some
Articles, such or very near, as they had already had under Henry III. But they
could not be contented with so little a Reward, for so great Services as they
had rendered him, they demanded much more: so that not to exasperate them by an
absolute denial,

His Conversion undermined the League to the very Foundation; It was now looked
upon, if we may so express it, only as a Castle in the Air, supported but by
one single Stone, viz. the Popes denial to give him Absolution. In effect, his
Holiness would not suffer the Duke of Nevers to enter into Rome (which was in
November) Italy, not of Ambassador, and upon condition he should remain there
but two days, that he should receive no Visits, nor make any to the Cardinals.
This Prince however contrived it so that the Term was prolonged, and he had
Audience twice of the Pope, the first time in December, the other in January:
but brought thence no satisfaction for the King, though as to his own Person,
they gave him as much and more then he desired.

The Duke of Mayenne failed not to talk high upon this refusal of his Holiness:
However this was not a reason strong enough to withold such as were already
inclining toward the King, and falling off from the League. Lewis de
L'Hospital Vitry was discontented, for that the said Duke detained four and
twenty thousand Crowns due upon Musters to his Company of Gentsdarmes; This Man
was the first who returned to his obedience, as he had been the first that left
the King after the death of Henry III. When he forsook that Party formerly, he
was Governor of Dourlens, which place he left to them, and made a show as if he
would have done the like by Meaux now to the League, telling the Inhabitants,
whom he expressly called together, that he freely left them to their own
liberty, only his Advice was they should follow his Example. This said, he went
forth with his Troop of Horse: but had so well disposed of Affairs beforehand,
that they deputed some to him the same day to desire he would come back, put on
their White Scarfs, and turned away Five hundred Men (much amazed) whom the
Duke of Mayenne had sent thither. Vitry had Twenty thousand Crowns Reward of
the King, the Office of Bailiff, and Governor of the City, with the Reversion
of both for his Son, and the Bourgeois the confirmation of their Privileges,
and an exemption from Tailles for nine years.

All other Governors bargained for more or less, according to the importance of
their Places, or the quality of their Persons. Most of the Cities got likewise
several Advantages, accordingly as those that directed them were Politic or
Affectionate:

Paris, and to this purpose he came to St. Denis. The Duke of Mayenne having
got some hint of de Belin and gave it to Brissac, whom he believed the most
faithful of all his Partisans. The Parliament finding by this their Measures
broken, and apprehending the Duke would make the Spaniards Masters of the City,
spoke warmly to him that they might keep Belin: the Duke urged some Reasons to
the contrary, but those satisfied not, and they continued their Assemblies. The
business grew hot to such a degree that the Duke made his Soldiers and Friends
take up Arms, whence would have followed most grievous Slaughter in the
Streets, and perhaps the utter loss of Paris to the King, had not the wisest of
that great Body, temporised and persuaded the rest to give way yet for a while.

The Third day of the Month of January happened the Reduction of the City of Aix.
The Duke of Mayenne did not think there had been any place more assured to his
Party then this same, because the Count de Carces had Married a Daughter of his
Wives, nevertheless this Lord failed him. Being thereto disposed by the
Gentlemen Provenceaux who had declared themselves Enemies to the Duke
d'Espernon, and withal fearing the event of a Siege, he resolved to choose a
Master that should be sufficiently able to protect them; and thereupon
persuaded the General Council of the Province to acknowledge the King, and to
beseech him at the same time to give them another Governor then Espernon.

The Parliament therefore Ordained the same day that all Acts of Justice should
be done in the Name of the King; and by any another Decree made some days
after, declared Rebels, and guilty of High Treason whoever would not obey him.
The Archbishop Genebrard refused to submit, and having kept himself concealed
ten or twelve days, retired to Marseilles with the Duke of Mayennes Agent.

After this Example, Lions which ever since the imprisonment of the Duke of
Nemours, had kept it self as Neutral, declared also for the Kings Party. The
Eschevins and principal Citizens having made their Treaty with Alfonso
d'Ornano, and received an assurance of the confirmation of their Privileges,
an entire Amnesty, and that there should be no Exercise but of the Catholic
Religion in their City and Suburbs. The Five and twentieth of January, d'Ornano
being advanced with his de la Guillotiere, they set up Barricado's, and cried
out, Let the French Liberty live! Down with the Tyranny of the Italians. The
next day they all with one Voice shouted and cried, Vive le Roy; and all the
Inhabitants, Men, Women, and Children, put on white Scarfs. Now having found
amongst the Dukes Papers no less then seventeen new Imposts of the Italian
invention, which he would have laid on them, had they not surprised him, as was
before related, they prudently Ordained in a General Assembly of their
Town Hall, (and made every Member Swear

The Fifteenth of February, Orleans followed the same dance, la Chastre being
Berry, from whence in favor to him all the Garrisons were to be dismissed,
excepting those in the Tower of Bourges, and the Castle of Meun upon Yeure.
There were two Factions in the City which wholly divided it, the Fraternity of
the small Cord, otherwise called by the name of Jesus, invented by a Cordelier,
a Zealous Leaguer: and the Politics who inclined to the King. To execute his
design he strengthened himself with the last, secured the leading Men of the
other Faction, or turned those out of Town he could not gain; after these
Precautions, he declared the Seventeenth of February in the Town Hall the
intention he had to submit to the King, and exhorted the Inhabitants to follow
his Example, or suffer him to retire. So soon as he had finished his Harangue,
the Bishop and principal Persons gave him most humble Thanks for procuring
their Reconciliation with their Natural Sovereign, and protested they would
embrace his Resolution. They then read the Articles granted by the King, which
were Ratified with all the Signs and Expressions of Joy.

Bourges did the same within few days after, and upon the same Conditions. The
presence of the Duke of Mayenne retained Paris: and till that vast Body were
disposed for so great a Mutation, the King employed his time in his Coronation,
as well to remove that Scruple the Ancient Customs of the French imprinted in
the minds of many, that this being wanting he could not assume the Title of
King of France, as to convince the People more and more that he was thoroughly
persuaded of the Religion of his Ancestors.

Now because he had not yet the City of Reims in his possession, nor the
Saint Ampoule, (the Holy Oil) which is there kept in the Abbey of St. Remy, he
made choice of Nostre-Dame Church of Chartres, most famous for her Devotion to
the Virgin, and from the Abbey of Marmoustier caused a Viol to be brought, said
to be that which Severus Sulpicius and Fortunate Bishop of Poitiers, in their
Writings affirm to have been brought by an Angel to the great St. Martin, to
restore his Limbs battered by a fall from top to bottom of a pair of Stairs.
The Twenty seventh of February, Nicholas de Thou Bishop of Chartres performed
the Ceremony after the same manner as it had wont to be at Reims.

Mayenne saw his Party drop off hourly one after another without Paris about
the end of the last year, and with whom he had held Council without calling in
the Spaniards) did surrender this present year to the Paris the Sixth of March,
and took his Wife and Children with him, many suspected he had agreed with the
King, and that he only seemed to remain in that Party to prevent those that
were of the Spanish Faction from giving up that City to Strangers in some fit
of despair.

He could not be ignorant how Brissac Treated with the King, and that he
pretended cause of discontent, for that he had not given him satisfaction upon
the Duke of Elboeufs turning him out of Poitiers, after he the last year so
bravely defended it against the Royalists. All was in readiness for above two
Months past to receive the King at Paris: but the Seize (or Sixteen) seconded
by the Spanish Garrison, and four thousand of the Rabble, to whom the Ambassador
of Spain gave each a Rixdoller per week, and a proportion of Wheat, did so
narrowly observe him that he could not put his design in execution: It is said,
likewise, that having discovered it they were resolved to prevent him, and to
rid themselves of those that were most active in assisting him: These were,
amongst others, the President le Maistre l'Huillier Prevost des Merchands, du
Vair a Counselor, and l'Anglois an Eschevin or Sheriff.

These being Sagacious Men, and having a desire to save their Country, not to
bring it under oppression, forgot not, before they proceeded farther, to have a
particular and express assurance from the King; That no manner of Violence
should be done to any one Inhabitant of the City, neither in Body or Goods;
That he should give a general Indemnity without any exception; That he should
take them all into his Protection; And as for the Strangers, That he should let
them go Scot-free with Bag and Bagage.

The Orders given for the night between the One and two and twentieth of March,
to seize upon the Ramparts and Gates, the King who had drawn his Troops
together at St. Denis, came to Montmartre. The only difficulty remaining with
Brissac, was to shake off those Spaniards the Duke of Feria had allotted to
accompany him in going the Rounds, with Order to kill him upon the first noise
they should hear from without: but they were not so crafty in contriving
pretenses not to leave him, as he was in forging excuses to send them off.

When he had rid himself of them, in less then half an hour the Kings Forces
entered, one part by the Porte-Neuve and the Port St. Denis, another Party
descended along the River, and made themselves Masters of the Ramparts on that
side, as also of the Arsenal, the Grand Chastellet, the Palais, and the Avenues
to the Bridges, Lansquenets, who School-Key for not crying Vive le Roy. The
Bourgeois likewise secured their Quarters, and Pad-lock'd up the Doors of the
most Zealous Leaguers, lest they should come forth to disturb them, placed
Courts of Guards at the Quarrefours, (or Corners of meeting Streets) and
marched thorough all the Town with Vive le Roy in their Mouths, and Bills of
general Pardon in their Hands which they distributed to all they met. The
Populace followed the Soldiery and mixed familiarly with them; the Spanish and
Walloon Garrisons did not stir out of Doors.

The King being within two hundred paces of the City, Brissac brought and
delivered up the Keys to him, and in Recompense received the Mareschals Staff,
and a promise of being made an Honorary Counselor in Parliament, of
considerable advantage in those days. About Ten in the Morning, being informed
all was very quiet, and that his Forces were in Battalia in all the Markets and
spacious Streets, he entered into the City by the Newgate, accompanied by great
numbers of the Nobless and his Companies d'Ordonnance, and went directly to
Nostre-Dame to hear Mass, and sing the Te Deum, commanding Five hundred Men to
march before him with their Pikes trailing, as signifying this Victory was
voluntary.

Some Mutineers having made a show of resistance, fled and hid themselves at
home. Before it was Noon, all the City was in admiration to find they were in
as much quiet as ever they had been in the profoundest Peace, and by that were
fully confirmed in the esteem they had of the more then ordinary goodness and
wise Conduct of their King. He found his Dinner completely ready at the Louvre,
and his whole House in as good order as if he had resided there a long time. He
sent to offer Safe Conduct to the Duke of Feria and the Spaniards, and Ordered
a Party of Horse to Convoy them to the Arbre de Guise.

About three in the Afternoon they marched forth by the Gate St. Denis, the
King looking out of a Window to see them. Their Colors were furled, and their
Drums covered, carrying along with them some off-cast Prostitutes, and about
thirty passionate Leaguers. The most Zealous was Boucher Curate of St. Benoist,
who died Dean of Tournay above Fifty years after, but much changed in humor,
being as great a French Zealot amongst Strangers, as he had been furiously
Spanuolized in France.

When the King entered into Paris, he sent St. Luc to assure the Cardinals de
Piacenza and de Pelleve, and the Dutchesses of Nemours and Montpensier, that
they should receive no injury, in testimony whereof he allowed them some of his
Guards: but the Cardinal de Pelleve had no need of it, for he resigned his Soul
in the Hostel of Sens while they were singing the To Deum. The King did not
refuse the Cardinal de Piacenza a Safe Conduct, though he had acted with so
much passion against him; he even suffered him to take along the Jesuit Verade,
and Aubry Curate of St. Andre dez Ars, though guilty of the detestable attempt
of Barriere.

du Bourg surrendered the Bastille, and Beau-lieu the Bois de Vincennes; and at
the end of the eighth, the King ordered a general Procession, where he assisted
in Person with his whole Court, to render Thanks to God for his having restored
to him the Capital City of his Kingdom.

It was not thought necessary to wait the return of the Parliament at Tours to
verify the Declaration which reestablished those who were remaining in Paris,
as also another granted in favor of Brissac and the City of Paris. The
Direction or Address, was after an extraordinary manner, To the Chancellor and
other Officers of the Crown, Dukes, and Pairs, Counselors of State, and
Masters of Requests, to Read, Publish, and Register them in the Registry of the
Parliament, and other the Sovereign Courts.

Those who had served the King in this important Reduction, were not left
without Rewards. The Parliament being re-established, the King made a new
Presidentship for le Maistre, he also created one in the Chamber des Comptes
for l'Huillier, and two of Masters of Requests for du Vair and l'Anglois.
Honest and dis-interessed People said, that if their intentions were purely to
serve the King and the Public,

To obliterate, as much as it was possible the sorrowful remembrances of what
was past, Peter Pithou Counselor in Parliament, had order to raze out of the
Registers in Court all such Acts as had been forged during the Troubles against
the Kings Authority; John Seguier de Autry Lieutenant Civil, caused all Libels
to be burnt, with severe Prohibition either to Print any more, or keep any by
them; And the Parliament having changed their Style, made a Decree the
Thirtieth of this Month, Which vacated and disannulled all Decrees, Judgments,
and Oaths, made since the Ninth day of December 1588. which should be found any
ways prejudicial to the Kings Authority and the Laws of the Kingdom, as having
been extorted by force* Declared null all that had been done against the Honor
of King Henry III. and Ordained Information should be made of the detestable
Parricide committed on his Person; Abolished all Feasts and Solemnities the
League had instituted upon occasion of the late Troubles; Revoked the Power and
Authority given to the Duke of Mayenne; Enjoined him, and all others to
acknowledge the King; And commanded a yearly general Procession to be made upon
the Two and twentieth of March, in remembrance of the Reduction of Paris,
whereat that Court to be present in their Scarlet Robes.

To the Authority of Parliament they joined that of the University, thoroughly
Renauld de Beaulne newly promoted to the Archbishopric Sens, called first an
Assembly of the Curates of Paris, who unanimously Navarre the Two and twentieth
of April: where the Rector, all his Deputies, and a great number of Scholars
and Religious Votaries of all Orders, Swear to be faithful to the King even to
the shedding of their Blood, renounced all Leagues, and retrenched the
Refractory from their Bodies, as spurious and rotten Members.

The same week returned the Members of Parliament and other Companies who were
at Tours. The Governor of Paris, (this was Francis d'O whom the King had
restored to that Command) a great number of the Nobility, and the most noted
Citizens, went to meet them as far as Bourg-la-Reyne. Thus all were reunited
without trouble to any Man, unless it were about some fifty Persons, to whom
the King sent Tickets to quit the Town. These were most notorious People,
nevertheless many others took so hot an alarm upon it, that it was like to have
produced very ill effects.

Paris thus reduced, the other Cities came in with so much haste as if striving
to precede each other. The Six and twentieth of April, Villars brought in
Rouen, Havre, Montivilliers, and Pont-Audemer: but of all the Chiefs of the
League he set the highest price upon what he did, and would abate nothing of
Twelve hundred thousand Livers in Money, sixty thousand Livers Pension, the
Government of all those Cities, without owning (for three years time) the Duke
of Montpensier, who had that of the Province, and the Office of Admiral. Biron
having this, it could not be taken from him without wounding his very Heart,
and that the more deeply, for that Villars was his Concurrent both in Valor
and Reputation.

May-David returned to his Duty with the City of Verneuil. As also the
Magistrates and Bourgeois brought in Monstreuil and Abbeville in Picardy.
Troyes in Champagne after they had forced out the Prince of Joinville the
Governonor, Sens in Burgundy, and Rion in Auvergne. Montluc Governor for the
League in Agenois, brought in Again, Villeneuve, and Marmanda.

During this Torrent of Prosperities, the King had information that Count
Mansfeld, after a Conference which the Duke of Mayenne held with him, had
besieged la Capelle, and going to relieve it, found it at the last gasp; He had
his revenge upon the City of Laon. The Duke had left his second Son in it with
the President Jeannin as his chief Council and Adviser. The King besieged it
about the end of May, the Enterprise was hazardous for him, he wanted
Ammunitions, and the discontent of the Marshall de Biron, who was the Soul of
his Enterprises, were a Remora. Mansfeld approached to relieve it, his Army was
posted upon la Fere, defeated, he retired into Artois, where Sickness
completed the ruin of his Forces.

The Place defended it self yet a long time and very obstinately, not
capitulating till the Two and twentieth of July, to surrender upon the First of
August, if they were not relieved by that day. In the Attacks Givry was slain,
the most accomplished Cavalier of the whole Court, both for his Heroic Valor,
his skill in all Polite Learning, his ready wit and ingenious gallantry. An
Amorous despair occasioned

During this Siege, the Baron de Pesche Treated with the King for the Town of
Chasteau-Thierry, and the Inhabitants of Poitiers for theirs, the Government of
it and of the Provinces were left to the Duke d'Elboeuf. After the Capitulation
of Laon, the Magistrates of Amiens, Bea^vais, and Peronne, alarmed for that the
Spanish Cabal would have engaged them to take a new Oath, returned to their
Duty, those of Amiens having forced the Dukes of Mayenne and Aumale to quit
their City. Dourlens, which in the Reign of Henry III. had been given as a
place of security to the Duke of Aumale, would needs be comprehended in the
Edict of the Reduction of Amiens.

September the King laid Siege to Noyon; Descluseaux who commanded within, gave
it up the Eighteenth of October. Thus he recovered all Picardy, excepting three
places, Soissons, Ham, and la Fere; which were in the power, the first of the
Duke of Mayenne, the second the Duke of Aumale, and the third of the Spaniards.
For Colas, Vice-seneschal of Montelimar who was Master of this last, had given
himself up entirely to them; and in Recompense they gave him the Demaine with
the Title of a County.

Paris to re-imbroil the Kingdom. The greatest part of the Royalist Lords were
angry that the Leaguers carried away most of the Money and the best Rewards;
they repented likewise the having dispatched and advanced the Kings Affairs so
soon, that he was now almost in a Condition not to want their further help. The
Parisians were more alarmed at the fifty Persons he had banished the City, then
they could be assured by all his Declarations; The Cardinal de Bourbon could
not put the ambitious-pleasing imagination of a Crown out of his thoughts; The
Count de Soissons his Brother was wounded to the very Soul, because the King
refused to let him have his Sister, after he had most solemnly promised it; and
Biron afflicted and discontented they had deprived him of Paris: where he met
with so kind a Reception, that the King conceived some jealousy, and ran
thither from the Siege of Laon, that by his presence he might dissipate those
practices which possibly they would have carried on against his Interest.

As for the Cardinal of Bourbon, death put an end to his aspiring hopes, and
the Kings fears, soon after, about the end of July. He believed he was poisoned
by October following Francis d'O Sur-Intendant des Finances, ended his life in
his Hostel at Paris, his Soul and Body being equally corrupted by all sorts of
Villainy. The King was easily consoled for his loss, because he made prodigious
devastations, and yet held him as it were under Tutelage. After this he for a
time ordered his revenue to be managed by four or five in Commission: but
finding no satisfaction in a multitude (still disagreeing and self-interessed)
he restored the Sur-Intendance, and gave it to Sancy and Rosny.

While the Chiefs and the Cities of the League were pressing their surrender to
the King that they might be at ease, the Peasants and Commons of the upper
Guyenne rose and took up Arms, to defend themselves from the plundrings of the
Nobility, and the cruel vexations of Tax-gatherers. They gave them the
nickname of Tard-Advisez Or advised too late.
, and they again retorted the appellation of Croquants Or Gluttons, etc.
, because in effect they feed upon and devoured the poor Country People. Their
first Rendezvous was in Limosin: Chambret who was Governor there for the King,
beat and dispersed them. Those of Angoulmois who endeavored to do the same,
were likewise scattered by Massez the Kings Lieutenant in that Country. But it
was not so facile to appease those of Perigord. A Country Notary first brought
them together in the Forest of Absac, within a League of Limiel: and they
afterward had diverse other Assemblies, where they increased to the number of
Forty thousand. The Marshall de Matignon enervated their whole Strength by
inveigling from amongst them all such as had born Arms, of whom he formed
several Companies and sent them into Languedoc; the King allayed the rest of
the Storm by remitting the remainder of their Tailles.

Bretagne and Burgundy were yet standing out, not having submitted to the King.
We may say one part of Provence also, for he thought it worse in the hands of
Espernon then in those of the League. The Inhabitants of Laval introduced the
Marshall d'Aumont into their City. Lesonnot Governor of Concarneaux treated
with him, Talhouet soon after did the same for Redon; and made himself Master
of Morlaix by the assistance of the Bourgeois, and of the Castle after a long
Siege. There were five thousand Spaniards in the Province commanded by one Don
Juan d'Aquila, and the Duke of Mercoeur had three thousand very good Men; so
that if they could have agreed together, they would have been stronger then the
Royalists: but the jealousy of those two Nations, and the peeks between the
two Chiefs rendered them incompatible.

Aquila refused to join with the Duke to relieve the Castle; the Duke did the
same when Aumont had besieged the Fort of Crodon, which the Spaniards had built
with great expense upon the point de la Langue, which divides the Gulf of
Conquet, and commands it. Before this Quinpercorentin (being only invested) had
surrendered to the Marshall, and soon after the Town of St. Malo perfected
their Treaty; wherein her Merchants made it appear they were neither ignorant
in their Interests, nor in their Politics.

As for Provence, the King durst not overtly set aside the Duke of Espernon, as
well because of the Intelligence he might contract with Spain and Savoy, as
because of his Alliances with the Marshall de Bouillon, the Duke de la
Trimouille and Ventadour, who besides were very much discontented; and even
with the Constable de Montmorency (I call him so, for the Sword was given him
the precedent year.) He therefore only sent for him to come to Court, to do
equal Justice upon his and the Countries Complaints. But the said Duke having
four thousand Men lent him by the Constable, and five and twenty hundred which
himself had raised, he returns into his Fort, and held the City of Aix by the
throat, as he did the Count de Carces, and the Parliament, exercising his
revenge upon all those that fell into his hands.

Lesdiguieres moved by their re-iterated cries, quitted the Affairs of Savoy to
go and succor them. He passed the River of Durance at Ourgon, and entrenched
himself Senas. Espernon came bravely forth to meet him, and tried him by great
Skirmishes: but could not stop his march, for the Constable would not risque
his Men, but even withdrew them quite.

This Lord, who after a long Series of Troubles and Crosses was become huge
Circumspect, found it much safer to make himself a Mediator, then a Party in a
Cause, wherein it was to be feared the King would declare. He therefore
procured a Truce for three Months, during which time, the Fort was deposited in
the hands of Lafin, a perpetual Negociator. Lafin had undertaken to put three
hundred Men in Garrison there to keep it in Sequestration. Lesdiguieres found
means to slip in a great many Soldiers that belonged to him amongst those
others: so that by his invention the Fort was in his disposition. Being
therefore one day, the Eleventh of July, gone Aix, as if to fetch a walk, he
approaches insensibly to the Fort, and when he was near enough; commands the
Captain in the name of the King, to give it up that it might be razed. He no
sooner spoke but the Garrison set open the Gates to him in despite of the
Captain; and at the same time he abandons the said Fort to the Provencaux, who
in less then two days ruined that vast work which the Spanish

That done he returned into Daufine, apprehending the great preparations for
War the Duke of Savoy was making. Lesdiguieres had taken several little places
in his Country: This Prince having regained them all during his absence, did
also take Briqueras even in his sight, making good use in this Enterprise of
the Milanese Forces Burgundy.

Noyon, to visit his Frontiers of Champagne, (this was in the Month of
November) agreed to a Peace with the Duke of Lorrain, who had endeavored to
make it above a twelvemonth before by Bassompiere. He promised this Duke to do
right to him, and his Children, as to the Succession of Catharine de Medicis
their Grandmother; without prejudice to what the Duke pretended, as well in his
own behalf as theirs, to the Dutchies of Bretagne and Anjou, and the Counties
of Provence, Blois and Coucy. He left the propriety of Marsal to him, and to
his Successors, the Cities of Dun and Stenay in exchange of Jamets, which the
Duke rendered to France. And moreover promised him the Government of Toul and
Verdun for one of his Sons, and to the Brother of that Son that should survive
him. Bassompiere had the Lands of Vaucouleurs engaged to him for an old Debt of
Sixty eight thousand Crowns, and for thirty six thousand more he lent in ready
Money to the Treasury.

In the same Month of November was in like manner concluded the Treaty between
the Duke of Guise and the King: who by this means retrieved likewise the Cities
in Champagne which were yet in the Leaguers hands. Some Months before, this
young Prince having none that were considerable in his absolute disposal, had
secured himself of Rheims after this manner. St. Pol, a Creature of his
Fathers, and who saved his Life the day before the Barricado's, mastered this
Town by means of a Redoubt he had built at the Gate called Mars, and pretended
by this piece and some others which he held, to make the King confirm his
Mareschals Staff to him. The Duke who would needs get this prey to make his own
Composition the better, quarreled with him one day in the Streets of Rheims,
and ran his Sword into his Belly. By his death he became Master of Rheims, and
having withal the Cities of Rocry, St. Dizier, and Ginville, he procured a
very advantageous Treaty. For they gave him four hundred thousand Crowns in
Silver, the Government of those Places, besides that of Provence; The last not
so much to gratisie him as to dispossess Espernon, and perhaps that they might
ruin one another thereby.

Burgundy, which hitherto had remained almost entirely for the Duke of Mayenne,
began to give him the slip. Auxerre, Mascon, and Avalon, broke his Bonds. Dijon
and Beaulne were upon the point to do the same when he flew thither with his
Light Horse. Now perceiving he could contain them no longer by fair, he used
foul means and severity, caused in Dijon the Heads of James Vernes, who was the
Mayor, to be ^ut off, and Captain Gau's, razed the Suburbs of Beauln^, doubled
the Garrison, Spaniards to make a sudden War on that side.

Mere necessity kept him yet in Confederacy with those dangerous Friends. He
knew the Duke of Feria and Diego d'Ibarra imputed all this decadency of Affairs
to his treachery, which could indeed be justly imputed to nothing but his
slowness and irresolution; He knew they hated him so mortally, that when he
went to the Archduke Ernestus, after the Siege of Laon, they had deliberated
to take off his Head as a Traitor, and seeing the Archdukes Council would not
concur in that point, they had essayed to rid their hands of him by Poison, or
by Poniard.

And, indeed, some imagined it was he who first, to revenge himself for their
unhandsom Treatments, possessed the Kings Council, by such Friends as he had
amongst them, with the design of declaring War against them, and that he had
privately made his Treaty with the King. However it were, the Party was strong
enough in Council to persuade him to a Rupture. The Huguenots desired it out of
that perfect hatred they still bear to the Spaniards: The Catholics to divert
the Huguenots from their Contrivances; by giving them this satisfaction, and
such Employments as would have been improper to entrust them withal upon any
other Service. The honest Frenchmen to unite all hearts together, revive their
affections for their Country, and consound all the remainders of Factions and
Cavils about Religion, in the more zealous prosecution of this common Quarrel.
The Politics, in fine, to make a strong Revulsion without, of that Venom which
caused so much mischief within, and to employ the Enemies of the Kingdom in
quenching a Fire at their own homes, in stead of suffering them to blow the
Coals continually in France.

It was therefore resolved in the Kings Council to carry the War into their
Country; and because Hainault and Artois were known to lie the most exposed to
that ruin which must follow upon a Rupture between the two Crowns, it was
judged fit to write to the principal Cities of those Provinces, that if they
could not prevail with the King of Spain to withdraw his Forces out of the
Territories of France, and if they did not forbear to make War upon his
Subjects and the Cambresians, whom he had taken into his protection, he was
resolved quickly to make them feel the weight of his Arms.

It is held that three Persons did more especially inspire the King with this
design; Gabrielle d'Estree his Mistress, Balagny, and the Marshall de
Bouillon. Gabrielle that Franche-Compte for her Son Caesar, Balagny that he
might Hainault and Artois, the Marshall for two ends, the one to maintain
himself in the Seigneury of Sedan, the other to give an opportunity to Prince
Maurice of Nassaw his Brother in Law, to fix his Grandeur by securing the
liberty of the United-Provinces. For we must know that Charlote de le Mark, the
Mareschals Wife, happening to die some Months before without Children, he
retained that Principality, by virtue, said he, of a Testamentary Donation she
had made to him, and the acquisition of the right of the Duke of Montpensier,
and had very lately betroathed Elizabeth the Sister of Prince Maurice.

He vaunted of having Correspondents ready to spring their Mines in the Country
of Luxembourg, Balagny promised to make a great breach in Artois, and Sancy was
positively confident of prevailing with the Swiss to Conquer the
Franche-Compte. The Duke of Lorrain, too, offered toward this Expedition four
thousand Men commanded by Tremblecour and Aussonville. In effect they did enter
the Comte at the very beginning of the following year: but it was against his
interest and contrary to his intention. Neither did they do any thing but make
some incursions very ruinous to the poor People, except it were their taking
the little Towns of Vezou, Luxeu, and Jonville.

Artois, imagining to have had some good success there: the severity of the
Winter brought him back to Paris, and almost to a tragical death. For the same
day he arrived (which was the Seven and twentieth of December) at six in the
Evening, while he was in his Mistresses Chamber at the Hostel du Bouchage, and
stepped forward to embrace Montigny, he received a stroke with a Knife on the
lower Lip which broke one of his Teeth.

Immediately they seized upon a young Fellow who was thrusting into the Crowd,
and by his scared Countenance they knew it must be he had made the attempt. His
name was John Chastel, Son of a Woolen-Draper dwelling before the great Gate of
the Palais, aged about Nineteen years, a melancholy Spirit, who said in his
Interrogatories; That he was prompted to commit this Crime, because finding
himself laden with heinous and unpardonable Sins, and imagining he could not
avoid the Torments of Hell, he had thought at least to diminish them by this
attempt; which he believed to be a Meritorious Act, for that, said he, the King
not being reconciled to the Church, could be naught but a Tyrant. He confessed
likewise that he had made his Exercises in the College of Clermont under the
Jesuits, and that

This disposition added to the injurious Libels against Henry III. and against
the King now Reigning, found in the Chamber of John Guignard one of the Fathers
of the Society, and whereof he was the Author; (and likewise the remembrance of
the zeal which some amongst them had manifested for the interests of Spain) and
some Maxims their Preachers had published against Kings and against the ancient
Laws of the Kingdom, and the opinions was held of them that by means of their
Colleges and Auricular Confessions, they perverted the minds of the Youthful,
and of the tender Conscienced which way best pleased them) gave occasion to the
Parliament to involve the whole Society in the same punishment due for the
Crimes of particulars.

Thus by one and the same Decree which was pronounced the Nine and twentieth of
the Month, and executed by Torch-light, they condemned John Chastel, to suffer
the pains accustomed for the like Parricides, and Ordained that the Priests and
Scholars of the College of Clermont, and others calling themselves of the
Society of Jesus, as being Corrupters of Youth, Disturbers of the Common Peace
and Enemies to the King and State, should within three days leave their House
and College, and in fifteen the whole Kingdom; and that all what belonged to
them should be employed to pious uses, accordingly as the Parliament should
dispose of it.

Some other Parliaments following the same Sentiments with this of Paris,
banished them by a like Decree: but that of Bourdeaux and that of Thoulouze
refused to conform to it, so that they sheltred themselves in Guyenne and
Languedoc till they were recalled. By another Decree, John Guignard having
owned his Defamatory Writings, was condemned to be Hanged, not for the having
made them, but for having kept them. By another also, John Gueret, under whom
Chastel had gone thorough his Courses of Philosophy, and the Father of this
wretched Parricide were banished the Kingdom, the first to perpetuity, and the
second for nine years; and it was Ordained his House should be demolished, and
in its place a Pyramid of Carved Stone to be erected which should contain the
cause of it. Upon one of the four Faces was the Decree engraven, and on the
other three, diverse Latin Inscriptions in Verse and Prose, in detestation of
the Memory of that horrid Attempt, and that Doctrine which was held to have
been the occasion of it.

Hennuyers and Artesians being expired without their giving him any answer, he
caused a Declaration of War to be published against King Philip and his
Subjects, it happened some weeks after that the Archduke Emperor Rodolph II. and
Mahomet III. Son of Amurath after he had caused twenty of his Brothers to be
drowned, he Reigned ten years.
Ernest Governor of the Low Countries died the One and twentieth of February,
King Philip committing the Administration to Peter Henriques Guisman Count de
Fuentes, till he had otherwise disposed of it.

The Duke of Nemours having made his escape from the Castle of Pierre-Encise,
disguised in the habit of a Valet, and carrying the Pan of his Closs-stool, got
immediately on Horseback, and with his Friends and three thousand Swiss lent
him by the Duke of Savoy, took several Forts round about Lions, whereby he
thought to famish that great City: but the Constable de Montmorency who brought
a thousand Maistres, and four thousand of the Kings Foot, having received Order
to remain in that Country, Vienne, so close, that his Swiss weary of the great
Savoy to the Marquess de Trefort General of that Dukes Bress where they had
taken Montluel.

Nemours was gone to the Constable of Castille, with design of engaging him to
come into Lyonnois, Disimieu his most intimate Confident, to whom Pipet chief
Castle of Vienne, treated his Accommodation the Twelfth of April, drew his Men
into the Town, and invited the Constable thither, who took the Oaths of the
Inhabitants. Nemours, who thought this bosom Friend had been proof against all
Temptations, was like to have lost his wits when he heard of this infidelity.
Such as were inclined to believe the worst (and Lisimieu had more of
self-interest then duty, and chose rather to call him Traitor to his Friend,
then faithful to his King. And even when Nemours fell sick, whether for grief
or some other cause, they reported he had given him a Fig to prevent his
Resentment.

Charles IX. Blood flowed in great quantities from his Mouth. His more then
ordinary courage did for some time resist the violence of this Distemper: but
when he was so much attenuated that he could no longer stand upon his Feet, he
desired to be carried to his Castle of Anecy in Savoy; and there having
languished for some Months in such a dismal condition, as drew tears from the
Eyes of every one that beheld him, he resigned up his Soul about mid- July,
aged twenty eight years. The Marquess de Saint Sorlin his Brother succeeded
him in the Duchy of Nemours and other Territories, and soon after came to an
agreement with the King.

Mayenne had not so much love for him as to be grieved, but the pejoration of
his Affairs brought grief enough upon him from elsewhere. In the Month of
February the Inhabitants of Beaulne, to whom the King the preceding year had
granted a four Months Truce, fell upon that Garrison the Duke had reinforced,
and called the Marshall de Biron to their aid, who then besieged the Castle de
Monstier-Sainct Jean hard by. This Marshall having forced three hundred
Soldiers who yet defended themselves in the City, to capitulate, laid Siege to
the Castle; which surrendered within a Month, having in vain expected the Duke
of Mayenne Nemours to deliver them.

The Cities of Autun and Aussonne finding his declining condition, did also
quit his Party; the first by the advice and management of their Maire, the
second by a Treaty Senecay made with the King who left him the Government of it.

By the example of Beaulne, the Inhabitants of Dijon took Arms in the beginning
of May, and finding themselves too weak to drive out the Garrison, had recourse
to Biron, who gained all the Quarters of the Town, and at the same time
besieged the Talon which was within a quarter of a League, whither the Count de
Tavanes had retired.

The Constable of Castille (named Ferdinand de Velasco) was descended into the
Franche-Comte in the Month of April with an Army of Fifteen thousand Foot, and
three thousand Horse. This Marshall apprehended lest he should fall upon his
back with all his Forces: the Constable de Montmorency had the same fear upon
him, and both these pressed the King extremely to advance that way. His
Mistress by her Caresses made him resolve it; She desired he might conquer the
Franche-Comte for her Son, to whom he promised to give the Revenue in
propriety, but the Honorary Sovereignty to the Swiss, thereby to oblige them to
his protection.

Lorrainers commanded by d'Aussonville, he might make up a very considerable
Army; and as for his Frontler of Picardy, he relied upon the Forces of the
Marshall de Bouillon, the Count de Saint Pol, and the Admiral de Villars,
recommending above all things to them a good Correspondence, and a readiness
when necessary to join their whole Strength together; To whom when in one
entire Body, he gave the general Command to the Duke of Nevers. And for the
Affairs of the Kingdom in gross, he established a Council at Paris, of whom he
made the Prince of Conty Chief. The event showed the method he had taken both
for the one and other was not good; For the Count de Soissons jealous they had
preferred the Prince of Conty before him, fomented the Leaven of those Factious
remains in Paris, and so much did those of the said Council, as also the Chief
Commanders in the Armies, countermine each other, that they did his work but
negligently.

It is fit we know that in the Month of March, the Duke of Longueville was
killed by a strange accident; Taking a review of his Army at Dourlens, a Piece
discharged Amiens. The day France may justly account for one of the most
generous and most accomplished Princes of his Age. The King was Godfather, and
gave him his name and the Government of the Province: and till he were of Age,
gave the Commission of it to the Count de Saint Pol his Paternal Uncle.

The Constable of Castille having forced the Lorrainers to abandon all they had
taken in the Franche-Comte, and Trembl^cour who had put himself into Vesou to
capitulate, prepared to enter into the Duchy of Burgundy, and had made a
Bridge at Gray upon the River Soane, besides one belonging to the Town. The
King having notice of Biron to go and meet him only with two hundred Maistres,
and five hundred Arquebusiers on Horseback, to retard his March a day or two,
and during that time make a Retrenchment to part the Castle of Dijon from the
City, and then leaving therein a thousand Bourgeois, go forth and fight the
Enemy with his whole Army within a League or two of Dijon. This undertaking
would have been judged rashness, had the event not justified it.

The last day of June, being at Fontaine Francoise, the midway between Dijon
and Gray, he discovered the Enemies whole Army descending from Saint Seyne,
and at the same time found himself charged by the Duke of Mayennes French
Troops, commanded by that Duke and by Villars Houdan. He there stood in need of
all his Virtues: Biron being rudely repulsed, the King maintained the shock
with a hundred Horse only, made several stout charges, and drove back four or
five Squadrons almost to the gross of the Duke of Mayennes Army. But certainly
had he advanced further, he must have lost many of his Men, his Honor, and
perhaps his Person.

The Duke of Mayenne sent three times, and the fourth went himself to entreat
the Constable to march on to certain Victory: but he being as cold to action as
hot in words, and imagining the Duke pretended to teach him his trade: he
stirred not, but replied, with pride and senceless gravity, he knew well enough
what he had to do. The same day he retired to Saint Seyne, and the next day to
Gray, where he denied entrance to the French, nay even to the wounded; The King
on the contrary took care they should be dressed, and sent a safe conduct to
Villars to carry him to Chalons.

This day was much more famous for the Kings wonderful Exploits, then either
for the number of the Combatants, or of the slain, (for there were not sixscore
killed upon the place) and acquired him greater advantage yet then honor; for
as much as the Castillians coldness, his suspicions and inhumanity toward the
French, broke them quite off from the Spaniard; whereas the King opened his
Arms so kindly and favorably to them, that he drew a great part to his service.

Mayenne not knowing how to extricate himself from the Artifices of the
Spaniards, thought of returning to Sommeriue in Savoy, and from thence send to
demand security that he might go to Spain and give an account to King Philip of
his Conduct, and complain of the ill proceedings of his Agents. The King
perceiving him at the very brink of the Precipice, gave him assurance he was
ready to receive him into favor, and to treat him much nobler then he could
ever justly hope for from those Renegado's; To which he added that till they
had agreed upon the Conditions between them, he might remain at Chalons, where
he should neither be besieged nor invested.

Before he accepted of these Offers, the Duke made another great and last
effort to persuade the Constable to relieve the Castle of Dijon. The Constable
having absolutely refused it, he took leave of him as if he would have
undertaken it himself with what Forces he had, and retired to Chalon. From
thence he gave order for the surrender of the Castles of Dijon and Talon to the
King, in retribution of his kindness.

Whilst the King was yet at Dijon, he advised the kindred of Charlote de la
Trimouille, Widow of Henry Prince of Conde, to present him a Petition, desiring
the Process against that Princess might be removed to the Parliament of Paris;
That all proceedings made by the Judges of St. John d'Angely might be set
aside, That new information might be taken; and that in the mean time she might
be set at liberty upon their Bail, upon condition to appear for her within four
Months. The King having allowed it, sent John de Vivonne Marquess of Pisani, to
Saintonge, to be Governor Huguenots might possibly have made their Head, the
other to plant him betwixt himself and the Count de Soissons; who seeing him
without Children, accounted himself presumptive Heir, and trod upon his Heels.

After he had spent some weeks in quieting Burgundy, restoring their Parliament
which had been interdicted, and calling back the Counselors who had removed
themselves to Semur, he entered with his Army upon the Franche-Comte, with
design to fight the Castillian, and if he obtained a Victory, to conquer that
Province. He staid there near upon three weeks, during which he oft-times
harceled the Spaniard to draw him out of his Intrenchments, beat his straggling
Troops, in two or three Rencounters, ransacked the whole Country, and brought
so panick a fear upon Besancon, and all the other Cities, that he had surely
made them stoop to his power, had not the intercession of the Swiss, and a
contagion that got amongst his Men, wrested that Conquest out of his hands.

The Swiss moved in fine by the loud cries of the Comtois who claimed their
protection by virtue of some ancient Treaties they had made with the Cantons,
and Comtois added certain Sums of Money to defray the Charges of his Army;
which

From Burgundy the King made a Journey to Lions with his Court. Diverse reasons
led him thither; Two amongst others, the desire to Treat with the Duke of
Savoy, and the necessity there was to give Orders for the Affairs of Daufine
and Provence, where there were some bickerings between the Governors and the
Captains.

As to the first point he offered the Savoyard a Truce, and afterward even to
give him up the Marquisate of Salusses for his eldest Son. There were several
Conferences concerning this at Pont de Beauvaisis between the Agents for the
two Sovereigns, and the Duke seemed not to be averse to a Peace: but the
condition of Homage the King proposed for the Marquisate distasted him.

For the second point, he sent the Duke of Guise to the Government of Provence,
gave the Lieutenancy to Lesdiguieres, and that of Daufine, whereof he had made
the Prince of Conty Governor, to Alfonso d'Ornano. Thus opposing Espernon with
a potent Enemy, setting a careful watch over the Duke of Guise, and taking away
the too great power Lesdiguieres had in Daufine, he thought he had sufficiently
provided for the security of those Countries.

In the same place was the Treaty concluded for the reduction of Bois-Daufin,
also a particular Truce was granted the Duke of Mercoeur for Bretagne, and a
general one to the Duke of Mayenne for all the remaining Parties of the League.
Bois-Daufin held yet the Cities of Chasteau-Gontier in Anjou, and of Sable in
Main, with some others which served as outworks for the Duke of Mercoeur; and
therefore the King considered him so as to allow him very advantageous
Conditions, and over and above the Baston de Marshall.

The Voisinage of the King hastened likewise the more courageous of the
Parliament men of Thoulouze to declare to the Duke of Joyeuse, that the King
being now a Castle Sarrasin; whence the King joined them with those who in the
beginning of the Troubles had transferred themselves to Besiers, that so being
altogether they might act the more effectually for his Service.

Carcassonne and Narbonne, prompted with the same Spirit as those other hand
the approaches of the Marshall de Matignon and Anne de Levis regained the City
of Rodez; so that the Duke of Joyeuse had no other Places of importance left
him but Thoulouze and Alby.

But whilst the King was thus employed at one extreme part of his Kingdom, the
Spaniards made him bloody work toward Picardy by the death of Humieres, the
loss of Dourlens, and that of Cambray. The Duke of Aumale, and Rosne were cause
of it. Both taking it in scorn the King should slight them, by denying the
Government of Picardy to the first, and to the second the Title of Marshall of
France, which he had granted to other Leaguers. The City of Ham was the Duke of
Aumales, and he had placed a Governor there named N. de Mouy Gomeron, who being
dead, his three Sons went to Bruxels to demand what was due to him. The
Spaniards detained them all Prisoners to force them to deliver up the Castle of
Ham. Dorvilliers their half-Brother who had the command of it in their absence,
would give no ear to it, but called in Humieres and the Nobless of Picardy, and
gave them passage by the Fosse of the Castle to attaque the Spaniards that were
in the Town. Humieres charging them bravely was slain, his Men enraged at his
death redouble their Assaults, and at two days end force them, and cut them all
in pieces, not allowing quarter to one of them. The Count de Fuentes who at
that time besieged Catelet, came running to relieve this Garrison, but could not
do it early enough; For spite whereof, he before the Town of Ham caused the
Head of Gomerons eldest Son to be cut off, the Archduke Albert did afterward
release the other two. This done he again returns before the Chatelet, which he
gained upon Composition the Four and twentieth day of June.

The regret of the Nobility for the loss of the brave Humieres, who alone was
worth an Army, and the cries of the Picards whose Frontiers were open, gave an
opportunity to the hottest Heads in Parliament, who remembered the injuries they
had received by the Duke of Aumale, to make a thundering Decree against that
Prince. By which they declared him Criminel de laesae Majestatis in the highest
degree, and of the Parricide of Henry III. and for these Crimes condemned him
to be drawn alive by four wild Horses, his Quarters to be set up on the four
chief Gates of the City, if he could be apprehended, if not in Effigy, his
House of Anet to be razed,

The Sentence given, Achilles de Harlay first President, caused the Execution
to be suspended for some days, during which they waited for Orders from the
King: but Angenout made so much noise they were fain to go thorough with it.
They dragged his Phantosm to the Greve, and quartered it the Four and twentieth
of July. The King was very sorry they had robbed his Clemency of this Pardon,
and thereby engaged the said Prince and all those French that were yet
obstinate and resolute to an irreconcilable hatred against France: whom they
afterward most desperately wounded, and perhaps might have utterly ruined, had
they found a King of Spain less aged and infirm then Philip happened to be.

The Citizens of Cambray could no longer endure the proud and violent behavior
of Balagny, and had no less contempt then hatred for him after the check he
received before Senlis. Rhosne well acquainted with their discontent, and
having great intelligence in the City, advised Fuentes to besiege it, and that
the French might not be able to bring relief in a Body, to take in Dourlens
first. There were but few within the place: notwithstanding Fifteen hundred
Horse and Foot did make a shift to get in; and at the same time the Count de
Saint Pol, the Marshall de Bouillon, and the Admiral de Villars joined
together to succor it.

They had above four thousand Men, and the Duke of Nevers was not above a days
march distant with twelve hundred more: but as there was no unity amongst those
Chiefs, and they disdained to obey that Duke, they hastened to relieve the place
before he joined with them.

Fuentes encouraged by Rosne went to meet them; at first the Marshall made a
very stout Charge, but having the worst he falls to a retreat, and the Admiral
who staid behind to make another Charge, engaged so far amongst the Enemies,
that they surrounded and took him Prisoner with fifteen or twenty Gentlemen of
note, and all his Foot were cut in pieces. The Spaniards killed him and
Sesseval in cold Blood, for they are not wont to pardon any who having once
been under their Pay shall take up Arms against them. The King gave the Office
of Admiral to Damville the Constables Brother, and the Government of Havre to
the Chevalier d'Oyse Brother of the deceased: but restored the City of Rouen to
perfect liberty, having ordered the Fort St. Catharine to be demolished.

As the jealousy between Bouillon and Villars occasioned this loss, that
between the Duke of Nevers and Bouillon caused a more bloody one. While Nevers
excused himself Bouillon did all he could to thrust it upon him, thinking
thereby to shelter his Reputation under another name, and amidst his fears and
suspicions marched giddily about the place without attempting any thing: it
happened eight days after the Battle, that the Besieged who fought very well, yet
defended themselves but ill for want of Ingeniers, unfortunately suffered the
Enemies to force in upon them.

The Spaniards gained the Castle by a general assault upon a Bastion, and made
great slaughter of the Garrison that was within it. From thence they descended
into the Town, where finding no resistance, they massacred all, as well the
defenseless Women, and the Children, as the Armed Men, the raging Soldiers
running thorough every Street and crying, This is the Revenge for Ham. They
gave no quarter but to seven or eight, whereof Haraucour Governor of the City
was one. The Pavement was strewed with the Bodies of above three hundred
Gentlemen who were gotten in, and two thousand Persons more.

It is incredible how great the Spaniards joy was, to find by this experiment
it was possible for them to beat the French by fine force, who till now were
ever wont to beat them so: but that which raised their hearts and spirits more
yet, was that at the very same time, they had news from the Low Countries, that
Mondragon, who commanded their Army there in the absence of Fuentes, had forced
Prince Maurice to raise his Siege from before Groll in the Country of
Overissel, and having afterward encamped near him, boasted that he would
hinder him from undertaking any thing all the rest of the Campaign. So after
they had settled Hernand Teillo Protocarerro Governor in Dourlens, hovered some
days upon the Frontiers of Picardy, and put a fresh Convoy into la Fere, they
marched toward Cambray full of the confidence of their taking it.

For consolation of these losses, the King was informed his Affairs advanced
very successfully at Rome. After the Duke of Nevers was gone thence
dissatisfied, Pope Clement having notice that in France they had renewed the
Proposition for making a Patriarch there, relaxed somewhat of his severity, and
finding of late the King did not much solicit him, he began to apply himself
to the King. He wrote to the Cardinal de Gondy to renew that Negotiation, sent
the Jesuit Possevinus to Lions to confer about it with the Constable and with
Bellievre, and ordered the Cardinals, Chartreux, Capucins and Minimes, to
command those Orders to Huguenots and even the Politics, were of opinion they
ought to make him postulant in his turn, and run after what he had rejected;
nevertheless considering the great Consequences, the King resolved to send some
Deputies of Rome, and give them an express Procuration to Treat about the
Conditions of his Absolution, and to receive it in his name.

For this purpose he made choice of James David Du Perron, and joined Arnold
d'Ossat with him, as then but a simple Priest, yet a Man of rare prudence and
great merit, who had before Negociated a long time in that Court. It was said
of the latter he had the talent to insinuate into the most Refractory, and
charm them to listen to him, of the other, that he left no room for reply if
they would but hear him with attention, so great was the rapidity and force of
his Reason, that he did not only persuade, but he compelled.

The multiplicity of Affairs that intervened in the Kings Council, having
obstructed Du Perrons dispatch four Months together, the Spanish Faction had a
fair opportunity to make the Pope believe they scoffed at him; and when this
Agent did come, contrary to their hopes, they practiced all their subtilties,
and laid what stress they could upon the ill success at Dourlens, to hinder
both him and d'Ossat, from being admitted to Audience. Then when they had been
received (which was about mid- July) and the Pope (having taken advice of the
Cardinals in private) had declared

The Court of Rome was easily induced to lay hold of this last, the bare
prospect did so please them, as they employed all their Arts and Engines to
persuade the Kings Bourges; the other, that he would have the Ceremony
performed in presence of all the Cardinals, and make use of the Baguette Or
Wand*
the third, that giving Absolution he should use these words: That he
reabiliated, or restored the King to his Royalty, as if he had been suspended
by the Excommunications of the Popes his Predecessors.

Du Perron was greatly blamed for it in France, perhaps unjustly: the Politics
reproached him that to merit the Popes favor, he had submitted his King to be
cudgel'd by Proxy with the Popes white Wand.

As to the remainder, the intercessions of the Seigneury of Venice, of the Duke
of Lorrain, and the Duke of Florence, the solicitations of the Cardinals de
Joyeuse, and Tolet, and the good offices of Baronius, then Confessor to the
Pope, did much forward the business. Tolet was a Spaniard by birth,
nevertheless he acted herein against the interest of Spain, that he might
deserve and obtain of the King by his Services, the recalling and restoration
of the Jesuits, of whose Society he had formerly been.

When they had agreed upon all the Articles, his Holiness appointed the
Sixteenth day of September to give this public Absolution: which he did upon a
Scaffold at the Porch of St. Peter's Church, with the Ceremonies to be seen at
length in the general History, or in the more particular Relations of those
times.

After this, above a Month ran out before the expedition of the Bulls, whether
he would by this delay make them more esteem and desire the favor he granted,
or that he were willing to give the Duke of Mayenne and other Heads of the
League a competent time, to finish their Agreements.

But the King, as soon as he had received the news of it, ordered the should
give thanks to God for it over all the Kingdom, sent to the Parliament to take
off the prohibition he had made against sending to Rome, appointed that the
Concordats with the Holy See should be exactly observed, and sought all
occasions to testify his obedience to the Sea of Rome, and acknowledgments to
the Pope.

Fuentes was before Cambray, the Marshall de Balagny had made no great
preparations to receive him, having but seven hundred Men in Garrison. The Duke
of Nevers informed of their want in that place, sent the Duke de Retelois his
eldest Son thither with four hundred Horse, who happily pierced into the Town:
but the People of Artois and Hainault desiring to deliver themselves from the
oppression of Balagny, and the Archbishop of Cambray being pusht on with the
zeal, not so much of being restored to his Pastoral See, as to the Goods and
Revenues of the Church which Balagny had denied him the enjoyment of,
strengthened the Besiegers Army with above eight thousand Men, contributed great
Sums of Money, and sent Guns, Ammunitions, and Provisions to them.

Nevers at Peronne was forming a considerable Body to Rosne who knew the
Discords amongst the French Officers, and the ill disposition of the Bourgeois
toward Balagny, had not assured the Chiefs, there would quickly be something
disclosed very favorable to them. In effect, the Cambresians in despair for
that the King would not admit them into the number of his Subjects, they having
at the beginning of the Siege sent Deputies to request it of him, and thereby
considering they must ever lie groaning under the burden of some such severe
Master as Balagny, resolved to shake it off at the first opportunity.

Swiss, that were in Garrison, to side with them, did barricado themselves in
all the Streets, seized on the great Market place, and ran to parley with the
Besiegers. Balagny durst not appear; his Wife, true Sister of the brave Bussy
d'Amboise, marches into the Market place with Pike in hand, and used
Exhortations, Entreaties, Promises, and Oaths, to stop this Resolution. Vic
showed them that at least they ought to provide for their own security by some
regular Treaty, and take time to consult therein; neither the one, nor other
prevailed in the least, the Authors of this Revolution pressed things on so
fast, that the Inhabitants upon the bare word of the Spaniards, went and opened
them their Gates, and even offered Fuentes to charge the French who then stood
at the breach, but he could not consent to so much baseness, so that they had
time to retire into the Citadel.

The Citadel was very weak, the courage of those that defended it extremely
depressed, and that of the Citizens and Spaniards mightily raised by their good
success; Besides there were Provisions but for ten or twelve days, for the
Spaniards knowing the covetous humor of the Dame de Balagny, Wheat being
somewhat dear in June and July, had contrived to drain the Granaries of all the
Store was in them, by giving her what price soever she asked for it, and the
Town was invested before the next Harvest could supply them. So that it seems
in selling her Corn, she likewise sold her little Coronet, or Sovereignty.

When Vic had searched and discovered the small quantities were in the
Magazines, he was of opinion they should demand a Truce, which was allowed them
for four Nevers in the mean while not able to agree with Bouillon, and
concerned for the danger his Son was in, sent word to the Besieged they should
make the best composition they could. They did so the Seventh day of October,
to quit the place within two days after, and made it indeed very advantageous.

de Balagny believing that it was a more gentle fate to fall into the Cambray
to console and to divert himself from all melancholy thoughts.

A resistance of seven or eight days longer might have saved this place. The
King informed of the dangerous condition it was in, came post from Lions to
take some order for it, but he had news of its surrender at Beauvais: and there
together with the trouble for this loss, he was forced to suffer the murmurings
of his Soldiers, who openly affirmed it was occasioned by his neglect and
delay, whilst his Mistress, for her private interest, withheld him at Lions.
His choler discharged it self upon the Duke of Nevers: in a Council held to
consider of what was to be done after this loss, he said some very picquant
things to him; wherewith that Duke was so sensibly galled, that this Disgrace
together with the smart of his Wounds, which burst open afresh by the satigues
of the Campaign, cast him upon his Bed in the Castle of Nesle, and deprived him
of life about the midst of October.

To repair this loss of Cambray, the King employed the Forces he had got
together la Fere, the only place remaining in the Spaniards hands on this side
the River Sum, and which they could not relieve but with great difficulty. He
believed it so little stored with Provisions, that he reckoned to reduce it to
famine before the Spaniards could recruit it, or draw their Men together: and
therefore at first he only thought fit to block it up by two great Forts he
built at the end of the Marsh. Whilst these were raising he took a Journey to
Monceaux to visit his Mistress; and from thence returned to the Siege, bringing
with him the Duke of Mayenne and some Companies he had there.

first certain news of his Absolution. In the Kings Council, many were of
opinion, since he had stood it out so very late, not to admit him to any
Treaty: but the King desired, at what price soever, to put out the remainders
of that dreadful Fire of Civil War, which did yet smoke and smother in diverse
places of his Kingdom, particularly in Provence and Bretagne, and to repair
those sad breaches the Spaniards had newly made in Picardy; Besides there had
otherwhile been some kindness and amity between him and the Duke, and he
considered that Personally he had never offended him* That he had given up no
one place to the Spaniards; That if he France with so many Braves as would
follow him? since Rosne almost singly, had been the cause of such great losses.

These reflections obliged him not to reject the Duke; and besides his Mistress
by her intrigues had been above a year endeavoring by degrees to dispose the
King to grant him good Conditions. This Lady, besides her generous inclination
which prompted her to do kind offices, sought every where to make Friends, as
well because aspiring to become the Kings lawful Spouse, she stood in need of
such to bring about the dissolution of Queen Margarets Marriage, as because she
desired to secure her self of some support in case the King should happen to
fail her. Now having no reason to hope for any favor from the Princes of the
Blood, the Huguenots, nor the Politics, she endeavored to gain this Duke,
that he might devote himself entirely to her Service.

By this means he obtained the most honorable Conditions that ever Subject had
of his Sovereign, but which notwithstanding were very mean to those that had
been offered him before his Party was scattered, and when Treating for all
those Members jointly he might still have remained Head of them.

Folembray, of the Month of January, the King spoke of him in very favorable
terms; Acknowledged a Zeal for Religion had been the motive Granted him an
Oblivion of all things past; Acquitted and discharged him of all Moneys
received and disposed of; Restored him and his to all their Goods and Estates:
Declared there lay no accusation or charge against the Princes and Princesses
of his House toaching the death of the deceased King. Promised willingly to
hear the demands of the Dukes of Mercoeur and Aumale, and suspended the
execution of the Judgment given against the last; Left him Chalon upon the
Soane, Seurre, and Soissons for Cities of security, and the Government of
Chalon separately (for six years) from that of Burgundy, to his eldest Son;
undertook to acquit him of three hundred and fifty thousand Crowns, for which
he and his Friends were engaged, as likewise all other the Debts he had
contracted, as well in his own name as by being Head of the Party, with the
Swiss, Reisters, Lorrainers and other Strangers, and obliged himself to put
them amongst those of the Crown, and to annul all such Obligations as he had
entered into for the said purposes.

Together with this Edict were likewise dispatched those for the Dukes of
Joyeuse, and the new Duke of Nemours. The King granted them some particular
Conditions, France. Some time after, Mayenne going to attend the King at
Monceaux, was by him received in so obliging a manner, as he protested that was
the only time the King made an absolute conquest over him, and vowed his Soul
should sooner betray his Body then he would forfeit his Faith or his Obedience
to so good and so generous a Prince.

There now remained no more of the Heads of the Shipwrackt Faction but the Duke
of Mercoeur, the Duumvirs of Marseilles with some small Cities in Provence, and
the Duke of Espernon; who being still obstinate to hold the Government of those
Countries, seemed, as one ready to enter into the League, when all the rest
were going out of it. I will not speak of the diverse Exploits that had been
done in Bretagne the foregoing year, but only how the Royalists besieging the
Castle de Comper near Renes, the Marshall d'Aumont their General was killed
there. He was a Person whose Valor had proved stanch in all trials, and one of
the most zealous and most faithful of the Kings Servants: John de Beaumont
Lavardin was honored with his Office of Marshall. The dissipation of the
whole Army followed the death of their General: but the Duke of Mercoeur made
no advantage of it, because of those suspicions which held him perpetually
embroiled with the Spaniards.

The Province afterward received some comfort by the three Months Truces,
which were often prolonged: but by the Estates, whom St. Luc gave order to be
Renes, they were again laden with a most heavy burden. Which was an Impost of
Six Crowns per Tun upon all Wines brought thither from abroad.

During the Truces, the Marquess de Belle-Isle being gotten into Mount St.
Michel intending to surprise it, was killed by a Captain of his own Party,
whose name was Ker-Martin. He thought that by carrying the Keys of that place
to the King, he should in recompense have at the least a Mareschals Staff.

After the Kings intentions were made so manifest to the Provenceaux, that they
had no room left for doubt, the Provisions for the Duke of Guise being
registered in Parliament, and sortified by a thundering Decree against Espernon
and all his Adherents: those that had followed him only as their Governor
forsook him, and such others as Anchot de Mesplez whom he put out of St.
Tropez, one of his best places.

In effect Mesplez was the Man for the King, who had Orders not only to
dispossess him of the Province, but also underhand to hinder Lesdiguieres from
taking root there. Which he showed plainly enough when Lesdiguieres having
besieged Cisteron, and being on the point of forcing it, he treated with the
Governor Ramefort and got into the place with three hundred Men to defend it
against him. Now although Lesdiguieres did very well know this cross Game was
dealt him by a higher hand, he omitted not to continue his Services, (which
every where succeeded prosperously) and took five or six places more from the
Espernonists: but when he observed his progress redoubled the jealousies of the
Duke of Guise and the Provenceaux, and that he could now make no further
advantage, either as to his own Affairs, nor the Kings, he returned into
Daufine, upon some pretense the juncture of those times offered him.

When the Duke of Guise was become Master of all the Forces of the Province, he
Savoyards and the Duke of Espernon, and to reduce the City of Marseilles. The
Savoyards held yet two places there, Grace, and Berre: he recovered the first
by means of two Captains who killed the Commander of it, and blocked up the
other with two Forts. However a while after, one Captain Alexander Governor of
the last, making a great Sally, slew all the Men that were in those Redoubts
and razed them; so that he preserved the place for the Duke till the Treaty of
Vervins.

The Reduction of Marseilles was the more important work: several designs which
they made trial of for this purpose had all miscarried, Famine and Misery had
mightily wrought upon and disposed the meaner People to a change, but the
Duumvirs (Lewis d'Aix, and Charles de Casaux) stood but the more upon their
guard; and having offended so many People by their violence and severity, that
they could hope for no security amongst a generation so inclined to Resentment,
they rather chose to treat with the King of Spain (who promised to give them
two Dutchies in the Kingdom of Naples) then with their natural King. They had
therefore to this end dispatched three of their Confidents to Madrid; and in
the mean time had obtained of John Andrea Doria Prince of Malfy, a succor of
twelve hundred Men, brought to them in four Galleys by his Son, with hopes of a
much greater number in a few days.

Bourgeois named Peter Libertat, who was one of the most intimate Friends to
Casaux, in so much as he had entrusted him with the Guard of the Port Royal.
This Man originally a Corsican, Valiant, daring, and one that desired to raise
himself by some brave Action, having long before prepared his Party, treated
with the Duke of Guise to receive him into the City, provided they would give
him the Office of Viguier, a Patent of Nobility for him and his, the Government
of Nostre-Dame de la Guard, and fifty thousand Crowns in Silver.

When he had gotten his Securities, they appointed the Seventeenth of February
for execution. That day the Duke of Guise approached the City within half a
League, and much nearer yet placed in Ambuscado some Troops commanded by
Alamanon. In the Morning Lewis d'Aix going out of the Royal Gate as his custom
was, with some Arquebusiers to search round the Walls, Libertat who was there
upon the Guard with his People, pulls up the Drawbridge and shuts him out.
Casaux was within the Town, and not knowing they had put this trick upon Lewis
d'Aix, came with some belonging to him toward the same Gate as usually:
Libertat goes to meet him, charges him and kills him. Lewis d'Aix in the
interim gets over the Walls, being Craned up by a Rope and a Basket, draws
together a good number of his Friends, amongst others the two Sons of Casaux,
and with these he comes and attaques Libertat and regains the Port. But the
Advocate Bernard, whom the Duke of Mayenne after his Treaty had sent to the
Duumvirs to persuade them to return to their Obedience, goes forth into the
Street with his Pike in Hand and a white Handkerchief in his Hat, followed by
five or six noted Citizens, crying out, Vive le Roy! In a quarter of an hour he
got near a Thousand Men together, and at the same time Alamanon advances from
without with three hundred Soldiers, upon whose appearance Lewis d'Aix loses
courage, falls back, and gets into the Fort St. Victor, the two Sons of Casaux
threw themselves into the Fort de la Guard; the Spaniards leap into the Water
to recover their Galleys, and stand off to Sea. In fine, the Duke of Guise is
received into the City, and his presence so astonishes those that had
Cantonized themselves in their Towers and Forts, that they immediately
surrendered at discretion.

Casaux, and three more. As to Lewis d'Aix and the Sons of Casaux, the first
escaping by night from his Fort, fearing to be delivered up by his Soldiers,
and the others having been turned out of theirs by one of their best Friends
who desired to deserve his pardon to their cost: they all retired to Genoa,
where they ended their miserable lives in want and contempt.

Marseilles reduced, the Duke of Guise bent all his Strength against the Duke
of Espernon. As he was coming to the relief of the Citadel of St. Tropes, which
Mesplez had besieged, de Guise charged him so impetuously that he forced him to
repass the River of Argence; which he did with so much precipitation, that the
greater part of his Troops were drowned or knocked at Head.

Grimaud, landed three hundred Men: Mesplez in fine, forced the Besieged to
come to a Capitulation.

Amidst these Transactions Espernon was like to have been blown into the Air by
the malicious invention of a Peasant who had resolutely vowed his death. This
Fellow knowing the Inn he lodged in at Brignoles, got an opportunity to put
into a Room under his Chamber, three Sacks of Powder, which he said was Wheat
that he must fell. There were Pistol Locks placed within them, to whose
Trickers he had fastened a small String, and tied the other end to that Cord
which bound his Sacks. When he was certain the Duke was sat down to Dinner, he
goes forth and brings in a Baker to buy this Wheat, and when he had directed
him to the Sacks, steals off and runs away. In the mean time the Baker untying
one of the Sacks, makes the Powder take Fire, and was burnt with those that
were below; and yet this Fougade did no mischief either to the Duke or any of
his People, its greatest violence taking vent by the Window and Doors of that
first Floor.

He then perceived his great Heart did in vain persuade him to struggle against
Fortune in a Country where they practiced such horrid inventions to destroy
him, so that he resolved to leave it, but with Honor; and for this end he had
recourse to Spaniards in Picardy, obliged the King to condescend more easily
then he would have done in any other season, and to send Roquelaure into
Provence to treat about his Accommodation. Espernon having conferred with him,
accepted first of a Truce the Fourteenth of March, then of these Conditions,
That he should be confirmed in all his Offices and Governments, That he should
moreover have that of Limosin to be joined with those of Saintonge and
Perigord, and the survivance of them for his Son; also a Sum of Money, and an
assurance that those on whom he had bestowed the Governments of Places in
Provence should be continued in them. The Treaty Signed he went out of the May:
but the remembrance of those injuries he received

The Siege of la Fere was in the beginning but a Blocade, as well because of
the inconvenience of the Season and the want of Canon, as those hopes the King
had

The Cardinal Archduke Albert of Austria, newly provided of the Government of
the Low Countries, desired to equal the glory of Count Fuentes, who in one
Campaign had taken four places upon those Frontiers: he therefore Armed
powerfully, and gave out he was resolved to relieve that place. But when he
found it could not be done without the hazard of a Battle, which would have
been too great for him, because he wanted Horse, and besides he must have born
the shock of four or five Garrisons, thorough which he must have passed: he
contented himself with throwing in five hundred Horse, each carrying a Sack of
Corn on his Crupper and a bundle of Match about his Neck. This done he turns
toward the Seacoast, and having made a show of besieging Monstreuil, falls
down of a sudden upon Calais, pursuant Rosne had contrived for him. This
Captain had already invested it, and seized upon the Forts of Nieullay and the
Risban.

The Terror which was within the place, and the Wind which seemed to conspire
with the Besiegers without, made it be lost in little time. Francis de Saint
Pol-Ridossan a Gentleman of Gascongne who was Governor, had but ill provided
for his defense, and had but little Credit and Authority with the Bourgeois and
the Garrison. So that when the Archduke upon his arrival had forced the Suburb
du Courguet, which lies along the Harbor, fear so possessed the Inhabitants,
that they immediately talked of surrendering: but they pressed it much more when
they beheld a breach made in their Ramparts; Then nothing could restrain them,
but a Capitulation must be made the Twelfth day of the Siege, to give up the
Town within eight days, and the Citadel in six more, if they were not relieved.

The first eight days being expired, they surrender the City, with so much
amazement, they had not the foresight to transport any of their Cannon into
the Castle, where there were but three mounted; and the Bourgeois flocked
thither in multitules, instead of tarrying in their own Houses to preserve
their Goods which were lest a prey.

In the mean time the Wind hurried away the Count de Saint Pol, and the Count
de Belin his Lieutenant, who had taken Shipping at St. Valey's with three
thousand Men. The same storms drove off the King no less rudely, who coming
from the Siege of la Fere with the Regiment of Guards, and five hundred Horse,
was put to Sea from Bullogne. As likewise they were cross to the Hollanders;
who having wrestled Risban, were at last constrained to retire.

The King had placed his only hopes in the Queen of England, having dispatched
Sancy to her, and some days after the Marshall de Bouillon, to desire her
speedy assistance: but his change of Religion having almost totally
extinguished the affection of that Princess, and much diminished her esteem,
she would allow him no more help gratis, but demanded Calais for her self,
since as well he was going to lose it. This disobliging procedure was an
addition of grief and trouble to the King, he chose rather to let his Enemies
tear the place by force from him, then yield it tamely to his Friend. Sancy
acquainted the Queen with this Resolution, and used so many Arguments, that he
disposed her to send a Relief, which consisted in Eight thousand Men, and all
in readiness; In so much as the Earl of Essex, who commanded them, put to Sea
with a fair Wind: but whilst they were amused in resolving some difficulties as
to place and conditions for their landing, the Citadel was gone.

The Archduke had granted the Besieged a Truce during the six days, Bertrand de
Patras Campagnoles Brother to the Governor of Boulogne, being entered into the
Citadel by the Canal at low Water with two hundred and fifty Men, caused them
to break it. The Archduke irritated at this infraction, immediately attaques
the Citadel, and by the advice of Rosne who knew the defects of the place, beat
the Curtain between the two Bastions which face the Port, to dust; then
Afternoon on the same day the Three and twentieth of April, gives three
Assaults. The Besieged sustained two, not without great loss. Bidossan was
killed* in the second. After this it was time to yield: but Campagnoles by an
excess of bravour, would needs stand a third. His Soldiers did not second his
Resolution, they gave ground, and threw away their Arms to save themselves,
some here, some there. Such as could get into the Sanctuary of the Churches, or
avoid the first fury saved their Lives: all the rest to the number of above
seven hundred were put to the Sword.

It had been no great difficulty for the King to have made the Spaniards perish
for want in Calais, had he been assured the English would have served him
faithfully: but as he had not too much reason to confide in them, he returned
to the Siege of la Fere, having first reinforced the Garrisons of Ardres,
Monstreuil, and Boulogne. La Fere might have held out much longer by the
ordinary rules, had it not been for the Consideration of Colas: the King of
Spain had given Order to Osorio not to stay till the utmost extremity, for fear
he should be obliged to deliver that Man up to the King; so that although he
had nothing to fear for at least a Months time, he made May, to which Colas
Signed, Count de la Fere.

But in the interim the Archduke marching out of Calais the Third day of May to
complete his Exploits, attaqued Ardres, a little place, but very strong, and
very considerable for that it covers Calais. The Count de Belin and Montluc had
shut themselves in to defend it, and there were Fifteen hundred fighting Men,
nevertheless the horrible Slaughters of Dourlens and Calais, had so much
terrified those Soldiers, that they trembled even while they defended
themselves. It happened likewise by misfortune that Montluc, in whom they had
some confidence was slain by a Cannon-ball, and afterward the Basse-Ville was
gained, and most of those in it knocked on the Head in heaps just at the
entrance into the Upper-Town, by reason those that stood there to guard it
being more affrighted then the others, had let down the Port-cullice, and
exposed them to the fury of the Besiegers. Afterward Rosne begins to thunder
upon the Bastion with his great Artillery; which begot so horrible and
universal a dread amongst the Soldiers, that they even leaped over the Walls,
or ran and hid their Heads in Cellars. Belin himself most extremely affrighted,
demanded Composition and surrendered the place the One and twentieth of May.
Which having done maugre the Governor (named Isambert du Bois-Annebout) and
without taking advice of the other Captains, he ran great hazard of his Life at
Court.

This was the sixth Cate^^^. (...) Capelle, D (...) lens, (...) Calais and
Ardres.
place the Spaniards conquered in one year from the French, not so much by
their own, as the Valor of Rosne and about a hundred desperate Frenchmen more,
who knowing themselves utterly excluded from all pardon and favor, endeavored
to make the King regret them, and the Spaniard consider them. Now it fortuned
happily for France that the Archduke at his return to Flanders, besieging Hulst
in the Country of Waes, Rosne was there killed in an Assault; which happened in
the Month of August.

So many losses on the neck of one another, the Frontier laid open in four or
five places, the Sea shut up, the robberles of the Soldiers, the surcharge of
Tailles and Imposts, caused an incredible consternation in the minds of the
People, awakened the Factions of the League, and favored the Contrivances of
the Grandees. These well foreseeing that the too sudden establishment of the
Regal Power would be the Montpensier a young and easy Prince, to propound to
the King, That it would do well to give the Governments in propriety to those
that held them, thereby to engage them to contribute with all their might to
the defense of a State, in which they really had a share. One may well imagine
that this Expedient did not overmuch please the King: nevertheless he treated
this

The Huguenots gave him no less disquiet then did the Grandees of his Kingdom;
he could not grant them the Edict they craved without offending the Pope; and
they interest was to destroy them: they interpreted all the Excuses he made for
not yet being able to satisfy them, as studied Artifice, and the remembrance
of things past, gave them just apprehensions for the time to come. And, indeed,
they forsook him in the midst of the Storm; and held more Synods and Assemblies
in these three last years, then in the thirty five precedent.

The King was laboring at that time to reunite all the Protestants his Allies
in one League against the House of Austria: these discontents of the Huguenots
cast great coldness and suspicion upon their Spirits; so that the German
Princes did all excuse Palatine, and the Duke of Wirtemberg, who
notwithstanding gave him only good words. Bouillon and Sancy had much ado to
engage the Queen of England, who at length made it Offensive and Defensive; The
King and she obliging themselves reciprocally to send four thousand Men into
eithers Country, if they were assaulted, and to make no Peace or Truce with the
Spaniard, but by mutual consent. The Hollanders entered into it likewise, with
great willingness and alacrity, by a Treaty made the last day of October, and
promised to march into the Field upon the Frontiers of Artois or Picardy, with
Ten thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse.

The Kings Army was so tired with the Siege of la Fere, that he was fain to
send them to refresh themselves in the Provinces, reserving only some Troops
with which the Marshall de Biron made three several irruptions into Artois. He
made horrible devastation in that Country by Fire and Sword, as well in revenge
of the cruel spoil Boulonois, after the taking of Ardres, as to teach him
hereafter to make a fairer War.

In the Month of July a Comet was discovered in the Heavens, whose light
appeared sometimes pale and faint, otherwhile more clear and lively: it had a
long Train that did extend toward the East and South.

Another Prodigy appeared in France at the beginning of the year; Francis de la
Ramee, a young Man so called (being the name of a Gentleman with whom he had
been bred in Poitou) pretended to be lawful Heir to the Crown. He said he was
Son of Charles IX. and Elizabeth of Austria, and fancied that Catharine de
Medicis stole him in his Cradle, sent him out of his Country, pretending he was
dead, that so her dear Son Henry III. might succeed. Now being come, I know not
how, out of Poiton into Vermandois, he lodged himself in a Peasants House who
assisted him in acting this Comedy, and bare Witness of many Apparitions which
this young Man pretended to have frequently seen. There was great probability
this Farce Reims, where they were condemned, the first to the Gallows, the
other to be present at the Execution. The Parliament of Paris upon his appeal
confirmed the Sentence, and added that the Body of la Ramee should be burnt and
the Ashes cast into the Air. This was executed in the Greve the March; The
Parties condemned having been first obliged to own the Imposture openly.

Those things which pained the King most were how to content the Zealous
Catholics, Rome, who were concerned how he would behave himself after his
Absolution: to find wherewith to defray the Expenses of his Armies amidst the
present distractions and miseries of his People: and to redress and remedy the
inconveniences we have mentioned. For satisfaction touching the first point,
he received the Popes Legate with all Affection and Reverence, and took care the
Prince of Conde might be instructed in the Catholic Religion. The Mother of
this Prince having been justified by the Parliament of Paris, followed her Son
in his Religion, as she followed him in his Fortune, and made her abjuration at
Rouen, at the feet of the Legate. This was Alexander de Medicis, Cardinal and
Archbishop of Florence, a Prelat who coming into France with a Pacifique
Spirit, appeared as much an Enemy to all hotheaded Zealots, as a true lover of
Peace and the good of this Kingdom.

For the other two points, the King could find no way more ready or effectual
then to call a great Assembly of all the Kingdom: but it was only of Notables
chosen out of the Grandees, Prelates, and Officers of Justice and of the
Finances, or Treasury: for that of the General Estates would have been too
delatory and tedious, and then as

This meeting was held in the great Hall of the Abbey St. Ouin at Rouen; The
King began the first Session on the Fourth of November with a Speech that was
Pathetick, Concise, and Sententious: in which they were overjoyed to hear
these Expressions truly worthy and becoming a good King, whatever motive put
them into his Mouth; That he had not called them thither to follow him
blindfold in what he should desire, but to take their Councils, to believe
them, to pursue them, in short to put himself under their Tutelage. The
Chancellor set forth the urgent necessity of Affairs, and demanded speedy
assistance. The Deputies made ready their Papers Or Bills.
for the Reformation of the State; and upon this occasion the Officers of the
Robe and Finances, made it appear by their demeanor, that their power and
interest was going to exceed all other Ranks and Orders, as they have done,
even to these very times.

per Liver upon all Merchandise entering into any enclosed Town, excepting
Wheat. The first brought in a present Supply, but the second produced much more
trouble and difficulty, then Money.

Philips Body or his Mind, had vigor enough to follow his swiftfooted Fortune,
or carry the prosperity of his Arms so far as possibly they might have
Low Countries, at least, to his dear Daughter Isabella Eugenia, since not able
after the expense of so many Millions to obtain the Crown of France for her. He
gave therefore greedy Ear to the Propositions of Accommodation made to him by
his Holiness, and had given long and favorable Audience to the General of the
Cordeliers, named Bonaventure de Calatagirone, who was come to wait on him on
behalf of the Pope. He afterward sent him to the Archduke Albert, who made him
go into France, and from thence he returned again to Flanders. So that the
Treaty was much advanced, when an accident, of the greatest astonishment to
France, interrupted it, and brought this Kingdom again into extremity of danger.

Hernand Vulgarly called A^a^tel.
Teillo Governor of Dourlens, (who in the Body of a Dwarf, had a more then
Gigantine courage) being well informed of the ill order observed by the
Inhabitants of Amiens in the guarding of their Gates, (for they would admit of
no Garrison) formed an Enterprise upon the Town, and having communicated it to
the Archdukes Council, obtained four thousand Men to put it in execution. The
Tenth of March a little before Nine in the Morning while all the People were at
Church, sixteen Soldiers disguised like Peasants, and commanded by a Captain
named d'Ognane, enter the Gate de Montrescut, some carrying Nuts, others Aples,
and the the Allarm-Bell ring out, few People put themselves into a posture of
defense. The Spaniards in the mean time seized upon the Church Gates, the
Markets and Ramparts. The Count de Saint Pol as much affrighted as the People,
in stead of intrenching himself at some Gate, mounted on Horseback and escaped
to Corbie, crying out he was going to fetch some Troops quartred within half a
League of that place. Hernand Master of the Town, gave it over to the Spoil,
the Inhabitants were stripped to their very Shirts, and set at Ransom, excepting
some that were of the Confederacy, or such as had been of the most Zealous
Leaguers.

The King was in his Bed when he received this so surprising news: he rose
immediately and sent for several Friends that they might comfort him. The most
undaunted took France to be now in great danger when they saw Paris was become
a Frontier, at one end the Duke of Mercoeur, at the other the Duke of Savoy, in
the midst the Relics of the old Factions endeavoring to join again in a
Body, and the new Cabals showing their Heads. There was but one Remedy, and
that was to regain Amiens with expedition, but the Enterprise appeared very
difficult; and this was certain, that if it failed, the affront would more then
double the present disaster. So that the most part of the chief Officers
dissuaded it, and there were even some would needs have their Protestations
registered in Parliament. The Duke of Mayenne was almost the only Man of a
contrary opinion, who so encouraged the King, that he de Biron to invest it
toward Artois, and to hold the Enemies still in play, and then resolved to go
himself and secure the Cities on the Frontier, and give Order for all things to
be prepared for the Siege.

The troublesome relics of a Distemper which his Divertisements had brought
upon him the precedent year, sent him back from the Frontiers to Paris, and
kept him there almost three weeks in his Chamber. We cannot forbear to mention
that during this time, the anguish of his Malady joining with the misfortune of
his Affairs, did almost stagger and overcome his constancy, and forced from his
heart such Sighs and such Complaints as were rather conformable to the ill
state of his Condition,

However, his Presence was not useless at Paris to hasten the Levies of Men and
Money. The Provinces on this side the Loire undertook to maintain six Regiments
of Foot for him; great numbers of the Nobility flocked thither after him; and
because there were some yet very loath to leave their own homes, and many
Malecontent, the Parliament to oblige them to come forth, made a Decree which
set a Mark of Infamy upon all those that did not get on Horseback upon this
urgent occasion.

For the Money, Maximilian de Betune Rosny provided it: he was become sole
Sur-Intendant des Finances, Sancy and Schomberg not being able to comply with
him, had quitted that and taken up the employment of the Sword again. They
raised a considerable Fund by voluntary Loans, and the creation of diverse
Offices; those in best condition at Paris Taxed themselves very liberally, as
well out of fear of falling into the miseries of War again, as because the
Re-imbursements were assigned upon the melioration of the Gabels, which was a
good Security. There were four Counselors created in each Parliament, as many
Maistres des Comptes in the Chamber of Paris, two Treasurers of France in every
Court of Audit, two Esleus in all the Elections, a Trienval aux Tresoriers de
L'Espargne, one at the Parties Casuelles, and so of all the Accomptables.

This latter way being extremely chargable to the Kings Finances, by consequent
to the People, there were some Counselors of Parliament, more worthy of
ancient Rome then of a Country where the love to public good does ordinarily
pass but for

From the end of March Biron was scowring about the Country toward Dourlens
with some Horse, to prevent the Spaniards from conveying Ammunitions into
Amiens; And though he were fewer in numbers then those of Amiens, he
notwithstanding began the Circumvalation beyond the Sum. It was forty
thousand fathom in circumference, flanked with seven strong Pentagones, and
with a Bridge upon the River Longpre. All the Month of April was spent in
marching of Men thither, that of May in making their Lodgments in their
Quarters; so that the approaches began not till about the beginning of June.

de Biron; who considered not that there is nothing more dangerous then to
shock the Pleasures of ones Sovereign, or to take any advantage to make him
know his own weakness.

Upon the first rumor of the loss of Amiens, the remainders of the Spanish
Faction would have made some stir in Paris, where King Philip still maintained
a little private Council to encourage his Partisans. The most Zealous therefore
held some meetings, to consider whether they might do him any Service in this
juncture of Affairs: but one of them having discovered a Consult of theirs in a
Cabaret, there were some of them trussed up in the Greve; and the ignominious
death of those quite broke off that dangerous Correspondence, and untied the
whole knot of them.

France, or glad of an opportunity to pretend so, an Assembly was held in
Bretagne of the Nobility, in presence even of Brissac, Lieutenant for the King
in those Countries, and with the knowledge, as they said, of the Dukes of
Montpensier, de la Trimouille, and de Bouillon: where they propounded to make a
Tiers (or third) Party, under the name of Bons Or, True good Frenchmen.
Francois, and under the Protection of the Queen of England, as if the King had
not had Strength enough to defend them, or had been wanting in Care or Courage.
But the news they received that the Siege of Amiens went on more successfully
then they had guessed, stifled this Proposition, and dissolved the Assembly.

Nothing less was expected from the Duke of Mercoeur, but that the Truce which
was to hold but till the end of March, being expired, he would make a great
Effort to Master the whole Province: nevertheless the Kings Agents had so much
influence upon him, that he prolonged it to the latter end of July. Wherein he
seemed not well to understand his interest, and gave others a just occasion to
reproach him with what he had often told the Duke of Mayenne, That
opportunities had never failed him, but he had often missed his opportunities.

As for the Duke of Savoy, Lesdiguieres not only made Head against him, but
carried the War even into his own Country. He entered Morienne with Six thousand
Men, gave chase to Don Salines General of the Dukes Horse, took St. John de
Morienne, St. Michael, Aiguebella, and diverse Castles. The Duke on his part
Armed powerfully to drive him from his Territories; and there happened many
Rencounters between them, where the Valor of that Prince, and the Experience
of Lesdiguieres, turned the balance of success sometimes one way, sometimes the
other, till Winter came and parted the two Armies.

The Princes of Italy took France to be so much lost by the loss of Amiens,
that the Duke of Florence had the confidence to think of seizing some small
fragment for his share. During the greatest heat of the League, Bausset fearing
lest the Spaniards, who had an Eye upon Marseilles, should seize upon the
Island and Castle d'If, whereof he was Governor, had entreated that Duke to
send some Forces to assist him in the keeping them. The Duke slipped not the
opportunity, he sends him Five hundred Men, however Bausset still kept the
Castle of If, and quartered them without, upon the Island. Now, one day when
his Son whom he had left in his place, was gone to Marseilles, they seized upon
this Castle, partly by craft, partly by force, and drove out all the French.

They pretended in the beginning (to amuse the Marseillois) that they would
only hold it for the King, and defend it against all his Enemies; but when the
Duke of Guise had built a Fort in the Island of Ratouneau, which lies near that
of If, thereby to cover Marseilles and counter-mine them, they openly declared
their intention. John de Medicis Brother of the Duke of Florence, coming
thither with five Galleys, built another Fort in the Island of Pommegue,
distant about a Mile from the other two, took the Frigates the Marseillois had
freighted with Provisions, to Victual the Fort of Ratonneau, and even told du
Vair who was sent to him, that those Islands belonged to his Brother the Duke.
In effect, had not the face of the Kings Affairs been changed, he would have
explained his Pretensions, and have urged that the Duchess his Wife had a
right to this Island, as being of the House of Lorrain, who believed they had
so to all Provence.

The Huguenots after the Kings Conversion, made as it were a Band apart, and
minded their own Interest singly, as being now disjoined from his. They had
employed themselves in no other thing for two years past but holding of
Assemblies Politic composed of three Deputies of each Province, i. e. a
Gentleman, a Minister and an Elder. They met first at Saumur, then at Loudun,
afterward at Vendosme, Saumur, and lastly at Chastelleraud. From all these
Places they sent Deputies to the King to beseech him he would convert the Truce
which Henry III. had granted them, into an irrevocable Peace; and he amused
them still with fair words, delays, and many difficulties of his own creating.

Now when they plainly perceived that the more he settled his own Affairs the
less he granted to them, that besides he was perfectly well with his Holiness,
and heaped his favors and caresses on the Leaguers: they imagined the coming
of the Legate into France was upon some design to prejudice them, and that he
was just upon making his Agreement with Spain to destroy them utterly. These
apprehensions and the suggestions of la Trimouille and the Marshall de
Bouillon, had made them like to have run to their Arms three or four times:
nevertheless the more moderate, and the more saint-hearted amongst them, who
conjectured that when Amiens was taken, they must lie at the Kings Mercy, could
not be persuaded to it; on the contrary joining to their Arguments some other
means they used at the same time to gain the Deputies in those Assemblies, they
prevailed so far, as to possess the others with Patience, and to make them wait
for the Edict he promised them.

Few of them however came to him at the Siege of Amiens, the apprehensions some
malicious People buzzed in their Pates, Or a Camp Massacre.
Of a Saint Bartholomew in the Field, and the little esteem they guessed the
Court had for them, kept them at home. As to the rest, all that seemed to be
most contrary to the Kings Service did on this occasion most promote it: for
Biron surpassed himself, although he had no real affection for him, his own
Honor called him to Action; The Leaguers were desirous now to become the Sword
and Restorers of the State, as they had been the Bucklers of Religion; and the
Queen of England, though much dissatisfied, sent him four thousand Men.

French, destroyed their Works and their Batteries, stopped them upon every turn,
and sometimes made them even give ground, so that it was three Months 'ere they
got to the Fosse. Amongst a many Sallies, they made three very great ones, in
the last of which were slain Five hundred French and thirty of their Officers.
The use of Mines, which had been but little practiced in France during the
Civil War, was revived in this Siege: each did instantly attaque the other by
these Subterraneous Fires: and oft-times such were going to spring one Mine,
who found another bursting out under his Feet, which blew him into the Air, or
buried him quick in the Earth.

The perpetual Combats by night and day, much diminished the Besieged, sickness
had cast a greater number yet upon their Beds, and their Medicaments which were
Hernand Teillo durst make no Sallies without keeping great Guards of Horsemen
in the Streets. Having therefore no more Soldiers then what was necessary to
withstand the Assaults, he sent the Archduke word of the Condition he was in,
conjuring him to make an Effort to save that place which covered his
Low Countries, and gave him so fair a passage into France.

Spain, but being enough excited by his own Honor, and not caring if he did
hazard some Towns in his own Country to preserve so important a Foreign
Conquest, drew together, with all diligence, an Army of Eighteen thousand Foot,
and four thousand Horse, and taking his march, accompanied with the Duke of
Aumale and the old Count Mansfeild who was carried in a Sedan, sent Contreras
before with Nine hundred Horse to observe the Enemy. It was very dangerous to
expose such a Party of Cavalry in the Field against an Army that had almost
seven thousand Horse at their Command, and indeed Contreras after his departure
from Dourlens, being advanced as far as Querieu within three Leagues of Amiens,
was smartly repulsed: He thought in case of necessity to make his escape to
Bapaume, but was overtaken by the Light Horse near the Rivolet of Encre, then
by the King himself, who took three Cornets from him, and put the rest to the
rout amongst the Woods, where they were left to the mercy of the merciless
Peasants.

This Essay was but an ill presage for the Archdukes Enterprise, and a worse
yet was the death of Hernand Teillo, who no doubt would have bravely seconded
him. September, as he was standing upon a Ravelin ready to make a Sally, he was
slain by a Musket Shot which hit him in the Side. The Besieged by unanimous
consent, elected in his stead Hierome Caraffa Marquess de Montenegro, and owned
him for their Governor.

Two days after Francis de l'Espinay Saint Luc Governor of Brouage, and Great
Master of the Ordnance, had the like fate. He was a Lord that for his real
worth had few his equals at Court, not any for his Generosity and Wit, and the
soft charms of Conversation. His Government passed to his Son: but his Office
of Grand Maistre to Anthony d'Estree by the favor of Gabriella his Daughter,
upon condition however that he should take some other Reward for it, and
exchange it again at the Kings pleasure.

The Fifteenth of the Month the Archduke parted from Dourlens with his Army in
a Body: but he advancing not above two Leagues the three first days, because
the Duke of Montpensier was hovering about him with the Light Horse: the King
imagined he had no design to attempt any thing by open force, but only lie
hovering Longpre. His intention was to gain that Post, and afterward make
himself Master of the Bridge upon the Sum, to pass Two thousand five hundred
Men into the City, whom he had expressly culled out, and put under the Conduct
of Charles de Longueval Count de Buquoy.

At sight of this great Army, the Sutlers and Camp-Boys belonging to the Kings
ran away in a fright, the out-Guards were abandoned, the Foot fell first into
confusion and then to a rout, neither the Constable nor other chief Commanders
could re-assure them, the Dukes of Montpensier and Nevers appeared in vain on
the outlines, to cover this disorder in the Camp, the terror spread it self
still more and more thorough all the Army. The Spanish Horse already cried out
Victory, and the Soldiers said, Come we must fall on: but the Archduke knew
not how to improve so fair an opportunity, he lost above three hours time in
holding Council. In the mean while the Duke of Mayenne who guessed his design,
sent some old Soldiers and six Fieldpieces toward Longpre, and the King
returning from his Sport put his Men into order, and restored their courage
again, though not without much difficulty.

At last, the Archduke having deliberated a long time, moved toward Longpre*
When his Men were about midway, the six Guns began to play upon them, and
raked quite cross so effectually, that they took off whole Ranks together:
nevertheless they had not above five hundred paces more to get quit of this
Storm, and be out of danger, and then might easily have gained Longpre and the
Bridge. But this unexpected Slaughter discomposing him the more, because his
Spies had assured him there were no Cannon near that place, he commanded them
to gain the Hill that they might be secure; which exposed them in truth much
longer to the fury of the Cannon, and cost them two hundred Men in stead of
fifty. His Council thought convenient that from thence he should go and Post
himself at St. Sauveur, which is a quarter of a League more to the left hand on
the Rivers side.

The night was spent in perpetual allarms, mean time the Duke of Mayenne, for
fear of falling the next day into the same peril as before, caused the Avenues
to Longpre speedily to be fortified. This proved a necessary work, for on the
Morrow the Archduke laid a Bridge over against St. Sauveur, and immediately
endeavored to pass his Forces to assault Longpre; but found the French so well
prepared to receive Vignancour. Neither did he remain there above four or five
hours; For finding the King followed him with all his Army, excepting four
thousand Men, whom he left in the Trenches, and that his Post was not tenable,
he dislodged a little after midnight. If the King had been believed, he could
not have got off without a Battle; There is some probability he might have
gained it against an Army disordered by their hasty retreat, and then no doubt
but the Conquest of the Low Countries would have been the consequence of that
Victory. However his Captains considering the chance of War is ever uncertain,
and that the Kingdom of France would have run too great a hazard in his Person,
because in the present Condition of things, his Succession must have been very
Disputable and Contentious, they restrained his forward heat and brought him
back to the Siege.

The Archduke being returned into Artois employed his Forces for the taking
Monthuli^ which incommoded Ardres, then dismissed them, and retired to Arras.
He there fell sick, of Grief, as it was said, for having no better succeeded in
his Enterprise of Amiens, and for the loss, during his absence, of seven or
eight places taken by Prince Maurice along the River Rhine, and in the Country
of Over-Issel.

The same day he went off, the Besieged being Summoned, which was upon the
Nineteenth of September, did not think convenient to stand so obstinately on a
defense which might have held long indeed, but had been to no purpose, and only
dangerous to themselves. They Capitulated therefore upon the best Conditions
usually granted on the like occasions, and promised to surrender in six days,
unless they were relieved within that time; They were allowed to send notice of
it to the Archduke, and gave Hostages for performance of the Agreement. The
said Term expired, they rendered the Town in the Morning of the Five and
twentieth of the Month: The Constable received it in the Name of the King, they
going forth about Ten of the Clock the same day, carrying off together with
their Bagage three hundred wounded Men, and a thousand Women, whereof four
hundred belonged to that City.

The King being on Horseback at the Head of his Army, with great kindness
permitted Montenegre and the other Captains to salute him by embracing his
Knees. At Evening he made his entrance into the City, and gave the Government
to Dominick de Vic, who finding but Eight hundred Inhabitants there in all,
re-peopled it

The King himself carried the news of the surrender of Amiens to the Archduke
Arras, went to visit him there with his whole Army, and to salute him with some
Volees of Cannon; Then finding no body moved, he returned to Dourlens and
invested it. But the Rains, the Mire, the scarcity of Provisions, the too great
Fatigues, and the Maladies proceeding from all those inconveniences,
constrained them to decamp before the end of the Month of October with great
damage and some shame.

Toward the end of this year the Duchy of Ferrara, for want of Heirs Males,
reverted to the Holy See by the Death of Duke Alphonso II. the last Legitimate
Prince of the House of Est, and Son of Hercules II. and of Madam Renee of
France. Ferrara was of the number of those Territories which the Countess
Matilda Daughter and Heiress to the eldest of the House of Est, gave to the
Holy See for the sake of Pope Gregory VII. about the year 1077. Since that time
the Male-off-spring of the other Brothers, bearing the Title of Marquess d'Est,
had ever enjoyed it, not as Proprietors, but only Vicars of the Holy See, till
the year 1471. that Pope Paul erected it to a Duchy and invested Borso
therewith; to whom the Emperor had also given Modena and Regio with the like
Titles.

Now the Duke Alphonso II. seeing himself without Male Children, had made
diverse Applications to the Pope and the Emperor, to obtain the transport of his
Dutchies to Caesar d'Est who was his Kinsman. The Court of Rome did not think
him fit to succeed, because his Father, who was an Alphonso, was reputed but
the Natural Son of Duke Alphonso I. of that name. Thus on that side he could
get no ground, but he gave such vast Sums to the Emperor Rodolphus, that he
granted him the transport of the Duchy Modena and Regio, of the Principality
of Carpy, and some other Territories holding of the Empire. He made account
that with all these, together with the great Wealth, and the good Friends he
should leave him, he might be able to maintain himself by force in the Duchy
of Ferrara. In effect, when he died, which happened the Twenty seventh of
October, Caesar believing he should be supported by the Venetians, and even the
Spaniards too, got into possession, and at first stood firm against the
Excommunications of Pope Clement, and against his Army which was commanded by
the Cardinal Aldobrandino Legate and Nephew of his Holiness: but when he
understood that the King of France, which he never did imagine, took the
affirmative for the Pope, and found the dread of this great Power had cooled
his Allies, and affrighted the Ferrareses, he threw down his Sword, and made
his Accommodation about the end of December. By the Treaty, he restored the
Duchy of Ferrara, to the Pope: Who left him all the free Lands, or Estate,
which the House of Est had possessed there, and granted that he and the Dukes
his Descendants, should have in Rome the same Rank, and the same Prerogatives
as the Dukes of Ferrara had there enjoyed.

Paris honored the Kings Victory with a Triumphant Entrance they made for him.
He passed the whole Winter in his Louvre harkening to Propositions of Peace,
but making, however, preparations for War, employing his Intelligences to
disunite the Huguenots, and above all to regulate and meliorate his Finances.
As to the Peace, while he was yet before Dourlens, Villeroy on his behalf, and
John Richardot on the Archdukes, conferred together upon the Frontiers of
Picardy and Artois, and had agreed together that both Kings should send their
Deputies to Vervins, where the Popes Legate was to be present in quality of
Mediator.

Henry IV. after so many satigues and pains, earnestly desired to enjoy his
repose, and apprehended lest Amiens, that some new Faction should start up
within his Kingdom amongst the Grandees, or the Huguenots, or even in his own
House, because he had no Children. As for King Philip, he found himself even
dying, and saw his Son both weak and unexperienced; so that they were both
resolved to proceed with more sincerity then is wont to be practiced on such
occasions.

The King for this purpose named Pompone de Bellievre, and Bruslard de Sillery,
both Counselors of State, and the latter also a President in Parliament. The
Archduke having powers from the King of Spain (who had contrived it thus, that
so if his Deputies must give place, the shame would be the less to him) made
choice of John Richardot President of the Catholic Kings Council in the
Low Countries, John Baptist Tassis Knight of the Order of St. James, and Louis
Verreiken Audiencier, Prime Secretary and Treasurer of the Council of State.

France arrived at Vervins the Seventh of February, those of Spain a few
French, as being at home, went to visit them first, yet would not extend their
civility so far as to give them the upper-hand at their meeting. This was a
great stumbling Block at their very entrance: the Legate found an Expedient to
remove it. He took the higher end, as it belonged to him, placed his Nuncio at
his right had, and gave the French their choice either to sit beneath the
Nuncio, or right over against him. They chose the latter, and left the other to
the Spaniard. This method satisfied them all, these vaunting they had the right
hand, and the other that they were scated nearest to the Legate, besides that he
to whom we allow the choice has the advantage.

They first agreed to a Cessation of Arms for four Leagues round Vervins, and
safe-Conducts for their Couriers that should travel to Paris and Bruxels. The
King had explained himself that he could not Treat, unless they would put
things into the same condition as they were stated by the Treaty of Cateau in
Cambresis, Anno 1559. and that they would comprehend his Allies: the Deputies
for the Archduke agreed to the first* but having no express Commission for the
second, they were forced to send into Spain about it. A general one was sent
them, but with private Orders, enjoining them not to comprehend the Rebels of
the United Provinces, whom they pretended to be still their Subjects, or else
in exchange to comprehend on their side the Duke of Mercoeur, who was no more
Rebel, said they, then those Provinces, as also the Duke of Savoy, who should
not be obliged to restore the Marquisate of Salusses.

These were two great difficulties: there were also two others; the one
concerning the manner and time for restoring of places, and the other the
business of Cambray: for the French demanded it should be left to its
Neutrality, and that the Citadel should be razed, and the Spaniards were
obstinate for holding it, because, as they pleaded, they had conquered it from
an Usurper.

But for the two first, the Kings indulgent Fortune and the faithful Care of
his Officers surmounted them. The Duke of Savoy in the beginning of February,
had again taken the Field with a considerable Army, having Albigny for
Lieutenant, Aiguebelle, and then besieged Charbonnieres, a place standing upon
a high Rock at the entrance into the passage of Chamberry near St. Jean de
Maurienne. Lesdiguieres sent Crequi with Twelve hundred Men to its relief; the
Duke suffering him to approach, hemmed him so dexterously in amongst the
streights of those Mountains, with all his Men, that he defeated one Party of
them, and compelled the rest with their Commander, to lay down their Arms and
surrender themselves, after they had lain one night in the

Daufine and Lyonnois, where there were at that time no Forces, as it put the
Duke upon a new attempt against those Provinces. Lesdiguieres himself pretended
to be amazed at the blow, and perhaps might be so: but the old Fox The Duke of
Savoy called him so.
having recovered his senses, contrived a design which put a stop to all the
Dukes further Conquests. This was the taking the Fort de Barraux: He attaqued
it the night of the Thirteenth of March by Moonshine, and

The reputation of this Action was very great, though the importance of the
place was not so, the Savoy Ambassador did not talk now so loud at Vervins.
However he stood stiff for the Marquisate: but the Spaniards did not so back
him as they ought to have done their Masters Son in Law, but obliged him to
relinquish. So that That the Pope should be sole Judge of the Differences
between him and the King; That his Holiness should decide them within one years
time; That if he should happen to die before that time, there should be a three
Months Truce between the Parties, during which they should make choice of some
other Arbitrators: That in the interim the Duke should surrender the City of
Berre in Provence, which he yet held, and that he should disown Captain la
Fortune, who had seized upon Seure It is now called Bellagarde.
in Burgundy in his name; That the Duke should stand Neuter between the two
Crowns.

As to the Duke of Mercoeur, he seeking every day new pretenses and shifts to
delay his Agreement, hoping the Spaniards would comprehend him amongst their
Allies: the King was advised by Schomberg to draw toward Bretagne, that so his
presence might wholly quell the Duke, and likewise determine the business of
the Huguenots. He followed this good Advice, and sent Order to Brissace to
begin the War, whilst he prepared for that Expedition, and appointed a Council
at Paris to govern there during his absence, and Forces to guard the Frontiers
against any invasion of the Archdukes.

So soon as Brissac had drawn the Sword, he executed an Enterprise projected
upon Dinan. The Inhabitants having barricado'd themselves against the Castle;
he besieged it, and took it upon Composition. The King departed from Paris in
the Month of February: The rumor of his March so terrified those Captains that
held Bretagne, as Craon and Rochefort in Anjou, Montjan in the Country of
Maine, Mirabeau in Touraine, Tifauges in Poitou, and Ancenis even in Bretagne,
that they brought the Keys to him on his way.

The Dukes astonishment was great, when he heard those places he expected
should serve him as Outworks to retard the Kings Progress, were fallen in a
moment, and so had left all those he held in Bretagne wholly naked, and besides
much startled by their example. There being now no other Refuge for him but the
Kings Clemency, he had recourse to it by the intercession of the Kings
Mistress, newly made Duchess of Beaufort, who offered to obtain honorable
Conditions for him, provided he would bestow his only Daughter in Marriage upon
her eldest Son, who by the Courtiers was called Caesar-Monsieur. He did not
reject this Proposition; but his Wife (Mary de Luxembourg-Martigues) a proud
and haughty Princess, could not condescend. Her Husband notwithstanding knowing
what power the Ladies had with the King, sent her beforehand, and charged her
to offer the said Daughter to him, to be disposed of in favor of that Prince
as best pleased him.

Both of them hoped this Lure would dispose the Dame to render them the good
Offices they stood in need of, and that afterward they should find means to
delay the accomplishment of their Promise, during which, time might bring forth
some favorable occasion to change the Scene, or turn the Tide another way. But
this Dame, as crafty as themselves, made no great haste to serve them, but on
the contrary would let them know her intercession only could save them. When
therefore the Duchess of Mercoeur presented her self one Morning at the Gates
of Angers, she was rudely turned back, and forced to retire to Pont de Ce: but
when her Pride thus humbled, had taught her to refer her self wholly to the
will of the fair Dame, she was the very same day sent for, and the King soon
moved with the Tears of that obliging Sex, and very ready to grant what his
Mistress requested, allowed the Duke an Edict almost as honorable as he could
have expected when his power was greatest.

For having taken care in the Preface of it to excuse him, though after his
Reconciliation with the Pope, nay, even after the coming of the Legate into
France, he had not submitted to him, supposing he acted in that manner for some
reasons that respected the preservation of Bretagne, which must have run the
hazard of being invaded by Strangers, whilst the Forces of France were employed
upon the Frontiers of Picardy: He declared, That he held him, and all those
that had followed his Party, for good and faithful Subjects, restored them to
their Estates and Commands; Revoked all Judgments given against them; Confirmed
all such as had been made by the Members of Parliament and Presidial Courts of
that Party. Guingamp, Montemort, and Lamballe* Pass-ports for the Spaniards who
lay in the River of Nantes to retire; and power to keep the Places and Forces
he then had, till a Month after the Verification of this Edict; Not to mention
several other the like Conditions as those granted in the Edict for the Duke of
Mayenne.

The Price of so honorable a Treaty was his Daughter, whom the King in few
days betrothed to his Son Caesar. He had legitimated and enriched him with the
Duchy of Vendosine, to be by him held with the same Rights and Advantages as
the preceding Dukes had enjoyed, and with a promise to give him within four
years wherewith to redeem all its Lands that had been alienated. Which the
Parliament verified, without drawing any consequence for such other Lands as
were of the Kings Patrimony, which by the Laws of the Kingdom were reunited to
the Crown from the moment he attained it. The Treaty made, the Duke of Mercoeur
came to Angers to salute the King, who received him as his Sons Father in Law.
The Contract for this future Marriage was sealed in the Castle belonging to the
said Town, and the Fiancailles, or Betrothings were celebrated in the same
place, with as much Pomp as if he had been a Son of France. The Cardinal de
Joyeuse not disdaining to perform the Ceremony.

From Angers the King descended to Nantes, and from thence went to Renes, where
the Estates of Bretagne were held. He fojourned about two Months in those two
Cities, employing that time in putting every thing in good order for the quiet
and security of the Province, and collecting Twelve hundred thousand Crowns,
the greatest part whereof was given him by the Estates of that Country.

Whilst he was at Nantes he finished the business of the Huguenots. Their
Deputies being come to him at Blois, he made them follow him thither, and had
put them off till after his Treaty with the Duke of Mercoeur. That Treaty being
perfected, he would yet have made some further delay, but they pressed it so
home that he could scarce find any reasonable Excuse; And besides he
apprehended lest their despair should in the end put them upon some undertaking
that might retard the Peace with Spain, and give the Leaguers a plausible
pretense to reunite and take up Arms again. This Consideration, above any
thing else, obliged him to grant them the Edict, which from the name of that
Town, is called the Edict of Nantes.

Secret, the most important being that which left them several Places of
Security, besides all those they already held. This Edict is that Safeguard
under which they have lived to this very hour in security and quiet, and freely
enjoyed the Exercise of their Religion. The King durst not send it to the
Parliament to be verified, till the Legate were out of the Kingdom, so that it
came not thither till the following year.

They labored incessantly at Vervins about the Peace, the French did not
insist so much now on Cambray, although they had not yet passed by that
Article. The Archduke impatient to consummate his Marriage with the Infanta
Clara-Eugenia, hastened as much as possible he could the grave pace of the
Spaniard, and obliged his Deputies to step over many trivial things. Had it not
been for the Allies of France, the Treaty had been finished in less then three
weeks. The King demanded a two Months Cessation of Arms for them, that they
might send their Ambassadors, the Spaniards refused it absolutely; and upon
this Contest, the violent Spirits belonging to eithers Court, the chief
Commanders of their Armies, and those that desired troubled Waters, did not
fail to press for a Rupture with all their might and interest, but it availed
nothing, the two Princes were of a contrary disposition.

In the mean time the English Ambassadors arrived at Court, which as then was
at Nantes: they did not show themselves much averse to the Peace, for the
difficulties did not concern them, but the States, from whom they had Orders
not to separate. Now those would have none at all: knowing too well the Peace
could not be made without some prejudice to their liberty, for which they had
fought almost thirty years, and without which they neither valued their Estates
nor Lives, choosing rather, therefore, to hazard all then to lose the Recompense
of so much Labor, Blood, and Treasure. One thing besides confirmed them yet
more in this generous Resolution, which was a Dispatch they intercepted coming
from the King of Spain, which gave his Deputies Order not to comprise them,
unless upon Condition to restore the Roman Religion over all their Country, to
reduce it to an absolute Obedience, and fill up all Offices with Catholic
Magistrates.

English that he would not Ratify it till forty days after his Deputies had
Signed it.

May, and on the Twelfth they put it into the hands of the Legate, praying him
to keep it secret till the two Months of the Cessation were expired. And yet
the King made no scruple of publishing it to the Estates of Bretagne, telling
them he was going into Picardy to carry the Ratification himself. In effect he
went away with that design, having first given the Government of Bretagne to
the little Duke of Vendosme, upon the surrender of the Duke of Mercoeur his
Father in Law: but an indisposition befell him on his way which constrained him
to return to Paris.

The Queen of England unable to prevail with him to allow one Month beyond the
forty days, wrote to him of it with Reproaches, and in terms which accused him
of unthankfulness. The English declaimed most outrageously in the Court of
France against his proceeding, and made their Complaints come to the Ears of
all the Protestant Princes, the Hollanders behaved themselves more modestly. It
was endeavored to satisfy both the one and the others with weighty Reason of
State, and with many examples of the like, and they were oftentimes exhorted
to enter into the same Treaty by that Door which was left open for them.

This seems to have been done only out of good manners, for they knew well
enough it was not their interest to come in; and perhaps some would have been
much puzzled if they had been persuaded to it. However it were, the Deputies of
the latter sent the King word the term of two Months was too short to Assemble
the Estates of all their Provinces, and the Queen of England made him
understand she would not be divided from them.

Having, as he believed, therefore satisfied in every point of that devoir he
owed to his Alliance, and his Reputation, he sent his Ratification to his
Deputies about the end of May, the date in Blank, with order not to fill it up
till the Twelfth of June, at which time expired the forty days granted to Queen
Elizabeth. That day Vervins, and afterward in all the Cities both of France
and the Low Countries, with such loud Expressions of Mirth and Joy as resounded
thorough all the Kingdoms of Europe, and gave no less terror to the Turks, then
content to the greater part of Christians.

viz. Charles de Crouy Duke of Arschot, Francis de Mendozze Admiral of Arragon,
Charles de Ligne Earl of Aremberg Knight of the Golden Fleece, and Lewis de
Velasco Grand Master of the Ordnance, serving as Ambassadors with Richardot and
Verreiken, brought the Ratification to the King, and Witnessed his Swearing to
the Treaty in Nostre-Dame the One and twentieth of June, there being present on
behalf of the Duke of Savoy Gaspard de Geneva Marquess de Lullins, and Reonard
Roncas his Secretary of State. Reciprocally the Marshall de Biron, Billievre
and Sillery, did the same for the Archduke at Bruxels the Six and twentieth of
the same Month; and William de Gadagne Boteon at the Duke of Savoy's, who did
not Swear it till the Second day of August at Chamberry. King Philip the Second
Signed the Articles indeed, but being prevented by Death could not Swear to
them with the same Ceremonies as the rest of the Princes had done.

This is the Substance of the most Essential Articles. The Treaty was concluded
conformably and in approbation of that of Cateau-Cambresis; of which and the
precedent ones nothing was to be innovated, but such things as should appear to
derogate from this same. If any Subject of either of these two Kings should go
to serve their Enemies by Sea or Land, they should be punished as Infractors
and Disturbers of the Public Peace. Such as had been forced out of their
Lands, Offices and Benefices, accompting from the year 1588. should be
restored, however they should not enter upon any Lands of the Kings without
Letters Patents under the Great Seal. In case the King of Spain should give the
Low Countries, and the Counties of Burgundy and Charolois to the Insanta his
Daughter, she and her Territories should be comprised in this Treaty, without
making any new one for that purpose. The two Kings should mutually surrender
what they had taken the one from the other since the year 1559. viz. the Most
Christian King the County of Charolois, and the Catholic King the Cities of
Calais, Ardres, Monthulin, Dourlens, la Capelle, and le Catelet in Picardy, as
also Blavet in Bretagne, For security whereof he should give up four Hostages
(these were the abovenamed.) Both the one and the other reserving all his
Rights, Pretensions and Actions, to what he had not renounced, but should not
pursue, or prosecute the same but only by way of amity and Justice. (This had
regard to Navarre and Burgundy.) It was likewise said; That this Treaty should
be Verified, Paris, Chamber of Accounts, and other Parliaments; and on the same
day in the Grand Council, other Councils, and Chamber des Comptes of the
Low Countries.

The Interests of the Duke of Savoy were therein treated in such manner as we
have related: There was nothing mentioned of the Duke of Florence, because he
pretended not to be in War, and said he had seized on the Islands of Marseilles
only for satisfaction of certain Sums of Money owing by the King to him, and
whereof they had stopped or diverted the Assignments; Add that d'Ossat was gone
to Florence to May, upon these Conditions; That the Duke should render the
Islands of If and Pommegues, and might carry thence his Cannon, Equipage, and
Ammunition. For which the King should own himself his Debtor for Two hundred
thousand Crowns: That good Assignments should be given him for it, and for
Security of the said Payment twelve Notables of the French whom himself should
nominate.

End of the League and the War.
Thus were extinguished to the very last Spark, not only that Civil War the
League had kindled in the Bowels of France, but likewise those Firebrands which
that Faction had fetched in from other Countries; And this Kingdom being now in
perfect quiet, had no more to do but by gentle degrees endeavor to repair the
infinite damage they had suffered, and to recruit their Strength and Forces,
half consumed by so many ghastly Wounds, and so great an effusion of their best
Blood.

The first discharge for the People and for the Kings Coffers, was to disband
all they well could of those Armies then on foot. This Cashiering having filled
the Woods and Highways with a world of Robbers, the Prevosts had Order to
scowre about the Countries to suppress them; And because many of them were
brave Fellows whose desperate condition put them upon this last shift, and made
them bloody in their own defense, the King to take away this mischief, made a
Declaration the Fourth of August, Which did forbid the use of Firearms to all
sorts of People, excepting his Gentsdarmes, Light-Horsemen of his Guards, his
Companies d'Ordonance, and all Prevosts and their Archers, enjoining every one
to run upon and apprehend

The same Month the King being at Monceaux, the Treaty of Marriage was
concluded between Madam Catharine the Kings Sister, (aged near Forty years) and
Henry Duke of Bar, Son of Charles Duke of Lorrain. Several difficulties in
matters of Religion had held it in debate for above two years together. The
Nuptials were deferred till the beginning of the year following, the two Parties
having but little satisfaction in being made a Sacrifice by their Parents to
interest of State, against the sentiments of their Consciences.

The Ecclesiastical Discipline being much neglected during the time of War, the
King allowed of an Assembly of the Clergy at Paris, the Deputies having
conferred together touching their Interests, Francis de Guesle Archbishop of
Tours, was enjoined Trent, (excepting only such Heads as might infringe the
liberties of the Gallican Church, and the privileges of Sovereign Courts:) The
re-establishment of Canonical Elections, for Benefices having Cure of Souls;
The revocation of Briefs of Nomination to such as were not vacant; as also
those for Pensions granted to Laics on those Fonds; Full liberty for the
Clergy to enjoy their Revenue without any other obligation but that of doing
their Functions; The Reparation of Churches and other Sacred Places; and the
due observation of those Contracts the Clergy had made with the King.

His Answer was concise, grave, and full of excellent things: he told them he
took their Exhortations in good part, but he exhorted them likewise to well
doing, and to concur with him toward the Reformation of Abuses; That he had
not occasioned them, but that he had found them, and that they must proceed
gradually, as in all things of such great importance; That hitherto they had
met with nothing but fair words, but he would give them good effects, and that
they should find under his gray and dusty Coat, he was all Gold within; (By
this he reflected on the breach of Faith, and Luxury of his Predecessors) That
to each of their demands, he would return his Answers, as speedily as he could
deliberate with his Council.

King Philip II. had not the pleasure of enjoying his Peace long, nor to see
the so much desired Marriage of his Daughter, he dying at the Escurial the
Thirteenth of September. He was Aged Seventy and two years, whereof he had
Reigned two and forty and nine Months since the abdication of his Father.
Philip III. his only Son, was then but in his Twentieth year, he left him all
his vast Estates, excepting the Low Countries, and the Franche-Comte, which he
gave in Dower to his dear Daughter Isabella.

That those Provinces should return to the Crown of Spain upon default of Heirs
Male or Female; That if they fell to a Daughter, That they should have no
Commerce to the East and West Indies; That the King reserved to himself to be
the Chief, of the Order of the Fleece, and to place Governors and Garrisons in
the Citadels of Antwerp, Ghent, and Cambray, who should Swear to him and to the
Princes of the Low Countries.

A Hectique Fever had wasted this King for above fifteen Months, when the Gout
seized him most cruelly upon the Eve of St. John: these Acid Humors bred
Swellings and Imposthumes which broke out first on his Knee, then in diverse
parts of his Body, whence issued perpetual swarms of Lice, which could be no
way prevented. To this was joined a perpetual Satyriasme Or Priaepisme.
which drained all his Strength and Blood with a most dreadful Prurience. The
horrible stench proceeding from his Ulcers, and those loathsome Infects which
eat him to the Bones, made the very Hearts of all that did but approach him
ready to faint, but yet his own did not: he endured all these Torments with so
mavelous a patience, and kept his Mind and Spirit in so staid and firm a
posture to his last gasp, that they could hardly judge whether they beheld in
him the greater Example of Humane Misery, or of Heroic Constancy.

In this ruinous Body crumbling away thus by piecemeal, his Judgment sound and
entire, disposed yet of his greatest Affairs: and at the moment of being no
more, endeavored to extend his Dominion to the future, laboring to draw up
Counsels, Advice, and Memoirs to direct the Government of his Son. Many were
found after his death, of which some stole into the public Light; Vain and
ambitious Care! Princes will Reign according to their own fancies, they seldom
or never will believe their Predecessors; Therefore well may they imagine their
Successors will

He made his Will two years before his death: by a Codicil he enjoined his Son
to have the business of Navarre well examined, and to do right to the Heirs of
John d'Albret if it were theirs. He said, his Father Charles V. had Ordained
him to do the same by his Will: but his vast Employments had not allowed him
time to think of it. At the end of this Codicil he added a Clause which
destroyed his former Order: It was, That they should not make the said
Restitution or Reward, but in case it would be no way a prejudice to the
Catholic Religion, or to the

Before the news of his death arrived in Flanders, the Archduke was gone
thence, having deposited the Sacred Purple in the Church of Nostre-Dame de Haux
within two Leagues of Bruxels, and left the Government of the Low Countries to
the Cardinal Andrea of Austria, in the name of the Infanta Isabella who had
there been owned for Princess. He passed by Tirol, whence he carried Margaret
Daughter of the Archduke Charles (who was dead) and the Widow, his Mother, to
Ferrara. They were received very solemnly, and Pope Clement, who had been in
that City from the Eighteenth of May, celebrated the Marriage of King Philip
III. with Margaret, and of the Archduke with the Infanta Isabella, Albert being
Proxy for the King of Spain, and the Duke of Sesse for Isabella. The new Queen
and the Archduke did afterward stay two Months in Milan, then in the Month of
February of the following year, they embarked at Genoa for Spain, where this
double Marriage was Celebrated between the said Parties in the City of Valentia
in the Month of April.

October, the King being at Monceaux, (an Estate which he had given to his
Mistress) as he was beginning to enter upon a Diet, he fell ill of a retention
of Urine attended with a higher Fever and frequent fits of fainting, which gave
some apprehension that he was near his end: but the cause being removed, he was
immediately relieved, and left his Bed within two days.

His Mistress having thus seen her self so near the Precipice, did solicit
him eternally to Marry her, and pressed him with the more confidence, as her
tender care might have ensued. Soon after the Cardinal de Medicis, being come
to take leave for his return to Rome, the King discovered to him the design he
had to satisfy her, and entreated he would do him the good office to persuade
the Margaret. The Legate answered, very coldly, that his Holiness had sent him
into France for no other business but what concerned the Peace, which having
successfully mediated, he was now going to give an account to the Pope. The
King repented he had discovered his Heart so openly to Sillery to Rome, he
enjoined him expressly to assure that Cardinal all those fancies were dispelled.

Catharine the Kings Sister with the Duke of Bar, which was Celebrated on the
last day of January, some while after, that of Charles Duke of Nevers with
Catharine Daughter of the Duke of Mayenne, and that of Henry Son of that Duke
with Henrietta Sister of Charles, and then that of Henry Duke of Montpensier
and Henrietta Catharine, only Daughter of Henry Duke of Joyeuse, and Heiress of
that rich House. The King the same year erected Aiguillon to a Duchy and
Pairrie in favor of the Duke of Mayennes Son.

The Duke of Bar had great repugnance for his Marriage to a Huguenot Princess,
who besides was of Kindred in the third and fourth degree, and therefore stood
in need of a double dispensation, the one for diversity of Religion, the other
for Parentage: but the Duke his Father thinking to find great advantage in this
Match, passed over all those Scruples of Conscience. The difficulty was to find
a Prelat that would adventure to Celebrate this discordant Marriage: many whom
they solicited did flatly refuse it; the Archbishop of Rouen, Bastard Brother
to the King, after a little entreaty, lent a helping hand, and tied the Nuptial
Knot in the Kings Closet, and in his presence, thinking it unbecomming to deny
so small a piece of Service to him who had so lately promoted him to so fair an
Archbishopric.

After the Solemnities of those Weddings were past, two unexpected changes gave
the Court just cause of admiration; the one was of that same Henry Duke of
Joyeuse who had newly Married his Daughter, the other of Antoinetta Sister to
the defunct Duke of Longueville, and Widow of the Marquess de Belle-Isle. The
first, as we have formerly related, came out of the Capucins Covent, Anno 1592.
Now being moved with his Mothers Tears, a Lady very devout, and very
scrupulous, pressed by the summons of his own Conscience, peequ'd at some words
uttered by the King, and solicited by the Popes secret Admonitions, (for he
had given him dispensation to tarry abroad in the World but while the Catholic
Religion should need his assistance) he resolved to make good his Vow, and
having sent his Mareschals Staff and blew Ribbon to the King, retired to the
Capucins Covent in Paris. They were much amazed, three or four days afterward,
to see him in a Pulpit, where that Penitential Habit, and his Sermons much
fuller of Zeal, then Learning, gave him more luster in the opinions of the
People, then either his Birth or Dignity had gaven him at Court.

For the Marchioness of Belle-Isle, one of the handsomest and wittiest Ladies
of her time, having left Bretagne without communicating the design to any of
her Relations, Fucillantines newly instituted at Toulouze. Kermartin, was
Hanged, she not being able to obtain his Pardon, gave her so much distaste that
she would never converse more with the World by whom she had been so slighted.

In the beginning of the year, Sillery being sent to Rome about the business of
the Marquisate of Salusses, had Orders likewise to follicite the dissolution of
the Kings Marriage. The hopes of having the Seals upon his return, was a
powerful motive to make him act with all his might, for the Duchess of
Beaufort had promised she would get them for him, without any regard to the
Interest of the Chancellor de de Chiverny, a good Friend to her Sister de
Sourdis; believing she had done sufficiently for her by obtaining a Cardinals
Hat for her eldest Son.

The first point of Sillery's Commission had not proved difficult but only for
that Queen Margaret knowing very well, the King after he had repudiated her,
would Marry the Duchess, gave notice to the Pope how for that very reason, she
would never consent; And the Pope for the same cause had repugnance enough to
it; For he did not see very well how he could Legitimate Children that were
born in Adultery, and foresaw great troubles for the Succession of the Kingdom,
for as much as the Princes of the Blood would never have agreed to it, and
besides the Children that should have come afterward, being born in lawful
Wedlock, would have disputed it with the former. However the King importuned
him extremely by his Agents, and it was to be doubted lest to go a shorter way
he should make Process against Queen Margaret for Adultery, and do by her as
Philip the Fair had done by his eldest Sons Wife.

Beaufort did never leave the King, and was gone with him to Fontainebleau,
being big with Child: The Easter Holidays approaching, he desired she would, to
avoid scandal, go and pass them at Paris, and lodge at Sebastian Zamets, that
rich Partisan who owned himself Master of Seventeen hundred thousand Crowns.
Now one Maundy-Thursday, this Fellow having taken a most particular care to
treat her with such Viands as he knew were most agreeable to her Palate, it
happened that going to the Tenebrae Mattins in Lent in the (...) C. Churches.
at the Little Saint Antoines, she fell into a Swoon; Immediately they bring
her back to Zamets: but her illness increasing, she had no patience till they
had removed her out of that cursed House. They conveyed her therefore to her
Sister Sourdis; and there was Fontainebleau, upon the news of this accident,
being informed of her death at Ville-Juif, turned short back again with what
grief we may imagine, but which was soon dislodged by a fresh Engagement.

After her death she appeared so hideous, and her Visage so disfigured, none
could behold her without horror. Her Enemies from thence took an occasion to
make the People believe it was the Devil had put her into that sad and dismal
plight, assirming she had sold her self to him upon condition she should alone
engross all the Kings favor. They made the like Story of Louysa de Budos, Wife
of the Constable de Montmorency, who died this year with the same Symptoms;
and true it is, there was in either of their deaths, not really the operation,
but the instigation of him who has been a Murderer from the beginning.

The Pope believed it was a favor granted by Heaven in answer to his Prayers:
so soon as he heard the news, he became very inclinable to dissolve the
Marriage of Queen Margaret. This Princess keeping her self still shut up in the
Castle of Vsson in Auvergne, having been parted from her Husband almost
fourteen years, had hitherto denied to give her consent: but after she was
acquainted with the news of this Ladies death, she sent her Petition to the
King, desiring she might be permitted to Address her self to the Pope, to
demand, He would pronounce the Nullity of her Marriage, since there having
never been any mutual consent, but a manifest compulsion, besides the diversity
in Religion, and Parentage in the third degree, and for that the dispensation
which was necessary upon those two Heads, having never been demanded by the two
Parties, nor notified in due time and form as they ought to have been, it was
Null.

The King allowed her Applications to the Pope; who having read her Petition
which contained these Reasons, and likewise one from the King which tended to
the same purpose, named the Cardinal de Joyeuse, Horace de Monte a Neapolitan
Archbishop of Arles, and Gaspard Bishop of Modena Nuncio for his Holiness, to
Judge of this Affair upon the place, telling them that if the Allegations were
true they were to part the Married couple. These Judges having therefore
examined the proofs which were produced on either side, Declared the Marriage
null and not valuably contracted, and permitted the Parties to re-Marry
elsewhere. The Proceedings Rome, the Pope confirmed the Sentence the more
willingly as having been put in hopes the King would choose a Wife amongst his
Relations.

As soon as the Legate was gone forth of the Kingdom, the Assembly of the
Huguenots which still held good at Chastelleraud, pressed more instantly the
Verification of the Edict of Nantes. Besides that the thing in it self had many
difficulties, the Clergy made their opposition in Parliament; and in that
numerous Company there were many more for rejecting, then for receiving it. It
was observed that such who had been formerly most zealous for the League,
pleaded now most earnestly for the Verification; which was because they had
found by experience, that in matters of Religion, any violent methods destroy
much more then it can edify. A long time were they Haranguing pro and con,
upon this so important a Subject: but the King having sent for them, did in his
turn Harangue them so effectually, adding the force of Authority to the power
of Persuasion, that they in fine obeyed and Verified the Edict.

Many being herewith discontented, a favorable opportunity presented to stir
up the People. One named James Brossier who was a Weaver of R^morantin, had a
Daughter named Martha, aged Twenty years, who tormented with Vapors from the
Spleen, was put into most extraordinary Motions and Postures, as Saltations,
Contortions of all sorts, Cries that imitated the Voices of several Animals,
foaming, and lolling out her Tongue, and sometimes speaking inwardly like the
Engastromites, or Ventriloqui, in so much as it was very easy for him to make
the Populace believe she was possessed. With this Get-penny, leaving his own
home, he strowled about the Country under pretense of carrying her on
Pilgrimage, or to find out some Exorcists that might deliver her. The Bishop of
Orleans and the Canons of Clergy had hunted her out of their Territories, and
Miron Bishop of Angers had sent her packing from his Diocese, guessing by many
particulars he had observed, that it was only some Natural Distemper, with an
addition of Studied and long practiced Impostures Paris, where there are always

The honest Capucins seized first on this possession, and began to Exorcise her
in the Church called Saint Geneviefve. The Cardinal de Gondy Bishop of Paris
was not light of belief, but by Advice of a great Assembly of Ecclesiastics
whom he called together in that Abbey, chose five famous Physicians to examine
what it might be. After several Scrutinies three of the five made their Report
to him, that there was very little of the Devil in the Wench, but a great deal
of Artifice, and indeed somewhat of a Distemper: for her Tongue was mighty red
and swollen, and they did hear some kind of a rattling noise in her left
Hypocondrium. A fourth, by name Hautin, would declare nothing positively, but
said, according to the Sentiment of Fernelius, they must wait the trial at
least three Months; Duret was the only Man who maintained she was possessed.
His great Reputation gave them the confidence to call in other Physicians;
These were of his opinion, and thereupon they once more open the Scene. The
People ran thither in Multitudes and with Emotion, great heats there were for
and against it; and it was to be feared lest this Oracle should give some
Seditious Answers, unless they made good haste to stop her Mouth. The
Parliament therefore put the Possessed into the hands and guard of Lugoli
Lieutenant Criminel, and the Kings Attorney in the Chastelet for twenty days
together, and in the mean time appointed eleven Physicians of the most famous
of that Faculty to visit her. These made their Report they could discover
nothing which was above the power of Nature. The Preachers notwithstanding
cried aloud they undertook upon the Jurisdiction of the Church, and stifled a
miraculous Voice, which God had sent amongst them to convince the Heretics.
The Parliament was fain to use their Authority and impose Silence upon them;
and as for Martha they gave Order to Rapin Prevost de Robe Course, to convey
her back to R^morantin, and there leave her in the custody of her Father, with
command she should not stir out of that Town without express leave from the
Judge of the place, upon pain of Corporal Punishment to either of them.

The Comedy did not end for all this: Alexander de la Rochefo^caud Abbot de
Saint Martin, and Brother of that Count de Randan who was slain at the Battle
Issoire and of Francis Bishop of Clermont afterward a Cardinal, stole away this
Avignon, then to Rome, fancying she would act better on that grand Theater, and
that he should find more credulity in that place which is the Spring head of
Belief. But the Agents of France having already pre-possessed the Pope and all
that Court with the fear of offending the King, those Friends by whom he
thought to be there supported, failed him, and he could meet with none that
would believe a thing so contrary to their interest. Therefore finding himself
mistaken, he was forced by Letters humbly to beg pardon of the King; and soon
after fell sick and died of Grief, as it was said, for having gone so far to be
despised. Martha and her Father forsaken of all the World, had now no other
refuge but an Hospital.

The Reader will not be displeased if I mention three very great Rarities which
were observed in three several Persons this year. The one was in Gaspard de
Schomberg, who had served the King very successfully in his Armies and in some
Negociations. He was from time to time troubled with sudden and great
difficulty of breathing: coming one day from Conflans to Paris, being near St.
Anthonies Gate, he was in a moment seized with this difficulty, and lost both
his Respiration and Life. The Chyrurgeon that opened him to search the Cause,
found the left side of that Membrane called the Pericardium, which encompasseth
the Heart, and serves as a Bellows to refresh it, was turned into a Bony
Substance, so that it hindered Respiration.

The second was, that in the Country of Main was seen a Peasant named Francis
Trouillu aged Thirty five years, who had a Horn growing upon his Head, which
began to appear when he was but Seven years old. It was shaped almost like that
of a Ram, only the Wreathings were not spiral, but strait, and the end bowed
inwards toward the Cranium. The forepart of his Head was bald, his Beard red,
and in Tufts, such as Painters bestow upon Satyrs. He retired to the Woods to
hide this monstrous deformity, and wrought in the Cole-pits; The Marshall de
Laverdin going one day a Hunting, his Servants spying this Fellow who fled, ran
after him, and he not uncovering himself to salute their Master, they tore off
his Cap, and so discovered his Horn. The Marshall sent him to the King, who
bestowed him upon some body that made Money by showing him to the People. This
poor Fellow took it so much to Heart to be thus Bear-led about, and his shame
exposed to the Laughter and Censures of all the World, that he soon after died.

The third Curiosity is the Daughter of a Country Smith of Conflants, a
Borough upon the limits of Poitou and Limosin, who was three whole years
without eating or drinking; which proceeded from a Relaxation of the Aesophage,
after a Paris, and her Friends advising her that she might thereby avoid such
trouble, to endeavor to swallow something, she forced down some Broth; which
having with difficulty for the two or three first times assayed, she found good
in it, and by this means opened the Conduits of Nourishment, and by little and
little brought her self to the eating of solid Viands. The like had formerly
happened Anno 825. to a Girl under the Empire of Lotaire* after she had been
three years without swallowing any Food.

In these years a new and very odd kind of Distemper overspread Potukia, a
Province of Poland, bordering upon Hungary, whence it extended thorough all
those Countries. It has its seat in the Hair, which it twists together in one,
or two Locks, and at first causes no inconvenience, but in some space
suppurates and breeds an infinite of Vermin, and if they cut them off, that
acid and fuliginous humor which so entangleth them, flows back upon all the
parts of the Body, and begets cruel Pains, Contortions, Dislocations, Ulcers,
Exostosae, and all the strangest Accidents imaginable. Physicians have given it
the name of Plica, because it has such effect upon the Hair, and that of
Cirragra, as being a kind of Gout, which begins by that odd kind of weaving.

A Peace being made, the Grandees of the Kingdom were but little considered in
the Administration of Affairs: the Council composed all of Men of the Quil,
desired to bring them lower that they might stand on equal ground. Those that
had been of the League were so well treated as to have no just cause of
complaint, but rather gave a jealousy to the others. As for the Duke of
Mayenne, otherwhile their Head, being ruined both in his Estate and Credit, he
lived meanly, and affected to appear yet poorer then he was, knowing his want
of Power and Riches was now his only security.

But diverse of those that had served the King, taking themselves to be ill
used, absented yet more from him, then he was alienated from them. The most
discontented were the Marshall de Bouillon, the Duke de la Trimouille, the
Constable de Montmorency, the Duke of Montpensier; More then these yet, the
Duke d'Espernon and the Marshall de Biron. This last more bold and confident
then the rest exhaled his discontents by odious complaints, and vauntings not
to be endured. He could speak well of no body but himself, which was his
Eternal Theme and Entertainment: He exalted himself above the greatest
Captains, it was he alone that had done all; there was no Place or Dignity he
did not think beneath his Merit; Naught but the Sovereignty could satisfy him,
and he would Crown himself with his own hands.

Too great applause had corrupted this brave Courage, the King himself had
praised him too much, had raised him too high. After the loss of Dourlens and
Cambray, the Nobless and the Soldiery all cast their Eyes upon him only, as
both the Sword and Buckler of the State; At his return from the Siege of Amiens
he was intoxicated by the fondness of the Parisians; and when he went into
Flanders to Witness the Archdukes Swearing to the Peace, the Spaniards knowing
his Vanity and ill disposition, gave him such lofty Elogies, as filled his Head
with Air and Vanity, and his Heart with wicked Thoughts and Sentiments.

From that time, nay even before, he sought and courted the favor of the
Populace, affected for the Catholic Religion a Zeal that proceeded even to
Beads and May, having made a Journey into Guyenne, he there regaled the
Nobility with Feasts, Presents, and Caresses, held private Conference with such
as had most Credit in the Province, and behaved himself after such a manner,
that the King apprehending some Disturbance there, descended to Blois,
Poitiers, thereby to prevent many who might have engaged themselves in his
Contrivances. He was yet there when the news of the Duke of Savoy's Voyage
obliged him to return to Fontainebleau.

During his abode in that Country, Philip Hurat Chiverny Chancellor of France,
who had desired leave to go and see his House of Chiverny, did there fall sick
and died the Nine and twentieth day of June. He stood much upon his Nobility,
and did as much affect the Quality of Earl and of Governor of Orleannois and
Blesois, as that of Chancellor, which he had held twenty years. His Posterity,
as almost all those that attain great Fortunes at Court, sunk in a short time.

Pompone de Bellievre succeeded him in that great Office, and at first began
with two things which were most necessary, viz. a severe Edict against Duels,
and a Rule that none should be admitted to the Office of Master of Requests
till he had been ten years in the Sovereign Courts, or twenty in some Court
Subordinate.

Villeroy Secretary of State, Sillery President in the Parliament of Paris,
Jannin in that of Burgundy, and the Marquess de Rosny Sur-Intendant of the
Finances, had the greatest share in the Administration of Affairs. The last
governing the Purse, had great advantage over the others; besides the King made
himself more familiar with him, and considered him as a Creature he had raised,
and one that had never held any Party but his own. And indeed, he was shaped
every way to his humor, and very fit to manage that Office as he intended it
should be. For besides that he was indefatigable, thrifty, and a Man of great
order, he was rough in denial, impenetrable to Prayers and importunities, and
with both hands greedily scraping Money into the Kings Coffers. To this purpose
he received all manner of Proposals, the easiest he made benefit of in his
time, and the refuse was left to glut the following Reign. He made thorough
inquisition after such Money as had been mis-employ'd, and wherever that
lighted he fell upon the great as boldly as the little ones, took the hatred
and blame of all denials or disappointments upon himself, stopped his Ears at
their Complaints or Reproaches, not minding any other thing, but where to raise
new Fonds from day to day.

Hereby did he become most necessary to the King, and got into his favor more
and more. He often showed him a just state of Receipts and Payments in every
Concern distinctly; as likewise the Projects of such Expenses as were to be
made; and the Inventories of all the Arms, Ammunition, and Cannon in his
several Places; all by Summary Abridgments, to give the more gusto in perusal
and inform him without tiring him. For he knew very well that the King being of
a ready and quick apprehension, could not dwell long upon any one particular,
neither in Reading or Writing, nor endure any tedious Discourse or Reasoning.

Those that had managed the Revenues, or Finances, had put things in a most
horrible disorder and confusion, and the Expenses in the Civil War had drained
them so low, that it was almost impossible to remedy them by the ordinary ways.
The King was charged with Six Millions of yearly Rents and Pensions, above five
Millions Salary for his Officers of Justice and the Treasury, with Petitions of
an infinite number of brave Soldiers, Officers, Gentlemen, and Lords, who
prayed some for Rewards, others for some Benevolence and Charity, that they
might at least subsist. It would therefore have been but reasonable if for a
time they had exceeded the bounds of the common methods, to repair these
Disorders, were it not that such Examples remain even after the necessity is
over, and that a Tax or Charge once imposed turns to a common Right or Claim.

Espargne, he studied in the first place to open all the Springs from whence
they were to slow, and stop up all by-leaks which made them drop aside and lose
themselves. Most enormous abuses were committed upon the levying of such Moneys
as were raised by extraordinary Commissions; and it was the custom of some of
the Council to procure very easy Adjudications that they might share in the
profit: As to the former, he ordered the Receivers to make Receipts for these
as for the other; and as to the second, having found out that the Sub-farms,
amounted to twice as much, as the general Adjudication, he tied up the hands of
the Principal Farmers, and caused the whole to be brought into the Treasury. As
to the remainder he soon made himself so much Master of the Council for the
Finances, that he retrencht all the little Tricks and Projects, and made it
apparent to those grand Statesmen, that to discharge his Office there was no
need of so great Politiques and Craft, but only to be diligent and laborious,
and both know how to add and to substract.

The Kings clearest Revenues were alienated or engaged to the greatest Lords,
he assigned their payments on the Espargne or Exchequer, and restored all these
Alienations to the Kings, who made them treble the value. He likewise abolished
all those Levies they had settled for their own profit, without any other
Authority but the License of a Civil War. He also caused all such Privileges
to be revoked as had been granted for above thirty years; together with all
Patents of Nobility from the said term. King Henry III. had sold a thousand in
Normandy alone: and it was said, that under color of that profusion, others
had traded for above double that number. Those Gentlemen of Parchment were
allowed the Exemption they had enjoyed during all that time, for their
re-imbursement. Then was the famous Privilege called The Franchise of Chalo
Saint Mars, utterly abolished.

After these Revocations, he sent Commissioners into the Provinces to regulate
the Tails. And because the open Country was much destroyed, he was constrained
to lessen them about Six hundred thousand Crowns, and to remit all Arrears to
the year 1597. which amounted to above twenty Millions. As well, it would have
been impossible to have raised them; and then it was not so much a loss to the
King, as to the Receivers who had advanced one part of it, and those Captains
and Lords who had Assignments on the other. They cancelled all the Obligations
the Debtors had given to the former, and revoked the Assignments of the latter.

His design was, said he, to take off all the Tailles, to this purpose to
dis-engage the Kings Demeasns, in which he labored very much, and so supply
what more should

Any other way but that of Arbitration would have better pleased the Duke of
Savoy. He would willingly the Spaniards had undertaken his defense: and
although he had already experimented at the Treaty of Vervins they had not
overmuch zeal for his interests, he omitted not to solicit them and to give
them great Respect: but when they had made him know, they would not engage
their young King in a War for love of him, he thought it might do well to
inform the Pope with the Reasons he had for detention of the Marquisate.
Francis d'Arconnas Count de Touzaine his Ambassador in the Court of Rome, and
Sillery who was there in the same Quality for the King, gave in an Abstract of
their Titles: whilst those were under examination, the King demanded as having
been disseized, he should be restored before all other Proceedings; and the
Duke replied that the said Maxim of Right had place between private Men, not
amongst Potent Princes, as the King was, to whom if they should once adjudge
the possession, he would never quit or surrender it again.

Upon this Sillery propounded an Expedient, viz. that the enjoyment should rest
in the Duke till a definitive Sentence, provided he would hold it as a Feif
Mouvant of Daufine. Arconnas not yielding to that, the Pope found out another,
which was, that it should remain in Sequestration in his hands. The Patriarch
of Constantinople (this was Calatagirone General of the Order of St. Francis,
whom he had honored with that Title) was enjoined by him to propound it to the
two Princes, and if they approved it, to demand a prolongation of the time
agreed for Sentence, which was ready to expire. Both of them feigned to think
well of it, and yet neither of them were really contented: for they feared lest
the Pope, if he had it in his hands, should take a fancy to bestow it upon one
of his Brothers Sons. Thereupon Arconnas, either with design to gain his
friendship, or to fore-stall his Judgment, went and assured him on the behalf
of his Duke, that if the Marquisate fell to his Master, he might dispose of it,
to such of his Nephews as he should think fit. The Pope interpreted this
Compliment a high injury to his Integrity, and from that time waved the
Arbitration.

France by means of his Ambassadors. When he found they could not succeed to
his wishes, he resolved to come himself; and because he knew his Council would
not permit him to hazard thus his Person and Reputation, he ordered Roncas to
write to him, that the King would be very glad to see him, though on the
contrary he had told his Agents plainly, that unless he were disposed to render
up the Marquisate, he would find little satisfaction in his Voyage. This Prince
had so good an opinion of his own ability, and his Talent of Wit, which indeed
were admirable, that he doubted not to gain the heart of the King and his
Ministers by his subtle ingenuity, or over-persuade them by his Arguments and
Reasons. In the Month of June was fought that famous Duel, betwixt Philipine
his Bastard Brother, and the Lord de Crequy; Philipine was slain, and that
sinister accident, (for he relied much upon the like presages) should have made
him alter his Resolution: but another Omen seemed to promise he should reap
something of his labor; which was, that in the Month of September all the
Fruit Trees in Savoy put forth their Blossoms which turned to Fruit in less
time then an hour. So he parted from Chambery the first day of December with
his Council, a Train of twelve hundred Horse, whereof he sent back the one half
from Lions, and great Riches in Moneys, Toys, and Jewels.

The Marriage of Queen Margaret being dissolved, the Kings Agents engaged him
upon seeking for Mary de Medicis, Daughter to Francis in his life time Duke of
Florence, Niece of Ferdinand Brother and Successor to that Francis: but in the
interim his heart which was not wont to be long in freedom, was taken by the
attractive Charms of Henrietta de Balsac, a pleasant, airy, witty, and engaging
Virgin Lady; and indeed she came of a Race that inspired Love, for her Mother
was that Mary Touchet who had been Mistress to Charles IX. and was after
Married to the Lord d'Entragues, from whose Embraces this young Venus sprung.
Her Parents desiring to make the best of such an opportunity, were very
watchful, and kept her close, lest enjoyment should extinguish that bright
flame of Love her Eyes had kindled in the Kings Breast. This she did so well
second on her part, that in fine by her betwitching innocence and modesty, and
by her inviting denials, she engaged him to give his promise he would Marry
her, if within that year she brought him a Son. Upon this assurance, and after
a shower of Gold (worth a hundred thousand Crowns) he had his full liberty. He
soon after gratified her with the Lands of Verneuil, and the Title of
Marchioness.

We do not know whether for his honor we should believe he did intend to make
good his word: but Sillery and the Cardinal d'Ossat, went so far on with their
Treaty for Mary de Medicis, that they put it beyond his power to recall it. He
therefore Alincour Son of Villeroy, to Rome, under color of returning thanks
to the Pope for the justice he had done him concerning the business of his
Marriage with Queen Margaret, and to acquaint him with that he desired to
Contract in the House of Medicis. After this Complement he entreated his
Holiness to vouchsafe that Sillery and he might go to Florence to see the
Princess and Negotiate that Affair, which was much more advanced then they
discovered to him.

It is incredible how much the Marchioness of Verneuil was vexed and afflicted
to see her self fallen from the fairest hopes of a Crown, yet she dissembled it
and hid her trouble under the borrowed countenance of content: but the Count
d'Auvergne her half Brother, as much out of the Malignity of his Nature as
Resentment, sought to revenge this injury, and joined with the Malcontents we
have before mentioned. These together conspired to coop the King up in a
Prison, to rob him of his Crown, and give it to some other Prince of the Blood:
Many have been of opinion the Duke of Savoy had a hand in the contrivance, or
that at least having some hint of it, he had undertaken to come into France to
try what advantage he might be able to reap thereby.

What ever design he had, he descended along the Rhosne by Boat to Lions, and
then from Rouane to Orleance. In this last place he was received by the Duke of
Nemours, upon his way betwixt that and Fontainebleau by the Marshall de Biron,
and two Leagues nearer by the Duke of Montpensier. At Pluviers he took Post a
little Fontainebleau the Fourteenth of December about eight in the Morning,
where he found the King just ready to mount his Horse to have gone and met him.
After he had entertained him there for six days together with the
Divertisements of Hunting, Gaming, and Promenades, he took him to Paris upon
the One and twentieth of the Month. He offered him an Apartment in the Louvre,
but the Duke giving him thanks, went and lodged at the Hostel de Nevers.



With all this he gained nothing of the King. Upon the very first Discourse he
held with him, he found what condition his hopes were in: In the beginning he
endeavored to lay open his Soul that he might gain some affiance, and after he
had with much eloquence made all imaginable protestations of service and
adherence, entreating him to receive both himself and Children into his
protection, he fell a complaining of the Spaniards, then propounded the
Conquest of Milan and of the Empire, and to make discovery of the Friends, the
Intelligence, and the Means he had for that purpose. We may believe his Tongue
was then guided by his Heart, for he was much picqued with the little regard
the Spaniards had for his Interest at Vervins; and besides his Wife, Sister to
Philip III. (which was the only Link had tied him to that Crown) died the
foregoing year. However it were the King heard him attentively, and gave him
thanks for his good will: but after all told him the restitution of the
Marquisate ought to precede all those designs, and that they would consider the
other Affairs when once this point was over.

Each time the Duke renewed the charge, he was repulsed in the same manner.
This inflexibility, so he called it, put him into amazement and despair, yet on
his Face appeared no symptoms but of inward satisfaction; as the King likewise
on his part, continuing the civilities he owed his Guest, took care he should
be diverted the most agreeably they possibly could. All the Grandees had the
Bouquet A Nose-gay given from one to another, which appoints who shall Treat
next.
to treat him each in his turn; and amongst the Singularities of France, the
King led him to his Parliament, and to a hearing in the Grand Chamber, where a
Cause upon a most extraordinary Subject was pleaded, which gave full scope to
the Clients Advocates to exercise their Eloquence, as also to the Kings, his
name being Lewis Servin. After the Pleading was over, the First President
treated the two Princes most Magnificently at his own House.

Notwithstanding these demonstrations of a seeming amity, their humors as
different Spain came to the Duke, and openly hit him in the teeth with a most
bloody reproach, saying the King had assured him he was come purposely into
France to persuade him to make a War upon Spain.

The Duke was offended in the highest degree with the King, but not daring to
question him, designed to revenge himself upon the Marshall de Biron (who as
yet passed for) his Favorite. Being therefore one day a Hunting, he takes the
Marshall aside, and begins to complain of the King in very sharp terms, with
design Biron should take him up, and give him some occasion to draw his Sword.
Biron, far from undertaking to justify the King, began to rail much worse at
him then the Duke, and having once let loose the reins of his impetuous Spirit,
disclosed all his secrets, and made known there was already a Conspiracy formed
to dethrone him. The Duke surprised and pleased at the same instant to hear of
this which was above his hopes, immediately closed with the Party, offered all
his assistance to the Conspirators, and even wrote into Spain to make them
partakers of such good tidings. But perhaps they might be acquainted with it
sooner then himself, and Picote have Negociated the thing with the Count de
Fuentes, who was a Personal Enemy to King Henry IV. This Picote was a Native of
Orleans, but an ill Frenchman, who fled to the Low Countries; Biron had held
him Prisoner at Aussonne, and there it was he first began to know him.

From this day, the Duke began to caress Biron extremely, and to flatter his
vain and ambitious humor. Knowing the too great Reputation of this Marshall
gave the King some Umbrage, he studied to praise him even to excess before his
Face, on purpose to augment his jealousy, and picque him to let fall some
disobliging thing against his valor and brave feats in War. In effect, he did
force two or three very stinging Expressions from him, which straightway the
Duke conveyed to the Mareschals Ears by Lafin, a double and dangerous Man, who
having corrupted Biron by his flatteries, was a great Agitator in this
intrigue, and made the Conditions between the Duke and the Conspirators.

After Twelfth-tide they notwithstanding went on to Treat of the Affair
concerning the Marquisate, there being four Deputies on the Kings part, as many
on the Dukes, the Patriarch of Constantinople also assisting: who had Orders
from the Pope to use all his dexterity to dispose the King to leave that
Territory to the Duke, so much he feared the Neighborhood of the French might
bring a War (perhaps Calvinism) into Italy. The Duke on his side made diverse
Propositions to the King, sometimes

In fine the Duke approving neither the one nor the other, proposed to leave
him the Marquisate in exchange for Bresse, comprising the City and Citadel of
Bourg, Barcelonnete with its Vicariat, even to Angentiere, the Valley of Sture,
that of Perouse, and Pignorol with their Territories. The King accepted this
offer: the Treaty was Signed the Twenty seventh of February, and they allowed
the Duke three Months time to consult with the Lords his Subjects, and to have
free liberty to choose either the Reintegrande, or this exchange. Three or four
days after he took leave of the King, who conducted him as far as Charenton,
and left him the Baron de Lux, who accompanied him thorough Champagne and
Burgundy to the borders of Bresse.

This year, as all others which are the last of an Age in the Christian Era,
was named the Holy-year, because of the Jubilee observed at Rome, with the
Ceremonies his Holiness is wont to practice upon that great Solemnity. It being
customary for such Ambassadors as are there to obtain Remission by offering an
Alms, he from the King distributed amongst the poor two thousand pieces of
Gold stamped with the Arms of France.

Amidst the great affluence of Pilgrims, whom either devotion or curiosity (for
there were many Religionaries) brought to the said City, the Duke of Bar made
one, but incognito. This Prince after his having lived like a kind Husband with
Madam Catharine his Wife for six Months together, had suffered his Confessor to
fill his Head with so many scruples of Conscience, that he left her, and took
the opportunity of this Jubilee to go and obtain his Absolution of the Pope, and
a dispensation for the time to come. The Pope did flatly deny him the latter,
unless Catharine would become a Convert, and for the first he so terrified his
timorous Conscience, that he promised never to cohabit with his Wife, but
repudiate her unless she would become a Catholic. Upon this protestation he
was privately restored to the Communion of the Faithful, for to have been
admitted publicly, the transgression being public, he must have undergone a
Penance that was so. Two smart words from the King would have made the Court
of Rome step over all these difficulties, and joined him again to his Wife; for
want of this courage, the poor Princess did for a while live as a Widow in the
midst of Marriage.

In the Spring time the King being at Fontainebleau, was Spectator, and in a
manner Moderator of the dispute between James Davy Du Perron Bishop of Evreux,
and Philip du Plessis Mornay. This last had composed a large Treatise against
the Mass:

The King had great interest and reason this work should be blasted, because
many suspected he maintained and justified the Author, who in effect had served
him very successfully both with his Pen and with his Sword. Now Du-Plessis
himself gave him the occasion by his temerity. Du Perron who was in his
Bishopric of Evreux, bragged he would produce five hundred passages in his
Book which were falsely alleged, maimed, or altered. The Friends of Du-Plessis
advised him to reply that if there were any such, he would forsake them, and
stand to those that were not so, of which there yet remained to the number of
above three thousand five hundred, but he too fond of his own labors, summoned
Du Perron by a public challenge to join with him, and set his hand to a
Petition for the King to appoint Commissioners to examine and verify the
Passages in his Book Line by Line. Du Perron did not flinch from it, and the
King named five, viz. for the Catholics the President de Thou, Francis Pithou
Advocate, and John Martin Reader and Phisician to the King: for the Huguenots
Philip de Canaye Lord de Fresne, and President at the Chamber of Castres, and
Isac Casabon Regis Professor in the Greek Tongue. He had sent for this last to
be an Ornament to his University of Paris: but some years after he went into
England.

It was extreme imprudence in Du-Plessis to undertake a Combat where the King
and all his Court were Parties, and to venture his Honor and Credit upon the
Faith of his Collectors; such People being ordinarily but little exact, not
caring whether their materials be good, provided they can but furnish store
enough. And likewise his acquaintance knowing his Quil much more fluent then
his Tongue, desiring he would rather have continued to write then adventure to
discourse, dissuaded him from entering the Lists with an Adversary whose
Eloquence was a Torrent, and his Memory a Prodigy. Now whether it were
presumption or want of foresight, he either would, or could not get out of
this snare.

In the beginning the Popes Nuncio was much alarmed at this Conference, however
the King making him understand it did not concern the truth of the Doctrine,
but only that of his Quotations; he assented to it. The day appointed upon the
fourth of May, the Bishop of Evreux consigned into the hands of the Chancellor
the five hundred Passages, of which they were to take a certain number every
day into examination; and the very evening before the dispute, he sent nineteen
to Du-Plessis,

The King was present at this Combat with the Chancellor, some Bishops, the
Secretaries of State, and six or seven Princes. They could examine but nine
passages that day. Du Perron having the truth, the King and the favor of the
Assembly for him, had the advantage in all: he did not only overcome but
overwhelm his Adversary; who much weaker, amazed, and disfavour'd, defended
himself so poorly, it made the Catholics pity and his own despise him. The
Judges pronounced that in the two first passages, he had taken the objection
for the solution; as for the sixth and seventh, they were not to be met with in
those Authors, whence he quoted them: upon the ninth that he had mis-translated
Images for Idols, and in the rest had either omitted some words that were
material and necessary, or had recited them but by halves.

The night put an end to the dispute. Du Perron pursuing his advantage demanded
it might be continued the next day: but his Antagonist disordred with his
over-watching the night before, and to say truth, with the shame of his ill
success, fell sick and retired to Paris, and from thence to Saumur, without so
much as taking his farewell of the King; leaving the Field to his Enemy, and a
fair Subject for triumph to the Catholics, and confusion to those of his own
Party; which was soon after forsaken by Fresne-Canaye. Du Perron had for Crown
of this Victory a Cardinals Hat.

The University eldest Daughter of our Monarchs, being like the rest of the
Kingdom, extremely disfigured by the War, wanted to be reformed. The King at
his return to Paris gave charge thereof to Renaud de Beaune Archbishop of
Bourges his great Almoner; who having advised with the Deans of the four
Faculties, the most able Professors, Proctors of the Nations, Principals of
Colleges and the Rector, and viwed the Statutes and Reglements made 150 years
before upon the like occasion by the Cardinal d'Estouteville, changed, added,
and retrenched as was thought most Mathurins.

The Archduke Albertus going to attaque the Prince of Orange who besieged
Nieuport, had at the first a notable advantage over him, regaining the Fort
Albert taken by Maurice and cutting off near a thousand Hollanders in the
place; After which had he but fortified himself in the passage between Ostend
and Nieuport, he would have forced them to surrender at discretion, or to have
taken Shipping in Maestric at one Stage, and the greatest part had scarce eaten
a bit of Bread in four and twenty hours: but the heat of this good success led
him out of his Post to fall upon the Hollanders. The Fight was very bloody,
being very old Soldiers on either hand, and animated by the brave example of
their Chiefs. The day began to decline when the Victory inclined toward
Maurice; not but that his purchase was dear enough, for it cost him twelve
hundred Men, but the Archduke left near four thousand upon the place, all his
Cannon, and a great number of brave Captains; Amongst others Colas formerly
Vice-seneschal of Montelimar, and pretended Count de la Fere.

It is observed to the honor of Maurice, that he gained this Battle over an
Albertus of Austria, upon the same day, viz. the second of July, as another
Albertus of the same House, had three hundred years before gained a Victory
over an Adolphus of Nassaw, in a Plain near Spire, where he deprived him both
of his Empire and Life. It was said the generous Blood of Nassaw had brought
forth this Prince three Ages after, to be the Avenger of the most illustrious
of his Ancestors.

Savoy was not to stand to his Treaty at Paris, he pretended to have been
compelled by a just fear of being detained: and he flattered Verwins; or if he
were assaulted he should be supported by the Spaniard, whose interest it was to
employ all their Power to bar up the French-mens entrance into Italy, or that,
in fine, if he should leave Paris, those Seeds of Conspiracy he had sown in
France would disclose themselves. In effect, the King of Spain had commanded
the Count de Fuentes to furnish Moneys toward it, this Count had informed
himself of it is Truth by the Spanish Ambassador in Swisserland, and Roncas who
had discoursed with Biron, disguised like Porters, yet nevertheless he refused
to advance any thing unless the Duke of Savoy would give him Montmelian and two
other Places for Security of the Money; The Duke could never be brought to do
that, and so the Count let slip a fair Occasion for his Master's advantage.

As soon as he was arrived at Bourg the Fourteenth of March, he dispatched a
Courier to the King to give him thanks for the Honor he had received in
France. Being at Chambery the Four and twentieth of May, Bruslard Brother of
Sillery, and the Patriarch of Constantinople, went to Summon him either to
agree to the Restitution or the Exchange, since the time drew near. He referred
them till he Turin, and from thence sent Roncas to demand a new delay; this was
to give Belly his Chancellor time to complete his Negotiation in Spain. King
Philip's Council, to make him the more obstinate in the Retention of the
Marquisat, assured him the young Prince would come and assist him in Person at
the head of Fifty thousand Men: But these were but words; for the Duke of Lerma
who

The Duke's delays, and the Discourses he held of the Severity they had showed
him in France, made it plain enough that he had no desire to execute the
Treaty. Wherefore the King consenting to a Prolongation till the end of July,
did not however omit to advance toward Lions, that so his approaches might
both hasten the said Restitution, and at the same time the Preparations for War
he was making to compel him. His Council who were much divided about this
Enterprise, detained him above Fifteen days at Moulins, where he arrived at the
beginning of July; and in the mean time the Billets Doux, (or Love-Tickets)
from Verneuil his Mistress, and the Intrigues of the Ministers of his
Pleasures, recalled him daily to Paris. That Lady passionately desired he would
be at her Labor, believing if she brought him a Son; there might be some hopes
yet to persuade him to perform his Promise. He was more than a little inclined
to return and give her Satisfaction, when the hand of Heaven, if we may say so,
broke the Charm, and set this Prince at Liberty: for one day after many violent
Claps of Thunder, a Flash of Lightning breaking into the Chamber of the
Marchioness, and passing under her Bed, she was so horribly frighted, that she
was presently delivered of a dead Child.

The Duke thought he should find contrivances enough to amuse the King till
Winter. Roncas and the Marquess de Lullins propounded the Restitution to him,
but at the same time demanded the investiture of the said Marquisat for one of
the Duke Sons; This demand was no better received from their Mouths, than it
had been from the Dukes at Paris; and Roncas sent back to him again, was
commanded to let him know the King's great dissatisfaction. On the other hand,
Foffeuse whom the King at the same time dispatched to the Duke to know his
utmost resolution, brought back word, That nothing was to be done, unless they
Savignan and Pignerol.

Roncas however returning some days after, assured that his Master intended to
restore the Marquisat upon the Conditions expressed in the Treaty of Paris,
which he, the Marquess de Lullins, and the Archbishop of Tarantaise Ambassador
in Ordinary, of that Duke, gave in Writing under their Hands. Upon that the
King gave Commission to Bruslard and to Janin, to Negociate with those Three
concerning the Articles. When they had fully settled them, Roncas who had the
Secret, excused himself for signing them, till he had first showed them to his
Duke: The King allows him some days too for this; but the Duke, who desired
nothing but to gain time, instead of sending Roncas back to Lions, sent only a
Courier, who carried an Order the other two should Sign, but which was only
Verbal. Paris, it was said, That he should place none there that was an Enemy
to the Duke. To solve this difficulty, he named N. de Poisieux le Passage, whom
the Duke could not reasonably suspect, being Brother in Law to Count de la
Roque his Grand Escuyer, and immediately ordered him to March with Nine hundred
men to go and take Possession of the Citadel of Carmagnoles.

The Articles agreed to by the Deputies, expressed that the Duke should render
it the Sixteenth of August; The King doubted not of it, he was much astonished
when he was informed he refused to ratify them, and that on the Seventh of the
le Passage: Nevertheless the Duke did again send the Patriarch of
Constantinople to Lions, to assure him he was disposed to Surrender the
Marquisat, upon certain new Conditions which he had contrived. But it was now
too late to shuffle, the King quite tired with these Dedalian intricacies, had
sent to declare War, and was advanced to Gren ble. The Patriarch came to him
the Fifteenth of August, most carnestly to bes^ech him in the Name of the Pope,
Lions.

It did not seem that he had Forces sufficient to undertake this War, and that
was the thing which deceived the Duke of Savoy. Indeed he began it at first
with not above Seven or Eight thousand Men at most, but he had given such good
Orders, that this Snow-ball increased more than one half in very short time. He
divided these Forces in two Bodies, the one to enter upon Savoy toward
Chambery, the other to fall into Bresse; This was Commanded by the Marshall de
Biron, and the other by Lesdiguieres, a great Commander for those Mountainous
Countries. Rosny's Diligence provided so well for Ammunitions and Cannon,
(having conveyed them by Water) that in the end of July he had in those Parts
forty Pieces of Cannon, and wherewith to make Forty thousand shot.

And indeed he omitted nothing in this Expedition to show himself worthy the
Office of Grand Master of the Ordnance, wherewith the King had newly honored
him, having also Established it an Office of the Crown. Two years before he had
likewise given him that of Grand-Surveyor of the Highways, knowing him to be
careful and orderly, and that he would take great pains in repairing and
maintaining the Roads for convenience of Carriage, which in effect he performed
extremely well.

In one and the same day being the Twelfth of August, Biron took and pillaged
the City of Bourg, by forcing his way through one of the Gates with a Petard;
and Crequy seized on that of Montmelian. The Savoisiens suspected the Count de
Montmajor who Commanded in the first, did betray it; some French on the
contrary, imagined Biron had purposely given him notice of his Enterprise that
it might miscarry: for it is certain that the former had put himself in a
posture of Defense, standing to his Arms the whole Night, as if he knew of it,
but then defended himself so poorly, that they had just cause, at least, to
accuse him of Cowardice.

The Duke of Savoy believed he might sleep quietly upon the Security of this
Fortress, and that of Montmelian; They were both accounted impregnable, the one
because it was very regular, the other for its odd situation: for it stood upon
a lofty Rock, very steep on every side, with Bastions not Mine-able, a Fosse,
or dry Ditch, hewn out of the quick Stone, the Ground about it the same, and
covered with pointed Mountains which seemed accessible to none but the winged
Inhabitants of the Air; so that it was thought impossible either to make any
Trenches, or to raise Batteries. This place was really well enough furnished,
but the Governor, who was the Marquess de Brandis of the House de Montmajor,
wanted Resolution; The other on the contrary wanted almost every thing,
especially Provisions: but in recompense was provided with a Commander who was
very brave and resolved to all Extremities. They called him the Chevalier de
Bouvens.

Bourg was followed with all those of Bresse and the Country of Bugey. Grillon
with a Party of the Regiment of Guards seized on the Suburbs of Chambery; The
King going thither in Person, the Count de Jacob, Miolans and Conflans made
little resistance, the Floods of Rain, and difficulty of carrying their great
Guns in a Country scarce passable for Carts, defended that of Charbonnieres
near Fifteen days: But as soon as their Cannon had battered it in a place
which seemed a Rock and was not so, it was taken by assault the Nineteenth
September.

After this Success Lesdiguieres pushed directly to Saint John de Maurienne,
made himself Master of all that Valley to the foot of Mount Cenis. Then entering
into Tarantaise, made them bring him the Keys of Briancon, Monstiers, and
Saint Jaquemont. The report of these so sudden Conquests extremely astonished
the Pope: The Spanish Ambassador solicited him most instantly that he would
interpose his Authority to stop the King's Progress: both these apprehended
almost equally, not the Ruin of the Duke of Savoy, but that the French should
have Passage to enter into Italy: The Pope was therefore over-persuaded to send
his Nephew the Cardinal Aldobrandin to the King in the quality of Legate, with
order to use all possible means to procure an accommodation.

It was much wondered at, in the mean while, that the Duke of Savoy did not go
about to resist so Puissant an Enemy, but on the contrary past his time at
Turin in Dancing and making Love, as if he had rested in the bosom of a
profound Peace. We cannot tell whether he relied on the intercession of the
Pope, assistance from Spain, the effect of some great Conspiracy, or the event
of some vain Predictions, which assured him, That in the Month of September
there should be no King in France; which proved true, for he was then in Savoy.
Now when he found that all these failed him, that the Citadel of Bourg was
invested, that of Montmelian formally Besieged, and the Fort Saint Catherine
blocked up, he began to awaken and draw his Forces together.

He promised himself that the Citadel of Montmelian would hold out at least Six
Months, believing the Heart of Brandis as well fortified as the place. In
effect, that Marquess did at first triumph in words, as imagining they could
raise no Batteries to Attaque him: But when Rosny had found the way to plant
them in four or five places, (for what cannot Money, Ingenuity, and Labor
bring to pass?) his Bravery sunk on a sudden: He permitted his Wife to hold
Conversation with the Wife of Rosny, and his Fears increasing every hour, he
capitulated the October, to Surrender the Place upon the Sixteenth of November,
if it were not relieved within that time.

Upon which Design the Duke parted from Turin with Ten thousand Foot, Four
thousand five hundred Arquebusiers on Horseback, and Eight hundred Maisires,
Aouste, and along the little Saint Bernard, then came and encamped at Aixme.
The King went to meet him as far as Monstiers, and had fought him, but for the
great Snow which fell in the Night, and made a Barricade betwixt the two
Armies. The Duke needed but have made a Diversion toward Provence: But Four
thousand Spaniards (lent him by Fuentes) refused to go any further than Saint
Bernards, and Albigny Lieutenant General of the Duke's Army, had much ado to
make them stay there to guard that Passage.

Mean time the timidity of Brandis had so infected the Courage of his Soldiers,
that there was no Spirit left amongst them. For some out of fear did
precipitate themselves from the Rocks to escape, and the rest could scarce
endure to stand under their own Arms, and wanted even the Confidence to fire
upon the Enemy. Nay more, Having suffered the French by small Parties to enter
the Place, they were found to be so numerous, as to be able to Master them, and
could have turned them out. So that having suffered himself to be reduced to
this Condition, he was forced to anticipate the term of the Capitulation, and
began to dislodge upon the Ninth day of November.

In the Place were found Provisions for above Four Months, Thirty Pieces of
Cannon mounted, and Ammunition enough for Eight thousand shot. He talked a long
time with the King in the Cloister belonging to the Dominicans, and that same
Night treated Rosny and Crequy with a Supper in his own House. He afterward
France, where his Cowardice was opprobrious even amongst the most Cowardly, he
took Sanctuary at Brandis in Swisserland, and some while after was apprehended
at Casal, and carried Prisoner to Turim.

The Legate would not stir from Rome till the Ambassador of Spain had promised
him in Writing, the King his Master should agree to such Treaty as he could
make, and recall his Forces if the Duke proved obstinately contrary. Passing by
Milan he got the like Writing from the Count de Fuentes, and the Duke whom he
saw at Turin, promised to stand to what he should think convenient. His coming
did not make the French put up their Swords: the King would not see him till he
was Master of Montmelian, and the Five and twentieth of November, coming to
Chambery to receive him, he refused to hear any thing of an accommodation
Francis d'Arconnas Count de Touzaine, and Rene de Lucinge des Alymes, Chief
Steward of his Household) should salute him, then sent him to confer with
Villeroy, and at the same instant went to the Siege of the Fort Saint
Catherine.

This Place and the Citadel of Bourg being all the Duke had left on this side
the Mountains, the King was persuaded the taking of them would reduce him to
demand a Peace. Bouvens who was in Bourg, stood out resolutely both against his
Proffers and his Menaces: But Peter Charrue Governor of the Fort Saint
Gatherine, Brandis, than his: for three days viz. the Sixth of December, he
capitulated to Surrender within ten days.

The City of Geneva having the King so near them, sent him two Deputies to
implore he would continue the same Protection to them as his Predecessors.
Theodore de Beze the most ancient and the most renowned of all the Ministers of
that Religion, delivered the Message, and in few words made him a Compliment
worthy of his Reputation.

Biron in all this War played a very ambiguous part: as he was most extremely
Vain, but withal engaged with that Duke, he desired Honor for his own share,
and yet ill Success to the King; so that he could not forbear doing bravely and
September being at Pierre-Chastel in Bugey, Laffin came to him, and by his
order made to Journeys two Roncas. The King, who then was at Chambery, informed
of this going and coming, and being jealous of some dangerous underhand
Practice, sent for him, and gave him caution to Banish that pernicious fellow
from his Society. He did not regard, as he ought to have done, this good
advice, on the contrary he increased the just Suspicions they had of him: for
being under such Apprehensions as those still are that inintend Mischief, he
went no more to see the King without a great crew of desperate Fellows, and
always lodged himself in some by-place.

There were two things exasperated this haughty Spirit, and made his discontent
swell to a perfect Rage; the one was, the King denied him the Government of the
Citadel of Bourg, which he requested for a Friend of his, when it should be
taken: The other that he had not given him the sole Command in this War, as he
had formerly at the Siege of Amiens, but equaled or rather even preferred
Lesdiguicres above him, who was a Huguenot and his Enemy. In this fury he
conceived an Enterprise upon the Person of the King, but soon after had a
horror for it within himself and desisted: However he did not let fall the
Practices he was engaged in with the Duke, and the Conde de Fuentes. Laffin
under pretense Loretta, departed about the last days of the year to go and
conclude the Bargain he treated first at Ywree with the Duke and the Ambassador
of Spain in that Court, then at Turin with Roncas, and afterward with the Duke
and the Count de Fuentes at Some. Picote who came from Spain

To repeat the whole substance of this Treaty in few words, as was since
discovered, they agreed to Dismember the Kingdom, make as many Soveraignties as
Provinces, and shelter all these petty Principalities under the Protection of
Spain. The Duke of Savoy for his part was to have taken, if he could, Lyonnois,
Dausine and Provence, and Biron the Duchy of Burgundy, to which the Spaniards
would have joined the Franche Comte as a Dowry for a Daughter of their Kings,
or one of Savoy, whom they promised to give him in Marriage. They were besides
engaged to furnish him with such Prodigious Sums of Money, that he might easily
have guessed by the excess of their Promises, they never designed to perform
them.

Biron moved rather by his Fears than any remorse of Conscience, approached him
in the Monastery of the Cordeliers at Lions, and pretending a deep and sincere
Repentance, confessed that the refusal of the Government of Bourg, had filled
his Mind with Phrenetique thoughts and fancies; but Protested they were past
away like Dreams and Shadows, and that if he had a Thousand lives, he would
Sacrifice them every one to obtain his Pardon. The King was touched to the very
heart with a kind of secret Pleasure to see he thus confided in his Clemency,
that Virtue which he cherished above all others: he Pardoned him without any
reserve, and assured him, That he would give him so many tokens of his
Affection, he never should have any cause to prove unfaithful.

A Pardon attended with so much Goodness, ought certainly to have purged his
giddy head of all those wicked Thoughts and Designs; And yet no sooner was he
returned to Bourg, but he dispatched Bosco the Cousin of Roncas, to the Duke
and the Count who were still at Some with Laffin. This Trade continued all the
year 1601. until the Birth of the Daufin, when Biron seemed to change his Mind,
and sent for Laffin to return. Now as this Traitor began to play double,
Fuentes perceiving by his juggling there was no t^^sting him, thought fit to
seize his Person, and likewise upon Renaze his Secretary. In effect Renaze was
apprehended as he passed through Savoy: but Laffin who was mistrustful of every
thing, went by the Grisons Country, and so avoided the Ambuscade.

After this he was highly offended that they detained his Secretary, a young
Fellow who was accused of serving him for other uses less commendable than his
Employment in Writing. Which displeasure, joined to a jealousy he conceived
that the Marshall put more confidence in the Baron de Luz than in him, was the
true Motive that pushed him on to ruin him.

Saint Catherine had capitulated, the King took Horse to go and meet his new
Spouse who had staid for him Eightdays at Lions. The Duke of Florence Uncle to
this Princess, having received the King's Procuration by Bellegarde his Master
of the Horse, Married her the Fifth of October (the Cardinal Aldobrandin
performed the Ceremony) and afterward showed his Magnificence and Riches in
Feastings, Huntings, Carrousels, Balls, and other Divertisements usual upon the
like Solemnities. The Italians have not omitted to note, as a mark of his
Grandeur, that one single Comedy cost him Sixty thousand Crowns the acting.

The Galleys belonging to Florence and Malta brought the new Queen to
Marseilles, where she Landed the Third of November, accompanied by the Florence
her Aunt, the Duchess of Mantua her Sister, Don Antonio her Brother, and
Virginio des Vrsins Duke of Bracciana. The Constable, the Chancellor, the Dukes
of Nemours and Ventadour, with the Duke of Guise Governor of that Province, and
the Cardinals de Joycuse, de Gondy, de Givry, and de Sourdis, were sent to
receive her on the behalf of the King, as likewise many of the Princesses and
greatest Ladies of the Court to keep her Company.

After the Consummation of the Marriage, which was performed the very same day
of his Arrival, the City of Lions honored the Queen with the Pomp of a
Magnificent Entrance. Afterward the Nuptial Ceremonies were celebrated the
Seventeenth of December in the great Church there by the Cardinal Aldobrandin.
Whom (which we mention en Passant) the King permitted to exercise the Functions
of Legate in his Kingdom, though his Faculties were not verified in Parliament.

The Treaty of Peace which had been begun at Chambery, was continued at Lions
between Sillery and Janin on the King's part, and Arconnas and des Alymes on
the Dukes. The Legate contributing his Mediation and care to advance it,
obtained a Suspension of Arms from the King for a Months time while they were
in Treaty. The Pope and the Spaniards did above all things dread the French
should have the Marquisat; and the Duke had likewise a great deal of interest
not to suffer it, because by this means they would have had footing in the
midst of his Estates, and have held him, as it were, continually blocked up in
Turin; It was therefore not very difficult to make him offer Bresse in
exchange. The French withal demanding Eight hundred thousand Crowns for the
Expenses of Savoy to add for that consideration, Bugey and Valromey, and then
also the Bailliwick of Geix, that they might have Cental, Demont, and
Rocque-Sparviere: for the King affirmed that those places were not of the
Marquisat of Salusses, but of the County of Provence.

The Chancellor and Villeroy had positively promised the Legate, that none of
the places taken from the Duke should be demolished, and he had sent such word
to the Pope: To the prejudice of this Promise, Rosny had blown up the Fortress
of Saint Catherine by Mines, and the Inhabitants of Geneva failed not to
demolish it; Hearing this News when they were ready to Sign, he was so offended
that he ceased intermedling any further with the Treaty, and openly declared
that he revoked all he had said.

Arconnas and des Alymes did not so hastily press him to undertake the Business
anew, as judging the Citadel of Bourg was yet in a condition to hold out a long
time, and in the mean while their Duke, together with the Spanish Army, would
make some great Attempt to put in Relief. The Besieged suffered very much
already, most of them having for at least a Month past fed upon nothing but
Dogs and Horses: During the Suspension the King had allowed they should be
furnished with a Hundred Loaves a day, and some Bottles of Wine: But with these
refreshments they conveyed in a Report that their Deputies abusing of their
faithful Constancy, did not hasten to conclude the Treaty, but trusted more to
what they could yet suffer, then they did Commiserate them for what they had
suffered already. The Besieged thought this so great a Truth, that they sent a
Ticket to those Deputies, Signed by Bouvens and all their Officers, to declare
they could not hold above two days more, and that they should make their
account accordingly.

The Necessity was not so pressing as they pretended: However the Deputies took
so hot an Alarm, that they immediately besought the Legate to renew the Treaty.
He would do nothing in it till they had given him a Declaration in Writing
January, which enjoined them to Sign when the Legate commanded it: But when all
was concluded, they excused themselves by reason three days afterward another
Express was come, which ordered them to defer it till the Duke had conferred
with the Count de Fuentes.

They ought, no doubt, to have followed the last Instructions; and yet the
Legate who found all the pains he had taken likely to be lost, and himself like
to receive a sensible Affront, employed Arguments, Entreaties, and Artifice to
persuade them that they were bound to follow the first. The Spanish Ambassador
joined his instances to the Legates, and the Necessity of their Master's
Affairs pressed them also, for they believed the Citadel of Bourg to be lost.
Yet could they find no way to reconcile the breach of this last Order with
their Duty: the Patriarch found out one; which was that the Legate should give
them a Promise To make the Duke approve of the Treaty, to free them from his
Indignation, and to warrant their Persons, Declaring that what they had done
was out of the respect due to his Authority, and because of the rank he held in
Christendom. Upon the assurance of this Writing they Signed the Treaty the
Seventeenth of January: but to say the truth, this was no reason to the Duke,
it was rather an offense, to own the Commands of any but himself. Therefore the
Negotiation being ended, Arconnas was received by him with extreme coldness:
Des Alymes fearing something worse, durst not go to Court, but set himself upon
making his Apology; and understanding it had but the more exasperated the Duke,
he changed his Sovereign, and retired to the Country bearing his own Name,
called Bugey.

The Duke and the Count de Fuentes, deferred for some time to ratify the
Treaty; the Duke because he was willing that to oblige him to it, King Philip
his Brother in Law should have recompensed him for the inequality of an
exchange which he pretended to be very disadvantageous to himself: The second,
because he ardently desired a War, hating the King's Person, and vainly
promising himself he should find the Fortune de la guerre as favorable in
those Parts, as formerly in Picardy.

The Legate, who was then gone to Avignon, took such an Alarm upon their
refusal, that he rode away Post to find the Count at Milan, and e're he went
dispatched a Gentleman to the King to desire he would harbor no distrust
concerning his making good the Treaty, and to prolong the Suspension of Arms
for Savoy made them wait yet Seven or Eight days e're he came to Milan; and the
Count being of intelligence with him, refused to Sign before that Prince had
done so. But when King Philip had signified his Pleasure, and the Legate, by a
wyle of an Italian Breed and Air, had reproached him that he alone hindered the
Duke from Signing, had picqued him with Honor, and obliged him to decipher the
whole Secret between him and the Duke, he could delay it no farther. And
besides, the Duke having sent a Messenger expressly to Bourg with a Token,
(which was the one half of a broken piece of Gold) to know the condition of the
place, upon pretense of going there to Surrender it, found it really such that
the Besieged could not maintain it Three days longer, unless they would feed
upon one another.

Lions, where the Constable, Sillery, and Janin, staid to receive it. The King
was gone thence Post to Paris about Fifteen days before; the Queen followed by
easy Journeys, and arrived at the beginning of Saint Germains Fair. Toward
Spring, both of them went to Orleans to gain the Jubilee the Pope had

This is the Substance of the principal Articles of the Treaty. The Duke
quitted the Country of Bresse to the King, comprehending Bourg with its Cannon
and Ammunitions, Bugey, Valromey, and the Bailywick of Geix, with the River of
Rosne from Geneva even to Lions, excepting only Pont de Gressin, which he
retained for the convenience of Passage. Moreover he gave up the City,
Chastellenie, and Tower of the Bridge of Chasteau-Dausin, and demolished
Beche-Daufin. The King in exchange left him the Marquisat of Salusses, with the
Cities of Cental, Demont, and Roque-Sparviere, and rendered up all the Places he
had taken during this War. Both the one and the other were bound to make good
the Gifts, Rewards, and Assignments made by either of them or their
Predecessors upon those Lands they yielded up.

Bouvens went out of the Citadel of Bourg the Ninth of March. Had there been
Provisions they could never have forced him thence: But the City being
surprised on an instant, he could not transport any Stores into that place,
Peter d'Escodeca Boesse a Huguenot, and therefore the fitter to be trusted
there.

In the Count de Fuentes Army were Five and twenty thousand Men, he could
willingly have employed them against France: but the Council of Spain had
designed them elsewhere. One half were sent to Flanders, the other about
Mid-spring were put aboard several Galleys for some grand Enterprise against
the Infidels. It was believed they Algiers, by the Assistance of Ten thousand
Christian Slaves who were to be Armed upon their Landing. The Barbarians
suspected it, and shut them close in their Cellars, doubly-chained. Now,
whether that were the Design or not, this Fleet having roved about those Seas
some time, returned into Port, much shattered without so much as offering to
make any the least attempt.

A powerful Diversion of the Turkish Forces would much have amended the Affairs
of the Emperor Rodolph. Sultan Amurath III. had broke the Peace with him in the
year 1591. after he had made one with the Persian. It Is true that during the
rest of his Reign he ever had the disadvantage, nor was his Son and Successor
Mahomet III. more fortunate the first year of his: The Imperialists having
taken Strigoniam, and Sinan his Grand Vizier being most shamefully chaced by
Sigismond Battory Prince of Transylvania. But the following, which was 1596.
the said Sultan going in Person, gained the Fortress of Agria in the Upper
Hungary, which the Turks call the INEXPVGNABLE, and won a great Battle over
Mathias the Emperor's Brother, who came, too late, to the relief of that Place.

Persians who renewed the War with him, and the Mutinies of the Janisaries,
made him lay aside his Enterprises for some years: but having brought his
Forces again that way, the Emperor not relying any more upon the Conduct of his
Generals, who served him very ill, had cast his eyes upon the Duke of Mercoeur,
as well because of his Courage and Quality, as because it was likely he would
bring great Numbers of brave Frenchmen with him, who otherwise weary of being
idle, would United Provinces. This Duke did joyfully accept so honorable an
Employment, not, however, without the King's Permission, and took with him the
Count de Chaligny his Brother, a great many Volontiers, and some complete
Companies of Soldiers.

There is no Historian of those times but has taken delight to mention the
Exploits of this generous Prince; They relate the great, though fruitless,
efforts, he made with only Fifteen hundred men, to raise the Siege which
Ibrahim Bassa had laid to Canisa with Threescore thousand Combatants, and to
draw him to give Battle; Afterward, when he had no more Provisions, his
gallant Retreat, the bravest that Europe had beheld 1602. the taking of
Alba-Royal, and defeat of the Turks who marched to relieve that Place. After so
many noble Actions, as he was returning into France for his Domestic Affairs,
a Purple Fever seized on Nuremberg, and sent him to Triumph in Heaven the
Nineteenth of February.

Now Seha Abbas King of Persia, having renewed a War against the Turks, was
persuaded by Anthony Shirley an Englishman, one of the greatest Cheats in the
whole World, to seek the Alliance of the Christian Princes against their common
Enemy. His Ambassador Conducted by this Anthony, saw the Emperor, the Pope, and
the King of Spain; they all gave him noble Reception, and magnificent Promises,
but such as had no effect. The whole Profit of this famous Embassy fell to
Anthony, who stole and converted to his own use the greater part of the
Presents the Persian sent and designed for the Christian Princes.

Mahomet advertised of the great Noise it made in Europe, and that the Duke of
Mercoeur with a small number of French, put his Armies to more trouble than the
whole Forces of Germany had done before, dispatched an Envoy to the King,
desiring him to recall that Prince, and renew the ancient Alliances between the
House of France, and that of the Ottomans. This Envoy was only a simple
Physician without any Train or Attendance; not that those Barbarians are so
insolent as to hold the Kings of France Inferior to their Grandeur, but
because our Kings themselves would never Christendom. However the effect of
this Negotiation was as inconsiderable as the Minister of it.

Vervins did not hinder the two Kings from seeking to take their advantages of
each other. The Spaniards reproached the King that he assisted the United
Provinces with Money, and that he permitted his Subjects to go into their
Service with whole Troops of Horse, and complete Regiments of Foot. As to the
first he replied, That if he did send them Money, it was because he owed them a
great deal: But for the second, he could not avoid making an Order to Prohibit
the French from bearing Arms for those Provinces, though in effect he were very
glad they disobeyed him in that point, and was as sorry and displeased with
those that took Pay under the Spaniard.

On his part there was much more cause to accuse them of infidelity; He
complained that they had sent Forces to the Duke of Savoy; that the Count de
Fuentes had endeavored to form an Enterprise upon Marseilles; that they had
debauched the Marshall de Biron; and that they yet held intelligence with the
Grandees of the Kingdom to stir up the flame of a new Civil War.

It wanted but little, being thus already exasperated at each others underhand
dealings, of breaking into an open defiance, for an Affront the Spaniard put
upon the Ambassador he had at Madrid, this was Anthony de Silly Rochepot. Some
Spaniards, whom they protested were the Aggressors, killed two of them. The
Dead being of the best Families of the Town, their Parents and their Friends so
stirred up the Rabble, that they ran in multitudes to the Ambassador's House to
do themselves justice by force. The Alcade, so they call the Town-Judge, could
find no other way to appease this fury, but by going himself to the
Ambassador's, and with strong hand break open the doors, and carry those
Gentlemen away Prisoners. This was an attempt, justly deserving Punishment, to
force a place which ought to be held Sacred: the King of Spain however did not
do justice, but even detained the Prisoners when the Commotion was over, as if
they had been liable to his Laws. The King therefore made loud complaint to all
Christian Princes that they had violated the Rights of Nations, and the Majesty
of France recalled his Ambassador, who departed without taking leave of the
King of Spain, and Spain.

The People on those Frontiers did already apprehend the miseries of a Bloody
War, and were the more alarmed upon a Report that the Bell at Arragon, which
they hold miraculous, had rung out diverse times of its own accord, which never
happens, said they, without presaging some great Accident; And that upon Holy
Thursday, in the Village de Cudos near Basas in Gascongne, a Woman uncov'ring
her Paste, which she had wrapped in a Napkin, perceived a Bloody Cross both
upon the one and the other. This was seen by great Numbers of People, and the
Vicar of the Parish carried some of it to the Bishop. Which may perhaps not
seem so miraculous to those that consider how amongst good Wheat there grows
sometimes another worser Grain, which after its Flower is kneaded, will

Now the Duke of Lerma Minister of King Philip, apprehending a War as the bane
of his Fortune, entreated the Pope in behalf of his Master to become the
Mediator for an accommodation, and caused the Prisoners to be put into his
French Ambassador's at Rome, and desired the King to send another Ambassador
into Spain, assuring him that he should be received with as much honor as he
could desire. The King thereupon sent Emery Joubert de Barraut in the stead of
Rochepot; the Principal Officers went forth to meet him at his approach near
any of their Cities; when he came to Court, the Grandees made him their Visits,
and within three days after, he had a favorable Audience.

During the heat of these Contentions, the King being gone to Calais, the
Archduke who besieged Ostend, greatly feared he drew near to disturb him, in
his great Enterprise, and sent to Compliment him in terms as one that is afraid
and entreats. The King assured him he had not the least thought of molesting
him, and that he did desire to observe the Peace, provided that on the Spanish
side they would do him reason.

And in truth, it was not any such thing that led him down to Calais, but the
desire of Negociating at the nearest distance with the Queen of England. That
Princess having some Projects to impart for the ruining of the House of
Austria, longed to confer with him personally, and flattered her self with the
hopes of an Dover and Calais. Biron was ordered on the King's behalf, to go and
make his excuses to her for that he could not participate of that joy.

Whilst he was preparing for this Embassy, Rosny passed into England to
endeavor the discovery of Queen Elizabeth's thoughts. He pretended to have no
order to see her, but only a Curiosity to make a Voyage to London: he was soon
taken notice of, as he desired, by some English Gentlemen, who carried him to
the Queen; and gathered as much of her Mind as she would let him know. Now when
she found the King deprived her of the satisfaction of an enterview, which she
so ardently desired, she went about Forty Miles from London; and there it was
she received Marshall de Biron, and treated him with all the Magnificence
imaginable. From thence she brought him to London, where she showed him,
perhaps designedly, the Head of the Earl of Essex, otherwhile her Favorite,
planted upon the Tower, amongst those of many more English whom she had put to
Death for conspiring against her.

All France, but principally the King, was in great impatience to know if what
the Queen bare in her Womb, would prove the accomplishment of their earnest
wishes: Knowing therefore her time drew near, he went in haste from Calais to
beat her Labor. She was delivered at Fontainebleau, and brought forth a Son
who entered upon the Stage of this World on Thursday the Seven and twentieth
September about Eleven at Night; he was named Lewis. The Father transported
with joy, did the same day put his Sword into the Royal Infant's hand,
according to the Custom of the Kings his Predecessors, craving the favor of
Almighty God that he might one day make use of it for his Glory, and the good
of his Subjects. The Birth of this little Prince was preceded by an
Earthquake, a presage of those terrible Wars wherewith all Europe was to be
shaken during his Reign.

Five days before, viz. The two and twentieth of the Month being the Feast of
Saint Maurice, the King of Spain had a Daughter Born, to whom they gave the
Names of Anna-Maria-Mauritia. Such as pretended to have Skill in judging of
future times, observing that Heaven had given Birth to these two first Children
of different Sexes, so near one another, did then foretell it was decreed they
should

The Daufin made his first Entrance into Paris the Thirtieth day after his
entrance de Montglas his Governess, and the Nurse. The Prevost des Marchands
and the Eschevins, went a good way into the Fauxbourg to receive him, and made
him a Harangue; the Governess replied to it.

In the Month of April a difference arose which was like to have embroiled all
Provence, between the Archbishop of Aix, (Paul Huraud de l'Hospital), and the
Parliament. A Priest had forced a little Boy of Six or Seven years old: the
Parents giving information, the Archbishops Official, or Chancellor, ordered
that the Parties should proceed before him: but upon the Parents appeal, the
Parliament ordained one of the King's Judges should have the hearing of it. In
fine Provence the Ecclesiastics were wont to enjoy the same Privileges and
Franchises, as those of Italy enjoyed, the Archbishop complaining they had
infringed the Liberties of the Church, excommunicated all such Counselors as
had been assisting in this Prosecution, forbid any within his Diocese to
administer the Sacrament to them, and sent a Brief to all the Churches
containing their several Names. This Scandal was the greater as happening to be
near the time of Easter. The Parliament offended with this proceeding, cited
the Archbishop, and upon default of Appearance, declared his Brief calumnuous,
and his Excommunication null and abusive, ordained he should take it off, and
enter the same in the Court Register, (or upon Record) within three days, in
default whereof he should pay Ten thousand Crowns fine. In the mean time the
Archbishop was obstinate, to persist, and the Parliament to compel him, the
People were divided into two Parties, and grew hot even to the danger of some
great Commotion: Nevertheless the Parliament having ordered a seizure of the
Archbishop's Temporal Estate (the only Bridle for the Clergy, when they more
value their Revenues than either their Duty or their Dignity) he soon complied,
took off his Excommunication

Bourdeaux. The Archbishop who was the Cardinal de Sourdis, a hot-brained man,
had demolished an Altar in the Church Saint Andre his Cathedral, without
communicating it to the Chapter. The Canons endeavoring to Rebuild it, were
drove away somewhat too rudely by his People. The Parliament took the Cause in
hand, and upon their Complaint put the Mason in Prison who had pulled down the
Altar. The Cardinal breaks the Prison doors and takes him thence. Some days
after, the Parliament, assisted by the Jurats who came with a strong hand,
caused the Altar to be Rebuilt. The Cardinal was so enraged, that the Sunday
following, being informed the first President, (by Name Godfrey Mallouin
Sessac) and the President Verdun, were hearing Mass in the Church of Saint
Project, he went thither with his Archiepiscopal Crosier and the Holy
Sacrament, and there Excommunicated them by Bell, Book and Candle. The
Parliament in great wrath for the injury done to all their Body by this affront
to their Head, made a Decree which enjoined him to revoke his Censures, and to
cause the same to be published in the same Church upon the Penalty of Four
thousand Crowns Fine, forbidding all Bishops to use the like for the future to
any Judges for doing their Office, upon Pain of Ten thousand Crowns. The King
having received the Complaints of either Parties, brought the Business before
himself, and there kept it, to allay the heats on either hand.

There were diverse Reglements published this year necessary to discharge the
King's Debts, and make the Money circulate. Amongst others the Suppression of
the Triennals created upon necessity of the Siege of Amiens, and their
Reimbursement by the Ancient and Alternatives. They did however reserve those
of the Espargne, Parties Casuelles, Extraordinaries for War, and some others.
The Prohibition against Transporting Gold or Silver out of the Kingdom, or
exposing any more Foreign Coin, except Pistols and Reals of Spain. Another
forbidding the wearing of Gold or Silver upon their Clothes, or to squander
away that precious Metal in guilding. The King authorized this last by his own
Example, and looked very sowrely upon a Prince who presumed to appear before
him with that Gawdry. This Reformation did much discountenance the Gossips and

The most Universal cause of all the Disorders and Corruptions, sprang from
Luxury; the extraordinary Taxes first brought forth and Nursed this proud and
dainty Monster: tho'to say truth both of them were as yet but in the Cradle.
The Contractors and Exchequer-men having abundance of Money, which for the most
part cost them but the dash of a Pen, did lay it out in all manner of Vanity.
And most of the Gentlemen, who were picked to equal those foolish Expenses, did
by over-swelling and strutting burst themselves, like the Frog in the Fable;
Then when they were so ruined and had nothing left to sell but their Honor,
they Married with those Fellows Daughters, to get great Portions, which they
could not have met with in Houses of Repute or Quality; not considering that
from such corrupted Blood, nothing but a corrupt and vicious generation

It was therefore become most necessary to repress the insolency of these
Robbers, and their Pillage, or unlawful Gains, that caused it. The King for
that purpose established a Royal Chamber, composed of Judges of known and
approved integrity, selected from amongst the Masters of Requests, belonging to
his Parliament, and the Cour des Aides of Paris. The People who are easily fed
with vain hopes, imagined that the Gallows would soon do them Justice upon
those Robbers under the specious title of Officers, and that their Spoil would
be restored, at least in part, to such as had been fleeced by them: but by
virtue of great Presents and Intrigues, they found out able Mediators; for some
of the greatest Lords, many fair Ladies, together with the Ministers of the
King's Pleasures, attaqu'd the Clemency of that good Prince with so many
Engines and Importunities, that he admitted those Rascals to Composition, after
the Chamber, or Court had sat till the year 1604. and so punished them only in
their Purses, and that but very lightly.

Thus the Public, far from receiving that Satisfaction they so justly
expected, had the displeasure to find this Inspection served only to secure
that booty to them who had so unmercifully rifled the Kingdom. Nor could they
distinguish the Innocent, few as they were, from the Guilty, since not the most
wicked, but the more weak were the most roughly handled.

The Adventures of a Man who said he was Sebastian King of Portugal,
miraculously escaped from the hands of the Moors after the Battle in Africa,
did for some years exercise the worlds Curiosity, and begot a diversity of
Judgments, according as men's Minds were variously disposed. The Portugueze did
easily believe it was their King, the Italians doubted it, the Spaniards
treated him as a Fourbe and Magician. He told his Fable, or his History so
well, and brought so many Proofs and Tokens for the truth of what he said, that
they could not detect him of one Mistake. The Senate of Venice, to whom he
first addressed himself in the year 1598. found all his Answers very pertinent
to such questions as they put to him: but the Spanish Ambassador to that
Seigneury, made so much noise, that he was laid hold on, and after he had been
Prisoner there two years, condemned him to quit their Territories within Eight
days. The Portuguese Merchants who were then in Venice, travested him as a
Jacobin to carry him to Rome about the end of the year 1600. As he passed by
Florence the Grand Duke apprehended him, and fearing to offend the King of
Spain, who had a Fleet upon those Coasts, put him into the hands of the
Viceroy of Naples. The Viceroy having detained him a while, caused him to be
shaved and sent to the Galleys, who carried him into Spain; where he was shut
up close Prisoner in the Castle at Saint Lucar, and there died soon after. A
horrible Injustice if he were Don Sebastian, and too slight a Punishment if he
were an Impostor.

Some years before, another who came from the Terceres into Portugal, acted the
same Part, having gotten together Six or Seven thousand Men, created Grandees,
and bestowed upon them all the Offices belonging to the Crown: The Cardinal of
Austria Viceroy of Portugal dispersed this confused Herd of Wild Beasts, and
put their Counterfeit King with his principal Associates to Death.

June, Bellegard Grand Escuyer, or Master of the Horse, got to be made the
Grand Maistre, or Superintendant of them, Beaulieu Ruse Secretary of State that
of Lieutenant, Beringhen first Valet de Chamber Comptroller General, and
Villemareuil Councellor in Parliament the Office of President to take
Cognizance of all Matters, and Causes relating to Workmen that should be
therein employed. The Parasites did not stick to say Heaven had reserved this
Happiness for the Reign of Henry the Great, and that the Earth enamored with
his incomparable Virtues, opened her breast to let him behold all what she had
of Rich and Beautiful: but when they came to work in their Mines, the expense
did much exceed the profit, so that all these metallic Treasures vanished in
fume and vapor like Quicksilver.

The Alliance between France and the Swiss and Grisons, being expired after the
Death of Henry III. the Agents for Spain had omitted no endeavors to break
those People wholly off from us, and engage with them; particularly the Five
petty Catholic Cantons; so that for some time past these had made one with
them, and with the Duke of Savoy* Now the King desiring earnestly to renew with
them upon the same Conditions as his Predecessors, Francis Hotman Morfontaine
his Ambassador in those Countries, had begun to lay some foundation for a
Treaty, and would have carried it on much further, if Death had not laid his
cold hands on him at Soleurre. Afterward Emeric de Vic placed in his stead,
pursued his work; and about the end of the foregoing year Sillery had been sent
thither expressly to put the finishing hand to it.

The greatest difficulty, was to make the Treaty of the Five little Cantons
accord with what the King demanded upon the foot of the old ones. Sillery
thought he had overcome it by the Promise he made of Paying them a Million of
Gold for what was due upon the former account: But the delay of Payment (the
most sensible of all Injuries to them) had given opportunity to the Emissaries
of Spain and Savoy to cast the Seeds of Anger and Discontent into the Minds of
those suspicious People; in so much, that all was breaking in pieces when the
Marshall de Biron arrived at Soleurre in the Month of January of this year
1602. with a

His magnificent Expense, his Discourse wholly Martial, and the luster of his
brave Acts, whereof themselves had often been Eyewitness; had indeed a great
influence upon those Warlike Spirits; but it was the Arrival of the Wagons
laden with Silver that wholly won their hearts. The Alliance was then renewed
to last, not only during the life of the King, but during the life, also, of
the Daufin. The Marshall crowned this Festival with the Magnificence of a
sumptuous Banquet, where he did wonders, in describing the Grandeur of the
King, and the Power and Strength of France. This was not the least of his
Services, but it was the last day of his Glory and good Fortune. At his return,
finding that Laffin was sent for to Court, he staid in Burgundy and would not
stir thence till the Month of June.

There had been granted by the Estates at Rouen a Tax of a Sol per Liver upon
such Wares as should be brought into any City, but for Three years only; the
term expired, this Impost was continued with great severity; and the Partisans
had hung up Papers containing the Prizes of all sorts of Goods near the Gates
of Guyenne and Languedoc could not endure so odious an Imposition, and which
was no way due: Limoges and Rochell opposed it by main strength, the rest were
ready to follow the same Dance, some Emissaries running about those Countries
blew up the flame; and there was danger it might put those whole Provinces into
a Combustion, unless timely care were taken to prevent it. To this purpose the
King went to Blois, and thence to Poitiers, and sent the President Jambeville
into Limosin.

This Magistrate was very vigorous, he took the Hoods away from the Consuls of
Limoges who were in Office, and caused two or three of the most Factious to
suffer by the severest hand of Justice. By these means he appeased the Tumult
in Limosin: as on the other side the Voyage of Rosny to Rochell, disposed the
People of that haughty City to admit of the Impost. The Order and Paper of
Prizes therefore was set up again in all the Cities: But some Months after, the
King being satisfied of the Obedience of his Subjects; and moreover finding the
said Impost did stand him in almost as much to Collect it, as it brought in,
revoked and converted it into a moderate Subsidy; For Imposts, though they be

Whilst the King was in Poitou, the Parliament the Chambers assembled, after a
Mercuriale Afternoon Sittings, etc.
, and chiefly at the instance of the President Seguier, seconded by the
Examiners, ordained that all Advocates, or Attorneys, pursuant to the 161
Article of the Estates at Blois, should at the end of all their Briefs or
Writings put down the particulars of all they had received for their Fees, and
give a Certificate of what they had gained from their Clients for their
Pleadings. He made this Decree the Thirteenth of May, upon the desire the King
had to reform the gross Abuses in Law-States, and upon Complaint made to him by
the Duke de Piney, of an Advocate that had demanded Fifteen hundred Crowns of
him to Plead one Cause. The Advocates refusing to obey, there was a second,
which enjoined those that would not Plead, to make such Declaration to the
Register, after which they were forbidden to exercise their Profession, upon
peine de faux, i. e. Loss of Life and Estate.

Brouillery beginning to look like a Commotion, he would needs determine it,
and caused an Order to be dispatched which restored the Advocates to their
Function, and commanded them to return to the Bar and obey the first Article.
Which was only for the Formality. For the Judges themselves who made it winked
at it, and let it fall to nothing.

It was with much reason suspected, that the Commotions in Guyenne were a Train
leading to those other Mines contrived by the Marshall de Biron; and it looked
as if at the same instant that he was to spring them, the Spaniards were
prepared to give the Assault, and enter upon the Kingdom. For they had raised a
numerous Army by Land, which was kept upon the Frontiers, and were fitting
another for Sea under the Command of Juan de Cardonna. They gave out that the
first was to be sent into Flanders: and the second to execute some Enterprise
upon Algiers by the assistance of the King of Fez: But it was apprehended
rather to be designed against Burgundy, and to surprise some Seaport Town in
Provence.

The Spaniard showed plainly enough by his Treatment of Alexander Caretta
Marquess de Final, who was comprised in the Number of the King's Allies, that
he cared not overmuch to observe the Treaty of Verwins: for Fuentes seized
upon Final, having paid the Garrison of that place for Ten or twelve Musters
that were due to them. The very Old Age of that poor Lord, who was near upon
Fourscore, and his being destitute of Children, gave him the Confidence to make
this Usurpation, for which the good Man never had any other Satisfaction, but
only, I know not what Pension allowed him in the Kingdom of Naples.

The fear of some terrible Event keeping the King in perpetual alarms, he came
back from Poitou to Fontainebleau, that he might search into the bottom of the
Conspiracy, believing that if once it were but laid open, it would not be so
Laffin be brought before him who was privy to the whole Secret. We have told
you what cause of discontent this man had against Biron; It is conjectured he
had given notice to the King of all his Practices for a long while before this
time; at least it is most certain he had thoughts of doing so; and of providing
himself with Evidence to verify his Accusation.

And this they ground it upon, Biron had with his own hand written a Project of
the Conspiracy, Laffin persuaded him it was dangerous to keep it by him, and
that he needed but to have a Copy. Biron gives it him to Transcribe in his
presence. When he had done so, he rowls up the Original between his hands like
a ball, and cast it into the Fire: but Biron not minding it further, (the
negligence of a great Lord) he craftily draws it out again, and puts it into his
Pocket. So that some will needs believe this man overwhelmed with Debts, That
since God had bestowed a Daufin upon the King, he would think no more of his
former Follies, and prayed him to return.

When Biron understood Laffin was pressed upon by the King to go to Court, he
sent a Gentleman to put him in mind of his Oaths, to let him consider he had
his Life and Honor in his hands, to entreat him above all things to burn all
his Letters and Papers, and to rid himself of a certain Curate whom they had
employed in some ill-favored Business. Laffin being come to Fountainebleau
revealed all to the King, gave him all the Letters and Papers, and named the
Conspirators to him; amongst whom he involved so many Persons of Quality, even
Rosny, that the King amazed at the greatness of the Peril, was for some time in
much doubt whom to confide in.

His secret Council thought convenient to dissemble in respect of many of the
accused, and indeed there lay no other proof against them but the Depositions
of Laffin; It had been the ready way to have set all France on a flame should
they have fallen upon so many great ones at once, it was safer much to allow
them time to repent, than to have put them to the necessity of seeking their
particular safety in a desperate general Rebellion. And therefore (...) all the
Letters Laffin produced, they published none but those which made mention of
Biron only;

All this was done before the King went to Poitiers. During his Voyage Peter
Fougeu Descures, and then the President Janin being sent into Burgundy,
labored to dispose Biron to come to Court. His Conscience, his Friends, those
Prognostications wherein he put much confidence, diverse ominous Presages, the
pressing haste of those that would have him go, dissuaded him; On the contrary,
the Assurance which the Baron de Lux newly returned from Court gave him, that
Laffin had discovered nothing, the King's profound Dissimulation, who one day
said before this Baron, that he was very glad Laffin had cleared several doubts
which some had made him conceive of Biron's innocence, the shame the Marshall
had of showing any fear, and giving advantage to his Enemies, the apprehension
of being thrust out of his Government if he did not obey, and withal his Pride
and his ill Fate betrayed him to the resolution of going to the King.

Before he went, he received a Ticket from a Lord, his intimate Friend, who
advised him rather to go into the Franche Comte: for there was now no farther
Security for him in Burgundy, the King's Agents having disposed all things
there to invest him. Upon his way many more of the same Tenor were delivered
him; At Montargis he met one so pressing that he was like to have turned back
again; nevertheless he pursued his unhappiness, and arrived at Fontainebleau the
Fourteenth June.

The Duke d'Espernon had sent before his coming to proffer him his Service,
believing those odd Reports that flew about were but the Slanders of his
Enemies. de Roussy his Sister, spoke more plainly, wishing him to get away
before he was more strictly guarded.

This would perhaps have proved very difficult, so carefully was he observed:
but he had no need to provide for his Safety by such shifts, the King himself
offered him a way both more certain and more honorable. He had resolved, and
his Council applauded that resolution, to extend his Clemency to him, and
forget all what was past, provided he would faithfully discover and unriddle
the whole Practice, with all the instruments of this Conspiracy, that so by
certainly

Laffin had kept his Faith, and thinking whatever the King hinted was but
Conjecture, was so far from owning any thing, that he talked audaciously and
without respect. The first time he replied, he was not come either to justify
himself, or to accuse his Friends. At the second, he made loud Complaints, was
transported, demanded Justice against his Accusers, or Permission to carve his
Satisfaction with his Sword. At the third it was nothing but Bravado's,
Menaces, execrable Oaths, which convinced the King that he was much more
susceptible to commit a Crime than to repent it. He therefore resolved to
abandon him to the severity of Justice, since he refused to cast himself into
the arms of Mercy, and gave Order to Vitry and Prasbin Captains of the Guards
du Corpse, to be in a readiness to apprehend him, and also the Count d'Auvergne,
the most intimate of his Acquaintance, and Accomplices.

Before it came to this, he would needs Communicate the Proofs he had against
them to his secret Council, that he might not bring People of such great
importance before his Tribunal, unless there were enough to Convict them. When
they had satisfied him that there was more then needed, he made yet another and
last effort to draw the whole Truth of the Fact out of the mouth of the
Marshall. At Night about Ten of the Clock, having left off his Gaming with the
Queen, he called him into his Closet, and conjured him once for all, to confess
that freely of himself, which he was but too well informed of by others,
passing his word that a true and ample Confession should wipe off all his
Crimes, how many and enormous soever. The least token of Humility and
Repentance had saved him: But he most arrogantly replied, That, this was to
press an Honest man too far: So that the King touched at the same time with
Sorrow Since you will reveal Nothing, Adieu Baron.

Going forth from thence, he was seized by Vitry, as the Count d'Auvergne was
by Praslin. Both of them being kept that Night in the Castle, were the next day
conveyed to Paris by Water, and lodged in the Bastille. The same day the King
arrived by the Gate Saint Marceau, the People following him with loud
Acclamations which expressed the Joy they resented for his having discovered so
dangerous a Plot.

Three days after, Biron's Relations to the number of Seven, of whom were
Saint Blancard his Brother, Salignac of the same Surname, and James Nompar
Caumont la Force, coming and casting themselves at the King's feet to implore
his Mercy, had for Answer, That he would leave him to the Severity of the Law.
Immediately he sent a Commission to the Parliament of Paris to make his
Process, and another particular one to the first President, to the President
Potier, and to Fleury and Turin the two eldest Counselors of the whole Company
to Examine him. His Friends presented a Petition in the Name of his Mother,
desiring he might have Council allowed him, as is usual to such as are accused;
But the Court denied it, grounding it upon this, That they are not allowed any
in case of Treason.

In this necessity whereas he should have collected all his strength of Reason
and Prudence, he showed if ever he were Master of any, that this present
trouble of Spirit had utterly confounded them: for from the moment he was
Apprehended to the day of his Death, all his Discourse and Behavior seemed to
tend only to the aggravating his Crime, and loading him hourly with new Guilt.
When Vitry made him Prisoner, he would needs have the King be a Persecutor, and
said to those that saw him led away, Behold, Sirs, how they treat the good
Catholics. After his Confinement, unless at those times when he fell into
perfect raving, his mouth was ever full of Reproaches, Imprecations and
Rodomontado's.

As to the Witnesses, he reproached them not till after he had heard their
Depositions, though he had been fore-warned that if he had any thing to object,
it must be beforehand. Thus he owned Laffin for an Honest man and his good
Renaze had been alive he could have testified the contrary, and justified him:
he did not imagine he was so near at hand, and was much amazed when they read
his Deposition, and brought him to confront him. This fellow had made his
escape from the Prison at Quiers with his Keepers, so opportunely, one would
have guessed the Duke of Savoy was of Intelligence with the King.

The Witnesses alone Convicted him, for most of his Writings were dated Lions.
All things being ready, they led him to the Parliament to give Judgment: He was
conveyed thither by Boat with a strong guard. The Chambers were assembled, the
Chancellor presided, not one of the Dukes or Pairs were there, although they
had been summoned in due form. He defended himself somewhat better there, than
he had done before his Commissioners. They gave him full liberty and time to
Plead, and this time he did Plead as he had often Fought; that is, he did
wonders.

All the strength of his defense consisted in an endeavor to make it out, that
the Will without any Effect, or a Design without an Overt act, was not
punishable, that his Services ought to over-poise and excuse some transports of
passionate and indecent words and thoughts that had no farther consequence; And
above all he laid his main stress upon this, that the King had Pardoned him in
the Cordeliers at Lions. To these Reasons and Arguments he added so lively a
Representation of his brave deeds and so many Motives for Compassion, that he
drew Tears from the Eyes of some of his Judges; and if they had at that instant
given their Opinions, perhaps he might have found some mercy: but they having
then not time enough to take all their Votes, the Business was deferred till
Monday, in the mean while he was remanded to the Bastille.

On Monday, while the Judges were in Consultation, an Order was brought them
under the Great Seal, whereby he revoked the Pardon he had given him by word of
mouth at Lions. Some of his Ministers finding the Prisoner stood so much upon
that, and apprehending his fury if he should escape, prevailed with the King to
make the said Revocation, though it were a thing altogether unnecessary, and
somewhat contrary to his Natural Clemency.

The Judges, as one Man, gave all their Votes for his Death; They declared him
Convicted of High Treason, for Conspiracies against the Person of the King,
Designs upon the State, and Treaties with the Enemies, and Condemned him to
have his Head cut off in the Greve, his Estate confiscate to the King, the
Duchy of Biron to be Extinguish't, and those Lands and others, if he had any
which were held of the King, reunited to the Crown. The Sentence being brought
to the King, he put off the Execution till the next day, and changed the place
from the Greve to that of Bastille. Which to his Friends was interpreted as a
Favor, though it was purely an effect of the fear they had of some Commotion,
not so much amongst the common People, as the Soldiery, who loved him most
entirely.

Upon Tuesday the last day of July about Noon, the Chancellor with some
Counselors of State and of the Parliament, went to the Bastille to put the
Sentence in Execution. So soon as Biron saw him he cried out, he was a Dead
man, and asked if there were no Pardon. The extravagancies, and the transports
he showed in this last Scene, where his Courage ought to have showed its force,
if he had had any, demonstrates enough, that some who dare venture into dangers
with Bravery, because they have a prospect of overcoming, have not the
resolution to stare Death in the face, when there is no possibility of escaping.
The Ros^y, though he esteemed him his most mortal Enemy; Then when he found
they all were deaf and dumb to his requests, he fell into more fury than before.

They had at first no little trouble to bring him to that condition a Criminal
should be in to hear his Sentence pronounced: yet he heard it patiently enough,
excepting those words which accused him of having Conspired against the Person
of the King, this he could not endure, but cried out, That was False; and he
persisted to his very death, that he was innocent as to that point. It was a
mighty laborious task the Doctors had to prepare and dispose him to his Death:
he had scarce any settled intervals. They thought fit not to tie him, lest that
should put him out of all his Senses. When they led him to the Scaffold, the
sight of the Executioner put him into a new rage: He would not let him touch
him, nor tie a Handkerchief over his Eyes, he bound it on himself, and then
unbound it again two or three times. At last the Executioner took his time and
blow so dexterously as made his Head fly off at one stroke. As it was full of
Fire and Spirits, it was observed to make two Rebounds, and cast forth a much
greater quantity of Blood, than came from the whole trove of his Body. His
Corpse Saint Paul, with a mavelous Confluence of People, who flocked thither
from all Parts, and served for his Funeral train.

He was of a middle Stature, and for Corpulence gross enough, had black Hair
beginning to turn gray, his Physiognomy cloudy and ominous, his Conversation
rough, his Eyes sunk inwards, his Head little, and no doubt ill furnished with
Brains: his extravagant Designs, his giddy Conduct, and the foolish Passion he
had for gaming (losing in one year above Five hundred thousand Crowns) were
infallible marks of it. The King bestowed the Government of Burgundy on the
Daufin, and the Lieutenancy on Bellegarde during his Minority.

The Death of Biron put out all the remaining Sparkles of the Conspiracy, if
any were yet alive: his Friends and Relations bemoaned his Death, but durst not
murmur; his Confederates knowing he had said nothing against them, and being
certain they had not written any thing, (for amongst his Papers they found no
Letters but his own) reassured themselves, and that more especially because the
King made as if he had no knowledge of their Practices; the King of Spain, nor
Duke of Savoy dared not make any attempt now; whose Ambassadors were not the
last that Congratulated the King, for his having detected this Conspiracy. He
let them understand he very well knew their evil Disposition toward him, but
yet assured them he would not break the Peace: but he denied to grant Passage
by this Bridge de Gresin to their Milan Forces, before he had thoroughly informed
himself of all this grand Affair.

Their Design, as they gave out, was to pass into Flanders, nevertheless he
suspected they were brought thither only to favor the Enterprise of the
Marshall de Biron, and apprehended when he was first taken, lest they should
have exasperated his Confederates by despair. Upon this consideration, and to
keep Burgundy in obedience, he had sent thither the Marshall de Lavardin with
some Forces; So that those who held the Castles of Dijon and Aussonne, after
they had used threatenings four or five days talked no more but of submitting,
when they perceived him in a condition to force them. The Fidelity, no less
than the Courage, of this Lord, was well known to the King upon many Trials,
therefore for some time past he had taken delight in bestowing the Noblest
employments upon him, to eclipse the glory of Biron.

Edme de Malain Baron de Lux, Lieutenant in the Government of this Province,
acquainted with the utmost Practices of the Conspiracy, was so wise and
fortunate as not to lose himself: He trusted to the Mercy of the King, came to
him, and disclosed all. Wherefore he Pardoned him without any reservation,
passed his Oblivion in the Parliament of Paris, and in the Parliament of
Burgundy, and left him in his Command.

de Fontenelles of the House of Beaumanoir, and Rene de Marcc-Monibarot Renes,
were apprehended as Confederates with Biron. The Grand Council having a
Commission to try the first, condemned him to be Drawn on a Hurdle to the Greve
and there to be Broken alive upon the Wheel, and sent two or three of his
People to the Gallows. The Cruelties this Gentleman had committed in Bretagne
during the Leagne, and the obstinacy he had showed for that Party, did not a
little help to aggravate his Punishment; On the contrary, the Services which
Montbarot had done the King in that same Province, did much contribute toward
his justification. The Count d'Auvergne remained but Two Months in the Bastille
after the Death of Biron, the King set him at Liberty, and also received him
into his Favor. He had a Powerful Intercessor Verneuil, and moreover he owned
all he knew.

The Marshall de Bouillon thought it more safe to be at large, and to justify
himself at distance; He considered that Rosny jealous of the too great credit
he had amongst the Huguenots, did him ill offices at Court, and he had reason,
had he been never so innocent, to apprehend the Indignation of the King,
because at Poitiers, that Prince having told him of his Practices, he retorted
again too confidently, and in such a manner as is justly accounted Criminal
toward a Sovereign. Thus, far from coming upon the King's Commands, he went
and presented himself at the Cambre my-Partie of Castres, offering to justify
himself there, for he pretended they were his Natural Judges, because his
Vicounty of Turenne is within the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Toulouze,
whereof the Chamber of Castres is a Member. How-ever it were, he drew from them
an Act of Comparition, for which the King was very angry with them. Passing by
Montpellier, he engaged the Reformed Churches of Languedoc, to write in favor
of him to the King; then finding no place of Security in France, he went to
Geneva, and from thence into Germany, where having persuaded the Protestant
Elizabeth, he gave his Enemies more cause to animate the King against him.

Toward the end of this year, the King discovered how the Prince of Joinwille
Spaniards, and negociated some Contract or Colligation with them, by means of
Philip d'Anglure Guyonvelle a Lord Franc-Comtois. He caused him therefore to be
apprehended: but when he found there was more of Puerility and Wantonness, than
Malice in his Transactions, he would not put the young Prince in Prison, he
only put him into the Custody of the Duke of Guise his eldest Brother, that he
might teach him more Wit.

Amidst so many Inquietudes and Alarms, the Court tasted some little joy at the
reception they made for the Swiss and Grison Ambassadors who came to Paris to
Swear their renewed Alliance with the Crown. They were in number Forty two,
Sagner Advoye of Berne was their Orator. They arrived at Paris the Fourteenth
of October, and stayed there Thirteen days. The manner of their Reception,
their Lodging, the Feasts that were made for them, the Ceremonies they used at
their Swearing the Alliance in the Church of Nostre-Dame, which was performed
the Two and twentieth of October, the Presents which the King bestowed on each
of them, were just the very same things as we have seen these latter years upon
the like occasion, and are withal more proper to fill up a Ceremonial than a
History.

But it is remarkable that at the Treat was given them in the Archbishopric
after they had taken the Oaths, the King who had dined apart, came into the
Hall where they were sitting, accompanied by the Cardinals de Joyeuse and de
Gondy, and some other Lords and presenting himself at the end of the Table
without sitting, nor yet suffering any of them to rise, drank to the health of
his Comperes, or Gossips, and obliged the two Cardinals to do the like. The
Ambassadors received this Honor bare-headed, and Pledged him in the same
manner.

About four or five days afterward they took leave of him, having obtained
Three things which they earnestly desired: The First for the whole Body of the
Cantons, viz. A Confirmation of the Privileges that had been granted to them in
France; Of the other two, the one was for the Protestant Cantons, and imported,
That they should not be obliged to serve against those of their own Religion:
The other for the little Cantons, allowing them, to continue their Alliance
with Milan and Savoy, provided it were not Prejudicial to that which they had
newly made with the King.

An Edict which the Chancellor had minuted against Duels, was not yet
Published. The King receiving every day Complaints how the most generous Blood
of his Nobility, (idle and punctillious) was shed in these Combats, thought
himself obliged to put that Curb upon so Tragical a Fury; The Edict was
Published in the Month of June. It forbad all the King's Subjects from making
any Duels, or Challenges, as well within, as out of the Kingdom, under pain of
the Punishment inflicted for High Treason, viz. Death and Confiscation, as well
for the Seconds, as for the principal Parties concerned: Ordained that Process
should be made to the memory of those that should happen to be Slain in those
Combats; Enjoined the Connestable and Mareschals of France, to cause such to be
brought before them as had any

Complaint was made that Strangers melted down the Gold and Silver, and carried
it out of France, and that the manner of counting by Crowns increased Luxury;
because it cost no more to say Crowns than Livers. Upon this pretense some of
the Council, by Motives not well understood, persuaded the King to raise the
price of Moneys* so that the Gold Grown which was at Sixty Sols, was raised in
value to Sixty and five; the Franc's These are the Pieces of 27 Sols now.
which were worth Twenty Sols, to One and twenty and four Deniers; the quart
d'Escus of Fifteen Sols, mounted to Sixteen; and the Testons of Fourteen and a
half, to Fifteen and a half. It was likewise ordained, That from that time
forward they should account by Livers, as was used before the year 1578. when
King Henry III* ordained they should reckon by Crowns.

Those who had given this advice, desiring to have it Authorized, the King sent
for the Chief of the Four Sovereign Companies, of the Chambers des Monoyes, and
the principal Bourgeois and Merchants to come to the Louvre to have their
Opinions. All excepting those of the Monoyes found great inconveniences in the
said Change or Alteration: Nevertheless, those that had given that Council,
persuaded the King to pass by all those Reasons to the contrary, and to force
the Parliament by diverse express Commands to verify it, without having any
regard to the Remonstrances made by them: whom they would not allow to speak,
but only to deliver what they did object in Writing.

The Preparation made by the Duke of Savoy, was for an Attempt upon Geneva.
Albigny his Lieutenant General on this side the Alps, and Governor of Savoy,
had the first Conceptions of it; Bernoliere Governor of Bonne perfected the
Design. The first chose Twelve hundred Men to execute the same on the Night of
the Two and twentieth of December, led them to the foot of the Wall between
Porte-Neuve and that of la Monnoye, made them plant their Ladders which were of
a mavelous Structure, and saw Three hundred Soldiers get up well Armed, and
provided with good Hatchets, Pincers and Hammers; this was about two hours
after Midnight. Bernoliere, who managed the whole Design, having surprised the
Sentinel, forced the Word from him, then killed him, and stood in his place; he
did the same to the next that came the Rounds, but imprudently suffered a Boy
that carried the Lauthorn to escape. The Lad ran to give the Alarm to the Court
of Guard, and the whole Town: who but for this had remained in a profound
quiet, resting upon the Faith of their first Syndic of the Guard, named
Blondel, who was afterward proved to be of intelligence with the Undertakers.

They had designed not to stir till just at break of day, but now finding they
were discovered, they resolved to begin the Execution. They therefore divided
themselves into two Parties, went to gain the one the Porte-Neuve (or Newgate)
and the other that of the Tartaise, and of these last part of them believing
the Town was already their own, broke into the Houses and fell a Plundring. The
first did Petard the inward Gate: but it happened that the Petard was not in a
readiness to break open the second; that soon after their Petardier, or Gunner,
was Slain, and a Burgher cut the Rope which held the Port-Cullis, and made it
slide down. Then was the time they should have made use of their Hatchets: But
their Astonishment made them forget they had any such Instruments.

In the mean time the Inhabitants having taken up their Arms, and gotten into a
Body, came to attaque them. The Savoisiens who were gone to the Tartaise Gate,
rejoyn with those at the Newgate; This Gate is taken and retaken Bernoliere is
laid dead upon the spot; these that were without do not succor them as they
ought to have done, by giving hot and false Alarms at the other Gates. In fine,
their great Numbers over-whelm the Savoisiens, about some Fifty of them are cut
off, the rest run to their Ladders; the Cannon from an opposite Bastion had
battered them in pieces, they leap from top to bottom of the Fossez, where most
of them are knocked on the Head, and even many of those that had not been
within the City. Attignac and the other Chiefs, to the number of Thirteen,
defend themselves so valiantly they obtain a Capitulation with their Swords in
hand: But, as you shall find, their valor reserved them but to a more ignoble
Fate.

The Duke of Savoy believed the Success so certain, that he parted from Turin
four days before, and was come to Pont d'Estrambieres, which is within a
League of Geneva. We may guess what his displeasure was, when upon his Arrival
he heard Albigny Sounding a Retreat; Wherefore he returned the very next day
over the Mountains in post-haste, leaving his Forces in the Countries of
Foucigny, Chablais, and Ternier, and sent dispatches to the Neighboring
Princes, especially to the Swiss, to justify his Action.

He had three colors for it; The First, That Geneva was not comprised in the
Treaty of Vervins; Neither was it indeed expressed by Name: but the King
maintained that it was included under the Name of the Allies of the Swiss. The
Second, That the Inhabitants of Geneva refused to Pay him the Duties and
Imposts for what they possessed in some Parts of the Countries subject to him,
and this was true. The Third, That Lesdeguieres had contrived a Design to seize
upon their City, and that he only endeavored to prevent him, as being more
equitable it should fall into the hands of their Natural Lord, then into a
Strangers and an Heretics.

The Day come, they held a Council in the Town Hall how to dispose of their
Prisoners: the wisest were of opinion to keep them as Hostages in case the Duke
should have a mind to Besiege their City: but the common Rabble, and the Widows
Rhosne.

They make mention of a Damoisselle Wife of Sonnas one of the said Thirteen
Officers, that had Seven Children by him, and was great with the Eighth, who
having resolved neither to eat nor drink till she had once more kissed her dear
Husband, and the Magistrates having refused to let her have his Head, she sat
her self just opposite to the place where they had planted it, and kept her
Eyes ever fixed upon that dismal Object of her Love, and her Despair, till Death
deprived her both of her Sight and Life.

It happened after some good distance of time, that Blondel Syndic of the Guards
was accused by certain Persons of having had intelligence with Albigny: but
they being of the Scum of the People, his Authority was enough alone to
invalidate their Testimony; so that the Business had rested there, if himself,
to his Misfortune, had not pushed it on too far, by contending to have them
punished as Calumniators. The necessity of a Self defense, drove them to search
out for Proofs; They alleged that he had sent Letters to d'Albigny by a
Savoyard Peasant. The difficulty was to meet with this Fellow, three years were
spent before they could get a sight of him; so soon as he appeared Blondel made
him Prisoner, and had put him down into a Dungeon. He thought by his very rough
handling to force him to be willing to ^leer him: But finding he persisted in
the Truth, he suborned the Jailer, who strangled him in the Dungeon, and left
the Rope about his Neck, as if the poor wretch had exercised that Cruelty upon
himself. The truth of the Fact being discovered by Inspection of the Place and
Circumstances, Blondel and the Jailer were broke upon the Wheel; The first
before he died, owning his Correspondence with the Savoyards.

Swisserland and France, the Bearn immediately concerned themselves for the
defense of Geneva, the King assured them of his Protection, and a Thousand or
Twelve hundred Huguenots put themselves into the Place to defend it in case it
were attaqued. This People turbulent and proud of the Support of the
Protestants and that of France, gave themselves up to their resentments, and
began a War against the Duke of Savoy: but with much more Fury than either
Force or Success. Now the King, Geneva, had an interest to make up an
Accommodation: For if it went farther, he knew himself obliged to assist the
Huguenots, and join all the Protestant Party together, which would mightily
have shocked the Pope, whom he more dreaded than all the Powers upon Earth. For
this reason he gave Order to Emery de Vic his Ambassador with the Swiss, to
come to Geneva and dispose them to Peace, and at the same time declared to the
Duke of Savoy who armed to Besiege that City, that if he proceeded any further
he must concern himself.

The consideration and weight of so great a Power, put a full stop to their
Motions on either hand, and brought them to a Peace. The Cantons of Glaris,
Soleure, Scaffhauss^n, Basil, and Appenzel, the least interessed of the
Thirteen, undertook to manage it. It was first begun at Remilly, and finished
at Saint Julian's near Geneva the One and twentieth of July, and ratified by
the Duke the Five and twentieth. The Treaty contained, That they should
mutually restore the Places which had been taken; That the Immunities and
Exemptions which those of Geneva enjoyed for what they Possessed in the
Territories of the Duke, should be Confirmed: That the Duke should not draw any
Forces together, raise any Fortifications, nor keep any Garrisons, within four
Leagues of their City; and that it was declared to be comprised in the Treaty
of Vervins.

The Court passed the Winter after their wonted manner: Dancing, Gaming,
Feasts, Balls, and Comedies, especially those of the Italians, were their daily
Divertisements. In the beginning of March, the King took a journey to Mets,
November, was delivered of her first Daughter. The chief Motive of this Voyage
was to discover what practices the Duke of Bouillon might possibly have
contrived with the Protestants of Germany, and secure the City of Mets, which
being at that time in great combustion, might have sided with some other

The Duke of Espernon having been settled in that important Government by King
Henry III. had left the Lieutenancy both of that City and Country in the hands
of a Gentleman named Mont-Cassin his Kinsman, and that of the Citadel to Sobole
of the House of Cominges, who had been bred as his Page. Soon after having
recalled Mont-Cassin near his person, he bestowed both those employments on the
second; he invited a younger Brother to come into that Country, a man violent
and covetous, and who soon gained the full sway over him. Now the Elder Sobole
having brought some assistance to the King at the Siege of Laon, got of him, as
the reward for his Services the promise of these Lieutenancies, his Master
being then in Provence and in disfavour at Court with this new power, playing
Rex, he begins to treat the Inhabitants scurvily, and enraged that the Duke
seemed to justify their complaints, and foment their discontents, he by the
advice of his younger Brother, Accused the principal Citizens and Officers of
Justice, of having intelligence with Mansfeld Governor of Luxembourg; upon this
Information several were imprisoned, and had been put to the Rack. But, in
fine, the business being brought before the Parliament, their innocence and the
calumny of Soboles were clearly made known. Then the Duke makes no difficulty
of espousing the quarrel of the oppressed, so that they barricade themselves to
besiege Soboles in the Citadel. This Mutiny proved the loss of the two
ungrateful Brothers: but the Duke got nothing but the pleasure of a revenge.
For the King making have to treat with them, pressed it so home, that before
his Arrival they Surrendered the place into his hands, without making the least
advantage to themselves. He settled Francis de Montigny la Grange Lieutenant
for the King over that Country and that City, and Arquien his Elder Brother in
the Citadel, under the Government notwithstanding of the Duke D'Espernon; who
feigned to be very well satisfied, though he foresaw he should have no power
in those parts so long as the King lived.

Ever since the Kings absolution at the Court of Rome, the Jesuits had missed
no opportunity of employing the Popes intercession, with all their art and
industry to solicit their re-establishment, pretending it was one of the
secret conditions which had been opposed at his absolution. But the imprudent
conduct of some of their Society in England, at Venice, and in the lesser
Cantons of Swizzerland, having brought complaints against them to Rome, the
Pope grew somewhat cold in the pursu^e of it. Now as the King was passing by
Verdun, the la Varenne, presented themselves to request of him that the Decree
of the Parliament of Paris, which forbid the French to send any of their
Children to study in the Jesuits Colleges, might not extend to theirs. The
King having returned them a very Gracious Answer, they thought it a fit time to
try a little further. Their Provincial named Armand, and three or four of his,
came to Mets, and choosing the week of the Passion of our Lord, most proper to
stir up mercy and compassion in a Christian Soul, got into the Kings Closset
upon Holy-Thursday after noon, and fell down at his feet. The good Prince soon
raized them again, and gave them a full Audience. The Provincial who was
Spokes-man, insinuates himself, by extolling of his Victories and his Clemency,
then endeavored to justify his Society from the common reproaches of their
Enemies, and afterward concluded by conjuring and imploring his Royal Clemency
by the precious Blood of Jesus Christ to show mercy toward them, and to do it
in such sort, that this favor might depend on nothing but his own goodness,
that it might be wholly from him alone, and that they might have no obligation
but to himself.

They had put down their harangue in writing: after he had heard it with all
possible humanity, he took it out of their hands as if to read it with more
attention. The Monday following having called them a second time into his
Closet, he gave them his positive word for their being restored, commanded the
Provincial to come to him at Paris and to bring Father Cotton, then embraced
him and all his Compagnons, in token he freely forgave them for the time past,
and would make use of them for the time to come.

While he was at Mets, he received some Letters the Prince Palatine had written
in favor of the Duke of Bouillon his Brother in Law. In the same place some
German Princes came to Compliment him, particularly Maurice Landgrave of Hesse,
N. de Bavaria Duke of Newburg, the Duke of Deux-Ponts of the same House, and
John George of Brandenburg, who disputed the Bishopric of Strasburg with
Charles Cardinal of Lorrain ever since the year 1592. the first having been
Elected by the Protestants at Strasburgh, and the second by the Catholics at
Saverne. The Emperor had often endeavored to bring them to an agreement, but
could never effect it. The King rather suspended then decided the controversy;
by sharing the Revenue between the two Contenders: but the following year it
was absolutely and finally determined by the mediation of Frederick Duke of
Wirtemberg, upon these conditions, amongst many others, That John George of
Brandenburg should entirely yield up the Bishopric to the Cardinal de Lorrain,
for an hundred and thirty thousand Crowns of Gold ready Money, and that the
City and Baillywike of Ober^agh should remain in the hands of Frederic,
redeemable at the end of thirty years by the Cardinal or his Successors, for
the sum of four hundred thousand Crowns.

From Mets the King went to Nancy to visit the Duchess of Bar his Sister, and
to give her the satisfaction of seeing a Balet danced which was of her own
invention; for such things are not to be counted the least important Affairs of
the Court. It was likewise, as some would have it, further to convince the Duke
of Bar of his scruples concerning that Marriage, and to let him know that the
devoir of Man toward his Wife being founded both on a natural and a divine
right, ought to be more regarded then humane prohibitions. However it was,
within some few Months after, the Duchess believed she was with Child.

The King had designed a longer stay upon those Frontiers, that he might draw
the German Princes to him, by making himself a friendly Mediator of their
differences, reconciling as much as possible the Protestants with the
Catholics, re-uniting in one common League, those that apprehended they might
be oppressed Austria, and scattering Money amongst the Captains and Officers.
But the News he received that Elizabeth Queen of England was at the Agony, made
him suddenly leave that place to return to Paris.

This Princess so much exalted by the Protestants, and made so black by the
zealous Catholics, was in truth worthy of immortal praise for the grandeur of
her courage, her mavelous prudence, the rare qualities of her mind, and above
all that tender love her Subjects, whom she exposed to cruel deaths. This
severity, notwithstanding proceeded April about four in the morning, Aged sixty
nine years and six months, of which She had Reigned forty five and more.

On her Deathbed she gave Letters written with her own hands, and sealed with
her own Seal, to Robert Cecil High Treasurer and Secretary, with Command he
should open them so soon as she expired. Now whether by these writings she had
declared James Steward King of Scotland her Successor, or had left the liberty
of Election to her Subjects, as the last mark of her affection, the Lords, the
Bishops, those of the Privy Council to the late Queen, with a great number of
the Nobility, and the Major and Sheriffs of London, being on the same day
assembled early in the Morning at the Guild Hall, Elected that Prince for their
King; and so speedily, that they Proclaimed him by eight of the Clock; whereof
sending him notice to Edinburg, he came to London the seventeenth day of May.

It concerned France to take care in time to secure the Alliance with this new
King, for that hitherto his correspondence and interests had been with the
Spaniard, his whole Council held that bias, the inclinations of his Wife Anne
of Denmark, who had much influence over him, were turned toward them, and it
was not to be doubted but that the Catholics, who were numerous in England,
and even all the people, because of the advantage of Trade, much more
considerable from Spain then France, would use all their endeavors to oblige
him to Treat with King Philip. It was therefore thought fit to send Rosny on
the Embassy: James's Counselors, because he had the Purse wherewith to guild
his Arguments and make them the more efficacious.

He had order to demand of that Prince, first the continuation of his Amity,
and Alliances with the King; afterward to sound whether he would incline to
assist the United Provinces against the Spaniards. If he did not do it frankly
to proceed warily, and not discover the private designs of the King against the
House of Austria: but if he did find him disposed, to lay open the Methods
whereby to destroy that grandeur, and reduce it within the limits of Spain
only, and their Hereditary Countries in Germany; For this purpose to make a
League Denmark and Sweden, who should first attaque the Low Countries and then
the Indies, to be shared amongst the Confederates; and to set up at the same
time a potent Caball in Germany to take the Imperial Crown from him. He was
also commanded, if he found the overtures favorable, to desire that King to
put a stop to the English Piracies, who since the Peace of Vervins, under
color of a War with Spain, had taken for above Three Millions belonging to the
French; As likewise to demand that the French who Traded in England, might
enjoy the same Privileges and Franchises as the English enjoyed in France, by
the Treaty made between King Charles IX. and Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1572.

His whole Negotiation is to be seen at length in his Memoirs, and how he
brought back a Treaty into France made the Five and twentieth of June, by
which, the Prince promised in his own Name, and Rosny in the Name of the King;
of which he made great use, though he had no express Commission for it, to
renew and strengthen the Ancient, and never interrupted Alliances between
France and Scotland, and those between the late Queen Elizabeth and King Henry
IV. That a League should be concluded between the two Kings, for the Defense of
their respective Kingdoms, Persons, and Subjects, and of their Allies:
Especially of the United Provinces, whom they should forthwith assist with
Powerful Succors, which should be raised in England, but paid by the King of
France, the one half in Deduction for what he might be indebted to the English;
That if either the one or the other were Attaqued by the Spaniard, his Allie
should assist him with a Land Army, or a Fleet of Ships, at the choice of him
who should be so Assaulted, which should consist, at the least, of Six Thousand
fighting Men; That if both should at the same time be Assailed, or should Henry
with Twenty thousand Men, whom he should send into the Low Countries, and a
considerable number of Galleys and other Vessels into the Mediterraneum. And
James with a Body of Six thousand Men by Land, and two strong Fleets which he
should send the one upon the Coasts of Spain, the other toward the Indies.

Before this Treaty the King had been greatly afflicted with a Retention of
Urine, caused, as was said, by an Excrescence stopping up that Channel. The
Danger was so eminent, that believing he should die, he had begun to dispose of
the Government during the Minority of his Son.

When he was Cured, he applied himself as before to his Buildings, and in
procuring Money to be more plentiful and of a quicker Circulation in his
Kingdom, thereby to make his Subsidies flow in both more abundantly and more
readily. Trade appearing to him to be one of the most certain means and ways
Chamber des Comptes, and the Cour des Aides. And because he was not Potent
enough at Sea, and by that way the Expense was great, and the Profit a long
time and very uncertain in its coming, he thought to succeed better and sooner
by Home-Manufactures. Therefore he set up of diverse sorts; Tapestries of the
richest Fabric in the Faux-Bourg Saint Marceau, by means of diverse excellent
Artists whom he invited thither from Flanders: Guilt-Leather Hangings in the
Faux-Bourg Saint Honore^ and Saint Jacques; Mills to work and cleave Iron
with ease, and to cut the same into several pieces, which were Built on the
River of Estampes; Gaases and thinn Linen Cloth at Mantes upon the Seine;
Pot-works for coarse and fine Earthen Wares of all sorts at Paris, Nevers, and
Brisambourg in Saintonge: Glass-houses for Chrystaline in imitation of the
Venetians, at Paris, and Nevers. (There had been formerly some at Saint
Germains en Lay in the Reign of Henry II. but the Wars had extinguished the
Furnaces.) Cloth and Serges; Stuffs and Silks in diverse Parts of the Kingdom,
and several other things.

The Manufacture of Silks was that which took most with the generality, and
promised the greatest Profit. The use of it first began in the East even with
the beginning of the Persian Monarchy; The Romans having penetrated those
Countries by their Conquests, could easily have brought away the Art and Use of
it, but despised it, fearing to render themselves effeminate by those softer
Garments, much fitter for tender amorous Youths and Women, than the more rough
and martial Men. Afterward their Courage growing indeed effeminate, they
suffered it to be introduced in the lesser Asia and in Greece, about the time
of the Empire of Justinian. Then toward the year 1130. it made a step into
Sicilia and Calabria, by means of Roger King of Cicilia, who upon his return
from an Expedition to the Holy Land, having taken Athens, Corinth and Thebes,
transported all such as wrought in Silk to Panormus. Of them the Sicilians
learned to breed up those Worms that make the Silk, to Spin, and Weave it, and
afterward brought the Art into Italy and Spain.

From Italy it came first into the hottest Parts of France, as Provence, the
Comtat of Avignon, and Languedoc; Francis I. settled it in Touraine, thinking to
make great Profit by it. Nevertheless it was not common in France for a long
time, for King Henry II. was the first who wore Silk Stockings at his Sister's
Wedding. Charles IX, and Henry III. the Courtiers did not use much Silk, but
after that the very Citizens began to wear it frequently. For it is a most
certain Observation, that Pride and Luxury does never spread so much as during
Public Calamities; For which I can guess at no other reason, but that it is a
Curse from Heaven which ever comes hand in hand with the Plague of Civil War.

Now King Henry IV. believing this Manufacture might in like manner be set up
at Paris, treated with certain Undertakers who Built several places in the
Tuilleries, the Castle of Madrid, and at Fontainebleau, to breed Silkworms,
(they sending every year into Spain for the Eggs) and gave order for the
planting great Numbers of white Mullberry-Trees, and raising Nurseries of them
in all the adjacent Parishes, the Leaves of those Trees serving as Pasture for
those precious Worms or Catterpillers.

Tours, who pretended to make quantities sufficient to furnish the whole
Kingdom. But as those kind of Establishments accommodate only the Undertakers,
and incommode all others, it was soon found, that this Project ruined the City
of Lions, which may justly be called the Golden Gate of France, destroyed their
Fairs, and withal diminished the Customs by one half. These Considerations
tendered to the King, as he was never obstinate to prefer his absolute Authority
to evident Reason and Demonstration, he made no scruple to revoke it.

In the Month of June, Ferdinand de Velasco Constable of Castille passed through
France on his way to England to finish that Treaty of Peace with King James,
which Taxis the Ambassador in Ordinary from Spain had begun. I shall here
observe, that he concluded it about the middle of June in the following year:
to the great regret of the King of France, who knew by this what he was to hope
for from King James, a Prince heedless and timorous, a Philosopher in words,
yet having nothing but the mien of a Soldier: And who withal was not yet so
well settled in England, as to venture or dare to shock any one of his
Neighbors.

de Verneuil; the heats of the Count de Soissons, which many times broke out
upon Points of Honor, for the most part rather imaginary then real, and the
Insolency's of the Duke d'Espernon were of the first sort. The procedure of the
zealous Catholics, who sought by oblique Methods to engage him to ruin the
Huguenots, as on the opposite the Discontents of the Huguenots who endeavored
to Cantonize that they might not be taken unprovided, were of the second.

We shall Discourse of the two first Points hereafter. As for the Count de
Soissons, being already much offended for that Rosny had refused to allow him a
certain Impost upon Linnen-Cloath, which he begged of the King, the false
Reports made to him by the Marchioness of Verneuil, pushed him on to such an
extremity of resentment: that he talked of nothing but to be revenged by the
Death of Rosny; and although the King did openly enough take part with this
last, he could never allay the Count's Passion, but by obliging Rosny to disown
by a Public Writing, what he was accused to have spoken of the Count, and
offer to fight any Man that durst maintain the contrary.

The Brave Grillon had suffered himself to be persuaded to lay down his Command
of Mestre de Camp in the Regiment of Guards, the Duke of Espernon Colonel of
the French Infantry, took it to be his Right to Nominate; the King would
retrench that Right, and had destined it for Crequy Son-in-Law to Lesdiguieres.
Espernon after having made all his efforts by Intrigues and by Remonstrances,
to maintain his pretended Right, retired Malcontent to Angoulesme:
Nevertheless being informed the King threatened to follow him, he was advised to
submit to his Pleasure: When the King saw he acquiesced obediently, he did him
Justice; for he ordered Crequy to wait upon him in that Country, to make Oath
to him, and to take his Attach on his Provisions.

However he reserved the disposal of that Office, and the like in all other the
old Bodies: but would have them be subject to the same Devoirs toward their
Colonel: That when two Companies happened to be vacant in the Regiment, he would
fill up one by Nomination of the Colonel, who should not be installed, nor
take place, but from the day they had given their Oaths to that Officer, and
taken his Attache: That as for the like Officers in other Regiments, the
Colonel should Nominate, and he choose Captains out of those so named; and as
to the Lieutenants, Ensign-Collonels, Sergeant-Majors, and their Ayds,
Prevosts, Mareschaux de Logis, and other Officers, he should dispose of such by
his sole Authority. Which raised his Power above that of Princes, and almost in
a condition to make Head against the King himself.

Huguenots, and too much persuaded of the Spanish Grandeur, endeavored to
divide the King from the Protestants, to reduce him to an entire submission to
the Pope, to bring in the Jesuits, and to unite him with Spain and Rome,
thereby to extirpate Calvinisme from all his Territories. Taxis Ambassador
from the Catholic King, offered Spain for that purpose, representing that the
Huguenots were the greatest Enemies to his Person, and often had solicited
King Philip to help them to dethrone him. He was, indeed, but too well informed
that the Chiefs of the Huguenots, as Bouillon, la Trimouille his Brother in
Law, Du Plessis-Mornay, Lesdiguieres, and some Gentlemen that were his
Domestics, but had quitted him when he went to Mass, and almost all the
Protestant Ministers, had no more that Love for him which otherwhile they had
shown, but sighed after some other Protector. He could not, how-ever, resolve
to treat those as Enemies who had so tenderly nursed and bred him up, and had
Sacrificed every thing for his sake; and he considered withal, that if he could
have forgot their eminent Services, he must thereby have alienated from him all
the Protestant Princes, and have remained alone exposed to the Mercy of the
same Power and Persons that had formed the League, which was what they desired.
He chose therefore rather to restrain the hatred of particulars, without
designing, or indeed daring, to fall upon the whole Body of them.

The Duke de la Trimouille was he who discovering himself with most Confidence,
rendered himself the most Criminal, not so much by Actions, as by his
Discourses. His Strength lay in Poitou, where he had his Estate and Friends;
The King to destroy his Credit and his Intelligences, thought fit to give the
Government to Rosny; And to this effect, knowing that Malicorne and the
Marshall de Laverdin, who had the Reversion the one after the other, were
content

A little while before, about the beginning of October, the Huguenots had held
a Gap in Daufine, where they made several Reiglements for their Ecclesiastical
Discipline. Amongst others, That the Word of God should be the sole foundation
of their Theology and their Sermons; That those Scholastic Disputes wont to be
used in their Synods, should be sent back to their Schools; That they should
have no Effigies upon their Tombs, nor Coats of Arms or Escutions in their
Temples. They likewise ordained many things for the maintenance and good order
of their Colleges and Academies, and for the instituting of Seminaries and
Libraries in each Province.

One of their main ends, was to conciliate the Lutherans with the Zuinglians
and Calvinists: for the first were a more bitter Enemy to these than to the
Catholics themselves: they invited therefore some Doctors of the Palatinat who
were Calvinists, and some others from diverse Parts of Germany who were
Lutherans That the Pope was the Antichrist, and in that quality should be
inserted in their Confession, which should be sent and recommended to all the
Protestant Churches in Christendom.

The Minister Ferrier, possessed with an impious and turbulent Ambition, was
chief Promoter of it. The more Prudent amongst them, even the great Scaliger,
condemned this Decree, as the monstrous Product of a violent Cabal, and
acknowledged that the Name of Antichrist could no way be suitable or
appropriate to Clement VIII. who was very moderate toward those of their
Religion. The Pope's Nuncio and the whole Clergy of France were moved and
provoked at it as became them, and carried their Complaints to the King; who
thought himself more concerned and affronted yet than they, as by consequence
reproaching him that he worshipped the Beast, and which was more, cut him out
very dangerous work at Rome. He therefore made use of all his Authority, and
all the interest he had in those of greatest Credit amongst the Huguenot Party,
to get them to abolish the said Decree; But not being able to persuade them to
annul it, he did however so order things that it remained (unexecuted, and)
only in the Heads of those that forged it. Four years after, viz. in Anno 1607.
the Factious brought it again above-board, and got it confirmed in their
Assembly at Rochell; And for the second time, also, he hindered the effect of it.

After his Voyage of Mets, the Jesuits earnestly solicited to be recalled:
they had grand intrigues at Court, they had very potent friends there, who
urged that none but they were capable to instruct youth, and to convert the
Huguenots. Cotton who never forsook the Court but preached there with great
applause summoned the King day by day to make good his promise, the Nuncio
pressed him on behalf of his Holiness, Villeroy and Sillery joined their good
Offices, but their most prevalent Solicitor was William Fouquet la Varenne,
Comptroller General of the Post Office, who from the meanest employments of the
Kings House, had raised himself to the Cabinet or Closet, by those
complaisances and Ministeries, which are the most agreeable to the great ones.
This dextrous Courtier had a huge fancy to enrich and illustrate la Flesche the
place of his Nativity, and whereof the King had given him the Government: he
had already set up a Presidial, an Election, and a Salt-work, all of a new
Creation: the Crown of his desires was now to see a College of Jesuits
Established there; to this end the King had given him his Palace, had assigned
eleven thousand Crowns of Revenue, and vast Sums of ready Money to build and to
maintain it; and gave order that his heart and that of his Queen, and of all
his Successors should be buried in their Church there.

When his intentions on this Subject were made known, there was not one in all
the Council that durst open his lips against it. He therefore gave them an
Edict for their re-establishment, Which confirmed them in those Houses from
whence they had not been expelled, restored them to those of Lions and Dijon,
and to all that belonged to them; yet not without several conditions very
necessary, but which time or favor have easily abolished.

September, the Company put off the business till after Saint Martins day,
that it might be considered at more leisure. The Chambers Assembled ordered to
make most humble remonstrances to the King, to let him know the justice and
necessity of that Decree or Act, by which they had banished the Society. The
Month of December being passed whilst they were drawing it up, Andre Huraud de
Maisse who had a Vote in Parliament, Christmas Eve the Deputies being admitted
into the Kings Closet, Achilles de Harlay first President spoke for them.

The weight of his reasons supported by the dignity of so grave a Magistrate,
and with the force of his Eloquence, were enough to have convinced the King,
had he not been absolutely fixed in his resolution: but as he gave Audience to
those Gentlemen only to make the Restoration of the Society the more
authentic, he was not at all moved. After his giving thanks to the Members of
Parliament, with his accustomed benignity, for the care they showed of the
common good, and for the security of his person, he replied, that he had well
foreseen and considered all those objections, and inconveniences which they
laid before him: but that they must trust him with the care of providing
against those, and desired that his Edict might be verified without any
modification. The Officers belonging to the King did notwithstanding delay the
dispatch of it, and essayed to put some stop to the verification: but the King
having sent for them treated them with rough Language, and enjoined them to set
about it that very day; they were therefore forced to obey.

to have always attending upon the King one of their Society, a Frenchman, and
sufficiently authorized amongst them, to serve him as a Preacher, or Chaplain,
and to be responsible for the actions of the Company, instead of blemishing, as
those imagined who had thrust it in, proved to them the greatest honor they
possibly could desire, for it empowered them to give Confessors to the King.

Father Cotton was the first of theirs that held that place: all honest people
did mightily rejoice, imagining he could show no connivence for the

Chastels Condemnation, and their Banishment, and on the other three diverse
Inscriptions in Verse and Prose very biting and very injurious to them. To take
away the Brand-mark from the forehead of the Society, they must pull down that
Monument which taught men to curse that hellish Parricide. It was desired it
might have been done by a Decree of Parliament: but when they found the
Sentiments of that great Company were quite contrary, they did it without
further application to them: tho not without giving the World a just occasion
to speak variously concerning it. In the place of that Pyramid they made a
Conduit or Fountain, all whose streams of Water though clear and plentiful
shall never be able to wash away the memory of so horrid a Crime.

Catherine Duchess of Bar, interrupted the divertisements of the Court, and
clothed it in Mourning. A tumor in her Womb, (which her Physicians,
Flatterers, and Ignorants affirmed to be a true conception and treated her
accordingly) made her lose her life the thirteenth day of February in the City
of Nancy. To be reconciled with her Husband, she had diverse times suffered
disputes of Religion between some of the Catholic Doctors and her Ministers,
but with no other success then what the like Conferences are wont to produce,
viz. to make the truth more obscure. She had also given some hopes that she
should be instructed: not withstanding she obstinately persisted in her first
belief to her very death.

France were known to the Council of Spain, almost as soon as they were taken,
the King was mightily troubled at it, and knew not at whose door to lay the
blame; the discovery of the Treachery of Nicholas l'Hoste, brought it to light.
This was a young Clerk of Villeroy's, whom his Master employed in deciphering
Letters and dispatches. He was Son of one his Domestics, and his own Godson;
he bred him up in his own house, and for his first employment placed him with
Rochepot whilst he was Ambassador in Spain. In that Country a Frenchman named
Rasis a Native of Bourdeaux, (who for his having been too hot a Leaguer, could
not attain the Kings permission to remain in France, and therefore was retired
to Madrid) corrupted and prevailed with him to accept a Pension of twelve
hundred Crowns to betray the secrets of his Master; and after his return into
France he continued to earn it by the same infidelity. Now Rasis at length
finding they neglected to pay him his own allowance discovered this intrigue to
Barraut the French Ambassador: Barraut assured him of a good reward, and to get
a pardon for him; In effect they sent him one immediately: but when he found it
was Signed by Villeroy, he judged it would not be safe for him to stay any
longer in Spain, and desired to be gone at soonest. The Ambassador therefore
lent him Money and his Secretary to conduct him into France.

His fears were just, for so soon as the Council of Spain knew of their
departure, they gave notice of it to their Ambassador in France, by an express
Courrier, who got thither two days before them. They did not find Villeroy at
Paris, but at a house of his own name on his way to Fontainbleau where the
Court was. He did not think fit to send presently to apprehend l'Hoste who was
yet at Paris, till he had first spoken to the King; the next day l'Hoste came
to Fontainebleau, but as soon as he spied Rasis he immediately slunk away, the
Spanish Ambassador having appointed a Flemming to conduct him to the
Low Countries by Champagne.

The Provost des Mareschaux hastens to overtake them, and pursues him so la
Ferte: but hearing the noise of Horses, (it was in the night) ventures to wade
cross the Marne and was drowned. It is not known whether by chance or despair,
or whether his Guide played him that fly trick, to prevent the discovery of his
Accomplices. His Body was brought to Paris, the Parliament made Greve, which
was Executed the nineteenth of May. Such as were Enemies to Villeroy rejoiced
at this misfortune: they would willingly have charged his Servants fault on
him, but not daring to Accuse him of infidelity, they taxed him with
negligence. The King was for some days a little reserved toward him, however
considering his great and real grief, and the necessity of his Services,
instead of adding to his affliction, he took part with him, and had the
generosity to console him.

The Council of Spain were in despair for that the French passed in great
numbers to the Service of the Hollanders, and every year the King furnished
those Provinces with six hundred thousand Livers in ready Money. These succors
had put King Philip to so great an expense, that not knowing where to get any
more Cash, he laid an Impost of thirty per Cent. upon all Goods imported into
his Dominions, or exported thence. The King could not suffer such exaction,
which enriched his Enemies to the loss of his Subjects: he prohibited all
Commerce to the Low Countries and Spain; and observing that the appetite of
gain tempted the Merchants, who for the most part value no other Sovereign but
their Interest, to infringe his Laws, he added great penalties to it. This was
to begin a rupture, the Spaniard set a good face upon it, as if they much
desired it: but underhand solicited the Popes mediation: who put an end to
this dispute by persuading them to take off the new impost o^ the one hand, and
the prohibition on the other.

Not daring openly to revenge himself upon the King, he endeavored at least to
contrive some private means to perplex and displease him. Taxis, his
Ambassador, had concerned himself in the intrigues of the Morchioness de
Vernevil; Balthazar de Suniga, who succeeded him, followed his Footsteps, and
held secret correspondence with five or six Italians who absolutely governed
the Queen, particularly Conchino Conchini a noble Florentine, and Leonora
Galigay, a Bedchamber woman to that Princess, whom Conchini had Married. She
was the homeliest Creature about the Court, and of very abject birth: but that
great Empire she had over her Mistress, repaired all the defects both of her
person and condition.

The King as weak in his passions and domestic Affairs, as valiant and rough
in War, had neither the heart to reduce his Wife to obedience, nor to rid his
hands of his Mistresses, who were cause of all his Domestic broils. Those
little Italian people, to render themselves more necessary, exasperated the
spirits they should have allayed, and by the malignity of their Reports and
Councils increased the Queens discontents; so that instead of reclaiming the
King by alluring Caresses (for he would be flattered) and endeavoring to
regain his affection with the same Arts others made use of to steal it from
her, she made him loath her Society with her Eternal grumblings and bitter
reproaches. This contest betwixt Man and Wife was the perpetual business of the
Court; their Confidents were no less busily employed in these Negociations,
then the Council was in the most important Affairs of State; and this disorder
lasted as long as their Marriage, being sometimes quieted and laid asleep for a
few days, then waked and roused again by fresh occasions, and accordingly as
those Boutefeux thought fit.

coquette, used all her artifice to maintain those fewds, which maintained her
felicity. Amongst her Jests with which she made the King merry, she often mixed
some insolences against the Queen, and upon diverse occasions would make her
self her equal, spoke meanly of her extraction, and then would counterfeit the
Gate, her gestures, and her way of speaking. These offenses did so much
heighten the resentments of this Princess, that she with outrageous Language
threatened a severe Revenge; the Marchioness having reason therefore to
apprehend more then a bare affront: and withal displeased with the King for not
taking her part, made use of an artifice common enough amongst those Female
Politicians when designing to revive a dying passion: She feigned to be touched
with a remorse of Conscience and Christian sorrow: the fear of God, said she,
would suffer her no more to think of what was past but only to do penance for
it, and that of her own life, and Childrens forbid her to see the King in
private. She went yet farther, and begged leave of him to seek a Sanctuary out
of the Kingdom for her and hers.

This Artifice had not at first its effect: for the Holy time of Easter
approaching, he was resolved to take her at her word, and to give her leave to
retire into England, where she might have the Duke of Lenox her near Kinsman to
support

After all this, the Queen being satisfied, and the Marchioness appearing no
more, the Tempest seemed to be allayed, when the King discovered that
Entragues, Father of the said Lady, and the Count d'Auvergne had contrived a
dangerous design with King Philip's Ambassador; It was to convey the
Marchioness into Spain with her Children; which was negociated with Balthazar
de Suniga, Ambassador from the Catholic King, by the management of a certain
Englislr Gentleman named Morgan. It was reported, whether true, or false, how
the Count d'Auvergne having acquainted the Spaniards with the Promise of
Marriage the King had given the Marchioness, had made a seoret Treaty with
them; by which King Philip promised his assistance, to set her Son in the
Throne: And to that purpose would furnish them with Five hundred thousand
Livers in Money, and order the Forces he had in Catalogne to March, and second
the Party who were to Cantonize in Guyenne and Languedoc. Nay* much more was
mentioned, Daufin.

Now after the Death of l'Hoste, the Count finding the Intrigue began to be
discovered, retired into Auvergne, upon pretense of a Quarrel which happened to
him at Court: The Business being taken into Deliberation by the Council, some
gave their Opinions he ought to be treated like the Marshall de Biron; but the
King would by no means proceed after that manner: The example would have been
of Consequence to his Bastards; So that the Constable, and the Duke de
Ventadour, the former, Father in Law to the Count, and the other his Brother
that wretched Man, upon condition however that he should Travel three years in
the Levant.

When he thought himself out of Danger, he offered the King, if he would he
pleased to give him his full Liberty, to continue his Correspondence with the
Spaniards that he might discover all their Secrets, and give him a true account
thereof. The King seemed to confide in his Promises, soon discovered that he
neither kept Faith with him nor his Enemies, but juggled with both. Thereupon
he Commands him to Court: The Count excuses it, till he had his full and
authentic Pardon; they sent it to him, but with this Clause, That he should
come to the King: He could not find in his heart, to rely upon the word of a
Prince whom he had so often deceived; so that the King resolved he should be
Apprehended Auvergne. The Count stood much upon his guard, and thought there
was no Man in the world able to surprise him being so well fore-warned;
Notwithstanding Nerestan, and the Baron of Eurre, having enticed him into the
Field to be present at the Muster of a Company of Gens-d'armes belonging to the
Duke of Vendosme, surrounded and dismounted him, and took him in such manner

At the same time Entragues and his Wife were seized in their House at
Malesherbes, and the Marchioness in her Hostel at Paris. The Count was brought
to the Bastille, and Entragues to the Conciergerie, or Common-Goal of Paris. It
was necessary that all the world might see and know the Spaniards still
maintained Factions in France: The King therefore commanded his Parliament to
proceed against these Criminals: The event we shall show in the next years
Transactions.

Another Faction also did much discompose the King's Thoughts. He could not
deny the Hugenots leave to Assemble at Chastelle^ant: and it was to be feared
the Intrigues of the Marshall de Bouillon, and Credit of the Duke de la
Trimouille du Plessis Mornay should put them upon Resolutions contrary to his
will and interest. But Rhosny under color of going to take Possession of his
Government of Poiton, broke their measures* And la Trimouille falling into
Convulsions, and then languishing, died some while after, Aged not above Four
and Thirty years. He was a Nobleman of great Courage, and of most eminent
Qualities;

The King diverted himself, amidst all these Intrigues, with Buildings and
other such like Occupations, when his leisure would give him leave, as tended
to the improvement of his Kingdom. King Henry III. had begun the Pont-Neuf,
having built two Arches, and brought the Pyles for the rest above the Water
mark, Henry IV. finished it, so that People began to pass over about the end of
the preceding year. He carried on the Works also of the Louver Galleries, the
Castles Saint Germain en Lay, Fontainebleau, and Monceaux, which last he had
bestowed upon his Wife. After his Example, all the Great and the Rich fell to
Building; the City of Paris was visibly enlarged and embellished: The Hospital
Saint Lewis was Erected, for such as were infected with the Plague. Some
private people undertook the Place, (or Square) Royal: and others offered to
make a much finer one in the Marese du Temple.

They likewise offered at many Projects, to make several Rivers Navigable which
either had never yet been so, of else were now choked up; and to open a
Communication between the greatest, by means of the lesser lying nearest
together with some new Channels where it should be necessary, to carry it from
the Seine to the Loire, the Loire to the Soane, and the Garonne with the Aude,
which falls into the Mediterraneum, near Narbonne: The Conjunction of these two
last would have made that of the two Seas.

As for that of the Seine and the Loire, Rhosny undertook it, drawing a Channel
from Briare, which lies on the Seine, to Chastillon, above Montargis, upon the
River Loin, and falls into the Seine at Moret. In this Channel they Collected
all the Waters of the adjacent Rivolets, designing to make Two and thirty
Sluices to retain, and let them go by flashes, when needful to convey their
Boats. He Expended above Three hundred thousand Crowns, but the change of
Government made this design to miscarry, though very much advanced. It was, a
long while after, taken up again, and completed at last.

In the Month of October, a new Phenomena was observed in the Heavens, which
appeared four Months together. It was at first taken for the Planet Venus,
because although it exceeded all the other Stars in Magnitude and Splendor,
yet had it no Tail but Observation soon found it was different from that
Planet, for they both appeared at the same time. John Kepler a very Learned
Mathematician, wrote a Treatise of its Motion, according to the Rules of
Astronomy, without troubling himself or the World, to no purpose, like the
Judicial Prognosticators; who upon this Apparition, and the Conjunctions and
Oppositions of some other Planets happening this year, and such as were to happen
the year following, made, as is usual, diverse strange and terrible Predictions.

Languedoc, and which would have caused a horrible Famine had they not been
furnished with Wheat from Champagne and Burgundy by the Rivers of Soane and the
Rhone. The Plague also raged in several Provinces of France; the soregoing year
it had afforded Death a most plentiful Harvest in England.

When the Plague was ceased in those Countries, King James hold his first
Parliament in London, to whom having made a Gracious and Royal Speech
concerning the happy Union of the two Kingdoms, the Affection he had for his
Subjects, the Laws and Regulations they were to make, he desired of his
Parliament, and they granted it, That from thence forward the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland should be joined into one Body, under the Denomination of
GREAT BRITAIN, otherwhile used by the Romans: Whereupon was Coined that Medal,
bearing this Inscription, HENRICUS ROSAS, REGNA JACOBUS. His Speech was full of
excellent things, amongst others, That he did not believe, as Flatterers would
fain persuade their Princes, that God bestowed Kingdoms upon Men to satisfy
their unruly Lusts, and Pleasures, but to take care of the Peace and Welfare of
the People; That the Head was made for the Body, not the Body for the Head: The
Prince for the People, not the People for the Prince.

Rome which begot great Contentions in That it was not an Article of Faith to
believe that Clement VIII. was Pope; which so enraged the Holy Father, as
without the Intercession of the Spanish Ambassador, the Society had been in
great Danger. The Second, That Sacramental Confession might be made by Letter.
The Third was, The Novell Opinion of Molina, the Spanish Jesuit, touching
Grace, of which we shall perhaps, make mention elsewhere. I call it Novell,
because that Author vaunted himself the Inventor of it, as a thing wholly
unknown to the Ancient Fathers, who by this, said he, might have avoided a
great deal of Embaras, had they lighted on the Notion. The Jesuits for
Self-Preservation were forced to renounce the two First; which notwithstanding
were rather stifled, than Condemned: but they maintained the Third, with all
their force, against the Dominicans. These attaqu'd it as an Opinion which
destroyed that of their Saint Thomas, and even that of Saint Augustine which
has been received and allowed by all the Latin Church.

By too eager an endeavor to increase the King's Revenue, the Super-Intendant
brought such disorder into the State, as can never be made worse but by the
continuation of it. Formerly, the Offices of Judicature and of the Treasury
might be resigned, but the Resignee was to live Forty days after, otherwise the
King was to provide one. Now Rhosny considering that the King made no benefit
upon such Vacancies by Death, but was obliged to bestow them at the importunity
of Courtiers, he bethought him of a way to bring great Emoluments to the
Exchequer. Which was, to secure the Office to the Wife and Heirs of those that
were in Possession, provided they would yearly pay the Sixtieth Denier of that
Finance, or Revenue, those Offices had been valued at; in Default whereof they
should upon their Death revert to the Profit of the King. This was called, in
Exchequerterms the Droict Annuel: The Vulgar named it, La Paulete, from the
Name of Paulet the first Contractor: In some Provinces they gave it that of La
Palote, because the Officers there had to do with one named Palot, who
undertook it after Paulet. This favor was first granted but for Nine years,
but it has been renewed for the said term, from time to time to this very day.

Unless stark Blind, they might with half an Eye foresee that this Edict would
consequently and necessarily perpetuate the Sale of Offices, besides the
impossibility of reducing them, (as they ought) to their ancient Number; That
it would raise the prizes of them to that monstrous excess as we have by
Experience known. That it would make those that held them less dependant on the
King,

And indeed no one Court throughout the Kingdom, (while they had nothing in
their Prospect but the good of the Nation) did much incline to accept of it: So
that they only read and published a Declaration in form of an Edict, at the
Court of Chancery in the year 1605. But when particular Men, (making
reflections) considered their Families would receive vast advantages, they
consented to the public loss, for their own private Gain; which perhaps in
time may not prove altogether so much as they had flattered themselves withal.
The Chancellor Believre kept the said Declaration in his hands for some Months,
and did not then pass it, till he was in danger of losing the Seals for it;
which he could not hold much longer however, for Sillery's interest forced them
out of his Possession.

Men of upright Honesty could have wished that instead of this odd kind of
Establishment, they would rather have taken away not only the Sale of Offices,
but likewise all Salaries, Wages, Spices, and Presents, without leaving any
other Emoluments but the Honor of the Magistracy, and hopes of future Rewards
for their long, or their eminent Services in the due Administration of Justice.
This Method, said they (besides that it would have produced the advantages
contrary Paulete) would have been of vast Profit to the King, by casing or
discharging his Coffers of the Wages to so many Officers: It would have reduced
the Charges to a very small Sum, and have discharged the public of huge
Burdens, besides the Plague of tedious Suits in Law. For there could have been
hone but Men of Integrity and Probity, that would have undertaken those Offices
thus denuded of Profit, and such Magistrates being totally disinteressed, and
not in a possibility of getting by delays, would most certainly have
endeavored to do speedy and impartial Justice, and retrench those Formalities,
and little quirks and shifts by the severe Punishment of litigious
Pettifoggers: And there was no France then flourished and abounded, even
amongst the Gentry and the richer sort, there would have been enough willing to
undertake those Offices gratis, and who till their Prince should have thought
fit to reward their Virtue and Diligence otherwise would have satisfied
themselves with the pleasure of well doing, and the real delight of being
commended, respected, honored and by all ingenious Persons highly applauded: a
Motive which alone does daily prompt the more brave and generous to venture
their Estates and Lives, and wherewith the best governed States have ever
rewarded the Noblest Actions, rather than with Money, which renders Judges
covetous and mercenaries, proud and voluptuous, unjust and oppressors.

We must not step out of this year 1604. without briefly mentioning the Siege
of Ostend, which never shall be forgotten. It lasted Three years and Seventy
eight days, during which time it was the School and Cockpit of all that were
the bravest Warriors in Christendom, the exercise of the best Ingeniers, and
most dextrous Inventors of Machines, and the Spectacle of the curious and
inquisitive who flocked thither from all Parts, and gazed at the sight as on a
Miracle. The Archduke began it the Fifth of July in the year 1601. The
renowned Ambrose Spinola put an end to it the Twentieth day of September in
this year 1604. having had the honor to reduce the place to a Capitulation.

It had the advantage of receiving daily Supplies by Sea; so that when ever the
Garrison was tired, they could send them out, and take a Recruit of all fresh
Soldiers in their stead. By this means the Besieged disputed their ground foot
by foot, and did not Surrender till they had no more Earth left to cover
themselves. When the Spaniards were come in, and found the Walls beaten quite
down by the Cannon, the Earth all torn up with their Mines, and nothing
remaining but Rubbish and Ruin, they were but little satisfied for having
bought so dear a little heap of Dust and Sand, (or rather a place of Burial)
which cost them above Ten Millions of Money, Seventy thousand Men, and Three
hundred thousand Cannon-Shot; not reckoning the Cities of Rhimbergue, Grave,
Sluice, Ardembourg, with the Forts of Issendre and Cadsant, taken by Count
Maurice, whilst they were pelting at this Siege.

In these times, there happened a not able Change in the Kingdom of Sweden. The
King Gustavus Eric-son had set up the Confession of Ausburg in the place of the
Catholic Religion, and bred his two Sons in that Profession, namely John who
succeeded him, and Charles Duke of Sudermania. John maintained the same, yet
notwithstanding, whether he were not fully satisfied, or were over-persuaded by
his Wife Sigismond his Eldest Son to be bred up in that Religion. Besides this
Sigismond, he had also another Son named John Sigismond was Elected King of
Poland in the year 1587. during the Life of his Father, and went into that
Country; the Second remained in Sweden: Now, when King John died in Anno 1592.
he by Will, either real or supposed, left the Government of the Kingdom of
Sweden to his Brother Charles: this Prince making good use of the Assistance of
the Lutherans, to Exclude his Nephew, and get into the Throne himself, managed
his Design so Prudently, that he had the Government of the said Kingdom settled
upon him by the Estates, Anno 1595. and afterward obliged them to take the
Crown from the Sigismonds, Anno 1599. And, in fine, after a War of some years,
to place it upon his Head: Which was done this year 1604. Sigismond not being
ever able to wrest it from him again; so that after his Death it descended to
the Great Gustavus his Son, and to his Heirs.

d'Auvergne, and his Accomplices with the more diligence, because the Queen
seemed to be a Party, the King not to exasperate her, showed no less heat then
she, and the Parliament made all the dispatch they possibly could. But the
intentions of all three were very different, for the Queens were to chastize a
Mistress of the Kings, that hereafter such as succeeded might dread her anger;
as for the Parliament such as minded Courtship, more then to unriddle the
hearts of Kings, thought they did great service by proceeding with all
severity; and as for the King, he had no mind to disgrace his Mistress, for
fear of distasting those by whom he expected to be obliged; he only desired a
thundering Arrest, (or Decree) might pull down that haughty spirit and make her
readily submit, who of late treated him like a mere stranger, and to his
enjoyment opposed the fear of God, and the prohibitions of her Confessor.

The Count d'Auvergne was Examined three times; the King having given notice to
the Parliament, by his Attorney General, that they ought to have no regard to
his pardon, nor that Brevet he had granted him. Entragues, the Marchioness his
Daughter, and Morgan were likewise interrogated; the Count laid all upon the
Marchioness his Sister, believing the King could never find in his heart to
ruin her: he cast all the reproaches on her he possibly could express, and she
upon him. Entragues on the contrary did wholly acquit her, and took all upon
himself, choosing rather to hazard three or four years of a languishing
remainder of life (for he was above seventy three years of age) then to put his
dear Daughter in danger of losing her head with ignominy.

The business was carried on with such heat, that the first day of February
there was an Arrest, (or Act) which condemned the Count, Entragues and Morgan
to be beheaded in Greve; and the Marchioness to be reclused in a Nunnery at
Beaumont near Tours, till more ample Information concerning her. The Queen
received much joy, yet reaped not all the advantage she expected from this
grand Arrest: for the King acquainted the Court, by his procurer, or Solicitor
General, that he desired the Sentence might be suspended till he had made a
more narrow inspection. When therefore he had humbled the haughty Marchioness
by so terrible a Decree, he began to show favor that he might obtain some from
her, and caused an instrument to be passed under the Great Seal, which was
verified in Parliament the three and twentieth of March, giving her liberty to
Vernueil.

After all this there were some people in Parliament so unacquainted with
intrigues of this nature that they importuned him for leave to pronounce
Judgment: but he eluded their pursuits by diverse delays; and at length by other
instruments commuted the punishment of the Count, and of Entragues, to a
perpetual imprisonment, and then restored them to all their honors and
estates, though not to their Entragues his house of Malesherbes for his Prison:
and as for Morgan he only banished him the Kingdom for ever. Seven Months being
passed, and no new proofs coming in against the Marchioness, for indeed who
could have taken the pains to produce any? the King gave her a Writing of the
sixteenth of December which declared her perfectly innocent, and imposed
perpetual silence on his Solicitor General touching that Fact.

The Count d'Auvergne being the most dangerous, was therefore handled the
worst, they left him in the Bastille, where he remained twelve years, without
any other consolation then what he received from good and ingenious Books, the
faithful compagnons for all Ages, fortunes and places.

During these amorous intrigues, which were managed as grand Affairs of State,
the King began to engage in affection with Jaquelina de Bueil, whom he made
Countess of Moret; yet nevertheless he soon after recalled the Marchioness,
whose charming humor and conversation ever seasoned with pleasant railleries,
and picquant reflections upon the other Court Ladies, did most agreeably divert
his mind, from the too intense thoughts of his Affairs, and vexations caused by
the ill humors of his Wife: but on the other hand, it begot new Brouilleries
every hour with her, as also frequent punctillio's between the other Lords and
Ladies of this Court: a Subject much more worthy and fit for a Romance, then
such a Chronicle, but which have occasioned the most considerable Events in the
Court of France since the Reign of Francis I.

Margaret having often earnestly desired permission to come to Paris,
especially after she knew the d'Auvergne, whereof she gave punctual accounts to
the King: so that, in fine, he resolved to grant her request. She arrived then
at Paris in the Month of August; and they assigned her the Castle of Madrid in
the Bois de Boulogne to lodge in. She staid there six weeks, thence removed her
Lodging to the Hostel de Sens: but there, an odd accident happening to one of her
Minions who was killed in the boot of her Coach, by a young Gentleman, in
despair because that Gallant had ruined his Family as to the favor they had
from that Princess: She quitted that unfortunate Hostel, and purchased another
in the Fauxbourg Saint Germain, near the River and the Pre au Clerc, where she
began a great foundation of Buildings and Gardening.

There it was she kept her little Court the remainder of her days, odly
intermixing voluptuousness with devotion, the love of Learning with that of
Vanity, Christian Charity and Injustice: for as she had the Ambition to be
often seen at Church, to converse with learned men, and to bestow the Tithe of
her Revenues upon Friars and Monks, she also took a pride in fresh Galanteries,
inventing new divertisements, and never paying her just Debts.

Pope Clement VIII. by diving too far into the profound questions concerning
Grace, which have no bounds nor bottom, did by the study thereof, as it was
said, so over-heat his Brain, as kindled a Feavor in his Blood, whereof he dyed
the third day of March. There were two Factions in the Conclave, that of the
Aldobrandines, and another of the Montaltes. The Cardinal de Joyeuse, having
made himself head of the French Cardinals, and of some other indifferent ones,
mated them both so well, with this flying party, that he disposed them to Elect
the Cardinal Alexander de Medicis, Leo XI. this was upon the first day of
April. They made Bon-fires for joy at the Court of France, and all over the
Kingdom in consideration of the Queen; but the news of his death extinguished
them as soon almost as^ they were lighted, for he survived but five and twenty
days. The regret was by so much the more sensible, as their joy had been short
lived, and he had raised their hopes and expectations. Then the two Parties
renewed their intrigues in the Conclave with more heat and application then
before: the Cardinal de Joyeuse by his prudent conduct calmed them a second
time. They having on either part made use of all the little policies and
stratagems employed in the like cases, he contrived it so, that the plurality
of Votes Camillo Borgheze; who was Elected the sixteenth day of May, and took
the name of Paul V.

Whilst all Italy had both their Eyes and Hearts attentively fixed upon these
Cabals, Peter Gusman de Toledo, Count de Fuentes, Governor of Milan, thought
this a proper time to forge his Chains intended for them, and would needs make
an Essay of his grand design, first on the Petty Princes bordering upon his
Government, then upon the Grisons. He commanded the President and Treasurers of
Milan to summon the first Malespines, as being the feeblest: but they failed
not to call upon the Princes of Christendom to assist them, and to make the
World acquainted by their Apologies, that if this Claim of the Spaniard were
allowed of, there was no Potentate in Italy could be exempt, neither the Dukes
of Parma or Modena, the Genoese or the Venetians, the Duke of Tuscany, nor even
the Holy See: insomuch as by their loud outcries, they made him let go his
hold.

As to the Grisons, the Conde being angry at the new League was made between
them and the Seigneory of Venice, he put forth Edicts which broke their
Commerce with Milan, without which it is impossible for those Leagues to
subsist; and to quell them absolutely, he built a Fort called by his own name,
upon a high Rock which commanded the entrance into the Val-Teline, and the
Valley of Chiavenna, to serve not only as a bridle to those people, and stir up
the Valtelines against them, who being all Catholics disdained that
Protestants should Lord it over them; but also to have free passage and
communication with Tyrol, and other hereditary Countries belonging to the House
of Austria.

The Swiss, whose resolutions are slow and heavy, did not bestir themselves so
soon as they ought, to have broken this uneasy Curb, which gave a check to the
whole body Spanish Faction so increased amongst the Grisons, as caused most
pernicious divisions, and made them run great hazard of their liberty.

It was impossible but the remembrance of so many injuries the King received
from the Spaniard, and so many Conspiracies, which by their instigation had
been formed against his person, must give him some resentment: he verily
believed too, that his life would be more secure in an open War, then such a
treacherous and insidious Peace: wherefore, his thoughts both day and night
were rolling on the means to destroy that House much more an Enemy to his
particular person, yet, then to the Kingdom of France. But, as he was guilty of
that fault Spaniards, did eternally bait and importune him to wave it, and
enter into a League with them, and with the Pope. But far from yielding to her,
he re-allied himself with the Protestant Princes, and was endeavoring to draw
the Duke of Savoy and the Duke of Bavaria to Club in the design, promising the
first to help him in Conquering the Kingdom of Lombardy; and the second to
assist him with Money and Credit to make his Interest to attain the Empire,
when Rodolphe, who was already old, should cease to live. These negociations
lasted three or four years before he could succeed.

Having such vast designs, he notwithstanding was at prodigious expenses in
building, Gaming and Mistresses. Such as imagine that all the Actions of
Princes tend to some certain concealed ends, would have it, that he was glad to
find his example made the Grandees run upon those Rocks, so that being wholly
taken up with vain amusements, softened by dalliance, and impoverished by
excessive expense, they could neither spare the time, nor means to contrive any
Brouilleries. It is very certain that many of them lost so much at play, they
were not in a condition, had they intended it, to make any considerable
disturbance.

I have heard it affirmed that a refined Italian, having bought up all the Dice
that were in Paris, and furnished the Shops with false ones made for his
purpose, fell in with the Court Gamesters, and knowing exactly which would run
high or low, made a prodigious gain, which he shared with Persons of the
highest Quality.

However it were, the huge Sums the King expended in these three Articles, (not
including those he employed on other more necessary ones) those which he had
issued out for the payment of his debts, and redeeming part of his demeasnes,
and those also which he collected and heaped up for the carrying on the
projects he had conceived, could not possibly be raised without grinding his
people, whatever care and Methods he took. Besides, he was too easy in
granting, to his Courtiers and Ladies, either new Monopolies, or new Imposts,
and made Gifts that were of profit to particulars, but which tended to the
general ruin. Moreover, the Nobility, and old Commanders, were discontented in
their minds to see him by little and little reduce the Companies d'Ordonnance,
and the old Regiments to so narrow a condition; and instead of keeping those
old bodies full and complete, he gave Pensions to above twelve hundred men, who
most commonly were chosen rather upon recommendation then for their merit. The
Cardinal d'Ossat had otherwhile taken the liberty to presage, that these
discontents would become universal, and one day break forth into some great
disorders.

Some Sparks of it were to be seen in the Provinces of Quercy, Perigord, and
Limosin: The Servants of the Duke of Biron, furiously bent to revenge the de
Bouillon, whether they had orders from him, or acted by their own proper
motions, believing he would own them if they succeeded, made diverse Assemblies
of the Nobility, and gave earnest Money for the levying of Soldiers, but in
such pitiful Sums, that it plainly appeared this advance-money came out of some
little private Purse only. And yet to give life to their Partisans, they every
hour reported some forged news of the Marshall, sometimes affirming that if
they held together but till the Month of October, some great matters would be
done in favor of him: another while that they should find him in France sooner
then his friends imagined, or his Enemies desired: Then, that the reason of his
stay was but to bring such Germany, as would be able to enter into the very
heart of the Kingdom, and bide Battle in the open Field.

Besides all these Rumors which at so great a distance made the Rebellion
appear a hundred times more formidable than it really was, the King had
frequent notice, that the Spaniards held Intelligence, and had Designs upon the
most important Frontier places, as Toulon, Marseilles, Narbonne, Bayonne, and
upon Blaye. He apprehended also lest the whole Party of the Reformed Religion
should embrace the Mareschals defense, and by the Directions of so able and
knowing a Person should be inclined to form a separate Republic in the
Kingdom: for they talked of setting up Councils in each Province, of not
admitting such as were Officers of the Kings to any Consultations that
concerned the Good old Cause, to make Orders and Regulations for raising of Men
and Moneys, and to make Leagues with Strangers. To these Dangers he opposed the
Cares of Rhosny, who having had Interest and Credit enough to preside in their
Assembly of Chastelleraut, stifled all Motions of Affairs of that Nature, and
besides mightily qualified the hottest amongst them, by presenting to them on
the behalf of the King, a Brevet dated the Eight of August, which prolonged
their holding the Places of Security for Three years.

When all was out of danger on that Side, the King prepared himself about the
end of August, to take a Journey into the Provinces where the Fire was
kindling; and to clear the way before him, he ordered Ten Companies of the
Regiment of Espernon, with two Masters of Requests, John Jacques de Mesme
Roissy, and Raimond Vertueil Fueillas; The first went to take Information in
Limosin; the second in Quercy, but caused all the Prisoners to be brought to
Limoges.

Bouillon's Friends could never have believed they durst have attaqued his
Castles, because they were comprised amongst those places of Security granted
to them of the Religion: they were much startled when they found that
consideration could not protect them. Bouillon being informed of it, sent them
Orders to Surrender upon the King's first Demand.

As to themselves, the wisest preferring a timely retreat before an obstinate
stay, withdrew; some, as Rignac and Vassignac to Sedan, others to other places
of Safety: Many had recourse to the King's Clemency, and purchased their Pardon
by discovering the whole Series of the Conspiracy, the Cities they were to have
Surprised, the Places where they were to be Armed, those that had promised to
declare for them, and many more Particulars, which being thoroughly examined, had
little other foundation, but their own credulity and foolish imaginations. Nor
was any thing produced in Writing against the Duke of Bouillon, nothing
appearing but the Evidence of such people whose profligate reputation destroyed
the Credit of what they would have asserted.

The more Unfortunate fell into the hands of Justice. Roissy made their
Process, assisted by Ten Counselors of the Presidial. Five or Six paid down
their Heads, which were planted over the Gates of Limoges, the Bodies burnt,
and their Ashes dispersed in the Air. Some others were hung up in Effigy: But
these Executions were not till after the King had been gone a Month; who seeing
the Fire was put out, returned to Paris toward the end of November.

As he was going to Limosin, being at Orleans, he took the Seals from the
Chancellor de Bellieure, to give them to Sillery, but still left him the honor
to be Chief of the Council, a sorry Comfort for so great a Disgrace, and which
gave Bellieure occasion to say, That a Chancellor without the Seals, is a Body
without a Soul.

At Paris the King met with new cause of disquiet, the Business of the City de
Thou, Nicolai, and Calignon, a Master of Accounts, and a Treasurer of France:
and in the manner these did proceed, none could have just cause of Complaint.
But when he had named others, and it appeared by their management, the Council
had a design either to destroy, or much lessen that Fond which was the clearest
subsistence of many Families in Paris, the interessed, who Prevost des
Marchands, he being as it were their Guardian.

This was Francis Miron, a man of Courage and Probity, and who had no other
interest but his Duty and the Honor of his Office; He took up the Business with
some heat, spoke very resolutely in the Town Hall, and wrote to the King who
was then at Fontainebleau. Those of the Council who had a Pique against him for
his great resolution, too stiff in their opinion, imputed as a Crime that he
should mention Nero in some Discourse of his, and insisted much with the King
to have him apprehended. The Bourgeois were ready to take up Arms in defense of
their Magistrate, although he protested he would rather choose to die, than be
an occasion of the least disorder.

It was a great happiness for the City of Paris to have so good and so wise a
King as Henry: who having in other occasions thoroughly tried the Fidelity and
Candor of Miron, and it being withal his Method to give People time to calm
and cool themselves, and repent of their rashness, he would not push things on
to extremity, which must have engaged him to severe Chastisements; So that the
Tenants referring themselves wholly to this good natured Landlord, and Miron
having explained himself with all the Respect and Humility due from a Loyal
Subject to his Sovereign, he stopped all further proceeding touching their Rents.

As to the rest, Paris does owe this acknowledgment to the honor of Miron, that
in his Office of Lientenant Civil, and of Prevost des Marchands, they never had
a Magistrate so exact in settling of the City Government, their Markets, and
what else was necessary, or that so warmly espoused the Peoples interest, or
took more pains and care about the Revenue and Rights belonging to them, to
clear their Debts, keep up that Splendor becoming the Capital City of the
Kingdom, as also to beautify, and furnish it with things that were at once an
Ornament and of Public Advantage. The several Streets enlarged, many new Paved
and made shelving to convey away the Dirt and Water, Eight or Nine stately
Conduits or Fountains, still casting forth their plentiful Streams, the River
improved with Wharffs, Keys, and watering places, diverse little Bridges in
places convenient, a new Gate at the Tournelle, that of the Temple repaired and
opened, after it is having been shut up above Forty years, will be lasting marks
and tokens of it to all Posterity. But there was nothing so noble as the Front
of the Town Hall, which seemed to have been left imperfect for Two and seventy
years space, to give this Magistrate an opportunity of making it the Monument
of his Fame, and to exercise his Generosity by employing all the Profits of his
Offices to put it into that condition wherein we behold it to this very day.

As to the Assembly of the Clergy, that Body having recovered much force and
vigor, the Complaints and Demands they had to make to the King were very
great. Hierosme de Villars, Archbishop of Vienne presented the Assemblies
Papers to him, and was the Mouth of the whole Assembly; He made a long
discourse upon those vexations the Church suffered on all hands, the infamous
Trade of Benefices, Simoniacal Bargains, Pensions paid to Laymen, and frequent
Appeals, as gross abuses. He said, the cause of all those Disorders was the
refusal, they had hitherto met with, for Publishing the Council of Trent; That
it was strange the Kingdoms of the Earth, which are but as the baser Elements
of the Terrestrial Globe, should substract and withdraw themselves from the
benign Influence of the Church, which is the Celestial World; That the things
which pass away on the wings of Time should hinder the Fruits of an Eternal
duration; That they should make Divine Reason stoop and truckle to Humane
Policies, and, if we may so express it, subject God, in a manner, to the Wills
of Men.

As to the Reception of the Council of Trent, the King would not be Positive,
That it could not quadrare with the Reasons of State, and the Liberties of the
Gallican Church; On the contrary he declared that he desired it as much as
they, and was very sorry it met with so great Difficulties: That he would spare
neither his Life, nor Crown for the Honor and Exaltation of the Church. And as
concerning Simonies, etc. they must lay the blame upon those that practiced it,
not upon him, for he made no Trade of Bishoprics, like the Favorites of his
Predecessors, but bestowed them gratis, and upon Persons of Merit.

He afterward, at leisure, made distinct replies to all their Papers, and
amongst other things granted them by an Edict, the liberty of redeeming such
things as formerly belonged to them, and had been sold for little or nothing
without due

There happened this year Three Eclipses two of the Moon; The first upon the Four
and twentieth of March, the second the Seventeenth of September; and one of the
Sun the Second day of October: It began about One of the Clock afternoon, and
for two whole hours caused such a darkness, that it seemed as it were Night;
the disk of that great Luminary being totally obscured by the Moon which
appeared black, and edged with a circle of light quite round.

The Astrologers after their wonted manner Predicted it would have most
terrible Effects: If the Fougade in England had not failed, they would have
made the world believe that this Phenomena did Prognosticate it. Some English
Catholics accustomed to contrive Conspiracies during the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, being much incensed against King James, for that though at his first
coming he had given them fair hopes of enjoying greater liberty than ever in
their Religion, yet did now keep as severe a hand over them as any before,
Plotted to destroy both him and all the most eminent of the Kingdom by a Blow,
the very thoughts whereof begets a horror. Robert Catesby, and Thomas Percy
were the principal Authors. These knowing the Parliament was to Sit at
Westminster, hired the Neighboring Houses, and then some Cellars under the
very place of their Meeting, filled them with Barrels of Gunpowder which they
covered with Coals and Faggots, and intended to set Fire thereto when the
Houses of Parliament were Assembled, and so blow up the King with all his Lords
and Commons there attending. One of the Conspirators could not forbear writing
a Letter to a Gentleman his Friend, but in a Counterfeit hand, and without any
Name, conjuring him not to meet there in Parliament for some days. This
Gentleman Communicates his notice to a couple of the Lords belonging to the
Privy Council, who made their Report of it to the King, thereby to discharge
their Duty. They took it to be a piece of Raillery on purpose to affright and
scoff at them: but the King was not of their Opinion, and judged by the terms
of the Letter, (which said, That it should be a terrible Blow; and the Danger
past as soon as you can burn this Letter,) that this must be some Execution by
Fire. It was therefore thought necessary to search into all the Cellars and the
neighboring Houses; the first time nothing was discovered, but the great
quantity of Woods and Coals giving some suspicion, they returned again the
second time, (this was the Night preceding the Day the Parliament was to
Assemble, viz. the Fifth day of November.) They then perceived one of Percy's
Men at the Door, named Faukes; he had been observed there before, and his
Countenance was now Aghast; they seized him therefore, and finding him provided
with Match to give fire to the Train, he boldly owned the Design.

The Conspirators who were retired into the Country till the Fougade had taken
Effect, hearing it was discovered, dispersed several ways, to draw their
Friends together, and make the People rise; but they were so roughly handled,
that some were slain, others taken, and the rest in great Numbers forced to
quit the Kingdom. Most of these last got over to Calais, where the King had

The last day of January, Eight of the Chief Conspirators suffered, in London,
the Punishment inflicted on such as are found Guilty of High Treason. Not one
of them accused the Priests, or Friars, being bound not to discover them by
terrible Oaths; yet King James caused diligent Search to be made for them,
especially the Jesuits. Two of those Fathers had made their Escape, viz.
Garnet, and Hall, with a Boy that served them, to the Castle called Abington
belonging to a Gentleman; the People hid them in the Tunnel of a Chimney, and
fed them with Broth conveyed to them by a long Pipe: But the Searchers having
turned out all the Domestics of the Family, and left a strong Guard London;
the Boy, whether in despair, or for fear he should by force oftortures discover
his Masters Secrets, ripped open his own Belly with a Knife, whereof he died
before he could be examined.

King James was persuaded that Garnet knew every particular of the Plot, as
being an intimate Confident of Catesby's; but would not put him to the Hall;
and from their Discourse, which was overheard by two Witnesses who lay
concealed, they got full proof for his Condemnation. He died as a Martyr,
notwithstanding, and passed for such in the opinion of the English Catholics.
His Apologist writing also four years after, affirmed that a Gentleman who was
present at his Death, desiring to have of his Relics, having Garnet's Picture
traced in lines of Blood upon one of them; which was at that time kept by a
Lady as a most precious and wonderful Relic.

The Pope fully justified himself from the reproach of this horrible attempt,
and showed by good literal Proofs, that he had forbid the English to ma^^ use
of any such Bloody ways. The Jesuits labored also on their part to make Father
Garnet's innocence appear: And King Henry IV. whose honor was much concerned in
their Conduct, since he had recalled them, sent Father Coton to the English
Ambassador, to assure him the Society had no hand in that Conspiracy, and that
if some particular Members of theirs were concerned, they disowned and detested
them. There was however another Jesuit in England named Oldcorne, who
maintained that the said Enterprise was good and laudable, and for so doing was
Condemned and Executed as Garnet had been.

France, about the end of the foregoing year, was discovered the Treason John
d'Alagon de Merargues, a Gentleman of Provence, but originally by his Ancestors
of the Kingdom of Naples, whence King Rene had brought his great, great, great
Grandfather. The resemblance of his Surname had infected him with the vanity to
believe he was of the House of Arragon; and upon that score it came into his
head to make himself a Fortune by the Spaniards; to deserve which, by some
Signal action, he had undertaken to bring the Spaniards into Marseilles. The
Office of Procureur Syndic of that Country, and his great Alliances by
Marriage, his Wife being related to the Duke of Montpensier and the House of
Joyeuse, rendered him very considerable; the Command of two Galleys maintained
for the King's Service seemed to facilitate the means to make him Master of the
Harbor or Port; and the Office of Viguier, which he was assured of for the
next year now at hand, gave him great Power over the City. He had
notwithstanding so few Instruments for so great a Design, that he communicated
it to a Slave belonging to one of his Galleys, whom he would needs employ in
it: the Slave discovered it to the Duke of Guise, and the Duke of Guise sent
notice of it to the Court.

Merargues going thither soon after about some Affairs of the Province, la
Varenne had order to observe him, and acquitted himself so well, that one
evening slipping into his House, with a Prevost, he surprised him while he was
entertaining B^uneau Secretary to the Spanish Ambassador with his Design. They
seized upon both, and searching them, found a Writing tied under Bruneau's
Garter, which decypher'd the whole Mystery. Bruneau was Imprisoned in the
Bastille, Merargues in the Chastelet, and from thence transferred to the
Conciergerie.

The Spanish Ambassador made great noise at the detention of his Secretary; he
spoke of it as a high injury to the Dignity of his Master, an Affront to all
Crowned Heads, and a violation of the Security due to every Ambassador.
Secretary had committed; and made him sensible that such who debauched and
Hollanders, and had attempted to stir up the Morisco's in Spain; whereof there
was proof, said he, in the Confessions of diverse Criminals that had suffered
Death in those Countries.

To the first point, the King made the same answer he had formerly given upon
the same Subject: To the second, he said, it was an Artifice of the Council of
Spain, who by the extremity of Tortures had forced those Suppositions from the
mouths of some unhappy wretches, Executed for other Crimes, or had thrust them
into their forged Wills and Testaments, thereby to have matter to recriminate
with some appearance of Truth. After diverse Replications on either part, the
King assured the Ambassador that his Secretary should have no wrong done to
him, and that he would send him the whole result of the Process, to see whether
he would own it, or not.

During all this Month, the Entertainment of the Politicians in their
Conversations, and the subject of their Writings, was to discuss to what
Latitude this Security of Ambassadors and their Servants did extend, and in
what cases they ought to be subjected to the justice of that Country, wherein
they did reside. In the mean while the two Prisoners were interrogated, the
Secretary confessed all, and when they had clearly Convicted him, and gotten
sufficient proof from him to Convict Merargues, the King forbad the Parliament
to proceed any further with him, and some few days after sent him back to the
Ambassador with a Copy of the whole Process. But as for Merargues, they went
through with him; for an Arrest, or Sentence, of the Nineteenth of the Month
made him lose his Head in Greve, and Condemned his Body to be cut in four
Quarters, which they set up over the four principal Gates of Paris, and sent
his Head to Marseilles, to be there planted upon one of their Gates.

France administered new cause of Festivity, the King was seriously minded to
restore the Duke of Bouillon upon his entire and not conditioned submission. It
was nigh upon four years he had been out of the Kingdom, and by his Apologies,
Negociations, and the intercession of diverse Princes of his Religion, had
contended with the King, not as to his Duty, which, he said, he was ever ready
to pay, but his Innocence and Honor which he was obliged to maintain. In
effect, they could not Convict him of any Conspiracy, not even of the last,
though there was some reason to suspect him guilty of all. The King knew he had
stopped his ears at the instant Solicitations of the Spaniards: He remembered the
eminent Services he had rendered him in his most pressing Necessities, and he
desired he might do him more yet hereafter in the shock he intended to give the
House of Austria. On the other hand, he well knew, that this Marshall, so long
as he was absent from Court, would ever keep the Huguenot Party in suspicion;
and it somewhat concerned his Honor to make all Europe see, they being well
informed of this Affair, that it was not without good ground he had so used
him. Now the only way to satisfy together, both his Reputation, and his
Clemency, was to engage him to come and crave his Pardon, and Surrender his
City of Sedan into his hands which he would needs have in his Power, at least
for some days, that the whole world might understand the Marshall held both
his Life and Fortune from his Bounty.

The Marshall did at length resolve to acknowledge he had failed, he named his
faults however, Imprudence and Precipitation, rather than Infidelity; And
though he expressed an impatient desire to wait upon the King, yet he excused
his coming, till all those Clouds and Foggs of Crimes wherewith he had been
charged, were utterly dispersed, it being as shameful for a Master to make use
of any Servant, while under such ill-favored Circumstances, as for the Servant
to have been wanting in his Fidelity due to so great a Monarch. He apprehended
no hurt from the King, but only from the Counsels of Sully: for as he believed
him his Capital Enemy, he imagined he would persuade the King to keep Sedan,
and that the apparent Benefit of the State would excuse and cover the Venial
Sin of breaking his word.

Rosny, shall be henceforward called the Sully, because at the beginning of
this year, the King honored him with the Title of Duke and Pair, which he
annexed to the Lands of Sully purchased by this Lord since his favor. The
Letters Patents were sealed the Nineteenth of February, and verified the last
day of the Month in Parliament; whither the new Duke went to be received,
accompanied as one who had both the King's Treasury and favor to befriend him,
and invite them.

The Business was brought to that pass, that the King finding himself in Honor
absolutely engaged to have Sedan, and the Marshall obstinately bent not to be
dis-seized, nothing remained but force that could determine the Controversy.
In the Council, Villeroy and Sully were of different Sentiments concerning this
Enterprise: Sully openly persuaded the King to go in Person to Sedan; Villeroy
endeavored to hinder it, but by more private ways: To this end he made the
difficulties appear very great, the Consequences worse, the place impregnable,
the Mareschal's Correspondence both without and within the Kingdom very
dangerous: He represented how all the Huguenot Party was ready to rise, all
Germany ready to take up Arms, all England to put to Sea to support it, that he
had numerous Levies in Swisserland and the Low Countries who would begin their
March upon the first beat of Drum.

But the King slighted all these Apparitions as vain and airy Fantosmes, and if
Donchery, which is within a League of Sedan, with his Forces, and had himself
taken a view of the place, the Marshall who had still kept his Negotiation on
foot, demanded to confer with Villeroy, before Sully arrived. It had never been
his design to come to the Swords point with his King, but only to make use of
his Wits, and retard his March by suggesting many Dangers and things he neither
would or indeed could do. On the other hand Villeroy had all the desire
imaginable to conclude the Treaty, that he might ravish the honor of this
Expedition from Sully.

So that upon the second Conference he had with the Marshall, he brought him
to agree, To Surrender the Place to the King, and to consent that he should
keep a Governor and a Garrison there during the space of four years: The King
on his side fully Pardoned him, for all that he could ever have done or said to
that day, without any Reservation, whereof he caused Letters of Abolition to be
expedited, and sent them to be verified in Parliament, dispensing with his
Personal Appearance, and many other customary Forms.

The next day being the last of April, the Marshall relying on the credit of
Villeroy, and the Protection of the Queen, who was willing to gain so knowing
and so Potent a Lord, came to wait on the King at Donchery in the Morning,
asked his Pardon, and took a new Oath of Fidelity to him. The following
Thursday, Sedan, and settled Netancourt his Governor there. This done he
returned to Paris, where he would needs be received as Triumphant, with the
noise of all the Cannon in the Arsenal. The Marshall de Bouillon came soon
after; and the world much admired to see him the very first day as much in the
King's favor, and in his most familiar Conversations, as he had been before
his absenting.

At the same time, the King went to Sedan, the most furious Winds, that ever
yet were heard of, agitated the Air and Sea, not only in France, but also in
England, the Low Countries, and Germany; In the Campaign, it forced back not
only those that traveled on foot, but even Horses, threw several often on the
ground; put Carts and Coaches to a full stop, tore up the strongest Trees by
the Roots, beat down Towers and Steeples, whose Coverings and Walls buried
great numbers of People under their ruins. At Paris, so long as this Tempest
lasted, which was all Saturday, Easter-Sunday, and Monday, the Tyles, Stacks of
Chimneys, nay the very Rafters of the Houses flew about the Streets, and killed
or maimed above Seventy Persons. This Storm did, as it were, threaten to tear
up the very Foundations of the Earth, and force the vast Element of Waters out
of its Natural Bed, to cause a second deluge, after it had caused infinite
Shipwracks in the securest Harbors.

In the Month of June, the King coming from Saint Germains to Paris, by Coach,
Co^ty, the Duke of Montpensier, Vendosme, and designing to cross the Seine at
Port Nully, one of his Horses, instead of going into the Ferry-boat (for as
then there was no Bridge) strayed into the Water, and drew the Coach after him
into a place very deep. The Gentlemen that followed on Horseback, threw
themselves instantly into the River, and happily saved the King, and then all
the rest of his Company. The Queen was in the greatest Danger, la
Chasteigneraye drew her forth, and for this good Service deserved to be Captain
of her Guard some while after. The Marchioness de Verneuil, as she was wont,
played with her Wit maliciously upon this Adventure, and told the King, that if
she had been there, she would have cried out, The Queen Drinks *; which
re-inflamed the Queens resentments, and caused new Picqueerings.

Queen Catherine de Medicis had given the Counties of Auvergne and of Laraguais
to Charles, Natural Son of her Son King Charles IX. Queen Margaret pretended
that she could not do it, because that by the Contract of Marriage with Henry
II. those Lands had been substituted to the Children that should proceed from
it, of whom none were remaining but her self.

Charles, she had waged Law with him to retrieve it; and even Six years before
the Parliament of Toulouze had pronounced in her favor for the County of
Lauraguais. This favorable Prejudication, and the Juncture of Affairs invited
her to bring the like Action before the Parliament of Paris for the County of
Auvergne, and with the like success: for by a Decree in March they adjudged it
to her. Immediately she made a Present of the said Lands to the Daufin, by
absolute Deed of Gift executed while living, upon condition they should be
united to the Crown for ever, and not alienated,

The Court enjoying a perfect repose, now celebrated the Ceremonial Baptism of
the Daufin, and the two Daughters of France: for the Essential Baptism was
administered immediately after their Birth. They had made Magnificent
Preparations at the Louvre for this Ceremony, but the Plague beginning to
Infect Paris about the end of June, and spreading much in July and August,
obliged the King to transfer it to Fontainebleau. It was there performed upon
Holy-Cross Day, in the Court de L'Ovale, where they erected an Amphitheater, as
having no place spacious enough within Doors to contain all their Pomp. The
Cardinal de Gondy Catherine, and for Godfather had the Duke of Lorrain, the
Duchess of Tuscany for her Godmother, represented by Don John de Medicis. The
Eldest Daughter had no Godfather, only a Godmother who was the Arch-Dutchess
Clara Isabella Eugenia: Madam d'Angoulesme represented her, and gave the Name
of Elizabeth to the Child. At the Baptism of the Daufin, the Cardinal de
Joyeuse stood Godfather for Pope Paul V. who for this purpose had declared him
Legate in France during three Months. The Duchess of Mantoua Sister to the
Queen, was Godmother. She being invited to come expressly into France, the Queen
prevailed she might take place of the Princesses of the Blood; a Novelty not
very pleasing to the French, nor to the King himself.

On the day which preceded that of this Ceremony, a light appeared toward the
Western Quarter of the Heavens, which expanding by little and little, cast
forth as it were long flashes toward the South, and the East with most
admirable swiftness. After these Fusees, which lasted near a quarter of an
hour, appeared diverse Chariots of Fire which seemed to shock one the other, and
wherein they fancied to discern some appearances of Lances, Pikes and Arms
which darted them. This Spectacle ended not till about Midnight, and by a clear
Light which made the whole Hemisphear seem to sparkle, then insensibly decayed
in half an hours time. But two days after, about the same hour as at first, all
of a sudden a great Light appeared in the Air, toward the West, as if to light
the Scene, and give the Spectators the Pleasure of a Combat, wherewith the
Demons of the Air, if we may believe so, would entertain the Court, and outvie
their Divertisements. For they formed, as it were, Regiments of Horse and Foot
charging with impetuosity; some tumbled off their Horses, and others trampled
underfoot, many Muskets and Pistols discharged at each other, the Fire and
Smoke

In the general (Abolition, or) Pardon which the Financiers had been
constrained to purchase to deliver themselves from the pursuit of the
Chamber-Royal, the Crime of Forgery had been excepted, as it should ever be.
Some Informers, People of no Credit nor Habitation, and indeed owning
themselves for Counterfeits, imagined that this Exception would be of advantage
to frighten the said Officers and make them befriend and stand by them in all
their villanious Cheats. They first felt their Pulses several times thinking to
squeeze somewhat from them, but they were hugely deceived; those Harpies whose
greatest pleasure

This Court, to give the greater terror, began with such severity as filled the
Houses with Garrisons, the Marketplaces with Gibbets and Effigies, and Foreign
Countries with Run-aways who went to voluntary Banishment: but the most guilty
having timely got their Necks out of the Collar, and carried subsistence enough
along with them to wait till the Torrent were past, began to treat at that safe
distance, and employed part of their Spoil and Theft to gain Friends and
Protectors; who by diverse methods allayed the heat of their Prosecutions, and
spun things out to great length, well knowing the King was soon weary and
easily gave over, when he once met with the like difficulties. Just so did it
fall out, and when they heard him begin to complain of the great cry and little
wool, the Queen Mother implored his Mercy for these wretches, and at the same
time they offered to redeem themselves, and bid up to Six hundred thousand
Crowns. The Richer sort advanced the whole Sum, but re-imbursed themselves
doubly by those Taxes the Court allowed them upon the little ones, who had but
pilfer'd;

Before the year ended, the Marriage of Eleonora Sister of the young Prince of
Conde was completed with Philip Eldest Son of William Prince of Orange and
Earl of Nassaw. He was sent Prisoner into Spain by Duke d'Alva in the year
1568. and having remained there diverse years, recovered his liberty by
renouncing the Protestant Religion. In the mean time Blacons, a Huguenot
Gentleman, had got possession of the Government of Orange, with design, said
he, to keep it for him: and in effect, Anno 1599. knowing he was at Genoa with
the Archduke Albert, and the new Queen of Spain, he went thither to carry the
Keys of the place to him, and invite him to come and take possession, as he
did; yet did he not leave it entirely at his disposal, for fear, said he, lest
the Prince being a Catholic should misuse the inhabitants, who were not so.
Now the King, in favor of the said Princes Marriage with Eleonora, compelled
Blacons to restore that Principallity to him, and also confirmed its
independance by very express Letters Patents.



That upon the Popes request he sent the Order of the Holy Ghost to Alincourt
his Ambassador at Rome, to conferr it with all possible Solemnity on Duke
Sforza, and the Duke de Saint Gemini of the House of the Vrsins, dispensing
them from the obligation of making proof of their Nobility, as the Pope had
dispensed him from the Statute of that Order, which prohibits the conferring it
upon Strangers.

That he had a Second Son born the Sixteenth of April, who bare the Title of
Duke of Orleans, and dyed four years after, before the Ceremonies of Baptism.

That in the Month of May, a Chiaux brought him a Compliment and Letters from
the Grand Signior Mahomet.

That in the Month of July he reunited all his own particular demeasnes to the
Crown of France.

September, a Comet appeared, whose long and large Train did point directly to
the Sun, it being of the magnitude of Jupiter, and the color of Saturn. It Is
motion at first was so swift, as in few days, within its own Circle which was
very great, it ran nine degrees and more: this velocity diminishing daily
together with its magnitude, it disappeared at the end of October.

That the grand Master of Maltha sent a Bone of the Foot of Saint Euphemia,
Virgin and Martyr, to the Doctors of the Sorbonne, who otherwhile had chosen
her for their Patroness; and that the University went in a Body to the Temple,
where the Ambassador of the Order lodged to receive that Sacred Treasure.

That as to the concerns of one named la Motthe, who was accused of being an
accessory in the Murder of Francis de Montmorency Halot, committed by the
Marquess d'Allegre at Vernon in the year 1593. and who had obtained Letters of
abolition from the King, and for his greater Security, had lifted up the Shrine
A Priviledg^ elsewhere Related*
of Sanict Romain at Rouen, there was great dispute before the Kings Council
about this Privilege, by some Advocates of Parliament, who to speak truth,
were but little skilled in the antiquities of France. The Grand Council gave an
Act to the Kings Ministers of this opposition that had been made as to the
allowance of the said Privilege: and then by a Decree of the six and twentieth
of March 1608. (having regard to the Kings pardon) banished the accused for
nine years from Court, as also from Normandy, and Picardy, and condemned him to
some reparations, and to some Amend, or Fine. The King made likewise this
Modification, or Proviso, in the Privilege of Saint Romans for the future.
That whomsoever the Chapter should nominate to lift or take up the said Shrine
should be bound to take out Letters of Pardon under the Great Seal, that so
this favor might be derived indeed from the Prince, and proceed in a judicial
order.

We shall pass by these things and many others the like, to observe the
management of two very important Affairs without doors, wherein the Kings
Authority and Prudence had the best share; I mean the difference between the
Pope and the Seigneory of Venice, and the Truce between the Spaniards and the
States of the United-Provinces. As to the first, His Holiness complained for
that the Seigneory inchiostre, that is to say, besmeared a door, (belonging to
a Kinswoman of his) with Ink (which is the highest affront in those Countries)
because she had refused to consent to his infamous desires: The second because
he was Accused of incest with his own Sister, of Assassinates, Poysonings,
Robbery on the Highways, Magic, and of many other Crimes.

He was offended yet more at three or four Decrees made by them against the
honor and the liberty of the Church. By one in 1602. they had excluded the
Lords Spiritual, under what title or pretense soever, from the right of
emphyteutique prelation. By a second of the year 1603. they had forbidden the
building of any Church, Convent, or Hospital, without permission of the Senate,
upon pain of banishment for such as transgressed, and confiscation of the
Ground and Edifice. By a third of the year 1605. they extended that Decree made
(first only for the City of Venice) in the year 1536. to all the Cities and
Territories under their obedience; viz. That no Ecclesiastique should be
allowed, to leave, bequeath, or engage any Goods to the Church, and if it were
found that they possessed any of that sort, the said Goods should be
distrained, and the value restored to whom it should belong. To which was
added, That henceforward none should give any Estate in Lands to the Clergy,
nor to the Religious Orders, without the consent of the Senate, who would allow
of it upon good consideration, still keeping and observing the same solemnities
as are observed upon the alienation of the public demeasnes*

The two first Decrees were made in the time of Clement VIII. the third was
renewed during the vacancy of the Holy See. Paul V. declared to the Ambassador
of the Seigneory, That he would have this last to be abolished; The Ambassador
having Mortmain; and that the Senate had ordained nothing therein but
Valentinian, and Charlemain, the Kings of France, from Saint Lewis even to
Henry III. Edward III. King of England; the Emperor Charles V. and several
others most Christian Princes had ordained in the like matters.

But the Pope, very far from taking these reasons for current payment demanded
moreover that they should deliver up the Prisoners to him; and sent two Briefs
to his Nuncio, for Martin Grimani Duke of the Seigneory, which ordained him to
do both the one and the other, under pain of Excommunication, and interdiction.
When these Briefs arrived at Venice, the Duke was in his agony, so that they
deferred the opening of them till the Election of a new one, who was Leonard
Donati. Under the Authority of this Duke, the Senate made answer to the Pope;
That they could find nothing in the Decree, nor in their own conduct that did
any way deviate from the respect they owed to the Holy See, or which was not of
the rights of their Sovereignty in temporals. At the same time they nominated
Duodi Ambassador Extraordinary, to go and declare the reasons for their so
doing to his Holiness.

In the mean time, he from France, (it was Fresne Canaye) and the Cardinal
Delfini, made use of all their skill to allay the Popes indignation: but on the
one side the Cardinals of the Spanish Faction, and on the other, the Catholic
Kings Ambassador, Ferdinand Paceco Duke d'Ascalona, puff't him up and heated
him with specious motives of Religion and Honor. The Cardinals did this to
cast the good man into some Embarass, hoping the troubles of such a perplexed
business would shorten his days. As for the Duke of Ascalona, he sought to
revenge himself for some resentment he had against the Venetians, and thought
hereby to give his Master an opportunity that might signalize his power in
Italy.

The extraordinary Ambassador from the Seigniory coming too late, sound all
things in a flame; and notwithstanding all the respects he could tender to the
Cardinals, and all the Arguments and Reasons he could urge, he saw some time
after, a Bull posted up in the public places of Rome, declaring that the Duke,
and the Senate, had by their undertakings against the Authority of the Holy
See, the rights of the Church, and the privileges of the Ecclesiastiques,
incurred those Censures contained in the Holy Canons, the Councils, and the
Constitutions of the Popes, ordained them to deliver up the Prisoners into the
hands of his Nuncio, declared their Decrees null and invalid, enjoined they
should revoke them, raze and tear them out of their Archives and Registries,
and cause it to be proclaimed throughout all their Territories, that they had
abolished them, and this within four and twenty days which he allowed as the
utmost time. And in case they obeyed not, he declared Excommunicate them, their
Abettors, Counselors, and Adherents; And if after the four and twenty days
prefixed, they did abide the Excommunication with stubbornness, then he
aggravated the Sentence, and subjected the City and State of Venice to
interdiction. This made Duodi retire from thence without taking his leave of
the Pope, bringing along with him Nani the Ambassador in Ordinary from the
Seigneory.

Capucins, and the Jesuits, both very strictly tied to his Holiness interest:
the latter having likewise somewhat to clear before him concerning the great
Affair of the point of Grace, with the Dominicans; wherein they ran no less
hazard, should they miscarry, then to be charged with temerity and error.

Pol Soave of the Order of the Servites, (vulgarly called Fra Paolo) John
Marsile a Neapolitan, Doctor in Theology, and Fulgentius of the same fraternity
with Pol Soave: on the opposite Cardinal Bellarmine, and the Cardinal Baronius
appeared the most zealous defenders of his Holiness. After these had dealt the
heaviest blows, a confused multitude of meaner Authors tilted at one another;
the meanest Lawyers and Canonists presuming according to the party they
espoused either to restrain or extend the Authority of the Pope beneath or
above the Council and Canons; and to discourse of the power of Princes, and the
boundaries of their Dominion.

It was to be feared lest a more dangerous shock should follow; the Pope drew
his Forces together in the Duchy of Spoleta, and had given the general Command
of them to Rainutio Farnese, Duke of Parma. He had promised himself to make his
Censures

The two most potent Princes of Christendom, the Kings of France and Spain
outvied each other in offering their Assistance, but he perceived plainly that
they at the same time treated with the Venetians, and designed only to make an
accommodation and gain the honor and credit to themselves. The Spaniard had
sent him a very obliging Letter, and dispatched Francis de Castro Ambassador
extraordinary to Venice. The King of France also dealt with his Holiness by
Alincour his Ambassador in Ordinary, and toward the end of the year ordered
the Cardinal de Joyeuse to go to the Venetians to Negociate the Treaty which
was already much advanced by Fresne Canaye his Ambassador in Ordinary.



Joyeuse and d'Alincourt, Procurators for the King in this mediation, promised
to subscribe to these conditions, and to become security to his Holiness for
performance: and his Holiness, upon the receipt of this writing from their
hands, was to give Joyeuse power to take off the Censures.

de Joyeuse went post to Rome with these Articles. The day after his Arrival,
which was the Eighteenth of March, the Pope having admitted him to Audience,
did again make great Efforts, at least in appearance, for the restoration of
the Jesuits: for it concerned him in honor not to forsake them visibly, since
they had been expelled for his quarrel. The Cardinal did as good as undertake
to obtain this point, if they would leave the business absolutely to his
management; but the Pope did not think that convenient. The Cardinal du Perron
who was then at that Court upon some other account, employed his Eloquence to
persuade him, he ought not to break off the agreement for the Jesuits sakes,
since their return was not positively denied but only deferred. The Pope
pretended to yield to his ponderous reasons: but it appeared at last, that Du
Perron's was a needless debate on that point; since the Spaniards, as was after
known, bad secretly obtained of his Holiness, that he would make no further
instance but for fashion-sake only; whereof they failed not to give the Senate
Notice.

They had had all the share they could desire in the secret inward managing of
this Affair* but they endeavored likewise to have the outward public
transacting. The French would never suffer et; which proved none of the least
difficulties in the completing it. For these Urafty Politicians resolving to
have a hand in it, or to break it, sometimes demanded, that the taking off the
Censures should be done at Rome, otherwhile essayed to have some new Clause
added to the Popes Brief: Then again they endeavored to persuade, they ought
to oblige those Bishops that had not obeyed, to come to Rome and defire
absolution of his Holiness. None of these succeeding, they tried to alarm
him, by spreading a report; the Senate would protest against the surrender of
the Prisoners: but the Cardinal de Joyeuse secured him from that apprehension.
Having made all these attempts in vain, they demanded that the Cardinal Sapate
who had zealously stickled for the interests of his Holiness, might be
associated with the Cardinal de Joyeuse for the executing of the Brief: But
Joyeuse told them plainly, he would sooner leave all as it was, then suffer any
other whoever he were, to partake this honor with him.

Venice, and had consulted with the Seigneory, they appointed the one and
twentieth of April for the Action. In the morning, of that day, before any
other thing was done, the two P^^soners were brought to the Dukes House, and
theredeliver'd into the

The Ceremony being over, and the Gates opened, the Count de Castro Ambassador
of Spain, came to congratulate the Senate upon their reconciliation with the
Holy Father; and the Cardinal went to celebrate Mass pontifically, in the
Patriarchal Church, where were present the Senate, and the Count de Castro, the
people flocking thither from all parts with incredible* joy: Those Bishops that
had not submitted to the Censures, received absolution likewise; but whilst
they were in dispute about the Conditions with those whom the Pope had preposed
for this Affair, they wholly abstained from Celebrating, and thus in effect,
submitted to the interdict after all.

The Senate honored such as had written in their defense with good Pensions,
and took them into their protection: but their whole power and care was not
enough to secure Fra Paolo from the malice of some Assassines, who having
watched him a long time, surprised him one day as he was returning to his
Monastery, and wounded him in several places with a Stiletto, but such care was
taken in the cure that he recovered. Afterward he hung up the Stiletto before
an Altar in the Church belonging to his Convent with this inscription, Dei
Filio liberatori: not so much perhaps to Consecrate his acknowledgment to God,
as to immortalize the horror of that Assassinate, and stir up the public
hatred against those who were believed to be the Authors.

I come now to the Truce between the United Provinces and the King of Spain.
The two parties were extremely fatigated with a War of above forty years
continuance: they had both of them diversely resented the inconveniences, and
did dread the Event; the Spaniards had expended infinite Sums of Money, and
lost more Men then those Countries were worth: They saw no probability of
reducing them by force, and apprehended withal that if they should chance to
get too much advantage over them, they might cast themselves into the Arms of
the French for protection, which would have drawn after them the other
Provinces that were yet left them. But the greatest of their fears was, lest
they should utterly ruin their Trade to the Indies, and hinder the Arrival of
their Flota's, Albert most ardently desired the Peace, thereby to enjoy
Flanders quietly, and be able to employ his Money and Friends to gain the
Imperial Throne, which he expected would soon be vacant by the death of
Rodolphus.

On the other hand, the Provinces finding themselves overwhelmed with debts,
almost forsaken by the English, and under the apprehension of being so too by
the French, who grew weary of contributing so much toward the expenses of a
War without reaping any apparent profit. Many of their Merchants imagined that
a Peace would bring them Mines of Gold; and some being greatly alarmed at the
progress of Marquess Spinola, who amongst other places had taken Grol, and
Rhimbergue, took the freedom to say, That since they could not subsist of
themselves in a separate body of State, it were better they should rejoyn
themselves to their natural Lord, then to put themselves under another who
would lie more heavy upon them, as being so near a Neighbor. A certain
Flemming, named Caminga, one of the first of those who were otherwhile called
Gueux, having one night held such like discourse, was the next day found dead
in his Bed at Embden.

Their dispositions being such on either part, the Archdukes first sounded the
Foord by Valrave, de Wittenhorst, and John Jevart who in the Month of May the
reunion of those Provinces, with the rest, under the obedience of That by the
Decree made at Utrecht Anno 1579. the King of Spain had lost his right of
Sovereignty over those Provinces, and that they had been United in one Body,
and declared a free State and Republic: the which had been confirmed by a
prescription of more then five and twenty years, and by several Princes and
States, with whom they had made diverse Treaties and Confederations.

The Archdukes, as is believed, made this Essay only in point of honor; for
their Deputies sent immediately to let the States know, That the intention of
their Princes was not to gain, or take advantage of the United-Provinces; but
to leave them in the condition they then were in, and to Treat upon that foot.

This proposition did not displease the States: and on their side the
Archdukes They called him Pater Ney
Father John Neyen or Ney, General of the Cordeliers, but who was a natural
Flemming, and had been bred up in the Protestant Religion till the age of two
and twenty years. His Father was one Martin Ney otherwhile very well known too
and employed by the Father of Prince Maurice. As to the rest, his behavior
appeared to have so much of integrity, that notwithstanding his change of
Religion, and Habit, the Hollanders had a great deal of confidence in him.

He brought them very obliging Letters from the Archdukes, who offered amongst
other things, (to take away all suspicion of any surprise) to depute none for
this Treaty but Originaries of the Low Countries; to hold the Conferences in
such place as it should please the States to choose; to agree to a Truce of
eight Months, and to get the conditions ratified by the King of Spain. The
States accepted of the Truce, to begin on the fourth of May; the Letters of the
ratification were delivered on either part, and publication thereof made. The
difficulty was for the ratification from Spain, Lewis Verreiken, Secretary of
State to the Archdukes, brought it the fourteenth of July to the Hague; but as
it was only in paper, subscribed Io el Rey, and sealed only with the little
Seal; moreover, as it gave the Archdukes the Title of Lords of the
Low Countries, and they had omitted this Clause, That they should treat with
those Provinces as holding them for a free Country. The States found it
imperfect as well in form as in substance.

France who had received notice from the States, that they had accepted of a
Truce, fearing the business should be managed to the disadvantage of his
interest, resolved, that he might share in the Negotiation, and make himself as
Arbitrator, to send thither the President Janin, one of the best heads in his
Kingdom, and Paul Choard Bazenval, to labor jointly with Elias de la Son of la
Blanch first President in the Court des aiides Massacred at the St. Barthol^
mews.
Planche Russi (whom he had sent Ambassador to the States in the stead of
Busenval) by communicating with the said States and fortifying them with their
conceils. The King of England likewise would needs have his Ambassadors there,
and by his example the King of Denmark, and the Protestant Princes; but those
of France arrived there the eight and twentieth of May: those from England not
till the Month of July; and the others about the end of the year.

The Ratification of Spain carried to Madrid, being brought again to the Hague
with some alterations; but not all those the States had mentioned, did not
fully content them: Those that desired not the Peace, took occasion from
thence, and from some other incidencies, to frame such Obstructions as made
them spend four Months in contests only. Notwithstanding in the beginning of
November, the States upon the instances of Father Ney, went on to the
Negotiation: That they should not in the least touch upon the foundation of
their Liberty, and their right of Sovereignty, which they had acquired at the
Expense of all that was dear to them in the world. Now because the Truce
expired in January, they left it to the discr^tion of the Archdukes to prolong
it for a Month, or Six Weeks. In these Messages too and fro was this whole year
almost wasted.

It is held, that one of the Considerations which hastened most the Council of
Spain to accept of this Truce, was their fear of losing the Indies, and their
Maritime Forces; for the Hollanders had taken from them and Burnt, within three
years, above Thirty great Galioons, and now newly had defeated their Admiral
Don Juan Alvarezd'Avila, in the very Port of Gibraltar, the Five and twentieth
April.

This Exploit may well be counted one of the most brave and resolute that ever
was performed on the Seas. Jacob de Heemskerk Commanding the States Fleet,
consisting of Twenty six Vessels, attaqued that of Spain, though above a third
part stronger than his own, and under shelter of the Cannon both of the Town
and Castle. He pursued the Admiral quite through the Enemies Fleet, having
given Command not to fire one Gun till they came Yard arm to Yard arm. Upon
this near approach, the Valiant Hollander had his Leg taken off by a Cannon
Ball, whereof he died about an hour after; but in the interim harangued those
with such force that were about him, and gave such good Orders, that his Men
Spanish Admiral, wherein d'Avila was, and Twelve Ships more, took Two hundred
Prisoners, amongst whom was the Son of d'Avila, and killed above Two thousand
Men, whereof above Fifty were Persons of Quality. This signal overthrow filled
all Spain with mourning, and carried a very hot Alarm even to Madrid. It was
believed that if the Victors had pursued their blow, they might have forced
Gilbraltar, and Cadiz too; but they retired to Tituan, a place upon the Coast
of Africa, belonging to the King of Fez, to refresh, and to repair themselves.

Great Winter year, for the Cold which began to be very bitter on Saint
Thomas's Day, lasted above two Months without relenting in the least degree,
excepting one or two days, and congealed, or if we may so express it, petrified
all the Rivers, froze most of the young Vine-Roots, and other tender Plants,
starved above half the Wildfowl and Small Birds in the Fields, great numbers of
Travelers on the Roads, and near a fourth part of the Cattle that were housed,
as well by its violent sharpness, as for want of Forage. It was observed that
the heats of the following Summer did almost equal the Severities of the
Winter, and yet the year might be reck'ned amongst the most plentiful.

The Thaw caused no less damage than the hard Frost had done, the Cakes of Ice
in the Rivers destroyed a world of Boats, Keys, and Bridges; The Waters raised
by the sudden melting of the Snows drowned the Valleys; and the Loire breaking
down its Banks in many places, made a second deluge in the Neighboring
Campagnes.

Lions is a wonder worthy to be described; There was Saone, before the Church
de l'Observance; the whole City trembled, for fear lest upon breaking loose, it
should carry away the Bridge, and therefore made Public Prayers to avert that
Misfortune and Damage: a simple Artisan undertook to make it break into little
shivers, and swim away by degrees without any disorder, for a certain Sum of
Money agreed upon by the Magistrates of the Town. To this effect, he on the
Shore right against it, lighted two or three small Fires, with half a dozen
Faggots, and a few Coals, and falls a muttering certain words. Immediately this
prodigious glaciated Rock burst, with a noise like the report of a Cannon, into
an infinity of pieces, the greatest not exceeding four or five foot. But, this
poor fellow, instead of receiving his Reward, was in danger of receiving severe
Punishment: for the Divines said, That the thing could not possibly be so done,
without some operation of the Devil; so that his Recipe, or Charm, was burnt
publicly in the Town Hall. Ten, or Twelve years after he brought his Action in
Parliament, for his Reward: I could never learn the success of it.

Henry last Duke of Montpensier, after he had languished two years with a
Hectic Fever, reduced to suck a Nurses Breast, expired about the end of
February. His only Daughter a little before his Death was Contracted to the
King's second Son; who dying young, she afterward Married the third, whom we
have seen Duke of Orleans, he came into the world the Five and twentieth of
March following. Henrietta Catherine de Joyeuse, Widow of Henry, re-married
some time after to Charles Duke of Guise.

In the Month of May, Charles Duke of Lorraine, a good Prince, liberal and
pacifick, passed from this life to the other, and had for Successor his eldest
Son Henry Duke of Bar and Marquis du Pont.

Some perhaps would take it amiss should I forget, that the Duke of Neuers sent
on an extraordinary Embassy to the Pope, to tender him the filial Obedience,
made his entrance into Rome upon the Five and twentieth of November, the most
magnificently that ever had been known upon the like occasion; and Jubilee to be
published which commenced at Rome September, and Six Weeks afterward at Paris.

I think I may in this year place the Invention of Perspective Glasses, because
the use of them began now to grow common in Holland and France. A
Spectacle-maker of Midleburg presented one which he had made to Prince Maurice,
which seemed to bring any Object, though two Leagues distant within Two hundred
paces of the Eye* for from the Hague they could easily discern the Dial at
Delf, and the Windows of the Church at Leyden: the year following many were to
be had in the Shops at Paris* but which could not descry a third part so far as
those.

Some have named them Galileo's Glasses Or Telescopes.
, as if that famous Mathematician had invented them: but it is most certain
this happy Discovery was made long before his time: We find manifest footsteps
of them in the Works of Baptista Porta; and we must acknowledge that the
Ancients made use of them, if that be true which Roger Bacon says, That Julius
Caesar being on the Belgic Shore opposite to great Britain, did with certain
great Burning-Glasses discover the Posture and Disposition of the British
Army, and all the Coast along that Country. However it were, they have labored
so happily to bring them to their full Perfection, that it will be difficult to
make any further Addition or Improvement: The mavelous Observations which
have been made and are daily taken of the Heaven by the help of them are a most
illustrious proof of their Success.

As to the Subject of the Fougade at Westminster, the King of Great Britain who
believed that all these Conspiracies proceeded from that Power which the Pope
pretended over Sovereigns, made an Oath of Fidelity, or Allegiance after a new
form, wherein he obliged all his Subjects, to acknowledge that he was their
true and lawful Sovereign, and that the Pope had neither of himself, nor from
any other, the Power to depose Kings, or to warrant any Stranger Prince to
invade their Country, or to dispense their Subjects from their Oaths of
Allegiance: therefore should Swear to him, that notwithstanding any Sentence
whatsoever of the Popes, they would faithfully obey him, and serve him, and his
Successors, and should discover whatever Conspiracies they did know either
against his Person, or against his State.

The Pope having notice hereof, sent a Brief to the Catholics, to forbid them
the taking this Oath. George Blackwell, Archpriest of England, being
imprisoned upon the refusal he made of it, suffered himself at last, to be
persuaded, that this Brief had been extorted, and that there was nothing
contained in the Formulary of the Oath contrary to the Articles of Faith, so
that he took it and caused it to be taken by the rest of the Catholics in
England. But the Pope by a second Brief, confirmed the first, and Cardinal
Bellarmin wrote a Letter to Blackwel, to show him that the said Oath wounded
the Unity of the Church, and the Authority of the Holy-See. He published an
Apology for this Oath; the Cardinal made an Answer; the King a reply, which he
addressed to the Christian Princes. Some Authors concerned themselves in the
quarrel; and it being a contest wherein the power of the Popes was debated, as
likewise that of temporal Princes, it became the exercise and entertainment of
the most learned men in Europe for some Months together.

The States of the United-Provinces had reason to make the Spaniards believe
and see, that in case the Treaty of Peace were broken off, they should be
assisted both by France and England; wherefore they had several times made
instance to the Ambassadors of those Kings that they would enter into a good
Defensive League for their preservation. The King of France did first agree,
and Signed it the second day of January, notwithstanding the contrary advice of
those of Spaniard; the Ambassadors of the King of England having some points to
settle with the States touching the liquidation of Arrears of Moneys, did not
conclude it till four or five Months after.

Those of Spain deputed for the Peace; to wit, the Marquess de Spinola General
of King Philips Armies in the Low Countries; John Crusel Richardot, President
of the Privy Council to the Archdukes; John de Mancicidor, Secretary of War to
King Philip; Friar John Neyen, or Ney, Commissary-General of the Order of Saint
Francis, and Lewis Verreiken, prime Secretary of State to the Archduke,
Arrived at the Hague in the Month of January. The States deputed William of
Nassau, and the Lord de Brederode: and the seven Provinces named for each of
them one of the most able and best qualified they had amongst them.

The Compliments made on either part, they began to assemble the Sixth day
February. In the first Ten Sessions they produced their Procurations, and
treated of an Amnesty, of Reprisals, and some other such Points which passed
without much difficulty; but when they came to mention the Commerce of the
East Indies, there began the main of the Negotiation, the States insisting to
have the full liberty of that Trade; the Spaniards to exclude them; thinking
there were only a few Merchants interested in that Trade, and that the rest
would not concern themselves much for their preservation: but the Company which
of late years was set up for the Indies, had forty Ships belonging to them, the
least of five hundred Tun burden, well provided for War, and each of the value
of five and twenty thousand Crowns: Besides, fourscore more of six or seven
hundred Tun which traded to the West Indies, not reckoning a great number of
smaller bulk for Guiney, and the Islands Saint Dominique. Being therefore
animated by their profit, and withal upheld and countenanced by Prince Maurice,
they made so much noise, and roused the public by so many Manifesto's and
discourses in Print, that their Deputies were obliged to stand to it.

Seeing therefore they could not agree upon that point, they quitted it to pass
on to those concerning the reciprocal Trade in the Low Countries, the
renunciation of reprisals, the declaration of their limits, the demolition and
exchange of places, the Cassation of Sentences of Proscription and
Confiscation, the restitution of Goods, the Privileges of Cities, the
disbanding of Soldiers on each side, and many other points.

In the Memoirs of the President Janin are to be seen the difficulties that
were created on either part upon different Articles, particularly about the
restitution of places. How the Truce was prolonged two several times, the one
to the end of May, the other till July. How Father Ney going into Spain for
more ample powers, was detained there a long time by the slow motions, either
natural, or artificial, of that Council: How the President Janin, sent for by
the King, took a turn into France, and how Don Pedro de Toledo, who was then
going to Germany, came at the same time, with design, as was believed, to found

We there find likewise the great jealousies the States conceived upon the
Conferences he had with the King, the Intrigues and Artifices of Prince Maurice
to break this Treaty, the different Factions that were formed in that Country
for and against it: Then the rupture of the said Treaty by the States, upon the
Spaniards persisting to have the free exercise of the Catholic Religion
re-established in all their Territories, and that they should lay down the
whole Trade and Navigation to the Indies; and in fine upon this rupture, the
retreat of the Ambassadors of Spain, who took their leaves of the States the
last day of September, and returned to Bruxels.

Those of France, and Great Britain, particularly the first, did not for all
this leave off their Mediation, but propounded to both parties to make a long
Truce, at least, since they could not agree upon the Articles for a perpetual
Peace. Prince Maurice opposed it openly, because his employment must be at an
end with the War: He had subject enough to declaim against the artifice of the
Spaniard, and to entertain the peoples fears and jealousies; and talked the
more confident and high, as having all the Sons of War on his side, and the
Province of Zealand, besides four or five good places in his disposition, and
the desires of the Protestant Princes, who apprehended lest during such a Truce
the power of the Austrian House should fall upon their Backs.

But the Kings honor was too much concerned, after he had taken so much pains,
and his interest likewise, (to disarm Flanders, which he designed to seize
upon) not to bring this business to a conclusion. He pursued it therefore so
Antwerp on the five and twentieth of March, with those of Spain, and made a
Truce for twelve years, which was proclaimed in that City the fourteenth day of
April.

Spain limited to the Countries he held in Europe, not meaning the States
should Trade into those others East and West Indies.
, without his express License. That either should hold such places as were then
in their possession, That such whose Estates had been seized or confiscate by
reason of the War, or their Heirs, should have the enjoyment of them during the
Truce, and should re-enter upon them without any other form of Justice; That
the Subjects belonging to the States should have in the Kings and Archdukes
Countries the same liberty in Religion, as had been granted to the Subjects of
the King of Great Britain by the last Treaty of Peace. Reciprocally the States
promised, that there should be no alteration made in those Villages of Brabant
which depended upon them, where hitherto there had been no other exercise of
Religion but the Catholic; for which the Ambassadors gave their Guaranty in
writing.

The President Janin being returned to the Hague after the Publication,
exhorted the States in behalf of the King, to grant to their Catholic Subjects
the free exercise of their Religion; but all that he could obtain was, that
they should be no more prosecuted nor troubled if they did it in their own
houses, and for their private Families only.

If the power of Spain received a great shock by this Treaty, that which they
procured themselves by the expulsion of the Moors was no less. After the
eversion of the Kingdom of Granada, great numbers of Mahometans and Jews were
remaining in those Countries, who had settled and spread themselves in the
Kingdoms of Valencia, Chastille and Andalouzia; they were baptized and
professed Christianity, for which reason they were called new Christians; but
yet did secretly exercise the impieties of their Forefathers. They were
reck'ned to be above twelve hundred thousand of both sexes. King Philip
informed that for diverse years they had sought for and courted the protection
of the King of France, the United Provinces, the King of England, nay, even the
Turks, and the King of Morocco; and suffering himself to be persuaded that upon
a certain Good Friday, they intended to cut the Throats of all the old
Christians in those Countries where they inhabited, resolved to thrust them out
of his Territories, not permitting them to carry away any thing, excepting some
Merchandise of the Country; seizing and detaining their Gold and Silver, their
Jewels and movables, only he allowed the fourth part to the Nobility in
recompense of the damage they sustained by such their banishment: for they
improved and made the Lands yield more by one third to the Gentry, then the
Spanish Tenants could do.

Africa, part getting into France, and Italy, did most of them perish after
diverse manners; some were drowned by those very Mariners who pretended to
transport them; others Massacred by the Arabes; many being first stripped and
then turned away by those from whom they expected shelter, died of hunger,
being in execration to the Christians as Infidels, and to the Infidels as
Christians; so that of this huge Multitude, hardly could the fourth part make
shift to save themselves. Spain will for a long time feel the smart of this
more then barbarous inhumanity for the cruel expulsion of so many Myriads of
Men, together with the continual recruits they are ever sending to the Indies,
and their natural lazy temper, has made of that Country, otherwhile the most
peopled and the most cultivated in Europe, a vast and barren solitude.

Some Christian Pirates were retired to Tunis, and Algier, and had there gotten
so many of their own stamp together, that they held the Straight of Gibraltar,
as it were shut up, and dared even attaque whole Fleets. The Malouins not able
to endure these Robberies, fitted out some Vessels to set upon them: Captain
Beaulieu their Commander, having considered of the means to destroy the Tunis,
under the very Castle of Goletta. The Spaniards having joined him with eight
great Galioons, would needs second him in this generous enterprise. When the
Wind stood fair, he put himself bravely in the Van, entered the Haven at noon
day, passed under the Cannon of the Fort, against which he fired a hundred and
fifty Broad-sides; then, observing his Vessels could get no nearer, he leaped
into a Barque with forty Men only, and piercing through a continual Tempest of
five and forty great Guns which thundered upon him from the Fort, went and put
fire to the greatest Vessel first, whence it was conveyed to all the rest, and
consumed three and thirty, whereof sixteen were fitted for Men of War, and one
Galley.

Ferdinand de Medicis Duke of Tuscany, Uncle to Cosmo II. of that name
succeeded him in his Estates.

June, to stop the fury of Duels; the other of the Month of May, to remedy or
prevent the too frequent Bankrupts. The first increased the penalties ordained
by the Precedent Laws against such as fought, and against their Seconds, made
several rules for the reparation of affronts, and allowed such as had received
any great injury to bring their complaints to the King, or else to the
Connestable France, and to demand leave to fight; which should be granted them
if it were judged expedient for their honor.

The second punished the Bankrupts with death, as Robbers and public Cheats;
declared null all Conveyances, Sales, Grants, or Donations by them fraudulently
made; ordained that even those that had received them, or had been assisting
toward the receiving of their effects, or had induced or persuaded the
Creditors to compound with them, should be chastised as Accomplices; forbid all
their Creditors to give them any Letter of License or time of delay, upon pain
of forfeiting their respective debts, and more if they transgressed.

Upon this there were great numbers that fled out of the Kingdom; but one of
the most notorious, who sheltred himself in Flanders, being taken at
Valenciennes by permission of the Archdukes, was brought to Paris, and by
Arrest, or judgment, of the Masters of Requests made amend honorable with a
Torch in hand, was put in the Pillory three several days, and then sent to the
Galleys. A most necessary example to suppress the Roguy-shirkings of that sort
of Cattle; For having hid their heads a while to oblige their Creditors to give
away good part of what is their just due, they soon after appear again proud
with the spoil

de Verneuil had a new increased his passion, as on the other hand the pursuit
he made to have her again within his power, and the Offensive Language she
used, redoubled the Queens jealousy, and their Domestique quarrels.

Sully, and some other of the Kings Confidents labored in vain to reduce both
the one and the other to the Kings will and pleasure; they threatened the
Marchioness, that he would make choice of some other, and if once she lost his
favor together with his heart, both she and her Children must inevitably be
confined to some Monastery. In effect, he endeavored to wean himself from her,
by making public love to the Countess de Moret, and a while after to the
Damoiselle des Essars. They at the same time represented to the Queen, that her
passion did but alienate the Kings affection more and more, that Complaisance,
tenderness and caresses were the only Charms to retain him; and that till she
could prevail with him to forsake the illegitimate Objects, she ought in common
prudence to make use of all her moderation, if she desired to obtain any
favors for her, or hers. But Conchine, and Leonora Galigay, very remote from
putting her into this disposition, having usurped so much power over her will,
that they governed her desires, her affection, and her passions, as they
pleased,

The King had often been advised not to suffer those fatal brands so near her
who every day put fire to the House, and would some time or other set the whole
Kingdom in a flame: Don Juan de Medicis, having essayed by his Order, to
persuade the Queen to discard them, she fell into passion with injurious words
and reproaches, and was so bent to do him some injury, whatever the King could
do to appease her, that he was constrained to retire out of France. The
impudence of those little rascally people grew to so great a height that they
used Menaces, even against the Kings person, if he durst attempt theirs, as
many had often counseled him to do.

The zealous Catholics of his Council, joining with and pursuing the Queens
intentions, maintained dangerous correspondencies with the Council of Spain by
means of the Ambassador of Florence, and made much ado for the Marrying the
Daufin, and the eldest Daughter of France, with the Son and Daughter of King
Philip: insomuch, as that Prince, whether of his own Motion, or by their
suggestion gave command to Don Pedro de Toledo, (related to the Queen) whom he
was sending into Germany, to sojourn some time in the Court of France and sound
the Kings intentions.

We know not what Propositions he made to him in private, but it was suspected
he had talked about making a League between the two Crowns to force all the
Protestants to return to the Catholic Faith, and that he had offered to yield
up all the Right his Master had to the United Provinces, and to give them in
Dower to the Daufin, with his eldest Daughter. But the King answered very
coldly as to these Marriages: for he would have no Alliance with the Spaniard,
he desired to Marry his Daufin with the eldest Daughter of Lorrain, to join
that Duchy to France: and had resolved to bestow the eldest of his Daughters,
on the Duke of Savoy's eldest Son. It was said, that to indemnifie the Lorrain
Princes who pretended their Duchy was a Fief Masculine, he proposed to give
them the Rank and Privilege, as Princes of his Blood immediately next those who
really were so.

It had been already for some years past that the Duke of Savoy, dis-satisfied
with the Spaniards, as well for that they had not allotted his Wife so good a
share as her Sister Isabella, as also because they did not assist him in due
time and place, sought to make his Fortune better on the French side, and
omitted no opportunity of renewing the Propositions for the Conquest of Milan.
In the year 1607. the Cardinal de Joyeuse, at his return from Venice, and Anno
1608. Vaucelas, who had been sent to Turin to congratulate the Duke, upon the
Marriage of his two Daughters with the Dukes of Mantoua and of Modena, brought
the King some hints of it; but he did not then confide enough in him, or did
not judge it yet time to declare himself. This year, Bullion being gone into
Savoy upon some other Affairs, had order to declare his intentions to the Duke,
and likewise to propound the Conquest of Milan for himself, excepting only some
places he should leave to the Venetians, as being very commodious for them. The
Duke opening both ears to such fair proffers, Bullion brought Lesdiguieres to
discourse with him; And from that time was a League concluded, between the King
and the Duke, Offensive and Defensive, of which the Marriage of his Son, with
the eldest Daughter of France, was to be as it were the Seal, and Guarantie.

The design to reduce the House of Austria within the limits of Spain and its
Hereditary Countries, was never out of the King's thoughts: Most of the Princes
in Christendom, and above all, the Protestants, did eternally solicit him to
go about it; His Commanders desired it to have Employments; and the Huguenots
pushed the wheel forward, thereby to prevent any League between the two Crowns,
which undoubtedly would have tended to exterminate them. On the contrary, the
Catholics, in whom some leaven of the old League was yet remaining, omitted
nothing that might divert him; they believed it to be even a work of Piety to
lend a helping hand to his Pleasures, that so his glass might run on in soft
and idle hours: but though in other things he relied much on their Council, he
seldom discovered his Resolutions, nay hardly made any mention to them of any
thing concerning this great Enterprise; and if he had delayed it hitherto, it
was but because he would take all his Precautions, and make all the necessary
preparations before he would declare himself.

Sweden and Denmark had given him their Parol at least four years since: The
United Provinces at the making of their Truce, assured him they would break it,
when ever he should desire it: besides the Duke of Savoy, the Protestant
Princes of Germany, and several Imperial Cities: The Duke of Bavaria entered
into this League, upon the assurance that the Election to the Empire being made
free, they would make him King of the Romans. The Venetians were promised some
Cities in Milanois, and those of the Kingdom of Naples on the Adriatic Gulf:
To the Swiss, the Country of Tirol, the Franche-Comte, and Alsace. The Pope did
even suffer himself to be hooked in, provided they would help him to reunite
the Kingdom of Naples to the Holy See, which would have afforded him most
excellent means for accommodating his Nephews. Thus would all the Princes of
Christendom have furnished themselves with the Spoil of the House of Austria;
and the King, that the World might not have the same cause of Jealousy against
him, as they justly had against the House he was going to help them Plunder,
would not have retained one inch of Ground for himself, but have been content
with the Glory only of this brave undertaking for his share.

After this, as there are now bounds to so noble a race of Honor, he designed,
when he should have settled the Limits and Pretensions of the Christian Princes,
established a firm Peace and Union amongst them, and formed a general Council
for this Christian Republic they should employ all the Forces of it, to ruin
the Mohammedan Tyranny. These Designs, without doubt, were not above his
Courage, or his Power, but perhaps of an extent longer than his life and his
health, being as he was Aged Six and fifty years, subject to the Gout, of which
he had frequent Fits, and obliged every year to run through a course of Physic
once at least, and oft-times twice.

Henrietta Charlotta, Daughter of the Connestable de Montmorency, and of Lonisa
de Budos his second Wife, appeared no sooner at Court, but she out-shined all
other Beauties there: The first Diana, and held a Dart in her hand: She then
inspired him with Sentiments quite contrary to those which that chaste Goddess
should inspire men's Hearts withal.

The Confidents of this Prince's Passions, the young Charmers Parents, even
those Petticoat Politicians about the Queen who thought by this new, to turn
off all his old Mistresses, were disposed to serve him in this Courtship. All
flattered and soothed his Passion, but she alone that could ease him; he
fancied he might overcome her, by raising her to the highest rank in the Court,
next the Queen, and in that Prospect married her to the Prince of Conde, Young
and Poor, who held all from his Power and Bounty, and had as yet neither
Governments, nor any Employment, but who being what he was, and withal
accomplished both in Body and Mind, might with a little more complaisance have
been in a capacity to have obtained the Noblest Commands in the Kingdom. The
Nuptials were solemnized at Chantilly in the Month of March.

The Duke of Vendosme having attained the Age of Sixteen years, the King was
impatient to Consummate his Marriage with Francis de Lorrain, only Son of the
Mercoeur. The Mother, and some of the Virgins Kindred had ever made great
opposition: in the end, Father Cotton, extremely persuasive and insinuating,
disposed them to give the King this Satisfaction: The Fiancailles, or
Betrothing, was made the precedent year: And in this the Marriage Fontainbleau
the Ninth of July.

It was about this time of rejoicing that the King's new flame, increasing by
the Presence of the Princess of Conde, appeared so plain, and shone so bright
and hot, as offended the Eyes of her Husband, and gave him a shrewd Fit of the
Headache. Then, the scrupulous, the discontented, the King's concealed Enemies,
those People whose Malignity is never pleased but in Troubles, without any
other aim but to make mischief, and even the Queen her self, peeked him with
Honor

This rough treatment had an effect quite contrary to what he desired; the
Prince being the more enraged, and withal apprehending some violence from so
headstrong a passion, though he had seen no such example in this good King,
resolved to retire himself from Court. Having therefore disposed every thing
for his design, he did, as we may say, steal away his wife the nine and
twentieth of August, set her behind him on Horseback, and when he had rode
some Landrecy, without entering there, and from thence traveled with all speed
to Bruxels, where the Popes Nuncio, and the Archdukes received him with a
great deal of joy, and rendered him all the honor that was due to his quality.

Upon the news of this unexpected Evasion, the King full of anger and love,
could not dissemble his emotions, not even before the Queen, but yet
endeavored to color them with reason of State. His Council was of Opinion he
should resolve on nothing in so important a business, till they were certain of
the place of his retreat. A Month afterward they had certain notice he was at
Bruxels; then the King ordered Praslin, Captain of his Guards, to go to the
Archdukes and demand they should surrender to him the first Prince of his

This Answer did not satisfy the King, he counted as dishonor all the honor
they could show to him who had incurred his disfavour, and had carried Reports
into stranger Countries which wounded his reputation. Besides, the too great
familiarity that Prince had contracted with the Duke d'Aumale a mortal enemy to
his person, gave him a plausible pretense to evaporate his choleric
transports, which were known to be produced by another and a fairer cause. He
therefore sent Ambassadors to the Archdukes, who spoke yet louder to them then
Praslin, yet gained no more then he. Some of his Confidents, thinking to do him
good service, would needs employ themselves without Commission, and made
attempts Bruxels (this was in February Anno 1610.) the whole City put
themselves in Arms to defend so Noble a Guest; but he, fearing some dangerous
Event, retired from thence, and passed into Milan.

The Count de Fuentes, a furious Enemy to the King, set maliciously a report
Wing, that he had put the price of two hundred thousand Crowns France, and was
going to submit and comply when the death of the King happened.

Whatever some may have said, the greatest passion the King had was for Fame in
the pursuit of his brave and noble design. The death of John William, Duke of
Cleve, Juliers and Bergh, Count de la Mark, and Lord of Ravestein, happening the
five and twentieth of March, afforded him a specious overture. This Prince
William, who was so of John Duke of Cleves, Count de la Mark, and Lord of
Ravestein, which John had espoused Mary, Daughter and Heiress of William Duke
of Juliers and Bergh, and Lord of Ravensburgh. Observe it was expressly said in
their Contract, That those Lands should ever remain united in one hand, thereby
to be enabled the better to defend themselves against their Neighbors who
became too powerful.

The Succession of Duke John William was extremely litigious amongst his Heirs,
as well because of the diverse dispositions of the Dukes his Predecessors,
Frederic III. had conceded them to Albert Duke of Saxony, for services rendered
to the Empire, in case those who then were in possession should come to dye
without Heirs Males; and Maximilian I. had ratified this concession two several
times. Afterward, quite contrary, when William Son of Duke John, (and Brother
of Sibylla married to John Frederic, soon after Elector of Saxony) espoused
Mary of Austria, Queen of Hungary and Sister of Charles V. (this was in Anno
1545.) that Emperor granted to him, (and his Successors confirmed it) That if
they left no Sons of this Marriage, the Daughters should be capable of
succeeding in all his Estates, the Eldest first, and then the younger
consecutively one after another: and if there were none living at the time of
the decease of the Father, the said principalities should appertain to their
Male-Children. The same condition had been apposed in the Contract of Sibylla,
Sister of this William in the year 1526. when Duke John their Father Married
her to the said Frederic Elector of Saxony, who was afterward defeated and
destituted of his Duchy by the Emperor Charles V.

Now this William, Son of Duke John, had had a Son; to wit, the John William
whose death we now mentioned; and four Daughters, who were Mary-Eleonora, Anne,
Magdalen, and Sybilla. These Daughters had Married, the first, Albert Frederick
Duke of Prussia, Anno 1572. of whom there were none but Daughters remaining:
The second Philip Ludovic Duke of Newburg, of whom were born Wolfang, and some
other Males: The third, John Duke of Deux-Ponts Or Luee-Brughen.
, Brother of that Ludovic, who dyed before Duke John William, but had left
Sons: and the last Charles of Austria, Marquess of Burgaw, of whom there were
no Children. Of Mary-Eleonora and Albert were produced many Sons who died
young; and four Daughters, the eldest of whom named Anne, espoused John
Sigismund of Brandenburgh, who was Elector and Duke of Prussia: The fourth was
wife of John Georges Brother of Christian II. Elector of Saxony. We have
nothing to do with the other two.

Brandenburg pretended entirely to this Succession for his Son George William,
who was Issue of Anne Daughter of Mary-Eleonora the Eldest of the four Sisters.
But the Duke of Saxony demanded all these Principalities likewise, founding his
right upon the donation of the Emperors Frederic and Maximilian, which he
maintained to be good, since the said Fiefs were Masculine; and urged that the
following Emperors could not otherwise dispose of them to the prejudice of the
Laws and Customs of the Empire, and contrary to the nature of those Lands. The
same Duke had two more claims besides this; the one for John George his Brother
who had Married the fourth Daughter of Mary-Eleonora, the other was for the
Princes of the Branch of Weymar, and that of Koburg, Issue of John Frederic,
Elector of Saxony, (dispoliate by Charles V.) and of Sibylla, Sister of William
II. Duke of Cleves, and Juliers, Father of John William.

I speak not of the pretensions of the Duke de Nevers, and of Henry de la Mark
Count de Maulevrier, whereof the first said he was Heir of the House of Cleves;
the other of the House de la Mark; for they did not pursue it with much vigor.

Volfgang Or Wolfgang.
Eldest Son of the Duke of Newburgh entered the first into the Country Anne his
Mother: Immediately afterward Brandenburgh sent his Brother earnest thither
for those of his Son. These two Princes not able to come to an agreement made a
transaction, by the mediation of the Landgrave of Hesse; by which they promised
to end their differences amicably, to employ their Forces jointly against any
who to their prejudice should offer to seize upon those Lands; and to
administer them, per individuum, and without prejudice to the rights of the
Empire, and the other pretenders. Soon after, an Assembly of the States of that
Country being held at Dusseldorp, the King of France sent to desire them to
approve of this Treaty, and declared himself openly enough for those two
Princes.

But the Emperor, in case of litigation, taking himself to be the Natural, and
Sovereign Judge between Parties contending for Fiefs holding of the Empire,
maintained that the Sequestration belonged to him till a definitive sentence:
therefore he caused them all to be Assigned before him by an Act of the four
and twentieth of May, and gave Commission to the Archduke Leopoldus, Bishop of
Strasburgh, and Passau, to take those Territories into his hands. The City of
Juliers received him, having been surprised by their Seneschal, who Dusseldorp;
but most of the other places gave Leopold, with several Mandates from the
Emperor, Manifesto's and Apologies, which both the one and the other sent into
all parts of Christendom.

The Interests of all the German Princes were very much perplexed, and
uncertain, in this Affair: on the one side they all equally apprehended, as
well the Catholic, as the Protestants, lest the Emperor under pretense of
Sequestration, should make himself Master of those Countries, and aggrandize
his own house by it. On the other side, the Catholics feared that the
Protestant Princes if they remained in possession, would become the strongest,
and oppress them. Upon this consideration, they contrived a League Defensive
among themselves, the Duke of Bavaria made himself the Head, and drew in the
Electors of Mentz and Triers: altogether sent away dispatches to Rome and to
Spain to have Wirtsburg, where Leopold was present.

A month after the Catholic Electors, and the Princes of the House of Austria
went to the Emperor at Prague, with design to Elect a King of the Romans,
whilst the Emperor was yet living He was not very old, but very much broken.
for fear lest after his death the Protestants should make one of their own
Religion. There were some so confident as to propound the Duke of Bavaria; and
the Jesuits who were very powerful in that party, were not much averse to it,
because they hoped to Govern that Prince as they pleased: nevertheless that
very consideration, and the great interest of the House of Austria turned most
of the Votes for Ferdinand Archduke of Graits, Cousin to Rodolphus.

The Protestants at the same time assembled at Hall in Suabia, where there
appeared fourteen Princes of that Religion, above twenty qualified Lords, and
Deputies from all the great Protestant Cities. Amongst those Princes, was the
Elector of Brandenburg, Frederic-Ludovic Duke of Newburg, and Christian Prince
of Anhalt. This last being sent by the two others into France, brought word
back that the King highly embraced their defense, and that in the Spring he
would March in person to their Assistance; For proof whereof he brought with
him an Ambassador from the King, he was named Boissise. The States of

What they Treated at Hall was kept very secret, the Princes writing down their
resolutions with their own hands not trusting to their Secretaries. It was said
that they had agreed and resolved to consider of the means to retrieve the City
of Donaverd out of the power of the Duke of Bavaria (who had taken it upon
pretense it was under the Imperial Ban for some Violencies Committed against
the Catholics;) to satisfy the Duke of Saxony for the succession of Juliers;
to Elect a King of the Romans, and to make a Counter-League in case the Pope
and the House of Austria formed any to oppress them.

It would be difficult to judge how intrigues so perplexed as these, could have
Cleves and Juliers, and had assured the Popes Nuncio that if he assisted them,
it was principally to oblige them by his good Offices to Treat the Catholics
kindly in their Territories, and perhaps to make them to become so themselves.

This Declaration gave some ombrage to the Protestants, and did not fully
satisfy the Catholics. The Nuncio who knew not the intentions of his Master,
could not keep silence: those that were yet tainted with the Leaven of the old
League, endeavored to patch up a new one; And it was said, the foundations of
it were laid at la Flesche. For a Woman affirmed she had seen in a house where
they kept many Scholars, certain Registers in which many had subscribed with
Signatures of Blood. It is certain that this year there were great numbers of
persons imprisoned at Paris and elsewhere for some kind of Conspiracies, and
that they were released immediately after the death of the

It could not but notoriously be known by this time that the King had in hand
Cleves and Juliers: for he had above Thirty thousand Foot, and Six thousand
Horse, all select Men, marching toward Champagne. Lesdiguieres, whom he had
made Marshall of France after the Death of d'Ornane, had Twelve thousand Foot,
and Two thousand Horse; the Duke of Savoy, and the Venetians were to join him
with Thirty thousand more: the Princes of Germany had but few less, and the
United Provinces upward of Sixteen thousand. I do not mention the Sea-forces,
which with those of Denmark and Sweden, would have made up a Fleet of near
Six-score Sail, all great Ships, and well manned and provided.

It was reck'ned this War, (not including the advance Money and Charges for
raising of Men, besides the Ammunitions, and Artillery) would cost the King
Twelve hundred and Fifty thousand Crowns per mensem, and as much for Payment of
the Armies of his Allies; viz. The Duke of Savoys, the Venetians, the Popes,
the German Princes, the Danes, the Swedes, and the United Provinces; and he had
wherewithal to maintain these Expenses five years together, without grinding
his People by new Taxes, for he had above Forty one Millions of ready Money,
whereof Two and twenty lay in the Bastille, besides his certain Revenue, of
which there came effectually into his Coffers, all Charges defrayed, Six
Millions yearly. Moreover his Super-Intendant, in case of necessity, promised
an Hundred seventy and five more upon Parties extraordinary; but which we may
well doubt they could never have gotten in without greatly grieving and
burthening the Kingdom.

The House of Austria took no great care to provide themselves against so rude
a Shoe: which made it be believed they relied upon some strange accident,
concealed from their Enemies, but whereof they held the Instruments and secret
Engines in their own disposal, which they could let loose to do the certain
execution in any case of extremity. Many fancied they were in the bosom of
France, and even hid in the Royal Family. A certain Damoiselle, named Anne de
Comans, gave Information of a horrible Conspiracy against the Person of the
King. After he was dead, she persisted in the same discovery, and gave her
Narrative in Writing, but they pretended she was mad, and shut her up. Whether
she were so, or not, such as did hear and had examined her, might have left us
their opinions; but the Juncture of those times, and the too great importance
of the subject have wholly suppressed many strange things.

It is most certain that there were more than one single Conspiracy against
this good King: his Enemies had forged of so many sorts, and on so many sides,
that it was very improbable if not impossible he should escape. They looked
upon his Death as so certain a thing in Foreign Countries, that there came News
of it from Spain to France, that they Published it in Milan almost a Month
before; that several Merchants of the Low Countries writing to their
Correspondents in Paris, desired to be informed whether the report was true;
and that on the Eight of the Month May, whereas he was killed the Fourteenth, a
Courrier passed through Liege, and bawled aloud, that he was going to carry the
News to the Princes of Germany. Was it that they thought to intimidate him
therewith, and would emply their menaces before they would proceed to the
execution.

Conchine in the mean time, and those of his Cabal did incessantly increase the
Queens jealousies, and maliciously made her believe that the infinite Love the
King had for the Princess might transport him to dangerous Extremities.
Assuredly a Prince so good and so just, could not be capable of it; neither did
he omit any devoir or tenderness of a Husband to take away all suchlike
Suspicions. He Conchine; who to extend his Authority by enlarging the Queens
Power, inspired her that it was necessary she should be crowned before the
King's departure.

Already the Forces were marching toward the Frontiers of Champagne, the Train
of Artillery was gone, and they had sent to demand passage of the Archduke
through his Territories; this demand was to be followed close, the least demurr
would have been prejudicial, and besides that Ceremony of a Coronation did not
agree well with the great Embarass of present Affairs, no more than the Expense
which she required could be compatible with the vast Charges necessary

Saint Denis the 12th day of May, with the accustomed Ceremonies, and a Pomp
extraordinary Magnificent, himself taking the care to do the Honors, and to
give the Orders. There was some contest between the Ambassadors of Spain, and
those of Venice; who proceeding to blows rather augmented the pleasure of the
day than any way less'ned or discomposed it. The Count de Soissons being
picqu'd upon I know not what Punctilio of Honor, touching the Ornaments of his
Wives Robes, and the Habits of the King's Natural Children, did not appear at
this Festival, but retired to his house of Blandy; an Absence which in few days
proved very prejudicial to his Affairs.

After the Coronation of the Queen, her entrance into Paris was appointed for
the fifteenth of the Month, they caused Portico's to be Erected, Triumphant
Arches, Inscriptions, Statues, and Scaffolds in those Streets she was to pass
through, and were preparing a stately Treat in the Palais; for which reason the
Parliament, to leave the place at full liberty, held their Session in the
Augustins. The King in the interim overwhelmed with cruel anxiety and a
melancholy of which he could not possibly divine the cause, felt in himself
the Symptoms of that unhappiness which threatened him. One would have said he
had the Dagger already in his bosom: He was often heard to send forth doleful
sighs and words of ill presage; the Heavens and Earth (if we may give faith to
such things) did also afford him some very sinister ones. It was observed that
some days before, the May which had been Planted in the Courtyard of the
Louvre was fallen down of it self. A Star appeared visibly at Noonday in the
Year 1609. the year preceding that a great Comet had been seen; and the Loire
over-flow'd most furiously, as it had done a while before the violent deaths of
the two Kings Henry II. and Henry III. The same year likewise the Inhabitants
of Angoulmois, both Gentry and Peasants, affirmed they had beheld a frightful
prodigy; it was a fantastique Army, which seemed to consist of about eight or
ten thousand Men, with Ensigns party-colored of blew and red Imagination
contributes much toward the shaping of these Figures.
, Drummers ready to beat, and a Commander of great appearance at the head of
them, who having Marched upon the Earth for above a League together, lost
himself in a Wood. It was about two years past that a Priest found upon an
Altar at Montargis, a Ticket which gave notice the King would be Assassinated.
And about the same time, two Gentlemen of Gascogny, of different places, and of
different Religions, came expressly to Court to advertise him of the doleful and
pressing Visions they affirmed to have had upon the same subject. Of three or
four of his Horoscopes terminated his life in his fifty seventh year. Diverse
Prognosticators, amongst others he who had otherwhile foretold the Duke of
Mayenne the Murder of the Duke of Guise his Brother, and the loss of the
Battle of Ivry, advertised him of an approaching and very sudden danger: There
was one so bold as to tell the Queen, that Festival would conclude in Mourning
and in Tears: and that Princess starting one night out of her sleep, weeping
told the King she dreamt they were stabbing him with a Knife. Himself was not
ignorant that the number of the years of his Reign, according as a Magician had
computed to Queen Catherine de Medicis, were even almost accomplished; and he
had some kind of confused knowledge of diverse Conspiracies which were hatching
against his person. He in his life time had discovered above fifty, many
contrived or fomented by Churchmen or some of the religious Orders, (such
pernicious effects does indiscreet zeal produce:) but he could not avoid this
last, his hour was come, and it seems all the former warnings which Heaven gave
him, were not so much to save him from the fatal blow, as to make men certainly
see and understand that there is a Sovereign Power,

Francis Ravaillac, had formed this resolution to Murder him. He was a Native
of Angoulesme, Aged about two and thirty years, Son of a Man belonging to the
Law, living at that time. In the beginning he had followed the Trade of his
Father, then ran into a Convent of the Fueillans, and was a Novice there; but
they thrust him out Angoulesme. The austerity of the Cloister, the obscurity of
his Prison, the loss of his process, and the extreme necessity whereunto he was
reduced, confounded his judgment and irritated more and more his atrabilary
humor. From his early youth, the Frenzies of the League, their Libels, and the
Factious Sermons of their Ignivomous and Sanguinary Pulpiteers had imprinted in
his mind a very great aversion for the King, with this belief, That it was
lawful to kill those who brought the Catholic Religion into danger, or made a
War upon the Pope: He was so very hot in these matters, that he could not so
much as hear any body pronounce the name of Huguenot, but he fell into a fury.

Those that had premeditated to ridd themselves of the King, finding this
instrument so proper to act their Design, knew very well how to confirm him in
his Sentiments* they had people at their beck who haunted him eternally, though
he knew not their intents, who caused him to be instructed by their Doctors,
and enchanted him with supposed Visions, and the other the like diabolical
Arts. There are proofs, that they carried him as far as Naples, where in an
Assembly, at the Viceroy's Palace, he met with many others who had all devoted
themselves to the same end; They made him come from Angoulesme to Paris two or
three times: in fine, they managed and guided him so well to their liking and
purpose, that by his sacrilegious hand they perpetrated the detestable
resolutions of their own wicked and accursed hearts.

The day after that of the Queens entrance, the King was to have made the
Marriage of Mademoiselle de Vandosme, the eldest of his natural Daughters, and
the following day the Feast; then the next Morning to mount on Horseback and
go to his Army: But on the Evening of the Day of Entrance, which was a Friday,
a little before four of the Clock, as he was going to the Arsenal without
Guards, to confer with the Duke of Sully, an Embarrass of certain Carts having
stopped his Coach in the midst of the Street de la Feronerie, and his Valets, or
Footmen, passing under the Channels of Saint Innocents; this Devil incarnate,
stepped upon a spoak of one of the hind Wheels, and advancing his Body into the
Coach gave him two stabbs in the Breast with a Knife, the first glanced along
the fifth and sixth Ribb, and did not enter his Body; but the second cut the
Arterial Vein above the Ventricle of the heart; so that the Blood bursting
forth with impetuosity, choacked him in a moment, he not being able to utter
one word.

It had been foretold him, he should die in a Coach, so that upon the least
jolt, he would cry out as if he beheld the Grave opened ready to swallow him:
But yet imagined he had escaped the effect of that prediction after two great
hazards he run through, the one at his going to visit the Duchess of Beaufort;
the other in the Ferry-boat of Nully, whereof we have made mention.

So strange an amazement and terror seized upon those who were present at this
Tragical Accident, that if Ravaillac had but dropped his Knife, they could not
then have discovered him; but being taken holding it yet in his hand, he owned
the Fact as boldly as if he had performed some Heroique Action. There were two
things then observed, from which the Reader may draw what consequence he
pleases; the one, That when they had taken him, seven or eight Men were seen to
come up with their drawn Swords, who cried aloud he deserved Montigny, where
they kept him two days in the Hostel de Raise with so little care, that all
sorts of people spoke with him: and amongst others, a Friar who had great
Obligations to the King, having accosted him, and called him My Friend, said to
him, he should have a care of accusing honest people.

There were in the Kings Coach, the Dukes of Espernon and of Montbason, the
Mareschals de Lavardin and de Roquelaure; and the Marquesses de la Force and de
Mirebeau: these Lords being allighted, and having covered his face, and drawn
the Curtains, made them drive back toward the Louvre, and commanded at their
Entrance, they should call out for a Chyrurgeon and some Wine, that it might be
believed he was not yet dead. They laid his Bleeding Corpse upon a

Espernon, and the Marshall de Lavardin. We shall show in the following Reign,
if the times will permit us, how the Court wholly changed it is Face, the
Government its Maxims, the Ministers their designs: How the Orders which Henry
the Great had established were renversed, his Oeconomies dissipated, his
faithful Servants turned out of doors, and his Alliances forsaken, to take up
new ones: so that France, which was so lately triumphant and Mistress of
Europe, saw her self almost reduced Spain, and the Agents of the Court of Rome,
who were the Oracles of the Regency. It must however be acknowledged, that it
proved very happy both for the quiet and the ease of the People in general.

So soon as the King was dead, the Duke of Espernon ran to order the Companies
of the Regiment that had the Guard, to seize upon the Gates of the Louvre, sent
for the rest who were quartered in the Fauxbourgs, to come and post themselves
upon the Pont-neuf, in the Street Daufine, and about the Augustins, thereby to
invest the Parliament, and compel them, if requisite, to declare the Queen,
Regent. The President de Blanc-mesnil who then held the Afternoon Audience,
broke off, upon the dreadful rumor of the King's being wounded; but durst not,
or would not stir from thence: And in the mean time, the President Seguier,
whom the Duke of Espernon had been with for his advice and assistance, came
thither immediately, with a good number of his Friends: So that the Company was
assembled to serve the Duke in his Design.

Amidst that innumerable and confused multitude of People wherewith Paris was
then thronged, who were of so great diversity of Humors and Interests; amidst
the Animosities betwixt the Catholics and the Huguenots, the Feuds amongst the
Grandees, the Suspicions which the one cast upon the other concerning this
Murder; the specious pretense there was to animate the People to revenge the
Death of a Prince so greatly and generally beloved, and the avidity of the
Rascally sort to be Plundering: it is manifest that the least spark of Sedition
would have set all Paris in a flame, and the more easily, because the
Bourgeoisie had their Arms in readiness, having Mustered twice or thrice a Week
for above a Month, to be prepared for the entrance of the Queen. The Prudence
of her Magistrates, I mean the Prevost des Marchands, and the Lieutenant Civil
did most happily obviate those Disorders: The first, was James Sanguin; the
second, Nicholas le Jay, a man of great Sense, and who had acquired a great
deal of Credit amongst the Citizens, because he made the Honor of his Office to
consist in serving the Public well. Both appeared every where about the
Streets, amused the populace with diverse reports, exhorted the considerablest
Bourgeois to keep them in awe, managed every thing so wisely, and gave such
excellent Orders; the one Commanding the Captains of every Precinct, the other
the Commissaries, Archers and Huissiers, to be in a readiness, that nothing was
able to make the least disturbance.

Henry IV. died in the midst of the Fifty seventh year of his Age, three Months
before the end of the Two and twentieth of his Reign, leaving three Sons, and
three Daughters by Mary de Medicis his Second, or rather his only Wife, since
the Marriage between him and Margaret de Valois was declared Null. The eldest
named Lewis, has reigned; the second had no Baptismal Name, and died within
the fourth year of his Childhood: he bare the Title of Duke of Orleans: The
Third had it likewise, and the Name of John Baptista Gaston. The three
Daughters were called Elizabeth, Christian, and Henriette-Maria. The eldest was
Wife of Philip IV. King of Spains; the second, of Victor Amedea, Prince of
Piedmont, then Duke of Savoy after the death of Duke Charles his Father; the
last, of Charles I. King of Great Britain.

The number of his Natural Children did by much surpass his Legitimate ones:
for besides those whom he would not, or could not well own, he had Eleven, S ix
Gabriella d'Estree, which were Caesar Duke de Vendosme, Lewis, Francis, and
Isabella, these three died young; Alexander Grand Prior of France, and
Catharine Henrietta Wife of Charles Duke de Elbaeuf; Two by Henrietta de Balsac
d'Entragues, to wit, Henry Duke de Verneuil and Bishop of Mets, at present
Governor of Languedoc, and Gabriella Wife of Bernard de Nogaret, Duke de la
Valette, then Duke of Espernon; one, only, by Jacqueline de Bueil, which was
Anthony Count de Moret: And two Daughters by Charlotta des Essars, a private
Gentlewoman; They were named Jane, and Mary Henrietta; the former was Abbess of
Fontevrault, and the latter of Chelles.

It may be seen and judged by the course of his whole life, whether he justly
merited the Title they gave him of Great, with that of Arbitrator of
Christendom. There were some would needs reproach him; That he loved Money too
well, and that to gather it he exposed his Kingdom to the avidity of Partisans,
who amongst a great number of odd Projects they put him upon, made him
establish the Paulete, or Annual right; That the inquisition he made after such
Catterpillers served more to confirm their Robberies, than to punish them; That
loving a little too much to be soothed, he gave a freer access to Charlatans
and Flatterers, than to his prudent and faithful Counselors; and that he often
suffered importunity to wrest those favors from him which he had refused to
bestow on Merit. They added, That he was very liberal of Caresses and fair
words toward the Sword men, when he stood in greatest need of them, but the
Peril once passed, their Services were as soon forgotten; and that he oftener
gave rewards to those who had done him Mischief, than to such as Sacrificed
their Fortunes for his Interest and Advantage; That he did not much trouble
himself to restrain the concussions of his Lawyers and Justices, though he were
well enough acquainted and informed thereof, but let them go on impunitively,
provided they did not oppose his absolute Will, and the verification of his
Edicts; That he had suffered those belonging to the Treasury to ally themselves
with the Officers of his Sovereign Courts, who before controlled their
misdemeanour, whence consequently followed, that the one being fortified by the
other, they feathered and decked themselves with the richest Plumes and Spoil
the War had stripped the honest

If History might make Apologies, she might vindicate him from the greater part
of these reproaches; though not altogether from the fondness, not to say
frenzy, he had to Gaming, which certainly is very unbecoming in a great Prince,
and which begot a great many Academies and Gaming-Houses in Paris, most
pernicious Schools for Youth, and the fatal Rocks whereon many rich and noble
Families do split and sink themselves; and much less yet could she excuse his
abandoning himself to Women, which was so Public and so Universal from his
early youth even to the last Period of his days, that it will not so much as
admit of the name of Love, or be allowed but Galantery.

But these defects have been in some manner effaced and dispelled by the luster
of his great and glorious Actions, his continual Victories, and his high
Enterprises; by the infinite goodness he manifested toward his People, and
above all by his Valor tried in so many Combats, and his never-failing
Clemency salutary to so many People. These two most royal Virtues which marched
in the Van of all his Undertakings, were ever contending with each other which
should overcome his Enemies in the noblest manner; so as they have left it
still a doubt to whether of the two he was most obliged for his good Success,
and whether it must be said he recovered and conquered his Kingdom by force of
Fighting, or by virtue of Pardoning.

Church of the Sixteenth Century.
Church.
THe Heads, or Governors, of the Church having not had that care, incumbent
upon them, to maintain its discipline, the irregularities and vices of the
Clergy mounted to the highest degree imaginable, and became so public, as
rendered them the Objects both of the hatred and contempt of the people: One
cannot without blushing make mention of the Usury, Avarice, Crapulence, and
Dissolution of the Priests; of the licentious and villanious Debaucheries of
the Monks: the Luxury, Pride and vain Expenses of the Prelates; the shameful
sloth, gross ignorance, and superstitions both of the one and the other.
Neither durst we say, how the corruption of Simony had invaded and tainted the
noblest parts of the Church, nay, even the head its self, had we not for
undeniable proof the constitution made by Julius II. in the year 1505. which
ordained, that such Pope as should have attained the Papal dignity by those
means, should be destituted; That they should proceed against him, as against
an Heretic, imploring even the Secular power; That the Cardinals accomplices
of this impiety, should be degraded, and deprived of all Offices, Honors, and
Benefices; That the remaining ones who had no hand in it, should proceed to a
new Election, and if it were needful, should assemble a General Council.

These disorders, to speak truth were not new, we must confess there had been
the like of a long time, but the general ignorance which reigned in those
former barbarous ages, did as it were hide and cover them in her shades of
darkness: now in these latter days the light of good Learning being brought
into Europe, its beams illuminating the obscurest places, made these stains
appear in all their deformity; And as the ignorant, whose weak eyes being
dazzled with this brightness, found fault with it, and endeavored to cast Dirt
on that which exposed their defects, the Learned in revenge treated them in
ridicule, and took the greater pleasure in discovering their turpitude and
decrying their superstition.

It must be likewise granted that the enterprises of the Court of Rome had
highly exasperated the Princes and the Nobility of Germany, and that the wicked
life of Alexander VI. and the contest between the Pope Julius II. and France
had extremely scandalized the most moderate men. Lewis XII. the best of Perdam
Babylonis nomen, and procured the Assembly of the Council of Pisa to restrain
the Attempts of Julius. It is true, that Council caused more scandal then good,
but there were started some questions very disadvantageous to the Sovereign
Authority of the Pope, and which could not but leave very ill impressions in
Men's minds.

After the death of Julius, Leo X. made the Concordat with Francis I. by which
that Pope obtained an Abolition of the Pragmatick, and secured to himself the
Annates payable at every mutation of Bishops and Abbots; (they call Monsieur de
Marca, Archbishop of Toulouze, and afterward of Paris.
of our times seems to say, the Annates, in respect of the Popes, could not
pass but for perfect Simony, were it not that our Kings, in this case, do
transmit their temporal right to them. We must refer it to the more learned to
judge whether the Elections were Jure Divino, and whether they could be taken
away; as likewise, whether that observation, which many have made, be true;
that from the very time they were Abolished, Heresies have crowded in throngs
into the Church, and that Holy City being thereby denuded of her strongest
Walls and Ramparts, found her self to be insulted over by Errors, and her
temporal Estate invaded by decimations: for Leo did grant them so easily to the
King, that ever since, the Pope his Successors have made no difficulty to do
the same, and have suffered them to become very common and frequent.

Church.
Such was the State and disposition of things, when Luthers Schism began first
to appear. The great noise it made soon stifled all the lesser disputes,
particularly that between the Orders of Saint Francis and Saint Dominique,
about the Conception of the Virgin-Mary* which has been since revived by the
Dominicans stiff adherence to the Doctrine of Saint Thomas.

It likewise put an end to those which some Monks of Colen had raised against
John E'in-rauch in High Dutch, and Capnos in Greek, signify Smoke.
Reuchlin, who called himself Capnion. Occasioned thus. A certain Pseffercorn,
Renegado Jew, had advised the Emperor Maximilian to cause all the Hebrew Books
of the Rabins to be burnt, not with design this counsel should be put in
execution, but to oblige the Jews to redeem the Writings of their learned
Doctors with great Sums of Money of which he pretended to have his share.
Reuchlin, very Skilful in the Hebrew Tongue, having been consulted with by the
Emperor upon this Subject, was of a contrary Sentiment, and put down his
Reasons in Writing: Pseffercorn mad he should hinder him of his Prey, wounded
his Reputation with biting Satyrs; and some Monks of Colen taking up the cause
and quarrel of this Fourbe, because he had been Baptized in that City, caused
his Adversarie's Book to be burnt*

It is sufficiently known what Martin Luther was, an Augustine Monk, Native of
Islebe in the County of Mansfeild, Professor in Theology in the new University
of Wittemberg, Founded by Frederic Elector and Duke of Saxony, who loved and
valued him for the volubility of his Wit, and his Eloquence: He was a cheerful
Man, and of very gay humor, but too vehement and too intemperate in Speech,
extremely Confident, who never retracted, and delighted too much in the Music
of his own Commendations and Applause. The occasion that brought him into the
Lists is known likewise, and that he was not excited to it but by the interest
of the Wallet, because the Preaching of the Croisade had been committed in
Germany, to the Jacobins, against the ancient Custom which ever allotted it to
the Augustins in those Countries. In the beginning he Preached only against the
abuse of those Indulgences, by that means to ruin the Trade of the Jacobins who
vended them; but being pusht onward from Dispute to Dispute, he was transported
so far that he declared himself wholly against the Roman Church, Anno 1520.

'Twas the Protection of Frederic Duke of Saxony, then esteemed the wisest of
the German Princes, and the Applause of the Nobless of Franconia, that
emboldned him to set up the Standard of Rebellion. So long as Frederic lived he
durst make no change in the outward form of Religion, nor quit his habit of a
John his Successor being absolutely intoxicated with his Eloquence, permitted
him every thing. He therefore cast off his Froe, and Three years afterward
Married an un-vailed Nun. Then cutting, at large as we may say, in the whole
piece, he shaped a Religion after his own Mode, which he changed, added to, or
retrenched so long as he lived: So that one may say, he had no steady or
certain belief, and those Articles he framed were rather dubious than
Dogmatical, although he published them as Oracles. He died at Islebe, Anno
1546. the Six and twentieth of February, revered of all those who followed his
Doctrine as a great Apostle; and on the contrary detested by the Catholics as
an Hereslarque and the public Incendiary of Christendom.

Some time before he thus Un-masqued himself, there had appeared several
Preachers who fell foul upon the Vices of the Prelates and the Court of Rome,
threatening them with Divine Punishment, as horrible as sudden and near at hand:
A Constitution of Leo X. made in the year 1516. which forbids them Preaching
the like things, of the farcing their Sermons with Tales, Prophecies,
Revelations and Miracles, is an evident proof thereof.

Luther's Credit drew after him one Party of the Augustins, startled many more,
and rendered all of them so suspected, that the Pope was like to have abolished
the whole Order. This pretended Evangelical Liberty opened the Cloister Gates
to many other Monks, especially in Germany, un-vailed great numbers of Nuns,
let loose the People against the Churchmen, and pushed on the Nobility to
seize upon their rich Possessions.

But Luther did not remain long sole Head of this Revolt; for whether it were
he gave rise to these Motions, or whether some malign influence disposed men's
Minds thus to Brouilleries and Contention, there arose in a short time a
Prodigious quantity of new Doctors and of novel Sects, who destroyed the one
the other, yet notwithstanding agreed all in these Six points; The first, That
Church.
they directly shocked the Superiority of the Pope: The second, That they would
admit no other Judges of the Articles of Faith but the Holy Scriptures only:
The third, That they rejected certain Books of it, some more, others fewer,
which they said were not Canonical. The Fourth, That they retrenched several
Sacraments: The Fifth, That they held several Novelties concerning Grace, and
free Will: And the Sixth, That they denied Purgatory, Indulgences, Images,
Prayers to Saints, and many Ceremonies of the Church.

After his Death, the Confusion was incomparably greater: It would be endless
to enumerate all the Authors, the Names, and the Whimseys of these different
Sects; there were some that received the Errors of Ebion, of Manes, of Paulus
Samosatenus, of Sabellius, of Arius, of Eutyches, and other ancient Heretics.
There were such who finding no firm footing or foundation any where, did only
acknowledge there was one God the Creator of all things; (these were called
Deists.) Others going farther, and making a last effort of Impiety denied there
was any other Divinity besides Nature alone.

The furious Irruptions of the Turks into Hungary, and the fatal Discords
amongst the three greatest Princes of Christendom, Charles V. Francis I. and
Henry VIII. were very favorable to these Sowers of new Seeds: For whilst
Christendom was affrighted at the Ravages of the Infidels, and every where in
Divisions, they had not the leisure to consider of these disputes: And then
Charles V. standing in need of the Princes of Germany to resist Francis I. and
to get the Empire to be settled upon his Son, (which he could never obtain)
Causes of the Progress of Lutheranism.
would not prosecute them to the utmost, or totally destroy them, as he might
have done after the gaining of the Battle of Mulberg. On the other hand,
Francis I. his Rival openly supported them, and entered into League with them,
though at the same time he burnt the Sacramentaries in his own Kingdom. Add
thereto the difficulties the Popes made for the holding of an Ecumenical
Council, whose Authority perhaps might have stifled this Monster in it is Birth.

Other Causes which obstructed it.
On the opposite there were other Causes and other Conjunctures which
obstructed the speedier increase of it: First, The great Credit of the Faculty
of Theology at Paris, the Learning of some Zealous Doctors, though but few in
number, who made Head both against Luther, and the other Sectaries; then the
diversity and variety of Opinions, and Pride of other Novators, who all
contending to be Heads of Parties, became fiercer Enemies amongst themselves,
than against the Church of Rome. Luther imagined the University of Paris being
offended, as she was, for the Abolition of the Pragmatique, would embrace the
opportunity to be revenged of the Pope, and upon that Surmise he submitted to
their decision the Dispute he had against John Eckius, the first Catholic
Doctor that durst bid him Battle: but they condemned him in harsh and rude
terms, and thus by their Authority retained the Clergy, and People, who were
running in Crowds after him.

As to the other Point, in a short time the Sect of Zuinglius, and that of
Calvin were found to be as prevalent and powerful as his; both the one and the
other, notwithstanding, showing ever a great deal of respect for all he said,
and acknowledging he was the first that had unveiled the Evangelical Truths,
tried often, with profound Submissions, to reconcile themselves with him: but
he would never yield to it in the least, unless they would first confess the
real presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist: to which they would not yield;
Therefore, He treated them as Heretics all his life time.
and to this very day his true Disciples are less compatible with theirs, than
with the Catholics the Princes, and the Cities of their Opinion have labored
in vain to unite them, and the many Conferences which were held for that
purpose, have served to no other end but to make it manifest it is an
impossible thing.

Besides these, I find a fourth cause, which was the too sudden and too great
Change that Zuinglius and Calvin would have made as well in the Exterior face
of the Church, as in the Essential points of Faith. Luther had retrenched but
very little or nothing of what the People were accustomed to: he left their
Ornaments, Bells, Organs, Tapers, and had not altered the manner of Saying
Mass, and Divine Service, only he added some Prayers in the Vulgar Tongue. So
that the most part looked at first upon him as a Reformer only of the Abuses
Church.
of the Churchmen; but when his work was so advanced as in a probability to
have made a general Revolution, comes Zuinglius cross his way, who began to
Preach in Swisserland, Anno 1520. and then Calvin, Fourteen years after
dogmatized in France: who instead of following the same footsteps, set
themselves upon Preaching against the reality of the Body of Jesus Christ in
the Holy Sacrament, taking away the Ceremonies and Ornaments, casting out the
Relics, breaking down the Altars and Images, and over-turning the whole
Hierarchical Order; in fine, stripping Religion of all that does most take and
fix the imagination by the Eye; in so much as almost all the People had them in
aversion as Impious and Sacrilegious Persons, and became but the more zealous
for that worship they had seen practiced by their Forefathers.

There is some reason to doubt whether we ought to place the Riches, and vast
Incomes of the Church either amongst the Causes that advanced these Errors, or
that impeded their Progress: for as it is most certain it was a Bait that
allured the avarice of Princes, and the Nobility, and drew them to favor the
pretended Reformation, that they might have an opportunity to seize upon that
infinite Treasure; so on the other side it is as certain that many Prelates,
and people richly Beneficed had leaped over the Church pale, had they not been
retained by the apprehensions of losing those Means, without which they could
not

We shall not need to particularize after what manner the Princes of Germany,
as Saxony, Brandenbourg, the Palatine of the Rh^^e, Brunswich, Wittemberg, and
Hesse; the Swiss and the Grisons; the Kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden; Prussia,
Transylvania, and other Countries abandoned the ancient Faith; who were their
first Evangelists; for what reason the Religionaries of Germany took up the
name of Protestants, which is communicated to all that are separated from the
Roman Church, and all what passed in those Countries upon the score of
Religion; it is foreign to our Subject, and may be seen at large in their
several Histories. Come we therefore to what does more particularly concern
France and the Gallican Church.

There were yet some remainders left of the ancient Vaudois, or Poor of Lions
in the Valeys of Daufine La Vaupute, Fraissiniere, Pragela, Argentiere, etc.
, who had their Pastors, and held their Assemblies a part, in some Forts they
had Built for their Security: so that they made, as it were a little
Independent Republique, as well for Matters of Religion, as for Government.
Pope Innocent IV. with the consent of King Charles VIII. delegated one Albert
Catanea, Archdeacon of Cremona; who having by force of Arms destroyed their
Redoubts, and slain, or taken Prisoners the most mutinous, did the more easily
convert the rest by the Sword of the Word, or else drove them out of those
Valeys: But they soon after herded together again, and reestablished
themselves.

In the year 1501. the Gentry of the Country Prosecuting them for the Crime of
Heresy, rather with design of getting their Estates than to Convert them, King
Lewis XII. being then at Lions, understanding they were innocent People, or
irreproachable Manners and Conversation in all things else, obtained Bulls of
Alexander VI. that they might be Visited, and committed the Care to Laurence
Buceau, Bishop of Cisteron his Confessor, and to Thomas Pascal, Doctor in
Divinity and Regent of the University of Orleans, to take Cognizance of the
same, and make Report in Council. The Bishop knowing how agreeable acts of
Benignity and Clemency were to that good Prince, ordered all the Informations
which had been made against these poor simple Creatures in the Parliament of
Grenoble, and the Spiritual Courts of Gap and Embrun, should be brought to him;
and having called them together diverse times, exhorted them first with great
Charity, and then propounded the Articles of Faith to them distinctly. To which
having with one voice answered, Credo, and Vowed to die in that Belief, he left
them in Peace; and stealing suddenly away from Grenoble, carried all these
Criminal Proceedings to Guy de Rochefort Chancellor. Some years after, the
News of Luther's Predication being come to them, they fancied a new Sun was
arisen, and sent to him to have the Communication of his pretended Gospel
Light; notwithstanding soon after, their Belief and Opinions being less
conformable to his, then to that of the Sacramentaries, they quitted him to
join with them.

About the End of the Fifteenth Age, and in the beginning of the Sixteenth,
there were some Seeds of their Heresies already sowed in France. For Anno 1492.
the Morrow after Corpus-Christi Day, a Priest who was hearing Mass at Nostre
Church.
Dame, snatched away the Host from the Celebrator after the Consecration, and
cast it on the ground to trample it under foot. And in Anno 1502. a Picard
Scholar, Native of Abbeville, committed the like Fact on Saint Lewis's Day in
the Holy Chapel. Both were seized immediately, and some days after burnt alive
in the Market aux Cochons Pigge- Market.
, without any signs of Repentance; the first having his Tongue torn out; the
second his Hand cut off upon the very place where they brake the holy Wafer.

King Lewis XII. having a great contest with Pope Julius II. demanded a general
Council to reform the Church both in its Head, and in its Members, and caused
one to be assembled at Pisa by the Suggestion and with the assistance of
certain Cardinals dissatisfied with that Pope. The said Council was soon driven
from thence, and retired to Milan, from whence they were likewise forced to
remove, and came to end their days at Lions. That whole Affair was very ill
managed, the Pope opposed him with another Council which he assembled at
Lateran; and this being grown the more powerful, did in the end constrain Lewis
XII. to renounce his, and those Cardinals, and Bishops that had been the
Promoters of it, to humble themselves before his Holiness to obtain Absolution.

The Officers of the Parliament of Provence having been all excommunicated by
the Pope in this Council, because they had hindered the execution of his Orders,
(if they had not approved of the others) and because they acted daily several
things which in those times were taken to be designs: The King desired they
might submit, and that Lewis de Souliers, his Ambassador to the Council having
their special Procuration, should in their Name formally disown all they had
done against the Liberties of the Church, against the respect due to the Holy
See, promise that for the future they would be more circumspect, that they
should ratify this Submission within four Months, and that he should desire
their Absolution; which was granted them.

The same Council had likewise cited the Prelates of France to come and show
the reasons why they still justified and maintained the Pragmatique. It is
probable they would to his Decrees have opposed or alleged the Liberties of
the Gallican Church; but Francis I. very far from supporting them, did himself
abandon that which his Predecessors had defended with so much resolution and
firmness, and passed or agreed to the Concordat with Leo X. of which we have
made mention in the year 1516. The smart of so great and desperate a wound,
made the Clergy, the Parliament and the University, cry out in vain: those two
great Powers being now joined together, valued not their Complaints. The Clergy
had protested to take all Opportunities for the making of Remonstrances to the
King for the Re-establishment of Elections; this they pursued very well four or
five times under King Henry III. and Henry IV. but at length they grew weary,
whether believing they were no longer obliged to labor to no end, or that
several of the Bishops gave it over in Charity to themselves, as

The Authors of the Novel Opinions spared no pains to convey and plant their
Doctrines in the remotest Provinces: Printing was a great help to bring their
Works to light, and make them spread, the Zealots were at the charge of
Printing and Dispersing them, and the Country Pedlers, whom they paid very
Beginning of the new Opinions in France, and the cause of their Progress.
well, had always some of these new-fashion Wares in their Packs, which they
showed for great Rarities to the curious and inquisitive. Their Disciples crept
into the Universities, where under color of teaching the Law, or Greek, or
Hebrew, they instilled their Doctrine into the hearts of the younger fry.
Others more polite and more dexterous insinuated into the Society of Women, and
studied to gain their favor, that they might gain their belief. Thus they
gained an Absolute Power over Anne de Pisseleu Duchess d'Estampes, Mistress of
Francis I. over Margaret Queen of Navarre; and over Renee of France, Daughter
of good King Lewis XII.

There were others who endeavored to get into the Houses of such Bishops as
they believed to be most susceptible of their fancies. James le Fevre, Native
of Estaples, a little Town in Boulonois, who was not Doctor in Divinity at
Paris, as many will have it, at least he is not to be found in the Registry of
that Faculty: William Farel a Daufinois, Arnold and Gerard Roussel, Picards,
fell in Church.
about the year 1523. with William Briconnet Bishop of Meaux, and entangled his
Mind so with those dangerous Opinions, that he began to own and Preach them.

There was the same year in that City, a Wool-Comber by Name John le Clear, who
had the Impudence to say, That the Pope was the Antichrist; he was Whipped for
it by the hands of the Hangman, and Banished the Kingdom. This Punishment
corrected him not, he went to Mets to vend his Wares, and was there Burnt for
having broken down some Images. Lewis Berquin, Artesian by Birth, a powerful
Genius according to the Sentiment of Erasmus, suffered a like Death at Paris
the One and twentieth of April, in Anno 1528.

Now the Bishop of Meaux being charged with the Crime of Heresy, retracted
upon the first Admonition, having beforehand sent away his Doctors, amongst
whom Arnold was so terribly scared that he continued a good Catholic ever
after: Gerard made his escape to Luther: Farel went to Zuinglius at Zurich, and
le Fevre to Nerac to Queen Margaret. The two others came also thither some time
after, and there began to form a new Church, wherein they used no Mass, nor
observed the Canonical hours for Prayer, but communicated by taking Bread and
Wine, and giving it to all that were present, in the same manner, said they, as
Jesus Christ and the Apostles had practiced: Before, and after they made
Sermons, wherein they explained the Word of God. They called it Preaching, and
their way of taking the Eucharist, Manducation. The Queen went amongst them,
and sometimes led her Husband thither, who was very submissive to her Will, and
no less Zealous against the Authority of the Pope; because that had furnished
the Spaniard with a fair pretense to Invade the Kingdom of Navarre.

In the mean time Anthony Duprat, Archbishop of Sens, Cardinal and Legate,
Paris, Anno 1528. where appeared Six of his Suffragants, and a Delegate from
the Seventh. They there propounded the Catholic Doctrines; and condemned
Luther's; they Prohibited all Nocturnal Assemblies, and the Reading of any
Heretical Books, with Excommunication against them, their Abettors and Adherers.

On their part, they sought by all manner of ways to make some impression upon
the Mind of King Francis I. A Curate of the Parish of Saint Eustache, named
le-Cog, Preached one day before him, and speaking of the Mystery of the
Eucharist, told them that they must lift up the heart toward Heaven, where
Jesus Christ sat at the right hand of God his Father, not bow down to the
Altar, and for this reason, said he, does the Church sing Sursum Corda: those
Doctors that were present would not let the Proposition pass so, but obliged
him to retract.

That King had a mighty tenderness for his Sister Margaret, and was no less
fond of good Learning when he met with it amongst the Ingenuous, and the Beaux
Esprits: the Novators employed both the one and the other to draw him over to
them. At that very time, which was in the year 1533. Philip Melancthon a man of
as rare a Genius as any of that Age, propounded to compose all the Disputes and
Differences in Religion, and did condescend to many Points, in favor of the
Catholics: in so much that if things of that Nature could have admitted of a
Division, he would have shared the Differences to have reconciled the Parties.
The King who had some interest to make himself considerable amongst the German
Princes, and to whom it would have gained Immortal Honor to have become the
Arbitrator of Christendom, wrote to him by William du Bellay Langey, whom he
sent into that Country, That he Passionately desired to see him, that he should
be most extremely Welcome, if he would come and confer with his Divines, for the
Reconciliation and Reunion of the Church, and the Re-establishment of the
ancient Polity; which he desired to embrace with all Affection. But the
Cardinal de Tournon, and the Divines of Paris, apprehending the Consequences of
this enterview to be like the opening of a Gap in the Sheep-cote to one whom
they looked upon as a Ravenous Woolf, made such frequent and such pressing
Remonstrances to the King, that he gave Melancthon notice, he did excuse him
from taking so great a trouble upon him.

Church.
They likewise, hindered him from reading the Book of Calvin's Institutions,
which the Author had dedicated to him in Anno 1535. and withal, engaged him to
send for his Sister Margeret, and her Doctors to come to Court; They were
brought thither, together with her, by Charles de Coucy-Buric, the King's
Lieutenant in Guyenne, imbued with the same Sentiments as that Princess. He
privately gave her fraternal Correction and Admonition, and sent her Doctors to
Prison; but so soon as they retracted he released them, upon condition they
should never dare again to approach the said Princess. Notwithstanding he
restored her Roussel to her whom she had provided with the Bishopric of
Oleron, and the Abbey of Clairac, with which he passed the remainder of his
days in an apparent exercise of the Catholic Religion, and a most exemplary
Holiness of Life and Conversation, if his inside were equal to his outward
deportment, and his heart as sincere as his tongue seemed Pious.

As for the Queen, she protested to her Brother never to depart more from the
Catholic Religion, and showed her self much an Enemy to those that opposed it;
nevertheless toward the end of her days, which was in Anno 1549. she seemed to
repent of her Repentance, and desired Calvin by Letters to come both to
instruct and to comfort her, but he did not judge there would be any security
for him in the Journey; and ever choosing rather to expose his Counsel than his
Person in case of danger, he would not stir out of Geneva, which was his main
Fortress.

We have formerly told you Vide in the Year 1534.
who this Calvin was his Birth, his Beginnings, and his Progress. It is worthy
our Observation that in Anno 1534. he held his first Synod at Poitiers in a
Garden, and from thence sent his Disciples forth to other Cities to plant his
new Gospel. Those that have seen him, write that his Speech, his Gestures, and
his Presence were but little taking in the Pulpit; but his Books manifest that
no man in his time had so Eloquent a Pen as his. His manners were much more
regular than Luther's; he appeared sober, frugal, continent, settled, edifying
both by his Discourse and his Example; notwithstanding he was by Nature surly,
violent, jealous, injurious, and implacable toward any that opposed him.

In the year 1535. the Citizens of Geneva having withdrawn themselves from the
dominion of their Bishop, who was also their Temporal Lord, and then from that
of the Roman Church, called in Calvin, and Farel to be their Pastors. Scarce
had they been nestled there two years and a half when some difference arose
between them and the Magistrates of the City, who drove them out; this was in
the year 1538. but absent as they were, they still maintained their Cabal; and
their Party was so strong they were recalled again in Anno Calvin never left it
more, having as it were established his Pontifical seat in that place, from
whence he governed his whole Party as well in Temporals as Spirituals. Farel
could not long comply with him, and retired into Switzerland.

As Calvin's temperament was very severe, and an Enemy to all divertisements,
that besides he must needs have observed, how the Lutherans instead of having
retrenched their Luxury, Debaucheries, and Oppressions, had rather increased
them, he thought it would be much better to use more strictness in reforming
those irregularities, so to gain Proselytes by the specious appearance of
Austerity. He therefore forbad all Oaths, which then were grown very horrible
and very frequent, not permitting his to affirm otherwise then by the word
verily; he prohibited Dancing, Cabarets, Gaming-houses, and Usury; he punished
Fornication and Adultery with death; and recommended modesty of Habits,
Frugality and Temperance, that so those of his Sect might appear to be really
reformed, and the Catholics by opposition much more irregular and much more
dissolute.

The number of his followers increased daily, they held their Assemblies by
night in Cellars or in solitary places, and had Advertisers who went from house
to house to give them notice of the place and time. Francis I. a very merciful
How the Novators were treated in France.
Prince was not over rigorous to them till in the year 1535. when they lost all
respect to him, as well as to things Holy and Sacred. Some over Zealous amongst
them, being angry because he would not hear Melancton, nor read the works of
their Calvin, posted up certain very scandalous placards against him, and
against his Religion, and scatterd'd diverse very injurious Libels even upon his
Table and on his very Bed: nay there were those that cut off the Arms Church.
and heads of some Images. So that being exasperated to the highest degree by
this audacious Saerilege, he quitted Blois where he then was, and came to
Paris; where after he had given order to seize upon a good many of these
Sacramentaries, he made on the 2^ th of January that Solemn Procession which is
described in all the Histories of those times: and to expiate those impieties,
delivered up to the Flames six of those Wretches. He afterward caused diverse
others to be Condemned to the same sufferings, but who went to their death with
an alacrity and constancy worthy of a much better cause.

They had more to undergo yet in the Reign of Henry II. the aversion which the
Duchess of Valentinois had conceived against them in hatred to the Duchess
d'Estampes, and the more Religious zeal of the Cardinal de Tournon, renewed the
Anno 1550. a fantastical Fellow undertook in the open daylight to cut off the
head of an Image of the Virgin in the Church of Nostre-Dame at Paris.

In fine, maugre all punishments, the mischief became so great, that it was not
in the power of man to extirpate it by force: and besides the diverse manners
and methods of proceeding gave them opportunities to escape; for sometimes they
were left to the Judgment of the Secular Magistrates: another while they were
taken out of their hands to be carried before the Bishops, then they sent them
to the Presidial Courts, created first, as it was said, by the suggestions of
the Sacramentaries themselves with design of becoming Masters thereof by
persuading and engaging their Friends to buy those new Offices. Which however
brought them little advantage in the end, because at length the cognizance of
those Crimes was referred to the Parliaments.

After the loss of the Battle of Saint Quentins they lifted up their heads in
diverse parts of the Kingdom. They had the confidence at Paris to meet by night
Jacques: The Magistrates having Information went thither well guarded; those
that were armed amongst them fought their way through the crowd and saved
themselves: some less desperate were seized, all the Women were taken, of whom
four or five belonged to the Queen: For she her self, to be thought wise and
pious, seemed to have some tendency toward that Religion. The accused defended
themselves so well upon their Trials, that their friends had time enough to get
Letters of intercession from the Protestant Princes of Germany, which saved
their lives.

Anno 1554. They first began to have a Minister at Paris, his Name was John
Macon. Four years after, on the Nine and Twentieth of July they held their
first Synod in the same City; the number of those they have held since is
almost infinite. In that of Chaalons, which was in the year 1563. they
propounded to exterminate all Despotique Power, the Papacy, and Chicane or
Pettyfogging, which they termed the three Pests of humane kind. It was but very
lately they ordained that the singing of Psalms turned into French Meeter,
should be part of their Liturgy: Marot had done but fifty only; after his death
Beza set himself about that work and finished the remainder. This Version (if
we may so call it) was published, with excellent Tunes set and Composed by the
most Famous Musicians of those Times. The more pious of the People received
them with applause, and took delight in singing those Psalms and Airs,
imagining by this means to suppress all filthy and impure Songs; but when it
came once to be understood that they were the Symbol of the Sacramentaries,
they not only abstained from them, but also fell foul upon such as offered to
sing them; which occasioned great Tumults at Paris, particularly in the year
1558.

The Ministers of State were accused (whether wrongfully or not) for not Causes
of the Progress of Calvinisme in Fr.
having applied the true remedies against this Contagion, whilst it infected
none but the poorer sort, by whose loss they could reap little gain; being
rather willing it should spread and take hold of the qualified and rich, that
they might have fines and great confiscations; the only means whereby those in
favor enriched themselves under the Reign of Henry II. In effect great numbers
of People that were wealthy, of Ecclesiastics, and of the most considerable
Officers were found to be tainted, many even of the best Heads belonging to the
Parliament were coifed, and possessed with it: who might perhaps have drawn
most of the Members of that body after them, had not the King gone in Person to
that famous Mercurial of the year 1559. and sent diverse of them away Prisoners.
Church.
Some of these would needs justify themselves, the rest retracted: the only
Anne de Bourg was immolated for his Religion. His example spoiled more then an
hundred Ministers could have done by all their zealous Preaching. Then the
weakness of the Reign of Francis II, the Minority of Charles IX. the Causes of
discord which animated the Princes of the Blood assisted by the three
Chastillons, against the Princes of the House of Guise, the Malign and
Artificial Ambition of the Regent Catherine de Medicis who flattered sometimes
the Huguenots, sometimes the Catholics, according as she had need either of
the one or the other; In fine, the Connivence of some great Magistrates, and of
several Bishops gave opportunities to this Sect both to strengthen, and
multiply and confirm themselves.

We have elsewhere spoken of the Tumult at Amboise, the Enmities, and Cabals of
the Grandees for the Government, the rise of the name of Huguenot given to the
Calvinists, who till that were called Sacramentaries* and of the Prince of
Conde's taking up Arms, with the other Chiefs. We shall not need France to the
poor and humble subsistence of an Hospital.

It was the Kingdoms misfortune, that this Reformation which the Huguenots
Preached up so much, was passionately desired by the best of people, and their
Cause happening to be in some manner complicated with the interest of the State,
those who had an ambition to show themselves good Frenchmen favored and
supported them indirectly, and Clubb'd Councils with them. For this reason the
Estates of Orleans did not endeavor to destroy them, and some even of the
Prelates themselves advised to allow them the Colloquy of Poissy, and after
that to grant them another Conference concerning Images, Relics, and the
Ceremonies; which did greatly heighten their courage.

It would perhaps have been more to the purpose to have at that time called a
National Council; and if they had intended to pluck up that Weed by the roots
at its first springing, they ought to have held a general one. Those are the
proper and sovereign Remedies God has left his Church wherewith to extinguish
the like flames, but oftentimes humane Policies does not suit with it. And in
those very days the mistaken interests of Princes, and of the Pope himself,
opposed the common good of the whole Christian Church. The Council of Council
of Trent.
France put the Court of Rome into a Fit of Trembling at every mention they
made of calling a National Council, so greatly did they apprehend the Capacity
of the French Divines, and the Liberties of the Gallican Church: Nor was this
one of the least considerations and motives which obliged Pope Paul IV. to
recontinue the Council of Trent.

The Memoires of this Great Council have been collected by several persons, and
its History written and published by diverse Authors, but somewhat variously,
and in many things rather according to their inclinations and their particular
engagements, then the naked truth. Pope Clement VII. had been obliged in 1533.
to assure the Emperor Charles V. he would convocate one that same year; but
when he understood how the Protestant Princes (very far for submitting to the
conditions he desired) maintained and urged that he ought not to be present at
it, since he was a party; that the controversies were to be judged by the word
of God only, and that the Laity must have their suffrages as well as the
Clergy: he made no great haste to forward it, and only promised the said
Convocation not setting either the time or place.

Pope Paul III. his Successor, indicted it effectually for the two and
twentieth of May in the year 1536. at Mantoua: from thence, because the Duke
feared for his City, he would have it held at Vincenza in the Territories of
the Seigneory of Venice, and there to begin in the Month of May of the Year
1538. but the Germans complaining that the said place was too remote from them,
the Venetians being under some apprehensions of exasperating the Turk, who
dreaded this grand Assembly, and withal but few Bishops appearing there, he
suspended it for as long time as he pleased. Anno 1541, by consent of the
Catholics of Germany who had held a Diet at Spire, he appointed it, by a Bull
dated the two and twentieth of May, to be held the first of November of the
same year in the Church.
City of Trent: and nevertheless all Europe being soon after put into a
Confusion with the War between Charles V. and Francis I. he was forced to
recall the Legates he had sent thither, and to suspend it yet a second time,
till a more convenient Season, which he would declare when he judged fit.

The Peace was made between the two Kings Anno 1544. In this Treaty some
Propositions were hinted about reforming the abuses of the Church of Rome; The
Pope having notice of it, judged it necessary to prevent them, and a second
time Summoned the Council of Trent for the fifteenth of March of the year 1545.
with this precaution however, that he gave his Legates order, in case any thing
were moved against his interest, either to dissolve it or to transfer it. The
Assembly was found to be so thin, that he Adjourned the opening of it till the
thirteenth of December; when the number being little increased, the French
Bishops who were but three had thoughts of retiring; however they did remain,
and the Council was opened.

Smalcalde* The Legates who knew the intentions of their Master, perceived
then, that it was not for his interest to hold the Council any longer in that
place. Taking therefore an occasion upon some flying report of the Plagues
being gotten into that Vicinage they transferred it to Bologna the eight and
twentieth of February in the year 1547. not staying to be informed whether the
Emperor and the King would approve of it: the Spanish Bishops refused to follow
them, and remained at Trent.

The same year in the Month of April, the Emperor gained a great and entire
Italy, wresting from him Parma and Piacenza, making himself Master of the City
of Rome, restoring the Imperial dignity there; and that which he feared more
yet then all this, reforming the abuses of his Court, according as the Bishops
even of his own Territories when they were at the Council, had highly declared
for in many set Speeches. Amidst these Alarms the Holy Father not knowing which
way to turn himself, did earnestly solicit the King of France to oppose this
formidable progress, to rally and support the scattered remnants of the
Protestants, and even to call in the assistance of the Turk. Thereupon, the
tenth day of September happened the death of the Duke of Piacenza his Son; his
grief for so Tragical an Accident, joined with the terror of the Emperors
Victory, together with those protestations his Ambassadors made against its
Translation, were the chief causes he made the said Council to cease Anno 1548.

It was interrupted till in the year 1551. the vehement instances of the
Emperor and the Catholics of Germany obliged Pope Julius III. to re-intimate
the same at Trent the first day of May of that year, and to begin again where
they had left off. Some Protestant Princes, and some certain Cities to comply
with the Emperor, sent thither their Deputies. But soon after the War of Parma
broke out, and the King being offended that the Pope should League himself
against him with the Emperor, wrote to the Council by James Amiot, Abbey of
Bellosane, a very disobliging Letter for the Pope, and filled with these like
protestations, That there being no free access at Trent for his Bishops he
could not send them thither* That he did not hold it for a General Council
called to reform Abuses and to restore the Discipline, but looked upon them as
an Assembly practiced by subtle intrigues and for temporal interests: That
therefore he did not believe himself obliged or bound to their Decrees, neither
himself nor the Churches of his Kingdom, but declared, That when ever is were
needful he should have recourse to the same means and remedies whereof his
Predecessors had made use in the like cases.

The Pope being soon weary of the War, dispatched Legates to the Emperor and to
the King to Treat of a Peace. The faculties of him that came into France being
presented to the Parliament, received the same restrictions as had been put to
those of the preceding ones.

Now the King being well again with the Pope, the Council continued during the
whole year 1551. and the following also. Whilst they were thus going on, the
terror of the Arms of Maurice Duke of Saxony, who was advanced as far as
Inspruc, where he thought to surprise the Emperor; and the rumor of the Kings
who entered into Germany, did so much scare the Prelates, that most of Church.
them ran quite away. The Legates therefore suspended the Council for two years
only; but by the diverse accidents and mutations of Affairs, it was interrupted
till the year 1561. when Pope Pius IV *re-assembled them. His Bull of Indiction
met with great difficulties both from the Emperor and from the King* their
Councils desired it might be a Convocation of a Council wholly new, not a
continuation of the old, and that they might re-examine those Decrees, had been
already made; for they had hopes thereby to allure and bring in the
Protestants. Frenchmen, found fault that the Address was made only to the
Emperor, and that the name of King Charles was not expressed, as those of
Francis I. and of Henry II. had been in the foregoing ones. In effect they had
not comprised him but under the general terms of Kings and Christian Princes.
They did the same injustice in their acclamations upon the closing up of the

The Ambassadors of France who were Lewis de Saint Gelais Lansac, Arnold de
Ferrier President des Enquestes in the Parliament of Paris, and Guy Faure
Pibrac Chief Justice of Tolosa, Arrived there the eighteenth of May. Queen
Catherine and her Council, had given them a Charge to press vigorously for the
Reformation of Abuses, and to behave themselves in such sort as the Protestants
might have reason to believe they intended them all manner of reasonable
satisfaction upon their complaints. Pibrac harangued them to that purpose, and
Lansac did second him; to this effect he demanded they should declare it to be
a new Council, and that they would stay for those Bishops who were coming
thither from France, as likewise the Ambassadors, and Divines from the Queen of
England, and from the Protestant Princes. Notwithstanding these instances, the
Legates declared it was a continuation, and would have them proceed immediately
without waiting for the Prelates of France.

Lansac and his Colleagues joined themselves also with the Emperors Ambassadors
in the demand they made for the use of the Cup, for the Laity of Bohemia, to
whom the Church had otherwhile most benignly allowed it. On the other hand, the
French Bishops seconded the Spaniards with all their might and main, to have
them declare that Residence was of Divine Right; but neither the Ambassadors,
nor they had any satisfaction upon either point, and were diverse times in
deliberation to be gone. Pibrac being recalled to the Court of France by Queen
Catherine, Ferrier was the manager, who harangued upon all occasions with
extreme vehemence.

During these transactions, the Cardinal de Lorrain Arrived at Trent,
accompanied with a great number of Bishops, and took such authority upon him,
that the Pope having conceived some jealousy, called him amongst his
familiars, the Petty Pope on the other side the Mountains. He knew that he was
come to Act in concert with the Imperialists to engage them to give some
satisfaction to the Lutherans (whom he desired to unlink from the Huguentos,
having to that effect both he and his Brother, conferred with the Duke of
Wirtemberg, and other Princes of that belief at Saverne:) and therefore he had
taken care and provided (to be fortified against him) a great number of Italian
Bishops whom from all parts he sent to the Council of Trent before the Cardinal
should Arrive there.

Some Months after his coming, they received two Messages of great News at the
Council, the one of the death of the King of Navarre, the other some Dreux;
Both of them gave the Cardinal great reason to believe his Brother might soon
make himself Master of all France, and that consideration increased his credit
and power very much in the Council; and by consequence that of the Ambassadors
with whom he was very well united in the beginning.

They propounded therefore, according to the instructions they had, four and
thirty Articles of Reformation, whereof the most Remarkable were; That none
should be ordained Priests, unless they were ancient, as the very word
imported* That they should restore the Functions separately to all the sacred
Orders, without allowing one Order to do what belonged to another; That they
should not confer them all at once, but observe the interstitium; That none
should be admitted to the dignity of an Abbot, or of a Prior conventual, who
had not read, or taught Theology in some Famous College; That an Ecclesiastic
should be capable to hold but one single Benefice; That they should say the
Prayers in French after the holy Sacrifice of the Mass* That they should gives
the Church.
Communion to the People under the two species, or both kinds; That they should
render to the Bishops their entire Jurisdiction, without allowing exemption to
any Monasteries, unless to the Heads of Orders; That the Pastors should be
capable, and obliged to Preach and to Catechize; That Simony, and the sale of
Benefices should be punished; and that those abuses might be removed and taken
away which had been introduced amongst the vulgar in the worship of Images. The
Cardinal de Lorrain would no doubt, have assisted them to his utmost if the
death of the Duke of Guise had not intervened: but as the good Fortune and
Prosperity of that Brother had much elevated him, so his loss depressed him
most infinitely; he now thought of nothing but an accommodation with the Pope,
and letting fall his grand designs obliged likewise all the Bishops of his
Party to do the same: So that the Legates, and other Persons dependants of the
Court of Rome, remaining Masters in the Council procured many things to be
passed there according to their own desires and intentions.

About this time began the contest for Precedence between the Ambassadors
France, and of Spain, wherein it may be truly said the Pope did not preserve
the right of France in its entire. If we believe some, he was willing to foment
this dispute that he might have some color to break up the Council; which he
had thoughts to do several times before, because he could not govern them as he
desired. It had like to have fallen out now; the Ambassadors of France,
pickqued not against the Legates who depended on the will of the Pope, nor
against the Council which was not free, nor against the King of Spain and his
Ambassador, who maintained their Pretension; but against a particular man that
acted as Pope, and had intruded into Saint Peter's Chair by unlawful Cabals, and
an unworthy Traffic, of which they had undeniable Proofs, before them.
Nevertheless such as were sincere and well meaning men amongst them, moderating
this difference, found out an expedient to compose matters, but which in truth
did in some sort prejudice one advantage France had ever been in possession of:
But she knew how to recover her former right afterward, and to maintain it.

The Cardinal de Lorraine had now no other thought but to hasten the conclusion
France to settle the Affairs of his House. He went to wait on his Holiness at
Rome, with whom he had long and private Conferences; and after he came back to
Trent, he acted altogether in concert with the Legates. In so much as the said
grand Assembly, which during the space of twenty seven years, and under the
Pontificat of Five Popes, had been interrupted and resumed diverse times,
finally ended on the second day of December in the year 1563. To the
unexpressible satisfaction of his Holiness, who thereby was delivered of many
great fatigues, and far greater apprehensions of the diminution of his absolute
power.

The Decisions have been received in France as to the points of Faith, but not
those for Discipline, there being many that infringe the Rights of the Crown,
the Liberties of the Gallican Church, the authority of the secular Magistrate,
the Privileges of the Chapters and Communities, and diverse usages received in
the Kingdom: and if several of their Reiglements are practiced, it is not by
virtue of the Decrees of that Council, but of the Kings Ordonannces.

Calvinisme which the Edicts of King Francis I. and Henry II. had suppressed,
began to appear again publicly under the favor of those conjunctures we have
before specified. The Edict of July delivered them from the dangers of death;
the Colloquy of Poissy gave them confidence to Preach openly; the Edict of
January, the Liberty of Exercise; and the accident of Vassy, the occasion to
take up Arms.

From thence followed infinite Murders, Robberies, Destruction of Churches,
Burnings, Prophanations, and Sacrilegious Outrages. Those people enraged for
that they had burned so many of their Brethren, revenged it cruelly upon the to
wit, the destruction of the ancient Libraries belonging to Abbeys, where Church.
there were inestimable Treasures for History, and for the works of Antiquity.

The Clergy in these Wars sustained likewise great damage in their Temporal
Estates; for besides that the Huguenots invaded them in many places, the Kings
also constrained them four or five several times to alienate much Lands for
great Sums of Money to be employed toward the expenses of their War, and gave
them so short a time that they were forced to sell at a very mean rate. Shall
we

When Francis Duke of Guise was Assassinated near Orleans, the Queen Mother and
the Huguenots being on either hand delivered from that approaching ruin,
wherewith he threatened them, were easily inclined to a Peace; The Queen and the
Prince her Prisoner treated it personally; the Edict was dispatched to Amboise
the nineteenth of March, 1563. This was the first of the seven granted them by
King Charles IX, and Henry III. for so often did they take up Arms, sometimes
being thereto necessitated, otherwhile out of choice and design. The Massacre
of Saint Bartholomew, which in all probability should have utterly quelled
them, did but rather encourage them to undergo all future extremities, since it
left them no other prospect to save themselves but by hazarding their All.

Now this first Peace in 1563. displeased his Holiness so much, that he
resolved to discharge his wrath upon those whom he believed to be the most
dangerous Enemies of the Catholic Religion in France, particularly upon Jane
d'Albret Queen of Navarre, who had banished it out of her Kingdom, and pulled
down all the Churches; and upon some Prelates who manifestly countenanced
Huguenotisme.

He had a mind to Summon the Queen before the Council, and to have made her
process at that grand Tribunal: but foreseeing the Emperors Ambassadors would
soon oppose it, as they had done in the like Case concerning the Queen of
England, he resolved to cite her to Rome, and caused the Citation to be posted
up at the Gates of Saint Peter's Church, and at the Inquisition, declaring, if
She did not make her appearance, that her Lands and Lordships should be
proscribed, and that She should personally incurr all the penalties provided
against Heretics.

As for the Prelates, he gave orders likewise to the Cardinals of the
Inquisition, to cite them to Rome upon a day certain, and if they appeared not
personally, to carry on their process to a definitive Sentence, which he would
pronounce in his secret Consistory. The Inquisitors, by virtue of this Command,
cited Odet de Coligny Chastillon, Cardinal Bishop of Beauvais, but who had
quitted his Purple to follow the fortune and opinions of his Brothers, and bare
the Title of Count de Beauvais. N. de Saint Romain, Archbishop of Aix, John de
Montluc, Bishop of Valence, John Anthony Carracciol of Troyes, John de
Barbanson of Pamiez, Charles Guillard of Chartres, Lewis d'Albret of Lascar,
Claude Reyne of Oleron, John de Saint Gelais of Vzez, and Francis de Nouilles
of Acqs. In the same number they might very justly have placed Peter du Val,
Bishop of Sees, who was of the same sentiments with Montluc.

After these Proceedings in the Court of Rome, the Pope pronounced the Sentence
against the Cardinal de Chastillon, whereby, he declared him an Heretic,
Seducer, Schismatic, Apostate, and one perjured, degraded him of his
Cardinalship deprived him of Offices and all Dignities, especially the
Bishopric of Beauvais which he held of the Holy See, and exposed him to all
the faithful that could apprehend him, and deliver him up to justice. The
Cardinal to show that he depended no way on the jurisdiction of the Pope,
resumed the Purple, and assisted, clothed in that manner, at the Act of the
Majority of the King in the Parliament of Rouen: whereat the Pope was so
incensed, that he publicly pronounced the Sentence, and caused it to be
affixed in the Markets of Rome, and afterward dispersed all over Europe.

But as for the Queen of Navarre, the Kings Council considering the
consequences of suffering a Princess to be dispoyled who was related to the
King, and that her Husband died fighting in defense of the Catholic Religion,
that her Case would be a prejudgment against all Crowned Heads, and that this
Chastisement Church.
would turn less to the advantage of Religion then to the profit of the King of
Spain, who from thence would take an opportunity to invade her Country, made
such effectual Remonstrances to the Pope by the mout h of Henry Clutin-Doysel
his Ambassador, that the Citation given against this Queen was revoked. As for
the Bishops, the Cardinal de Lorrain having likewise informed the Pope, that it
was against the Rights and usage of the Gallican Church, to suffer their
Process to be made at first instance at Rome, it stopped that business for th e
present; but five years after, Pius V. taking advantage of the weakness of the
Kingdom to extend his own Authority, pronounced a like Sentence against them as
that which had been thundered against the Cardinal de Chastillon, and caused it
to be published in France.

The Rebellion of the Huguenots produced the Faction of the League, the example
of their Confederations with Foreign Princes authorized also the measures
these took with Spain. The proceedings of both Parties were almost the same; at
first they affected a strict Discipline, then after a little while they fell
into all manner of Licentiousness; Their Pulpiteers, and their Libellers were
equally insolent and Factious; they employed the same Maxims, and used the same
Language and Arguments against Sovereign Authority which they attacked, and for
the Liberty of the Subjects, and of Conscience to those whom they Debauched. In
like manner both the one and the other, when they found they were in such
extremities they could not possibly extricate themselves by ordinary means,
suborned Assassines to help them out; but all who made use of those cursed
means, perished by a like fate: For as Poltrot murdered Francis Duke of Guise,
so the Son of that Duke killed the Admiral; the Quarante-cinq Forty five.
Massacred this Prince at Blois; and those whose hands were stained in his
Blood, did most of them come to a Bloody end; the wrath of Heaven punishing the
first by the second, and these by a third, who were so too by others. Which had
gone on to infinity, if the Clemency of King Henry IV. had not put a stop to
those Murders, which necessarily trod upon the heels of one another.

The first Lineaments of the League were traced in Guyenne, and in Languedoc,
during the first Civil War, when there was danger lest the Huguenots should
make themselves absolute Masters of those two large Provinces. In the year
1585. Humieres, with the Nobless in his Government of Vermandois, formed one at
Peronne; and Lewis de la Trimouille another in Poitou. The House of Guise
labored hard to collect, and join them all together, especially after the
Death of the Duke of Anjou: Not, perhaps that those Princes were then pushed on
with the ambition of usurping the Crown, as they have been accused, but because
they were so by the Natural desire of self-preservation. For the Physicians
assuring them that Henry III. could not live long, they justly feared when he
should be no more, to be crushed, either by his Favorites, betwixt whom he had
a mind to share his Kingdom, or by the Huguenots whose hatred against their
Family could not be satiated with less then the blood of all those Princes:
therefore it was they so provided and Fore-Arm'd themselves lest they should
remain exposed to the Mercy both of the one and the other. It is probable the
Forces they afterward got into their hands by the Confluence of such potent
Party's both from within and without the Kingdom, might inspire them with
thoughts that were both more high and more Criminal: though it would be yet a
much more easy task to find credible Conjectures, then an certai n or
convincing Proofs of it.

The Pope, the Sorbonne, the Jesuits, and almost all the new Religious Orders
contributed with all their might to form the League; But yet their Credit would
never have been sufficient to maintain it, if the People had not been so very
ill used as they then were, and if the burden of the Imposts, the Insolence of
the Favorites, the Weaknesses and scandalous Manners of Henry III. had not
given them both an aversion and contempt for the Government.

The Duke of Nevers began it out of zeal, and then disowned it out of
jealousy; Father Claude Matthieu a Jesuit was the first Courier for them:
Gregory XIII. fomented it, Sixtus V. approved and protected it. Some will needs
have, that the former contributed to the Conspiracy of Salcede: as the latter
excommunicated the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde Anno 1585. After
the Barricades he wrote to the Duke of Guise, comparing him to the Machabees,
and gave him notice he had Created a Legate, a Latere; (this was John Francis
Church.
Morosini) to whom the Cardinal de Bourbon and himself should communicate all
their designs. The Death of this Prince murdered at Blois, gave him much de
Guise, and the detention of the Archbishop of Lions furnished him with a
pretext of revenging it with the Anathemaes of the Church. His Monitory against
King Henry III. was published the four and twentieth of May, affixed in the
usual places at Rome the same Day, and on the Gates of the Cathedral Churches
of Meaux and Chartres the three and twentieth of June.

If the Relations we have of those times are true, this Pope was even
transported with joy upon the news he received of the Assassination of the said
Prince, and highly applauded the act of Jacques Clement in the Consistory,
comparing it to the most glorious Mysteries of Christianity, and to the
generosity of the most glorious and Illustrious Martyrs. He thought after this
change he was bound openly to take in hand the defense of Religion, and to
hinder Henry IV. from getting into the Throne so long as he remained out of the
Church: He therefore sent the Cardinal Caetan Legate a Latere, to the Duke of
Mayenne. Upon this occasion the Members of Parliament who were remaining still
at Paris, and those that had withdrawn themselves to Tours, being directly
opposite, acted after a quite different manner, but with alike heat, the one
for the Pope the others for the King.

The Sorbon refused nothing to the entreaties of the League, and the desires of
his Holiness in an Affair that concerned Religion. It is not unknown what Henry
III. and Henry IV. but when the latter of these two Kings was converted, and
withal become Master of Paris, they made one quite contrary in favor of him,
not waiting till he had received his absolution from Rome.

Gregory XIV. not well informed of the State of the League, engaged himself yet
farther then his Predecessor, he promised fifteen Thousand Crowns per Month to
maintain and defend the City of Paris, and sent an Army into France, but it
perished almost before it is entrance, and brought much more Scandal by the
Vices of their Country, then assistance to the Party.

The Prelates, to preserve their Revenues which indeed was the main thing
studied by most of them, and their greatest obligation, followed the Party that
Gregory by a Bull of the year 1591. commanded all those that then followed the
King, to forsake him upon pain of Excommunication; but the present evil
touching them more sensibly then his remoter Menaces, they would not obey his
Commands.

This Pope held the Sea but six Months; Innocent his Successor, but two;
Clement VIII. who was Elected afterward, did at first follow the Steps of
Gregory, and sent to Philip de Sega Bishop of Piacenza, (who was made Cardinal
by the said Gregory) to procure the Election of a Catholic King, This was in
the year Rome, made a Proposition for the creating a Patriarch for France; and
such as were the most powerful at Court, either upon the Score of favor or
merit, did second it with all their might out of the hopes they had to obtain
the said high dignity. But the Cardinal de Bourbon who had other thoughts for
his own grandeur, opposed it vigorously, under pretense that it would be a
means to Confirm the King in his Schism, and exasperate his Holiness the more.
So it was ordained, that the Kings nomination to Benefices should be Confirmed
by the Bishops, and that each of them should have the power of his Dispensation
in his Diocese as the Pope.

If we should judge of the intent of the Heads of the League, by the effect
produced, we might affirm it was good: for the Traverse and Troubles they gave
Henry IV. put him to such a plunge, that fearing worse might follow, he resumed
and embraced the Religion of his Ancestors to secure himself of the Crown.
Clement did for some time after keep the Doors of the Church shut against him;
but at length finding the weakness of the League, and the Ambition of the King
of Spain, opened them wide to him with great demonstration of kindness; But
Church.
not however without making all his efforts for augmenting the Authority of the

From that time France was troubled no move with those violent fits occasioned
by heats of Religion; although some relics still remained within her bowels of
the inflammations of the Holy League: as on the other side the Cabals and
Contrivances of the Huguenots gave continual Alarms and Apprehensions to King
Henry IV. We have told you he allowed them the exercise of their Religion, and
many other advantages by the Edict of Nantes.

Of the corruption of the two Parties, a third was generated named The
Politics, a People who seeming to profess the Religion of that Party they were
engaged in, yet having indeed none, since they placed and made it wholly
subservient in all things to Temporal Interests of State, were for that reason
more pernicious then all the Heretics.

During the greatest Heats of War for Religion, under the Reign of Charles IX.
and the beginning of that of Henry III. the Clergy had not the leisure to
Councils of the Gallican Church.
assemble any Provincial Councils, although the Church stood in much need of
them; but after the year 1580. there were held five or six by the Archbishops
assisted by their Suffragants. The Cardinal Charles de Bourbon Assembled one at
Rouen Anno 1581. Anthony Prevost Sansac held one at Bourdeaux the following
year: Simon de Maille one at Tours in 1583. Reinold de Beaune one at Bourges in
1584. Alexander Canigiani one at Aix Anno 1585. And Francis de Joyeuse Cardinal
one at Toulouze Anno 1590.

I do not reckon amongst these Assemblies neither the diverse Conferences
between the Catholic Doctors, and the Protestants, of which the most Famous,
as also the most pernicious, was the Colloquy of Poissy; nor even what they
call Assemblies of the Clergy of France, because the Form and Methods of
Proceedings, and the reasons of their Convocation differ very much from those
of Councils, though upon occasion they do sometimes treat of Discipline, and
other Matters Ecclesiastical. It is true that in all times the Prelates have
held such Assemblies, either by Order of the King, or by his leave, when it was
requisite for them so to do; but they were not held regularly, as they began to
be since that Sacred Order was obliged in a Contract of twelve Hundred Thousand
Livers of Rent to the Town Hall.
Hostel de Ville of Paris, and upon that Score to pay their Tenths punctually.
We may, in my Opinion, put that of Melun

The Remonstrances they made to the King by the Mouth first of Arnaud de Pontac
Bishop of Basas, then of Nicholas l'Anglier Bishop of Saint Brieuc's, were very
pressing for the discharging and taking of those Rents, for reception of the
Council of Trent, and the re-establishment of Elections. They could obtain
nothing as to the first; for the second they were promised it should be
considered in due time and place; but to the Third, the King replied very
roughly that he would do nothing in it, and asked whether they did not hold
their Bishoprics from him; To which some answered generously enough, that they
were ready to surrender them into his hands again, provided he would be pleased
to surrender that right to the Church according to the Holy Canons.

As to the remainder we may know by their Remonstrances what the disorders
Disorders in the Church.
of the Gallican Church then were; we find, how the Bishoprics, the Abbeys,
and Collegiate Churches were in the hands of Captains; That these words were
often heard in their Mouths, my Bishopric, my Abbey, my Priest, my Chanons,
my Monks. That by an Act the Grand Council Ordered the Moneys upon the Sale of
a Bishopric should be employed to pay the Debts of the Vendor; that in the
Kings Council an Abbey had been adjudged to a Lady, as being given her in
Dower, with an express Declaration, that after her Decease the Heirs should
enjoy it in equal proportions: That many Bishoprics were without Bishops, and
their Goods usurped by profane Persons: that of near eight hundred Abbeys, to
which the King named, there were not an hundred Titulary or Commendatory
Abbeys, and that of those the greater part did but only lend They were called
Custodines.
their names to others, who in effect enjoyed the Revenue: Thus were the
Churches without Pastors, the Monasteries without Religious Votaries, the
Votaries without Discipline, the Temples and Sacred Places fallen to ruin, and
converted to Dens of Thieves.

When the Clergy perceived they were thus left a prey to all the World, and
that the Licentiousness of a Civil War exposed their Goods to the first
occupier, the Catholics falling on them with no less greediness then the
Huguenots, they Church.
endeavored to reunite themselves for their own security, and the Bishops
were forced to reside in their Bishoprics, if not to feed their Flocks, yet at
least to preserve wherewith to feed themselves, Before this necessity, they ran
from them as dismal Solitudes; the divertisements of Paris, and Servitude at
Court, were a more pleasing exercise. History observes, how Anno 1560. John de
Montluc, Bishop of Valence, speaking his mind freely one day in the Kings
Council, complained how forty had been seen at once in Paris wallowing in all
manner of Debaucheries and Idleness. Therefore the Parliament enjoined them by
a Decree, to return to their Bishoprics and to perform their Duties, otherwise
they should be constrained to it by Seizure of their Goods and Equipage. But
perhaps considering after what way they lived there for the most part, their
absence might be less scandal to their Flocks, then their residence

In this Age were not made any new Orders of Monks; I shall however mention
that of the Minimes which began in the precedent: Saint Francis a Native of
Paolo in Calabria was the Institutor of it, and did plant it in France, at the
Religious Orders.
time he was called thither by King Lewis XI. Pope Sixtus IV. approved it in
1473. And Julius II. Confirmed it in 1506.

All those of the Mendicants renewing their Ancient Fervor and Discipline,
some sooner, others later, begot diverse Reformations. That of Saint Francis
which has ever been more abounding than any other in diversity of Habits and
Observations of Rules, produced three new Branches, that of the Capucines, that
of the Recollects, and that of the Piquepusses.

That of the Augustines did likewise produce one which is the Hermites of Saint
Augustine; as the Carmelites also produced the Congregation of those named
Deschaux. I pass by in silence that of the Dominicans or Jacobins Reformed, and
that of the Augustins deschaussez, or Barefooted, forasmuch as they belong to
the Seventeenth Age.

And to speak first of the Recollects, we must know that there having been at
diverse times many different Congregations in the Order of Saint Francis, who
vaunted each the observing the Rule of their Patriarch in its greatest purity
and simplicity, Leo X. had ordained that they should all be comprised and
reduced into one, under the name of the Reformed; That notwithstanding there
were yet many more of them who affected to be more rigid then the rest, and to
observe the Rule literally pursuant to the Declarations of Nicholas III. and
Clement V. That in the year 1531. Clement VIII. caused certain Convents to be
assigned, by the Superiors of the Order, where they placed those that had the
Spirit of Piety and Recollection; for which cause they were named Recollects.
The Cities of Tulle in Limosin, and of Murat in Awvergne, were the first in
France who allowed them any Convents, some Religious Friars having brought this
Reformation out of Italy about the year 1584. they had one at Paris; at present
they have in the several parts of the Kingdom near an Hundred and fifty, which
are divided into seven Provinces.

The Original of the Capucins, so named from the extraordinary form of their
Capuchon, Some had worn them before.
or Hood, was thus. In the year 1525. a Friar Minor Observantin named Matthew
de Basci of the Duchy of Spoleta, a Votary in the Convent de Montefalconi,
affirming that God had commanded him by a Vision to the exercise of a more
severe Poverty, and that he had showed him the very manner how St. Francis was
clothed, cut out a long pointed Hood or Capuche*, and such a Habit as the
Capucins now wear, and retired himself into Solitude, by permission of the
Pope. Some others, prompted by the same Spirit, joined with him, to the number
of twelve: The Duke of Florance gave them a Hermitage in his Territories, and
so by little and little his band increased to that number, that in the year
1528. Pope Clement VII. approved this Congregation under the name of Friars
Minors Capucines. Pope Paul III. confirmed it Anno 1536. with permission to
settle in any place, and gave them a Vicar General, and Officers and Superiors.
Such as have believed that Bernardinus Ochius, who Apostatized, and went over
into the Camp of the Philistines or Heretics, was the Institutor of so Holy a
Congregation, were very ill informed: perhaps the advantage he had of being
once their General, and one of the first and most noted of those that embraced
this Reformation, has caused the mistake. In the Reign of Charles IX. they
were received into France, and had first a Convent Church.
at Meudon which the Cardinal de Lorrain caused to be crected for them, and
another little one in the place called Piquepuz, where now are the Religious
Pentients of the Tiers, or third Order of Saint Francis. King Henry III.
transferred them from that place into a Convent he caused to be Built for them
in the Faux-burg Sanct Honor: They have nine Provinces in this Kingdom, and
above four hundred Convents.

The Tiers Order of St. Francis, named the Penitents, were in the beginning
only a Congregation of Secular Persons both of the one and the other Sex, but
some while after they were made regular. Now in the following Ages, being
extremely relaxed, one of the Society named Vincent Massart a Parisian,
undertook to Reform them about the year 1595. The first Convent of this
Reformation was built in the Village of Franconville, between Paris and
Pontoise; and the second in the place called Piquepuz, at the end of the
Faux-burg Saint Antoine, whence the vulgar has named them * Piquepusses. This
Order is divided in four Provinces, and has about threescore Convents.

Pope Eugenius IV. having thought fit to mitigate the Rule of the Carmelites;
the said mitigation having made them fall into a too great relaxation, Saint
Theresia, a Nun of this Order in the Convent of Auilla in Castille the place of
her Birth, brought them again to their former Austerity. She began with the
Sisters for whom she built a Monastery at Avile; Afterward she undertook to
restore the Men likewise, being assisted in this good work by two Religious
Carmelites, who had their first Convent near the same City. Pope Clement VIII.
separated them from the mitigated, Anno 1693. and allowed them to have their
Province apart, and to choose their Superiors amongst themselves, upon condition
however to acknowledge the General of the Order. They came not into France till
the year 1505. Their Convent in the Faux-bourg Saint Germain, the first that
ever they had in the Kingdom, was Built Anno 1611.

The Reformed of the Hermites of St. Augustine, who are called at Paris les
Petits Peers, (i.e. the Little Fathers) was instituted at the General Chapter
of that Order held at Madrid Anno 1588. From thence some went and settled
themselves in Italy, and from Italy six or Seven were brought into France in
the year 1595. by William d'Avencon Archbishop of Embrun who loged them at the
Priory of Villars Benoist in Dauphine. They were not Established at Paris till
the year 1609. first in the Faux-burg St. Germain, where Queen Margaret Ordered
a Convent to be erected for them, which they left to the Augustines Reformed
who hold it still; then near the Gate Montmarte where they have built another.

The great care which the Friars De la Charity took by receiving in, as also
tending and administering to the Sick, deserves we should make mention of them.
The Blessed Ican de Dien, or John of God.
Native of the Diocese of Evora in Portugal, a simple Man without Learning, but
inflamed with a Charitable zeal toward helping the poor sick, began this
Congregation in Spain about the year 1570. He went daily about the Streets, and
into many Houses, exhorting all good Christians to bestow their Alms, and
having frequently these words in his mouth, Do good Brethren whilst you have
the time, for which cause in Italy they named these Votaries, Fat ben
Fratelli. Pious V. Confirmed it by his Bull of the first of January 1572.
Clement VIII. reformed it, and Paul V. made it a Religious Order, obliging them
to the three usual Vows, and a special fourth, which is to tend the sick,
under the dependence notwithstanding, and under the Correction of the
Ordinaries.

The Congregation of Feuillents sprung from the Order of the Cistertians, and
began not till the year 1586* in the Abbey of Feuillents which is in the
Diocese of Rieux, within six Leagues of Toulouze. It had for Author John de la
Barriere, who being Abbot Commendatary of that place, had taken on him the
Habit of a Friar, Sixtus V. approved it, Clement VIII. and Paul V. allowed them
particular Superiors. King Henry III. Founded a Convent for them in the
Fauxbourg Saint Honor, near the Garden of the Tuilleries, and Anno 1587. John
de la Barriere brought thither threescore of his Friars. They went then all
barefooted, but have since worn Sandals, or Galochees; They have but three
Prvinces in France, and some thirty Monasteries.

(...) Regulars.
As every Age and every Generation has its particular gusto and productions,
this sixteenth Century was very fertile in Congregations of Clerc's Regulars,
who are a kind of midling species between Monks and Priests. Such are those of
the Theatins, the Somasques, the Clerc's Minors, the Ministers of the
Infirmaries, Church.
the Schools of Piety, the Clerc's Regulars of Saint Paul, called Barnabites,
the Oratorians of Rome, and the Jesuits, this last much more potent and of
greater extent then all the rest together. I shall observe, en passant, that
one of these Fathers, a man very devout, named John Leon, a Flemming by Birth,
and Regent in the lower Classes of their College at Rome, assembling those
Scholars who were desirous to add Piety to Erudition, gave beginning to their
Congregation of the Virgin; which has been found so good and useful, that they
have not only made of them for their Scholars, but also for the honester sort
of Citizens, and even in some places for Artisans.

Of all the Clerc's Regulars, none have come into France but the Jesuits, the
Barnabites, and the Theatins. These last we not established till in our time,
under the Regency of Queen Anne of Austria. It is well known that Saint
Ignatius was Institutor of the Company of Jesus, how it began in the year 1534.
and how it was approved by Pope Paul III. and by his Successors. We may
elsewhere relate upon what conditions they were admitted into France, the
oppositions formed against their reception and the great and frequent Traverses
they have undergone diverse times. It shall suffice at this moment to say, that
they have filled the whole Earth with the loud report of their names, and the
Books they have composed both for the advancement of Religion, and of all
polite Learning.

The Barnabites had been wished for in France by King Henry IV. to have
employed them for the Instruction of Youth, and to have substituted them in
place of the Jesuits, after they were empelled. They came not then, but about
six years after their General sent some of his Order to labor for the
Conversion of Bearn* yet did not they take root in this Kingdom till a long
time afterward: they have here fifteen or sixteen houses, in most of which
they have Colleges to teach all manner of good Learning. Their first
establishment was at Montargis Anno 1620. And two years after they had one at
Paris near the Palace. Their Congregation took Birth at Milan, and was
instituted by three Gentlemen, two of that City, another of Cremona. They went
by the name of Barnabites, because they established themselves in Barnaby's,
and the Church they built there was Consecrated to God under the name of that
great Apostle.

Religious Orders of Women
Let us now speak of the Religious Orders of the other Sex. We omitted in the
end of the last Age, how in Anno 1594. John Ti^^eran a Cordelier, having moved
and even melted the most obdurate hearts, and converted many Ladies of Pleasure
by his Preaching, founded an Order Des Filles Repenties Or Penitent Whores.
to the honor of Saint Magdalene, which was to receive such who by the Mercies
of God should be brought to forsake and abhor their sins. For which reason they
were called Penitents. There came in at the very first two hundred and twenty:
and as the number increased so much, that the Revenue was not sufficient, they
allowed many to go about the Town, to crave the Alms of the Charitable and
well disposed people. Which lasted till the year 1550. when by reason of many
inconveniences, they were shut up in a most strict confinement. Lewis Duke of
Orleans, who was afterward King, gave them his Hostel of Orleans At present
the Hostel de Soissions.
near Saint Eustache, where they remained till Anno 1572. that Queen Catherine
dislodged them to build a Palace there, and transferred them to the Chapel
Saint George, in the Street Saint Denis, which till then belonged to the Order
of Saint Magloire.

Queen Jane Daughter of King Lewis XI. being parted from King Lewis XII. her
Husband, and retired to the City of Bourges, had now no further thoughts or
desire of pleasing any but him who does bestow the Celestial Crowns of
Eternity; and since she could not lose her Virginity to become the Mother a
Daufin would needs make her self the Mother of an infinite Company of Virgins
by preserving it. She therefore instituted the Order of the Annunciation, or
the Annunciades, which she put under the direction of the Friars Minors
Observantines The Rule is not taken either from that of Saint Bennet, nor that
of Saint Augustine, nor any other; but formed of the ten Virtues of the Holy
Virgin, which are Chastity, Prudence, Humility, Truth, Devotion, Obedience,
Poverty, Patience, Charity and Compassion. The Habit is singular, the Vail
black, the Mantle white, the Scapular red, the Robe gray, and a Cord for a
Girdle. There are diverse Monasteries of them in France and in the Low Countries.

Church.
We must not confound this Order with that of the Celestial Annunciades, the
institution whereof came from Genoa, and did not begin till the year 1604* we
shall make mention of it in due time and place.

The Rule of the she Capucines is almost the same with that of the Men, and
their Institution almost as ancient: The Duchess of Mercaeur laid the first
Stone for the Foundation of their Convent at Paris in the year 1604. pursuant
to the intentions of Queen Louisa her Mother in Law, who by Will left wherewith
to build it, for those Sisters.

The first Convent of the she Feuillantines, was established near Toulouze
about the year 1590. then transferred to Toulouse it self. Antoinetta d'Orleans
Widow of Charles de Gondy, Marquess of Belle-Isle, put her self into it, Anno
1599.

The Pope drew her thence to give her the Government of the Abbey Font-Evrard;
and some years after she instituted the Congregation of the Benedictines under
the Title of Saint Mary of Calvary, and Saint Scholastique.

As for the Sister Carmelites, their reform not being brought out of Spain in
above forty years after their first beginning, it happened that Anno 1604. Peter
de Berulle who was yet but a simple Priest, though one that had rare natural
Talents, and the particular favor of Heaven, took the pains to go into that
Country, and to bring thence some Scions of that most happy Nursery to graft
and plant in France, so that at present there are nine and fifty Monasteries of
them.

Military Orders.
King Henry III. as we have already mentioned, established the Order of the
Holy Ghost Anno 1597. and Henry IV. that of Nostre-Dame du Mont-Carmel Anno
1607. The Pope gave him his Bulls for the Erection of it the same year; and the
following others whereby he united it with that of Saint Lazarus. We must note,
touching this last, that at the time when the Western Christians held the Holy
Land, besides the orders of the Templers, the Teutonick Knights, and the
Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, there was likewise one established under
the Title of Saint Lazarus, who received Pilgrims into their Houses founded for
that purpose, conducted them in their Journeys, and defended them against the
Mahometans: insomuch that the Popes gave them great Privileges, as other
Princes gave them great Possessions. Lewis VII. Anno 1154. bestowed the Lands
of Boigny near Orleans upon them. These Knights there seated themselves after
the Christians were beaten out of the Holy Land, kept their Titles, and always
held their Assemblies in that place.

Now being become useless, they also came to be despised, so that the Knights
of Saint John's easily obtained the suppression of that Order and the Uniting of
it to their own from Innocent VIII. but those in France having made complaint
to the Parliament, it was ordained they should be kept separate from all other.
And in effect they have always had their grand Masters. Pius IV. who was ever
very curious for the adorning his Family with fair Titles, gave the said Honor
of great Master (of those in Italy only) to Joannot de Chastillon, his Kinsman;
This Joannot being dead in the year 1572. Pope Gregory XIII. left it wholly to
the Duke Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, and to all his Successors, and joined this
Order to that of Saint Maurice, which he instituted in favor of that Prince.
But as that concerned not France, Aymar de Chattes Knight of Malta, had a
desire to get it restored, and revived here that he might be graced with that
dignity; Philibert de Nerestang, a Gentleman of extraordinary virtue, and
Captain of the Guards du Corpse, succeeded him in the same design, and so
effectually and happily employed the power and interest of Henry IV, that he
made him Great Master in the year 1608. and obtained a very advantageous Bull
of the Pope for the said Order; which is particular for the French only, as
that of Saint Maurice and of Saint Lazarus is for those beyond the Alps. The
Knights amongst other Privileges, have the liberty to marry, and hold Pensions
of Consistorial Benefices.

Illustrious Prelates.
I do not know that the Gallican Church produced many Prelates in this Age, who
increased the Catalogue of Saints; but she had many that were very illustrious,
some for their Learning, others for the management of Affairs as well Spiritual
as Temporal, and diverse both for the one and the other. The first and the most
eminent of them all, was George de Amboise Cardinal, a wise Prelate, a generous
able and honest Minister, and a Cardinal with but one Benefice; who governed
his almost absolute power by rules of justice, and founded the Kings interest
upon the public good.

Church.
The Popes never made so many Cardinals in France as during this Age,
particularly under the Reigns of Francis I. and Henry II. There were three in
the House of Bourbon, Lewis Son of Francis Duke of Vendosme, Charles Brother of
Anthony King of Navarre, and another Charles Son of Lewis Prince of Conde. The
first was Archbishop of Sens: the other two of Rouen: There were five of the
House of Lorrain: The first was John Bishop of Mets, who kept up the dignity of
his Birth at a very great height, and made it appear he was a Prince by such
liberalities as amounted even to profusion. The second was Charles Archbishop
of Reims. He was Nephew of the said John, and Brother of Francis Duke of Guise.
Heaven, Fortune and his Birth had denied him nothing that was requisite to the
making up of a great Man; the learned of his time, said of him, that he was the
Mercury of France, as his Brother was the Mars; but many Men believed, he would
have been much greater yet, had he been less ambitious and less turbulent. The
third was Lewis Brother of this Charles, who was called the Cardinal de Guise
Archbishop of Sens.

The fourth, another Lewis also Archbishop of Reims, as Charles his Uncle had
been; he was Murdered at Blois with Henry Duke of Guise his Brother: And the
fifth, Charles called the Cardinal of Vaudemont, Brother of the Queen Louisa.
There were others likewise of great Birth, one of the House of Luxembourg,
which was Philip Bishop of Man's: one of the House of Longueville; i. e. John
Bishop of Orleans: one of the House of Albret; which was Amanjeu Bishop of
Lascar: one of the House of Gramont, who was Bishop of Poitiers, then
Archbishop of Toulouze, named Gabriel: one of the House of Strozzi (he was
called Lawrence) Bishop of Beziers: one of the House of Joyeuse, this was
Francis Archbishop of Toulouze; he lived in the Reigns of Henry III. and Henry
IV. and Strozzi in the time of Charles IX.

Almost all the rest, to the number of near twenty, were likewise persons of
Quality, and attained to this eminent dignity, some, though but very few, by
their merit only, as John du Bellay Bishop of Paris, and George d'Armagnac, Son
of Peter, Baron of Caussade, Bastard of Charles last Earl of Armagnac: the most
part by knowing how to make their Court, or because allied to those in favor:
as Philip de la Chamber; Adrian de Goussier Boissy, Brother of Arthur Grand
Maistre of the Kings Household; John le Veneur, Bishop of Lisieux, and Grand
Almoner of France; James d'Annebault, Brother to the Admiral of that name;
Claude de Longvic Givry, Bishop of Poitiers; Anthony Sanguin He was Nephew to
the Duchess d'Estampes.,
whom they called the Cardinal de Meudon; Odet de Chastillon, Nephew of the
Connestable de Montmorency; and George de Amboise, second of that name,
likewise Archbishop of Rouen, as his Uncle was. As for Peter de Gondy, Son of
the Marshall de Raise, and Bishop of Paris, he was Created Cardinal upon the
recommendation of Queen Catherine; as also Rene de Birague a Gentleman of
Milan, who together with this dignity he had the Office of Chancellor of France.

There were some others of meaner Birth, who arrived at this dignity by means
of their employments in the Finances, or in the Law, as Anthony Duprat, John
Bertrandi, and Philip Babou la Bourdaisiere.

But it was neither Blood, nor favor that clothed Arnold Dossat, and Jacques
Davy du Perron with the sacred Purple, it was the recompense of their services,
of their great capacity, and of their rare erudition. Dossat was but the Son of
a Peasant in the Diocese of Auch; and du Perron of a Huguenot Minister of the
lower Normandy, but a Gentleman. We have known a Natural Son of the first, who
died Curate of Mesnil-Aubry, within four Leagues of Paris.

Bishops.
There was likewise a great number of Illustrious Bishops, concerning whose
promotion one may say the same things as have been hinted of that of the
Cardinals. I observe at Sisteron, Lawrence Bureau an excellent Preacher for
those times; he had been a Religious Carmelite, and Confessor to King Charles
VIII. and Lewis XII. At Treguier, John du Callouet a famous Doctor in the Civil
and Canon Law: he died Anno 1504. At Lucon, Peter de Sacierge, whom Lewis XII.
made Chancellor and President of Milan. At Marceilles, Claude de Seissel a
Savoyard by Birth, whose Writings are very well worthy to be read, being every
Turin. At Renes Bernard Bochetel, who served as Secretary to the Kings Church.
Lewis XII. and Francis I. but in fine, touched with some remorse of
Conscience, or by some other motive, he quitted his Bishopric, whose functions
in effect are Paris, then at Sens, Stephen Poncher a Tourengeau by Birth, who
had been President in Parliament, Chancellor of Milan, and of the Kings Order,
and Keeper of the Seals of France. Under Francis I. at Riez, then at Vence, and
afterward at Aurenches, Robert Cenault Or Robertus Cenalis.
, at Mascon, Peter Castellan Great Almoner of France. And at Maguelone, William
Pelicier. These three were raised upon the consideration of their Learning;
Castellan was he who with Budeus put the brave King Francis upon the design of
instituting the Regis Professors at Paris, and who chose the first, whereof
Pelicier was one. In the time of Henry II. I find at Lavaur, Peter Danez whom
Francis I. had called from the University of Bourges where he professed the
Greek Tongue, to make him Tutor to his Daufin; And at Vienne, Charles de
Marillac, who died in the year 1560. for the great fear he had le^t the House
of Guise, against whom he had let his Tongue ramble too freely, should draw him
within the Noose and Guilt of Heresy, or Accuse him of some Conspiracy.

In the time of Charles IX, and Henry III. there was at Man's, Charles de
Angennes Rambouillet, in whose praise it is said, that during his Nine and
twenty years holding that See, he never gave one Cure, but upon the score of
Merit and Integrity, having for that purpose made a Register of all those whom
he thought most deserving and capable. At Nevers, Arnold Sorbin, who was
Surnamed de Saint Foy Or Saint Faiths.
, because he had been Curate of a Parish so named; he passed for a great Divine
and a very Eloquent Preacher. At Orleans, John de Morvillier, Native of the
City of Blois; Queen Catherine made him one of the King's Council, where he was
ever opposed to the Chancellor de l'Hospital, because he aspired to get the
Seals, as in effect he did. At Auxerre, James Amiot, Native of Melun, of very
mean Extraction, but a man of exquisite Literature: Henry II. made him
Preceptor to his Children, and Abbot of Bellosane; afterward Charles IX. one
of his Disciples gave him the Bishopric of Auxerre. At Valence, John de
Montluc, who was too wavering in the Faith, though very Learned, and withal a
very dexterous Negociator. At Tours, Simon de Maille, a profound Theologer and
well read in the Fathers, who was taken out of the Order of the Cistertians
where he was Abbot, to be promoted to an Archbishopric. At Air, Francis de
Foix Candale, Uncle of the Duke d'Espernon's Wife, thoroughly versed in Humane
Learning, in the Philosophy of Trismegistus and of Plato, and in Chemistry. At
Chaalons, Pontus de Thiard, both Poet and Mathematician, a singular Talent! who
died Aged Fourscore and four years. At Evreux, Claude de Saints, a vehement
Preacher, and a Divine of great Reputation: and at Senlis, William Rose, who
had likewise made himself very famous by his Sermons. These two were Passionate
Leaguers: Saints was taken in Louviers, with the City, by the Royalists, Anno
1591. and carried to Caen, where he died in Prison, having ran great hazard of
making his Exit on a Scaffold for his Writing and Preaching against Henry III.
Rose had many shocks to undergo likewise after the Decadence of the League; but
he at length did fortunately extricate himself, and exchanged his Bishopric
with him of Auxerre. At Clermont, was Bishop Anthony de Saint Nectaire, who
employed himself much in the intrigues of Catherine de Medicis; And at Sees,
Peter du Val, in whose time the Chanons of his Church resumed their secular
Habits, as they did during this Age in many other Cathedrals. The desire of a
Reformation made him lean too much toward the Party of the pretended Reformed.
Lewis Moulinet his Nephew was his Successor. It is observed of him, a rare
example of a true Pastor! that during his holding that See for Twenty seven
years together, he was never but one Six Months absent from his Bishopric or
Diocese, showing by this example, that a good Bishop takes delight in his
residence, as the evil one both esteems and finds it his Pain and Punishment.

Peter d'Espinac, and Reinold de Beaulne: the first Archbishop of Lions, and
the second of Bourges, both Men of great Eloquence, and far greater intrigue;
Espinac of the Party for the League, and Beaulne of that for the King; they
both lived a good while in the Reign of Henry IV.

Under whom neither must we forget Alfonso d'Elbene Bishop of Alby, nor Arnold
de Pontac, and Nicholas l'Angelier generous Defenders of the Rights, and the
Liberty of the Church, this being Bishop of Saint Brieuc, the other of Bazas;
nor Rene Benoist, who being Curate of Saint Eustache at Paris, greatly
contributed Church.
to the Conversion of King Henry IV. and the bringing him into the pale and
bosom of the Church, without staying for any Orders from Rome. The said Prince
chose him for his Confessor, and named him to the Bishopric of Troyes: It is
true he could not obtain the Bulls for it, but we may boldly say he deserved
them, were it but only for those very reasons for which they were denied him.

Bishops who fell into heresit.
We ought not to give the Name of Bishops to those who fell into the Errors of
the Sectaries, and whom by the Pope were excommunicated for the same, as we
have before mentioned. Yet was there but one of those Ten, that embraced
Calvinisme; namely John Caracciol Son of John Prince of Malfy, Bishop of
Troyes, who Anno 1565. abandoned his Bishopric to take a Wife. It is true that
about Six years before, viz. in the year 1559. James Spifame had quitted his
Episcopal See of Nevers to Marry and retire to Geneva; but if his example did
show the way to Caracciol, certainly his unfortunate end ought as much again to
have detered him: for upon I know not what suspicion they had of him in that
City, he was accused of Adultery, and they caused his Head to be cut off for
that pretended Crime.

Even from the Fourteenth Age, Learning did begin to re-flourish, and as we may
say, to emit some Infant, yet lively beams, principally in Italy. In proportion
as they discovered its beauty and luster, it inflamed the Love and Curiosity of
the Ingenious, who being nauseated with the Barbarity of the Schools, and the
Fopperies and Ergotismes, wherewith the Authors of those times were stuffed,
applied themselves to search after the Greek and Latin Authors of the more
polite Ages, in the select and best furnished Libraries, and rescuing them out
of the rubbish and dust, wherein they had been so long Buried, made them more
Public and communicable to the World by the help of Printing.

They then studied to speak Greek and Latin as exquisitely, as in the times of
the Republic of Athens, and the Empire of Augustus: Those that were inclined
to the Study of Holy Writ, endeavored likewise to attain some Knowledge and
Perfection in the Hebrew Tongue, without which it is almost impossible thoroughly
to understand the Books of the Old Testament; and at the same time the
curiosity of such as traveled into the Countries of the Levant, brought back
with them an itch or desire of learning the Oriental Languages, especially the
Arabian, of which the Turkish is an Idiom. True it is that these Learned Men
though able to attain to the greatest purity of Foreign Tongues, could not give
it to the French; on the contrary, they made it more harsh and more obscure
than it was before, perplexing it with a multitude of tedious Allegations,
false Phrases, Transpositions, and broken Latin, from all which Sophistication,
the Age we now live in, has had much ado to Purge and to refine it.

King Charles VIII. loved all the Noble Arts, but had not time to Cultivate and
to improve them. Lewis XII. favored them, had an esteem for, and generosity
toward the Learned, and caused search to be made after the Manuscripts of
ancient Authors, whereof he gathered and made up a curious Library. Francis I.
surpassed him very much in that noble Passion, as he surpassed all the Princes
of his time in Magnificence and in liberality. His Reign, to say all in a word,
was the Reign of Men of Learning; he had an incredible multitude of them, and
those truly accomplished and Skilful in the Tongues, in the Knowledge of
Antiquity, in the Law, in Philosophy, and Physic; as also in the Mathematics
and Astrology. And indeed, that great Prince did so generously favor them with
his Gratifications, with the noblest Employments in all his Affairs, and his
personal familiarity, that it seemed, as he would share his State and Grandeur
with them.

A Volume would not suffice to contain but the names only, and almost all of
them were so excelling, each in his way, that whosoever should undertake to
select some particular ones out of those Miriads, must run the hazard both of
doing wrong to his own Judgment, and to the Merits of those whose Names he
should omit. I shall observe only, that the Universities abounded with very
learned Professors in Philosophy, and in Humanity; That as much may be said of
the Facult* Medicina, which till then had but an imperfect knowledge of the
Doctrines of the Divine Hippocrates: That that of Theology had more learned
Doctors than ever Church.
before, though not perhaps so clear and so enlightened for the Positive, as we
find now in our days; That all the grand Magistracies were supplied and filled
with Persons both profound in Science, and most of them of singular Virtues;
and that there never was more of Jurisprudence in the Parliaments and at the
Bar, nor greater Capacity and solid Reasonings amongst the Advocates.

I shall only add, that the French Poesy, which till this time was almost
nothing but a gross gingling paltry way of Rhiming, without either much of Art
or Fancy, began to be stripped of its Pyed-Coat, and to deck it self with the
real Ornaments of Antiquity: But yet even those who labored to restore it to
that Harmonious Composition, invented for no other end but to elevate the Mind
and Thoughts to things Noble and Sublime, did most unhappily pervert the same
by the ill use they made thereof. For studying by a Criminal complaisance to
flatter the Vanity and lascivious Passions of the Court, they Metamorphosed, if
I may so speak, the Muses into Sirenes, and debased that Noble Offspring of
Heaven, to somewhat of more shameful and sordid than either Mendicity or
Slavery.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE KINGS OF FRANCE Contained in this FIRST PART.
PHARAMOND, King I. Page 6 About the year 418. CLODION the Hairy, King II. 8
Anno 428. MEROVEUS, or MEROVEC, King III. From whom the Kings of the First Race
have taken the name of MEROVIGNIANS. Anno 448. 10 CHILDERIC, King IV. 12 Anno
458. CLOVIS, King V. 14 Toward the end of the year 481. CHILDEBRT I. King VI.
20 Anno 511. in December. CLOTAIR I. King VII. 28 Anno 558. CHEREBRT, King
VIII. 29 Anno 561. CHILPERIC, King IX. 31 Anno 570. CLOTAIR II. King X. 37 584,
in October. DAGOBERT I. King XI. 54 Anno 628. CLOVIS II. King XII. 58 Anno 638.
CLOTAIR III. King XIII. 62 Anno 655. CHILDERIC II. King XIV. 64 Anno 668.
THIERRY I. King XV. 67 Anno 674. CLOVIS III. King XVI. 71 About the year 691.
CHILDEBERT II. or the Young, King XVII. 72 About the year 695. DAGOBERT II. or
the Young, King XVIII. 77 Anno 711. CHILPERIC II. King XIX 79 Anno 716. THIERRY
II. called de Chelles, King XX. 81 About the year 721, or 22. INTERREGNUM. 83
739. CHILDERIC III. called the Senceless, or Witl^^s, King XXI. 86 Anno 743.
Second Race of Kings who have Reigned in France, and are named CARLIANS, or
CAROLOVINIANS.
Anno 752. PEPIN, named the Brief, King XXII. 90 Anno 768. about the end of
September. CHARLES I. called the Great, or Charlemain, King XXIII. 96 Anno 814,
in February. LOUIS I. called the Debonnaire, or Pious, King XXIV. Page 120 Anno
840, in June. CHARLES II. surnamed the Bald, King XXV. 131 Anno 877. LOUIS II.
surnamed the Stammerer, King XXVI. 148 Anno 879, in April. LOUIS III. and
CARLOMAN, King XXVII. 150 Anno 884. CHARLES III. called Crassus, or the Fat,
King XXVIII. 154 Anno 888. EUDES, King XXIX. 157 Anno 893. CHARLES, called the
Simple, King XXX. 158 Anno 923, in July. RODOLPH, King XXXI. 167 Anno 936, in
January. LOUIS IV. called Tr^nsmarine, King XXXII. 175 Anno 954, in October.
LOTAIRE, King XXXIII. 183 Anno 986, in March. LOUIS the Slothful, King XXXIV.
198
Third Race of the Kings of France, called the CAPETINE Line, or of the CAPETS.
987. in June. HUHG CAPET, King XXXV. 201 Anno 996. ROBERT, King XXXVI. 208
Anno 1033, in July. HENRY I. King XXXVII. 214 Anno 1060. PHILIP I. King
XXXVIII. 220 Anno 1108, in July. LEWIS the Gross, King XXXIX. 234 1137, in
August. LEWIS called the Young, King XL. 242 1180, in September. PHILIP II.
surnamed Augustus, King XLI. 252 Anno 1223, in July. LEWIS VIII. surnamed the
Lion, King XLII. 295 Anno 1226, in November. SAINT LEWIS, King XLIII. 293 1270,
in August. PHILIP III. surnamed the Hardy, King XLIV. 314 1285, in October.
PHILIP IV. surnamed the Fair, King XLV. 322 LEWIS X. called Hutin, King XLVI.
344 1316. REGENCY without a King for five Months. 345
A TABLE Of the Principal Matters contained in this FIRST TOME.
Abbeys and Monasteries built and founded in great numbers in France. Page 73,
74, 75 Abbeys and Bishoprics during the Eighth Age. 115 Peter Abailard is
condemned by the Council of Sens, and seized at Clugny. 276 Abderame marches
through Aquitania Tertia, forces and sacks the City of Bourdeaux. 81 Is
vanquished and slain in Battle near Tours. 82 Abbots refuse obedience to the
Bishops. 283 Abbots of the Order of St. Bennet take the Ornaments of Bishops.
ibid. The humble and truly Religious Friars refuse them. ibid. Abbot of St.
Riquier the first Friar that dared to Confess and preach without permission of
the Ordinary. 287 Abrodites tributaries to the French. 123 Abulas King of the
Moors. 221 Abuses, turned to advantage of the Popes. 283 Acre, or Ptolemais, a
Town and Seaport of Syria, assaulted and forced from the Christians. 324
Adalgise, Son of Didier, endeavors in vain to recover the Kingdom of Lombardy.
100, 103 His death. ibid. Adelbert Marquess of Yvree. 162 Adelbert Count de la
March and Perigord. 203 Adeleida, or Alix second Wife of Louis the Stammerer.
149 Adeleida, Widow of Lotaire King of Italy, sought in Marriage by Berenger
181 Marries Otho King of Germany and Lorraine, ibid. Adeleida, Daughter of
Robert, Espouses the Earl of Flanders. 213 Adolphus Earl of Nassaw elected
Emperor Page 324 He sends to defy the King of France in a haughty manner. 325
Is deposed, his death. 327 Adrian, Pope. 142 Concerns himself in the difference
of Lorraine between Charles the Bald and the Emperor Lewis. 143 Adultery
severely punished. 336 Aetius, General of the Romans in Gaul, defeats Attila
King of the Huns in Battle, and chaces him. 10 His death. 11 Agnes of France,
Married to Robert Duke of Normandy. 313 Aimer Earl of Poitiers. 158 Aix la
Chappelle built by Charlemain. 105 The Alani and other barbarous People, make
an irruption amongst the Gauls, then pass into Spain. 3 Alain of Bretagne
defeats and cuts the N^rmans in pieces. 1^7 Alain, called Twistbeard, Duke of
Bretagne, his death, his Children. 184 Alain Fergeant Duke of Bretagne, his
death. 237 Alaric King of the Visigoths besieges, and takes Rome, his death. 3
St. Albert Bishop of Liege, his History. 292 Albert Archduke of Austria
removes ^i; Corpse from Reims by permission of Lewis XIII. ib^d. Albert Duke of
Austria is elected Emperor. 327 He renews the Alliance of the Empire with
France. 3^8 His death. 334 Albigenses Heretics, their Original. 277 Are
condemned. ib^d. Rejected the New Testament. ibid. Albon de Fleury. 205 Aletea,
Pa^rician, punished with death. 45 Alexander III. Pope, his feigned modesty
cause of a Schism. 278 His Election confirmed by the Gallican Church, as also
by the Anglicane. ibid. Seeks an Asylum in France. ibid. An Emperor and a
pretended Pope at his Feet, who had disputed that dignity with him. 274
Alexander III. King of Scotland, his death. 323 Alsiel Sultan of Egypt. 324
Alphonso I. Duke of Portugal, proclaimed King, who was the first King of
Portugal. 243 Alphonso Count of Toulouze makes a Voyage to the Holy Land, his
death. 245 Alphonso Count of Poitou. 297 He Marries the Daughter of the Count
de Toulouze. 299 Honored with the Girdle of Knighthood. 302 Leads a
re-inforcement of Croisez, or Crossed to St. Lewis in the East. 305, 306
Alphonso X. King of Castille, elected Emperor. 307 He gives up his right to the
Empire. 316 Alphonso Brother of St. Lewis, his death. 312, 315. Alphonso King
of Castille almost wholly dispossessed of his Estates, his death. 320 Alphonso
King of Arragon. 321 Alphonso of Castille, named de la Cerde, his death. 352
Alexis, Son of Isaac Emperor of the East. 261 His unfortunate end. 262 Alienor,
Wife of King Lewis the Young. 240 Alienor, Daughter of William IX. Duke of
Aquitain, Marries Lewis the Young. 241 Repudiated by the King, she Marries
Henry Duke of Normandy, and Presumptive King of England. 246 Alix Queen of
Cyprus. 259 Alix Pernelle Daughter of King Lewis the Gross. 241 Alix third Wife
of Lewis the Young. 248 Alix of France betroathed to Richard of England, cause
of the quarrel between him and the Father in Law. 255 Alix of Champagne Regent
of the Kingdom. 255 Alliance by Marriage between the Kings of France and
England. 247 Alliance of France confirmed with the Emperor Frederic. 299
Alliance of Scotland with France. 325 Alliance of the Empire renewed with
France. 328 Alliance of Scotland renewed with France. 348 Amalaric King of the
Visigoths. 22 Amalasunta cause of the ruin of the Ostrogoths. 24 Amaury, Count
de Montfort made Constable. 295 Arnold Amaulry Inquisitor against the
Albigeois. 239 Amaulry, or Aimery, Doctor of Paris, teaches a new and
scandalous Doctrine 337 Amee the Great, Count of Savoy and Prince of the
Empire, augments his Estate by several Seigneuries. 345 Of the St. Ampoule, or
Holy Oil. 15 Anaclet, Antipope. 239 Angers taken by the Normans and retaken.
144 Anjou divided into two Counties. 141 Anne Widow of King Henry Marries again
the Count de Crespy. 219 Anseau de Garlande great Seneschal or Dapifer. 239
Ansegise Archbishop of Sens. 145 Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury banished. 289
St. Anselme writes a Treatise of the Incarnation. ibid. Ansgard, Wife of Lewis
the Stammerer. 149 St. Anthony, the establishment of his Order in France. 233
Apostolic Heretics. 276 Appeals to the Court of Rome. 51 Archembault Lord of
Bourbon. 236 Archbishops, at what times the Metropolitans took that Title. 114
Archbishop of Reims, a great debate between the Bishops of France, between
Artold and Hugh Son of Hebert Count of Vermandois. 206 Of the same again
between Arnold de Reims, and Gerbert. 206, 207 Archbishop of Rouen named
Primate of Normandy. 232 Aribert King of a part of Aquitain. 54 His death. 55
Arles, of the Ancient Rights and Preheminencies of its Archbishop in Gaul. 50
Arles, Kingdom united to that of Burgundy Transjurane. 169 Arles, the Temporal
Seigneury belongs to the Archbishop of it. 335 Great Naval Army. 296 Of
Coat-Arms and the beginning of their use. 225 Armand, Clerk of the City of
Bress, causes Rome to rebel against the Popes. 272 Arnold King of Germany, of
Bavaria, and Lorraine. 156 Drives Guy of Spoletta out of all Lombardy. 160
Arnold Emperor, his death, his Wife, and Children. 161 Arnold Count of
Flanders. 168 Arnold the Fat, Count of Flanders. 164 Arnold Earl of Flanders,
does cause the Duke of Normandy to be treacherously slain. 178 Arnold the old
Earl of Flanders, his death. 186 Arnold Archbishop of Reims degraded of his
Dignity. 204 Restored. 207 Count d'Argues takes up Arms against the Duke of
Normandy to his confusion. 144 Of the County of Arragon and its Original. 97
Arragon Kingdom, its Original. 163 Artois made a County and Pairie. 301 Artois
adjudged to Mahaut in prejudice of Robert grandson of Robert of Artois. 347
Robert of Artois commands the Kings Army in Flanders, is defeated and slain.
330 Artold Archbishop of Reims. 179 Arthur Duke of Bretagne. 256 Takes up Arms
against John (without Lands) who takes him Prisoner, then Assassinates him. 262
Asylum in Churches. 53 Assembly general appointed in May, no more for the
future in March. 124 Assemblies, three sorts of great Assemblies. 117 Assembly,
at Aix la Chapelle. 122 Assembly, or Parliament of Nimeghen. 126 Of St. Martin.
126 Assembly general of Franefort. 127 Assembly general, or Parliament of Mets.
139 Assembly of Coblents. 140 Assembly of Meaux. 150 Assembly general of
Tribur. 155 Assembly Synodal of the Bishops of Gaul and Germany at Verdun. 180
Assembly of Prelates at Estampes. 240 Assembly of the Estates of the Kingdom at
Paris. 329 Assize of Count Geofry, Law for the Partage, amongst the Bretons.
254 Astolfus King of the Lombards, seizes the Exarchat of Ravenna, etc. makes
himself Master of Rome. 91 Is constrained by the French to desist from his
Enterprise, and to restore the Exarchat, etc. 92 His death. 93 Ataulfe, King of
the Visigoths passes in Gallia Narbonensis. 3 Athalaric, King of Italy. 21 His
death. 24 Attila King of the Huns, surnamed the Scourge of God, enters into
Gaul, is there beaten, and vanquished, and forced to retire. 10 His death. 11
Avari, ravage Turingia. 29 Avari seize upon Lombardy. 46 Avari, are those of
Austratia. 104 Are wholly subdued. 106 Avarice insupportable of the
Ecclesiastics during the eight Century. 116 d'Aresnes John, Earl of Hainault,
becomes Earl of Holland. 326 Augustines, Friars, their Institution, and their
Establishment. 340 St. Avi, Abbot of Mici. 21 Avignon besieged and taken by
King Lewis VIII. her Walls thrown down, and Moats filled up. 296 Austerities at
the Article of death. 288 Austrasia and its extent. 20 Austrasia given to
Dagobert by King Clotair, and the Conduct of Pepin the old Maire of the Palace.
46 Austrasians despise the commands of Brunehaut during the minority of King
Childebert. 34 Will not endure the Government of a Woman. 78 Beaten by the
Neustrians. 78 Austria falls into the hands of the Emperor Rodolph. 316
B.
Baliol John, declared King of Scotland. 323 Is vanquished by the English,
taken Prisoner, and constrained to renounce his Alliance with France. 327 Set
at full liberty, but despised by the Scots. 330 Banners belonging to the Church
formerly used in time of War as their Standards. 216 Bankers, and of their
excessive Usury and Extortion. 324 Barcelona besieged and taken by the French.
107 Bastards not admitted to Prelacy by the Holy Canons. 210 The Kings of
France not allowed to be Married to a Bastard. 246 Bastards, Adventurers of
Gascongny. 352 Battles. 32, 33, 35 Battle between the Armies of Clotair II. and
Thierry King of Burgundy in the year 599. 42 Battle near Toul and Tobiae. 44
Battle of Tetry. 69 Battle of Vinciac in Cambresis. 79 Battle very famous near
Tours, wherein the Saracens were beaten, and utterly defeated. 82 Battle of
Sigeac. 83 Battle near Periguex. 94 Battle very bloody at Fontenay. 132 Battles
in the Air. 134 Battle lost by the Romans. 185 Battle near Monstreuil Bellay.
211 Battle of Tinchelray in Normandy. 227 Battle between the French and the
English. 234 Battle between the Flemings and the French to the disadvantage of
the last. 330 Battle very bloody between the French and the Flemmings, to the
loss of the last. 331 St. Batilda Queen of France her Elogy. 60, 61 Bavarians
and their Original, and establishment in Bavaria: under the obedience of
France. 23 Baldwin or Badouin Earl of Flanders, steals away the Daughter of
Charles King of Neustria. 140 Baldwin the Bald Earl of Flanders. 162, 164
Baldwin with the Beard, Earl of Flanders, chaced from his Estates by his Son,
is restored by the Duke of Normandy. 212 Baldwin surnamed the Frisonian, chaced
his Father. 212 Baldwin Regent of the Kingdom of France, and Earl of Flanders,
his death. 218, 220, 221 Baldwin King of Jerusalem. 222 Baldwin of Hainault.
224 Baldwin XI, Count of Flanders makes a League with the King of England
against France. 257, 358, 259 Baldwin Earl of Flanders takes up the Cross for
the Holy Land. 261 Is elected and declared Emperor of Constantinople. 263 His
death. ibid. Baldwin an Impostor, pretending to be Earl of Flanders, his
unfortunate end. 296 Baldwin King of Constantinople, comes into France to
demand assistance. 300 Baviere the Duchy extinct by the death of Tassillon.
103 Bearn Vicounty. 315 Beatrix of Savoy. 300 Belisarius conquers the Kingdom
of the Vandals. 24 Benefices, the great ones at the disposition of the Popes.
That the same Ecclesiastic cannot in Conscience hold more then one. 301
Perpetuated in their Houses. 291 Benevent Duchy made Tributary to the Emperor
Lewis the Debonair. 121 Bennet Archdeacon is elected Pope. 186 His degradation
and his death. -- Bennet XI. Pope, does things with more mildness then Boniface
his Predecessor. 332 His death. ibid. Benenger Roman Earl of Provence,
Rebellion of his Subjects. 300 Berenger Duke of Spoleta. 156 Berenger I. King
of Italy. 162 Crowned Emperor of the East. 162 Forsaken of the Italians and
dispossessed. Calls the Hungarians into Italy. His death. ibid. Berenger King of
Italy, with his Son Adelbert, is abandoned of his Subjects. 188 Banished into
Germany. ibid. Berenger Archdeacon of Angers an Heresiark, and Head of the
Heretical Sacramentaries, his several Retractions and Death. 229 Berenger
Raimond Earl of Provence, his death. 303 Bernard King of Italy, makes Oath of
fidelity to the Emperor Lewis the Debonair. 121 Appeases the Tumult of the
Romans. 121 Conspires against the Emperor his Uncle, and is taken Prisoner. 122
His death. 123 Bernard Earl of Barcelona the Favorite of the Empress Judith.
126 St. Bernard opposes Henry the Monk, disciple of Peter Bruys in Languedoc.
245 Abbot of Clervais in high esteem amongst the Prelates, the Grandees, and the
People. 243 Preaches the Croisado by command of the Pope. 244 Acquires great
Reputation to his Order. 271 Causes Innocent II. to be owned. 303 Bernard
Saisset Bishop of Pamiez made Prisoner. 326 Berthier Maire of the Neustrian
Palace, his unhappy end. 69 Bertoald Maire of the Palace. 42 Bertradi Daughter
of Simon de Montfort, Marries Foulques le Rechin who was Aged. 222 She leaves
her Husband to Marry King Philip, though nigh of Kindred. 222 Robert de Bethune
Earl of Flanders, his death. 350 Bilicbild, Queen of France. 65 Blanch Wife of
Lewis the Lazy. 198 Blanch of Castille, Widow of Lewis VIII. and Regent of the
Kingdom, causes Lewis her eldest Son to be Crowned. 295 Her death, and burial.
306 Blanch of France, Queen of Castille. 313 Blanch of Artois, Queen of
Navarre. 316 Blanch of France, betroathed twice, and Married in fine to
Rodolphus Duke of Austria. 321 Blanch of Burgundy. 324 Blasphemy, Edict against
Blasphemers. 252 Beomond Prince of the Normands in Apulia. 222 Boniface Bishop
of Ments, takes great care for the re-establishment of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, by the Convocation of diverse Councils. 112, 113 Boniface Marquess
of Montferat, joins with the French, in the Expedition to the Holy Land. 256 Is
made King of Thessaly. ibid. Boniface VIII. elected Pope. 325 Endeavors to
make Peace in Christendom. ibid. Makes himself an Enemy to the King of France,
Philip the Fair, diverse causes of enmity. 326 Arbitrator of the differences
between the King of France, the English and Flemings. 328 Publishes a general
Indulgence, afterward called a Jubilee. 328 Attributes the Temporal Power to
himself, as well as the Ecclesiastical. 329 Disaffected to the French. 329
Excommunicates Philip the Fair. 329 Is accused of Heresy, and diverse other
Crimes. 329 Ill treated at Anagnia by the French, his death. 332 Boson Brother
of Queen Richilda. 143 Is Crowned King of Burgundy, defeated and vanquished in
Battle. 151 Bourges, Archbishop takes the Title of Primat and that of Patriarch
over the Archbishops of Narbona, Bourdeaux, and of Ausch. 337 Bourgogue, or
Burgundy, united to France, and loses the Title of a Kingdom. 22 Bourgogne, or
Burgundy, Duchy yielded by King Henry to Robert his Brother. 214 Bourgogne
Transjurane, and the Kingdom of Arles, pass into the hands of the Emperor
Conrad, and the Princes of Germany. 215 Bourgogne, or Burgundy, County, the
Subject of a great Quarrel. 238 Difference and a hot War between Reinauld Earl
of Burgundy, and Bertold Duke of Zeringben for the County. ibid. Given to
Philip the Fair. 324 The Bourgundians make themselves Masters of a part of
Gall. Their Conversion to the Christian Faith. 8 Of the Mariners Compass, and
its first invention. 330 Brabant, Chief of the Dukes of Brabant. 210 Britain,
Great, subdued by the English Saxons. 8 Bretagne, casts off the yoke of the
French. 135 Loses the name of Kingdom, and takes that of County, then of
Duchy. 144 In great trouble. 184 Subjected to the Duke of Normandy. 215 In
great trouble. 245 Bretons make great Incursions upon the Territories of the
French, and are brought to reason. 56 Subjected to the Crown of France
vanquished. 123 Obstinate, for their liberty. 124 Brosse, Peter de la, a Barber
advanced to a Supreme Fortune, endeavors in vain to ruin the Queen of France.
318 Is Hanged. ibid. Brunebaud banished to Rouen, is set at liberty. 35 Gets
away the Huns by force of Money. 42 Chaced by the Austrasians. 42 Leads a
Vicious Lewd Life. 43 Her unhappy end. 45 Bruno Archbishop of Colen. 184
Bulgarians have a quarrel with the Avari, and are totally vanquished. 121
Ransack Panonia Superiora. 124 Ransack Lumbardy. 162 Burdin favorite of Henry
V. Emperor, confined to a perpetual imprisonment. 274
C.
Calistus II. Pope, under the protection of France, against the Emperor. 236
Calistus III. Antipope. 272 Canal, begun for the Communication between the
Rivers of Rhine, and the Danube, remains imperfect. 104 Candia falls under the
Dominion of the Venetians. 263 Cardinals in great splendor. 292 The Cardinals,
their growth and their authority. 282 Fall from their so great power. ibid.
Carloman Son of Pepin King of Austrasia. 95 His death. 97 Carloman eldest Son
of Charles the Bald, revolts against his Father, is punished. 144 Carloman,
King of West- France, Aquitain and Burgundy. 148 His death. 156 Carloman Son of
Charles Martel Duke and Prince of the French in Austrasia. 86 He and Pepin shut
up their Brother Griffin in a Castle. 84 Bring the Duke of Aquitain, and the
Duke of Bavaria to reason, who were revolted. 86 Marches afterward against the
Saxons. 86 Quits the World, and takes on him the Habit of St. Bennet at Mount
Soracie. 87 Caroloman comes into France on behalf of Astolphus King of the
Lombards, and is shut up in a Monastery at Vienne, and his Sons shaved. Anno
754. 92 Caroloman Son of Lewis the German King of Bavaria. 148 Great
preparation for Italy, without effect. 146 His death. 149 Carmelites, their
institution and establishment. 339 Carobert King of Hungary. 334 Castille, in
trouble and divisions about the Crown. 316 Catares Heretics. 278 Celestine
Pope lays down the Triple Crown, or Thiara. 325 Celibate of the Priests. 288
Disorder falling thereon. ibid. Cenobites. 4 Chape, or Mantle of St. Martin
born at the head of their Armies. 244 Thomas de Champeaux Doctor in Theology
takes the Habit of a Friar at St. Victors. 276 Chanons Regulars in esteem. 290
Charles Martel, his birth. 78 Maire, or Prince of Austrasia. 79 Held Prisoner,
happily escapes. 78 Beaten by the Frisons. 79 Beats and untrusses part of
Rainfroys Forces. 79 Routs the said Rainfroy another time. 79 Makes himself
Master of all the Kingdom of Neustria, and that of Burgundy. 81, etc. Reduces
Bavaria. 82, etc. Sacketh Aquitain. 82, etc. Utterly defeats the Saracens. 83
Persecutes the Prelates, and seizes on the Treasures and Revenue of the Church
to pay his Soldiers. Reduces Burgundy. 82 Vanquishes the Frisons, and subdues
Ostergow, and Westergow. 82 Carries the War a third time into Aquitain. ibid.
Again marches against the Duke of Aquitain. ibid. Goes into Languedoc, against
the Saracens who were got into that Country; defeats them in Battle near
Sigeac, and regains diverse places, which they had taken. ibid. Is solicited by
Pope Gregory the II. to declare against Luitprand King of the Lombards in
favor of the Church. 84 He shares the Kingdom between his three Sons,
Carloman, Pepin the Brief, and Griffon. ibid. His memory blasted after his
death. ibid. Charlemain his Birth. 85 Shares the Kingdom of France with his
Brother Carloman, and has Neustria for his part. 95 Subjects Aquitain entirely
to his obedience. 96 After the death of his Brother, he remains sole King of
France. 97 His Manners and Conditions. ibid. Defeats the Saxons in Battles and
brings them to reason. 98 Passes beyond the Alps with a potent Army, makes
himself Master of all Lombardy, and utterly extinguisheth that Kingdom. 59 Goes
to Rome, confirms those Donations to the Pope, which had been made to him by
Pepin his Father, and adds more to them. ibid. Makes a second Voyage to Rome,
and is declared Patrician, and Crowned King of Lombardy. ibid. Orders he
establishes in that Kingdom before his departure. ibid. Makes diverse
Expeditions into Saxony. 100, etc. Passes into Spain against the Moors, reduces
the M. of Spain under his Dominion. 105 Makes a third Voyage, causes Pepin his
eldest Son to be Baptized, and Crowned King of Italy, and Lewis his second Son
King of Aquitain. 101 Subdues the Breton Army. 106 Reduces the Duchy of
Bavaria under his obedience. 102 Makes an Alliance with the Scots. 104 Makes an
Expedition against the Huns, which succeeds very fortunately. 104 A noble
design for Communication between the Rhine and the Danube. 104 At length
subdues and quells the Saxons. 108 Passes into Italy, punishes those that had
abused Pope Leo, and is Crowned Emperor of the West. 106 Highly regarded by all
Princes. 107 Shares his Dominions amongst his three Sons. 108 Makes a Peace
with the Danes, the Sarazins of Spain, and the Greeks. 110 His Death, his
Elogy, his Wives, and his Children. 111 Charles, eldest Son of Charlemain, his
feats of Arms. His death. 110 Charles King of Rhetia. 126 Has for his share the
West part of France, and then Aquitain. 127 Charles Brother to Pepin of
Aquitain, shorn and shut into a Monastery. 137 Charles the Son of Lotaire King
of Burgundy. 139 Charles King of Provence, and of Burgundy. 139 He unites with
Charles his Uncle against Lewis the Germanick. 141 Charles the Bald, Emperor
and King of France. 145 A difference happens between him and Lothaire his
Brother, after the death of their Father. 205, etc. He Marries Hermentrude,
carries his War into Aquitain and Bretagne, and makes a Peace with the Bretons.
132, 133, 134 Makes himself Sovereign of Aquitain. ibid. Is reconciled with
Lotharius, his Brother. Is turned out of his Kingdom, by the conspiracies of
his Subjects. 138, 139 He seizes upon the Kingdom of Lorraine, after the death
of Lotharius. 142 And shares it with Lewis the Germanick his Brother. -- Seizes
likewise on the Kingdom of Burgundy. 143 Is Crowned Emperor of Italy by the
Pope. 145 Vain Enterprise upon the Succession of Lewis the Germanick. 146
Passes to Italy in assistance of Pope John. 146 Is hated of his Subjects and
Poisoned. 147 His Elogy. ibid. Charles III. called the Gross, Crowned King of
Italy, and then Emperor. 154 Is received to the Crown of France by preference
to Charles the Simple. 154 Comes to the relief of Paris against the Normands.
155 Repudiates his Wife. His unfortunate end. 156 Charles the Simple, Son of
Lewis the Stammerer, his Birth. 149 Crowned King of France. 158 Makes himself
of all Lorraine. 164 Abandoned of all his Subjects, because of the insolence of
his favorite. 165 Too great simplicity. 167 Is made Prisoner by his Subjects.
ibid. His death. 168 Charles a French Prince, Duke of Lorraine. 188 Gets the
ill will of the French, by making himself Vassal to the King of Germany. 189
The Crown of France denied him, he has recourse to his Sword to recover his
pretended right. 202 Taken Prisoner with his Wife. 203 His death. 204 Charles
the good Earl of Flanders. 237 Assassinated and Massacred. 238 Charles of Anjou
chief of the Branch of that name. 297 Accompanies St. Lewis the King in his
Expedition to the Holy Land. 304, etc. Charles the Lame, Son of Charles of
Anjou 320 Charles Earl of Anjou. His election for the Kingdom of Sicilia,
confirmed by Pope Clement IV. 310 Passes into Italy, is Crowned King of Sicilia
by the same Pope; his happy progress. 310, etc. Defeats Conradin in Battle,
takes him Prisoner, and causes his Head to be cut off. 311 Constituted by the
Pope, Vicar of the Empire in Italy. ibid. Passes into Africa, and joins the
French Army before Tunis. 314 Great contest for the County of Provence. 319 His
too great ambition blinds his Judgment, and makes him lose Sicilia. 318 His
death. 321 Charles Earl of Valois. 321 Of his right to the Kingdom of Arragon.
323 Charles of Valois gets possession of the Authority after the death of
Philip his Brother. 344 Conquers Guyenne. 351 Strangely sick. ibid. Charles the
Lame set at Liberty. 323 Is Crowned King of Sicilia. ibid. Renounces the
Kingdom of Arragon. 324 Marries his Daughter to the Earl of Valois. ib. Charles
the Fair, Marries Blanch of Burgundy. ibid. Charles de Valois Marries Clemence
of Sicily. ib. Makes Peace with the Arragonian. 325 Charles Earl of Valois
makes War in Guyenne against the English. 326 Leaves France and goes into
Italy. 328 Passes into Sicilia with a potent Army in favor of Charles the Lame
his Nephew, and makes a Peace between the Parties. 330 Is sent by the Pope to
Florence to calm the Factions in that Republic. ib. Charles the Fair his Wife
accused of Adultery. 336 Charles IV. called the Long, King of France. 350
Causes a general Inquisition concerning the Financiers, Farmers, and
Tax-gatherers. ib. Repudiates his Wife, accused of Adultery, to Marry the
Daughter of the Emperor. ib. His death, his Wives and Children. 353 Charles VI.
regulates the Benefices. Charles VII. makes some orders about the Benefices.
282 Chartreux, and the establishment of their Order in France. 232 Childebert
I. of the name King of France. 20 Seizes upon Clairmont in Auvergne. 22 Makes
War upon Amalaric King of the Visigoths. 22 He and his Brother Clotair make
themselves Masters of the Kingdom of Burgundy. ib. Inhumanely Massacre two of
their Nephews. ib. Makes War upon Clotair his Brother. 24 He and his Brother
Clotair pass the Pyreneans, and ravage all the Country of Arragon. -- His
death, his Wife, and his Children. 27 Childebert II. of that name King of
Austrasia. 32 Adopted by Goutran his Uncle. 33 Makes a League with Chilperic
against him, and falls upon his Country. 34 Reconciliation with Goutran. 38
Carries his Forces into Italy against the Lombards. 39 Gives examples of
severity. 40 His death, his Children. 41 Childebert II. called the Young King
of France. 72 His death, his Children. 73 Childebrand Son of Pepin. 78
Childebrand King of the Lombards. 91 Childerick fourth King of France. 12
Degraded of his Royalty, and chaced out of France, and another elected in his
stead. ib. Is recalled by his Subjects, his Warlike Exploits, his death, his
Children. ib. Childeric King of Austrasia. 62 Becomes sole King of France. 64
Plunges into the Debaucheries of Wine and Women. 65 Persecutes St. Ledger. ib.
Becomes a Tyrant: his unhappy end. ib. Chilperic II. King of Neustria, with
Rainfroy his Mayor. 64, 65 Chilperic alone, King of France, with Mariel his
Maire. 80 His death. ib. Childeric III. King of France. 86 Is degraded and made
a Monk. 87, 88 Chilperic King of Soissons falls upon the Territories of his
Brother Sigebert. 29 Too great License in his Marriage. 30 Makes War against
Sigebert and causes him to be assassinated. 32 Seizes on the Kingdom of Paris.
ib. Surcharges his People with Imposts. 34 Assassinated at Chelles in Brie. 36
Clement IV. Pope, his rare modesty. 310 Confirms the election of Charles of
France for the Kingdom of Sicilia. -- Clement elected Pope, is Crowned at
Lions. 332 His death. 336 Clodion the Hairy, second King of France. 8 His
Conquests in Gaul. ib. His death, his Children. 9 Clodomir King of Orleans. 20
Barbarous cruelty: his unhappy end. 21 His Children. ib. Clotaire seizes on the
Kingdom of Mets after the death of Theobalde his Nephew. 26 Ranges the revolted
Saxons to reason. ib. Succeeds in the Estates of his Brother Childebert, to the
prejudice of his two Nices, Daughters of the defunct. 27 Cruelty more then
barbarous toward his Son Chramue. 28 His death, his Wives, and Children. ib.
Clotaire II. of that name King of Neustria. 37 Remains sole King of all France.
45 Set himself to regulate his State, and restore Justice, and good order. ib.
His death, his Wives, and Children. 47 Count of Flanders makes a League with
the English, and draws the War upon his own Country. 326 Is held Prisoner in
Paris. 327 Clotaire III. King of Neustria and Burgundy. 62 His death. 63
Clotaire King of Austrasia. 79 His death. 80 Clovis V. King of France succeeded
to his Fathers Crown, and makes great Conquests. 14 Marries Clotilda. ib.
Defeats and subdues the Almains. ib. His Conversion to the Christian Religion,
and his Baptism. 15 Makes War upon the Burgundians. 16, 17 Reforms the Salique
Law. 16 Makes War against the Visigoths. ib. Rids his hands of the other petty
French Kings of his Relations. 17 His death, his Children. ib. Clovis Son of
Chilperic, his unfortunate end by the wickedness of Fredegonda his Mother in
Law. 34 Clovis second King of Neustria, and Burgundy, takes away the Silver
Ornaments of St. Denis Church to feed the Poor during a Famine, accused for
having taken an Arm of St. Denis to keep in his Oratory. 59 His death, his
Wife, his Children. 60 Clovis III. King of Neustria and Burgundy. 71 His death.
ib. Clugny Abbey, its beginning. 205 Loses its Reputation. -- College of
Navarre, its Reputation. 331 Combats of Wild-Beasts practiced under our first
Kings of France. 90 Comedians, Jugglers, Buffoons, etc. banished the Court of
France. 253 Comet in the Sign of Sagitarius. In the Sign of Virgo. In the Sign
of Scorpio. 201 Comet seen in the year 1264. Comet in the year 1301. Of the
Earldom of Holland. 140 Earls of Anjou, their Original. 149 Conan Duke of
Bretagne, his death. 221 Conan the Fat, Duke of Bretagne. 237 Conan III. Duke
of Bretagne. 245 Canon the Little, Duke of Bretagne, his death. 249 Councils
necessary to preserve the purity of the Faith, and the Ecclesiastical
Discipline. 4 The first Councils that were held and Celebrated. in Gall. 4, 5
Councils held in Gall during the fifth and sixth Ages. 18, 19 Councils
Convocated in France during the Seventh Age. 75 Council of Francfort against
the Heresy of Felix d'Vrgel. 104 Councils held in France during the Eight
Century. 114 Council of Lateran. 141 Council of French Bishops at Mets. ib.
Council of Attigny. 143 Council of Savomeres. -- Council of Poutigon. 145
Council of Tribur. 160 Councils Celebrated in France during the Ninth Age. 171,
etc. Council of French Bishops at Mets. 141 Council general of the Bishops of
Gall and Germany, at Ingelheim. 180 Council of Reims. 203 Councils held in
France during the Tenth Age. 206 Councils Provincial annulled by the Popes. 230
Councils assembled in France during the Eleventh Century. 232 Council National
at Chartres. 243 Councils of Spain lay the first foundations of the Authority
of the Popes. 290 Council of Lions, where the Emperor Frederic is
Excommunicated and degraded of the Empire. 303 Council of Lions, the Pope
presiding there in Person. 316 Council general assigned at Vienne in Daufine.
235 Councils of the Gallican Church during the Twelfth Age. 289 Such as were
held by Order of the King. 290 Councils of the Gallican Church lose their
Authority. 289 Councils of France of the Twelfth Age, whereat the Popes
assisted. ib. Councils held in France during the Thirteenth Age, for the
extirpation of Heretics. 337 Confession public at the point of death. 287
Confession Auricular. 287 Conrar Duke of Worms raised to the Empire. 217
Conrad King of Germany his death. 163 Conrad Duke of Lorraine obstinately
Rebellious. 181 Conrad King of Burgundy his death. -- Conrade the Emperor takes
the Cross on him, and goes into the Holy Land. 244 His return into Italy. 245
His death. 246 Conrade Son of the Emperor Frederic. 306 Passes into Italy,
causes his Nephew Frederic to be Strangled, and seizes upon Sicilia. 307 His
death. ib. Conradin. ib. Descends into Italy, with a great Army, for the
recovery of Sicilia, his unfortunate end. 311 Conspiracy of the Romans against
Pope Leo. 121 Of Bernard King of Italy against his Uncle Lewis the Debonaire.
122 Conspiracy and horrible Treason of the Neustrians against their King
Charles. 139 Other Treachery of the same in favor of the same Prince. ib.
Conspiracy against Charles the Bald. 146 Conspiracy of the Italians against
their King Berenger, 185 Constance Wife of King Robert, proud, capricious, and
insupportable. 211, 212 Constance of Sicilia, Marries the Emperor Henry IV. 246
Constance Elizabeth second Wife of King Lewis the Young. 16 Constantine
Copronymus, endeavors to recover the Exarchat by means of the French. --
Constantinople besieged and forced by the French, and the Venetians joined
together. 262 Returns from the hands of the Latins into that of the Greeks. 309
Constantius Count and Patrician in Gall. 3 Crimes how punished amongst the
ancient French: Diverse means to purge themselves thereof. 49 Crimes, they
justified themselves by Combat. -- Croisades, and Beyond Sea Expeditions,
advantageous to Popes, and Kings: but disadvantageous to the great Lords, and
the People. 224 First Croisade, and their happy Exploits. 224, 25 Croisade
preached over all Christendom. 223 Croisade for the recovery of the Holy Land.
260 Croisade against the Albigeois. 264 Croisades affirming the Popes
Authority. 262 Croisade new of French Lords for the Holy Land. 301 Croisade new
by St. Lewis for succouring the Christians in the Levant. 312 Croisades during
the Thirteenth Age. 336 Cunibert Bishop of Colen. 56
D.
Dagobert Son of Clotaire, the miraculous protection of his Person. 45 Builds
the Abbey of St. Denis. ib. His Father gives him the Kingdom of Austrasia. 46
His Marriage, quarrel between the Father and the Son. ib. Dagobert I. of that
name, King of Neustria, Austrasia, and Burgundy. 54 He gives part of Aquitain
to his Brother Aribert. 54 Too much license in his Marriage. ib. Remains sole
King after the death of his Brother Aribert. 55 Establishes his Son Sigebert
King of Austrasia. 56 Disposes of Neustria and Burgundy in favor of his Son
Clovis. ib. Subdues the Gascons and brings them to reason. 57 His death. ib.
Dagobert Son of Sigebert, King of Austrasia, shaved and banished. 60 Is
recalled, and acknowledged King of Austrasia. 66 His death. 68 Dagobert II.
King of France. 77 The Danes and Normands infest the Coasts of France. 106
Continue their Piracies. 211 St. Denis Areopagite: his Corpse found entire in
the Monastery of St. Denis in France. 233 Devotion and Piety, admirable in our
ancient Kings of France. 73 St. Didier Bishop of Lions suffers Martyrdom. 43
Didier King of the Lombards conceives the design of abating the power of the
Popes, and making himself Master of Italy, excites Troubles and Schisms in the
Church of Rome. 98 Causes of particular enmity between him and Charlemain. 98
Is dispossessed of his Estate. 99 His death. ib. Didier is elected King of the
Romans after the death of Astolphus, Anno 755. Differences between Hugh de
Vermandois, and Artold, for the Archbishopric of Reims. 180 Difference between
King Lotair and the Children of Hugh the Great. 184 Dispensations, their
beginning. 182 Dissentry horrible in France. 34 Divorce of a Marriage, the
cause of great Troubles. 243 Dol in Bretagne, made a Metropolitan. 134 Brought
again under that of Tours. 274 Dominion. Example of an enraged passion for
Dominion. 296 Dominicans, their Institution and Establishment. 339 Dreux,
Bishop of Mets. 127 Drogo or Dreux Son of Pepin. 72 Drogon Duke of Bretagne,
his death. 184 Duchy of Lorrain, given to Godfrey Earl of Verdin, Bouillon and
Verdun. 209 Dutchies of two sorts in France. 183 Duel proposed to the King by
his Subjects. 235
E.
Ebles Count of Auvergne and Poitou, and Duke of Aquitaine. 170 Ebles Baron de
Roucy, a famous Warrier humbled and brought to reason. 227 Ebon Bishop of Reims
deposed and degraded. 128 Ebroin Maire of the Palace, perfidious and wicked 62,
69 Is shaved and confined to the Monastery of Luxieu. 64 Quits the Monastery to
take up Arms. 67 His retreat into Austrasia: he there supposes a false Clovis
in the place of King Thierry, whom he feigns to be dead. 67 Causes St. Ledger to
attaqu'd in his City of Autun, puts his Eyes out, and shuts him up in a
Monastery. ib. Is received Maire of Thierries Palace. 68 Great Tyranny, his
death. 69 Eclipse of the Sun. 213 Ecclesiastics go to Rome to visit the Holy
Places. 269 Edmund Brother of Edward King of England, his death. 326 Edward
eldest Son of the King of England, goes to make War in the Holy Land. 312
Edward Son and Successor of Henry King of England. 315 At his return from the
Holy Land, passes thorough France. ib. Passes by Sea, and comes to the City of
Amiens. 319 His Voyage to Bordeaux by France. 322 Employs himself to
accommodate the differences betwixt the Kingdoms of Arragon and Sicilia. 323 A
Riot between some particular People makes him break the Peace with France. 324,
325 Makes a powerful League against France. 326 Attaques the Scots and brings
them under his Laws. 327 Marries with Margaret of France. 330 Makes Peace with
the King of France. 331 His death. 334 Edward Son of King Edward Marries
Isabella of France. 327 Edward II. King of England. 332 His Contest with
Charles the Fair King of France. 351 Odious to his People by reason of his
Favorites, his unfortunate end. 352 Ega Maire of the Palace of Neustria, his
death. 58 Election and the Investiture of the Popes in the power of the Emperor
Otho. 186 Election of Popes. 3^6 Elections to Benefices. 285 Emma Queen of
France. 168 Emma, or Emina Wife of King Lothaire. 198 Empire Rome when it
ended. 13 Empire troubled about the Election of an Emperor, after the death of
Henry VI. 259 Empire of Greece, difference between Michael and Baldwin
determined. 318 Empire ruined by its disunion. -- Engelberge Wife of the
Emperor Lew's of Italy. 156 Enguerrand de Marigny his unhappy end. 336
Enterprise of the Pope upon the Bishops of France. 203 Enterview of the three
Kings of France, of Germany, and of Burgundy. 170 Enterview between Lewis
Transmarine, and Otho of Lorraine. 180 Enterview of the Emperor Henry, and King
Robert. 211 Enterview and Enterparlance of the Emperor Henry III. and Henry
King of France. 217 Enterview of the King of France Lewis, the Young, and the
Emperor Federic. 247 Enterview of the Kings of France and Arragon. 308
Enterview of the two Kings of France and England in the City of Amiens. 319
Enterview of the Kings of France and Castille at Bayonne. 323 Enterview of the
King of France and the Emperor at Vaucouleurs. 328 Eon de L'Estoille. His
ignorance, passes for a great Prophet, is apprehended, his death. 291
Erchinoald Maire of the Palace. 61 Era, or manner of accompting of the times,
by the Mahometans. 47 Estate of the Gallican Church after the Conversion of
Lewis, or Clovis the Great. 50 The Fourth Age. 4 During the Fifth and Sixth
Ages. 17 The Seventh. 73 The Eighth. 112 The Ninth. 170 The Tenth. 205 The
Eleventh Age or Century. 228 Eudes Duke of Aquitaine. 80 Makes a League with
the Sarecens of Spain, and draws them into France. 81, etc. His death. 82 Eudes
Count of Paris and Duke of France, succeeds in the Estates of Hugh the Great
his Brother. 155 Is raised to his Dignity, and declared King of West- France.
156 Defeats and cuts the Normans in pieces. 157 Quarrel betwixt him and Charles
the Simple. 159 His death. 160 Eudes first Earl of Champagne. 203 Eudes Count
de Pontieure. 211 Eudes Son of King Robert Earl of Champagne disputes the Crown
with Henry his Brother. 214 Reduced to reason. 215 Undertakes upon the Kingdom
of Burgundy, and upon the Loire to his own confusion, his death. 217 Eudes or
Otho Duke of Aquitain and Gascongne. 221 Rebellion of his Subjects: his death.
-- Eudes Earl of Corbeil. 234 Eudes Duke of Burgundy. 347 Eudon Earl of
Pontieure, seizes the Duchy of Bretagne, to the prejudice of Hoel. 245
Eugenius II. elected Pope. 124 Comes into France. 127 Exarchat of Ravenna, and
its dependances. 92 King Pepin makes a donation of it to the Apostle St. Peter
and St. Paul, not to the Emperor Constantine. ib. Excommunications rendered
despisable. 270 Their force. 290 Exemptions and Immunitles granted to
Monasteries. 271 Exemptions of Bishops were granted by the Diocesan, but with
the Consent of his Brethren. ib. Exemptions of Monasteries by whom granted, and
the reasons. 268 Expeditions beyond Seas. 244
F.
Faction strange. 150, etc. Famine great (...) France. 59 Famine horrible and
cruel. 213 Faramond, or Pharamond, first King of France. 6 His death. 7
Fastrade Queen of France, her Marriage, her death. 105, etc. Favorites of
Princes, cause of great troubles and uproars. 333 Federic II. King of Sicilia
is elected Emperor, and repasses into Germany. 265 Renews the Alliance between
France and Germany. 266 Federic II. cause of a Schism. 272 Federic I. of the
name, called the Barbarossa Emperor. 246 Federic I. Emperor his ambition put a
stop by Pope Adrian, uphold Victor against Alexander III. Pope. 289 Upholds
Calistus III. ib. Is unfortunate. ib. Asks pardon of his Holiness at Venice. ib.
Goes to the Holy Land. 303 Shares his Empire amongst his Children, his death.
306 Federic Grandson of the Emperor of that name, Duke of Austrasia. 306
Federic Duke of Austria joins with Couradin in the War of Sicily, his unhappy
end. 311 Federic of Arragon takes the name of King of Sicily. 325 Ferdinand of
Castille, called la Cerde, his death. 317 Ferrand of Portugal, Earl of
Flanders. 266 Feast of Fools. 293 Feasts or Festivals, and of their
Celebration. 52, 53 Feasts of Christmas and Easter Celebrated by the Kings of
France with great solemnity. 93 Fiefs, and their Original. 35 St. Filibert
imprisoned. 68 Financiers prosecuted. 344 Financiers and Maloistiers called in
question and punished. 350 Flagellants. 309 Flanders, made a County. 104 Given
to William Duke of Normandy, Son of Robert. 238 Subject of a great feud. ib.
Divided. 330 Revolts, and is lost as to France. ib. In trouble. 351 Flochat.
Quarrel betwixt him and the Duke of Transjurains. 59 Florence, Republic in
Troubles by reason of the Factions which torment it. 330 Flota Peter, a Man
violent and covetous. 329 Formosa Pope, cause of a horrible scandal to the
Roman Church. 161 Forces; Difference there was otherwhile betwixt those
belonging to the King, and those of the Kingdo^^. 238 Fulk, Archbishop of
Reims, is assassinated, and the Murderer eaten up of Lice. 162 Fulk le Roux,
or the Red Earl of Anjou, his death. 164 Fulk le Bon, or the Good, Earl of
Anjou. 164 His death. 180 Fulk Earl of Anjou a Capital Enemy of the Bretons,
his death. 184 Fulk le Rechin takes Beltrade for his third Wife. 223 Fulk King
of Jerusalem, his death. 243 Fulk Archbishop of Reims menaces his King to
withdraw his Subjects. 266 France, and its first establishment in Gall. 20
Divided into Oosterich, or Eastern part, and Westrich, or Western part. 20
France, the Western part without a Chief. 155 Dismembered in diverse parts. ib.
France united, preserves it self against the Authority of the Popes. 287
Franciscans and Dominicans: of their jealousies against each others, and their
Enterprises on the Functions of Ordinary Pastors. 303 Their Quarrel with St.
Amor. Vide Quarrel. Franciscans Religious, their Institution and
Establishment. 339 French, and their Original. 2 Their incursions into Gall.
ib. The French Nation divided into diverse People. 3 Occupy, a part of Germania
Secunda. 6 Their first Kings, and of their inauguration. ib. Chaced byond the
Rhine by the Romans. 7 French, their Conversion to the Christian Religion. 15
They snare the Lands of Gall amongst them to the Loire. 17 Their Manners and
Customs. ib. Cross themselves, and make an Expedition for the recovery of the
Holy Land. Their Conquests. 260, etc. Fredegonda causes Sigebert to be
assassinated, and her Husband Chilperic. 32, etc. She likewise causes Pretextat
Archbishop of Rouen to be assassinated. 38 Her death. 41 Friars Minors or
Cordeliers, their institution. 264 Friars Preachers, or Jacobins, their
institution. ib. Friars Preachers and Friar Minors, and of their Enterprises
upon the Rights of the Ordinaries. 339 Frisons, and Neustrians, attaque the
Austrasians. 79
G.
Gaifre Duke of Aquitain, his obstinacy not to acknowledge King Pepin,
chastized. 93, etc. His death. 94 Ganelon, and his fable. 140 Gascogne divided
into Duchy and County, its extent. 121 Gascogne and Aquitania Secunda
ransacked and desolated by the Normands. 142 Gascogne. The House of Gascogne
resolved into that of Poitiers or Aquitaine. 209 Gascons make irruptions upon
the French. 35 Make themselves Masters of a part of the Novempopulania, or
Aquitania Tertia. 42 Subdued by the French. 56 Punished for their insolence.
121 Reduced under a Duke of their own Nation. 143 Brought to reason. 209
Gaveston, Favorite of the King of England. 334 Gaul, its situation. 1
Conquered by Caesar. ib. Divided by the Romans into diverse Provinces and
Governments. ib. Its Towns and Cities. 1, 2 Of their Revolts. 2 Part of it
conquered by the Visigoths, another part by the Burgundians, and the remainder
by the French. 3, 4, etc. Gautier de Bevierre, crosses himself for the Holy
Land. 260 Gauzzelin, Abbot of St. Germain des Prez. 145 Gedoin, Abbot of St.
Victor. 276 Geffroy Plantagenest, Earl of Anjou, Marries the King of Englands
Daughter. 239 Quarrels with his Father in Law. 240 Dispossessed in part of his
Duchy of Normandy. ib. Geffroy Martel Earl of Anjou. 216 Besieges and takes
the City of Tours. An Act of Piety. ib. Geoffrey Martel, quits the World, and
shuts himself up in a Monastery. 217 Geoffrey the Bearded. 217 Geoffrey Martel.
ib. Gefrey, Brother of Henry King of England, is made Earl of Nantes. His
death. 247 Geffrey of Bretagne takes up Arms against the King of England his
Father. 250 Geffroy Duke of Normandy and Bretagne. 249 His death. 254 Gelasius
is elected Pope. 236 Is driven from Rome by the Emperor Henry V. and comes into
France. ib. Gelasius II. acknowledges the power of Councils. 289 General of an
Army. The divisions betwixt Generals of Armies of a pernicious Consequence. 40
Generosity admirable. 165 Genseric King of the Vandals, sacks the City of Rome.
11 Gerfroy Grise-gonnelle Earl of Anjou, his death. 188 Gerfroy Duke or Earl of
Bretagne, his death. 211 St. Gerard. 205 Gerard Bishop of Angoulesme
acknowledges Anaclet for Pope. 274 Subject of that acknowledgment. ib. His
death. 275 Gerberge Queen of France, endeavors to release her Husband of his
Imprisonment. 179 Governs the State under the King of Lotaire her Son. 184
Gerbert elected Archbishop of Rheims, very skilful in the Mathematics. 203
Deposed. 204 Gibellins in Italy. 348 Giles Bishop of Rheims degraded of his
Bishopric, and banished to Strasburgh. 40 Gillon is elected King of France in
the place of Childeric. 12 Revolt of the French against him. 13 Godfrey King of
Denmark, undertakes against the French. 109 Descends into Frisia, and pillages
the Country. ib. Godfrey of Buillon Head of the first Croisade to the Holy
Land, elected King of Jerusalem, his glorious Exploits. 224, etc. His death. --
Gondebaud King of Burgundy. 15 Conquers the two Narbonnensi. 16 The Armor:
between the Seine and the Loire unite with the French. 15 Gondebaud calling
himself Son of Clotaire, comes from Constantinople into France to reap the
Succession of his Father, his unhappy end. 35, 38 Gondebaud a Monk, employs
himself for the deliverance of the Emperor Lewis the Debonnaire. 126 Gondemar
King of Burgundy. 21 Gondioche, King of the Burgundians, his death, and his
Kingdom divided amongst his four Sons. 13 Gontran King of Orleans and of
Burgundy, takes too much license in his Marriage. 29 Leagues himself with
Chilperic against Sigebert their Brother. 32 Adopts his Nephew Childebert and
places him in his Throne. 33 Seizes upon the Kingdom of Paris, and a part of
Neustria. 37 Takes Fredegonda into his protection. ib. Gontran King of Orleans
makes War against the Visigoths in Languedoc. 39 Effects of the inconstancy of
the mind. 40 His death. ib. Gotelen Duke of Lorraine. 221 Goths and their
Country, divided into Ostrogoths and Visigoths. 2 Gregory II. Pope opposes the
Emperor Leo stoutly in defense of Images. 84 Gregory III. Excommunicates the
Emperor Leo. -- Gregory VII. menaces Philip King of France to Excommunicate
him, if he do not reform himself. 221 Gregory VIII. Antipope. 272 Gregory IX.
Pope in contest with the Emperor. Violent proceeding. His death. 301 Gregory X.
Pope. 315 Griffon Son of Charles Martel by his Brothers shut up in Chasteauneuf
in Ardenne. 84 Is set at liberty by Pepin his Brother. 87 Grimoald, Maire of
the Palace of Austrasia. 58 Causes the young King Dagobert to be shaved, and
sets his Son upon the Royal Throne. 60 Grimoald Son of Pepin Espouses the
Daughter of the King of Frisia. 77 Assassinated and slain. 78 Guelphes and
Gibbelins, two Factions in Italy. 303 Girard de la Guette, a Financier of Paris
advanced to the Gallows. 350 Guy Duke of Spoleta, Emperor of Italy. 156 Chaced
out of Lombardy. 160 His death. ib. Guy of Burgundy dispoiled of those Lands he
held in Normandy. 2 6 Guy-Geofrey-William Duke of Aquitaine, Reconquers
Saintonge, then passes into Spain against the Saracens. 220 His death. 222 Guy
Earl of Auvergne, deprived of his Earldom. 265 Guy Count de Saint Pol. 298 Guy
Earl of Flanders vanquished and made Prisoner. 308 Guy de Dampiere Earl of
Flanders. 322 Is held Prisoner at Paris with his Wife and Children. 325 Guy
Earl of Flanders is restored to his County. -- Guy Brother to the Daufin of
Vienne, a Templer, burnt alive. 336 Guyemans, a faithful Friend of King
Childeric's. 12
H.
Hatred mortal between William of Normandy, and Arnold Earl of Flanders. 127
Hatred mortal of the Flemmings against the French, its beginning. 257 Hebert
Count of Vermandois. His death. 162 Hebert Count of Meaux and of Troyes, his
death. 178 Henry Duke of Friuly falls into the Country of the Huns. 105 Henry
Duke of Saxony comes to the relief of Paris, his death. 155 Henry the
Bird-Catcher King of Germany. 165 His death. 170 Henry II. called the Lame,
Emperor. 208 Henry Duke of Burgundy, his death. 209 Henry Son of King Robert
is Crowned and Associated by his Father. 212, 213 Henry King of France
surmounts his Enemies. 214 Chastises the Felony of the Sons of the Earl of
Champagne his Nephews. 216 Expedition of small effect in Normandy. 217 He
assists the Duke of Normandy against his rebel Subjects. ib. Coldness between
his Majesty and the Earl of Anjou. ib. Diverse Emparlances with the Emperor
Henry III. 218 Second Expedition into Normandy, unsucsessful. -- Causes his
eldest Son Philip to be Crowned. 218 His death, his Wife, his Children. 218,
219 Henry IV. Emperor in contention with the Popes. 209 Seized by his Son
Henry, his death. ib. Henry V. Emperor in contention with the Popes, Pascal II.
and Galasius, for the nomination to Bishoprics. 223 Is Excommunicated. ib.
Reconciled to the Pope. 234 Arms powerfully against France, to his confusion.
ib. Henry King of England in contention with the King of France. 234, 235 Is
obliged to make Peace with him. 236 Renewing of the Quarrel. ib. Loses his
three Sons at Sea. 237 Conspiracy of his Domestic Officers against his Person.
ib. Declares his Daughter Matilda Heiress of all his Estates. -- In contention
with his Son in Law the Earl of Anjou: his death. 240 Henry Duke of Normandy
Espouses Alienor. 246 Gets into possession of the Kingdom of England. ib. Henry
King of England becomes very powerful, undertakes against Languedoc for the
County of Tholoze. 247 Makes War again upon the King of France. 249 Arms his
own Children against him. ib. Accused of the Murder of the Archbishop of
Canterbury. 250 In debate with the King of France. 254 Takes up the Croisade
for the recovery of the Holy Land. His death. 255 Henry the Young, takes up
Arms against the King of England his Father. 252 His death. 253 Henry VI.
Emperor. 256 His death. 259 Henry Earl of Champagne, Generalissimo of the
Christians in the Holy Land. 257 His death. 259 Henry IV. deprived of the
Empire by his Son. 272 His ill conduct. ib. Henry V. Emperor, the cause of a
Schism. 272 Forces the Pope to agree to what he pleases. 273 Renounces the
Investitures. ib. His death. ib. Henry VI. Emperor is Excommunicated. 275
Henry pretended King of the Romans, his death. 304 Henry of Castille takes up
Arms against Charles of Anjou King of Sicilia. 311 Henry III. King of England
comes into France, and treats with the King for Normandy, and other the Lands
his Predecessors had been possessed of. 310 Feud with the Barons of his
Kingdom. ib. His death. 315 Henry the Fat, King of Navarre. 315 His death. 317
Henry Count of Luxemburg is elected Emperor. 334 Passes into Italy, his death.
335 Hermengarde Empress, her death. 123 Hermenegilde takes up Arms against the
King of Spain, her death. 38 Peter the Hermit a Gentleman of Picardy. 223
Hildebrand Popes Legate in France. 229 Hildegarde Queen of France. 102 Hilduin
Bishop of Liege unsaithful to his Prince. 205 Hinomar Bishop of Laon, deposed,
and persecuted. 142 Reabilitated. 161 Hinomar Archbishop of Reims. 139 His
death. 153 Hoel Son of the Duke of Bretagne Assassinated. 184 Hoel Duke of
Bretagne. 221 Disputes the Duchy of Bretagne against Eudes de Pontieure. 244
Abandoned by the Nantois. 247 Honorius II. Pope, his death. 239 Hugh Son of
Valdrade. 151 Hugh Bastard of Valdrade. ib. Hugh the Great, Tutor to Charles
the Simple. 155 Hugh King of Italy comes into France. 168 Hated of his
Subjects. 170 Hugh le Blanc Earl of Paris and Orleans, and Duke of France. 175
Hugh le Noir, or the Black. 176 Hugh the Great, otherwise le Blanc, i. e. the
White, makes a League with Hebet Earl of Vermandois against their King. 176 His
death, his Children. -- Hugh Capet, Son of Hugh the Great. 183 Earl of Paris
and Orleans. ib. Is made Duke of France. 184 Elected and Crowned King of
France. 201 Why he would never put the Crown on his Head, after his first
Coronation. 202 Of the State of the Kingdom of France, at that time. ib. He
assocates his Son Robert to Reign with him. 202 Sends his Son Charles and his
Wife Prisoners. 203 Re-unites the County of Paris, and the Duchy of France to
the Crown. ib. His death, his Wives, his Children. 204 Hugh de Beauvais
Favorite of King Robert. 212 Hugh Son of King Robert Associated and Crowned by
his Father. His death. 211, 212 Hugh Earl of Vermandois chief of the second
House of that name. 218 Hugh Duke of Burgundy, after the death of Duke Robert
his Grandfather. 221 Hugh de Saint Pol. 225 Hugh the Grand, Brother to King
Philip of France, chief of the first and second Croisade, his death. 224, 225
Hugh de Crecy. 235, etc. Hugh III. Duke of Burgundy, his death. 237 Hugh Count
de la March, is constrained to render Homage to the Earl of Poitou. 303 Hugh
Abbot of Clugny receives the Ornaments of a Bishop. 284 Humbert with the White
Hands Earl of Maurienne and of Savoy, chief of the Royal House of Savoy. 215
Humond Father of Gaifre, resumes the Title of Duke of Aquitaine to his
confusion. 302 Huns make War upon the French. 312 Huns Avari in Civil War. --
I.
James the Great of Arragon, and the finding his Corpse about the beginning of
the Ninth Age. 114 James King of Arragon. 312 James King of Majoraca and
Minorca. 320 Jane Countess of Flanders. 304 Jane of Burgundy. 324 Jane Queen of
France, Heiress of Navarre, builds and founds the College of Navarre at Paris.
331 Her death. ib. Jane of Burgundy. 345 Jerusalem Kingdom its end. 254 Images,
and the manner of Worshipping them in France. 172 Imbert de Beaujeau commands
the Kings Army against the Albigensis. 238 Imposts excessive stir up the People
to Rebellion, makes them lose the respect and love they owe to their Prince.
330 Indulgence general, otherwise called Jubilee, its institution. 328 Ingonde,
Daughter of King Sigebert, Espouses Hermenigilde Son of the King of Spain
Leuvigilde. 38 Her death. ib. Ingratitude of Wenilon, or Ganelon Archbishop of
Sens. 138 Innocence, justified by Combat. 46 Innocent II. Pope makes War
against the Duke of Puglia, and is made Prisoner. 240 Thwarted by an Antipope,
he takes refuge in France. ib. He Excommunicates the King of France, and puts
his Kingdom under Interdiction. 243 Innocent III. Pope puts the Kingdom under
Interdiction. 264 He Excommunicates Raimond Earl of Toloze. 266 Owns the
Authority of the Council, and that a Pope may be deposed. ib. Innocent IV. Pope
takes refuge in France. 303 Inquisition, established in Saxony. 108 Who first
exercised it. 264 Intendants of Justice, or Law. 117 Interdict pronounced
against England. 264 Interdict pronounced against France. 259 Interest, every
thing yields to it amongst the great ones. 302 Investitures, of Benefices. 236
Jourdain de l'Isle in Aquitain hanged on a Gibbet at Paris. 351 Irene, Empress,
chaced by Nicephorus. 107 Isaac Angelo, Emperor of the East, deprived of the
Empire, of sight and of liberty. 261 Isabella Widow of John King of England.
302 Isabella of Tholoza, her death. 316 Isabella of France, Married to Thibauld
King of Navarre. Her death. ib. Isabella of France. 327 Isabella Queen of
England passes into France. 351 Sent away from Court, she retires again into
France. ib. At her return into England, she revenges her self of her Husband by
a most horrible treatment. Afterward chastised her self in her turn. 352
Isemburge of Denmark, Wife of King Philip Augustus, repudiated by her Husband.
277, etc. Italy become a Kingdom. 13 In trouble. 134 Is horribly rent by the
Guelfs, and the Gibbelins. 303 Italians inconstant. 168 Judicael in Bretagne.
157 Judith Daughter of Charles the Bald, stolen by the Earl of Flanders. 140
Judith second Wife of Lewis the Debonaire. 129 Suspected, and even accused of
impurity. 130 Ives Bishop of Chastres, a great defender of the Discipline of
the Canons. 223 Justice exercised by such as made profession of bearing Arms
under the Kings of the first Race. 48 Punishment of Crimes, and diverse means to
purge themselves of several Crimes. 48, 49 Justification by cold Water, by hot
Water, and by Fire. ib.
L.
St. Lambert Bishop of Liege, Divine punishment of his Murderer. 72 Lambert
Earl of Nantes. 134 Lambert Son of Guy, Crowned Emperor in Italy. 160 Landry
Maire of the Palace. 41 Language, natural of the first Frenchmen. 50
Lasciviousness of a Prince cause of great evils. 30, etc. Latilli Peter, Bishop
of Chalons and Chancellor of France, put out of his Office and imprisoned. 344
Launoy John, Viceroy of Navarre. 323 Lauria Roger Admiral. 320 Legates sent into
France. 230 Ledger Saint Bishop of Autun. Persecuted and confined in the
Monastery of Luxeu. 65 Re-established in his Episcopal See. ib. His Eyes put
out, the Soles of his Feet cut away, and his Lips, then shut up in a Monastery.
67, 68 His death. ib. Leo IV. Pope, his death. 138 Leo Emperor disputes the
Worship of Images, and will have them taken out of the Churches. 84 Leo elected
Pope. 105 Ill treated at Rome, has recourse to Charlemain, and comes to him,
105, etc. Makes another Voyage into France. 108 Leo Pope, acts of severity, his
death. 121 Leo VIII. elected Pope, in the place of John the XII. 185 His death.
186 Leo IX. Pope, comes into France, and holds a Council at Reims. 217 Is made
Prisoner by the Normands of Italy. 218 Leo Isauric Excommunicated. 266 Letters
of Exemption false, counterfeited by certain Monks. 290 Leudesia Maire of the
Palace. 67 Levies of Moneys of three sorts. 111 Leutard an Heretic, his
unhappy end. 228 Levigildus King of Spain, causes his Son Hermenigilde to be
strangled. 38 His death. ib. Lezignan Guy. 257 Liturgy, or Mass according to
the Church of Rome, brought into France. 102 Locusts in a prodigious quantity.
144 Lombards pass into Italy, and establish a Kingdom. 29 Descend into
Provence, and the Kingdom of Burgundy to their own confusion. 30 Will have no
more Kings, and commit the Government to thirty Dukes. 31 Restore Kingly
Government. 36 Lombards reduced to reason. 186 Lorraine parted in two. 143
Given to the Kings of Germany. 149 The Sovereignty of that Kingdom remains in
Lothaire King of France. 188 Lothaire eldest Son of Lewis the Debonaire, is
made King of Italy, and associated in the Empire. 122 Lothaire King of Italy.
His Marriage with Hermengarde. 123 Is Crowned Emperor by the Pope. ib. Lothaire
King of Italy seizes on the Empire of his Father, and shuts him up in St.
Medard at Soissons, then causes him to be degraded, after his public Penance.
127, 128 Lothaire King of Italy, difference between him and Charles his
Brother, touching their shares, after the death of their Father. 134
Reconciliation with Charles his Brother. 138 Changes his Imperial Purple, for a
Friars Frock. ib. His Wife and Children. ib. Lothaire II. of Lorraine. 139 He
repudiates Thietberge his Wife to Espouse Valdrade, and that made a great deal
of noise. 140 The said Marriage annulled, and he Excommunicated by the Pope.
141 Passes into Italy against the Saracens, his death by Divine Punishment. 142
His Children. ib. Lothaire Son of the King of Italy. 179 Lothaire King of
France. 183 His Marriage with Emma, or Emina, Daughter of Lothaire King of
Italy. 187 Enterprise upon Lorraine. 188 Repels and chases the Germans out of
France, where they had made an irruption. 189 Repasses into Lorraine. -- Causes
his Son Lewis to be Crowned and to Reign with him. ib. His death. 189 Lothaire
Duke of Saxony elected Emperor. 238 Lothaire II. Emperor, his death. 243 Louis
of Aquitaine, passes into Italy, to the assistance of his Brother Pepin. 104
Besieges and takes Narbonne and Tortosae. 106, etc. Louis, or Lewis, the
Debonaire, his coming to the Crown. 120 Purges the Court of Scandal. ib. His
Coronation, and of the Empress Hermengarde. -- His continual exercises of Piety
and Devotion. 122 Concerns himself in the reformation of the Clergy, and draws
upon him the hatred of the Churchmen. 122 Associates Lothaire his eldest Son in
the Empire, and shares for his other Children. ib. Severely punishes the King
of Italy his Nephew who had conspired against his Person, and his Accomplices.
122, 123 Causes all his Bastard Brothers to be shaved. ib. Reduces Bretagne to
a Duchy. ib. Marries a second Wife after the death of Hermengarde. ib. Marries
all his Sons. 124 Subdues the Bretons. ib. Gives occasion of discontent to his
Children, who conspire against him, and shut him up Prisoner, in the Abbey St.
Medard of Soissons. 125, etc. Does public Penance, and is degraded. 126, etc.
Is re-established in his Royal Throne. 128 Divides again his Estates of France
Eastern and Western. 129 His death, his Wives, his Children. 130 Of his great
care in regulating all that concerned the advantage and administration of the
Church, the discipline of the Clergy, etc. 170 Louis, Son of Lewis the
Debonaire, is made King of Bavaria. 122 Louis King of Bavaria embraces the
Cause of his Father Lewis the Debonaire, afterward turns against him. 126
Louis Emperor King of Italy. 138 Louis the Germanick usurps Neustria upon his
Brother Charles. 139 Divides Lorraine with him. 142 Troubled and disquieted by
his Children. 144 His death. ib. Louis the Emperor and King of Italy, despised
by his Subjects. 138 Makes a League with Lewis the Germanick against Charles
the Bald. 139 Difference about Lorraine. 143 Is despised of his Subjects. ib.
His death. 144 Louis the Stammerer Emperor and King of Neustria, or West-
France, Aquitain, and Burgundy. 148 Is Crowned Emperor by Pope John. ib. His
death. 149 Louis III. and Carloman his Brother, Kings of West- France, Burgundy
and Aquitain. 148, etc. Death of Lewis. 152 Louis Son of Boson seizes upon
Provence. 156, etc. Louis Son of Arnold, Emperor of Germany, and King of
Lorraine. 162 His death. 163 Louis the Blind King of Provence. 170 Louis IV.
called Transmarine, is recalled from England, owned and Crowned King of France.
175, 6 Abandoned of all his Subjects in Neustria, is constrained to save his
life by a shameful flight. 177 Makes a Peace, and is reconciled to his
Subjects. 179 Seizes Richard Duke of Normandy. ib. His precipitate revenge
draws great difficulties upon him. 178 Is carried Prisoner to Rouen. ib. Is
restored to liberty. 179 Brouilleries in France. 180, etc. Is reconciled with
Hugh le Blanc, and they make Peace together. 181 His death. ib. Louis King of
Aquitain chastises the Revolt of the Gascons. 110 Associated to the Empire, and
declared Emperor by Charlemain, his Father. 111 Louis King of France, called
the idle or Lazy, Marries a Princess of Aquitain, named Blanch. 198 His death.
ib. Louis, called the Gross, Son of King Philip, designed King, takes up the
Government of Affairs. 226 Passes into England. 227 Betrothed to Luciane
Daughter of Guy de Rochefort. 227 His pretended Marriage with Luciana broken by
the Pope. ib. Quarrels and brouilleries with his Subjects. 234 Defeats the
English in Battle about Gisors. 35 Renewing of the War between those two
Princes. 236 Strongly opposes the Emperors Efforts, who would needs be
revenged, because he had protected Pope Calixtus II. 236, etc. Reduces the
Count d'Auvergne to reason. 238 Revenges the Parricide committed on the Person
of the Earl of Flanders. 239 Causes his Son Philip to be Crowned. ib. Becomes
an Enemy to the Clergy his Subjects, and is Excommunicated. 239, etc. His
death, his Wives, his Children. 241 Lewis the Young Crowned in the life time of
his Father Lewis the Gross. 240 Louis, the Young, he Marries Alienor Daughter
of the Duke of Aquitaine. ib. Establishes Justice, and secures the public
safety. 242 Is Excommunicated, and his Kingdom put under an interdiction by the
Pope. 243 Receives Pope Eugenius into France. 244 Takes the Cross, and goes
into the Holy Land. ib. His return into France. 245 Repudiates Queen Alienor,
and Marries the Daughter of Alphonso VII. King of Castille. 243 Goes to St.
Jago in Gallicia out of Devotion. 246 Difference with Henry King of England for
the County of Touloze. 248 He makes Alliance by Marriage with the House of
Champagne. 249 Suppresses the disorders of his Kingdom. ib. Enters into War
again with the King of England, their Reconciliation. ib. Takes the protection
of the King of England's Children, against their Father. 250 Passes over into
England, and goes to visit the Tomb of St. Thomas of Canterbury. ib. His death,
his Wives, his Children. 251 Louis VIII. King of France his Birth. 254 Parlies
with the Emperor Federic II. 266 His Coronation, at Reims. 295 Enterview with
Henry Son of the Emperor Federic. 295 Crosses himself against the Albigenses,
and makes War upon them in Person. 296 His death, his Wife, and his Children.
296, 297 St. Louis King of France, his Coronation. 298 Great disturbances in
the State at the beginning of his Reign. ib. etc. He Vows to make War against
the Infidels. 303 Voyage to the Holy Land. 304, etc. His Army entirely
defeated, and he made Prisoner of War by the Infidels. 305 Is set at liberty
with all the rest of the French Prisoners. 306 Whether it be true he gave a
Consecrated Wafer, as a pawn for his Word. 305 He visits the Holy Places, in
the Holy Land. 307 His return into France. ib. He entertains the King of
England magnificently. ib. Regulates his Kingdom by good Laws, and exercises
himself in good Works. 308 Endeavors to accommodate Affairs between the
Barons, and their King Henry. 309 Undertakes a new Crosade for relief of the
Christians in the Levant, passes into Africa, besieges Tunis, his death. 312,
313 Elogy. ib. His Children. ib. Louis Son of King Philip, and the eldest of
the first Bed, his death. 317 Louis Earl of Euvreux. 321 Louis the Debonair
deposed by the Bishops. 127 Leonis Peter, Antipope, surnamed Anacletus, his
real Right enfeebled by his ill Conduct. 274 Louis VI. courageously opposes the
unjust pretentions of the Popes. 306 Louis Hutin eldest Son of Philip the Fair,
is Crowned King of Navarre. 334 His Wife accused of Adultery. 336 Louis Hutin
King of France. ib. He finds the Kingdom in Combustion for the vexation of
Imposts, and alteration of Moneys. 344 Inquisition after the Financiers. ib. He
takes up Arms against the Flemings. 345 His death, his Wives, and Children. ib.
Louis eldest Son of the Earl of Flanders, accused for designing to poison his
Father. 348 Louis Count of Nevers and Rhetel, his death. 523 Lewis Count of
Flanders, of Nevers, and of Rhetel. 524 Louis de Bavierre passes the Mountains.
352 Luitgarde Queen of France, her death. 106 Lutgarde Queen of France. 209
Luzignan Hugh Count de la March. 438
M.
Of St. Magdelane, and the finding of her Corpse. 341 Mahaut Countess of
Flanders. 345 Mahomet, his death. 47 Of his Successors. 59 Mainfroy Prince of
Tarentum. -- Mainfroy the Bastard usurps the Kingdom of Sicilia, and disturbs
the Pope, and Territories of the Church. 309 Contracts an Alliance with the
King of Arragon. ib. His death. 310 Manuel Emperor of Greece his
perfidiousness, and horrible Treason. 244 Merchants of France. 256 Marches of
Spain fall under the Dominion of the French. 101 Margaret of Provence Marries
King Lewis IX. 300 Margaret of Provence accompanies the King St. Lewis in his
Voyage to the Holy Land. 304 Margaret Countess of Flanders. 304 Margaret of
France betrothed to Henry Duke of Brabant, and afterward Married to Henry his
Brother. 313 Margaret of France Marries the King of England. 321 Marriages of
our first French. 49 Marriage of the Degrees prohibited by the Canons. 52
Marriage. The French did repudiate their Wives when they pleased: The Kings
themselves had often times several. 72 Marriages prohibited, such as Marry
within the degrees forbidden, are most commonly unhappy. 223 Marriages
prohibited even to the seventh degree. 232 Marriage of King Philip with
Isemburge of Denmark. 258 Marriage of Mary Agnes with King Philip. 260 Marriage
of Isabella d'Angoulesme with King John without Land. 261 Marriage of Jane de
Toulouze with Alfonso Earl of Poitou. Marriage of St. Lewis with Margaret of
Provence. 300 Marriage of Beatrix Countess of Provence, with Charles Earl of
Anjou. 303 Marriage of Berenguelle de Castille with Alfonso King of Leon,
declared null. 306 Marriage between the Princess of Arragon, and the eldest Son
of the Bastard Mainfroy. 309 Marriage of Blanch of France with Ferdinand of
Castille. 312 Marriage of the Children of St. Lewis. 313 Marriage of Philip the
Hardy with Mary of Brabant. 316 Marriage of Jane Queen of Navarre with the
eldest Son of the King of France. 320 Marriage of the two Daughters of the Earl
of Burgundy with the two Sons of Philip the Fair. 324 Marriage of the Earl of
Valois with the Daughter of the King of Sicily. 324 Marriage of Lewis of France
with Blanch of Castille: and of Philip of France with the Daughter of the Earl
of Boulogne. 241 Marriage of Rodolfe Son of Albert with Blanch of France. 328
Marriage of Jane of Burgundy with Philip d'Euvreux. 345 Marriage of Margaret of
France with the Earl of Nevers and Rhotel. 348 Marriage of Jane Countess of
Burgundy and Artois, with the Duke of Burgundy: Of Margaret of France with the
Earl of Flanders; and Isabella of France also with the Daufin of Viennois. 349
Marriage of Mary Daughter of the Emperor Henry of Luxemburg with the King of
France. 350 Marriage sometimes permitted to the Subdeacons, sacrilege in the
Deacons. 274 Mary of Brabant Queen of France. 316 Mary of Luxemburg Queen of
France, her death. 350 Marles Thomas, revolts against Enguerand de Boves his
Father. 227 Excommunicated by the Popes Legate, his unhappy end. 235, 236
Marseilles besieged, and rendered at discretion. 308 St. Martial revered as an
Apostle. 231 Martin Governor in part of Austrasia: his unhappy end. 69, 70
Martin IV. Pope Excommunicates and degrades the Arragonian, and causes a
Croisade to be published against him. 320 Martin Monk of the Cistertians a
Cardinal, his praise. 293 Matthew de Montmorency goes to the Holy Land. 261,
etc. Matthew Abbot of St. Denis in France, Regent of the Kingdom in the absence
of the King St. Lewis. 312 Matthew first Duke of Milan. 325 Matilda Daughter of
Henry King of England declared Heiress of all his Estates. 239, etc. Maxim
seizes on the Empire, his death. -- St. Mayeule. 205 Malec-Sala Sultan utterly
defeats the French Christian Army. 305 Melun, the subject of a War. 208
Meroveus third King of France, from whom the Kings of the first Race have taken
the name of Merovingians. 10 Joins with the Romans against Attila. ib.
Continues his Conquests in Gaul: his death. 11 Meroveus Son of Chilperic,
Espouses Brunehaud. 32 Shut up in the Monastery of St. Calais. 33 Escapes from
the Monastery, his unhappy end. ib. Metaphysick of Aristotle. 265 Meteors
representing Battles in the Air. 257 Metropolitans. Their Authority lessened by
the Popes. 230 Milan Duchy, and their first Duke. 325 Militia and Military
Discipline in the days of the Carlovinians. 117 Militia. The first of the Kings
of France who had any Forces in pay. 259 Milon Vicount of Troyes. 325 Milon the
Popes Legate in France. 264 Miracles supposed. 188 Missionaries Apostolic sent
into Gaul, to declare and preach the Faith of Jesus Christ. 4 Mogles People and
Nations. 302 Monks declaiming against the Temporal Goods of the Church and the
Sacraments condemned. 276 Monk John the Cardinal comes into France on behalf of
the Pope. 329 Monks and their first Establishment in Gall. 4 Seize upon Cures.
Church of the Eleventh Age quit them; but retain the Revenues. ib. Molay James
great Master of the Templars burnt alive. 333 Mommole Patrician. 34 Monarchy
French divided into five Dominions, or Governments. 156 Monasteries. 53 Built
and founded in great numbers in France. 74, 75 Filled with Hypocrites. 285
Moncade Gaston, Lord of Bearn. 315 Money amongst the first French. 49 The
change and abasing of Money, cause of an emotion and rising amongst the
Populace of Paris. 333 Monothelites. France had no share in their disputes. 76
Munderic pretends to be King, his death. 23 Mutiny of the Flemings against
their Earl. 351
N.
Namur, chief of the Counts of Namur. 216 Nantilde repudiated by King Clotaire
II. who afterward takes her again. 55 Narbona held by the Saracens rendered to
King Pepin. 93 Navarre falls under the Dominion of the French. 101 Its
beginning to be a Kingdom. 125 In trouble and divisions after the death of King
Henry the Fat. 317 Neomenie makes himself Master of Bretagne, and drives out
the French, declaring himself the Sovereign. 135 Is Crowned King of Bretagne.
136 Over-runs and ransacks Anjou. 137 Nera Foulges. 204 Neustria and its
extent* 17 Nicephorous Emperor of the East. 107 His death. 110 Nicholas Moine,
or Monk, of Soissons, contradicted by a Modern Author. Church of the Twelfth
Age. Nicholas I. Pope, Excommunicates a Council of Bishops in France, who
declare him Excommunicate. 141 Annul the second Marriage of Lotaire King of
Lorraine, with Valdrade, and confirm the first with Thietberge. ib. Nicholas
III. Pope conspires against Charles King of Sicilia. 318 His death. 319 Nogaret
William seizes on the Person of Pope Boniface. 332, etc. St. Norbert Founder of
the Order of Premonstre, afterward Archbishop of Magdeburg. Church in the
Twelfth Age. Normandy first erected to a Duchy. 163 Ravaged by a Civil War
between the Heirs of Henry King of England after his death. 170, etc. All in
Blood and Fire by the quarrels of the particular Lords of the Country. 215
Normans course along the Coasts of France. 123 Their descents and pillaging of
Gascogne and Aquitania Secunda. 134 Course along the Coasts of Spain, and take
Sevill. 125 Course along the Coasts of Flanders. 129 Land in Neustria and
Bretagne. 135 Enter upon Neustria again. ib. Called Truands. 146 Scowre,
pillage, and ravage France. 151, etc. Besieges the City of Paris. 155 Defeated
and cut in pieces. 157 Whence so great numbers of such barbarous People could
come into France. 158 Re-enter France by the Mouth of the River Seine. 160
Become Masters of that Province called since Normandy, and on Bretagne. 163
Revolt against their Duke. 178 Their name began to grow glorious and powerful
in Italy. 215 Nantes County; Difference between Henry King of England, and
Conan Count of Renes, or of the Lesser Bretagne. 247
O.
Odo Duke of Burgundy. 237 Odo third Duke of Burgundy. 248 Reduced to reason.
254 Odo I. Abbot of St. Genevieve. 278 Office of Constable. 295 Officers.
Princes are responsable for the faults of their Officers. 304 Ogine Queen of
France. 175 Onfroy Chief of the Normans in Italy, and of his Conquests. 216
Orders Sacred, and of such as were admitted during the Eighth Century. 115
Orders famous, which took beginning during the Eleventh Age. 233 Orders
Religious established during the Third Age. 339 Orders Sacred, have each their
Function. 286 Order of Fontevraud, and its confirmation. 290 Organs, when first
brought and used in France. 93 Oriflame born as a Standar in time of War. 244
Ostrogoths overrun and ravage all Italy. 217 Otho William chief of the Earls
of Burgundy, that is to say, of the Franche-Comte. 209 His death. 212 Othelin
Earl of Burgundy puts himself under protection of the King of France, and gives
him his Earldom. 324 Othomans, or Ottomans, and the beginning of their dreadful
Family or House. 329 Otho King of Germany and Lorrain, assists Lewis the
Transmarine against his Subjects. 179 Otho Duke of Burgundy. 184 Otho King of
Germany, makes himself Master of Italy; Is Crowned King of Lombardy, afterward
Crowned Emperor. 185 Remedies several Commotions in Italy by severe
punishments. ib. Causes his Son Otho to be Crowned and Associated in the
Empire. 186 His death. 187 Otho II. Emperor and King of Germany. 186 Gives
Lorraine to his Brother Charles. 188 Makes an irruption in France to his
confusion. ib. His death. 189 Otho III. Emperor and King of Germany, his death.
209 Otho Emperor. 263 Is Excommunicated by Pope Innocent. 264
P.
Paganis Hugh, Institutor of the Order of the Templers. 275 Pairs of France,
who were to assist at the Coronation of the Kings, reduced to the number of
Twelve. 240 Paleologus Michael becomes Master of the City of Constantinople.
309 Pamiez made a Bishopric. 326 Paris very much considered by the Kings of
the first Race. 31 Paving of its Streets. 254 Surrounded with Walls. 255
Parliament of Worms. 142 Of Attigny. 265 Parliament of Poissy. 142 Parliament
of Compeigne. 184 Parliament of Worms. 152 Parliament of Estampes. 217
Parliament of Soissons. 266 Parliament of Amiens. 309 Pascal Pope, Murder
committed in his House, in hatred of the French. His death. 124 Paschal II.
Pope comes into France, and holds a Council at Troyes in Champagne. 227 Ill
treated by the Emperor. 236 Paschal III. Antipope. 272 Pastorels Crossed. 306
Patarins Heretics. 278 Peasants and Pastorels take up Arms for the recovery of
the Holy Land. 348 Peace with the Danes. 110 With the Saracens of Spain. ib.
With the Greecks. ib. Peace between King Lewis the Transmarine, and his
Rebellious Subjects. 178 Peace between King Lewis the Transmarine, and Hugh le
Blanc. 180 Peace between the two Empires. Between the French and the Danes. 123
With the Saracens of Spain. 123 Peace between King Lothaire and the Emperor
Otho II. 188 Peace with the English. 236 Penitence public. 274 Penitents
public excluded from Functions Civil, Military, and from Marriage. ib. Pepin
Maire of the Palace of Austrasia, his death. 58 Pepin the Gross, or d'Herstal
Prince of Austrasia. 69 Makes War upon Thierry King of Neustria, seizes his
Person and the Government of all France. ib. Reduces the Revolted Frisians.
ib. Assembles a Council. 70 Expedition against the Almans. 72 Makes an Alliance
with Bathod Duke or King of the Frisons. ib. His death, his Children. 78 Pepin
the Brief, Son of Charles Martel, Duke and Prince of the French in Neustria. 84
He, with his Brother, ranges the Dukes of Aquitain, who were revolted, to
reason. 86 Pepin called the Brief, Elected, Anointed, and Crowned King of
France. 90 A generous action that made him more considerable amongst the French
Lords of his Court. ib. Makes the Saxons Tributaries to France. 92 Becomes
Protector of the Roman Church, against the Lombards; Marches into Italy with
his Army, and compels Astolphus to give up the Exarchat of Ravenna, and the
Justices of St. Peter. 92, 93 Receives the Oath of Fidelity of the Duke of
Bavaria. 94 Forces the Saxons to do the same, and to pay him Tribute. ib.
Subdues all Aquitain, in diverse and several Expeditions. 95 His death, his
Wives, and Children. ib. Pepin King of Italy, his feats of Arms. 109
Unfortunate Enterprise against the Venetians. 110 His death. ib. Pepin Son of
Lewis the Debonaire, is made King of Aquitain. 122 Espouses Engheltrude. 123
Pepin Son of Bernard King of Italy, chief of the first Branch of Vermandois.
123 Pepin King of Aquitain. 122 He embraces the Cause of the Emperor his Father
against his Brother Lothaire, then turns against him. 126 His death, his Wife,
and his Children. 129 Pepin King of Aquitain shaved and confined in a
Monastery, and afterward in the Castle of Senlis. 137 Perfidiousness of the
Emperor against the Christians of the second Croisade, to the Holy Land. 225
Phenomenas very extraordinary. 109 Philip King of France. 220 Concerns himself
in the Quarrel of the Flemings unsuccessfully. 222 Runs into disorders and
vexations with his Subjects. ib. Is threatened with Excommunication by the Pope.
ib. Repudiates Berthe his Wife, and Marries Bertrade. 223 Is Excommunicated
because of this new Marriage, by the Bishops, by the Pope, and by a Council at
Poitiers. ib. Braved by the Lord de Montlehery. ib. In fine obtains a
dispensation in the Court of Rome, is absolved, and his Marriage is confirmed.
226 His death, his Wives, and Children. 227 Philip Brother of King Lewis the
Gross, sides with the discontented Party. 2^5 Philip Augustus King of France,
his Birth. 249 His Coronation. 250 His Marriage with Isabella Alix. 251 He
begins his Reign and Government with Piety and Justice. 252 He withdraws
Vermandois from the hands of the Earl of Flanders. 252 He sends succors to the
Holy Land, and causes the Croisade to be preached. 253 Difference between him
and the King of England. 254 Takes the Cross on him, with the King of England,
for the recovery of the Holy Land. 255 Gives chase to the King of England, who
was entered upon France. ib. His Voyage to the Holy Land; Order for the Regency
of his Son, and Kingdom during his absence. ib. Difference intervened between
him, and Richard King of England. 256 Takes the City of Acre, or Ptolemais. ib.
Falls sick, and returns into France. 257 Withdraws the County of Artois from
the hands of the Earl of Flanders. ib. Declares War against the King of
England. 258 Repudiates Isemberge his Wife, then takes her again. ib.
Reconciles himself with John King of England. 259 Endeavors to accustom the
Ecclesiastics to furnish him with Subsidies. 261 Conquers all the Territories
of King John, which held of the Crown. 261, etc. Philip the Fair, King of
France, Marries the Queen of Navarre. 320 Is Crowned at Reims. 322 Accommodates
and makes Peace with the Castillian. 323 Causes search to be made amongst the
Banquers. 324 Opposes the designs of the King of England, for the subjecting of
Scotland, and recovering the Cities in Guyenne. 325 Is offended with Pope
Boniface. 326 A great Conspiracy against him. 326 Makes War in Flanders: his
progress. 327, etc. Confers with the Emperor Albertus. 328 Enters into a
quarrel with the Pope, and hinders the French Prelates from going to Rome,
whither the Pope sent for them. 329 Is Excommunicated by the Pope. ib. Takes up
Arms to chastize the Rebellion of the Flemings. 330 Treats a Peace with the
English. ib. Makes a Voyage into Guyenne and Languedoc. 331 Fore-arms himself
against the B^lls of B^niface. ib. Assists at the Coronation of Pope Clement at
Lions. 332 Appears at the General Council of Vienne in Daufine. ib. Undertakes
War against the Flemings. -- His three Sons Wives accused of Adultery. His
death, his Wives, and Children. 336 Philip of Alsace, Earl of Flanders, his
death. 257 Philip of Dreux Bishop of Beauvais, is held Prisoner. 258 Philip
Earl of Boulogne. 299 Philip Emperor assassinated. 264 Philip the Hardy King of
France. 314 Returns from Afric into France. ib. He Arms against the King of
Castille in favor of the Princes of Navarre his Nephews. 316 Takes up Arms,
and passes the Pyrenean Mountains, against the King of Arragon. 320 His death,
his Wives, and his Children. 321 Philip the Long espouses Jane of Burgundy. 324
Philip d'Euvreux. 348 Philip the Long, King of France. 347 His Wife accused of
Adultery. 336 Brouilleries in the State. 348 His death, his Children. 349
Philip de Valois passes into Italy against the Gibbelins. 348 Philippa Daughter
of the Earl of Hainault. 352 Peter Son of King Lewis the Gross, chief of the
House of Courtenay. 241 Peter Duke of Bretagne, takes Arms against the King.
296 Surnamed Mauclerc, or Illiterate, or Witless. 300 His death. 301 Peter Earl
of Alencon. 312 Peter Earl of Arragon Crowned King of Sicilia. 317 A villainous
and shameful slight. 320 Is Excommunicated and degraded by the Pope. ib. His
death. 321 Peter Abbot of Cane, refuses the Miter. 270 Planet Mars, not visible
in a whole year. 105 Plectrude Widow of Pepin, intrudes into the whole
Government of France. 78 She is constrained to quit the Government to Charles
Martel. 79 Poissy Gerard Financier. 254 Politics Heretics. 276 Poland
honored with the Title of a Kingdom. 209 Ponce Abbot of Clugny, by his
Debauches loses the Reputation of his Order. 279 Papeli^ans Heretics* their
Forces and Er^ors. 276 Popes of the Fourth Age. 5 Popes, when they began to
change names, at their creation. 136 Memorable example of their Sovereign
power, and of an extreme severity. 209 Of their Elections. 247 Have a right to
exhort, not to command the Kings of France. 326 Acts of Temporal Sovereignty
they assumed on all occasions, during the Thirteenth Age. 337 They would raise
themselves above all Sovereigns. 293 Gilbert Porct Bishop of Poitiers
condemned. 289 Port Royal, its foundation. 83 Portugal, of a Duchy, made a
Kingdom. 243 Pragmatick of St. Lewis. 312 Pretextat, Archbishop of Rouen. 32
Restored to his See, and assassinated. 38 Prior of the Monastery of Gristan his
History. 288 Primacy of the Church of Lions over the four Lyonnoises. 232
Prince that oppresses his Subjects, is easily abandonned by them. 45 Prince
dispoiled of his Estate because of his ill Conduct. 161 Privileges of Monks.
282 Bring a Scandal to the Church. Buy it off dearly at Rome. ib. Prodigy
unheard of, of Snakes and other Serpents, who fought most obstinately. 2^8
Protade Maire of the Palace. 43 Provenceaux rise against their Earl and Lord.
301 Provisions of the Pope. 236 Petro Brusians, Heretics. 276 Puisset Hugh.
235
Q.
Quarrel between Thierry and Boson. 146 Quarrel for the Archbishopric of
Reims. 177, etc. Quarrel and hatred of the ^arls of Char^res and Flanders,
against the Normans. 186 Quarrel famous between the Pope, and the Emperors. 223
Quarrel between Robert Duke of Normandy, and Henry his younger Brother for the
Kingdom of England. 226 Quarrel of the Popes with the Emperor Henry IV. 227,
etc. Quarrel between the Bishops and the Monks, for the Tenths. 228 Quarrel
between the Emperor, and the Pope for the investiture of Bishoprics. 236
Quarrel between the Secular Doctors of Theology, and the Orders of Religious
Mendicants. 307 Quarrel of the Count d'Armagnac, and the Lord de Casaubon. 315
Quarrel bloody and long for the Succession of the Crown of Scotland. 323
Quarrels. Little particular Riots, do often produce very great Quarrels. 325
Q^i^alet Bishopric transferred to St. Malo's. Church of the Twelfth Century.
R.
Rabanus Maurus Archbishop of Ments. 173 Race Carolovinian, and the end of it.
Causes of its ruin. 198, 199 Rachis King of the Lombards turns Monk. 91 Leaves
his Monastery, whither he is forced to return again. -- Radbod King of the
Frisians. 72 Radegonda Saint. 22 Raillery that cost very dear. 222 Raimond
Earl of Tolose, principal Favourer of the Heretics in Languedoc, is
Excommunicated. 264 Reconciles himself to the Church. 295 Is brought to reason.
299 Raimond Earl of Toloze, pretends to be Lord of the Marsellois, etc. 300
Raimond Prince of Antioch. Rainfroy Maire of the Neustrians. 79 His death. 81
Rambold of Orange. 224 Ranulf Duke of Aquitaine. -- Rapes. The Emperors
Daughter taken away. 136 Rebellion of the Sorabes. 121 Of the Gascons. ib. Of
the Bretons. 124 Rebellion of Children against their Father punished. 144
Rebellion of the Earl of Poitou and Duke of Aquitain. 184 Rebellion punished.
211 Rebellion of the Aquitains against their Duke. 216 Rebellion of the
Children of the King of England. 250 Reconciliation of the two Brothers Lewis
and Charles, and their Nephew Lotaire. 140 Reformation of Monasteries, and
Religious Houses. 205 Regency of a Woman causes great troubles in the Kingdom.
298 Regency of the Kingdom without a King. 345 Relics of St. Denis and his
Companions. 45 Relics of Saints carried for Ensigns of War. 216 Remistang
hanged. 94 Remond Count of Tolouse. 224 Renauld de Dampmartin. 259 Renauld Earl
of Boulogne, suspected of Intelligence with the English, refuses to obey the
King. 266 Reputation of Isemburge of Denmark by King Philip Augustus. 257 Of
Havoise of Gloucester by King John without Land. 261 Retreat of many great
Persons into the Monasteries. 112 Revolt of Verdun. 15 Of Auvergne against
their King Thierry. 22 Revolt of the Saxons chastised. 46 Revolt of the
Visigoths in Septimania. 65 Revolt of the Turingians, the Frisons, the Saxons,
and the Almans, who shook off the Yoke of the French. 71 The same, the
Aquitanians, and the Gascons. ib. Revolt of the Frisons. 72 Revolt of
Aquitaine. 95 Of the Saxons. 98 Revolt of the Gascons chastised. 107 Of the
Duke of Benevent. 108 Revolt of Panonia inferior. 123 Revolt in Aquitaine. 158
Revolt of the Neustrians against their King. 177 Of the Normans against their
young Duke Richard. 178 Revolt in Lombardy. 186 Revolt of a Son against his
Father. 227 Revolt and rising of the Flemings against their Count. 299 Revolt
of the Romans against Pope Eugenius. 244 Revolt of the Marseillois against the
Earl of Provence, attended with a long War. 300 Revolt and general conspiracy
of all Sicilia against the French. 319 Reims, otherwhile Metropolis of Liege.
Church of the Twelfth Age. Richard Duke of Normandy. 178 Taken away by King
Lewis the Transmarine, is industriously saved, both he and his Duchess. 178
Richard Duke of Normandy in War with the Earl of Chartres. 187 Richard without
Fear, Duke of Normandy, his death. 204 Richard I. Duke of Normandy, his death.
208 Richard II. called the Good, Duke of Normandy, his death. 212 Richard III.
Duke of Normandy. 212 His death. 213 Richard Duke of Aquitaine betrothed to
Alix of France. 250 Richard Duke of Aquitaine takes Arms against the King of
England his Father. ib. Richard Earl of Poitou refuses his Homage to the King
for his County of Poitou. 254 Richard Earl of Poitou. He quarrels for the
County of Tolose, and strives to invade it by force of Arms. 255 Falls out with
the King of England his Father. ib. Richard King of England, before Earl of
Poitou. 256 He accompanies the King of France in his Expedition to the Holy
Land. ib. Great misunderstanding happens betwixt these two Princes. ib. His
admirable progress in his Voyage. 257 Quits the Holy Land, to return to his own
Kingdom, and is taken Prisoner in Germany. ib. Had great Wars with the French.
258 His death. 259 Richard, Brother of Henry King of England, lands at
Bourdeaux with a potent Army. 296 Richard pretended King of the Romans. 309 His
death. 315 Richilda, Wife of Charles the Bald, is Crowned by the Pope. 145
Richilda, Countess of Flanders. 221 Robert the Strong, or the Valiant, the
Stock of the Capetine Race. 140 His death, his Children. 142 Robert elected and
Crowned King of France, to the prejudice of Charles the Simple. 165 His death.
ib. Robert Earl of Troyes and of Chaalons. 184 Robert I. Duke of Burgundy,
Chief of the first Race of the Dukes of Burgundy. 214 His death. 215 Robert,
called the Frison, Earl of Flanders, his death. 221 Robert King of France. 202
He Marries Lutgarde for his first Wife, and for his second Bertha, Sister of
Rodolph the idle King of Burgundy. 202, 209 Excommunicated by the Pope, because
of his second Marriage. 209 Recovers by the Sword, the Duchy of Burgundy,
which Otho-Guilliame had usurped. ib. Marries for his third Wife Constance
Blanch. 210 Addicts himself wholly to works of Piety. ib. Causes his Son Hugh
to be Crowned. 211 Re-joyns the County of Sens to his Domaine. ib. Admirable
patience. 212 Act of Bounty, or Goodness, more then Royal. ib. He refuses the
Kingdom of Italy for his Son. ib. Causes his Son Henry to be Crowned after the
death of his Son Hugh. ib. Institutes by his Authority a Bishop at Langres. 213
His death, and his Children. ib. Robert becomes Duke of Normandy, by a
fratricide. 212 Assists King Henry against his Enemies. 215 Constrains the
Bretons to do him Homage. ib. His death. ib. Robert Guischard a Normand,
Conquers Calabria. 218 Robert, called of Jerusalem, Earl of Flanders. 222
Robert Duke of Normandy. ib. One of the Chiefs of the first Croisade. 224 At
his return from the Holy Land, he demands the Kingdom of England of Henry his
Brother, who had seized it during his absence, his death. 227 Robert Earl of
Flanders his death. 235 Robert Earl of Auvergne, tyrannizes the Bishop of
Clairmont, is reduced to reason by the King. 238 Robert Son of King Lewis the
Gross, chief of the House of Dreux. 241 Robert Earl of Dreux. 299 Robert Earl
of Gloucester. 243 Robert Earl of Artois, chief of the Branch of that name. 297
Accompanies King Lewis in his Voyage to the Holy Land. 304 His death. 305
Robert II. Earl of Flanders. 312 Robert Earl of Clairmont in Beauvaisis,
Original of the Branch of Bourbon. 313 Robert Earl of Artois. 315 Commands an
Army for the King in Navarre. 318 Robert Earl of Artois makes War in Flanders.
327 Robert Earl of Flanders. 335 Robert de Bethune Earl of Flanders breaks the
Truce. 348 Rochefort Guy, makes War upon his King. 234 Rochel taken from the
English. 296 Rodolph, or Ralph King of Burgundy, Transjurane and Arles, his
death. 214 Rodolf his Election to the Empire confirmed. 316 Rodolf Rufus,
elected Emperor. -- Rodolfe Emperor, his death. 324 Roger Duke of the Normands
of Italy, passes from thence into Sicilia against the Saracens, and makes
himself Master of all the Island. 221 Roger Earl of Foix. 315 Roger Duke of
Pouille, or Puglia, Crossed by the Pope, who makes War upon him. 239 The first
King of Sicilia. 241 Roger I. King of Sicilia, his death. 246 Roger de Lauria a
famous Captain. 331 Roger de Mortimer. 352 Roger Earl of Alby favors the
Albigensis. 278 Rollo, Roll, or Rodolf, Chief of the Normands, makes himself
Master of part of Lyonnois. 164 First Duke of Normandy, his Conversion to
Christianity, and his Marriage. ib. His death. ib. Romain Cardinal Legate,
Favorite of Queen Bla^ch of Castille. 140 Rome rebelleth against the Pope. 272
Rotrou du Perch. 224 Rousselin his Heresies. 276 Routiers a sort of Soldiers.
248 Routiers, Bandits, and Robbers favor the Heretics. 249
S.
Sacramentaries, Heretics. 228, etc. Saint Amor William, great quarrel with
the Orders of the Friars Mendicants. 307 Saintonge the subject of a great War.
208 Saladin King of Egypt, tears the holy City of Jerusalem out of the hands of
the Christians. 254 Saliens, ancient People of the French. 7 Solomon seizes on
the Kingdom of Bretagne. 140 His unhappy end. 144 Sanc first of the Hereditary
Dukes of Gascongne. 137 Sanche Duke of Castille makes a Peace with the King of
France. 323 Saracens become Mahometans. 59 Saracens of Africa become the
Masters of Spain. 77 Saracens pass from Spain into France, and make some
Conquests there. 80 They enter into Languedoc, and destroy all that Country. 83
Wherefore called Moors. 83 They overrun all Provence and lay it waste. ib.
Torment Italy. 146 Savari de Mauleon General for the English in Guyenne. 296
The Saxons revolt. 52 Throw off the Yoke of the French Dominion. 79 Divided
into several People. ib. Made Tributary to the French. 91 Entirely subdued,
become Christians. 108 Schism in the Church caused by the dispute concerning
the Worshipping of Images. 84 Sclavonians have a quarrel with the French
Austrasians. 55 Make inroads upon Turingia. 56 Sergius II. elected Pope without
permission of the Emperor. 136 He was not the first who changed his name, but
Sergius IV. ib. St. Ademar, Institutor of the Order of the Templers. 290
Sicilia a Kingdom, its beginning and extent. 242, 243 By what means Sicilia
fell under the Dominion of the Kings of Arragon. 310 Dismembered in two. 326
Siege and taking of Angens. 144 Sigebert King of Austrasia chastises the Avari
out of Turingia. 29 Marries Brunehaud. 30 Unfortunate taking upon the City of
Arles. 31 War with Chilperic his Brother. 31 Assassinated and slain. 32
Sigebert Bishop. 62 Sigeric King of the Visigoths. 4 Sigismund King of
Burgundy, abjures Arianism, and receives the Orthodox Faith. 20 Causes his Son
Sigeric to be Strangled: his retreat into a Monastery. 21 His unhappy end. ib.
Silingi a barbarous People. 4 Silvester II. Pope. Example of extreme severity.
209 Simon de Montfort does Cross himself to go into the Holy Land. 260 Simon
Count de Nesles, Regent of the Kingdom, in the absence of St. Lewis, the King.
312 Of Simony. 18 Bishops of Bretagne accused and convicted of that Crime. 136
Prelates in France, who voluntarily renounced their Benefices for this cause.
229 Simplicity too great in a Prince. 167 Sobrarve a little Territory in the
Kingdom of Arragon. 125 Sorabes reduced to reason. 121 Spencers Hugh Father and
Son Favorites of the King of England. 351, etc. Their unhappy end. 352
Stilicon Massacred. 4 Succession of Males to the Crown, by preference to the
Females. 346 Suedes embrace the Christian Religion. 110 Suevi overrun and
ravage Gaul, and then pass into Spain. 270 Swiss. Their generous Conspiracy
against the oppressions of the Lieutenants of the House of Austria. 334
T.
Tanchelin his errors. Church of the Twelfth Age. Tancred Son of Rebert
Guischard. 224 Tancred causes great discord between the Kings of France and
England. 256 Tartars make their irruptions, their Original. 302 Tassilon Duke
of Bavaria, and his Son Theudon shaved and confined to a Monastery. 103 Te
Deum, Sung by the Benedictins in time of Lent. 231 Templers their Institution,
and Confirmation. Church of the Twelfth Age. Are utterly exterminated, and
their Order abolished throughout all Christendom. 333 Thassilon Duke of Bavaria
gives an Oath of Fidelity to King Pepin. 93 Theodad King of the Ostrogoths his
death. 23 Theodald Maire of the Neustrians. Theodald Son of Grimoald his death.
78 Theodebald King of Mets. 25 His death 26 Theodebert Son of Thierry makes War
in Languedoc, then named Septimania. 24 Theodebert Son of Thierry succeeds to
the Crown of his Father, and makes War against Clotair his Uncle. 24, 25
Carries his Arms into Italy, his death, his Children. 24 Theodebert Son of
Chilperic, his death. 32 Theodebert, King of Austrasia, vanquished in Battle,
and exterminated with his whole Race. 43 Theoderic, King of the Visigoths,
joins with the Romans against Attila, his death. 10, 11 Theoderic, King of the
Ostrogoths, establishes the Kingdom of Italy. 14 Theoderic, King of Italy,
passes into Gall, and comes to relieve the Visigoths against the French, and
the Burgundians, and becomes King of the Visigoths. 16 His death. 21 Theudis
King of the Visigoths in Spain, his death. 25 Thibauld Earl of Chartres and
Tours. 216 Thibauld Earl of Chartres declares War against the King. 235
Thibauld Earl of Champagne, falls into the Kings disgrace, and is severely
handled. 243 Thibauld Earl of Blois, and Chartres. 245 Thibauld Earl of
Champagne, his death. 246 Thibauld Earl of Champagne. 260 Thibauld Earl of
Champagne, difference about Alix Queen of Cyprus his Cousin. 299 Thibauld Earl
of Champagne, becomes King of Navarre. 301 Thibauld Earl of Champagne becomes
Chief of a new Croisade. His death. ib. Thibaud King of Navarre. 312 His death.
315 Thierry King of Austrasia, otherwise of Mets, treacherously abandons
Clodomir his Brother. 20, etc. Makes himself Master of Turingia. 21 Chastises
the Auvergnats who had revolted against him. ib. His death. ib. Thierry King of
Neustria, and of Burgundy. 64 He is shaved and confined to the Monastery of St.
Denis. ib. Recalled and resetled in his Royal Throne. 6 Fights unfortunately
against Ebroin Maire of the Palace, and falls into his hands. -- His death, his
Wife, and his Children. 70 Thierry called de Chelles, King of France. 81 His
death. 83 Thierry Earl of Alsatia, disputes the Earldom of Flanders, and
remains sole Master and Possessor. 168 Thierry of Alsatia, Earl of Flanders, he
passes into the Holy Land. 243 Thierry first Earl of Holland. 146 Thierry Earl
of Alsatia, and Flanders, his death. 249 Thibauld III. Earl of Blois. 259
Thibauld Earl of Champagne. 296 A Conspiracy against him. 299 Tietgaud
Archbishop of Triers, deposed, and Excommunicated. 140 St. Thomas Aquinas, his
death. 316 Thomas Prior of St. Victor assassinated in the Arms of a Bishop.
Church of the Twelfth Age. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury undertakes the
defense of the Church, is assassinated in his Cathedral. ib. Thuringia falls
under the Dominion of the French. 22 Title of King of Jerusalem annexed to that
of Sicilia. 319 Treason divinely punished. 178 Translation of a Bishop from one
See to another, condemned. 160 Trebisond Kingdom, its beginning. 263 Truce
between the French, and the Saracens of Spain broken. 123 Truce, or Peace of
God established in France, to prevent Factions, Murders, and Robberies. 253
Truce with the English, and the Fleming. 327 Truce with the English. 299 Truce
granted to the Flemings. 330 Trincavel, Son of the Earl of Beziers, comes
hostily upon the Kings Territories. 301 Toloze County, subject of a War. 138
Subject of a great quarrel between the Kings of France, and the Kings of
England. 248 Totila King of the Ostrogoths, his death. 26 Touars Guy Duke of
Bretagne. 263 Tournay erected to a Bishopric. Church of the Twelfth Age.
Troubles and Factions in Normandy, caused by the Minority of Duke William the
Bastard, and by the defect of his Birth. 216 Tumult in the Duchy of Benevent.
104 Tumult in Rome. 121 Turks, and of the time wherein they began to make War
upon the Christians. 95 Of their irruptions upon Christendom. 223, etc.
Turingians revolt against the French. 58, etc.
V.
Vaire-Vache, Hemon. 224 Valda Heretic, Chief of the Vaudois. 245 Valdrade
Espouses King Lothaire King of Lorraine. 140 Excommunicated by the Pope. 142
Valentinian Emperor, his death. 11 Vallia King of the Visigoths. 4 Vamba King
of the Visigoths. 65 Vamba King of Spain Vowed and Consecrated to Penitence in
an extreme Sickness which took away his understanding, is obliged to renounce
his Royalty. Church of the Twelfth Age. Vandals overrun and ravage Gall,
thence passing into Spain, and from thence into Africa. 3, etc. Vandals
absoutely vanquished, and their Kingdom extinguished in Africa. 23 Varaton
Maire of the Palace of Austrasia. 69 Varnaqui^r, Maire of the Palace of
Bu^gundy. 44 Varnes, Garnes or Guerins, a People of Germany exterminated. 40
Venedi and Sclavonians. 46 Venice and its first establishment. 11 Venice, its
situation, and construction. 108, 110, 111 Venetians join with the French in
the Expedition to the Holy Land. 261, 262 Venetians in trouble and disorder
amongst themselves. 108 Verdun puts it self under the protection of the King.
348 Vermandois the Subject of a War between King Philip II. and the Earl of
Flanders. 253 Vespers Sicilian. 319 Vexin French given to the Duke of Normandy.
214 Given for a Dowry with Margaret Daughter of the aforesaid Prince. 242
Vezelay, Revolt of the Inhabitants against the Abbot their Lord. 249 Victor
elected Pope to the prejudice of Alexander III. 247 His death. 248 Victor IV.
Antipope. 272 St. Victor, its foundation. 290 Otherwhile the dwelling of a
Recluse. ib. Divinity taught there. Praise of that House. ib. Peter de
Ville-Beon, Chamberlain, his death. 312 Visigoths pass from Italy into Gall,
under the Conduct of their King Ataulfus. 3, 4 Visigoths, Civil War amongst
them. 26 Visigoths, elect their Kings. ib. Vitiges elected King of the
Ostrogoths. ib. Vitri in Champagne, forced, sacked, and burnt. 2^3 Vltrogolthe
Queen of France, leads a Holy Life. 27 University of Paris, those of Orleance,
of Toloze, and Montpellier, and of their institution. 341, etc. University of
Paris, its first Institution, or Establishment. 104 Voyage to the Levant. 224,
etc. Voyage to the Holy Land. 261, etc. Vrgel Felix, Heresiarque. 104 Usury.
260 Urban II. Pope, dethroned by the Emperor, comes into France, holds a
Council at Clairmont in Auvergne, and there Excommunicates the King and his
Bertrade. 223 Exhorts the Prelates Zealously to the defense of the Christians in
the East, against the Turks. ib. Urban IV. Pope, orders a Croisade to be
Preached against Mainfroy, the Bastard. 309 His death. 310 Waroc, or Gueret, a
Breton Earl, seizes upon Vannes. 33 Wenillon or Guenillon Archbishop of Reims,
ungrateful and a Traitor to his Prince. 139 Not the Fabulous Ganelon. ib.
Y.
Yolante Queen of Castille. 317 Ypres, William. 238 Yves Chanon of St. Victor,
Cardinal. The Twelfth Age. Yvetot in Normandy, a Kingdom. 25
The end of the Table of the First Volume.
A TABLE OF THE KINGS OF FRANCE Contained in this SECOND PART.
PHILIP VI. called de Valois, surnamed the Fortunate, King XLIX. Page 357 1328.
In February. JOHN I. by some called the good King, King L. 371 1350. In August.
CHARLES V. called the Wise and Eloquent, King LI. 384 1364. In April. CHARLES
VI. called by some the Well-beloved, King LII. 400 1380. In September. CHARLES
VII. called the Victorious, King LIII. 447 1422. In October. LEWIS XI. King
LIVE. 481 1461. In July. CHARLES VIII. called the Affable and Courteous, King
LV. 507 1483. In September. LEWIS XII. surnamed the Just, and the Father of the
People, King LVI. 532 1498. In April. FRANCIS I. called the Great, and the
Father, or Patron of the Learned, King LVII. 556 1525. In January. HENRY II.
King LVIII. 622 1547. In March till 1559 in July.
A TABLE Of the Principal Matters contained in this SECOND VOLUME.
A
ADornes voluntarily quit the Government of Genoa. Page 553 Ant. Adornes Duke
of Genoa. 546 Adrian Pope. 570 Makes a League with the Venetians, the Emperor,
and the English, against France. 573 His death. 575 Aiguillon Besieged, and
well Defended. 365, etc. Alva Duke Governor of Milanois, enters upon the
Territories of the Church. 647 Albert Marquess of Brandenburg. 632 d'Albret
Connestable his death. 433 d'Albret General of an Army. 540 d'Albret, John King
of Navarre his death. 560 d'Albret Henry, King of Navarre. ibid. d'Albret Henry
of Navarre made Prisoner of War. 579 d'Alegre. 540 d'Alencon. b. 426 d'Alencon
Duke, his death. 433 d'Alencon Duke Prisoner of War. 448 Chief of the
Praguerie, debauches the Daufin from the Service of the King. 457 Is taken
Prisoner. 466 Is Condemned. ibid. Is set at Liberty. 482 Falls in with the
Party for Charles of France, and the Duke of Bretagne. 488 Is made Prisoner,
his death. Duke of Alencon, his shameful flight, his death. 495 Alexander V.
Pope by Election in the Council of Pisa. 426 Gives privilege to four Orders
Mendicants to administer the Sacraments in the Parishes, and to receive the
Tithes, if any be given them. ib. Alexander VI. Pope. 517 Makes a League
against the French, with the Venetians. Page 518 His death. 540 Alfonso King of
Arragon adopted by Queen Jane of N^ples, and his adoption ^acated and nulled.
448 Alfonso King of Arragon and Sicilia, his death. 467 Alfonso King of
Arragon, Enemy of Ludowick Sforza. 519 Alfonso King of Naples, hated of his
Subjects, shuts himself in a Monastery; his death. 521 Alfonso Duke of Ferrara
in War with the Pope. 546 Alliance by Marriage between the King of France, and
the Emperor. 537 Alliance renewed with the Swiss. 628 Ambassadors. 587
Ambassadors of France Assassinated and Slain by the Spaniards. 612 d'Amboise
Chaumont Commands the Kings Army in Burgundy. 501 d'Amboise Cardinal in Milan.
535 Legate in France. 536 Goes to the Emperor Maximilian on behalf of the King
of France. 537 Aspires to the Papacy. 540 His death. 546 Ame VI. Earl of Savoy,
carries his Arms gloriously against Amurath Sultan of the Turks, and the King
of Bulgaria. 385 Accompanies the Duke of Anjou in his Voyage to Italy. 405 His
death. 408 Ame VII. Earl of Savoy. ib. Ame VIII. Duke of Savoy, quits his
Estates, and retires himself to Ripailles. 454 Ameri of Pavia, a Lombard
Traitor, rewarded for his Treason as he deserved. 368, etc. Amurat Sultan. 412
Anabaptists, and their horrible Tragedies in the City of Munster. 598 d'Andelot
held Prisoner. 651 Andrew King of Sicilia, hanged and strangled at his Chamber
Window. 396 Anjou Duke Lewis, foolish enterprise for the Conquest of the
Kingdom of Naples. 439 Anjou Charles, Connestable. 467 Anne of France, Wife of
Peter de Bourbon Beaujeu. 506 Governess of the young King Charles VIII. 508 She
usurps all the Authority. ib. Anne of Bretagne, though promised in Marriage to
the Archduke Maximilian, she afterward espouses the King of France. 515 Anne
Queen of France, Wife of Lewis XII. her death. 554 Anne of Bolen, Marries the
King of England Henry VIII. 591 Beheaded. 605 d'Annebaut Marshall of France.
607 d'Annebaut Admiral, goes to seek out the English upon their own Coasts. 619
Anthony Duke of Brabant. 420 Anthony Duke of Lorraine, his death, and his
Children. 618 Anthony de Bourbon King of Navarre. 642 d'Aramon Ambassador of
France to the Great Solomon Sultan of the Turks. 629 Archambaud de Grailli
Captal de Buch, gets into possession of the County of Foix by the Sword. 418
d'Armagnac the Count shamefully treated by the Count de Foix. 394 Passes into
Lombardy against the Vicount John Galeas, 413 Renders himself absolute in the
Government of the Kingdom. 433 Is held Prisoner at Paris. 435 Those of his
Faction, pillaged and ill treated, is restored to his Goods and Offices. 494
His death. ib. etc. d'Armagnac James, Duke of Nemours, Beheaded. 500 d'Armagnac
the Bastard. 484 Arming, a dreadful Navy prepared against England, without
Success. 409 Army Naval against the English. 619 Arnaud de Corbie, Connestable.
428 d'Arras the Cardinal Commands the Kings Army. 495 d'Ars Lewis a brave
Soldier. 541 Artewelle James, dextrous, undertaking, and politic. 362 His
unhappy end. 365 Assembly of the Clergy, upon the complaint of the Kings
Judges. 358 Another at Paris, for the defense of Pope John XXII. 359 Assembly
of the Estates general of France. 379 Assembly of the Notables at Paris. 428
Assembly of the Notables at Orleans. 434 Assembly of the Grandees of the
Kingdom at Tours. 483 Assembly of the Estates general at Tours, against
Monsieur, the Kings only Brother, and against the Duke of Bretagne. 489
Assembly of the three Estates upon the Subject of the deliverance of the
Children of France Prisoners in Spain. 587 Assembly of Ausburgh. 593 Avarice of
the Captains and Chief Commanders of the Army's. 565 d'Auberticourt Captain
Ravages Picardy. 379 d'Aubigni, 518, etc. Commands the Army of King Lewis XII.
in the Conquest of the Kingdom of Navarre. 536 Avignon rendered to the Pope. 367
d'Aumale Duke commanded to punish the Seditious in Guienne. 627 Austria Erected
to an Arch-Dutchy. 513
B
BAjazeth defeates the Christians in Hungary, 417 Is himself defeated and taken
Prisoner by Tamberland. ib. etc. John Baillet, Treasurer of France, Massacred.
377 Balue the Cardinal, Legate in France, insolent arrogance. 491 Betrays King
Lewis XI. ib. Is held Prisoner. Banquiers and Datary of the Court of Rome,
great abuses. 629 Bar de Philip goes into Hungary against the Turks. 418 His
death. 433 Barbazan a great Captain. 453 Barbarossa falls upon the Island of
Corfu, and destroys the open Country. 606 Comes upon the Coasts of Provence.
615 Battle famous of Mont-castle in Flanders. 358 Battle of Caen. 366, 371
Battle of Poitiers between the French and the English, glorious to the latter.
374 Battle of Brignais. 381 Battle of Azincourt. 432 Battle of Varnes in
Hungary. 460 Battle of Fourmigni. 463 Battle of Montleherry, betwixt King Lewis
XI. and the Count de Charolois. 485 Battle of Granson between the Burgundians,
and the Swiss. 499 Battle of Montguion in Burgundy. 501 Battle of Fornoue. 522
Battle of Seminare in Calabria, between the French and the Spaniards. 538
Battle of Aignadel. 545 Battle of Orange in Bretagne. 513 Battle of Cerignoles
in Puglia, between the French and the Spaniards. 538 Battle of Ravenna. 550
Battle of Novarre. 553 Battle of Guinegaste. ib. Battle of Saint Quintins,
otherwise of Saint Laurence fatal to France. 647 Battle of Mulberg where the
Protestant Princes of Germany were vanquished. 625 Battle of Cerizolles to the
advantage of the French. 616 Battle of Marcian to the disadvantage of the
French. 639 Bavaria Lewis Emperor treats the Pope ill; his ill Conduct. 359
Robert of Bavaria and Count Palatine, is elected Palatine. 418 Beauvais
Besieged by the Duke of Burgundy, and generously defended by the Women, as well
as by the Men. 494 Belgrade gained by the Turks. 572 Bennet XII. Pope. 361 His
Death. 364 Bennet XIII. Pope of Avignon. 424 His Death. 432 Betford, or Bedford
Duke, Regent of the Kingdom of France. 440 Blois, Charles de, vanquished in the
Battle of Auvray, loses the Day, the Duchy, and his Life. 385 Boniface IX.
elected Pope of Avignon. 414 Caesar Borgia Duke of Valentinois, Marries
Charlote d'Albret. 533 His unhappy End. 541 Bourbon James, Earl de la March.
381 Bourgogne Duchy united inseparably to the Crown. ib. The said reunion
annulled in favor of Philip the Hardy, to whom the said Duchy was given. 382
The E. of Buckingham Lands at Calais with a Potent Army, and Marches into
Bretagne. 402 John II. Duke of Bretagne, without Children, provides for the
Preservation of the Duchy. 361 Bretagne in great Trouble after the Death of
Duke John II. 363, etc. Subjected to the Obedience of the King. 392 In
Troubles. 511 United to the Crown. 594 Bretons disjoyn from the French, and
recall their Duke refugiated in England. 397 Contend with each other about the
Marriage of their Princess Anne. 514 Brunswick Duke Henry, elected Emperor.
418 Bull of Pope Julius, exposing the Kingdom of Navarre as a Prey to the first
Occupier. 544 Bull, Golden Bull. 373 Bureau de la Riuiere favorite of Charles
VI. -- Bures, Governor for the King beyond the Alps. 572 Bussy d'Amboise slain
in the Battle of Marignan. 559
C
CAen, the Castle taken and retaken in one Night. 373 Calais besieged in vain
upon the English. 456 Calvin his Birth, and the establishment of his Sect. 597
Cambray taken by Intelligence with the Emperor. 551 Captains and Generals of
Armies. The Checks they receive is many times caused by the malice of those who
are of the King's Councils. 450 Cardinals in great Numbers in France. 625
Cartels, or Challenges, of Defiance between the Kings of England and France to
the Emperor. 588 Castille falls under the Dominion of Philip Archduke of
Austria. 542 Chairadin Barbarossa ravages the Coasts of Naples and Sicilia. 600
Is beaten by Sea and Land by the Emperor Charles V. ib. Charles of Bohemia
elected Emperor. 367 Charles King of Navarre being discontented retires from
Court. 372 Charles IV. Emperor Crowned in Rome. 373 Charles V. Surnamed the
Wise, King of France. 384 Makes a memorable Ordonance for the Majority of Kings
at Fourteen years. 393 His Death, and his Elogy. 398 His Wife, and his
Children. 399 Charles the Wicked King of Navarre, his unhappy end. 410 Charles
the Noble King of Navarre. ib. Charles VI. King of France. 400 His Death. 441
Charles VII. King of France his Coronation. 447 A strange Accident which happened
to him. ibid. His Death, and his Children. 467, 468. Charles VIII. King of
France, his Marriage with Margaret of Burgundy. 504 Declared Major at Fourteen
years, his Coronation. 508 His Triumphant Entry into Rome. 520 His Death. 525
Of Saint Charlemaine. 529 Charles the Fifth (formerly Charles of Austria)
Emperor, comes from Spain into the Low Countries, and is Crowned at Aix la
Chapelle, 564 His Cession and Renunciation of the Empire, and his retreat into
a Convent. 645 Charlotta Queen of Cyprus her Death. 512 Charles Bastard Brother
to the King of Navarre. 589 Charles Duke of Savoy not well looked upon by the
King Francis I. 599 Besieges the City of Geneva without Success. ib. His Death.
636 Charles Duke of Lorraine Son of Francis, is brought to the Court of France.
646 Count Charolois out of favor with Lewis XI. 481, 482, 483. Joins with the
other Princes and discontented Party, and takes the Field. 484, etc. Makes an
Alliance with the English by marrying his Sister Margaret. 486 Goes against the
Liegeois, and chastises the insolence of those of Dinant. 488 Chastillon made
Prisoner by the English. 388, 389 Chaumont Governor of the Milanois, chaces the
Venetians from the Territories of Ferrara. 547 Chastisement of Robels after a
most noble and royal manner. 612, 613 Cherifs, and the beginning of their
Reign. 551 Christiern III. King of Denmark. 607 Christopher Columbus discovers
the New World. 516, 517 Claude of France Marries Francis I. then Duke of
Valois. 555 Clement V. Pope. 441 Clement VI. Pope. 364 His Death. 372 Clement
VII. his Election to the prejudice of Urban VI. the Cause of a Schism in the
Church. 396 His Death. -- Coligny Admiral of France. 645 Combat of Birds in the
Air the one against the other. 513 Combat or Battle of Renty, between the
Emperor Charles V. and Henry II. 638 Combat Naval. 642 Combat bloody betwixt
Birds of all sorts of Species. 426 Comets of an extraordinary magnitude. 494
Comines quits the Duke of Burgundy, ib. Is taken Prisoner. 511 Cominges County
United to the Church, 458 County, otherwhile preferred to that of Duchy. 434
Council of Trent assigned by Pope Paul III. who sends his Legates thither. 613
Council of Eighteen Persons established. 485 Council, a Prince that will have
sincere Advice, ought to hide his own Sentiments. 545 Constantinople taken by
force by the Turks. 465 Michael Corbier a Monk Antipope. 359 Courtray Pillaged,
Burnt, and Sacked by the French. 406 Creation of a Chamber in each Parliament.
357 Croisade in England against the Clementines. 407 Crosses appear in the Air,
and on their Clothes. 536 de Crouy Count de Reux, ravages the Frontiers of
Picardy. 606
D
Oliver, DAin, Barber to Lewis XI. punished with Death. 508 Dampierre Admiral,
his Death. 433 Daufin of France Commands an Army in Roussillon. 612 Daufine
United and incorporated to the Crown of France. 369 David King of Scotland
driven from his Kingdom. 360 His Death. 391 Diepe Escalado'd by the French. 455
Difference and Quarrel between the Pope and the Emperor. 359 Difference
between France and Austria. 516 Difference, quarrel between the French, and the
Arragonians for the Limits of the Partage of the Kingdom of Naples. 537
Difference and quarrel raised at Venice between the French and Spaniards for
Precedence. 652 And Doria General of the French Galleys. 587 Quits the King's
Service, and goes into the Emperor's. 588, 589 Chaces the French out of Genoa.
590 Dragut a famous Corsaire, or Pyrate, gives chase to Andr. Doria's Galleys.
634 Joins the Galleys of France on the Coasts of Tuscany. 639 Charles Prince of
Duras. 368 Most dexterously ruins the Duke of Anjou's Army, and remains
quietly in Possession of the Kingdom of Sicilia. 408 Is Crowned King of
Sicilia, and Besieges Queen Jane in Naples. -- Usurps Hungary; his Death. 409
E
EClipses. 616 Edict of Chasteau-Brian for a search after the Religionaries.
631 Edward III. King of England, Marries the Daughter of the Earl of Hainault.
357 Renounces to the Crown of France. ib. and 380 Renders Homage to the King of
France. 358 Declares War against him. 361 Recommences War with France. 365
Lands in the Lower Normandy, comes and defies King Philip de Valois, to Fight
him under the Walls of Paris, and from thence retires to his County of
Ponthieu. 366 Defeats the French in the Battle of Crecy. ibid. Besieges, and
takes Calais. 367 Lands at Calais with a dreadful Army. 379 Makes a Peace with
France and with Flanders. 380 Is defied by the King of France, who denounces
War against him. 388 His Death, and his Children. 394 Edward Earl of Savoy, his
Death. 358 Edward Son of John Baliol King of Scotland. 360 Edward Duke of York
Crowned King of England. 467 Edward of York King of England utterly forsaken by
the English, flies into Flanders to the Duke of Burgundy. 492 Returns into
England, and recovers the Throne. 493 Lands at Calais. 496 Accommodation with
France. 497 His Death. 509 Eleonor Queen of France, procures an Enterview
between the Emperor and the King. 608 Elizabeth Queen of England. 651 Openly
embraces the Protestant Religion. ib. Emmanuel Emperor of Greece comes into
France. 419 Emmanuel Philibert Duke of Savoy, Commands the Imperial Army, in
the Low Countries. 635 Empire of the East, its end. 465 C. d'Enguien gives
Battle to the Imperialists, and gloriously gains the Victory. 616 Enterprise of
the French upon Genoa, very shameful. 522 Enterview of the Kings of France and
England, Charles and Richard. 413 Enterview of the King of France and Castille.
482 Enterview of the Kings of Fr. and Engl. 497 Enterview of the Kings of
France, and of Arragon. 544 Eugenius IV. Pope. 454 d'Eureux John in Bretagne.
394 Expedition of the French, and the Venetians against the Turks without
Success. 536
F
FAction very pernicious in Paris. 377 Famine, and Plague. 393 Federic utterly
dispoiled of his Kingdom of Naples, takes refuge in France. 536 His Death. 542
Felix lays down his Papacy, in favor of Pope Nicholas. 461 Ferdinand,
otherwise Ferrand, Bastard of Alphonso of Arragon, King of Naples. 518 His
Death. ib. Ferdinand and Isabella conquer the Kingdom of Granada. 516 League
themselves with the Venetians and the Pope against the French. 521 (Surnamed in
Raillery John Gipon) makes Inroads upon the French. 525 Usurps Navarre. 551
Shares the Conquests of the Kingdom of Naples with the King of France. 536
Drives out the French, and makes himself Master of all. 538, etc. Makes a Peace
with King Lewis XII. 542 Receives from the Pope the investiture of the Kingdom
of Naples. 554 His Death. 560 Ferdinand Son of Alphonso, King of Naples,
abandons his Kingdom. 520 Restored by means of the Italian Confederate Princes.
521 His Death. 525 Ferdinand Brother of Charles V. elected King of Hungary. 584
Elected King of the Romans. 593 Emperor. 652 Ferdinand King of Hungary
defeated of his Armies by the Turks. 606 Flemmings abandon the French, and
acknowledge Edward of England for their King. 362 Flanders overrun and ravaged
by the English. 397 In great Troubles, split into diverse Factions. 403 Florence
troubled by the two Factions of the Passy and the Medecis. 501 Cast off the
yoke of the Medicis, and return to their popular State. 586 Reduced under the
Dominion of the Medicis. 562 De Foix Gaston, General of the King's Armies
beyond the Alps; his noble Exploits, and glorious Death. 550 Francis I. King
of France, heretofore Duke of Valois. 556 Seeks the Alliance and Amity of his
Neighbor Princes. 527 Passes the Mountains for recovering the Milanois; his
happy Progress. 558, etc. Renews the Alliance with Charles of Austria. 562
Birth of a Daufin. ib. Renews the Alliance also with the English. 563 Aspires
to the Empire after the Death of Maximilian. ib. Is hurt with Jeasting and
Sporting. 566 Sends an Army into Italy. 569 Spaniards enter upon Guienne, the
English into Picardy. 572, 575 Drives the Imperialists out of Provence, pursues
them into Italy, and lays Siege to Pavia. 578 Is made Prisoner of War before
Pavia, and transferred to Spain. 579 Is set at Liberty. 582 Unites Bretagne to
the Crown. 594 Makes an Alliance with Solomon, against the Emperor, and the
Venetians. 606 Gives passage through France, to the Emperor Charles V. to go
into Flanders, and does him all the Honor imaginable. 608 Demands reparation
of him for the Murder of two of his Ambassadors, declares War against him, and
does attaque him in five several places. 612 Carries his greatest Forces
toward the Low Countries, and makes a considerable Progress there. 614
Attaques the English in his own Country. 619 Joins in league with the
Protestant Princes of Germany. 620 His Death, his Elogie, his Wives, and his
Children. 620, 621
G
GAbelle taken off from Guienne. 640 Galeas John, his Death. 518 Gaunt Revolt,
and rising the Gantois. 465 Gaston Phoebus, Earl of Foix makes the King his
Heir. 373 His Death. 413 Gaucourt Lewis Prisoner of War. 448 Governor of
Daufine, beats the Duke of Savoy and the Prince of Savoy. 452 Gentdarmerie
reduced all into Companies d'Ordonance. 457 Genoa puts its self under the
Obedience of the King of France. 416 Falls under the Dominion of Fregosa. 460
Revolts against the King of France, who brings them to reason. 543 Is surprised
by the Italians. 572 Brought again to obey the King. 587 Restored to Liberty.
590 Geneva Revolt, drives out their Bishop, and changes their Government, and
Religion. 599 Besieged in vain, by the Duke of Savoy. ib. Genoese relieved by
the French against the Barbarians of Tunis. 412 Revolt against France. 551
Restored to obedience of the King. 552 Gentlemen Pensioners of the King. 501
Gonsalvo Ferdinand, Great Captain. 523 Federic de Gonzague first Duke of
Mantoua. 580 Ferdinand de Gonzague Governor of Milan. 623 Gravelle Chancellor
of the Empire. 600 Gregory XI. Pope restored to the Sea of Rome. 394 His Death.
396 Gregory XII. Pope of Rome. 422 Grignan, Governor of Provence. 618 The M. du
Guast Governor of the Milanese for the Emperor. 604 Defeated in Battle makes
his Escape to Milan. 616 Causes two Ambassadors of France to be killed. 612
Guerin, Kings Attorney in the Parliament of Provence. 629 Gueschin Bertrand
defeats the Navarrois. 384 Made Prisoner in the Battle of Auroy. 385 Brings
from Spain the Bastard Henry de Castille against King Peter the Cruel his
Brother. 387 After is vanquished and taken Prisoner. ibid. Is recalled from
Spain by K. Charles. 390 Is made Connestable of France, his happy Progress. 391
Secures all Bretagne for the King of France, 392 His Death. 397, etc. Guienne
is all regained by the French from the English. 463 Gueldres Adolf Chief of the
Gantois Forces. 500, 501 Guise, the Duke Commands the King's Army in Italy.
643, etc. Guise, Claude Duke at the Battle of Marignan. 558 The C. de Guise
Governor of Champagne repels the Germans. 575 The D. of Guise refreshes with
Men and Ammunition the City of Peronne. 604 de Gyac. 437 Beheaded. 450
H.
HAbits, and their Reformation. 386 Hangest de Hugueville. 427 Harcourt Geffrey
calls the English into Normandy. 374 Harcourt Lewis Count, Beheaded. ib.
Harfleur taken by Assault, and Sacked by the English. 418 Henry of Castille
rises against King Henry his Brother to his Confusion. 386 Denies his Brother
in his turn, and seizes on the Crown. 387 Defeated again in Battle, retires
into France. ib. He returns into Spain, and remains King of Castille by the
Death of his Brother. 388 Henry of Castille defeats the English in a Sea Fight.
391 Henry IV. King of England, his Death. 431 Henry V. King of England, he
Besieges and takes Rouen, and Masters all Normandy. 435, etc. Marries Catherine
of France. 439 His Entry, and his Coronation in Paris. 440. ib. His Death. ib.
Henry VI. is Proclaimed and Crowned King of France. 454 Marries the Daughter of
Renee of Anjou. 459 Causes Humphrey Earl of Gloucester to be put to Death. 460
Is vanquished by the Duke of York: saves himself in Scotland. 467 Is set at
Liberty. 492 Henry VII. King of England: His Death. 547 Henry VIII. King of
England, sees King Francis I. and they make a League betwixt them. 594 Causes
his Marriage with Catherine of Arragon to be dissolved, and Espouses Anne of
Boulen. 595 Withdraws himself wholly from the obedience of the Pope, and
declares himself Head of the Church of England. 596 Sollicites the French, in
vain, to break with the Pope. 597 His Cruelties draw the hatred of his Subjects
upon him. 611 Henry II. King of France. 622 Seeks the Preservation of the
Alliance with the Turks. 625 Visits the Provinces of his Kingdom. 626 Rupture
between his Majesty and Pope Julius III. 630, etc. Sollicites Solomon to break
the Truce in Hungary. ib. Quarrels openly with the Emperor. 631 Makes a League
with the Princes of Germany. 632 Makes diverse Edicts to procure and raise
Money, even on the Churches. 632 Seizes upon Lorrain, and gets the Cities of
Mets, Toul, and Verdun. ib. Takes diverse places in Luxemburgh. 633 Design
against Naples miscarries. 634 Great arming, to small purpose. 636 Ravages
Brabant, Hainault, Cambresis, the Country of Namur and Artois. 638 Makes Peace
with the Spaniard. 651 Pursues the Religionaries most curelly. 653 His Death,
and his Children. 654 Heresies which appeared during the Fourteenth Age. 445
And infected France in the Fifteenth. 527 Hesdin forced, demolished and razed
by the Imperialists. 637 Hesse Landgrave takes the quarrel of the Dukes of
Wittemburgh. Hungary attaqued and desolated by the Turks. 597 Humbert Daufin of
Viennois, makes a Donation of his Seignory of Daufine to the King of France.
369 Humieres Governor for the King beyond the Mountains. 606 John Huss, burnt
alive. 435
I
JAcqueline Countess of Hainault, Holland, Zealand and Frizeland, is carried
away by the English. 440 La Jacquerie. 378 La Jaille beaten in Artois. 642 Jane
Queen of Sicily, causes her Husband to be Strangled. 368 Jane of Burgundy Queen
of France her Death. 369 Jane, or Joan, Queen of Naples, dethroned by Charles
de Duraz. 404 Her Death. ibid. Jane, or Joan II. Queen of Naples. 431 Jane, or
Joan, the Pucelle, Chaces the English from before Orleans. 451 Carries the King
to Reims to be Crowned. 451 Her other Exploits. 452, etc. She is taken Prisoner
of War, at the Siege of Compiegne by the English, her Death. 453 Her Memory
justified. 466 Jane Queen of Naples her death. 448. 454 Jane Queen of France
takes upon her the sacred Vail in a Convent. 534 Jane of Castille loses her
Wits. 642 Jane Queen of Spain; her Death. 642 Indies West, by whom discovered.
516, 517 John I. King of France. 371 Defeated and vanquished in Battle, and
taken Prisoner by the English, near Poitiers. 374 Makes Peace with the English,
and is set at Liberty. 380 Repasses into England. 382 His Death, his Wives, and
his Children. 383 John XXII. Pope, degraded and another substituted in his
place. 359 His Death. 361 John King of Arragon in War with the Castillian. 482
John d'Albret King of Navarre deprived of his Kingdom by the Arragonians. 551
Innocent VI. Pope. 372 Innocent VII. Pope of Rome. 420 his Death. 422 Innocent
VIII. Pope favors Renee Duke of Lorrain, against Ferdinand King of Naples. 514
Inquisition cause of great Troubles in the Kingdom of Naples. 625. Interim
granted to the Protestants of Germany. 610 Investiture granted to King Lewis
XII. of the Milanois, by the Emperor. 541 Investiture of the Kingdom of
Naples, given by the Pope to Ferdinand of Arragon. 547 Isabella de Valois
Duchess Widow of Bourbon, made Prisoner, by the English. 389 Isabella of
Bavaria, Queen of France, claims the Regency. 435, etc. Her death. 456 Isabella
of Bavaria Wife of King Charles VI. the too strict Union of this Princess with
the Duke of Orleans gives a Scandal. 421 Held Prisoner, and afterward gotten
away by the Duke of Burgundy. 435 Isabella Queen of Arragon: her Death. 542
Iscalin Paulin, afterward called the Baron de la Guard, goes on behalf of the
King to Solomon at Constantinople. 612 Italy divided into two Factions, for the
Pope, and for the Duke of Milan. 629 Jubilee Centenary celebrated. 536 Julius
Pope. 541 Recovers Bolognia upon John Bentivoglio. 543 Enemy of France. 547 He
Leagues and Arms against the Venetians. 545 Reconciled with them. 546 Quarrels
with the Duke of Ferrara about some Salt Pits. 547 Sollicites the Swiss, and
the King of England against France. ib. Besieges the City of Miranda in Person.
548 His Death. 552 Julius III. Pope. 628 Leagues with the Emperor against the
Duke of Parma, and the Count de la Miranda. 629 Breaks with the King of France.
630, etc. Juliers the Duke, killed in a Battle. 389 Juvenal John, Chancellor.
430
K
KNoles, an English Captain. 379
L
LAdislas seizes upon Rome, and the Lands of the Church. 425 Ladislas the
Young, King of Hungary. 460 Landgrave of Hesse Prisoner. 624 Languedoc, the
Government of it given to the Lord de Chevreuse. 416 Lanoy. 583 Viceroy of
Naples. 584 Laon, the Cardinal de Laon: his Death. 411 Lautrec bravely defends
Bayonne. 575 General of the Armies of the League in Italy; his Exploits. 587,
etc. Governor of the Milanois: his Death. 590 Lancaster Duke, Lands at Calais
with an English Army, traverses and runs through all France, without doing any
considerable Exploit. 387 Lands at Calais, and over-runs the Country of Caux.
388 Enters France in Arms. 427 Passes into Spain, and Conquers a part of
Castille. 408 League of the King with the Venetians, the Florentines, and
Sforsa, for the deliverance of the Pope and the Children of France that were
Prisoners. 420 League of the Princes against the House of Burgundy. 426 League,
the first the Kings had with the Swisse. 501 League and rising of the
Spaniards, called the Santa Junta. 565 League, Holy League in England to
prevent a Schism. League offensive, and defensive, between the Pope, the King
of France, and the Holy See. 605 Leon King of Armenia flying from the cruelty
of the Turks, takes refuge in France. 408 Leo X. Pope. 552 His Death. 552 D
Leve Anthony, General for the Emperor in Piedmont. 602 Liege in great Troubles
about the Election and Establishment of a Bishop. 424 Taken by Storm, sacked
and burnt by the Duke of Burgundy. 490 Implacable hatred of the Liegois against
the House of Burgundy. 424 Limoges taken by Storm by the English. 392 Loire,
the River Loire frozen in the Month of June. 484 Lorain Charles Cardinal raises
himself, and his House very much. 629, etc. Longueville Duke Prisoner in
England. 554 Lewis, or Lovis of Bavaria Emperor Excommunicated by the Pope,
and degraded from the Empire: his Death. 367 Lowis the Great King of Hungary,
Revenges the Death of the King of Sicilia his Brother. 368 Lovis Duke of Anjou
seizes on the Regency after the Death of Charles V. etc. 400 His Death. 408
Louis Duke of Orleance Brother of King Charles VI. 412 Is assassinated by order
of the Duke of Burgundy. 423 The Duchess his Wife comes from Blois to Paris,
to complain to the King. 424, etc. Louis II. Duke of Anjou invested with the
Kingdom of Naples. 426 Louis of Anjou King of Sicily. 430 Louis of Anjou King
of Naples. 454 His Death. ib. Louis XI. King of France, his return from
Flanders, and his Coronation at Reims. 481 Ill Conduct in the beginning of his
Reign. 482 His Death, his Elogy, his Wives, and his Children. 505, 506. Louis
King of Hungary vanquished by the Turks. 584 Louis, or Lewis XII. King of
France, heretofore Lewis Duke of Orleance. 532 His Marriage with Jane, Daughter
of Lewis XI. declared null. 534 Makes Peace and Alliance by Marriage with the
King of England. His Death. 554 Louysa of Savoy Mother of King Francis I.
Regent of the Kingdom during the Voyage of her Son into Italy. 580, etc. Her
Death. 594 Luther, and of his Defection, and going out of the Church: the Birth
of Lutheranisme. 562 Lutheranisme introduced in Sweden, in Denmark, and Norway.
606 Lutherans sought after in France. 575 Punished. ib. Called Protestants. 562
Louret President of Provence. 449 Luxury, breeds from Desolation. 374
M
Perrin, MAce. 377 Island of Madera's discovered. 439 Mahomet takes the City of
Constantinople by force. 465 His Death. 503 Majority of the Eldest Sons of
France. Memorable Ordonance. 393, etc. Mantoua from a Marquisate erected to a
Duchy. 592 Marcellus II. Pope. 642 Mareschals of France. 623 Margaret of
Burgundy marries the Daufin of France. 504 Margaret of Scotland Queen of
France: Her Death. 506 Margaret of Austria Wife of Charles VIII. is sent back
into Germany to Maximilian her Father. 516 Margaret Sister of King Francis I.
passes into Spain. 581 Marriage of Charles VI. with Isabella of Bavaria: and of
John of Burgundy, with Margaret of Bavaria. 408 Marriage of the Daufin of
France, with the Daughter of the Duke of Burgundy, and the eldest Son of the
Burgundian with Michel of France. 421 Marriage of Catherine of France with the
King of England. 439 Marriage of Margarite of Anjou with the King of England.
459 Marriage of King Lewis XII. with Mary Sister of the King of England. 544
Marriage of Philip of Spain with Isabella of France. 654 Of the Duke of Savoy
with Margaret, Sister of King Henry II. 653 Mary Queen of England: her Death.
651 Mary Queen of France Wife of Lewis XII. 554 Takes the Duke of Suffolk for
her second Husband. 568 Mary Queen, Widow of Hungary, Governess of the
Low Countries. 601 Mary Princess of Scotland. 613 Mary Queen of Scots, great
Troubles in Scotland for her concern. 618 Brought into France. 624 Mary Queen
of England declares War against France. 646 William de la Mark, called the
Wildboard of Ardenne, Beheaded. 504 Marseilles Besieged by the Imperialists
without Success. 577 Martin V. Pope, transfers the Council of Siena to Basil.
448 Prince Maurice. 631 Maximilian Emperor: Besieges Terouene. 502 Maximilian
is Elected and Crowned King of the Romans. 510 His Death. 563 Maximilian King
of Bohemia in contest with Charles V. his Uncle. 638 Meaux Besieged, and taken
by the English. 440 Medicis Peter, chaced and banished from Florence. 520
Medicis Laurence invested in the Duchy of Vrbin. 561 The Medicis restablished
in Florence. 591 Laurence de Medicis Assassinates and kills the Duke of
Florence: his unhappy end. 606 Cosmo de Medicis Duke of Florence. ib. Declares
himself against the French, and against Siena. 640 Melfe, the Prince of Melfe,
or Malsy, 616 Mercier Sieur de Novain Favorite of King Charles VI. 411 Milan
conquered by King Lewis XII. and by the Venetians. 534 The investiture granted
to Lewis XII. by the Emperor. 542 Abandoned by the French. 550, etc. Regained
by the French, and as soon lost for them. 552 Falls under the Dominion of the
Emperor. 578 Mines, the way to fill them with Powder to blow up a Wall. 539
Pic Mirandulus, his Death. 520 Moncado, Viceroy of Sicilia, slain in Fight.
589 Moncins Governor of Guyenne Massacred by the Bourdelois. 627 John de
Montaigu Favorite of Charles VI. 411 Montargis surprised by the English. 453
Montecuculi drawn by four Horses for Poisoning the Daufin. 603 John de Montfort
remains sole Duke of Bretagne, by the death of Charles de Blois. 385 Defeats in
Battle Charles de Blois, abandons Bretagne, and retires to England. 367 Returns
into Bretagne. 393 Montmorency, a Town not inconsiderable, burnt. 379
Montpelliers: Mutinies of the People, because of the Imposts. 397 John de
Montaigue Surintendant, punished with Death. 425 Montpensier the Duke, made a
Prisoner of War. 647 Moscovy. 502 Muley-Assan King of Tunis, dispoiled of his
Kingdom by his Son who puts out his Eyes. 456 Mutinies and Popular Commotions,
because of the Imposts, and excessive Subsidies. 402, 403, etc.
N
NAples, Kingdom conquered by the French, and soon after retaken from them. 521
Strange Revolution against the French, who are driven out of that Kingdom. 538
C. of Nassau Prisoner of War. 512 The C. of Nassau Ambassador in France. 557
Enters into Champagne and Besieges Mouson. 567 Makes an irruption upon Picardy.
Louis of Navarre. 603 Navarre Usurped by Ferdinand of Arragon. 551 Reconquer'd
by the French, but soon lost again. 565 The D. of Nemours General of the Army
for the King in the Kingdom of Naples. 537 Slain in the Battle of Cerignoles.
538 I. Earl of Nevers, goes to the Assistance of the King of Hungary against
the Turks. 417
Nice Besieged in vain by Barbarossa. 615 Nicholas I. Antipope. 359 Nicholas,
the Pope is owned in France. 461 The Duke of Normandy Commands a very Potent
Army with small Success. 365 Normandy overrun and ravaged by the English. 374
United inseparably to the Crown, 381 Falls under the Power of the English. 437
Is wholly regained from the English. 463 Is put under the Power of a new Duke,
487 Brought to the Obedience of the King. 488
O
OBservance strickt of the Order of Saint Francis. 443 Officers maintained in
their Offices. 489 The mutation of Officers a Cause of great trouble. ib.
Oliver de Blois attempts upon the Person of the Duke of Bretagne, 436 He and
his Brothers Condemned to Death. 437 Oliver Francis Chancellor of France. 623
Orange Prince. 510 Orange Prince, Prisoner of War, 513 Is made Lieutenant for
the King in Bretagne. ib. General of an Army without Power. 586 Order of the
Star Instituted, or rather renewed, abandoned to the Chevalier du Guet. 372
Order of the Garter Instituted. 371 Order of the Collar, its Institution. 408
Order of Saint Maurice Instituted. 526 Orleans Besieged by the English,
succored and delivered by the Pucelle Joane. 450 Orleans Charles Duke set at
Liberty. 458 Orleans John Bastard, Earl of Dunois, and great Chamberlain, his
Death. 492 Orleans Charles Duke, his death. 483 Orleans Louis Duke Espouses the
Princess Jane of France. 503 Orleans Louis Duke, Chief of the Council. 508
Makes a League, and a new Party against the State with the Duke of Bourbon and
others. 510 Absents far from Court: retires into Bretagne; forms a new Party
against the Government, and raises Forces. ib. Is made Prisoner of War, 513
Commands the French Ships in Italy. 519, etc. Duke of Orleans, second Son of
France, Commands an Army in Luxemburg, his Exploits, 612, etc. His Death. 619
Regal Ornaments. 441 Ottranto taken by Assault by the Turks. 503 Retaken by the
Christians. ib.
P
PAlavicini; Manf. 569 De la Palisse Marshall of France. 567 His Death. 579
Ambrose Pare Chyrurgeon. 619 Paris enlarged, and fortified. 375 Is oppressed
and suffers strangely during the Contest and War between the Houses of Orleans
and of Burgundy. 426, etc. Reduced to obedience of King Charles VII. 464
Blocked up by the Princes. 486 In great Astonishment. 604 Parisians. Enterprise
upon the City of Meaux, to their Confusion, 378 Stick to the King of Navarre.
ib. Divided into Factions; Insolence insupportable. 377, etc. Mutiny because of
Imposts, take up Arms, Arm themselves with Iron Mallets; for that reason named
Mallotins. 403. etc. Chastized severely. 406 Arm and range themselves under
Colonels and Captains. 488 Parliaments of Bourdeaux and Burgundy, their
Institution. 506 Parliament of Paris made Semestre. 640 Parliament of Bretagne
Established. ib. Parma, Subject of a War between the Pope, and the King of
France. 629, 630, etc. Pavia Besieged by the King of France. 577, etc. Taken by
Assault and Sacked by the French. 585 Paul III. Pope. 597 Mediator of a Peace
between the Emperor and the King and confers with them. 607, 608 His Death.
628 Paul IV. Pope. 642 Makes a League offensive, and defensive, with the King
against the Spaniard. 644 Strips the Caraffes his Nephews of all their Offices,
and chaces them out of Rome. 653 Paulin, a brave Captain. 618 Pembrook E. Lands
in Bretagne, over-runs Anjou, and Poitou. 388 Vanquished in a Naval Fight by
the Spaniards and taken Prisoner. 391 The C. de Perigord, Archambauld
Talegrand, Condemned to Death. 418 Perpignan surprised by the Spaniard, or King
of Arragon. -- Philip de Valois King of France. 357 Sends to the Navarrins
their lawful King and Queen. 358 The English declare War against him. 361 His
advantage over his Enemy. 362 Makes a Truce with Edward. ib. Becomes hated of
the Nobility. 365 Is Defeated, 366 His Death. 370 Philip King of Navarre: his
Death. 365 Philip of Navarre calls the English into Normandy. 374 Philip Duke
of Burgundy, Son of John, undertakes to revenge the Death of his Father. 438
Seeds of Division between him and the English. 440 He joins to Flanders and
Artois several other Counties and Lordships. 450 He takes in second Marriage
the Princess of Portugal. 452 Institutes the Order of the Golden Fleece. ib. He
withdraws from the English, and makes his Peace with the King of France. 454
Besieges Calais upon the English in vain. 456 Philip of Savoy is kept Prisoner.
483 Philip the Good Duke of Burgundy, his Death. 488 Philip of Spain arms
Powerfully against France. 646 Enters himself upon Picardy. 647 Philip of Spain
Marries the Queen of England: Recalled from England, by the Emperor Charles V.
his Father. 966 Pius II. Pope, his Design to make a War against the Turks,
without effect. 467 Pius II. endeavors to extend the Power of the Popes beyond
the bounds of all right and reason. 482 Pisa shakes off the yoke of the
Florentines. 520 Pisseleu Anne Duchess of Estampes. 583 Diana of Poitiers,
Mistress of Henry the Daufin, afterward King of France. 622, 623 Pompadour
Geffrey Bishop of Periguex. 511 Poncher Stephen Bishop of Paris. 545 The
Portuguese discover great Countries, and Sail to the Indies. 439 Posts and
Couriers established. 501 Poyet Chancellor of France deprived of his Office:
His death. 610 Pragmatique abolished by a Declaration of the Kings, that had no
effect, for the opposition it met with. 482. 488 Set up by the Gallicane
Church, 526 Suppressed, 526 Abolished by King Francis I. 560 The Praguerie a
dangerous Commotion. 457 Du Prat Chancellor and Archbishop of Sens, assembles a
Provincial Council. 590 Ant. du Prat Cardinal Archbishop of Sens: His Death.
599 The Provost of Paris Massacred. 378 Protestant Princes of Germany, and of
their great Forces. 620 Are vanquished. 624 Protestants of Germany, when and
wherefore so named. See Luther: Protestants of Merindol, and Cabrieres,
Massacred. 618. 629 Provence parted in two. 368 Psalter of the Virgin. 539
Q
QUarrel which arose between the Duke of Burgundy, and the Duke of Bedford. 449
Question about Property, or Propriety, makes a great debate and noise, and
ended with Fire and Faggot. 443
R
Giles de RAiz, Marshall of France Condemned to be Burnt alive. 458 Rance de
Cere, General of an Army for the King at Naples. 585 The C. de Rangon General
of an Army in Italy. 604 Ravenna taken and Burnt by the French. 550 Rebellion
severely chastised. 609 Reconciliation of King Lewis XI. with his Brother. 491.
Betwixt the Houses of Orleance and of Burgundy. 458, etc. Registers
Baptisteries. --. Religion Catholic abolished in England. 626 Religionaries
assemble by Night at Paris, and are severely Punished. 647 Peter Remi Sieur de
Montigni Financier, Drawn, and Hanged. 358 Rene of Anjou succeeds not in his
Enterprise upon Naples. 467 Rene Duke of Lorraine, 496 Inconstant and variable.
ib. Is dispoiled of his Duchy of Lorraine. 497 Is amongst the Swiss and the
Germans at the Battle of Morat, 498 Is called to Naples to take that Crown. 514
Rhodes Besieged by the Turks: but bravely defended. 503 Besieged, and taken by
the Turks. 572 Richard II. Surnamed of Bourdeaux, King of England. 394 He and
his Uncles Lancaster and Gloucester, have mortal jealousies of one another, 416
He is made Prisoner, Degraded and Deposed, and Condemned to a perpetual
Imprisonment. 418 His Death. -- Richard Duke of York, excites a Civil War in
England. 464 Richard Duke of Gloucester seizes tyrannically upon the Crown of
England. 504, 505 Richmond, Arthur Earl, Connestable of France. 448, etc.
Connestable and Duke of Bretagne: His Death. 466 Rincon, Ambassador of France
assassinated. 612 Robert the Wise, King of Naples: His Death. 364 Rochefort
William Chancellor of France. 408 Rochell quits the English, and returns to
the Obedience of the King of France. 391 Rome in great Trouble, for the
Election of two Popes. 396 Attaqued, taken by Assault, Pillaged and ravaged by
the Imperialists. 585, 586. Of the Rosarie. 539 Rouen Besieged and taken by the
English. 437 Quits the English, and returns under the obedience of the King of
France. 465 Roussillon sold to the King. 482 Roussillon and Cerdagne rendered to
Ferdinand. 517 Rupture between France, and the Empire. 646
S
SAcramentaries write against the Holy Sacrament. 598 Eustace de Saint Peter, a
Burgher of Calais; his Heroic Generosity to save his fellow Citizens. 367
Saints, or holy Persons, living during the Fourteenth Age. 445 Salisbury E.
Besieges Orleans. 451 Lands in Bretagne. 454 Salusses, Marquess, Commands the
King of France's Army in Italy. 541 Commands the Army before Naples, after the
Death of Lautrec. 590 Savoy erected to a Duchy. 433 Secret, Women incapable of
Secrecy. 617 Secretaries, the Kings Secretaries increased. 640 Sepus, John,
King of Hungary in part. 611 Sforza Ludowic, surnamed the Moore, was the
principal Motive that determined King Charles IX. to the Conquest of Naples.
518 Seizes tyrannically upon the Milanois. 520, etc. Leagues with the Venetians
and the Pope against the French. 523 Treats with the King of France without
executing any one Article of the Treaty agreed upon. 523 Ludowic Sforza
stripped of all his Estates takes refuge in Germany. 534 His unhappy end. 535
Sigismond Emperor comes to Paris. 433 Sixtus IV. Pope solicites the Princes to
Unite against the Turks. 493 Solomon gets the best part of Hungary, and lays
Siege to Vienna in Austria. 562 Attaques Hungary by Land, and sends relief to
the King, 614 Seizes on Transylvania. 630 Duke of Somerset Regent, or Protector
of England. 626 Divisions between him, and the Earl of Warwick 628 Agnes
Soreau, or Sorel, Mistress to King Charles VII. 460 Stuard, Robert King of
Scotland. 390 Suffolck Jane, designed by King Edward, and after his Death
Proclaimed, and received Queen of England. 636 Made Prisoner. 637 Swiss beat
and utterly defeat the Burgundians in diverse Battles. 498, etc. Refuse to
engage against the French in Milan. 535 Seize upon Bellinzonne. ib. Devote
themselves to the Pope against France. 547 Beat and drive the French from
before Novare. 552 Enter into the Duchy of Burgundy, and Besiege Dijon. 552
League with the Pope, the Emperor, the Arragonian, and others against France,
for defense of the Milanese. 557 George de Sully. 522
T
TAlbot a brave Soldier: His death. 464 Talmont, Prince slain in the Battle of
Marignan. 559 Tamberlan. 412 Toledo Peter, Viceroy of Naples: his Death. 639
County of Tolosa united inseparably to the Crown. 381 John Duke of Touraine,
Son of Charles VI. declares against the Armagnac's. 433 His Death. 434 Treaty
of Marriage between the King of England, and Catherine of France, Daughter of
King Charles VI. 439 Treaty of Alliance, between France and the Empire. 542
Treaty of Madrid for the Liberty of Francis I. and for a Peace between the said
Prince, and the Emperor. 582 Treaty of Peace between France and England. 628
Transylvania invaded by the Turks. 630 Truce between the French and English.
415, 416. Turks and their Progress in Europe. 412 Make a great Progress, 562
Ravage the Island of Corfu. Raise the Siege of Belgrade. 606 Turelupines,
Heretics. 445
V
VAlentinois and Diois United to Daufine. 460 Valentine of Milan Marries the
Duke of Orleans. 412 Vaudemont Commands the Naval Force for the King at Naples,
585 His Death. 590 Vaudois in the Alps exterminated. Venceslaus Emperor, King
of Bohemia, comes into France. 417 Is degraded of the Empire. 418 Venetians
jealous of the glorious Success of the French in Italy, make a League against
them. 521 Conquer a part of the Duchy of Milan. 536 Their irregular Ambition
draws the French Arms upon them, as also the Emperor and the Pope, and are
roughly handled. 545 Their Affairs re-settled. 546 Shut up the Passage into
Italy against the Emperor Maximilian. 544, etc. Agree with France. 552 John de
Vienne Admiral of France Lands in Scotland against the English. 408 Goes into
Hungary against the Turks. 417 La Vigne, Ambassador of France at
Constantinople. 644 Villeroy Secretary of State. 623 De Villers-Adam,
Burgundian, is by Night introduced into Paris, and makes himself Master of it.
435, 436 P. de Villers L'Isle-Adam, Great-Maistre of the Knights of Rhodes, 573
University of Paris, and its Privileges, 413 Endeavor to determine the
Schism that was in the Church. 414 A mark of their Power, 420 Their continual
pursuits for the reunion of the Church. 422 Hinder the Abolition of the
Pragmatique. 482 Its Reformation. 506 Urban V. Pope, ransomed by the Forces
that were going into Spain. 389 His Death. 391 Urban VI. Pope. 396 Baseness,
and meanness. 402 To revenge himself of Jane Queen of Naples, he causes Charles
de Duras to go thither and take Possession of that Kingdom. 404 Sounds a War on
all hands against the Clementines. 407 His Death. 414 Francis Maria Duke of
Vrbin. 570 The D. of Vrbin General of the Venetian Army. 584 Commands the
Confederate Army in Italy. 591 D'Vrfe. Grand Escuyer. 508 The Earl of Warwick
chaces Edward of York King of England. 492 His Death. 493 Dukes of Wirtemberg
restored to their Country. 597 Wirtemberg Duke General of an Army. 605
Wickliffe.
X
JOhn Xancoins, Receiver General; convicted of Misdemeanour. 466
Y
The D. of York Slain in Battle. 467
Z
John de ZApols pretended King of Hungary, calls in the Turks to his
Assistance. 562 Zizim, Son of Mahomet, Prisoner to the Knights of Rhodes, 503
Is put into the hands of Pope Innocent VIII. 515 Zuinglius begins to Vend his
Opinions, Doctrines, and Errors. 563
A TABLE OF THE KINGS OF FRANCE Contained in this THIRD PART.
FRANCIS II. King LIX. Page 657 1559. In July. CHARLES IX. King LX. 673 1560.
In December. INTERREGNVM. 731 1574. In June.
HENRY III. King LXI. 737 1574. In September. HENRY IV. King LXII. 797 1589. In
August.
A TABLE Of the Principal Matters contained in this THIRD PART.
A
ABbey of Saint Peter sacked. Page 817 Abbeville sets up the Ensigns of the
League. 788 Submits to the King. 839 Azores faithful to the Prior of Crato. 753
Aiguesmortes surprised by Montbrun. 728 Aiguillon taken by the Huguenots. 709
Aix for the League. 744 John d'Alargon de Merargues, his Treachery. 920
Alba-Royal taken by the Christians. 886 Archduke Albert of Austria. 854 Takes
Calais, 855 And Ardres. ib. d'Albret Jane, Queen of Navarre. Aldobrandius makes
a Faction. 915 Alfonso II. Duke of Ferrara. 861 Alenson Duke courts Queen
Elizabeth of England. 722 Favors the Heretics. 725 Demands the general
Lieutenancy of the Army's. 727 The King refuses him. ib. Is the only hopes of
the Huguenots. ib. Escapes, and gets to Dreux. 741 Makes his Peace. 743 Comes
to Court, 744 Takes the Title of Duke of Anjou. Subject of his Animosity
against the Huguenots. 744 Besieges and takes la Charity. 748 The King not
willing he should concern himself in the business of the Low Countries, causes
him to be secured, he escapes. 751 Comes to Angers, and from thence to Mons in
Hainault, where he takes the Low Countries into his Protection. ib. Takes
places for his Security. ib. Besieges Bins, and beats it so furiously, that he
takes it. ib. Maubeuge opens her Gates to him. ib. Quesnoy and Landrecy refuse
him entrance. ib. Alenson resents not the fury of the Saint Bartholomew. Page
721 l'Allemand Vouze Master of Requests discovers the Conspiracy of Amboise.
665 Alost surprised by the Duke of Anjou. 762 Ambassador of France goes before
him of Spain. 685 Ambassadors of Poland, their arrival to Congratulate their
new King. 725 Amnistie general granted to the Huguenots. 688 Amnistie granted
to the Parisians by Henry IV. 834 Amurath III. Sultan. 876 Angoulesme seized by
the Huguenots. 680 Anjou Duke made General of the Armies. 698 Fights the Battle
of Jarnac. 704 Raises the Siege of Poitiers. 712 Fights the Battle of
Moncontour. 721 Excites his Brother to Massacre the Huguenots. 717 Is elected
King of Poland. 725 Is much beloved there at first, but soon after hated. 726
Anthony King of Navarre. 657 Unworthily used. 659 Commands an Army for the
King. 683 Wounded at the Siege of Rouen, his Death. ib. Anthony Prior of Crato,
declares himself King of Portugal. Comes into France. 753 Antwerp taken and
sacked by the Spanish Soldiers. 751 Missed by the Duke of Anjou. 763 Ardemburgh
taken by the Hollanders. 913 Arras the place where the Duke of Parma died. 827
Arrest, or Decree of Parliament in favor of Henry IV. 831 Arrest, annulling
all the Arrests or Decrees made against Henry IV. 838 Arrest or Sentence
against Biron. 896 Articles of Pacification granted to Rochel, by the Duke of
Anjou. 725 Articles of the Treaty between Henry IV. and the Duke of Savoy. 887
Assemblies Nocturnal and Clandestin of the Religionaries forbidden. 661
Assembly of the Grandees of the Kingdom at Founta^nbleau, to remedy the
troubles caused by the differences in Religion. 666 Assembly of the Huguenots
at Millaud. 732 Assembly of the Notables at Compeigne. 726 Assembly of the
Clergy of France. Church 16 th Age. Ast rendered to the Duke of Savoy. 675
Aumale Duke Commands the King's Armies in Normandy. 682 Austria Don Juan going
to the Low Countries passes through France. 744 Is Governor thereof. 751
Approves of the Pacification of Ghent. ib. Gains the Battle of Gemblours. 752
His death. ib. Suspected to have been Poisoned by his Brother the King of
Spain. 752 Auvergne redeems themselves from being Plundered by the Germans. 742
Auvergne partly debauched from the Service of the King. 791 Count d'Auvergne
apprehended. 914 His long Imprisonment. 915
B
BAligny natural Son of the Bishop of Valence, disposes the Polanders to elect
the Duke of Anjou for their King. 724. Balagny advises the War against the
Spaniard, 842 Loses Cambray. 849 Balsac, Frances Entragues Married with a
Natural Daughter of Charles IX. 730 Baronius an ardent defender of his
Holiness. 926 Bellarmine a defender of his Holiness. 926 Serves Henry IV. 849
Barry Georges la Renaudie Deputy for the Huguenots. 665 Is made Lieutenant to
the Prince of Conde. ib. His indiscretion. 666 St. Bartholomew's a fatal Day to
the Huguenots. 721 Battle of Dreux, 686 The two Generals are taken. ib. Battle
near Paris. 697 Battle of Moncontour. 711 Battle of Lepanto. 714 Battle of
Ivry. 804 Bathory elected King of Poland. 740 Bauais demanded of the Flemings
by the Queen of England. 751 Bavaria Duke enters into the League made by Hen.
IV. 935 Bayeux seized by the Huguenots. 681 Bayonne feels not the Saint
Bartholomew's bloody Effects. 721 The Bearnois, a Name given to Henry IV. 800
Beia Lewis Duke, pretends to the Crown of Portugal. 752 Belle-Isle erected to a
Marquisate. 724 Bertrand Peter Son of Blaise de Montluc passes into Afric:
his death. 701 Berghe rendered to the Spaniards. 763 Besancon in a fright. 846
Beza at the Colloquy of Poissy. 677 Judgment on that famous Man. ib. Bigarrats
a Name given to the Royalists. 808 La Bigny Secretary of the Conspiracy at
Amboise. 666 Bins Besieged and taken by the Duke of Alenson. 751 Birague
Chancellor, his Speech to the Estates of Blois. 745 Birague Keeper of the
Seals. 717 Birague the Cardinal Rene, his Death. 766 His Defects. ib. Biron,
the Marshall same, 699 An ill Catholic, 709 His Courage, 763 In danger at
the Saint Bartholomew's, saves himself by his resolution. 720 Sent Governor to
Rochel. 722 Invests that place, 723 Pursues the Army of the Dukes of Mayenne,
and of Parma. 822 His death. 824 Biron swears Fidelity to Henry IV. 797 Hinders
the King from going to Paris. 705 Concerns himself in every thing. 809 Sent
before Rouen. 812 The King takes away the Office of Admiral from him, first
cause of his Discontent. 839 Treats with the Spaniards. 881 Does well, and
talks ill. 884 His anger proceeds to rage. ib. Goes into England. 889 Goes into
Swisserland, 892 Comes to Court. 894 His obstinacy. 895, 896 Condemned to
Death. 897 Blois regained from the Huguenots. 683 Bobigny Meziere kills the
Marshall de Saint Andre. 686 Bodin, his Liberty in the Assembly of Estates
held at Blois. 747 Bois de Vincennes the place where died Charles IX. 729 Bonne
de Lesdiguieres, his Condition and Qualities, 740 Receives the one half of a
piece of Gold broken from Henry King of Navarre. 755 Makes War in Daufine, 771.
Quits Savoy to go and succor Aix, 841 Is thwarted by the King's Order, without
diminishing any thing of his Fidelity. 852 Resists the Duke of Savoy, and
carries the War into his own Country. 859 Is astonished at the taking of
Crequi, 864 Takes Barraux, and puts a stop to the Duke's Progress. ib. Commands
an Army in Savoy, at the same time with Biron. 882 Seizes upon all the Valley
of Saint John de Maurienne. 883 Bouchard Chancellor to the King of Navarre,
reveals the Secrets of the Prince of Conde. 668 A Butcher Kills a Hundred and
fifty Huguenots. 719 Burbon, the Cardinal, persuades his Brothers to come to
Court. 669 Secured in Peronne. 769 Seized in Blois, 786 Concurrent with Henry,
797 Proclaimed King, 799 His death. 807 Lewis of Bourbon Prince of Conde,
instructed in Calvinism. 665 Declared Head of the Pretended Reformed, 665 Is
accused of being concerned in the Conspiracy of Amboise, 666 Comes not to the
Assembly at Melun. 669 Comes to Court, ib. Is Condemned to Death. 670 Is
declared Innocent. 674 Reconciled to the Duke of Guise. 675 Makes a League with
the Germans. 679 Made Prisoner at the Battle of Dreux. 686 Recommences the War.
696 Appears in Arms before the King's Army. ib. Is almost surprised at Noyers.
702 His death. 710 Bourbon the young Cardinal makes a Party. -- Du Bourg burnt.
662 Bourges Besieged by the King's Army Commanded by the King of Navarre, and
the Duke of Guise. 683 Surrenders to Henry IV. 836 Bragadin, defends Famagusta:
Greatness of his Courage during that Siege, and after the taking of the place.
714 Is flayed alive. ib. John of Braganza restored to his Kingdom and Crown of
Portugal. 753 Branch of the Valois ends in Henry III. 795 Brandenburgh Marquess
refuses Succor to the Huguenots. 697 Breda taken by the Duke of Parma. 758
Bretagne feels little of the fury of the Saint Bartholomew. 721 Acquired to
France by the Conduct of the Valois, 795 Vexed by the French, and by Strangers.
817 Brissac, Marshall of France, a great Partisan of the Guises. 670 Bruxels
invested by the D. of Parma. 760 Bruges enters into the Union of the United
Provinces. 757 Bucentauro, a Vessel in which Henry III. was received at Venice.
733 Bulls of the Pope without effect. 815 Bouillon Duke suspected of
Huguenotisme. 682 Bouillon declares the Sentiments of Henry IV. to the Duke of
Savoy. 873 Bussy, Favorite of the Duke of Anjou, affronts those of Henry III.
which causes the detention of his Master. 751 Bussy comes to the Duke of
Alenson at Dreux, 741 Favorite of the Duke of Alenson. 751 His Death. 754 Bussy
le Clerc, his Impudence. 788
C
CAen seized by the Huguenots. 681 Caesar Monsieur Natural Son of Henry IV. 865
Is Contracted with the Daughter of the Duke of Mercoeur. ib. Calais redemanded
by the English. 689 Calvin becomes as Powerful as Luther. Vide Church of the 16
th Age. Cambray Besieged by the Spaniards. 849 La Capelle Besieged by
Mansfeild. 838 Captains possessing Benefices. 16 th Age. Capucins their
Founder. Chapter 16 th. Age. Carcistes Factionaries. 754 Cardinals Inquisitors cite
the Prelates suspected of Heresy. Chapter 16 th Age. Casimir sent by Eliz. Queen
of England into the Low Countries, is ill looked upon by the Prince of Orange.
751 Castres retained by the Huguenots. 701 Catanea Albert drives the Vaudois
out of their Valleys. Chapter 16 th Age. The Catelet taken by the Spaniard. 855
Rendered to the French. 868 Catherine de Medicis her Maxim. 667 Is declared
Regent. 673 She favors the Huguenots. 675 Causes Charles IX. to visit all the
Kingdom. 692 Demands the Kingdom of Tunis for the Duke of Alenson. 722 Is
declared Regent of the Kingdom after the Death of Charles IX. 731 Her aim, the
day of the Massacre of Saint Bartholomew. 717 Her Galantery. 712 Comforts her
Son the King of Poland, promising him a quick return. 726 Would have her
Daughters Children reign in France. 767 Her Death. 789 Catherine Sister of
Henry IV. Married to the Duke of Bar. 868 Is forsaken by her Husband. 879
Catholics persecuted in England under Queen Elizabeth. 903 Cavagnes Master of
Requests, Chancellor of the Cause, Condemned, Drawn on a Sledge with the
Effigies, or Fantosme, of the Admiral. 721 Robert Cecil Enemy of the French.
903 Chaalons retaken from the Huguenots. 683 Chiverny Chancellor. 870 His
Death, 874 End of that Family. ib. Charbonieres taken by the Duke of Savoy. 864
Charles IX. King. 673 Crowned by the Cardinal de Lorrain. 674 Is declared Major
in the Parliament of Rouen. 690 Courts Elizabeth Queen of England. 712 The said
Queens Excuse. ib. Marries Elizabeth, the Emperor's Daughter. 713 Forms the
Design to Massacre the Huguenots. 715 Authorizes that Cruelty. 717 Makes his
Brother depart for Poland. 726 Becomes good at the end of his days. 730 His
death. 729 Description of his Person, ib. His inclinations, ib. Was a great
Swearer, 730 His Children, ib. Vices Predominant during his Reign. ib. Caused
his Daughter to be named by Elizabeth Queen of England. -- Chastel (John)
wounds the King in the Mouth, or the nether Lip. 842 Is Condemned. 843
Chastelleraud place of the Assembly of the Huguenots. 871 Cemitery, or Burial
Place, allowed the Huguenots at Paris. 743 Clement VIII. gives some Convents to
the Recolts. Church 16 th Age. Coligny the Admiral, charged with the Death of
the Duke of Guise. 687 Joins with the Germans. 699 Is Condemned to Death, and
his Head proscribed. 707 Takes several places going to Bearn, 702 Comes to
Court, and is highly favored 715 Is Massacred. 719 Company, or Society of
Jesuits restored in France. 907 Conde Princess loved by Henry III. 739 The
King would vacate her Marriage, and have her for his own Wife, ib. Her death.
739 Princess of Conde makes the King in Love with her. 936 Is carried away by
her Husband into Flanders. 937 Confederation between Queen Elizabeth of
England, and the Huguenots of France. 683 Conference between Henry King of
Navarre, and the Duke of Espernon. 760 Confusion or amazement, of those that
were present at the Murder of Henry IV. 942 Council of France betrayed. 911
Courtiers Italians ruin the Kingdom of France. 774 Courtiers adore not the
Prince but during his Grandeur. -- Cracovia in Uproar upon the departure of
Henry III. 732 Croquants a Faction in the time of Henry IV. 840 Curates of
Paris assembled to acknowledge Henry IV. 838 Curton dis-engages Florat
Seneschal of Auvergne. 705
D
DAcier Commands a Body of an Army. 703 Is made Prisoner. 712 Dacier Attorney
General preserves the City of Touloze for Henry III. 788 Dandelot Brother to
the Admiral de Coligny, imbued with the Opinions of Calvin. 666 His resolution.
696 Is with the Prince at Rosoy. 697 Passes the River after the Battle of
Paris. 697 Makes up a small Army. 704 Falls into Poitou. 705 Declaration of the
Duke of Guise against King Henry III. 769 Declarations of Henry III. against
the leagued. 788 Decree of the Clergy assembled at Mante, declaring the Pope's
Bulls against Henry IV. to be Null. 850 Deputies of the pretended Reformed
Churches have Permission to hold an Assembly at Mante. 835 Despair oftentimes
more advantageous than good Fortune it self. 794. 835 Desportes Abbot of Tyron
a greater Courtier, than a Poet; though an excellent Poet for those times. 818
Diego d'Ibarra Ambassador of Spain, 821 Demands the Crown for the Infanta. ib.
Diepe remains faithful to Henry III. 788 Acknowledges Henry IV. 801 The
Difference between the Pope and the Venetians. 925 Dijon sees Casimir pass by
with his Germans. 742 Given to the Chiefs of the League. 771 Is seized by the
Duke of Mayenne, 787 Would return to their Obedience under the King, and is
hindered by the Duke of Mayenne. 841 Its Reduction. 844 Declaration denouncing a
War against King Philip. 843 Directors and Confessors animate the People. 775
Disciples of Luther. Church 16th Age. Dixmude taken by the Duke of Alenson. 762
Rendered to the States of the Low Countries. 763 Doctors of Paris enter into a
Conference with Henry IV. 832 Dominique de Gourgues a Gascon, revenges the
French Massacred in Florida by the Spaniards. 701 Doria General of the Spanish
Galleys. 713 Brings back his Vessels to Naples, and forsakes the Christians.
714 Doway its Seminary filled with Catholics too Zealous. 758 Dourlens taken
by Orleans, cause of the death of the Guises. 782 Is granted to the League. ib.
Dourlens will needs be comprised in the Edict of the Reduction of Amiens. Under
King Henry IV. 839 Drougne a River, where was fought the Battle of Coutras. 778
Dunkirk in the hands of the Spaniards, 758 Taken by the Duke of Alenson. 762
Duel famous between Philipin Bastard of Savoy, and the Lord de Crequy. 876
Duplessis Mornay agrees Henry III. and Henry of Navarre, afterward King of
France. 791 D'uumvirs of Marseilles. 851
E
EBion his Errors renewed in the Sixteenth Age. Vide Chapter 16 th Age. Eclipses
Three in one year. 919 Edict to put Persons that were irreproachable into
Offices of Judicature. 665 Edict in favor of the Huguenots at the instance of
the Queen Regent under Charles IX. 675 It was the first that they ever
obtained. ibid. Edict against Duels. 705 Edict Prohibiting foreign
Manufactures. 905 Edict which gives to Calvinisme the Name of Pretended
Reformed Religion. -- Edict against Duels and Bankrupts. 934 Edward Prince of
Portugal. 752 Egmont Count, his death. 699 d'Elboeuf Duke Prisoner at Loches.
790 Elector Frederic of Saxony, vanquished, and destituted of his Duchy. 937
Eleonor de Roye, Wife of the Prince of Conde. 658 Eleonor Daughter of William
Duke of Cleves, 937 Wife of Albert Federic Duke of Prussia. ibid. Elgade, a
City of the Azores taken by Don Antonio Prior of Crato, pretending himself to
be King of Portugal. 760 Taken by the Spaniards. ib. Elizabeth de la Paix, Wife
of the King of Spain, and Daughter of France is Poisoned. 700 Elizabeth Queen
of England assists the Huguenots. 662 France declares War against her. 689
Takes the Low Countries under her Protection. 762 Courted by the Duke of
Alenson, 754 Will take no Husband, and the reason wherefore. ib. Sends the
Order of the Garter to the King. 768 Puts Mary Stuart to Death. 776 Sends
assistance to Henry IV. 818 Sends Succors to the Siege of Amiens, 860 Receives
the Marshall Biron very well. 883 Her Death, and her Praise. 902, 903
Elizabeth Daughter of Henry IV. 943 Is married to Philip IV. King of Spain. ib.
Emmanuel King of Portugal, from whom by Daughters are issued the Dukes of
Braganza. 752 d'Entragues Espouses Mary Toucher Mistress to Charles IX. 876 Her
Daughter beloved by Henry IV. ib. Is Condemned to be Beheaded, but receives her
Pardon. 914 Ernest Archduke proposed to the Estates assembled at Paris to be
King of France, marrying the Infanta of Spain. 831 Ernest of the House of
Brandenburg pursues the right of his Nephew upon Cleves. 939 Eseovedo Secretary
of Don Juan of Austria is Poignarded. 752 Espernon Duke, Favorite of Henry III.
designs against the Duke of Anjou. 764 Makes a Party to seize upon the Duke of
Guise. 770 Being in the highest degree of favor, advises the ruin of the
Guises. 775 Hinders the League from making any great Progress in Normandy. 781
Was in the Coach with Henry IV. when he was Murdered. 942 The Queen confides
much in him. 943 Causes her to be declared Queen Regent. ibid. d'Espinay the
Princess in the absence of her Husband, defends Tournay during two Months. 758
Essars d'Amoiselle beloved by Henry IV. 934 Estampes taken by Henry IV. 800
Estates assembled at Blois under Henry III. 804 Estates General of the United
Provinces treat with the Duke of Anjou. 751 Are in Combustion. -- The Duke of
Anjou having endeavored to make himself Master of Antwerp, they
notwithstanding sends him Provisions. 763 Send Deputies to King Henry III. to
proffer him the Government of the Country. 769 d'Estree, beloved of Henry IV.
goes to the Siege of Amiens, the murmurings of the whole Army obliges her to
quit the Camp. 859 Sollicites the King to marry her. 869 Her death. 871 Europe
began to be more enlightened in the 16th Age. Chu. 16 th Age.
F
FAbian Son of Blaise de Montluc, assists his Brother Bertrand in his Design
for the East Indies. 701 Famagusta the Capital City of Cyprus, gainedby the
Turks. 713 Federick Marquess of Baden assists the King against the Huguenots.
710 Ferdinand Emperor Brother of Charles V. 692 His death. ib. Flemmings
cannot endure the Inquisition. 695 Final taken by the Spaniards. 893 Florida,
whence the Name. 700 Florence Duke, assists the Duke of Nevers, to seize upon
Marseilles. 769 la Force Massacred at the Saint Bartholomews. 720 His Son
Escapes. ib. Fort Charles in Florida built by the Spaniards, and taken by
Dowinique de Gourgues. 701 Fra Paolo, otherwise Pol Soaue, writes for the
Republique of Venice against the Pope. 926 Is like to be Murdered. 928 France
in Civil War for Religion, 679 Has always the preference before Spain. 685
Afflicted with two most cruel Maladies. 757 Their King essentially most
Christian. 798 Francis I. settles the Art of making Silk in Poitou. 904 Was not
severe against the Huguenots. Church 16 th Age. Recalls his Legates from the
Council of Trent. ib. Francis II. King of France. 657 Falls Sick, 670 His
Death, and Burial. 671 Franche-Comte attaqued by the French. 842 Promised to
Biron, with a Daughter of Spain. 884 Given to Isabella Clara Eugenia Infanta of
Spain. 869 Conditions of that Donation. ib. Frisia gives all Power to the
Prince of Orange. 751 Fuentes, Governor of the Low Countries. 843 Besieges
Cambray. 847 Gains a Victory upon the French. 847 Obliges Prince Maurice to
raise the Siege of Grol. 848 Takes Cambray, and does not make an ill use of his
Victory over the French. ibid. Personal Enemy of Henry IV. 878 Fulgentius
writes for the Venetians against the Pope. 926
G
GAbriella d'Estree beloved of Henry IV. assists at the Ceremony of his
Conversion. 832 Gantois hate the French, and the Roman Religion. 762 Gascons in
Dispute with the Provenceaux. 825 Gaspard Bishop of Modena, Nuncio in France.
871 Delegated to take cognizance of the Nullity of Marriage of Henry IV. and
Margaret of Valois. 871 Geneva, the Duke of Savoy endeavors to seize it. 802
Withdraw from their Obedience to the Bishop. Church 16 th Age. Call in Calvin
and Farel to be their Pastors. ib. Is, as it were the Pontifical seat of
Calvinisme. ib. Gerard Balthazar a Franc-Comtois, Emissary of the Spaniards,
Kills the Prince of Orange with a Pistol. 767 Gondi the Cardinal confers with
Biron. 806 Golf of Venice, the Ceremonies used there at the Reception of Henry
III. 733 Gregory XIII. Pope, regulates the Calender. 761 Gregory XIV. declared
an Enemy of the Peace and Union of the Church, Enemy of the King and of the
State. 815 His death. 818 Grisons renew the Alliance with Henry IV. 892 Quit
the Roman Religion. Chur. 16 th Age. Guiche the Countess, beloved by the King
of Navarre. 773 Angry at the King's forsaking her, she endeavors to debauch
his Sister. 814 Guienne acknowledges Henry IV. 824 Guises make themselves
Masters at Court, under Francis II. 657, etc. Duke of Guise possesses the whole
favor of Francis II. 660 The Huguenots would ceaze him to make his Process.
665 Fortifies himself with the Name of the King. 669 Causes the Prince to be
apprehended and prosecuted. 670 Gains the Battle of Dreux. 686 And makes the
Prince Prisoner. ib. His Courtesy and Gallantry. ib. Lays Siege to Orleans.
887 Is assassinated by Paltrot. ib. Justifies himself of the Murder at Vassy.
887 His Praises. ib. Guise Duke returns into France, with his Uncle the
Cardinal of Lorrain. 692 Defends Poitiers bravely and acquires much reputation.
706 Is the Principal Author of the Saint Bartholomew. 717 Is made the Chief to
execute that Massacre. 718 Declares for the League, and seizes on the Cardinal
of Bourbon. 768 The Pope compares him to the Machabees. 784 Has several
Advertisements given him of his Danger. 786 Is assassinated by the Order of
Henry III. at the Estates of Blois. ib. His Body is burnt by Richelieu. 787
Guise the Cardinal bears the Cross in a Procession. 764 Would make himself
Master of Normandy. 781 Is hindered by the Duke of Espernon. ib. Guise, Duke,
before Prince of Joinville made Prisoner at the Death of his Father. 787
Escapes out of Prison, 817 Is attaqu'd near Abbeville by King Henry IV. 821
Aspires to the Crown. 832 Kills Saint Pol Governor of Reims, and makes his
accommodation with Henry IV. 841 Reduces Marseilles to obedience of the King.
852 Gustavus Ericson introduces the Confession of Ausburgh in Sweden. 913
H.
HAinaut suffers scarcity. 760 Hampton Court the place in England, where the
Treaty between Queen Elizabeth and the Huguenots was concluded. 683 Havre de
Grace delivered to the English, ibid. Besieged by the French and Surrendered,
689 Henry d'Angoulesme Bastard Brother to Charles IX. has Order from the King
to kill the Duke of Guise. 712 Henry of Navarre Espouses Margaret of Valois.
717 Generosity of that Prince, who refuses to kill the Sole Heir of the
Kingdom, 740 Hates his Wife, who has as little Love for him. 750 Henry III. is
killed on the same day, and at the same place where he advised the Massacre of
St. Bartholomew. 795 Henry Cardinal Archbishop of Evora King of Portugal after
the death of Sebastian. 752 Henry grand Prior of France Bastard Brother to the
King. 753 Henry III. King of France and of Poland, 737 Leaves Poland, 732 Makes
his Entrance into Paris. 739 Hates the House of Guise, 745 Loves the Princess
of Conde. 757 Forms the design of putting the Duke of Guise to death. 780
Besieges Paris, reduces it to extremity, and is killed at Saint Cloud. 795
Heemskerk Admiral for the States of the United Provinces, attaques the Spanish
Flota, is slain, his death glorious, 790 Henry IV. his coming to the Crown, 797
Gains the Battle of Ivry. 705 Besieges Rouen, 821, 820 Beats up the Duke of
Guise's Quarters at Abbeville. 821 Opposes at Fontaine-Francoise, and bears the
brunt of the whole Spanish Army, and gives proofs of his Heroic Courage. 845
Receives his absolution from Rome. 849 His consternation upon the loss of
Amiens, 858 Regains that Town in Sight of the Archduke. 862 Demands of the
Duke of Savoy the Restitution of the Marquisate of Salusses, 876 His Marriage
with Mary de Medicis, 885 Does what he can possibly to save Biron, and in fine
leaves him to the Law, 895 Loves the Princess of Conde, and is ready almost to
declare War against the Archduke upon her occasion. 936, etc. Forms the Design
to pull down the House of Austria. 938 His Wife Mary de Medicis Crowned, 941 Is
Murdered, 942 Predictions of his death. 941 His Wives, his Mistresses, and his
Children, 943, 944 His praise. ibid. Henry Duke of Bar, Successor of Charles
Duke of Lorraine. 940 Marries in his Fathers Lifetime with Catherine Sister of
Henry IV. 868 Henrietta Charlotta Daughter of the Connestable de Montmorency
inspires Henry the IV. with the Love of her, who marries her to the Prince of
Conde, and he carries her into Flanders. 936 A Design is formed to steal her
away, and bring her back into France. 937 Hercules II. Duke of Ferrara. 862
Holland Leagues against Spain. 756 Hospital of Saint Lewis to entertain such as
are infected with the Plague. 911 L' Host Nicholas discovers the Secrets of
France. 908 The Spaniards make him betray his King and his Master de Villeroy,
whose Servant he was. ibid. Drowned in the Marne upon his Flight, 909 L'Hostel
de Ville, or Town Hall of Paris gives Fifty thousand Crowns to him that should
kill the Admiral de Coligny. 690 Huguenots, Original of that Name. 667 General
Massacre of them at the Saint Bartholomew's. 718 Acknowledge Henry IV. for King,
and maintain him in his Right. 979 Their suspicions of him after his
Conversion. 855, 860 Forsake him at the Siege of Amiens, 860 Apprehend a Saint
Bartholomews in the Camp. ibid. Were formerly called Sacramentaries. Church 16
th Age. Paul Huraud de l'Hospital Archbishop of Aix, Excommunicates the
Counselors of Parliament. Church 16 th Age.
I.
THe Count de Jacob renders the City of Bourg. 882 James King of Scotland is
proclaimed King of England after the death of Queen Elizabeth. 903 Holds his
first Parliament at London. 911 They conspire against his person, and intend to
blow up the House of Parliament at Westminster. 919 Consequence of that
Fougade. 920 Jannizaries mutiny against Amurat III. retard his Enterprises.
887, 888 Jarnac, the place where was fought the Famous Battle of that Name. 714
Jane Queen of Navarre is cited by the Pope to appear at Rome; if not, her Lands
and Estates are proscribed. Church 16 th Age. Brings her Son Henry of Navarre
and Henry Prince of Conde to the Huguenots, after the loss of the Battle of
Jarnac, and re-assures their Spirits by her Exhortations. 705 Comes to Court by
the persuasions of the Admiral, and under the Pretense of the Marriage of her
Son to the King's Sister. 716 Telligny is sent to her for that purpose. 715
Dies by over-heating her self, or rather of poison. 716 Jesuits turned out of
France with Infamy. 843 Are restored maugre the oppositions of the Parliament
and their Remonstrances by the first President, 907 Are accused of the
Conspiracy of the Powder-Plott, against James King of England. 920 Purge
themselves of it. ibid. Impost that has ever increased since its first
beginning. 676 Impost upon Wines compared to the Crocodile, for its growth.
ibid. Joyeuse loses the Battle of Coutras with his Life. 778 Joyeuse Cardinal,
sent to Rome by the Duke of Mayenne, to Treat concerning the Conversion of King
Henry IV. 833 Serves the Republique of Venice most Wonderfully in their
accommodation with the Pope. Isabella of France marries the King of Spain. 659
Isabella de la Paix, espouses Philip II. King of Spain. 692 Enterview between
Catherine de Medicis her Mother, and the said Princess, 693 Is poisoned by her
Husband though great with Child. 700 Isabella Infanta of Spain marries the
Archduke Albertus, her Father gives her the Low Countries in favor of this
Marriage. 869 Conditions of the said Donation. ib. Issoire given to the
Huguenots for a place of Security. 743 Judges ordained to inform about the
Assassinate committed on the person of the Admiral de Coligny. 718
K.
JOhn Kepler a Learned Mathematician. 911. Kermartin kills the Marquess de
Belle-Isle, 852 The Widow attempts upon his Life. 870 Kervan-Saray, Turkish
Hospitals. -- Koburg a Family issued of John Frederic Duke of Saxony. 938
Korneburgh, a Gate of Antwerp, seized by the Duke of Anjou's Men. 762
L.
LAffin, Favorite of the Duke of Anjou, 744 Debauches the Marshall de Biron,
878 Betrays Biron, 894 Reveals all to the King. ibid. Landriane sent into
France to support the League. 845 His ill conduct. ibid. Lansac Ambassador of
France, at the Council of Trent, yields somewhat to the Spaniard upon the
Solicitation of the Cardinal de Lorraine. 685 Lerma Duke Minister of Spain,
hinders the War between France and Spain, 889 Lieutenant General of the
Kingdom, a Title given by Francis II. to the Duke of Guise. 665 The Parisians
give it to the Duke of Mayenne under Henry III. 790 Is granted by Catherine de
Medicis to the King of Navarre. 671 Limoges holds their Obedience to Henry III.
791 Livron besieged, 738 Defends it self bravely. 739 Loire, a design to join
the River of Loire to the Saone, 911 Longueville Duke, undertakes to go and
beseech Henry IV. to make himself Christian, and then desists. 798 His Death.
845 Cardinal Lorraine, Crowns Charles IX. 674 Goes to Rome after the death of
Pius V. 716 Is called the Pope on the other side the Alps. 684 His death. 739
Louchali retires from the Battle of Lepanto with Two and thirty Galleys, 714
Louis King of Sicilia, first Founder of the Order of the Holy Ghost. 753 Louis
XI. Institutor of the Order of Saint Michael. 754 Louis XIV. obliges Philip IV.
to renounce the precedence under his handwriting. 685 Louis XII. causes the
Council of Pisa to assemble. Church 16 th Age. Louisa, Daughter of Nicholas de
Vaudemont, marries Henry III. 739 Louviers taken at Noonday by Biron, 815
Ludovic of Nassaw sent to the King by the Admiral. 715 They render him the
Castle of Orange, ibid. Enters the Low Countries, and surprises Mons. 716
Lusignan Castle, reputed impregnable, and famous by the Fables of Melusine,
taken by Teligny. 706 Luther, Martin, an Augustine Monk, Church 16th Age. His
defects. ibid. Casts away his Frock, and marries. ib. Dies at Islebe. ibid.
Luxemburgh Sebastian defends the Port of Leith against the English. 662 Lions
taken by the Huguenots. 680 Delivered from Eminent dangers of Ice are
ungrateful. 930
M.
JOhn Mason first Huguenot Minister at Paris. Church 16th Age. Maderes taken by
the French. 701 Maestricht taken by the Duke of Parma. Mailly Breze Philip,
Captain of the Guard du Corpse, Seizes the Prince of Conde at the Estates of
Orleans. 670 Malta besieged by the Turks. 693 Mancicidor Secretary of King
Philip for the affairs of War, deputed for to make the Peace with the United
Provinces. 931 Margaret of Lorraine Mother of Mary Stuart, Governs Scotland.
662 Margaret Duchess of Savoy, her Councels to Henry III. whose Aunt she was.
733 Margaret Duchess of Parma Governess of the Low Countries her conduct. 695
Margaret Daughter of France assists at the Assembly of Saint Germains under
Charles IX. 676 They propound to marry her to the King of Navarre, 712 Her
Marriage dissolved. 876 Permitted to come to Paris, an Accident that happened to
her at the Hostel de Sens, her life. 915 Margaret Queen of Navarre adheres to
Calvinisme. Church 16th Age. Protests to Francis her Brother she will forsake
her Errors. ib. She repents it again, and writes to Calvin. ibid. Mary Stuart
Wife of Francis II. 671 Is beheaded. -- Mary of Cleves espouses the Prince of
Conde. 717 Mary de Medicis Married to Henry IV. 885 Is Crowned, and declared
Regent. 941 Massacre of Vassy the first Signal of the War for Religion. 679
Matthias Archduke, Brother to the Emperor, in the Low Country. 751 Matilda
Wife of Alphonso III. King of Portugal, the Subject of the Pretensions of
Catherine de Medicis to that Kingdom. 753 Prince Maurice besieges Newport, is
beaten at first by the Archduke Albert, and at length gains the Victory, 880
Maximilian II. succeeds to Ferdinand I. 692 Maximilian Emperor Elected King of
Poland. 740 Duke of Mayenne leads an Army Royal against the Prince. 742 The
Spaniards in deliberation for cutting off his head. 842 Agrees with the King.
851 Puts the King upon the Siege of Amiens, 858 Serves well in that Siege. 859
Horace de Monte a Neapolitan, Archbishop of Arles, Named for the dissolving of
the Marriage of Henry IV. 871 Montmorency Connestable of France, comes to the
Assembly of the Grandees Convocated by Catherine de Medicis at Fontainbleau.
668 Harrasses the Army of the Huguenots. 697 Gives them Battle, is wounded to
death, his great courage in that last moment, ibid. The Prince of Montpensier
at the Estates of Orleans. 670 Seeks the Heyress of Sedan for his Son, 818 His
Death. 824 Morisco's exterminated in Spain. 933 Mouker, the place where
Requesens gained a Battle. 751 Moulins, place of the Assembly where they made
the Famous Edict of that Name. 694 Mustapha Bassa enters the Island of Cyprus
713
N.
NAmur Surprised by Don Juan of Austria Governor of the Low Countries. 751
Nani, Ordinary Ambassador of Venice to the Pope, retires with Duodi the
Extraordinary Ambassador. 926 Nantes, the Parliament of Renes is transferred
thither. 665 The place of the Famous Edict of that name. 866 Adolphus of Nassaw
vanquished by Albert, 880 Philip of Nassaw restored to Liberty, marries Eleonor
of Conde, and is restored to his Principality. 924 Nemurs Duke put in Prison
after the death of the Duke of Guise. 787 Escapes. 789 Is made Governor of
Paris. 806 Aspires to the Crown. 831 His strange Kind of Death. 844 Nerac, Jane
d'Albret banishes thence the Roman Religion, which Charles IX. reestablishes.
693 Nerestan Philibert Captain of the Guard du Corpse, is made Grand-Maistre of
the Order of Nostre-Dame of Mount- Carmel. Church 16 th Age. Neyen, John, or
Ney, a Cordelier deputed by the Archdukes to mediate a Peace between them, and
the United Provinces. 929 Nevers, Duke, pursues the Huguenots, receives a blow
which he feels all his life after. 698 Nicholas III. Pope. Chu. 16th Age.
Nicosia taken by the Turks. 713 Fra. Noialles Bishop of Dags Ambassador in
Turkey. 716 Notables assembled at Saint Germains en Lay. 765 La Noue, Francis,
a Huguenot Captain, his Wisdom in admiration amongst the Catholics. 698 The
Nouueaux, a Cabal under Charles IX. 724 Noyers a Castle of the Prince of
Condes, a Soldier measures the Fosse or Graft, and they would have surprised
that Prince. 702 Noyon taken by the Duke of Mayenne, 829 Besieged by Henry IV.
839 Is taken. ib.
O
d'O Surintendant of the Finances under Henry III. 752 Upon the refusal of the
Duke of Longueville, declares to Henry IV. the Sentiments of those Catholics,
who followed him. 798 His death. 840 His Vices. ib. d'Ognagne a Spanish
Captain, Conducts the Soldiers who surprised Amiens. 857 Ochinus, Bernardinus,
Apostatises, question, whether he were the Institutor of the Capucins. Chur. 16
th Age. Orange Prince, Founder of the States of the United Provinces. 699
Orange Prince, is thwarted by the Flemmish Lords. 752 Provinces that obeyed
him. 751. 757 Is elected Lieutenant by the Archduke Matthias. 751 Puts the
Ducal Vesture upon the Duke of Anjou. 759 Is assassinated. ib. Recovers of his
Wounds. ib. Discovers the Treachery of Salsede, ib. Thwarts the Duke of Anjou,
762 Treats the French courteously after their Attempt upon Antwerp. Retires to
Antwerp. 763 Is Killed. 767 Order of Saint Michael greatly vilified, 753 Its
Institutor, and reasons for its Establishment. 753, 754 Orders new of Religious
are the Promoters of the League. Chapter 16 th Age. Order of the Annunciation. ib.
Order of the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem. Chapter 16 th Age. Order of Saint
Lazarus. ib. Order of the Celestial Annunciado's. ib. Order of the Templers.
ib. Orleans, the Prince of Conde goes thither, and the Huguenots make it their
place of Arms. 686 d'Ossun Surnamed the Brave, flies at the Battle of Dreux,
and for madness starves himself to Death. 687 Ostend attempted by the Duke of
Anjou, but misses his aim. 762 Besieged by Duke Albertus. 889 How long the
Siege lasted. 913, etc. Oysans a Fort built by Lesdiguieres. 785
P
PAceco Duke of Ascalone Ambassador from Spain, foments the Division between
the Pope, and the Venetians. 926 Pacification of Ghent. 695 Papaux a Name given
to the Catholics by the Huguenots. 673 Pareus Ambros. accused of having
Poisoned Francis II. 671* Paris besieged by Henry III. reduced to extremity and
saved by a detestable Monk. 794, 795 Parliament of Paris gives the Name of
Conservator of the Country to the Duke of Guise. 667 Parma Duke brings Relief
to Don Juan of Austria. 751 Commands the Army after the Death of that Prince.
752 Takes Maestrickt. 757 Takes Breda. 758 Takes Tournay after it had been
bravely defended by a Lady. ib. Invests Antwerp. -- Has much ado to resolve to
come into France. 811 Enters Paris and has Compassion of them. 812 Takes
Corbeil. ib. Retires from Ivetot with great industry. 822 Dies at Arras. 827
Paul IV. his Death. 662 Endeavors to set up the Inquisition every where. ib.
The Romans beat down his Statuas. ib. Paul III. suspends the Council of Trent,
668 Approves of the Jesuits. Chapter 16 th Age. Paul V. declares the Cardinal de
Joyeuse Legate in France for three Months, that he may represent him as
Godfather to the Daufin, the Son of Henry IV. 923 The Paulette its Author, and
its Establishment. 912 Perigueux sacked. 740 Perthau Bassa escapes at the
Battle of Lepanto. 714 Philibert Emanuel Duke of Savoy yields his Right in
Portugal, to the King of Spain. 752 His Death. 757 Philip of Spain intermeddles
with the Affairs of France under pretense of Religion. 678 Sends Ambassadors to
Charles IX. to solicit him to depute to Nancy, where the Assembly of
Christian Princes was assigned. 691 Causes the Council of Trent to be
Published, and sets up the Inquisition in the Low Countries. 695 His merciless
Councils. ib. Puts his Son to Death, and causes his Wife to be Poisoned. 700
Seizes upon Portugal. 753 Equipps a mighty Fleet against England, 783 Gives the
Low Countries to his Daughter Isabella; the Conditions of the Donative, 869 His
Malady, his Death, his Age, and his Successor. ib. Philip III. King of Spain,
is married to Margaret of France. 869 Du Perron Cardinal made choice of to go
to Rome to demand the Absolution of Henry IV. 848 Compleats the said important
Affair. 849 His Birth. Church 16 th Age. Piali Bassa Admiral of the Forces sent
by the Turk to Malta. 693 Pius IV. takes the Alarm at a National Council in
France. 668 His Vanity. Vide, Chur. 16 th Age. Pius V. makes a League between
the Spaniards and Venetians. 715 De Piles valiantly defends Saint John
d'Angely. 708 Poissy, the place of the famous Colloquy of that Name. 676
Politiques, a Faction. Chapter 16 th Age. John Poltrot Mere, Assassinates the Duke
of Guise. 687 Prodigles at the Deaths of Henry II. Henry III. and Henry IV. 941
Provinces-Vnited, solicit the French and the English to enter into a League.
931 Pseffercon a Renegado Jew advises the Emperor to cause all the Jewish Books
to be Burned. Chur. 16 th Age. Writes against Renchin. ib.
Q
QVarante of Paris chosen out of several Cities. 788 Proclaim Charles Cardinal
of Bourbon, King. 799 Quercy Appenage of Margaret of Valois. 755 Quin^ones
Conde de Luna Ambassador of Spain at the Council of Trent, disputes the
precedence with France. 685 John Quintin Speaker for the Clergy at the meeting
of the Estates under Charles IX. 673 Gives the Admiral Satisfaction. 674
R
RAbastains Besieged by Montluc where he was hurt. 740 The Marshall de Raise by
his Practices hinders Rochel from receiving any relief from England. 724
Rambouillet beats the leagued at Sable, and takes many Prisoners, releases his
Wife. 807 Rasats a Faction under Henry III. 740 Rapin sent to Touloze by the
Prince, they make his Process. 699 His death revenged. 709 Reformed Religion,
at what time the Huguenots took that Title. 743 Religion makes People undergo
every thing. 723 Makes even the very Women become courageous. ib. La Renaudie
chosen by the Huguenots to assemble those of their belief. 665 Indiscreetly
discovers his Design. ib. Kills his Cousin, and is Killed. 666 Reunion Edict
given by Henry III. 783 Is sworn to by the King. 784 Jo. Ribaud returns to
Florida, is ill treated by the Winds, and worse yet by the Spaniards. 700 Jo.
Ribaud sent to Florida by the Admiral, builds a Fort there, and returns, ib.
His Men coming away after him, are reduced to such Streights by Famine, that
they eat one of their Sick Company, are relieved by the English. ib. Rochel
enters into the Huguenot Party. 698 Fortify themselves after the Saint
Bartholomew. 722 Is invested, 723 Fortified by the Huguenots, it defends its
self wonderfully well. ib. Rodolph King of the Romans Son of the Emperor,
Conducts Henry III. 733 Requesens Governor of the Low Countries, 750 Gains a
famous Battle. ib. A League against him. ib. Rosny Surintendant of the
Finances, 840 Ambassador in England. 903 Rosoy in Brie the Rendezvous of the
Huguenots to surprise Charles IX. at Monceaux. 696 Rossius a Physician Hanged.
825 De Rouet a Damoiselle beloved by the King of Navarre is cause of his Death.
684 Rouen besieged by the Kings Army, conducted by the King of Navarre, and the
Duke of Guise. 683 Their Fort Saint Catherine taken by Assault. ib. The City
taken by Storm, and Sacked. ib. Besieged and quitted by Henry IV. 800 Roussel
Francis May David surprises the Castle of Vernueil, and makes himself Master of
the Town after a long Fight. 682 N. de Roye Mother-in-Law to the Prince of
Conde, seized at the Estates of Orleans. 670 Rybeirac Second in a Duel to
Entragues, the first Example of that kind. 750
S.
SAbellius his Errors in Vogue. Sacierge Peter Chancellor under Lewis XII.
Church 16th Age. Sacramentaries a Name given to the Huguenots. ib. Sagner
Advoyer of Berne brings a Message for renewing of the Alliance with Henry IV.
898 Saint Cloud the place where Henry III. was lodged during the Siege of
Paris, and Murdered. 795 Sainte-Croix Marquess takes the Acores upon Don
Antonio. 760 His cruelty. ib. Saint Soulene draws off his Ships when they were
ready to engage. 760 They make his Process. ib. Saint John d'Angely Besieged by
the Duke of Anjou, is taken after a rude Siege. 708 Saint Luo Favorite of Henry
III. forfeits his favor because he would undeceive his Master. 772 Hurts the
Prince of Conde to whom he afterward Surrenders himself a Prisoner. 778
Salsede Nicholas, his Original, his Treason, and his Death. 759 Salusses
Marquisate seized by the Duke of Savoy. 785 The King redemands it, 870 Treaty
for the exchange of it. 887 Saveuse a brave Picard, his death. 793 Schomberg
passes into Germany on behalf of Charles IX. 716 Scbastian King of Portugal
loses a Battle against the Moors. 752 The Seize, or the Sixteen; Henry III.
resolves to punish them. 780 Solicit the Duke of Guise to come to their
assistance, ib. Seize upon the Gates of Paris, and elect the Duke of Aumale for
their Governor. 781 Will set up the Government of a Commonwealth, or
Republic. -- Devote themselves to the Spaniard. 814 Own the Duke of Guise for
their Head. 819 Cause some Presidents, and Counselors to be Hanged. ib.
Obstruct the Reduction of Paris. 836 Serini Count, defends Liget bravely, his
generous Death. 693, 694 Sigismund of Austria King of Poland is infirm. 715
Sixtus V. Pope, his Ambition. 792 Solomon enraged for having missed Malta,
falls upon Hungary, 693 Dies before Ziget. ib. Sonnas a Commander of the Savoy
Forces, that attempted to surprise Geneva, is taken and Executed. 900 Example
of the extraordinary and unheard of Love of his Wife. ib. James Spifame quits a
Bishopric to take a Wife. Church 16 th Age. Strasburgh redoubles their Guards
after the Saint Bartholomew. 722 Strossi Cardinal, makes a League. 744 Surenne
place of the famous Conference between the Royalists, and the Parisians. 830
The Swiss depute to Henry III. in favor of the Huguenots. 774 Remain in the
Service of Henry IV. 976 Are received and feasted at Paris. 898
T
TAlsy, a place of Conference between the Queen and the Prince of Conde. 678
Tanneguy du Chastel, his Generosity, and Acknowledgment. 671 Tanguerel
Batchellor of the Sorbonne Condemned by the Parliament for having maintained a
Thesis against Kings. 678 Tard-advisez rebels under Henry IV. 840 de Thiard a
Poet, and a Mathematician. Church 16 th Age. de Thou Nicholas Bishop of
Chartres Crowns Henry IV. 836 de Toledo Roderique General of the Milan Forces
for the Duke of Savoy, beaten and slain by Lesdiguieres. 833 Truchard Maire of
Rochel makes the Town enter into the Huguenots Party. 698 Toloza exercises many
Cruelties at the Saint Bartholomews, and Hangs five Counselors. 721 Henry de
la Tour Vicount de Turenne, Contriver of the Association of the Duke of
Alenson, the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, 724 Is made Marshall of
France upon his Marriage with the Heiress of Sedan. 818 Surprises Stenay the
Evening before his Nuptials. ib. de Tournon Cardinal refuses to give place to
the Princes of the Blood. 676 Trans the Marquess, his two Sons are slain. 756
Tremblecour Commands the Lorrain Forces. 842 Triumvirate under Charles IX. 681
Feared by the Queen. ib. Troyes Abbot of Gastine has his Head cut off by the
Order of the Prince of Conde. 683 Gebard Truchses Archbishop of Colen Marries,
Success of the said Marriage, 766, etc. Tunis Kingdom demanded by Catherine de
Medicis for her Son. 722 Turin rendered to the Duke of Savoy. 675
V
Du Vair a Councellor labors for the reduction of Paris. 837 du Val Peter,
Bishop of Sees preaches some Sentiments very like to Calvinism. 675 Valence
assaulted in vain by the Huguenots. 668 Valery Lands belonging to the Widow of
the Marshall de Saint Andre, given to the Prince of Conde to continue his
Love. 689 La Valette a Favorite to Henry III. 737 Varade the Jesuit a great
Enemy to Henry IV. is brought by the Cardinal de Piacenza. 838 The Cardinal de
Vendosme presides in the Council held at Tours. 815 Venice receives Henry III.
in a most gallant manner. 733 Acknowledges Henry IV. for King of France. 800
Venetians exclude the Ecclesiastics from the Management of Affairs. 661 James
Vennes Maire of Dijon is beheaded. 841 Vesins takes Montluc's great Cornet. 722
Villars Governor of Rouen gives himself to the Guises. 782 Makes a furious
Salley upon the King's Army. 821 Restores Rouen to the King, and is made
Admiral. 839 Villa-franca taken by the Duke of Lorrain. 812 Villegagnon sent to
Florida by the Admiral, Treats the Huguenots ill there. 700 Villeroy Secretary
of State retires from Court. 780 Is made choice of for a Conference for the
Conversion of the King. 823 Sees the King, who is very well satisfied with his
Conduct. ib. Viniosa the Count, follows Don Antonio. Prior of Crato King of
Portugal. 760 Vinon Besieged by the Duke of Savoy, 817 Is bravely defended. ib.
W. Virtemberg Duke quits the Huguenots. 679 Vitry refuses to Sign an
accommodation for Religion with Henry IV. 798 Enters with some Forces into
Paris. 806 Hinders some that intended to open the Gates to the King. 810 Makes
his agreement with the King. 835 Wolfang Duke of Deux-Ponts brings an Army into
France, 704 His March, 705 Takes la Charity, ib. His Death. ib. The University
Condemns Henry III. 788 Makes a Decree against Henry IV. 807 Declares Henry IV.
unfit to come to the Crown. ib. Assemble at Navarre to own Henry IV. 838
Warwick, Ambrose Earl, Governor of Havre de Grace, Surrenders the Place. 689
West-frizeland, the Government is given to Prince Maurice. 767 Vzez erected to
a Duchy, and Pairie. 730
Y
YEure a River. 836 Yonne a River. 777 Yvetot, place where the Dukes of
Mayenne, of Parma and Montemarcian, were hemmed in by Henry IV. 822 Yvry, the
Campaign, or Field, where was fought the famous Battle of that Name. 705
Z
ZAmet the famous Partisan under Henry IV. 871 Zelande League themselves
against the Spaniards. 757 Ziget a Fortress in Hungary attaqued by Solomon, 693
Is gained. ib. Zuinglius, his Sect as much in Vogue, as that of Luther. Church
16 th Age. Zuniga Requesens Ambassador of Spain, disputes for Precedence with
the French, and loses it. 685 Zutphen Leagues against the Spaniards. 757
FINIS.

