THE Country Innocence: OR, THE Chambermaid TURNED QUAKER. A COMEDY. With
Alterations and Amendments.

As it is now ACTED at the THEATER ROYAL.

Written by JOHN LEANERD.

Licensed, Apr. 6. 1677. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce, over against St.
Dunstan's-Church in Fleet Street. 1677.

To his Honored Friend Sir FRANCIS HINCHMAN.
IN my juvenile Years, when I had the Honor of being your School-fellow, you
not only encouraged my Fancy, but gave me such Instructions, as I may boldly
say, raised me to this Height of Presumption; and although I dare not reckon my
self amongst the Number of those who daily Rival each other for their Indear'd
Mrs. Laureat, yet I durst presume in the defense of my Country Innocence, to
put in for a small share of that Great Glory, especially since ushered into the
World under your Noble Patronage. That she will meet in this lewd Age with a
thousand Inconveniences, and severe Censures, some of which may, perhaps,
blast her Virgin Purity; yet being under your Protection, I make no doubt, will
arm her so against the Assaults of Malice, that she need no more fear the Envy
of a Private Censurer, than on the Stage she did the Honor of her Royal
Auditors.

It was a happiness I did not hope for to have her Cause tried by Majesty and
Goodness; but since you still were happy in all your Undertakings, I made no
doubt (you Applauding the effect of a few lazy hours) but Fortune would save me
from that severe Damnation, the Critick's Noise and Nonsense: Though Arrogance,
and Impudence, are an Author's chief dependency, yet Modesty and Bashfulness
shall proclaim how much I fear the Rigor of this Censorious Age.

Sir, I am sensible, I come far short, both of Merit and those Commendations,
you were pleased to bestow upon me, since this trifling piece, I Am sure can
merit neither; How-ere it must needs be much to my satisfaction to have
acquired the honor of your love and liking, and as this is the first I ever
ventured to undertake, I hope it will not be the last you will do me the honor
to Protect.

Self-Love in Poetry is much like Self-Affection in a Woman, who shall
communicate with her Glass a whole day together, and never find (though she be
most deformed) the least Object that may proclaim her Odious.

After I had begun this Piece, and had finished the two first Acts, I was
doubtful whether I should make any farther progression, till by fortune, you
came in and gave me such good Encouragement, I flew to make an End: Which makes
me say with Homer: Inspired with Friendship, and your good Advice,
I strove to please the Age, though nere so nice.


And that is the hardest Task a man can undertake, especially in this Age, where
Wit consists only in gaudy Clothes, monstrous French Dances, and damned dull
Machines. A Play cannot be made without a Painter, nor expect Applause unless
your gentile Frenchman teaches their Feet more Nonsense, than their Tongues
that day can utter; those are the Toys now Please.

But for you, who understand the very soul of Plays, and can by the Person
guess at his Works, were pleased to like this Ancient way of Writing, and
though I have not those taking Graces which the World admires, yet you were
pleased to like my Country Innocence, in its homely dress, as well as those
fine Plays composed of Noise and Ornament.

Sir, I keep you by my Impertinence from your more serious Studies, and from
that which you may better like than these rude Lines. Yet I hope as you have
hitherto encouraged me, you will not now condemn him who writ more to please
you than himself, hoping by that means to Ingratiate my self more into your
favor than ever, and without offense, presume to write my self,

Sir, the most Constant Admirer of You and your Merits, Your Servant to
Command, JOHN LEANERD.

TO THE READERS.
YOu may imagine, That I am vainglorious in thus Crouding a Play into the
World, before 'twas scarce acquainted with it; but when you, as well as I, know
the Reason, you will not blame my have. I think there is scarce any that used
to see Plays, but went (nay crowded) to help a new Author into the World, and I
think (without Ostentation) never was House more thronged; what Applause it
had, I Will leave to your Censuring, not daring to blase my own Merits. The
first, second, and other times it was Acted, I think lost me no Credit, but as
Fortune never for a Continuance stays with one person, so at length she Jaded
me, robbing me of the Honor of my Plays continuance for that time; by a
Mischance which happened to one, whose Part was too considerable to be quickly
studied.

This I thought fit to acquaint the World withal, that it might take off those
calumnious and false Reproaches, the Critics of this Age would throw upon me.

But Gentlemen, to you I speak, who judge more for Affection, than for Justice,
be not severe to One never writ before; use him but as kindly as you do your
Mistress, the first Night of your Enjoyment, and then I need not fear, had I a
thousand Enemies.

And you, sage serious Judges, who damn all Plays this Age has yet produced,
learn to be kind to one you never saw; Applaud him, though in whispers, and
he will strive, ere long, to give you thanks in that Degree, which you most wish,
and he does most desire, that is, in once more bringing before you the Works,

GENTLEMEN, of one, who desires to be your Obliging Servant, JOHN LEANERD.

PROLOGUE:
Spoken by Mr. CLARK.
AS a young Girl that is newly come to Town,
And in her Russet wanders up and down,
Ventures her Maidenhead for half a Crown,
So our young Poet with his first Design
Hazards his Credit for a Pint of Wine.
Honor's grown wondrous cheap, as well as Plays;
I Gad, both are worth nothing, now adays,
Since every Fop presumes to wear the Bays.
Never was Wit so much abused before;
The Trade's grown common, and the Jilting Whore's
Debauched in every Street, at every Door.
You men of Wit, of Honor, and Renown,
Those little Fops, the Monsters of the Town,
To be thought witty, with their Noise cry down.
But let that pass; Damn all those men of sense,
Whose Wit consists in Noise and Impudence.
Our Fate's so hard, and you are so severe,
To hiss and rail, is all your Business here.
The Visor-Masks you mind, and not the Wit;
Talk Bawdy, and Debauch your selves in the Pit.
Then in a rage, as if your Wit was scared,
You damn the Play, though scarce a Word you heard.
Pray let Good Nature, now that slighted Miss,
Whisper the Wits, and beg 'em not to hiss.
For those whose Wit consists in gaudy Clothes,
In vamping Old, and studying New Oaths,
I Will leave, until their want of Noise and Sense
Damn 'em beyond their own Impertinence.
Actors Names.
SIr Oliver Bellingham, -- Mr. Lydell. Sir Robert Malory, -- Mr. Coysh. Captain
Mullineux, -- Mr. Goodman. Plush, -- Mr. Wiltshire. Rash, -- Mr. Griffin.
Gregory Dwindle, -- Mr. Haynes. Mr. William, -- Mr. Powel. Old Thrashard, --
Mr. Watson. Abraham his Son, -- Mr. Styles. Two Servants. Shepherds and
Shepherdesses. A Constable and Watchmen. Six Morris Dancers, and Fiddlers.
WOMEN.
Lady Lovely, a Widow, -- Mrs. Marshall. Lady Malory, -- Mrs. Rutter. Margaret
and Gillian, Daughters to Thrashard. -- Sarah Cook. Barbara, Lady Lovely's
Maid, -- Mrs. Knep. Old Gentlewoman, -- Mr. Perrin.
THE Country Innocence. OR, THE Chambermaid turned QUAKER.
ACT. I.
Enter Sir Oliver and Mr. William. Mr. Will. BElieve me, Sir, I have told you
what you Worship may most certainly trust to.


Sir Oliv. May I not speak with her?


Mr. Will. You know my place -- there is no more hope from the deep pit of
Grief, to raise in her any conceit of Love, than there is to raise her Husband
up again from the cold Bed he sleeps in. Take this for all: My Lady, Sir, has
vowed to live and die a Widow -- So I leave you.

Ex. Mr. Will.
Sir Oliv. Is It possible? Well, I know not! but if she has made such a Vow, and
keep it! to find out such another and a Phoenix, is but an equal labor.


Enter Mr. Rash. Rash. Save you Sir Oliver.


Sir Oliv. As much to you, kind Mr. Rash.


Rash. You have been with the Widow, this melancholy Lady already. Give you
much joy of your fair hopes, Sir Oliver.


Sir. Oliv. As much to your self Sir, kind Mr. Rash.


Rash. I Will hope as much as I can, though you are a Knight, and I but an honest
Citizen: A Mercer is a Merchant, and will look for good Ware for his money.

Knocking within at the door.
Sir Oliv. If he should enter now; I Will see the issue.


Enter Mr. William. Rash. You know my coming to speak with your Lady Mr.
William:


Mr. Will. But she is not at leisure to hear you.


Rash. I hope you do but Jest.


Mr. Will. Believe me, Sir, in Earnest.


Rash. But I Will not take it in Earnest.


Mr. Will. But you must.

Offers to go to the door. Though you are a Citizen, you are not free of this
Hall, and therefore must have no admittance.

Exit Mr. Will.
Sir Oliv. Give you much Joy of your fair hopes. Another --


Enter Plush. Plush. Save you Gentlemen: how is it Mr. Rash?


Rash. As well as may be Mr. Plush.


Plush. You have got the start of me, I see that Gentlemen; a Suit brought me
home this Morning made me stay somewhat the longer; but my Tailors Bill, like a
Woodcock as he is, shall be so much the longer a paying -- you have been within?


Rash. In our time.


Plush. I mean this Morning.


Rash. But the Lady means no such thing, Sir.


Sir Oliv. We heard of your Worships new Suit, and would not go in before it.


Plush. I Will lead the way then.

Knocks at the door.
Enter Mr. William. Mr. William good Morrow, good Morrow sweet Mr. William: and
where is the Lady? you see we come to come to her.

Mr. Will. By your favor, Sir, you are too hasty.


Plush. Why, is not the Lady up yet?


Mr. Will. Not for you to take her down Sir. Farewell.


Plush. This Fellow's saucy.

Ex. Mr. Will.
Sir Oliv. Minds not your Worships new Suit; but we must be content.


Rash. We may be patient, Sir, but not content; for nothing contents me but the
Lady.


Enter Sir Robert Mallory. Sir Rob. Who have we here, Mr Plush, Mr. Rash? I
dare be so bold as embrace you two -- but my Noble Sir, my SIR of a Thousand
per Annum.


Plush. Why, I can be a Knight an I list Sir.


Rash. And I can be Knight an I list Sir.


Sir Rob. Dubbed with the City Dagger -- then Rash would be rash indeed: you
come to see my Sister? Las good hearts! Methinks the Gates of themselves should
fly open to such brave men as you are.


Sir. Oliv. You have the Old Heart still, Sir.


Sir Rob. The Young Heart still Sir Oliver -- the Mad Heart, the Merry Heart --
the Light Heart, with the Candle of Conceit burning in it as bright as Lucifer,
Hesper and Vesper: you have not been within? I Will turn out this pair of Asses,
and then you shall see my Sister. I perceive by your melancholy looks, my
melancholy, pettish, peevish Sister is not at this time to be spoke withal.
It Is such a foolish Thing; -- she knows not Worth, nor how to entertain't:
suffice it Gentlemen, I do; and shall not go behind her back to let her know
your Merits: and in a just proportion to that Merit, that mass of Merit, you
shall find her favor: So Mr. Push and Mr. Rash I shall desire you to leave us.


Both You Will remember.


Sir Rob. Shall I remember (Gentlemen) to eat, to sleep, to drink? then I Will
remember you --

Ex. Plush and Rash.
Sir Oliv. Then? -- when Sir Robert?


Sir Rob. When I am asleep -- awake I shall never mind 'em, for their Worships
are hardly worth it.


Sir Oliv. Yes in a just proportion to their merit.


Enter Abraham. Sir Rob. Yes, that is just nothing -- hang 'em Glowworms, hang
um.


Sir Oliv. Here Is another Rub in our Alley, Sir.


Sir Rob. A Tenants Son of mine -- and how does my honest Abraham?


Abr. The better your good Worship is well Sir; I was to seek your good
Worship, at your Right Worshipful House Sir; but missing you there, I rejoice I
have met with you here.


Sir Rob. Why? what is the matter? Abr'am, what is the matter?


Abr. In the way of Love, as they say, from my Father and my Sister, and my
the other Sister too -- you know who I mean Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. Thy scolding Sister?


Abr. You are in the right.


Sir Rob. And how does Margaret my Pretty Tenant?


Abr. That Pretty One is pretty well Sir.


Sir Oliv. Remember me to her by this.

Gives him a Ring. Within this day or two at the farthest I should breath a
Gelding; it may be that way, and visit my Pretty Tenant.


Abr. Long may your Worships Gelding breath, and your Worshipful Self also. I
am in haste Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. Take your own time, Good Abram.


Abr. Thank your good Worship Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. I have done your Patience wrong,

Ex. congying. Indeed I have; but the best that lies in me to right it, you
shall command. Now to my Sister.

Knocks at the door. Now where is my Sister?


Enter Mr. William. Mr. Will. She Is within Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. Come then, let us to her.


Mr. Will. You must pardon me: she is so retired to Solitude, and set so deep in
grief, that till her sighs and tears will give her leave to entertain such
worthy Visitants, it is her strict command that no man enter.


Sir Rob. Not my self?


Mr. Will. Your self, Sir, if you would not swell her grief too big for her
faint Breast to carry; give her way, a little time may change her.

Exit.
Sir Rob. It Is enough -- you see Sir Oliver:


Sir. Oliv. Your love, Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. But, as her Gentleman discreetly said;
A little time may change her: We must still
In such a kind humor win a Woman's will.
Exeunt.
Enter Mr. William and Barbara. Mr. Will. Come, thou make such a matter of
nothing.


Bab. Nothing, do you call it? I know not, but I Am sure I feel something --
it is almost kicking ripe already.


Mr. Will. Almost kicking ripe? -- come, come, thou art a Chambermaid still: --
and I prithee what is this but a Work that belongs to the Chamber?


Bab. Well, you will not marry me?


Mr. Will. And hazard my place with my Lady -- and yet now I think on it -- I
will --


Bab. Marry me?


Mr. Will. To some of my Old Acquaintance: there are Hundreds in the City that
have swallowed worse bits than thou art.

Exit Mr. Will.
Enter Lady Lovely in Mourning veiled, Lady Mallory and Old Gentlewoman. Lov.
Urge me no more; but let the Love you seem to show be expres'd in Words, that
better suit with such a Robe as this, and my immutable resolve.


Mall. Then I persuade in vain, yet whilst you live (encompassed thus with
sorrow and solitude) a Widow you seem to voice to the ill censuring World some
imperfection in your self. It Is true, you lost a worthy Gentleman, my self a
Noble Brother; yet if you loved him living, love him dead; then I am sure you will
cast all sorrow off, and cease to wrong your self.


Old Gentle. Mark you that now?


Mall. It Is the best Tombstone you can lay upon him; the noblest Monument you
can erect; and to that Monument an Epitaph, shall make him live for ever.


Old Gentle. Law you there now! -- shall make him live for ever! -- you are not
dumb tho? -- are you?


Lov. Would thou were, or I had lost my hearing; I can wish nothing so adverse
to me, as your Tongues: and therefore if your Visits bring with them nothing
but these persuasions --


Mall. Keep away.


Old Gentle. Nay, as speak't as think it. -- Here Is a coil for a Husband, I
have had for my own part -- 1-2-3-4, and yet if the fifth come up handsomely to
me, I know what I I know, I warrant you.


Mall. How! Five!


Old Gentle. Fifteen, if the Destinies had so decreed it.


Enter Mr. William. Mr. Will. Madam, there be Suitors below to see you. Mr.
Rash the Mercer -- one Plush a humorous Gallant, and a spick and span new
Suitor a Country Gentleman, one Mr. Gregory Dwindle.


Old Gentle. Spruce Mr. Rash I know.


Mall. And I, Mr. Plush, a notable humorous Coxcomb: but what is that Gregory?


Mr. Will. Unknown to me; but believe me, together they make up a delicate
Motion. -- Is your Ladyship pleased to see um?


Lov. Present your Motion somewhere else, my Griefs give way to no such
lightness.


Mr. Will. I Will tell 'em what you say.

Is going.
Mall. Pray stay a little, I know (...)ors are but empty things; not worth our
serious thoughts yet Sister, pray let um Enter, let 'em look upon you.


Lov. Still your desire's my trouble.


Old Gentle. Come, come, pray: you are so melancholy.


Mall. Why, their mirth will be a means to Cure you.


Lov. Kill me rather.


Old Gentle. Go, bid 'em come.


Lov. Bid 'em be gone.


Mall. Nay, then you are too Cruel: Stay.


Lov. Sister, if you know no other Merriment, than what you raise from my
vexation, take it, I will not hinder your Desires; pray take it.


Old. Gentle. You will not leave us, will you?


Lov. Yes.


Mall. And go mew your self up in your Chamber, like a cloystered Nun, there
waste away your tedious Hours in sighs, and spend the Day in groans: for my
part, I am altogether for Mirth and open Air; a Prison cannot content me -- but
Sister, before you go, let me entreat one favor of you.


Lov. What is it?


Mall. That in your absence you would be pleased to let your Waiting Gentlewoman
appear in your Apparel: it is but slipping off this upper Garment, and this
Mourning Veil, and she is my Lady.


Mr. Will. How? my Bab, my Lady?


Mall. It will be sport to us, and to your self a rare advantage, Sister.


Lov. Though pleasure be no pleasure to this Bosom, since you propose the
acquittance of that trouble, your desire's granted.


Mall. But be speedy then with your directions for her carriage in it.

Ex. Lady Lovely, Bab, and Mr. William.
Old Gentle. Did you ever see such a self-willed Thing as this is? a Widow this
two months, and yet not hear of a Suitor.


Enter Mr. William, Rash, Plush, and Gregory. Mr. Will. The Gentlemen, an't
please you.


Greg. Yes indeed, an't please you.


Old Gentle. Mr. Rash!


Rash. Your Servant, Gentlewoman.


Mall. Mr. Plush!


Plush. My name is Plush. Master my Title, and Sir a Title that may be.


Greg. And my name is Gregory.


Plush. Fop -- the sound is out of season -- but where is the Lady?


Rash. I, where is the Lady?


Greg. We would see the Lady.


Plush. I hope she has done Mourning now, has she not?


Greg. Why, does the Lady Mourn?


Mr. Will. Indeed she does.


Greg. It Is a delicate thing to Mourn. -- Well, an my Father would but die
once! -- would we could see this Lady.


Enter Bab, like Lady Lovely veiled. Old Gentle. You have your wish already.


Rash. Beauteous Lady.


Plush. Most beauteous Lady.


Greg. Most beautiful Lady that may be: for yet I see no such matter.


Plush. Thy Eyes are veiled with Ignorance, or else, through this thin veil,
thou might as we, -- behold matter of admiration! -- you will vouchsafe; -- not
yet.


Bab. Alas! -- upon their captive Heart, my sorrows yet have set too strong a
Guard for such delights to enter.


Plush. I could wish, that Conqueror of thy Heart and all his Guard were
visible, that I might challenge them.


Mr. Will. I marry Sir, that were a challenge indeed.


Plush. Methinks I could -- do --


Mall. What do you think you could do Sir?


Plush. O -- my most delicate Lady!


Mr. Will. Do his most delicate Lady; a terrible Do indeed.


Old'Gentlew. Well Lady; if this be the man shall have you, you shall have a
Man I can tell you.


Greg. If I be the Man that shall have her, she shall have a Man I can tell you.


Old Gentlew. But he is a fighting man.


Greg. A fighting man? Let him play at the Ancient Weapon, an he were a Fencing
Man, I Will have about with him.


Mall. The Ancient Weapon! -- what Weapon's that?


Greg. Why this.

Show his hand.
Mr. Will. As Wise as Valiant; it is the Ancient Weapon indeed Sir.


Mall. And why not this? --

Shows his Sword.
Greg. I am better acquainted with this.


Plush. Well, we shall meet?


Greg. And meet again: tell me of fighting -- Lady!


Old Gentlew. I see you are valiant Sir; -- and you are happy in having so much
Valor as you see attend your Beauty.

To Bab.
Bab. I must confess them Worthy Gentlemen; but they must pardon me; -- the
Worth that I have lost in my dead Husband, is so full and fresh upon my
understanding: -- that all else have but homely entertainment -- and yet you
are welcome Gentlemen.


All three. For that we thank you.


Rash. We must hope still.


Greg. Well, and my Father would but die once! I live hope too Lady.


Mr. Will. You see their Valor Sir, -- and what is your Weapon?


Rash. I am no man of the Sword -- I have no Weapon.


Old Gentlew. How Sir, no Weapon?


Mr. Will. What should you do in Cupid's Fencing-School, and have no Weapon?


Rash. There was a Time I could have crossed a Cudgel; and if any man strike
me, I have a Weapon too.


Mr. Will. The coldest Flint has fire I see: what Weapon?


Rash. One that is indeed all Weapons, Long Sword, Sword and Dagger, Sword and
Buckler, Single Rapier and Dagger, Halbert, Half-pike, Quarter-Staff, Short
Sword and Gauntlet, and that terrible Fly-flap the Fauchion.


Mr. Will. All these in one?


Rash. Or one that is worth all these, and that in a word is the Law.


Mr. Will. A terrible Weapon indeed.


Rash. There, let me firk um, and jerk 'em; there, let me stand upon terms;
there, let me play the Master, and Mr. Attorney my Usher, and then with all the
Weapons in that School have at 'em.


Enter Sir Robert and Sir Oliver. Mr. Will. This goes heyond your Rapier, or
that Ancient Weapon the Fist.


Mall. We are betrayed: my Husband and Sir Oliver.


Bab. What Is to be done?


Mall. Play the Lady a little longer, and handsomely Bab, and I Will promise thee
a new Gown.


Sir Rob. Come, come, we will speak, and speed too, my Knight of a Thousand per
Annum. Where Is this Mourning Lady? What, my Madona and my Lady Littleworth!
hoyday! this Covy of Coxcombs too!


Rash. Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. One.


Rash. Kind Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. Two.


Greg. Worthy Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. Three: yet never a wise word amongst them. What still dumb Lady? An
ye were as heavy as Lead, 'twas but a light trick of you to deny access to such
a man as this is, and allow it to such Minncks as these are, god's death I could
kick 'em out of the Room, and be angry with you, though you are my Wives Sister,
for lodging such baseness within you.


Old Gentlew. Why, you are not out of your Wits, are you?


Sir Rob. You have no Wit to be out of, Gentlemen: you are all Hobby-horses, an
it please you to leave the house now, and come again -- when you are sent for
-- you shall be -- heartily glad to be welcome?


Mall. You see his humor, Gentlemen, pray leave us.


Greg. Why? but I hope --


Mall. Not one word more an ye love me.


Greg. Nay, then -- I would I were but gone once.

Exeunt manent Sir Rob. Sir Oliv. Lady, Mall. Bab. and Mr. William.
Sir Rob. Come, take my Counsel and forget him.


Bab. Never.


Sir Oliv. Still looking downwards to your Husbands Grave?


Bab. To those that wear so sad a Suit as this, the Grave's the Glass they use
to deck um by. Pray give me leave.


Sir Rob. Prithee look up a little; -- I can show thee a Glass, that shall
reflect no such affrighted shadows.


Bab. Oh! Oh! Oh! --


Mr. Will. Excellent Mourning Lady.


Sir Rob. The Nuptial Knot binds Loving Paires together, only for term of Life,
has no extent over the Divoice of Death.


Bab. Pray, pray, no more.


Sir Oliv. That only binds the Living to the Living, and not the Living to the
Dead.


Sir Rob. That flesh that has Soul within it; the endowments and excellencies,
bounteous Heaven bestows to that, has nothing but the frightful shape, and the
cold Figure of a Man.


Sir Oliv. Yet this; whilst you dote upon your Husbands dust, you do (sweet
Lady) dote upon your Torment.


Bab. You have my Resolution, so pray leave me.


Sir Oliv. And you be buried in your Husbands Grave: I see my Suit must dye too.


Sir Rob. Yes, and let it, let it for ever dye to her, and live to one deselves
it better. Come, I Will bring thed, though she be my Wives Sister, to one that is
younger, fairer, richer, and it may be -- honester too.


Mall. How, Sir Robert, Honester!


Sir Rob. Yes, honester; an she prostrate her self to a Set of Moris-Dancers --
and neglect such a Caesar as this is! Come Sir Oliver, let us away.


Mall. Nay, but hark you, hark you Sir Robert, and worthy Sir Oliver, that
you may see this Lady, is not the Woman that you take her for; look, do you
know this Lady?

Bab discovers her self.
Sir. Rob. How, Bab?


Sir Oliv. My Ladies Chambermaid!


Mr. Will. A trick of mirth they put upon the Coxcombs.


Sir Rob. Were you my Lady?


Bab. So your Lady would have it, Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. My Lady Bab -- how like you this Sir Oliver?


Sir Oliv. This Change has put some life into me Sir; and I must tell you,
bettered my opinion both of the Ladies Wisdom, and her Goodness.


Sir Rob. But hark you Wife, may we not see my Sister?


Mall. Faith, yet her temper is not as we'd have it; but we shall win her by
degrees, and turn her melancholy to a sprightly humor.


Sir Oliv. Then I Will not doubt my happiness.


Sir Rob. Come, Sir Oliver, mean time we will see what mirth my House can yield to
entertain you with, -- A ha! my Girl! Why, such a Wench is worth her weight in
Pearl!

Exeunt manent Bab and Mr. Will.
Mr. Will. Well, thou have played my Lady like a Lady:

I have a trick from this Conceit to do,
Shall make us sport, and help thy swelling too.
Exeunt.
ACT. II.
Enter Old Thrashard and Margaret dressed Genteelly. Marg. SIR, I have spoke my
danger.


Thr. A dangerous case, believe me; and yet methinks there is no great danger
neither: for, say a man offer to blow thee up with Love-powder; if his Train
lie so open, you may see it: you have the Wit, I hope, to shun it, -- h'an't
you.


Marg. I have done hitherto.


Thr. And do thou fear thou can hold out no longer?


Marg. Sir, I do not.


Thr. That Is well, but to the point: what is he? do I know him?


Marg. Yes, if you know Sir Robert Malory your Landlord, Father.


Thr. Sir Robert! He aim against thy Chastity? has he bestowed upon thy Infancy
that care and cost that he has done; maintained thee amongst his own, and for
this? is this the best you can affoard him?


Marg. No -- Father, for these should I forgot to pay, the most obsequious
Duties I can tender, 'twere just in Heaven I should forget my self.


Thr. Had this been spoke of any other man, I might have lent an ear to it: --
but, Sir Robert! Noble Sir Robert! -- that brave man, Sir Robert! our bounteous
Benefactor! Say he has scattered some words in the way of merriment, some
pleasant, idle -- wanton -- what do you call it? sprinkled a little Bawdry in his
speech? as Courtiers may, else they are no men of Fashion. That cuts not off a
Maidenhead -- Nay, perchance the Merriment that you interpret Lust, was his
mere love to Virtue.


Mar. Virtue!


Thr. Yes: -- it is my Conceit, that all his Talk, his Letters, and all the
Gifts he sent you, were employed in the way of Trial, not to make thee naught;
but so to sound thy goodness.


Mar. Think you so? I Will think so too then Father.


Enter Gillian. Gill. This is fine, you have the golden time on it.


Thr. What golden time? you will still be scolding.


Gill. Scolding! Marry come up Mrs. Jinny-finny; we cannot speak to you now, but
it is scolding; well, I say little.


Thr. Nothing at all were better.


Gill. But I Will say something; has a Woman a Tongue to say nothing?


Marg. Prithee be patient Sister.


Gill. Yes I waun't you, I must Wash, Scowre, Brew and Bake, and do this thing,
and do that thing, and do every thing, while such a Beautiful Blouse as you
are, must sit still and do nothing.


Thr. Why, do thou not see her at work?


Gil. At work! a great piece of work adeed Law! Prick, Prick, Prick, as if she
had nothing in the World to mind, but Prick, Prick, Prick; but it is no matter,
it is but my hard Fortune; I am a Fool indeed, and so you make me.

Weeps.
Thr. What, what, a Shower after this Peale of Thunder? Nay, do not cry good
Gillian.


Enter Abram. Abr. Oh! Father, Father!


Thr. Now Boy, what News with you now?


Abr. Brave News Father; News of the brave Sir Robert.


Marg. Pursue me still -- Good Father give me leave while he is come in and
gone again.


Thr. What leave?


Marg. To absent my self, but in some Neighbors house: I have a trick to pass
him -- You may tell him I Am gone to London.


Abr. When I have told him already you are here in the Parlor a sewing.


Thr. Come, you are a Baggage, a foolish Baggage to injure with such frivolous
suspicions, a Gentleman of his repute and goodness: come, let me hear no more
on it.


Abr. Sirster Gillian, I have the rarest News for you.


Gil. For me, it is well: and what News have you got for me Sir?


Abr. Skipping News, lepping News, tripping News.


Gil. How! Dancing Brother Abram? Dancing!


Abra. Dancing, Prancing, Advancing; Nay, it is a Match: a Match upon a Wager.


Gil. A Match! who be they?


Abr. Why, all the Maids of our Town Edmonton, and all the mad Wenches of
Waltam.


Gil. A Match, and leave me out! When, when is it Brother?


Abr. Marry, even this Morning, they are now going to it helter skelter.

Music within.
Gil. And leave me out! Where Brother, where?


Abr. Why, there Sister Gillian, there, at our own door almost; close by the
May Pole; on the Green there: hark, you may hear them hither.

Music again.
Gillian Sings. SHALL the Lasses and Lads, to be merry all Day,
To Frolic and Kiss, to be bucksome and Gay,
Meet all on the Green
To choose out a Queen,
And leave out the bliss of their mortal Estate;
The Lass that is all Ayrie, and longs for the Fate,
That Fate which is common to those who can tell
The Blessings of Youth, that in Pleasure excel.
And I be not One!

Ex. Singing and Dancing. Abr. Thou't never be Two, I think; for on my
Conscience there is no man that knows her has valoir enough to come near her.


Thr. Why, well said Girl, keep but that resolution


Enter Sir Robert. And let his purposes be what they can, they cannot hurt
thee. Look, he is come already.

Sir Rob. Good morrow Tenant: Good morrow Beautiful Tenant.


Thr. As much to my Worthy Landlord.


Abr. As much to my Worthy Landlord.


Sir Rob. My Tenant Abram -- God-a-mercy good Tenant Abram. I want your welcome
Fair One.


Marg. Sir, you are welcome.


Sir Rob. Had this been spoke with Smiles upon thy Cheek, I durst have sworn
the Syllables had been the language of thy Heart. What, still so adverse to my
Pleasure? Tenant, and my young Tenant, shall I crave the Room? I have something
to deliver from my Lady, that she would have a Secret to the Ear of every one
but Margaret.


Thr. The Room? our poverty possesses nothing Sir, but what is yours; you may
command it. Come --


Abr. I smell my Landlord: but -- no more words but mum.

Ex. Thr. and Abram.
Sir Rob. Still, still this cloud upon thy brow, sweet Peg, you know my mind.


Marg. And you know mine Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. I mean, I love you.


Marg. Not half so well as I love you.


Sir Rob. Love me! then there is some hope again. Aside.

Let Us see how willingly you will yield to my Embraces. How! fly 'em Peg? such a
thing denied, how can thou say thou love me?


Mar. Yes, Sir: I love you in your Name, your Reputation, the Dignity you carry
in your years, -- in your Lady. I love you Sir, in the fair Benevolence you owe
her Virtues. In a word, Sir Robert, I love you in that Purity, that shall when
Death threatens, make you look boldly on him. Thus I love you.


Sir Rob. This is not that I looked for; do you remember your Father is my
Tenant?


Marg. Sir he is.


Sir Rob. Nay, since you urge it, let me tell you Minion, he is not my Tenant
neither, but my Beadsman.


Marg. And like an humble Beadsman in his Prayers remembers all your Charity.


Sir Rob. He does, but you forget it Fair One.


Mar. Then let Hea'vn when we Petition the reward it merits forget me too.


Sir Rob. Is It not forgetfulness, when all the Love the tender cares and cost,
that from thy Infancy, to this ripe Growth, I have bestowed upon you, cannot
gain me such a request as this.


Marg. This! Alas! your greatest gain's in losing: Nay, I Will tell you, the
Love, the Care, that Cost, that Noble Breeding, which seems to you a winning
Argument, is my best Argument against you.


Sir Rob. How?


Mar. Why, Sir, the Education, that fair Breeding you have bestowed upon my
Poverty has made me what I am, and plentifully furnished my Soul with all that
best adorns her, that whatsoever is in opposition to it, is --


Sir Rob. What?


Marg. Your Lust, Sir Robert: I am bold, but yet can kneel to beg your mercy
for it.

Kneels.
Sir Rob. What? she imagines Water to my Flame, is Oil to increase it. The more
she puts me off, the more she pulls me to her. Come, come rise, though you be
so unkind, I can forgive you: I must not look at first to have so great a
happiness, as that we aim at, but must use degrees, and then --


Mar. What then?


Sir Rob. For this time Peg, I Will leave thee: What? leave thee, and leave thee
nothing? that were foul play indeed: there; nay, take it: indeed you shall.


Marg. Indeed I will not Sir; for any service I can do you, your Favour's price
sufficient. No, not yet? I have it. How I forget my Duty? Here so long, and never
a Chair to ease you? Abram, Brother; pray pardon me, Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. How, a Chair? kinder and kinder still: Nothings like Gifts to gain a
Woman's will.

Aside.
Enter Abram. Marg. Come, come, a Chair there for Sir Robert.


Abr. She pities your long standing Sir; but I have a Chair almost at my
Fingers end.

Reaches a Chair. Look you Sir, will it please you Bum this Cushion.


Sir Rob. How, Bum it Tenant?


Abr. Yes: Bum it Landlord -- look you Sir, of this fashion.


Marg. Come, you will be foolish.

Abram sits down. You know my mind, bring 'em in.

Whispers Abram.
Abr. An I bring 'em not in, let Sir Robert kick me out.

Ex. Abram.
Sir Rob. Come, fit down; nay, yet a little nearer; you need not be afraid to
sit by me.


Marg. I am not Sir, as long as you are virtuous.


Sir Rob. I Will be as virtuous as an Alderman, and abhor all -- How now? what is
that?

Music within.
Marg. Music, Sir Robert.


Sir Rob. Rot on their Fiddle and their Fiddle-strings, thou art my Music.


Enter a Morris: after the Morris this Song is sung. SONG.
CHarming Beauty, you alone
Deserve the Glories of a Throne;
Such a Queen we Swains admire,
And each Breast is filled with Fire,
And yet vain is our desire.
Cho. Though to Love and fond Joys we our thoughts do prefer,
Yet none can be worthy, not worthy of her.
II.
Thou Queen of our Joys, and thou Goddess of Bliss,
Though the Charms are too great to be mentioned in this,
Let a smile, since you are made the bright Lady of May,,
Instead of a frown all our Services pay;
For since Frown's a Fate, no severer can be,
Your Smiles can rejoice us and set us all free.
Cho. Free, we are free from all trouble and Strife,
And this day is the best, and the happiest of Life.
Dance again. Gil. You see we sweat to make your Worship merry; how do you like
our pastime?


Sir. Rob. I like it so well, I could wish you were further off with it.


Maids. Have we this for our kindness, Sir Robert?


Gil. Marry come up, Sir Robert.


Marg. Shall I entreat you leave the Room.


Gil. The Room?


Abr. So she said, but I know she means no such matter, only a trick; tell her
you wonnot go.


Marg. Pray leave the Room.


Gil. We wonnot.


Marg. Wonnot?


Gil. No: We were sent for in, and we will not go out again yet. Out? Marry gip
there, never a good Inch of a thousand. Fiddlers strike, I Will strike you else;
and cut your begging Bow-strings.


Sir Rob. I must be gone, I see; these miserable impudent Stallions will
overrun me else. Farewell, nothing grieves me but --


Marg. But what Sir?


Sir Rob. We cannot -- kiss at parting -- Farewell.

Ex. Sir Rob.
Gil. Come, we will have the the other bout, and then --


Marg. Nay, we will have no more at this time, here is enough.


Gil. For you, but not enough for me; you shall command me, shall you?


Marg. Nay, be not angry Sister, it is no Command, but my Entreat -- Good Sister.


Gil. Well, since you entreat me, and seem to know your betters, you shall have
your will for once. Fiddlers lead the way, and Wenches follow your Leader.

Ex. Fiddlers playing, Gillian and the Morris-dancers following dancing.
Abr. Leader! if scolding were fighting, what a Leader would thou be? you would
bring 'em on with a Powder.


Enter Old Thrashard. O! Father, Father!

Thr. Never a wise word for a Wager: Sir Robert's gone I see.


Marg. Yes, Sir, he is.


Thr. And how do find him? I do not think the man, that your suspicion
seemed to make him.


Marg. You have a good Opinion of him Father, and I Will not stand to cross it.


Thr. Come, you are a peevish Thing, and I Am afraid have been distasteful to him.

Consider all is his, we must be wise, Since by his frowns we fall; and favors
rise.

Exeunt.
Enter Sir Oliver, Bellingham, and the Lady Lovely. Sir Oliv. Madam, can the
Heart thus feed (like Vultures) on it self, and bear the torment? for such is
Grief, sweet Lady.


Lov. Sir, as I am, pray leave me.


Sir Oliv. Leave you to be out Rivall'd by the Dead!


Lov. To me he lives, and every hour appears so really my own, as all the
Embraces of a Second Match would stick upon me like the Leperous Stains of Lust
and base Adultery, and by this pray understand the vainness of your suit, and
so conclude it.


Sir Oliv. No more: I have my Answer, and am Married.


Lov. Married!


Sir Oliv. As you are Madam, to my Self alone, no other earthly Creature; yet
my Love Petitions, that if e're hereafter, (since now you are so firm) you find
an alteration in your Soul, to fancy Wedlock, that I, I your Servant may, for
that second Happiness to Heaven, stand fairest in your Election.


Lov. That satisfaction take, if e're I marry, it shall be you, that is my
Resolution.


Sir Oliv. I am extasi'd beyond the Joys of Heaven. If e're I know the Sweets
of Hymen, I must find 'em here. So, we are married now, and in this Joy I leave
you.


As he is going Enter Sir Robert Mallory, Lady Mallory and Old Gentlewoman. Sir
Rob. Here Is a Rub in your way a while, my brave Knight of a Thousand per Annum;
and how do find her, is she coming? Ha.


Sir Oliv. You see my Hopes set Smiles upon my Cheeks; let them resolve you Sir.


Sir Robert. I understand you: but when is the Day?


Sir Oliv. Nay, question that no further, we shall talk on it.


Old Gentlew. I, I, when a thing's done, it is done.


Sir Rob. You Would feign be Doing too then?


Old Gentlew. Would I not? do you think I am all dead flesh? -- I warrant you.


Enter Mr. William. Sir Rob. Now Mr. William, what good tidings now Sir?


Mr. Will. My News is, worthy Sir, that Mullinex the stout Sea Captain is
returned, and yesterday was seen on the Change.


Sir Rob. George Mullinex?


Mr. Will. The same Sir.


Sir. Oliv. How is it -- ha -- you lose Color Madam?


Old Gentlew. Lady.


Mall. Sister.


Sir Oliv. Beshrew the Name, and Owner of the Name, which has disturbed you --
What Is that Name to you?


Lov. Sir, nothing but my Trouble.


Sir Rob. A troublesome Captain indeed Sir: a Suitor to her once, and Rival to
her Husband Sir James Lovely; but missed the mark he aimd at; he shot fair, but
Lovely fairer; upon which he went to Sea; where he has been three Years, but's
now returned: and hearing (as it seems) that she is a Widow, he would renew his
Suit, give her a Broadside, Sir, and Board her; nay, let me tell you, you have
a hot Rival, one that will Quarrel, Fight, and by my Faith -- I am half afraid
of Danger.


Sir Oliv. If he be not all Valor and no Judgment, I fear none: but what so
e're he be, I Will be but what becomes me.


Mall. It may be some new Beauty has him now; some Foraign Mistress.


Sir Rob. Or it may be Sister, this time of Service in the Wars, has made him
only in Love with Fighting.


Enter Rash, Plush, and Gregory. Lov. More Vexation.


Sir Rob. This Mountain brings forth a Mouse! have we talked all this while of
a Captain, and now must be troubled with Coxcombs?


Plush. The Gods protect you Lady.


Old Gentlew. Thank you Sir.


Plush. I spoke to that sweet Beauty.


Old Gentlew. But I must speak to you Sir, for you see she has other
employment. Pray stand aside a little.


Plush. If I must, I shall attend her leisure.


Old Gentlew. You must attend her too Sir: do you not see she is busy.


Rash. I would not interrupt her.


Greg. I would not interrupt her! Is that the resolution of a Lover? let me
come to her.


Sir Oliv. But you shall not Sir.


Greg. Nay, if I shall not Sir, I will not Sir.


Sir Rob. Is that the Resolution of a Lover?


Greg. A man can do no more than he can do: but an my Father would but die once
--


Enter Captain Mullinex Rushing in. Capt. Make nice to me of entrance! where is
the Widow? for so I hear she is now. What, mourning still? I am a bold
Gamester: Save you all at once; all Suitors Gentlemen?


Rash. Yes indeed, Sir, we are all Suitors.


Sir Rob. You Are a little to Rash in that, for I am none.


Greg. Nor I neither: would I were at home.


Capt. What are you Sir?


Rash. Sir, I am a Citizen, and a Mercer.


Capt. I know you by this Wheel, Turns him round. You have a great many Bags,
and a great many Buildings too Sir; but dare you for all that, presume in the
way of Matrimony, to look so high as a Lady?


Rash. He that can purchase a Lordiship.


Capt. Thinks he may purchase a Ladyship: -- You my Rival! Can you fight Sir?


Rash. It may be I, it may be no, Sir.


Capt. Then I Will try whether you can or no Sir.

Kicks him. Not a word as you love your Coxcomb.

Pushes him out. Are you a Suitor too Sir?

To Plush.
Plush. Too Sir.


Cap. You Are an Ass, Sir, -- can you fight?


Plush. Fight? in a Ladies Chamber?


Capt. Why? where would you fight Sir?


Plush. Why, the truth on it is -- I would fight -- no where.


Capt. I thought as much, and therefore I will kick you -- good Mr. Outside of
a Gentleman follow your valiant Leader.

Kicks him out.
Old Gentlew. You will not kill him, will you?


Capt. Have you so much Tongue, and never a good Tooth, Madam Fumble?


Old Gentlew. Fumble, Fumble, -- you are a most --


Capt. Peace, an you love your old Carcass -- peace.


Lov. You bind me to a Patience.

To Sir Oliver.
Capt. One Post support another? What are you Sir?


Greg. Why -- I -- am -- a -- Gentleman.


Capt. Will your Arms bear you out in the Title?


Greg. My Legs shall bear me out, Sir.


Cap. Then you will not be beat out as they were?


Greg. I should be very loath to be beaten.


Capt. In troth I think you would Sir.


Greg. Do I look like one that would be beaten?


Capt. If you stay you must.


Greg. Why, therefore I mean to be gone Sir. But if my Father would but die
once.

Exit.
Lov. You see his rudeness, and to prevent the danger it threatens, pray leave
me.


Sir Oliv. I will not add to his too prodigal heat, nor be cold to fear it.


Lov. It Is my Love.


Sir Oliv. And mine to tarry, not offending you, with humble contradiction.


Capt. Are these your Suitors Madam?


Mal. A little in Jest, but you have paid them in earnest.


Old Gentlew. I did but speak in the way of Compassion, and your Lordship
called me -- Madam Fumble, Fumble, did I ever fumble with you Sir?


Capt. Be wise in being Silent; I hear you have lost a husband: How is it Widow?


Old Gentlew. You Will quarrel with her too, will ye?


Capt. You are so nice: I cannot Complement, kiss your white Hand and fleer
upon you. I can kiss your Lip, hug you, and tell you I must lie with you.


Lov. There may be those of your Acquaintance, to whom this Language would be
pleasing; but to let you know how ill't appears to me, I Will change my Room Sir.


Capt. But you shall not.


Sir Oliv. You lay too rude a Violence upon the tenderness of Ladies.


Capt. Do I so Sir? I thank your kind remembrance. You the man? this Ladies
only man Sir?


Sir Oliv. My desire is you would not be uncivil.


Capt. Whatsoever my Will produces, I can justify.


Sir Oliv. That power maintains offense, is weakness Sir, and has no taste of
Breeding, or of Manhood.


Capt. I Will make you taste of something.

Offers to draw.
Sir Rob. But you shall not. Have we no Servants near us.


Lov. Save him; help.


Enter Mr. William and Cut. They interpose between 'em. Old Gentlew. O! you are
wicked Captain.


Cut. What? Naked Weapons in Ladies Chamber?


Sir Rob. Take her in, poor Lady, how she is frighted!

Exit Lady Lovely.
Enter Hugh. Hugh. My Noble Knight and Master!


Sir Oliv. We have done Sir.


Hugh. And you have done, there is nothing to do; if nothing to do, the less to
take care for; the less to take care for, the sounder we sleep; and asleep we
think no body hurt Sir. And so having done, I have done.

Ex. Hugh and Cut.
Capt. You have the advantage of me.


Sir. Oliv. I must tell you, this rudeness better would become the Field, than
such a Place as this.


Capt. That you may know, I know as much as you instruct me to, meet me to
morrow.


Sir Oliv. I will not.


Capt. As good have said you dare not. The Apology is pretty, all Cowards use
it.


Sir Oliv. How, Cowards?


Capt. Cowards.


Sir Oliv. His Lunacy has shot its self into my Blood. A Coward! proclaim me
what you call me, if I be.


Capt. You Will meet me then?


Sir Oliv. I will.


Capt. Where? Thou or I.


Sir Rob. O -- Nay, if you break so violently out, I shall suspect it is to
prevent our Meeting; for Manhood covers such Intents as these under a friendly
seeming -- thus --

They Embrace each other.
Sir Rob. I marry, Gentlemen, I like this well.


Mall. Believe me, I was jealous of worse Matters.


Sir Rob. And I, never trust me else.


Capt. You know the Place and Time, Sir.


Sir Oliv. You shall find, I Will forget neither.


Enter Cut, and whispers Lady Mallory. Capt. So -- now Beauteous Widow: -- is
she gone? I have no Courtship to pursue her with, nor will I offer it: but let
me tell you, he that best hopes her favor, if he have it, must bid fairer for
it than this Sword: and so I Will leave you.

Ex. Capt.
Sir Rob. How is it Sir? your eyes speak trouble still?


Sir Oliv. Sir, if they do, it is only what they have from your Sisters Trouble.
I must leave you till better hours invite me to return.


Sir Rob. Nay, Sir Oliver, our ways lie both together; therefore pray permit
me, Sir, to wait upon you.

Ex. Sir Robert and Sir Oliver.
Mall. Is It possible? be sure you raise not this suspicion from your own Fancy;
look the ground be good, the matter's weighty.


Cut. I tell you but the Voice in Edmonton, which is, that he daily Visits this
Country Innocence; whether he has enjoyed her yet or no, I am not certain; but
it is so reported.


Mall. I will not be too easy to believe, nor yet too confident, I know
there is Fire in such a Wenches Eye, and Old dry Wood will soon be kindled;
which if he be, I Will find a way to quench him, quench both Fires, And satisfy
at once their loose desires.

Exeunt.
Act the Third.
Enter Threshard with a Letter, Margaret, Gillian, and Abraham. Thr. Sir
Robert's Hand, art sure on it?


Mar. I am too sure.


Thr. And sent to thee last night?


Gill. I by this Day was it, Father. I know it to be his Hand; what do you
think of this now?


Thr. I know not what to think.


Mar. You see the picture of a Lustful Heart drawn to the life.


Thr. I believe thee: yet Old Sir Robert.


Enter Lady Mal. disguised. Gill. Yes, even Old Sir Robert: who have we here, a
Beggar?


Abr. An she desire any thing here, I shall desire her to be gone with a
vengeance: who would you speak withal? -- Hum -- hum -- ha woman.


Mal. A poor old woman; be not offended, Sir.


Abr. And what would thou have, poor old woman?


Mal. My business is to you.


Mar. To me, what is it?


Gill. I, I, what is it?


Mal. Though I may speak it; since you fall into causless suspicions of me,
either hear me as I am willing to present it to you, or as I am I Will leave you.


Mar. Nay pray stay -- Good Father, leave us.


Thr. Take your own course; -- nay -- nay, come you would fain be scolding: on or
I Will set you forward.


Exit Thrashard, Gillian, and Abraham. Mar. Now to this private business; what
is it?


Mal. Love, and I assure you one worth entertaining from such a matchless
Beauty, here is the witness of it; Shows a it is a fair one.

Cabinet.
Mar. If no foul end attend it.


Mal. It Is a fair offer for that short delight the Gentleman would purchase.


Mar. You have not named the man.


Mal. It is Sir Robert.


Mar. Sir Robert Malory?


Mal. The same. I might renew your memory by relating his bounties to your
father; and by those you cannot choose but guess he loves you, Fair one. Witness
this, this noble Prize; nay look upon it, it is a fair one, Lady.


Mar. Yet much too poor to bribe an Angel to impurity. Go bear 'em back again,
and tell thy Master the lustful Knight that sent 'em, Where we rate our
Chastity above our Life, we will not sell it for such Toys as these are.


Mal. How! such Toys -- I dare be bold to tell you, in this act you do not
only lose this Golden Offer, but Happiness for ever.


Mar. Yet more vexation. I will not call thee Woman, for a Woman would never
labor thus t'infect the Name with such a sin as this is. Father, Sister, for
Heavens sake help me. Father, Brother, Sister.


Enter Thrashard, Abraham, and Gillian. Thr. How now, Girl? why, what is the
matter? ha?


Mar. Examine her. But she perchance may tell you what she does is her duty,
and that to make our poor and barren Fortunes freghtful with a Golden Shower.


All. A Golden Shower.


Abr. O rare! an thou can do that, Old Woman, long may thou rain I beseech
thee.


Mar. Father, you may believe me, for she is.


Thr. What?


Mar. A Bawd.


Thr. A Bawd?


Mar. Nay, though the Brow of such a one be Brass, she dares not contadict it:
she is no less, and her employment from Sir Robert


Thr. How? come come take heed.


Gill. What should she take heed of? An she be a Bawd she is a Bawd.


Abr. That Is certain, were her Bawdship employed amongst Ladies. -- But she
shall ride in Triumph: now Tobacco and Aqua vitae burn thee.


Gill. Now the stinking sweat upon thee and thy painted Journy-women.


Abr. How many Noses do you think have been lost in your Bawdships service?


Gill. How many Coaches have you bawdifi'd?


Abr. How long have you run on in this sin? How often have the Coachmen and
Horses been whipped for your pleasure?


Thr. Was this Sir Robert's bounty? Base, base woman; but we'll reward your
labor.


Gill. You lose a Daughter of me else.


Abr. And an Abram of me I can tell you.


Thr. I Will go get an Officer, Abram provide a Cart.


Gill. And let me alone for a Basin.

Ex. Thr. Gill. and Abr.
Mal. Has Love and Bounty this reward?


Mar. Yes, and the best it merits: Away, thou art a Devildrest in shape of
Woman.


Mal. And thou an Angel. Now I have found thy goodness.

Discovers her self. Know me better.


Mar. My ever worthy Lady.


Mal. Come, no more: thou see the purpose of this poor Disguise, therefore
fear nothing here. Nay, you must take it, since that which seemed to be the
hire of Lust shall now be the reward of Virtue: but you must imploy't as I
direct you.


Mar. Do but direct, and if I fail in any thing enjoined, let your displeasure
punish me severely.


Mal. This is all; against my Husbands coming (for I Am sure he will not long be
from thee;) with this and more that I Will supply thee with, trim up this homely
Cottage and your self; it is my pleasure.


Mar. 'T must then be mine to serve it.


Enter Thr. Gill. Abr. Constable and Watch. Thr. I have told you what she is,
Mr. Constable.


Gill. A Bawd.


Abr. All over -- we'll not bate you an Ace, Mr. Constable; and therefore have
a care you do Justice.


Constable. I have been amongst Whores and Bawds too before now, and I think I have
tickled them soundly.


Abr. I think so too: A Constable, what whore dares deny him entrance?


Constable. For what belongs to this Staff let me alone. Come, where is this Bawd?
where is she?

All go toward my Lady Malory, and seeing it is she they start.
Thr. My worthy Lady.


Gill. My most worthy Lady.


Abr. Come, where is this Bawd here?

Seeing Lady Mal. starts. My most worthy Landlady.


Con. What have I to do with Ladies? It Is the Bawd that my Authority must cope
withal.


Abr. Constable, you may make a Hobbyhorse of your Painted staff, and ride home
again: Whip lie you there, and what say you to the Basin?


Gill. I say, it is a base one, and the Barberly Knave that owns it, they say
his Wife had a Tooth drawn above, while he was trimming below, let him keep it
for her an he will, for we have nothing to do with it,


Mal. Time's earnest with me to be gone: farewell, you know my mind, perform it.


Mar. With such a zealous care as Saints the will of Heaven.

The virtuous secret here Enclosed I Will show,
Since from pure fountains such pure Rivers flow.
Exeunt severally.
Enter Barb. dressed and Mr. William. Barb. Hey ho! good truth this little
practice of my Lady has lulled me into so sweet a fancy, that all this time I
have been thus attyr'd i have thought my self a very Lady; I would I were a very
--


Mr. Will. Maid again, would thou not Barb?


Barb. Well, and I be not I may thank you for it.


Mr. Will. What, thank me for it and cry? Come come, conceal't a little longer,
and I Will warrant thee I Will find thee out a Father.


Enter Gregory. Here Is one of the Fops already. Withdraw.

Leads her off and Returns. Gre. Mr. William, hist, do you hear? I have the
worst luck at Women, but I Will to her


M. Will. What Mr. Gregory?


Gre. The very same, Sir -- your Lady's now gone in, may a man be so bold --
you understand me.


Mr. Will Faith not yet, but there is hopes you may see her anon.


Gre. I had a glimpse of her, I cannot tell, but if my Father would but dye
once.


Mr. Will. I marry Mr. Gregory, his Passing Bell were Music.


Gre. The man that rung it should not sweat for nothing.


Enter Plush. Plu. A happy day, Mr. William, and as much (though my Rival) to
the sweet Mr. Gregory Dwindle.


Gre. Thanks sweet Mr. Timothy Lyning


Plu. How Is that Sir? -- Lyning?


Mr. Will. A conceit he has, witness your Worships Coat.


Plu. It Is lyn'd indeed, and may line a Ladies Pettycoat, when such a simple
Gregory as thou shall dwindle but to hear on it.


Gre. The dwindle in disgrace?

Draw.
Plu. Tell me of lyning.? --

Draw.
Mr. Will. Why Gentlemen you come to see my Lady: which, if you kill one
another, you will hardly do, believe me.


Gre. You have said right, Mr. William, and had it not been for that --

Puts up. I had, but it is no matter, --


Plu. And so had I -- Puts up. but let that pass --


Gre. Well, an my Father would but dye once.


Enter Rash. Rash. Gentlemen all, Good day: may we not in to the Lady?


Mr. Will. In to the Lady -- you are somewhat rash indeed, Sir.


Rash. Enter the house I mean, Sir.


Mr. Will. She is now going forth to her Brother Sir Robert Malory; what favor
she may bestow as she passes I know not. But be not to tedeous, I beseech you.

Exit Mr. Will.
Rash. Well, this melancholy Lady is a hard piece of matter to compass.


Plu. Some what straight laced, Mr. Rash.


Gre. An I could but come to unlace her, I should make her forget her mourning.


Rash. We all aim at one mark -- which only one must hit. I hope well.


Plu. And I hope as well as you Sir.


Enter Bab. and Mr. Will. as before. Mr. Will. Have a care, you know my
directions.

All the men complement her together. But one at once I beseech you.

Plush whispers with Bab, she shakes her head.
Mr. Plush has the start of you, Gentlemen.

Rash. We cannot help it, worthy Mr. William.


Gre. Hope well, and have well, the Motto of my Arms if ever I live to be
Knighted, which if my Father would but dye once.


Mr. Will. You would be a Fool in Folio.

Aside.
Gre. She shakes her head, what does she mean by that?


Mr. Will. To hear him talk so like a humorous Coxcomb.

Plush complements and leaves her. She has shook him off already.


Gre. I Will try my entertainment.

Gre. approches her after a great many of ridiculous complements.
Rash. I shall have my turn I hope anon.


Mr. Will. 'Twere a very ill turn if you should not, Sir.

Bab. smiles.
Rash. There Is the man, see how she smiles upon him.

Bab. points at Rash
Mr. Will. No here is the man, see how she points at you.


Rash. She points at me indeed; but oh those smiles.


Mr. Will. That smile's a laugh, a scorn, a mere derision.

Gregory comes from her shaking his head amorously. Do you note his coming off,
Sir, to her, to her?

Rash goes to her complementing all the way. Sir, what news?


Plu. Nay, I say nothing, what it was it was.


Mr. Will. And what say you, Sir?


Gre. What she said she said.

Bab. claps her hand on her breast.
Plu. That clapping of her hand upon her breast I do not like; she gave me good
words, but that is a tough bit on my stomach.


Mr. Will. I Will help you down with that, her words were these. It Is very true,
you are a very civil Gentleman, and one above the fortunes which you seek; but
when the heart is promised there is no calling back. These were her words,
believe me. Did she not shake her head? as who should say, you are the man must
have her.


Plu. It Is enough.


Mr. Will. You are muffled up in melancholy too, Sir.


Gre. She gave me comfortable words, but that embrace, and thus her hand
meeting her heart so often moves she a little.


Mr. Will. Then you will be moved with nothing. I Will tell you what she said. Sir,
you are a good man, a Citizen, wise and rich, though these three seldom go
together

Aside. But when they do, it is an Aldermans pace. The Maidenhead is your Aims,
and in your Arms believe me I wish one, for my Widowhood is otherwise engaged.
These were her words; you are the man must have her, did she not smile upon you?


Gre. Yes, she did.


Mr. Will. Why, why should you be maid then?

Rash comes from Bab, melancholy. Look, he comes from her, and as melancholy as
a sick Munkey. You are the man, Mr. Gregory.

Barb beckons. She bockons one of you.


Plu. Me, me, I hope, and I Will to her.


Gre. You shall not go alone, Sir.


Both go to her and whisper. Mr. Will. Now what is the happiness?


Ras. My happiness is, that what she said, she said.


Mr. Will. You have had a long and a very gracious hearing.


Rash. I have, I thank her, a very gracious hearing. Why does she laugh so loud?

Bab Laughs. It Is not at me I hope.


Mr. Will. At you? -- no Sir, no, -- what laugh at a civil Gentleman? I could
tell you what she said for a need.


Ras. I should be glad to hear it.


Mr. Will. Then I will make you glad, Sir, beseech you hear me.


Mr. Plush. You are a proper man smooth and soft; you have not your name for
nothing. I have heard you are valiant; fear no man, but the man that frights
any man, a Sergeant; yet you have made some of them run, two or three at once,
and glad they could overtake you too.


Ras. This was a thing worth laughing at indeed.


Mr. Will. But for Mr. Gregory the Country Gentleman (good harmless thing) she
said little or nothing to him. I have told you what she laughed at, you are the
man must have her --

My Lady beckons me. They fall off; Barb beckons Mr. Will. Your pleasure, Madam.


Plu. I cannot tell if shaking of the head, and serious shaking of the head,
may be gracious sign of love, I am the man.


Gre. Oh smile, sweet smile, full of splendidious rays, such as the Sun at
Dinner time displays: if I do not tickle her in figure, let me be counted a
Cipher; well, if my Father would but dye once, -- I am the man must have her.


Mr. Will. Your will shall instantly be done sweet Lady Gentlemen, it is my
Ladies pleasure you leave her at this time.

To Mr. Plush aside.
Mr. Plush, my Lady desires you to meet her exactly at Ten a clock this morning
at the Devil Tavern, and there expect her coming.

Offers to go to Barb. What discover your self before these Coxcombs? Away,
away, you are the man must have her.


Plush. Most beauteous Lady.

Exit complementing.
Mr. Will. Mr. Gregory, I have sent him off with a flea in his ear, only that
I might desire you to meet her at the Devil exactly at ten a clock, in some
disguise for fear of a discovery; and she will not fail to meet you.


Gre. At the Devil, said you?


Mr. Will. Yes, yes, at the Devil Tavern, and there you will find my Lady will be
your Lady. Be gone.


Gre. Well, if my father would but die once, then -- farewell most beauteous
Lady.

Exit complementing.
Mr. Will. Mr. Rash, I have given him a Box to put his Pepper in; you are the
man shall have her.


Rash. In good deed, Sir.


Mr. Will. You Will hear as much from my Lady.


Rash. O might I be so happy.


Mr. Will. Why you shall, Sir. I have told the Gentleman your mind, sweet Lady,
who desires no greater happiness on earth then to hear it from your self.


Barb. Mr. Rash, though it scarce suit with modesty, my blush begs excuse;
blame me not then for saying of that I love you, since it is a certrin truth,
and such a one as you desire to hear, and therefore take your wish, you are the
man shall have me.


Rash. May I build?


Mr. Will. With Brick according to the Statute.


Rash. I mean upon this promise.


Mr. Will. O, you mean upon the Lady, Sir: you hear you may, the foundation is
laid to your hands, and the Edifice half up already; and to complete the
structure my Lady would have you meet her in some disguise at the Devil Tavern,
at ten a clock exactly, and from thence to go with her to the next Chapel, and
there be put in possession of your greatest Happiness.


Rash. I will not fail the time. Farewell, dear Lady. With this I take my leave.

Exit.
Mr. Will. Farewell, credulous Coxcomb; how easily are these Citizens gulled,
and how monstrously do they gape for the blessing of a debauched Chambermaid?
Any thing that has not the nauceous name of a Cits. Darling is as modest as an
Angel.


Barb. I hope to gratify me for the pains and care I take in thus providing
thee a wealthy Father and a foolish Husband: I may enjoy the blessing of your
company.


Barb. I shall not derogate from the custom of us Citizens, who long more for
the company of a Gentleman Usher, then a big-bellied woman for impossibilities;
but you must be a Godfather.


Mr. Will. I must not be a Courtier else, nor you a City wife; for it is always
the poor Cuckolds custom, to pick him out for a Godfather who has the greatest
share of his wife's company. But we trifle time; let us go. In such affairs
swift motion we desire;
One hour can kindle and put out the fire.


Exeunt.
Enter Sir Oliver and the Captain as in the field. Cap. Now, Knight, I see you
love a noble promise too well to break it: you are a Gentleman.


Sir Ol. Sir, should I find that I had lost my self in any thing that should
proclaim me less, I should not hate my Enemy so much as such a heady action.


Cap. I am ready.

Draws.
Sir. Ol. So sudden; although I came to fight, yet were I sure I could put by
thy fury, the fighting part should only be thy own, mine only my own Buckler.


Cap. Slighted; 's death prepare, or --


Sir Ol. I must not dally then; Draws. come Mullineux


Cap. I Am ready.

Fight; Cap. wounded.
Sir Ol. Hold, Captain, hold; you bleed.


Cap. As you must do, or all my bloud's at hazard; come on, Sir.


Sir Ol. How fatal, Sir, another close may be we know not.


Cap. No, nor do we fear it.


Sir Ol. Then, Mullineux, what following hurts you have call not the work of my
unwilling hands, but thy frenzy. Captain, you faint

They fight.
Cap. Take your advantage then.


Sir Ol. Advantage, Sir, how mean you?


Cap. Of my wound.

Lets his sword fall. My weakness, Bellingham. -- You see there is now no
interposed resistance between my heart and thy bold weapon, come.


Sir Ol. I rather wish that all thy blood were in thy veins again, though with
that strength, new courage, and the malice that but two minutes past pursued my
life; you should again pursue't, and put it to another dangerous hazard.


Cap. Thou art a noble Enemy -- And now my troubled Understanding's calm again;
I see my self worthy the wounds I have, and all their anguish trebled -- thou
art just.


Sir Ol. I am too unmindful of thy wounds, thy smarting faintness -- but my
cares shall now only attend thy safety.


Cap. Mind thy own -- fly Bellingham.


Sir Ol. Let all my best desires be fruitless then; come, Mullineux, let me
support thy fainting body.


Cap. Worthy Sir, you made me see that braves and boastings in good causes are,
The Dolphins wanton dallying on the waves;
That foreruns tempests, this untimely graves.


Exeunt.
Act the Fourth.
Enter old Thrashard brave, and the Lady Malory. Mal. You know my mind; fail
not in any thing that lies in my direction.


Thr. Fear not me; you have made me brave, and I Will do my business as bravely.


Mal. And so for your Son and Daughter.


Thr. Nay for my Son, since he put on his bravery for a Gallant in jest, he
will not be persuaded but that he is a Gallant in earnest; scorns to think on
Canvas, course Frize, or a Sheepskin Doublet, or to talk but of Lords and
Ladies. And as for my Daughter --

W hum within.
Mal. Hark, he is come already.


Thr. In good Lady, it is his hum indeed.

Exit Lady Mal. If I can but hit the state of a Justice handsomely.

Enter Sir Robert. But here comes Sir Robert, I must go to my station.


Thr. walks up and down in state. Sir To. Well Edmonton, thou that holdst her
who holds me in the strong net of Affection, I am once again come to see thee:
how in th'imagination of this sport my old heart capers? Well, this little
house, this little cottage, while it holds my Peg is my best house, my Castle
and my Palace of pleasure.


Thr. You are welcome, honest Gentleman; what would you?


Sir To. Ha, what would you, Sir? By his face old Thrashard my Tenant, but by
the reverend outside that he wears I know not with what style to salute him.


Thr. Would you ought with me or mine, Sir?


Sir To. I would speak with Good man of the house, Sir.


Thr. The Right Worshipful Master of this house you may speak to.


Sir To. What may I call your name?


Thr. My name in common is Thrashard, but with the Gentile Addition Oliver
Threshard Esquire Justice of Peace and Little.


Sir To. Justice of Peace and Little -- do you not know me, Mr. Oliver?


Thr. Not you Mr. what shall I call you? Belike you would have us know you
whether we will or no, Sir.


Sir To. Has not your Worship a son named Abram?


Thr. My Worship has a son that men call Mr. Abram Thrashard.


Sir To. May a man desire to see him, Sir?


Thr. He Is not afraid to be seen, Sir -- Son Abram, Mr. Abram.


Enter Abram brave. Come, here is a Gentleman desires to see you.

Abr. To see me, my Right Worshipful Father? if he be a Gentleman we are to be
seen and spoke to. Your business to me, Sir? -- hum -- hum -- hum --


Sir To. Does your Worship know me, Mr. Abram?


Abr. My Worship does know many Gentlemen, some Lords and some Ladies too, Sir.


Sir To. But me your Landlord, Sir Robert?


Abr. Landlord to one in Satin?


Sir To. Your Worship remembers me, sure Sir?


Abr. My Worship remembers you not, Sir; must not, shall not, nor will not:
Landlord to one in Satin! Did you hear him, Right worshipful Father?


Thr. I heard him, my worshipful son; just thus he talked to me too.


Abr. Landlord to one in Satin!


Sir To. They talk of a wonderful Year, but here is a most wonderful Minute. I
am sure, worshipful Sir, have not you a sister called Gillian?


Abr. Called Mrs. Gillian I have, and you shall know that I have: Sister, Mrs.
Gillian, Sister.


Enter Gillian brave. There Is a Gentleman would speak with one Gillian, no more
but so, plain Gillian.

Gill. You might have remembered the M, Sir.


Sir To. Which of the M's Madona Mistress, or Maulkin?


Gill. Right worshipful Father, shall our Greatness endure the Maulkin?


Sir To. I confess Forgetfulness: your pardon, sweet Mrs. Gillian.


Thr. It Is well you have changed your note, Sir; had you not, by this Chain I
know what I know, Sir.


Sir To. Do you know me, Mrs. Gillian?


Gill. For a saucy Companion I do, Sir.


Sir To. Why this is admirable; what Brokers Wardrobe have they met withal?
Let me not mistake, and charge a kindness with unkindness though: for ought I
know this may be some conceit, that in the close shall to my entertainment add
more delight and luster. Worthy Sir, may but my boldness progress to the sight
of your fair Daughter Margaret, I have done, and rest indebted to your Right
worshipful self, and your worshipful son and daughter.


Thr. Son Abram, call in your Right worshipful sister.


Abr. Now talk like one of us, a Gentleman; a Gentlewoman shall talk with the
Gentleman, and so as the Proverb is, It Is merry when Gentlefolks meet. Sister,
Mrs. Margaret, Sister.


Enter Margaret brave. Mar. Your business, Brother.


Abr: Ask our Right worshipful Father.


Sir To. I there is the star that ushers in my happiness.


Mar. With me, Sir?


Sir To. My beauteous Margaret, how ere o'th'sudden changed into these rich
clothes, I hope you know me better then your father does, your brother, or your
sister.


Mar. Know you, Sir?


Sir To. I hope you do.


Mar. Indeed I do not, Sir.


Sir To. Not know me?


Mar. No; -- nor to be brief and plain do I desire to know you.


Sir To. Not know me, I am Sir Robert Malory.


Mar. Sir Robert Malory? I do not know him; but I have heard of such a one, a
Knight, a City Knight, a piece of old dry stuff that is good for nothing, yet as
lustful as a Satyr: out upon him, wrongs his good Lady, such a beauteous Lady,
nay such a virtuous Lady; out upon him. They say his Lust most eagerly pursues
his Tenants Daughter, a poor Country Innocence.


Sir To. Ha, this the delight I looked for?


Mar. It Is reported he has done her good, settled a poor Estate upon her aged
Father; and of goodness must the reward be sin?


Sir To. Some Conjuration, Witchcraft.


Thr. How he sweats?


Mar. Sister, Pray call our mother.


Gill. Lady Mother.


Enter Lady Malory. Mal. How now, what is the matter?


Sir To. How Is this? her mother? why this is my Lady, or the Devil in her
likeness; I Am sure she will know me.


Mal. Desire to speak with me, Sir?


Sir To. You Lady, will she not know me neither?


Mal. I cannot stand to talk, Sir.


Sir To. Not with me?


Mal. With you, Sir? no, Sir? what are you, Sir?


Sir To. Ha, do you not know me, Lady?


Mal. Know you, Sir? how? when? where? why? for what, Sir?


Sir To. How? when? where? why? for what, Sir? why here is the finest mad fit,
the most worshipful piece of Lunacy, that a man shall desire to look on: why,
are not you my wife?


Mal. Thy wife?


Sir To. My wife.


Mal. I hope, my Right worshipful Husband, you will not see me jeered and
derided; he challenges me for his wife.


Thr. My Lady your wife? By this Chain if you play the mad Alderman here, you
were better have done it in Bedlam. Your wife? Go to, no more but so, go to.


Abr. Our Right worshipful mother your wife? By this Satin go to, no more but
so, go to.


Mar. Methinks in such a Gentleman as you are, such sport, so old, and such a
reverend man, this wildness shows not handsome.


Sir To. Handsome quotha, my wife deny me too? If I be mad, I Will play the mad
man's part a little longer. Hark Lady, are not you my wife? are not you my
Tenant? are not you Abram Ninne? you Gillian of Brainford? you pretty Peg of
Edmonton? and this house here my own? 's death they jeer me. This is a trick of
my Ladies, to deride and shame me: she has discovered me, and there is no hiding
of my faults. Peg, wife Peg, I confess my love; but do you hear me, Lady? Madam
Peg.


Mal. The old man's mad.


Sir To. I were mad indeed if I should not know my own Lady: prithee torment me
no longer. I was wanton I confess it, and blush to own I was so; but by this
free confession I hope to gain your pardon.


Abr. When we walk thus abroad, how our once familiar Acquaintance will bow and
adore our Satin? but we know the worshipful nod, for a word we shall hardly
afford them.


Mal. May I believe all this you have protested? well, but yet you may make
Relapses, how ere the fault is pardoned.


Sir To. My thanks, and promise never to dote again on her, nor any other. How
likes the Right worshipful this now?


Thr. By this Chain exceeding well, Sir.


Abr. I protest by this Satin it is, Sir.


Sir To. Please your Worships may I possess her now? Do you know me now?


All. Our worthy and right worshipful Landlord.


Sir To. Will your Satin submit to that, Sir? Peg, I love thee, not for thy
Beauty but thy Virtues. The testimony of it shall be this; your states shall be
as great as they appear to be, I have spare bags will do it; and my care shall
find you out a worthy Husband. Right worshipful Tenant, I give you the House
and Lands you live in, and to maintain your selves and them with credit an
hundred pounds a year, and after your decease it passes to your Heirs, from
thence to their Posterities.


All. Thanks to our Right worshipful Landlord.


Sir To. For you't shall be my care and study to find out a just and fit reward
to crown your Virtues. This conquest gained, rewards are due to those
Who make such acts as these their greatest foes.


Exeunt.
Three Tables are set out; Enter Gregory Dwindle disguised as in a Tavern. Gre.
This is the place I am to meet my Lady in, and near the hour too; but I wonder
she would choose a Tavern! Perhaps she loves Sack before Matrimony, if she does
so do I; therefore, sweeet Mr. Gregory, sit down and recreate your self.

Sits down and knocks; Enter Drawer. A Bottle you conceive me of the best
Canary; and if a Lady come pray send her in.


Draw. What Lady, Sir?


Gre. That Is counsel, but for satisfactions sake it is a Mourning Lady.


Draw. You are mistaken in the house, Sir; here is none but mad Ladies come
hither.

Exit Drawer.
Greg. She may be a mad mourning-Lady, for ought I know. If my Father would but
dye once, how happy should I be!


Enter Drawer with Wine, and Plush disguised. Plus. If the Lady comes, you know
my mind; I Am in the Figure Three.

Sits down; Draw. fills to Gre. and then goes to Plush. I am for Canary: but
what fellow's that?


Draw. A Country Gentleman, Sir, that stays here for a Lady.

Gre. drinks all this while.
Plus. Do you know her?


Draw. Not perfectly, but I guess some Madonna or other that haunts our house:
we have all conveniences.

Exit Drawer.
Gre. This Sack would taste better if my Father were but dead once, but as it
is, it is.

Drinks.
Enter Drawer with wine, and Rash disguised. Ras. You know the token?


Draw. Sweet Mr. Rash, I do, and shall observe it.


Ras. But what two fellows are they? I would be private.


Draw. Two Town Bullies, that call here commonly once a day, to drink a Bottle;
their stay will not be long.


Ras. But why asunder?


Draw. For fear of quarrelling, Sir; men of such known valor are commonly at
variance.


Ras. Another Room would serve me better; I am not fit for Bullies.


Draw. You need not fear them, Sir, they dare not fight a stranger.

Draw. goes to Plush, and fills out a Glass, Rash sits down, Draw. comes to
him.
Ras. I am for Sack.


Gre. This Sack is very powerful, for methinks, I could fight now; sa, sa, sa.

Draws, and fences up toward Rash.
Ras. Hold, Sir, hold; I beseech you hold: let not me be the object your rage
points at.


Gre. What, Mr. Rash, are you here? I'gad we are the happy men, I see.


Ras. I think so too, Mr. Gregory: put up, put up, and let us drink a health to
the Lady.

Gre. puts up.
Gre. With all my heart, and sing a health to her too, if my Father would but
dye once.


Raf. Now you talk of singing, let us have a singing health, to pass away time,
till the Lady comes.


Gre. With all my heart, but as for Mr. Plush he may hide his face like a
velver lining: we are the happy men.

Mr. Plush dances up and down, at last comes to Gre. and Rash.
Plus. What, Mr. Rash, and Mr. Gregory Dwindle!


Gre. and Ras. What, Mr. Rash, are you here too?


Plus. So it feems, and I fear we are all sent hither to be made Coxcombs of,
for I see no Lady appears.


Gre. That may be, however I Will be merry, and sing a song, and drink a bottle;
and a Pox of Melancholy, my Father must dye, that is my comfort.


Ras. Well said, Mr. Gregory, hang sorrow, I say: let us have the song.

SONG.
Here is without doubt
Two Fools and a Lout,
Who came out of hopes to be merry or mad.
But I gad their delight
Has shamed 'em out right,
And has made the poor Citizen sad.
But let her be damned, and be wretched, and poor,
I Will drink till I Am drunk, and be jilted no more.

Gre. What say you, Gentlemen?


Rash. I Am of your mind.


Plus. And I.


Gre. Then show your selves true sons of the Pitcher, and roar out the two last
lines.


All Sing. Then let her be damned, for she is wretched and poor.
We Will drink till we are drunk, and be jilted no more.
All drink. Enter Mr. William. Mr. Will. Good morrow, Gentlemen, you may wonder
my Lady chose out this place to meet in; but when you know the reason, you will
rather praise than blame her. She knows you are valiant all, you for the Sword,
you for the Law, and you, Sir, for the ancient weapon, Fist.


Gre. By your favor, Sir, I am for the Modern Weapon, Sword too, if I am
provoked.


Mr. Will. It may be so, Sir, therefore my Lady knowing your excessive Valors,
and desiring to have no Innocents blood shed in her cause, desires you to drink
for her.


All. How?


Mr. Will. He that drinks most, and finds the newest Health, my Lady vows to
marry.


Ras. Say you so? nay for drinking and so forth, let me alone.


Plus. And me for drinking, drabbing, swearing, fighting, dancing, singing, and
huffing, let me alone, and if here are not Graces enough to win a Widow, the
Devil shall turn husband.


Gre. And let me alone for -- if my Father would but dye once.

Mr. Will. to Gre. aside.
Mr. Will. If I might advise you, Mr. Gregory, drink out of a Boot.


Gre. A Boot?


Mr. Will. Yes, a Boot, and one of the largest you can meet withal. It Is new,
and a sufficient Jest to win a Lady.


Gre. I can do it.


Mr. Will. You need not fear the Lady then.

Enter Draw. Greg. whispers the Draw. Mr. Will. aside to Plush. Out of a shoe,
Mr. Plush, I think would take with her, for I once heard her say, she saw the
frolic, and it pleased her strangly.


Plus. It shall be done, Sir.

Plush whispers the Drawer, who Exits: Mr. Will. aside to Rash.
Mr. Will. A bottle serves your turn, that being off leave the two Fops, and
come down stairs, where you shall find my Lady ready to receive you.


Ras. Thanks, Mr. William, let this reward your care.

Gives him Money.
Mr. Will. Gentlemen, I must be gone, my Lady waits below to hear of your
success, and whoever gets the victory, let his loud voice proclaim it. Farewell.

Exit Mr. Will.
Enter Drawer, with a Boot full, Shoe full, and a Bottle full of Wine; gives
the Boot to Greg. the Shoe to Plush, and the Bottle to Rash. Ras. I see,
Gentlemen, you are resolved to outdo me: if I lose the Lady for want of
drinking, it is my ill fortune, howe'r here is to her, and to that happy man who
has her.

Drinks, and sneaks off.
Plus. And here is a health to the unhappy man who goes without her.

Drinks.
Gre. And here is a health to the leg, foot, and person that in former ages wore
this famous Boot.

Drinks.
Plu. This shoe has a devilish hogo with it: Essence of toes! how I admire you.

Drinks.
Gre. This boot has as profound an understanding as my Lady, and because I
desire to know the depth of one as well as the other; thus I squeese the
Pitcher, over Shoes, over Boots, I say.

Both having drunk, hollow, and reel up and down, crying a Dwindle, a Plush, a
Plush, a Dwindle, etc.
Plus. Why, Mr. Gregory Dwindle, Fop out of Mode, and Monster of the Town, dare
you presume to think you have won the Lady?


Gre. Why, Mr. Timothy Facing, Fop Alamode, and Pimp to half the Nation, dare
you presume to think you have won the Lady?


Plus. Yes, and to show I dare, thus I assault you.

Throws the shoe at Greg.
Greg. And in return, I Will bootifie your Honor.

Throws the Boot at Plush; both draw and fight at a distance.
Plus. Dwindle, thou have wronged me.


Gre. Plush, thou have wronged me.


Plus. Thou have not won the Lady.


Gre. Thou have not won the Lady.


Plus. For which -- though I am loath.


Gre. For which -- though I am loath: but yet I must, my Honor cannot brook it.

Fight at a distance again*
Plus. Hold, hold, Mr. Gregory, I believe we are both choused: what is become of
Rash?


Gre. Pox of our rash doings, how soon might one of us two have been nothing.
But what is become of Rash?


Plus. Sneaked after the Lady, on my life.


Gre. O that the Rascal were but dead once, how I would maul him for all his
skill in Law.


Enter Mr. Will. Mr. Rash, and Barbary as Married. Gre. Oh, horror, revenge,
revenge.


Plush. Blood and revenge assist me.


Mr. Will. Why Gentlemen, what mean you?


Gre. Nothing, Sir, but revenge, revenge, I say.

Gre. and Plush, rave up and down.
Rash. They quarrel for your beauty, Lady.


Bab. Lady me no Ladies, for I Will be a Lady no longer, I am my Ladies
Chambermaid. Do you know me?

Plucks of her Vail.
Mr. Will. If you know her not yet, you may know her anon by this, Sir.


Rash. By that, Sir. What Sir? Villainy, villainy, etc.


Bab. No matter for that, I Will be honest enough to you, Sir.


Rash. Pox of your honesty. Villainy, villainy, I say.

Exit Running.
Bab. You cannot fly so fast, but I can follow. --

Exit Running.
Gre. Blood and revenge, I say.


Plush. I, I, blood, and revenge, I say.


Mr. Will. Fie Gentlemen, be patient, you are mistaken, and the loss you rave
for so is but imaginary. Did you not see the Jest?


Gre. Yes, yes, I saw the Jest, that is, I saw Rash, and my Lady, hand in hand;
But blood, and revenge, I say.


Mr. Will. You are mistaken, it was Bab, my Ladies Chambermaid.


Gre. How! my Ladies Chambermaid?


Mr. Will. The Lady is a Dish for your self to Feast on, Mr. Gre.


Gre. Is It possible? Gull him with the maid, to help me to the Bed of the
Mistress?


Mr. Will. You see my love, Sir? He Is a foolish Remnant-seller, and a Citizen:
you are a Gentleman. Hark in your ear, meet her within this hour, at the
Chapel in Dukes-Place.


Gre. I shall have her then?


Mr. Will. You need not doubt it.


Gre. Well, if my Father would but dye once!


Mr. Will. Be gone, be gone, Sir, you will lose the time else.

Exit. Gregory. -- Now for you, Mr. Plush, my Lady desires you to meet her
within this two hours, at Hide-Park corner; from thence to go to
Knights-Bridge, and there Enter into those pleasing Bonds, called Matrimony.


Plush. Shall I have her then?


Mr. Will. You shall but miss not a hair of my Directions, hark, -- be gone. --

Whispers.
Plush. I will not fail, I cannot choose but laugh at the poor Citizen, a
Chambermaid?

Exit Laughing.
Mr. Will. Laugh on, at length I shall have all the cause, and bless my self,
thus happily to end, the troubles were begun in one nights pleasure, methinks
I Am a Gallant all over: and glory as much in making other men Father my
Children, as they do in Marrying their Debauched Misses to their servants, thus
far I Am safe: Dwindle must Marry my Lady Antiquity; but who Mr. Plush? Oh I
have it: Thrashard has a scolding Daughter, and one, who as much longs for a
Husband, as he does for a Wife. Her I Will seduce to meet him: if not the person,
the Estate will move her.

Then all who smile to see Intrigues well done,
For love, or honor, will Applaud this one.
Exit.
ACT the Fifth.
Two Chairs set out. Enter Rash like a Puritan, running, and Bab like a
Puritan, following him. Rash. KEep off, I say, do not pursue the faithful: have
thou not already Metamorphoz'd me from a man, into a Monster? from a Reverend
Citizen, into a dishonorable Badg of Antiquity? I feel the horns, yea the very
horns of the Beast as it were rebel against the Flesh, and tell me I am
transformed.


Bab. From a Monster, to a Saint? Ah consider what a vile Trade you followed,
how you Cheated this, that, and to'ther Friend, and all for want of the true
light, which now is plentifully bestowed upon thee.


Rash. A true light one you were indeed, and so I fear will prove; But have a
care, consider, I may reform, I may find out the ill turnings, the evil
meanings, and the sinful doings of the Brethren; and then reassuming my so late
lost Religion, be advanced the Cities head, and, as one of its grave Fathers
has already sacrificed the Devil and the Pope, and other the less faulty, and
harmless sinners of the Age; I may bend all my fury toward you, and with my
sword of destruction, which is the Beam of Justice, sweep ye all into that
honorable Mansion, Bridewell.


Bab. Oh horrid! -- can thou name that place, and not tremble? Or think you
that common sewer of Sin, and not despise the founder. Bridewell? Oh horror! A
common Bawdy House, and made for the entertainment of none but loose, loose
Women, called by the vulgar Whores.


Rash. 'Twas built for thee, base Woman; But the spirit's weak, and vexation
desires a Resting place, I must sit down.


Bab. Alas, poor spirit, I will sit down too, and keep thee company, even in
tribulation.


Enter as Married Gregory and old Gent. vaild: after them a Boy with Wine. Gre.
The business is done, now Widow, and there is no frowning. Come, come, I am the
happy man, and so forth. -- Boy, some Wine, -- here is a health to that
Monstrous Coxcomb Rash. --

Drinks and flings the remainder in Rash's Face.
Rash. Oh, most Diabolical! my zeal pricks me, to give them some dehorting
words of Exhortation. Hum, hum. --


Gre. Come, come, I say, you shall drink, drink and be drunk, Lady, and then.
--

Reels against Rash.
Rash. Where are you Reeling, do you think, you profane abuser?


Gre. Why you blind Coxcomb, to a Tavern. Do you hear, Monster? if you will
drink you may, if not, you see this. --

Shows him his sword.
Rash. No, I smell a Satan in it, I defy thee, do what thou dare.


Gre. Aminadab, I will beat thee into one Sponge, and then cut thee into
pieces, Hypocrite, unless you will do as I do, that is drink, and so forth.
Will you take?


Rash. No, I will first turn Martyr, and take my affliction patiently, it is the
oath of the Brethren.


Gre. And this is the Oath of the Hectors.

Draws.
Rash. Do, strike, I am armed with spiritual armor.

Strikes him.
Bab. Cease, wicked man, to persecute the faithful. These are not stripes of
Love. Alas, poor man he melts: and I in pity must relent for company. --


Rash. Well, Sir, the Brethren will meet, and then.


Gre. Then I will beat them too, and so commend me to um. Come along, Widow.

Exit. Gre. Gent. and Boy.
Rash. My zeal must find revenge, this persecution I find is the Badge of the
Brethren.


Enter Mr. Will. like a Quaker. Mr. Will. Welcome, dear brother, how have you
fought within this Wordly warfare?


Rash. Not without great danger of Satan's devices, but being confidently Armed
with the Spirit, I came off without any corporal harm, yet I suffered
notwithstanding, the persecution of a sword, and had that Hellish liquor Sack
most scornfully flung into my Eyes, which made my zeal grow hot to revenge me
of my persecutors.


Mr. Will. It was well done, and showed the stoutness of a Brother. The Element
is good, if in the hands of a zealous Brother: which makes me seldom be
without it, I have found great comfort in a cup of Sack.

Plucks out a Bottle.
Bab. I profess, Brother, you say right.


Mr. Will. The Bottle is full, I drink of it to fire my zeal, which is many
times apt to grow cold; will it please you to taste of it?


Bab. I thank you, and will participate, -- trust me, Drinks. it is very good,
and my spirit moves me to try the Drinks again. Depth of it. -- verily, verily,
it is very comfortable, the very Emblem of water of life. --

Drinks again.
Mr. Will. How soon is this credulous Couple deluded? by this means I hope to
make both Friends, In Zeal, in Drink, and Weddings, all have ends.


Rash. It is indeed the very Water of life.


Mr. Will. I I, therefore the Brethren use it, trust me Brother, it recovered
Mrs. Simple, that was struck into a vision, and wakened her so contentedly, as
if she had seen but a dream, it was at a Sermon of one Mr. Thumps.


Bab. Indeed I knew him, he was silenced, because he broke a new Pulpit. A very
painful man, and much given to labor and Travel.


Mr. Will. You say right, he does much good upon the fisters; but as I was
informed, he was silenced for waking a Usurer that was a sleep.


Bab. No, no, it was a Churchwarden believe me; but have you any more of this
Liquor?


Mr. Will. Yea, for the faithful, I have.

Gives Bab, another Bottle.
Bab. Ananias, take some of this, it is good to digest affliction.

Gives it to Rash.
Rash. Truly, Spouse, thy counsel is at this time very comfortable.

Rash drinks often.
Mr. Will. After adversity, prosperity has a pleasing taste. May I participate?


Rash. Yea, -- and much good Drinks and then gives it to Mr. Will. who drinks
all off. may it do unto thy spirit. Is it all off? -- It Is pity. -- Now,
Spouse, let us go unto thy Woman, thy deceitful Woman, who has abused the
faithful, but I forgive her.


Bab. And I, with all my heart.

Exeunt. Manet Mr. William.
Mr. Will. Thus far I Am safe and every thing succeeds according to my wish. Now
Bab, thou have a Husband, and one that is made of Wax, and as fit to take any
impression, as his zeal is to follow any Religion; But how you came so altered
is a Riddle, and one too deep for me to Conster. By this time all my Clients
are Married, from the Fop to the Courtier, from the Courtier to the Clown, and
from the Clown to the Precisian. All Is done, and safely, thanks to my happy
Stars.

What I shall get by this Prodigious Birth,
Is yet unknown, all I desire is mirth.
Exit.
SCENE Drawn, Discovers the Captain in a Chair, Sir Oliver disguised like the
Doctor, Sir Robert, Lady Mallory, and the Lady Lovely weeping. Sir To. How
is it, Captain?


Capt. Faith a weak man, Sir Robert.


Sir To. Nay, nay Sister then I shall chide you. Weeping? Come, come, dry your
eyes, you have wept too much already.


Lov. Had I thought to come, had been to meet this new occasion, I tell you
plainly, you would come alone for me.


Capt. That it is my fault, so many tears are shed, I cannot but acknowledge,
and could my death, which once I thought more certain far than life, make
reparation for that rash act, of which, I, wretched I, was Author, you soon
should find an ample satisfaction.


Lov. It was not that we came for; but hearing that worthy Gentleman, Sir
Oliver, upon this bloody accident was fled, we came to know the certainty from
you.


Capt. He fled. To stop his flight, I gave him what encouragement I could, told
him my wounds were nothing, and proclaimed the hand of Noble Bellingham, as
white as innocence. Do you see this Ring, your tears will hardly let you see
it, yet Ladypray look upon it. Can you call to mind a former sight on it?


Lov. I have seen it sure, Sir Oliver's, I take it.


Capt. Lady, 'twas.


Lov. What comfort yields the sight on it?


Capt. I have shown this, to acquit me of those Treacherous thoughts, that you
suspected in me, against the life of Noble Bellingham, who as he parted to take
a journey in uncertain Paths, left this Ring with me.


Sir To. You have charmed us now from all our harsh suspicions.


Cap. I do not grive so much, this loss of blood, nor all the smart goes with
it, as by this I have lost the sight and the society of such a fair Example of
all goodness; I could tell you how much beyond the sufferings of a man,) I
dared him to the field, how meeting there, he did not look upon me as a Foe,
but took into his Embraces my wounded body, brought me from the field, and to
the diligence, and well known skill of this good man did leave me, and with him
his ample satisfaction for my cure, or whatsoever might be demanded.


Sir To. Sir, you have given him a fair Character.


Capt. He were baser than Envy that would not; and all this he did in the honor
of your Beautiful Lady.


Sir To, Lady!


Mall. Madam.


Sir To. Dear Sister.


Capt. He loved you dearly; can his praises then offend your Ear?


Lov. No; Every syllable of his commendations is Music; but to think that for
my sake, his much commended worth should thus be lost, O I could weep my self
into a senseless statue, O Bellingham, O Noble, Noble Bellingham! No hope again
to see him?

Weeps.
Capt. Do you wish it?


Lov. As life, or health, or Heaven.


Capt. You will not then deny one kindness to me?


Sir To. What is it, Captain?


Cap. Only this, Sir Robert, I would beg since she desires to see him, the
favor to wear this Diamond, until I find fit time to send it to him.


All. Send it?


Capt. Yes, no strict enquiries of me, if you dare trust me.


Lov. But direct me, Sir, I Will carry't him my self.


Capt. You know my bosom, Lady, if you will send it?


Lov. Take it, Captain. -- But,


Capt. I conceive all that you can urge me to, and will perform it to your own
wish.


Lov. But why returns not Bellingham? Or does he (hearing his goodness has
Inthrald my heart,) neglect me now, 'cause I neglected him, when my fresh
griefs enforced me? If he do I must confess it but a just revenge: and so as
long as grief shall give me leave, I Will patiently endure it.


Cap. But you shall not, you have endured beyond a Woman's strength, and shall
endure no longer. Mr. Doctor, you are the man must Cure her.


Sir Ol. Discovers himself, -- Beauteous Lady, 'twas your command I should not
trouble you with any tedious Love-suit; and you see I Have done what you enjoined
me, now I hope, I have your voluntary grant?


Lov. I am now what Noble Bellingham shall please to make me.


Sir To. No doubt but he will make much of thee, Sister, will thou not, Knight? My
brave Sir, of a thousand per annum.


Sir Ol. She Is now my own, and in this union, Sir, the best delights that her
desires would have, are mine, my own, and I shall so pursue 'um.


Enter Mr. William. Sir To. The news with you?


Mr. Will. Your Tenant Thrashard having information you and your Lady, were
come to visit your melancholy Sister, By way of thanks and gratitude for your
last kindness, has brought some of his Neighboring Shepherds, to present you
with a Dance.


Sir To. He Is welcome, and if it be no trouble to you, Sister, give them
admittance,


Lov. You may command me, Brother.


Music within, they all sit down, then Enter Thrashard, Abram, Margaret, and
Five more dressed like Shepherds and Shepherdesses, they Dance. After the Dance,
they Sing. SONG.
Charming Beauty, you whose Eyes
Delight in love and sacrifice:
Since your Glories shine so bright,
Let no sorrows make it night,
Banish all the griefs away,
While delights about you play.
For the Pleasures of youth, and the Joys of your Bliss,
Is to Frolic, Admire, to Revel, and Kiss.
Cho. For the, etc.
The sweets of your life, on that Union does wait,
Immortalized Joys are the blessings of Fate:
The Gods though made drunk with their pleasures above,
Think nothing Diviner, than that of your Love;
For love to excess, by enjoyment made strong,
Makes Mortals immortally frolic along,
In delights uncontroul d, like the powers above,
We surfeit and faint with the pleasures of love.
Cho. In delights, etc.
Each passionate look, and each melting embrace,
Each glory attending the charms of your face,
So subtly attracts, and so strongly commands,
We are slaves being free, and free when in bands.
Unkindness in frowns, the mandate of hate,
Makes Hell of what Heaven Decreed for our fate.
But you in this Empire so tutelar prove,
That Angels are subjects, and fight for your love.
Cho. But you in, etc.
Song ended, they dance: after the dance, enter Rash, Bab, and Mr. William. Sir
Rob. Tenant and Friends, we thank you, and assure your selves it shall not go
unrewarded: but now to Church; nay we will not lose a minute.


Mr. Will. I beseech you stay a little, there is more mirth in your way, and
such as I dare promise will be worth the looking on: see, it appears.


Sir Rob. Who Is this, Mr. Rash?


Ras. The same, an't please you.


Sir Oliv. Your suit continued still, Sir?


Ras. I have turned up another suit now, Sir.


Sir Rob. Your Wife!


Ras. Even so, Sir.


Bab. Verily so, Sir. -- Do not you know me, Lady?


Love. Truth, not I.


Bab. Nor you, nor you, nor you?


Mal. We know thee not. What art thou?


Bab. This it is to put off our vain and superfluous colors, and to walk as
becomes the zealously metamorphos'd. I was your creature, Lady.


Love. How? my creature!


Bab. In the phrase of the world 'twas so, but I am now my own, yet verily I do
err, for no wife is her own disposer, verily none, for we, to affirm sincerely,
are but members of our head, the man our spouse and our superior.


All. How, Bab?


Mr. Will. The same, believe me.


Capt. How comes she to speak in the nose so?


Mr. Will. The tone of the Brethren; but what do you think of this member, Bab?


Bab. Though begot, and conceived in vanity, yet being born in the state of
Matrimony, the offense may no doubt be remitted, and the innocent in time may
prove a most zealous member.


Sir Oliv. And what think you, Sir?


Ras. I think as my wife thinks, for man and wife are one.


Bab. Verily you have said, and said like a zealous husband.


Enter Plush, and Gillian veiled. Mr. Will. Much joy betide your Worship.


Plus. I thank you. For having this Beauty, I have all the joys my auspicious
Stars could give me.


Mr. Will. Well, Gregory, if you do hang your self --


Plus. Why, if he does, he does, we cannot help it, we are now man and wife.


Mr. Will. For better, for worse.


Plus. Then for better, for worse, I will keep her; why there is another Rival
of mine, Sir Oliver; say he should take the same Journey, and go to Heaven in a
halter after him, can I help it?


Sir Oliv. I confess you cannot, thank you, Mr. Plush.


Plush. I did but say, if you should, Sir.


Sir Oliv. No, though the loss be somewhat grievous to me, the sorrow shall not
go so deep, she is yours.


Plus. As sure as the Church can make her.


Sir Oliv. What must be, must be, Sir; much joy betide you.


Plus. Thank you.


Enter Gregory, and Old Gentlewoman veiled. Gre. Now, Lady, in spite of all my
Rivals, you are mine.


Old. Gentlew. I am, Sir.


Gre. I know you are, and thereupon --

Offers to kiss.
Mr. Will. Not a kiss, till you come to your Chamber, and then she is your own
all over.


Gre. It Is enough: now if my Father would but die once.


Mr. Will. When Plush shall hear of this, he will hang himself.


Gre. If he do make a wry mouth at the match, I cannot help it, I should not do
so by him though.

Save you, Gentlemen, we have the Lady.


Plus. We have the Lady, Gentlemen.


Sir To. Is my Sister divided between you?


Sir Oliv. You cannot both have the Lady.


Plus. Alas, poor Gregory.


Gre. Alas, poor Plush.


Lov. Alas, poor Coxcombs: here is a coil indeed about a worthless shadow: what
am I, Sir?


All. Alas, poor Gregory, -- Alas poor Plush.


Plus. Why, who have I then?


Gill. Why, who do you think you have? this is no Ivy-bush, nor I an Owl. Do You
stare upon me?


Thr. My daughter Gillian!


Abr. What my sister Gillian! I thought by her scolding, she would be a Lady.


Plus. Are you my wife?


Gill. I cannot tell, how do you think, Sir, ha?


Sir To. Come, Sir, be contented, she is young and handsome, and no doubt will
prove a fortune to you. But what say you, Sir?


Gre. Why, I say, I know not what to say, she is not very old, is she?


Sir Rob. In her Hood, some fifty, but in some other dressings she has, she may
pass for a thing of twenty.


Gre. Here be some Gutters, Channels, and long Lanes, but being filled up with
a little Plaster of Paris, the face may pass.


Sir To. For a Paris-Garden face it may, Sir.


Old Gentlw. Come, never be melancholy, you shall find a woman of me, I Will
warrant you.


Gre. Thou speak like a good old Gentlewoman. Well, an my wife would but die
once.


Old Gentlew. How, sweetheart? your Father.


Gre. I know what I said, I Will warrant you, if my wife would but die once.


Mr. Will. Come, you are so melancholy; why here is a man suffers as much as
you* or you, Mr. Plush and yet you see he is patient.


Ras. I thought I had married a Lady too, but by Lady there is no such matter,
we must be contented now though.


SONG.
You that languish'd so long for those whom you find,
Have kindness for you, like the rest of mankind,
Though Love and that cheat no man can endure,
Yet be constant and kind, tho they are false and unsure,
For in time you will have something to ease a sad heart,
The pleasure to think how your Rivals do smart.
Here Is a Brother, a Fop, and a country Clown;
A Sister, a Scold, and a Jilt of the Town:
These Babbies of Grace, to be faithful, as yet,
Resolve to debauch, by the Rules of the Writ.
To increase without fear of a monstrous preamble,
And hold forth to all they shall meet in their ramble.
To be faithful and true, are the Rules they admire:
To oblige every Brother, and quench every fire,
These Lambs of a Fold, like young Adamites move,
Make Text their enjoyment, Religion their love:
In a Pulpit they will melt, like a Spark in a Coach,
Thump the Cushion and Preach, though they are big with debauch.
Bab. You may abuse the faithful, who are big with Grace and Labor, and rail
against those careful Shepherds, who strive with the sweat of their brows to
keep their Flocks from straying, you may. --

From the time that Plush and Gillian entered, the Captain entertains Margaret
in dumbshow till now.
Capt. The Token I remember, and that after this Ladies Marriage I gave it
thee, with a promise, If ever I lived to come ashore again, never to marry
other.


Mar. You did, Sir.


Capt. Heaven, I see, is just in every thing, and would not let me violate that
Faith I had given up to thee. And since it has preserved me from a Fate severe
as was my Merit: thus I make good my promise; Which is thy Father?


Mar. This, Sir.


Capt. Then to him I kneel, hoping he will be so truly kind to give me his consent.


Thr. Captain, take it, you are a worthy Gentleman, and much deserve a better
fortune.


Abr. What another Lady of the Family of the Thrashards! nay then I feel Honor
creeps on apace, and I may be a Lord. Your servant, Brothers; nay I am bold,
but it is my ambition to be acquainted with Gentlemen.


Capt. And you are welcome, we both are Brothers now.


Sir Rob. Why, God a mercy, Captain, now I love you dearly; and to express how
much I dote upon you, let us have a Dance, and then we will move to Church, where I
will play the Father.


Capt. I thank you, Sir.


A Dance. Capt. Now, Gentlemen, let us go.
Never was day so doubly blessed before,
Contemned by one, I found what I adore.
Double Affection too does crown the End:
Finding a Mistress, I have found a Friend.

Sir Oliv. Honor to such excess, in you I Have found,
Love, Virtue, Merit, it at once has crowned.
Your Generosity so highly moved,
By all the World you ought to be beloved.
When friendship to such height does act its part,
At once you conquer, body, soul, and heart.
Exeunt.
EPILOGUE.
YOu did expect some bawdy Farce to day,
Some glorious nonsense, or a thundering Play,
Enough to fright the hussing Wits away:
But you are cheated, and instead of either,
We Have tired your patience with Harangue of neither.
How pleasant 'twas to see some sleep in the Pit,
Some serious Judges, and there dream of Wit,
Awake, I Am sure they never thought of it.
Some in a corner amongst the numerous crowd
It seems were pleased, they laughed so monstrous loud;
'Twas not at Play, but Beauty under cloud.
D -- me, says one* she is handsome, wondrous fair;
Another, rot the Jilt, if two compare
In notes together, all the Pit despair.
Then humming round the creature yet unknown,
They court her to-unmask, that being done,
Their stomachs nauseate, and their love grows cool,
And all retire from unregarded fool.
We have no charms to attract your face this way,
No gaudy Clothes, nor Scenes to grace our Play.
Here you must be content with yea and nay.
But let that pass: be kind, Gallants, for fear,
Through me your double dealings do appear.
I Am grown precise, a Sister, and a Saint,
Laid by the Trade of Chambermaid and Paint.
The lewd vocation of informing Cully,
Your Miss admits the Amors of such a Bully.
They meet in private, and to tell you truly,
This night the intrigue is done with Betty B --
Then Spark, despising all his Mistress charms,
Perhaps, takes me into his longing Arms;
With patience leaves what was before his right,
And all to shun the danger of the fight.
But roaring Huff for such affronts will cry,
D -- me, the Rascal and the Jilt shall die.
But this is past, I am a Convert grown,
Abhor the lewd devices of the Town.
Move as the humor moves, sometimes be bold,
A Shepherd may debauch in his own Fold.
The Lambs sometimes must play; should they be dull,
A Sister never would get her belly full.
Am I not happy then, in my new bands?
Gallants, do you confirm it with your hands.
Isee your looks prognosticate a storm,
And if you please, your Quaker shall reform.
Religious Players, in this wicked Age,
Appear like Devils, and disgrace the Stage:
Those serious Fops have ruined all our pains.
To shun our House will make a Saint of Haynes.
FINIS.

