The last WORDS OF THOMAS Lord PRIDE, Taken in Short hand by T. S. late Clerk
to his Lordship's Brew House.
My good Friends and Neighbors,
YOu are come (I thank you) to see me dye: and let me request you to take my
last Breath. I Will no set Speech; the long Parliament loaded you with those; (so
many Speeches as, if orderly burnt, would brew two hundred Quarters of Malt:)
and had sat speeching still, if his late Highness had not bad to Vnhouse them.
I spoke none, neither in the Commons, nor in the other House: and yet I must
either now speak or else hereafter for ever hold my peace. My Conscience, it is
my Conscience speaks: And the first thing that is upon my spirit is the Killing
of the Bears, for which the people bait m^, and call me all the names in the
Rainbow. But did not David kill a Bear? did not the Lord Deputy Ireton kill a
Bear? did not another Lord of ours kill five Bears and five Fiddlers? may
Bears be killed in Nottingham, in Leycester, and not in Surrey? You know I was
high Sheriff of the County, and if I might not kill a few Bears why was I made
Sheriff? I thought it our interest to let nothing live that would fight; and
therefore we made an Act against Gock maches: others have killed far greater
things with less Commission. But perhaps they will say I struck at the
Prerogative; for Kings and Protectors have a Privilege when they find a good
Mastive Dog, to clap their collar upon him and use him for the Game; and so if
kill the Bears, hang the Dogs, no Bear no Dog. But think you the Prerogative
would reach to Bears? or that Great Britain were the Isle of Dogs? are we,
like St. Mallows, guarded by Mastives? the French have ever made us their
Apes, and u^till we follow their Dogs too? If an English Mastive get whelps in
France they all prove Curres; (I wish our English Soldiers there may never
turn French.) Can we forget that horrid Accident when Major General Skippon
came in a Horse-licter wounded to London? when he passed by the Brew House near
S. John's street, a Devilish Mastive flew (as at a Bear) at one of his Horses,
and held him so fast by the stones, that the Horse grew mad as a mad dog, the
Soldiers so amazed that none had the wit to shoot the Mastive, but the
Horse-licter born between two Horses tossed the Major General like a Dog in a
Blanket. Thus your Dogs use Horse and Man: And for Women, remember now Swash
the abominable Mastive took a dispensation with an Elder's Maid. Nay, not a Sow
in the streets by night, but the Watchmen's Dogs steal privately to her, which
makes your London-Piggs have such round heads: and when I my self had my first
Brew House (which was at Pye-corner) I heard a Pig bark, whereby I knew 'twas a
City Pig. Here Is a sweet stir with Bears and Dogs, able to make a wiseman
mad: for first they pretend to preserve their Dogs, yet rayl at me for shooting
the Bears that kill those Dogs; and then tax me for killing the Bears, yet
set their Dogs to tear the Bears in pieces. Yes, and the Man that owed the
Bears now sues me for destroying his Goods. but what the Devil are Bears good
for? They bragg of a Weapon-salve made forsooth of the fat of Bears killd in
the Act of Generation, (though Bears never generate but by night when none can
know it:) my Sword has made some Wounds, let them anoint the blade of my Sword
and try how many Cavaliers 'twill cure. The Devil has a hand or a foot in this
Salve if it come from Bears: for, you know the Beast with seven heads and ten
horns had the foot of a Bear, whence people say a Bear has the Divel's foot:
You think I mean the Bear at the Bridgefoot (for God sends meat and the Devil
sends GOOKS:) I mean a Limb of the Devil, and is it a sin to destroy the Devil?
George, was Sainted for killing a Dragon; (Saints of old like honest George
used to kill Beasts, but now Saints commonly kill men;) the Dragon and Bear are
Pictures of the same; for the Devil has diverse Suits to put on; he wears not
only the Beast (a red Dragon, an Otter, a Bear) but a very Man, a Woman, in
Silks, in Buff, in a long Mourning Cloak (to hide his cloven foot) and too
often a Saint or Angel of new light; yet then so like as one Devil to another.
An Author of Ours said the Beast's ten horns are the Kings of Europe; which
may be the reason why the Members that voted against a King were so hot for
Decimation: those Members were not the major part, but the Major General part:
I confess that Author wrote after the King was beheaded, when our Liberties
stood committed to several Keepers. And yet I would know that Member's name
that would not be a King: every creature (above and below) has a Monarch in
his belly: the Devil would fain have bin King of Heaven, and Adam scorned to be
King of the Earth, and each of his sons would be King of all the rest. And
(to speak my Conscience) if the State should vouchsafe to name me King, I think
I should not question the Elections no, though it were (as I hear the Persians
once chose a King) by the neighing of a horse. But he that has Horse may soon
be a King; and therefore I love to save my Horse; but why with a vengeance
should we save Bears that feed upon Horseflesh? My Physician says that an
old fellow one Pliny told him, that a piece of Bears flesh will grow b^gger by
boiling; which shows the Devil and his Damme is in Bears; for all things else
will boil away to nothing: had all my Beer had a good sound boiling, I had not
dyed worth a pound of Hopps. Are these your Beasts of the Game? I profess I
hate Gaming, there is an Act against it, though some of our own ^lay deep as
any, and the Gamesters made Di^e of some of Their bones who made that Act; (O
who can tell how a man is used when once he comes to be a dry bone!) Something
there is that Dice run now more false then ever, that so many new curses follow
those Bones. Perhaps the Bears come not within the Ring of this Act against
Gaming, yet both Dog and Bear are within the lists of the Act against Duells;
and though they are out of the Act of Oblivion, yet some new Justices brought
them within the Act for Marriages. It Is confessed they fight but not for us;
they are no part of the militia, and never paid so much as Pole money: they
never with Lions were admitted into the Tower, nor showed at Westminster among
the fine Sights; nor ever reckoned among the Crown Jewels. There were
Propositions for bringing in Plate, money, and Horse, but not for Bears. And
yet now must England turn Greenland? the War has made it Red Land, and Funerals
make it black Land, and our Ministers make it blew Land. But if I never answer
for killing any thing but Bears I shall do well enough: Were I arraigned, it
could not be Murder, but Beare-slaughter: nay I killd them in my own defense,
for they would have killd me; which is more then can be said for putting many
a thousand to death. O but they say I killd them not fairly, but shot them dead
in cold blood? And am I the first that did so? have we not done it over and
over? I killed them as we killd Lucas and Lisle, two as brave men as the King
had any: what? would they have me bayt them to death? do I look like a
Beare-ward? or should I knock them in the head like an Ox? there is a Major
General can do that better then I. I remember one (now a great Lord) who
speaking against Strafford, said, Beasts of Prey ought to have no Law: shall
we grant that to Bears which we denied to Strafford? A Cavalier told me
that this was but a Quibble upon the word Law, for there is (said he) no Law
for Beasts, but that a man may kill them for his use, and the more sudden and
less pain the better, and if a Hare or Stag have Law, that is, liberty to run,
it is not for their but for our sakes, to prolong our sport in their
destruction. However that Quibble was seasonable then, and did our wor^ upon
Strafford and Canterbury. But mark how both sides plead so me; the one says,
Beasts of Prey must have no Law; the other says There is no Law for Beasts: so
both say it is lawful for me to kill the Bears. No matter how; hang them,
shoot them, chop of their heads, send them to Jamaica, any way is best. For can
there be Beasts more Malignant then Bears? I looked but in my Almanac, and
there I found two Dogs and two Bears among the Stars; and those I dare say
are Malignant Stars; for within two lines the great Bear is call^^ Charles
Wayn. By this you will imagine Malignants are in Heaven; but we and they shall
scarce meet in one place: for else it were madness in us to kill them, because
thereby we send them to be happy. But They as well as We would fain live;
and would have good Estates as they had before, and as We have now: it is in
our Power whether They shall live but not whether we our selves shall dye; for
though our Army be as strong to day as yesterday, yet our own Bodies draw
nearer Death. Behold it in me: and remember Naseby, which made us what we
are; how the King's best men, when the Victory was Theirs, took a bottomless
fancy of running all away, having done the like before at Marston moore. I have
known six-thousand (and no Cowards neither) fly all like Bedlems when no enemy
was within seaventeen miles, and if they were all exam^n'd upon Oath they could
not tell why. And they say that one poor wooden Horse at Troy did more then all
our Army in the Indies. It Is certain no Woman is so fickle as an Army. I speak
not for my self; for it is well known I have done my part; sure I have killd
better things than Bears; and killd them as men should be killd, either in
the field or in a High Court of Justice: the best Cavalier among them all (the
King himself) I Judged to the Block; my Lord Hewson is my witness, for he sat
next to me. Perhaps they think my Lord Hewson and I not fit to be Judges
because of our Trades; but let them show me one Text of Scripture where
Brewers and Shoomakers are forbidden to be Judges. I confess in Juries of Life
and Death we except against a Butcher as blooded in slaying of sheep and
Calves; but if he only kill Bears and Men he may be either a Juror or a
Judge. I knew a Judge did use to mend Stockings; (I spare his name because he
did a Business for me) and it is as lawful to mend Shoes as Stockings, and if
a Judge may be a Cobbler, a Cobbler may be a Judge. As for me, it is true I
have born a Sling; which made a Knave call me Sr Thomas Slingsby; but I made
the Slingsbies shorter for it by one, and that one shorter by the Head; and had
done as much for young Mordant, but that (having drank White Wind that morning)
I stepped forth to the Wall, and before I could return, Mordant was quit. Thus
the Life of Man is but a pissing while. But what if I have born a Sling? did
not David so too? the difference is, He laid by his Sword and took up a Sling,
and I laid by my Sling and took up a Sword. Kings, Lords and Gentlemen take
money for their Land; others sow it and sell the Corn to us; we advance it to
good Beer and Ale, and then sell the Drink to those Kings, Lords and Gentlemen;
and thus the Cup goes round. They sell for money, and We sell for money; and if
a Shilling had a Tongue as well as a Face, it would say, Sir, I am but twelve
pence whether you meet me in the Brewhouse or in the Exchequer. It Is true,
there are diverse sorts of Shillings: some are Brass; impudent Rogues, who when
discovered are nayl'd to a Post: some are ^ead, heavy dull Beasts that will not
go: others are right Metal but clipped, poor decimated things that would go
and cannot. But Brass is B^^ss and Silver is Silver at Court and at Pye-corner.
I was as wa^m in my Leather Jacket as in my Scarlet Cloak. It Is strange what an
eyesore that Cloak was to some, as if the Garment it self could sin* indeed
we had a man that used to hang his Cloak in my Brew House (as Country folk
hang Wool over pales of Water to make it weight:) and so though not He, yet
his Cloak was a Drunkard. But Cloak or Jacket I was the same man: I never
denied, but still kept my Trade, (and if others had done so, a hundred thousand
Lives had bin saved) at last I got to be Brewer to the Navy; and if each man
had drank like the Whale at Greenwich I could have filled them all: for I had
three Brew-houses, one at London, another at Kingston, and a third at
Edinburgh. And why not I have three Brew-houses as well as Assembly-men three
Benefices? they were my Livelihood as theirs were their Livings. One of those
fellows at Margarets Westminster (who had four Preferments given him by the
State) would needs teach us how to live by a Word: You Will ask (said he) what
Word is that? it is Faith, get Faith and I Will undertake you may live Gentleman
like: but that Rascal brake his own word with me, and dyed Twelve pound in my
debt. I grant he was first that told me my Surname came from a King of Rome,
called (as I remember) Turkquintus Suparbus: there were seven of those Kings,
but they are long since dead, and thence men call me one of the seven deadly
sins, they may as well call me one of the seven Wisemen, or one of the seven
Planets or seven Wonders of the World. But if we credit such as He, it is a
very hard thing not to be a King. They Will prove (if you will pay them) that
Rhombus and Remus that founded Rome were of English extraction; (I know not
whether we had the same Mother, but it is said many of us had the same Nurse.)
But I never ca^'d three pence for their Praise; therefore I pray ye vex not my
Corpse with a huge Monument, which cannot protect it self, nor me; and many a
man's Bones had slept in quiet if his prating Tomb had not told where he lay.
And trouble not my Ghost with any of their Elegies, Latin or English; they make
a man but laughed at, and are not worth a handful of Grains. I do not mean Mr
George VVithers* for He got the Statute Office by Riming: he has now told that
Office, but when will he sell his Verses? a Statute lies upon them so as no
body will buy them. It Is not a Month since one of the State's Poets brought
mean Anagram for me and my Wife: but I hear those Anagrammers should be all
fetched into a Court of Wards, for although they have not Wit enough for
Lunatiks, they are dull enough for Idiots. But now they will all at me: what a
heap of paltry Quibbles and Clenches will they throw upon me? you will hear them
cry, Now Pride has a fall, -- Now there are but six deadly sins. -- O, Sir,
are you there with your Bears? They but saw me stand, holding my Crab-tree
cudgel upright, and they cried, Lo, there is the Bear and the ragged staff! How
have they dragged my poor Name, and set me back from P to B to make me born in
Bride's Church Porch? it is false and Nonsense to call me BR^DE, though my Wife
was so when I led her to Church. I know they will tell you of my Letter to a
Friend where (instead of my best Beer) I wrote that I had sent my best Bear.
But all Letters and Books are false; there is none of them honest except the
Bible. I have an Abridgement of an English Chronicle which drowns the Duke of
Clarence in a Rundlet of Malmsey (the Duke might as soon be drowned in a
Thimble;) but perhaps it is a whole Tonn in the Chronicle, for my book is but a
'^itome. Hang Names and Words; Greek and Latin will not make an honest man; and
a man may speak Truth without true spelling, I remember when I dined with the
Florida Ambassador at Alderman Nowel's, where we had Florence wines, I told
the Alderman that when that Ambassador got home to his Country he might send
us more of that Florida wine: They all smiled; but whar cared I? 'twere not two
pence to me if Florida were in Italy, and Florence in the Indies: they should
remember I was a Brewer, not a Vintner. But I am posting thither where there
are no Quibbles; though I fear (in the weak condition I am now) I my self have
bin forced upon many: for Dying men talk idly; and he that is sick and talks
much, can hardly escape from Quibbles or Nonsense. And I hope you will pardon my
baiting your Patience so long with the Bears: consider it was the great Action
of my Life, and the only thing (in the opinion of many) that would lie upon my
Conscience. I confess I thought the Lease of my Life had not b'n expired;
there is Breath enough in the world, but I must have no more of it. For Death,
Death is the grand Malignant; and a Malignant Fever is his Lieutenant
General, and (which is worse) this New Disease is his Major General, a Disease
which sweeps through all Counties of England. And though the Weekly Bills of
Mortality know not us who die in the Country; yet it is my comfort I dye here in
my own House at Non-such. 'Twas the Kings House, and Queen Elizabeth loved this
above all her Houses; and some say my wife looks like that Queen, though the
old Earl of Manchester was said to look like Her; (That Queen might look like
whom she pleased, for She by Proclamation for bad any to draw her Picture;) but
I would not have my Wife like both Her and Him, and so make her a 'Maphrodite.
She has brought me diverse Sons; and I leave them good Estates: (I hope I do)
and would gladly leave a good name to keep them company. The very Malignants
say my Sons are civil persons: But should I live a thousand years they would
not say so of me: I think 'twould not trouble them to see me renew acquaintance
with my Sling. But how many know ye, that (raised like me to Power and
Command) have willingly returned to the place from whence they came? They talk
indeed of a Roman General who came from the Plough ( Dick Tator I think they
call him) who having beat the Enemy went home to the Country, rich and
renowned for a very wise man. And they say if that pitiful pilchard
Massanello (who had a hundred thousand at his pleasure) had left his command,
he had not been rewarded with a musket bullet, but had been honored with a
statue of Gold. It Is true the Queen of Sweden, though born a Kings Daughter,
resigned her Crown, and vows she never lived happy til now. But her Successor
love's Kingdoms better then so, and will only have as many as he can get. He
soon swallowed Poland, and as soon disgorgd it: and is now in Danemark, holding
two Forts (with two hard names) which stand like our Graves-end and Tilbury:
and had he strength to take Ours too, I think in my Conscience he would make
us all Danes. He has many Designs: but all my Design is only to save my
Estate and my Soul. Indeed heretofore I had some little Plotts, but they did
not all take: I thought to make the same Horses serve both for my Coach and
Dray, but I found my Dray-horses were too high shod, and I might as well have
Harnessed the Bears. And yet I know what belongs to Horses: for I was the
first brought Horses into Paul's: and those Horses brought Saddles, for a
Sadler has set up another Exchange there. I was told Epsham water might do me
good, but I durst not take it, having used the Vicar so very severely, lost
that Parish Priest should unhallow the Well: and (to say truth) from my Youth I
never used to drink Wa^er. My Youth minds me of the late Earl of Pembroke:
for w^^n he lay dying (as I do now) I went to visit him, and when they to^^
him Colonel Pride was there (for then I was but Colonel) who? (...) (said he)
Pride? oh, a precious Youth! But what had he to do with my Youth? had I such
strength and health as in my Youth, I would no^ change with any Lord in
England. I now die a Lord, and had I l^^^^ (...) long as that Earl I might
have been an Earl as well as he. And (...) first of all the new Lords,
whereby you will see whether our Sonn^ ^eed us in the Peerage. I would have no
Barons War: though I fea^ a world of Doubts will be raised about the Other
House* They Will pu^ it to the question Whether our House be within the Act
against (...) Buildings? and (if within the Act) Whether as built upon a new
f^^^dation, or because it is a Cottage? Then (after the Foundation) have a^ ^he
Roof; Whether it be Tyled or Tbatcht, (I do not mean by Wat Tyler or
Jack-Straw) Whether it be the Upper House or a Garret, where old Shoes, old
Casks, and such Lumber is placed? Whether this High Court be a Court of War,
where none sit but Officers? with a hundred such questions too many for a Dying
man to remember. And truly himself have been much puzzled with this Other
House: for the Common (...) House and ours is the other* and (...) is one House
and (...) other, and who can (...) ^rewhouse, he (...) if I mean to (...)
^ouse, then goes he to Kingston: when he return^ I send him to my (...) House,
then goes he to London: and when he comes back I bid him (...) to Kingston or
London, but to the other House, and then must he ^arch to Edinburgh. Thus a
man must run though two Nations ere (...) can find this other House: for this
is the other and that is the other and all are the other House: though sure our
House of Peers is such as ^ere cannot be such an other House. I hope it is no
offense in me to compare the House of Lords to a Brewhouse: for I am of both
Houses: (...) ^ow how men are at work in both, and what great Heats are often
in bo^^ and how in both they all work for one man, yet every man for himself
with twenty more things wherein the two Houses agree. The difference is, that
we took the Engagement against a House of Lords, but not ag^^nst a Brew House.
But that was meant of the old House of Peers, not the new: and a new House is
worth two old ones, for the Stare has a whole years Rent of a new House if it
stand within ten miles of London. But alas (my good Friends) I am now going to
the Lower House, whithe^ we all must go sooner or later and the best and
greatest Lord of us all had other go to the other House then to the other
World: for no Brew House (...)there, but a great hot Oven that will never be
cold. Therefore take ^^^d, for as we Brew, so must we Bake.

FINIS.

