THE ARCHBISHOP of CANTERBURY HIS LETTER TO The King concerning the Plot, etc.
and written with his own hand.
May it please your Majesty,
AS great as the Secret is which comes herewith, yet I choose rather to send it
in this Silent Covert way, and I hope safe, then to come thither, and bring it
my self. First, because I am no way able to make have enough with it. Secondly,
because should I come at this time, and antedate the meeting; There would be
more Jealousy, of the Business, and more Enquiry after it, especially If I
being once there, should return again before that day, as I must if this be
followed, as is most fit.

The Danger it seems is imminent, and laid by God knows whom; but to be
Executed by them, which are very near about your (for the great honor which I
have to be in danger with you, or for you; I pass not, so your Sacred Person,
and the State may be safe.) Now may it please Your Majesty, this Information is
either true, or there is some mistake in it: If it be true, the Persons which
make the discovery will deserve thanks and reward; if there should be any
mistake in it, your Majesty can lose nothing but a little silence.

The Business (if it be) is extreme foul, the Discovery thus by God's
providence offered seems fair. I do hereby humbly Beg it upon my knees of Your
Majesty, that you will conceal this Business from every Creature and his name
that sends this to me. And I sent his Letters to me to Your Majesty, that You
may see his sense both of the business and of the Secresy. And such
Instructions as You think fit to give him, I beseech you let them be in your
own hand for his Warrant without imparting them to any. And if Your Majesty
leave it to his discrection to sollow it therein in the best way he can, that
in your own hand will be instruction and warrant enough for him; and if You
please to return it herewith presently to me, I will send an Express away with
it presently. In the mean time I have by this Express returned him this Answer,
that I think he shall do well to hold on the Treaty with these Men, with all
Care and Secresy, and drive on to the discovery so soon as the Business is ripe
for it, that he may assure himself and them, they shall not want reward, if
they do the Service; That for my part he shall be sure of secresy, and that I
am most confident Your Majesty will not impart it to any. That he have a
special Eye to the 8 and 9 Proposition. SIR, for God's sake and your own
safety, secresy in this Business, and I beseech you send me back this Letter,
and all that comes with it speedily and secretly, and trust not your own
Pockets with them. I shall not eat nor sleep in quiet, till I receive them, and
so soon as I have them again and Your Majesty's Warrant to proceed, no
diligence shall be wanting in me to help on the discovery.

This is the greatest Business that ever was put to me, and if I have herein
proposed or don any thing amiss, I most humbly crave your Majesty's pardon, and
I am willing to hope I have not he^^in erred in judgment, and infidelity I
never will.

These Letters came to me September 10 at night, and I sent these away
according to the date hereof, being extremely wearied with writting this
Letter, copying out these other which come with this, and dispaching my Letters
back to him that sent these, all in my own hand; once again Secresy for God's
sake, and your own: To his most blessed protection, I commend your Majesty and
all your Affairs, and I am.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Servant, William Cant.


