OF THE Incurable Skepticism OF THE CHURCH OF ROME.

IMPRIMATUR. Hic Liber Cui Titulus [Of the Incurable Skepticism of the Church
of ROME.]

October. 20. 1687.
GVIL. NEEDHAM

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church
yard, MDLXXXVIII.

PREFACE.
AMong the manifold accusations, with which the Papists are wont to defame our
most holy Religion, there is none which they oftener allege, or more seriously
endeavor to evince, or confirm with more plausible arguments, than that
whereby they pretend that we utterly overthrow all certainty in divine matters
and consequently Faith it self. This is the constant subject of their Writings
and Discourses, this is of late their only argument. To obviate therefore these
importunate clamours, I resolved thoroughly to examine the whole Argument, and
inquire whether there be any truth in those things which many obtrude for most
certain. Having then with some diligence considered the matter, I soon found,
first that those things are false and and frivolous, which are commonly opposed
to us; and then that our Adversaries themselves are manifestly guilty of that
crime, wherewith they asperse us, and can by no Arts be purged from it. For
both that celebrated infallibility of the Church and of her Governors, upon
which the whole System of Popish Faith relies, is easily proved to be null and
feigned, and that even if it were true, it could yet produce no assurance of
Faith, no certainty of belief. To evidence and evince all this I thought not
unfit; and therefore have undertaken to demonstrate these three things.

I. That it is most false what is pretended with so much confidence, that the
Church, at least in the sense by them understood, cannot err.

II. That granting the Church cannot err, this her Infallibility is of that
nature, that both it self labors with inextricable difficulties, and can
confer certainty upon nothing else.

III. That our Faith relieth upon far more firm foundations; and that nothing
is believed by us, which is not both certain in it self, and such as the
certainty of it cannot be unknown by us.

Of these three Propositions, which may in time, God willing, be demonstrated,
I have now undertaken the Second, because that may be comprehended in a much
shorter Discourse than the rest. I will show therefore in this Treatise, that
the least assurance of those things, which are believed, is wanting to the
Popish Religion; and that all things are there doubtful, all things uncertain,
and nothing firm. This although it be most true in the Agenda also of their
Religion; yet to avoid prolixity I confined my self to the Credenda only, and
even in these omitted many things, which might perhaps seem not inconsiderable
to many. For not one or two ways only does the Roman Religion overthrow the
firmness of Faith: It does it upon many accounts, principally by their Doctrine
of the Eucharist, which introduces an universal Skepticism into the whole
System of Christian Religion: Not to say, that their Divines in teaching that
the very Existence of God is not so much known as believed, manifestly betray
to Atheists the Cause of Religion. But I omit these things, as not properly
belonging to the matter by us undertaken. What I offer in this Discourse may
perhaps seem to some too much embarassed with Sch^lastick Terms and Disputes:
Nor indeed do I wholly deny it. But I desire those Persons to consider, whether
this could possibly be avoided. For only to propose our Arguments, and not
vindicate them by examining what is opposed to them by our Adversaries, seems
to me the least part of an accurate Disputation; Which whosoever shall peruse,
even with the greatest diligence and attention, cannot nor ought not to give
sentence; because they have not yet heard the other party, whose defense cannot
be without injustice neglected. Those defenses indeed are become nauseous in
this Age, and not undeservedly: But however they could not be justly passed by
and dissembled by us Yet in these I have endeavored to propose them as clearly
and perspicuously as I could, and accommodate them to the capacity of all
persons. Whether I have gained my intent experience must declare.

OF THE INCURABLE SKEPTICISM OF THE CHVRCH of ROME.
CHAP. I. Wherein is laid down the Design of this Treatise; and some things are
premised for the better understanding of the whole.
IT is acknowledged by all, that the perfection of that Faith, which the
Schoolmen call Inform, we Historical, consists in three things, that it be
plenary, pure, and firm; that is, that it believes all which God has
revealed; and that without any mixture of error, or admittance of doubt. That
the Faith of Papists is neither plenary nor pure many have demonstrated: That
it is not firm or unshaken I here undertake to prove; and to show, that
admitting their Hypotheses, a Papist cannot with a certain and firm Faith be
persuaded of the truth of any thing; not only not of those Articles, which Rome
has added to the Divine Revelation, but not even of those, which were truly
revealed by God.

For since Objects of Faith are inevident of themselves, and deserve assent no
otherwise, then as it shall appear that they have been revealed by God; and
Revelation it self not a whit more evident: there is necessarily required one
or more Rules, whereby things Revealed may be distinguished from not Revealed.
We have only one such Rule, the Holy Scriptures: The Papists many, that so what
they want in goodness, they may make up in number. For to Scripture they have
added Tradition, Decrees of Popes, Constitutions of Councils and consent of
Pastors, not only those who have successively ruled the Church from the first
foundation of it, but of those also who govern at any determinate time; and
lastly the belief of the whole Church.

Now that by the means of any Rule our Faith may become firm, two things are
necessary: First that the Rule it self be true, containing nothing false or not
revealed: And then Secondly, that what we believe manifestly agree with this
Rule. If either of these conditions fail; our Faith must be uncertain. Nor is
it only requisite, that a Papist be ascertained both of the truth of the Rules
of his Faith, and the conformity of what be believe unto them: But also that he
be as firmly persuaded of the truth of these things, as he is of the truth of
any Article of his Faith. For since the Faith of Papists depends wholly upon
these Rules, and is sustained only by them: How can it be, that the persuasion
of the truth of those things, which they believe merely for the sake of these
Rules, should be more firm, than the persuasion of the truth of the Rules
themselves, or of the conformity of what they believe unto those Rules? It
being impossible, that an Effect should have more in it, than the Cause can
give it: A Conclusion stronger than the Premises; or a House firmer than the
Foundations. Nor do our Adversaries deny this. Holden Quamcunque enim
certitudinem attribuere possumus assensui intellectus propter authoritatem Dei
revelantis elicito, eam necesse est provenire ac dependere a certitudine medii,
quo haec Dei revelantis authoritas intellectui communicatur. -- Impossible
est, ut majori certitudine vera and rationali credat aliquis ea quae dicuntur a
Deo revelari, quam qua cognoverit Deum ea revelasse. Holden. Anal. Fid. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
affirms, that whatsoever certainty we can attribute to an assent of the
understanding given for the sake of the authority of God revealing: The same
must necessarily be derived from, and depend upon the certainty of the means,
whereby the authority of God revealing is communicated to the understanding:
And that it is impossible, that any one should believe those things which are
said to be revealed by God with a greater degree of true and rational
certainty, than wherewith he is assured, that God did reveal them. Aegidius
Estrix Est. Diat. de Sapientia Dei, etc. Assert. 26, 27, 28.
lays down and proves these three Assertions. 1. That an Assent of Faith
cannot be more certain than the Principles upon which it depends. 2. That it
cannot be more firm than those previous Assents from which it is deduced. 3.
That that which is otherwise, is an imprudent assent. And John Martinonus Non
potest fides supernaturalis superare formali certitudine sumpta ex merito
objecti certitudinem carum veritatum, quae includuntur in ipsius objecto, and
in quibus fundatur illa certitudo. Mart. Tom. 5. disp. 20. de Fide Sect. 8.
to the same purpose writes, That supernatural Faith cannot with a formal
certainty taken from the merit of the object exceed the certainty of those
truths, which are included in its object, and in which that certainty is
founded.

Since therefore the persuasion which Papists have of what they believe, either
is, or is thought to be, Divine Faith: It hence appears that it cannot be
solid, unless they be assured by Divine Faith, or some other not inferior
persuasion, that both the Rules of their Faith are true, and that what they
believe is entirely conformable to them. This our Adversaries confess: And
because some of them hold, that no persuasion is of equal certainty with Divine
Faith; therefore it is necessary, that by Divine Faith they be ascertained of
those two things, or at least the first of them. So Ludovicus Caspensis Nisi
fide divina credamus ejusmodi Pontifices esse successores Petri; nihil est quod
possimus fide divina credere. Lud. Cisp. de fide, disp. 2. Sect. 6.
Unless we can believe, says he, by Divine Faith that such and such Popes are
Successors of Peter; there is nothing we can believe by Divine Faith.
Martinonus Neque summus Pontifex posset nos obligare ad credendum de fide, id
quod definit ut dictum a Deo: nisi de fide esset ipsum habere potestatem
definiendi and infallibilem assistentiam. Mart. de fide disp. 9. Sect. 6.
affirms that the Pope could not oblige us to believe de fide, that which he
defines as said by God; unless it were de fide, that he has the Power of
defining, and infallible assistance. Maimburgh Maimb. de la uraye parole, Chap.
3.
has much to the same sense which would be here too long to insert.

If the opinion of these Divines were received by all, the Dispute would be the
shorter. For then I need only prove, that none of our Adversaries is by Divine
Faith assured of the certainty of the foundations of his Faith: Since all other
kind of assurance, being inferior to that of Divine Faith, would not suffice.
But because this Hypothesis, although admitted by most, is denied by some few;
and labors with insuperable difficulties, which I will not here touch. I will
not have the force of my argument rely upon it. It remains therefore to be
inquired, whether our Adversaries can boast of any certainty in this matter
distinct from, and as they think, not inferior to the certainty of Divine
Faith. But first we must lay down somewhat concerning the kinds and degrees of
certainty. Bellarmine De Justif. lib. 3. cap. 2.
makes a two fold certainty, Evident, and Obscure; that of things in themselves
manifest, this of things that depend upon external proofs and testimonies. To
the first kind he assigns three degrees: whereof first Principles constitute
the first; Conclusions evidently drawn from these, the second; and things
perceived by sense the third: That is certainty of the Intellect, of Science,
and of Experience. To Obscure Certainty he gives as many degrees. The first is
of those things which are believed for Divine Authority: The second of those
believed upon the account of humane authority, but that so illustrious, that it
leaves no place for doubt; the third of those things which are confirmed by
such and so many arguments, as may exclude anxiety, but not distrust: Or
certainty of Divine Faith, which is absolute, certainty of Humane Faith, which
is Moral, and certainty of opinion, which is conjectural. Thus far Bellarmine,
whose distribution of the kinds of Certainty might be allowed: if the raising a
conjectural opinion, even to the lowest degree of it, were not too improper and
irrational. But to pass by that, this rather deserves notice, that he has
made no mention of that kind of certainty, which is so famous in the Schools,
as neither wholly evident, nor wholly obscure, but mixed of both. Such have
Theological Conclusions; which are deduced from two propositions, the one
evident, the other revealed.

It need not much be inquired; whether our Adversaries have this last certainty
of the firmness of the foundations of their Faith. For it is either of the same
kind with the certainty of Faith, or of a diverse. If of the same, as some
will, then to prove, that our Adversaries have not herein the certainty of
Divine Faith, will disprove this. If of a diverse, as most think, then it is
inferior to the other, and less firm; and consequently not sufficient. Besides
such who think, that these Theological Conclusions founded upon a mixed
certainty, are de fide, as Alphonsus a Castro, and Melchior Canus, must
acknowledge that their opinion, oppugned by so many and so great Divines of the
same party, cannot be certain. But an uncertain opinion, though true in it
self, cannot be the foundation of an undoubted certainty, such as is that of
Divine Faith. Lastly whether this certainty be, or be not, inferior to that of
Divine Faith; it can have no place here but absurdly and preposterously. For
all this certainty is derived from things revealed; and cannot therefore add
any to things revealed. Theological Conclusions are admitted only for the sake
of those revealed Propositions, from which they are deduced. Those Propositions
therefore cannot be admitted for the sake of these Conclusions, without a
manifest and absurd Circle.

I do not remember, that any of our Adversaries have assigned a Conjectural
Certainty to the persuasion which they have of the Truth of the Rules of their
Faith. And surely such Certainty would be too mean and inconsiderable for this
place: Belonging to Opinion rather than Faith, as Bellarmine well notes; and
not excluding distrust, which is absolutely destructive of Divine Faith.

A Moral Certainty is rarely made use of by our Adversaries in this case; being
such as take place only in matters of fact, and not all those neither, but only
such as are perceived by the senses of other men, and those, so many and so
clearly, as take away all suspicion either of fraud or error. Whereas those
parts of a Papists belief, which have most need of being backed by certainty;
and are subject to the greatest difficulties, are matters of right; or at least
such as fall not under the senses either of himself or others. There are some
things indeed, which they would have to be manifest by this kind of certainty,
such as the knowledge of a lawful Pope, or a Canonical Council, what the present
Church teaches, or to which Society belong the notes of a true Church, etc. We
must consider therefore, whether in these cases this certainty be sufficient.
It would suffice indeed, if the opinions of Bagotius or Huetius were admitted:
Of whom the first equals, the second prefers Moral Certainty to Metaphysical,
and even that which is acquired by demonstration. But few approve these
excesses: Many on the contrary depress this certainty too low. However all
agree, that it is inferior to that of Divine Faith. For which reason alone I
might reject it, but shall notwithstanding be content only then to do it, when
it is falsely pretended.

As for an evident certainty our Adversaries, neither do, nor can glory in it.
For if the foundations of Faith had that: No previous motion of the will by the
Divine influence, no supernatural assistance of grace would be necessary; which
yet all require; and none but fools and stupid persons could be disbelievers.
Besides, that those things which are of positive right, and depend upon the
free Will of God, cannot be taught by nature, but must be known only by Divine
Revelation. But herein our Adversaries consent to us, as we shall see
hereafter, and presume not to boast of evidence in the Objects of their Belief.

There remains therefore only the certainty of Divine Faith, which they can
pretend to. Wherefore I shall chiefly consider that; not neglecting yet the
rest, whenever it can be imagined that they may be made use of by our
Adversaries: omitting only the certainty of Theological Conclusions, and that
for the reasons beforementioned. I shall now examine all the Foundations of
Faith which our Adversaries are wont to produce; beginning at the Holy
Scriptures.

CHAP. II. That the Faith of Papists is not founded on Holy Scripture.
THAT the Scripture is most certain in it self, and most fit to ground our
Faith upon is our constant belief and profession. But this cannot suffice our
Adversaries, unless they recede from their known Principles. The Scripture may
be considered and used for the establishing of our Faith two ways: First as it
is in it self, and its own nature: and Secondly as it is confirmed,
illustrated, and assisted by the help of Tradition, and the authority of the
Church. That Scripture, the first way considered is not a fit foundation of our
Faith, our Adversaries not only freely confess but sharply contend: maintaining
that, laying aside Tradition and the Church, we cannot be assured either that
Scripture is the Word of God, or consists of such Books and Chapters, or that
they are delivered incorrupted to us, or faithfully translated; or that this,
or that is the sense of such a place. Of these opinions and arguments their
Authors are agreed, their Books are full: that should I recite but the names,
much more the testimonies of the maintainers of them; I should become
voluminous.

To this may be opposed, that this is only the opinion of the School Divines
and Controversial Writers: that there are many in the Church of Rome, who
believe the authority of the Scripture independent from the judgment of the
Church, and dexterously use that method of arguing against Atheists; as H^etius
in his Books of Evangelical Demonstration, and the Anonymous Author of the
Dissertation concerning the arguments, wherewith the truth of Moses his
Writings may be demonstrated: that such as these may have a true and firm
belief of those things which Scripture plainly teaches; which are all, that
are necessary to be believed.

Whilst I congratulate to the Church of Rome these more sober Prosylites, and
wish that by a general concurrence therein they would refute my Dissertation: I
observe, first, that there are very few among them of this opinion. Secondly
that it does not appear, that even these few are persuaded that their arguments
suffice to found a Divine Faith upon the Scriptures demonstrated by them. The
Licensers and Approvers of the aforementioned Dissertation seemed to be afraid
of this; while they manifestly distinguish a persuasion arising from those
arguments, from true Faith. Lastly that it does not appear, whether they think
that they can without the authority of the Church be obliged to believe, either
which are Canonical Books, or what is the sense of those Books. So that until
they declare their mind herein, they are not by us to be disjoined from, much
less opposed to the rest.

I may therefore take it for granted, that according to our Adversaries the
Faith of private men cannot rely upon the Scripture destitute of the
assistance of Tradition: since it is what themselves most of all contend for.
Now for what concerns Scripture considered the latter way, as it is fortified
by the accedaneous help of Church and Tradition; I might perhaps omit the
handling of it here; forasmuch as neither Church nor Tradition can confer a
greater degree of firmness upon Scripture; which that they have not themselves,
I shall in the proceeding of this Discourse more opportunely show hereafter.
However because some few things occur not improper for this place; I shall very
briefly speak of them.

First then how little help there is for Scripture in Tradition, appears
hence; that it can no otherwise teach what is the true sense of Scripture, but
by the unanimous consent of the Fathers: which whether it be to be had in any
one text of Scripture, may be much doubted. It was a hard condition therefore,
Nec eam unquam nisi juata unanimem consensum patrum accipiam and interpretabor.
which Pope Pius IV. prescribed, in his Profession of Faith, to all which
desired admission into the Church of Rome, and which may for ever silence all
the Roman Commentators: that they will never receive nor interpret Scripture
any otherwise, than according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers. Now I
would fain know, how this Law can be observed: since I may confidently affirm,
that there is no one place of Scripture explained the same way by all the
Fathers. For there are many places, which none of them have touched; and none,
which all have interpreted. Nor will it suffice to say, that they agree, who
have interpreted it, and that the silence of the rest is to be taken for
consent: as if they must be supposed to consent, who were ignorant of such
interpretations, or dead perhaps before they were made, or as if the Ancients
were wont expressly to reject all interpretations different from their own; or
these might not be rejected, or at least others proposed, in those Books of the
Fathers, which are lost. It is not enough therefore to have the consent of a
few; unless we be assured of the concurrence of the rest. But granting that it
is, it cannot be denied, that our Adversaries can collect nothing certain out
of any place of Scripture, if any one of the Ancients have interpreted it
otherwise. Hence Alphonsus a Castro -- Itaapertum and indubitatum, ut nullus ex
sacris and probatis Doctoribus illud in aliquo alio sensu interpretetur, juxta
quem non possit talis propositio per illud de haeresi convinci. Castr. de justa
haeret. pun. lib. 1. cap. 4.
requires, that among the necessary qualifications of a Text of Scripture to
be produced for the conviction of Heretics, this be the chief; that it be so
plain and undoubted, that none of the sacred and approved Doctors interpret it
in some other sense, according to which such a proposition cannot be thereby
convinced of Heresy. But if this be true; how few places will there be, of
whose sense we may not doubt? Certainly there are very few explained the same
way by all ancient Commentators. This Christopher Gillius Multa sunt in sacris
literis, quorum sententia neque ex Traditione, neque ex Ecclesiae definitione
habetur. -- neque semper communis (Sanctorum) sententia reperitur; vel quia
diversa sentiunt, vel quia pauci locum aliquem interpretati sunt. Gill. de
doctr. sacra lib. 1. Tract. 7. cap. 6.
Professor of Conimbria, acknowledges, who affirms many places to be in
Scripture, whose sense can be had neither from Tradition, nor from the
Definition of the Church? neither yet can a concurrent explication of the
Fathers be found, either because they were of different opinions, or because
few explained the place. And the Anonymous Writer of the Treatise of the
Liberties of the Gallican Church Pauca sunt (Scripturae loca) que S S. Patres
varii vary interpretati non fuerint. lib. 3. cap. 11.
maintains, that there is few places of Scripture, which the Holy Fathers have
not differently interpreted. As will also manifestly appear to any one, who
shall consult those Interpreters, that are wont to produce the expositions of
the Ancient Writers.

Hence the Readers may imagine, to what a straight our Adversaries would be
reduced; if they were tied up to their own Laws, and allowed to urge no other
places of Scripture against us, than what are unanimously interpreted by the
Fathers. A Specimen hereof may be found in Launoy, where he weighs the Texts
of Scripture produced by Bellarmine for the Popes authority; and showing that
they are diversely explained by the Ancients, concludes thence, that they are
wholly ineffectual.

That the sense of Scripture cannot be learned from Tradition, hence appears:
but neither is it taught any better by the Church. At least She has not yet
taught it. For how many Decrees of the Church is there about the true sense of
Scriptures. Decrees I say: for not every simple explication or allegation of a
Text is to be looked upon as an authentic interpretation of it; but only that
which has an Anathema affixed to the deniers of it, or dissenters from it. Of
this kind I find but four or five in the Decrees of the Council of Trent, and
in those of elder Councils none at all. For 1500 years the Church delivered not
the sense of so much as one place: whence may be judged, both what a faithful
Interpreter She is of the Holy Scriptures! and how small an assistance we are
to expect from her in obtaining the true sense of them.

CHAP. III. That Tradition is no better ground for the Papists Faith, than Holy
Scriptures.
THUS have we taken from our Adversaries the first and chief foundation of
Divine Faith. The Second will be as easily removed. I mean Tradition; which may
be considered two ways, as well as Scripture; either as it is in it self, or as
it is confirmed by the authority of the Church. That it has no force the first
way considered, Bellarmine Scriptura, Traditiones, and omnia plane dogmata,
nisi certissimi simus, quae sit vera Ecclesia, incerta prorsus erunt omnia.
Bell. de Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 10.
expressly acknowledges, affirming that till we certainly know what is the true
Church, Scripture, Tradition, and all matters of belief are utterly uncertain.
That Bellarmin is in the right herein, at least as to what concerns Tradition,
is manifest by these two reasons.

First, that taking away the attestation of the Church, it cannot be known,
that there is any Divine Traditions. For laying aside that, how shall we know,
that there is any unwritten Word of God derived down to us? From Tradition?
that cannot be, since we are now doubting, whether there be any Tradition. From
Scripture? That favors not Tradition: but if it did, it would avail nothing;
since as we show in the foregoing Chapter, Scripture according to our
Adversaries cannot obtain belief; till it be it self confirmed by Tradition and
the Church. Thus does the truth of Tradition remain uncertain, unless it be
sustained by the Churches authority. Gregory a Valentia Sicut de authoritate
ipsius Scripturae necesse per aliquam aliam certam authoritatem constare; ita
etiam de auctoritate Traditionis, si ea quoque revocetur in dubium. Val. Tom.
3. disp. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 7. 12.
well knew this, who puts Tradition into the same condition with Scripture;
neither being of authority when called in doubt, unless confirmed by some other
certain authority.

Secondly, granting that it may be known, that there are Divine Traditions, it
cannot yet without the authority of the Church be known, which they are: so
many false, dubious and suspected Traditions being carried about; each of which
pretends to the same Character of Divine Authority. The testimonies of the
Fathers will not help in this case: since even their judgment is dubious, and
in many things it cannot easily be told, what was their opinion. Thus Valentia
Cum Traditio scriptis fere Doctorum Orthod. in Ecclesia conservetur;
quaestiones ac dubia moveri possunt de sensu illius, sicut dubitatur saepe de
sensu ac mente Doctorum. Ejusmodi autem quaestiones -- per eandem ipsam
Traditionem definiri satis non poterunt. Val. loc. cit.
confesses that Tradition being conserved in the Writings of the Orthodox
Doctors is as dubious and uncertain, as the opinion of those Doctors is: and
that the doubts raised concerning it cannot be defined by Tradition it self. In
like manner George Rhodius Neque scire potero Traditionem aliquam esse veram;
nisi vivens regula, id definierit. Rhod. de fide quaest. 2. Sect. 5. 1.
affirms that no Tradition can be known to be true; unless some living Rule
shall so define it. But that this matter, being of no small moment, may be the
more manifest; we may observe that our Adversaries require two things to make
the testimony of the Fathers worthy to be relied on. First that they consent;
and secondly that they do not merely propose what seems most true to
themselves; but testify moreover that what they teach, was either delivered by
Christ, or is of Faith, or, which is all one, the opposite of it, heresy. If
either of these fail, then their testimony is not secure. The first condition
is required by many and particularly by Alphonsus a Castro, Quarta est omnium
SS. Doctorum, qui de re illa scripserunt, concors sententia Castr. de justa
haeret, pun. lib. 1. cap. 4.
who enquiring out the ways, whereby a proposition may be convinced to be
heretical; in the fourth place assigns the unanimous consent of all the
Fathers, who have written upon that argument. The latter condition is made
necessary by many more. Driedo Non quia Hieronymus, sic vel sic docei, non quia
Augustinus, etc. Dried. de Eccles. Dogm. lib. 4. cap. 1. 6.
tells us the authority of the Fathers is of no value any otherwise than as
they demonstrate their opinion either from the Canonical Scriptures, or the
belief of the universal Church since the Apostles times; and that they do not
always deliver their sense as matters of Faith: but by way of judgment,
opinion, and probable reason. Stapleton Non enim omnibus eorum dictis haec
authoritas datur; sed quatenus vel Ecclesiae publicam fidem referunt, vel ab
Ecclesia Dei recepta and approbata sunt. Stapl de princip. doctr. lib 7. cap.
15.
writes that this authority is not allowed to all the sayings of the Fathers,
but either as they relate the public belief of the Church, or have been
approved and received by the Church. Gillius Testimonium, Patrum vel Doctorum
Scholasticorum communiter asserentium ali p^id ad fidem vel Theologiam
pertinens, simpliciter tamen, and non indicando esse dogma fidei, esse debet
argumentum firmum Theologo, sed citra infallibilitatem fidei. Gill. de doctr.
Sacra lib. 1. Tract. 7. cap. 13.
lastly grants, that the testimony of Fathers and Doctors unanimously asserting
somewhat pertaining to Faith and Divinity, if they simply assert it, and do
with all tell us it is an Article of Faith, ought to be a firm Argument to a
Divine, but without Infallibity of Faith.

Both conditions are required by Canus, Can. Loc. Theol. lib. 3. cap. 4.
and Bannes Bann. in 2. quaest. 1. art. 10. Si quod dogma fidei Patres ab
initio secundum suorum temporum successiones concordissime tenuerunt, hujusque
contrarium ut haereticum refutarunt,
who laying down Rules, whereby true Traditions may be discerned from false;
both assign this in the second place and in the same words: If the Fathers have
unanimously from the beginning, all along the Succession of their times, held
any Article of Faith, and refuted the contrary as heretical, Bellarmine and
Gretser Bell. and Grets. de verbo Dei lib. 4. cap. 9.
give this for their fourth Rule. When all the Doctors of the Church teach any
thing by common consent to have descended from Apostolical Tradition, either
gathered together in a Council, or each one a part in their Writings. Suarez
Licet Patres vel Scholastici in aliqua sententia conveniant, non asserendo
illam esse de fide, sed judicium suum in ea proferendo, non faciens rem de
fide; quia semper manent intra mensuram authoritatis humanae. Suarez de fide
disp. 2. Sect. 6.
writes, that although the Fathers and Schoolmen agree in any opinion not
asserting it to be of Faith: But delivering their Judgment in it, they will not
make it to be of Faith, because they remain always within the limits of humane
authority. Filliutius -- quae unanimi consensu Patrum tanquam de fide
proponuntur. Fill. in Decal. Tract. 22. cap. 1.
reckoning up the seven degrees of things pertaining to Catholic verity,
assigns the Sixth degree to those truths, which by the unanimous consent of the
Fathers are proposed to be of Faith. Martinonus Certum est nullum ex S S.
Patribus vel Doctoribus seorsim sumptum esse Regulam Fidei, -- jam de eorundem
simul sumptorum consensu distinguendum. Vel enim loquuntur ex proprio sensu,
non asserendo rem tanquam de fide, and judicium suum de ea proferendo; and sic
non Regula Fidei. Mart. de fide disp. 8. Sect. 3.
that none of the Holy Fathers or Doctors taken separately is the Rule of
Faith; nor all yet together conjunctly, unless they assert their common opinion
to be of Faith, and not merely propose their own judgment. Lastly Natalis
Alexander Cum omnes Patres in eandem sententiam conspirant, eamque propugnant,
ac proponunt, ut Apostolicam doctrinam, and Ecclesiae dogma Catholi. ea fide
credendum: tunc eorum authoritas necessarium argumentum sacrae doctrinae
subministrat. Alex. saecul. 2 p. 1022.
affirms, that when all the Fathers conspire in the same opinion, defend it,
and propose it as Apostolic Doctrine, and an Article of the Church to be
believed by Catholic Faith: Then does their authority afford a necessary
argument of Sacred Doctrine

Thus far these Writers: And that the rest do not disagree from them we shall
soon be persuaded; if we consider, how unlikely it is, that a greater
infallibility should be allowed even to an unanimous testimony of the Fathers;
than to Pope, or Council, or both together, or the present Universal Church:
All which our Adversaries grant may err in those things which they simply
affirm or teach, and define not to be of Faith.

It suffices not therefore, either that many Fathers deliver an opinion as of
Faith; or that all should simply teach it, but not affirm it to be of Faith.
Now if these two conditions be observed; How few Articles of Christian Faith
shall we receive from Tradition? For the Fathers seldom all agree, and more
rarely admonishes us, that what they teach, is of Faith. So that if you take
away all Articles, wherein either of these conditions is wanting; it may well
be doubted, whether any one will remain. Certainly if our Controversial Divines
should so far make use of this observation, as to reject all testimonies of the
Fathers produced by our Adversaries against us, with which themselves will not
be obliged, that is, such as are deficient in either of the conditions before
laid down: They would be reduced to silence, and not have one authority left to
boast of.

From what has been said, it appears that matters of Tradition and belief
cannot be learned from the Fathers. Hence Aegidius Estrix Est. Apol. Sect. 4.
vehemently inveighs against Peter-Van Buscum a Divine of Gaunt; who in his
Instruction had remitted young Divines to the Fathers to learn the Christian
Doctrine from them. Nuet. adv. Claud. de Eucharist. in praefat.
And Nuetus the Jesuit likens those Writers of Controversy, who passing by
the Scripture betake themselves to the Fathers, to Thieves and Rogues, who
deserting the Cities, flee into thick Woods, that they may more securely hide
themselves.

If the Fathers therefore teach not Tradition; there remains only the Church,
whence it can be known. Whether the Church therefore has that power, as to
confer the desired Certainty upon what She pronounces to be revealed and to be
believed, is next to be inquired. Which, because our Adversaries here chiefly
fasten their hold, easily giving up the former means of conveying Tradition;
shall be somewhat more accurately discussed.

CHAP. IV. That the Faith of Papists cannot be founded even upon the Definitive
Judgment of the Church.
First because it is neither evident, nor of Faith, that the Judgment of the
Church is certain.
BY the name of Church, whereon our Adversaries would have the Faith of all men
to be founded, they are wont to design two things. First that visible
Congregation of men, which consists of Pope, Clergy, and Laics; all professing
the same Faith. Secondly that part of this first Church, whose office it is to
Rule the rest, and prescribe Laws of acting and believing to them: Whether this
part be the Pope, or a Council. The former they call the Universal, the latter
the Representative or the Regent Church. To both they ascribe infallibility,
but in a different way; to the first in believing, to the second in defining,
or as they choose to speak, in proposing. So that whatsoever the Universal
Church believes, or the Representative proposes to be believed, must
necessarily be true, and revealed by God; and the denial of it, heresy. We
shall examine each in order: But first of the Representative Church.

Our Adversaries believe to have been instituted by God a living and visible
Authority, whose office it should be to define matters of belief and practice,
infallibly determine emergent Controversies, and judge of Heresy. That
whatsoever this power, which some call the Chair, others more accurately the
Tribunal, defines, proposes, or judges; may and ought to be received of all
Christians as an Article of Faith: and that this is the ordinary and immediate
foundation of the Faith of private Christians. Indeed in assigning this
Tribunal, what and where it is, all do not agree. But that there is such an
one, whatsoever it is, all do contend. Whether there be such an one, is a great
question, and may justly take up another Discourse. But now we only consider,
whether the judgment and definition of this Tribunal be such, as that whosoever
relyeth upon it, can or ought to be certain, that he does not err, and that
what he believes, is true. For it is not enough that this Tribunal be
infallible, unless its infallibity be also manifest. Since if it had such a
privilege, but either unknown or uncertain; he indeed, that acquiesced in its
definitions, would not err, but could never be certain, that he does not err,
and might reasonably doubt, whether he does or no. I enquire therefore, whether
our Adversaries can be certain that the Church in defining cannot err.

If the Papists have any certainty of the infallibility of the Church defining;
it must be either Moral, or evident, or that of Divine Faith: For the rest we
have excluded before. But it can be none of these. Not Moral, for that depends
upon the testimony of another senses: But the Infallibility of the Church
cannot be perceived either by our own, or by another senses. Nor indeed is it
here pretended to by our Adversaries: No more than Evident Certainty, which
they expressly acknowledge they have not herein. So Andrew du Val Non potest
firmiter and infallibiliter sciri nisi ex Divina Revelatione, Du Val in 2. 2.
page 16.
tells us The Infallibility of the Church can be certainly known only by Divine
Revelation. Arriaga Non est veritas per se nota, Arr. de Fide Disp 3. Sect. 1.
that it is not a Truth known by it self, or self evident. Conink Sola Fide ex
Scripturae testimonio constat; solos fideles dirigit. Con. de act. Cupern.
Disp. 9. dub. 5.
that it is known to us only by Faith from the testimony of the Scriptures, and
serves to direct only the Faithful. Ysambertus Non potest sciri ab hominibus
infallibiliter, nisi ex divina revelatione. Ysamb. de Fide Disp. 26. art. 2.
that it cannot be known infallibly by men, otherwise than by Divine
Revelation. Rhodius Cognos^itur tantum Fide divina. Rhod. de Fide quaest. 1.
Sect 4.. 4.
that it is known only by Divine Faith. Lastly Antonius Arnaldus Non est quid
ex se evidens. Arn. Perpert. de la Foy, live. 1. chap. 7.
that it is not self evident.

The whole matter therefore comes to this, whether the Infallibility of the
Church be of Faith. That it is our Adversaries, as we see, pretend; that it is
not, I prove many ways. First this seems to be the opinion of a man of great
Name among them, Launoy, who every where oppugneth the Infallability of the
Pope, and shows that the Infallibility of a Council appears to him not to be
of Faith; while he says Quamvis certum sit non errandi privilegium inesse
Concilio; long tamen certius est apud Theologos Ecclesiae inesse. Laun. Epist.
ad Vallant. Tom. 2.
that although it be certain the privilege of not erring is in a Council; yet
that it is far more certain among Divines that it is in the Church: Which he
would never have said, if he had believed the Infallibility of a Council to be
of Faith. For then it would be no less certain than the Infallibility of the
Church.

Besides it is the common opinion of our Adversaries; that nothing is of Faith,
of which Disputes are raised in the bosom of the Church, She being conscious of
them. Thus Holden Certum est illud non esse Fidei divinae and Catholicae dogma,
cujus oppositum a plurimis piissimis and doctissimis Catholicis viris public
sustentari vidimus, sciente nimirum and jacente Ecclesia universa. Hold. Anal.
fid. lib. 1. cap. 9.
affirms, that is not an Article of Divine and Catholic Faith; whose opposite
is publicly maintained by many pious and learned Catholics, the Universal
Church knowing of it, and winking at it. To the same purpose Canus Sunius aut
paucorum opinatio non fuerit ab Ecclesia rejecta, tum plurimorum authoritas --
nihil certum firmumque conficiet. Can. loc. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 3.
teaches, that if the opinion of one or a few be not rejecsed by the Church;
then the (contrary) authority of many will produce nothing firm or certain.
There is extant among the works of the Fratres Valemburgii a Treatise called
the Rule of Faith, written formerly in French by Veron, and translated into
Latin by the Valemburgii, and so openly adopted by them, that whatsoever Veron
writ of himself in the singular, they translate in the plural. So that
whatsoever is contained in it, may be looked upon as the sense of all three
Writers. Now the chief scope of this Book is to show, that not a few opinions
taught by many of their Doctors, and by us affixed to the whole Church of Rome,
are not of Faith, but may be safely denied. To the obtaining of this end they
make use chiefly of two means, the silence of the Council of Trent, and the
testimonies of Doctors of a contrary opinion: and Section 15. Variae sunt hac
de re Doctorum sententiae; quod vel solum sufficit probando id non esse de fide
Catholica.
have these words, That the different judgment of the Doctors herein may alone
suffice to prove, that it is not of Faith. Upon this foundation proceed all
those Divines; who maintain that the Pope is infallible, or superior to a
Council. Thus the Valemburgii Ea solien de causa non affirmamus hanc
propositionem fide Catholica esse tenendam; quod Authors, qui contrarium
sentiunt, nondum videamus ab Ecclesia damnatos pro haereticis. Val. Tom. 1.
Tract. 1. Exam. 3. number. 111.
write, that for this cause only, they will not affirm this proposition to be
of Catholic Faith, because Authors of the contrary opinion are not condemned
by the Church for Heretics. So Bannes Bann. in 2.2. quaest. 1. art. 10. dub. 2.
, Bellarmine Bell. de Pont. lib. 4. cap. 2.
, Vasquez Vasq. in 3. disp. 137. cap. 1.
, and Duval Duval. in 2.2. p. 344.
tells us, that they will not assert the contrary opinion to be heresy;
because it is not yet condemned by Popes or Councils, and is tolerated in the
Church. But Gillius Quare rigida videtur censura, qua Bannes oppositam notat
(sententiam) vocans eam temerariam. Gill. de doctr. Sacra lib. 1. Tract. 7.
cap. 4.
goes farther, and reprehendeth Bannes for inflicting even a mark of rashness
upon the opinion of one only sense of Scripture, since four Divines, Alensis,
Albertus, Henricus, and Medina had defended it.

This opinion of our Adversaries is grounded on a double foundation. The first
Gillius declares in express words, viz. that it is not credible that so many
learned and pious persons should either not know what the Catholic Faith
teaches, or knowing it should oppose it. The Second is, that it would be a
most unpardonable neglect of the Church to see the Faith torn in pieces by her
Children, and be silent in so urgent an occasion. For by that connivance She
should at least indirectly confirm heresy: it being a Rule of the Canon Law,
Error, cui non resistitur, approbatur, Did. 83.
that an Error, which is not resisted, is approved.

If therefore I demonstrate, that not one or two, but many of the Roman
Divines, and those the most celebrated, and by their merit preferred to the
greatest dignities in the Church, were not only ignorant of, but also openly
denied this Infallibility: I shall at the same time prove, that it is not of
Faith. The former will easily be performed. For first, the most noble and
learned Jo. Fr. Picus Voluerunt multi Concilium si una cum Pontifice in iis
quae ad essentiam fidei pertinent, sententiam ferat, nullo pacto errare posse.
Restitere alii, affirmantes errare posse Concilia, and jam errasse -- nec ad
huc aliquid (quod sciam) promulgatum est, cujus vi ad alterutrum credendum
obstringamur. Picus ad Theor. 4.
Prince of Mirandula confesses, that their Doctors and Canonists are divided
in their opinions, whether a Pope and Council conjunctly defining matters of
Faith can err or not: and that we are not obliged to believe either opinion.
That Picus his testimony is true any one will be convinced, that considers
how many things repugnant to this Infallibility the greatest men of the Roman
Church have taught. These may be reduced to four heads. First, the testimonies
of those which teach that the Pope and Council (to whom alone this
Infallibility is assigned) can err. Secondly, of those which deny that Church
which is unerring and indesectible, to be so tied to the Clergy, that it may
not wholly consist in others. Thirdly, of those who assert that the Faith of
all men, one only excepted, may fail; and so the Church subsist in a single
Laick or Woman. Fourthly of those who imagine that the Faith may perish in all
adult persons, and so the Church consist only in baptized infants.

For the first we shall produce Ockam, or at least them, whose opinions he
relates. (For in his Dialogues he never speaks in his own person) Vna sola est
Ecclesia militans, quae contra fidem errare non potest. -- Temerarium est
dicere, quod Concilium Generale contra fidem errare non potest. Occam. Dial.
part. 1. lib. 5. cap. 25.
He therefore assirms, that it is rash to say a General Council cannot err
against the Faith; that being the peculiar privilege of the Church Militant.
That Scripturae divinae, universali Ecclesiae, and Aposiolis absque alla
dubitatione in omnibus credendum. Nullis vero aliis, quantacunque doctrina vel
Sanctitate praepolleant, -- It a quod nec in Concilio generali, si esset
congregata universalis Ecclesia, nec Decretis Pontisicum, nec Doctorum dictis
est necessario credulitas in omni dicto absque omni exceptione praestanda. Id.
part. 3. Tract. 1. lib. 3. cap. 4.
the Scriptures, the Universal Church and the Apostles are without hesitation
to be believed; but none others how eminent soever in holiness and Learning, no
not a General Council, although the Universal Church were gathered together in
it, nor the Decrees of Popes, nor the Judgments of Doctors. Lastly Si
quaeratur, quis habet judicare, an Concilia suerint Catholice celebrata,
respondetur quod periti in Scripturis habent judicare per modum firmae
assertionis, quod definita ab iis sunt Catholice definita. Id. cap. 19.
that it belongs to every man skilful in the Scriptures, with a firm assurance
to judge whether Councils have been celebrated Canonically, or defined
Catholickly.

Peter de Alliaco 1. Concilium generale potest difformari legi Christi. 2.
Ecclesia Romana, quae distinguitur a tot a congregatione sidelium, ut pars a
toto, potest haereticari. 3. Tota multitudo Clericorum and Laicorum virorum
potest a fide deficere. All. in quaest. vesper. art 3.
Cardinal of Cambray, and one of the Presidents of the Council of Constance,
lays down these Three Assertions. 1. That a General Council can depart from
the Law of Christ. 2. That the Church of Rome, which is distinguished from the
whole Congregation of the Faithful, as the part from the whole, may fall into
Heresy. 3. That the whole multitude of Clergy and Laity may apostatize from
the true Faith. This Lecture opposed by a Parisian Doctor he afterward largely
defended in his Reply, which he Entitled de Resumpta: Where among other things
to this purpose he enquireth, what is to be done, when a General Council errs,
and the State of Christendom is so depraved, that Heretics have all the Power,
the Faithful being become few and contemptible: And in this case advises to
make diverse Appeals, commit themselves to the Divine Grace, and bear the injury
with Patience.

Waldensis Non est ergo specialis Ecclesia, non Africana, nec utique
particularis illa Romana, sed universalis Ecclesia, non quidem in generali
Synodo congregata, quam aliquotiens errasse percepimus. Sed est etc. Vald.
doctr. Fid. Tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 19. Paulo post. Quia nulla harum (Synodi
Episcopalis, etc,) est Ecclesia Catholica Symbolica, nec vendicat sibi sidem
dari sub paena perfidiae. Sed etc. -- Nec movere quenquam debet, qued talem
concordem professionem Patrum praeposui decreto generalis Concilu, etiamsi e
toto orb existentes convenirent Episcopi. Et cap. 27. Nec tamen alicui jam
dictae (Ecclesiis Apostolicis, maxlme vero Romanae, and authoritati Concilii
Generalis) ita obediendum censeo, and tam prona fide, sicut primae fidei
Scripturae, vel Ecclesiae Christi Symbolicae, sed sicut institutionibus
Seniorum and monitioni paternae.
teaches, that the Church, which is the Infallible Rule of Faith, is neither
Pope nor Council, which have sometimes erred; but the Series and Collection of
all Doctors successively from the Apostles to our times. That neither an
Episcopal Synod, nor the common decree of the Roman Church, nor yet a General
Council of all the Bishops of the World, is that Catholic Symbolical Church,
that can challenge assent upon pain of insidelity: But the Universal succession
of the Holy Fathers throughout all Ages. That an unanimous consent of the
Fathers is to be preferred before the Decree of a General Council, although all
the Bishops of the World be therein. That Obedience is not so readily and
entirely to be given to the dictates of any particular Church, or even to the
authority of a General Council, as to the first Faith proposed by Scripture, or
the Symbolical Church of Christ: The other being to be regarded only as the
institution of the Elders, and paternal admonition.

Cardinal Panormitan Ideo in concernentibus sidem Concilium est supra Papam --
Puto tamen quod si Papa moveretur melioribus rationibus and authoritatibas qudm
Concilium, quod standum esset sententiae suae. Nam and Concilinm potest errare,
sicut alias erravit, etc -- Nam in concernentibas sidem etiam dictum unius
privati esser praeferendum dicto Papae, si ille moveretur melioribus rationibus
N. and V. Testamenti quam Papa, Panorm. in Cap. Significasti de electione.
writes, that in things indeed concerning Faith a Council is above the Pope.
Yet if the Pope be moved with better reasons and authorities than the Council,
we are to stand to his determination. For even a Council may err, and has
erred. That in matters of Faith the judgment even of one private man is to be
preferred before the Sentence of the Pope; if he were moved with better
Arguments drawn from the Old and New Testament, than the Pope. And much more to
the same purpose. Antony Ant. Sum. Theol. part. 3. Tit. 23. Cap. 2.. 6.
Archbishop of Florence has transcribed this whole passage of Panormitan into
his sum of Divinity without making the least mention of him; and delivers it as
his own opinion.

Cardinal Cusanus Notandum est experimento rerum Concilium universale plenartum
posse deficere; quomodo etiam varia Concilia talia fuerunt, quae judicando
errarunt. Cusan. Concord. Cath. lib. 2. cap. 3. and 4.
allows indeed Ecumenical Councils to be infallible: But to this End
requires so many conditions, that it is very difficult they should all be had,
and impossible to be known when had. The fourth condition is, that the Council
regulate it self by the Rules of the Holy Ghost laid down in Scripture, and the
definitions of precedent Councils. Otherwise that, howsoever free and
universal, they may be appealed from, and protested against. And at last
concludes, that it is to be seen by experience, that a full General Council can
err; as diverse such Councils have been, which have erred in defining. Thus he
of Councils; who has much more about the errability of the Pope. Wherefore
Bellarmine reckons him among the Parisians. Nicholas de Clemangis Clem. in
Disp. de Conciliis.
expressly Disputes against the Infallibility of Councils. But because he
preadmonisheth he assirms nothing, but only to dispute for finding out the
truth: I shall not urge his Testimony.

Cardinal Dominicus Jacobatius Quia Concilium potest errare, ut patet in
Conctlio Ariminen^i, Ephesino. 2. Africana Synodo tempore Cypriani, and in
aliis multis. Nec obstat si dicatur, quod Ecclesia non potest errare; quia
intelligitur de Ecclesia universali. Sed Concilium repraesentative dicitur
Ecclesia; in Concilio enim vere non est universalis Ecclesia. Jacob. de Council.
lib. 6. page 239.
asserteth, that when Popes and Councils disagree in defining; that judgment is
to be preferred, which is consonant to the definitions of precedent Councils.
If none of which have passed Sentence in this matter; then the Councils
definition shall not be received, if the Popes be founded upon better reasons
and authorities. For that a Council can err; as appears by that of Ariminum,
the Second of Ephesus, that of Africa under Cyprian, and many others. That the
Infallibility of the Universal Church proves not the same to be in a Council:
Since the Universal Church is not truly in a Council. That in the case of
contrary definitions by the Pope and a Council, it is not yet defined, what is
to be done or observed. That his Opinion however is, that he which should hold
to and observe either part, should not therefore incur the danger of Damnation
although he died in the observation of it.

All these manifestly teach that both a Pope, and Council, to whom alone active
Infallibility is attributed may err. Nor is it enough to say, that herein they
deliver their judgments of the Pope and Council, disagreeing one from another,
and not conjunctly defining. This indeed may seem to be said with some color
of Truth in Jacobatius: But as for Occam and Alliacensis, it does by no means
fit them. Nor yet does it in the least enervate the Testimonies of the rest:
Since whenever they deny infallibility to Pope or Council; they do not
thereto oppose the consent of both, but either the Symbolical and successive
Church, as Waldensis; or the Universal, as all the rest. Besides they deny
infallibility to belong to the representative Church, and to be the property of
the Universal, whereas every one knows and acknowledges that only the
representative Church is in a Council. As for Jacobatius his opinion it plainly
is, that obedience is then immediately to be given to the Decree of a Pope or
Council when it is consonant to the definition of some former, even particular
Council, which had been received by the universal Church; that this obedience
therefore is to be paid, not for the authority of the present definition, but
the approbation of the Universal Church, which She is supposed to have given to
it by a long reception. But what clears the matter beyond all exception, is
that Jacobatius is one of those, who think the Church may fail, except one
woman only: as we shall see afterward under the third head.

The second Classis contains the testimonies of Doctors asserting the Church,
for which Christ prayed, and promised the Gates of Hell should not prevail
against it, not to be confined to the Ecclesiastic order, but may consist of
believers of whatsoever rank and order. This Petrus Alliacensis expressly
affirms in the place by us above cited. So the Author of the Gloss Quaero de
qua Ecclesia intelligas quod hic dicitur, quod non possit errare? de ipso Papa,
qui Ecclesia dicitur? sed certum est, quod Papa errare potest. Respondeo, ipsa
congregatio fidelium hic dicitur Ecclesia. Et talis Ecclesia non potest non
esse. Nam ipse Dominus orat pro Ecclesia. Cause. 24. quaest. 1.
upon the Canon Law, inquiring what Church it is that cannot err, determines
it to be the Congregation of the faithful; which cannot fail, Christ having
prayed for it: and Nicolas Lyra A vera se. fide subvertendo: Ex quo patet, quod
Ecclesia non consistit in hominibus ratione potestatis vel dignitatis
Ecclesiasticae vel saecularis; quia multi principes, and summi Pontifices, etc.
inventi sunt apostatasse a fide. Propter quod Ecclesia consistit in illis
personis; in quibus est notitia vera, and confessio fidei and veritatis. Lyra
in Matthew. 16.18.
to those words, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, affixeth this
Gloss -- that is, to subvert it from the true faith. To which he subjoyns.
Whence is manifest that the Church consists not in men in respect either of
Ecclesiastical or Secular Dignity; (for they have sometimes apostatized from
the Faith) but in those persons in whom remains a true knowledge and confession
of the faith and truth.

The third Classis comprehends the testimonies of those who teach, that the
whole Church may fail, except one only person, and that either Ecclesiastic or
Laick, Man or Woman, and so the Church consist in that person alone. That the
Church actually did so at the time of our Saviors Passion, Tostatus Tossed. in
Matthew. praef quaest. 14.
(does not assert, as Suarez Suar. de fide disp. 9. Sect. 3.
and Bannes Bann. in 2.2. q. 1. art. 10. dub.
salsly relate, but) tells us it was the common opinion in his time. The same
writes Aeneas Sylvius in his History of the Council of Basil. Bannes and
Turrecremata Terrec. de Eccles. lib. 3. cap 6.
attribute this opinion to Alexander Alensis, Hagutius, and Durandus
Asimatensis: the latter ascribe it also to the whole multitude of Preachers;
and produces out of Alensis Opinio que dicit, quid in s^la Vin ine stetit
Ecclesia, in q^^d s^la sides mansit in passione, videtur nobis vera.
this sentence. That opinion, which says the Church consisted in the Virgin
alone, in whom alone romained true faith at the passion, seems true to us:
which Turrecremata also himself defends in many places, particularly Sum. de
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 30. lib. 3. cap. 61. Beside these four there are not, a
few, of the same mind. Ockam In uno sdo potest stare tota sides Ecclesiae; quem
^dmedum tempare mortis Christi tota siles Ecclesiae in B. Virgin remanebat.
Non est ctiam credendum, etc. Occ. Dial. part 1. lib. 2. cap. 25.
affirms that the whole Faith of the Church may remain in one single person, as
it did in the blessed Vargin at the time of our Lords passsion; that if God
permitted this in the days of the Apostles; he will much sooner permit it in
these latter Ages; and that the contrary opinion is rash. Panormitan Passibile
est, quod vera sides Christi remaneret in uno solo -- Hoe patuit post passionem
Christi. Nam, etc. Et forte hine dicit Glossa, qu^d ubi sant bmi, ibi est
Ecclesia Romana. Panorm. loc. cit.
in the words immediately following those before cited, says it is possible
the Faith of Christ may remain in one only person. That at the Passion of our
Savior it remained only in the blessed Virgin; and that for this cause
probably the Gloss says, where ever good men are, there is the Church of
Rome. This passage also, as well as the former, Antonius Florentinus translated
into his Sum. Peter de Monte Quia sides potest remarere etiam apud simplicem
Laicum, and in aliis omnibus jerire, sicut accidit in persona B. Mariae in
passione Christi. Pet. de Monte lib. de Monarchia
Bishop of Brixia gives this reason, why Laics ought to be admitted into the
Council; because the Faith may possibly remain in one simple Laick, as it did
formerly in the Blessed Virgin. Clemangis In soli potest muliercula per gratiam
manner Ecclesia; sicut etc. Clem. disp. de Council.
asserts the Church may by grace remain in one single woman, as formerly in the
Virgin. Jacobatius Nam and remansit sides in B. Virgin aliis deficientibus
post passionem, ut astenderetur quid non possi: defi^ere sides, pro qua
Christus oravit, cum diait Petro. Et ego pro te rogavi, ut non desietat svies
tua. Et non intelligitar, and Jac. de. Council. lib. 6. p. 242.
writes that after the passion faith remained in the Blessed Virgin alone,
that so the promise of indefectibility made by Christ unto his Church might not
fail; which promise was made not to the representive Church (or a Council) but
to the Universal. Lastly J. Fr. Picus M^randula Christi tempore desicientibus
in side Apostolis integra and omnino persectissima fides in solae Virgin
Domini matre remansit. Pic. Theor. 13.
says that in the time of Christ the Apostles falling away from the Faith, it
remained entire and perfect in the Virgin alone.

The fourth Classis exhibits only Jandovesius of Minorca, who by the relation
of Banncs Bann. Comm. sus. in 2.2. quaest. 1. art. 10. dub. 1.
taught about the year 1363. that in the time of Antichrist the Church should
consist only of baptized infants, all adult persons apostatizing from the Faith.

Thus far these testimonies, which occurred to me in a hasty search. If I had
time or opportunity to turn over the Writings of the XIII. XIV. and XV. Ages; I
doubt not but I should find many more. However any one may see, how utterly
repugnant these which I have produced are to the Infallibility of Pope and
Council. Yet there is no sentence pronounced against these Writers, no mark set
upon them, not the least censure inflicted on them. How can this be, if they
had taught right down heresy? Nay this opinion is not only not condemned, but
also many ways approved. First, in that the Defenders of it have been preferred
to the greatest dignities of the Church; some made Cardinals, others Presidents
of Councils, one (Antoninus Florontinus) Sainted and at this day Worstripped.
Which surely would not have been done, if he had taught Heresy. But what is
more express, and which cannot be eluded, is that Thomas Waldensis's work,
whence he produced the clearest passages, was solemnly approved by Pope Martin
V. This Trithemius Quod Martinus Papa V. examinatum authoritate Apostolica
confirmavit. Trithem in Vald.
assirms telling us that Martin V. examined this work, and confirmed it by
Apostolical authority. The Bull of approbation also may be seen presixed before
the third Volume; with the Examination subjoyned, which lasted above a month;
when the work being presented to the Pope, it was by him confirmed in full
Consistory. So that after this strict examination and solemn approbation to
imagine heresy is contained in this Book, will draw the Pope, who approved it,
and the whole Church (which never opposed this approbation) into the suspicion
of heresy.

I have done with the first argument. The second shall be drawn from the
silence of the Council of Trent; which alone proves that they thought it not
an Article of Faith; since they condemned not the Protestants on that account,
although no less vigorously impugning it, than any other Article of their
Church. This argument is so much the stronger, in that our Adversaries
frequently urge the silence of the Council of Trent to prove Articles, by us
objected to them, not to be of Faith. So Veronus, and the Valemburgian Brethren
in the book abovementioned. So the Bishop of Meaux in that Famous Book, which
has illuded so many. If they reasoned well herein; why may not we use the same
Arguments? And then the Infallibility of the Church cannot be of Faith, because
wholly pretermitted by the Tridentine Council.

Lastly, that it is not of Faith may be proved hence, that no soundation of
such a Faith can be alleged. For if any were, it must be either Scripture, or
Tradition, or some decree of the Ruling Church, or the consent of the Universal
Church. That Scripture and Tradition cannot be produced in this Case, we have
already demonstrated, for this reason especially, because the certainty of both
depends upon the testimony of the Church. Yet Amicus Sumi possunt Traditio and
Scriptura primo modo ut approbatae infallibili judicio ipsius regulae animatae,
quo pacto sunt authoritatis divinae and credendae fide insusa Hoc autem modo a
nobis non sumuntur ad probandam infallibilem authoritatem regulae animatae.
Secundo modo sumi possunt, ut testatae signis and rationibus humanis, ut qued,
etc. quo pacto sunt authoritatis humanae and credendae fide acquisita, Atque
hoc modo sumuntur, ad probandam, etc. Amic. de Fide disp. 6. n. 52.
slieth thither; who after he had objected our argument to himself, answers
that Scripture and Tradition may be taken either as approved by the infallible
judgment of the living Rule, and so of divine authority, and to be believed by
infused Faith. That thus considered they cannot be produced to prove the
authority of the living Rule: Or they may be taken as only testified and
confirmed by humane reason, and so of humane authority, and to be believed by
acquired Faith: That this way considered they are produced to prove the living
Rule: wanting indeed infallible divine authority, but having such humane
authority, as by the accession of Christ's Providence over his Church becomes
infallible.

I wish the Jesuit in writing this had first objected to himself our whole
Argument. For that is drawn not only from the impossibility of knowing,
according to our Adversaries, the Divinity of Scripture or Tradition without
being first assured of the infallibility of the Church; but also from hence,
that they teach it cannot be known which are the Canonical books, whether
received by us uncorrupted, or faithfully Translated, and is the true sense of
them, without the same previous assurance. If he had objected all this to
himself; he must either have departed from all the rest of their Divines, and
denied their so much boasted of arguments, or have yellded herein. Yet let us
examine wh^^ he offers. First therefore his joining the provid. (...) the yet
human authority of Scripture and Tradition is (...) and absurd. For of that we
are assured no otherwise then by Faith, and consequently it cannot be a
foundation to Faith. Now this being taken away, the other Arguments of the
Truth of Scripture and Tradition according to the Jesuits argumentation become
fallible, and so no sit foundation for infallible Faith. Besides I would know
whether this acquired Faith carries with it indubitable Truth, and be of the
same certainty with. Divine or infused faith, or at least sufcient to found
Divine Faith upon. For if it be not, our argument returns: If it be, why may we
not have without the assistance of the Churches authority a Divine Faith of
those things, which Scripture, or if you will, Tradition also, clearly and
plainly teach, at least as clearly, as they are thought to teach that
infallibility of the Church.

But Amicus has a reserve for this. He pretends Ibid. number. 49.
that although the human Arguments of the Truth of Scripture and Tradition be
self evident avd sufficient to create a Divine Faith; yet that we are forbidden
by God to believe them with a Divine Faith; till his Vicar the Pope shall have
confirmed them. A miserable refuge, which lies open to a thousand
inconveniences. For to omit asking where this prohibition of God is to be
found; not to urge that hereby all their Arguments drawn from the nature of the
thing concerning the uncerainty of any revealed Article without the
supervenient Authority of the Church, are wholly destroyed; not to say, that
hereby the controversy is turned from matter of Right into matter of Fact, and
become a mere enquiry, whether God has made any such prohibition: Laying aside
I say all these things, I will insist upon this one Observation. It is not here
enquired, whether Scripture and Tradition proposed by any other than the Pope
oblige us to assent or not; but only whether any one, either obliged or not
obliged, can receive them howsoever proposed and thence build his Faith upon
them. If he can, then our Argument returns; and we may also believe with Divine
Faith what we find taught in Scripture. If he cannot, I would fain know which
way then Papists can admit Scripture and Tradition, and from them learn the
Infallibity of the Church; since Amicus had before denied that it could be
Learned, or ought to be believed for the testimony of Scripture and Tradition,
as infallibly proposed by the Church.

It is manifest therefore, the belief of the Insallibility of the Church cannot
rest on Scripture or Tradition. But neither can it on the judgment of the
Ruling Church. For besides that no such judgment is produced; if it were, it
would be fruitless. For then, what was never granted, the Church will be judge
and give sentence in her own cause: which Alphonsus a Castro Si de Scriptura
ipsa est quastio, non poterit ipsamet esse Judex: quia tunc erit abire in
infinitum. In propria causa nallius restimonium est validum. Castr. de justa
baret. punit. lib. 1. cap. 5.
denies to Scripture; because that were to run in infinitum, and no testimony
can be valid in its own cause. For imagine any one, that believed not the
Church to be infallible now to begin to believe it: This first act of belief
cannot be founded upon the judgment of the Church. For whosoever believes any
thing for the sake of the Churches judgment, did before believe that judgment
to be certain; which destroys the supposition.

This our Adversaries confess. So Conink Judicium quo judicamus nobis credendum
esse Ecclesiam habere infallibilem omnino authoritatem proponendi res fidei,
debet aliis notis, sive alio fundamento niti. Conink. de actib. sup. disp. 17.
dub. 3.
. The judgment, whereby we judge that we are to believe the Church has
infallible authority of proposing matters of Faith, ought to be grounded upon
other arguments or some other foundations So also Moeratius Nemo potest credere
hunc Articulum fidei nostrae, interveniente ad assensum hunc ipsa Ecclesiae
authorit^te, tanquam regula res credendas infallibiliter proponente. Maerat. de
fide disp. 17. Sect. 2.
. None can believe this Article of our Faith (the Infallibility of the Church)
the Churches authority it self intervening to this assent, as the rule
infallibly proposing matters of belief.

There remains therefore only the belief of the Universal Church, wherein this
Faith of private Papists herein can rely. Many things might here be said: but
because we shall handle that matter more fully at the end of this Treatise; we
will not anticipate our arguments here. I shall only in a word observe the
absurdity of it. Our Adversaries say, that private persons ought to believe the
active infallibility of the Ruling Church; because they seeit believed by the
Universal Church. But why does the Universal Church believe it: truly for no
other reason, but because She do believe it. For the Universal Church is
nothing else, but the collection of all single believers.

CHAP. V. That it is uncertian, what are those Decrees of the Church, whereon
Faith may rely.
WHAT I said will be more manifest to him, who shall consider; that to make the
Decrees of the Church a fit foundation for our Faith, it is not sufficient to
know that the Church in defining cannot err; unless also we know, what are
those definitions of the Church, which are placed beyond all danger of error.
For our Adversaries all acknowledge, that the Church does not always, nor in
all things enjoy this privilege of Infallibility; but in many things may be
mistaken, as in desining Philosophical questions: and in general whatsoever
belongs not to Religion. Some add Controversies of Fact; others Canonization
of Saints; many all those things, which although belonging to Faith, are not
yet proposed as of Faith, but only simply affirmed, or brought for the
illustrating and confirming of some other matter. Since the Church therefore
may be mistaken in so many things: we ought to be well acquainted, what those
Decrees are, wherein Shecannot err.

That this notwithstanding is most uncertain, two things evince. First that it
appears not, what are the conditions, what the Character and Notes of a firm
and valid Decree. Secondly, that although this should appear, it would not yet
be known what are those particular Decrees, which have these Characters. The
first again is manifest by two reasons: first in that it is uncertain whether
these exceptions, wherewith the infallibility of the Church is limited, be all
lawful; and then no less uncertain whether they be all, which can and ought to
be assigned. For if both these things be not certainly known; we shall
continually doubt, whether we do not for some unjust exception undeservedly
reject some Decree of the Church, that ought to be obeyed; and received some
other, which for some just exception not yet assigned ought to be rejected.

But both on the contrary are uncertain. The first, concerning the lawfulness
of the conditions already assigned is, because our Adversaries themselves do so
irreconciliably differ in assigning them. Whatsoever one lays down, some
other removes: So that nothing certain can be had thence. Nor can it be said
these conditions are self evident, or of Faith. For what evidence is that which
escapes the knowledge of so many Learned men? And our Adversaries grant, as we
saw before, that nothing can be of Faith, whereof Catholic Divines dispute
unregarded by the Church. Besides if it be of Faith, it must be revealed. But
where is this revelation? In Scripture? Nothing either is or can be produced
thence. In Tradition? That will afford perhaps two or three Testimonies of the
Ancients, but which respect only one condition (that of excluding Controversies
of Fact) and are themselves liable to many exceptions. But granting they are
not, what shall become of the other conditions assigned, of no less moment: Or
what will two or three Testimonies avail, wherein their Authors affirm not what
they write to be of Faith: Nor will the Regent Church give us any help herein.
For She has defined nothing in this matter; or if she had, it would be wholly
vain. For it would still be enquired, whether that Definition were of Faith;
and so in infinitum. As for the Universal Church, She can have no place here,
as well for the reasons abovementioned, as because her dissent rather than
consent is to he showed herein.

There is no way therefore left, but to recur to Experience. They will say they
have observed the Church to err, when she undertook to define in cases
excluded by their exceptions; and that these exceptions therefore must
necessarily be applied to those places of Scripture, which attribute
infallibility to the Church. But then they will give us just reason to reply,
that if experience gives us a right to reject that sense of Scripture, which
the words seem to imply, merely because it is repugnant to our Observations,
and substitute another more congruous to them! Then we may most justly reject
that sense of those Words, This is my Body, which our Adversaries assix to
them, as contrary to the experience of all mankind, and assign another
perfectly accommodated both to reason and experience. Besides there is nothing
against which our Adversaries more sharply contend, than to judge and examine
the Definitions of the Church by dumb and dead Rules, such as Scripture and
Tradition are: yet this very thing is done by those men, who thence conclude
the Church to be fallible in certain cases, because they have observed her to
have been formerly mistaken in them. For this can be done no otherwise than by
examining the Decrees of the Church, either by Scripture, or Tradition.

Again, if experience gives them a right to limit the infallibility of the
Church by their exceptions; why may not we challenge the same privilege, and
assign our exceptions likewise. We then lay down only that one, formerly
proposed by Cusanus, which if admitted by our Adversaries, will soon put an end
to all controversies, that is, that the Church never presume to define any
thing but according to the Holy Scriptures, leaving undecided all things,
wherein they are either silent or obscure. And so all our Controversies are
reduced to this one point, whether this exception is to be added to those which
our Adversaries have assigned. As often therefore as they oppose to us the
judgment of the Church, we may with reason reject it, till they can show, that
our exception is unjust, which they will never be able to do. On the contrary
we can demonstrance the equity of it by experience, and show that the Church
has erred, as often as She observed not this exception. But let it be
rejected. Who cantell, Whether no other is to be added? Certainly if the
observation of the past Errors of the Church have given occasion to these
Writers to form these exceptions; the observation of future errors will
likewise produce new exceptions. Nay who will warrant, that nothing already
past has escaped the notice of these Observers, whence other exceptions might
have been framed?

And hence also appears what I undertook to prove in the second place, that
although we were assured the exceptions are lawful and justly assigned; we
cannot be certain they are all that are so, and whether others are not yet to
be added. For since the exceptions are formed only from experience; if the
Authors of them made not a just observation of all the past errors of the
Church, or had not in their eye all possible future errors of a different
nature; there may be other exceptions, no less necessary and momentous, to be
assigned. And how shall we be at last ascertained of the requisite diligence,
sagacity, and prudence of these Observers? I shall illustrate all by a famous
example. One of the chief exceptions, whereby the Papal power is limited, is
that all those Decrees are excluded, which were not for some space of time
affixed to the doors of St. Peter's Church and the Apostolic Chancery, and
solemnly promulged by the Popes Messengers in the wonted places. This exception
was made about an hundred years since merely to serve a turn; when they could
by no other means clude the arguments of the Protestants against the Papal
Infallibility drawn from Pope Clement VIII. his Bull, whereby he re-called
Sixtus V. his Edition of the Bible, and Preface prefixed to it. Then it was
they forged this exception pretending that Sixtus his Bull, although printed
and prefixed to his Bibles, had not been solemnly published by the Messengers.
An exception, which had been never dreamt of, had not Sixtus erred; as
appears hence, that the precedent Writers Cajetan, Canus, and Bellarmine make
no mention of it, whereas of the subsequent Writers few forget it. Nor is there
any doubt, but that if any Pope hereafter should commit some other mistake,
which might wound his pretended Infallibility; some other Exception would be
framed to salve his honor.

If therefore our Adversaries, as we have proved, cannot certainly know what
are the conditions and characters of the Infallible Decrees of the Church, they
must necessarily be ignorant, which Decrees may be securely believed and
obeyed. But granting they might be certain herein, and taking away all these
scruples, they will be yet for ever uncertain which Decrees have, which want
these conditions. For what will it avail to know that the Church, may err in
matters Philosophical, or of Fact, or which are not proposed as of Faith; if we
be uncertain what are Philosophical matters, what of Fact, and what proposed as
of Faith? Yet that all these kinds of things are yet uncertain, will be easily
evinced. For,

First, since the School Divines have so intermingled Aristotle's Philosophy
with Divinity, nothing is more difficult than exactly to distinguish them.
Whence it frequently happens, that what one accounts merely Philosophical,
another esteems matter of Divinity. So in the year 1666. when a certain
Theatine Apud Launoi Epist. part 5. Epist. 2. ad Berruer.
at Paris had proposed these and such like Theses to be publicly disputed of,
viz. That any knowledge in the Father was absolutely sufficient to beget the
Son; so that if the Father had understood but any one object, suppose a Lilly,
he must be thereby supposed to have begotten the Son, that if both together had
loved but any one object, as a Rose, yet would they thereby have spirated the
Holy Ghost. That the unspeakable torment of Devils consists in this, that by
hypostatical union the Devil is become fire, and fire become the Devil. These
and the like Theses the proposer maintained to be Theological. Launoy contends
they are Philosophical; others think, perhaps more truly, that they are foolish
and profane. The Council of Constance defined the accidents in the Eucharist
to remain destitute of any subject. The Cartesians deny this, and value not the
definition, pretending that it is about a matter Philosophical. Others
thereupon accuse their denial of heresy. Copernicus and Galilaeus their
Systeme of the world were condemned at Rome. Some thereupon dare not embrace
it, though otherwise inclined to believe it. Others more bold contend it is
purely a matter of Philosophy. See therefore many learned and wise men divided
about the application of the first exception. And if so, how shall more
ignorant persons be able rightly to distinguish them, and thence certainly to
know, to which of the Churches Decrees they are to give a steadfast, and to
which a dubious Faith?

The same is the case of the second Exception. Many of our Adversaries deny the
Church to be infallible in questions of Fact. In the mean while they differ
about determining, what are matters of Fact, and what of right. To know what is
the sense of a late Writer, many account a question of Fact. Estrix Estr. Diat.
de sapientia etc. assert.
on the contrary contends it belong to right.

The same may be said of the third Exception. That excludes from the rank of
infallible all Decrees not proposed as of Faith. But what those Decrees are,
does not appear. So the Council of Trent, for example, defined that the body of
Christ exists under the Bread by virtue of the words, but the Blood not by
virtue of the words, but by concomitance. No anathema being inflicted upon
those, that think otherwise. Hence arose a question, whether this distinction
were of Faith. Some in Vasquez Vasq. in 3. disp. 185. cap. 2.
hold the negative: himself largely endeavors to prove the affirmative. This
might be further confirmed with innumerabe instances. But I choose rather to
take notice of somewhat more remarkable. The Church in defining has in these
latter Ages been wont to make use of words, which might rather conceal than
declare her opinion, and from which the most sagacious persons should not
collect her meaning. For example one of the notes, whereby we know, whether a
definition be by the Church proposed as of Faith, is the excommunication of the
Deniers of it, yet it sometimes happens the Church would not have that be
thought to be of Faith, the Deniers whereof She excommunicates. So the Council
of Trent Si quis contrarium do^ere, prae, dicare, vel pertinaciter assirere
praesumpserit, eo ipso excommunicatus existat.
having enjoined that every one conscious of any mortal sin, should confess,
before he communicates; subjoyneth: If any one presume to teach, preach, or
pertinaciously assert the contrary; let him be ipso facto excommunicate. Any
one would hereby imagine, that the opinion of Cajetan were condemned of
Heresy. Yet Canus Hoc propter periculum cautum est -- Nam quod sententia
Cajetani non fuerit pro heretica condemnata and nos testes sumus, qui Concilio
intersuimus. Can. loc. Theol. lib. 5. cap. 5.
tells us, that for caution sake it was not; and of this, says he, we, that
were present in the Council are Witnesses. See another Artifice, which creates
more perplexities. When the Church condemns many propositions in one Decree;
it ofttimes happens, that they are not all of the same kind and quality; but
some Heretical, others only erroneus, some Rash, others Scandalous, and some
Offensive to Pious Ears, as they are wont to term them. Now none but Heretical
propositions hurt the Faith, and consequently if the Church be infallible only
in matters, which she proposes as of Faith, when she condemns these mixed
propositions, her judgment is infallible only in respect of the Heretical ones.
The rest may with safety and truth be defended. It is of insinite concern
therefore in the direction of our Faith; that these propositions should be
distributed into their several Classes, and the particular censure specified in
each of them. But that is very rarely done. The propositions are all huddled up
together: And we are only told in general, that some of them are Heretical,
others Erroneus, etc.

Thus the Council of Constance Quibus examinatis fuit repertum aliquos and
plures ex ipsis fuisse and esse notorie heretico, alios non Catholicos sed
erroreos, alios scandalosos and Blasphemos quosdam piarum aurium offensivos,
nonnullos little temerarios and seditiosos. Council. Constable. Sess. 8.
condemned 45 Propositions of Wickliff in these Words. This Holy Synod has
caused them to be examined, and it is found, that many of them are notoriously
Heretical, others not Catholic but erroneous, some scandalous and blasphemous,
some offensive to pious ears, and some rash and seditious. In the same manner
that Council condemned Thirty Assertions of John Husse; without acquainting us
what particularly in them is contrary to Faith, and consequently what wherein
themselves cannot err. The Popes make use of the same trick. So the Bull Quas
quidem sententias, quanquam nonnullae aliquo pacto sustineri possent, in rigore
tamen haereticas, erroneas, etc. respective damnamus. Bulla ad calcem Operum.
Vasq.
wherewith Pius V. and Gregory XIII. condemned Seventy five Propositions of
Michael Baius after it has recited them, and confessed that diverse of them
might be in some sense maintained, condemns them all respectively, as
Heretical, erroneous, suspected, rash, scandalous, and offensive to pious ears.
See an ambiguous sentence, and very unfit to remove scruples. Nor does Vasquez
deny it, but tells Ex qua censura non apparet, qualis untcuique propositioni
censura sigillati^n conveniat. Vasq. in 1.2. Disp. 190. cap. 18.
us, that from their censure does not appear, what censure agrees to each
single Proposition. Wherefore when himself had undertaken to defend some of
these Propositions; that he might know in which of them the Poison of Heresy
lay hid; he began to read Baius's Book, having first asked leave. But when that
would not do, he consulted Cardinal Toletus, whom the Pope had sent to Lovain,
to see the Bull put in execution; and Learned from him that the Popes had
condemned some of those Propositions, only because they were too sharply
worded. Now what a rare help does the Church afford in declaring to every one
what he should believe when the sense of her own decrees cannot be known
without consulting her most intimate Counselors, such as Canus and Toletus?

Further it may very well be, that he which knows the particular propositions
condemned of Heresy, may be ignorant wherein the Heresy consists. For the
same proposition may admit of many senses, whereof some may be true, others
false, some Heretical, others not. If the Church had any care of the truth: She
ought accurately to distinguish these senses, and tell us which may be
admitted, and which ought to be exploded. But nothing of this is done. Rather
Pius V. and Gregory XIII. declaring that some of Baius his Propositions are in
some sense maintainable but in rigor heretical, tell us neither what is that
harmless sense, which may be defended, nor that pernicious Heresy, which ought
to be avoided.

But nothing evinceth this more clearly, than what lately happened upon
occasion of the Jansenist Doctrine. Five Propositions were taken out of
Jansenius his Augustinus, and by some French Bishops sent to be examined by the
Pope. Others were present for Jansenius, who pleaded the Propositions were
capable of diverse senses, some true, some false; and earnestly desired it might
be specified in which sense each Proposition were approved or condemned. That
request being stisly denied by the Roman Consistory, who were resolved to
condemn them in the gross: The Jansenists distinguished Three Senses of each
Proposition, and placing the different senses in Three Columns offered them to
the Examiners, desiring they would admonish which of all those senses the
Censure aimed at. But neither so could they obtain their End. Only afterward
when the Controversy grew hot, Pope Alexander VII. declared the Propositions
were condemned in the sense intended by the Author. The Author had been now
dead, before his Book was published, much less condemned. And so while the
Popes pretended to condemn the Authors sense; they said nothing else but that
they condemned a sense; which neither they would, nor any body else could tell,
what it was. And to this day it is disputed among them, what is that Heretical
sense intended by the Author and condemned by the Popes.

Thus much of the Third Exception. I might add another, which not a few of our
Adversaries produce. For they require, that the Church proceed maturely,
diligently, and Canonically in her judgment: Which certainly few or none can
know. But because the consideration of this would take up too much time. I
shall omit it: Having already sufficiently evinced, that nothing is more
uncertain, than to know what are those Decrees of the Church, which may be
securely believed; and consequently that Faith cannot be founded on them.

CHAP. VI. That it is uncertain, what is that part of the Universal Church, to
which active Infallibility belongs.
And First, that it does not appear, whether it be in the Pope.
IF we should after all this grant the knowledge of the Churches Infallibility,
and of her Infallible Decrees, not to be impossible, this would contribute
nothing to the establishing our Faith; unless it were likewise known, what is
that Supreme Tribunal, whose Decrees are to be obeyed. For if this were
uncertain, says Arriaga, Si enim incertum hoc esset; quicquid de judice
controversiarum in Ecclesia ut certum de fidecreditur, esset plane ridiculum
Arr. de Fide Disp. 7. Sect. 8.
whatsoever is believed as of Faith concerning a Judge of Controversies in the
Church, would be ridiculous. Now this thing is really uncertain, as I shall
prove. There are three opinions concerning it among our Adversaries. For this
Supreme and Infallible power is by most assigned to the Pope alone, by almost
all the French and some few more to a Council alone, and lastly to Pope and
Council together by some very few, so few, that I could never find one that
expressly asserted this opinion, and but two or three that obscurely insinuate
it.

I begin with the Pope; and affirm, that unless his Infallibility be of Faith,
his Decrees cannot be the foundation of Faith. No other certainty will here
suffice, for as for Moral and Self evident, here is not the least shadow of
them; and that of Theological Conclusions I before excluded. So that certainty
of Faith is necessary. This our Adversaries confess, at least those of the
first opinion. Caspensis Nisi fide divina credamns ejusmodi Pontifices esse
successores Petri, nihil est quod possumus fide divina credere. Casp. de fide
disp. 2. Sect. 6.
writes that unless we believe by Divine Faith such Popes to be the Successors
of Peter, there is nothing we can believe with Divine Faith. Martinonus
Pontifex non posset nos obligare ad credendum de jide id quod definit ut dictum
a Deo; nisi de fide esset ipsum habere potestatem definiendi and infalibilem
assistentiam Sp. S. Mart. de fide disp. 9. Sect. 6.
that the Pope could not oblige us to believe as of Faith what he defines to
be revealed by God, unless it were of Faith, that he has the power of
defining, and infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost. Rhodius Si non esset de
fide, quod (Papa) sit infallibilis; ergo non est de fide quod non fallatur.
Rhod. de fide quaest. 3. Sect. 1.. 3.
that unless the infallibility of the Pope were of Faith; it would not be of
Faith; that he is not actually mistaken.

Is it therefore of Faith that the Pope is infallible? So indeed some of them
maintain, as Suarez, Castrus, Palaus, Lud. Abelly, Ja. Vernautius, Fr. Macedo,
Theoph. Raynaudus, Amicus Caspensis, Martinonus, Rhodius, and others. Yea
Abelly Veritatem religionis fundamentalem, articulum fidei ex praecipuis unum,
cui innitantur caeteri omnes. Abelly apud Estrix Diat. ass. 47.
affirms that it is a fundamental truth of Religion, a Prime Article of Faith,
upon which the rest depend, and the contrary opipinion a capital heresy.
Vernautius Neminem posse sine crimine hereseos doctrinam tenere contrariam
Pontificis fidei omnibus fidelibus propositae. Vern. apud eundem.
concludes that none without the crime of heresy can hold an opinion contrary
to the belief of the Pope proposed to all the faithful. Macedo Censeo qui
absolute negat insallibilem esse Papam -- errare haud dubie in fide, and si in
errore obstinatus perseveret; haereticum fore. Mac. ibidem.
thinks the denial of it to be an undoubted error in Faith, and if obstinately
persisted in heresy. Lastly Raynaudus Qui Pontifici eam infallibilitatem
abrogant, a plerisque, sin minus ab omnibus trans Alps and Pyrenaeos habentur
haeretici saltem materialiter. Rayn. (...) punct. 5.
tells us, the deniers are by many, if not by all beyond the Alps and
Pyrenaeans accounted heretics, at least materially. When he says materially,
he means in the Language of the Schoolmen that the opinion of these Deniers
is accounted in it self heretical, and wants only obstinacy in the defenders to
make it downright and formal Heresy. Now this obstinacy is judged of, partly
by the external Proposition of the Truth opposed to Heresy, partly by the
internal disposition of mind. Now because the latter is known to God alone, and
all truths are not sufficiently proposed to all; therefore those of whom
Raynaudus speaks do wisely in laying down that limitation of material Heresy.
But this Salvo will not serve the Learned disbelievers of the Papal
infallibility. For since it is as clearly revealed to them, as it is to the
believers of it: Either those are rank Heretics, whom a sufficient Proposition
will not convince; or these fools, who assent to an opinion insufficiently
proposed.

Thus indeed these Writers: But others are of a contrary opinion, as
Bellarmine, Vasquez, Tannerus, Duval, the Valemburgii, Gab. Boyvin, and others,
who strenuously maintain the Infallibility of the Pope, and yet deny it to be
of Faith. Duval Duval. de potest. Pont. part. 2. quaest. 1.
produces three weighty reasons.

1. For that it has been no where defined. 2. That the opposite Doctors, as
Alliacensis, Gerson, etc. Were never condemned. 3. In that the Scripture does
not clearly enough teach this Infallibility. The two first reasons are also
made use of by Bellarmine, Vasquez, the Valemburgii, and Boyvin. And indeed
this opinion is most consonant to the received Principles of their Church. For
if nothing can be an Article of Faith, of which their Divines freely dispute
unregarded by the Church: This certainly cannot be; whose Truth has been and
is to this day fiercely disputed of among them, even by Bellarmines Confession
from the time of the Council of Constance; the Church all this while inflicting
no censure on either party. Besides if the Infallibility of the Pope be of
Faith; it will then be Heresy to deny it, as we saw some before asserting.
Hadrianus Florentius therefore was an Heretic, (who affirms Certum est, quod
possit (Pontifex) errare, etiam in iis quae tangunt fidem, Heresin per suam
determinationem vel Deeretalem asserendo plures enim fuerunt Pontifices Romans
heretici. Hadr. in Dictat. in 4. Sentent.
the Pope can err even in those things which concern Faith by asserting Heresy
by his determination or decretal, and that many Popes have been Heretics.) and
the Church will be a favouress of Heresy in that She afterward promoted
Hadrian to the Popedom without first requiring of him an abjuration of his
Heresy.

Again if this opinion be Heretical, the Council of Basil will be heretical,
that defined it and vigorously maintained it: The Sorbon and Gallican Clergy
heretics, that teach it: the Pope a favourer of heresy, who daily conferreth
Abbeys, Bishoprics, and Cardinals Hats on notorious Heretics, gives them
places in Councils, and maintains Communion with them: the whole Latin Church
will have been divided in point of Faith, and part infected with heresy, part
with the Communion of heretics, for many Ages, from the Council of Constance
according to Bellarmine, but even from the time of Firmilian (or the middle of
the third Century) according to Lupus; who assigns Firmilian to be the first
opposer of Papal Infallibility, and makes St. Basil to have been his Successor
in opinion, as well as in the Sea of Caesarea, that thenceforward this Heresy
got ground among the Grecians, insomuch as the Pelagians condemned by the
Popes, appealed to the Council at Ephesus, hoping their sentence might easily
be reversed by the Greek Bishops, as not allowing the Popes Infallibility. If
so, then this dissension is very ancient in the Church; which if it touches
Faith, then a pestilent Heresy has for many Ages been connived at by the
Church and Councils. But whatsoever becomes of Lupus his Calculation, certain
it is this dissension has continued from the Council of Constance, so that if
it be concerning a matter of Faith, the Church of Rome has all this while
wanted that glorious Character of Unity of Faith, which She so much boasts of.

CHAP. VII. That it is not certain, whether the Pope in defining used all
diligence necessary to a right definition, or whether he observed all the
wonted solemnities in publishing his Decree.
ANother scruple next arises, no less weighty than the former. For granting we
may be assured of the Infallibility of the Pope, it is still to be inquired
which be those Decrees of his that are infallibly true. For that all are not so
our Adversaries confess. Many things are by them required, and besides those
before mentioned two other conditions, viz. Diligence of the Pope in well
examining the question to be defined, and observation of the due solemnities in
publishing the definition. For the first, they require that he diligently
consult Scripture and Tradition, address himself by Prayers to God, and omit
nothing, which may assist him in finding out the Truth. So Tapperus Tapp. orat.
3.
, Canus Can. loc. Theol. lib. 5. cap. 5.
, Cellotius Cell. de Hier. lib. 4. cap. 10.
, Bagotius Bag. Instit. Theol.
, and many others, but above all Duvall Duval. de Pot. Pont. Sect. 2. quaest. 5.
, who not only proposes, but also accurately demonstrates the necessity of
these conditions.

But who can assure us, that this requisite diligence was always used? Or as
often as a Papal decree comes forth, are we to suspend our assent, till we be
ascertained that nothing requisite was omitted by the Pope? If that be true,
there will be few Decrees, to which we owe assent and obedience. Canus,
Bellarmine, Suarez, Duvall, Martinenus, Rhodius, and many others answer, that
as he which promises the End, promises also the the means of that End; so
Christ in promising Infallibility to the Pope must be supposed likewise to have
promised that he would take care the Pope should never omit any thing necessary
for finding out of truth and declaring it to others when found. I will not now
enquire, whether this be consonant to what they teach about the Controversy of
the Aids of Grace. I only ask, whether what they allege be certain. If not,
our Faith will always sluctuate, and ever be uncertain. That it is not certain
Tapperus Si contingeret eum (Pontisirem) perperam pracedere; an Deus eam
volentem maledicere prchiberet, sicut impedivit Balaam an potius retractari
saceret ejus judicium, sicut etc. Certum non est, Tapp. loc. cit.
ingenuously confesses. Whether, says he, if it should happen, that the Pope
proceeds wrong, would God hinder him going about to curse, as he did Balaam, or
make him retract his judgment, as the Counsel given by Nathan the Prophet to
King David? It is not certain. Nay that it is absolutely false, may be proved
by many examples. Did Benedict II. Examine well what he went about when he
condemned Julian Toletanus his Book, which he was afterward forced to approve?
Did Vigilius who sometimes condemned, sometimes defended the Tria Capitula? Did
John VIII who notwithstanding his Oath, the Decrees of his Predecessors, and
Sanctions of Three Councils, restored Photius, and reinforced the Schism?

Another very evident Example of this is afforded by the suppression of Sixtus
V. his Bibles, which alone might evince three things, that the Popes are not
always sufficiently diligent in their Definitions, that they can err in any
Decrees, and that it is not known when the requisite Solemnities are observed
in the promulgation, which was my second Argument. The case was this. The
Council of Trent in authorizing the Vulgar Version had desired it might be
correctly and accurately set forth, leaving the Execution of this matter to the
Pope. That this might be well done, Ad nos totum hoc judicium proprie and
specialiter pertinet. -- Hac perpetuo valitura Constitutione, de Venerab.
Fratrum consensu and Consilio, de certa su^i scientia, and Apostolicae
potestatis plenitudine, -- Apostolied sibi a Domino tradita authoritate.
great industry was used. At last after Forty Six years Sixtus V. published the
Edition, prefixing a Bull to it, whereby he commanded it to be received by all
men: And wherein having prefaced that the matter belonged wholly to his
cognizance, and that all necessary diligence was abundantly used by himself,
and the Cardinals and Doctors employed about the work; he prenounceth by that
irrevocable Decree, with the consent and Counsel of his Brethren, of his own
cortain knowledge, and the fullness of Apostolic power, that this is
undoubtedly to be accounted that very Edition, which was made Authentic by the
Council of Trent, and now approved by himself: And by the Apostolic power
delivered unto him by our Lord, commands, that every where and in all cases
it be received for true Legitimate, Authentic, and undoubted; and all suture
Editions be corrected by this, and not the least syllable be changed, added or
omitted upon pain of the greater Excommunication. This certainly, if any thing
was a question of Faith and right, being concerning the true Rule of Faith, and
pure word of God. Sixtus also omitted no words, whereby he might make his
Decree valid. Yet Clement VII. a while after undid all, revoked his
Predecessors decree, suppressed his Edition, and publishes another of his own,
wherein he makes more than 2000. corrections of Sixtus his Edition, as our
Learned Dr. James has in a peculiar Treatise showed. To this so fatal an
overthrow of the Papal Infallibility Tannerus Tann. de fide Disp. 1. quaest. 4.
dub. 6.
the Jesuit replyeth, that Sixtus his Decree was not Authentic, nor did oblige,
because not promulged in the due form, that is not assixed, or at least not the
whole due time, to the doors of St. Peter's Church, the Apostolic Chancery, and
in Flora's Field: And this he proves by the here say Testimonies of
Bellarmine, and Ferdinandus Albertus the Jesuit: Although in the printed Copies
of the Bull the Messengers Names are found subscribed testifying that all the
wonted Solemnities of promulgation were observed.

To this Launoy, Laun. Epist part. 1 p. 144
rejoyns that these are mere tricks to establish the authority of the Roman
Court, and impose upon unwary men, if yet any can be found so foolish as to
regard them. Has Christ therefore appropriated the Infallibility, conferred on
his Vicar, to Walls and doors, that his definitions cannot be infallible,
unless these petty punctilio's be observed: That these pretenses of Tannerus.
Vasquez, Bellurmine, and others, are madness and Foppery, frivolous
impertinence, Deliramenta loquitur, Ibberas naenias sectatur, and frivola
Siculis gerris vaniora Theologiaer, importat. Haec refer me pudet.
and shameful nonsense. That promulgation signifies nothing to the Popes
Infallibility; nor adds any truth or falsehood to the definition, but
supposes it in them. For if it be false the Promulgation will not make it
true, although it be published by a thousand Messengers, and affixed to St.
Peter's doors to all Eternity: That Sixtus in defining that, for which his Bull
was abrogated, did plainly err; and that Clement in abrogating his Bull and
suppressing his Edition ought himself to have believed this, at least gave
others occasion to believe it. Thus Launoy.

I might add it has hitherto been believed that this Infallibility does
proceed from the Holy Ghost. But when should the Holy Ghost confer it? Surely,
if ever, while the question is discussing and defining. Whereas now when the
Pope has done all that lay in his power, and nothing remains but only some
petty circumstances of promulgation to be performed by servile and illiterate
Messengers; then only, and not till then, does this Infallibility exert it
self; which makes the Pope fallible, and the Messengers infallible. For the
first may pronounce somewhat false, the latter nothing but what is true. But
passing by all these things, suppose this excuse well grounded. Yet have I
obtained, what was to prove that there may be sometime wanting in the Pope that
diligence which is necessary to define well. For this consists not in the
circumstances of Promulgation, but in examining the question, inquiring the
truth, and weighing the reasons. What if after all it be not duly published by
Messengers: That concerns not my argument, nor hinders the precedent negligence
of the Pope.

Besides, if without these solemnities of Promulgation no Bulls be obligatory,
the authority of the Decrees of all ancient Popes may be justly doubted of. For
who can assure us that all these circumstances were then observed, when it is
the height of folly to think they were so much as known. Either these therefore
are not necessary, or the ancient Decretals are all void. But suppose they are
necessary: That they are not wanting to this Bull of Sixtus the subscriptions
of the Messengers do testify. I know it is pretended that they were added by
anticipation only to hasten the Edition. But that serves my purpose as well.
For must every one, that receive a Bull, suspend his obedience, till he shall
ride post to Rome, and consult the Registres? And hence appears the uncertainty
of the second condition required to the Infallibility of any Papal Decree. For
if the Testimony of the Bull it self be sometimes false, and we be forced to
pick up the Truth from flying reports; how shall we be ever assured, that the
Decree was duly Promulged?

One thing more we may observe, that even by Tanners confession some reported,
that the Decree of Sixtus was really affixed in the due places, and taken down
after his death. This Compton Count. in 2.2. Disp. 22. Sect. 5.
also dares not deny, but leaves it to the Reader to be believed or rejected by
him. But if the Bull was not taken down, till Sixtus died; then Sixtus erred as
long as he lived, and promoted error as far as in him lay; and what is the
chief of all, used not the necessary diligence to avoid error.

CHAP. VIII. That it is not certain, whether the Pope defines according to his
own mind, or against his conscience: and that this latter case may happen, is
proved by many examples.
WE are not yet got rid of our doubts and perplexities. Those which we have
already mentioned, are external, and obvious to the senses, if not of all, yet
at least of some. Whereas here is one unknown and impenetrable to all but the
Pope himself, to wit, his own Conscience. For to judge right it is required,
that he pronounces what he thinks is true, and not decree against his judgment
for any fear or force. That the Pope notwithstanding has not always such an
assistance of the Holy Ghost, as constantly to withstand these attempts; I
shall demonstrate by four examples, those of Marcellinus, Liberius, Paschal,
II. and Eugenius IV.

That Pope Mercellinus under Diocletian's persecution did deny the Faith,
publicly sacrifice to Idols, and was for that reason deposed in the Synod of
Sinuessa; is acknowledged by Pope Damasus, or whosoever be the Author of the
Liber Pontificalis, by Nicolas I. Luitprandus, Marianus Scotus, Martinus
Polonus, Gerson, Cusanus, Hosius, Platina, Papyrius Masso, Bellarmine in the
first Edition of his Controversies, Baronius in the second Edition of his
Annals, Amicus, Emanuel a Schelstrate, and many others. I know indeed that some
deny it, relying on the silence of Eusebius, and testimony of St. Austin, who
says the Donatists objected this to Marcellinus, but could not prove it.
Whether the fact be true or no, it is enough for me that Pope Nicolas I. and
many others thought so. Baronius Non tanti sumus ut de Marcellini lapsu
opinionem ore omnium diffamatam antiquare possimus; quae and communi fere
omnium consensu appareat postea esse credita, Bar. ad An. 302 Edit. Plant. p.
800.
insinuates this, when in the first Edition of his Annals, where he endeavors
to elevate the Faith of this History, he excuses himself, for opposing. the
common and almost universal opinion. And Natalis Alexander Not. Hist. Eccl.
Saec. 3. Dis. 20.
observes, that the Roman Breviary favors this belief. Whence it is evident,
that this thing seemed neither impossible nor improbable to the whole Roman
Church: which shows that according to the opinion commonly received in her, the
Popes may possibly be moved by some vehement perturbation of mind to betray the
Faith. Bellarmines Non nisi actu externo ob^metummortis. Bell.
excuse here will not avail, That Marcellinus taught nothing against the Faith,
was no Heretic or Infidel, but in external act, for fear of death. For (to
pass by the accusation of the Synod of Stnuessa, that he did it for the love of
money) even this demonstrates what I was to prove, that a Pope may be induced by
some perturbation of mind, as sear or covetousness, to violate his Conscience,
and betray the truth.

Liberius comes next, who after he had bravely a while resisted the threats of
Constantius, either weared out with the hardship of his Exile, or moved with
the desire of recovering his See possessed by Faelix; subscribed to the Arian
Heresy, and the sentence against Athanasius, Bellarmine pleads much in his
excuse: The sum of which is this, That Liberius his fault consisted only in
condemning Athanasius, and communicating with Heretics; that himself neither
taught Heresy, nor was an Heretic but in external action; lastly that the
Confession, which he subscribed, was orthodox, although the word (...) were
wanting; and that according to Sozomen before his departure from Sirmium he
published a Confession, wherein he condemned the Heterousians. But this answer
of Bellarmines is wholly insufficient. For 1. Whereas he pretends Liberius was
an Heretic only in external act, that no less serves our purpose, as
manifesting that a Pope may be wrought by his passions to pronounce in matters
of Faith against his own knowledge and judgment. 2. If he condemned Athanasius,
it was not because he was by the false accusations of the Arians induced to
believe Athanasius guilty, but only that he might free himself from the
miseries of banishment, and the fears of death: As Athanasius (...) Athanas
Epist. ad Solit.
witnesses. In the first case he had only erred in matter of fact; but now he
failed in constancy: Which also proves my assertion. 3. To communicate with
known Heretics, as Bellarmine acknowledges Liberius to have done, is to
favor Heresy, and add authority to it. Christianus Lupus largely handles this
ad praesoript. Tertulliani cap. 41. where he strongly urges the example of the
whole Clergy of Rome, who separated themselves from the Communion of Pope
Anastasius; merely because he had not denied Communion to a Deacon of
Thessalonica of Acacius his party, who yet was far from an open Heretic. 4.
Where Bellarmine denies Liberius to have subscribed to an Heretical Confession
of Faith; this is manifestly repugnant to the plain Testimonies of the
Ancients. We shall produce some. Liberius Vbi cognovi just vos illum
(Athanasium) condemnasse; mox consensum meu^n commodavi sententiis vestris --
Itap^e amoto Athanasio a Communione omnium di^o me cum omnthus vobis pacem and
unanimitatem habere. Nam -- Dominus n^ster and frater communis, Demophilus, qui
dignatus est fidem vestram and Catholicam exponere, quae Sirmii suscepta est,
-- Hane ego libenti animo suscepi, etc. Liber. Epist. 7. Me autem cum omnibus
vobis Episc^pis Ecclesiae Catholicae pacem habere his literis s^ire debetis,
fratres charissuni. -- Quicun que autem a pace and concordia nostra
dissenserit, s^iat se separatum a nostra communione.
himself in his Epistle to the Eastern Bishops (who were Arians) tells them
that he is convinced the Condemnation of Athanasius was just, whom therefore he
looked on as Excommunicate, and would maintain Peace and Unanimity with them.
That he subscribed at Sirmium their Catholic Faith expounded unto him by
Demophilus (an Arian Bishop.) And in his Epistle to Valens, Ursacius, and
Germinius (the heads of the Arrian party) says, I profess to hold Communion
with all you Bishops of the Catholic Church: And Excommunicate all those which
shall dissent from this our Blessed concord. St. Hillary Anathema tibi a me
dictum Liberi, and s^^iis tuis Iterum tibi Anathama, and tertio Praevaricato^
Libeti, Hill in Fragm. Perfidiam apud Sirmium conscriptam, quam dicit Liberius
Catholicam, a Demophilo sibi exp^sitam, Id. ibid. O te miserum, qui nescio
utrum majori impietate relegaveris (Liberium) quam remiseris, Id. lib. ad
Constantium.
denounces a threefold Anathema against Liberius for this Subscription, and
calls him a Prevaricator of the Faith, and in another place says, the Heresy
penned at Sirmium, which Liberius calls Catholic, expounded to him by
Demophilus, etc. And tells Constantius, that he sent back Liberius to Rome with
no less impiety, than wherewith he had before banished him; intimating, that he
had made him an Heretic. St. Hierome In hoc habetur detestabilis, quod
Liberium primus sollicitavit ac fregit, and ad subscriptionem, haereseos
impulit, Hier. in Fortunat. Liberius taedio victus exilii, and in haeretied
pravitate subscribens, Romam quasi victor intraverat, Id. in Chron.
in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, says Fortunatianus is to be
detested, for that he first broke the courage of Liberius, and persuaded him to
subscribe to heresy: And in his Chronicle relates how Liberius worn out with
the toils of banishment: and having subscribed to heretical pravity, entered
Rome as a Conqueror. Auxilius takes it for a thing most certain. Who knows not,
says he Quis nesciat, quod Liberius Arianae haeresi subscripserit? Aux. de
Ordin. lib. 1. cap. 25.
, that Liberius subscribed to the Arrian heresy? which he repeats in another
place. Lib. 2. cap. 1.
The old Roman Breviany Cum doleret (Eusebius) Liberium Papam Arianae haeresi
consensisse. Breviar. Romans
in the Festival of St. Eusebius the Confessor, says; Liberius consented to
the Arian Heresy: To these produced by Launoy I shall add three others.
Philostorgius (...). Philost l. 4. c. 3.
affirms that Liberius and Hosius subscribed against the Consubstantiality, and
against Athanasius. Sozomen Soz. lib. 4. cap. 15.
says that Constantius sending for Liberius (...) forced him to confess that
the Son is not consubstantial to the Father: Where may be noted the
disingenuous fraud of Valesius, who renders (...) only by caepit compellere, he
begun (or went about to compel him. Lastly Peter Damian Porro Liberius
perfidiae deceptus errore Arianae haeresi subscripsisse dignoscitur. --
Liberius itaque factus Apostata sex annorum spatia supervixit. Pet. Dam. Epist.
Writes thus, Liberius is known to have subscribed to the Arian Heresy,
deceived with the error of perfidiousness, and faith, that after he was become
an Apostate, he lived yet six years. Many things might here be added to confute
Bellarmines Answer, which because they belong more immediately to the
Controversy of the Papal Infallibility; I shall omit them.

The third example is that of Pope Paschal II. All the World knows what
quarrels were formerly between the Popes and Emperors about the Investiture of
Bishops. The Emperors would suffer no Bishops in their Dominions, but what
received Investiture from their hands: The Popes excommunicated both the Givers
and Receivers of it. While the Controversy was yet hot, the Emperor Henry V.
takes Pope Paschal Prisoner, and extorteth from him a Privilege, whereby Illam
dignitatis praerogativam nos dilectioni tuae concedimus, praesentis privilegii
pagina confirmamus, ut regni tui Episcopis investituram virgae and annuli
conferas. Si quis item etc. apud Marcam de Concord, lib. 8. cap. 20.
the Pope yields and confirms to him and his Successors the Right of
Investiture for ever; forbidding the Metropolitans to consecrate any Bishops or
Abbots, but what have been first invested by the Emperor. Many then cried out
the Faith was violated, and Heresy established by this concession,
particularly Goffridus Vindocinensis, out of whom Christ. Lupus Lup. diss. de
laid Antist. invest.
cites much to this purpose. And the whole Council of Vien, over whom Guido
Archbshop of Vien, the Popes Legate presided, writ thus to Pope Paschal in
their Synodical Epistle Privilegium, quod a vestra Majestate violenter
extorsit, tractare diligenter curavimus. -- Igitur dictante Sp. S. investituram
omnem de manu laica haeresin esse judicavimus, and scriptum illud, quod Rex a
vestra simplicitate extorsit, damnavimus.
We have diligently examined the Privilege by the Emperor extorted from your
Majesty (for so they call him) Therefore by the direction of the Holy Ghost we
have defined laick Investiture to be Heresy, and condemned that Privilege.

Nor did Paschal himself defend his action; but in a full Council recanted his
Error, acknowledged his Fault, Scriptum illud, quod magnis necessitatibus
coactus -- feci, -- sicut prave factum cognosco, ita prave factum confiteor,
and omnino corrigi -- desidero, etc.
recalled his Privilege, and submitted himself to the censure and correction
of the Council, pleading that he was compelled to that sin by great
necessities, which being done, Girardus Bishop of Angoulesme stood up, (as the
Acts of the Council published by Baluzius testify) and in the name of the Pope
and Council, condemned, abrogated, Nos omnes in hoc S. Concilio coram D. Papa
congregati -- judicio Sp. S. damnamus, etc. Et hoc ideo damnatum est, quod in
eo continetur -- quod est contra Sp. S. and canonicam institutionem.
and excommunicated this privilege, declaring the reason to be, because elect
Bishops were therein forbid to be consecrated, before they had received
Investiture, which (say they) is against the Holy Ghost, and canonical
Institution. Now let the Reader judge, whether that can be defended, which the
Pope himself confesses to be prave factum, wickedly done, and which the
Council defines to be against the H. Ghost and canonical Institution? If the
Pope can by a solemn Decree permit wicked things, certainly he must be
fallible, if not in Faith, yet in Manners, if not in the Credenda, yet in the
Agenda of Religion. For what Lupus Lup. loc. cit.
pleads, that Paschal's fault was like that of St Peter carried away with the
dissimulation of the Jews, Gal. 2. of which Tertullian says, it was a fault of
Conversation, not of Doctrine; that, I say, is wholly vain and frivolous. For
St Peter's fault consisted wholly in withdrawing his conversation from the
Gentile Converts. But who ever accounted Privileges a matter of Conversation?
The one may be performed by every body, the other by none but persons in
Authority. A privilege, says Martin Bonacina Privilegium ab eo conceditur, a
quo lex ferri potest. Ita Azorius, etc. Ratio est, tum quia privilegium est
quaedam lex; tum quia est quaedam dispensatio in lege. Bon. de legib. disp. 1.
quaest. 2.. 2.
, is granted by him, who can make a law. So Azorius, Suarez, and Salas. The
reason is, because a privilege is partly a Law, partly a Dispensation of the
Law. Paschal therefore made a Law, which was to be for ever valid. St Peter
neither said, writ, nor decreed any thing. What more unlike than these two!
Nothing can here be said, but what Paschal himself pleaded, that he was
constrained with great difficulties. This I do not deny: and it proves my
assertion, viz. That Popes may be induced by fear to decree against their
Conscience.

The last example is that of Pope Eugenius IV. who having called the Council of
Basil, a little after dissolved it, and removed it to Bononia. The Council
would not obey, but continued to sit: and consequently according to the
Principles of our Adversaries became thenceforward unlawful. Wherefore Leo X.
Conciliabulum seu potius Conventiculam, quae praesertim post hujusmodi
translationem Concilium amplius appellari non merebatur.
in the Council of Lateran calls it a False Counsel, or rather a Conventicle,
which after that Translation deserved no longer to be called a Council: Yet
Eugenius Decernimus and declaramus praefatum generale Concilium Basileense a
tempore praedictae inchoationis suae legitime inchoatum fuisse and esse, etc.
revoked his own dissolution, and pronounced the Council had, notwithstanding
his Translation, been always Catholic and lawful. Now the Council of Basil
after the Popes dissolution was either lawful or unlawful. If lawful, Leo X.
and the Lateran Council erred. If unlawful, Eugenius yet erred worse in
legitimating a Council guilty of so great a Crime, as is Rebellion against the
Head of the Church. For it cannot be said, the Council was really unlawful; but
that Eugenius gave it that validity and authority, which it wanted, and purged
away its Crimes. Eugenius himself professes the contrary in his revocatory
Bull of his Letters of Dissolution. Nothing therefore can be answered here, but
what Duval Respondeo Eugenium, cum haec scriberet: tunc a quibusdam
Cardinalibus perterritum, and ni Bullas adhaesionis Concilio expediret, se ab
eo omnes secessuros. Duvall. Anteloqu. ad Tract. de potest. Pont.
alleges, That this Bull was extorted by fear. The Cardinals threatening, that
unless he expedited his Bulls of adhaesion to the Council, they would all
forsake him. This answer grants to me, what I was to demonstrate, that Popes
may be prevailed on by fear to decree against Truth and Right. So that this
being granted, as it cannot be denied, no Decrees of Popes are to be received;
before we be assured, that the Pope was forced by no Fear or Threats to publish
them: which can very difficultly be known, if at all. Besides, if Fear can
extort a false or unjust Decree from the Pope; why may not any other
perturbation, as Hatred, Anger, or Covetousness, do the same? Well says Canus
Qui metu frangitur, is cupiditate etiam frangatur necesse est. Can. loc. Theol.
lib. 5. cap. 5.
in a like Argument. He which will yield to Fear, must necessarily yield to
Covetousness or any inordinate Desire. Nothing therefore is more uncertain than
the Papal Decrees. For who can tell, what induced the Pope to decree this or
that? 1 Cor. ii. 11.
For what Man knows the things of a Man, save the spirit of Man which is in
him?

CHAP. IX. That it is not certain, whether he who calls himself the Pope, and
is commonly accounted the Pope, be really such.
THere remains yet another inextricable doubt. For suppose we have overcome all
the precedent difficulties, and found some relief for so many uncertainties: It
is yet to be inquired, whether he which makes the Decrees, and proposes them
to be observed by the Church, be the true and lawful Pope, as he is commonly
esteemed. For while this be doubtful; we may justly doubt whether his Decrees
be obligatory. Now this matter may by many ways become uncertain. As first it
sometimes happens, that two or more do at the same time contend for the Papacy;
all of which have their several Partisans, by whom they are accounted the
lawful Popes. Many such Schisms have been in the Church, whereof one continued
near 50 years. The knowledge of the true Pope was then so difficult: that
Duvall and Maimburg observe two Ecumenical Councils, those of Pisa and
Constance, dared not to examine and define the matter; but thought it more
prudent to depose all of them, and create a new One. How then shall private men
be able to know, what Councils themselves could not find out? But neither then
also, when One only claims the Papacy, and possesses the Throne, does it
certainly appear, whether he be a lawful Pope: and that for many reasons.

For in the first place if he be an Heretic, a Schismatic, an Infidel, or an
Atheist; he cannot surely be Pope. For as Turrecremata says well, how shall he
be Head of the Church, who is no Member of the Church? Gregory a Valentia Val.
tom. 3. disp. 3. quaest. 15. punct. 3.
, and many with him, distinguish between an open Heretic or Infidel, and a
secret one, asserting the first cannot be a Member of the Church or Pope, the
latter may, for this reason chiefly, because otherwise Confusions and Dangers
could not be avoided in the Church, if the actions of secret Heretics and
Schismatics were ipso facto invalid. Yet he acknowledges in the same place,
that the contrary Opinion is held by the greatest Men in the Church of Rome,
Aquinas, Turrecremata, Sylvester (who affirms this to be the common Opinion of
all the Doctors) Paludanus, Augustinus Anconitanus, Vlricus, Cajetanus (at
least as to what concerns Heresy) and Alphonsus a Castro. Whence this at least
is gathered, that Valentia's Opinion is not certain, and the contrary not
improbable: which is sufficient for my purpose. For whether true on false,
matters little in this case, provided nothing be certain on either side.

Further those who imagine the Pope forfeits not his Dignity, unless he be an
open Heretic, agree not among themselves. Some think him ipso facto deprived
without expecting any sentence, some not till sentence is pronounced. But thse
latter herein shamefully betray the Popes Superiority to a Council, which they
had undertaken to defend. For if a Pope fallen into Heresy shall retain his
Dignity, till he be judged and deprived by a Council; the Council will be
thereby Superior to a true and undoubted Pope. Again how shall a Council
condemn a Pope for Heresy; if it cannot certainly define what is Heresy;
which according to these Divines cannot be done by a Council destitute of its
Head, such as that Council must necessarily be, which deposes the Pope for
Heresy. But of that in another place. Bellarmin although far more wary and
circumspect than Duvall, thought the Pope by manifest Heresy fell ipso facto
from his Dignity; so that by a Council he is not so much deposed, as pronounced
to be deposed. But since that is called manifest Heresy, which is declared by
some outward sign as Words or Writing, nor does it matter whether it be
manifest to few or many; there will always remain a doubt, whether he who is
accounted Orthodox, be not in his mind a Heretic, Infidel, or Atheist, and
has not revealed his Heresy to some of his intimate Friends and Confidents.
For that once supposed he cannot be Pope. Nay Bannes Bann. in 22. quaest. 11.
art. 4.
asserts, That he which speaks out his Heresy by words, although no man hears
him, is not to be accounted a mere mental Heretic, but does thereby incurr the
Sentence of Excommunication.

If you ask, whether there were ever any such Popes: The most noble Jo. Fr.
Picus Mirandula Alium meminimus pontificem creditum and ordinatum, quem tamen
praestantes viri putarent nec pontificem esse nec esse posse, utpote qui nullum
Deum crederet, omne infidelitatis culmen excederet, etc. namque fassum eum
affirmabatur demesticis quibusdam nullum se deum aliquando etiam dum
pontificiam sedem teneret, credidisse. Et alium audivi pontificem, qui
familiari cuidam asseruerat apud se animarum immortalitatem minime creditam.
Pic. Theor. 4.
shall answer for me. We remember, says he, another Pope so esteemed and
ordained, whom good Men believed neither was nor could be Pope, as he which
believed no God, and exceeded the utmost pitch of infidelity; as his Simony and
infinite wickednesses did also testify. And it is affirmed he confessed to
some of his Domestics, he believed no God; even then when he sat in the Papal
Chair. And I have heard of another Pope, who affirmed to one of his Confidents,
that he did not believe the immortality of the Soul. To this we may add the
express Confession of Coster Fatemur fieri posse, ut Petri successor idola
colat, apud se forte de fide non recte sentiat, adeo^ diabolicis artibus operam
naver. Coster. Enchirid. Controv. c. 3.
the Jesuit; We confess, says he, the Successor of Peter may be an Idolater, a
private Heretic, and in secret exercise Diabolick arts.

Secondly, It may be that the reputed Pope be for some unknown reason incapable
of that Dignity; as if he be not baptized, or has not received Holy Orders.
For the Council of Florence Janua Sacramentorum.
has defined Baptism to be the door to the other Sacraments; and in the third
Book of the Decretals, Tit. 43. it is commanded both by the Council of Compeign
and by Innocent III. that if a Presbyter whom all accounted to have been
baptized, shall afterward appear not to have been baptized, he be first
baptied, and then anew ordained. Wherefore if he be either not baptized, or not
ordained, he cannot be Pope. But either or both may easily happen, since to the
validity of those, as well as other Sacraments, our Adversaries require the
intention of him that confers the Sacrament, which can be known to God alone.

Thirdly, It may be that he who is commonly accounted Pope, may be unduly
created, and for some Canonical impediment, manifest or occult, be incapable of
the Papacy. For, says Lupus Neque enim gravis canonica personae vitia per
Papalem electionem sanantur. Lup. Schol. ad Conc. VIII. p. 1354.
, all Canonical irregularities of the person are not taken away by Election to
the Popedom. For which reason he there observes Pope Constantine was justly
deposed, as being of a Layman immediately made Pope; whereby he became
irregular by the Canon of Sardica: and that, as is affirmed by approved
Authors, Clement VII. dared not call a General Council against the Lutherans;
because being a Bastard, he feared to be declared irregular.

Fourthly, He who is elected Pope, may be ipso facto excommunicate, and so not
capable of that Dignity. So Picus Mirandula Pic. Theor. 4.
tells us of a learned and sober man in his time, and he a Dignitary of the
Church; who gave it for his opinion, that the then Pope was no Pope, because he
had exercised the Office of Pope, before he had been elected by two parts of
the Cardinals; whereas the Canons provide that such a man shall be so far from
being Pope, that he shall be rendered incapable of that Dignity, as lying under
an Anathema. For the like cause it is reported the Jesuits were resolved not to
acknowledge Clement VIII. for Pope, if he had condemned Molina, as he intended,
because of some slaw in his Election. It is an established Rule of the Roman
Conclave, That none be accounted duly elected, but who has two third parts of
the Cardinals Votes: Cardinal Sanseverino had gained them, and thereby of right
became Pope. But while they were giving their Votes in the Chapel, the
dissenting Cardinals crowded in, disturbed those who were taking the Votes, and
persuaded one of the other Cardinals to withdraw his Vote: whereby Sanseverino,
although duly elected, missed the Chair; and Aldobrandino consecrated, who took
upon him the Name of Clement VIII.

But these perhaps are very rare instances. Those which follow are more
frequent. It often happens, that the Election is not free, but extorted by
force, threats, promises, bribes, factions, and the like arts. In which cases
the Popes themselves have pronounced the Election to be null and irregular, and
the elect Person an Antipope and Apostate. So Nicolas II. Plat. in Nicol. II.
decreed in a Lateran Council, That all Elections procured by money, or favor,
or popular tumult, Non Apostolicus, sed Apostaticus.
or military violence, should be null and void; and the Elect Pope accounted
not Apostolical but Apostatical, to be anathematized by the whole Church as a
Robber, and by any means deposed.

But Julius II. Sicut de vera and indubitata haeresi. Tanquam Apostaticus,
Simoniacus, Haeresiarcha, Magus, Ethnicus, and Publicanus vitari. Nec hujusmodi
Simoniace electus per subsequentem ipsius inthronizationem, seu temporis
cursum, aut etiam omnium Cardinalium adorationem seu obedientiam ullo unquam
tempore convalescat. Habetur apud Raynald.
is much more rigorous, who with the consent of the Cardinals decreed and
defined, That Simony was true and undoubted Heresy, and that in whatsoever
Election that intervened by giving, receiving, or promising of money, or any
other goods or Benefices, the Election should be ipso facto void; and the
Elect, although he had the concurrent Votes of two thirds of, or even all the
Cardinals, should be no Pope, but made for ever incapable of that or any other
Ecclesiastical Dignity, and be held and detested by all Christians as an
Apostate, Simoniack, Haeresiarch, Magician, Heathen and Publican: and that the
person thus Simoniacally elected shall never become regular, by any subsequent
inthronization, or prescription of time, or even the adoration or obedience of
all the Cardinals. Thus these Popes, truly and wisely. For Christ had said long
before John x. 1.
, Verily, verily I say unto you, He that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.
And the Apostle after him Hebr. v. 4.
, No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron. Whosoever therefore obtain the Popedom by evil arts; and enter not by
the Door, but leap into the Chair by wickedness, are no lawful Pastors, but
Thieves, and Robbers, and ravening Wolves.

But you will say, Were there ever such Popes? I answer: why not? Certainly the
very Constitutions of Nicolas, and Julius, and others, which might be added,
prove it is possible, and insinuate it has sometimes happened. For those
things are not wont to be forbidden, which cannot be performed: and it is a
received Maxim, That good Laws arise from bad Actions. Ex malis moribas bonae
leges.
But we want not frequent Examples. For to pass by what we before related out
of Picus Mirandula, who knows not that Vigilius obtained the Popedom by three
most heinous crimes, by the violent expulsion of his Predecessor Silverius,
whom falsely accusing of Treason, he procured to be banished into the Island of
Palmeria, and there starved him to Death, or as others say, assassinated him;
by promising to the Empress Theodora, he would establish the Eutychian Heresy;
and by notorious Simony, giving to Belisarius two Centenaries of Gold? These
things are accurately described by Liberatus, and after him by Baronius. Nor
does what Baronius Bar. ad ann. 540.
, Binius Bin. in Vigil.
, Ferrandus Ferr. Traite de l' Eglise chap. 3.
, and others allege to obscure this matter, avail any thing, to wit, that
Vigilius after Silverius his death resigned the Popedom, and would not resume
it till he was canonically elected. For to omit the insufficiency of this
excuse, since Vigilius and all his adhaerents were excommunicated by Silverius,
and so even these pretended Canonical Electors became excommunicate; to pass by
this, the pretense it self is false, being related by no one Writer of those or
the following times. They produce only Anastasius saying that the Sea of
Silverius was vacant six days. But this, say they, could not be while Silverius
was alive, for he was all along the lawful Pope. Ergo, after his death Vigilius
resigned, and was chosen anew. A worthy Argument! As if those who write the
lives of Popes, are not wont to assign to them only that time, wherein they
quietly enjoyed their Dignities Papebrochius observes this: Baronius, says he
Baronius integrum quadriennium faciens durare Pontificatum Silverii, etc. Sed
malumus juxta modum loquendi Catalogorum veterum jam alibi observatum plus una
vice solum, id tempus numerare, quo Romae sedit; licet, etc. Pap. Propyl. ad
men's. Maium in Vigil. dissert. 13.
, making Silverius his Popedom to last four years, deferrs his Death to the
year 540. But we rather choose according to the usual style of the ancient
Catalogues, more than once observed before, to reckon only that time while he
sat at Rome; although he never ceased to be Pope by the injury he suffered.
But to take away all pretense, I say, that Anastasius not only might respect
the time of his deposition, and not of his death, but that also he really did
so. For to whom does Anastasius reckon the two years, or thereabouts, wherein
according to Baronius, Vigilius possessed the Sea of Silverius yet alive? They
say to Silverius, I say to Vigilius, and demonstrate it past all doubt. For if
Anastasius had assigned those two years to Silverius; he would have given to
him in all above three years, to wit, those two years, and the seventeen
months, that he enjoyed his See quietly. Yet he reckons thus in the whole,
Sedit annum unum, menses quinque, dies undecim.
Silverius sat one year, five months, and eleven days; assigning to him only
that time which passed between his Election and Expulsion. The case is no less
clear in Vigilius. Baronius computes, that almost eighteen years passed from
the Ejection of Silverius to the death of Vigilius. Just so many does
Anastasius assign to Vigilius his Papacy. He sat, says he Sedit annos XVII.
menses VI. dies XXVI.
, seventeen years, six months, twenty six days. It Is manifest therefore
Anastasius assigns the time that Silverius survived his Expulsion, to the
Popedom of Vigilius; and consequently that these six days of vacancy of the Sea, immediately sollowed not the Death, but the Expulsion of Silverius. So
that this whole story of the Resignation and new Election of Vigilius is a mere
Fable. Nor does Papebrochius deny this, This Resignation, says he Sed gratis
assenitur renunciatio minime necessaria ei, cui causae non deerant in speciem
justae ob quas poterat judicare ordinationem Silverii nullam fuisse, utpote
contra Canones factam, nec per subsecutum Cleri consensum satis certo purgatam,
cum neque hic totus liber videretur, sed me^u extortus. Id. ibid.
is asserted gratis, as not necessary for Vigilius, who could not want specious
reasons to declare the Consecration of Silverius null, as made against the
Canons, and not certainly enough purged by the subsequent consent of the
Clergy, which seemed not wholly free, but extorted by fear. Thus he, whereby
instead of one Example of Simony he has given me two, of Vigilius whom he does
not sufficiently purge, and of Silverius. He does not clear Vigilius; for
whatsoever Silverius was, he ought not to have been falsely accused, oppressed,
banished, and murdered by the procurement of Vigilius. Besides the promises
made to Theodora, and the Money given to Belisarius make him guilty of Simony,
although the Sea had been duly vacant, or Silverius dead. Now for what
Papebrochius insinuates of Silverius his Simony, Liberatus writes that
Theodatus King of the Goths by violence forced the Clergy to Elect him. So one
Simoniack succeeded another; one Usurper followed another.

But of this enough. Of the Popes of the X. Age let Genebrard speak. An Age,
says he Seculum hoc uno infaelix, quod per annos fere CL. Pontifices circiter
L. -- a virtute majorum prorsus defecerint; Apotactici, Apostaticive potius,
quam Apostolici, quando non per ostium, sed per posticum, i.e. Imperatorum
tyrannidem ingrediebantur. Genebr. Chron. ad an. 901. Istius temporis
pontifices, ut intrusi ab Impp. potius quam electi, monstraerant. Id. ad an.
107.
unhappy in this one thing, that for almost 150 years about 50 Popes together,
from John VII. to Leo IX. degenerated wholly from the virtue of their
Predecessors; and ought rather to be called Renegadoes and Apostates, than
Apostolic; since they entered not in by the Gate, but by the back Door, viz. by
the Tyranny of the Emperors. And in another place, The Popes of that time, as
intruded rather by the Emperors, than chosen, were monsters. Or let Baronius
Quaetunc facies S. Romanae Eccl.-siae? quam foedissimae! cum Romae dominarentur
impotentissimae aeque ac sordidissimae meretrices, quarum arbitrio mutarentur
seeds, darentur Episcopi, and quod auditu horrendum and infandum est,
intruderentur in sedem Petri earum amasii Pseudo-Pontifices. Nunquam Cleri
eligentis vel consentientis postea aliqua mentio: Canones omnes pressi
silentio; Decreta Pontificum suffocata; proscriptae antiquae traditiones,
veteresque in eligendo pontifice consuetudines, sacrique ritus, and pristinus
usus, prorsus extincti. Bar. ad an. 908.
be heard. What was then the face of the Church of Rome? how very ugly! when
impudent and filthy Whores governed all at Rome; who changed Sees at their
pleasure, disposed of Bishoprics, and what is dreadful to speak, intruded
their Gallants into the Sea of Peter. No mention then made of the Clergy
electing or consenting, the Canons were all trod under foot, Decrees of Popes
despised, the Ancient Traditions turned out of Doors, and the Old Customs,
Sacred Rites, and former use of Electing Popes wholly extinct. Hence at every
turn he calls the Popes of these times Intruders and Usurpers, and at the year
897, says, Intrusus ab intruso.
Boniface was driven out by Stephen, one Intruder by another.

But to descend to particulars. Then was that infamous and scandalous
Controversy about the Popedom of Formosus. John VIII. had deposed him from the
Bishopric of Porto. Marinus restored him. Afterward himself was Elected Pope,
and held the Chair six years; in which time he held a General Council, and was
acknowledged by the whole World. Yet after his death his Successor Stephen VI.
calls a Council, abrogates all his Decrees, annuls his Ordinations, diggs his
Body out of the Grave, puts on it the Pontifical Robes, and set it in the Papal
Chair, then solemnly deprives and degrades it, and having cut off his three
fore-fingers (wherewith he performed Ordinations) cast it into Tyber. John IX.
who comes next, calls a new Synod, annuls whatsoever Stephen had done; and
restores the memory and Decrees of Formosus. Sergius a while after
anathematized Formosus anew, and abrogated whatsoever had been done in his
favor by John. This occasioned Auxilius a Writer of those times to compose his
Dialogue against the intestine discord of the Church of Rome (to use Sigebert
Gemblarensis's Contra intestinam discordiam Romanae Ecclesiae, sc. de
ordinationibus, exordinat. and superordinat. Romanorum Pontisicum, and
ordinatorum ab eis exordinationibus and superordinat. Sigebert. de Script.
Eccl. cap. 112.
words) viz. concerning the Ordinations, Exordinations, and Superordinations of
the Popes of Rome, and the Exordinations and Superordinations of those ordained
by them And Baronius Haec perpetrata ab intrusis and usurpantibus thronum
Apostolicum, quae legitimi Pontifices sunt execrati. Bar. ad an. 908.
, is forced to say, These things were done by Intruders and Usurpers of the
Apostolic Throne; which lawful Popes have detested.

In the next Age the words of Platina deserve to be observed. The Papacy, says
he Eo tum Pontificatus devenerat, ut qui plus largitione and ambitione, non
dico sanctitate vitae and doctrina, valeret, tantum dignitatis gradum bonis
oppressis and rejectis obtaineret: quem morem utinam aliquando non retinuissent
nostra tempora. Plat. in vita Sylvestri III.
, was come to that; that he who exceeded, not in Piety and Learning, but, in
Bribes and Ambition, obtained that dignity, good Men being oppressed and
rejected: which custom would to God our Ages had not sometimes retained. In
latter Ages the Simony of Alexander in procuring the Popedom, partly by ready
Money, partly by large Promises; is at length related by Onuphrius, and
Volaterran, but especially Guicciardine. And Varillac Varil. Hist. Franc. 1.
Live. 1.
tells us, that Octavian Fregosius Duke of Genua procured the Election of Leo
X. by the solicitation of his Emissaries among the Cardinals, and by detaining
Prisoners in the mean while the Cardinals of the opposite Party; who hastening
to Italy by Sea, touched at Genua in their Voyage. There would be no end, if I
should produce all the Examples, which History suggests. And if the known
instances be so many, what may we think of the secret Acts of Simony? For this
is a Crime, whose chief art consists in keeping it secret, and hiding it from
the Eyes of Men. However what we have alleged, proves this may sometimes
happen; and consequently that we can never be certain the same has not
happened, even when it does not appear. And from all, which has been said,
appears the impossibility of certainly knowing, whether he which possesses
the Papal Throne at any time, be a lawful Pope; and such, whose Decrees may be
securely believed and obeyed.

Our Adversaries are here brought into great streights. Duval Duval. de Potest.
Pont. par. 2. Sect. 5.
confesses, it is a great difficulty, and what has excited no small stirs in
some Universities. To solve this, they take different ways. Some deny it can
ever happen, that an unlawful Pope should possess the Chair; and that it is of
Faith to believe every particular Pope lawful. So Suarez, Valentia, Arriaga,
Raynaudus, Caspensis, Martinonus, Rhodius, and others cited by them: and with
reason. For if this be not of Faith; no Faith can be founded on their Decrees,
as they invincibly argue. But on the other side, how can that be of Faith,
which so many Examples prove to be false? Or on what foundation shall this
Divine Faith be placed? Suarez and Martinonus answer upon the reception of the
Church: and it is worth observing how they confirm that. Because if it should be
once granted, says Suarez Si talis posset semel dari error in universali
Ecclesia; nunquam esset verum illam habere certam and infallibilem regulam
vivam fidei sibi loquentem Christi nomine. Suar. de fide, disp. 10. Sect. 5.
, that an error of this nature can happen in the universal Church; it can be
no ways true, that she has a certain and infallible living Rule of Faith
speaking to her in Christ's Name. The same says Martinonus Mart. de fide,
disp. 5. Sect. 6. Nam is error aequiparatur errori in fide -- muito
intolerabilius esset errare in viva fidei regula. Iidem ibid.
. Both add, that this error would be equal to an error in Faith: For, say
they, if it be an intolerable error in the Church, when the whole Church
believes a Book to be Canonical, which is not; although that be but a dead
rule of Faith; it would be much more intolerable to err about the living rule
of Faith. That they reason soundly, cannot be denied. For it is no less
repugnant to absolute Infallibility to err about the living than about the dead
rule. But this being admitted, I shall much more easily prove the Church can
err about the dead Rule, than Suarez, that it cannot err about the living. That
it cannot err about the dead Rule our Adversaries can never prove: that it can
about the living, I will demonstrate. If ever any Pope was unlawful and
irregular, surely Vigilius was. Yet he was owned and esteemed as lawful Pope by
the fifth General Council, and by the whole World. Although he were banished,
imprisoned, and publicly vilified by the Emperor for the refusing to condemn
the Tria Capitula, and afterward excommunicated by the Western Bishops for
doing it; yet was he never denied to be true and lawful Pope. So in the ninth
and tenth Ages those monstrous Popes were, by Baronius At, quod mirandum est,
isti (Pontifices) licet tales fuerint, tamen eo honor and reverenita fideles
omnes prosequebantur Romanam Eccl. ut quemcunque in ea sedentem audirent nomine
tenus Pontificem, eundem, mirum dictu! nulla habita discussione ejus ingressus,
eum ut Petrum colerent. Bar. ad an. 897.
his confession, so honored and reverenced by All the Faithful, that
whomsoever they heard did preside in the Church of Rome, although indeed but a
nominal Pope, never enquiring into the lawfulness of his Election, they
respected no otherwise than St. Peter himself. In a word, all those whom I
mentioned before, were generally obeyed by the Church. The Church therefore can
err in this matter. But see how Suarez and the rest, by pretending the
contrary, have destroyed their own darling Opinion. For if it be of Faith, that
a Pope acknowledged by the whole Church, is a lawful one; then Stephen,
Romanus, and Sergius, who condemned Formosus, and annulled his Acts as not
being lawful Pope, erred; and so farewell all Papal Infallibility. For they
erred in the Faith; if it be of Faith that Formosus was lawful Pope, as it must
be according to these Divines; since Formosus, while he lived, was acknowledged
and obeyed by the universal Church; whereas these three Popes his Successors
defined, that he was no lawful Pope.

Duval perhaps was aware of these inconveniences, and therefore took another
method. He maintains it matters nothing, whether he which possesses the
Popedom, be true Pope or no; and that his Decrees will not be at all the less
infallible. We affirm, says he Dicimus talem Pontificem pro vero creditum
nunquam erraturum -- ne in Ecclesiam falsum pro vero obtrudatur, nunquam eum
Deus errare sinet, and quidem secundum legem communem and ordinariam. Duvall.
de potest. Pont. par. 2. qu. 5.
, that such a Pope esteemed for true, can never err. For God, lest falsehood be
obtruded upon his Church for truth, will never permit him to err, and that
according to the common and ordinary Law: because the Pope is not for himself,
but for the Church. But there is nothing solid in all this. For first his
reason is vain. For if the Pope be not for himself, but for the Church; no more
are any other Governors of the Church. Shall therefore whatsoever they do be
valid, although they be neither baptized nor ordained? To think so, Suarez
calls Heresy, nor will Duval allow it. Yet allow it he must, or else part with
his Argument. Secondly, this is directly contrary to Julius II. his Decree. For
Duval would have a Simoniack or irregular Pope to be obeyed and heard. Julius
commands him to be looked upon as an Heresiarch and Magician, to be disobeyed,
deprived, and driven out of his See. Thirdly, if we consult Scripture, that
forbids us to hearken to these Invaders of Church Offices. For our Savior,
after he had said that those which enter into the sheepfold any other way, than
by the door, are Thieves and Robbers: adds John x. 5.
, And a stranger will they (the sheep) not follow, but will flee from him: for
they know not the voice of Strangers. And in another place Mat. vii. 15.
, Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening Wolves. Now Simoniacks and Usurpers of Ecclesiastical Offices
are these Thieves and Robbers, and ravening Wolves.

Now as for reason, that can never teach us, that we owe the same reverence to
unlawful, as to lawful Popes. For contrarily in the Civil Government every man
is bound even to disobey a Tyrant and Usurper, who drives out the lawful
Prince. Besides, since Infallibility is by our Adversaries annexed to the
Popedom as an inseparable Privilege; he that is no Pope can have no right nor
claim to it. So says also Martinonus Hujusmodi potestas and assistentia non
datur Pontifici nisi vero, cui soli est promissa in Petro. Mart. de fide disp.
9. Sect. 6.
expressly; This Power and Assistance is given to none but a true Pope, to whom
only it was promised in Peter. And it seems indeed incredible to me, that any
wicked man should extort that from God by his Crimes, which he had annexed to a
lawful succession. As if by Wickedness he could obtain a right to the perpetual
assistance of the H. Ghost; which had he been innocent, he had for ever wanted?
Certainly the Ancient Popes thought far otherwise. They never dreamed of
purchasing the H. Ghost by Simony, but rather imagined that would obstruct his
favor. So Innocent I. Perfectionem Spiritus quam acceperant, amiserunt. Nec
dare ejus plenitudinem possunt, quae maxim in ordinatienibus operatur, quam
per impietatis suae perfidiam perdiderunt. Innoc. 1. Epist. 18. cap. 13.
speaking of Simoniacks, says, They have lost that perfection of the H. Ghost,
which they had received. Neither can they give the fullness of it, which exerts
it self chiefly in Ordinations, having forfeited it by the perfidiousness of
their Impiety. Gregory I. Quia qui in templo Dei columbas vendere
praesumpserunt, eorum Deo judice cathedrae ceciderunt: qui videlicet error in
subditis cum augmento propagatur. -- quia eum quem quis cum pretio ordinat,
provehendo agit ut haereticus siat. Greg. I. lib. 4. Epist. 50.
They which in the Temple of God presume. to sell Doves (by which, as in the
words immediately precedent appears, he means Simoniacks) their Bishoprics by
the judgment of God are become void; which error is propagated with increase in
those who are subject to them. For whom any one ordains for Money, by ordaining
he makes him an Heretic. Which words he repeats more than ten times in his
other Epistles John VIII. Joann. VIII. Epist. 94.
has used the same Expressions in one of his Epistles. And Peter Damian tells
us this was confirmed by a miracle. For a Simoniacal Bishop could never
pronounce the Name of the H. Ghost: on which he makes Merito siquidem Spiritum
S. dum emit, amisit. P. Dam. Opose 19. cap. 6.
this remark. For he deservedly lost the H. Ghost while he bought him.

But to return to our Argument; what more incredible, than that an Atheist,
Infidel, and profane person should be infallible? Who would not wonder at a
Pope pronouncing and deriding Oracles at the same time? Infallible and ignorant
of his Infallibility? Teaching with certainty what himself thinks to be false?
Surely if things be so; an irregular and usurping Pope ought not in prudence to
be deposed: Since his Infallibility, as well as that of any lawful Pope, will
serve to direct the Faithful, and confound Heretics; and his Deposition cannot
be attempted without the danger of Schism. Lastly I would know, whether when an
unlawful possesses the Throne of a lawful Pope; Infallibility belong to both,
or only to the first. If to both, then in vain does God dispense so great a
gift to the injured Pope, whom no Body acknowledges as such. If only to the
first, then the Privileges of an Intruder will be more and greater, than those
of a lawful Pope; and Usurpation will confer, what Canonical Election cannot.
To these add the Arguments, which Suarez Suar. de fide disp. 10. 6.
produces against this Answer: As, That it incurreth the same difficulties it
is brought to solve. For it is not more certain that a reputed Pope has the
Privilege of Infallibility, than that he is a lawful Pope: Since both depend
upon the common belief of the Church, and neither is revealed. Again, if he be
only a Nominal Pope, he may be also only a Nominal Priest, and so cannot give
Absolution, has therefore no right to all the Privileges granted by Christ to
St. Peter, because no share in the Power delegated to S. Peter in those words,
Whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, etc. Farther that Answer is contradictory
in assigning to the reputed Pope an inseparable property of the Papacy,
(Infallibility) and yet denying him to be Pope, that is, truly so.

It is manifest therefore, that this Answer is plainly false: But let it be
true. What still if it shall be uncertain? It will be in the end the same
thing; and we shall as easily obtain our design. For if I may doubt whether he
be lawful Pope that possesses the Chair; and also whether an unlawful Pope
enjoys the Privilege of Infallibility: I may then justly doubt, whether I
ought to assent to the Decree of every single Pope, and can never be certain of
it. That the first is uncertain I have already showed. That the latter is not
certain, Our Adversaries will not deny. For if any, it must be the certainty of
Faith; which Duvall will never grant, who denies even the Infallibility of a
lawful Pope to be of Faith. If any one yet shall dissent from Duvall, and
contend that it is of Faith: he may be convinced by the same Arguments, which
we produced against the rest. He may be asked where God revealed it, or the
Church defined it. He may be told that Defenders of the contrary Opinion were
never yet accused or condemned of Heresy. Lastly, He may be put in mind of
Stephen, Romanus, and Sergius, who declaring Formosus to have been an unlawful
Pope, did also annull his Decrees. But I need not insist upon refuting that,
which no man maintains. So that we may conclude there is no certainty to be had
in this matter, and therefore that Faith cannot safely rely on the Pope's
Sentence.

CHAP. X. Wherein is prevented an Evasion, whereby Duvall endeavors to elude
whatsoever has been hitherto said concerning the Pope.
DVvall Respondeo definitiones Pontificis non esse de fide, donec universalis
Ecclesia, quam de fide est errare non posse, eas acceptaverit. Duvall. de
potest. Pont. part. 2. qu. 5.
oppressed with so many Difficulties, takes refuge in saying, The Definitions
of the Pope are not of Faith, before he Church, whose Infallibility is of
Faith, has received them. I might justly rest here, ince Duvall hereby grants
us all we desire, viz. that faith cannot be founded upon the definition of the
Pope alone. Whether the Churches Authority adds certainty to it, I shall
enquire hereafter. In the mean while that the Truth maybe on all sides more
manifest and because many things now occur not proper for another place; I will
more accurately consider Duval's argument. And first, Duval hereby is not
consonant to himself. For if the Pope's Decrees be not of Faith, till received
by the Church, then the Pope alone is not a Rule of Faith, but an aggregate of
Pope and Church together: when as Duval in another place Id. in 22. page 62.
teaches there are five Rules of Faith, the Church Scripture, Tradition,
Council, and Pope; whereof every one is so independent and sufficient, that
whatsoever it shall propose is most firmly to be believed: not to say that
hereby the perfections of a Rule of Faith will appear much more eminently in
the Church than in the Pope; since the Church can direct our Faith without the
Pope, but not the Pope without the Church; whereas Duval Ibid. p. 215.
teaches the quite contrary. Herein therefore he is neither consonant to
himself, nor to the other Patrons of Papal Infallibility, while he denies
obedience to be due to the Popes Decrees, till they be received and confirmed
by the Church: this being very near the opinion of the Sorbonists, those great
Enemies of the Popes Infallibility. For the Faculty of Divinity Facultatis
dogma non est quod summus Pontifex nullo accedente Ecclesiae consensu sit
infallibilis.
proposed their opinion in the year 1663. in these words; It is not the
judgment of this Faculty, that the Pope is infallible without the consent of
the Church. And the Clergy of France in the year 1682. determined In
quaestionibus fidei praecipuas. Summi Pontificis esse parts, ejusque Decreta
ad singula, Ecclesias pertinere; nec tamen irreformabile esse judicium, nisi
Ecclesiae consensus accesserit.
, That questions of Faith chiefly pertained to the Pope, and that his Decrees
concerned all Churches: yet that his sentence was not irreformable, unless the
consent of the Church had supervened. How little does Duval's opinion differ
from this? who maintains that the Popes Sentence is indeed infallible before
the reception of the Church, but appears not so to be till then. For if so,
whether fallible or infallible, it signifies not: in matter of practice it will
be the same, and assent will be equally denied to the Popes Decrees, until they
shall have been admitted by the Church.

In the next place this Answer accuses of rashness and imprudence the far
greater part of the Church of Rome; which without expecting the approbation of
the universal Church, blindly receives the Papal Decrees, howsoever yet
uncertain. But that is of less moment. This I would gladly know, whether the
Church, whose reception makes the Papal Decrees to become of Faith, ought to
receive them without any precedent examination, or not till she has accurately
compared them with the Word of God. If the latter, then we have no definition,
on which Faith can rely. For I dare confidently affirm, there is none, which
the Church has thus examined and approved. Few undergo that labor: most
blindly follow the Dictates of the Pope. Not to say, that this is entirely
repugnant to that profound submission, wherewith the Decrees of the Head of the
Church ought to be received: or that according to this Principle the Pope
ought, together with his Decree, to transmit to several Bishops the reasons of
it; since without the knowledge of these they cannot be duly examined; or that
the Pope is highly unjust, who without being first certified of their universal
approbation, excommunicates and punishes the contemners of them: I will only
urge, that by this means the supreme Power is translated from the Pope to the
Church, as which passes the last and peremptory Sentence, not only on things
to be believed, but even on the Decrees of the Popes themselves. How this will
agree with the Doctrine of our present Adversaries; let them see to it.
Certainly Raynaudus, and the Author De Lib. Eccles. Gall. lib. 7. cap. 17.
of the Treatise of the Liberties of the Gallican Church think far otherwise:
of whom the latter bestows a whole Chapter to prove this very Proposition, That
the Papal Decrees are not therefore to be obeyed, because confirmed by the
Churches consent; but therefore consented to by the Church, because
antecedently infallible.

But if the Pope's Decrees are to be received by the Church with a blind
assent, and without any previous examination. I do not see of what weight such
a reception can be; which according to this supposal must be granted to false
Decrees, as well as true. Besides, such reception would not differ from Divine
Faith, such as is given to the most authentic Revelations: and so this opinion
would be repugnant to it self. For it supposes Faith is not to be yielded to
the Papal Decrees antecedently to the Churches reception; and yet requires the
Church to receive them with a blind assent, that is, with Faith.

Theophilus Raynaudus uses a not unlike Argument in disputing against this
Answer of Duval, which is now before us. The definitions of the Pope, says he
At hoc perabsurdum est, quia non est in potestate plebis fidelium facere, ut
quod non est de fide sit revera tale. Raynaud. (...), punct. 5.
, in matters of Faith, are received by the People either as to be believed with
Divine Faith, and so antecedently to the Reception of the Church; or not upon
their own account, but for the sake of the Churches Reception. But this is very
absurd; because it is not in the Power of the multitude of the faithful to make
that be of Faith by their Reception; which was not really such before. For then
many things would become of Faith, which are by no means such; as the
Assumption of the B. Virgin, which no Christian doubts of, and yet none believe
to be of Faith. He might have added other Examples: which we shall produce
hereafter.

It may be yet asked, Whether this Approbation of the Church required by
Duvall, ought to be express, that is, whether the Pope's Decrees ought to be
positively received by all, before they become Infallible: for if so, there are
few or no Decrees, which have been thus received, certainly none, whose
Reception of this kind is or can be manifestly known: or whether a negative
Reception will suffice, and so those Decrees become certain, which are opposed
by none. But neither can this be certainly known, until we be assured, that the
Decree is taken notice of by all the faithful. Whereas how many Papal Decrees
are there, which are unknown to the greatest part of Christendom? And no
wonder: since St. Augustine himself was ignorant of that Nicene Canon, which
forbad him to be associated in the Bishopric to Valerius yet alive. But that
which is chiefly to be herein regarded, is that the certainty of this
sufficiency of the negative Reception of the Church can never be demonstrated,
and without that we are still at a loss.

This consideration also is of no small moment: That if it be lawful to deny
Credit and Obedience to the Popes Decrees, before it shall be known they have
been received by the Universal Church: hereby a wide gate is opened to Schisms
and Dissensions. For then every contentious or capricious person may contemn
and hinder the Execution of the most just Decrees; and so put an end to the
Authority of this (...) much boasted Monarchy. For suppose the Pope published
(...) Decree. Some admit, others reject it. Hitherto according to Duvall, it is
not of faith, because not yet received by the Universal Church. What shall be
done in this case? Must a Council be called? That Duval Pessime Deus Ecclesiae
suae consuluisset; si viam hanc, quae raro foeliciter desinit, tanquam
expeditius malorum indies emergentium remedium reliquisset; quinimo Ecclesiam
ad impossible quodammodo obligasset. Duvall. de Pot. Pont. part. 4 quaest. 1.
himself acknowledges to be highly inconvenient, sometimes impossible, and for
most part unsuccessful, That if God had left only that remedy for daily
emergent doubts, he would in a manner have obliged his Church to
impossibilities: since the calling and meeting of a Council depends upon the
pleasure of secular Princes: who for reasons of State may prevent it; although
the Pope and with him all the Bishops in the World desire it. But even if they
meet, it is possible they may dissent in their Opinions. If you say that part
must be adhered to which the Pope favors; I ask how it is to be adhered to;
whether with Divine Faith? For of that only we now dispute. This Duvall, I
suppose, will not affirm. For if the Infallibility of the Pope alone be not of
Faith, part of a Council adhering to him will not make his yet uncertain
Decrees to become of Faith; since according to Duval nothing but the Reception
of the Universal Church can do it; whereas in this case the Approbation even of
the whole Representative Church is wanting.

CHAP. XI. That neither can the Faith of Papists rely on the Decrees of Pope
and Council consenting together.
First, Because their Infallibility is not sufficiently certain.
THUS have we dispatched the three first Foundations of a Papist's Faith. The
fourth succeeds, viz. an Ecumenical Council; which may be considered two ways,
either as disjoined from the Pope, and destitute of his consent; or as
confirmed by it. The Sorbonists hold the Infallibility of it the first way
considered, The Monarchical Divines only the second. But that I need not
dispute separately against the Sorbonists, appears for two reasons: First,
Because their Opinion is easily confuted. For we need oppose to them no more
than this, that the Infallibility of such a Council is not certain, at least it
is not of Faith, as we before demonstrated it ought to be. For the Sorbonists
can never prove this to be revealed by God. Scripture says nothing at all of
Councils, especially Ecumenical. They flee indeed to Tradition. But they
cannot produce any Testimonies of the Fathers, that say this is of Faith; not
any evident Decrees of Councils; not the consent of the Universal Church, for
the greatest part of the Roman Church thinks otherwise. Besides, the Opposition
it has met with among many Divines of the Church undeniably proves it not to
be of Faith. For if the dissent of a few Sorbonists can cause the Infallibility
of the Pope not to be of Faith; certainly the opposition of a far greater
number of Monarchical Divines will produce the same Effect, as to the
Infallibility of a Council without the Pope. Secondly, Because it may be
confuted with the same Arguments, wherewith I shall prove that the definitions
of Pope and Council consenting together are no firm Foundation for our Faith.
For if both together suffice not, a Council without the Pope will never be
sufficient: Since the consent of the Pope may possibly add some firmness to the
Decrees of a Council, but most certainly can take none from them.

To supersede therefore any further Dispute of that matter, let us enquire
whether the Faith of our Adversaries can rely on the Decrees of Pope and
Council conspiring together. This many of them imagine. Bellarmin Bell. de
council. lib. 2. cap. 2.
and Duvall Duvall de Pot. Pont. part. 2. qu. 6.
, glory there is no doubt of it among them; that it is unanimously taught by
their Divines, and therefore is of Faith. But I deny both. For although the
Monarchical Divines are of this Opinion, yet the Sorbonists dissent: who
maintain indeed the Infallibility of a General Council, whether agreeing or
disagreeing with the Pope; but allow not this Prerogative to every Council, but
only to a Council truly Ecumenical, lawfully constituted, Canonically
proceeding, and wholly free. The Monarchical Divines acknowledge the necessity
of those Conditions, yet differ from the Sorbonists two several ways. First,
In that they interpret these Conditions differently; as we shall see hereafter.
Secondly, In that whether these Conditions be present, they would have judged
from the subsequent confirmation of the Pope: which the Sorbonists will by no
means allow, but require the knowledge of it to be had some other way. Hence
many Councils which the Pope has pronounced to be both lawful and Ecumenical,
the Sorbonists will not acknowledge either for lawful or Ecumenical; as that
of Lions under Innocent IV. that of Florence, and the Lateran under Leo X.
others which the Sorbonists admit, and the Monarchists reject, as those of
Pisa, Constance (at least as to the first Sessions) and Basil. So Bellarmin
rejecting some ancient Councils, as those of Sirmium, Ariminum, Milan, and the
second of Ephesus, on pretense that they were not approved by the Pope, is said
by Richerius Richer. apol. pro Gers. axiom. 22.
to trisle in assigning for the cause that which is not such: Since, as he
affirms, these Councils were not rejected, because not approved by the Pope,
but because wanting the requisite Liberty. Not to say, that the Sorbonists
reject some Councils, merely because the Pope was present, oppressing and
over-awing their Liberty. It is manifest therefore that the consent of our
Adversaries about the Infallibility of Councils confirmed by the Pope, consists
only in words, and is not real; and that by a General Council the Sorbonists
understand one thing, the Monarchists another. The thing it self therefore
cannot be of Faith; since by the received Doctrine of that Church nothing can
be so, but what is unanimously acknowledged and taught by Catholic Divines.

But to make the whole matter more evident, I will demonstrate two things.
First, That this appears not to be of Faith from other Arguments beside the
dissent of the Sorbonists and Monarchists. Secondly, That although it were
certain in general, there are some Infallible Councils, yet it can never be
known that any particular Council is so. This was demonstrated above, although
under other terms, when we proved that the active Infallibility of the Church
is not of Faith: and what I just now produced, confirms it not a little. To
which may be added, That the Infallibility of Pope and Council together cannot
be of Faith, because the Infallibility of neither separately is so. For I would
ask, why that alone should be of Faith: whether because that only is true, or
that alone revealed, or that only known to be revealed. Not the first: for then
the whole Latin Church would have erred. For there is not, at least, not known
to be, any, who do not attribute Infallibility either to the Pope alone, or a
Council alone. Not the second: For then the same inconvenience would follow,
since there are none but what hold the Infallibility of one of the two to have
been revealed. Not the third; For who can ever imagine, that God would give
Infallibility to Pope or Council, and yet not reveal it so clearly, as that it
might be believed with Divine Faith. For he can have given it for no other end,
than that it might be to Christians the Rule of Believing, which it cannot be,
as we before proved, unless it be it self of Faith.

To this may perhaps be opposed, that the Infallibility of Pope or Council
separately wants not Divine Revelation, but only the Definition of the Church
proposing it. But if so, then the so much boasted of Wisdom and Assistance of
the Holy Ghost must be wanting in the Church, which would not make this
Revelation by her Definition to be of Faith, and thereby have left to the
faithful no other living Rule of Faith than the Pope and Counsel consenting
together, which for the known difficulties of calling General Councils cannot
be perhaps had and applied once in an Age; whereas the Infallibility of the
Pope, if defined to be of Faith, would be an apt and easy Rule, ready to be
consulted upon all occasions. But in truth this Infallibility of Pope and
Council united is no where expressly revealed by God, or openly defined by the
Church. For many places of Scripture, and Decrees of Councils are indeed
alleged for the Infallibility of each separately, but not one for that of both
conjunctly. None certainly will deny this; if the Opinion of Albertus Pighius,
and Fr. a Victoria be true: Of whom the first by the confession of Bellarmin
Bell. de council. lib. 1 cap. 3.
thought the institution of Councils plainly human, and found out by Natural
reason: the second Nihil aliud posset totum Concilium, quod non possent Patres
per se singuli secundum suam potestatem: unde haec potestas non est in Concilio
immediate jure divino, sed ex voluntate Praelatorum. Vict. Relect. 2. de
potest. Eccl. Sect. 1.
has these words; A whole Council can do nothing, which each Bishop might not
by his own power do of himself: whence this power is not in the Council
immediately by Divine Right, but by the will of the Bishops. That this opinion
is at least probable, must be confessed. For no mention of General Councils is
to be found in Scripture, none in the Ecclesiastical Writers of the three first
Ages, to whom they were wholly unknown. If this opinion should be true, that so
much Infallibility would vanish into smoke. For who could assure us, that God
had annexed so great a privilege to an humane Institution? at least it could
never be of Faith, because wanting Divine revelation. I know this opinion is
rejected by Bellarmine, but so softly, that he does not explode it as absurd
and intolerable; nor say the contrary is of Faith, but only more probable. From
whence I argue, That if the Divine institution of Councils be only more
probable, then their humane institution is probable: at least neither opinion
exceeds probability, and so neither can be of Faith.

CHAP. XII. That there was never any Councils Ecumenical.
THus have we proved the existence of infallible Councils to be uncertain. But
grant it certain and undoubted. This will be yet to be inquired, what those
Councils are; without the knowledge of which the certainty of the former will
be wholly vain. Yet is this thing impossible to be known. For let us survey the
conditions which our Adversaries require. The first is, that the Council be
truly Ecumenical. This indeed is not much insisted upon by the Monarchists;
who maintain any Council great or small, confirmed by the Pope to be
infallible: and so make no difference between particular and general Councils.
For according to their opinion, without the approbation of the Pope both are
alike fallible; with it, both alike infallible. Whence Gr. a Valentia Nullum
Concilium infallibilem authoritatem definiendi per se habet, seclusa Romani
Pontisicis authoritate. II. Accedente Romans Pont. confirmatione Concilium
quodvis est infallibile. Val. com. 3. disp. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 7.. 45.
proposes his judgment in these two assertions. I. No Council has of it self
infallible authority of defining, laying aside the Authority of the Pope. II.
The confirmation of the Pope being added, any Council is infallible: not so the
Sorbonists, they require the Council be truly Ecumenical. The Sorbon, says
Richerius Schola^ Parisiensis soli Ecclesiae, and generali, non particulari,
Concilio authoritatem infallibilem decernendi ascribit. Rich. Apol. pro Gers.
ax. 22.
, ascribes infallible authority of defining only to the Church, and a general,
not particular, Council. So Holden Primo, debet Concilium hujusmodi esse vere
generale. Hold. Annal. fid. lib. 2. cap. 3.
: Such a Council ought in the first place to be truly General. This therefore
is first to be inquired, whether any Council obtruded on us for a Rule of
Faith, be General. Now I assert two things: I. That there were never yet any
such. II. That even if there had been, it would be yet uncertain, which were
such. The first I will prove in this, the second in the following Chapter.

That a Council be truly Ecumenical, one of these things may be thought
necessary: either that all the Bishops of the World be present, or at least
those who may sufficiently represent the absent. For who can otherwise imagine,
that a few Bishops should authoritatively impose Laws upon the greater number
not inferior in Piety and Learning, at least not necessarily inferior.
Certainly by the consent of all, one equal has no authority over another: and
a few meeting together, do not by their conjunction obtain a right to prescribe
Laws to the greater number, although disjoined in place, as a Learned man
Thornd. Orig. Eccles. cap. 22.
has well observed. We must therefore necessarily recur to one of these
conditions. Yet although even the first should happen, which cannot be without
infinite difficulty, I am not obliged to grant the whole Church to be
represented in that Assembly. For not to say, that would suppose that blind
obedience which is forbidden by the Scripture; it may happen that in a Diocese
the Bishop be Heretical, and the inferior Clergy Orthodox. In which case the
Bishop cannot represent the belief of his Church neither de facto nor de jure,
unless we will say his Church was bound to follow him in his Heresy. But I
will not insist on this. Suppose such an Assembly to represent the whole
Church. Yet this cannot be denied, that such an Assembly never was, nor any
Council in which so much as the twentieth part of the Episcopal College were
present. And if such a Council were never held formerly, when the whole
Christian World was subject to one Emperor: it cannot be hoped for in this
present state of Christendom divided into so many Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

Laying aside therefore this, let us consider the second way of holding a
General Council. Those who are present in a Council can no otherwise represent
absent persons, than if they come in their name, and by their command, which
may be two ways. First, if they be expressly and by name delegated; as if
Provincial Synods should be held every where before the General, and Delegates
there chosen for the whole Province. Or secondly, if omitting all this, every
Bishop absenting himself, should for that very reason be thought tacitly and
interpretatively to transfer his Vote and Authority on those which go to the
Council, Richerius and Holden seem to favor the first way, Salmeron the
latter. For Richerius Promptum and expeditum est ex singulis ordinibus aut gene
ribus Ecclesiasticorum aliquos ex singulis provinciis and nationibus
Christianis deligere. Rich. Apol. axiom. 21.
having defined a General Council to be an Assembly of the whole Clergy
collected out of all the particular Provinces, tells us this is not to be
understood of every single Ecclesiastic, but that the readiest way is to choose
some out of every Order and kind of Ecclesiastics in every Province and
Christian Nation. Holden Vt tot variarum Ecclesiarum in diversis regnis and
provinciis sitarum pars aliqua seu numerus Episcoporum deputetur and intersit.
Hold. Anal. fid. lib. 1. cap. 9.
requires that some part or number of Bishops may be deputed out of diverse
Kingdoms and Provinces; and be present in the Council. On the contrary Salmeron
Qui legitime impediti, vel ex permissu sedis Apostolicae non veniunt, jus suum
totum in eos qui convenerunt censentur transtulisse. Salm. Tom. 12. Tract. 77.
says; Those who by a lawful hinderance or the permission of the Apostolic
See come not (to the Council) are supposed to have transferred their right upon
those which meet. Occam and John Brevicoxa Bishop of Paris seem to have
conjoined both ways: whereof the first Diversae personae gerentes authoritatem
and vicem universarum partium totius Christianitatis, nisi aliqui noluerint cel
non potuerint convenire. Vnde si aliquae provinciae nollent vel non possent,
etc. Occam. Dial. l. 5. c. 8.
requires in a General Council diverse persons bearing the authority and places
of all the parts of Christendom, unless some would not or could not come.
Whence if some Provinces would not or could not delegate persons having their
Authority and Votes, the Council would be no less General. The latter
Congregationem, in qua diversae personae gerentes vicem diversarum partium and
provinciarum totius Christianitatis ad tractandum de bono communi rite
convenient. Brev. apud Laun. epist. part. 8. ad Amel.
defines a General Council to be a Congregation, wherein diverse persons
bearing the Proxies of the diverse Provinces of Christendom, meet Canonically to
consult of the common good. To which he subjoyns Ockam's Proviso concerning the
absence of the Delegates of some Provinces.

However it be, the first way of holding General Councils is not observed by
our Adversaries. For immediately upon the Summons every Bishop, who intends to
be present, sets forward without expecting the Delegation of their
Comprovincial Bishops. Nay rather both the Historians of the Council of Trent,
Father Paul, and Cardinal Palavicini, relate that when the Viceroy of Naples
would have had four Bishops of that Kingdom chosen and sent to the Council in
the name of all the rest; the Pope took it very ill, and most severely forbid
it to be done. Which I question not to be the reason, why Canus and Bellarmine
in assigning the conditions of a General Council, never mention this. This
express and formal Delegation therefore is not necessary to constitute a
General Council; unless they deny the Tridentine and other Councils, in which
it was not used, to be General. But neither is it valid, if it were used. For
Bishops may be delegated either with an absolute and unlimited Power of giving
their Suffrages as they please; or restrained to certain Rules of Voting on
this or that side. The first way, though tolerable in temporal affairs, the
success of which is of no great moment, yet is not to be endured in matters of
Faith and eternal Salvation. For suppose the Delegates vote Heresy; shall the
Delegators be bound to confirm their Suffrages? The second way of delegating
destroys the liberty of the Council. For the present Bishops would by this
means be no Judges of the Controversies proposed; and all disputation or
examination of the Question in hand would be wholly vain.

The first way therefore of Representation is useless. Let us now consider the
second. I affirm that the absent Bishops cannot be said to have committed their
suffrages to the present. For first, Although this may with some color be said
of those which have been lawfully and sufficiently summoned; yet it cannot be
applied to them, who either are not summoned at all, or not by him who has the
lawful Authority to do it. Who this is, is yet undetermined. Besides, what if
the absent Bishops shall openly protest they will not be obliged by what the
others shall decree, as the French did at Trent; Shall they be also supposed to
have tacitly assented? But to show the vanity of this pretense more clearly, I
will prove that tacit delegation, which in other cases may be allowed, to have
here no place. First, it does not appear what is the peculiar Office to be
performed by the Bishops in a Council. Holden makes them only Witnesses of
revealed Truths: Others rather think them to be Judges. But Judges they cannot
be unless also Witnesses. For how shall they define an Opinion to have been
revealed or not; unless they know it to be so, and be Witnesses of the
Revelation, or at least Tradition. Yet it is certain that Proxies in witnessing
are not wont to be allowed; or if they be, that a tacit delegation will not
suffice. I add, if it were a matter of more external Discipline, or what
concerns only the Bishops themselves; those who absent themselves might perhaps
be supposed to quit their right, and submit themselves to the judgment of the
rest which meet in the Council. But to imagine such a thing in a matter of
Faith and Truth is most absurd. Shall those Bishops, who might have born
Witness to the Truth, be thought to have forfeited or deserted their right;
only because either voluntarily or by force they were absent from the Council?
If this were admitted; error would soon triumph over Truth, and Faith over
Heresy. For our Adversaries confess, and Experience has often proved, That
the major part of Bishops in a Council may favor Heresy. For suppose the
heretical Bishops nearer to the place of the Council, or supported by the
favor of the secular Prince, or mightily zealous in the propagation of their
Error, all which advantages Arianisme formerly enjoyed in the East. If to
these be added the right of representing absent Bishops, they may establish
Heresy in the Church for ever, and oblige the absent Bishops for a punishment
of their negligence to subscribe to erroneous Definitions of Faith. Lastly, If
the absent Bishops tacitly delegate their suffrages to the present; there is
no number of Bishops so small, which may not constitute a General Council, nay,
although they be all of one Province; (provided the Summons were directed to
all the Provinces) as being interpretatively invested with the Authority of all
the absent Bishops. Which yet is not allowed by our Adversaries: and Bellarmine
Vt saltem ex majori part Christianarum Provinciarum aliqui adveniant. Bell. de
Council. lib. 1. cap. 17.
himself requires as the fourth condition of a General Council, that some
Bishops come from at least the greatest part of the Provinces of Christendom.
Let the Reader now judge, how that can stand, which Richerius Maxim proprie
and perfectissime. Rich. Apol. axiom. 21.
so positively affirms, That an Ecumenical Council represents the whole Church
most properly and perfectly. On the contrary, what I have already offered,
proves that the Church is not at all, much less most perfectly represented
thereby.

CHAP. XIII. That although there were Ecumenical Councils, it would be always
uncertain which they were.
THAT there is no truly Ecumenical Councils, I have proved in the precedent
Chapter! But grant there is, We shall gain but little, unless we undoubtedly
know, which they are, that deserve that Name. For the Papists will not have
their Faith rely upon a Council indefinitely, but upon such or such a Council,
as for Example upon that of Constance or Trent. But their Faith cannot rely on
these, unless they were certain they were Ecumenical: which that they can
never be, I shall prove in this Chapter. I might perhaps supersede this labor,
as being already performed by Learned Men even of the Church of Rome, Launoy
Laun. Epist. part. 8. ad Ames.
, and the Author de lib. etc. lib. 5. cap. 2.
of the Treatise of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, although with a
different intention. For the first seems to have undertaken it only for the
love of Truth, the second that he might show the necessity of depending wholly
and absolutely upon the Pope. But because both of them have omitted many
things; it will not be perhaps unuseful to add mine to their Observations.

First therefore, The difficulty of knowing Ecumenical Councils appears from
the discord of Authors in numbering them. Bellarmine reckons 32 which
distributing into 4 Classes, he makes 18 of them to have been approved, 7
condemned, 6 partly approved and partly condemned, and 1 (the Pisan) neither
manifestly approved, nor manifestly condemned. Bosius Bos. de signis Eccl. lib.
5. cap. 8.
numbers 18, expressly denying the rest to have been General. Bannes Ban. Catal.
Council. praemisso Tom. 3. in Thom.
15, or at most 17. But all omit that of Siena, although acknowledged to have
been General by the Council of Basil Council. Basil. in quadam resp. data 3. Id.
Maii, 1436.
. Again of those numbered by Bellarmin, some are by other Writers expunged out
of the List. Let us view them in order. After the 1. Nicene Council, of whose
Universality none doubts, comes that of Sardica, which is thought to be General
by Bellarmin, Baronius, Perron, Lupus, Natalis Alex. Maimbourg: denied by the
Africans, Photius, and Auxilius Apud Lupum Diss. de Council. Sardic.
among the Ancients, by Richerius Rich. de Council. lib. 1. cap. 3.
and Peter de Marca Marca de Concord. lib. 7. cap. 3.
among the Moderns. The first Constantinopolitan Council Natalis Orientalis
duntaxat Ecclesiae Concilium istud fuit, nec Oecumenicum nisi ex post facto,
quatenus, etc. Not.. 4. part. 1. p. 236.
affirms to have been only a Synod of the Eastern Church, and Ecumenical only
ex post facto, inasmuch as the Western Church in the Roman Synod under Pope
Damasus approved it. Yet in the year after the Council the Eastern Bishops
meeting at Constantinople, and writing to the Roman Synod, call their former
Council Ecumenical: which Valesius Val. Not. ad Theod. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 3.
does not without cause wonder at, and observes the Western Church did not of a
long while after esteem it Ecumenical.

I find none which deny the 1. Ephesine Council to have been General. Yet if
any one should do it, he would not want some foundation. For in the first
Session, wherein Nestorius was condemned, not only the whole Oriental Diocese,
subject to the Patriarch of Antioch, was absent, but also the Legates of the
Western Bishops were not yet come. Cyrill indeed supplied the room of Pope
Coelestin: bat Arcadius and Projectus were sent in the name of the other
Western Bishops, as Lupus Lup. diss. de Council. Ephesians. cap. 6.
observes. In the following Sessions the Oriental Bishops would not be
present; but making a separate Synod in the same City, anathematized the other;
which prevailed indeed in number and reason, and so may be called lawful, but
cannot be Ecumenical. The Council of Chalcedon is acknowledged by all, yet as
to the 13th Session (in which notwithstanding all the Canons of the Synod were
made) it is rejected by Baronius, Lupus, and many others; because the Legates
of Rome, and the Bishops of Egypt were then absent; whereas the Greeks and
others contend it was wholly Ecumenical. The V. Council under Justinian, which
was the II. Constant inopolitan, is admitted for Ecumenical by all the present
Greeks and Latins. Not so formerly; when the Africans, Italians, Spaniards,
and Gauls rejected it. And certainly it was not Ecumenical. For Vigilius and
the Western Bishops, although then at Constantinople, would not be present in
it. The Council in Trullo is accounted General by some Greeks and Latins, as
Innocent III. Gratian, Bellarmine, Barnes, and others; denied by Baronius Bar.
ad an. 692.
, Leo Allatius Leo All. de perp. consensu.
, and Bellarmin Bell. de Pont. lib. 2. cap. 18.
himself in another place. The II. Nicene is esteemed Ecumenical both by
Greeks and Latins. Yet formerly Hincmar and even Theodorus Studita, that great
Patron of Image Worship, maintained it was only local; as Lupus Lup. did. de
Council. Nicaen. II. cap. 15.
confesses. Certainly it was denied to be Ecumenical by the ancient French,
Germans, and English, and by the Synod of Franoford, who denied it could be
called Ecumenical, when it was proposed to them, as Peter de Marca Proposita
est sacro conventui Synodus Nicaeae habita, quam illi Oecumenicam dici posse
negarunt. Marc. de Concord. lib. 7. cap. 17.
acknowledges. Yea, and in the Caroline Capitular, they call it an Heretical,
Schismatical, Erroneous, and Presumptuous Synod, wondering at the impudence and
vanity of its Bishops in ranking themselves with the six former General
Councils. And justly might they wonder at it. For although the Roman Legates
were present: Yet the Western were not either by themselves or by their
Delegates. Not to say that the pretended Legatas of the three Oriental
Patriarchs were suborned by the Council, and had no Commission from those
Patriarchs. That the Council of Franoford was called General, Baronius Bar. ad
ann. 794.
observes; Certainly Hinomar gave it that name. Nor does Bellarmine oppose,
although in another place Bell. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 8.
he calls the II Nicene Synod more Universal. However it could not be General;
since all the Greeks (who were not yet divided from the Western Church by
Schism) were absent. The VIII. Synod the Latins call Ecumenical; the Greeks
deny it, as the English, French and Germans did also formerly. The Greeks on
the contrary reckon for the eighth General Council the Synod under Photius,
which is rejected by the Latins.

After these Bellarmine reckons eight other Councils eider than that of
Constance, viz. four of Lateran, two of Lions, and those of Vien and Pisa. But
the Council of Constance In formula fidei Pontifici eligendo praescripta.
admits only one of Lateran, one of Lions, and that of Vien: rejecting the
other five. Clement VII. rejects yet more. For in his Bull of Privilege for
the Edition of the Florentine Synod, he calls it the eighth General Council;
whereby he proscribes all these eight, the Council of Constance it self, and
the Constantinopolitan under Ignatius, which commonly bears the Title of the
Eighth: of these eight, that of Lions under Innocent IV. was one; wherein
Frederick the Emperor was deposed. This Bellarmine, Onuphrius, and the
Assertors of the Pope's deposing Power contend to have been General. Launoy and
Widdrington deny it. Nor is this a late Controversy. This very thing was
disputed in the Synod it self between the Pope and Thaddaeus the Emperor's
Orator, Vid. Labbeanam Council. editionem.
who appealing to a future General Council, was rejected by the Pope upon
pretext that the present Synod was Ecumenical. The Council of Constance is
from the beginning to the end accounted General by the French; as the Cardinal
of Lorrain Apud Gallos Constantiense Concilium in partibus suis omnibus ut
generale habetur. Comm. ad Briton. Senate.
expressly affirms, and the whole Clergy of France lately confirmed with a
solemn Decree. The Monarchists deny it to have been General in the first
Sessions; because of the three Obediences but one was present. So Cajetan,
Canus, Bellarmine, Duval, and innumerable others. Bosius Bos. de signis Eccl.
lib. 5. cap. 8.
and F. Cotton go farther; of whom the first reckons it not at all among the
Ecumenical Councils, the second by the testimony of Richerius Rich. Hist.
Council. lib. 2. cap. 3.
, wiped it out of the List of them. That the Council of Basil was always held
Ecumenical by the French, the Cardinal of Lorrain witnesses. The same was the
opinion of Eugenius IV. Bellarmine, Carranza, Labbe, and others. Duval Duvall.
de potest. Pont. in antelo su.
vehemently opposes it, and stiffly contends it was never General. The Council
of Florence was never by the French esteemed either lawful or General, says
the same Cardinal Conc. Florentinum perinde ac nec legitimum nec generale
repudiatur. loc. cit.
. On the contrary, the Italians and Spaniards extol it to the Skies. The
Council of Lateran under Leo X. Fabulottus, Bellarmine, and many more, contend
to have been Ecumenical. Yet Bellarmine confesses that some doubt of it; and
Duval Quidam aiunt non fuisse vere and proprie generale, c^m ei vix C. Episcopi
intersuerint. Duvall. de potest. Pont. part. 4. qu. 7.
, That others affirm it not to have been truly and properly General, forasmuch
as there were scarce an hundred Bishops present in itc. And himself a little
after leaves it uncertain, because of the paucity of Bishops: which reason
might also exclude many Sessions of the Council of Trent.

Thus therefore it manifestly appears, That there are many Councils, whose
universality was and is still disputed of; the Latins agreeing neither with the
Greeks, nor among themselves. And if so: what certainty can be founded upon
their Decrees, to which the very first conditions of an infallible Council is
wanting? To this may be opposed, there are some Councils, which none deny to
have been Ecumenical; as the I. Nicene, that of Chalcedon in the first
Sessions, the VI. and the Tridentine. I own the consent of our Adversaries
herein; and omitting many things, which might be replied, I will chiesly insist
upon this, That this consent of our Adversaries is vain and destitute of all
foundation, and would presently vanish, if they adhered to their own
Hypotheses. For those conditions, which they require to make a Council
Ecumenical, are not to be found in all these Councils; and besides, are such
as create new scruples and perplexities.

First therefore, Holden Vt tot variarum Ecclesiarum in diversis regnis
sitarum, pars aliqua sen numerus Episcoporum deputetur ac intersit; qui
conventum communem ad eum universitatis gradum convenientem assurgere faciat,
ut improbarum conjurationum, etc. absit omnis suspicio, etc. Hold. Anal. sid.
lib. 1. cap. 9.
teaches, that to constitute a General Council, it is necessary some Bishops
out of so many diverse Churches situate in distant Christian Kingdoms and
Provinces, be deputed and be present, as may make the common Assembly arise to
that degree of Universality, as may exclude all suspicion of fraudulent
Conspiracies and Factions; so that no prudent or honest man may doubt it to be
Occumenical. Many things may be here observed; as first, how many Bishops
soever be present, we can never be sure there is no Faction or Conspiracy in
the Council, how well disposed, or from how different soever places they come.
What hinders but they may be corrupted at the place of Council? The Councils of
Milan, Ariminum, and Ephesus are eminent Examples of this; yea, and the Council
of Trent it self: wherein F. Paul Hist. Cont. Trid. lib. 6.
relates, that the Spanish Bishops complained there were present more than
forty Bishops obnoxious to and Stipendiaries of the Court of Rome; whereof some
received thirty, others sixty Crowns a month. Again, that when it was reported
at Rome, that the French Bishops were on their way to the Council, Pius IV. in
a great fright called together the Bishops waiting then at Rome, told them how
necessary their presence was at the Council, and persuading some with promises,
others with gifts, hastily packed them away to Trent. The fear of this made the
Councils of Constance and Basil to decree, That the Votes should be taken not
singly, but according to the several Nations; It being not reasonable, says
Richerius eNihil causae est, cur in rebus ad fidem aut disciplinam Eccles.
spectantibus una and sola natio Italica sibi plus assumat and arroget, quam
aliae nationes Christianae. Rich. Apol. ax. 8.
, that in things pertaining to Faith and Discipline, the Italian Nation alone
should assume and arrogate to themselves more than any other Christian Nations.

The number of Bishops therefore affords no certain remedy against Factions.
But suppose it does: Is nothing else required to constitute a General Council
but freedom from Factions? Then many National and Provincial Synods will become
Ecumenical. Certainly Factions may be wanting in particular Councils, if many
Bishops be present; and perhaps Ecumenical liberty, if but a few. If that
liberty contributed any thing, it would be only to enable the Bishops to
proceed Canonically if they would. But that is not the thing we now dispute of.
For particular Councils have been often seen to proceed very well, and
Ecumenical very ill.

Secondly, Holden neither does nor can define how many Bishops (or out of how
many Provinces) must necessarily be present; but leaves the matter to common
prudence; the judgments of which are infinitely various and uncertain, whence
no certainty in this particular, upon which all the rest depend, can be had
thence: especially if we consider that the Bishops present in Councils are
sometimes more, sometimes fewer. So the Council of Lateran under Innocent III.
is said to have had above a thousand Prelates, that of Chalcedon six hundred;
the I Constantinopolitan one hundred and fifty; the V. Lateran one hundred;
that of Trent in the first Sessions much fewer. So that Prudence can six no
certain rule here, and if she be satisfied when a great Number is present; she
cannot but he sitate, when but a few.

Holden's Rule therefore is of no use to the knowledge of Ecumenical Councils.
Lupus Dico adesse oportere sedem Apostolicam, omnes Ecclesiae Orthodoxos
Patriarchas, etc. Lup. Dissert. de Council. CP. I. p. 306.
comes somewhat nearer the truth; who requires the presence of the Pope, all
the Orthodox Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitans, and Bishops, if not
corporally, at least by delegation, or express consent, whether previous or
subsequent. The same says Bosius Bos. de signis Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 8.
. But neither are they in the right, For if this were true; all Councils whose
Decrees are received by the whole Church, would be Ecumenical, and so the
Councils of Ancyra, Neocaesarea, Laodicea, Gangra, etc. (whose Canons were
received both by the Greek and Latin Church, and confirmed by diverse Popes and
General Councils) would become Ecumenical. This Explication, says the Author
Haec explicatio Concilii ideam confundit. Hac enim ipsa ratione non solum, etc.
lib. 5. cap. 2.
of the Treatise of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, confounds the idea of
a General Council; and by resolving the whole Authority of it into the
subsequent acceptance of the Universal Church, raises National, Provincial,
and even Diocesan Synods into the same rank with it. This also would follow,
That Councils, how frequent and numerous soever, could not be Ecumenical, till
they were received by the Universal Church, and so those Councils would have
lied, which without expecting this subsequent Reception, entitled themselves
Ecumenical; as almost all did, although many of them not received of a long
while after, as the V. VII. VIII. of which before. Nay Lupus observes the
Canons of the first Council of Constantinople were not received before Innocent
III. For more than 800 years therefore according to Lupus, that Council must
have been Particular; nay both General and Particular. For the Creed of it was
admitted by both Churches, the Canons only by the Greeks.

But laying aside these, Let us come to Bellarmin, who has used more accuracy
herein. He lays down four conditions of a General Council. First, Prima est, ut
evocatio sit generalis, ita ut innotescat omnibus majoribus Christianis
provinciis. Bell. de Council. lib. 1. c. 17.
, That the Summons be General, and notified to all the greater Provinces of
Christendom: For that this was always observed, and for default of it the
Council of Constantinople against Images was declared void by the VII. Synod.
But how shall we be assured, that this condition was not wanting to any one
Council either Ancient or Modern, or that certain Intelligence was received in
every Province of the indiction of it? Secondly, Vt ex Episcopis nullus
excludatur undecunque veniat, modo constet eum esse Episcopum and non
excommunicatum. Id. ibid.
That no Bishop be excluded, whencesoever he come, provided he be known to be
so, and be not excommunicated. That this again was always observed we cannot
be assured. For not only those are to be esteemed excluded who are openly
rejected; but those also, who privily by Threats, Promises, or any other way
are forced to depart: as Paulus Vergerius, Bishop of Justinople, by public
Writing complained he was from the Council of Trent. The third Vt adsint omnes
Patriarchae vel per se vel per legatos. Id. ibid.
condition is, That all the Patriarchs be present either by themselves or by
their Legates. But to this Bellarmin adds, That it is not very necessary;
because the Council of Ephesus without the Patriarch of Antioch condemned
Nestorius, and the Synod of Chalcedon concluded almost all things without him
of Alexandria. And at this time, says he Non sunt necessarii, quia haeretici,
vel certe schismatici. Id. ibid.
, These Patriarchs are not necessary, because Heretical, or at least
Schismatical. But it does not follow, That because one Patriarch may be absent,
therefore the rest ought not to be present. Besides Bellarmin herein
contradicts himself. For he demonstrateth the necessity of the presence of the
Patriarchs by this Argument among others, because the II. Nicene Council proves
that the Council of Constantinople against Images was not Ecumenical from the
absence of the Patriarchs. If this Argument hold, the presence at least of some
Patriarchs will be necessary. And whereas he denies the presence of the
Patriarchs to be now necessary, because Heretical or Schismatical, this again
creates new perplexities. For they deny themselves to be so, and it is at least
very uncertain whether they are so: So that this thing must be first searched
out and determined, before a firm assent can be given to the Decrees of a
Council wanting their presence. See new Difficulties, new Labyrinths Lastly,
With Canus, Duvall, and others, he requires, That if not all Bishops be present
in the Council, as they cannot all be; at least some out of all the greater
Provinces meet there. If so, then must be wiped out of the Catalogue of General
Councils the II. and V. in which no Western, some of Lateran, and those of
Vien, Constance and Trent, in which no Eastern Bishops were present. Duvall
Duvall. anteloq. ad lib. de potest. Pont.
opposes this reason to the Council of Basil; which may with equal reason be
returned upon all the rest. Beside, when neither Bellarmine nor any other dare
determine how many Bishops out of each Province must necessarily be present, or
how many Provinces may safely be wanting in the Council; the whole matter
cannot but remain uncertain. That also deserves to be observed which Bellarmine
admonishes, That it was always thought sufficient, that when a General Council
is held in the East, a few, suppose one or two Western Bishops be present; or
as few Eastern Bishops in a Council held in the West: as he proves by diverse
Examples. But if two or three Bishops can sufficiently represent one entire
part of the Universal Church; why may not as many more represent the other
part? Which being admitted, a Meeting of four or five Bishops will constitute a
General Council, which to me seems very absurd and ridiculous.

Hence it appears therefore, that our Adversaries can produce nothing
satisfactory in this matter: which will be yet more manifest; if to what we
have observed already be added, that they talk much concerning it, but prove
nothing. Whereas they should not tell us, what they thought requisite or
sufficient to constitute a General Council, but also demonstrate it so to be,
and that so clearly, that no doubt might remain. Otherwise we shall be ever
uncertain, which are to be called Ecumenical Councils, and which not. Yet
nothing of this is produced by them: themselves rather differ about the
conditions; and what one thinks sufficient or necessary, another rejects as
insufficient or unuseful. So Bellarmine thinks it sufficient that many be
present in the Council, and none excluded. Lupus denies this to suffice, unless
the absent Bishops, either before or after the Council, shall assent.
Bellarmine holds this assent unnecessary. For speaking of the Lateran Council
under Leo X. he has these words: Quod autem non fuerit receptum, saltem ab
omnibus, parum refert. Nam decreta Conciliorum non indigent approbatione
populi, cum ab co^uon accipiant authoritatem. Bell. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 17.
But whereas it was not received, at least by all, it matters little. For the
Decrees of a Council need not the approbation of the people, since they receive
not their authority from them. Fabulottus Fabul. de potest. Papae super Council.
c. 5.
and the Author Vbi supra.
of the Treatise of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, maintain and at large
prove the same things. Thus all things are uncertain among them, and hang upon
a thread Martinonus was not ignorant of this: who to proceed more warily,
flies to the Pope and Council it self; and makes them, especially the Pope,
the only Judges of these preliminary Questions. To him, says he Pontificis est
declarare, an congregatio sit generalis sufficienter, and an qui adsunt teneant
locum sufficienter omnium aliorum. Mart. de fide, disp. 5. Sect. 7.
, it belongs to declare whether the Assembly be sufficiently general, and
whether those which are present, sufficiently represent all the rest. But
neither does this suffice. For as to a Council, since only a General can
infallibly pronounce in matters of Faith, and the Universality of the Council
pertains to Faith, before we can acquiesce in the determination of the Council
concerning its own Universality, we must know whether it be general. Otherwise
we cannot be assured, that it did not err in that very determination. Besides,
if this Judgment of the Council it self sufficed; all those were to be admitted
as general, which challenged that Title to themselves. But some of these the
Monarchists reject, as the Council of Constance before the union of the three
obediences, and that of Basil: others the Sorbonists, as the Florentine, and
the Lateran under Leo X. The same may be said of the Pope. For every one of
these four Councils were decreed to be General by some Pope, yet none of them
acknowledged to be so by all.

CHAP. XIV. That not all Ecumenical Councils are presently lawful: That it is
very difficultly known which are lawful.
THus have we considered the first condition of an Infallible Council,
Universality. The second follows of no less moment, That, If it be lawful. Our
Adversaries confess, that the H. Ghost is not indifferently present in all
Councils, how numerous soever. They acknowledge even the most numerous to have
defined erroneously. They require them to be rightly and canonically
constituted, and every way lawful. Whence as often as we object to them the
Errors of some Councils; they think it enough to answer such were
Pseudo-Councils, Conventicles of no value, not lawful Councils, to which alone
they allow the privilege of Infallibility. That the knowledge therefore of the
lawfulness of Councils is very difficult, however necessary to give assurance
to Faith relying on the Decrees of them, and that no true certainty is to be
had therein, I here undertake to prove. And the difficulty of this knowledge
may hence appear; That it is utterly unknown what are the conditions necessary
to make a Council lawful. I never yet met with any one, who dare undertake to
assign them, much less demonstrate them. Some things may be found scattered
here and there in treating of other matters, but nothing delivered ex professo.
Yet unless this knowledge were fixed, these conditions assigned, agreed on, and
demonstrated, and their number exactly determined, so as we might be
ascertained that neither more were required, nor fewer sufficed: in vain will
Councils define, the Infallibility of their Decrees will be always uncertain.

I doubt not, but if God had intended to tie our Faith to the Decrees of
Councils; he would either have tied it to all indifferently, or provided that
no unlawful Councils should ever be held, or given us plain and manifest Rules
whereby to distinguish lawful from unlawful ones. For to permit diverse unlawful
Councils to be held, to command the faithful to adhere only to the lawful ones;
and all this while to prescribe no certain conditions, assign no manifest
Characters of a lawful Council, is highly repugnant to the Wisdom and Goodness
of God. He might indeed justly have left this difficult inquiry to us; if it
had been accommodated to our strength and capacity. But the discord of whole
Churches in assigning the lawful Councils, and consequently the Error of some
most Learned men, manifestly evince it to exceed both. So formerly adhered to
the V. General Council the whole Eastern and the Roman Churches; Africa,
France, Spain, and the rest of Italy, openly and vigorously rejected it. Each
of these Churches did then abound with most Learned and most Holy men; which
proves the thing to have been very doubtful and obscure, and difficult to be
determined. The same may be said of the Council of Constance as to the first
Sessions, Basil, Florence, and the V. Lateran: whose Lawfulness is to this day
disputed of.

The difficulty of this matter can arise only from the ignorance of the
conditions necessary to make a Council lawful. If these were fixed, the
determination would be easy, unless the conditions themselves were intricate
and imperceptible. The Monarchists, who assert those Councils to be lawful,
which are called, presided over, governed, and confirmed by the Pope, all which
are easily known; can scarce doubt which are lawful Councils; whence they all
agree in numbering them. Not so the rest: who neither agree in assigning the
conditions of a lawful Council, nor explain the necessity of each condition,
nor demonstrate what they say to be true. For Example, the first condition
given by the Monarchists, is, That the Council be called by the Pope. So also
many of the Sorbonists: as Brevicoxa Debet Concilium authoritate Pontificis
congregari, nisi in casu in quo Papa esset notorius haereticus. Brev. apud
Launoi. Epist. part. 8. ad Amelium.
, who says, The Council ought to be called by the Pope, unless he be a
notorious Heretic: and Richerius Est Summi Pontificis regulariter and
ordinary generalia Concilia indicere and convocare; it a si rogatus id facere
detrectet, etc. Rich. Apol. axiom. 25.
, who affirms, The calling of Councils ordinarily and regularly to belong to
the Pope, unless he be distracted, or refuse to do it when desired. Launoy, on
the contrary, thinks it matters not by whom the Council is called, so it
decrees rightly when met. Therefore after a clear passage cited out of Maximus
his Disputation with Theodosius Bishop of Caesarea, he Igitur non a Synodorum
convocatione, quae ab hoc vel illo fiat, sed a recta fide, quae in Synodis
sancitur, Synodorum authoritas depromenda est. Laun. Epist. part. 6. p. 263.
concludes the authority of Synods not to depend upon the calling of them,
whether done by one or other, but upon the truth of their definitions. Nor
without reason. For if no Councils were lawful, but what were called by the
Pope; then the ancient Christians had no lawful ones; among whom all those
famous and holy Councils were called only by the Emperors: as Launoy and
others have abundantly demonstrated.

The same may be said of the second condition assigned by the Monarchists, the
Presidence of the Pope in the Council either by himself or by his Legates.
Richerius Rich. Apol. ax. 25. and 26.
and Holden Hold. Anal. fid. lib. 2. cap. 3.
do not refuse it; of whom the first teaches the Pope has a Right to preside
over Councils; the latter affirms him to be by Divine Right Head of all
Councils. But Launoy in proving that the Pope presided not over the first
Councils, shows that he thinks not this condition necessary.

The third condition is more difficult: which consists in this, That the
Council be made up of those who have a right to be present; and none others.
Who these are is not manifest. For first it is inquired, Whether Laics be
comprehended in this number? This almost all deny; yet Peter de Monte Ista jura
supra pro utraque part producta reddunt hane materiam mirabiliter dubiam.
Tract. de Monarchia.
Bishop of Brixia, after he has produced many places on both sides out of the
Canon Law, thence concludes this matter to be wonderfully doubtful. Certainly
in the Council of Jerusalem, which many hold to have been Ecumenical, the
first and the Pattern of all Councils, Laics were present, subscribed the
Synodical Epistle together with the Apostles, and said equally with them: Acts
xv.
It seemed good to the H. Ghost, and to us. But to exclude them, and admit only
Ecclesiastics; shall all ranks of these be admitted? This the Monarchists
deny, and assert only Bishops to have ordinarily the Right of a definitive
Suffrage, and Cardinals, Abbots, and Generals of Religious Orders by
privilege. The same seems to be the opinion of Holden. Contrariwise Gerson
Gers. de potest. Eccl. confid. 12.
, Lud. Alemanus Apud Aeneam Silvium. Hist. Council. Basil. l b. 1.
Cardinal and President of the Council of Basil, Almain De sup. porest. Eccl.
, Richerius Apol. ax. 21.34.
, and Vigorius Comm. cap. ult.
, vehemently contend that Presbyters, at least Parsons bearing Cure of Souls,
have a right to sit in Councils. This is indeed a great Question, upon which
depends the validity of all Councils. There were some (as those of Basil,
Constance, Pisa, and the Lateran, by the testimony of Alemannus an Eyewitness)
in which Presbyters had a decisive Vote, but far more (even all the rest) from
which they were excluded. If they have a right; all these last Councils are
unlawful: if not, all the first.

Concerning Abbots there arises another doubt. They have sat in Councils now
for many Ages by Privilege. The first who obtained it, as Lupus Lup. Tom. 1.
p. 865.
observes, was that most wicked Barsumas, who made no small bawling in the
Ephesine Latrocinium. But it is inquired, who had Power to give them such a
Privilege. Certainly that Spirit which reveals Truth, and as our Savior
tells us, blows where it lists, cannot be obliged by any humane Grant to
confer Infallibility on those, to whom he never promised it. The Monarchists
themselves acknowledge the Pope cannot confer on his Legates the privilege of
not erring. How then shall either Pope or Council give it to Abbots? But if
they cannot; then are unlawful all those Councils wherein Abbots sat, those
especially wherein they exceeded the Bishops in number, as the Council of
Lateran under Innocent III. in which (by Bellarmin's Bell. de Con cil. lib. 1.
cap. 5. and 7.
computation) were present 1283 Prelates, of which only 473 Bishops; and that
of Constance, which among a 1000 Fathers had no more than 300 Bishops. The same
Question is moved concerning Procurators of Bishops. For it is justly doubted,
whether Bishops can delegate that Power of defining matters of Faith without
danger of Error, and transfer it upon others that are no Bishops. For if not,
all those Councils will be invalid, wherein these Procurators were admitted.
Now that they cannot, seems probable. For to omit that, the Monarchists
affirm the Pope cannot communicate his Infallibility, and that Bishops should
be able to do more than the Pope, seems incredible; I urge that this
Procuration is not allowed even in temporal Causes. Judges are not permitted to
substitute others who may give Judgment, and pronounce Sentence in their stead.
And if this be thought inconvenient in judging the frail and momentany things
of life; how much more will it be in defining matters that relate to eternal
Salvation? Lastly, delegated Judges can never subdelegate another; unless the
Delegant shall expressly grant Power of doing it. Let our Adversaries therefore
either show where God has given Bishops power to constitute Procurators to sit
in Councils in their Name; or confess it to be uncertain whether those Councils
are lawful, in which these Procurators sit.

They will plead Prescription perhaps for this; and urge that it is not
probable a Custom received and approved by so many Ages, should not be lawful.
But they have no Right to make use of this Argument. For Widdrington Aliud est
facere de facto, aliud determinare quod ita possit fieri de jure. Widd. contra
Schulck. page 241.
in replying to that Objection of the Assertors of the deposing Power, That
Kings and Emperors have been deposed by the Church, and therefore may be so;
answers out of Sylvester, That it does no way follow, it being one thing to do
withing, another to determine that it may be done lawfully. And Richerius Apol.
ax. 38.
freely reprehends many things observed in the Councils. Lastly, Holden
Theologi passim affirmant posse quodammodo errare Synodes omnes, etiam
Oecumenicas, in legibus ad Eccles. disciplinae regimen spectantibus. Hold.
Anal. fid. l. 2. c. 3.
tells us, That all Synods, even Ecumenical, may in some measure err in
matters of Ecclesiastical Discipline, as most Divines hold. If in those, then
surely in things which they neither command nor define, but only tolerate.

The Presidents of the Council of Trent were very much perplexed with this
Question, and knew not well what to do in it. Cardinal Palavicini Hist. Council
Trid. lib. 21. cap. 1.
relates how they consulted the Court of Rome and the ablest Canonists, and
employed Learned men, Scipio Lancelottus and Michael Thomasius, to write
concerning it. The Question proposed was, Whether to Procurators were of Right
due a decisive Suffrage in the Synod? This they determined in the Negative; as
well because it was not a matter of contract or private business, (...) which
these Procurators were employed, but the common concern of the whole Church; as
because they bore not that Office in the Church, to which God had promised the
assistance of the H. Ghost in Ecumenical Synods. But because the custom of the
Church was contrary, and some show of Arguments appeared on the other side: the
Legates thought not sit to determine this Question themselves, but expected to
know the pleasure of the Court of Rome.

Thus much for the third condition. Gelasius Secundum Scripturas, sec.
traditionem Patrum, sec. Ecclesiasticas regulas, pro side Catholica and
communione. (...) ad Episc. Dard. epist. 13.
assigns many together, while treating of the difference of lawful and unlawful
Synods, he defines a lawful Synod to be that which acts. aocording to the
Scriptures, Tradition of the Fathers, Ecc^^^astical Rules, and in defense of
Catholic Faith and Communion; that to be unlawful which acts contrary. I
inquire not now, whether all these conditions be necessary. I only say that it
will be very difficult this way to distinguish lawful from unlawful Synods. For
how few can compare the Decrees of them with Scripture, Fathers, and
Ecclesiastical Rules? Maximus requires much fewer things. For he would have
nothing else inquired, but only whether the Council decreed rightly. For to
Theodosius Bishop of Caesarea objecting, That the Lateran Synod held at Rome
under Pope Martin, was not received, because not held by the Emperor's
Command, he thus replieth Si Synodos quae sactae sunt jussiones Imperatorum
firmant, and non sua fides, recipe Synodos, quae contra homoousion factae sunt,
etc. Omnes enim has Imperatorum jussio aggregavit. Attamen omnes damnatae sunt
propter impietatem infidelium dogmatum ab eis confirmatorum -- illas novit
sanctas and probabiles Synodos pius Ecclesiae Canon, quas rectitudo dogmatum
approbavit -- Et dixit Theodosius, It a est ut asseris; dogmatum quippe
rectitudo Synodos roborat. Disp. Maximi cum Theod. inter Anastasii Collectanea
a Sirmondo edita Paris. 1620. p. 161, 162.
: If the Commands of the Emperor, and not their holy Faith, makes Synods
valid, then must you receive the Synods held by the Command of Princes against
the Doctrine of Consubstantiality, as those of Tire, Antioch, Seleucra, etc.
For all they were called by the Emperors, but all condemned by reason of the
impiety of the heretical Doctrines confirmed in them. For the pious Rule of the
Church acknowledges only those for holy and lawful Synods, which the truth of
their Decrees have approved. To which Theodosius rejoyned: So it is as you
affirm: for the truth of their Doctrines makes Synods valid. So they, and with
them Launoy above cited. Which if it be admitted, the Controversy is at an
end. None of us will deny those Councils are to be assented to which have
decreed rightly. But how shall we know, whether they have decreed rightly. Here
lies the difficulty, our Adversaries, especially being Judges, who are averse
to all discussion, and affirm it to be above the capacity of the people. Which
way soever therefore they turn themselves, they cannot deny it to be very
difficultly known which are lawful Councils, and consequently which, although
confirmed by the Pope, can afford certainty and firmness to our Faith.

CHAP. XV. That tt is uncertain whether any Councils have been Free.
FReedom is so necessary to the being of an infallible Council, that all assign
it as a condition, none omit it: and herein those two great Antagonists Edmund
Richerius and Andrew Duval agree; of which the first makes this his XXII. axiom
Libertatem ferendi suffragii esse conditionem essentialem ad celebrationem
Synodorum penitus necessariam, etc.
: That the Liberty of Voting is an essential condition wholly necessary to the
Celebration of Synods, and so necessary, that without it the H. Ghost presides
not over Ecclesiastics met in Council. For the Apostle 2 Cor. iii. 17.
says, Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty: and an Anonymous
Author Numerosissima Concilia, qualia fuere, etc. propter hanc libertatis
carentiam illegitima sunt pronunciata.
of a Tract offered to the Assembly of the French Clergy, says, That most
numerous Councils, such as those of Ariminum and the II. of Ephesus for want of
this liberty have been pronounced unlawful. On the other side Duval Caruit
liberate Conciliis necessaria. Duvall. de potest. Pont. part. 4. quaest. 6.
speaking of the Council of Ariminum, says, It wanted the Liberty necessary to
Councils, and afterward of the II. Ephesine Council, that although lawfully
called, yet it proceeded unlawfully, being overawed by violence of Dioscorus,
in like manner as the Council of Ariminum had been by Constantius. The same
says Melchior Canus Can. Loc. Theol. and lib. 5. cap. ult.
.

The Ancients consent hereto. St. Hilary Incipio definitio Catholica habita ab
omnibus Catholicis Episcopis, priusquam per terrenam potestatem territi
haereticorum consortio sociarentur. Hill. in fragm.
gives this Inscription to the first Decree of Ariminum; This is the Catholic
definition composed by all the Catholic Bishops, before that terrified with
the Secular Power, they were joined to the Society of Heretics. And St.
Athanasius having rejected (...). Athan. Epist. ad Episc. Afric.
the Decrees of this Council of Ariminum, because extorted by contention and
force, and desiring a lawful Council, Let an Ecclesiastical Synod, says he
(...). Id. Epist. ad Solit.
, be held far from the Palace, where neither the Emperor is at hand, nor his
Commissioner intrudes himself, nor any Judge threatens; but where the sole fear
of God and institution of the Apostles suffices. St. Basil (...). Basil.
Epist. 52. ad Athan.
thought the mere relation of the violence used in the Council of Ariminum
enough to invalidute all the acts of it. Lastly, Facundus Nusquam coactum
concilium nisi falfitati subscripsit; sicut in Arimino, etc. Fac. lib. 12. cap.
3.
says, Never did any forced Council subscribe to any thing but Error, as
happened in those of Ariminum and Ephesus.

That a lawful Synod therefore ought to be free, is on all sides confessed. But
we are not to imagine that this freedom is taken away only by Stripes,
Imprisonment and the like. There are other more secret and no less efficacious
means to obtain the same end. Among these Canus and Richerius reckon threats;
St. Ambrose the favor of Princes; when he says Dum Imperatoris gratiam
sequuntur, Dei gratiam perdiderunt; qui cum placere potentibus aucupantur,
maledicto se perpetuo subdidere. Ambr. in Luc. 6.
of the Fathers of Ariminum, That seeking the favor of the Emperor, they lost
the favor of God, and desiring to please great Men, subjected themselves to a
perpetual curse. Richerius Vi aut minis, vel aliis studiis aut fabricis, and
prensationibus immoderatis, vel gratia, pecunia aut pretio, vel rebus pecunia
aestimabilibus. Rich. Apol. axiom. 22.
asserts this liberty is hindered by force, threats, or other Factions and
Plots, by immoderate making of Parties, favors, giving of Money or any other
Gifts. Card. Perron Du Perron Repliq. live. 1. chap. 28.
says, the desire of pleasing has often crept in among Princes, and spoiled
and corrupted the judgment of Synods. Holden Absque suffragiorum ambitu aut
sollicita prensatione. Hold. Anal. fid. lib. 2. cap. 3.
requires that all things be maturely discussed in the Synod without any
begging of Votes, or sollicitous making of Parties. Lastly Estrix Haec illi,
inquies, vi and terrore compulsi. Fateor: sed qui terrore compelli potuerunt ad
approbandam haeresin, quidui potuissent delabi eodem aliis rationibus aut
^^piditate prava impellente? Estr. Diat. assert. 43.
having said, that the Bishops of the II. Ephesine Council were forced by the
violence of Dioscorus to subscribe to Heresy, has these words: But you will
say, this they did, compelled by Force and Terror. True: but those who can be
compelled by Terror to approve Heresy; why may they not be induced to the
same by other Reasons, or any inordinate Desire?

From what has been said, I gather four things: I. That liberty in voting is a
condition absolutely necessary to a lawful and Infallible Council. II. That
this liberty is infringed not only by open force, but also by threats,
promises, gifts, soliciting of Votes, or any other secret Arts. III. That this
may not only be, but has actually been done, and that more than once. IV. That
these things are so certain, that they are acknowledged by our Adversaries,
both Sorbonists and Monarchists. But if these be true, as most certainly they
are; we can never safely assent to the Decrees of a Council, till we be assured
that no methods of Violence or Corruption, either manifest or secret, were used
to infringe its liberty. But since none can know this but God alone, it is
thence most evident, that we are not only not obliged to a blind assent to the
Definitions of any Council, but that it would be a most gross folly and
manifest danger of Error to do it: because none but free Councils are
Infallible; and no man can possibly know which are free.

Melchior Canus Ita ^re^, (...) nullius Synedi explorata authoritas habeatur.
Can. loc.-Theol. l. 5. c.
saw this, who having produced the Example of the II. Ephesine Synod adds, That
if a true and a lawful Synod can err through fear, then Heretics may pretend
that all the rest were subservient to the Lusts of Popes and Emperors: and so
the Authority of no one Synod will be left certain. Nor indeed is this fear of
Canus vain. For long since many both Heretics and Catholics have complained
of the violated liberty of Councils. So Eusebius, Theognis and Maris, repenting
of their having subscribed in the Council of Nice, came to the Emperor; and
told him, We have done wickedly, O Emperor, in that being terrified by you we
subscribed to Heresy: As Philostorgius Apud Nicetam, These. lib. 5. cap. 8.
relates. So Ibas in his famous Epistle to Maris the Persian complains, the
Fathers of the I. Ephesine Council were corrupted by Cyrill's Gold. The Legates
of the Roman See made the like complaint in the Council of Chalcedon, Lucentius
Council. Chalced. Act. 16.
telling the Presidents in open Council that the Bishops were circumvented, and
forced to subscribe to Canons, to which they had not assented. In the V. Synod
Lupus In hae Synodo Justinianus Diocletianum induerat; ejus affectibus
serviebant omnes Graecorum Episcopi. Lup. tom. 1. p. 737.
says that Justinian became a Diocletian, and all the Greek Bishops were
Servants to his inclinations; and relates the words of Eustathius the
Presbyter, who affirms that nothing was therein done without violence,
necessity, partiality, and affection. Richerius Ita ut vix ullus contramussare
auderet: quae forma Conciliorum habendorum viguit a seculo Gregorii VII. ad
tempora Synodi Constantiensis. Rich. Apol. ax. 38.
says, that from the times of Gregory VII. to the Council of Constance for 340
years, the Popes were wont arbitrarily to impose Laws upon the Church; and
having formed Canons and Definitions at home, to call Synods, and imperiously
to propose them, where none dared so much as to mutter against them: and in
another place Hist. Council. lib. 1. cap. 13. Ita ut hoc stante regimine omnino
impossible videatur liberum haberi Concilium.
tells us, That Gregory VII. contrary to the custom used in the Church for more
than a thousand years, introduced that order, that all Bishops should swear
Obedience to the Sea of Rome; whence, says he, the liberty of all subsequent
Councils was taken away: but much more by the Popes arrogating to himself the
collation of Ecclesiastical Dignities and Benefices: so that as long as his
Government in the Church continues, it seems altogether impossible to have a
free Council. Duvall Duvall. Anteloq. ad lib. de potest. Pont.
evinceth the Council of Basil was not free, from Aeneas Sylvius, who relates
that the Eugenian party being terrified with threats, all rose up together, and
cried out in the Council, Liberty, Liberty is taken away from us. How is it
that the Patriarch threatens he will break, our heads? The Greeks returning
home protested against the force put upon them in the Council of Florence, and
therefore would not stand to the Decrees of it. As for the Council of Trent,
Richerius Color quidem impediendae confusionis, sed revera ut omnis occasio
liberius disputandi de necessitate Ecclesiae reformandae in Capite and in
membris patribus Concilii tolleretur. Et hae sunt arts eximiae; quibus Curia
Romana suam absolutam sulcit Monarchiam, ne dicam tyrannidem. Rich. Apol. ax.
22. and in Epilogo. Si hodie celebrentur Concilia, Episcopi non sunt Judices,
etc. Item liberam sententiae dictionem non habent in Synodis, quoniam potestas
infallibilis and voluntas absoluta Papae pro omni Synodo, deliberatione,
consensa, lege, Canone, and communione Sanctorum coli servariq^e debet, ex quo
etium, etc.
assures us, That the Essential Liberty of Councils (which gives to the
Bishops full power of proposing what they please) was wholly taken away; while
none were permitted to propose any thing but the Popes Legates, upon pretext
indeed of avoiding confusion, but really that all occasion of disputing freely
concerning the necessity of reforming the Church both in Head and Members might
be taken away from the Fathers of the Council. And these are the fine arts,
wherewith the Court of Rome upholds her absolute Monarchy or rather Tyranny.
That in modern Councils Bishops are not fudges and Legislators, as they ought
to be, but only Counselors to the Pope, and cannot freely give their Suffrages
in the Council; because the Infallible Power and absolute Will of the Pope,
must now adays be received and observed instead of all Synod, Deliberation,
Consent, Law, Canon, and Communion of Saints: whereby the Church is become the
Bondslave of the Pope, as Cajetan A polop. part, 1. cap. 1.
impiously and flatteringly calls her. But the intolerable oppression of
Liberty and various Arts used in the Council of Trent, F. Paul amply relates in
his History of that Council. You will say, perhaps, these are false, and
calumnies. But how does this appear? Other Historians perhaps deliver contrary
accounts. But how shall we be ascertained they tell truth? If the first
Historians be disbelieved; why may not these also? How ever it be, possible it
is the first relation may be true; and until they be proved false, we can never
be certain they are not true, can never esteem those Councils free, and
consequently not Infallible. For that the irregularity of a Council is not
manifest, suffices not to found our Faith upon its Decrees; but to that end
the perfect regularity of it must be known and evident: which cannot be, while
the freedom of it is uncertain.

But this is not all, Canus and Estrix before truly observed, That herein no
more account is to be had of Fear, than of any other perturbation of the mind:
and that he who can be forced by threats to decree against his Conscience, may
no less vehemently be shaken and drawn from the truth by Hatred, Anger, Hope,
Desire, or the like. Certainly the efficacy of these Passions is no whit less;
and if the H. Ghost defends not Bishops in Council from the impressions of
Fear, neither will he from the temptations of other Affections. Suppose
therefore we be assured no force was used to infringe the Liberty of the
Council, which we can never be; yet this will not suffice, unless we be at the
same time ascertained that the Bishops were corrupted with no Passions, led by
no Affections, and served no Interest in giving their Suffrages. Till then we
must suspend our assent to the Decrees of any Council; as justly doubting,
whether that may not have undergone the same unhappiness, which has attended
some former Councils. So Lupus accuses the Fathers of the I.
Constantinopolitan Council of envy against the Western Bishops, but especially
the Church of Rome. Liberatus relates, That Theodorus Ascidas, Favorite to the
Emperor Justinian, in revenge of the Condemnation of his admired Origin,
projected the design of the V. Council, and thereby extorted from the whole
World the Condemnation of the Tria Capitula. Duval, That the Council of Basil
was blinded with hatred against Pope Eugenius. What happened to these, might as
well to other Councils, and who can assure us it did not?

But no Liberty seems more requisite to the establishment of Truth; than that
which purges the Mind from preconceived Opinions, and addicts it wholly to
Truth. For it cannot be hoped, that they who are infected with Error, should
define rightly; and immediately upon their entering the Council, from Patrons of
Heresy become Champions of Faith. This Experience has often taught. For why
did the Councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus; and Chalcedon desine
rightly, but because they consisted of Orthodox Bishops? Why the African under
Cyprian, and all the Arrian Councils erroneously; but because they were made up
of Bishops favoring those Errors? Why the Council of Sardica both rightly and
erroneously, well at Sardica, ill at Philippopolis; but because the Orthodox
Bishops stayed at Sardica, the Heretical went to Philippopolis? How comes it to
pass therefore, that in assigning so many conditions of an Infallible Council,
this one should be forgotten, the most necessary of all, that it consist only
of Orthodox Bishops? Wisely then did the Popes, Leo and Vigilius, who labored
hard, that only an equal number of Greeks and Latins might be admitted into the
IV. and V. Councils, the one fearing the Eutychians, the other the Enemies of
the Tria Capitula. However it be, if Threats and Promises, if Fear and Desire
can hinder Orthodox Bishops from defining truly; much more will preconceived
Opinions hinder Heretical ones from decreeing rightly: Since the first are
drawn to favor Error unwillingly, and act in it coldly; the latter promote it
with their utmost Zeal and greatest Vigor.

Lastly, I do not see, how if a Council be placed beyond all danger of erring
by the assistance of the Holy Ghost, Fear, or any other Passions can so far
prevail in it, as to divert the Fathers of it from the right way. This might
indeed be, if Councils were infallible in their Nature, but in their
Hypothesis, who ascribe their Infallibility only to the external direction of
the Holy Spirit, it is highly absurd and irrational. For cannot the Holy Ghost
invincibly arm the minds of those, in whom he dwells, against the terrors of
Threats or Temptations of desire? Why then is the Hymn, Veni Creator Spiritus,
sung before every Session of Councils? Why is it expressly said, Accende lumen
sensibus; Infunde amorem cordibus; Infirma nostri corporis virtute firmans
perpeti? Why is he called the Living Fountain, Fire, Charity, and Spiritual
Unction? Why the finger of Gods Right Hand, but to design his powerful
Assistance against all the defects of Nature, and infirmities of Mind? This
assistance therefore is desired. If it be obtained, in vain are Threats,
Bribes, Promises, and other Frauds: they can never corrupt the Council. If it
be not, who can assure us the other part of the Petition is granted, viz.
Illumination of Mind to discern and dispel the Sophistry of Heretics. But why
do I insist on this? If we consider those Holy Men, in whom the Holy Ghost is
thought to have dwelt, and armed with his Graces for the defense of Truth, as
Athanasius, Basil, Chrysostom, Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, and the rest; we
shall find that they were impenetrable to fear or flattery, and constantly
despised both the threats and promises of Arian Princes. If the Holy Ghost
therefore presides over Councils, neither the force nor fraud of Enemies can
obstruct the Infallibility of it; and we may much more justly and truly, than
Richerius did before, apply those words of St. Paul to them, Where the Spirit
of the Lord is, there is Liberty. For he alleged them to prove that Liberty is
a Condition pre-required to the presence of the Holy Ghost in a Council:
whereas the construction of them manifests it to be rather an effect of this
presence: according to that of our Savior: John. VIII. 36.
If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed: and Ibid. v. 32.
the Truth shall make you free. For the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Christ; so
that what is done by the one, may be well attributed to the other. But to make
an end. Our Adversaries found the Infallibility of Councils upon the promises
of the assistance of the Holy Ghost made to the Apostles by our Savior in
those words, The Spirit of Truth shall guide you into all truth; I will send
another Comforter, etc. which they maintain to have been spoken not only to the
Apostles, but to their Successors also to the Worlds end. If so, then must
necessarily be conferred on both an Infallibility of the same kind and quality.
But were the Apostles preserved by the assistance of the Holy Ghost from
involuntary Errors, and left unarmed to the assaults of Threats and Promises?
Certainly no. Christ both promised and gave to them his assistance against all
kind of Temptations and Corruptions, whereby they might be drawn to betray the
Truth. Either Councils therefore have the same assistance, or can pretend no
share in these Promises.

Two several ways therefore is the Authority of Councils overthrown by the
Doctrine and Concessions of our Adversaries about the necessity of their
Liberty; both in that it is certain they may be drawn from Truth by any other
means as well as defect of Liberty, and uncertain whether there was ever any
free Councils. The Sorbonists can oppose nothing to this: but the Monarchists
think they can. They pretend that when a Council is thus corrupted, yet the
Rock of the Church, the Pope, remains unshaken, whom no force can move, as for
whom Christ prayed, that his Faith should never fail. For first, the Sorbonists
deny this; which suffices for me, as proving that pretended Privilege of the
Pope not to be of Faith, and so not able to give certainty to the Decrees of a
Council, whose Liberty is suspected. But then this invincible Constancy of the
Pope is demonstrated to be false by the Examples of Marcellinus, Liberius,
Paschal II. and Eugenius IV. to which we may add a fifth, that of Pope
Vigilius, from whom the Emperor Justinian, after he had extorted by force and
threats the Condemnation of the Tria Capitula from the fifth Council, extorted
an Approbation of the Council's Decree by the same Method: as he did afterward
in like manner from his Successor Pelagius. Lupus Vigilius aerumnis lassus and
libertatis ac sedis recuperandae amore victus, tandem consensit in Synodum. --
Pelagius Romani Episcopatus amore ad recipiendam Synodum est inflexus. Lup. in
Council. Tom. 1. p. 737.
acknowledges both, saying, that Vigilius, overcome with hardships, and the
desire of recovering his Liberty and See; and Pelagius, corrupted with desire
of the Papal Chair, both consented and approved the Synod. Popes therefore as
well as Councils may be drawn to decree against their Consciences. No where is
to be found invincible Constancy; no where the desired Certainty.

CHAP. XVI. That it cannot be known, whether the Intention of the Fathers of
the Council be right.
AS Lawfulness and Liberty are necessary to the constitution of an Infallible
Council; so is a right proceeding in it, when constituted. This consists in
three things; a good Intention, an accurate Examination of the Question to be
defined, and a Canonical Conclusion. Every one of these beget new scruples and
perplexities; of which in their Order. First therefore it is required, that the
Bishops, laying aside all Worldly Interests, seek only the finding out of
Truth, the Glory of God, and Edification of the Church. For they cannot define
Truth, unless they know it: Know it they cannot, but either wholly by their own
Sagacity and Industry, or by the Assistance and Illumination of the Holy Ghost.
The first way must be and is acknowledged to be fallible by our Adversaries,
who therefore fly to the second, and impute all the certainty of Conciliar
definitions to the direction of the Holy Ghost. Hence the Mass of the Holy
Ghost, and the Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus, is wont to precede every Session of
Councils; and this Title presixed to their Decrees, The Holy Universal Synod
Lawfully Assembled in the Holy Ghost; and oftentimes that other, It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost and to us; which supposes the Council to be directed and
assisted by the Holy Ghost.

But can we imagine that Holy Spirit illuminates their Minds, whose Hearts he
does not sanctify, and inflame with love of Truth and zeal of Divine Glory? He
inspireth not Souls defiled with Sin, and addicted to worldly Considerations.
So the Author of the Book of Wisdom: Sap. I. 4, 5.
For into a malicious Sold Wisdom shall not enter; nor dwell in the Body that
is subject unto sin. For the Holy Spirit of Discipline will flee Deceit, and
remove from Thoughts that are without Understanding, and will not abide when
unrighteousness comes in. Our Savior promises the knowledge of his Truth
only to those, who by Piety and the Love of Heavenly things, have sitted their
Minds for the reception of it. So he tells the believing Jews, John VIII. 31,
32.
If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed. And ye shall know
the truth, and the truth shall make you free. And in another place, John XIV.
21.
He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father; and I will love him, and
manifest my self to him. The like says David, Psalm. XXV.
The meek will he guide in judgment; and the meek will he teach his way. And a
little after, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them his Covenant. And St. Paul speaking of them that received not the
love of Truth, that they might be saved, says, 2 Thef. II. 11.
And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion that they should
believe a lie. And in another place 1 Timothy I. 19.
asserteth, that some having put away a good Conscience, made shipwreck in the
Faith.

These places cannot be eluded by saying, they speak of a Practical and not a
Speculative Knowledge of the Truth. For besides that this can by no means be
applied to the two last places, I cannot see with what appearance of reason God
can be said to promise Knowledge of Truth to those that love him, fear him; and
to the meek, who by being such, must be supposed to have had it before. A
Theoretical therefore, or more clear and distinct knowledge of the Truth is to
be understood to be here promised to Virtuous and sincerely Pious Persons.
Whence it cannot be supposed the same by the ordinary Law of Divine Government
is granted to profane and wicked Bishops in a Council, if there be any such,
as none denies such may be. This St. Chrysostom asserts, when upon those
words, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them; he says, (...). Chrysostom. in Matthew. Homil. 60.
What then? are not two or three gathered together in his name? Yes, but very
rarely. For he does not only mention a Meeting (a Synod) or require that alone,
but together with that requires others Virtues, and that with great exactness,
and in the first place. Nicholas de Clemangis Illos quomodo audiat aut visitet,
aut illustret, qui sibi adversantur, illumque cum in se n^n possint, in ^liis
extinguere nituntur, qui pro igne charitatis ardore sunt ambitionis indammati?
Clem. in disp. cum Schol. par.
proves the same thing largely and accurately. He affirms, the first four
Councils were for no other reason had in so great Honor, than because they
consisted of holy and pious Men; and denies that wicked Men are directed by
the Holy Ghost. For how should he hear, visit, or illustrate them, who resist
him, and endeavor to extinguish him in others, when they cannot in themselves,
who instead of the fire of Charity are enflamed with the heat of Ambition? He
observes also, That the Fathers of Ancient Councils used to begin their
Sessions with Fastings, Prayers, and Tears; Which would have been unnecessary,
says he, if they had been certain they could not err, nor be deceived in their
Undertakings, nor be defrauded of their desire for want of due preparation and
disposition.

The Presidents of the Council of Trent were persuaded of the truth of this.
For in the beginning of the Council they penned an Admonition, which they
commanded frequently to be read, wherein they exhorted the Fathers to be
touched with a true and lively sense of the Sins that occasioned so many Evils;
Nisi haec been cognita and perspecta fuerint, frustra intramus in concilium,
frustra invocamus Spiritum Sanctum, etc. Haec sunt quae contristant and
repellunt quem invoca^imus Sp. S. sine quo nihil omnino facere poterimus, quod
ad bonum and pacem Ecclesiae cedat.
that otherwise in vain was the Council celebrated, in vain the Holy Ghost
invocated: For that he, how greatly soever entreated, would not be present:
That Repentance and Reformation of Life was absolutely necessary to obtain the
assistance of that Holy Spirit, who had formerly refused to give any Answer to
the Jews consulting him in the Prophet Ezekiel, because of their Abominations;
that they must necessarily abstain from those things which are wont to corrupt
the love of Truth, and deprave the Judgment; as all Passions and perturbations
of the Mind, Anger, Hatred, Favor, or the like. For these are the things which
grieve and drive away the Holy Ghost, whom we have invoked; without whom we can
do nothing that may tend to the good and peace of the Church. Hence may be
noted the shameless folly of Cardinal Palavicini's pretense, who would make his
Readers believe, That the Presidents by all this meant no more, than that
Repentance and amendment of Life was necessary, not to defining rightly, but to
the successful execution of their Definitions, and happy extirpation of Heresy.
Consonantly to the Admonition of the Presidents, Didacus Payva Andradius, who
was present in the Council, teaches, Ii vero in Christi nomine congregari
dicuntur, quos non privata commoda inducunt, non honoris aura, etc. Nam qui ut
privatis rationibus consulant, contentionibus serviant, miserosque homines
specioso Concilli nomine decipiant, cocunt; minime quidem in Christi nomine
convenire, nec Ecclesiasticos sed mortiferos conventus agitare dicendi sunt.
Andr. def. Council. Trid. Lib. 1.
That those only may be said to meet in the name of Christ, whom not any
private interests, not Ambition, Hatred, Envy, or the like; but Charity, and
the love of Peace, Truth, and Piety actuates and enflames. For they who meet to
serve their own Interest or Party, or to deceive Mankind with the specious name
of a Council; meet not in the name of Christ, nor are to be called
Ecclesiastical, but pestilent Assemblies. Lastly, Duval Sepesitis humanis
assectibus, and sola sibi proposita veritate. Duval de potest, po^t. part. 4.
qu. 6. Vbi nemini su fraus, vis, aut injuria, nullusque adstantium animi motu
aut passione praepeditur, sed omnes veritatis amore ducuntur. Id. qu. 10.
absolutely requires that the Bishops act in the Council, Laying aside all
Humane Affections, and proposing to themselves only the sinding out of Truth.
And in another place, That no fraud, force, or injury be offered to any, that
none of those present be prepossessed with any Passion or Commotion of Mind,
but that all be led with the love of Truth.

It is manifest therefore both from Reason and the Confession of our
Adversaries, That Truth cannot infallibly be defined in a Council, unless the
Bishops bring with them Minds truly desirous of it, and animated with Zeal for
the Honor of God; and moreover, cordially implore the Divine Assistance. But
since this escapes the knowledge of Man, and is perceived by God alone, the
searcher of Hearts; whatsoever depends upon so dubious and obscure a condition,
must necessarily be uncertain. For who can certainly tell, whether all the
Bishops of any Council were prepared and disposed and that nothing was indulged
therein to Flesh and Blood? Neither can you say, that this is indeed necessary,
but never deficient; that God takes care by his Providence the Bishops be
rightly disposed, and fully perform their duty. For first, God has no where
promised this; and then Experience has proved the contrary. This vigilant care
of God had no place in the 2d. Ephesine Council, none in the two
Constantinopolitan Synods against Images under Leo Isaurus and Constantine
Copronimus, if our Adversaries speak true; none in the Council of Basil, where
the Bishops were blinded with hatred against Eugenius, if we believe the
partisans of the Court of Rome, who are wont abundantly to vilify all
Councils, that decreed contrary to their liking.

But they are neither the first nor the only Persons, that have complained of
these abuses. All know what Gregory Nazianzen Naz. Querel. de Episcopis and
hominum ingratitudine.
writes of the Fathers of the I. Council of Constantinople; whom he calls a
tumultuous Rabble, a factious Assembly, composed of ignorant and vile fellows
newly taken from the Plough, the Oar, the Army, and the Chain, of the posterity
of the Collectors, who thought of nothing but falsifying their accounts, of
mean Mechanics newly started out of their shops, some of them mere Rascals and
fitter to be placed in Houses of Correction. Flagriones and pistrinis digni.
Yet this is the second of the four most ancient and most famous Councils;
which Gregory I. and with him many others profess to reverence equally with the
four Gospels. These irregularities made Nazianzen resolve never to be present
in any more Synods, (...). Naz. Carm. X. de diverse. vitae gener.
where nothing but Strife, Contentions, and exposing of one another faults,
and thence mortal hatred on each side were to be observed. Isidore Peleusiota
Isid. Epist. 310.
writes to Cyril of Alexandria, President of the first Ephesine Synod, that
many of those, who were present in Ephesus accused him, that seeking the
Revenge of a private injury, he did not Orthodoxly enquire after the things of
Christ. And in another place he exhorts him to leave off contention, and not
take revenge of the Church for his private injuries, and sow eternal Discord
under pretext of Piety. Of Pelagius Legate, afterward Pope of Rom, and
Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea, whereof one procured Origin, the other Theodorus
of Mopsuestia to be condemned, and so occasioned the fifth Synod, Liberatus
Illud liquere omnibus credo per Pelagium, etc. hoc scandalum in Ecclesiam
fuisse ingressum; quod etiam public ipse Theodorus clamitavit se and Pelagium,
vivos incendendos, per quos hoc scandalum intravit in mundum. Liberat. Brev.
cap. ult.
says, it is manifest that by those two this scandal entered into the Church,
which Theodorus also publicly Confessed, crying out that he and Pelagius
deserved to be burned alive for introducing that scandal. And Garnerius Etsi
negotium hoc vesano partium studio, infensisque incredibiliter animis susceptum
est.
in his notes upon that place, confesses the thing was undertaken with a
furious partiality, and incredibly imbittered minds. Not to say that Lupus in a
passage above cited makes Justinian in this whole business a Partizan of
Theodorus, and all the Greek Bishops Slaves to him. Lastly an Eminent Writer,
Claudius Saints, Nusquam praesentiori numine afflatus est, quam cum venire
isthuc noluisti. Nullus enim dubito, quin prae dolor mortuus esses, si ea
vidisses, quae ad eludendam reformationem infanda patrantur. Cl. Sanct. epist.
ad Espenc.
who went with the other French Divines to the Council of Trent, relates what
he observed there in these words, speaking to Espencaeus. Never were you more
plainly inspired by God, than when you refused to come hither. For I doubt not,
but you would have died with grief, if you had seen those wicked Arts, which
are put in practice to elude a Reformation.

If any one shall suspect the like of any other Council, he will have no mean
Authors for his Leaders in it. However that the Fathers of any Council were
better inclined, must appear to us otherwise than from the Universality of it;
since Learned Men have long since observed, that many in Ecumenical Councils
have sought any thing rather than the Glory of God. Yet is that the only way,
that is or can be offered for our assurance therein.

CHAP. XVII. That it seldom appears, whether a sufficient Inquiry has preceded
the Decrees of a Council.
THe second part of a lawful proceeding in the Council, is a diligent Inquiry
and Examination of the Question to be defined. For truth is not now obtained by
immediate Revelation, or Extatick Inspiration, but by a Labor and Diligence
proportionate to the difficulty of the thing it self. The Bishop of a Council
must carefully enquire into the Truth, patiently hear both Parties, maturely
weigh the Arguments on both sides, accurately compare them with the invariable
Rule of Faith, and then only when they are conscious to themselves they have
omitted no part of requisite diligence, to pronounce sentence. This is the
constant Opinion of our Adversaries as well as ours. Melchior Canus In
Conciliis non debent Patres mox quasi ex authoritate sententiam absque alia
discussione dicere; sed collationibus and disputationibus re ante tractata,
precibusque primum ad Deum fusis; tum vero question a Concilio sine errore
finietur; Dei sc. auxilio atque favore, hominumque diligentia and studio
conspirantibus. -- Ex quo perspicuum est non dormientibus and oscitantibus
Patribus Spiritum Sanctum assistere, sed diligenter humana via and ratione
quaerentibus rei de qua disseritur veritatem -- quamobrem qui sive Pontificum
sive Conciliorum diligentiam in fidei causa finienda in dubium vocant, eos
necesse est Pontificum judicia ac Conciliorum infirmare. Can. loc. Theol. lib.
5. cap. 5.
teaches, that in Councils the Fathers ought not immediately by their Athority
to give Sentence; but the Matter must be first weighed in conferences, and
Prayers offered up to God; then shall the Question be determined by the Council
without Error, the assistance and favor of God, the diligence and study of
Men conspiring together. And then from the Examples of the Councils of
Jerusalem and Nice concludes, It is manifest that the Holy Ghost assists not
the Fathers when idle and careless, but diligently seeking out the truth of the
Question proposed, by human means and ways; wherefore they which call in doubt
the diligence of Popes or Councils in defining a matter of Faith, must
necessarily invalidate the Decrees of Popes and Councils. The same says Ferus
in Act. XV. 7. Bellarmin de Council. lib. 2. cap. 7. Duvall Anteloq. ad lib. de
potest. Pont. and part. 2. qu. 4. Cellotius de Hierarchia lib. 4. cap. 10.
Bagotius Instit. Theol. lib. 4. disp. 5. cap. 4. sect. 1. Maimbourg de la vraye
Eglise cap. 10. sect. 4. and 9. Martinonus de fide disp. 9. sect. 7. whose
words would be too long to cite at large. The Sorbonists maintain the same
thing. So Richerius: Ecclesia errare non potest in quaestionibus juris
decidendis; si modo diligentiam necessariam adhibeat and prudenter agat: ut
Patres Africani loquuntur. Rich. Apol. ax. 23.
The Church cannot err in deciding Questions of Right; if she uses necessary
diligence, and acts prudently, as the African Fathers say in their Epistle to
Pope Coelestin. Holden Debent omnia in hujusinodi Synodo conciliariter (ut
loquuntur Theologi) peragi; ita ut praevio examine diligenti and fideli absque
suffragiorum ambitu aut sollicita prensatione discutiatur subjecta materia.
Hold. Anal. fid. lib. 2. cap. 3.
: In an infallible Synod all things ought to be done conciliarly ( as Divines
speak) so as the matter in hand be discussed with a diligent and faithful
examination, without any making of parties or soliciting of votes.

If these Divines be in the right, as they certainly are; then what certainty
can be in the Decrees of Councils? Who shall assure us, that the Bishops did
all they ought to do? and how shall every private Man know that? Canus was not
ignorant of this. If once, says he, Si semel haereticis hanc licentiam
permittimus, ut in quaestionem vocent, etc. quis adeo coecus est ut non videat
omnia mox Pontificum Conciliorumque decreta labefactari? -- It aque praestat
semper Pontifex quod in se est, praestatque Concilium, cum de fide pronunciant;
caditque causa, si quis e nostris aliter existimat. Can. ubi supra.
we give Heretics leave to call in question the requisite diligence of the
Judges of the Church; who does not see, that all the Decrees of Popes and
Councils are presently overthrown? He therefore takes Refuge in the Providence
of God, and pretends that God, in promising Infallibility to his Church, must
be supposed to have obliged himself thereby, to take care, that necessary
diligence, which is the means of it, should never be wanting in the Judges of
the Church. Hence, says he, the Pope always performs his Duty, the Council
their duty, when they pronounce of Faith; and if any of our Divines think
otherwise, our cause is ruined.

In this Argument of Canus I observe first, that he confounds the Means with
the Conditions. Diligence is a Condition, which God imposes upon the finding
out Truth. If the Council neglects this, God is bound to no promise: the Error
is to be imputed wholly to them. Secondly, if the Council can neglect no
Conditions, no diligence necessary to defining rightly, and always punctually
perform their duty; it is impossible it should ever err. For the Divine
Assistance will never be wanting to humane industry in Matters of Faith; and
when both meet, there can be no Error. Thirdly, if Councils therefore perform
their duty, because God in promising to them Infallibility, the end, must be
supposed also to promise the means, whereof this is one: Then every Council is
infallible, none ought to be rejected, all are indifferently to be received;
because God must be believed to have promised his Assistance to all Councils,
not wanting in their Duty, and also to take care that none should be wanting in
it. You will say perhaps Canus understands not all, but only Lawful Councils.
But I would know what are those Lawful Councils. For Councils are such three
ways, upon account of their Indiction, Constitution, and Proceeding. If you
answer by the two first ways, then the thing is false. For the second Council
of Ephesus, by the Confession of Bellarmine and Baronius, was both rightly
called an dconstituted, yet degenerated and proceeded inordinately. If he means
the third way; then his answer will come to no more than this, That Councils
will proceed rightly, if they proceed rightly.

But to put an end to this pretense; none will deny, that the Council of
Constance was lawful: Yet Canus confesses, that necessary diligence was not
always used in it. Some things, says he, Quaedam non conciliariter acta. Nam
in IV. and V. sessione nec disputatio aut disquisitio aliqua intercesserat nec
delecti fuerant adhuc viri docti ad disserendum and tractandum ea quae in fidei
doctrina essent constituenda. Id. lib. 5. cap. ult.
were not acted conciliarly, for in the IV. and V. Sessions no Disputation or
Disquisition preceded; no Learned Men were chosen to dispute and treat of those
things that were to be defined in Faith. The same thing is acknowledged by
Richerius of the great Council of Lateran under Innocent III. wherein
Transubstantiation and the Deposition of Heretical Princes were decreed. We
learn, says he, Ex Matthaeo Par. discimus nihil quicquam actum in illa Synodo
conciliariter ex more aliorum Concili^rum, nimirum communibus votis atque
suffragiis Patrum sigillatim discussis, perpensis and collectis -- Cum ergo
aliud sit aliquarecitare capitula in Concilio, aliud, etc. Rich. Apol. ax. 38.
out of Matthew Paris, that nothing was acted conciliarly in that Council after
the manner of other Councils, the common Votes and Suffrages of the Fathers not
being singly discussed, weighed, and collected. When therefore it is one thing
only to read a few Articles in a Council (and so shuffle them up, for no more
was done) another thing to examine and decree them Synodically and Canonically,
using due diligence. In vain does Bellarmin labor to palliate the Business. So
Maimbourg Maimb. de bello sacro lib. 11. ad an. 1215.
observes that the Ancient Councils were far more diligent than the Modern;
and for an example of this degeneracy brings this very Council of Lateran;
wherein the weightiest Matters of Faith, Manners, and Discipline were defined,
and (which took up most of their time) Peace and War treated of; and all
concluded in three weeks. The same Author in another place Ibid. ad an. 1245.
wonders how the Council of Lions under Innocent IV. wherein many things, the
least whereof would require a long and tedious discussion, were decreed, could
be finished in three Sessions. But neither in Elder times was due diligence
always observed. Whosoever shall read the Canons of the Council of Sardica,
will easily perceive how hastily they were made. Hosius propounded what he
thought fit. He asked the Bishops whether it pleased them. They cried out, It
did; nothing more was done: his Propositions immediately became Canons. So in
the Council of Chalcedon in one Session, or rather end of a Session, when the
Pope's Legates and Emperor's Commissioners were gone out, thinking the Session
was ended, suddenly XXVIII Canons were clapped up; whereof every one deserved a
long Consideration.

Neither can you say that greater care and diligence is wont to be used in
defining Matters of Faith. Here also it is often wanting. For where should we
rather expect to find it, than in weighing the Arguments on both sides,
consulting the rule of Faith, and searching out the sense of Scripture? yet
nothing is more frequent in the Decrees of Councils, than to find trifling
Reasons, false Glosses upon Scripture, and impertinent Allegations. Upon such
sandy and weak Foundations are their Definitions often built. Canus, Bellarmin,
Valentia, and many others confess this. I will produce now only Holden and
Duvall. Holden Nequaquam habent virtutem definitions. Hold. Anal. fid. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
says, that the Presaces, Reasons, Arguments, and Illustrations of conciliar
Decrees have not the virtue of a definition. Duvall: Audacter asserimus maximam
partem actorum ad sidem non pertinere. -- Item rations quibus Patres in
decernendis conclusionibus nituntur. Duval. Anteloq.
We confidently assert, that the greatest part of the Acts (of Councils)
pertain not to Faith: also the Reasons which the Fathers rely upon in decreeing
their Conclusions. To prove this, he brings the Example of the VII. Synod;
which defined Angels might be painted, because they are corporeal; and of the
Synod of Eliberis, which forbad Candles to be lighted in Churchyards, lest the
Souls of the Dead should be disturbed. To these he might have added many more
Examples, and particularly out of the II. Council of Nice; where for the sake
of Images, Scripture, Fathers, and Logic are most shamefully abused; so as may
create Indignation and Laughter together. Now I ask, whether those can be said
to have examined the matter in hand diligently, used the Rule of Faith rightly,
and considered the Arguments of both sides maturely; who obtrude such
impertinent trifles for solid foundations of their Decrees? Nay, even in the
Council of Trent, where they disputed so sharply and copiously, too much have
was sometimes made in their proceedings. Certainly when they decreed the vulgar
version to be authentic; in whatsoever sense that be understood, they must
have decided an infinite number of things at the same time. For thereby the
Synod pronounced there was no verse in it which was not the pure Word of God,
at least contained nothing false. How great and how accurate an Examination did
this require? Yet none at all used, the Version not so much as read before
them; but the thing defined, as if it were self-evident. Rashly therefore; and
if rashly, why not falsely? In a word, this condition is neither always
fulfilled; nor can it be known, but by a very few, when it is so.

From what has been said, appears how rashly and untruly Canus affirmed
necessary diligence to be never wanting to Councils. Richerius therefore having
related our Objection and the Answer of Canus, pronounces thus. Sic
difficultatem non solvit, sed potius involvit atque incrustat, ut saepe solet.
Rich. Hist. Council. lib. 1. cap. 9.
By this means he solves not the difficulty, but rather involveth it, and dawbs
it over, as he is wont to do. He promises a better solution, and having cited
a passage of Peter de Alliaco, wherein he says, that Infallibility is only a
Privilege of the Universal Church, that it may be piously believed Councils do
not err if they be guided by Scripture, otherwise they have erred, answers,
Censeo hic moralem and probab^lem consecturam, qualem rebus agendis sapientes
impendere consueverunt, sufficere; at que ubi constat Concilium fuisse liberum,
and Patres diligentiam adhibuisse necessariam, plane acquiescendum esse, nisi
forte aperte constaret aliquid contra fidem esse patratum. Id. Ibid.
That in this case a moral and probable conjecture, such as wise men make use
of in actions of Life, is sufficient; and when it is manifest that the Council
be free, and the Fathers have used necessary diligence, we must acquiesce in
their Decrees, unless they be clearly repugnant to Faith. How near to truth
does the good Doctor approach? For first, he rejects not the Opinion of the
Cardinal; which if admitted, will soon put an end to the Controversy.
Secondly, by the last clause of his Answer he confesses that a Council free,
and using requisite diligence, may pronounce contrary to the Faith. Otherwise
the exception would be vain, if the Case could never happen. Lastly, when he
flies to a probable conjecture, he does thereby plainly acknowledge, that
certainty cannot be had; which suffices for me. For if our Adversaries confess
they want certainty, I shall not envy them their probability.

CHAP. XVIII. That it is uncertain, whether plurality of Suffrages ought to
overcome, or whether perfect unanimity be required. That in both Cases no small
Difficulties occurr.
THere remains the last part of a Lawful Proceeding, the Conclusion; whereby
the President of the Council, when he has heard the Suffrages of the Fathers,
solemnly pronounces Sentence. Concerning this is no small Controversy, viz.
Whether the President of the Council, whosoever he be, ought to give Sentence
according to the major part of the Suffrages; or whether a full or absolute
unanimity be necessary; and whether the same account is to be made of a Decree
made by the Votes of all, and by the Votes of the major part. The Monarchists
distinguish here, and say, that if the Pope himself presideth, and perceives
either the major part or all to favor Error, he may deny his assent to them,
and give Sentence as himself pleases. But if only the Legates preside, and
have Instructions what to do; if the major number of Votes be consonant to
their Instructions, they may give Sentence without expecting unanimity; if
repugnant, they must suspend their assent on both sides, and refer all to the
Pope, who may determine it as he pleases. However regularly and ordinarily
they think plurality of Votes ought to overcome. So Bellarmin: Est verum
decretum Concilii, quod fit a majori part; alioqui nullum esset legitimum
Concilii decretum, cum semper aliqui dissentiant. Bell. de Council. lib. 2. cap.
11.
That Decree of a Council is true, which is made by the major part; otherwise
no Decree of a Council would be lawful, since some have dissented in all. And
in another place Ibid. lib. 1. cap. 18.
produces the Example of the Council of Chalcedon, which declared Heretics
ten Egyptian Bishops, who would not acquiesce in the Judgment of the major
part: And in a third place says, Nisi detur locus majori parti suffragiorum.
lib. 1. cap. 21.
There will never be an end of Controversies, unless we give place to the major
part of Suffrages. The same says Tho. Bosius Bos. de signis Eccl. lib. 16.
cap. 9.
, and many others. This Opinion seems also to have obtained at Trent. For
when the Fathers were divided about abolishing Clandestine Marriages, 56
Bishops against the Decree, 133 for it, and both parties obstinate, they agreed
to consult the Pope; who gave Sentence for the Decree: and his Approbation,
says Card. Palavicini Ejus approbatio sustulit omnem dubitationem. Hist.
Council. Trid.
, took away all doubt. Yet this was not always done. For although 30 Bishops,
and among them the Legate Seripandus privily, opposed the Decree, whereby it
was defined that Christ offered up himself in his last Supper; yet the Decree
was promulged, and stood in force.

Far different was the Opinion of J. Fr. Picus Mirandula Quia si pars major
contra divinas literas decernere quicquam vellet, numero minori adhaerendum
esset. Quinimo simplici potius rustico, and infanti, and aniculae, quam and
Pontifici and mill Episcopis credendum, si contra Evangelium isti, illi pro
Evangelio verba facerent. Pic. Theor. 16.
, who in Dissensions of a Council, thought the major part was to be adhered to,
caeteris paribus, that is, provided neither were repugnant to Scripture. But if
that happened, then that part was to be followed, either major or minor, which
had Scripture on its side. For that if the major part would decree any thing
against Scripture, the minor were to be adhered to: Yea, a simple Rustic, an
Infant, and an old Woman were to be believed rather than the Pope and 1000
Bishops, if these spoke against the Gospel, those for it. Gerson Si aliquis
simplex non authorizatus, esset excellenter in S. literis eruaitus, potius
credendum esset in casu doctrinae suae assertioni, quam Papae declarationi. Et
talis eruditus si, etc. Ger de exam. doctrine. Part. 1. Consid. 5.
had said the same thing before him: If any private person without Authority
should be excellently learned in the Scriptures, his Assertion were to be
believed in matters of Faith, before the Declaration of the Pope. And in case
he were present in a General Council, he ought to oppose himself to it, if he
perceived the major part, either through malice or ignorance go contrary to the
Scriptures. But if this Opinion be true, and private Men may judge which part
in a Council follows Scripture, which the contrary; then as often as there be
dissensions in Councils, their Power in desining will not be Supreme, as being
subject to the examination of all Men. Beside, if the major part of a Council
can manifestly and directly vote contrary to Scripture, much more can they do
it obscurely and indirectly, and therefore may be even then mistaken, when
their error is not manifest. And if so, the Decrees of the major part can in no
case, not caeteris paribus, be securely believed.

For these Reasons perhaps Cardinal Turrecremata maintains, In controversia
quae dubia est and nondum definita, arguendum est a majore part. Tur. de
Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 65.
That in a doubtful Controversy not yet defined, the major part must be
adhered to. But neither is this Opinion safe. For if we must stand to the
Plurality, shall Truth always overcome? Has Truth that excellent fortune as to
please always the greater part? Let Canus be heard: I deny, says he, Nego cum
de fide agitur, sequi plurimorum judicium oportere, etc. Can. loc. Theol. lib.
5 cap. 5.
that in matters of Faith the Judgment of the major part ought to be followed.
For we do not here as in Humane Judgments, measure the Sentence by the number
of Suffrages. We see frequently, that the greater overcomes the better part. We
know that those things are not always best, that please most. We know that in
things of Faith the Opinion of wise Men is to be preferred. Now Wisemen are
few, but Fools innumerable. Four hundred Prophets lied to Ahab, while one
Micaiah spoke truth. The greater part of the 2d. Ephesine Synod sided with the
wicked Dioscorus. Bannes Bann. in 2.2. quest. 1. art. 10. dub. 4.
his Disciple has the like words, and Salmero Salm. tom. 12. tract. 70.
the same. And indeed it may easily be, that more Heretical than Orthodox
Bishops be present in a Council; as well because the greater part of all the
Bishops in the World may be infected with Heresy, as we shall prove hereafter;
as because the Heretics, even although fewer in number in the whole Church,
may, incited by a perverse Zeal, flock to the Council in greater numbers than
the Catholics. Now what can we expect from such an Assembly? What, but that
every one should pronounce according to his preconceived Opinion, and decree
that which he thinks most true?

The fear of this made the Popes, Leo and Vigilius, desire before the IV. and
V. Councils, that an equal number of Western and Eastern Bishops might be
present in them. For the like cause Richerius Rich. Hist. Council. lib. 14. cap.
ult. Novam and inauditam rationem procedendi.
complains, That in the Council of Trent there were more Italian Bishops,
than of all other Nations together: And this he makes to be the cause of the
exorbitant Power of the Pope in all latter Councils, and of introducing a new
and unheard of way of proceeding into them; the Italian Bishops being almost
all the Popes Creatures and obnoxious to him. Thus he computes out of the Acts
of the Council, that from the beginning to the end of it there were present 187
Italian Bishops, but out of other Nations no more than 80. Further, our
Adversaries do not deny, that a Council gathered out of one half of the
Christian World may totally err; as for example, The Council of Constantinople
under Copronymus consisting of 338 Bishops, who decreed Images were to be
abolished. To make this Council Ecumenical there wanted only the presence of
two or three Western Bishops. Suppose them present, and opposing the Decree of
all the rest. How must the President then have pronounced, if with the major
part, an Ecumenical Council would have erred, and the Decree would have been
Heretical in the Opinion of our Adversaries?

Moved with these Reasons, some of our Adversaries, as well Monarchists as
Sorbonists, deny, that plurality of Votes ought to overcome in Councils, and
account only those Decrees certain, which are established by the unanimous
consent of all. This was the Opinion of Cusanus Ecce concordantiam maxim in
iis quae fidei sunt requiri: and quanto major est concordantia, tanto
infallibilius judicium. -- Vnde licet in Synodis universalibus plura necessaria
sint, maxim tamen communis omnium sententia. Cus. Concord. Cath. Lib. 2. Cap.
4.
which he proves from the Eighth Synod, and then adds; See how consent chiefly
in those things which are of Faith is required: and by how much the greater
this consent is, so much the more infallible is the Decree. Whence, although in
Universal Synods many things be necessary, yet most of all is the common
consent of all. So Holden: Imo tametsi plurimorum fuerit in Concilio
congregatorum testimonium, nisi universum and Catholicum sit, traditionis
certitudinem perfectam non habet. Hold. Anal. fid. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Although it be the Testimony of the major part of a Council, if it be not
universal and general, it has not the perfect certainty of Tradition.
Richerius Rich. Apol ax. 22.
seems to be of the same mind, although he speaks not so plainly. Nor do
Stapleton Stapl. de princip. lib. 7. cap. 9.
or Duvall Duval. Anteloq.
dister from it. But neither does this Opinion want its inconveniences. For,
first, hereby Councils are in a manner rendered useless. For it cannot easily be
imagined, unless some Factious Conspiracy should intervene, that all should
think the same thing, especially if they be many. And indeed we have few
examples of Councils, wherein the Bishops were unanimous. In that of Nice were
some Arians, at Sardica more, at Ephesus many Nestorians, at Chalcedon not a
few Eutychians; and so of the rest: which according to this Hepothesis must be
all expunged out of the number of lawful Councils. Secondly, The Infallibility
of Councils will hereby become unuseful; for they could never pronounce
Sentence. There would be always two or three Heretics present in the Council,
who to prevent the condemnation of their Heresy, need do no more than speak
their Minds, and dissent from the Votes of the rest. Thus the Power of the
Universal Church shall be overthrown, and all methods of extinguishing Heresy
eluded by the stubbornness of two or three Heretics. However it be, the
Council of Basil, which the Sorbonists so much extol, thought far otherwise,
and particularly the President of it, Lewis Cardinal of Arles. For when, in
treating of defining three Assertions that raised a Council above the Pope, the
major part voted the affirmative, although many Fathers, and among them the
famous Canonist Panosmitan, dissented, and even protested against it; yet the
President pronounced Sentence in the affirmative, and that Sentence was held
valid; as Aeneas Sylvius Hist. Council. Basil. lib. 1.
largely relates.

Whichsoever Opinion therefore our Adversaries embrace, they involve themselves
in inextricable difficulties. But I will not any further urge them. It suffi
eth, what none will deny, that it is not certain, whether the major part must
take place, or unanimity be required. Both may be defended, and neither is
self-evident, nor revealed by God, nor defined by the Church; as all
acknowledge. If this then be uncertain, it will be also uncertain what Decrees
of Councils were lawfully concluded, and consequently what command and deserve
belief.

CHAP. XIX. That it cannot be known from the subsequent Approbation of the
Church, which were lawful Councils.
FRom what has been hitherto said concerning Councils, it is most evident both
from the Reason of Things, and the Principles of our Adversaries, that the
Infallibility of Councils is a mere Phantasm; that if there were any Infallible
Councils, they must be such as are Ecumenical, free, lawful, and rightly
proceeding; that it cannot be yet certainly known, whether all these Conditions
be singly necessary, and whether all together suffice: That if that were
stated, it were unknown, what is required to make a Council Ecumenical, what
Free, and so in the rest; and much more uncertain, which or whether any were
so; that the lawfulness, freedom, right intention, necessary diligence, and
other conditions of an Infallible Council can never be certainly applied to any
particular Synod.

Many of these things are of that nature, that they cannot be known even by the
Bishops of the Council themselves. They can tell for example, whether
themselves have a right Intention, and be corrupted with no Interest or
Passion; but to know whether all the rest be equally sincere, is wholly
impossible. They no less than others must be uncertain what are the Conditions
necessary to constitute an Infallible Council; which neither God has revealed,
the Church defined, nor the consent of Doctors determined. If these things
cannot be known by the Fathers of a Council, how shall they by the other
Bishops far distant in the remote parts of the World? How by every one of the
common People, by Mechanics, Husbandmen, and Women, whose Judgment is so
small, and Notions so obscure? Again, if not of the present and later Councils,
how of the first and ancient ones, which length of time has involved in
darkness, and left to be known only by Conjectures? How shall the most learned
Men be assured of the freedom, legality, and all other necessary conditions of
these Councils, perhaps from the testimony of one or two Historians: as if
infinite errors of Historians were not daily found out, proceeding either from
ignorance, malice, or partiality.

But both of ancient and later Councils, this is chiefly to be considered, That
the conditions necessary to make them infallible, are of that nature, that one
cannot supply the defect of another. It suffices not to have some of them, nor
even all the rest, if any one be wanting. This Council must at the same time be
Ecumenical, Lawful, Free, and proceed rightly. If any one of these Conditions,
or any part of them be wanting, all the rest are of no value, the Council
becomes fallible. Whence many Councils, at least Decrees of Councils, have been
rejected, that were desicient but in one Condition.

Hence it may be concluded, First, That the Sorbonists have no firm foundation
for their Faith, having nothing to oppose to so many just doubts and reasonable
exceptions: For they think not sufficient the Judgment of the Pope, declaring
any Council to have wanted no necessary conditions of Infallibility, and reject
many, in favor of which he has so declared. They take their Judgment from the
sole consideration of the Council it self, and what was acted in it. Secondly,
That the Sentence of Pope and Council together is no more certain than that of
Pope alone; and that those therefore err, who make not the Judgment of either
separately, but of both conjunctly to be a firm Foundation for Faith and
Certainty. This might be perhaps with some color of Truth defended, if either
all Councils agreeing with the Pope, were admitted as infallible; or it were
certainly known what are those Councils which conjoined to the Pope obtain that
privilege. But both are false. For all our Adversaries, which acknowledge not
the Infallibility of Pope alone, allow it not also to him when united to a
Council not Ecumenical, or not lawfully constituted, or not rightly
proceeding. Now what Councils are Ecumenical, what lawfully constituted, and
what rightly proceed, we have proved that none can know. Unless the Pope
therefore has Infallibility, no certainty can accrue from his Judgment by the
addition of any Council. Which is also hence confirmed; that the Sentence,
whereby the Pope pronounces a Council to have been Ecumenical, Lawful, etc
comes from his sole Authority. For although the Council should pronounce the
same thing together with him; their Sentence would be of no value, as being
pronounced in their own Cause. So that the Decree of the Pope alone can not be
of any efficacy in this matter; which, if it cannot afford certainty, neither
will the Decree of Pope and Council together, at least no more certainty than
that of Pope alone.

Turn therefore the Authority of Pope and Council on all sides, take it
separately, conjunctly, divided, united; no certainty, no sirmness, no
foundation for Divine Faith will be ever obtained. One thing only our
Adversaries may pretend, that the Decrees of Councils become then certain, when
the Universal Church shall have received them. I have not indeed, yet met with
any who allege this. But I doubt not that many forced by the precedent
Arguments will take refuge there; and will therefore, before I proceed any
farther, demonstrate the vanity and salseness of this pretense.

And first, I oppose to it, what I before observed, That hereby Particular are
equalled and put into the same condition with General Councils, contrary to the
sense of all Christians, both Ancient and Modern, who constantly give the
greatest deference to General Councils. Not to say, that since hereby firm
assent cannot be given to a General Council not received by the Church, nor
denied to a particular one received by her; it would be foolish and absurd to
call a General Council, with infinite trouble and difficulty, when a particular
one may Define and Decree with the same Authority. Secondly, If the Church
reject some Councils, admit others, there must be some reason of this different
Judgment. This reason must be taken either from the Condition necessary to the
Councils Infallibility, as Universality, Freedom, and the rest, or from the
matters decreed in the Council, their conformity or repugnance to the rules of
Faith. If from the first, all the difficulties which we proposed in the
soregoing Chapters, will take place. For whether such a Council were
Occumenical, or rightly constituted, or did rightly proceed, being all Matters
of Fact, the Universal Church may err in judging of them: and so by her
judgment manifested in the reception or rejection of the Council, can neither
add to, nor take away any certainty from it. Besides, I have shown that the
conditions of an infallible Council cannot be known even by the Church when
they are fulfilled and when not. For if the Bishops present cannot know it,
much less those divided by great distance of place. Can the Americans or
Chinese know whether no bribes, no solicitation of votes, or making of parties
was used at Trent? The existence of such a Council they know only by uncertain
rumors. In vain is a certain knowledge hoped for. However it be, to determine
a thing of this nature and moment requires an accurate and diligent
inquisition and examination of all circumstances. Such an examination neither
ever was nor can be made by the Universal Church. For that would require a
judiciary kind of process, which the Church out of a Council cannot observe.
For our Adversaries ascribe to the Universal Church only a passive
infallibility in believing, not an active in defining. But grant she can judge
of this matter. Did she ever do it? Was the Council of Trent thus examined by
her? What witnesses were heard? What inquisition made, either by all Bishops or
any other? The Acts of it were always kept secret, and are to this day held
Prisoners in the Vatican, far from being submitted to the examination of the
Universal Church. The Canons are indeed promulged. But if any one should
examine them by himself, whether to be admitted or rejected, as the Gallican
Church rejected all those Canons, which concern Ecclesiastical Discipline, that
respects only the matter of the Council, (viz.) The Truth or Falseness, Justice
or Injustice of its Decrees, but not the form of it, (viz.) The Legality, Right
Constitution and Proceeding of it; of which only we are now treating. So Lupus
In Council. Tom. 1. p. 742.7.44.
tells us that the reason, why almost all the Western Bishops rejected the V.
Council, was, not any defect in the form of it, but their respect to the
Ancient custom of the Church, of Gondemning no man after his Death, that died
in Catholic Communion, Honor to the Memory of Theodorus of Mopsuestia, so
Famous over all the East, and Reverence to the Canons of Chalcedon, whose
Authority they thought infringed by the Decrees of this Council. So the Ancient
French and English rejected the Seventh and Eighth Synods, only for the
falseness of their Decrees, and defining the Lawfulness of Image worship, which
the others looked upon as Idolatry and contrary to the Faith; because they had
defined otherwise than the Orthodox Doctors had defined before them, says
Ademarus Cabanensis De imaginibus adorandis aliter quam Orthodoxi Doctores ante
definierant, statuerunt. Adem. apud Marcam de Concord. l. 6. c. 15.
: Because they Decreed many things inconvenient and contrary to the true Faith,
says Hoveden Multa inconvenientia and verae sidei contraria. Hoveden ad ann.
792.
. Lastly, that the Church in admitting Councils respects the matter, not the
form of them, may be hence proved; because the Church sometimes approves the
Decrees of unlawful Councils, as of Antiochia, which Ad An. 341.
Baronius accounts unlawful, because Celebrated, while the Indiction of the
Synod of Rome was yet depending: and did certainly act unlawfully in Condemning
Athanasius, and substituting to him Eusebius a Laick, and when he refused
George the Cappadocian, a man unknown to the Church of Alexandria. Yet the
Canons of this Synod were afterward received, as also the Decrees of the V.
Council; which Baronius and with him not a few think to have proceeded
Unlawfully.

There remains then to the Church only the latter way of examining Councils,
that is from the Matter of them, by examining the truth and salseness of its
Decrees, admitting the one and rejecting the other. This Examination we not
only admit, but also pray that it may obtain. But then in it supposes the
fallibility (in the first place) of a Council: otherwise why are her Decrees
examined? why not all promiscuously and reverently received? Secondly, hereby
not a Council; but the Universal Church will be the Supreme and Ultimate
Tribunal, as judging and irrevocably giving Sentence upon the Decrees of the
Council, which may be either approved or abrogated by her. Thirdly, hence it
will also follow, that the Decrees of a Council must not be assented to, till
received by the Church, because not till then certainly known to be true:
contrary to the constant practice of our Adversaries, by whom the Decrees are
admitted immediately after Sentence pronounced, at least immediately after the
Pope's Confirmation. Fourthly, Councils themselves plainly show that they are
of a contrary Opinion by denouncing Anathema's against the Opposers of their
Decrees, or Disbelievers of their Definitions, not staying till the Universal
Church shall have approved both, which demonstrateth that they believe a
supreme and uncontrollable Authority to reside in themselves: And this very
argument is made use of by Bellarmine to prove that Councils are Supreme in
which the Pope's Legates are present. Lastly hence it will follow that the
Decrees of a Council ought never to be assented to. For the Universal Church is
nothing else but the Collection of Christians. If therefore all single Persons
expect till the Universal Church receive the Decrees, the Universal Church it
self must expect; and so no body shall ever begin to receive and assent to them.

Further, it may be observed, that to make this approbation of the Church of
any weight, it were necessary that this Opinion should be generally received,
at least not opposed by any Bishop. For then immediately after the Promulgation
of the Decrees, all Bishops would betake themselves to examine them by the
Rules of Faith. If after this Examination they received them; then an
Approbation of the Universal Church might with some color be pretended. But
now when all, at least almost all, are of a contrary Opinion, and look upon the
Decrees, when once confirmed by the Pope, as Infallible; they receive them
without any precedent Examination; whereby this Reception becomes of no value,
as grounded upon a preconceived Opinion, which we have proved to be false. This
may be illustrated by what an Anonymous Author Les desseins des Jesuits
representes a lassemblee du Clerge. p. 43.
of the Sorbonists party says. He denies those Subscriptions are to be
accounted of; whereby many assent to the Pope's Constitutions when transmitted
to them; that they are not to be compared with the Decrees of Councils; because
the Bishops act not therein as Judges, nor examine what they subscribe. If this
Reason be valid in that case, it will be much more in the confirmation of
Councils by the subsequent reception of the Church. For much fewer doubt of the
Infallibility of a Council confirmed by the Pope, than of the Infallibility of
the Pope alone. He subjoineth another Reason of the Invalidity of these
Subscriptions; because they are commonly extorted by threats and fear of being
deposed from their Bishoprics, if they should Dissent. But has not this
happened in urging the Reception of a Council. Certainly Baronius Siquidem illi
qui damnationem trium Capitulorum non reciperent, Imperatoris jussu in exilium
agebantur. Bar. ad an. 553.
largly relates how the Emperor Justinian deprived and Banished those
Bishops, who would not admit the Decrees of the Fifth Council, and condemn the
Tria Capitula.

Lastly, it is certain there are very few Councils, if any, to which all
Christians, and consequently the Universal Church subscribed. This was showed
before and might be further proved. Whence among many other things these two
may be concluded: First, that all Christians never thought the Approbation of
the Universal Church to be the only Rule of admitting or rejecting Councils;
since there is none, which although rejected by the rest, many did not receive.
Secondly that the Unanimous approbation of the whole Church is no sufficient
and ready means to discern those Councils to which Obedience is due. For how
should it be such, when it is very rarely to be had? Now if this means be not
sufficient; either some other must be pointed out, which joined or substituted
to it may afford this so necessary knowledge to the Faithful; or it must be
acknowledged, that it is often unknown to which Councils assent is due. But it
seems incredible to me that God should give to Councils so great and so
admirable a privilege, as is absolute Infallibility, and this to extinguish
Heresies, compose Controversies, and direct the Faithful in the way of truth;
and all this while should give no certain or easy Sign, whereby Infallible
Councils, from which alone we were to receive so great happiness, might be
destinguished from deluding Conventicles. For this were to violate his own
precept, and hide the brightest candle in the Church under a bushel. Yet has
he given none. At least this approbation of the Church, of which alone we now
dispute cannot be here alleged; since our Adversaries have many Councils to
which they pretend obedience due, that were not thus approved by the whole
Church.

CHAP. XX. That it cannot be learned from the consent of Doctors what is to be
believed. I. Because it does not appear who those Doctors are, II. because
those Doctors, whosoever they are, do not always agree.
DRiven from Pope and Council, our Adversaries fly to the Faith of the
Universal Church. Whether herein they have sure refuge, is next to be enquired.
The Faith of the Universal Church may be taken two ways, either as it is taught
by the Pastors, or as it is believed, by all the Faithful, both Clergy and
Laity. Either way taken our Adversaries contend it is a certain Rule of Faith
to all private Christians; for that nothing false can either be taught by a
common consent of all the Pastors, or be believed by all the Faithful. But
since it is one and the same Faith, which is taught by the Pastors and believed
by the Faithful, it might suffice to consider either of them only, and thence
demonstrate that neither can be a Rule of Faith. Yet that our adversaries may
not complain any thing is omitted: I will treat separately of each; and first
that Faith cannot be founded upon the common consent of Doctors.

This may be evinced many ways. First, because it does not appear, who are
those Doctors whose consent is required. The whole foundation of this is
thought to be a place of St. Paul, Ephesians. IV.
where he asserts that Christ gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers (Doctors) for the edifying of the
Body of Christ, etc. But who these Pastors and Doctors are, is uncertain. It is
enquired, first, whether the same be Pastors that are Doctors. St. Hierom, St.
Augustine, Isidorus Clarius, Ben. Justinianus, and Lud. Cellotius thought them
the same; Hilarious Diaconus, Estius, and Corn. a Lapide, different. Next who
are designed by the word Pastors. Many understand thereby Bishops, and those
only; Cellotius Recte igitur Theodoretus Pastores and Doctores eos dicit, jui
incivitate and in pago erant deputati and segregati. Cell. de Hier. l. 8. c. 6.
Parsons only, and cites Theodoret for his opinion. Estius Di^iprecipue
signisicari Episcopos nomine Pastorum: nam generaliter hue etiam Parochi
pertinent. Est. in loc.
understands both, who also cites Theophylact. Now these questions are of great
moment. For if Pastors be the same with Doctors, and by both names Bishops only
be designed; they only must be attended. But if the Apostle understands Parsons
too, it is not enough to know what Bishops teach: we must also enquire what
Parsons teach. Again, if Professors of Divinity, and Preachers be to be added;
we must further search out their Doctrine. For if God annexed this privilege of
insallibility to the four Orders of Bishops, Parish Priests, Professors, and
Preachers taken all together; we must not so follow one Order, as to neglect
the other. For upon that supposition any one, nay any three of them may err,
and truth remain only with the fourth. However it be, it is manifest that both
ancients and modern differ in this point; and that therefore nothing certain
can be had therein, much less what is of Faith; which yet is necessary to
assure us that we have an infallible Rule of Faith in the Governors of the
Church.

But neither would that suffice, if it were of Faith. Somewhat else would be
yet necessary, viz. to know certainly whether to give assent to the Doctrine of
these Pastors and Doctors, whosoever they be, it be required that all should
consent in their Doctrine, every one of them, which they call All
Mathematically; or whether the consent of All Morally, that is, almost all,
will suffice: again, who they are exactly that may be called All Morally, and
how great a part of the whole may dissent without prejudicing the infallibility
of the rest, whether the third, or the fourth, or the tenth, or the hundredth,
etc. Who shall desine this? If All Mathematically must consent, God would have
appointed a Rule, which never existed: For so absolute a consent never was
among the Governors of the Church. But he which shall say, it suffices that
almost all consent, ought not only to assirm, but also to prove that he says.
But how shall so obscure a thing be proved? Or what certainty can be had in it?
Yet grant it can be had; it is still to be defined, when almost all can be said
to have consented; for that has a certain Latitude, wherein some Men will
think that number to be included, which others hold excluded.

But not to seem too scrupulous, let our Adversaries define this as they
please, and almost all be accounted to have consented, when only a tenth,
twelfth, or twentieth part shall dissent. Let all this be as certain, as it is
indeed doubtful and uncertain. I ask, whether that consent, which it shall have
pleased our Adversaries to define necessary, is always to be had? If any one
think so, he must be a stranger to all Ecclesiastical History; and never have
heard of the prevailing Heresies of Arius, Nestorius, and Eutyches, not to
mention others. But you will say, they were Heretics, whereas we require only
the consent of Catholics. Right; but it did not sensibly appear they were
Heretics; rather that was then the Question, Who were Heretics, and who
Orthodox. For the Arians, Nestorians, and Eutychians took to themselves the
name of Catholics, and branded the rest with the imputation of Heresy. Now if
this Question, which was certainly a matter of Faith, was to be determined only
from the consent of Doctors, it could never have been determined to the worlds
end; since that consent was never to be found. But to deal liberally with our
Adversaries, have not those often dissented, whom themselves acknowledge
Catholic? In the second and third Age the Asiaticks dissented from the
Europeans about the celebration of Easter. In the third Age, all the Africans,
and many of the Asiaticks, from the rest, about the re-baptization of
Heretics. In the fourth Age, the followers of Theophilus, Epiphanius, and St.
Hierom, from the favorers of Origin about his Condemnation. In the fifth Age,
the Greek from the Latin Church, upon account of the Quarrels between the Roman
and Constantinopolitan Sees. In the sixth Age, the Africans, Dalmatians, and
Italians, from the Greeks and Romans, concerning the Condemnation of the Tria
Capitula. In the eight and ninth Ages, the English, French, and Germans, from
the Greeks, and many of the Italians, about Image Worship. The Eastern has
dissented from the Western Church now for many Ages about some points of Faith
and Discipline. The Western Church has been divided for these three last Ages
about the Power of Pope and Council. And all these Dissensions proceeded even
to breaking of Communion, and pronouncing Anathema's against one another,
except the last, which also did no less in the fifteenth Age.

Now as often as this happens, to which part can the Faithful securely adhere?
Think not that the most are then to be followed; for besides that there are not
always more Patrons of Truth than Error; and that Canus Nego, cum de fide
agitur, sequi plurimorum judicium oportere. Can. loc. Theol. l. 5. c. 5.
and Bannes Non negamus, quin multi, immo plures Sacerdotes and Pastores
possint errare. Bann. In 2.2. qu. 1. art. 10. dub. 3.
expressly deny it: It is impossible to number Suffrages, and know which Party
is most numerous. They might be numbered perhaps, if the Church were included in
one Province. But now that it is diffused throughout the whole World, no mean
is left of knowing what is the Opinion either of all or most. Our Adversaries,
I suppose, will say, that when the Governors of the Church dissent about any
matter of Faith, the Faithful must suspend their assent, while the Controversy
endures, and content themselves by an implicit Faith to believe in it what the
Church believes, not enquiring in the mean while what the Church believes,
but leaving that to be enquired by the Church her self.

To this I answer, First, that this grants us all we desire. For we dispute
here only of explicit Faith, maintaining that our Adversaries have no certain
Foundation for that. If they flee to implicit, they thereby forsake explicit
Faith. Secondly, almost all our Adversaries confess that there are some
Articles, which even the most ignorant Christians are bound to believe with
explicit Faith: and Connink De actib. sup. disp. 4. dub. 9.
asserts the contrary Opinion of some Canonists to be held erroneous and even
heretical by the other Doctors. Further, all consent there are some points of
Faith necessary to be believed by all with explicit Faith, not only because
commanded to be so; but because the explicit belief of them is also the means,
without which Salvation cannot be obtained. Wherefore Hosius H^s. contra Prol.
Brent. lib. 3.
, in relating the known story of the Collier, says, he did not make that
Answer, of believing as the Church believes, before he had entirely repeated
the Apostles Creed, and professed his adherence to it. Now suppose the Bishops
differ about some Article necessary to be believed with explicit Faith, as
happened in the times of Arianism. Certainly the Faithful cannot at that time
sulpend their assent, if they do not together suspend their hopes of Salvation.
But not to insist upon that Example, suppose a Controversy raised about doing
somewhat, which God in the Scripture expressly commands to be done, such as we
contend to be Communion under both kinds, reading of the Scripture, etc. What
is then to be done? Must all action be suspended? This were to deny obedience
to God. We must therefore choose one part, and so reject the pretense of
implicit Faith. Again, implicit Faith is thus expressed, I believe what the
Church believes. It therefore supposes the Faith of the Church. Of what kind?
not implicit surely. For that would be absurd in the highest degree. Certainly
then the Church could not justly be accounted the Keeper of Tradition, which is
nothing else in our Adversaries sense, but that Doctrine which Christ delivered
to his Apostles, they to their Successors, until it was derived down to us. If
this be true, the Church of every Age must of necessity distinctly and
explicitly know that Doctrine. Otherwise it cannot faithfully and accurately
deliver it to the succeeding Church. Then how shall this Faith of the Church
her self be expressed? It can be by no other Form than this, I believe what I
believe; than which nothing can be more absurd. But I need not refute a Folly
which our Adversaries do not espouse, as appears from the words of Duvall
Quamvis aliqua successu temporis suerint in Ecclesia desinita, de quibus antea
eitra haeresin dubitabatur, certum tamen est illa fuisse semper a nonnullis
praedicata and declarata. Quod autem ab aliis non crederentur, istud tantum vel
ex oblivione vel ex ignorantia Scripturae aut traditionis proveniebat. Duval.
in 2.2. p. 111.
: Although some things were in process of time defined by the Church, which
were before doubted of without the Crime of Heresy, yet it is certain they
were always preached and declared by some. But that they were not believed by
others, arose either from the forgetfulness, or from the ignorance of Scripture
or Tradition.

Is it therefore this explicit Faith of the Church, which serves as a
Foundation to implicit Faith? So it ought to be, and so I doubt not but our
Adversaries will say it is. But in this case, wherein the Governors of the
Church dissent about an Article of Faith, it cannot be. For that which the
Church explicitly believes, is no desinite Opinion, but a mere Contradiction
repugnant to it self, and destroying it self. For one part of the Church
believes the Opinion, whereof the Controversy is raised, to be true, wholesome,
and revealed by God; the other part believes it false, pernicious, and
suggested by Men. Now, to have the belief of the whole Church, you must join
both parts of the Contradiction together: and so the Church believes that
Opinion to be true and false, wholesome and pernicious, revealed by God, and
suggested by Men. But this is not Faith, but a deformed Monster, consisting of
contrary and repugnant parts.

CHAP. XXI. That the consent of Doctors, even when it can be had, is more
difficult to be known, than that we can by the help of it attain to the
knowledge of the Truth.
TO what we observed in the precedent Chapter our Adversaries may perhaps
answer, That when the Governors of the Church differ about a matter to be
believed, then indeed the Faith of private Christians cannot rely upon their
Authority; but that this dissent is not perpetual, that they oftentimes consent
in delivering the Doctrine of the Church, and then at least may be securely
believed in what they teach. To this I reply, First, that hereby they must
grant they have no certain and sixed Rule of Faith for many great and weighty
points of Religion, contrary to their continual boasts of the abundance of
Rules, whereby God has provided for all the necessities of his Church.
Secondly, the Governors of the Church have now for many Ages differed about
some matters, upon which, according to our Adversaries, depend the hopes of
eternal Salvation. For Example, whether the true Church is to be found among
the Greeks or among the Latins? For of the five Patriarchates of the Church,
four are divided from the Church of Rome, and accuse her of Heresy and Schism,
both which Accusations she retorts upon them. Now, this is a matter of great
moment, which may be justly doubted of, and can never be determined by the
consent of Doctors.

But to omit that, this consent, if it could be had, is not so manifest and
obvious, as a Rule of Faith ought necessarily to be; which by the confession of
all must be clear, evident, and easy to be applied. This Duvall Secunda
conditio, eaque pariter essentialis, est perspicuitas. Nam si he regula
obseure sidei mysteria proponeret, regula fidei non foret. Duvall in 2.2. p.
207.
assigns for an essential condition of a Rule of Faith, and acknowledges, that
if a Rule obscurely proposes the Mysteries of Faith, it would thereby become
no Rule. And for this reason our Adversaries so much exaggerate the obscurity
of Scripture, that they may thereby show it could not be given by God for a
Rule of Faith. To which end, Gr. a Valentia Sententiam ejus authoritatis, cujus
de rebus omnibus sidei judicium est, apertam oportet esse, ut ab omnibus
fidelibus commode possit intelligi. Nam si non ita perspicue and plane
authoritas illa doceat, non ad eam rem valebit. Val. tom. 3. disp. 1. qu. 1.
punct. 7.. 4.
lays down this Axiom, which he afterward applies to the Scripture. The
Sentence of that Authority which is to judge of all matters of Faith, ought to
be manifest, that it may be easily understood by all the Faithful. For if that
Authority does not teach perspicuously and plainly, it will be of no use to
that end. So he, and with him many others. If therefore I shall show, that the
consent of Pastors about matters of belief is so obscure and difficult to be
known, that even the most learned, much more illiterate men cannot avoid Error
in searching it out; I shall thereby prove, that it could not be given to us by
God as a common Rule of things to be believed.

This obscurity and difficulty arises from three Causes. The first is the
amplitude of the Church diffused throughout the whole World; which permits not
the Faith of all Pastors to be known, unless we travel through all those
Regions, wherein they are dispersed. For it suffices not to consult a few.
They may be mistaken. The Opinion of all must be asked, the consent of all
appear. But how shall they be all singly consulted? Who ever learned the
Christian Faith this way? Yet this way Card. Richlieu Method. live. 1. chap. 14.
points out to us. He says, the uniformity of the Church is manifest to sense;
that all parts of the Church may be surveyed by one man at diverse times, or by
diverse men at one time. True; but to reduce this to practice, every single man
must take so many Journeys, send out so many Intelligencers; that this Method
cannot be persuaded but in jest. Valentia Fatendum est raro accidere posse, ut
quae sit doctorum omnium uno tempore viventium de religione sententia satis
cognoscatur. Va. ubi supr.. 46
the Jesuit is more ingenuous, who confesses, that it can rarely happen that
it may be sufficiently known what is the Opinion in Religion of all. Doctors
living at the same time. And this he understands in respect of the Pope
himself, as appears from what follows these words. If then the consent of
Doctors can rarely be known by the Pope, who has his Nuncio's and Emissaries
in all places, how shall it ever be known by private Men? Tanner Si opus esset,
ut plebeii seirent evidenter in tota Ecclesia sic credi; quot anni laberentur,
dum istam evidentiam acquirerent, quam neque periti semper habent? Tann. apud
Mart. de fide disp. 3. Sect. 4.
says the same thing, as he is cited by Martinonus. If it were necessary,
says he, that all private men should know evidently what is believed in the
whole Church, how many years must be spent in acquiring that Evidence, which
even learned men have not always? And Martinonus Certo and facile potest
consuli Pontifex, non sic tota Ecclesia, ne quidem omnes illius Pastores. Mart.
de fide disp. 9. Sect. 9.
says, The Pope may be certainly and easily consulted, not so the whole
Church, no, not all her Pastors only.

This may be proved by many Examples, of which I will produce some few.
Bellarmine Bell. de amiss. Stat. lib. 5. c. 6.
and Valentia Val. tom. 4. disp. 11. qu. 1. punct. 1.. 3. omnes Theologi,
universa Theologorum Schola.
assert, that all Divines agree concerning the punishment of Infants dying
without Baptism, and think it only poena damni undergone in that which they
call the Limbus puerorum. Yet is this Opinion falsely by them ascribed to all,
even Modern Divines (for among the Ancients St. Fulgentius is known to have
taught the contrary.) Florentius Conrius, Titular Archbishop of Tuam,
published a Book, wherein he endeavored to prove the contrary, approved by
fourteen Doctors of Divinity; whereof one Fr. Sylvius testifies Conrius his
Opinion is the common Doctrine of the School of Doway: Another, James Pollet,
professes, that for thirty years, wherein he had been conversant in the
Divinity Schools, he had never heard any other Opinion taught by the
Professors, than that unbaptized Infants are condemned to the eternal Torments
of Hell. A third, H. Rampen Quam S. Augustani sententiam verissimam semper
judicavi, desendi and decui tanquaman tiquioribus Ecclesiae decioribus
conformem, and semper hueusque ab excellentissimis quibusdam edoctam, utpote
Scriptur is magis innixam and Conciliis.
, Professor of Doway, says, That he had always judged that Opinion, being St.
Augustine 's, to be truest, defended and taught it as more consonant to the
ancient Doctors, and always even to this day taught by some most excellent
Persons, being founded upon Scripture and Councils.

Of Indulgences our Adversaries teach chiesly three things. I. That there is a
Treasure of the Satisfaction of Christ and the Saints, which may be applied to
persons liable to suffer the punishment of their sins, after the guilt of them
is remitted in the Sacrament of Penance; and that this Treasure is actually
applied by Indulgences granted by the Pope. II. That the Souls in Purgatory may
be helped by these Indulgences. III. That by them is remitted not only the
punishment enjoined in Penance, and decreed by the Canons of the Church, but
also that which is due at the Tribunal of God. These three things Bellarmin and
Valentia assirm to be taught by all Divines. Although the first, Bellarmin
confesses, was doubted of by Mairo and Durandus, who thought the Satisfaction
of Saints have no part in that Treasure; but the contrary, says he Communls
aliorum Theologorum tum antiquerum tum recentiorum omnium sententia. Bell. de
Indulg. lib. 1. cap. 2. Res certissima, and apud Catho licos indubitata.
, is the common Opinion of the other Divines, as well Ancient, as of all the
Modern, and was confirmed by a Decree of Clement VI. The Second he
acknowledges was denied by Hostiensis and Gabriel; but says, the latter
corrected his Error, and that it is a thing most certain, and undoubted among
Catholics. So Valentia Val. tom. 4. disp. 7. qu. 20. punct. 5.
says, it is the assertion of all the Orthodox. As for the Third, Valentia
affirms the contrary Opinion is exploded as erroneous by all the Orthodox. Who
could imagine after all this, there were any doubt concerning these points
among them? Yet Holden Caetera omni 1 dub a sunt, and a Theologis in utramque
partem agitata. Hold. Anal. fid. lib. 2. cap. 6.
teaches that this only is certain and undoubted, that the Governors of the
Church can and ought sometimes to indulge something, and mitigate the severity
of the Canons in each Tribunal. All the rest are doubtful, and disputed of by
Divines on both parts, to wit, whether there be a Treasure, of which the Pope
and other Pastors of the Church are dispensers, etc. where he largely shows
that all these Propositions are many ways doubted of, and wholly uncertain
among Divines.

If it be enquired, whether the Church can put Heretics to death? Valentia Ex
side certum est Ecclesiam licite and convenienter id facere posse. Val. tom. 3.
disp. 1. qu. 11. punct. 3.
answers, That it is not only certain, but of Faith, that the Church can
lawfully and conveniently do it. Holden Nunquam fuit religionis Christianae and
Ecclesiae Christianae dogma Carholicum. Nec omnes etiam piiss^mi and doctissimi
Catholici inquisitionis usum and rationem approbant. Hold Anal. fid. l. 1. c. 9.
on the contrary maintains, That to inflict death upon convicted, relapsed, or
even the most obstinate Heretics, was never an Opinion of the Christian
Religion and the Universal Church. Neither do all, even the most Pious and
Learned Catholics, approve the use and methods of the Inquisition. The like
says Richerius Rich. Hist. Council. l. 1. c. 10.
. If again it be enquired, whether the corruption of humane nature, introduced
by sin, consists only in the loss of supernatural Graces, or also includes
somewhat positive, whereby the Soul is vitiated? Rhodius Ita contra sectarios
omnes docent Orthodoxt omnes Theologi. Rhod. de piece. dis. 4. qu. 2. Sect. 3.
answers in the first sense, and affirms, That all the Orthodox Divines so
teach against all the Sectaries. Bellarmin Omnes communi consensu docent. Bell.
de great. primi hom. cap. 5.
: That it is taught by the common consent of all. Yet Vasquez Vasq. 1.2. disp.
132. cap. 4. and 5.
attributes the contrary Opinion to many Divines of great name, as Holcot,
Greg. Ariminensis, Gabriel, Henricus, Gulielmus Parisiensis, Autissiodorensis,
Driedo.

It is a Famous Question, whether the Pope, besides the Spiritual Power,
commonly attributed to him, has a power over Temporals, either direct or
indirect, whereby he deposes Princes for Heresy, or any other Crime, and
absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance. There are three Opinions about
this. The first is, that the Pope has, jure divino, a direct and absolute
Power over the whole World, as well in Temporals, as in Spirituals. The Second,
that the Pope, as Pope, has no Temporal Power, nor any Authority to deprive
Princes. The Third, that the Pope, as Pope, has not directly any Temporal, but
only Spiritual Power; yet that by means of that Spiritual, he has indirectly a
Supreme Power even in Temporals. Bellarmin Bell. de Pont. lib. 5. cap. 1.
, who relates these three Opinions in these very words, attributes the first
to many of the Canonists: the third he makes the common Opinion of Catholic
Divines: The second he says is not so much an Opinion as an Heresy, and
therefore he ascribes it only to Calvin, P. Martyr, Brentius, and the
Magdeburgenses: And in another place, under the feigned name of Adolphus
Schulkenius, he teaches the same thing, where he enveigheth Contra S. literas
doctrinam conciliorum and summorum pont. unanimem consensum p^^lrum and
dociorum haereti^is schismaticisqae se jungit. Apud Widd. contra Schulk.. 15.
against Widdrington (a defender of the second Opinion) as opposing the H.
Scriptures, the Doctrine of Councils and Popes, and the unanimous consent of
Fathers and Doctors, who all with one Mouth teach the Pope's Supreme Power in
Temporals; and thereby ranking himself with Heretics and Schismatics, while
he pretends to be a Catholic. Thus Bellarmin. Now on the other side, De Marca
and Launoy contend this Opinion was always unknown in France. The whole Sorbon
in the Exposition of their Judgment published in the Year 1663 testify, That
not only they never received this Opinion, but always refisted it with their
utmost power. Not to say, that the Kings of France, and Parliaments of Paris by
their Edicts and Arrests often condemned it, and forbid it to be held or
taught, particularly in the Years 1561, 1594, 1595, 1610, 1614, etc.

I might produce many more examples; but these suffice to show, That the
greatest Doctors mistake in imagining some Opinions to be approved by all the
Divines of their Communion, which yet are freely disputed of on both sides. And
if this happens to Doctors, who employ their whole time in matters of learning,
what shall we think of poor and illiterate Men, who know little beyond the
providing for the necessities of this life? Again, If the Judgment of only
those Doctors, who commit their Opinions to Writing, and are very few in
comparison of the rest, is not certainly known; how shall we know the Judgment
of those who teach their Flocks viva voce? Lastly, If their Opinion be true who
would have the Judgment not only of Bishops, but also of Parsons, Professors of
Divinity, and Preachers to be accounted of? what hope is there, that the
Opinion of so many Men should ever be known to any one Man, or to any but God
alone?

The second Reason of the difficulty of knowing the common consent of other
Doctors, is, the obscure Knowledge which is in the Church, of some points,
concerning which no Disputation has been yet raised. For nothing is more true,
than that Opinions are illustrated by Controversies. So St. Augustine Multa ad
fidem Catholicam pertinentia dum haereticorum callida inquietudine agitantur,
ut adversum cos defendi possint, and considerantur diligentius, and
intelliguntur, clarius and instantius praedicantur, and ab adversario mota
quaestio existit discendi occasio. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 16. chap. 20.
says, Many things pertaining to Catholic Faith, while they are disputed of
by the cunning perverseness of Heretick^, that they be defended against them,
are considered more diligently, understood more clearly, and preached more
earnestly; the Question moved by the Adversary becoming an occasion of
learning. This he proves in another place In Psalm 34.
by the Doctrines of the Trinity, Penance and Baptism, not sully handled before
the Controversies started in them by the Arians, Novatians, and Rebaptizers:
And therefore Valentia Val. tom. 3. disp. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 6. Et fortasse
latent adhuc in Ecclesia aliquae.
assirms, It belongs to the Church, as necessity shall require, to deliver anew
to the Faithful more explicitly, and by an Infallible Authority, as it were
draw out of darkness those truth of Faith, which were indeed at first delivered
by the Apostles; but now either by the negligence or perversity of Men lay hid.
And perhaps, says he, some do yet lay hid in the Church. An eminent example of
this appeared in the Council of Trent; when they were seeking out an
essicacious remedy against the inconveniences of clandestine Marriages. Some
advised the declaring them void for the future; and these were the major
number. Fifty Bishops, and among them the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and two of
the Legates, Card. Hosius and Simonetta, opposed it, saying, That was not in
the power of the Council. Morone the Legate, and many others suspended their
Votes. The Disputations grew high; at last they agreed to referr all to the
Pope. He answered, the Council had Power to make such a Decree, and that it
ought to be made. Hereupon clandestine Marriages were declared void; and an
Anathema added to the Decree against all those who should thenceforth deny the
Church has power to make Constitutions of that nature. See a Power residing in
the Church now become an Article of Faith, which was vehemently impugned by a
Patriarch, two Legates, fifty Bishops, and doubted of by many others. And shall
those now be heard, who maintain there is always in the Church a clear and
distinct knowledge of all things revealed?

We proceed to the third Reason, which consists in this, That some Opinions
are often divulged in the Church as revealed by God, and approved by the
Church, and are everywhere taught, which at last are found out and known to be
false. Monsieur Pajon Rep. aux prejuges part. 2. chap. 2.
produces three eminent Examples of this Observation; the first taken from the
decisions of the Canonists, the second from the form of Condemnation of the V.
Jansenian Propositions; the third from the Prohibition of reading the Bible;
which because he largely and accurately pursues, I will not here urge; much
less will add other Examples before pointed out in this Chapter. However, from
what has been said, it appears, that it is obscure and difficult to be known
wherein the Doctors consent. This will be more manifest, if we consider, that
it is far more difficult to know certainly what all the present Doctors teach,
than what the former Doctors taught. For the Opinions of these we have in their
Books, which we can read at home; but to know the Judgment of the others we
must travel through the whole World. Valentia supposes this very thing, where
he gives the reason why the Pope in desining rather makes use of dead than
living Doctors: Because, says he, Qui proinde omnes nec facile congregari nec
interrogari possunt quid sentiant. Val. Tom. disp. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 7.. 46.
the Opinion of these latter can very rarely be sufficiently known. For being
dispersed through the whole Church, they cannot all easily be either assembled,
or asked what they think; whereas the ancient Doctors are more famous, and are
not so many. If this be true, how dissicult must it be to know the Judgment of
the present Church; since the most learned Men can very hardly obtain the Sense
of the Ancient Church? Few or none can search all the Monuments of Antiquity,
pry into the most secret Recesses of it, and turn over the Writings of sixteen
Ages; and in all this long Journey make no slips, commit no errors: Yet is all
this easier in the Judgment of Valentia, than to enquire and find out the
Opinion of the Doctors living at any one time; which yet must be done by them,
who lay the Foundation of their Faith upon their consent.

I have not yet seen any of our Adversaries, who offers the least solution of
any one of these difficulties, except Cardinal Richlieu; who when he had
objected to himself, That blind Men hear neither all Preachers and Doctors, nor
learn from those, which they do hear, what the others teach, which is our very
Argument, except that what he says only of Blindmen, we justly apply to all
Men; he ansewers, Method. live. 2. chap. 8.
That as for a Philosopher to conclude all Fires to be hot, it is not necessary
that he experiments all the Fires in the World, the common consent of
Philosophers sufficing: so to know certainly, whether any Doctrine be the
Doctrine of the Church it abundantly suffices, that Blind-men hear it proposed
by diverse Doctors of the Church, and that it cannot be shown there are others
who teach the contrary.

But many things may be here observed. First, Those things do not always
suffice in matter of Faith, with which we are contented in disputing. There we
often argue from Concessions, which we own to be false: Here nothing is to be
produced but what is true and certain. Wherefore if no body oppose those
Doctrines which seem true to us, it does not follow that we ought to admit
them, unless they be both certain of themselves, and appear so to us: And if no
body points out to us any maintainers of the contrary Doctrine, it does not
^^^refore follow, that there are none; whence the Doctrine proposed, obtains
not thence any certainty, any motive of Faith. Secondly, Philosophers
themselves admonish, great diligence is to be used in making Arguments of
Induction, such as this is; and that an insufficient enumeration of particulars
is the great fountain of Errors; while a few, or even many, are reckoned up,
and thence a conclusion made of all. Wherefore he reasons not well, who argues
th^^, Such and such teach thus; nor does any appear who opposes, Therefore all
teach the same For it may easily be that many may teach otherwise, unknown to
him who reasons thus, but well known to others.

In the next place, it were to be desired the Cardinal had explained his mind
more clearly, and told by whom he means it cannot be shown that other teach the
contrary; whether by the blind Man himself, or by other blind or ignorant Men
like himself, or by one Learned Man whom he should consult, or by all Learned
men every where dispersed. If he means the first or second, then he greatly
errs in thinking it sufficient that the blind Man or other ignorant Persons of
his acquaintance cannot name any, who teach a contrary Doctrine to their
Parish Priest or those Doctors whom they hear. For all the Husbandmen,
Laborers, and Mechanics of the Parish may be easily ignorant, that a contrary
Doctrine, and that more true, is taught in America or India or even the next
Province; and so the blind Man shall be obliged to believe a falsity. But if
the Cardinal means it suffice, that the blind Man consult some learned Man to
know, whether none teaches contrary to his Parson; I would ask, whether our
Adversary requires it as necessary? If so, then all the common sort of the
Faithful are guilty of rashness and imprudence. For I dare swear that none of
them ever puts this in practice. If he says it is not necessary; he deserts
the cause. For upon what foundation shall their Faith rely, who do not that
which he confesses not necessary to be done, and yet think sufficient to
confirm their Faith? But what if the Doctor, who is consulted, be in the same
error with the Parish Priest, as none will deny he easily may? It cannot be
imagined that Doctor will tell the consulter the thing is not taught by the
Church, which himself thinks to belong to Faith. Or what if that Doctor be
ignorant that others, and those Learned Men teach the contrary; as we proved
might easily happen in the precedent chapter? That answer surely cannot be
sufficient to ground Faith upon, which can be false. For as Martinonus Ad
credendum fide indubitata and infallibili; qualis est fides divina, requiritur
argumentum infallibile. Mart. de disp. 3. sect. 4.
truly says. To believe with undoubting and Infallible Faith, such is Divine
Faith, is required an Infallible Argument. Lastly, that the Cardinal means it
suffices that none in the World can show the Parson teaches what is repugnant
to others, I can never be induced to believe, since a more foolish sense could
not be invented. For not the most sagacious Person, much less a blind Man,
could make so diligent an inquiry as to be assured that none such can be found
in the whole World. Add hereto, that it is not more difficult to know directly
whether any do teach otherwise, than to know whether there be any who can show
that it is any where taught otherwise: And so all our former Arguments will
return with their full force against this answer. But to omit all this, I ask
whether any ignorant Person using such diligence to inquire whether what is
taught by his Parson, is taught unanimously by all the other Governors of the
Church, as can be expected from a Man of his circumstances and capacity, can be
deceived therein? If he cannot; all those Learned Men, whom I mentioned in the
last Chapter will be guilty of a most intolerable negligence and supinity, as
being mistaken in that, wherein even the most ignorant cannot be deceived. If
he can, then he is not certain, and therefore has no Faith. For Faith must be
certain.

CHAP. XXII. That it does not suffice it be known that any thing is taught
Unanimously by the Governors of the Church, unless it appear that it is taught
to be of Faith. But that this is most uncertain.
FRom what has been said it is manifest, that neither do the Governors of the
Church always consent; nor if they do, can their consent be certainly known.
But suppose both. The controversy is not yet ended. For not whatsoever they
unanimously affirm, is to be received as the revelation of God, and the
Doctrine of the Church; but only what they unanimously maintain to be of Faith.
This Canus and Bellarmin plainly insinuate: The first, Quiequid fidelem populum
docent, quod ad Christi fidem attineat. Can. loc. Theol. lib. 4. cap. 4.
when he says, the Pastors of the Church cannot err in the Faith, but
whatsoever they teach the faithful People, that it belongs to the Faith of
Christ, is most true: Bellarmin: Id quod decent tanquam ad fidem pertinens.
Bell. de Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 14.
that whatsoever all the Bishops teach as belonging to Faith, is necessarily
true and of Faith. Therefore, Flor. Conrius defends himself against the
unanimous consent of Doctors, who taught 500. Years since that unbaptized
Infants were not punished with the torments of fire, by pretending that they
did not teach or propose this as of Faith. And indeed it cannot but be absurd,
that the consent of Pastors should reach farther than the Infallibility of
Pope, or Council, or the Universal Church, which as we have before observed, is
acknowledged not to take place, but in matters which they propose as of Faith.
Lastly, the Council of Trent, Pius V. and diverse Provincial Councils wished,
Non tanquam sidem docuerint aut proposuerint. Con. destatu pary. cap. 19.
that the Catechism of Trent might be admitted every where, and be used by all
Pastors in the instruction of their people. Perhaps this is observed: For why
should it not be! This whole Book then may be reckoned among those things which
all Pastors propose to their flocks, not as pertaining to Faith, but as true
and wholesome. If therefore, whatsoever all propose, must necessarily be true;
there can be nothing false, nothing uncertain in this Book. Yet none will deny
there are taught in it many Propositions false, more uncertain, and none which
might not safely be denied, if they received not their Authority from some
other Fountain. Wherefore it is no where admitted as of Infallible authority; a
manifest Argument, that those things may be false, which are not taught as of
Faith, although taught unanimously.

Before we believe therefore the Doctrine of the Governors of the Church, we
must consider how they teach it, whether as of Faith; if not, we must suspend
our assent. Now Bishops, Parsons, and Preachers, are wont to teach what seems
true to them, and agreing with Divine Revelation; but very rarely to admonish
whether what they teach be of Eaith, or a consequent of Faith, whether expressly
revealed, or cohaerent to things revealed. This Holden acknowledges. We never
heard, says In Doctrina Christiana tradenda nunquam audivimus Ecclesiam
articulorum revelatorum and divinarum institutionum Catalogum exhibuisse vel
composuisse, quo separatim and dislincte cognosci possent hujusmodi sidei
dogmata ab aliis omnibus, quae vel Ecclesiasticae sunt inslitutionis, vel certe
quae revelationi divinae haud immediate innitantur; atque adeo omnia simul
confuse and indistincte docuisse. Hold. Anal. fid. lib. 1. cap. 8.
he, that the Church in delivering the Christian Doctrine exhibited, or
composed a Catalogue of revealed Articles, and Divine Institutions, whereby
these Articles of divine Faith might be separately and distinctly known from
all others, which are either of Ecclesiastical Institution, or not immediately
founded upon Divine Revelation, but taught all together confusedly and
indistinctly. Hence even those Divines who agree in the truth of any Article,
often disser in judging whether it be of Faith; as we saw before concerning the
supreme Power of the Pope. Wherefore Holden assirms there are much fewer
Articles of Divine and Catholic Faith, than Divines commonly think; and
therefore bestows the whole Latter part of his Analysis in composing a
Catalogue of such Articles: which would indeed have been very useful, if it
were received by all. But he has omitted some things, which others contend to
be of Faith; and inserted others, which some would have omitted. Further in
this matter, I appeal to the experience of all Persons; who if they shall ask
any of our Adversaries what the Church teaches concerning Image worship,
Invocation of Saints, or the like, will be convinced by their different
answers, That it is not easy to say what the Church teaches. And if this be
dissicult to learned Men, how shall it be possible to ignorant Persons?

Our Adversaries cannot justly pretend, as many of them do, that the Doctors
may dissent in those things, which are of Theological, not Divine right, and
belong rather to the Schools than to the Pulpit, without either the knowledge
or the damage of the People; but cannot dissent in matters of Faith, unless
their dissensions be presently known, because disputations, strifes and Schisms
presently arise from them, which occasion either the Decree of a Pope or the
calling of a Council to extinguish the dissension, and cast the heretical part
out of the Church. That every Laick therefore, both may and ought to be
persuaded of the truth of those things, which his Pastor teaches to be of
Faith, while he sees none opposing him; although himself does not inquire,
whether others teach the same thing. So Suarez De fide disp. 5. Sect. 1.
. But here many things are supposed which cannot be granted. First, it is not
necessary, that as often as a Doctor proposes any thing to be of Faith, which
is not so, some others should rise to oppose him. We daily see the contrary not
only in Parishes, but even in Universities, where the Wits of Men are more
easily excited to controversy: yet there some affirm, others deny many matters
to be of Faith, without any subsequent Schisms or Animosities.

Secondly, if any Disputation, or Opposition should arise herein; it is not
necessary it should ever come to the ears of the common People. Every one knows
how hot the Controversy about the Pope's Infallibility has for some Ages been,
especially in France, where are many Defenders of each Opinion. Yet some Years
since, when I was in that Country, talking with a Priest, and him no ordinary
Person, but a man famous in the neighborhood, and Doctor of Divinity, when I
said the Pope's Infallibility was denied by many, and particularly by the
Sorbon, he grew very angry, said it was most false, and confidently maintained
that no Catholic Divine ever doubted of it. Nor could I free the Man from his
error, whatsoever I then offered to him. See another example more remarkable.
I was present at Paris in an Assembly of Learned Men, who met weekly to treat
of matters of learning. They then disputed of the Pope's Infallibility, which a
Priest said was lately rejected by the Gallican Clergy in their Synod. At that
an Abbot who presided over the Assembly, and had the repute of a very Learned
Man, was not a little moved, and denied any such thing was ever done by the
Clergy. He acknowledged indeed that the Pope could err, whenever he gave his
opinion as a Private Doctor, and that the Clergy meant no more than this: but
that there was no Catholic, who did not hold his judgment Infallible,
whenever he pronounced ex cathedra: and whatsoever the Priest could say, he
would not be persuaded that there was any dissension among Divines in this
matter. If this Learned Abbot could be ignorant of so notorious a thing; what
shall we think of illicerate Christians?

Thirdly, it is not necessary, that as often as dissensions arise in matters of
Faith, Schism should thence immediately be produced, and occasion a Decree of
the Pope, or calling of a Council. How many things did Theodorus of Mopsuestia
teach against the Faith, which yet were not canvassed of many Years after his
Death? All acknowledge the number of Canonical Books of Scripture, the
necessity of the Eucharist, and state of the Dead to be of Faith: Yet none will
deny the Ancients differed in judgment as to all these things; and all know
that no Schisms, Disputes, or Anathema's of Councils arose therefrom. But not
to depart from this very question: What can be more of Faith, than the Rule of
Faith it self, and the most essential condition of that Rule, Infallibility?
Many Doctors of the Church denied this in the XIV. and XV. ages, as we before
proved; yet no Schism, no Decree of the Church was occasioned thereby.

But to show the sophistry of this objection more evidently, it may be
observed, that there are five sorts of things, which, although not belonging to
Faith, may be in the Church proposed as of Faith. I. Things true, but not
revealed. II. Neither true nor revealed, but not repugnant to Revelation. III.
Repugnant to things revealed, but such, as it is not manifest that they were
revealed. IV. Repugnant to things manifestly revealed, but so as that
repugnance is obscure and remote, not clear and immediate. V. Clearly repugnant
to things manifestly revealed. Concerning matters of the last rank this
objection might have some force, but not much: since the contrary may be shown
in some examples. But for the four first Classes it has no color of truth.
They may be all taught as of Faith, and that, daily, yet be observed and
regarded by none, much less violently opposed by any. The want of apparent
opposition therefore suffices not to make what any one Doctor proposes as of
Faith, to be so. The consent and concurrence of all in teaching the same to be
of Faith, must be ascertained. Otherwise assent to it will be foolish and rash,
at least uncertain.

CHAP. XXIII. That it is not certain those things are true, which are
unanimously taught by all Pastors.
THat it is uncertain, what the Governors of the Church unanimously teach, we
have proved; yet grant it certain: Can we securely believe this their unanimous
consent? What if they may all err? This our Adversaries will say they cannot.
But is that certain and undoubted? If not, in vain is it alleged. They will
perhaps say it is; nay, and of Faith, so as it cannot be denied without open
Heresy. So Duvall In 2. 2. p. 106.
, and many others. And indeed, if it be not of Faith that all the Pastors
consenting cannot err, Faith cannot rely upon their Authority. Yet is this most
false; for we before proved these two Propositions. I. That nothing is of
Faith, whose contrary is held and taught by Catholic Divines, the Church
knowing and not censuring their Opposition. II. That the greatest Divines of
the Roman Church, Doctors, Bishops, and Cardinals taught; 1. That the whole
Clergy might be infected with Heresy. 2. That the Church, to which
Infallibility was promised, might consist in one Laick, or one Woman, the rest
apostatizing from the Faith. This was the Opinion of Alensis, the Author of the
Gloss upon the Decretals, Lyra, Occam, Alliaco, Panormitan, Turrecremata, Peter
de Monte, S. Antoninus, Cusanus, Clemangis, Jacobatius, J. Fr. Picus. But who
can imagine so many, and so great Men, either not to have known what is of
Faith, or wilfully to have taught the contrary?

This moved Suarez to esteem the Infallibility of the Pastors thus consenting
uncertain. It is asked, says he Petitur an omnes Episcopi Ecclesiae possint
convenire in aliquo errore. Nam inter Catholicos quidam affirmant, quia non
invenitur promissio. Alii negant, quia, etc. Mihi vero neutrum videtur satis
exploratum probabile autem est ad providentiam Christi pertinere, ut id non
permittat. Suar. de fide disp. 5. Sect. 6.
, whether all the Bishops of the Church can agree in any error? For among
Catholics, some affirm it, because there is no promise found (of the
contrary:) Others deny it, because the whole Church would be otherwise in great
danger of error. To me neither seems sufficiently certain. Yet it is
probable, that it becomes the Providence of Christ not to permit it. In these
words two things may be observed. First, That Suarez speaks of the
Infallibility of Bishops not in believing, but in teaching. For he says this
in answer to an Objection, That if all the Bishops could err, then the other
part of the Church, the Laity, might also err, because they ordinarily follow
the Doctrine of their Pastors, and are bound to do it. Now the People are bound
to follow their Pastors, not in what they think, but in what they teach. This
also appears from the reason why some denied the consent of all Bishops in any
error to be possible, because, if that should happen the whole Church would be
brought into great danger of error. But if Bishops should teach rightly,
although they thought erroneously, there would be thence no danger of Error to
the rest of the Faithful. Secondly, Of this Infallibility of Bishops in what
they teach unanimously, he says three things. 1. That some Catholics deny it.
2. That neither part seems certain to him. 3. That it is probable. All which
singly prove, That he thought it not to be of Faith. But who can imagine so
great a Doctor could be ignorant of what was of Faith?

Theoph. Raynaudus differed not much from the Opinion of Suarez: That the
visible Head, says he Vt. seposito capite visibili, membra omnia possint
infici aliquo errore materiali, vix potest contingere; and verisimillimum est
Deo semper cordi futurum ne id accidat. Si tamen accideret, incont aminato
capite, nibil decederet de perpetuitate verae fidei in Ecclesia. Rayn. (...)
punct. 5.
, being laid aside, all the Members should be infected with any material error,
could scarce happen; and it is most probable God will take care it should not.
Yet if it should happen, the Head being uninfected, the perpetuity of true
Faith in the Church would suffer no loss: Where he determines not absolutely
this cannot happen; but looks upon the contrary only as most probable; and
denies the Infallibility of the whole Church to depend thereon, which is so
much urged by the maintainers of the contrary Opinion. Rhodius speaks more
plainly, who affirms Mortuo pontifice, non est in Ecclesia ulla infallibilis
authoritas ad condenda fidei Decreta. -- Nullam e^ tempore infallibilitatem
actualem and proximam habet Ecclesia. Rhod. de fide qu. 2. Sect. 5.. 5.
, That the Pope being dead, the Church has no Infallible Authority to make
Decrees of Faith, as having no actual and immediate Infallibility at that time.

Hence is manifest, that we want little of a Confession from our Adversaries,
that the Infallibility of the Governors of the Church is not of Faith. And
indeed it cannot be. For no Foundation of such a Faith is to be found: Not
Scripture or Tradition. For not to say, that these, to make any Article become
of Faith, ought, according to our Adversaries, most evidently to contain it;
which evidence even they will not deny to be here wanting: It would be most
absurd, that Papists should believe this Infallibility of the Pastors of the
Church for the Authority of Scripture and Tradition; when they believe neither
of these, but for the Authority of the Pastors. Take away their Testimony, and
they will deny it to be known whether Scripture or Tradition be the word of
God, or what is the sense of either. The same may be said of the Decrees of the
Church Representative. For besides that no such express Decree of it can be
produced, the Infallibility of the Representative Church it self is believed by
every single Papist, only because they hear it taught by their Pastors. As for
the belief of the Universal Church, that ought not be produced. For that is the
thing now inquired, why the Universal Church believes so?

Will our Adversaries therefore say, they believe their Pastors cannot err in
teaching unanimously what is of Faith; because they so teach themselves? This
they must recurr to; for they have no other reason left of believing so: Yet
nothing can be more absurd. For first, it is the constant Opinion of all
Mankind, and a received Law among all Nations, that none should be Witness or
Judge in his own Cause. Secondly, As we believe not any Man to be true and
honest, till we be assured of his veracity and honesty from some other
Testimony than his own: So it would be the highest imprudence to esteem those
Infallible, who challenge that privilege to themselves; until their
Infallibility be known to us from some other Argument than their own Testimony.
Certainly our Adversaries will not permit even the Scripture, which is the word
of God, and has so many illustrious Characters of a Divine Original, to be
believed for its own Testimony; and Christ openly professed, that if he bore
Witness of himself, his Witness was not credible. Why then shall that be
attributed to the Governors of the Church; which Christ denied to himself, and
our Adversaries deny to the Word of God? Thirdly, The Question will return,
whence the Pastors of the Church know that they cannot err? For they will not
say, they know it because the Faithful believe it; since as Hallier Non ideo
vera docent Pastores, quia vera credunt Auditores; sed ideo vera credunt
Auditores, quia vera docentibus assentiuntur. F. Hallier de Hierarch. l. 4. c.
2.
well says, The Pastors do not therefore teach truly, because the Auditors
believe truly; but the Auditors believe truly, because they assent to the
Pastors teaching truly. They cannot say, that they know it from Scripture or
Tradition. For the truth of these, without the Authority of the Church is no
more known to learned than to unlearned persons. Think not, says Bagotius Cave
existimes unumquenquam, etiam Theologum Doctissimum, posse quicquam eredere
sine authoritate Ecclesiae and independenter ab ea. Bagot. Instit. Theol. l. 4.
c. 1.. 1.
, that any one, even the most learned Divine, can believe any thing without the
Authority of the Church, and independently from it. And Hosius Hos. cont. Brent.
goes so far, that he maintains it to be the best way, that even the most
learned Men should recurr to implicit Faith, and believe only in general as the
Church believes. Shall the Pastors therefore believe, that they cannot err for
their own Testimony? This is the natural consequence of our Adversaries
Doctrine, and that most absurd. For first, there is none of the Pastors which
believes so, because he teaches so; but all teach so, because all believe so.
Again, The Question will recurr upon what Foundation do they teach so? Here
either nothing, or only this must be answered, That they teach so because they
believe so. Then if you ask why they believe so? no other answer can be given,
than because they believe so; which is so foolish, as that I need not urge it
any farther.

CHAP. XXIV. That the Faith of all single Christians cannot rely upon the Faith
of the Universal Church; because, first, it appears not who belong to that
Church, which is thought Infallible.
THus far have we considered the Faith of the Universal Church, as it is taught
by the Pastors or Clergy. It remains that we treat of it as it is believed both
by Clergy and Laity; which is the last refuge of our Adversaries. Here I
undertake to prove, That there is nothing whereon the Faith of all private
Christians can less rely; and that for three reasons. 1. Because it does not
appear what is that Universal Church, whose Faith is to be the Rule of ours. 2.
Because it is not known what is the Faith of that Church. 3. Because it is not
manifest whether the Faith of any Church assignable, be true.

The first is evinced two ways. For first, it is uncertain what is the true
Idea or Definition of the Church, what is required to constitute it, whether
only an external profession of the true Faith, or also internal Faith and
Piety: And then although this were certain, it would be yet unknown, whether
the Roman, Greek, or any other, were that true Church. As for the first, our
Adversaries would persuade us, That they agree in the notion of a true Church.
Yet nothing is more manifest than their discord in this matter. There are
chiefly three Opinions of them herein: For if we should make an exact
enumeration of them, we should find many more. The first teaches, That the
Church is made up of all persons baptized, and outwardly professing the true
Faith, and adhering to the Pope of Rome, whether they be truly Faithful, or
secretly Insidels. The second to an External Profession, requires Internal
Faith, at least in form, to be added as necessary; and thereby excludes all
secret Insidels and Heretics. The third requires Charity to be added to these
two, and leaves no place in the Church, but to those who are truly just, and
free from Mortal Sin.

The first Opinion is defended by many, particularly Canus, Bellarmin, Duvall,
and almost all the later writers of Controversy, especially the French. The
second is taught by many: For all those seem to favor it, who desine the
Church to be the Congregation of the Faithful; of whom Launoy Laun. Epist. Tom.
8. ad Gattin.
reckons up a very great number. But it is openly and manisestly taught by
Alensis, Clemangis, Turrecremata, and Jacobatius; while in the places formerly
cited they assert, That the Church may be reduced to one only Woman, as it
actually was at the time of our Savior's Passion. The University of Cracow
produced by Launoy Vbi supra.
, desined Est Ecclesia Corpus mysticum, organicum, side Chrisli animatum, -- Ex
quo fit quod omnes baptizati, habentes fidem Christi sive informem sine
formatam, constituunt Ecclesiam militantem.
the Church to be a Mystical, Organical Body, animated by the Faith of Christ,
constituted by all baptized persons, having the Faith of Christ either in form
or formal. The same Opinion is accurately and largely defended by Suarez Suar.
de fide disp. 9. Sect. 2.
, Arriaga Arr. de fide disp. 7. Sect. 2.
, and Caspensis Casp. de fide disp. 2. Sect. 2.9.
among the Moderns.

The third Opinion seems to be favored by Bannes Catechumeni simpliciter
pertinent ad Ecclesiam invisibilem; siquidem sunt membra Christi per
Charitatem; sed ad Ecclesiam visibilem secundum quid, viz. per votum and
desiderium. Bann. in 2.2. qu. 1. art. 10. p. 47.
, while he says, The Catechumens simply belong to the Invisible Church, as
being members of Christ through Charity; but to the Visible Church only in
part, viz. in wish and desire. But he inclines more to the second, in these
words Ecclesia licet sit Respublica quaedam visibilis, requirit tamen aliquid
invisibile, sc. fidem. Haeretici ergo extra eam sunt, cum fidem non habeant.
Id. comm. fus. in art. 10. p. 90.
, The Church, although it be a visible Commonwealth, requires somewhat
invisible, to wit, Faith. Heretics therefore, as wanting that, are out of the
Church. And in another place Fideles peceatores sunt vere parts Ecclesiae
militantis. Id. Comm. brev. p. 47.
, The Faithful which are Sinners, are truly parts of the Church Militant. But
to omit Bannes, the third Opinion is openly maintained by Hugo a Sancto
Victore, whose words are these Ecclesia habet lapides, sc. fideles; qui sicut
per caementum lapis jungitur lapidi, sic per charitatem junguntur sibi. Hug.
lib. C. Sermon. Sermon. 3.
: The Church has Stones, to wit, the Faithful, who as one Stone is joined to
another by Cement, are joined to the Church by Charity. And in another place
Ecclesia sancta corpus est Christi uno spiritu vivificata, and unita fide una,
and sanctificata. -- Hoc itaque nomen significat membra Christi participantia
Spiritum Christi. Id. de Sacr. part. 2. cap. 2.
, The Holy Church is the Body of Christ, quickened by one Spirit, and united by
one Faith, and sanctified. This word therefore signifies the Members of Christ
partaking of the Spirit of Christ. Antoninus of Florence, after he had said,
The Church is sometimes taken for the General Collection of the Faithful,
subjoins these words Secundo modo sumitur Ecclesia pro congregatione bonorum
fidelium, qui sunt per charitatem Christo incorporati. Haec est Ecclesia, quae
regitur a Sp. S. corpus Christi mysticum, quod vegetatur spiritu ejus, pro qua
Christus oravit, ne fides desiceret. Ant. Sum. Theol. part. 3. tit. 12. c. 1.
, In the second place the Church is taken for the Congregation of Good
Believers, who are incorporated into Christ by Charity. This is that Church
which is governed by the Holy Ghost, the Mystical Body of Christ, which is
animated by his Spirit, for which Christ prayed, that her Faith should not
fail. The same says Cusanus Manifestum est hoc corpus Ecclesiae, quod ita se
habuit, ex praedestinatis tantum constitui -- Existentes in gratia praesentis
justitiae solum de Ecclesia esse censentur. Cus. Concord. lib. 1. cap. 4.
, It is manifest that this Body of the Church, which is thus disposed (which
adhereth to Christ in Spirit, in which the Spirit dwells, quickening the whole
Body) is made up only of Predestinate Persons. Only those persons therefore,
who continue in the Grace of present Righteousness are accounted to be of the
Church. Dionysius Carthusianus AEdificabo and confirmabo Ecclesiam meam, id
est, congregationem fidelium, corda eorum per fidem, charitatem and gratiam
mihi inseparabiliter connectendo; ita ut omnes sint unum corpus mysticum,
unaque domus. Carth. in Matthew. XVI. art. 26.
brings in Christ thus speaking. I will build and confirm my Church, that is,
the Congregation of the Faithful, by inseparably uniting their hearts to me by
Faith, Charity, and Grace; so as all may be one mystical Body, and one House.
J. Fr. Picus Mirandula A propria vocabuli significatione recedendum ipse non
putarem; ut primo and proprie principalissimeque Sancta Catholica Ecclesia
diceretur, quae omnes rectae and Apostolicae fidei and non fictae charitatis
homines complecteretur. Pic. Theor. 13.
says, That we ought not to recede from the proper signification of the Word;
that so that might be called primarily, properly, and most principally the Holy
Catholic Church, which comprehends all men of a right and Apostolic Faith
and unfeigned Charity. Ferus upon those words, Matthew. XV. The gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it, says Sed loquitur de Ecclesia Secundum spiritum,
quae solos electos complectitur. Fer. in Matthew.
, Christ speaks not here of the Church as it is commonly understood of the
Collection of all Christians, whether good or bad, but of the Church according
to the Spirit, which comprehends only the Elect. Lastly, Chr. Lupus Ecclesia
quae claves accepit, non est universa fidelium in legitimis Sacramentis
communio, sed sola congregatio justorum, seu Sanctorum communio. Lup. in
Council. tom. 4. p. 818.
affirms, That the Church which received the Keys, is not the universal
Communion of the Faithful in the Lawful Sacraments, but the sole Congregation
of the just, or the Communion of Saints: Which he pursues at large, and
proves by many Testimonies of St. Augustine; to which we might add many others
no less cogent of other Fathers; as St. Hierom, Agobardus, Bernard, etc. if our
Argument consisted in the truth of this Opinion. It suffices to show it was
received by many; and consequently that our Adversaries do not agree in forming
the Idea of a Church.

Now this Dissension is of great moment. For if the second, or especially the
third Opinion be true, the Doctrine of our Adversaries will be wholly
overthrown. For not to say, that if Sinners be excluded out of the Church, the
Pope and whole Councils may perhaps not belong to it, and so want that
Infallibility which is appropriated to the true Church. To omit this, since we
treat not now of active but passive Infallibilty, I say, That according to this
Hypothesis, the Faith of our Adversaries cannot rely upon the belief of the
Universal Church. For to conform themselves to this Rule of Faith, they must
first perfectly know it; which cannot be, if they know not what is that Church,
whose Faith they ought to follow. But how shall they know the Church, if that
consist only of Pious Men, whom none will deny to be known to God alone? Canus
was not ignorant of this; who rejects this Opinion, because, says he Incerta
erunt omnia, si apud solos pios Ecclesia est. Can. loc. Theol. lib. 4. cap. 3.
, all things will be uncertain, if the Church be limited to pious Men. Will our
Adversaries therefore say, that the first of these Opinions is certain, the
other undoubtedly false? That is easter affirmed than proved. Besides, of what
degree of certainty would they have their assertions to be? Not certainly of
Divine Faith; unlessHeresie be imputed to all those Learned Men, who maintained
the second and third Opinions. But no other degree of certainty can be obtained
in these things, nor will any other suffice.

CHAP. XXV. That our Adversaries have no way of knowing the true Church.
IT does not appear therefore, who they are that truly belong to the Church.
Yet suppose it is, and that all Baptized Persons outwardly professing the true
Faith, are Members of it; which Opinion most pleases our Adversaries, and is
most advantageous for them. It is still to be enquired, which, out of so many
Societies that challenge to themselves the name of the Church, justly and truly
claims it. For not any one that first occurrs, is to be admitted and preferred
before the rest. But here, if any where, a diligent and accurate Examination is
to be used; lest instead of the Church of Christ, we follow the Synagogue of
Satan; and for Divine Revelations receive execrable Errors. This especially
becomes them, who when they have found the Church, give over any further
enquiry, and receive without Examination all the dictates of it. They ought to
be very vigilant and curious in the choice of their Guide; lest if they happily
mistake, they incurr that Sentence of Christ, If the blind lead the blind, both
will fall into the ditch. Let us see therefore whether our Adversaries can
boast they have made a just and accurate enquiry herein, and most certainly
found out the true Church.

There are chiefly three Methods of making this Enquiry. 1. From the truth of
the Doctrine professed by any Church, and Conformity of that to the Word of
God. 2. By Notes known only by the light of right Reason, and independently
from the Word of God. 3. By Notes which are marked out and taught in the
Scripture. Arriaga prefers the first Method before all others. I answer,
says he Respondeo veritatem doctrinae probari etiam posse, non recurrendo ad
Ecclesiam, imo ante primam probationem verae Ecclesiae debere probari veritatem
doctrinae. -- Etenim cum Ecclesia, ut Ecclesia, definiatur per hoc, quod sit
coetus profitentium veram doctrinam fidei, repugnat in terminis me supponere
aliquam congregationem esse veram Ecclesiam; nisi dicam eo ipso ibi esse veram
doctrinam. Ergo non possum primo probare veram doctrinam ex vera Ecclesia. Arr.
de fide disp. 7. Sect. 5.
, that the truth of the Doctrine may be proved without recurring to the Church;
yea, and that before the first Proof of the true Church, the truth of the
Doctrine ought to be proved. He proves both parts of his Assertion largely,
and in the second part of it makes use of this Argument. For since the Church,
as a Church, is defined the Congregation of men professing the true Doctrine of
Faith, it is a contradiction in the very terms, to suppose any Congregation to
be the true Church, unless I do for that very reason suppose there is the true
Doctrine. I cannot therefore first prove the Doctrine is true from the truth of
the Church. To this we willingly subscribe, and approve this Method of
Arriaga's only. Not so the rest of our Adversaries, who detest it, and labor
to render it both infamous and impossible; pretending it to be full of
inextricable difficulties, and not to be surmounted by the most learned, much
less by illiterate persons. Wherefore I need not endeavor to prove that the
true Church cannot be by this way known by our Adversaries: They freely grant
it, urge it, and labor to demonstrate it.

The second Method is used by many; who contend that the Church may be known
independently from the Word of God by the help of Notes and Characters
perceived by Natural Reason, such as are Miracles, Sanctity, Antiquity,
Amplitude, and the like. But they withal admonish that the Church cannot this
way be known, as it has annexed to it the Privilege of Infallibility by the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, and consequently as it is the certain Rule of
Faith. They deny this can be any other way found out than by Faith relying on
the Promises of Christ and the other testimonies of Scripture. But that the
Authority, which these Notes conferr, is Humane, Fallible, and a Foundation
only of humane and acquired, not of divine and infused Faith. So among infinite
others teach Canus Loc. Theol. l. 2. c. 8.
, Bannes In 2.2. qu. 1. art. 1. dub. 4.
, Suarez De fide disp. 3. Sect. 10.
, Duvall In 2. 2. p. 10.
, Conink De actib. sup. disp. 17. n. 68.
, Arriaga De fide disp. 3. Sect. 1.
, Ysambertus De fide disp. 26 art. 2.
, Gillius De doctr. sacra l. 1. tract. 7. c. 9.
, Amicus De side disp. 2. Sect. 5.
, and Rhodius Duplex est authoritas Ecclesiae, alia est pure humana, prout sc.
eam probant miracula, prophetiae, and alia hujusmodi: alia est divina, prout ex
assistentia Sp. S. est infallibilis. Neutra potest esse objectum formale fidei.
Non prima, sequeretur enim sidem esse naturalem, esse fallibilem, etc. Rhod. de
fide qu. 1. Sect. 4.. 4.
: The last of these affirms, there is a twofold Authority of the Church; the
one purely Humane, as it is proved by Miracles, Prophecies, and such like; the
other Divine, as it is Infallible by the assistance of the Holy Ghost. Neither
can be the formal Object of Faith. Not the first; for then it would follow that
Faith were Natural, Fallible, etc. Certainly it is absurd to imagine that the
Church of Christ, redeemed and governed by him, and animated by his Spirit, can
be known by the sole light of Nature without Revelation. Nature might discover
somewhat admirable and excellent in it; but nothing more than humane, or
exalted beyond humane Infirmities. But this is not that we seek for. We are
enquiring a Method of knowing the Church as it is the Rule of Faith, and
Infallible: which since this Method cannot perform, it cannot be produced in
this place.

For these Reasons our Adversaries sly to the third Method; and endeavor to
demonstrate the Church from Notes, which they pretend to be assigned in
Scripture. So Driedo De Eccl. dogm. l. 2. c. 3. l. 4. c. 4.
from hence, that Christ is not now present, nor teaches with his own mouth in
the Church, nor attesteth the Preaching of others with Signs and Miracles,
concludes, We must necessarily slay to the Scriptures, and enquire thence which
is the true Church. Stapleton Dicimus ergo, and libentissime dicimus cum
Augustino in Scriptur is quaerendam esse Ecclesiam, i. e. quae sint notae,
dotes and proprietates Ecclesiae ex S. Scripturae oraculis, non ex humanis
document is investigandum esse. De princip. dectr. lib. 1. cap. 24.
: We say therefore, and willingly acknowledge with St. Augustine, that the
Church is to be sought for in the Scripture; that is, what are the Notes,
Privileges, and Properties of the Church, is to be found out from the Oracles
of Holy Scripture, not from Humane Arguments. The same say the Popish
Disputants in the Conference of Ratisbon Tantummodo igitur ex Scripturis
Religionem Christionam cognoscimus; quia tantummodo ex notis in Scriptura
declaratis, and non ex aliis cognoscimus, quae sit vera Ecclesia. Colloq.
Ratisb. Sess. 8.
. We know the Christian Religion only from the Scriptures; because from the
Notes only declared in Scripture, and from no others, we know which is the true
Church. This way also Card. Richlieu Meth. live. 1. Chap. 8.
chiefly follows.

But there are many things inconsistent to be found in it: As first, that it
supposes the Scripture to be acknowledged for the Word of God. For no man can
believe the Notes of the Church laid down in the Scripture to be true and
certain, till he be first persuaded that all things contained in it are true
and Divine. But how shall he, who has not yet known the Church (for such is he
who enquires after it) be assured of the Divinity of Scripture, if it be true
what our Adversaries so often inculcate, That the Scripture to us is of no
Authority, till attested and confirmed by the Church? Thus a manifest Circle
will be committed, Scripture received for the Authority of the Church, and the
Church for the Authority of Scripture. Card. Richlieu confesses this a great
difficulty; but contendeth it may be solved by saying, The Church is known
independently from the Scripture by the help of Notes, which Natural Reason
suggesteth can agree to none but the true Church. But if the Church can be
known before the Scripture, what need the Scripture be consulted to find Notes
whereby we may be brought to the knowledge of the Church? To what end these
Labyrinths and fruitless toil to search out a thing already known? Not to say,
that this Method is coincident with the second before mentioned, and is
therefore for the same reasons to be rejected. Besides it manifestly
contradicts our Adversaries Hypothesis concerning the obscurity of Scripture.
Every one knows how much they exaggerate this obscurity, and Richlieu himself,
within a few pages of this place, maintains it is obscure, both as to the
sense, and as to the letter; and that not only to the Reprobate, but even the
Elect; to the Faithful and Doctors themselves. Who after all this can believe
that he speaks sincerely and in earnest, when he undertakes to demonstrate out
of this Book, so obscure and impenetrable to the greatest Wits, the Characters
of the true Church, not to a Doctor or a Believer, but to an Infidel: For this
he pretends, about his Conversion is the Dispute raised.

The Cardinal therefore in that undertakes a most difficult matter. But the
obscurity of Scripture is not all the difficulty of this undertaking. For how
shall it be demonstrated those things are by Scripture assigned for the Notes
of the Church, of which Scripture is wholly silent, nay, teaches the contrary
to some of them; as might be evidently proved, if the intended brevity of this
Dissertation would permit it? But suppose the Scripture attributes to the
Church whatsoever our Adversaries would have to be so many Notes of it: This
avails not, unless it appear that those Notes are not only true, but also the
only Notes, and that no other is assigned in Scripture. This the Cardinal
himself admonishes. It is to be observed, says he Method. live. 1. chap.
, that although it does not follow that Society which has one of the Notes of
the true Church, is the true Church; yet it follows, that Society which wants
one of these Notes, is not the true Church. Valentia had gone before him. These
are the Notes, says he Non sunt notae Ecclesiae sigillatim sed conjunctim,
quia fieri possit ut una harum and altera aliis conveniat. Val. Anal. fid. lib.
6. cap. 7.
, which we urge, One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic. These are not the Notes of
the Church singly, but conjunctly; because it may be that one or two of them
may agree to others. And indeed it cannot be denied that the Greek Church has
many of these Notes. If therefore from one or more of them we might argue
affirmatively, the Greek must be granted to be a true Church.

To conclude therefore that the Roman, or any other, is the true Church, it is
necessary that no note of the true Church be wanting to it, and that it be
evident no other note is assigned in Scripture besides those wherein she
already glories. While this is uncertain, nothing can be securely concluded
from any Notes whatever. That an Infidel therefore be rightly instructed, it is
required, that he read over the whole Scripture from one end to the other,
accurately weigh and examine all places, that he may be ascertained none of
those Notes have escaped his diligence. But this besides, that it is long and
tedious, and apt rather to discourage and deterr than allure an Infidel to the
Christian Religion, is impossible, if our Adversaries Doctrine of the obscurity
of Scripture be admitted. For who can promise himself that nothing has escaped
his most sagacious enquiry, amidst so much darkness and intricacy, as our
Adversaries pretend to be in Scripture? Much less can an Infidel be assured of
this, whose Understanding is yet clouded with Errors, and his Eyes with
Blindness. Yet if he be not certain that no one Note of the Church is unknown
to him, how many soever he has by his search observed, in vain does he sweat:
since even, according to our Adversaries, many Notes contribute nothing to that
Society, to which any one is wanting. And this is so much the more difficult,
because our Adversaries are not agreed about the number of the Notes. Valentia
and many others assign four, Driedo six, Medina ten, Sanders and Pistorius
twelve, Bellarmin fifteen, Bosius an hundred. In so great variety of opinions
what certainty can be expected?

But what if in this diligent reading of Scripture many things shall occurr,
whereby the Catechumen will be induced to believe there are many other Notes
beside those which our Adversaries point out, and those such as will divert him
from embracing the Communion of the Church of Rome? He will in the first place
observe those words of Christ. John VIII. 31, 47. X. 27.
If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples indeed. He that is of God,
hears God's words. My Sheep hear my voice. Hence he will conclude that the
truth of Doctrine, and its conformity to God's word, is the most certain Note
of the true Church. But our Adversaries will never permit, that he should make
use of this Note to find out the Church. For that would introduce the first
method so much hated by them: and it were to be feared, that the Catechumen
comparing the Doctrine of the Church of Rome with the Scripture, would find a
manifest repugnance in many things. Another Note of the Church he would find to
be the observation of the Divine Precepts from the same places. For he cannot
be said to hear the voice of Christ, that obeys it not. And in other places
Christ says: John VIII. 10, 14.
If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my Love. Ye are my friends if ye
do what soever I command you. God also foretold by his Prophets that under the
new Covenant he would write his Laws in the hearts of Men, and make them to
walk in his statutes. But can the Catechumen find this observation of the
Divine precepts in the Church of Rome, where the Cup is taken from the Laity,
Prayers performed in an Unknown Tongue, and many other things used expressly
contrary to the Divine Commands?

The Scripture oft-times calls the Church the most chaste Spouse of Christ. Now
this Chastity consists in keeping her Faith to God, and transferring no part of
the Divine Worship due to him upon any other objects. Otherwise God will
implead her of adultery, and give her a bill of divorcement. Will the
Catechumen then from this Note conclude the Church of Rome to be the Spouse of
Christ; by whom he perceives so many Creatures, Saints deceased, their
Relics, the Cross, Images, and the Host, to be worshipped and adored?
Meekness and Gentleness is also a note of the Church, when her Children are
frequently in the Scriptures called Sheep, Lambs, Doves, Turtles. Isaiah
foretold all cruelty should be far from the Church of Christ. Isai. XI. 9. and
LXIII. 25.
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy Mountain. Christ left his Peace
to his Disciples, and said to them: Matthew. XI. 29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto
your Souls. Who can then imagine the Church of Christ to be that Society, which
persecutes all dissenting from her with fire and sword, and scarce uses any
other arguments than Racks and Gibbets? Of the same nature, with this Note is
another laid down by David. He calls Ps. CX. 3.
the Church a willing People: who are not retained in the Communion of their
Savior by force and fear, but by a most free and that most fervent Love. Hence
her most excellent Pastor is said Zach. XI. 7.
to govern her with two staves, one called Beauty, and the other Bands: but
that you may not mistake, those bands are Hos. XI. 4.
the cords of a Man, and the bands of Love. Is Rome therefore this Church of
Christ, which wheresoever she commands, has no stronger bands to retain her
People than the detestable Tribunal of the Holy Inquisition? To these two last
Notes is conjoined a sixth: That she be free, and not a Servant of Men,
especially of Pastors. This the Scripture teaches in many places,
particularly, Gal. IV. 25, 26. John VIII. 32.36. 2 Cor. I. 24. III. 17. IV. 5.
1 Pet. V. 3. Ja. I. 25. That therefore is not the Church of Christ, which
serves the Pope, whose Slave Cajetan expressly calls her. Is that Church free,
upon which the Pope imposes arbitrary Laws, which none must call in question?
Can he be denied to be Lord of the Church, who as the Canon Law Decret part. 1.
did. 40. can. Si Papa.
tells us, although he should carry innumerable People by troops as Slaves to
Hell, to be with himself for ever tormented; yet no mortal must presume to
reprehend his faults, because he is to judge all, to be judged of none? Who,
not to mention obsolete Stories, but lately commanded all to believe, there is
five heretical propositions in Jansenius; and yet, although humbly entreated by
many Doctors, would not declare in what part of Jansenius his Book they might
be found? What is this but to account Christians as most vile Slaves?

The seventh Note of the Church consists in this, John IV. 23.
That she worship God in Spirit and in Truth. The ancient Church of the Jews
indeed used a gross and sensible kind of Worship, and was employed about the
mean and beggarly Elements of the World: but it is the peculiar glory of the
Christian Church, to worship God in a way most consentaneous to the simplicity
of his being and the holiness of his nature. Not so the Church of Rome, which
observes so many diverse and difficult ceremonies; that in comparison of them
the Mosaic Rites are both few and easy. This you will soon acknowledge, if you
compare the fourth or at most the third part of the Pentateuch (for no more is
taken up with ritual matters) with so many vast volumes, the Ceremonial,
Pontifical, Ritual, Missal, Gradual, and others; which prescribe the external
part of the Roman Service. Lastly, the true Church is that which neither
usurpeth nor disturbeth the civil Government. Therein imitating Christ her
Master; who offered heavenly things to all, earthly to none; professed his
Kingdom was not of this World; withdrew himself unto the Mountains, when sought
for by the multitude to be made a King; and refused to be a Judge in a matter
of inheritance. The true Church observes the Apostles precept Romans XIII. 1.
of being subject to the higher Powers: And that other Ibid. v. 7.
of rendering to all their due, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom,
fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Not so the Church of Rome, whose
Head, the Pope, deposes Kings at his pleasure, absolveth their Subjects from
their Oath of Allegiance, and pretends to a Sovereign Dominion over the whole
World. I might produce many other like Notes of the Church out of Scripture;
but these suffice to show how great danger they expose the Church of Rome to,
who out of those Holy Writings permit a judgment to be formed of her Truth and
Purity.

I will now proceed briefly to demonstrate that not even from those Notes which
the Church of Rome assigns, can it be known that she is the true Church. Card.
Richlieu assigns four, Antiquity, Amplitude, Perpetuity, and Succession.
Amplitude shall be considered afterward; the other three I will now briefly
touch. Antiquity consists solely or chiefly in this, that the Church which is
called Ancient, have preserved the same Faith, Worship, and Religion from the
beginning. While the Church of Rome therefore glories in Antiquity, she
means that she now professes the same Faith which Christ formerly
instituted, and his Apostles taught. But to know this there is no other way
than to compare the present Doctrine of the Church of Rome with the Ancient
Monuments of Christian Religion, of which Scripture is the Chief. Now this in
nothing differs from the first method, which we only approve, and our
Adversaries reject. If then the Church cannot be known by that method, neither
can it by that which our Adversaries propose. The discussion of perpetuity is
yet more difficult. For therein is to be proved not only that the present is
the same with the first and original Doctrine, but also that it was so in every
Age, and that this profession of the old Religion was never once interrupted.
Now how vast and unexhausted a knowledge of antiquity does this require? No
ancient monument must be neglected; infinite Volumes both Printed and
Manuscript must be read through. This few Men can attend to; or if they could,
one Age would not suffice. Yet this accordding to Richlieu's method must be
done by any Infidel who is a Candidate of Christianity. The same may be said of
Succession. That is twofold, of Doctrine, and of Persons. The first is
coincident with antiquity and perpetuity: the second in Gretser's judgment is
of little moment. Without Truth of Doctrine, says he, Sine veritate doctrinae
successio Pastorum est exigui ponderis. De verb. Dei lib. 4. cap. 9.
Succession of Pastors is of small weight. But suppose it of the greatest
moment. What is more laborious and difficult, to say no more, than to prove
that in a long series of Succession continued through XVI. Ages there never
happened the least interruption.

Thus much of the Notes singly. As for all taken together, it is manifest that
even in our Adversaries opinion they cannot be certain; since they are found in
the Greek Church. The Cardinal denies that of Antiquity, because the Church of
Constantinople cannot demonstrate her claim of being founded by St. Andrew. Let
it be. Certainly the Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, and
Athens, which are parts of the Greek Church, were founded by Apostles, and the
first even by Christ himself. Again the Cardinal denies the Succession of the
Greek Bishops; because their Patriarchs were heretical. But first, it matters
not what the Patriarchs are, if the other Bishops be Orthodox. Secondly, this
very thing may be brought against the Succession of Popes: for some of them
have been condemned by General Councils. Lastly, if heresy interrupts
succession; it will be no more certain that the Succession of Popes was never
interrupted, than that no Pope was ever an Heretic. But how shall this be
ascertained, especially to an Infidel, of whom we now treat, who may consider
that many in the Church of Rome openly teach the contrary? To this may be
added, That it is absurd in this case to pretend Heresy against the Succession
of any Church. For that is the very thing now inquired by this Infidel, which
Society of Christians is the true Church, and consequently, which of them are
Heretics or Schismatics? This method therefore, can never certainly teach us,
That the Church of Rome is the true Church.

CHAP. XXVI. That it is uncertain, what the Universal Church believes.
IF after all this we should grant, That our Adversaries may certainly know
which is the true Church; it were yet to be inquired what this Church
believes. But how shall this be known? For first it does not suffice to know
what the greater or lesser part of the Universal Church believes, unless we
know what is the Faith of the whole. For our Adversaries confess, That the
greater part of it may err. So Tostatus answering to those, who from the
Universal corruption of the translations of the Bible before S. Hierom's time
argued, That the whole Church then erred, replied, That all the Copies indeed
of the Latin Church were corrupted, but in the Greek Church were preserved
entire. Now, says he, Ecclesia autem Latinorum non est Ecclesia Vniversalis,
sed quaedam pars ejus. Ideo etiamsi tota ipsa errasset, non errabat Eccl.
universalis, quia manet Eccl. universalis in partibus istis quae non errant,
five illa fint plures numero quam errantes, sine non. Tossed. in 2. Prol. Hier.
in Matthew. qu. 4.
the Latin Church is not the Universal Church, but only a part of it.
Therefore, although that had wholly erred, the Universal Church would not have
erred; because it remains in those parts which do not err, whether they be more
or fewer in number than the parts which do err. So Canus At nihil obstat, cur
major Ecclesiae pars non erret. Can. loc. Theol. lib. 5. cap. 5.
. Nothing hinders, but that the greater part of the Church may err. Bannes
Sententia majoris partis Ecclesiae potest esse falsa in materia fidei. Bann. in
2.2. qu. 1. art. 10. dub. 4.
. The Opinion of the greater part of the Church may be false in a matter of
Faith. Valentia considering those words of Christ: When the Son of Man comes,
shall he find Faith upon the Earth? says Significat paucissimos certe fore
postremo illo tempore fideles, non autem nullos. Val tom. 3. disp. 1. qu. 1.
punct. 7.. 16.
, He signifies that there will be very few Faithful in that last time, not that
there will be none. And Bellarmin Non tamen nullos, nec tam paucos, ut non
faciant Ecclesiam. Bell. de Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 16.
treating of the same words, says with Theophylact, That our Lord means,
there will be few Faithful in the times of Antichrist; not yet that there will
be none, nor so few, as not to constitute a Church.

Many Divines, and those of great name, (whose words we before produced) have
gone farther, and maintained, That the true Faith, and true Church may be
reduced to one only Woman. Nor does John Viguerius a Dominican, Professor of
Divinity in the University of Toulouse, differ much from them, teaching that
Faith, at least explicit, may be preserved in one person, all the rest
retaining only implicit Faith. It may be said of the Church, says he Sic
potest dici de Ecclesia, quod potest servari in uno, prout dicitur de Maria
Virg. quod in ea sola in triduo sepulturae mansit fides explicita de divinitate
Christi; quamvis multi alii per Judaeam existentes habere possent fidem
catholicam actualem and implicitam, non tamen explicitam, de divinitate
Christi. Vig. Instit. Theol. c. 10.
, that it may be preserved in one person, as it is said of the V. Mary, that in
her only, during the three days of burial, remained explicit Faith, touching
the Divinity of Christ; although many others in Judea might have actual and
implicit Catholic Faith, but not explicit, of the Divinity of Christ.

If either of these two Opinions be allowed, we must despair of ever knowing
the Faith of the Universal Church. For where can be sought for, by what Notes
can be found that Phoenix, that Deucalion of the Christian World, who alone
retains explicit Faith, when all the rest have either erred, or preserved only
implicit Faith? But be these Opinions true or false; the opposite of neither of
them can be of Faith, as I before proved of the former; and of the latter may
be hence proved, That this Book of Viguerius is approved by the Faculty of
Divinity of Paris; which would never have been done, if it had been found to
contain Heresy. However, let both be exploded, the other cannot be denied,
That the greater part of the Church may err. Nay further, None ever yet dared
to define, how great that part of the Church must necessarily be, which cannot
be infected with Error, without the ruin of the Infallibility of the whole.
Unless therefore it appears, that the whole Church consents, the belief of it
cannot be a sure Foundation for our Faith.

But first, the whole Church seldom or never consents. Certainly never in all
things. All things therefore can never be learned from her. Whence then shall
they be learned? Besides, where she does consent, it is so obscure, that it can
be known by no Man. This is proved, and much more manifestly, by all those
Arguments which we brought against the certainty of knowing what all the
Pastors teach. For if it cannot be known what all the Pastors teach; much less
can it be known what all the Faithful believe; since there are far more
Believers than Pastors, and these teach more distinctly than the others
believe. Beside, it is not sufficient to know what seems true to all the
Faithful, unless it be also known what they all embrace as revealed by God. For
our Adversaries acknowledge there are many false Opinions of the whole Church.
Maldonat A pud Richer Hist. Council. lib. 3. cap. 3.
proves this at large, and gives some Examples of it. As, that the Church for
many Ages used a Preface upon the Festival of St. Hierom, wherein she extolled
his pure Virginity, although St. Hierom in several places confesses the
contrary; for which reason the Preface was at last expunged; That for 600 years
she administered the Eucharist to Infants; That she worshippeth particular
Relics of Saints, and prays for the Souls of particular Men in Purgatory,
although it be not of Faith that those Relics are true, or these Souls in
Purgatory, and the like; which proves the necessity of knowing, not only what
is held by the Universal Church, but whether it is held by her as of Faith, and
revealed by God. But who shall ascertain this? For the common sort of Believers
are not wont accurately to distinguish these things; so that if any one should
ask whomsoever he meets, What they admit as true, what as revealed, what they
receive with Divine Faith, what with Catholic Opinion; he would find very few
who could comprehend the Sense of his Question; much fewer, who could answer
him distinctly. So far shall we be therefore from knowing by this method what
is believed in the Universal Church, that it can scarce be known what is
believed in any single Diocese.

CHAP. XXVII. That it may justly be doubted, whether all those things be true,
which the Universal Church believes.
THere remains the third Reason of the impossibility of founding the Faith of
all single Christians upon the belief of the Universal Church, the uncertainty
of the truth of this Belief. For, suppose the Church of Rome to be the true
Church, and that it is sufficiently known what she believes: It is not yet
manifest whether she believes rightly. For a True Church is one thing, an
Infallible Church another: Yet Infallible must that necessarily be, which is to
us a certain Rule of Faith. Before all things therefore it is required to be
known, that the Church is Infallible. But how shall this be known? Our
Adversaries commonly say, It is known by Faith. But to this I oppose the
Opinion of those Divines, who hold, That all Christians may fall from the
Faith, except one single Woman. Hence I conclude, That the Infallibility of the
Church cannot be of Faith, because repugnant to the Opinion of these Catholic
Divines. Certainly we, who deny the Infallibility of the Church, go not so far
as they. We believe that God preserves to himself even in the most difficult
times, a remnant according to the election of Grace: and that there always
remains at least an Invisible Church, whose name being collective, cannot
consist, and be restrained to one person.

Our Adversaries therefore cannot pretend their Opinion, as it is at this day
proposed, to be of Faith: And so much the less, because they can assign no
Foundation of this Faith. Not Scripture, Tradition, Decrees of Popes,
Definitions of Councils, or Consent of Pastors. For first, I have proved in the
preceding Discourse, That none of all these can be relied upon, at least
according to our Adversaries Hypotheses; and then it is the constant Doctrine
of Papists, That the Church is not believed for them, but they for the Church.
Again it is certain, that the Infallibility of the Church cannot be beieved for
the Authority of the Church it self. For that would be a manifest Circle; and
he that doubts whether the Church can err, does for that very reason doubt
whether she does not err, when she thinks that she cannot err. Therefore Bannes
Non potest reduci ad authoritatem ipsius Ecclesiae hoc enim esset idem per idem
confirmare. Bann. in 2. 2. qu. 1. art. 1. dub. 4.
said truly, That the Church is the Infallible rule of proposing and explaining
truths of Faith cannot be reduced to the Authority of the Church it self; for
that would be to prove the same thing by it self.

Why then is it believed? Our Adversaries commonly answer, That it is a thing
before all others to be believed, and not for any other Rule; for then the same
Question would return about that Rule: And because they commonly require three
things to make up an Act of Faith. 1. The Testimony of God revealing, as the
formal Reason and principal Foundation. 2. A Rule whereby this Revelation of
God may be manifested. 3. Motives of Credibility which may induce us to be
willing to believe; they think the first is here present, and the third
abundantly to be had in the Notes of the Church, which are perceived and
dictated by Natural Reason; but the second wanting, which they pretend not to
be necessary in a matter of first belief, such as this is. But first, if a Rule
be not required in forming this first Act of Faith: Why is it necessary in
others? Why may not all the other Articles be believed for the Authority of God
by the inducement of Motives of Credibility, with which the Christian Religion
is abundantly furnished? Secondly, Which is chiefly to be regarded, it is
absurd to boast of a Testimony of God revealing, which no way can be known. The
Infallibility of the Church, or any other Article of Belief can never be proved
to have been revealed by God, but by some Rule either living or dead, whereby
things revealed may be distinguished from not revealed; otherwise the most
foolish Opinion may entitle it self to Revelation, and then cannot be rejected.

Here they fly to Motives of Credibility, and by them undertake to supply their
defect of a Rule, and manifest the Revelation. But if these Motives can confer
upon the Church so sufficient an Authority, that what she proposes as revealed
by God, must be believed: Why may not the like Motives give the same Authority
to the Scripture, and assure us of the Divine Original of it? And that such
Motives are not wanting to the Scripture. Bellarmin 1 De verbo Dei, ib. 1. cap.
2.
, Suarez De fide disp. 5. Sect. 2, 3.
, Duvall Duvall in 2. 2. p. 120.
, and Martinonus De fide disp. 7. Sect. 1.
among many others expressly confess. Why may we not then by these Motives first
be satisfied of the Authority of Scripture, and from thence learn all things
necessary to Salvation, which are clearly contained in it; and be so saved
without recurring to the Church?

Further, How is it gathered from these Notes and Motives of Credibility that
the Church cannot err; whether evidently, certainly, and necessarily; or only
obscurely, probably, and contingently? The first our Adversaries will never
say; for then it would necessarily follow, That Faith is evident; which they
all contend to be false; insomuch as Bellarmin Ante approbationem Ecclesiae non
est evidens aut certum certitudine fidei de ullo miraculo quod sit verum mir
aculum. Et quidem quod non sit evidens patet, quia tunc fides esset evidens.
Bell. de Eccles. l. 4. c. 14.
disputing of Miracles, the chief of these Motives, has these words, Before
the Approbation of the Church it is not evident nor certain with the certainty
of Faith of any Miracle, that it is a true one. And that it is not evident is
manifest; for then Faith would be evident. Besides, if these Notes evidently
prove the Church cannot err, it would be most false, what our Adversaries
before delivered with so great consent, that by these Notes the Church is not
known as it has an Infallible, but only as it has an Humane and Fallible
Authority. Lastly, They acknowledge, as we before showed, That a manifest and
convictive Argument cannot be deduced from one or more of these Notes, although
fortified by the Authority of Scripture, if any one be wanting. How then will
they afford evidence, when perceived by the sole light of Nature, and are much
fewer? For they allow more Notes to be pointed out by Scripture, than taught by
the light of Nature.

Do these Notes then only persuade probably? If so, I have gained what I was to
prove. For then it will be only probable that the Church cannot err; and the
Faith of Papists will have no certainty, as not exceeding probability. For
whatsoever they believe, they believe either for the Testimony or for the
Judgment of the Church; and so cannot be more certain, or evident than is the
Infallibility of the Church in testifying and judging. Some to elude this, make
a twofold evidence, Physical and Moral; and grant the Arguments of the
Infallibility of the Church not to be Physically evident, but contend they are
Morally. So especially Aegidius Conink De actib. sup. disp. 2. dub. 2. number. 46.
collat. cum dub. 3. number. 71, 72.
. But here in the first place, this manifest absurdity occurrs; That when they
acknowledge these Arguments to be only Morally certain, they yet maintain
Faith, which is founded solely upon them, to be Physically certain; for that
degree of certainty all attribute to Divine Faith. Besides it hence also
appears, that this Moral Certainty does not suffice; because it is more than
Morally, even Physically evident, that those things are false, which the Church
of Rome teaches about the Eucharist: For that the Eucharist after Consecration
is still Bread and Wine, is proved by innumerable Arguments of Physical
Evidence, which consequently can never be counterweighed, much less out weighed
by Arguments of Moral Evidence, brought to prove the Infallibility of that
Church which teaches a contrary Opinion.

However it will not be amiss to examine, whether the Arguments drawn from
these Notes of the Church be morally evident, as is pretended. But first we
must remove the Equivocation which lies hid in this term. For it is used by
the Schoolmen in a threefold Sense. First therefore, many call that Morally
Certain, which is so probable, that many Arguments persuade it, but nothing
insinuates the least suspicion of the contrary. Secondly, Those things are
called Morally Certain; which to use Bellarmin's words, are confirmed by so
many Signs and Conjectures, as may exclude all Anxiety, but not all Distrust.
Thirdly, Those things are most properly said to be morally certain, which are
known by the common and unanimous testimony of a great multitude witnessing a
thing by them seen, which Testimony none contradicts; as Conink Quae ex communi
and concordi magnae multitudinis rem visam testantis testimonio, cui nemo
contradicit, noscuntur. De actib. sup. disp. 11. dub. 1. number. 44.
defines them. If our Adversaries say the Arguments take from the Notes of the
Church are morally certain in the first or second Sense; in the first place I
deny it: For those things only are morally certain in those Senses, against
which no contrary Arguments can be produced. For if any such occurr, the Mind
fluctuates, and can obtain no certainty. Now none can deny, that there are many
at least probable Arguments which persuade, That the Church of Rome is not the
true Church. Secondly, I assert, That neither of these Certainties will
suffice. For they cannot, but in a loose and improper Sense, be called
Certainty. They are indeed mere probability, which may suffice in matters of
Life and Action, where greater certainty cannot be had, but not in matters of
Belief and Salvation, where the greatest is required; whereas these may
possibly be false, as is manifest in the Cases of an Infant whether Baptized,
or an Host whether Consecrated, which are commonly produced for Examples of the
first and greatest of the two kinds of Moral Certainty. For both the Baptism of
an Infant, and the Consecration of an Host, depending upon the Intention of the
Priest, can never be certainly known to have been duly performed. For no Man
can be ever speculatively certain of those things which can be false.

There remains then the third Sense; which I deny not to be sufficient,
although it be not wholly consonant to the Doctrine of our Adversaries. But to
pass by that, it is manifest, That here is no place for this kind of certainty;
since it depends upon the Testimony of others so framed and circumstantiated,
that it is altogether, at least morally impossible to deceive, or be deceived;
as that Caesar and Alexander formerly existed, as Rome and Constantinople do
now; whereas Arguments drawn from Antiquity, Amplitude, Sanctity, etc. are of
another kind, as being wholly artificial, and consequently most different from
those which beget this Moral Certainty. Besides, there is none of these Notes,
wherein the Greek Church may not equally glory with the Latin. Sanctity,
Amplitude, Antiquity, and constancy of Martyrs none can deny to her. As for
Miracles, the Greeks by the confession of the Latins have somewhat admirable,
which is not to be found in the Roman Church. For Lupus In Council. tom. 5. p.
543.
relates out of Chr. Angelus and Leo Allatius, that it is at this day most
frequent among the Greeks, that the dead Bodies of Excommunicate Persons
immediately after death, grow black, swell, and become very hard, nor can be
dissolved before the Bishop gives them Absolution, which being once pronounced,
they are reduced into Dust: The Divine Goodness, says Lupus, by these Captivos
sub Turcica tyrannide Christianos divina bonitas consolatur per talia miracula
and in Evangelica fide confirmat.
Miracles comforting and confirming in the Faith, the poor Christians oppressed
with the Turkish Tyranny. In this Miracle four things may be observed. 1. That
it is not only boasted by the Greeks, but also acknowledged by the Latins. 2.
That it is an ordinary, and almost daily Miracle. 3. That it is annexed to the
Episcopal Dignity, so as their Excommunication and Absolution has a sensible
and supernatural effect. 4. That it serves not only to favor the Christian
Religion professed by the Greeks, but also their private error. For as Lupus
observes, They imagine the Absolution given after death to be valid, and to
deliver from the Torments of Hell it self; which seems to be confirmed by the
sensible effect that immediately follows the Absolution. What have the Latins
like to this? Their pretended Miracles are not acknowledged by their
Adversaries, but rather convinced of falsity by them, and even by many of their
own Communion; they are rare, not ordinary, nor annexed to any Ecclesiastical
Dignity; and such as, if they were true, serve to confirm only the Christian
Religion in general, not their own particular Tenets.

It is manifest therefore, That those Arguments are not certain, which are
deduced from the Notes of the Church; since, if they were so, they would
demonstrate, what our Adversaries think to be false, That the Greek is the True
and Infallible Church. This might be evidently evinced, if we considered each
Note singly. But besides that it is already accurately performed by our
Reverend B. Morton. Jo. Gerardus and others, it seems not very necessary in
this place. Here therefore I finish, and in one word conclude, That the
Papists, who boast of having so many immovable Foundations of their Faith, have
not so much as one which is solid; and that what they believe, they do it
pertinaciously indeed, but neither certainly nor firmly.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Richard Chiswell.
Dr. CAve's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2 Vol. Folio. Dr. Cary's
Chronological Account of Ancient Time. fol. Hooker's. Ecclesiastical Polity.
fol. Sir John Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion. fol. The Laws of this
Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, explained by diverse Judgments and Resolutions of the Judges;
with other Observations thereupon. By Willim Cawley Esquire fol. Dr. Towerson's
Explication on the Creed, the Commandments, and Lord's Prayer, in 3 Vol. fol.
Bishop Nicholson on the Church-Catechism. 40. Mr. John Cave's seven occasional
Sermons. 40. Bishop Wilkin's Natural Religion. 80. -- His Fifteen Sermons. 80.
Mr. Tanner's Primordia: Or, the Rise and Growth of the First Church of God
described. 80. Spaniard's Conspiracy against the State of Venice. 80. Dr.
Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three parts. 80. Certain genuine Remains of
the Lord Bacon, in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural, etc. with a large account
of all his Works. By Dr. Tho. Tenison. 80. Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on
select Texts. 80. Mr. Seller's State of the Church in the three first
Centuries. Dr. Burnet's Account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester.
80. -- Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England. 80. -- History
of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices and
Church Lands. 80. -- Relation of the present state of the difference between
the French King and the Court of Rome; to which is added, the Pope's Brief to
the Assembly of the Clergy, and their Protestation, published by Dr. Burnet.
80. Dr. Cumber's Companion to the Altar. 80. Dr. Sherlock's Practical Discourse
of Religious Assemblies. 80. -- Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness
of Separation. 80. -- A Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, in
answer to Mr. Baxter. and Mr. Lob about Catholic Communion. 80. Sir Rob.
Filmer's Patriarcha, or natural Power of Kings. 80. Bishop Wettenhall's Method
and Order for private Devotion. 12 s. Valentine's Private Devotions. 40. Dr.
Spencer de Legibus Hebraeorum Ritualibus and earum Rationibus. fol. Dr. John
Lightfoots's Works in English, in 2 Vol. fol. Sir Tho. Brown's Vulgar Errors,
with all the rest of his Works. fol. Patris Sim^nii Disquisitionis Criticae de
Variis per diversa Loca and Tempora Bibliorum: ^ Editionibus. Accedunt
Castigat. Opusc. Is. Vossi de Sibyllinis Oraculis. 40. The Case of
Lay-Communion with the Church of England considered. 40. Two Letters betwixt
Mr. R. Smith, and Dr. Hen. Hammond, about Christ's Descent into Hell. 80. Dean
Stratford's Disswasive from Revenge. 80. Dr. Hez. Burton's first Volume of
Discourses; of Purity and Charity; of Repentance, and of seeking the Kingdom of
God. Published by Dean Tillotson. 80. -- His second Volume of Discourses on
several Practical Subjects. Octavo. Sir Thomas More's Vtopia, newly made
English by Dr. Burnet. 80. Mr. Seller's Devout Communicant; assisted with
Rules, Meditations, Prayers and Anthems. 12 s. Dr. Towerson of the Sacraments
in General. -- Of the Sacrament of Baptism in particular. 80.
The History of the COUNCIL of TRENT: in which, besides the Ordinary Acts of
the Council, are declared many notable Occurrences which happened in Christendom
for 40 Years, and particularly the Practices of the COURT of ROME to hinder the
Reformation of Their Errors, and to maintain Their Greatness. Written by Father
Paul of the SERVI. To which is added, the Life of the Author, and the History
of the Inquisition.

Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
Dr. Burnets History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2 Vol.
Fol. A Collection of Sixteen several Tracts, and Discourses. Written in the
Years, from 1678, to 1685. inclusive, by Gilbert Burnet, D. D. To which are
added, A Letter written to Dr. Burnet, giving an Account of Cardinal Pool's
Secret Powers. The History of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the
Proceedings thereupon. An Impartial Consideration of the Five Jesuits dying
Speeches, who were Executed for the Popish Plot, 1679. 40. A Dissertation
concerning the Government of the Ancient Church: more particularly of the
Encroachment of the Bishops of Rome upon other Sees. By WILLIAM CAVE, D. D.
Octavo. An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's [Sure Footing in Christianity] concerning
the Rule of Faith: With some other Discourses. By WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D. 40. A
Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in Answer to a Paper
written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders. By
GILBERT BVRNET, D. D. Octavo. An Abridgment of the History of the Reformation
of the Church of England. By GILB. BVRNET, D. D. Octavo. The APOLOGY of the
Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio, a Venetian Gentleman,
concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by the Right Reverend
Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of Salisbury: Made English by a Person of
Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop: Collected and written
by the same Hand. Octavo. The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL, D. D. Bishop of Kilmore in
Ireland. Together with Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James
Waddesworth, (a late Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition of Sevil) in Matters of
Religion, concerning the General Motives to the Roman Obedience, Octavo. The
Decree made at ROME the second of March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of the
Jesuits, and other Casuists. Quarto. A Discourse concerning the Necessity of
Reformation, with respect to the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome.
Quarto. First and Second Parts. A Discourse concerning the Celebration of
Divine Service in an unknown Tongue. Quarto. A Papist not Misrepresented by
Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections upon the Answer to [A Papist
Misrepresented and Represented.] Quarto. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, in the several Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of
CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church.] Quarto. A
Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; against the
Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator. 40.
A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome. With
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. 80. A Papist
Represented and not Misrepresented: being an Answer to the First, Second, Fifth
and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Papist Misrepresented and
Represented;] and for a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, truly representng
the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome. Quarto. The Lay-Christian's
Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. Quarto. The Plain Man's Reply to the
Catholic Missionaries. 240. An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed,
concerning the Authority of the Catholic Church in matters of Faith, and the
Reformation of the Church of England. Quarto. A Vindication of the Answer to
THREE PAPERS cocerning the Unity and Authority of the Catholic Church, and the
Reformation of the Church of England. Quarto. Mr. Chillingworth's Book, called
[The Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation] made more generally
useful by omitting Personal Contests, but inserting whatsoever concerns the
common Cause of Protestants, or defends the Church of England, with an exact
Table of Contents; and an Addition of some genuine Pieces of Mr.
Chilling-worth's never before Printed, viz. against the Infallibility of the
Roman Church, Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an account of what moved
the Author to turn Papist, with his Confutation of the said Motives. An
Historical Treatise written by an AVTHOR of the Communion of the Church of
Rome, touching TRANSVBSTANTIATION. Wherein is made appear, That according to
the Principles of THAT CHVRCH, This Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith. 40.
The Protestant's Companion: Or an Impartial Survey, and Comparison of the
Protestant Religion as by Law established, with the main Doctrines of Popery.
Wherein is showed, that Popery is contrary to Scripture, Primitive Fathers and
Councils; and that proved from Holy Writ, the Writings of the Ancient Fathers
for several hundred Years, and the Confession of the most Learned Papists
themselves. 40. The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the
Roman Church falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth
mentioned by S. Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 3. Verse. 15. 40.
The Peoples Right to read the Holy Scripture Asserted. 40. A Short Summary of
the principal Controversies between the Church of England and the Church of
Rome; being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in Answer to a late
Pamphlet entitled, [Protestancy destitute of Scripture Proofs]. 40. An Answer
to a late Pamphlet, entitled, [The Judgment and Doctrine of the Clergy of the
Church of England concerning one Special Branch of the King's Prerogative, viz.
In dispensing with the Penal Laws. 40. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in the
two great Points of the Real Presence, and the Adoration of the Host; in answer
to the Two Discourses lately Printed at Oxford on this Subject. To which is
perfixed a Large Historical Preface relating to the same Argument. Two
Discourses; Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.
The Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined
and confuted. 40. With a Table of the Contents. Preparation for Death: Being a
Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France, in a dangerous Distemper of which
she died. By W. W. 120. The Difference between the Church of England and the
Church of Rome, in opposition to a late Book, entitled, An Agreement between
the Church of England and Church of Rome. A PRIVATE PRAYER to be used in
Difficult Times. A true account of a Conference held about Religion at London,
Sept. 29. 1687, between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Tho. Tenison, D. D. as also of
that which led to it, and followed after it. 40. The Vindication of A.
Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit,
Schoolmaster in the Savoy; together with some Account of his Discourse with Mr.
Meredith. A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer side,
notwithstanding the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that Their
Religion is the surest Way to Heaven. 40. Six Conferences concerning the
Eucharist, wherein is showed, That the Doctrine of Transubstantiation
overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religion. A Discourse concerning the
pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction; with an account of the occasions and
beginnings of it in the Western Church In Three Parts. With a Letter to the
Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom. The Pamphlet entitled, Speculum
Ecclesiasticum, or an Ecclesiastical Prospective-Glass, considered in its False
Reasonings and Quotations. There are added, by way of Preface, two further
Answers, the First, to the Defender of the Speculum; the Second to the
Half-sheet against the Six Conferences. A Second Defense of the Exposition of
the Doctrine of the Church of England, against the new Exposition of Mons. de
Meaux, late Bishop of Conaom, and his Vindicator. The FIRST PART. In which the
Account that has been given of the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition is fully
vindicated; the distinction of Old and New Popery Historically asserted; and
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in Point of Image Worship, more particularly
considered. 40. The Incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome. By the Author
of the [Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist.] 40. Mr. Pulton Considered in
his Sincerity. Reasonings, Authorities: Or a Just Answer to what he has
hitherto Published in his True Account; his True and full Account of a
Conference, etc. His Remarks; and in them his pretended Confutation of what he
calls Dr. T's Rule of Faith. By Tho. Tenison, D. D. A Full View of the
Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to the Eucharist, wholly
different from those of the Present Roman Church, and inconsistent with the
belief of Transubstantiation. Being a sufficient Confutation of CONSENSVS
VETERVM, NVBES TESTIVM, and other Late Collections of the Fathers pretending to
the contrary. 40.

