A MOTION Humbly presented To the Consideration of the Honorable, the
Committee of the high Court of PARLIAMENT.

Consisting of 18. queres, concerning the Books of COMMON- PRAYER.

October 8. 1641.

As also, an Honorable SPEECH, Made by Mr, Pymme.

Printed for H. Walker, 1641.

QVAERIES Concerning the Book of Common prayer.
1. WHether the Preface before the Book of Common Prayer, does not
sufficiently prove that the intent of those, by whom that Form was
established, were fully resolved, that afterward in convenience of time, it
should be altered? Published in the days Edward the 6.

2. Whether those Ornaments wrought with Images upon them, as Copes in
Cathedral Churches, and those Garments which the Bishops wear of woollen, and
some of silk, with linen sleeves and surplices worn by others of the Clergy,
be warrantable by Gods Word, to be used in our Churches by the Clergy, as holy
Vestments? Isay, 30. 22. Deutro. 22. 11. Levit. 19. 19. Luke 19. 35.

3. Whether the Absolution pronounced by the Minister to the people, after
Confession, be not direct Popery; and such Discipline, as Christ and his
Apostles never left to the Church? Rev. 3. 7. Psld. 45. 11. John 1. 29.

4. Whether whilst the Minister prays, the people should not rather go along
with him, in what he prays: answering Amen only, or some such Expression;
rather then by breaks to answer by responds: as it is ordered in the Book of
Common Prayer? Deuteronomy. 27. Acts 1. 24. 16. Acts 16. 25. Acts 20. 36, 37. Acts 12.
12.

5. Whether the Minister, and the people, each changing their part, at every
other verse in the reading of the Psalms; be not contrary to the custom of the
Primitive Church? 1 Timothy 4. 13. Acts 15. 31. Luke 4. 16. Heb. 2. 12.

6. Whether all the Canonical Scripture, ought not rather to be read through
every year: then that only, and the rest left out, and part of the Apocrypha
taken in, and used as it is? Dan. 10. 21. Mat. 21. 4. 2. Ioh. 5. 39. 1 Cor. 16.
26.

7. Whither it be not a great absurdity, to compel our Ministry to use such
Songs as are translated out of the Popish Service Book, and are not in the
Scripture, though otherwise perhaps less offensive? as Te Deum Laudamus, in
English, etc.

The Papist Clergy do delude the people with this hymn to believe a most
abominable lie of a Maid in Saxony. Of whom they have placed a story in their
Service Book, before the said hymn. There was (say they) a young, and an holy
Virgin in a Monastery of Nuns, and it happened once in a great Feast, that (he
was at matters in the quier. But because her Mistress did dread her
feebleness, she had her go rest her in the Dortour. The maid was sorry, and
loath to go thence, and therefore after she was gone out, she ab^de a while
without the quier. And when this hymnd, we praise thee, o God, was begun, she
saw (in a spiritual vision) heaven open, and the sisters quier lift up to
heaven. And when they came to say after. To thee all Angels cry aloud, she saw
all the Orders of Angels kneel down, and with great reverence do worship to
God, singing with the quier. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath. And when
they came to this. The glorious Company of Apostles praise thee, she saw the
Apostles kneel down to God, and sing forth with the quier. The same did the
Prophets when they sung. The goodly fellowship of the Prophets praise thee. And
so of the Martyrs: And then all Confessors, and Virgins, joined with them to
the quier and sang forth with them with great joy. And when the last verse was
in singing. O Lord in thee have I trusted, the quier came easily down again
toward the Earth, and Heaven closed, and that heavenly blisfull Company was
seen no longer.

This blasphemous lie is related in thrir Popish Service Book.

8. Whither to stand up at the repeating of the Creed, be a Ceremony of
absolute necessity? Acts 28. 23, 24. Ezekiel. 23. 26. Ephesians. 6. 11. Phil. 4. 1.

9. Whither in order of the 3. Collects, that for grace, should not rather be
first used, but is last, and after praying against our enemies, or for peace?
And whither in that Collect for grace it be proper to call it the beginning of
the day at 10. of the clock; or to call it night, at 2 or 3 in the afternoon,
as it is there used? Exodus 22. 29. Romans 8. 23. Romans 11. 16. Mat. 6. 33. Ioh. 5.
44.

10. Whither that expression, Almighty, and everlasting God, which only
workest great marvels, send down upon our Bishop, etc. be a warrantable Prayer
fit to be used? Mark 11. 24. Romans 12. 12. Mat. 21. 13. 1 Pet. 3. 17. 2 Samuel 17
18, 19, etc.

11. Whither it be not according to the primitive Church, and after their
Discipline rather to read the Gospel before the Epistle, then after: the
Gospel being first preached by Christ himself, and the Epistles written by
the Apostles afterward? Mat. 13. 11. Mark 13. 10. Acts 13. 24. Ioh. 19. 39.
Gal. 4. 13.

12. Whither such Jewish Ceremonies, as to bring Offerings to the Curate, are
not utterly abolished by Christ? Ephesians. 5. 1. 2. Heb. 10. 10. and ver. 11. 14.

13. Whither our alms do deserve any thing at Gods hand? If not, why should
we pray God to accept them, as is used in the Prayer for Christ's Church
militant here on earth, as it is titled? Mat. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 3. 27, Gal. 2
16.

13. Whether the Minister is to join with the people to pray for Gods Heavenly
grace; especially, for the Congregation present as it is used in the said
prayer, and not rather particularly, because Gods especial Graces do belong
only to his Elect? Ioh. 4. 10. Isay. 37. 21. Ezra. 10. 1, 2, 3. Acts 4. 31,
32. John 17. 9. verse 20.

15. Whether the gesture of kneeling, ought to be used, at the receiving of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, rather then to fit, as the Apostles did; the
contrary being never commanded in Gods Word, nor practiced in the Primitive
Church? Math. 26. Mar. 14 Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11.

16. Whether it be of any consequence, to demand of the Infants Godfathers, and
Godmothers (as they are called) whither they forsake the Devil, etc. or
whither they believe in God, etc. And they to answer in the child's behalf, as
grounds of receiving the Child into the Church, and bapiizing it? Mat. 3. Acts
18. 25. Romans 6. 3. 1 Peter 3. 21.

17. Whether it be lawful to sign the child on the forehead with a Cross,
there being no precedent for it in GODS Words, it being only a Popish
Ceremony? Ezekiel. 13. 3. Ioh, 10. 5, Mat. 15. 6. 2. Cor. 6. 6. 1 John 5. 21.

18. Whither the child be not sufficiently baptized, that is baptized in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: that it must be
brought to the Bishop after to be confirmed of him? Mac. 3. 11. Mar. 1. 4. Ioh.
1. 33. 1 Cor. 1. 14, 15, 16.

Many other quaerees concerning Matrimony, and concerning visitation of the
sick and the Burial of the dead, and the Churching of women might be made. But
to fould up all in that one saying, presenting them together in the last place
with that expression at the beginning of Commination: The words are these,
Brethren, in the primitive Church, there was a Godly Discipline, etc.

And by and by after, is said again. In the stead whereof, until the said
Discipline may be restored again (which thing is much to be wished) it is
thought good, that at this time in your presence, shall be read the geuerall
Sentences, etc.

Mr. Pym his worthy Speech in Parliament,
THE distempers of this Kingdom are well known, they need not Repetition; for
though we have good Laws, yet they want their Executioner: if they be
executed, it is in a wrong sense. I shall endeavor to apply a remedy co the
breaches that are made. And to that end, I shall discover first the quality of,
the Disease.

1. There is a Design to alter Law and Religion, the Parties that effect this,
are Papists; who are obliged by a maxim in their Doctrine, that they are not
able to maintain their Religion but to extirpate all others.

2. The second is our Hierarchy, which cannot mount to the hight they aim at,
without the breach of Law.

To which Religion necessarily join, that if the one, the other falls.

3. Agents and Pensioners to foreign States, who see, we cannot comply with
them, if we maintain the Religion established with us, contrary to Theirs, here
we intend the Spanish white Gold work, which are of most effect for Earthly
favorites, as for petty promotion, not Conscience. And such are our Judges
Spiritual and Temporal. Such are also our Coun^ellors of State, all these
settled in their contrivements, that aim at one end, and to this purpose they
walk on four feet, discountenancing of Preachers and men virtuous for
Religion, persecuted under the Law of Purity.

The second is the discountenancing of Preachers of contrary dispositions.

3. The negotiating with the faction of Rome, by frequent Preaching, and
instruction to p^each of the absolute Monarchy of Kings. Here follow several
IIeads.

THe political interpretation of the law to serve the times, and this to
impose taxes, with the color of law A Judge said it, when a habeas Corpus was
paid for, by keeping the King in continual want, that he may seek to their
Counsels for relief. To this purpose they keep the Parliament in distaste
that their Counsel might be taken. The King Himself is brought to this, like
a woman that uses her self to poison, when she might eat good meat. Search
the Chronicles, and we shall see, no King ever used Parliaments that was
brought to this want, Arbitrary proceedings in Courts of Justice; we have Law
left to the Conscience of a single man, all Courts are now of Conscience.

Plotters to insorce a war between France and Us; that when we had well
wearied one another, we might be brought to what scorn they pleased. The
petition wall is only Unity, the sudden dissolving of Parliaments, and
punishing of Parliament men, to affright us from speaking what we think, one
was committed, for not delivering up the Patitions of the House, a Declaration
which slandereth our procedings, as full of lies, as letters, who would have
the first ground to be our Example; and Papists under appearance to the King
his best Subjects; for they contribute money to the war, which the
Protestants will not do.

The other is the Military, by getting places of importance into the Papists
hands, as who were Commanders in the late Army, but they who were strong in
Arms, but they, to whom their Armor is delivered contrary to the Statute.

Their endeavors are to bring in strangers to be billitted upon us.

We have had no account of the Spanish Navy, and our fear is from Ireland, the
next is papisticall, that proceeds of Agents here in London, by whose desires
many Monasteries and Nunneries are erected.

FINIS.

