THE LOYAL GARLAND, Containing choice Songs and Sonnets of our late unhappy
Revolutions.

Very delightsul and profitable, both to this present, and future Ages.

Published by S: N. A Lover of Mirt^.

The fourth Edition, with Additions.

Fear God, Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17. ^ My son, fear thou the LORD, and the
King: and meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove. 24. 21.

London, Printed by T. ^ Johnson, for T. Passenger at the Three: Bibles on
London Bridge, 167^.

A Table of the Sonnets contained in this Book.
DEfacing of Whitehall. The Loyal Soldier. The Holly-bush. The Independent
Redcoat. London Pamphleteers. The Soldiers Delight. The Time-server: A Medley.
Loyalist and Roundhead. Gerards Mistress. The scornful Lover. Upon an Act for
Treason. A Song upon a Recanting Lover. Of Titulary Honor. The New Droll. Upon
the Newfound Wells. The silly Shepherd. Upon the Goldsmiths Committee. In
praise of Brewers. The Contest. The fond Amotist. On Women. The satiated Lover.
A Love Riddle. The loving Contest. In praise of his Mistress. A Love-Song. A
Pastoral Song: With the Answer. Upon Charing Cross. A Song in derision of his
Mistress. The Dominion of the Sword. The sickle Lover. A Mock-song. Good
Counsel. The Blind Zealor. Full forty times over. The Answer. The Jovialists
Coronation. A Lovers Request. The despairing Lover to his Mistress, Gather your
Rose-buds The Muses courting Sack. The Constant Lover. The Loyal Prisoner. The
Maidens Complaint. Canary's Coronation. The Lovers Complaint. Platonic Love.
Upon passionate Love. The Woman's Answer. A Song upon Putt and Tick-tack.
Londons Gratulation to General Monck All hail to the days, etc: I dote, I dote.
A Pastoral Song. A' Caveat for Maidens. The Platonic Lover. Loves Ecstasy. The
Husbandman and Serving-man. A merry Medley. The Resolute Lover. Upon the
Draining of the Fens. A Song in praise of Canary. The protecting Brewer.
Cromwell's Coronation. A Medley of the Nations. The Royalists Answer to Nay
prithee don't fly me. A Dialogue betwixt Tom and Dick. Englands Triumph. The
taking of Mardike. The Re-resurrection of the Rump. The Bulls Feather. The
merry Good Fellow. The Levellers Rant.
THE LOYAL GARLAND.
Upon defacing of White Hall.
WHat Booker does prognosticate
Concerning Kings or Kingdoms state,
I think my self to be as wise,
As some that gazeth on the skies:
My skill goes beyond, the depth of a Pond,
Or Rivers in the greatest rain,
Whereby I can tell, all things will be well,
When the King enjoys his own again.
2. There Is neither Swallow, Dove, nor Dade,
Can soa^ more high, or deeper wade;
Nor show a reason from the stars,
What causes Peace or Civil Wars:
The man in the Moon, may wear out his shoo'n
By running after Charles his Wain,
But all is to no end, for the times will not mend
Till the King, etc.
3. Full forty years this Royal Crown
Has been his fathers and his own:
And is there any one but He,
That in the same should sharers be*
For who better may, the Scepter sway,
Thau he that has such right to reign?
Then let us hope for a peace, for the Wars will not cease
Till the King enjoys, etc.
4. Though for a time we see White Hall
With Cobweb-hangings on the wall,
In stead of gold and silver brave,
Which formerly 'twas wont to have,
With rich perfume in every room,
Delightful to that Princely Train,
Which again shall be, when the time you see,
That the King enjoys, etc.
5. Did Walker no predictions lack
In Hammonds bloody Almanac?
Foretelling things that would ensue,
That all proves right, if lies be true:
But why should not he, the pillory foresee,
Wherein poor Toby once was taken?
And also foreknow, to the Gallows he must go,
When the King enjoys, etc.
6. Then avaunt upon thy hill,
My hope shall cast his Anchor still,
Until I see some peaceful Genesis Monck
Dove,
Bring home the Branch I dearly love:
Then will I wait till the waters abate,
Which most disturbs my troubled brain,
Else never rejoice till I hear the voice,
That the King enjoys his own again.
The Loyal Soldier.
WHen in the field of Mars we lie,
Amongst those Martial wights,
Who never daunted are to dye
For King and Country's Rights,
As on Belona's God I wait, and her attendant be,
Yet being absent from my mate, I live in misery
2. When lofty winds aloud do blow,
It snoweth, hail, or rain,
And Charon in his boat does row,
Yet steadfast I Will remain,
And for my shelter in some barn creep,
Or under some Hedge lie,
The Roundheads which strong Castles keep,
Knows no such misery.
3. When down in straw we tumbling lie,
With Morpheus charms asleep,
My heavy, sad and mournful eye,
In security so deep,
Then do I dream within my arms
With tha: I sporting lie,
Then do I dread, or fear no harms,
Nor feel no misery.
4. When all my joys are thus complete;
The Cannons loud do play,
The Drums alarm strait do beat,
Trumpet sounds, Horse, away,
Awake I then, and naught can find
But death attending me,
And all my joys are vanished quire,
This is my misery.
5 When hunger oftentimes I feel,
And water cold do drink,
Yet from my Colors I Will not steal,
Nor, from my KING will shrink:
No Traitor base shall make me pield,
But for the Cause I Will be:
This is my love, pray Heaven to shield,
And fare well misery.
6. Then to'our Arms we straight do fly,
And forthwith marcth away,
Few Towns or Cities we come nigh,
Good liquor us deny:
In Letho deep, our woes we steep,
Our Loves forgotten be,
Amongst the Iovialists we Sing,
Hang up all misery.
7. Propitious Fate then be more kind,
Grim death lend me thy Dart;
O Sun and Moon, and eks the Wind,
Great Jove take* thou our part,
That of these Roundheads and these wars,
An end that we may see,
And thy great Name we will all applaud;
And hang all misery.
The Holly-Bush.
CLear the eyes of the Watch,
Lazy sleep we dispatch,
From hence as far as Dep^bford,
For your: Flock-beds and your Feather
We Will expose to the weather,
And hang all the sheets on the Bed-cord.
Then sleep, sleep, and enjoy your beds,
You quiet drowsy heads,
May the Furies of the night,
Scarlet Fleas you affright,
And pinch you black and yellow,
But the plump brawny Lowse
Scorns the shelter of the house,
Oh! he is the Soldiers fellow.
2. Some the Night-more has pressed
With a weight on their breast,
The returns of their breath cannot pass;
But with us the Tale is addle,
We can take off the saddle,
And turn out the Nightmare to grass,
Then sleep, etc.
3. Now no more will we hark
To the charms of the Lark,
Nor the times of the early Thrush.
All the birds shall retire,
And submit to the Quire
Of we bo^es in the Holy-bush,
Then sleep, etc.
4. When the Country Lass
With her Dayry does pass,
Our joys no tongue can utter:
For we Sentinel stand,
And exact by command,
The excize of her lips and butter.
Then sleep, etc.
The Independent Red-coat.
COme drawer, come fill us about more wine
let us merrily tipple, the day is our own
We Will have our delights, let the country go pine
Let the King and the Kingdoms groan:
For the day is our own, and so shall continue,
whilst Monarchy we baffie quite,
We Will spend all the Kingdoms Revenue,
and sacrifice all to de light:
It Is power that brings us all to be ^ings,
and we will be all crowned by our might.
2. A fig for Divinity, Lecture, and Law,
and all that to Royalty do pretend,
We will by our sword keep the kingdoms in aw
and our power shall never have end:
The Church and the State we will turn into liquor,
and spend a whole town in a day,
We Will melt all their bodkins the quicker
into Sack, and so drink them away,
We Will spend the demeans o'ch bishops and deans,
and over the Presbyter sway.
3. The nimble St. Patrick is sunk in a bog,
and his contrymen sadly cry, oh hone, oh hone
St. Andrew and's Kirk-men are lost in a fog,
and we are the Saints alone:
Thus on our superiors and equals we trample
whilst Iockey the stirroy shall hold,
The Citys our Mule for example,
while we thus in plenty are rolled,
Each delicate dish shall but answer our wish,
and our drink shall be cordial Gold.
On the London-Pamphleteers.
My quil shall not judge, nor so much as grudg
at the gains of a great Commander,
I Will only have to do with an impudent crew,
made up of money and slander:
Old Nick rules the roast of the rotten London post,
which in time he will overturn all,
The same spirit guides, and craftily confides,
with the Diary and Diurnal.
Lo now, where do you think
Boys, lies all the Chink?
Oh the Devil hugs many a Darling.
Here Is a List of the Curs, and many Revolters,
That has buried ten thousand starling.
2. Politicus was rifled, and sooner robbed than
for truth, though he tells but little: stifled
Civicus ea^s beef, before whose relief,
was writ down fasting spittle,
Brittannicus does look for a Massy-book,
which stands against all reason.
Each line does it rot, and stain with a blot
of high and abominable Treason.
Lo now, etc.
3. The Parliament-Scout, in luck find him o^^
with his brethren birds together,
Who has vented more lies, than stars in the skies,
or drops in a years wet weather.
The saucy Oxford-Spy, was but one entire l^^
and the Phamphleteers in the Star-nest,
Is gone before to hell, the News for to tell,
and the Devil detains him for earnest.
Lo now, etc.
4 Here Is two ballad-men, have got well by these pen,
who can both write and well sing,
One as round as a hoop, 's made Captain often Troop,
the other gapes for a place under Elsynge.
Here Is a curld pated lout, who cries books about
is grown such a grand deceiver,
That by the very sale of the Spectacle Tale,
he has purchased a new fashion Bever.
Lo now, etc.
5. Here Is an old rotten queen, whose smock's very mean,
which used to cry Marp-bones,
Is married to the led for the money that he had
and now keeps a Press of their own.
Lo uow, etc.
The Soldiers delight.
FAir Phydelia, tempt no more,
I may not now thy beauty so adore;
Nor offer to thy shrine,
I serve one more divine,
and greatre far than you:
Hark, the Trumpet calls away,
We must ^o, lest the foe
get the field, and win the day,
Then mar^h bravely on,
charge them in the Van,
Our Cause Gods is, though the odds is,
ten times ten to one.
2. Tempt no more I may not yield,
although thine eyes a kingdom may surprise
Leave often thy wanton tales,
The Highborn Prince of Wales
is mounted in the field,
Where the the Lopal Gentry flock,
though forlorn, nobly born,
Of a never decaying stock:
Cavaliers be hold, never let go your hold,
Those that loirers; are by traitors
merely bought and sold.
Phyl. 3. One kiss more, and so farewell:


Sold. Fie, no more, I prithee fool give ore,
Why cloud 'st thou thus thy beams?
I see by these extremes,
a woman's heaven or hell:
Pray the King may have his own,
that the Queen may be seen,
With her Babes on Englands Throne,
Rally up your men, one shall vanquish ten,
Victory, we come to try our valor once age^^.

The Time-server: Or, a Medley.
ROom for a Gamester yt plays at al he see
whose fickle fancy fits such tims as the^^
One that says Amen to every factious propte
from Hugh Peter's pulpit to St. Peter's Cha^e
One that does defy the croster and the Crow
but yet can bouze with blades that carrou^^
whilst Pottle pots tumble down, very down
One that can comply with Surplice and with Clo^
yet for his end can Independ
whilst Presbyterian brolce Britains yoke.
2. This is the way to trample without trembling
it is the Sycophant's only secure,
Covenants and oaths are badges of dissembling
it is the politic put's down the pure:
To profess and betray, to plunder and pray,
Is the ^nely ready way to be great,
flattery does the feat:
Never go, never stir, will venture further
Than the greatest Dons in the town,
from a Copper to a Crown.
3. I am in a temperate humor now to think we
Now I Am in another humor for to drink well,
Then fill us up a Beer-bowl boys, that we
May drink it merrily,
No knavish Spy shall understand,
For if it should be known,
It Is ten to one we shall be trappan'd.
4. I Will drink to thee a brace of quarts,
Whose Anagram is called True Hearts,
If all were well as I would have it,
and Britain cur's of its tumor,
I should very well like my fate,
And drink my Sack at a cheaper rate,
without any noise or tumor.
oh then I should fix my humor.
5. But since it is no such matter, change your hue
I may ^og and flatter, so may you:
Religion is a widgeon, and reason is treason,
and he that has a loyal heart may bid the world adieu.
6. We must be like the Scottish man,
who with intent to beat down Schism,
Brought in the Presbyterian,
with Cannon and with Catechism:
If Beuk ^oon't do it, then Jockey shoot,
for the Kirk of Scotland does command,
And what has bin, since they came in,
I think we have cause to understand.
The Royalist and Roundhead.
STay, shut the Gate,
The Other quart, faith it is not so late as your thinking,
The stars which you see in the Hemisphere ^^
Are but studs in your cheeks by good drinking*
The suns gone to tipple al night in ye sea boy^
Tomorrow he will blush that he is paler than ^^ boy^*
Drink wine, give him water, it is Sack makes us the boys.
2. Fill up the Glass,
To the next merry Lad let it pass, come away wit:
Let Us set foot to foot, and but give our minds ^o'^
It Is heretical Sir: that does stay wit,
then hang up good faces, lets drink til our (...)
Gives freedom to speak, with our fanty disposes,
Beneath whose protection now under the rose is
3. Drink off your Bowl,
'Twill enrich both your head and your soul with Canary:
For a Carbuncl^d face saves a tedious race,
And the Indies about us we carry:
No Helicon like to the juice of good wine is,
For Phoebus had never had wit that divine i^
Had his face not been dow died as thine is, and mine is.
4. This must go round,
Off with your hats til ye pavement be crowned with your Bevers,
A red coated face frights a Sergeant and his mare
whilst the^ constables trembles to shive^s
In state march our facs like some of ye quorum
While the whores do fall down, and the vulgar abore um
And our noses like Link-boys run shining before ^ m.
The answer.
HOld, quaff no more,
But restore,
If you can what you 've lost by your drinking,
Three kingdoms and Crowns,
with their Cities and Towns,
While the King and his Progeny's sinking:
The studs in your cheeks have obscured his Star, boys,
Your drink and miscarriages in the late war boys,
Has brought his Prerogative thus to the Bar boys,
2. Through down the Glass,
He Is an ass
That extracts all his worth from Canary:
That valor will shrink,
which is only good in drink,
It Was the Cup made the Camp to miscarry:
Ye thought in the world there was no power could tame ye,
Ye tipled and whor'd till the foe overcame ^^
Cuds-nigs and Ne're-stir Sir, has vanquish
God-dam-me.
3. Fly from the coast,
Dry' are lost,
And the water will run where the drink went,
From thence you must slink,
If you swear, and have no chink,
it is the Curse of a Royal Delinquent.
Ye love to see Beer, bowls turned over ye thumbwell,
Ye love three fair Gamesters, four Dice, and a Drum well,
But you would as lieve see the Devil as Olive-Cromwel
4. Drink not the round,
You Will be drowned
In the source of your Sa^k and your Sonneth
Try once more your fate,
For the Kirk against the State,
and go barter your Bevers for Bonnets:
I see how you are charmed by your female inchanters,
And therefore pack hence to Virginia for planters
For an Act and two Red-coats will rout all the Ranters.
The Lord Gerards Mistress.
BE gone thou fatal Fever,
From me now be gone,
Let Love alone,
Let his Atherial slames possess my breast:
The help of my consuming heat,
No aid requires,
But swift destres,
Transfers my passion to a throne of rest;
Where I, who never in the pride of health
could find such warmth to move,
By sickness tamed, and so inflamed,
I feel no joys like Love:
But he, who trisled many a tedious hour away
my Love to try,
In little space has gained the grace,
to have more power than I.
2. Depart thou fatal Fever,
From me now depart,
Think not my heart
To thy dull flames shall be a sacrifice;
A Maid, dread Cupid, now is on thy Altar laid
by thee betrayed,
A rich oblation to restore thine eyes:
But yet nay forced acknowledgment can testify
thou have no craft,
To bend thy bow against a foe
that aims to catch thy shaft:
Nor do I fear thine arrows, though they all
at once against me do fly,
She that receives ten thousand sheaves,
can love no more than I.
3. No more, Physicians
Try your skills no more,
Pray give me ore,
I have a cure in physic seldom read;
Though you are skilful Doctors,
All the world does know
In learning flow,
You may as well go practice on the dead,
But if my Gerard please to grace me
with the glory of his looks,
I make no doubt to live without
Phystrians and their books.
It Is he who with his balming kisses
can restore my dying breath,
What bliss is this, to gain a kiss,
to save a maid from death!
4. To you that tell us,
Of another world I vow,
And do allow
Your sacred precepts, if you will grant me this,
That he whom I adore next to the Diety,
may go with me,
Without whose presence there can be no bliss;
Go teach your Tenets of Eternity,
to those that aged be,
Pray nere persuade a Lovesick Maid,
there is any heaven but he:
But stay, methinks a nicy flumber
has possessed my wearied brain,
Pray bid him die, if you think I
shall never wake again.
The Scornful Lover.
LOve thee, good faith not I,
I have som^thing else to do,
Alas, you mu^^ go learn to talk,
before you learn to woo,
Nay fie, stand off, go too, go too.
2. Because you are in the fashion,
and newly come to Court,
You think: your Clothes are Orators
to invite us to the sport,
Aha, we do but jeer you for it.
3. Nor look so sweetly youth,
not fiddle with your Band,
We know you trim your borrowed locks
to show your pretty hand,
You are to^ young for to command.
4. Or who so confident,
because that lately ye,
Have brought another complement
unto our Pedigr^^,
Thy inside seems the worse to me.
5. See where Sir Sworham goes,
I marry, there is your wit,
He cares not what he says or does,
So Ladies laugh at it,
Who can deny such Lads a bit?
Upon an Act for Treason.
BUt since it was lately enacted high Trease^*
For a man to speak truth against the head of a State.
Let every wise man make use of his reason,
to think what he will, but take heed what he pra^e
For the Proverb does learn us,
he that stays from the battle sleeps in a whole skin,
And our words are our own, if we keep them within
What fools are we then that to praitle do begin
of things that do nor concern us?
2. It Is no matter to the whoere gets the battle
the Tubs or the Crosses, it is all one to me,
It neither increases my goods nor my cattle,
A beggar's a beggar, and so he shall be;
Unless he turn Traitor,
Let misers take courses to hoard up their treasure,
whose bounds have no limits, whose minds have no measure,
Let me be but quiet, and take a little pleasure,
a little contents my own nature.
3. But what if the Kingdom returns to one of the Prime ones?
My mind is a Kingdom, and so it shall be,
i will make it appear, i^ I had but the time once
He Is as happy in one, as they are in three,
if he might but enjoy it:
He that is mounted aloft, is a mark for the fate,
and an envy to every pragmatical pate,
Whilst he that is low is safe in his estate.
and the great ones do scorn to annoy him.
4. I count him no wit that is gifted in railing
and flur^ing at those that above himdo sit,
Whilst they do out-wit him with whipping and goaling,
His purse und his person must pay for his wit;
but it is better to be drinking,
If Sack were reformed to twelve pence a quart
I Would study for money to merchandise for it,
With a friend that is willing in mi^th we would sport,
Not a word; but we'd pay it with thinking.
5. My petition shall be that Canary be cheaper
without either Custom, or cursed Exci^e,
That the Wits may have freedom to drink deeper and deeper,
And not be undone whilst our Noses we baptize,
But we will liquor them, and drench them,
if this were but granted, who would not desire
To dub himself one of Apollo's own Quire?
and then we will drink whilst ^ur Noses are on fire
And the quart-pots shall be Buckets to quench them.
A Song upon a Recanting Lover.
SUre 't was a dream, how long, fond man have I
been fooled into captivity?
my Newgate was my want of wit,
I did my self commit, my bonds I knit,
I my ^wn Iaplor was, mine only foe,
Which did my freedom disollow,
I was a Prisoner, cause I would be so.
2. 'Twas a sine life I lived, when I did dress
my self to court your ^evishness,
When I did at your footst^ol lie,
expecting from your eye, to live or die.
Now frowns or smiles, I care not which I have
for rather tha^ I Will be your s^ave,
I Will court the Gods to send me to my grave.
3. Farewell those charms yt did so long bewitch,
farewell that wanton youthful itch,
Farewell that treacherous blinking boy,
which proffered seeming joy for to destroy;
Farewell those nights of pleasure, and to you,
which were well known were not a few,
For ever, ever, evermore adieu.
4. Now I can stand the Salleys of your eyes,
in vain are all your Batteries,
Nor can that low dissembling style,
nor that be witched smile longer beguile,
Nor those heart-traps which you each hour renew,
to all those witch-crafts, and to you,
For ever, evermore I bid adieu.
5. Now will I shake off those chains, and prove
opinion built the Goal of Love,
Made all his bonds, gave him his vow,
his broken arrows too which murder so,
Nay all those Fancies, which as Lovers dream
were all composed to make a Theme,
For some carrousing Poets drunken flame.
Of Titulary Honor.
NAy preethee don't fly me,
But sit thee down by me,
For I cannot endure the man that is demure,
a pox on your Worships and Sirs:
For your Congees and tricks,
with your Legs and your Lips,
Your Madams and Lords,
and such finical words,
And the Complement you bring,
That does spell nothing,
you may keep for the Chains and the Furs,
For at the beginning was neither Peasant nor Prince,
And who the Devil made the distinction since?
2. Those Titles of Honors,
do remain in the Donors,
And not in that thing,
to which they do cling,
If his ^^oul be too narrow that wears them,
no delight can I see
In the thing called degree;
honest Dick sounds as well
As a name with an L,
that with Titles do swell,
And hums like a Bell,
to affright mortal ears that do hear 'um:
He that wears a brave soul, and dares honestly do
is a Herald to himself, and a Godfather too.
3. Why should we then dote on,
one with a Fools coat on,
Whose Coffers are tramm'd,
but yet he will be damned
Ere he will do a good act, or a wise one?
what reason hach he
To be ruler over me,
who is Lord over his Chest,
But his head and his breast
are but empty and bare,
And pufft up with air,
and can neither assist, nor advise one:
Honor's but air, and proud flesh but dust is,
it is the Commons make the Lords, as the Clerk makes the Justice.
4. But since we must be
of a different degree,
'Cause most do aspire,
to be greater and higher
Than the rest of their fellows and brothers,
he that has such a spirit,
Let him gain't by his merit,
spend his wit, wealth, and blood,
For his Countrey's good,
and make himself fit,
By his valor and wit,
for things above the reach of all others:
Honor's a prize, and who wins it may wear it
if not, it is a badge and a burden to bear it.
5. For my part let me be
but quiet and free,
I Will drink Sack and obey,
let the great ones sway,
That spend their whole time in thinking;
I Will not busy my pate,
With the matters of State,
the News-books I Will burn all,
And with the Diurnal*
light Tobacco, and admit,
They are so far sit,
for to serve good company, and drinking:
All the name I desire is an honest good fellow,
And that man has no worth, that wont sometimes be mellow.
The new Droll.
COme lets drink, the time invites,
winter and cold weather,
For to spend away long nights,
and to keep good wits together,
Better far than Cards and Di^e,
Ise Balls art quaint device,
Made up with Fan and Feather.
2. Of strange actions on the Seas,
why should we be jealous?
Bring us liquor that will please,
and will make us braver fellows
Than the bold Venetian Fleet,
when the Turks and they do meet
Within their Dardanello's.
3. Valencian that famous Town,
stood the French-mans wonder,
Water they employed to drown,
so to cut their Troops in sunder,
Turein gave a helpless look,
while the lofty Spaniard took
La Ferta, and his plunder.
4. As for water we disclaim,
mankind's adversary,
Once it caused the worlds whole frame
in the Deluge to miscarry;
And that enemy of Joy,
which sought our freedom to destroy,
And murder good Can ary
5. We that drink have no such thoughts,
black and void of Reason,
We take care to ^^^ our Vaults
with gold wine of every season;
And with many a Chirping Cup,
We blow one another up,
and that is our only treason.
6. Hear the Squibs, and mind the Bells
the fifth of November,
The Parson a sad story tells,
and with horror does remember,
How some hot-brained Traitor wrought
Plots that would have ruin brought
to King, and every Member.
On the Newfound Wells.
WE will go no more to Tunbridge Wels,
the Journey is so far,
Nor ride in Epsom wagons, where
our bodies tumbled are:
But we will to Westwood waters go,
the best that e're you saw,
And from henceforth we will have it called,
The Newfound English Spaw,
Then go Lords and Ladies what ere you all,
go thither all that pleases;
For it will cure you without fail,
of old and new Diseases.
2. Thither the country people thrust
by day, and eke by night,
And for to fill their Bottles first,
they scramble, scratch, and fight;
But when the Gentry thither come,
and people of good fashion,
There is presented to their view,
a fair accommodation.
Then go Lords, etc.
3. Joans was the first hole was found out,
my Ladies hole ne^^ after,
Yet when you taste, you are in doubt
which is the better water:
But so it is, my Ladies Hole,
does stand so near to Joan,
That if the people be too rude,
they may break both holes into one.
Then go Lords, etc.
4. It purges your Ladies bodies clean,
by stool and urine too,
'T will make you have a stomach to it
whither you will or no:
Then you may step among the furs,
a sitting place to find,
'T will make you o^e, and shut your purse,
before and eke behind.
The silly Shepherd.
A Silly shepherd wooed, but wist not
how he might his Mistress favor gain,
On a time they met, but kissed not,
ever after that he sued in vain:
Blame her not, alas, though she said nay
to him that might, but fled away.
2. Time perpetually is changing,
every moment alteration brings,
Love and beauty still estranging,
women are alas but wanton things,
He that will his Mistress favor gain,
must t^ke her in a merry vain.
3. A woman's fancy's like a Fever,
or an Ague that does come by fits,
Hot and cold, but constant never,
even as the pleasant humor hits:
Sick, and well again, and well and sick,
in love it is a woman's trick.
4. Now she will and then the will not,
put her to the trial, if once she smile:
Silly youth, thy fortunes spill not,
lingering labors often themselves beguile,
He that knocks, and cannot get in,
his Pick-lock is not worth a pin.
5. A woman's Nay is no denial,
silly youths of Love are served so,
Put her to a further trial,
Happily she will take it, and say no;
For it is a trick which women use,
what they love, they will refuse.
6. Silly youth why do thou da^ly?
having got time and season fit,
Then never stand, sweet, shall I? shall I?
nor too much commend an after wit;
For he that will not when he may,
when he will, he shall have nay.
On the Goldsmiths Committee.
COme Drawer, so me wine,
or we will pull down the Sign,
For we are all Jovial Compounders:
We Will make the house ring
With Healths to our KING,
and confusion light on his Confounders.
2. Since Goldsmiths-Committee
Affords us no pity,
out sorrows in wine w^ewil I sleep'um;
They force us to take
Two Oaths, but we will make
a third that we never mean to keep'um.
3. And next who e're sees
We Will drink on our knees
to the King, may he thirst that repines;
A fig for those Traitors
That look to our waters,
they have nothing to do with our wines.
4. And next here is a Cup
To the Queen, fill it up,
were it poison we would make an end on it:
May Charles and she meet,
And tread under feet,
both Presbyter and Independent.
5. To the Prince, and all others,
His Sisters and Brothers,
as low in condition, as high born,
We Will drink this, and pray,
That shortly they may
see all them that wrongs them at Tyborn
6. And next here is three Bo^ls,
To all gallant Souls,
that for the King did, and will venture,
May they flourish when those
That are his and our foes,
are hanged and ram'd down to the Center.
7. And next let a Glass
To our Vndoers pass,
attended which two or three curses,
May plagues sent from hell,
Stuff their bodies as well,
as the Cavaliers coin does their purses.
8. May the Cannibals of Pym,
Eat them up limb by limb,
or a hot Fever scorch'um to embers,
Pox keep 'um in bed,
Until they are dead,
and repent for the loss of their Members.
9. And may they be found
In all to a bound,
both with heaven and the countries anger,
May they never want Fractions,
Doubts, Fears, and Distractions,
till the Gallow-tree choaks them from danger.
In praise of Brewers.
There Is many a clinking verse was made
in honor of the Blacksmiths trade,
But more of the Brewers may be said,
which no body can deny.
2. I need notight else but this repeat,
The Blacksmith cannot be complete,
Unless the Brewer do give him a heat,
which no body can deny.
3. When Smug unto his Forge does come,
Unless the Brewer do liquor him home,
Could nere stirike my pot and thy pot Tom,
which no body, etc.
4. Of all Professions in the town,
This Brewers trade did gain renown,
His liquor once reached up to the Crown,
which no body, etc.
5. Much Royal blood from him did spring,
Of all the trades this was the King,
The Brewer had got the world in a sling,
which no body, etc.
6. Though Honor be a Princes daughter,
The Brewer will woo her in blood and slaughter,
And win her, or else it shall cost him hot water,
which no body, etc.
7. He feared no power, nor martial stops,
But whipped Armies as round as tops,
And cut ^ff his foes as thick ashops,
which no body, etc.
8. He di^'d for riches down to the bottom,
And cried, my Masters, when he had got'um,
Let every Tub stand on his own bottom,
which no body, etc.
9. In war like Arts he scorned to stoop,
For when his party began to droop,
He Would bring them all up as round as a hoop*
which no body, etc.
10. The Jewish Scots who fear to eat
The flesh of Swine, our Brewers beat,
I was the sight of their Hogsheads made them to retreat,
which no body, etc.
11. Poor Jockey and his Basket-hilt
Was beaten, and much Blood was spilt,
When their bodies like barrels did run a tilt,
which no body, etc.
12. Though Jemmy did give the first assault,
The Brewer he made them at length to hault,
And gave them what the cat left in the malt,
which no body, etc.
13. They did not only bang the Kirk,
But in Ireland too they did as much work,
'tWas the Brewer made them surrender Cork,
which no body, etc.
14. This was a stout Brewer, of whom we may brag,
But since he was hurried away with a Hag,
We have brewed in a bottle and baked in a bag
which no body, etc.
15. They say that Antichrist came to settle,
Religion within a Cooler and Kettle,
His Nose and his Copper were both of a mettle,
which no body, etc.
16. He had a strong and a very stout heart,
And looked to be made an Emperor for it,
But the Devil did set a spoake in his Cart,
which no body, etc.
17. The Christian Kings began to quake,
And said, with that Brewer no Quartels weel make,
We Will let him alone, as he brews let him bake,
which no body, etc.
18. But yet by the way you must needs understand,
He kept all his passions so under command,
Pride never could get the upper hand,
which no body, etc.
19. And now may all stout soldiers say,
Farewell the glory of the Dray,
For the Brewer himself to turned to clay,
which no body, etc.
20. Thus fell a brave Brewer the bold Son of slaughter,
Who need not to sear much what should follow a'ter,
That deall all his life time in fire and water,
which no body, etc.
21. And if his Successor had but had his might
We all had not been in that pitiful plight,
But alas he was found many grains too light,
which no body, etc.
22. Though wine be a Juice, sweet, pleasant, and pure,
This trade does such pleasure and profit procure
That every Vintner in town is turned Brewer
which no body, etc.
23. But now let us leave singing and drink off our Bub,
Let Us call for a reckoning, and every man club
For I think I have told you a tale of a Tub,
which no body can deny.
The Contest.
BEauty and Love once fell at odds,
and thus reviled each other:
Quoth Love I am one of the Gods,
and thou wait'st on my Mother:
Thou had no power on man at all,
but what I gave to thee;
Nor are you longer sweet or fair,
than men acknowledge me.
2. Away fond Boy, then Beauty tried,
we know that thou art blind:
And men of nobler parts they can,
our grates better find:
T was I begot the mortal Snow,
and kind^ed* men's desires,
I made thy Quiver and thy Bow,
and wings to fan thy fires.
3. Cupid in anger flung away,
and thus ^o^ Vulcan prayed,
That he would tip his shafts with scorn;
to punish his proud M^id;
So ever since Beauty has bin
but courted for an hour,
To love a day to held a sin,
against Cupid and his Power.
The Fond Amorist.
TEll me no more how fair she is,
for I have no mind to hear
A story of such distant Bliss,
I never shall come near:
By sad experience I have foui^^,
That her perfections cause my wound.
2. Nor tell me not how fond I am,
for to tempt my daring fate,
Which never time could triumph in,
but repent too late:
There are some hopes e're long I may,
In silence dote myself away.
3. I ask no pity Love, of thee,
nor will thy justice blame,
So that thou will not envy me,
nor glory in thy flame,
Which crowns my heart when e're it dies,
in that it falls thy Sacrifice.
On Women.
FEar not, my Genius, to unfold
thy silent thoughts of these;
Women are born to be controlled,
receive them as you-please:
Their long usurped Monarchy,
Has made me hate such tyranny.
2. Let them and their magnetic charms,
as Harbingets before 'um,
Possess themselves of Cupids arms,
as baits for to adore 'um:
I Will never commit Idolatry,
With Subjects born, as well as I.
3. Their Diety with them must fade,
this cannot be denied;
Yet since the pretty things were made
out of old Adams side:
We Will love them still, but know as thus,
We do it because then're part of us,
And let it then suffice the Elves,
To say we love them as our* selves.
The satiated Lover.
YOu are not Cynthia better pleased than I,
that you have led the way,
Through this dark night of blind inconstancy
and first by break of day:
To freedom now we will sacrifice dreams past,
'twas my dull fate to cry. Good morrow last.
2. Perhaps so soon I could not disengage,
having a greater, score*
Some birds will longer hove^ 'bout the Cage,
though 'twas their Goal before:
But 'twas not long I meant to sit about
Your ashes, when the fire was quite burnt out
3. But, now my Iaylor has my bonds unti'd,
I Will hold my hands no more
Up at Loves Bar, he is condemned and tried,
that has been burnt before:
But that heart sickness which you gave protects
'Sis seldom that the same plague twice infects
4. Breasts that have felt Love's cruel slavery are better fortified
By this experience, than they e're could he by reason or by pride:
Then blush not that you quench your amorous flame,
But blush with me, if e're you love again.
A Love-Riddle.
DOwn in a Garden sat my dearest Love,
her skin more soft and white, than dainty Snow,
More tender-breasted than the harmless Dove,
and far more kind than bleeding Pelitan,
I courted her, she rose, and blushing said,
Why was I born to live and dye, a Maid?
2. For her I plucked a pretty Marry-gold,
whose leaves were shut in with the evening
I spoke to her, Rise up Love, and behold
what pretty Riddles this to thee has shown: Sun
These Leaves shut in, are chasre like Cloister Nun,
Yet then will open, when they see the Sun.
3. What mean you by this Riddle sir, she said,
I pray expound it: then I thus began,
Know Maids were made for Men, Man for a Maid,
With that she changed color and looked wan,
Since you this Riddle sir, so well have told,
Be you my Sun, I Will be your Marry-gold.
The loving Contest.
WHen Ph^bus had dressed his course to the we^^
and took up his rest below:
And Cynthia agreed in her glittering weed,
her like in his stead to bestow:
I walked alone, attended by none,
till suddenly one did cry,
Oh do not, do not kill me yet,
For I am not prepared to die.
2. With that I drew near, to see and to hea^,
and there did appear such a show,
The Moon was so light, I saw such a sight,
it fits not each wight for to know,
A man and a maid, together was laid,
and ever she cried, Nay ^e,
Oh do not, etc.
3. This youth was so rust, that he took up he st^^^
although she did cry, yet still did she lie
And put him by with a no;
for he was so strong, and she was so young,
She rested not long for to cry,
Oh do not, etc.
4. Thus striving in vain, well pleased with he pai^
she vowed to remain his foe,
And kept such a quail, when he gave her the foll
the greater the Bropl did grow;
For he was prepared, and did not regard
her words, when he heard her cry,
Oh do not, etc.
5. At last he gave over, and suddenly swore,
he would kill her no more that night,
But bad her adieu, for he very well knew
she would tempt him to new delight:
But when he wn'd part, it went to her heart,
which taught her more art to cry,
Oh kill me, kill me once again,
For now l'm prepared to die.
In praise of his Mistress.
IF Narcissus foolish boy,
did on a shadow fix his joy,
Or consume himself in seeing,
that which had no life, nor being:
If fair Laeda loathed a man,
and yet doted on a Swan,
How blessed am I than loves a Fair,
in whom the choice of all perfections are!
2. No cloud inhabits where she dwells,
But all the Air perfumed smells,
Where her touches she disposes,
Lillies grow like fragrant Roses,
And through every of her veins,
the violet shoots up and resigns,
Which does perish and decay,
if she but once does turn her beams away.
3. The pure heat of that chaste fire,
Which shines through all her parts entire,
and does cheer me with de^^^ht
Those heavenly objects fill my sight,
dearest yet forget to kill,
That I may live to serve you still,
that I may kiss that blessed hand,
And so a Lovers statue always stand.
4. That I may have the happiness
to hug that tree, and not transgress:
To pluck those flowers, whose virtues are
to make me rich, thee only rare,
Or those kindlers of desire,
which do set the world on fire,
And so affright those powers above,
by consuming, all consuming Love.
A Love Song.
Lie still, my dear, why do thou rise,
The light that shines comes from thine eyes,
The day breaks not, it is my heart,
to think that thee, and I must part.
Oh stay, oh stay, oh stay,
Or else our joys will die,
Or perish in their infancy.
2. It Is true, it is day, what if it be,
will thou therefore rise from me?
Did we lie down because of night,
and shall we rise for fear of night?
Oh no: since in darkness we came hither,
With leave of light we will lie together.
3. Love, let me lie in thy sweet breast,
more sweeter than the Phoenix nest,
Love caused desire by thy sweet charms,
oh let me lie within Loves arms:
Oh let, oh let, thy blissful kisses cherish,
Or else my instant joys will perish.
A Pastoral Song: With the Answer.
CLoris since thou art fled away,
Amyntas sheep are gone astray,
And all the joys he took to see
his pretty Lambs run after thee,
They Are gone, they are gone; and he always,
sings nothing now, but well-a-day, well-aday.
2. The emboider'd Scrip he used to wear,
neglected lies, so does his hair,
His crook is broke, Dog howling lies,
while he laments with woeful eyes,
Oh Cloris, Cloris, I decay,
and forced am to cry, well-a-day, well-a-day.
3. His Daten Pipe whereon he plays
so often to his sweet Roundelays,
Is flung away, and not a Swain
dares pipe or sing upon his plain,
It Is death to any that shall say,
one word to him but well-a-day, well-a-day*
4. The way whereon her dainty feet,
in even measure used to meet,
Is broken down; and no content
came near Amyntas since she went:
For all that e're I heard him say,
was Cloris, Cloris, well-a-day, well-a-day.
5. The Ground whereon she used to tread,
he ever since has laid his head,
Still breathing forth such pining woes.
that not one blade of grass there grows:
Oh Cloris, Cloris, come away,
and hear Amyntas well-a-day, well-a-day,
The Answer.
CLoris, since thou art gone astray,
Amyntas, shepher'ds fled away,
And all the joys he wont to spy
In The Babies of thine eye,
Are gone, and she has naught to say,
But who can help what will away, will away?
2. The Green on which it was her chance
To have her hand first in a dance,
Among the merry Maidens cr^w,
Now makes her naught but sigh and rue
The time she e're had cause to say,
And who can help what will away, will away?
3. The Lawn with which she wont to deck,
And circle in her whiter Neck:
Her Apron lies be hind the door,
The strings will not reach now as before,
Which makes her often cry well-a-day,
But who can help what will away, will away?
4. He often swore that he would leave me,
E're of my heart he could bereave me,
But when the Sign was in the Tail,
He knew poor Maiden-flesh was frail,
And laughs now I have naught to say,
But who can help what will away, will away*
5. But let the blame upon me lie,
I had no heart him to deny:
Had I another Maidenhead,
I Would lose ir e're I went to bed;
For what can all the world more say,
Than who can help what will away, will away
Upon Charing Cross.
UNdone, undone, you Lawyers are,
that wander about the Town,
And cannot find the way to Westminster,
now Charing Cross is down:
At the end o'th Strand they make a stand,
sweating they are at a loss,
And chasing say, that is not the way.
they must go by Charing Cross.
2. The Committees they said, Verily, to Pop'ry it was bent
For ought I know, it might be so, to Church it never went:
What with -- and other Laws, the Kingdom does begin,
To think you I leave them never a Cross without doors, nor within.
3. For neither man woman nor child, can say, I Am confident,
That e re they heard it speak a word, against the Parliament,
'T had Letters about it found some say, or else it had been freed,
Fore George I Will take my Oath of it, 't could neither write, nor read.
A Song in derision of his Mistress.
FIne young folly, though you wear That rare beauty, I do swear, yet you never
came near my heart;
For we Courtiers learn at school, only with your sex to fool,
You are not worth a serious part.
2. When I sigh and kiss your hand, cross mine Arms, and wondering stand,
Holding Parley with your eye, next to dally with my desires,
Swear the Sun never shot such sires* all is but a handsome Lie.
3. When I eye your curled lace, gentle Soul, you think your face
Straight some murder does commit, and your conscience does begin,
To grow scrup'lous of a sin, when I court to she win ywit.
4. Therefore Madam, wear no Cloud, nor to check my love grow proud;
For in truth, I much do doubt it is the powder in your hair,
Not your breath perfumes the air, but your Clothes that set you out.
5. Yet for all this truth consest, and I swear I loved in jest:
When I next begin to court, and protest an amorous flame,
You Will swear I in earnest am; beldam, this is pretty spor^.
The Dominion of the Sword.
LAy by your pleading, Law lies a bleeding,
Burn all your studies down* and throw away your reading
2. Small power the word has,
And can afford us,
Not half so much privilege as the sword does.
3. It fosters your Masters,
It plasters Disasters,
It makes ye servants quickly greater than thee master
4. It venters, it enters,
It seeks and it centers,
It makes a prentice free in spite of his Inde^te^^
5. It talks of small things,
But it sets up all things,
This masters Money, though Money masters all things
6. It is not season,
To talk of reason,
Nor call it Loyalty, when the sword will have it Treason
7. It conquers the Crown too,
The Grave and the Gown too,
First it sets up a Presbyter, and then it pulls his down to
8. This subtle Disaster,
Turns Bonnet to Beaver
Down goes a Bishop, Sirs, and up starts* Weavit
9. This makes a Lap-man,
To preach and to pray man,
And makes a Lord of him that was but a Drap ^an.
10. Far from the Gulpit,
Of Sa^bey's Pulpit,
This brought an Hebrew Iron-monger to (...) Pulpit.
11. Such pitiful things be,
More happier than Kings be,
They get the upper-hand of Thimblebee and Slingsber.
2. No Gospel can guide it,
No Lw can decide it.
In Church or State, till the Sword has sanctified it.
13. Down goes your Law-tricks,
Far from the Matricks,
Spring up holy Hewsons power, and pulled down St. Patricks.
14. This Sword it prevails too,
So highly in Wales too,
Shinkin ap Powel swears Cuts-plutterer nails too.
15. In Scotland this faster,
Did make such disaster,
That they sent their money back for which they sold their Master.
16. It battered their Gunkirk,
And so it did their Dunkirk,
That he is fled, and swears the Devil is in Dunkirk.
17. He that can tower,
Or he that is lower,
Would be judged a fool to put away his power.
18. Take books and rent 'um,
Who can invent 'um,
When that the Sword replies, Negatur Argumentum?
19. Your brave Colledge-Butlers,
Must st^op to the Sutlers,
There Is never a Library like to the Cutlers,
20. The blood that was spilt, Sir.
Has gained all the Gilt, Sir,
Thus have you seen me run my sword up to the Hilt, Sir.
The fickle Lover.
Why should you swear I am forsworn,
since thine I vowed to be:
Lady, it is already morn,
and 'twas last night I swore to thee
That fond impossibility.
2. Have I not loved thee much and long,
a tedious twelve hours space?
I must all other Beauties wrong,
and rob thee of a new embrace,
Should I still dote upon thy face.
3. Not but all joys in thy brown hair,
by others may be found,
But I must search the black and fair,
like skilful Mineralists, that sound
For treasure in a plow'd-up ground.
4. Then if when I have loved my round,
thou prov'st the pleasant she,
With spoil of meaner Beauties crowned,
I laden will return to thee,
Even sated with variety.
A Mock-song.
HOwl, howl, some prodigious Owl,
For a Monster so foul,
no tougue can express,
And I fear I shall dye,
with a squint from that eye,
Which so lately did fly,
like infection from the sky,
Or some worse Malady:
but I Will do what I can,
Never to see her again.
2. When I, in the Kitchen did spy,
this deformed prodigy,
On her knoes scouring dishes,
oh she looked so like a witch,
That my feet and hands did itch,
to be kicking of her breech,
Or t'imbrace her with a switch;
but she will yield such a screech
That I was well assured,
she could not be endured.
3. Bloat, bloat, and as chaste as a stoat,
or a lecherous Goat,
Was this damnable Hagg,
from each eye there did come,
A thick menstruous gum
like the spermatick foam
Of some ulcerated wom'b;
but I dare make it known,
That this stuff did arise,
from no pearls of her eyes.
4. But now, increases my woe.
though I truly did know
Where this Pole-cat did dwell;
for her work being done,
'Bout the platter and the spoon,
she was vanished soon,
And left me glad alone,
and to the Devil she is gone,
Which makes me to say,
that I Will keep Holy Day.
5. Hence I, for ever will defy,
such vain impurity,
As the Kitchen affords:
all you sluts then adieu,
Be your smocks old or new,
I Will have nothing to do,
With such Tallow-mine as you,
but my love I le renew,
Where I Will sigh out my breath,
till occasion d by death.
Good Counsel.
CLoris forbear a while,
do not over joy-me,
Urge not another smile,
lest thou destroy me:
That beauty pleases most,
and is soon'st taken,
Which is soon won, soon lost,
kindly forsaken:
I love a coming Lass, 'faith I do,
But now and then would have her scornful too.
2. O cloud those eyes of thine,
bo-peep thy feature,
Warmed with an April shine,
scorch not the creature,
Thus to display thy ware,
thus to be fooling,
Argues how rude you are,
in Cupids schooling:
Disdain begets a shent, scorn draws me nigh,
It Is cause I would and cannot, makes me try.
3. Cloris, I Would have thee wise,
when gallants w^^e thee,
And Courtship thou despise,
fly those pursue thee,
Fasting moves appetite,
makes hunger greater,
What Is stinted of delight,
falls to the better:
Be kindly coy betimes, be smoothly rough,
And buckle now and then, and that is enough.
The blind Zealor.
I Am not mad, O Festus,
When zeal and godly knowledge
have put me in hope,
to deal with the Pope,
As well as the best in the College,
Boldly I preach war a Cross, war a Su^plice,
Miters, Copes, and Rochets,
Come hear me pray nine times a day,
And fill your heads with Crochets.
2. In the house of pure Emanuel,
I had my education,
Where my friends surmise,
I dazzled my eyes
With the sight of the Revelation,
Boldly, etc.
3. They bind me like a Bedlam,
They lash my four poor quarters,
while this I endure,
Faith maltes me sure,
To be one of Foxes Martyrs.
Boldly, etc.
4. These injuries I suffer,
Through Antichrists persuasion?
Take away the chain,
Neither, Room, nor Spain,
Can resist my strong invasion,
Boldly, etc.
5. Of the Beasts ten horns, Lord bless us,
I have knocked off three already,
If they let me alone,
I Will leave her none,
Though some say I am too heavy.
Boldly, etc.
6. I assailed the seven-hil'd City,
Where I met the great red Dragon,
But I kept him aloof,
With the Armor of proof,
Though here I have never a rag on.
Boldly, etc.
7. With fire, Sword, and Target,
I encountered with the monster,
Though the sons of pride,
My zeal deride,
And all my deeds mis-conster.
Boldly, etc.
8. I saw two in a Vision,
With a flying book between 'um,
I fell in despair
Five times in a year,
And was cured by reading Grenham.
Boldly, etc.
9. I observed in Perkins Table
The blank line of damnation,
but those crooked vains
so st^^k in my brains,
That I feared my reprobation.
Boldly, etc.
10. I unhors'd the whore of Babel,
With a Lance of inspiration,
But I made her stink,
and spill her drink,
In the Cup of abomination.
Boldly, etc.
11. In the holy tongue of Canaan,
I placed my greatest pleasure,
Till I prick my foot
with an hebrew root,
That bled beyond all measure,
Boldly, etc.
12. I appeared before the Archbishop,
And all the High Commission,
I gave him no grace,
But told him to his face
He favored Superstition,
Boldly, etc.
Full forty times over.
FVll forty times over I have strived to wi^
Full forty times over repulsed have bin,
But it is forty to one but I Will tempt her again;
for he is a dull Lover
that so will give over,
Since thus runs the sport,
Since thus runs the sport,
Assault her but often, and you carry the Fort,
since thus runs the sport,
Assault her but often, and you carry the Fort.
2. There Is a breach ready made which still
open has bin,
With thousands of thoughts to betray it within,
If you once but approach, you are sure to get in, then stand not off coldly,
but venier on boldly
With weapon in hand,
With weapon in hand,
If you once but approach, she is not able to stand
with weapon in hand,
If you once but approach she is not able to stand
3. Some Ladies when down before them you sit,
Will think to repulse you with Fire-buds of wit,
But alas they are but crackers, and seldom do hit,
then vanquish them after,
with alarms of laughter,
Their Forces being broke,
Their Forces being broke,
And ye fire quite out, you may vanquish to smoke
their forces being broke:
And ye fire quite out, you may vanquish in smoke
4. With pride and with state, some outworks they make,
And with vollies of Frowns drive the enemy back:
If you mind her discreetly she is easy to take,
then to it, never fear her,
but boldly come near her,
By working about,
By working about,
If you once but approach, she can never hold it out,
by working about,
If you once but approach, she can never hold it out.
5. Some Ladies with blushes and modesty fight,
And with their own fears the rude foe do affright,
But they are easily surpised if you come in the night;
then this you must drive at,
to Parley in private,
And then they are overthrown,
And then they are overthrown,
If you promise them fairly, they will soon be your own,
and then they are overthrown,
If you promise them fairly, they will soon be your own.
The Answer.
HE is a fond Lover that doteth on scorn,
Who Fortune's neglects has patiently born:
He Is proud of abules, if e're he return
To prove a fond Lover,
His wit he will discover,
By striving to win,
A fort, where old forces neglected have bin,
2. For when a Fort we defend from the foe,
We traitors imprison, they never come below,
And her Fort is defended by answering, Not
If this will not do it,
Disdain added to it,
Your weapon will fall;
Although you approach, you will not enter at all,
3. They are Lady-birds sure, these Lovers intend,
Which cannot with wit such a fortress defend
Whilst Hectors their Squibs and their Crackers do spend;
And vainly come after,
To conquer with laughter;
For she has us wit,
That spends all her ^ire in the smoke to be hit.
4. Where a fort has no strength but such as is made
By pride and by state, such a foe may invade;
For these are defenses for those of the trade:
You men are so witty,
Works guard not our City,
But fortes within,
With which we maintain't, though the outworks you win.
5. These warriors at last with our weapons will light;
If we are not aware, they will come in the night:
But alas they are denied, our ^ertues are bright
For she that loves honor,
No parley e're won her,
To yield up her power,
For a few flattering words, and the sport of an hour.
The Jovialists Coronation.
SInce it must be so, why then so let it go,
Let the Giddi-brain'd times turn round*
Now we have our King, let the Goblets be crowned
And our Monarchy thus we recover:
Whilst the Pottles are weeping,
We'^ drench our sad souls
In big-belly'd Bowls,
And our sorrows in wine shall lie steeping,
And we will drink till our eyes do run over,
and prove it by reason,
It can be no treason
To drink, or to sing
A Mournifal of Healths to our true Crowned King.
2. Let us all stand bare, in the presence we ^^^
Let our Noses like Bonefires shine:
In stead of the Conduits let Pottles run win:
To perfect this true Coronation;
And we that are loyal in drink shall be Peers,
For that face that wears Claret,
Looks like the Blood Royal,
And out-stares the Bores of our Nation;
In sign of Obedience,
Our Oaths of Allegiance,
Beer-glasses shall be,
And he that tipples, tends to the Nobility.
3. But if in this Reign, a Halberdly tra^^,
Or a Constable chance to revel,
And would with his twyvels maliciously swell
And against the Kings party raise Arms,
Then the Drawers like Yeomen o the Guard,
With Quart-pots,
Shall fuddle the Sots,
Till they make 'um both Cuckolds and Freemen
And on their wives beat up Alarm:
Thus as the Health passes,
Weel trifle our Glasses,
And count it no sin
To drink and be loyal, in defense of our King.
A Lovers Request.
SInce it is my fate to be thy flave,
render such pity you would crave:
Since it is my fortune so to be,
to him that courts his destiny.
2. It Was those magnetic eyes ^^ at drew
my heart away at the first view,
Since then to love it was the womb
which gave it life, be not the tomb.
3. Should I affect e^il'd delay
dangers attends a tedious way:
Few are the words that may combine
our hearts, it is only say Thou'r^ mine.
4. Yet if another has possessed
those hopes that might have made me blessed,
Be speedy in thy Doom, and I
by death am freed from misery.
The despairing Lover to his Mistress.
FAir Archabella to thine eirs,
that paints just blushes on the skies;
Each noble heart shall sacrifice;
yet be not truel though you may,
When ever you please to save, or slay,
or with a frown benight the day.
2. I do not beg that you should rest
in an enforced highway breast,
A Lodging for each common guest:
but I present a bleeding heart,
That never felt a former smart,
wounded by love, not pricked by art.
3. And if you smile, then I shall live:
but if you frown, a death you give,
For which it were a sin to grieve:
but if it be decreed I fall,
Grant me one Boon, one Boon is all,
that you would me your Martyr call.
Good Advice.
GAther your Rose-buds whilst you may,
for time is still a flying,
And that same Flower which grows to day,
to morrow will be dying.
2. The glorious Lamp of Heaven, the Sun,
the higher he is getting,
The sooner will his race be run,
and nearer is to setting,
3. That age is best that is the first,
whilst youth and blood are warmer:
But being fled, grows worse and worse,
and ill succeeds the former.
4. Then be nor coy, but spend your time,
and whilst you may, go marry;
For having once but lost your prime,
you may for ever tarry.
The Muses courting Sack.
POx take you Mistress, I Will be gone,
I have friends to wait upon;
Think you I Will my self confine
to your humors, Lady mine?
No: your lowering looks do say,
'twill be a rainy drinking day,
To the Tavern let us away.
2. There have I a Mistress got,
cloistered in a Pottle-pot:
Plump and bounding, soft and fair,
bucksom, sweet, and de bonair,
And they call her Sack my Dear.
3. Sack with no scornful dread will blast me,
though upon the bed she cast me,
Yet never blush her self to red,
nor fear the loss of Maidenhead:
And though mute and still she be,
quicker wits she brings to me
Then I e're could find in thee;
Yet if thou will take the pain
to be kind yet once again,
And with thy smiles but call me back,
thou shall be the Lady Sack.
Oh then try, and you shall see,
what a loving soul I Will be,
When I Am drunk with none but thee.
The Constant Lover.
MVst your fair enflaming eye
Make a Lover mourn or cry?
All consenting, not repenting
At your will to live or die.
2. Must your fair face, and rare desert,
Keep in awe a Lovers heart?
Yet by praying, and obeying,
In thee I hope to have part.
3. In excess of joy or pain,
I still labor to attain
Such a measure of Loves treasure,
Never to be poor again.
4. Although I should plainly see
Your disdain would murder me,
It should not fright me, but delight me,
So I might thy Martyr be.
The Loyal Prisoner.
HOw happy's that Prisoner that conquers his fa^e
With silence, and ne've on bad fortunes complains:
But carelessly plays with Keys on his grates,
And he makes a sweet consort with them and his chains,
He ^rown^^ care in Sack, while his thoughts are oppressed,
And he makes his heart float like a Cork in his breast.
Then since we are all Slaves, and Islanders be,
And our land a large prison enclosed with the Sea
W^'l drink off the Ocean, and set our selves free
For man is the worlds Epitomy.
2. Let Tyrants wear purple, deep died in the blood
Of those they have slain, their Scepters to sway,
If our Conscience be clear, and our Title be good,
With the ^ags that hang on us, with are richer then they,
We Will drink down at night what we beg or can borrow,
And sleep without plotting for more the next mortow,
Then since we are, etc.
3. Let the Usurer watch over his bags and his house,,
To keep that from Robbers he ra^'t from his debtors,
Which at midnight tryes theives, at the nosse of a Mouse,
And he looks if his Trunks are fast bound to their setters:
When once he is grown rich enough for a States-plot,
Buff in one hour plunders what threescore years got.
Then since, etc.
4. Come Drawer, fill each man a peck of old Sherry,
This brimmer shall bid al our senses good night
When old Aristotle was frolic and merry,
By the juice of the grape he stager'd outright,
Copernicus once in a drunken fit found
By the course of's brains yt the world did turn round,
Then since, etc.
5. It Is Sack makes our faces like Comets to shine,
And gives tincture beyond a complexion mask,
Diogenes fell so in love with his wine,
Then when 'twas all out, he dwelt in the cas^
And being shut up within a close room,
He dying, requested a Tub for his Tomb.
Then since, etc.
6. Let him never so privately muster his gold,
His Angels will their intelligence be,
Haw closely they are pressed in their Canvas hold
And they want the State-souldier to set them all free,
Let them pine and be hanged, we will merrily (...)
Who has nothing to lose, may cry, God bless the King.
Then since, etc.
The Maidens Complaint.
WHen Flora had mantled the Meadows with Flowers,
A and richly adorned her beautiful Bowers,
A Maid she sat sighing, and often did moan,
Saying, Love has betrayed her, and left her alone
2. I Will spit at the Tyrant that has me betrayed
And tax him with falsehood for wronging a maid
I Will call him blind Archer, and treacherous Boy,
Cause he with his engine my love does annoy.
3. But if he preserves my heart as he should,
And wounds me not deeper with arows of gold
I Will honor his precepts with clapping of hands
And still be obedient to all his commands.
Canary's Coronation.
COme let us purge our brains,
From Ale and Grains,
They do smell of Anarchy:
Let Us choose a King,
From whose blood may spring,
Such a sparkling Progeny,
It will be fit, strew mine in it,
Whose flames are bright and clear,
We Will bind our hands with Dray-mens bands,
When as we may be freer,
Why should we droop, or basely stoop
To popular Ale or Beer:
2. Who shall be King, now comes the thing,
For the which we all are met?
Claret is a Prince, that has long since,
In the Royal Order set:
His face is spread with a warlike seed,
And so he loves to see men,
When he bears the sway, his Subjects they
Shall be as good as freemen,
But here is the Plot almost forgot,
It Is too much burnt with women.
3. By the river of Rhine is a valiant Vine,
That can all other replenish,
Let Us then consent to the Government,
And the Royal Rule of Rhenish:
The German wine, will warm the Chine,
And frisk in every vein,
'T will make the Bride forget to chide
And call him to it again;
But that is not all, he is too small,
To be our Sovereign.
4. Let us never think of a noble drink,
But with notes advance on high:
Let Us proclaim good Canary's name,
Heaven bless his Majesty,
He is a King in every thing,
Whose nature does rentunce all,
He Will make us skip and nimbly trip,
From Ceeling to the Groundsil,
Especially when Poets be.
Lords of the Privy Council.
5. But a Vintner will his Taster be,
Here Is nothing that can him let,
A Drawer that has a good palate:
Shall be ^^quire of the Gimblet;
The bar-boys shall be the Pages all;
A Tavern well prepared,
And nothing shall be spared
In jovial sort shall be the Court,
Wine-Porters that are soldiers tall
Be Yeomen of the Guard.
6. But if a Cooper we, with a red nose see,
In any pott of the Town,
The Cooper shall with his Ads* royal,
Bear the Scepter of the Crown.
Young wits that wash away their Cash,
In wine and recreation,
Who hates Ale and Beer, shall be welcome here
To give their approbation,
So shall all you, that will allow
Canary's Coronation.
The Lovers complaint.
Tell me ye wandering spirits of the air,
did you ever see a Nymph more bright, more fair
Than beauties darling, and her parts most sweer
then stole content? if such a one you meet,
Wait on her early wheresoever she flies,
and cry, and cry, Amyntas for her absence dies.
2. But stay a while, I have informed you ill,
were she on earth, she had bin with me still:
Fly, fly to Heaven, examine every Sphere,
and see what Star is lately fixed there;
If any brighter than the Sun you see,
fall down, fall down and worship, that is she.
Go search the valleys, pluck us every Rose*
^. and you shall find a scent of her in those,
Go fish for Pearl-corral, there you shall see
how orential all her colors be:
Then call the Echo to your aid, and cry,
Cloris, Cloris assist, or else I dye.
Platonic Love.
FOnd Lovers what do you mean,
to Court an idle folly?
Platonic Love is nothing else
but merely Melancholy,
It Is active love that makes us jolly.
2. To dote upon a face,
or court a sparkling eye,
Or to believe a dimpled chin,
complete felicity,
It Is to betray your liberty.
3. She cares not for your sighs,
nor your lamenting eyes,
She hates to hear a fool complain,
and cry, he dies, he dies,
Believe she loves a close surprise.
4. Then he no more so fond,
as to think a woman can
Be satisfied with complements,
the frothy part of a man,
Oh no, she hates a Puritan.
5. Then venture to embrace,
it is but one squeak or two,
I Am confident no woman lives,
but sometimes she will do,
The fault lies not in her, but you.
Upon passionate Love.
NO man Loves fiery passion can approve,
as either yielding pleasure or promotion,
I like a mild and lukewarm zeal in love,
although I do not like it in devotion.
2. Besides, man need not love unless he please,
no destiny can force man's disposition,
How t^^^ can any die of that disease,
when (...) himself may be his own Physician?
3. Some one perhaps in long consumption dried
and after falling into love may die:
But I dare lay my life he never had died,
had he been healthy at the heart, as I.
4. Some others rather than incur the slander
of false apostates, may true martyrs prove:
But I am neither Iphis nor Leander,
I Will neither hang nor drowned my self for love
5. Yet I have been a Lover by report,
and I have di'd for love, as others do,
But praised be Jove, it was in such a sort,
that I revived within one hour, or two.
6 Thus have I loved, thus have I lived til now,
and know no reason to repent me yet,
And he that any otherwise shall do,
his courage is no better than his wit.
The Woman's Answer.
NO man loves fiery passion can resist
that either values pleasure or promotion,
I hate luke-warmness in an Amorist,
it is as had in love, as in devotion.
2. You that pretend to have a love-proof heart
and dare despise the sacred power of Love,
May know that more has fallen by Cupids dart,
than by the dreadful thunderbolts of Jove.
3. Nor can you love, or not love, as you please,
for Cupids laws commands the disposition:
And I have known one die of that disease,
whereof himself to others was Physician.
4. For when the little God does shoot his darts
from the bright eyes of women that are fair
The strokes are fatal, and will wound the hearts
of men as healthful as you think you are.
5. Those yt thus die for love, incur no slander,
but with Loves holy Martyrdom are crowned
Perhaps you cannot imitate Leander,
for every man was not born to be drowned.
6. You say you have been a Lover by report,
but never yet deserved so good a name,
He never loved indeed, loves but a sport,
it is ill jesting with a sacred flame.
7. Long may you live unlov'd, and when you die
women upon your loathed grave shall spit,
Till then all Gentlemen shall swear you lie,
to try your courage, as you did your wit.
A Song upon Pu^, and Tick-tack.
AY ^ung man and a pretty maid,
Sitting hand in hand together,
Smilington him thus she said,
Sweer, let us spend our time in pleasure,
Good sir, quoth she, if that you please,
a whole piece with you I will venture,
At Put, to pass the time with ease,
or at Tick-tack to hit and enter.
2. These parties being both agreed,
of their best skill to make a trial,
Though he at Put to learn had need,
yet he would give her no denial,
Good sir, quoth she, come lift with me,
those that lift least shall have the dealing,
Hers was an Ace, his was a Tree,
quoth he I was deceived in feeling.
3. She dealt to him, he put to her,
his game was good, she durst not see him;
To win the game she would be glad,
he was the first, and had the dealing,
And to be brief, three was the Set,
and he got two, e're she got any,
An yet she swore she would him beat,
for at last Put she had beat many.
4. Next Deal she held him closely to it,
his game was good, but hers was better,
He moved a Put, but durst not do it,
because her spirit was the greater,
Next bout she boldly Put to him,
and he undaunted, did put with her.
Hers being the best, the game was gone
because they did put both together.
5. Fair Mistress now I needs must say,
at Put your game is far the better,
At Tick-tack I will hold you play,
you shall loose all, and rest my debtor.
Tush sir, quoth she, I fear you not,
which if in your Tables I once enter,
I'ch game I Will set you such a blot,
beyond the which you dare not venture.
6. Will thou with fair play be content,
let not my ill play thee trouble,
For I have a full intent,
for to hit, or take it double,
Duce-Ace he threw, a Tree her hat,
and yet he over-see to hit her,
She took him then with a Why-not?
but merk at last how he did fit her.
7. Now for the Set with strength he cast,
it was his fortune for to hit her,
He sank into her blot at last,
and then she did confess he beat her;
Forty weeks hence, quoth she, I Will pay
my loss to thee, by this good token,
When as at Tick-tack I did play,
I always left my Ace-point open.
LONDON'S Gratulation to the Lord General, the sixth of March, 1660.
A Paean was a Song of Praise
First made to great Apollo,
When plagues did rage in any place,
Or cruel War, Peace follow,
The blessings of good health and peace
Are such strong Obligations,
The first fruits of our lips-encrease
And due, as their Oblation.
Then let us pay our Thanks to thee,
(The mistocles of London,)
Who timely came to set us free,
Or London had been undone.
2. Religion, Law, and Liberty,
Distinguish us from others
The French have lost what is kept by thee,
(In freedom once our Brothers)
All was at Stake, when Hewson came,
To make a new Translation;
England it self became a shame
And byword to each Nation.
Then let us pay our thanks to Thee,
( Renowned George of London,)
Who timely came to set us free,
Or London had been undone.
3. Our Churches were contemned of late,
Our Laws were but dead Letters,
Usurpers Lorded it in the State,
And vilantz'd their betters.
Poor Citizens were doomed the prey
Of Fleetwoods Safe Committee;
Grenades were prepared to pay,
The public faith to the City,
Then let us pay, etc.
4. Fire and flames (like Thunderclaps
discharged by Jove in flashes)
Which vomited from Hewsons Chaps
to lay us all in Ashes:
The Anabaptists damn d us all
to dismal Conflagration,
Or to enslave us to White Hall,
and Vanes vain ventilation,
Then let us pay, etc.
5. Our Goldsmiths rows in Lumbard-street,
and Cheap Side were propounded
For Pillage to the Saints; as meet
such Idols were confounded!
Our Merters, Groters, Drapers too,
were measured out and weighed all,
By the Plow-share of John Disborow,
that Standard, which has made all!
Then let us pay, etc.
6. Our other Guilds and Companies
were all condemned for plunder;
And (where our ancient glory lies)
our Senators brought under:
Petitions for our native Rights
were deemed pernicious Treason,
Which our brave Ancestors in fights
obtained from Kings with reason.
Then let us pay our thanks to thee,
( Renowned George of London,)
Who timely came to set us free,
Or London had been undone.
7. Our Brethren murdered were and slasht,
in peace as they were walking:
Out of their heads the brains were dashed
of some, as they stood talking:
The best betook themselves by flight
to Countrey-habitation;
Who staid in Town, were in such plight,
as Eighty eight's Invasion.
7. But when the Rump (as some it named)
assembled in December,
We thought, we had our own reclaimed
by pighting up that Member,
Sir -- we had seasoned well
with Salt to make fair speeches
In The House for us: but he can tell
no Tale but in his --
Then let us pay, etc.
8. Our Common Counsel were decry'd,
some Members sent to the Tower;
The Rump did then on horseback ride
In an unlucky hour:
They pulled our Posts and Chains all down,
Portcullices and Portals;
Sir Arthur (with a surly frown)
affrighted us poor Mortals.
Then let us pay. etc.
9. But ( blessed day) when thou did call
the Members long secluded;
They voted down our slavish thrall
from forty eight intruded;
And what remains yet to be done
for Church and State in freedom,
We hope shall never be begun
from Prin-ciples of Needom.
Then let us pay, etc.
10. The States of Venice, and the Dutch,
by nature are designed
For Commonwealths: But England much
to Monarchie's inclined.
When Noll usurped, we quiet were,
contented with that Ape-King,
But more security is there,
when rules the right, no Rape-King.
Then let us pay, etc.
12. If we consider France and Spain,
where Liberty is geason,
The Kings their Subjects do maintain
In peace by prudent reason:
For Monarchy in Heaven above,
(The Scriptures prove it clearly,)
Keep's all the Royal host in Love,
and unity most dearly.
Then let us pay, etc.
13. One head the body does preside
by natures due Creation;
One heart the life of Man does guide,
One spirit is infused in Man,
Till it is Mortification;
our Graces stugle be too:
Such Truths a mere Re-publican
or Devil must agree to.
Then let us pay, etc.
14. If Monarchy be best of all,
as ( Aristotle proves it,
And holy Writ,) well may we call
him loyal heart, that love's it:
And such the Noble Monk has been,
(as Devon-shire Annals render,)
Who faithful were to Bess our Queen,
and James our faith's Defender,
Then let us pay, etc.
15. Since thou art Offspring of that Race,
to Kingship well devoted,
Let Charles the Second to his place,
be speedily promoted:
Thus Wars will end in stable Peace,
Church, State, no more shall sever,
Our Trades will flourish, Wealth increase,
our George shall live for ever,
Our thanks we freely pay to Thee, etc.
A SONG.
ALL hail to the days,
that merits more praise
Than all the rest of the year,
And welcome the nights
That double delights,
As well in the Poor as the Peer,
Good fortune attend
Each merry man's friend,
That does but the best that he may,
For getting old wrong,
With a Cup and a Song,
To drive the cold Winter away.
2. Let Misery pack
With a whip at his back,
To the deep Tantalian flood;
And Envy propound
In Lethe be drowned,
That repines at another man's good,
Let sorrow's expense
Be a thousand years hence,
With payment of grief and delay,
And spend the whole night,
With honest delight,
To drive the cold Winter away,
An excellent Song.
I Dote, I dote, but am a Sot to show it,
I was a very fool to let her know it;
For now she does so cunning grow,
She proves a friend worse than a foe,
She Will neither hold me fast, nor let me go:
For she tells me I cannot forsake her,
Then straight I endeavor to leave her,
For to make me to stay,
Throws a kiss in my way,
O then I could tarry for ever.
2. Then I retire, salute, and sit down by her.
Thus do I fry in frost, and freeze in fire,
Then Nectar from her lips I sup,
Although I cannot drink all up,
Yet I am fort with kissing of the Cup;
For her lips are two brimmers of Claret,
Where first I began to miscarry,
Her Breasts of delight,
Are two Bottles of White
And her eyes are two Cups of Canary.
3. Drunk as I live, dead drunk without repriede
And all my secrets drebble through a sieve,
Upon my neck her Arms she lays
Then all is Gospel that she says,
Which I laid hold on with my fuddled faith:
For I find a fond Lover's a drunkard,
And dangerous is when he flies out;
With Lips and with Sips,
Black eyes and white thighs,
Blind Cupid sure tipled his eyes out.
4. She bids me rise, tells me I must be wise
Like her, for she is not in love, she cries,
Then do I fume, and fret, and throw,
Though I be fettered to my foe,
Then I begin to run, but cannot go:
But prithee sweet, use me more kindly,
It Is better to hold me more fast;
If you e're disengage,
The Bird from the Cage,
Believe me, he I leave you at last.
5. Like Sot I sit, that used to fill the town with wi^,
But I confess I have most need of it,
I have been drunk with Duck and Deer,
Above a quarter of a year,
Beyond the cure of sleeping, or small Beer;
I think I can number the months too,
July, August, September, October,
Thus runs the Account,
A mischief light on it,
Sure I shall go home when I Am sober.
6. My legs are lamed, my courage is quite tamd
My heart and body too, are much enslam'd;
Now by ^xperience I can prove,
And swear by all the Gods above
It Is better to be drunk with wine, than Love
For Sack makes ^s merry and witty,
Our foreheads with Jewels adorning,
Although I do grope,
Yet there is some hope
That I shall be sobe^ next morning.
7 Now with command, she throws me from her band
And bids me go, yet knows I cannot stand,
I measure all the ground by trips,
Was ever Sot so drunk with Sips?
Or ever than so over-seen in Lips?
I pray Madam Fickle be faithful,
And leave off your damnable dodging,
Either love me or leave me,
And do not deceive me,
But let me go home to my Lodging.
8. I have too much, and yet my folly's such,
I cannot leave, but must have to'ther touch,
Her*es a Health to the King: how now?
I Am drunk, and shall speak treason I vow,
But Lovers and fools may say any thing you know;
For I fear I have tired your patience,
But I Am sorry: it is I have the worst on it,
My wit has be reft me,
And all that is left me,
Is but enough to make a Song on it,
My Mistress and I,
Shall never comply,
And that is the short and the long on it.
A Pastoral Song betwixt a Shepherd and a Shepherdess.
Q. DId you not once Lucinda vow,
you would love none but me?
A. I but my Mother tells me now,
I must love wealth, not thee.
Shep. Cruel, thy love lies in thy power,
though Fate to me's unkind:

Maid. Consider but how small thy Dower
is, in respect of mine.

Shep. Is it because my sheep are poor,
or that my flocks are few?

Maid. No: But I cannot love at all,
so mean a thing as you.

Shep. Ah me, Ah me, mock you may grief?


Maid. I pity thy hard fare.


Shep. Pity for Love's but poor relief,
I Will rather choose your hate.

Maid. Content thy self, Shepherd a while,
I Will love thee by this Kiss,
Thou shall have no more cause to mourn
Than thou caust take in this.

Shep. Bear retord then you Powers above,
and all those Holy Bands:
For it appears the truest Love,
springs not from wealth nor Lands.

A Cavear.
TAke heed fair Cloris, how you tame
With your disdain, Amyntas flame;
A noble heart, if once denied,
Swells into such a height of pride,
'Twill rather burst, than deign to be,
A worshipper of Cruelty.
2. You may use common Shepherds so,
My sighs to storms will quickly grow,
And set such scorns upon your pride,
Will blast all I have magnified,
You are not fair, if love you lack,
Ingratitude makes all things black.
3. Oh do not for a flock of sheep,
A golden shore whereon you sleep,
Nor for the Tales ambition tells,
Forsake the house where honor dwells:
In Damon's Palace you will never shine
So bright, as in these arms of mine.
The Platonic Lover.
She Is not the fairest of her name,
and yet she conquers more than all her rate
But she has other motives to inflame
besides her lovely face,
As wit and constancy,
And charms that take the soul more than the ept,
It Is no easy Lover knows how to discover such divinity.
2. And yet she is an easy Book,
written in plain language for the meaner wit
A stately garb, and a gracious look,
with all things justly fit,
But age will undermine
That glorious outside which appears so fine,
When the common Lover shrinks and gives her over
Then she is only mine.
3. To the Platonic that applies
his clear addresses only to the mind,
The body but a temple signifies
wherein the Saints inshrin'd:
To him it is all one,
Whether the walls be Marble, or of stone,
Nay in holy places which old time defaces,
Most Devotion's shown.
Loves Ecstasy.
NOw I confess I am in love,
although I thought I never should,
But it is with one sent from above,
whom Nature framed of siner Mould,
So good, so rare, so all divine,
I Would quit the world to make her mine.
2. Have you not seen the Stars retreat,
when Sol salutes the Hemisphere,
So shrinks the Beauties called great
when sweet Rosella does appear:
Were she as other women are,
I should not court her with despair.
3. But I could never bear a mind,
willing to stoop to common faces,
Nor confidence enough could find
to aim at one so full of graces,
Fortune and Nature did agree,
No woman should be fic for me.
The Husbandman, and Serving-man:
WEll met my friend, upon the highway, walking on,
So sad all alone,
I pray you tell to me, of what science you be
Or are you a Serving-man?
2. Oh my brother deer, why do thou inquee^
any such thing at my hand?
I will not fain but chill tell thee plain,
I am a plain Husbandman.
3. If a husbandman you be, if you will go with me,
you shall find alteration then,
For I will bring you in a very short time,
where you may be a Serving-man.
4. Good sir, the give you thanks for your great deligence
zimple though here I do stand:
But yet I do mean with my plough and my tram
still to be a Husbandman.
5. We have pleasure like a King, we ride a hunting,
with our goodly Greyhounds many a one,
Our horns all arow, their measures for to blow
oh it is pleasure for a Serving-man.
6. We have pleasure more than that
to zee our Oren vat,
Not under their Loads for to stand;
but to labor and take pain,
To bring in our gain,
oh it is pleasure for a Husbandman.
7. A Serving-man does eat,
The best Meat that he can get,
his Pig, Goose, Capon, and his Swan,
Thereto his Pasties fine,
With Sack and Claret Wine.
oh it is Diet for a Serving-man.
8. As for Pig, Goose and Capon,
Give me good Beef and Bacon,
with Butter and Cheese among,
And in a Country House
Vat Pudding and Zouse.
that is Diet for a Husbanding-man.
9. A Serving-mans behavior,
Brings him into favor,
when he waits his Masters Table upon:
There is never a Knight nor Squire
That lives in all the Shire,
but he must have a Serving-man.
10. If a Serving-man you were,
Then need you not to care
for tilling or ploughing of your land;
For then you may go gay,
And wear brave array,
oh it is habit for the Serving-man.
11. As for your gay Repparel,
Zir, this is not the quarrel,
that you and I do stand upon:
But fain would I know,
If that thou can me show,
what pleasure has a Zerving-man.
12. A Serving-mans pleasure
Is without ineasure, when the Hawk is his fist upon,
To see what hall^ he will make,
His game for to take, oh it is pleasure for a Serving-man,
13. We have pleasure also,
To see our Corn grow, and prosper the land upon,
And to get it in our Barns,
Free from any harms, oh it is pleasure for a Husbanding-man.
14. Indeed sir, it were bad,
If none were to be had, to tend the Table upon,
But there is neither Emperor nor King,
Nor any living, can live without the Husbanding-man.
15. Indeed I must confess,
And grant you no less, and give you the upper hand,
Your labor is painful,
But yet it is gainful,
I would I were a Husbanding-man.
16. Then let us all,
Both great and small, pray for the Peace of old England,
And that we may ever
Do our endeavor, still to maintain the Husbandman.
A Merry Medley.
First Air. The Jews Corant.
LOt's call and drink the Cellar dry, there is nothing lover underneath the sky,
The greatest kingdoms in confusion lie,
Since all the world grows mad, why may not I my Father's dead and I am free he
left no children in the world but me, the Devil drunk him down with usury and
I Will repine in liberality,
When lirst the English war began
He was precisely a politic man,
That gained his state by lequestration till Oliver begun to tome with sword in
hand and put him to the run
Then jovial Lads who are undone,
So by the Father, co^^ home to the Son
Whom wine and mus^^k now do wait upon, let us tipple up a tun, and drink your
woes away, jolly hearts come on, come on.
Second Air. Princess Royal.
Here Is a Health to him that may do a trick that shall advance you all,
And beget a very jovial day.
Fill another bowl to he who has drank by stealth his Landlords health,
If his spirit and his tongue agree, the Land shall celebrate his fame, all the
world embalm his name, not a right good fellow, but will satisfy the same,
The Bells full merrily shall ring,
All the Town shall dance and sing, more delights than I can tell ye;
When we see this noble Spring, we will have Ladies by the belly, and a snatch at
the o'ther thing.
The third Air. Come hither my own sweet Duck.
WE'saw be merry and jolly, quaff, carouse, and reel,
We's play with Peggy and Molly dance, and kiss, and feel,
We's put up the Bag-pipe and Organ. and make the Welsh Harper to play,
Till Mauris ap Shon ap Morgan fisk as on St. Taffi^s day.
Hold up Jinny,
Piper come play us a spring, all you that have music in ye
Tipple, dance, and sing.
Fourth Air. French Tricatees.
LEt de French Monsieur come and swear,
Beg^r Mounsieur,
Dis is de ting vee long to hear,
So many a year,
Dancing vill be looked upon,
Now de man of Iron is gone,
Me glad his dancing days be done:
When de slower-de-luces grows
With de English Crown and Rose,
Dats very good as we suppose,
De French can live without de nose.
Fifth Air. French Tricatees.
SPain and English then, like men,
Shall love and make a League again.
Holland ^^ors shall quaff, and laugh,
Poor Irish swim in Usquebaugh,
James and Jinnikin, touch the Minnikin
Drink till all the Sky look blew, by this sweet change
Wonders does ensue, almost as strange
As Scotland to be true.
Sixth Air. A new Countrey-dance.
NO Drayman shall with his dull feet apea^
Lord in the Commonweal,
Or Jesuit in the Pulpit appear,
under a Cloak of zeal:
Musician never be noted
for wandering men of ease,
But they shall be finely Coated
and permitted to sing what they please,
If all things do but hit well
who knows but so 't may be,
Though now you be very zealous,
then you will laugh and be merry as we.
The Resolute Lover.
LIttle Love serves my turn,
it is so inflaming,
Rather than I will burn,
I Will give over Gaming;
For when I think upon 't,
oh it is so painful
'Cause Ladies have a trick
to be disdainful.
2. Beauty shall court it self,
it is not worth speaking;
I Will no more amorous pelf,
no more heartbreaking,
Those that ne re felt the smart,
let them go try it,
I have redeemed my heart,
now I defy it.
Upon the draining of the F^ns.
THe Up land people are full of thoughts,
and do despair of After-rain,
The sun he is robbed of his Morning-draughts,
they are afraid they shall never have shower again
Then apace, apace, 'pace drink deep, drink deep,
While it is to be had let us our Liquor ply,
The Drainers are up, and a coyl they do keep,
And threaten to drain our Kingdom dry.
2. The ne^ Philosophers rob us of fire, (the^^
and by reason do strive to maintain their
But if the fresh waters begin to retire,
we shall shortly have never an element left,
Then apace, etc.
3. Our deepest waters are now dry land,
and Cells are turned to serpents there;
If old Father Thames plays not the man,
then farewell to all our good English Beer.
Then apace, etc.
4. The Dutch man has a thirsty soul,
and our Cellars are subject to his call,
Let every ^aan then take hold of his Bowl,
it is pity the German Sea should have all,
Then apace, etc.
5. Summon all the brave Lads then that love to be merry,
and let every man lay his hand on the bowl,
And swear we will compel them to find us old Sherry,
that so stily our Bully March-beer have stole,
Then apace, etc.
6. Why should we stay here then, and perish with thirst?
to the New: world in the Moon away let us go;
For if the Dutch Colony get thither first,
it is a hundred to one but they will drain that too
Then apace, etc.
A Song in praise of Canary.
LIsten I pray, to the words I Have to say,
in memory firm and certain,
Rich wine does us raise, to ye honor of the boys
Quod non sacere desertim.
2. Of all the juice, that the Gods do produce,
Sack shall be preferred before 'nm:
It Is Sack that shall, create us all,
Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, Virorum.
3. We abandon Ale, and Beer that is stale,
Rosa-solis, and damnable Hum;
But we will track, in the praise of Sack,
against Omne quod exit in um.
4. This is the wine in former time,
each wisest of the Magi,
Was wont to car^uze, and frolitkly bowze,
Recubans sub regmine fagi.
5. Let the hoy be their bain, and the Pox be their pain,
let the Gout and the Colic pins 'um,
That offer to shrink from taking this Drink,
Seu Graeecum, sive Latinum.
6. Let the Glass go round, let the Quart-por sound
let each man do as he is done to;
Abaunt you that hug, the aborninable Jugg,
amongst us Hetaroclita sunto.
7. Sack's only divine, Beer's draff for a swine,
there is no such mud as Ale is;
In which they y wallow, a ^ox take their swallow,
Sunt Talpa Dama Canalis.
8. There Is no such disease, as he yt does please,
with Ale and Beer for to shame us:
Its Sack makes us sing, Hi-ding, a-ding, ding
Musa Apollo major^ Canamus.
9. When I Have Sack in my brain, I Am in a merry vain,
and this my only bliss is:
He that it most wise I can him despise,
Mecum consertur Ulysses.
10. How it clears the drain? how it warms
how against all crosses it arms us?
how 'it makes him that's poor courageous and roan the vein
Et mu^a^us dicere formas.
11. Give me my boy, my delight and my joy,
to the Lad that never drinks Ale,
By Sack he that clapsus, into our Syntaxis,
Est verbum personale.
12. Art thou sick or lame, or are thy wits in blame?
call for Sack, and thou shall have it:
Then do not rise, but be very wise,
Cui una natura negabit.
12. We have merry-go downs, we have jovial rounds,
yet nothing ^omes at random;
When you come to pay, do you shrink away,
Id est commune notandum.
14. He that drinks still and never has his fill,
has a passage like a Conduit?
He still does aspire, his rapture's on fire,
Si Aethera Aethera fundit.
15. I have told you plain, and I tell you again
be he as mad as Orlando,
He is but an Ass: and so let him pass,
Nisi bibit ostia stando.
The Protecting Brewer.
A Brewer may be a Burgess grave,
and carry the matter so fine and so brave,
That he the better may play the knave,
which no body can deny.
2. A Brewer may be a Parliament Man,
For there the knavery first began,
And brew most cunning Plots he can,
which, etc.
3. A Brewer may put on a Nabal face,
And march to the wars with such a grace,
That he may get a Captains place,
which, etc.
4. A Brewer may speak so monstrous well,
That he may raise strange things to tell,
And so be made a Colonel,
which, etc.
5. A Brewer may make his foes to flee,
And raise his fortunes, so that he,
Lieutenant General may be,
which, etc.
6. A Brewer may be like a Fox in a Cub,
And teach a Lecture out of a Tub,
And give the wicked world a rub,
which, etc.
7. A Brewer by's Excise and Rate,
Will promise his Army he knows what,
And set it upon the Colledge-gate,
which, etc.
8. Methinks I hear one say to me,
Pray why may not a Brewer be,
Lord Chancellor o'th University,
which, etc.
10. A Brewer may be as bold as a Hector,
When he has drunk off his Cup of Nector,
And a Brewer may be a Lord Protector,
which, etc.
11. Now here remains the strangest thing,
How this Brewer about his liquor does bring
To be an Emperor, or a King,
which, etc,
12. A Brewer may do what he thinks well,
Rob the Church and State, to sell
His soul unto the Devil of Hell,
which, etc.
Cromwell's Coronation.
OLiver, Oliver, take up thy Crown,
for now thou have made three Kingdoms thine own;
Call thee a Conclave of thy own creation,
to ride us to ruin, who dares thee oppose?
Whilst we thy good people are at thy devotion
to fall down and worship thy terrible Noss.
2. To thee and thy Mermydons Oliver, we
do tender our homage as fits thy degree,
We Will pay thee Excise and Taxes, God bless us,
with fear and contrition, as penitents should,
Whilst you great sirs, vouchsafe to oppress us,
not daring so much as in private to scold.
3. We bow down, as cowed down, to thee and thy Sword,
for now thou have made thy self Englands sol, Lord
By Mandate of scripture, and heavenly warrant
the Oath of Allegiance, and Covenant too:
To Charles and his Kingdoms thou art Heir apparent,
and born to reign over the Turk and the Jew
3. Then Oliver, Oliver, get up and ride,
whilst Lords, Knights, and Gentry do run by thy side,
The Ma^lsters and Brewers account it their glory,
Great God of the grain-tub's compared to thee
All Rebels of old are lost in their story,
till then plad'st along to the Paddington-tree
A Medley of the Nations.
The Scot.
I Am the bonny Scot sir,
my name is Mickle John;
It Is I was in the Plot Sir,
When first the Wars began:
I left the Court one thousand
Six hundred forty one;
But since the flight
At Worster sight
We are aw undone.
I served my Lord and Master,
When as he lived at home,
Until by sad disaster
He received his doom;
But now we sink,
Vds bred I think
The Deel's gat in his room:
He ne man spares,
But stamps and stares
At all Christendom.
2. I have traveled mickle grounds,
Since I came from Worster bounds
I have gang'd the jolly rounds
Of the neighboring Nations;
And what their opinion are,
Of the Scotch and English war,
In geed faith I sal declare,
And their approbations.
Jockey swears
He has his load,
Bears the rod,
Come from God,
And complaints go very odd
Since the siege at Worster;
We were wounded
Tag and rag,
Foot and lag,
Wemb and crag,
Hark I hear the Dutchman brag,
And begin to bluster.
The Dutch.
3. Vds Sacrament, sal Hogen Mogen States
Strike down der top sails unto puny Powers?
Ten two and tun os Tivel Dammy Fates,
If dat her Ships and Goods prove not all ours
Since da^ bloot and wounds do delight them,
Tantarara Trumpet sounds,
Let Van Trump go fort and fight them,
Oldest States shall first be crowned,
English Skellam fight not on godt side;
But at last the Flemings beat,
Dey have given us sush a broad side;
Dat ick sal be forced to retreat,
See de French man he comes in complete.
The French.
4. By Gar Mounsieur it is mush in vain,
For Dushland, France, or Spain,
To cross de English man;
De Nation now is grown so strong,
De Devla e'rt be long
Must learna de same tongue,
It Is bet^a den far to combine,
To sell them Wine,
And teash a them to make her La^p fine;
We Will teash them for to trip and minsh,
To kick and winsh,
For by de Sword we never sal convince,
Since every Brewer dear can beat a Prince.
The Spaniard.
5. What are the English to quarrel so prone,
Dat dey cannot now adays let deir neighbor alone
And sal de Grave and the Catholic King
Before ever dus controlled wid a sword and a sling
Sal bode de Indias be left unto de sway,
And purity a dose dat do plunder and pray;
E're dat we will suffer such affronts for to be,
We Will tumble them down, as you sal sentor see.
The Welsh.
6. Taffy was once a Cottamighty of Wales,
Put her Cousin O. P. was a Kreater,
Was come in her country Cu ^sspluttery nails
Was took her welsh hook and was peather;
Was eat up her Sheese,
Her Turk, and her Geese,
Her Pick, her Capon was ty for it;
Ap Richard, ap Owen, ap Morgan, ap Steven
Ap Shinkin, ap Powel, was fly for it.
The Irish.
7. O hone, O hone, poor Teg and shone,
O hone, may howl and cry,
St. Patrick help die Country men,
Or fait and trot we dye;
De English steal our hoart of Usquebagh,
Dey put us to de sword all in Dewguedagh:
Help us St. Patrick we ha no saint at all but dee
O let us cry no more, O hone, a cram, a cree!
The English.
8. A Crown, a crown, make room,
The English man is come,
Whose valor
Is taller
Than all Christendom:
The Spanish, French, and Dutch,
Scotch, Welsh, and Irish grutch,
We fear not,
We care not,
For we can deal with such.
you thought when we began in a civil war to waste,
Dur Tillage
Your Pillage
Should come home at last:
For when we
Could not agree,
You thought to share in our fall;
But nere stir Sir,
For first Sir,
We shall Nose yau all.
The Royalists Answer to, Nay prithee don't fly me,
I Have reason to fly thee,
And not sit down by thee
For I hate to behold,
One so sawey and bold,
To deride and contemn his Superiors,
Our Madams and Lords,
And such mannerly words,
With the gestures that be
Fit for every degree,
Are things that we and you
Both claim as our due
From all those that are our Inferiors,
For from the beginning there were Princes we know
'T was you Levellers hate'um, 'cause you cannot be so
2. All Titles of Honors
Were at the first in the Donors,
But being granted away
With the Grantees stay,
If he wear a small soul or bigger.
There Is a necessity
That there should be degree.
Where it is due we will afford
A Sir John, and my Lord,
Though Dick, Tom, and Jack,
Will serve you and your Pack,
Honest Dick's name enough for a Digger.
He that has a strong Purse can all things say or do,
He is valiant and wise, and religious too.
3. We have cause to adore,
That man that has store,
Though a Bore or a Sot,
There Is something to be got;
Though he be neither honest nor wittn,
Make him high, let him rule,
He Will he playing the fool,
And transgress, then we will squeeze
Him for Fines and for Fees,
And so we shall gain,
By the wants of his brain,
It Is the Fools-cap that maintains the City.
If honor be air, it is in common, and as fit,
For the fool and the clown, as for the champion or the wit.
4. Then why may not we be
Of different degree?
And each man aspire
To be greater and higher,
Than his wiser or honester brother?
Since Fortune and Nature
Their favors do scatter;
This has valor, that wit,
The Other wealth, nor is it fit,
That one should have all,
For then what would befall
Him that is born nor to one nor to'ther?
Though honor were a prize at first, now it is a chattle,
And as merchantable grown as your wares or your cattle.
5. Yet in this we agree,
To live quier and free,
To drink Sack and submit,
And not show your wit
By our prating, but silence, and thinking,
Let the Politic Jews,
Read Diurnals and News,
And lard their discourse,
With a Comment that is worse,
That which pleases me best
Is a Song or a Jest,
And my obedience I Will show by my drinking
He that drinks well, does sleep well, he that sleeps well, does think well,
He that drinks well, does do well, he that does well, must drink well.
A Dialogue betwixt Tom and Dick, the former a Country man, the other a
Citizen, Presented to the Lord General Monck, at Drapers Hall London. March 28.
1660.
To the tune of I Will never love thee more.
Tom. NOw would I give my life to see
This wondrous Man of might,

Dick. Do see that Jolly Lad? That Is he;
I Will warrant him he is right.
There Is a true Trojan in his face,
Observe him over and over.
Come Tom, If ever George be base,
Never trust good fellow more.
He Is none of the Fantastic brood,
that murder while they pray:
That truss and theat us for cur good,
(all in a godly way,)
He drinks no Blood, and they no Sack
into their guts will your:
But if George does not the knack,
Never trust good fellow more.
His quiet Conscience needs no guard,
He Is brave, but full of pity,

Tom. Yet, by your leave, he knocked so hard
H'ad like t'awak'd the City.

Dick. Fool, 'twas the Rump that let a Fart,
The Chains and Gates it tore.
But if George bears not a true heart,
Never trust good fellow more.

Tom. You City blades are cunning Rooks,
how carely you colleague him?
But when your Gates flew off the hooks,
you did as much be* rogue him.

Dick. Pugh -- 'twas the Rump did only seel
the blows the City bore:
But if George ben't true as Steel,
Never trust good fellow more.

Dick. Come, by this hand, we I crack a quart,
thou It pledge his Health, I trow.

Tom. Tope boy, Dick -- A lusty dish my heart*
away w'ot: Tom -- Let it go.
Drench me you slave in a full bowl,
I Will take 't an't were a score.

Dick, Nay, if George ben't a hearty So^il,
Never trust good fellow more.

Tom. But hark you, sirrah, we are too loud.
he'^ hang us by and by.
Methinks he should be vengeance proud,

Dick. No more than thee or I.


Tom. Why then I Will give him the best Blade
That ^ re the Bilbo wore.

Dick. If George prove not the bonny Lad,
Never trust good fellow more.

Tom. 't Was well he came, we'd mawld the tail
-- We Have all thrown up our Farms,
And from the Musket to the Flail,
put all our men in Arms.
The Girls had taken the Members down,
Never saw such things before.

Dick, If George speak not the town our own,
Never trust good fellow more.

Dick. But prithee, are the folk so mad?


Tom. So mad, say? -- They Are undone,

There Is not a penny to be had,
and every Mothers son
^ust fight, if he intend to eat,
grow valiant now he is poor:

Dick. Come, yet if George don't do the feat,
Nere trust good fellow more.

Tom. Why Richard, it is a devilish thing,
we are not left worth a groat.
My Dell has sold her wedding-ring,
and Sue has pawnd her coat.
The snivelling Rogues abused our Squire,
and call my Mistress whore;

Dick. Yet if George don't do what we require,
Nere trust good fellow more.

Tom. By this good day I did but speak,
they took my py-ball'd Mare,
And put the carrion wench to the squeak,
(things go against the hair.)
Our prick-rar'd Cornel looks as big,
still as he did before:

Dick. And yet if George don't hum his Gigg,
Nere trust good fellow more.
Faith Tom, our case is much at one;
we are broke for want of trade;
Our City's baffled and undone,
betwixt the Rump and Blade.
We Have emptied both our Veins and Bags
upon a Factious Score.
If George compassion not our rags,
Never trust good fellow more

Tom. But what do think should be ye cause,
whence all these mischiefs spring?

Dick. Our damned breath of Oaths and Laws
our murder of the King.
We have bin slaves since Charles his Reign,
we lived like Lords before:
If George don't set all things right again,
Never trust good fellow more.

Tom. Our Vicar -- (and he is one that knows)
told me once, -- I know what: --
(and yet the Thief is woundy close)

Dick. It Is all the better; -- That
Has too much Honesty and Wit,
to let his tongue run over:
If this prove not a lucky her,
Never trust good fellow more.
Shall's ask him what he means to do?
Tom. Good faith with all my heart;
Thou make the better Leg o'th two:
take thou the better part:
I Will follow if thou wilt lead the Van.

Dick. Content; -- I Will march before.
If George prove not a gallant man,
Never trust good fellow more.
My Lord: -- in us the Nation craves, but what you're bound to do.
Tom. -- We have lived Drudges: Dick- and we
Both. Restore us but our Laws again;
The unborn shall thee adore:
If George denies us his Amen.
Never trust good fellow more.

Englands Triumph: Or, the Rump routed, by a true assertor of Englands
Interest, General George Monck.
To the t^ne of, Fill up the Parliament full.
WHat makes the Soldiers
to stand to their Arms?
It Is for what they professed
to keep us from harms,
The Members secluded
come now in by swarms,
To fill up the Parliament full, full, full,
To fill up the Parliament full.
3. You know that the City Gates
late were thrown down,
And the Walls too were ordered
by Parliament frown:
But General Monck has pleased
Soldier and Gown,
And filled up the Parliament, etc.
3. A dispute there was had
by the Members secluded,
Brav^ Monck was the Vmpire,
and found them deluded,
But Englands great joy
is now wholly concluded;
For he has filled up the Parliament, etc.
Sir Arthur the Valiant
must make his speech large
Lest the Members excluded
lay treason to's charge,
He Would better have dealt
with his New Castle Barge,
Than to see the old Parliament, etc.
The Aldermen Grave,
and the Commons o'th City,
Imprisoned were
the more is the pity,
But General Monck said,
that I will acquit ye,
For the Parliament shall be now, etc.
Have you not seen
fresh flowers in the spring?
And have you not heard
a Cage-bird sing?
But if the Cage-Members,
would bring in the King,
It would fill up the Parliament, etc.
The Parliament now will
come into their Geers,
For secluded PRYN.
(that once lost his Ears)
Marched in with his Rapier,
for Commons and Peers,
To fill up the Parliament, etc.
Whose often Declaring
has furnished the Nation,
With Parliament Arguments
of the old fashion,
And would have both
King, Lords, and Peers in this Nation
To fill up the Parliament, etc.
Our brave General Monck
we bound are to thank;
The Honest Lord Fairfax
has played (too) his prank,
No thanks to be given
to the Rump nor the Shank
To fill up the Parliament, etc.
Had the City never moved,
nor the Prentices strove,
They Would lost their Old Charter:
but MONCK had a love
To challenge the Grand Ones
which Mischiefs did move;
And so filled up the Parliament full, full full,
And so filled up the Parliament full.
The taking of Mardike.
When first Mardike was made a prey,
'twas courage that carried the town away,
Then do not loose your valored prize,
by gazing on your Mistress eyes:
But put off your Petticoat-parley,
Potting, and sorting,
And laughing, and quaffing Canary,
Will make a good Soldier miscarry,
and never travel for true renown;
Then turn to your Martial Mistress,
Fair Minerva the Soldiers sister is,
Rallying, and Sallying,
With gashing, and slashing of wounds, sir,
With turning and burning of towns, sir,
Is a high step to a States-mans throne.
2. Let bold Belona's Brewer frown,
and his Tun shall overflow the town.
And give the Cobbler sword and fate,
and a Tinker may trappan the State,
Such fortunate foes as these be,
turned the Crown to a Cross at Naseby,
Father and Mother,
And Sister and Brother confounded,
And many good Families wounded
by a terrible turn of Fate;
He that can,
Kill a man,
Thunder and plunder precisely,
this is the man that does wisely,
And may climb to a Cheer of State.
3. It is the Sword does order all,
makes peasants rise and Princes fall;
All Syllogisms in vain are spilt,
no Logic like a Basket-hilt,
It handles 'em joint, by joint, sir,
Quilling, and drilling,
And spilling, and killing profoundly,
Until the disputers o'th ground lie,
and have never a word to say,
Unless it be Quarter, Quarter,
truth is confuted by a Carter,
By stripping and nipping,
And ripping, and quipping evasions,
Does conquer a power of persuasions,
Aristotle has lost the day.
4. The Musket gives St. Paul the lurch,
and beats the Cannons from the Church,
The Priests Episcopal Gown too,
and the Organ has lost his sound too,
Tantara, Tantara, the Trumpet
Has blown away Babylon^ strumpet
Now divinity 'gins to crack:
the Counselors are struck dumb too,
By the Parchment upon the Drum too.
Dub-a-dub, Dub-a-dub,
Dub-a-dub, Dub-a-dub an alarm,
Each Corporal now can out-dare 'um,
learned Litleton goes to rack.
5. Then since our swords so bright do shine,
we will leave our wenches and our wine,
And follow Mars where e're he runs,
and turn our pipes and pots to guns,
The bottles shall be the Granado^s,
we will hounce about the bravadoes,
By huffing, and puffing,
And suuffing, and kuffing yt Spaniard,
Whose brows has been died in a Tan-yard:
well got fame is a Warriors wife:
The Drawer shall be the Drummer,
we will be Colonels all next Summer,
By hilting, and tilting,
And poynting, and joynting,
Like brave boys,
we shall gold or a grave boys,
And there is an end of a Soldiers life.
The Re-Resurrection of the RVMP: or, Rebellion and Tyranny revived.
To the tune of the Blacksmith.
IF none be offended with the Scent,
though I foul my mouth, I Will be content,
To sing of the Rump of a Parliament.
which no body can deny.
2. I have sometimes fed on a Rump in sowse,
And a man may imagine the Rump of a Lowse
But till now was never heard of the Rump of a House,
which, etc.
3. There Is a rump of beef, and the rump of a goose,
And a rump whose neck was hanged in a noose;
But ours is a Rump can play fast and loose.
which, etc.
4. A rump had Jane Shore, and a Rump Messaleen
And a Rump had Antonies resolute Queen:
But such a Rump as ours is, never was seen,
which, etc.
5. Two short years together we English have scarce
Been rid of thy rampant Nose (Old Mars)
But now thou have got a prodigious Arse,
which, etc.
6. When the parts of the body did all fall out,
Some votes it is like did pass for the Snout;
But their the Rump should be King was never a doubt,
which, etc.
7. A Cat has a Rump, and a Cat has nine lives,
Yet when her heads off, her rump never strives
But our Rump from the grave has made two Retrives,
which, etc.
8. That the Rump may al their enemies quail
They borrow the Devils Coat of Mail,
And all to defend their Estate in Tail,
which, etc.
But though their scale now seem to be the upper
There Is no need of the charge of a Thankgiving supper,
For if they be the Rump, the Army's their
which, etc.
10. There is a saying belongs to the Rump, Crupper
which is good although it be worn to the stump
That on the Buttock I Will give thee a thump,
which, etc.
11 There Is a proverb in which ye Rump claims a part,
Which has in it more of sense than of Art,
That for all you can do I care not a fart,
which, etc.
12. There Is another Proverb gives the Rump for his Crest,
But Alderman Arkins made it a Jest,
That of all kind of Lucks, shitten Luck is the best,
which, etc.
13. There Is another Proverb that never will fail,
That the good the Rump will do when they prevail,
Is to give us a Flop with a Fox-tail,
which, etc.
14. There is a saying we is made by no fools,
I never can hear on it but my heart it cools,
That th Rump will spend all we have in close stool's,
which, etc.
15 There Is an observation wise and deep,
Which without an Onion will make me to weep,
That Flies will blow maggots in the rump of a Sheep,
which, etc.
16. And some that can see the wood from the trees,
Say, this sanctified Rump in time we may leese
For the Cooks do challenge the Rumps for their fees
which, etc.
17. When the Rump does sit we will make it our moan,
That a Reason be 'nacted if there be not one,
Why a fart has a tongue, and a fiest has none,
which etc*
18. And whilst within the walls they luck,
To satisfy us, will be a good work,
Who has most religion, ye Rump or the Turk furrow,
which etc.
19. A Rump's a Fag-end, like the baulk of a
And is to the whole like yt Iail to the Burough
It Is the bran which is left when the Meal is run thorough,
which, etc.
20. Consider the world, the heaven is the head on it,
The earth is the middle and we men are fed on it,
But hell is the Rump, and no more can be sed on it
which no body can deny.
The Bulls Feather.
IT chanced not long ago, as I was walking,
and echo did bring me to where two were talking,
'Twas a man said to his wife, dye had I rather,
Than to be cornuted, and wear the Bulls feather.
2. Then presently she replied, Sweet art thou jealous?
thou can not play Vulcan before I play Venus,
Thy fancies are foolish, such follies to gather:
there is many an honest man has worn the Bulls feather.
3. Though it be invisible, let no man it scorn,
though it be a new feather made of an old horn
He y^ disdains it in heart or mind either
may be the more subject to wear the Bulls feather.
4. He that lives discontent, or in despair,
and fears false measure, because his wife's fair:
His thoughts are inconstant, much like winter-weather
though one or two want it, he shall have a feat her.
5. Bulls feathers are common as Ergo in schools
and only contemned by those that are fools:
Why should a Bulls feather cause any unrest,
since neighbors fare always is counted the best?
6 Those women wh'are fairest, are likely'st to give it;
and husbandsth at have them, are apt to believe it,
home men though their wives should seem for to tedder
they should play the kind neighbor, and give the Bulls feather
7. Why should we repine that our wives are so kind
since we that are husbands, are of the same mind?
Shall we give them feathers, and think to go free?
believe it, believe it, that hardly will be.
8. For he that disdains my Bulls seather to day
May light of a Lass y^ will play him foul play
There Is never a proud Gallant that treads on Cows leather,
But he may be cornuted, and wear the Bulls feather.
9. Though Beer of y^ brewing I never did drink
yet be not displeased if I speak what I think,
Scarce ten in a hundred, believe it, believe it,
but either they will have it, or else they will give it.
10. Then let me advise all those that do pine,
for fear that false jealousy shorten their time
That disease will torment them worse than any Fever:
then let all be contented, and wear the Bulls feather
The merry Goodfellow:
WHy should we not laugh and be jolly,
Since all y^ world now is grown mad?
And lulled in a dull melancholy;
He that wallows in store
Is still gaping for more,
And that makes him as poor,
As the Wretch that never any thing had.
1. How mad is that damned Money-monger,
That to purchase to him and his Heirs,
Grows shriviled with thirst and hunger;
While we that are bonny,
Buy Sack with ready-money,
And never trouble the Strivener, nor Lawyer.
3. Those guts that by scraping and toyling,
To swell their Revenues so fast,
Get nothing by all their turmoiling,
But are marks of each Tax,
While they load their own backs
With the heavier packs,
And lie down galld and weary at last.
4. While we that do traffic in tipple,
Can baffle the Gown and the Sword,
Whose jaws are so hungry and gripple;
We nere trouble our heads
With Indenturs and Deeds,
And our Wills are composed in a word.
5. Our money shall never indite us,
Nor drag us to Goldsmiths Hall
No ^yrats nor wracks can affright us;
We that have no Estates
Fear no plunder nor rates,
We can sleep with open Gates,
He that lies on the ground cannot fall.
6. We laugh at those Fools whose endeavors
Do but lit them for Prisons and Fines,
When we that spend all are the savers;
For if thieves do break in,
They go out empty agin,
Nay the Plunderers loose their designs.
7. Then let us not think on to morrow,
But tipple and laugh while we may,
To wash from our hearts all our sorrow;
Those Co^rm^rants which
Are troubled with an itch,
To be mighty and rich,
Do but toil for the wealth which they borrow.
8. The Mayor of the Town with his Ruff on;
What a pox is he better than we?
He must vail to the man with the Buff on;
Though he Custard may eat,
And such lubbardly meat,
Yet our Sack makes us merrier than he.
The Levellers Rant,
TO the Hall, to the Hall,
For justice we call,
On y^ ^king and his powerful adherents and friends
Who still has endeavored, but we work their ends
It Is we will pull down what e've is above
And make them to fear us y^ never did love
We Will level the proud, and make every degree
To our Royalty how the Knee,
It Is no less than treason,
Against freedom and Reason,
For our beethren to be higher than we.
2. First the thing called a King,
To judgment we bring,
And the spawn of the court, that were proude^ than ^^
And next the two Houses united shall be,
It does to the Romish religion inveagle
For y^ state to be two-headed like a spread-(...)
We Will purge the super fluous Members (...)
They are too many Kings to sway,
And as we all teach
It Is our Liberties breach,
For the Freeborn Saints to obey.
3. Not a claw in the Law,
Shall keep us in aw;
We Will have no Cus^ion-cuffers to tell us of (...),
For we are all gifted to do it as well,
It Is freedom we do hold forth to the Nation,
To enjoy our fellow cretures as at the creation*
The carnal men's wives are for men of the spirit,
Their wealth is our own by merit.
For we that have right,
By the Law called Might,
Are the Saints that must judge and inherit.
FINIS.

