Mr. Roger Le Strange's SAYINGS With Brief NOTES to prevent misapprehensions.
And some Additional REASONS to prove him,
1. No Papist. FInding the Town in a Tumult, the Sea before me and the Enemy
behind me, I took a Boat and with much difficulty Escaped -- Le'Strang's
Apology. p. 4.

This a Specimen of the Gentleman's Valor, the Wits are seldom Celebrated for
Hero's, he defies his Enemy you see with his Posteriors and running away is, as
Familiar with him, as his own Fiddle or Madam Bs. Base-viol.

2. A Citizens Skul is but a thing to try the temper of a Soldiers Sword upon,
Ibidem. p. 48.

This is spoken out of Pure Affection to the Citizens, and shows their Pates
are good for something else, besides Petitioning. A Popish Successor will
confirm the truth of this Aphorism.

3. The Very mention of a Parliament Inrages them, and there is reason for it,
their Heads are forfeited, and if the Law lives, they must Perish: But all this
while, are not we in a good Condition, when the Transgressors of the Law, must
be the Judges of it, Ibidem. p. 51.

The Devil himself sometimes speaks truth, though, against his Will. But the
Private Cabal will con him no thanks for this Description.

4. We do further Engage in the presence of Almighty God, that if any Person or
Persons impose upon us any other Government, Inconsistent with or destructive
of Parliaments, we will prosecute him or them as Betrayers of the Peoples
Rights, and Subverters of the Fundamental Laws of the English Nation, Ibidem.
p. 52.

Is not this to Justify an Association: But have the People indeed any such
Rights and Fundamental Laws, Sir Poll, we thank you. And resolve Sixteen more
of your Dialogues shall persuade us to part with them to any such Tories as you
talk of, who would Impose Devilish Popery and French Slavery upon the
Freeborn Protestant People of England.

5. Of Men will be Damned, they had better Dam Rich than Poor, and keep their
Lacquies and their Whores, and at last go to Hell in Triumph, Ibidem. p. 93.

Our Author has endeavored to put this wholesome Doctrine in Practice, and Tugged
hard at the Quill this many a fair day for a Secretaries place, or some other
Court-Preferment. And it is no small grief to him, that after all, he should be
disappointed and go to Old Nick, a Beggar.

6. As there is no Fool to the old one, so there is no Knave to the old one I
bidem, p. 95.

Undoubtedly this Oracle is pronounced from Experience, for the Author himself
is got to his grand Climacterick.

7. Friendless abroad and Comfortless at home, as Guilty and as Desperate as
Cain, Ibidem p. 47.

This is an abrupt part of a Prophecy and you must send to some Holy-Road, for
an Interpretation.

8. That there are Rogues, there is no question, but yet I should be loath to
pass for one, Ibidem, p. the last.

Can you blame our Author therefore for protesting before the King and Council,
and Swaggering since in Print, that he is no Papist, nor any more concerned in
the Plot, than the Pope of Rome.

9. The Independents Murdered Charles Stuart, but the Presbyterians Killed the
King; State Divinity Printed 1661. The Presbyterians brought him to the Block,
the Independents Murdered him; the Presbyterians held him by the Hair, whilst
the Independents Cut off his Head. The Presbyterians bound and prostituted the
Virgin, and the Independents were the Ravishers: Relapsed Apostate, p. 120.
Printed 1661.

These are very Edifying sayings which have been worn threadbare in the Pulpit,
and made two Hundred and Fifty little Parsons pass in spite of Nature and
Truth at once both for Wits and Loyalists.

10. Bless us from a Gun! State Divinity, p. 22.

So say I too; and all its Paper-Bullets. But how the Squire will answer this
rash Ejaculation to his Trusty Friend Harry is left to be determined by the
Critics Spiritual and Temporal at Sam's.

11. Are not Knaves and Fools, the greatest part of the World? Ibidem, p. 29.

Can ye blame the Squire then, for Herding with the Biggest Party!

12. There are some People believe, that I write for an Halter and have a mind
to save my longing, Ibidem, p. 44.

The Laborer is worthy of his Hire, and no doubt, but in due time, the
Gentleman may have both his Desires and Deserts in this particular.

13. Hark ye Gentlemen! Between Jest and Earnest I have away of Fooling, will
go near to put your Gravities out of Countenance; Relapsed Apostate in the
Introduction.

This looks like the very Sire of Heraclitus Ridens. And indeed for Religion in
Jest and Fooling in Earnest, there is not a Merry-Andrew in all the Town can
Match his (late) Worship.

14. What Peace can they expect from others that are at War within themselves,
whose very thoughts are Whips, and their own Consciences their own Tormentors?
Ibidem, p. 4.

This may be one main Reason why our Dog-Towzer, that has been a Pestilent
Conney-catcher in his time, is always Snarling and Barking, and can never lie
quiet in his Kennel.

15. Betwixt Hanging and Transplanting all Men of different Opinions there must
needs ensue a Pleasant State of Concord. Ibidem, p. 116.

Yet this is that very Pleasant State, this Worthy Author if he had but as much
Power as Malice, would reduce us to.

16. A furious Bussle the Presbyterians make with the Silly People for fear of
Popery, Ibid p. 140.

This was a Preparatory Lullaby, that Popery might catch us Napping and none
dare speak against it for fear of being stigmatized for Presbyterians.

17. It Is not every Bodies Lot to Live like a Knave and Dye like an Honest Man,
A Whip, A Whip, in the Preface.

Is Saul also amongst the Prophets? sure the Man is turned Fortune Tellers and
presages his own Destiny.

18. I defy Malice it self to charge me with any sort of Malevolence toward
the Church or State, which even a Packt Jury would dare to give credit to.
Further Discovery. p. 3.

This you are bound to believe on pain of Curse Canonical; for so choice was
his Innocence, that he durst not trust it in the hands of the Highest and most
Honorable C^urt in the Nation, but fled and sneakingly sent his Wife to pretend
he durst not appear for fear of Man-takers and Bumbailies, How A Licenser, and
a Patentee and a Gazetter, and a Justice, and the Devil and all, and yet want a
Protection for the Shoulder? This it is to Play all Night at Lantreloe with
Rooking Ladies.

19. I defy any Man to produce another Gentleman in the Kings Dominions under
my Circumstances, that has Suffered so many Illegal, Arbitrary and mean
Injustices from any of the Abusers of the Kings Bounty, insomuch that after One
and Thirty Years Faithful Service to the Crown, the Bread has been taken out
of my Mouth, and in a large proportion Shared amongst some of those very People
that pursued the late King to the Block-English-mans Birthright, p. 14.

Alas poor Towzer! he can Open you see against Majesty upon occasion and
upbraid the King with his Services, and in effect charge him with Ingratitude
and Injustice; yet still the Gentleman may vaunt his Loyalty, though it is not
the Cause, but the Crust he values.

20. You may as well bring Heaven and Hell together as to Reconcile those
People, called Eanaticks or Non-conformists and Dessenters to any Terms of
Piety or Civil Order, Further Discov. p. 18.

What follows then, but you must Cut their Throats or Knock out their Brains to
rid the World of such Incorrigible Heretics, as your good Friends in Ireland
did in the famous 41. This you would be at, but Cursed Cows, God be thanked,
have short Horns.

21. Religion is a Spiritual Notion, out of the reach of Violence, and neither
to be Invaded, nor kept out by Force, Ibidem. p. 20.

Why then need the Government trouble it self with making Laws either to
exclude Popery or suppress Presbytery.

22. Who knows not, that Interest Governs the World, and that for Reasons best
known to themselves, he that is a Protestant in his Heart, may be induced
rather to appear a Papist; and the other, though a Papist in his Heart, may
find it his Interest yet to seem a Protestant, Ibidem, p. 30.

The first part of this is unsupposable, because Protestants can have no
Dispensations to help them out, but the latter clause is a very truth and it is
Forty to one, but this Author is an instance of it.

23. Confound us, if we do not agree and Resolve to serve God and Honor the
King, Ibidem. p. 47.

Let the World Renounce me, If I am less Innocent than I say I am or less
dutiful, then I have been, State Divinity, p. 61.

I am (by my hopes of Heaven) a true Son of the Church of England, Forth. Disc.
p. 2. All this is true by the Faith of a poor Gentleman, that has worn his
Doublet out at the Elboes in His Majesty's Service, Reformed Catholic, p. 3.

By the Everliving God, it is false as if he swore, I had come down the Chimney
on a Broomstick, Le Strange, no Papist.

Swearing is so natural to this Worshipful Son of the Church, that you see, he
cannot forbear it in Print. But who knows not the Proverb -- he that will
Swear, will lie.

24. We find the Court dangerously thronged with Parasites, Knaves represented
to the King for Honest Men, and Honest Men for Villains. Caveat for Caveliers,
p. 12.

Had any Body else said half so much, it had been an Arraignment of the
Government, and at least three quarters Treason, but this thinks, he has
License to abuse either Court, Parliament, City, Country, or the Protestant
Religion, whenever the humor takes him, or H. B. for satisfaction of old Scores
calls upon him for a Pamphlet.

Some Additional Reasons to prove Roger Le Strange, No Papist. First, because
he says and swears he is none in this Juncture, when it is very much his
Interest to be thought not to be so. Though formerly when the Papal Stream ran
high he acknowledged (as it is attested by Unbiassed proof) that he was of that
Church, whereof the Pope was Head. 2. Because a Man that never practiced any
serious Acts of Religion in his Life, ought rather to be accounted an Atheist,
than a Papist. 3. Because amongst all the Swarms of his sticht Tomes and
six-penny Volumes, he never wrote one line against Popery, though he has
translated Father Bona the Jesuit, to render that party more Acceptable for
their Devotions, but on all occasions and indeed without any, has clawed off
Protestants and endeavored to Widen the differences between them, as heartily
as either Philanax, or Goddin, or Sergeant could do for their Guts. 4. Because
ever since the Discovery of the Popish Plot, he has endeavored to Ridicule all
the Evidence, and to shamm it upon the Presbyterians, and divert the chase
against Papists, and smooth the way for the Meal-tub-Plot and Fitz Harrises
etc. Lastly, Because that after all this Bussle and so many charges against
him, and the numerous trifling Apologies, he has pestered the town with. He
never yet durst pretend or offer the least-shadow of Proof. That for 18 long
years together viz. between the year 1660 and 1678. he ever did frequent his
Parish Church, according to Law or received the Sacrament there, as the Rubric
requires, now if he never (ordinarily) came at any Protestant Church, nor
Communicated in its Sacraments in so many years, (and if he had, no doubt, but
he would have told us of it) does it not roundly follow, that he is a notable
true dutiful Son of the Church Established, very fit to be her Champion, and to
upbraid those that agree in her Doctrine, and often join in her Communion? But
since the Plot broke out and he was more violently suspected, and charged for a
Papist, he has (as he pretends) gone to Church sometimes and taken the
Sacrament in Holland, and is not this, (though, for 18 years before he made no
Conscience on it) enough to prove him a sound Church man and no Papist? Yes,
verily, and therefore be satisfied, for that is all the Substantial Reason that
(after all his Fooling) you are ever like to get from him.


LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis on Ludgate Hill. 1681.

FINIS.

