AN UNCOVERING OF MYSTERIOVS DECEITS; BY WHICH MANY ARE KEPT FROM REPENTANCE,
AND entering the door of Life.

In a Reply to M. Garners opposition of Truth, styled Vnvailing of Mysteries:
With Addition of A Reply to Mr. Thomas Whitfeild his Treatise, with a
threefold Title.

BY THOMAS MOORE.

JOHN 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me: Says Christ.

Whose sayings are all True and Right.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1647.

CHRISTIAN READER:
BEing once in conference with Mr. Robert Garner, that should have been about
the lawfulness or unlawfulness of Baptizing Infants, I desired the foundation
of all might be first discoursed, concerning Jesus Christ, whether he were the
Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, or no; which took up our time,
without agreement, then I yielded him to wave that; And if he would either set
down: 1. What the Ordinance (not the form or materials, but this ordinance)
of Baptism is, 2. Upon what grounds to be administered. 3. To what end, and
then set down his position of the unlawfulness of baptising the infants of
the Church: And I would answer him, or if he required, I would answer the three
questions, and set down my position of the lawfulness of baptising the infants
of the Church, or professed Christians. But more of him in this I heard not, till
I met with his book, in which he has fallen on the foundation, endeavoring to
darken it, and confute with his pen, what he could not with his tongue, and
therein has been pleased to join two brethren of his own judgment and
practice about Baptism with me, thinking his friends will take it, that he
answers one in answering the other, and so confutes both, when he confutes
neither; the men I reverence and love, and esteem gracious, and in many things
before my self; but I suppose, if they did believe and hold the foundation in
respect of the extent of it, as I do, they would not count unlawful the
baptising of such infants, as by gracious providence are brought into the
charge and tuition of Christians, to bring up for Christ, as I hope all
Christians take their little ones to be: But far be it from me to judge my
Brethren, that do, or leave undone to the Lord, and for the Lord, in manner of
using an ordinance; what have I to do to judge the servants of my Lord and
Master, to his own master he stands or falls, but answer I may when they
call me to it, only for the truth of the Gospel, and the plain sayings of
Christ, and against that which opposes the same, and so calls Christ execrable
(in opinion or practice) do I contend, and so far should I contend against the
denying baptising infants, or renouncing that Baptism then received, to take
another, and still love those I contend with, yea, as brethren, so far as
they exalt Christ: But the opposition of the truth of Christ's own words in the
Gospel, and the faith thereof, I cannot look at as done to the Lord in any
better manner then Saul, thought in his conscience, he was bound to do many
things against the Name of Christ. Therefore, meeting with a book of Mr.
Garners, with a glorious title opposing all the way the truth of the sayings of
Christ. I have been, (notwithstanding my love and reverence of the man and his
parts) the more plain, and rough in discovering, or uncovering those Mysterious
Deceits; covered over with acknowledgement of some parts of truth, and pretense
of unvailing Mysteries: which I had no sooner done, but there was sent me from
London a Book of one Mr. Tho. Whitfeilds, some years since a Minister in
Northamptonshire, and a Lecturer, as they say also, at Stamford, and since, as
himself says, at Yarmouth: and now I suppose, again in Northampton shire,
nigh Rutland, who pretended an examination of my Book: which either he did
very slightly, or answered very unfaithfully, and mistaking or flying my
sayings; framed other, supposing to answer me, in Answering Arminius; To whom
for all that concerns my Book, my Answers to Mr. Garner, do fully answer; yet
I have afforded a small reply to him, that he may not think himself slighted,
nor adored; only I am sorry for the sake of Ministers professed Divines, that so
grave a one should publish Arminianisme with such weak and unsavory
confutations; after such sound and learned ones ^xiant: And yet more, that he
should maintain an opinion to condemn his practice; for would he from place
to place stand Minister over a people, not being sure Christ Dyed for them all,
or would he receive wages for work of such, for whom he has no certain
ground, that there is a possibility of his Ministry to be profitable to them,
or will he baptize any for whom Christ has not Dyed, or eat the Lords Supper
with such; will he (...) an uncertain, and be as one that beats the air, far
be it; does not this, if it should be so, give occasion to others to speak
evil of such Ministry, Baptism, and Communion; Surely, for those of M.
Whitfeilds mind being conscionable; I marvel not, they run into Mr. Garners
opinion and practice: As for my self, seeing neither of them have granted those
Christian requests, in my Epistle before that Book; nor can oppose, but by
confounding what the Scripture makes distinct; and running to reasonings and
wresting Scripture sayings, I am still more confirmed; and finding the
quintescence of all oppositions I have met with to be in Mr. Garners Book: I
have resolved to let this Reply be for Answer to all, till I meet with those
that discourse more soundly: not doubting but there are that may help me still
with better expressions; in mean time I have writ this to prevent many from
being discouraged, and turned aside from Christ, desiring the Lord to make us
of one mind in him, as the Truth is in Jesus: And so rest.

Thy servant in, and for Christ: THOMAS MOORE.

AN UNCOVERING OF MYSTERIOVS DECEITS; BY which many are kept from repentance,
and entering the door of life.
THE FIRST PART.
THis very Distinction in considering the redemption by Jesus Christ, as it is
wrought, effected, and prepared by himself with God for men; And as by Spirit
he makes it known, and there-through draws men to himself, and works it
in men, affirming the one perfect, and before the other, and larger then the
other, is exeeding faulted by some Advarsaries of the truth of the extent of
these sayings Joh. 3.17 God sent not his Son into the world, to co^demn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved Joh. 4.42. The Christ, the
Savior of the world, 1 John 4.14. The Father has sent the Son the Savior of
the world, Ioh. 12.47. I came not to judge the world, but to save the world: 1
Cor. 5.15 He dyed for All, 1 Timothy 2.6. Gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Jo.
22. And is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world. This distinction,
I say, is faulted, and cried down as a fiction and subtilty, in which it
seems, if that be proved true, they are convinced, and among the residue one
that opposes the same distinction, is Mr. Robert Garner, with the approbation
of Master Hanzard Knols; to whom as pertaining to what I have writ in the
testification of truth of 1 Timothy 2.6. and Heb. 2.9. According to the sense the
words themselves import, I desire in love and meekness to return answer to as
much of his Treatise as concerns that Treatise of mine; and so whereas in his
first Treatise called Mysteries unvailed page 1: Though he use not my phrase,
which I yet pass over, he includes me usually to propound a certain
Distinction, as the ground of what I pretend to prove which is not true, for it
was used to clear the business for right stateing the question, which is
after proved; and this is also so said to be both in the Epistle and Treatise.

Page 2. After he had expressed the Distinction, right as I writ.

(First, There is a Redemption, Reconciliation, and Salvation wrought by Jesus
Christ in his own body with God for men.

Secondly, A Redemption, Reconciliation, and Salvation wrought by his Spirit in
men to God) then he wrongeth me, and says falsely, including me to call the
former, A reconciling of God to men, etc. for I have no where so called it, it
is not my term, and though I conceive it not fully a proper saying, yet I so
far reverence the Doctrine of the Church of England that says, Article 2.
One Christ very God, and very Man, who truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and
buried, to reconcile his Father to us etc. And something agreeing to this may
be understood, Psalm. 85.10.11. that I reprove it not. But the Term not being
mine, I take the charge of it on me as a falsehood, and so leave it.

3 Again, Page 2. He peremptorily affirms; that the Scripture warranteth no
such distinction in their sense; now sure the sense is as the words are; And
can a man of his reading and understanding be so ignorant of the Scripture as
not to find it there, or so rash, as boldly to deny what every understanding
reader may plentifully find there, as to instance some places.

Prove. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 6. Wisdom has builded her house; she has hewn out
her seven Pillars, she has killed her Killing; she has mingled her wine;
she has also furnished her Table; she has sent forth her maidens; she
cries in the highest places of the City. Who so is simple, let him come in
hither, and as for him that wants understanding; she says to him, Come eat
of my bread, and drink of the wine that I have mingled, forsake the foolish,
and live, etc. Mind this well, Is not Christ that dyed for our sins, and rose
for our justification, and offered himself in sacrifice to God for us the
Killing, the good meat, the bread of life prepared to be eaten for eternal
life? Joh. 6.48.50.53.54.55.63. Is not the holy Spirit he has received in the
man, and for men, to send sorth in the means, in words and ordinances to men?
the wine he has prepared to be drunk in for eternal life? Psalm. 68.18. Isay
55.1.3.4. Ioh. 6.55.56. was not the New Testament and promise of Spirit
ratified by his blood? Heb. 9.15, 16. And as he is in some sort testified in
his works, so he is plentifully set forth in his Word and Ordinances; and so
the Table furnished, Prove. 22.21. And is not here a real and true provision. A
rich store, not less then a redemption, reconciliation, and salvation of our
nature in the Son of God, and for men, even the worst of men, not yet called,
and to be after called: And is it in any, before by the heavenly call they be
prevailed with, to come in, and eat thereof; and then is not the provision
larger then the receipt: And does not Wisdom (the provision being made) both
send her maidens and by spirit go her self in, and with them, and call even
the worst of men (as by comparing this with Prove. 1.22, 23. appears) and that
not equivocally, but in earnest to turn, and come, and eat, and surely of
nothing, but what Wisdom had really prepared for them: Yea, though some refuse
to turn, and come, and are therefore put by, and eat not, Prove. 1.24, etc. Can
you read this Scripture, and not acknowledge the truth of the distinction, and
that the former is larger then the latter?

But to proceed: Matthew. 22 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. The Kingdom of Heaven is like
unto a certain King, which made a marriage for his son, and sent forth his
servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding, and they would not come:
Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden:
Behold, I have prepared my Dinner, my oxen, and my fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready; come unto the marriage; but they all made light of it, etc.
Is not there the same with that in Prove. 9. A rich provision, is it not larger
then the receipt, and set forth and affirmed ready for such, as yet had it not,
and are they not on that ground called and envited; yet they come not then nor
after, for even for their refusal, they were slain.

Now I hope Mr. Garner will not say the second time; There was nothing
prepared, and ready for them, that in coming they might have had, and eaten:
And is not the truth of the distinction here appearing.

And that the former part is larger then the latter in receipt.

But I proceed, Heb. 5 9. And being made perfect, he became (or was made) the
Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him. Mind this well, Is it
not here affirmed of Christ? 1. That he was made perfect. 2. That being made
perfect, he was made the Author of eternal salvation: And 3. That he is the
Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. Consider all these
three as the Scripture sets them before us: And so;

1. For the first: Was he ever at any time unperfect; surely in himself in his
own person: This Son of God, that is, the Christ, he was perfect from all
eternity, Prove. 8.22. The Lord possessed him in the beginning of his way,
before his works of old. 23. He was set up from ever lasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was, etc. 26. Before the hills, was he brought
forth etc. when he gave the decrees, he was by him as one brought up, and was
daily his delight, rejoicing ever before him, Coloss 1.15. The Image of the
invisible God, the first borne of every creature, Philip. 2 6. Who being in the
form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, Joh. 17.5. Glorified
with his Fathers own self, before the world was: So that in, and for
himself, he was perfect, in highest degree of perfection; and so might
himself without any of us have abode in that glory. Ioh. 12.24. But in this
his glory, and glorious perfection abiding, and not laying it aside, and
becoming lower, he could not be for mankind, that was fallen into sin, and
under death; a perfect JESUS, a perfect Propitiation, peace, righteousness,
and perfect Lord, Savior, and helper of mankind, which he must certainly be,
or else he cannot be the author of eternal salvation; That he might be perfect
then in regard of us; it was necessary that he be made flesh in our very
nature, that so the nature that sins might suffer: John 1.14. Romans 8.3. yea,
in our nature as fallen, and so submitted to infirmities, and mortallity, even
to the flesh and blood, that he might dye Heb. 2.14. And that he be in this
our nature subjected to infirmities, as a public man; and surely in the same
obligation with us; and so under the Law, under which we were fallen; That so
our debt may be his; and he be found under the guilt of our sins, Gal. 4.4.5,
And being thus found as a surety, a servant, and under the Law for us; that God
the Father pass by us, and call him to an account for our debt, and charge him
with our sins Isay. 53.6.2 Cor. 5.19. And he must own this charge, and
imputation, and confess also, Heb 10.5 9. Psalm 40 7.12. And that our sins
being charged on him, and he accepting the charge; he also undergo the
sentence, and so dyed for our sins; for without shedding of blood, there is
no remission of sins 1 Pet 2.24. and 3 18. Heb 9 22. And yet that he may be
perfect for us; it is necessary that he rise from the dead, acquit of all our
sin and a victory over our death, that as mercy and truth are met, and
righteousness and peace do kiss, in his Death, So truth may spring out of
the earth, in his resurrection for our justification Psalm. 85.10, 11. Rom 4 25.
For if Christ be not raised, our faith is vain, we are yet in our sins 1 Cor.
15.17. And now he is so risen, yet there is still more to be done by him,
necessary that he might be a perfect Savior, namely That by the eternal
spirit, he ascend into the highest Heaven, even the holy of holiest, and there
appear before God for us and present at the propitiatory, or mercy seat, and
bosom, of the Father, the virtue of his blood shed: He being now risen and so
offer to him, his own risen, and holy body; a spotless sacrifice, a price, a
ransom for those for whom he dyed; that so thereby, he may obtain, and procure
of his Father.

1. A right of Lordship over us all. 1. That we may be his by purchase, and he
have the power and authority over us, to dispose of us, and judge us, 1 Timothy
2.6. Romans 14.9.

2. Eternal redemption of our nature in himself, as the public man, and for
men, and receive eternal life in our nature in the man, and for men that he
may have it to bestow. Heb. 9.12, 14. 1 John. 5.11.

3. The use of means and sending forth of his Spirit in that means, whereby
men might be enlightened, in some knowledge of his goodness, and have some
participation of his mercyes, that they might thereby be admonished and
reproved and instructed to repentance, and seeking of him, and so come in to
him for life Psalm. 68.18. John. 1.4 5, 9 Act. 14.17. and 17 26, 27 30, 31. Romans
2.4 John. 1.7 and 20.31. for as we in our particular persons, as individualls
could not have partaked of the misery we fell in too in the fall of the first
public man, had their been no medium by propogation for increase to come forth
of him; so neither could any of mankind in any of their particular persons,
partake of that blessed restoration, and eternal life obtained, and received
in the nature of, and for mankind, in, and by the second public man; if there
be no Spiritual medium, to call, and regenerate men, that they may come into
him. But he having gone through; and done all first mentioned, and now obtained
all this latter mentioned; he is made perfect, and become perfect, and so as it
is said of him, Luke, 24.26, 46. ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, and to enter into his glory; thus it is written, and thus it behooved
Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day and that repentance,
and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, so it
is said even of God the Father, Heb. 2.10, It became him for whom are all
things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sonns unto glory, to make
the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings; suitable to which
it is said of Christ himself, Heb, 5.8. Though he was a son, yet learned he
Obedience by the things, which he suffered (as I understand) he took occasion
to show forth obedience by the things which he suffered, and so was made perfect,
yea perfect in the highest degree of perfection, though not while he was
suffering yet by, and through, sufferings, not in one thing only suffered; but
the things which he suffered, his sufferings: for had he not had our nature
subjected to humane infirmities; and that made under the law for us, he could
not have dyed for us, and then truth, and mercy could not have met;
righteousness and peace could not have kissed on our behalf Heb. 2.14. Psalm.
85.10. And had he not dyed for our sins he could not have risen Just; on our
behalf, and for our Justification, and so truth could not have sprung out of
the earth that we might participate Romans 4 25. Psalm. 85.11 and had he nor so
risen for our Justification, he could not have ascended into the Heavens to
present the virtue of his blood, and offer himself a sacrifice, a price, and
ransom to God for us; he had not then had wherewith to prevail with God, to
take sin out of the way, with all that was contrary to us, that mercy might
be shown, and righteousness look down from Heaven on us Heb. 1.3. Col.
2.14, 15. to purchase us into his dispose Romans 149. To obtain eternal
redemption, and receive eternal life in our nature for men, that he might have
it to bestow, Heb. 9.12. to procure means, and spirit to be sent to call, and
draw us, John. 16.7. Psalm. 68.18. nor had he had wherewith by spirit, to take
sin out of our conscience, and to purge our nature Heb. 9.14. for which
cause, he had his body given him; and has done the will of the Father, Heb.
10.5, 10, and so through suffering in our nature for us; and in the same nature
raised, presenting the nature of his sufferings, and offering himself a
sacrifice unto God; he is made perfect, or become perfect. A perfect Savior,
Propitiation, righteousness, A Lord able to save; and able to destroy: and
here is our business sure distinct: and here is a reconciliation, and
salvation in our nature, dispensable for the Sons of men: And being made
perfect.

2. For the second, he was made the author of eternal salvation, is not that
clear also, to be a further and distinct business, are not the words plain?
And being made made perfect, he became, (or was made) the author of eternal
salvation, to them that obey him As he is the procurer, He. 2.12 so he is the
doner, and giver of it, John 1.12. and 6.14. and 17.2. And this saying,
eternal salvation unto all them that obey him, does impart; that which
Scriptures else where shows, some salvation forewrought, and vouchsafed, that
men might obey him; in receite and exceptation whereof men do obey him; and in
neglect and refusal, or disobedience to him; wherein also will appear a
distinction of salvation it self, considerable, if the sayings of the
Scripture it self be heeded, and believed, which shows us;

1. That Jesus Christ, himself, in his own body, as the second public man,
having in the nature of all mankind, and for them dyed for our sins, and
risen for our justification, and in the same nature being ascended, exalted and
filled with all fullness of grace 1 Pet. 2.24. Romans 4.25. Has so saved out
nature in himself; that all, or any of that nature coming to him may, and in
union with him shall partake thereof, Romans 5.18. 1 John 5.11, 12. And he using
means to that end, that men might seek, and come to him. John 1.4, 5, 7,
10.11. Pro. 8 4 9. He indeed is, and truly so called, The salvation, and Gods
salvation, to the ends of the earth Acts 13 26. Isay. 40.6. Gods salvation
which he has prepared before the face of all people; A light to lighten etc.
Luke 2 30 31, 32. A horn of salvation, Luke 1.69. And I believe this is a true
and a real salvation, and eternal and complete in him before it be made
known; and the making known of him, is the making known of salvation, and that
for remission of sins also; though many receive it not Luke, 1.77 79. Acts
13.38 39 And is not here a salvation, a prepared salvation, a salvation made
known, and set before men, larger and far more then have enjoyed it.

2. The word that sets forth Jesus Christ the Son of God, and savior of the
world, and what he is, has done, and does in Heaven for us; and is ready to
bestow one all that do believe, and so calls them, and tendereth grace to
them on believing: It is called the word of salvation, Acts 13.23, 26, 30, And
they that neglect it, are said to neglect great salvation, Heb. 2.3. And is not
here salvation, even in the tender, before, and larger then the receipt, and
enjoyment?

3. The extention and reaching forth of mercies to men, Psalm. 145.8, 9. as the
persecution of their lives, and so giving space for repentance Acts 17 27, 28.
2 Pet. 3.9. Rev. 3.21. the preservation of the other creatures, that they might
serve for the good of mankind Mat. 5.45. Psalm. 36 5, 6, 7. and blessing these
to men for the good, and welfare of men in this life Acts 14.17 and all this
extended through the Propitiation Christ has made, and ransom he has given
for men, in which mercy and truth are so met, that God without violation of
truth, and justice, may show mercy to sinners Psalm. 85.10.11. And he is not
only good to all, in that his mercy is over all his works, but also he is
righteous in all his ways Psalm. 145.17. and so all these mercies are
testimonies of his goodness Psalm. 19.1.6. Romans 10.18. Acts 14.17. and that to
lead to repentance and seeking of him, Acts 17.27, 28. Romans 2.4. much more the
word, and Gospel where it comes, discovering Christ, which also is, that all
to whom it comes might believe, John 1.4, 7, still further where his spirit
comes in the means, striving with men, Genesis 6.3. these with all the
preservations and deliverances, inlightenings, and motions, leading from any
evil toward God, as they come from, and through a salvation effected in our
nature, by, and in Christ; and as they are witnesses of that salvation, and
come to lead to it, that in receiving of it, men might be saved; so they are
indeed, and that truly called salvation, or saving, Exodus 14 13. Psalm. 144.10,
and 36.6, 7. Yea the Holy Ghost wills us to account, that the long suffering of
God is salvation 2 Pet 3.15. and thus in these respects, he is the Savior of
al men 1 Timothy 4.10. Yea, the salvation in Christ, and love of God there-through
appearing, in all these fore mensioning mercies, or saving, or salvations, does
come to men, to call to reprove, and so to allure to come to Christ: The
salvation of God: and such as for love of other things, do refuse and come nor
in, are said truly to forsake their own mercies, Iona 2.8. loose their own
souls Mat. 16.24. Deny their right and lawful Lord that bought them; refusing
his counsel, and so bring upon themselve, swift destruction, 2 Pet 1.2. and
are even for that cause given over to Satan and destruction; not because he had
not bought them, but because they denied him that bought them; not because he
had not loved them, nor showed love in doing good for them, and to them, but
because they have been adversaries to him, for his love, and rewarded him evil
for good, and hatred for his love Psalm. 209.4, 5. not because, God sent not his
Son, that they might be saved, and that Christ shed no blood for them, nor
extended means there through to them, not any motions of spirit therein, but
because they have trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of
the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, and have done
despite to the spirit of grace: Heb. 10.29. not because there were no truth in
Christ for them, nor love of the truth to them, nor willingness and power in
that love to save them, nor it extended to them; but because they received not
the love of his truth that they might be saved 2 These. 2.10, 12. But held the
truth in unrighteousness Romans 1.18 Not because their was no propitiation made
for them, nor means used to purge them: But because he purged them, and they
were not purged; Ezekiel. 24.13. Not because, he would not, nor sought there
return: But because they would not harken to his council: they would none of
him; Ezekiel. 33.11. Psalm. 18.11. Prove. 1.24, 30. John 5.40. Mat. 23.37. no, nor
simply and absolutely, in the first place, because they could not; But because
when light came, and power, removing the yoke of the Jews: They regarded not
his light, and power, that would have enabled them: But loved darkness rather,
and so were given up, and then could not: Hos. 11.3, 4. John 3.19. Romans 1.18,
28. now can any say, he had no salvation in himself for them; nor extended any
to them, and was no Savior of them; surely none can say so truly: But they
were rebellious and disobedient to him, and so deny him that was their
rightful Lord; and distroyed themselves: but now he is said especially to save
them that believe. Which is the next point?

3. For the third, He became the author of eternal salvation, to all them that
obey; Is not here a distinct mention, an especial pointing out of the persons,
unto whom he is the author of eternal salvation, namely them that obey him,
and all them, and though it be a digression from this business, yet a word may
be noted; what this obedience is; It is the obedience of Christ, The obedience
of the Gospel 2 These. 1.8. Romans 6.17. The obedience of faith Acts 6.7, Romans
16.26. and so it is one and the same with Believing, compare Acts 5.32. with
John 7.38, 39. and so diverse translators have indifferently used the word,
disobedience, or unbeleife Ephesians. 5.6. and this will clearly appear, if we
mind first the opposition, between, the law of works, and the law of faith,
and between the obedience of the one in doing, and of the other in believing:
Romans 3.27. and 10, 5, 8, 9. Secondly the drawing nature of this faith, when
with the heart its not only of righteousness, but unto righteousness: Romans
10.10. and brings upon Christ 1 Pet. 3, 4, 5. having in it a discerning, and
approving, beholding and understanding of Christ, as he is the Son of God,
and our Savior, 1 John 5.20. An inward believing, and hearty credit-giving, to
the testimony God has in his word, and by his spirit given of Christ: 2 These.
1.10. 1 John 5, 6, 10. an high estimate of Christ, as the perfect and
sufficient propitiation, wisdom, Rock, etc. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. An hearty
trusting, and resting on Christ, and God in Christ, for eternal life, and all
that is in it, and appertains thereto: Romans 4.22 23, 24, 25, 26, and 6.8 10. A
welleased submission, to Christ, or embracing, and receiving him to be saved,
yielding up to him in all the reproof, and assurement, and love to him, and
his, which his grace appears, and moves too Gal. 5.6. Acts 26.19. and all
this is in unfeigned and cordial beleiving.

Thirdly, the commandments of Christ, suitable to believe in him John 14.1 and
to love one another as he has loved us, John 15.12. which the Father also
commands in commanding all to hear him; Mat. 3.17. And the not suffering the
Grace of God, manifested in his word, and works, to prevail, to lead to this
unfeigned faith, that works by love: is the disobedience that brings
condemnation John 3.18, 19. 2 These. 1.8. and 8.10. And the being thereby
overcome to this faith, is obedience, Romans 1.5. and 6.17 and mind that it is
said, He is the author of eternal salvation, to all them that obey him. But I
believe that it is not in Scripture said, nor that Mr. Gerner, or Mr. Knowles,
either can show it there: That he is said to be the author of eternal
salvation to the world, or the whole world, as he is said to be the Savior of
the world, and the propitiation for the sins of the whole world: nor is he
said to be the author of eternal salvation to all men, as he is said to dye
for all, and to have given himself a ransom for all: nor is he said to be the
author of eternal salvation to the unjust, ungodly, his enemies; as he is said
to have died for them: and til they can show this, they cannot disparage the
distinction, for we may see it all the way through the Gospel saying, as in
this Heb. 5 9 He is the author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him;
according to that is said of the will of God concerning him; namely;

That of all the Father has given him to undertake for, and upon the offering
of his sacrifice; he has given him, into his dispose to order and judge Pal.
2.7 9, 10 Romans 14 9, 11, 12. He should save them with such a salvation as may
forerun the knowledge of the truth, and then, bring them to the knowledge of
the truth, and loose none of them, but raise them up at the last day 1 Timothy 2
4. John 6.39. and this will be manifest one day, that he has done it, when all
shall by him, be raised, and come before him, and acknowledge him Lord, to the
glory of God; when it will be manifest, that who ever of them be lost, and
perish, he did not loose them; but they lost themselves, and brought
destruction on themselves: John 6.39. 1 Cor. 15, 21, 22. Phil. 2.10, 11. Mat,
16.26. 2 Pet. 2.1. But now for, eternal life, it is not so said, of all so
given, but of a giving upon, or after a giving: namely, after all by virtue of
his sacrifice, are given in to his dispose, then those that by discoveries of
grace, are in the heavenly call given him, in being brought to, and united in
him, in believing on him, That he may give them eternal life, John. 17.2. and
so he says John 6.40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one
which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I
will raise him up at the last day: Like to this also was;

2. The end of the mission, or sending him into the world* that he should do
that for men, and use such means toward them, that the world through him
might be saved: But more, that whosoever believes on him should not perish (as
there may be a saving, and yet an after perishing of some, Jud. 5.) but that
they that believe shall have everlasting life, John 3.16, 17, 36.

3. Like to this also is the end of the power, authority, and spirit, that the
Father has given to Christ his Son, and our Savior, namely; That he may
rule over all flesh, and be their right and lawful Lord, and so preach good
tidings to them, and show mercy to them, to comfort all that mourn John 17.2.
Acts 10.36. Mat. 28.18, 19. Isay. 61.1, 2. and to raise them from the dead, and
judge them according to their obedience, or disobedience to him: John 5.27, 28,
29. But to give eternal life to as many as by the heavenly call, are brought
in to see him, and believe on him, and so given him: John 17.2. with 6.4. The
mourners in Syon, to whom he is to give beuty for ashes: Esaias 61.3.4.

4. Like to this also is the proclamation, and doctrine of the Gospel,
declaring peace, pardon, and mercy in Christ, for all, and tendering it to all,
where it comes, whether they accept, or refuse, Luke 10.5. with promise or
acceptance, Acts 13.32, 38 39. But the promise of receipt of forgiveness and
eternal life, is ever, and only to those that believe on him, and harken to
him: John 3 15, 36. Isay, 55.3, 4 so that all the way through the doctrine of
the Gospel, the distinction between a salvation in Christ, tendered to men,
and the same given into, and working in men, is clear; the former generally
for all men, to be tendered to them; and and the other only to those that obey
him.

But it would fill many leaves, to explain and set forth that which the
Scripture sets forth, evidencing this distinction: as in Ezekiel. 24.3, 13,
setting forth a purgation, by ofire prepared, and the Pot with liquour, and
choice pieces of flesh put in, which is a good preparation for purging, and
bringing forth the Scum; and then of the efficafie of the fire; bringing the
scum a loft; in which respect, the liquor is said to be purged; and then of the
obstenacy of the people, in not suffering the scum when raised to be taken off,
and thrown out, and so it boiled in again, and the liquor was not purged; and
therefore the following purgation was to be consumption, and burning of pot,
and liquor and flesh and bones, and scum, and all together: Does not this
shadow out to us apurgation, and atonment, or propitiation wrought by Christ in
himself, that is full of force, and virtue (as fire) for opperation, like that
is said of him Heb. 1.3. And the declaration of this grace or purging, and
peace, to reprove for folly, and to call into Christ, and so in convincement to
make the scum to arise, like that Ephesians. 2.16. Prove, 1.22, 23 and then the
rebellion of many, for whom this purgation was prepared, and to whom being
tendered, it begun to work, and raise the scum, in which respect they are said
to be purged: like that Esaias, 5.1, 8. But they loving darkness rather then
light, offering despite to the spirit of grace, and in that respect not purged;
and for that cause to be destroyed: like that John 3.19. 2 These. 2.10. Though
such as receive the purgation, and yield to the opperation of it are purged
indeed, like that Heb. 9.14. Rev. 1.5. and is not here a distinction, between a
purgation, prepared and tendered and opperating, and the same purgation,
received, submitted too, and so enjoyed, in the choice effecasie, and fruit
thereof, and the former larger then the latter, how says the text, verse 13.
in thy filthynesse is lewdness; Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged; thou shall not be purged from thy filthynesse any more, till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee: now as they were tipes and figures to us,
does it not show all aforesaid?

Besides, to what purpose is the Council to such as are poor, blind, naked,
etc. to come to Christ, to buy, and receive of him Gold tried, white raiment,
and eye salve to anoint etc. if the provision of these prepared in Christ, and
the tender of them, be no larger then the receipt and enjoyment by men, sure
those that have received, and do enjoy, these are not poor, blind, naked, and
miserable; and they that are Destitute of these, and so poor, blind, naked and
miserable, are in vain counseled to go to get these things of Christ; if
there be not provision and fullness in him, for any but those that have it in
them all ready: but see, Christ gave no vain council, and yet he gave this
council Rev. 17, 18. yet if we should take notice of some parables uttered,
and opened by our Savior, will it not hold forth the same distinction to us
evidently: consider;

Mat 13.39. 18.23, 24, 28.37.43. Is not the field there the world of mankind,
such men as are neither borne of God, nor given up to the Devil, before either
good seed, or tares be sown, Is it not Christ his own field, and that also as
he is the Son of man, (and is not that by virtue of his death, resurrection,
and ransom, wherewith he purchased them, Romans 14 9. Psalm 2.6, 9. and 24.1,
2.) Is not Christ and the word discovering him, the seed, and good seed, before
it be sown? And are not those that have received that good seed, and are borne
thereof (as 1 Pet. 1.21.23.) and so the blade spring up of the same seed (as
Gal. 3.19, 19.) The children of the Kingdom: and the tares sprung up from the
evil seed: the children of the Devil: And are not all still in one field,
which is the world of mankind? which in respect of this mingle-mangle, of one,
and another, (not the Church and Kingdom sure, but the world of mankind, as
now) ends at the coming of Christ.

Now is not the field of mankind (that is not the Devils, who sows in another
man's field but Christ's the Son of man's field) larger then the Children of the
Kingdom, yea, is there not more seed sown, then is rightly received; and
brings forth fruit to the harvest: I say no more, but read the parrables with
there interpretations, Mat. 13. and Luke 8.5, 13. Thus far the distinction
appears, approved in Scripture, by sayings that are more remote in regard of
expressions, But if we come to view those that are nearer, and plainer, it
will more brighter and fully appear: as if I should instance, the language of
the Scripture, and spirit of wisdom therein speaking. That when it speaks of
the death of Christ, for propitiation, and so of his ransom, and that
redemption, and peace completed in his own body for men. And the common
salvation extended there-through to men, as apropitiation, and ground of
calling men: It speaks of it in general words, as for all, for the world for
sinners: But if in the same place, it speaks of the peculiar privileges
enjoyed; it changes the person, and speaks more limmittedly, and
applicatively; which would not always be, if both were of like large extent,
as is shown in the treatise, chap. 10, page 53.54. and may be more fully, when
need is; But that which is all ready shown in the Treatise is enough, where the
distinction is shown, and proved to be in the Scripture, where first the
several parts of the distinction are proved: The first part proved in diverse
plain sentences of Scripture, chap. 1. page 2. (which Mr. Garner mis-reporteth
in his Treatise, page 6. as alleged for the proof of the whole distinction)
and in the same chap. 1. page 3.4. The first part is explecated, the second
part of the distinction is proved also by diverse sentences of Scripture: chap.
1. p. 5.6, and explicated also page 6 7. Again secondly the distinctionit self
is proved in express words, in plain sentences of Scripture chap. 3. page. 24.
which Scriptures Mr. Garner receiting in his Treatise page 12.11. leaves out
some verses, that the distinction might be hid from his own, and other men's
eyes.

3. The distinction is explicated and proved by Scripture in eight particulars,
chap. 1. page 14, and 15.

And lastly, the whole five first chapters in that Treatise do evidence the
same to be in Scripture plentifully shown, all which it became Mr. Gerner to
have refused by plain sentences of Scriptue, before he had so boldly, against
such a appearing truth affirmed; That the Scripture warrenteth no such
distinction: But I will now veiw his reasons, or proofs which he opposes with
all.

1. He charheth me to propound these things rather in way of separation, then
distinction. and gives this as his ground; Because I say, Jesus Christ has
wroth salvation, or redemption in himself, in the nature of, and for all
mankind, with God, but that he has not wrought salvation or redemption in all
men to God which phrase, and terms of mine, are by him subtly altered, to
all persons before God, and for all persons in themselves) and thus (he says)
I devide Christ and his redemption; Surely it is no great matter for me to be
slandered by him, that has first slandered the Scripture, nor need I to answer
him in this matter, wherein every judicious Reader that reads that Treatise,
may see he writes falsely. I believe there are three that bear record in
Heaven, the Father, the word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. 1 John 5.7. A distinction, yet no separation or division. I believe the Father is
one, the Son another, John 5.31.32.37. and 7.16.17.18. The Holy Ghost
another, John 14.16.17. Distinct not divided, the three one still: I believe
that the Father is God, and yet that he sent the Son, John 3.16, 17. 1 John
4.14. and so that the Son is God, and yet he was sent of the Father. John
7.2. and that the Holy Ghost is God, and yet that he proceeds from the
Father, and the Son. Acts 5.3, 4. John 14.26. and 15.26. Yet no separation, I
believe still there is but one God, and that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
are one and the same God, 1 Cor. 8.4. Yea, further, I believe that this Son
of God was really in being before he took flesh. Pro. 8.22.31. John 1.1, 2,
3.10.11. And that in fullness of time he was made flesh, and walked up and
down among men in a frail and mortal body, Gal. 4.4. John 1.14. And as he
was on Earth, the Father was greater then he John 14.28. yet here is no
separation, not two Sons, but one and the same son still, and the father and he
are one, John 10.29, 30. I believe that this son of God in the nature of
mankind, the man Christ, did in that nature dye for our sins, and in the same
nature rise for our justification: Romans 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.4. And that in the same
nature, he did by the eternal Spirit ascend to Heaven, and offer himself a
Sacrifice and ransom for mankind to God. Act. 1.9. Heb. 9.14. So that the
nature of mankind is fully restored, raised, and glorified in this public
man, whom God has accepted and glorified with his own self, and filled him
with all fulness of grace, and truth, and given over all into his dispose, so
as fulness of redemption, Propitiation, wisdom, righteousness, and life is
in him, and that for men. John 1.4.14.16, Heb. 8.1. 1 Pet. 3.20. and can never
be separate, or divided from him, he, and it, are ever one, and together.
Neither can this propitiation be otherwise enjoyed by any, but by coming in to
him; receiving him, so as to ahve him, and be one in him, Joh. 5.40. 1 John
5.10, 11, 12. Yet I also believe, that all that know not Christ, that receive
him not, that believe him not, but lie in unbelief, that they are out of the
way of peace, Romans 3.10.19. Dead in trespasses and sins, under the power of
darkness; and of the wicked one, Ephesians. 21, 23. 1 John 5.19. And so know not
Christ, nor are known, or owned of him, Isa. 55.5. And so are not his people
not beloved in that love wherewith God loves his Son; Romans 9 25 26. And so
whatever redemption, or life be in Christ for them; yet they have none of it in
themselves: Ioh. 6 53. Yet when any of them are by the Spirit of Christ, in the
appearance of the grace of God in Christ brought out of the power of Satan, and
darkness to believe in Christ, so as they receive him, and are therein united
to him; They are then, and therein of the same seed, and heirs, and he gives
to them the privileges of sons, and they have the eternal life that is in
Christ, which before they had not, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. Gal. 3.29. Ioh. 1.12, 13. 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. And others yet remain without.

Now in all this, there is not the least dividing of Christ and his redemption,
which is ever in him, and wrought by him; so that in this saying, Mr. Garner
has done nothing to disprove the Distinction, but to give us just cause of
grief, that such men as Mr. Garner and Mr. Knoles should be no better
insighted in Divinity, and about redemption in and by Christ; Then that the one
should affirm, and the other approve it, that such a Distinctionis a
separating, and dividing Christ and his redemption.

But let us see how he helps it after.

2. He says, page 3. That in searching the Scripture, we shall find that
where mention is made of Redemption, reconcliiation, and salvation, as
concerning persons redeemed, we are to understand it to be spoken of those who
are reconciled unto God, or made partakers of redemption, reconciliation,
justification, and salvation in themselves before God by Jesus Christ: So we
are to understand these Scriptures following, Gal. 3.13. 1 Pet. 1.18, etc.

To which I answer: It Is not fair dealing for a reconciliation in Christ, for
persons, to put in persons reconciled: But to pass his often altering of
phrases for advantage sake, consider hissaying according as it is used in
Scripture, and understood in our language.

He apeareth in this Treatise as a Sholler, with his Greek, and Latin page,
40. to 41. Though T. M. whom he pretends to answer; be no such language; he
knows that redemption, though by use become an English word; is of the latin
word redemptio, which the Dixinary says is in english a redemption, buying,
purchasing, ransoming etc. And that redemptio, we call redemption; comes of
the verb redemo; to redeem, ransom, rescue, recover, by purchase etc. and this
may be a compound word of re and emo, whose English says the Dixionary, is to
buy, to purchase, or procure; and so the word redemption in English is
properly, to buy again, or to purchase, ransom, or recover again, something
that was lost, sold, or taken captive; and I suppose english men so understand
it; and according to this understanding, as we find the word used in
Scripture; they that are conversant therein may know.

1. That there is a redemption, purchase, or recovery of that which not he that
redeemeth, purchases, and recovereth lost; but another lost, or sold it; and
yet though he that bought it, never bought it before; yet because of some
interest he had in it, and that it was lost, or sold, though by another, the
purchase or recovery, is truly called redemption, or a buying again: Nehe. 5.8.
and so to our business, Isay. 52.3.

2. That there is a redemption, purchase, or recovery, of that which one has
himself fore bought, or purchased; but the thing purchased, is wrongfully by
force or fraud, taken or detarned from the right Lord and owner, and so he
ransomes, purchases, or recovereth it again, out of the hand of unjust
detainers of it; and this most properly called redemption (though not only nor
and always) 1 Samuel 30.18, 19. etc. Exodus 4.22, 23. and 9.6, 7, and yet that we
may come plainly to our business.

A redemption may be off, or made with a friend, or lover, and loved, as Ruth
chap. 4.3, 10. and so has Christ our kindsman bought us of God 1 Timothy 2.6. and
it may be off, or from an enemy, or adversary: Neh. 5 8.

And with the parties own self that is purchased Hos. 3.2. yea, and the
redemption also may be partly, partly by price, and partly by strong hand:
Psalm 77.15. And now to bring all close to our business in searching the
Scripture we shall find a double or twofold redemption purchase, or recovery
effected by Jesus Christ our Lord.

1. A purchasing of God his father, mankind that had lost or sold themselves to
sin, Satan, and death, and so the truth, and justice of God required the
overthrow and destruction of mankind in that first judgment, and death, but
Jesus Christ having dyed for our sins, and risen for our justification and so
mercy and truth met, and righteousness and peace have kiffed, and truth sprung
out of the Earth. Psalm, 85.10.11. He offered himself a price or ransom to
God his father, for all fallen and lost mankind; and so redeemed, bought,
purchased, and recovered them all of God his father, from everlasting perishing
in this first judgment and death and got them all into his dispose; yea, God
the father accepting the ransom or price, has given them all into the dispose
of Christ, and made him Lord of all; So as he is able to save, and able to
destroy, and will raise all and bring them to another, even his judgment seat,
absolving such as have believed on him throughout the day of grace, and
sentencing to a second death, such as have persisted in rebellion against him,
their right and lawful Lord that bought them: And in this redemption, and
purchasing men of God the Father, he had also the enemy even the Devil to
conflict with, who by might and strong hand he overcame, having tryumphed over
him, and spoiled him of his right of principality, by his first conquest over
men, in drawing him to eat of the forbidden fruit, and having spoiled him (so
as if he get men now, it is by a new conquest in keeping them in unbelief, and
so from eating of the tree of life, 2 Cor. 4.4. and 11.3. Ephesians. 2.2.) he sat
down on the right hand of God, Col. 2.15. All power and authority given to
him, 1 Pet. 3.22. who has bought all mankind of God the father, that has
given all over into the dispose of Christ, and made him Lord of all, Acts 2.36.
And of this redemption, buying purchase or recovery; we are to understand these
Scriptures that testify of it, Psalm. 2, 5.9.10.11. and 24. 1 and 75, 27. Romans
14.9.10, 11.12, 2 Cor. 5.9.10.11. Phil. 2.11. 1 Timothy 2.6. 2 Pet. 2.1. And do
not they that deny Christ to have made this purchase, devide Christ and his
redemption, and deny him his right of Lordship, and the equity and power of
raifing from the dead, and of judging a great part of mankind, let any
judicious, and unprejudicated Reader judge, and yet I am sure all thus redeemed
or purchased and bought, are not in themselves partakers of the choice ends and
fruit of this purchase.

2. A pu^chasing men of themselves, by a price tendered to them, and put into
their hands, though fools want a heart. Pro. 17.16. And this I (...) that was
foreslaine and had bought men of God, com^s a^^^n to b^^y men from among the
fellowship of the world, and from (...) service of sin and Satan, and all their
vain conversation (...) God: And this by his blood and sactifice also, but in
tendering and applying it to them; affording the oppertunity in means
vouchrated, sending spirit therein to witness of himself; and the peace made
righteousness completed by him, and life in him, commending the love of God
through his blood, death, and Sacrifice, and with the riches and excellency
appearing in him, out-bidding the world, he draws them to himself, and by
virtue of his blood spiritually applied, speaks peace to their hearts, pulls
them out of the state and fellowship of the world: and reconcileth and uniteth
them to God in himself. And this is a redemption of men unto God, in which
redemption working, Jesus Christ has to deal with enemies also, as the
rebellious lusts of the flesh, and the unbeleeving world, and the Devil that
rules in the hearts of unbeleevers, all which by might and strong hand he
overcomes and brings out of the power of them into his own Kingdom, Col.
1.13. and makes them free, etc. John 8.36. Gal. 5.1. And this is a little of
the redemption he works in men to God. and of this as a first fruits of the
whole, are such redeemed ones partakers of in themselves before God. And of
this redemption, is to be understood such places of Scripture as these, which
testify of it. Acts 20.28. Romans 5.8.10, 11. Tit. 3.4.5.6. Phil. 3.3.8.9. Rev.
1.5, and 5.9. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14, 21. But not so fully in all the places
aleadged by Mr. Garner, for in Col. 1.20. is a clear distinction, between his
having made peace through the blood of his cross, and then his reconciling all
things unto himself by him, of which the 21. Verse mentions but a part, as is
shown in the Treatise he opposes ( Chap. 9. page 50.51.) but answers not:
Ephesians. 2.13.19. Holds forth the opposed distinction of a peace made, and
enmity first slain, and then that peace preached, and after by some enjoyed:
Romans 4.24.25. A clear distinction between. Christ delivered for our offenses,
and raised for our justification, and the believing on him that raised him from
the dead; neither does the Scripture in that or any other place say, that all
for whose sins he dyed, and for whose justification he arose, do believe in
him that raised him from the dead, though he would force that foreign and
corrupt sense on that, and other places of Scripture, as in his treatise, page
13. and Romans 3.24 25. hold forth clearly the distinction of that in Christ for
men, and through Christ in believing men. Are not all Jew and Gentile first
concluded under sin, and short of the glory of God without difference? Verse
9.19.23. Is not the righteousness of Christ set forth in the Gospel or
Doctrine of Christ: often called, the faith of Christ, affirmed according to the
distinction Verse 22. unto all, and upon all them that believe, and is it not
explicated according to the distinction, first, Verse 24. The justification
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Then Verse
25. Gods setting him forth to be a propitiation through says in his blood to
declare his righteousness, etc. Sure then it was in him, God did not set him
forth for any thing he was not. And then, Verse 29. he sets forth the believers
as the receivers and injoyers of it, as for Gal. 3.13. and 1 Pet. 1.18. they
were inconsiderately quoted to this, as will after appear; but now where is
the force of this saying? if some places be understood of a redemption enjoyed,
and other places speaking of a redemption, not so enjoyed by many; must not
they so be understood also; but to speak (not now so much of persons redeemed
as) of the redemption that is in Christ for men; which he affirms to be no
other, yea, he faulteth it, to say it is any larger, then that they for whom it
is, are partakers of in themselves before God, and is not that really and
approved of him; see his Treatise, page 3. and 25. He should do well to tell
us what he thinks of Christ and believers, is not he yet glorified for them in
his body in the Heavens, and shall they have no more glory in their bodies,
then they yet have, if yea? then sure, the redemption is larger in the
preparation, then in the receipt, or are not they believers, who wait for the
redemption of their bodies, Col. 3.4. Romans 8.23. And is there indeed no more in
Christ? but only for those that have it already, is there no more to be brought
in? nothing to be told them to bring them, or thinks he, that the Spiritual
birth is before the natural, the Apostle tells us; That which is natural is
first, and afterward that which is spirisuall, 1 Cor. 15.46. he has showed
the weakness of his opinion, and occasioned the strengthening the persuasion of
the distinction, he opposes by this saying: for the Scripture plainly holds
forth a two fold redemption or purchaseof mankind by Christ.

The first of God, the second unto God, the first as a preparation in himself
in our nature, to be declared as a medium in which he effects the other, which
is by his spirit in men, and the former in preparation, larger then the latter
in receipt, and yet to speak as the truth is, the latter is most frequently
called redemption; in which some are brought out from among others, with whom
they were in worldly state and fellowship, and unto union and fellowship with
God in Christ and his people. And this latter was that which is tiped out in
the redemption of Israel out of Egypt, that shadowed the state of the world;
and yet in this redemption taken at large, appears a common, and special
salvation, whence that caveate, Judge. 5.7. I will therefore put you in
remembrance, though you once know this, how the Lord having saved the people
out of the Land of Egypt afterward destroyed them that believed not: so that
thus far the distiction proves sound: But to proceed.

3. He adds to further his opposition, page 4 that when mention is made of
reconciliation etc. for any persons under the Law, we must understand it to be
spoken (...) of such an atonement etc. as they were legally partakers of in
themselves before God, etc.

For which he coats many places, in Lev. Number. Chron. Nehmiah.

I answer, herein he has showed more weakness then he is aware off, for,

1. This Law was neither the Covenant made with Abraham Dev. 5.3. nor the
Gospel preached to Abraham, which as it is now more fully come forth, is the
subject of our discourse about the extent of it Genesis 12.3. and 16, 18. with
Gal. 3. to 8. yea, this was occasionally contrary to the Gentills; and a wall
of separation between them and the Jews: Col. 2.14. Ephesians. 2.14, 15. and yet now
brought in by him to limmit the intent of the ransom given, and purchase made
by Christ. And,

2. The redemption of Israel, out of Egypt, was not a tipe of Christ giving
himself a ransom for all men, and purchasing all men, as is said 1 Timothy 2.6.
Romans 14.9. But of Gods calling a people out of the world, into Gospel, and
church fellowship, and so to God; 1 Cor. 10.1, to 12. Jude 1, to 5. so as the
instructions those, and suchlike places afford, are such as many sayings in
Mr. Garners Book will not abide, namely;

That though Christ's blood has been, and is no more to be shed, and Sacrifice
once offered, and no more to be itterated, yet Beleivers stand in need daily to
approach to God by him, and to lay hands, or exercise faith on him, and in
confession of sins to seek renewed sprinckling of his blood, for further
cleansing, which still maintains the distinction, he opposes Heb. 7.25. 1 John
1.7, 8.

3. He himself says of this Covenant of the Law, that it is taken away, with
a perfect, powrefull, absolute, and complete memorial: page. 63. lines 6, 7,
16. and yet he retains it for his proof, which yet if it did prove any thing
for his purpose, I would accept it.

4. But to limit the Gospel privileges to the Jewish legal; and to limit the
extent of the truth of the Gospel message, and so the tent of the grace of God
in Christ to mankind, have it by that measured, is in my understanding both a
denial of Christ come in the flesh, and also a wrong offered to the mosaiecall
Law, which was never given to such an end: 2 Cor, 3. Ephesians. 2. 1 John 4.3, 14,
15.

5. He is to peremtory in his affirmation, for if any man approached to the
holy things in his uncleanness, he was to dye, and how was he then partaker
legally of the atonement? See all the places, with Number. 19.

Besides for their participation, their was more required then bloodshedding,
and offerings and even sprinkling by the spirit to make atonement; so that his
application of Heb. 10. and Romans 5. thereto is altogether unsound.

4. He faulteth also the distinction, between bloodshedding and blood
sprinckling, and me for setting down, that the atonement, and reconciliation,
was made with God by bloodshedding (which with that I writ before, comprehends
the sacrifice offered) and that it is received, and men reconciled to God, by
blood sprinckling: and then he lays down his main ground that must disprove
the distinction, and the sequel of his Treatise must prove that; and this it
is page 6.

"That all the blood which Christ did shed, is the blood of sprinckling. Behold
and mind this well, because it is laid down as his bottom proof: that being
proved must prove all the rest about opposing the distinction. But note,

1. The Treatise I writ, does no where deny, that all the blood which Christ
did shed, is the blood of sprinckling (nor can I suppose, that either Mr. Den,
or Mr. Lamb, have denied it in any of their writings) a worthy business, to
make to appear, that none denies, and that when proved, reproves nothing, he
labors to disprove.

2. There is in respect of the purpose, to which he alleges this proposition,
much darkness and obscurity; what he means by all the blood which Christ did
shed whether only the material blood, which in shedding issued out of the body
of Christ, as the blood he did bleed, and that came forth of him, when he was
circumcised, Luke 1.21. and when he was in his agony, Luke 22.24. and as some
suppose, when he was Scurged, and when he had a crown of Thorns platted on his
head Mark 15.15, 17. and when they nailed him on the Cross, and crucified him
Mat. 27.35. and when after his death his fide was peirced with a spear, Luke
19.34, 35. whether this be his meaning by all the blood (as the words with that
he writ before and after it would so seem) and whether this shedding, be all
the sprinckling he believes or not it remains doubtful; but as I understand,
as he took flesh and blood, when he was made in our nature Heb. 2.14. even so,
all the abasements, sorrows, anguishes, and torments he suffered in that
nature (with all the forementioned) being completed, or consummated in his
death, or dying; the whole being his laying down his life for us; this, all
this, nothing less then this I understand by all the blood that Christ did
shed: 1 John 3.16. Isay. 5.3.1, 8. and with all his sufferings, the completing
of them in dying: I count the shedding of his blood, though in this business,
bloodsheeding does imply the Sacrifice offered, whose blood was shed, Heb.
9.12.22.26. and yet take in all his sufferings, with the virtue thereof in his
Sacrifice offered; still shedding is not sprinckling: but shedding and
sprinckling, are two distinct things; tnd so with out shedding of blood, and so
offering the sacrifice, whose blood was shed, there is no remission of sins;
because otherwise there can be no blood to be sprinkled, Heb. 9.22, 23, 26.
yet even so also without sprinckling of blood, and therein applying the virtue
of the sacrifice, there is no remission of sins, purgation of conscience and
nature, and happy safety received, and enjoyed. Heb. 9.12, 13, 14, 23. and
12.24.

And this is clearly shaddowed, and typed out; it was not enough for the
Passover, that the Lamb was of the first year, and without blemmish, and
slain, and so the blood shed etc. unless the blood was offered with a branch
of Hysop, taken, and sprnickled on the two side posts, and the upper post of
the door, and without which, no assurance of a sacrifice: Exodus 12.6, 7, 22,
23. nor for cleansing and sanctifying, Bloodshedding was not enough, if it
were not also sprinkled, Lev. 8.11, 30. and 14 7. nor for taking away any
uncleanness, it was not enough that the water of purification was made for all
Israel, unless the particulars defiled were sprinkled with it Number. 19.13, 18,
19. yea, this distinction between bloodshedding, and bloodsprinckling, is in
the Law clearly held forth Exodus 29.16, 21 Lev. 1.5. and 4.6, 7. Number. 8.7. And
come to the Gospel ^ may be said of all to that what ever right or part Christ
has in them, by virtue of his bloodshed, and Sacrifice offered to God, yet (as
Christ says to Peter John 13.8.) If he wash them not, they have no part with
him.

3. Thirdly ^as he has set down his proposition darkly, and unprofitably, so
he has set it down subtly, and craftily, as a man guilty of some known
error, in what he would seem to maintain, in that going about to disprove the
distinction between bloodshedding, and blood-sprinckling, he says, all the
blood which Christ did shed, is the blood of sprinckling, which is fit togull
the un-wary, and leaves room, when the distinction proves sound, for him,
(notwithstanding his position) to say he meant not to fault the distnction,
though that be his main drift; that he might thirdly, disprove another
distinction if he could.

As here is a suspicion ofcarnality, and ignorance in his understanding of the
blood of Christ, as it is sprinkled: may not some Reader conceive, that he
would have men to think, that in the Mosayecall Sacrifices, the material
blood, even so such, and as it was, when shed, was sprinkled, even so the
material blood of Christ his body, such as it was when shed, even such, and so
materially sprinkled (a brave motive for the Romish reservation of rellects)
and because this can no way be demonstrated, and evidenced how it should be so,
and that it so is, therefore all the bloodshedding, must needs be sprinckling;
But to come a little nearer him;

If bloodshedding, had been the sprinckling, or if it had, or could so have
been sprinkled upon any, what would it have profited them, seeing, if Christ
be not risen we are yet in our sins, our faith vain, and preaching vain, 1
Cor. 15.14, 17, and the Lord Jesus Christ, of whom, and whose redemption we
treat, has a spiritual body, and is a spiritual man, the Lord from Heaven,
heavenly, A quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15.40, 49.

So now as he has dyed for our sins, and rose for our justification, and
offered himself with the virtue of his blood, and death a sacrifice to God the
Father, appearing now in Heaven for us Romans 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. Heb. 9.12,
14.24. when we speak of his blood, and death as presented before God in the
heaven, or applied to, or sprinkled on the hearts and consciencs of men on
earth, we understand it spiritually; his words, even when he speaks of these
things, are spirit and life, and so spiritually to be understood, John 6 63.
and so, though when we speak of his suffering, blood shedding, and dying, we
understand it materially, as in a mortal body he suffered in the flesh, and
shed material blood indeed; and dyed for our sins, and was put to death in
the flesh, yet as he is risen for our justification, and has overcome death,
and is gone up to Heaven, and has presented the virtue of his blood (which is
real and spiritual) before his Father in the Heavens, and by the spirit by
which he rose from the dead, offered himself a spotless sacrifice to God, and
obtained eternal redemption: Heb. 9.12.14.

So when we speak of the sufferings, blood, and death of Christ, as presented
in Heaven to God, or applied on earth to men; we understand it spiritually of
the worth, virtue, and prevailing effecacy thereof with God or men; and as the
Highpriest did once a year, go into the holy of holiest, and sprinkled blood
on the mercy seat, etc. and so sanctified the tabernacle, and made an atonement
for all Israel; and this that they might be cleansed (legally) from all their
sins: Levi. 16.14.15, 36.34. and yet they had their sacrifices to come to,
and sprincklings of blood, and of the waters of purification for application,
which if neglected, the neglectors were not personally clean, but to be cut off
or dye in that their legal uncleanness: Number. 19. to 8. And the fault found in
those sacrifices as appertaining to conscience is, that they did not make the
comers thereunto perfect: even so, we being fallen, and God yet merciful, and
willing to show us favor, even at his mercy Seat, in his own bosom; as I may
say, there was Truth requiring our death, and Justice our suffering the curse;
But Jesus Christ that dyed for our sins, being risen for our justification,
and gone with the virtue of his blood to the Father; mercy and truth are met,
righteousness and peace have kissed, and Christ has made the atonement with
God, and is become the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and now
righteousness looks down from Heaven, and God shows mercy to men Psalm. 85.10,
11, 1 John 2.2. Psalm 36.7, 8. so that here is a reconciliation made with God
for men, 2 Cor. 5.19 Ephesians. 2.16. Col. 1.20. a purgation, Heb. 3. a laver of
regeneration Tit. 3.5. to reconcile and purge with all, and this for men: But
yet if this be not applied, if men receive it not, and be not sprinkled,
washed, and purged, and renewed therewith, they cannot be reconciled in
themselves to good, and so not eternally saved, 1 John 3 3, 5. and this
spinckling is a spiritual business, namely:

When through the Gospel, in which Christ is set forth for a propitiation,
Romans 3.25. the spirit bears witness of Christ, John 15.26 1 John 5.6. and
therein instructs in the knowledge of his death, and resurrection for us, and
so gives in to believe the testimony: 1 Cor. 15.1, 4. Gal. 3.1, 5. 2 These.
1.10. and then shines in, and commends the love of God to the heart in this,
that while we were siners Christ dyed for us, and his love thus commended
through his death made known; then the virtue of his death, becomes prevalent
and effecatious in the believers heart, and reconciles him to God, in this his
receipt of the atonement Romans 5.8.10, 11. Tit. 3.4, 5. and redeems him from his
vain conversation 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. from among men, to God, Rev. 5.9. and so
purges both conscience and nature, Heb. 9.14. and so does he purchase to God,
and wash from sin with his blood, Acts 20.28. Rev. 1.5. and yet in himself,
in the propitiation he has made with God for men, there is the same fullness
still for those that have not yet received, and to dispense more still of the
virtue of his blood, to those that have received Romans 25.26. 1 Cor. 15.2, 3, 4.
1 John 1.7, 8, 9. John 1.16. So that both the distinctions remain sound as they
are explicated in the faulted, but not confuted Treatise, chap. 1. and 2. and I
am sorry that Mr. Knowles, and Mr. Gerner, are adversaries hereto.

5. He secretly, and covertly faults the distinction about the several ends
of the death of Christ, one for propitiation, and one for witness bearing to
the truth, and so giving us example of obedience to God, and love to one
another; and one for confirming the new Testament, all which are proved, and
explicated in the second chapter page 16, 21. and not at all by him refused;
and if he desire any further explanation, or proof, he might have it; I trow
he will not say, that as Christ dyed for our sins, the Scribes and Pharisees
did make him flesh, or under the Law for us; or that they did charge our sins
upon him; or put him to death for them; but that God the Father did all this to
Christ for us, and so delivered him for our offenses, and raised him for our
justification: Isay. 53.6. Rom 4 24, 25.

I hope also he will not say, that as Christ did willingly lay down his life in
suffering, all that befell him, or witnesse-bearing to the truth, for calling
sheep, and feeding the called, and to give us an example to follow his steps
therein; that God did persecute, and crucify him for speaking the words he
gave him to speak, and doing of that he gave him to do for the good of men,
and the special good of his sheep; But that the Scribes and Pharisees, the
Elders chief Priests etc. did through envy persecute, crucify and put him to
death for that: Psalm. 2.1, 4. Mat. 27.18. I hope he that can see the difference
between Gods sending Joseph into Egypt for good; and his Brethens sending him
for evil; can see the difference in this also; and so distinguish of the ends
of the same death of Christ, in these respects.

And for the third end, is that a confirmation of a Testament when the Testator
is put to death, as an evil doer; surely its not proper to say, God the Father
put him to death, to confirm Christ his own Testament; nor did the Pharisees
so put him to death, but as he was one with the Father in will, and so
willingly yielded himself to dye for our sins, and willingly laid down his
life in witnesse-bearing too, and defense of the truth he had preached, so he
most willingly and freely (as his own more peculiar acting) did give up the
ghost and die to ratify the new Testament, Heb. 9.16, 17. Galath. 3.14, 15.
which appears also in the timelinsse of his death before those that were
crucified with him, Mark. 15 44. though that also was for another special end,
Joh. 19.36. But yet most clearly in this, that whereas others, when they were
spent, and gave up the ghost, their heads fell down, he cried with a loud
voice, Mark. 15.37. and first bowed his head, and then gave up the ghost, Joh.
19.30. And so freely dyed, and confirmed his Testament: But Master Garner would
be faulting, knew he how, saying, that I speaking of the several ends of his
death in my Treatise, page 22. But he was mistaken; for that was in the former
chap. but in the third chapter I was speaking of the diverse manner of mentioning
those ends in Scripture, but something he would say, to bring that distinction
within compass to be faulted; in faulting the distinction, page 7. lin. 3.19.
though to no advantage to him.

6. He says also, page 7. That I say, That when the death of Christ in respect
of that end which was for propitiation, and ransom is only mentioned, as it is
for all, so it is expressed in such general words only, as the world, all men,
etc. (But here he has clipped my words, and left out that I say in Propositions
for faith, it is here expressed) and for this I quote he says, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15,
19, etc. And he should have done well to have put in many other places, and
expressions quoted, Chap. 20. page 133. Proof. 6. But this conclusion is
unsound says he, which will appear from what is written, Heb. 9.28. where
mention is made, says he, of the death of Christ, in respect of ransom and
propitiation only, etc. And yet it is not expressed in such general words, as
the world, or all men, to which I answer he has corruptly left out etc. which
was explained in my Treatise, chap. 20. page 33. But to pass that, I question
his first affirmation, and deny his second, though he calls, to mind it, and
double the same. But now let us mind it well, Heb. 9.28. So Christ was once
offered, etc. Is the words or sense here only, that he once dyed. True it is
that the offering to dye, is, and truly may be called an offering, but is
rarely found, that the offering of Christ to God includes but his death only,
however it is manifest in this chapter, that here it signifies more then death;
yea, are simply a ransom, or price to purchase of God only, even a sacrifice,
that is both a ransom, or price to purchase, and a reconciliation, atonement,
or peace made with God for men; and such a taking away the sins of the world
from between God and men, that mercy may be shown them, and means used
toward them, yea, and yet farther, that this sacrifice of his; might be a
remaining and continual thing before the Father, that Christ by virtue thereof,
might mediate in general for men, and so send forth spirit in the means, that
they might be convinced, repent and believe, and in special by amediator of
the new Testament, for believers; that he by virtue of this his Sacrifice may
purge them, and they receive the promise of the eternal inheritance: and all
this is manifest in this whole chapter, and the drift and business the Apostle
was about perpend it dilligently: He is here treating chapter 7. and 8. and
this 9. about the High priesthood of Jesus Christ; and especially mentions
Christ his coming, verse 11. Blood shedding, verse 22, 23. his assention to
Heaven verse 20, 24. His presentation of the virtue of of his blood, and
offering himself by the eternal spirit to God his Father there, v. 12, 14 26.
His appearing before God with the virtue of his Sacrifice, to take away sin
verse 26. having obtained eternal redemption, verse 12. his blood and
sacrifice of force to purge the conscience of all believers on who^ it is
spinckled, ver. 13, 14. And he for this cause the mediator of the new
Testament, that etc. verse 15, all which in this laeter part of the chapter he
is explicating, and confirming, let it be well minded: And yet a little further
consider, how, when, where, and to whom, Christ our great high Priest did offer
himself a Sacrifice, and we may see;

He did not offer himself such a sacrifice on the wooden Cross, that was not
the Altar by, and on which Christ was born and offered (through the foolish
Idolatrous Romanists have so esteemed and so prayed, Oh holy Altar of the
Cross save us) our Savior himself calls such conceivers fools, and teaches
us, that the Altar both sanctifies the gift, and is greater then the gift Mat.
23.19. which I hope none will say of the wooden Cross, that it sanctifies the
body of Christ, and is greater then the body of Christ: but the divine nature
was greater then the humane, and did sanctify and dignifie the gift, the
humane nature or body of Christ, and by this divine nature, even the eternal
spirit which supported him in his sufferings, and by which he rose from the
dead. By that spirit he was born up, and offered himself a sacrifice to God.
Heb. 9.14.

He went to the cross a sinner for us, he bore our sins to the tree, and was
made sin and a curse for us, and dyed for our sins, Psalm. 40, 12. 1 Pet.
2.24. 2 Cor, 5.21. Romans 4.25. but he was raised for our justification, and
being risen just and holy, he then offered himself (not spotted with our
sins on him, but) a spotless Sacrifice (without fault or spot) to God. Hebr.
9.14.

This sacrifice was not offered here on earth, the other high Priests did offer
on earth, they could but hear and lift up and wave before the Lord the
offering, and approach into a worldly Sanctuary, But Jesus Christ appeared in
the highest Heaven, and there presented the virtue of his blood, and offered
his sacrifice, Heb. 8.1.3. (...) and 9.11 12, 14.

This Sacrince of Christ was offered in the Heaven, not to men or Angels, but
unto God, In this business or Sacrifice offering, he had not to deal with
men, though for men with God. To God he offered the Sacrifice, and with God it
is accepted, and has prevailed, that so there may be an offer and tender, and
application to men, and a prevalency in all receivers, chap. 7, and 8. and
9.12, 14, So that all this well minded, Mr. Garner is too short, and limitting
in his affirmation. But let us fulfill his request, and proceed to mind it a
little further, Heb. 9.28. So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of, etc.

It is not certain, that in this place, the word bear the sins, does
signify, to be counted the sinner, and so to accept the imputation of them,
and bear the punishment due unto them, of which is meant, Isay 53.2.3, 6, 7. 2
Cor. 5.19, 21. For so and in that sense he his own self in his own body bear
our sins to the tree, or on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. and so in that respect he is
said to have been made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. And this was before his
refurection for our justification, and so the offering, or completing of the
offering mentioned in this chap. which offering is said to be to bear the
sins of, etc. In which offering he is not said to be made a curse, as he was,
when he hung upon the tree, but a blessing. A great high Priest of good things
to come, of which high Priesthood, he treats, chap. 7. and 8. and this 9.
chap. and that we may the better understand what bearing is here meant, let us
look into the words, and chap. consider the tipes here mentioned, and the
truth as it is found in Jesus.

First, For the sacrifice, besides that I have forenoted, Verse. 12.13. Note
further, that in the tipes were two Goats, one that was slain for a sin
offering, and the blood presented in the holy place, and sprinkled on the mercy
seat to make an atonement. The truth of what is shadowed therein, is found in
Christ that bear our sins in his body to the tree, and dyed for them, and
being risen has presented the virtue of his blood in the holyes of holyes, and
so obtained eternal redemption, and made an atonment for men, Levit. 9. and
16. Heb. 9.12, 13. 14. But we so sin against this goodness, that we give God
just cause to hold back all the streams of mercy from us, by which we ^^^ht be
instructed, and drawn in to partake of this atonement, and redemption, and so
in the tipes there was another Goat prepared, not a dead but a live Goat, that
even after the atonement, and reconciliation made in the holy place, was to
have their sins confessed over him, yea all their trespasses, and he did
bear upon him, all their iniquities into a land of Separation, or not
inhabited, where no man dwelt, to be charged with them, Levit. 16.10.20.21, 22.
And is not the truth of this found in Jesus Christ our Lord, that is risen for
our justification and now at the right hand of Godalive for evermore, by virtue
of his Sacrifice, mediating for men with God his father; so removing and taking
away from before his face, that ignorance, unbeleife and rebellion of men, that
might justly procure the with holding all streams of mercy from them, and the
present giving them up to a reprobate scence, and to Satan, and so destroying
them with his sorest judgments, that still through Christ they are preserved
alive, patience, mercies, means, and some light and motions of spirit are
extended to lead them to repentance, Romans 3.10.22. and 2.4, Col. 1.18 20. Psalm.
75.3. And to those that through his grace, are brought in by repentance, and
faith to Christ, to take of their following evils, to cleanse and purify them
to conformity with himself, and to bring them to his inheritance, 1 John 1.7.
Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Heb. 9.14.15. but to proceed a little further, and consider
something in this business, shadowed or typed in the Jewish high Priest (and
in a sort Priests and Levites also) who was to bear the names, and also the
judgment of the Children of Israel upon his heart, Exodus 28.29, 30. To bear
the iniquity of the Congregation, to make an atonement for them before the
Lord, Yea, the offerings fore offered, were given them to eat before the Lord,
Levit. 10.17. Yea, to bear the iniquity of the Sanctuary, and to keep the
charge of the Lord, Numb. 18.1.4. And to do the service of the Tabernacle, and
so not the Children of Jsrael, But they to bear the iniquity of the Children
of Jsrael, Numb. 18.22, 23. Now what bearing this was is to be considered. Was
it that the high Priest, and Priests should have the sins of the people
imputed to them; and that they should be counted sinners for or in stead of the
people, and suffer the punishment the people should have suffered, that so the
people might have an escape. I believe no such matter, and yet it was thus with
Jesus Christ; when he was made flesh for us: But sure there is another
understanding of their bearing the peoples iniquity, and judgment, and yet
nothing is therein shadowed, but what in the truth of it is found in Jesus
Christ our great high Priest also, if translators of as great skill in the
Hebrew, as Mr Garner in the Greek, may be trusted, they say, the word to
bear, Lev. 10.17. is to bear or take away; and that the Greek translateth it
that ye should take away, but whether they be credited or not, do not the
word themselves give forth such a sense, Number. 18.22.23. Neither must the
children of Israel henceforth come nigh the Tabernacle of the congregation,
lest they bear sin, and dye, but the Levits shall do the service of the
Tabernacle of the congregation, and they shall bear their inquity: It shall be
a staiute for ever: Now I pray what bearing of iniquity was this, but a taking
away of their iniquity, by ministering about, and ordering the holy things,
burning incense offering the Sacrifices. etc. (which the people were not
betrusted to do) that they might have Gods Ordinances, and presence therein,
and mercies, etc. continued to them? And how should the high Priest upon his
heart bear the judgment of the children of Israel before the Lord continually
Exodus 28.30. but in tender compassion and love to them, and care for them so to
minister in their behalf, etc.

And now is not the truth of all this found in our Lord Jesus Christ the great
high Priest, is not he the minister of the Sanctuary, or holy things, and of
the true Tabernacle etc. Heb. 8.2. the perfumer of his peoples prayers, and
services: Are any left to approach to God, or do any thing in their own
strength, or name? Is not all that is born of the flesh, flesh, John 3.6. and
shall not all flesh wither? Isay. 40.7.8. And is not Jesus Christ our high
Priest, full of love, compassion, and faithfulness, Heb. 3.2. and 4.15. and
5.25. and is not he the Mediator between God and man 1 Timothy 2.5., and the
advocate of believers 1 John 1.1. and is he not able to save them to the utmost
that come to God by him (or as in this Heb. 9.28. that look, wait for, or
expect him) seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them: Now the
Apostle treating of the high Priesthood of Christ, and mentioning types in
this chapter, and showing the truth of all to be in Christ, where shall we find
the truth of these things typed that have been mentioned about the Scapegoat,
and the Priest bearing or taking away the sins, and judgments of the people
in those respects forementioned, if not in the 26, and this 28. verses; and so
I charge not M. Garners sense here with falsehood, but imperfection, I fault
him, not for saying, the death of Christ, and his offering, as it is for
propitiation and ransom is heerment, but for his putting in only, and so
limmiting it to that only; where as it appears plainly by the whole chapter,
here is more meant.

But now I will veiw his second affirmation; It is not in such general words,
as the world, all men, etc. for which veiw the words again, Heb. 9.28. So
Christ was once offered, to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look
for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation; mind it
says he, and so I pray let us; it is not said he, was once offered to bear
the sins of many, and he shall appear the second time to them, or to those
many, without sin unto salvation; But unto them that look and wait for him,
as a special culled out of the general, and is not many, here then as
general a word as the world of mankind or all men: Let us a little mind the
word many, as it is here used and see;

Enough is showed in the opposed Treatise, chapter 3. page 22. chapter 8. page
48. and chapter 14. page 76 if compared together, that is not at all answered
by him: And though the word many in diverse places have a twofold sense, one
larger, and another more special; and in such places, I did not parralell it
with such general words, as all men, and every man, when spoken in the largest
sense, yet in some sort and respect I did and do, Romans 5.15. through the
offense of one, many be dead: and verse 19. By one man's disobedience, many were
made sinners: And is not many here all and every man that had being by
propogation from Adam, Psalm. 29.3. The voice of the Lord upon many waters (are
not the waters peoples, multitudes, Nations, and tongues Rev. 17,15.) now does
not his Kingdom rule over all Psalm. 103.19. and 66 7. and 119.89.91, and is
not many here as general a word, as the world, or all men.

Micah 4.3. He shall judge among many people, surely whatever be in the first
fruits, when this is completely fulfilled: It will as large as that in Mat.
25.32. etc. and is not this as large, and general, as all men, Dan. 12.2. many
of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt, surely what ever first
fruits of this may be in the call of the Jews; and though here be a word not
usual in such a business, as many of them; for which also a reason might be
given; yet by our Saviors saying, Mat. 13.42, 43. It appears it will be as
large, as that John 5.28, 29. so that if plentifully appears, the word many,
is often as general, as the word all men: But that I may do M. Garner no wrong
I will a little further consider the word many, because it is diversely used,
and so let us consider it;

First, It is sometimes used, with a special limmitting, and restraining word,
singling out from others, and pointing to some special, and this sometime to
the better part as John 1.12. As many as received him, opposite to the residue
that did not, and So Revel, 3.19. and 13.15. yet here it signifies all of that
sort: and

2. Some times to the worser part, as 2 Cor. 2.17. Mat. 24.12.

Secondly, the word many is some times used without any such word, and then it
is always general and larger, though sometimes the twofold business
mentioned, carries too a twofold sense, one general, and the other more
special, as is shown in the opposed Treatise, and some times one business
mentioned, and then it is as general, as all men, as in the place quoted.

But the word many, used without a special limmitting word, is never used
opposed to the greater number, as Master Garner would have it.

But it is used as opposed to the fewest, and smallest number, Mat. 20.16, many
are called, but few are chosen, and so Mat. 22.14 compare with Esaias. 45.22 23.

Thirdly, the word many, is used as a general, out from among which, some
spetiall are by degrees called; and so it appears evidently in this Heb. 9.28.
to bear the sins of many, there is the general, and he shall appear the
second time without sin unto salvation, unto them that look for him; there
is the spetiall called out of the general, for he shall appear to the residue
also, though to their terror, for denying him that so dearly bought them; and
so, many, thus used, is both as general and large, as all men, and serves to
amplify the word all, and shows it to be a great and large number; though
reason also might here be shown, why it is rather said many, then all.

So that Mr. Garner has changed this Text, in saying Christ's offering etc. is
not expressed in it in such general words, as all men etc. is: And overthrown
his whole business in calling this place for his help against the truth;
where as it, with the whole chapter, justifies the distinctions, yea, and the
doctrine he opposes.

7. I pass by his gross abuse of 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. that he might blast the
distinction, that where the Apostle speaking of the manifestation of the grace
of God in the appearing of CHRIST, says of CHRIST, that he has abollished
death, and brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel, he put it
in thus, and is then made manifest in the hearts of those to whom Jesus Christ
appears, abollishing death, and bringing life and immortality to light, page
11. I hope he is not of their minds, that confess not in their hearts Jesus
Christ, the Son of the Virgin Mary to be the Christ, and to have once dyed,
and to be risen and a live for ever more; but fancy only, a spiritual being,
and frame in themselves to be the Christ, and so to be now dying, and bearing
their sin in them, and to be rising in them yet, here he flies the Scripture
language, and speaks their language, so as at least, making the fruit the
foundation; I should have looked that grace, or the fear of God, would have
kept him from such altering the words of the Holy Ghost: But because every
Reader may discern this alteration, if he loo^^ the text, I pass it.

8. Last of all, he comes to oppose the distinction that puts difference
between the Redemption, life, and justification that is in Christ for men, and
the same upon, or in men, through the enjoyment of Christ: And this he does
from page 11. to page 24 in all which he seems to wrest the several
Scriptures from what they say about the same: But all he has said does not
discourage, but encourage men still to distinguish, and put great difference
between the redemption etc. in Christ, and the same (mark what I say not
another, but the same) upon, or in men, through the enjoyment of Christ: for
surely I believe;

1. It is a Redemption, life, etc. in him wrought for others, he was never in
bonds or death for himself, but for us, and our sins; but it is a Redemption
etc. in us, given from another even him who was free, when we were in bondage:
Romans 4.25. Gal. 1.4. and 4.3, 4. John. 12.24. Romans 1.5. and 5.11.

2. It is a Redemption etc. in him, which he by virtue of his ownblood and
Sacrifice has obtained, in and by himself, Heb. 9 12. But it is a Redemption
in us, obtained by no virtue of ours, but by him, and in receipt of him, by an
unfeigned believing on him: Ephesians. 1.7. Romans 5.1, 11. Acts 10 43.

3. It is a Redemption, life. etc. in him as in a fountain and cause, and that
immeasurably all fullness in him, Psalm. 36.9. John 1.14. Col. 1.19. and 2.3, 9.
But it is in us, as a receipt in a vessel, and though springing, yet both
receipt, and spring, but a fruit of that of which he is the cause, and in us
according to a measure, Romans 9.23. 2 Cor. 4.7. John 7.38, 39. and 1.16. Romans
12.3. Ephesians. 4.7.

4. It is in him absolute perfect and complete, in soul and body Heb. 7.1. and
8.1. 1 Pet. 3.22. but it is in us but as a first fruits, we still waiting for
the Redemption of our body, and the complete conformity to him, Romans 7.24, 25.
and 8 23. 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2. Col. 3.4.

5. It is in him first, and that as a preparation for us, before we partake of
it: Col. 1.18, 19 20. Prove. 9.1, 2, 3. Mat. 22.1, 8. But it is in us after,
when we by grace are brought into him, Ephesians. 2.1, 8, 12, 17. Col. 1.13, 14.

6. It is in him, as a gift in a giver, God the Father gave him, John 3.16. And
God has given us eternal life in him, so that this life is in Christ, 1 John
5.11. and God is making known, tendering, and giving this life by the Gospel,
in which he has set forth Jesus Christ to be the propitiation for remission of
sins, though unbeleevers receive it not, Romans 3.25. John 6.32, 36, and to
speak after the manner of men; It is in him, as a gift in, a Will, in the
hands of an Executor given to many, to be given unto them, when upon the
publishing the Will they come in to the Executor, and acknowledge the
benefactor, which if they refuse, when so made known and tendered, the refusers
may be refused.

And so this Redemption, life, and justification is in Christ, as in the giver,
some fruits whereof he extends to all men, (in preservation of creatures for
them, and their lives, and giving means that they might know, seek, and
receive the thing it self) Psalm. 75.3. and 36.6, 7. Acts 14.17. and 17.26, 27,
30, 31. John 1, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11. But the choice fruits, and the Redemption,
life, and justification it self that is eternal; he according to the Fathers
appointment, gives to those that believe on him John 17.2. and 6.40. and
1.12.12.33. But now this Redemption is in us, not as such a manner of gift, and
in such a giver; but as a gift in this gift first, and then with and through
this gift: 2 Timothy 1.9. Romans 8.32. and 7.25. and 8.1, 2. And from the gift of
this giver Jesus Christ, John 1, 12. and 17.2. Ephesians. 5.14. Rev. 2.10. it is in
us as a receipt that we have received, of, in, with, and through Jesus Christ,
in the receipt of him: John 1, 12, 16. Acts 26.18. Romans 1.5. and 5.11, 1 Cor.
15.1. Gal. 4.5. Col. 2.6.

7. This Redemption, life, and justification is in Christ Jesus, before men
either know it, or believe in him, and so whether men believe in him or no, set
forth that men might believe; Romans 3.24, 25. John 1.4, 5.7. 1 John 5.11, 12.
neither does any man's believing make it the more in him, nor any man's unbelefe
make it the less in him, who is always and for ever the same, 2 Timothy 2.10,
11, 12.13. Heb. 13.8 But now whatever all men, or any man, as they are in the
nature Christ took, and wrought Redemption in, have, by the gift, and
preparation of of God in Christ, yet have they no enjoyment in themselves of
the same, no not before God, or in Gods account, till by grace, they be brought
to believe in Christ, when there is (not an imaginary change, or a bare
manifestation, but) are all change wrought in them Tit, 3 4, 5, 6, 7. a new
birth John 3.5. 1 Peter 1.23. a real translation and change (not in Christ
but) in them: from the power of Satan and darkness, unto God, and the Kingdom
of Christ, Acts 26.18. Col. 1.23. from children of wrath, to be children of
God, Ephesians. 2.1, 22. from darkness to light 1 Peter 2.9. from death to life, 1
John 2.14, 15, yea, from being not his peculiar people, nor so beloved, to be
his peculiar people, and so beloved: Romans 9.25, 26. And is not here a great
difference between the same redemption, as it is in Christ for men, and as it
is in and upon men: or can such teachers of Israel be ignorant of these things,
or are they not willing to yield Jesus Christ the pre-eminence in all things,
as the Father wills or if in other things, will they needs deny it him in the
largest of the Redemption that is in him: But enough has been said to this:
But that I must follow him, in the veiw of the Scriptures, abused by him, Romans
3.24. and 4.24, 25. his abuse of these, and the truth is cleared before.

Romans 5.18. is quoted by me, for the atonement made in, and by Christ for men,
and Romans 5.1, 6, 10, 11. is for the same received, which he in quoting, and
answering obscures, and answers darkly, like a man a fraid of the light in the
text; for what if the Apostle speaking of the receipt of the atonement, and
justification, speaks of the receivers; does that prove there is no atonement
made by Jesus Christ, nor Justification in him for any more then had then
received; or that there was no atonement or justification in Christ for them
before they receive it, or had they received it from eternity? Consider the
text, when Jesus Christ made the atonement, they were without strength,
ungodly, verse 6. sinners verse 8. enemies, verse 10. But when the atonement
was received by them, sure they were friends and Saints etc. as Scripture
affirms; besides it is not affirmed of them that believed, verse 1. they had
now received By Christ the atonement, verse 11. and was not that by faith. Romans
4 22, 23, 24. and 5.1. John 1.12. and how could they receive the atonement, if
the atonement was not made, and complete in Christ before; how, or could they
truly say, they received it, yea, that they have now received, if they had it
from eternity in themselves,: So that all the way, the atonement received, is
held forth; and yet as plainly the same atonement held forth, and the
foundation laid for such also as yet had it not, that they might be brought in
to believe, and so receive the same; and these receives propounded, as an
encouragement to them, as in 1 Timothy 1.11, to 16. the Apostle first mentioning
the Gospel, verse 11. and then showing what a great sinner he was, and yet
received mercy, verse 12, 13, 14 he then lays the foundation for others, and
that in general, and at large. verse 15. and then affirms the mercy shown
him, was for an example, or pattern of encouragement to them that should after
believe, etc. verse 16. even so here in this Romans 5. having shown the rich
grace received in such believing, as in which the atonement is received: verse
1, 5, 11 he both lays, and explicateth the foundation, and sets it forth,
even for such also as had not received it, and so verse 6. though he says,
when we were without strength, yet he speaks not there so applicatively Christ
dyed for us, much less as Mr. Garner would have it for us, who have received
the atonement, and enjoy it in our selves (for such if such before his death he
needed not to have dyed) But he speaks indifferently, and undeterminarly in
general and at large, and that truly, Christ dyed for the ungodly, verse 6.
and then his explication is suitable, in which he sets forth the disease as
general, and opposes the remmedy to it as general, verse 12. yea, surpassing
the disease; and then he comes to distinguish between the remmedy, and the
receipt of the remmedy, verse 17. for if there be not grace, and the gift of
grace, before receipt, there can be no receipt: and the Apostle says not that
all for whom there is grace, and such a gift of grace prepared, but all that
receive the same shall reign in life etc. and then the Apostle gives a ground
of all he had said in this business, verse 18, 19. in which the extent of the
foundation, and distinction between it, and the receipt, or the truth of it
before receipt, and the effecacy in receipt, is held forth in: verse 18. read it
in what translation you will, and take the text only, and forbear the words
added by translators to supply the sense though it is true enough according to
the sense in verse 12. to take them in) and it is thus likewise then (so B^za,
and our former translation, or therefore, (so the Romists, and our latter
translation) As by the offense of one (or one offense) unto (or one) all men to
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one (or one righteousness) to
justification of life.

Three things are here to be noted about both condemnation and justification,
and so in one.

1. Note, by what condemnation came in, and that is expressed to be by the
offense of one, one Adam a public man, the first public man, or the one
offense (which contains all from the receipt of the Serpents suggestions, to
Adams conviction) of that one man, and this express, verse 12, 15, 16, 17, 18.

2. Note, how this faultiness and condemnation, came on the individuals, and
that both here and elsewhere in the Scripture is shown to be, not in the first
place, as they are individuals and particular persons, but in regard of their
nature, and as they were in that public man (in whom they were all made
righteous, Eccl^. 7.29,) who was to stand, or fall for himself, and all that
were to come of him, and so in his sinning, all sinned, and in his conviction
all were convicted, and death coming upon him, came upon all, and this without
the personal knowledge, will, motion, or act of any of the individuals, that
were to come from him; and yet so nearly, really, virtually, and effectually,
that none can come forth by propogation from him, partaking of his nature, but
they partake of this sin and misery, verse 12, 14, 17.

3. Note, on how many of mankind, how many that came by propogation from him,
or that were to come, or were included, in that nature this sin and death
passed, or were condemned in that condemnation, so, as it did so reach to them;
that in partaking of that nature, they necessarily feell it; and that is
express all men, verse 12, 18.

Now for the dissimilitude between a natural and spiritual man, and the
excellency of the spiritual above the natural, it is elsewhere shown, 1 Cor.
15. and for the superaboundding grace in the righteousness of the Lord the
quickening spirit, above the offense; and this condemnation it is mentioned,
verses 16, 17. so that in this 18. verse, 1 for justification, we are to note,

1. By what it came in, and that is express, by the rightousnes, of one, even
one man, the second or last public man, the Lord Jesus Christ or by one
righteousness (which contains all that whole obedience, from taking our nature,
suffering, and dying to his resurrection, and sacrifice offering to God) of
that one man v. 15.18.

2. Note how this justification was one (or unto the life) of men; and that was
not first on the individuals, as they are individuals and particular persons;
but in regard of their nature the second public man had taken, and so did
undertake for that nature, and so for the first Adam, who was but one (though
both male and female) public man; when this business was at first undertaken,
and so for all that issued, or were to issue out by propogation from that first
man, he undertook: And so the justification or restoration of life came on, or
reached to, or was for them in the public man, in whose person, in regard of
the nature taken, and cause undertaken (in whose dying for them, all dyed 2
Cor. 5.14.) this justification of them, was of their nature for them in the
public man, and so without their personal knowledge, will, motion, or act,
and yet so verrily, really, virtually and effectually as that al shall partake
of some fruits thereof, that are found in that nature; and none can by a new
birth be brought into him, and partake of his divine nature, but they
necessarily therein partake of the choice fruits v. 16, 17.

3. Note for how many, or unto how many of mankind this justification in the
public man is, and for whom this life is, and to whom it so reaches, that in
coming in to Christ they shall partake of it; and that is expressly said all
men, verse 18. and this affirmed with a word explicating, comparing and
confirming the same, yea, making the first proposition the ground and pattern,
measure and way of understanding the second proposition, in all the three
former particulars noted; even so by the righteousness of one, unto all men to
justification of life.

Thus is the foundation said and explicated, v. 18. and then in v. 19. he
brings in with it the manner of the receipt, in which the distinction. For as by
one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous: Is not this now apparently brought in; first as a
proof of the former, that all sintned and fell in the first public man, in
that all that partake of thanature, are sinners: and secondly, as one
explication, that as all sinned in the sin of the public man; so by coming to
have being from him, such the power of that disobedience of his, that they are
conceived and borne in sin, made sinners in their own particular persons, in
their partaking of that nature by coming forth from him.

And thirdly, these are many, that is, all virtually in him, which are many:
and personally in themselves, all that have being from him, which are many,
also; and is not here a distinction intimated in the change of the phrase,
between sinners on whom condemnation came in a public man, and sinners so made
in their own persons, and so under condemnation personally and is not this
proposition set for explication of the following proposition, so by the
obedience etc. as a proof of the truth and effectualnesse of the Justification
in Christ for all men, in that all men, in that all that come into him are made
righteous, and also an explication, that as Justification is effected for all
in the public man, so by a new birth being made one in him, they in their own
particular persons are made righteous in, and through him; and also it points
out these to be many also, even as virtually all mankind were made righteous in
him, which are many: so all that through grace are brought to have being in
him, those and only those are made partakers of this justification in
themselves before God, and so are made righteous in their own persons, in and
through him, and these are many also: And yet because men were first made
righteous in Adam, and fallen in him, before recovery and Justification was
wrought for them in Christ, and because men have a first birth in coming forth
of Adam, and bearing his Image, before they have their new birth; and come into
CHRIST, and partake of his righteousness, and because all that are come forth
from Adam, have therein been made finners; and also come forth from Adam (yea,
even of them that after may yet) are not come into Christ, and so not made
personally righteous in, and by Christ: There is another change of a term from
where two shall be; by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, many shall be made righteous, which clearly holds forth the
distinction, between the atonement and Justification completed in Christ for
men, as verse 68, and the receipt thereof in believing men, mentioned verse 11,
17. and that the former is larger then the latter, and overthrowes Mr. Garners
confounding and confused doctrine, that by necessary consequence, denies the
new birth; and that one sort of men did fall, or were made sinners in the fall
of the first Adam; seeing they were, if his doctrine be true always partakers
of righteousness and justification in themselves before God, and so could at
no time be condemned by him, nor need any new birth, as much as he denies any
redemption, atonement or justification to be wrought in Christ for the other
sort of men, and both these are a like true, that is to speak right; both
false; nor can be proved by him: But these things are plainly shown in the
opposed Treatise where this place is opened in chapter 8. page 41, to 49. which
he has not answered as (by his pretense as a Christian) he ought to have done.

But he has two reasons he says to (deny the words, and) manifest his forced
and corrupt sense: his first reason is,

That the justification here mentioned, is that which stands in the highest
degree in opposition to condemnation mentioned in the same verse; and this I
grant, and it needs no denial, for that is the condemnation which was of the
public man, and of all in the public man; out of which yet there may be an
escape by coming into Christ, and so this justification is of the second
public man, and of all (nor of any but) in this public man, of which many may
miss by unbeleefe, not coming into him, and this suites something with that
Romans 3.23, 24 neither are believers spoken of in this 18. verse, but in the 17,
19. with clear distinction, mentioning receipt, and so this verse for
justification in receipt, to be parralleld with Romans 3.26. and 4.5. and 5.1, 2,
3, 4. is grievously abused, seeing faith or believing is in them expressly
mentioned, and not so here.

His second reason is from the application of the Justification here mentioned,
unto the persons here mentioned, verse 17. but this is but a devised and
fraudelent reason, for none denies that Believers do receive even this very
Justification, and are partakers thereof in themselves before God; but what
were they before they believed, or what are any other that yet believe not?
What says the Scripture John 3.18, 36. 1 John 5.12. and this Justification in
verse 18. is not limmited, as in Christ for no more then those that had it in
themselves; nor is it affirmed, that all unto whom this Justification in the
public man did reach, should be eternally saved any more, then it is affirmed
of those to whom the condemnation in the public man did reach, that they shall
be eternally damned: But as all men as soon as they have being from Adam, are
in themselves sinners, so, so many as come to believe in Christ, are then made
righteous in enjoyment and not before, verse 19. chapter 4.21. And so speaking
of righteousness in life, he applies that only to them which receive
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, verse 17. which clearly
holds forth the distinction.

But his way of proving is weak and fraudelent also, like his reasoning first
he faith, this Justification etc. is in verse 15, 16.17, five times called a
gift (it had been well he had minded in this gift, the distinction between
grace, and the gift by grace, and between this gift, and the receipt; mentioned
in those verses) but what should this infer, do they that believe Jesus
Christ to be the Savior of the world, deny him to be the gift of God; or
faith, yea, or any mercies extended through him, to be the gift by grace given
of God: yet he cannot prove, that all that God gives any, is by them received;
the contrary appears John 6.32, 66. But it appears he knows the original;
that the free gift came, mentioned verse 18. is not the text but the
Translators words for supply of sense put in.

And yet secondly, in his way of proving, he has put in judgment came, page
16. and three times urged grace came one; with an exposition, came gloriously
and powerfully upon them page 16. and once with an alteration, comes, for
came, present for preter-perfect tense, page 19, 20. And to make a right or
full Babell, or confusion of all distinctions, he makes the gift came upon all
men, and many shall be made righteous, all one page 19. To what purpose did
this man fly so to the original, page 40, 41. seeing here he makes no
account of it; but for his own purpose lays additions for foundations, though
to any unprejudicated, it helps him nothing at all; seeing that whatever came
on any in a public man, it was at once and first, but the receite thereof is
after and by degrees, and now by one, and then by another; so that the
distinction remains in and with the Text sound again in page 21. he refers
his Reader to his after sayings about 2 Cor. 5.19. for his clearing that place
from proving the distinction, but there he has not done it; and how he clips
the quotation to leave out one verse, to hide that he opposes, for it is
clear, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. for in these two verses is express, that God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself, verse 19. and that some of the world
he has reconciled to himself by Jesus Christ, verse 18. there is a
reconciliation wrought by God in Christ verse 19. and a reconciliation wrought
by Christ of some men from the world unto God, verse 18. for proof and
clearing whereof, enough is said in the opposed Treatise, chap. 13. page 66,
67. and Postscript, to all which he has answered nothing; though that said,
both prove the distinction, and overthrow his after saying; 1 John 5.10, 11,
12. this place is abused by him, page 21, 22, 23. to hide the distinction with
his conceptions; but let the place it self be veiwed, verse 10. He that
believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself, he that believes
not God has made him a liar, because be believes not the record God gave of
his Son; is not here a clear distinction between a record given of God to
men, and the receipt thereof by men; And again concerning those men to, or for
whom the record is given, some believe, and some believe it not; is not here
another distinction, and mark that he says not, that he that believes God or
his sayings or testimony, has the witness in himself, for he may yet be
short of that, though he shall do well to take heed to that record, as to a
light shining in a dark place (for the word, or record, is a light) till the
day dawn and the day star arise in his heart: 2 Pet. 1.19. John 8.30, 31, 36.
But he that believes on the Son of God, that through the grace seen, and
believed in the record, is overcome to believe, or depend on him for eternal
life, as Romans 5.8, 10. Acts 18.27.) he has the witness in himself, as John
3.33. Psalm. 36.7, 8. Romans 14.22, 23, 24, 25. and 5.1. Again mind that he says
not, he that believes not on the Son of God has made him a liar, for if a
man believe God his saying, or the record God has given of his Son, though
he yet want light, and power for a through and unfeined dependence on him for
eternal life, yet if he take heed to this testimony or word and record, as to
a light shining in a dark place; till the day dawn and the day star arise in
his heart; God will not charge him with this great sin of making God a liar: But
he does well, and shall in due season experiment that light and power that will
enable him to depend on Christ, and build on him, Isay. 40.31. and 49.23. and
50.10. But he says, He that believes not God (and believes not his record)
has made him a liar: And why is he charged with so great a sin, is it
because there was no truth of good in the record for him, nothing in Christ for
him, far be it; no, it is because he believes not the record God gave of his
Son, as 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. verse 11. and this is the record (that God has
given of his Son, that God has given to us eternal life (is not here the
gift) and this life is in his Son (is not here he in whom it is, and where
God has given it, and put it for us that we might have it) so that here is
the gift distinctly, and is not the receipt as distinct in verse 12. He that
has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life: Lo, is
not here the distinction again between believers and unbeleevers, is not the
having the Son, the believing on the Son, John 1.12. and have not such
believers, the witness within them, and eternal life, John 3.18, 33, 36. and
is not, the not having the Son, the not believing on him, John 1.11, 12. and
are not such destitute of eternal life; and that not because it is not in
Christ for them; but because they believe not on him, John 3.18, 19, 36. And he
that believes not to day, and so yet has not the Son, may he not believe to
morrow, and so have both the Son, and life in him, and how, if it were not
before in him? 1 Timothy 1.15, 16. 2 Timothy 2.25 26. 1 Pet 2.12. so that the
distinction is here clearly held forth, and that life is larger in Christ, then
in the receipt: and Mr. Garners hovering about, as a fraid to look in the text,
affirming some part of the truth which we deny not, that he might deny some
part that we confess; has hurt us nothing.

Lastly, whereas he fears my thoughts of strengthening the distinction, by
saying, there is justification in Christ for all persons: to this I answer, I
know not where I said so, nor I suppose does he, for I believe spirits to be
persons, and I do not believe Justification to be in Christ for the fallen
Angels, not for all, nor for some of all sorts, nor for any one of them: and
likewise, though I said, and writ for men, yea, for all men, while they are no
worse then men, yet I have explicated the same, and affirmed that though life
be in Christ for all, yet some have so rejected him, while he was striving with
them to have brought them to life, that for their opposition, and rejecting of
the truth and grace of God, that he has given them up to Satan, and they are
become of the serpentine seed, and so the door of life is shut against them,
and though this life be still in Christ for all men, yet not now for them, who
though still called men, yet are, and are called also something worse then men,
reprobates sons of Beliall etc. yet they are persons still, as I have shown
in the opposed Treatise, chapter 11. page 56 62. It is not uprightly or fairly
done, to alter and change men's terms and phrases when he is dealing with them:
But let the terms be as they are, for all mankind, and I will mind what he
says. page 23. He desires to consider, that these words In Christ, when they
are spoken of, or applied unto redemption, Justification, Salvation and the
like, they do properly signify by, or through Christ; and holds forth unto us
a real, glorious and sure enjoyment, which those have of redemption;
Justification and salvation in Christ: of whom the things are spoken.

To this I answer, that if I had not met with subtilty and fraud in his
positions and terms before, I should marvel much at this.

Why he puts down his business thus, That these words in Christ, when spoke
of, or applied unto redemption etc. will he grant it concerns all men, when
that preparation in him is avouched as ready for them that yet have it not. and
they called to it, though some refuse, as Prove. 9 1, 5. Mat. 22.2.14. Romans
5.18. and diverse more places: then he must unsay the drift of his whole Book,
if he grant not this, he goes wrong for his proofs, and speaks fraudelently.

2 Why puts he it down these words in Christ, and not the atonement and
reconciliation made by Christ, and life and Justification in Christ, seeing our
discourse is about the person of Christ and what he has done, and what is in
him for men, and so that there is life and justification in him for men,
whether men have it or not, and before any do receive it, John 1 4, 5, 7, 9,
12, 17. Romans 5.6, 11, 12.6.8 1 John 5.11 12, and many more places: If he yield
this, he unsaies the whole scope of his Book: If not he, speaks subtly, and
his proofs are yet to seek.

3. Why does he only mentioned these words. In Christ, when in the text last
named the words were, in his Son, and so not limmitting to particular words,
but minding the person of Christ; and so in Christ, in Jesus Christ, in his
Son, in him, in whom etc. are all one, which by his own practice is granted;
therefore let not his Reader be dazzled with his singling out words.

Why does he say the words, in Christ, so applied, do properly signify by, and
through Christ, If he mean it of the work which he only in himself in his own
personal body, and by himself did accomplish and complete with God for men;
and of that fullness of power, authority and grace he has received in our
nature in his own person, that he may govern and dispense, then he speaks
untruly; for though by and through be true, and good words, and included, yet
in him, is the most proper term, when we speak of that in himself, and so
used by the Holy Ghost John 1.4. 1 John 5.11. Romans 3.24. Col. 1.19. and 2.3, 9.
But if he grant a redemption and life in this sense, he overthrows all he
has hitherto said, if he deny it, he denies the foundation laid by God in
Sion, to be such a foundation as may be for any that are not yet come in, in
the call of them, a foundation for, and of repentance, faith, etc. or for any
so coming in, to be built upon: and denies him to be a door of life for any
not yet entered; and the true Vine, or Olive tree, for any yet to be grafted
in, that are not in him already; and so takes away the key of knowledge from
men, and shuts the door of life against them: but if he mean it of the virtue
and power of this redemption and life in Christ, in the fruits thereof
in^dened to men as the preservation of their lives, and mercies vouchsafed to
lead to repentance, John 4.5, 9. Act. 14, 17. and 17.26, 27, To. 4.2. Then he
says right, It Is most proper to say By, or through; for many enjoying these,
yet have not himself, and so have not justification etc. John 1.5 9, 10, 11.
But this sense holds not with his business, nor after saying, so that his
meaning is of the redemption, justification and salvation in Christ and which
he is, as it is given in, or as he enters, and possesses the hearts of such,
as in appearance of his grace are reconciled to God, and so in abled to believe
in him: And this being his meaning, his saying that, IN, does properly signify
by and through, does give cause of suspicion of ignorance and of error.

First, of Ignorance, for this redemption, Justification etc. is not received
in the receipt of some discoveries or opperations only, but in receipt of
himself: The Scripture bears witness of him, and that which is in him, John
5.39. and so does the holy Spirit also, John 15.26. 1 John 5.6, 10. and the
faith of the Spirits working looks on him Zach. 12.10. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
Believes on him, John 3.36. and so receives him. John 1.12. and he, even he
himself is the Believers righteousness, Jer. 23.6. and life, Col. 3.4. made
of God unto them, whom he has made in him, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. and so as life is in him, and he is
life, and they that have him have life, 1 John 5.12. So believers have their
life in him, and in the very having of him, Ephesians. 1.7, 11. whence their whole
confidence and rejoicing is in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.3. whence though by, and
through, in this sense be true, good, and proper also, yet in Christ is as
proper, yea, more proper of the two.

Secondly, of error, for in receipt of this redemption, besides the faith and
hope in him, which it effects; it does work in the believer in all his
faculties, powers and members, melting and softening the heart, renewing the
disposition, and conversation, and so redeemeth and saves from the polutions
of the World, the tyranny of Satan, hardness of heart, and rebellious lusts,
and brings up, and unto love of brethren, and works of adoration and mercy:
Ezekiel. 36.27, 28. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. In which also the believers faith is
justified to be unfeigned and lively, James 2.19. etc But I hope Mr. Garner will
not say this is their life and justification before God, in which they glory
and rest, and approach to God in confidence on, though that for which they are
thankful to God; and though they may be said to have this in Christ, because
it is effected in them from his presence by spirit in them, and that which is
borne of the spirit is spirit, yet this is properly said to be by, and through
Christ, and so this interpretation of, in Christ, by him, remains dark and
boubtfull.

5. Why does he say the words hold forth a real etc. enjoyment by those of
whom the things are spoken: what means this? Does any deny that when the
redemption of Christ etc. is applicatively spoken of, concerning those which
have received the same, that the so speaking does not imply a real enjoyment by
those spoken of: no, sure the opposed Treatise every where acknowledges it,
and brings forth more testimony for it then Ephesians. 1.7 11. as he also might
have done; but that proves nothing for his business, for it was in him before
they received it, and there is more in them, then they are partakers of, in
themselves, though by faith, they have it in them, and so his saying, a real,
glorious and sure enjoyment, which they have of redemption, Justification, and
salvation in Christ is good, and true of believers; if understood of having it
by faith in Christ: But if this real, glorious, and sure enjoyment in Christ
be understood, according to his drift, to confound the distinction, and as he
expresses, and explaineth himself, page 10. and the three last lines, which
they are partakers of in themselves before God, according to the riches of his
grace by Jesus Christ, then his saying is not Scripture-like, nor savouring of
the spirit by which the Apostle speak, who acknowledges all fullness of
redemption and justification and life in Christ, and that by faith they had all
in him, and were complete in him; but in respect of a glorious enjoyment and
participation in themselves, they have not only confessed, their life hid with
God in Christ: Col. 3.3. But that they had not yet attained* Phil. 3.12, 13 and
that though Sons, yet it did not appear (they say not what we are, but)
what we shall be: 1 John 2.2. And that they were carnal, and though the
spirit alive, yet the body dead: and that they had the first fruits of the
spirit, and waited for the redemption of their bodies, Romans 7 14, 15, 24 25.
and 8 2.10 23 such high flowne speeches of glorious partaking in themselves of
all that is in Christ for them would more believe such as Himmeneu. and
Philletus, that say the resurrection is past all ready (they enjoy all to be
enjoyed) 2 Timothy 2.18 But to pass by his saying in this sense: What if the
redemption, Justification and salvation in Christ be spoken of Christ as it is
in him, and prepared by him for men and he, and his preparation spoken of, and
men spoken to, as Prove. 9.1, 5. Mat. 22.1, 7 John. 1 4 11. and 3.16, 17. what
does it signify and hold forth then? Does it not signify good will, and rich
provision in him, and set forth him a light, salvation and life, that men might
repent, and come to him and have life; does not all the Scripture quoted to
this end, bear witness to this, and does not the opposed Treatise testify the
same, and is not this that against which the opposer fights and for that
cause faulteth the distinction: But if he be sure of truth on his side, then.

6. Why does he not set down his saying plainly, why shunnes he the light, and
seeks to carry away his oppinion in the dark: Why says he not plainly, the
death, resurrection and sacrifice of Christ, the preparation of redemption,
propitiation, Justification, and life in him, and the mentioning and setting it
forth in the Gospel, and calling men thereto, is for no more then those that
are partakers thereof, both by faith in Christ and really, and gloriously in
themselves before God, and that the declaration of all this holds forth no want
in them to whom it is spoken, but a real enjoyment of all for whom it is
prepared, and that for those that refuse there was never any thing in truth
prepared for them: this had been plain dealing; and as he knows who once said
thus, so all his writing testifies this to be his meaning, in his own often
expression of his business, pages 3.4, 5, 6, and 10, 11, 12, and 13, 14, 15,
and 17, 19, 20, 21, and 23 24. all which is fully and in every of his
expressions answered, in which both the truth of the proposition, and the
distinction opposed is cleared and proved; and that in consideration of
Redemption, as in Christ for men, and as received by men, in reciving Christ,
the former is larger then the latter, and so his Babell of confusion, on which
he has walked through his Treatise, is confounded, in that is shown Prove.
9.1, to 5. Mat. 22.1, 7. Heb. 9 5. John 6 37 40. Ezekiel 24.13. Mat. 13. And all
the answer to him hitherto, though there was enough said in the opposed
Treatise, that remains unanswered and more and further explication in another
Treatise entitled, A discourse a bout the precious blood and Sacrifice of
Jesus Christ: in the first twelve chapters of that Treatise, which may serve
for answer in that business; and so I might have the farther view of this
opposers Tract, because he has here left my Treatise, and answers not
thereto, but because he pretends an including of mine, as he goes along; I
will take a brief view, and answer accordingly.

THE SECOND PART.
AND so as he includes me in answering Mr. Lamb. This I find all the way, that
he charge me with putting on many Scriptures a corrupt sense, which if I
had done, and he had made it manifest, I would have acknowledged it, and have
thanked him, but I find no such matter at all discovered, though often
boastingly affirmed by him; but I will plainly set it down without mending as
it is in the opposed Treatise, and then note what ways he has taken to prove
that sense corrupt, and so whether it stand good, or not.

The whole drift of the Treatise was to testify the truth of these two places
of Scripture, according to the sense the words import; and that was in my Title
(though another that is true also was put on it) and the places were 1 Timothy
2.6. who gave himself a ransom for all; And Heb. 2.9. That he by the grace of
God should taste death for every man; and the sense said by me to be imported,
Is this: That Jesus Christ by the grace, good will, and favor of God, did
taste death for every man, and so gave himself a ransom to God for all men
and so is become the Savior of the world, and the propitiation for the sins
of the whole world: This is the sense, as the Holy Ghost has left it for me,
in express words, If Joh. 3.16, 17. be compared with Heb. 2.9. 1 Timothy 2.6. and
Joh. 4.42. and 1 John 4, 14. and 22. And so is the sense expressed in that
opposed Treatise, Chap. 1. page 1. And all the five first Chapters with the
Distinctions in them then used to clear the stateing of the question, shall
now remain, (as this Opposer calls them) so many proofs, to which he has
said nothing, to show the abuse of any Scripture, or weakness of any proof,
as he that reads that Treatise and sees what is said may know, and then the
sense is opened and affirmed by plain Sayings of Scripture, without any
exposition, chap. 7 which neither he, nor Mr. Knoles is able to do for the
corrupt sense and contradictions of Scripture which he in many places sets
down. After that, the sense is proved six several ways by the Scripture
manifestly, which he has not showed the least weakness in; and this from
chap. 8. to chap. 19. And then again by six several arguments, chap. 20.
which he has not so much as meddled with: And then again, by his several
proofs, which also (unless three or four expressions in answer of Mr. Lambs
Reasons mentioned by him) he has not at all answered; besides following
reasons, that are all let alone; Where were Mr. Knoles his eyes, or his care of
speaking truth, when he writ to the Churches, that the most weighty reasons
etc. were fully and clearly answered, which is true of never a one, and but
very few (of the weakest also) meddled with: But now as the sense is, not only
in, but the very sayings of the Holy Ghost. So let us see how the holy Ghost
teaches us to take it, and when in the largest extent of the sense. Psa. 8.6.
The Prophet by the Spirit speaking of God the Father concerning Christ, (that
dyed, and rose, and revived, to that end, that he might be Lord of all, Romans
14.9.) Thou have put all things under his feet: Now how does the Holy Spirit
teach us to understand the word, All, when it is used in mentioning the works
of God in and concerning his Son Christ, when it is God that says or does
it; And when it is his Son, of or to whom he speaks, or does; how must we
understand, All, then; mind what the Holy Ghost says in Heb. 2.8. 1 Cor.
15.27. Heb. 2.8. he rehearses the words; Thou have put all things in
subjection under his feet (now mark the Inference or Interpretation) for in
that he put All in subjection under him; he left nothing that is not put under
him; What is the extent of the word, All, here? Is any exception here of any,
but only of God that did put all things under him? So, 1 Cor. 15.27. For he
has put All things under his feet; But when he says, All things are put under
him; It is manifest, that he is excepted, that did put all things under him
(that is, as is said, God only is excepted from being put Under) and mark that
he says, when he says; that is, when the Lord God says, and when he says it
of his works concerning his Son; he says not, when men speak of Christ, no,
nor when his servants speak to all men, or of them; nor says he, when God
says of earthly Kings; He will put All under them, that it is so large; no,
not when Jew and Gentiles are opposed; but when God says, and when he says it
of his Son, he has put all things under him, there is nothing left out;
nothing excepted, but God himself: and is not here a rule from as good and
skillful a Teacher, and one that can tell the mind of God in the Scripture, as
well and better then Mr. Garner; so that if it be Gods sayings, and that of his
Son, and his works in and through him, and he say, it is All men, there is
not a man to be left out or excepted, but only the man Christ, that is, God
man, by whom the works were wrought; and so when in the words following, he
speaks about his love to men, whose nature Christ took, and so became lower
then Angels for a time, and says by the Spirit of God, of the works of God in
and through Christ, that he by the grace of God should taste death for every
man (or as Mr. Garner likes better, for All): Is it not manifest that there is
not a man left out, that he dyed not for, but only himself, and says not the
Apostle the same to the Corinthians, to whom the Word was so fore expounded, 2
Cor. 5.14, 15. And what we are here instructed of the word All, when God so
speaks of his Son, is affirmed of his works in Joh. 1. from 1. to 12. where
we have three universal ties of the works of God by Christ.

1. All creatures: Joh. 1.3. All things were made by him (and how large is this
mind) And without him was not any thing made that was made: And is not the same
said of preservation of the world since the Fall, Psalm. 75.3. By him all things
consist, Col. 1.16.12.

2. All mankind, Joh. 1.4. In him, (that is in the Word that is now come in the
flesh, even Christ, was life) as life is in him, 1 Ioh. 5.11. So from the
beginning it was 1 Ioh. 1.1, 2, 3. And for whom, or whose benefit was this,
mind the text) and the life was the light of men (yea, but what men, those that
were really, and gloriously partakers of it in themselves before God, as Mr
Garner says, mind the Text) v. 5. And the light shined in the derknesse, and
the darkness comprehended it not; were not these natural men, and
unbeleevers, and is not Christ in whom this life is; and this life proceeding
from him witnesses of That All men through him might believe, verse. 7. And is
(...) affirmed the true Light that lightneth every man that comes into the
world, verse. 9. And is not that the Word that was made by him, and in which he
was, and yet it knew him not: And whereas out of this world he chose a people,
and gave them his Oracles, and so made them his own, and put his Name upon
them: Did not he come unto them, and yet they received him not, verse. 10, 11.
And is not here all the world of mankind from verse. 4. to verse. 11. while the
life in Christ for men, and the extention of light there through to men is
treated of, But now for receipt, see verse. 12 To as many as received him (this
when all refused, some by grace overcome) to them he gave power (the right and
privilege) to become the sons of God (it seems they were not so before)
even to them that believe on his Name, etc. And is not this [As many] another
universality, even all and every of them, that by a new birth believe on
Christ; so then here in the beginning of the Gospel, yea, in the beginning of
the first relation, revelation and declaration thereof, after the personal
Ascension of Christ in our nature; we are taught how to understand the words,
Men, (in divinity mentioned). All men, every man, and the world: If the saying
be by God, and of Christ his Son, and his works by and through him; if it be
of creation, and the things created, we are to understand it of all things,
nothing excepted, but the Creator himself. If it be of creation by Christ, and
a redemption wrought by Christ in his own person, and so life in him for men,
and some mercy and light therethrough extended to men; we are to understand it
of All men, not one excepted, but, The man Christ Jesus, that has wrought it
for men; and if it be of the peculiar privileges of sonship communicated by
Christ; we are to understand it of all that are borne of God, and so by faith
made one in Christ, even sons of All them, and no more but them, and none here
excepted, but the Son himself, whose the privileges are, and who does
communicate them to All that receive him, and so in him, are made sons;
neither is eternal life in any place of Scripture said to be given by Christ
to men indifinitely, nor to All men, nor to every man, nor to the world, as by
Mr. Garners doctrine, it should be of his sense of all men etc. were right, nor
is life said to be in Christ for the beasts, fowls, nor his light to shine in
them; though they be preserved by him for man's sake, yet the light in that
mercy is for men; So that in these Scriptures, Psalm. 8.6. Heb. 2 8. 1 Cor.
15.27. Joh. 1.3.12. (and the same in Colos. 1.16.20. as is showed in the
opposite Treatise, Chap. 9. to. 8.) we have a ground, a warrant, and reason
given; with a rule to know how to understand, the words All, and All men, every
man, when spoken in general, and plain propositions, when spoken by God, and
of Christ; and the great works of God in and through Christ, when applied to
all creatures, as creation, preservation, ruling; when applied to men, as
making them righteous, convicting, or condemning for him, when fallen, working
a restoration for them in a public man, as they fell, and were condemned in a
public man, extending mercies to testify his goodness, and lead to
repentance, appointing once to dye, the raising of them, and bringing them to
Judgment; And when applied to believers, regenerate and newborn men; as the
forgiveness of all their sins, renewing their nature, interessing them in
the privileges of Jesus Christ himself, giving them eternal life; yea, and
that in glory ^aigning with him after the Resurrection: All, and every,
according to that mentioned, and to which in speech applied, admits no
exception, no not of one, but God, and Christ himself; yea, Mr. Garner
confesses in his margent, page 44, 45. The word, All, in Scriptures upon some
occasions is to be taken for All persons from first to last: but he neither
shows when, where, nor on what occasions, nor shows any ground, or rule that
may stand to know it by; but leaves that for a Pope to canonize the text, and
tell us when, where, and in what sense the Scripture speaks truth: But the
Holy Ghost has given us a ground, or rule which will neither deceive us, nor
leave us at uncertainty; And the same rule will serve us to understand the
words world, and nations, when they are spoken of by God, and his making,
preserving, showing favor too; and judging of them by Christ: And so nations,
as well as world, when so spoken of in indefinite affirmations admits no
exception of any, but God in Christ, as Act. 17 24.26 21. Psalm. 86 9. Where of
all nations that God has made, it is affirmed that they shall come and worship
before him; And is not that by virtue of the ransom Christ has given for them
as Esaias 45.23. Phil. 2.7.11. which explicates Joh. 12.32. And there is a reason
(fit for faith, and better then All Mr. Garners contradicting reasons of
unbelief) Psalm 86.10 For Thou art great, and do wondrous things, Thou art
God alone. These, and all such like places are so to be understood.

But now if the word World be spoken of by God, with reference to some times,
as the world that then was and perished by water; the world that now is, and is
reserved unto Air; The world to come, we understand it accordingly, yet as
generally, and largely, as the words so spoken will bear suitable to God: And
so when nations are spoken of narratively in respect of some things past, or
prophetically in respect of some things to be after done, and yet in time also,
we understand it accordingly, yet in the largest sense the words so spoken will
bear.

But now when God speaks of All men, All nations, or the world, concerning
the Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, or Roman Monarcks, we have no ground, not
reason to understand it so largely, as when he speaks of Christ, much less
when vain men, or weak men, speak of all men, or the world: yea, even Gods
Commands to his servants, to preach the Gospel to every creature, and in All
the world, we understand not in so large a sense, as when God speaks of the
person of Christ his Son, and his works by him; but then, by All men, every
man, The world, we understand All where they come, one or other of his servants
from age to age; And this is an usual thing in Scripture and among men. To
call a part by the name of the whole, as the Church in such a house was but a
part of the Church in Rome, Romans 16. And that Church but a part of the whole
Church which is but one, and the calling a part by the name of the whole, does
not deny the being of the whole to Annihilate the residue; and limit all to
that part: But the being of the whole gives ground of truth for so calling the
part by such a name; And so that Christ dyed for All. A good ground for his
Servants to preach Gospel too, and pray for all where they come: But their so
preaching, and praying, is no limitation of the death of Christ, to have been
for no more then they so preach to, and pray for. And so that God made all men
righteous, that all sinned; that Christ dyed, and gave himself a ransom for
All; that all must dye, rise, and come to Judgment, is a good ground to say to
any sort of people, God so made you ye have sinned, Christ has dyed for you,
etc. or for any to say, God made u^ etc. But against the limiting these things
to such applicatory speeches as is showed full enough in the opposed Treatise
in the 5 and 11. and 12. and 13. Chapters at large, which remains unshaken
yet, and may serve as to show the vanity of Mr. Garners bringing in the diverse
acceptations of the words, Every, or All, page 41 And the World, pages 62, 63,
64, 65, 66. And the whole World, pages 95, 96. so far from the business to
give a right understanding; and fitted to blind the eyes of the Reader, and to
make him believe he sees that which he sees not.

And this already writ, with that in the forementioned chapters of the other
Treatise may serve both to answer all his book, and to show what that sense is
which he calls our corrupt sense, namely, that it is no other, but the plain
sayings of the Holy Ghost in, and about the foundation, and beginning of the
Gospel of Christ understood, and believed in their own expressions, and
according as the Holy Ghost expounds them, and wills us to understand them, as
the words not of men, but of God, and as spoken by God of his Son Christ, and
his great works by him, and so we understand, and believe, as it is written, 1 John 4.14. We have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent his Son the
Savior of the world: And that Jesus that was born of the Virgin Mary, and
suffered under Pontius Pilate, Mat 1. Joh. 18. Mat. 16 16. Is Christ the Son of
the living God; Joh. 4.42. The Christ, the Savior of the world; And that Joh.
3.17. God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved; And that to this end 2 Cor. 5.15. He dyed for
all, And Heb. 2 9. By the grace of God tasted death for every man; yea, so died
for all, that all died 2 Cor. 5 14. And that he rose from the dead the third
day, 1 Cor. 15.4. and gave himself a ransom to God for all men, 1 Timothy 2 6
And is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. And wills
that this Gospel be preached to all men where his servants come, as a truth,
that they might believe on him, Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15. Joh. 1.7. And that
whosoever believes on him shall have everlasting life, John 3.16.36. And who
so believes not sees not life, but abides under wrath, John 3.18.36. Behold,
the sense in the sayings of the Gospel; yea, the sayings themselves; And if
any man could not conceive how these sayings should be right and true, yet it
became him to believe them to be right and true, because they are the sayings
of the Almighty God of Truth, concerning his Son Jesus Christ for us; and
they are light, though our understandings be dark; and we do well to take heed
to them, as to a light shining in a dark place, till the day dawn, and the day
star arise in our hearts, Ioh. 1.4, 5. 2 Pet. 1.19. And not to prefer
darkness before light, and count our understandings light, and his sayings
darkness, and so with our understandings find follies, falsehoods, and
absurdities, impossibilies of truth in his sayings, and so call them errors,
and then go frame and fashion them (by wresting and cutting them to pieces,
and forcing senses on them) to our understanding, and call that, The mind of
God. But if M. Garner think the sayings of God are foolishness, let him know,
that the foolishness of God (that men count so) is wiser then men, and will
confound their wisdom one day, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20, 25. nor can he help it by
calling these sayings our corrupt sense; Let all that desire to know whether in
this I speak truth, read through that opposed Treatise, and see if these
recited sayings of Scripture, be not the sense there testified, and by Mr.
Garner, and Mr. Knowles called our Corrupt sense. But now I will note the ways
he has taken to overturne it, and that shall serve for answer, even the
noting his ways, which are,

THE THIRD PART.
I.
TO confound things that are distinct, and so to turn all into a confusion, by
denying the distinctions the Holy Ghost uses, that so he may walk in the
dark; cast a mist on the Scripture and not be espied, but this is shown, and
refuted in this Tract before, though he use it all the way.

II.
By altering phrases and terms of expressions in the sayings he opposes; this
also is already shown, though it be still after done by him; so that in
opposing such expressions, he fights with his own shadow, as he injures me in
altering my exprssions.

III.
Slandering me and others of the same faith with me; setting me forth to hold
that, which all my Treatise he opposes is against; and that other of the
discourse of the precious blood of Christ; and all the distinctions maintained
against his opposition, is against: as that I have resolved on the question,
that all persons ought to believe, that all their sins past, present and to
come are pardoned: so he says page 140. surely I am not so near to this, as
his many expressions in his Book shows him to be; I do not believe that God
or Christ, does so dispense pardone into the consciences of Believers in such
terms, while they are in their warfare, for their faith to receive it in such
an apprehension, it is cross to that in John 13.10. and 1 John 1.7. again page
141. That I determine that all men's sins (as they were imputed to Christ) are
not pardoned in Christ (that is there is not pardone in Christ for them) as a
truth to be preached to, and believed by all; which is in very deed his own
opinion, but cross to all my sayings: Again page 142. That I affirm that
nothing is required of any to make them partakers of remission of sins, but
only faith to believe the report of the Gospel; and that I make faith to
consist in a bare assent to the truth of the Gospel; and diverse other here and
there in his book, which any that read mine but with half an eye, may see to
be so grossly false, that one may wonder that the Father of lies should prevail
so far with such a man: But no wonder that in opposing the truth, he be left to
walk in the same steps with those that have formerly so done, nor can he say,
he did not mean me, for he includes me all the way; and so directs his reader
to take it page 21, 26, 30, 108. surely these three former ways are sinful,
evil and injurious carnal weapons.

IV.
He passes by all that is said by me in all the quoted Scriptures, to show the
sense to be as the words import; showing the same from the very words in the
text, and the coherence with the verses fore going and following, and other
Scriptures speaking of like things: A subtle and uneven way bewrays
conscience of weakness to answer, though stiffnesse of will to oppose.

V.
He pretends to hold it unsafe and unwarrantable to take all expressions in
Scripture, as simple undepending expressions etc. and professes to consider
well there dependency, page 3.32. and yet has not done so, but himself has
flown from that close keeping to the dependency of one word, and place, and
thing with the other that were with it, and before and after it, and places
speaking of the same things which is done in the Treatise he opposes; yea, he
has taken dependant words, as independent, that he might make a private and
independent interpretation of them, as the word for in, 2 Cor. 5.14. the word
Taste, Heb. 2.9. the word, takes away, John 2.29. the word Love, John 3.16. and
diverse others as shall after be evinced, and who can free this from malice, so
intimately to charge others, and from guile to go from his own profession.

VI.
He flies some times to the original, as if he would cleave to the text, page
41, 42. and in Heb. 2.9. says, that it is according to the Greek word to be
translated pro omnibus non pro omni; oh how may we that are no Scholars be
cheated by such great Clerks! what a difference is here between all, and every,
between all of the nature of man, all mankind, for that is the nature in which
he was made lower then the Angels, and every singular man; true it is our
former translation in Heb. 2.9. is all, and so is the Romists translation for
all, and so Mr. Beza translates it, pro omnibus (which is put in English for
all men; but none of them so presumptuous to ad, non pro omni, nor is there any
such words in the text, he might have put it in a parrenthesis; but greater
Clerks then Mr. Garner say verrily, the Greek word is in the singular number,
and so is most rightly and properly translated pro omni; every singular man)
and so our last translation, which Mr. Garner slanderously reproves, with his
own pro-omni, is the word right and proper in that word every man, and he is
not sincere in his profession of cleaving to the text; he does not make use of
it as he conceives he may colourably wrest it to his private opinion, for
before this page 41. 42. he informs page 16 17, 18, 19, 20. takes words in
Romans 5.18. judgment came, and the free gift came, which are not in the
original at all, nor in the former or latter translation, nor in Bezars
translation, neither in Latin nor in English, (nor in Remists translation)
only some translators put them in, in a different Charracter from the text;
some Judgment came, and the free gift came: some the fault, and some, sin;
came, and some good, and some; the benefit, abounded, but all give them
according to their conception, to supply the sense of other words, and note
them not to be the text; but this man brings them as the text, and then
comments and builds on them to make good his private opinion; oh how little
regarded he the original here, or text in translation either! But as he did
this before his pretense of cleaving to the original, so after you shall find
him more grossly abusing the words, and sayings of the holy Ghost, which of such
as believe, and receive the love of the truth are esteemed, understood,
believed, accepted, and retained, not as the words of men (that may have
failings and subtilties and want fulness of truth and force) but as they are
indeed and in truth the word of God, which effectually works in them that
believe, 1 These. 2.13. and is by them kept, John. 14.23, 24. his sayings have
no wreathednesse or falsehood, but being all true and right, Prove. 8.7, 8. and
22 21. yea, the very words so to be accepted, Eccls. 12.10 But this man will
first say his words, this Scripture in it self (and then mark his causion) and
being wrightly understood, is most holy, spiritual, and precious, but having
so said, he will give you a reason why they cannot be true as they are spoken,
and then be proceeds to wrest and gl^s^e them, as if in themselves full of
equivocation, and absurdities, but in his gloss which he calls the mind of God,
( page 165. line last) there is a precious truth; thus dealing with the
Scripture as if he were expounding and applying, (suffer the rudeness of this
expression) Jsops fables, for a wise man, and a friend would hardly interpret
the serious sayings of a wise prudent, judicious and faithful man so as he
does the words of the Holy Ghost; and if this appear so, is it not a degree of
their sin that crowned him with Thorns, and then bowed the knee, and said
hai, King of the Jews, but spit upon him, and smote him also, Mat. 27.29, 30
and though mockingly they adored him in the garments they had put upon him; yet
they led him in his own garments to be crucified, verse 31. and what is it
less, to magnify his sayings adorned with our glosses, and senses framed for
and put on them, but to lead them in their own sense, the sense which the words
themselves import, and wherewith they are naturally clothed, to be crucified,
and made to appear as vile; as is in the drift of the greatest part of Mr.
Garners discourse: But I will note here only, 2 Peter 2.1. and judge:

2 Peter 2.1. There were false Prophets among the people, even as there shall
be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction:
Are these the words of man, or God? Did Peter speak or write them according to
his own imagination, conception, and supposall in a charitable judgment; or
did he speak and write them according to the inspiration and motion of the Holy
Ghost? If we take them the former way, we make them the words of a man, that
may be failing and need help; if we take them the latter way, as they are
indeed verrily to be taken, 1 Cor. 2.13. 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 3.2. then we take
them as they are indeed the words of God; and so full of truth and certainty,
and opperation in them that believe, and so of themselves, if they may be
believed, they do instruct us in diverse things.

1 About the true Prophets and the false in former times, in this word But
there were false Prophets, the true Prophets did not study, or invent that
which they prophesied, nor speak, or write by their own will; but they waited
and attended diligently what the spirit did signify, and so speak and write,
as they were inspired and moved by the holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12. 2 Pet.
1.20, 21. and so the Apostles, 1 Cor. 2.2, 13. 2 Pet. 1.18. 2 Timothy 3.16. But
the false Prophets lifted up their own understandings and exercised their own
reasons, and finding as they conceived, absurdities and impossibilities in what
the true Prophets by inspiration had said; they according to their conceptions,
vented their own dreams, Jer. 23.26, 27.30, 32.

2. About the Teachers in times since the Apostles; the true Teachers take heed
to the words and sayings of the Gospel, uttered by the Prophets and Apostles, 2
Pet. 1.19. and 2 9 Gal. 1 8, 9. Ephesians. 2.20 and so speak according to light and
grace received, and faith given, Romans 12.3. even that Gospel, and those words
faithfully, without vailing, wresting, or corrupting it, 2 Cor. 2.17. and 3 12,
13. and 4 1, 2. Tit. 1.7, 8. But the false Teachers lifting up their own
understandings, conceit, impossibilities, follies, and absurdities, in words
and sayings and yet pretending to teach them, do veil, corrupt and gloss
them, make them appear right to maintain that which they hold forth, to 2 Cor.
2.17. and 11.3, 4.

3. The doctrine that these false teachers bring is full of heresies, oppinions
swarving from, and contrary to the truth and sayings of the Gospel, Gal. 1.6,
8.

4. The manner how they bring in these heresies, and that is not by an open and
plain rejection of the Scripture, but privily (as the false prophets of old
came pretending the name of the Lord, and thus says the Lord, so to steal away
the word of the Lord from the people, Jer. 23. and 29. so) they pretend the
words and sayings and spirit of the Apostles, 2 These. 2.2. and then pervert,
and wrest, and mangle those words, and color them, with their glosses; that so
they may steal the plain sayings of Christ, and the sense his words import,
from their hearers, and fasten on them, their own opinions and glosses: 2 Cor.
11.3, 4, 15. Gal. 1.7.

5. Both the work of these false teachers in venting their heresies, and also
the event of these heresies received, which is twofold, even:

1. Denying the Lord that bought them, here is the greatness of the evil, a
fearful sin, to deny his right of Lordship, that had so dearly purchased it,
Romans 14.9, 12. to deny the goodness of his Lordship, that had brought them out
of the darkness of this world, into so much light and fellowship with his
people, John 3.19. to deny him the truth, goodness and righteousness of his
sayings, Ier. 8.9. to deny the motions and teachings of his spirit, and grace
vouchsafed, Romans 2.4. Acts 7. What so great; so good a Lord, that has so
bought and loved them; to be adversaries to him, and refuse to have him reign
over them, and to reward him evil for good, and hatred for his love, this is
marked out for the inexcusable, abomminable great and fearful sin indeed, to
which is threatened the grievious curse. Psalm. 109.2, 3, 4, 5, to 20. Luke 19.27.

2. And bring upon themselves swift destruction; Is not this the just
punishment of so great a sin, and are not they said by this their sin to
bring it, yea, to bring it swiftly upon themselves, and heavy is the prophecy
to some, that many follow their pernicious ways, by whom the way of truth is
evil spoken of: now say, did not the Holy Ghost know whether they were bought
or not, and whether Christ by virtue of that purchase, was their right and
lawful Lord or no, and whether these did deny him or no? Or where will Mr.
Garner find the deceit, to make it but a seeming; was it in them, did they but
seem to deny, or was it in the Lord, that he had but seemingly bought them, in
both is the voice of Mr. Garners writing; they were not bought says he in
truth and really; as though it were indeed so, pa. 162. they did but deny him
he says in point of profession; they did but profess themselves to be bought,
page 158. to 165. so that in their continuance in their profession they, it
seems by him, thought themselves bought, but then they were in an error, for
they were never so much beholding to him; and when they turned aside, they came
nearer to truth, and had before been seeming servants to him, who, by this man's
doctrine, was but a seeming Lord to them; whose heart trembles not at this? But
he will help it with comparing it with the Epistle of Jude, let that therefore
be also veiwed, does not Jude mind them of the faith of the common salvation,
and tells them of some that turned (not a seeming or show but) the grace of our
God into wontonnesse, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Jude 2, 3, 4* does he not profess for their admonition, even therefore to put
them in remembrance, though they once knew this, how that the Lord having saved
the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those that believed
not Jude 5. Does not J^^^ here point the Christians to the remembrance of Gods
dearing with Israel of old, as Peter about their Teachers, to the Prophets of
old: And was not this deliverance out of Egypt, a ^ipe of Gods now bringing
men out of the darkness and fellowship of the world, to fellowship with his
people, which is something above that Mr. Garner opposes; and is not that
deliverance called a redeeming them, Deu. 15.15. and. 25.8. and 24.18. and
buying them, Peu. 32.6, 16. a saving Psalm. 109.8, 15. so that here were a
people, redeemed, bought, saved, yet many of them for their unbeleef afterward
destroyed (and this writ for our admonition) who is that which is so bold to give
the holy Ghost the lie, and say, they were not really redeemed, bought, saved;
but only seemingly and so they perished really in the first overthrow, but
seemingly afterward and now that men were once alive in Adam, and fell truly
into the power of the first death, but are in no sort truly made alive by
Jesus, and so cannot be twice dead indeed, but once really, and the other is
seemingly: How thinks any they shall perish in a second death, for denying a
seeming Lord, a seeming redemption, forsaking a seeming life, in a seeming
profession, who like M. Garner to paint out these things in fine words; yea in
his conceit, he has so colored and garnished these texts with his device,
that every understanding Reader shall see no other, but take this his forgery
to be as he professes it to be, even the mind of God not only in this, but in
many other Scriptures, as he says page 163. so that where the holy Ghost
speaks not of man's goodness, or works in purging or sanctifying themselves,
but of his own goodness in the gift of his Son, and of his Sons blood in the
virtue thereof, that had made a purgation for them, and prevailed for means to
work purgation in them, and sent his gracious spirit in the means, with some
prevailing effecacies to set forth the greatness of their sin, and the
justness of their judgment (like that Ezekiel. 24 23.) that slight such grace,
despite such a spirit, and ill require such goodness, 2 Peter 1.9 Heb. 10.29
30. all this gracious works of Father, Son, and holy Spirit, he conceives
must be taken for counterfeits and seemings also (and who will be charged with
hypocrisy here?) so that the evil of men in departing from the faith, is
their departure from hipocrysie, whereas the Holy Ghost charge them with
hypocrysie in their ways, when they are departed, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3, 4 now he
that dares thus deal with the Scripture, pretend the original, put words for
text that are none, make seemings of truth, and add too, and change the
sayings of the Holy Ghost, and call his own sayings the mind of God; what error
may not he this way bring in if believed? But who that is wise will credit him
that so deals with the Scripture?

VII.
I might note his intimation of difficulty in the plain sayings of the
Gospel, page 47.77. which when they speak of the foundation and first
beginning of the Gospel, are all plain and easy as they are now set forth, as
the Holy Ghost justifies Pro. 8.6, 7, 8 Hear, for I will speak of excellent
things, and the opening of my lips right things, for my mouth shall speak
truth, and wickedness abomination to my lips, all the words of my mouth in
righteousness, nothing froward or perverse in them, they are all plain to him
that understands, and wright to them that find knowledge: and chapter 22.20,
21. Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsel and knowledge (note
the end) that I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth; and
that thou mights answer the words of truth to them that send to thee: Surely
had Mr. Garner believed this testimony, he would not have conceited so many
impossibilities of truth, and absurdities in the plain sayings of Scripture,
and under pretense of difficulties, have so wrested, altered, and added to
them, to make them right to his seeming, but it may be he will deny all this,
and say, he has denied no truth (though he have often) but only sound out
fitter words to express it: but for that note, Eccles. 12.10. The Preacher
sought to find out acceptable words (note here words acceptable and pleasing to
God, and profitable and safe for men to vent, and receive the mind of God in,
and what are they mark) and that which was written up ight words of truth:
Where is he that can find us out more acceptable words to tell us the mind of
God in, or that will plead difficulty in his words in the beginning of the
Gospel that he may help us with plainer words to give the sense, will such a
one reply that in 2 Pet. 3, 16. many things hard to be understood, which they
that are unlearned, and unstable wrest, as they do all the other Scriptures to
their own destruction: Let such a one again mind this very place, whithout
coloring, or wresting, or glossing he may see.

1. That the spirit by Peter speaks not here (by things) of the beginning of
the Gospel of Christ, neither what Christ has completed in his own body for
men, not what by spiritual opperation he works and dispenses here in
believing men, But of the second coming of Christ to restore all things; and
so of the new Heaven, and new Earth; of which things Paul writ to these
Hebrews, Heb. 2.5, 8. and 12.26, 27, 28. and so in all his other Epistles, in
one place or other.

2. That he speaks not of all, or any whole Epistle of Paul, but only of some
of his sayings about these things, the coming and Kingdom of Christ etc. and
of these things he says not all, but as some Translators many, some certain
things are hard to be understood.

3. That he says not, that the manner of his writing, nor that the sayings,
but some things in those sayings are hard to be understood, now this is
commonly known, a saying may be plain, and easily understood what is said, and
yet something spoken in that saying above our knowledge, especially in promises
of this nature, though clearly delivered, as is clear, 1 John 3.1.2, 3. with
Col. 3.3, 4. the sayings themselves are a light, so called, 2 Pet. 1.19.

4, He says not that the sayings, or the hardness of the things in the
sayings, did lead any to err, no, sure if they had become fools in themselves
and believed the sayings, and attended on God therein, they should have had as
much knowledge of the things as was meet for them in due season, John 8.31, 32.
Prove. 8 9. But they not believing the truth of the sayings, because of some
things in them beyond their conception, they did wrest them, to bring them to
their own conception, and so hurt themselves.

5. He faith not that all men, or gracious men, but only such:

1. As were unlearned, not spiritually enlightened and taught of God, and so
had not the faith, and fear of God ruling in their hearts, John 6 44, 45. 2
Cor. 2.9, 15.

2. Unstable, such as did not abide in that which was plainly testified in the
Gospel, and which also they are at some time persuaded to believe John 2.24.

3. And did wrest all the other Scriptures to their own destruction, they did
not so magnify the love of God in speaking in the Gospel with words of
plainness, and truth for them to understand; but took his sayings as the
speeches of a Barbarian, and so they believed not the sayings in their own
plain repoit, for in so believing, or speaking, they had not erred, Mat. 2.5,
6. But they did wrest, mangle, add too, or take from; frame absurdities, raise
their own consequences, and then make glosses, and so wrested the Scripture to
their own destruction; so that all this rather holds forth the plainness of
the beginning of the Gospel.

And if it be replied, that Christ spoke many things in partables, Mat. 13.3.
Answer is, it is true, he did so, and yet he spoke the beginning of the Gospel
clearly, John 3.15, 19. and the partables expounded to his Disciples, are now
left upon record for us; and so that to us can be no sufficient plea: Mat. 13.
and Luke 8. But though he did speak many things in parrables before his death
and resurrection, yet he left in charge with his Disciples, to whom he
promised, and after his ascension did send forth his spirit to teach them all
he had said to them, John 14.26. that what he told them in darkness they
should speak in the light, and what they heard in the ear, that to preach on
the house tops Mat. 10.17. and is not this given as a reason, that the
knowledge given them is a light set on a candle-stick, that they that enter in
may see the light, Luke 8.10, 16. And have not the Apostles professed to have
kept this charge; to have used great plainnes of speech, and not to put a vail
over their face, 2 Cor. 3.12, 13. and to have renounced the hidden things of
dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God
deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth commending themselves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God 2 Cor. 4.2. and to write none other thing,
then those to whom they writ did read, 2 Cor. 1.13. and so, as when they read
they might understand their knowledge etc. Ephesians. 3.4. and protested before
God, the things they writ they did not lie; Gal. 1.11, 20. And shall we be
such fools then to be cheated, and drawn from the belief of the plain sayings
of the spirit in the Gospel, by unbeleeving intimations of difficulty, to
prefer men's painted fancies: far be it.

VIII.
He runs most upon reasoning, and frames reasons to find and conclude
impossibilities of truth, absurdities, untruths, and contradictions of truth,
even in the plain sayings of the Holy Ghost, page 25, 47, 111, 159, and 172.
And so hovers about a text to fashion it for himself, before he dare meddle
with it, the particular reasons I shall deal with in answer of his senses
forced on many words, and his latter conclusions; only note this here; this is
not the way of faith, or of a believer, nor yet the way to faith; it beseemes
Hethens, and Pagons for their religion, and not Christians: It beseems us, what
ever our Lord has said to believe it true, right and good, though it, be a
bove the reach of our reason; and not to go reasoning, and inferring, and so
seek to have reason first satisfied, and then believe; But to believe first,
that reason may be subdued in believing till when, it cannot be rightly
satisfied about the truth and goodness of divine things, seeing it is
naturally an enemy to God, Romans 8.6.7. and must be subdued: 1 Cor. 1.18.19.20.
and such as have striven to have reason first satisfied, have turned from the
truth, John 6.29, to 66. and this is the way by which the writers of Divinity
and Philosophy dissected have denied, the creation, and beginning of the world,
the drowning of the world, several actions of Christ, and the resurrection of
the body after death; they conceit they see so many impossibilities of truth in
the sayings, so many absurdities and contradictions; and they pretend
discoveries of mysteries, in which they affirm all true, so denying the whole
foundation of Religion: Oh reason unsubdued! Oh wisdom of the flesh! what an
enemy art thou to God: I am sorry to see a man of such eminency so swayed by
thee.

IX.
He compares the sayings of God concerning Christ and his works by him, with
the sayings of his servants touching men, yea, and of others also, as page 63.
not to equalize only the world, and all men in their sayings, in the largeness
of the extent, which yet were too much, to equal man with God, but to limmit
the extent of those words in the sayings of God, to the extent in the sayings
of men, which is very evil and dishonorable to God, Isay. 40.12, 18. and
contrary to our express rule, Heb. 2.8. 1 Cor 15.27. from Psalm 8.6. with
John 1.2, 3, 12. Though Mr. Garner has done this hiddenly.

X.
He limmiteth general sayings of the spirit, for propositions for faith to
applicatory sayings of Believers by the spirit in profession of faith, yea, and
makes those applicatory sayings in confession of faith, to be the true
interpretors, and oppeners of the largeness of the extent of the general
sayings for propositions for faith: pages 60, 61, 68. And by the same way of
interpretation, there is as much force every way to deny, that God created
every man, because it is said of Israel, one God has created us, Mal. 2.20.
that all men have sinned, because it is said of Israel, we have sinned and
committed iniquity, Dan. 9.5. and of believers, in many things we offend all,
James 3.2. That all must dye, because it is said of Israel, we must needs dye,
2 Samuel 14.14. that all shall be raised, because speaking of the Jews, it is
said many, etc. Dan. 12.2. and that all shall come to judgment because it is
said in speaking to believers, every one of us shall give an account of
himself to God, Romans 14.11, 12. and we must all appoare before the judgment
seat of Christ: 2 Cor. 5.10. And is not this a most dangerous and perrillous
way of expounding Scripture? As it is more largely shown both in the Epistle
and Book of the opposed, Treatise, which if he could not answer, he might have
taken warning not to have run into such snares.

XI.
He plainly and in express terms denies the Gospel and word of God, to be
the Gospel and word of God, in that he denies that doctrine and Gospel, and
those sayings to be there which are expressly there; intimating as if he had
some other un written verity, or Gospel, which with him is the Gospel, and it
is not there, and all in this written Gospel must be brought to that.

1. Whereas the Apostle speaking of those men that must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done in his body, whether it be good or bad; 2
Cor. 5 10. (suitable to that John 5 19.) and of his knowledge of the terror of
the Lord, (which will in that judgment be against them that would not submit
to, but deny the Lord that bought them) and on that ground did persuade men:
Though his heart and spirit was manifested unto God, and in believers verse 11.
yet he preached to others also that judged evil of him; and then tells them
what constrained him, even the love of Christ; and on what ground, even because
we thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then all dyed (or were dead) and then
affirms it possitively with one end of his death, and that he dyed for all,
that etc. verse 14, 15. and after an exposition how to take the word, All, when
God speaks of Christ, and his works in, and through Christ, he says that he
by the grace of God, might taste death for every man, Heb. 2 9. and speaking
even of unbeleevers also, he says, he gave himself a ransom for all. 2 Timothy
2.1, 6. And another Apostle, in an opposition between believers and unbeleevers
says, He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2, 2. yet
this man says, that to affirm of Christ, that he has wrought a peace, or
reconciliation in himself with God for all men, that it might be declared for
them to believe, and to affirm Christ dyed for all men, he finds no where in
the Gospel, nay, that is more moderate then that which follows, for he goes
further page 188. It is not agreeable to the Scriptures, and to preach it, is
not to preach the Gospel of Christ, but something which men (sure he must mean
such as the Carpenter, the Son of Mary, Peter the fisher, and Paul the
Tent-maker) have added to the Gospel of Jesus Christ: and p. 177 he says
determinatively, that this doctrine of Christ suffering for all men (his phrase
is persons) is not the doctrine of Jesus Christ, nor the subject matter of the
Gospel; nor is there such a thing found in the Gospel, nor in any part of the
word of God (and then he adds rightly understood: And must not that
understa^ding be according to some unwritten Gospel, to cloth this with, to
be adored, which in its own clothing is denied, and made vile by him, page 176.

2. Whereas the Gospel is glad tidings of a redemption and peace, and life,
and so good will to be declared, that in believing men might receive it, and
glad tidings, and a word of truth it can be to none for whom there is nothing
in truth prepared: And the Gospel our Savior so preaching, John 3 16, 17. and
12 47, 45. commanded his disciples to preach to every creature, (speaking of
the world of mankind, as John. 1.3, 4, 5 7, 9. Mat. 28.19.) Mar. 16.15. and
they so preached the Gospel, 2 Cor. 5.19. and him the Son of God, the
Savior of the world, 1 John 4 14 and many have so believed and confessed, John
4.42. He plainly denies all this, and says expressly page 133. That neither
Christ nor the Apostles did so teach, nor that he required them so to teach,
and though they declared peace to whatsoever house they came, that was but
ministerial (as if in ministry they told lies) page 136. nor says he, did any
of the Saints so believe: So that the written Gospel with him is no Gospel,
no word of God, understood according to its own sayings, but according to some
unwritten verity of his, which he calls the right understanding of it.

3. Whereas the Scripture in the Gospel sets forth God to be the Savior of
all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. and that his mercies are over all his works, Psalm
145.8, 9. and that it is through Christ that these mercies are extended: Psalm
75.3. John 1.3, 4 5, 9. Col. 1.18. and that these mercies are witnesses of his
goodness, Acts 14.17. and fruits of love, kindness, and mercy, Mat. 5.44,
48. Luke 6.32. to 36. and come to lead men to repentance, Romans 2.4. and to the
Gospel, that they might believe, and when men harden their hearts, and will
not be brought to submit to, and believe on him; he charge them to hold the
truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. To be adversaries to him for his love, to
have rewarded him evil for good, and hatred for his love, Psalm 109.4.5. and
that which was for their welfare, to be turned into a trap, Psalm 69.22.
beside, that said Psalm. 36.5, 6, 7. Yet would he have assaid to deny the
enjoyment of any mercies, any benefit, yea, as a benefit, though outward, by
any unbeleever through Christ, page 148* 149. but because he is in this
moderate, and says it is not clear to him, (which I believe, because he
believes not that for them through which it is procured) and says; if he
mistake in this, or any other thing, he is willing to be informed: The Lord
preserve in him and me such a heart, and then we shall not deny the sayings of
Scripture.

XII.
But that he may not be said wholly, and altogether to deny all the sayings of
the Gospel; he does acknowledge some parts, and sayings of truth, and press
the same to hide and deny other parts of truth, as the work Jesus Christ
works in men, by spiritual application of his blood, to deny the
compleatnesse of that he has wrought in himself with God for men: His
reconciling men to God, by spiritual application of his blood, to deny his
reconciliation wrought with God, in presenting the virtue of his blood in
sacrifice offered to God; his redeeming men out of the world to God; to deny
his purchasing men of God,; the eternal life given in Christ; to deny the life
of the world given by Christ; as is seen throughout his Treatise; And usual
ways of such as are witty and subtle; not only in points of faith, that they
may the more fairly deny one, for that cause to acknowledge another: And in
points of practice also, how many have pressed Believers walking after, and
according to particular dictates and motions suddenly given in by the Spirit of
grace, (which is very good) to deny or make careless of the sayings of Christ
in the Gospel; suitable to which he has writ his Law, or mind in the hearts of
Believers, that would move on all occasions according to those sayings if they
were heeded: And approve of pressed speaking and teaching the things of Christ,
by a sudden and immediate revelation of them by the Spirit of grace to the
heart, which is exceeding profitable, when that is indeed vouchsafed, and
suiting to the Prophets of old; and yet this, that they may deny Believers
according to the knowledge and faith given them, by comparing searching, and
producing Scripture to teach the things of Christ, which is also profitable,
and suitable to the Priests and Levits of old: And so to commend singing
according to a gracious inspiration, which is very good, when so vouchsafed;
yet this pressed, to deny singing according to grace in the heart, such Psalms
as are left upon record, which is also good; and many such like might be
instanced; and when it may be to hinder the receipt, and to disturb and put by
the settlement, and profitting of some needful and profitable truth, If it may
be that way compassed, Satan himself and by his instruments, will not let, to
acknowledge even some main truth; he could move his servant to say of the
Apostle, and Disciples to trouble them Acts 16.17. These men are the servants
of the most high God, which show unto us the way of Salvation: yea, and that he
might hold his fold still, if that would have served, he would confess Christ,
Thou art the Son of God, Mark 3.11. wherefore though I deal with a gracious
man, yea, were he as gracious, as he that was reproved Mat. 16.22, 23. Gal.
2.14. yet while I acknowledge with him every part of truth that he
acknowledges, I must also maintain against him that part of truth, which he so
plainly (yet in that respect subtly) denies.

XIII.
He professes his uprightness, and having Gods assistance, Epistle and
Treatise, page 201. and that he knows he has the spirit of of God, which
will reveal spiritual things to him, yea, the deep things of God. p. 32. and
so often professes his sense that is far fetched, and forced on a text to be
the mind of God, and has Mr. Knoles to affirm and confirm the same, and for
his uprightness, and having the Spirit of God: I would be lought to deny, but
in some measure acknowledge the same, both in Mr. Knoles and him, and desire
the increase thereof, both in them, and my self: But yet whether either of us
be upright, or have, or are lead by the Spirit of God, in this business about
testifying for, or against this part of the truth, by him opposed, must be
tried by the agreement of our sayings, with the plain word of God, Isay. 8, 20.
Gal. 1.7, 8, 9. for to compare our selves with our selves and among our selves,
it is not right, neither is he that commends himself approved, but whom the
Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10 12 18. And he that speaks of himself, secketh his
own glory. John 7.18. and we are willed, not to be shaken in mind or trouhled,
neither by word or spirit, or writing, as if from the Apostles, 2 These. 2 2.
And a Church commended, for trying them which say they are Apostles and are
not, and finding them liars: Rev. 2.2. and it is made a mark of false
teachers, to speak great swelling words, 2 Pet. 2.1.18. Jude 16. intruding into
things they have not seen, Col. 1.18. so that this boasting of having
uprightness, or the Spirit, is no good way for any man to prove, or determine
any thing in controversy.

XIV.
He forces private, strained, and unsound senses, upon diverse places of
Scripture; as to instance some of them in order, as they are in his Book, 2
Cor. 5.15. that they which live etc. Here says he, the living, or life
mentioned, is that eternal life that is in Christ Jesus, and the same sense he
puts upon the life of the world, mentioned John 6.33 51. now mark, how weakly
he proves this, and how unsound, and forced it is, says he, he dyed for all,
to make them a live, to recover them from death, and to bring them into an
estate of life^ by his dying for them, and rising again; this says he is the
force, and meaning of the words, he has in this if he had gone no farther,
acknowledged some part of truth, though weakly, and scantily, and with some
questionable expressions; because all must once dye, and after that the
judgment, and the end of this life (here mentioned) given is, that they that
live, should live unto Christ, so shall they have comfort in that judgment;
and this is the scope and force of the words, from verses 10, 11. to 14, 15.
But now that the life here mentioned, is the eternal life which is in Christ
Jesus, and only had in having him 1 John 5.11, 12. as he affirms, imposing
that sense on these three places, page 27. that remains to be tried, and by
Scripture will appear unsound: for,

1. This life appears evidently to be that which by Christ is procured, and
given to all men, to the world of mankind, as is affirmed, Acts 17.2, Psalm
35.3. with John 1.3, 4, 5 9. and so all the mercies and means for the
preservation of it, and for the leading men to repentance during the time of it
is procured by Christ, his ransom given, and propitiation made, John 1.4 10.
Col. 1.18. In whom mercy and truth are met, and righteousness and peace have
kissed, in whose resurrection, truth is sprung out of the earth, and by whose
ascension and mediation between God and men, Righteousness flows down from
Heaven, and the Earth is filled with his goodness, Psalm 85.10, 11. And as
his mercies are over all his works, so is he righteous and holy in all his
ways Psalm 145 yea the preservation of the life of creatures, is for the good
of mankind: Psalm 126 and 36. 5.6, 7. and this life procured for mankind, is
truly called life, because it with all the mercies vouchsafed to it, are
testimonies of his goodness, Acts 14 17. Psalm 19.1.6. Romans 10.18. To lead to
repentance, Romans 2 4 That men might seek him, Acts 17 24.27. and also, while
they are joined to the living; there is hope: Eccles. 9.4. and this life is
called life, and a living in opposition to death: Job 30.23. Isay. 38 18, 19.
And it is an estate of life, because of that light, that proceeds from that
life in Christ, to inlighten them that they might seek him: John 1.4, 5.9, 10.
Joh 33.30. Acts 17.27, 28. But had not Jesus Christ, made a propitiation for
men; if their beings had a long time continued, yet by the truth and Justice of
God, it must have been with such, or a sorer curse then that mentioned, Deuteronomy.
28.27, 28, 29. and without any hope, and so not an estate of life, whence also,
when men for their contempt of, and resisting the means used for their
repentance, are given up of God, and so reprobated, that there is no more hope
for them: Ier. 6.16 30. Ezekiel. 24.13. Romans 1.18 28. Prove. 1.23, 24. etc. Their
life is not then an estate of life, though once it was; but then also (as well
as in death) such are said to be blotted out of the Book of life, Psalm. 69.28.
not though this seacible being of those reprobates, after raised, and made a
live by Christ, shall after his sentance remain in torment for ever, yet is
that no where called life, as this life of men during the time of Gods
patience, and giving space, and means, is, 2 Pet. 3.9. Rev. 2.21. Eecles. 9.4.
Job 33.30. Besides this life, and eternal life, are set forth indifferent
expressions in Scripture, this is a preservation from death, that there may be
a time to seek the other. Eccles. 11. and 12. Psalm 69.8, 9, 10. But eternal
life, is a life from the dead, Romans 11.15. This the life that now is, but the
other that which in its fullness and visibility, is to come 1 Timothy 4.8. This
the life or light of men, John 1.4. But the other the life of Believers, Col.
3.3. This is called the life of the world, John 6 5.33. But eternal life is
called, the life of Jesus, 2 Cor 4.11, and the life of God, Ephesians 4.18. the one
affording a hope, that men following lying vanities may deprive themselves of,
Prove. 1.23, 24. Isay. 55.6. Jonah 2.8. The other affording such blessedness,
as preserves the honor for ever, John 10.27, 28, 29, 30. yea, the one
vouchsafed to unbelievers, that they might receive him, though they do not,
John 1.4.11. but the other only to them that receive him, John 1.12. Now let us
mind what life, or living is here meant, 2 Cor. 5.15. And this without any
wresting; by minding; first the reading, secondly the expression, thirdly the
dependency it bath with that fore declared, fourthly, the explanation, and
confirmation in other places speaking of the same things.

First, for the reading, eternal life sure by all confessed, is even God
living in his, and so they living in God, and to God, and sure so far not to
themselves, but to Christ; and the text speaks not in such terms, that they
which live unto God should not live etc. But that they which live:

Secondly, the expression is, That they which live should not henceforth,
after life vouchsafed (though before they did, 1 Peter 4.2, 3, 4.) live unto
themselves, but unto him that dyed for them, and rose again: Now sure, so much
eternal life as is in any heart, the spirit is life for righteousness sake,
Romans 8.10 and so far does, and can do no other but live in God and to God;
and so far not to themselves, but to Christ: Romans 8.2. 1 John 3.6.9. and 5.4.

Thirdly, the dependency of this, with the first ground of the Apostles
exhortation, 2 Cor 5.10. That we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad, knowing therefore the terror of
the Lord, we persuade men, etc. And where in will either the equity, or
terror of that judgment be, if not in this; that such as he dyed, and rose
for, and has offered them life, when some light comes, do refuse to yield to
him, and will still live to themselves? I trow this will not be said of them
that have eternal life.

And fourthly, for the explanation, and confirmation in other places of
Scripture, speaking of the very same business; does not the same Apostle,
speaking of Believers not living to God, give a ground like this, 2 Cor. 14.15.
why all ought to do^ so, Romans 14 9. for to this end Christ both dyed and rose,
and revived That he might be the Lord both of the dead and living; and does he
not on this ground, diswade men from living to themselves, and persuade to live
to Christ, and this also with the same motive, that we must be judged by him,
and give account to him: verse 10, 11, 12. And does not the Apostle Peter lead
us to the same sense, 1 Peter 4. For as much as Christ has suffered for us in
the flesh, arm^ your selves likewise with the same mind, for he that has
suffered in the flesh, has seaced from sin, that he no longer should (mark
here the living scope of) live the rest of his time in the flesh to the lust of
men, but to the will of God; for the time past of our life may, suffice us to
have wrought the will of the Gentiles, etc. See how in all things the places
agree; and what life, or living they speak of: As for Mr. Garners pointing 1
John 6.51. to know the life here meant to be eternal life; he is confuted, by
the place he points to, which shows, the life of the world to be procured,
and given by the death and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ offered to God, by which
they live; but eternal life is received only in feeding on him, which none
do, till by grace drawn out of the fellowship of the world to believe on him
John 6.27.29 40 51.53. etc. So that in this beginning of his dealing with the
quoted Scripture, he has preferred his reason as a light, before the plain
saying of the Scripture, which indeed is a light, though by him counted
darkness, that his reason, that should have submitted to be enlightened by it,
may inlighten it; and so he uses here carnal reasoning before faith, and
acknowledges though weakly, some part of truth, to deny another part, and
takes the expression as independent, and so forces an unfound sense upon it,
and two other places together.

I hope M. Knowles, nor Mr. Garner, did not count the sense given by him on
these words 2 Cor. 5.15 those that live to be one of the mysteries he unvailed;
for he has striven in this, to veil that which is open and plain, and
discover in it a mystery of deceit, that he might privily bring in a damnable
heresy, leading the greatest part of men to deny the Lord that bought them, by
denying his right of Lord-ship by purchase; by denying his goodness in proucring
them thereby their lives, with mercies and a door of hope, by denying their
engagement to him, not to live to themselves but to him; by denying the equity
of his judgeing them; Auill beginning, And to save labor where like abuse of
Scripture, and reason, and teaching such denyals are, I shall but note them
with this mark 1.

2. And in abusing three places, to force sense on these words; That lives, he
does the like by these words John 12.32. Will draw all men unto me, which he
limmiteth to this sense, I will give to all men (according to his d^i^t
eternal) life, where as the Scripture speaking of all coming before him,
gives us to understand it in a larger sense; namely, that as in his call: many
are by discoveries of his grace, drawn in to believe on him, and so given up to
him, and receive eternal life in, and with him; so they that refuse and
rebel, shall yet one day by his power given him by virtue of his ransom, come
before him, bow to him, and acknowledge him Lord, before he pass the sentence
on them: Isay. 45.22, 23. Rom, 14.9, 10, 11, 12. Phil. 2.7. to 10.11. So that
the same abuses as before, may here be noted* 1.

3. The word, For, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Romans 4.25. and 5.8. page 28, 29. 2 Timothy
2.6. Mat. 20.28 and 26.28 Luke 22.20 page 49, 50. This word For; where it is
He dyed for all, or many, for thee, for us, and the like: The nature and force
of, the word For (says he) is very significant; It signifies interest and
propriety, and carries the force of promise and performance in it; unto the
persons concerned therein, and this sense he explicateth thus: They have an
interest or propriety in the glory, virtue, power, life, and riches of his
death, yea, he after puts in specialty, right, enjoyment: In which expressed
sense of his as set down, page 28, 29. and 49, 50 There is much darkness, and
un Scripture like language in it; for the dying of Christ was but once in his
own person as the public man, to fulfill truth, and satisfy justice, and it
is over and past, and he is not now so dying, nor can dye any more: Romans 6.9,
10. Rev. 1.18. Besides, had he not risen and overcome death, We had yet been
in our sinner, and our faith vain, and perished when our bodies dye, 1 Cor.
15.17, 18. Yea, and however, his death is exceeding precious and fruitful; yet
the virtue of it for eternal life, glory, riches etc. is in Scripture
language, ratherest put upon his resurrection, ascension and glory, with which
the Father has glorified him, and his everliving to intersede, Asts 13.33
34.38, 39. ^ Romans 5.10. and 6.10. and 8.2 34. Heb. 7. and 8 and 9. and, 10.1,
Peter 10 ^ Col. 1.19. and 2.3 9. But his death in the virtue of it; as he is
risen, and is with the virtue of it gone into the holy of holiest, and has
there presented before God the Father, and offered himself by the eternal
Spirit to God, a ransom and spotless sacrifice, and so fat down by virtue
thereof a Mediator; so his death in the virtue of it is remaining, and
perpetual: Heb. 9.12 14.15. and thus it appears by his after writing, page
189. he is to be understood; and so if we mind that which is general and
common to the nature of man; his sense as first set down without his
explication has a truth in it; that as he took that very nature that all
mankind has, and dyed in that nature for sins, and rose for just fication,
and ascended, and gave himself a ransom to God for all, and by virtue thereof
is the man; the Mediator between God and men; so all in that nature have a
speciality of interest a bove the fallen Angels, and so have their lives by
him: Acts 17.27, 28. John 6.33. And have mercy and life prepared in him, and so
a right to look and come to him in the means that he uses, John 1.4 5. And a
promise that in so turning and coming in to him, he will save them etc. Porv.
1 22, 23, 24. Isay. 45.22. whence they that deny him in his call, and follow
still on for lying vanities, are said to deny him that bought them, 2 Peter
2.1. To forsake their own mercies, Jona 2.8. To loosse their own souls, Mate
16 26. to bring upon themselves swift destruction: 2 Peter 2.1. and so even
such to perish for whom Christ dyed, 1 Cor. 8.11. But when they are so given
up, and perish; they have lost their interest that once was theirs, and are
blotted out of the Book of life, and so though in agravation of their sin it
may be said stall. Christ dyed, that is, did once dye for them, but then For,
implies not the remaining virtue of his death in blessed operations, nor their
present interest therein, which they have now deprived themselves of: Prove.
1.24, 25.

But now for his sonse as explicated by him, it is very false, for it is not in
every place so significative, for such an interest as he has explicated; and
that is manifest abundantly in the Scripture.

1. Christ dyed for the Ephesians before Paul preached to them, and yet before
their receipt of the, Gospel, they were without Christ, being alians from the
common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. which had not been true if
Christ his dying for them, had in, and by that act of dying only, or in that
saying For, given them such an interest, as Mr. Garner affirms from the word
For.

2. But to proceed, he speaks in a plain contradicting language to the Holy
Ghost; who says expressly, That Christ dyed for the ungodly, Romans 5.6 For the
unjust, 1 Peter 3.18. And yet says again as expressly, that none such has any
inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5.5. and that such
(that is, while such, or as such) shall not inherit etc. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10 Gal.
5.22. And that those who now do inherit, were some times such, but then they
did not inherit, but now they are washed etc. and so made meet to inherit 1
Cor. 6.11. Col. 1.12.13. The holy Ghost never fastening the inheritance, and
such interest on this word, or bare act, Christ dyed for them; But on his
gracious application of the virtue of his death, and resurrection, inabling
them to believe, and making on in Christ: John 1.12. so that heerin his sense
appears unsavory in such an affirmation of Christ dying for all: But to come
closer to him, in that wherein he would strive to wind himself out, by
saying; though the word For, implies not such an interest, That all have at
present, yet it implies that at one time or other, they shall, that are
concerned in that word For, shall have such an interest: I shall therefore let
the Scripture appear.

3. That not only the dying, but the death of Christ in the virtue of it in his
Resurrection, Ascension, Sacrifice offering, with its prevailency with God, and
spirit, and grace received as it is in him, the public man; a purgation fit
to purge; a Reconciliation to reconcile a medicine to heal, a life to enlive,
food of life to afford eternal life to the eaters; and all ready and prepared
in him; and set forth in the Gospel, and men by Christ and his servants called
thereto: Prove. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Mat. 22.17. So it is affirmed ready, yea, and
many called and invited on this ground, Luke 14 17. come, for all things are
now ready, and yet those concerned in it, never eat of this ready, and
prepared supper, Luke 14.24. Mat. 22. And where was the interest Mr. Garner
talks on for present, or furture, in these, or those that perish for whom
Christ dyed, more might be said, and also how Christ first purchased a right in
men, as Romans 14.9. before he give that right to any, which he gives only to
believers: John 1.12, 13.

Besides, the word For, Being a relative to other words; which words gives us
to understand the force of it, whether it point to the cause, or to the motive
or the persons etc in which we shall always see, that Believers are only
concerned in the saying, when For, has that force for such a sense as Mr.
Garner fastens on it; when it is said he dyed for all men: And we can show Mr.
Garner that all men have not says, 2 These, 2 3. And so not such an interest,
though Christ dyed, for all: But as neither Mr. Garner, nor Mr. Knowles are
able to produce a Scripture that says; Christ dyed not for all men; to exclude
the Scripture sense; so neither can they produce one sentence of the Holy
Ghost, that all men have faith to justify their own sense withal; and so did
ill to make this an independent expression, to force a sense to exalt reason
above the plain sayings of the Holy Ghost, to take of most men's engagement to
Christ, and stop the passage of their coming to him, 1.

4. The word All, in 2 Cor. 5.14 15, page 31. Heb. 2 9. page 41. 1 Timothy 2.6.
page 52. This word All, and every, he restrains to be meant, (though he would
say it in general words yet) of the fewest and smallest number of men in all
ages, from Adam to Abraham, from Abraham to Christ's coming in the flesh, and
from thence to his coming again; for of that small (comparatively, though in
themselves a great) number he speaks, and desires to be understood, and his
reasons he gives for such an understanding, are very weak: That in 2 Cor.
5.14.15 cannot be says he, All mankind because it is said verse 12. Some glory
in appearance. etc. which were specially the Jews; which saying of his, is too
restrictive, for many both then and now, that were of the Gentiles, did glory
in appearance, as their great knowledge, parts, gifts, their enjoyment of
Church order, Baptism, and other Ordinances, with many famous Consentors, that
had it not in heart from the word and spiritual evidence; and the Apostle writ
some things to this end, that they, and we might have to answer such, and
amongst the rest, this in special, verse 10. We must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one etc. and verse 11. Knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord, we persuade men etc. And of these men, that must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ: it is evident he speaks saying,
He dyed for all.

That in Heb. 2.9. cannot be taken for every man, because the word, All, and
every, is some times to be understood with a limmitation, as when it is spoken
of the Church, or a company of Believers in one place, Acts 2.14, 15. and
4.45-21. No question but this high understanding, together with restraining
general sayings to applicative, is the way by which some evade these general
and plain sayings, Romans 13.7, 8. Render therefore to all their dues, etc. Mark
10.19. Defraud not, Mark 10.19. Do good to all men, Gal. 6.10. To speak
evil of no man, but to be gentle, showing all meekness unto all men: Tit.
3.2. To justify the defrauding of dues etc. Defrauding, and breaking truth,
and faith, with those that are not of their Religion, and using rigor toward
them; saying, these general sentences, must be understood by the applicatory
sayings; 1 These. 4.6. that no man go beyond, or defraud his Brother in any
matter: Col. 3.9 Lie not one to another, etc. Ephesians. 4.25. Speak every man
truth with his neighbor, for we are members one of another. Col. 3.13.
Forbearing one another: Oh that every Scripture should be thus grossly abused!

Again, 1 Timothy 2.6. All, cannot be, All, because says he, All he dyed for, he
ransometh from the power of Satan to God; from death to life: This he affirms
in his own name, and abuses that of Peter thereto, which speaks of an
applicatory redemption; for by his ransom, he first purchased all of God, and
they are given into his dispose, who has redeemed them from perishing utterly,
by the first judgment which he underwent, or in the first death which he has
over come, so that if they perish, it is for their sins, as they stand
related to him. And by a second judgment, and in a second death; and for
denying him that bought them, Psalm 2.6 11. Romans 14.9-12. And so from the
word, For, and the word, many, etc. he reasons, which are fore-answered: and
likewise he reasons from the will of God to have all saved; which by Scripture
is evident (in such a salvation as forementioned, that fore runs the knowledge
of the truth) is done by Christ, who also will bring all to a knowledge of the
truth one day: Phil. 1.10, 11. Though I will not oppose those, who conceive his
will to have all saved is; to be preserved, that they may all come to the
knowledge of the truth, and so it has reference to the Magistrates ordained of
God to such an end, Romans 13, And here on that ground to be prayed for: But so
much is said in the 11. chapter of the opposed Treatise about this, and nothing
of it refuted, that it is needless to say any more: But he has a little more
to say, and that in which there is a mystery; He says also, that by All, is
meant all degrees of men; but chiefly all Nations or kindreds of men, not of
the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also, page 53. All, to be meant of Nations,
or kindreds of people, and not of persons; we had need mind this well, because
it is one of his professed mysteries, that he has unvailed, who says page 53.
and 39. many Scriptures are so to be understood: Whereas I believe Christ took
on him, the person of the public man, and so the nature of mankind, and in
that nature dyed for men (the persons of men) and took his degree of
exaltation after his resurrection, and that he did not take on him any humane
degree, of King, Magistrate, superior, or inferior, or Judge, Lawyer,
Counselor, Noble-Gentleman, Yeoman, Husbandman, or Farmer, Schoolmaster, or
Scholar, yet I suppose he had a trade, but not to prefer a Carpenter before a
fisher, Tentmaker, Tailor, Weaver, or Apothecary, not do I think that he dyed
for these degrees; but for the men themselves, and that for our sins, not for
our degrees, though I believe he sanctified them, as other creatures for the
good of men: But mind this mystery he has unvailed, are not all degrees of
men, and all Nations, and all Kindreds of people, all persons; had he not as
good have writ plainly, and said, All, signifies, but some of all sorts of men,
and so have saved himself out of that snare, of denying persons to be men; But
if he had so said, yet the Scripture would reprove his saying, where Paul was
preaching Gospel, and Christ risen from the dead, and that God will judge the
world by him, and that he has given assurance thereof to all men, or offered
them faith, a ground to believe it, in that he has raised him from the dead,
how does he teach us there to understand, All men, and All Nations, see Acts
17.24. God that made the world and all things therein (mind how well this suits
with Psalm 8.6.10. Heb. 2.6.9. John 1.3.11.) Seeing he is the Lord of Heaven
and Earth etc. (compare this with Col. 2.3.9.) He gives to all life, and
breath, and all things (and was not all this by Christ, who by virtue of his
death and ransom, is the Lord of all, Acts 10.36. Romans 14.9.) now mind, verse
26. And has made of one blood, all Nations of men for to dwell on all the face
of the earth (so here in respect of the nature, the flesh and blood Christ
took, is no difference; and so in respect of his death; as death, was the wages
of finne, and of his resurrection, and offering, through which he is become
Lord of all, so as there is in him a door of hope, and he shall be the judge;
so far no difference; the difference, and so the mystery unvailed by the
Spirit through the Apostles, and not Mr. Knowles and Mr. Garner, is in some
further thing: And all Nations of men, is here all men, that are in all
Nations, of all sorts and degrees (which also is from his providence, according
to his purpose, as says the text) mind it) And has determined the times
before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation (and now mark the end,
verse 27.) that they should seek after the Lord, if happily they might feel
after him, and find him (note here his gracious end, but is there any hope, or
possibility, mind the text) though he be not far from every one of us (see
here how the word Us, may be stretched to the largest, when All, is spoken of,
all while used in the works of God, leaves none out, and that is a good ground,
in speaking to, and of persons surviving, and hearing to leave none out, and so
the Apostle here, does not after such a large proposition single out himself,
and those of his mind from the residue; But in respect of that he had spoken in
this, equalizeth himself to them (according to that Phil. 2.6, 7.) and so Us,
is as large, as all spoken to, yea, all at that time living, as the text does
manifest verse 18.) for in him we live and move and have our being, (and that
we may be assured, the Apostle puts in himself with them in the word Us, see
how he applies the saying of some of their own Poets) for we are also his
offspring etc. and on this ground exhorts to repentance, by preaching Gospel;
and that this shall not be in vain, we have a sure word Psalm, 86.9. speaking
of God and his works, he says; All Nations whom thou have made shall come,
and worship before thee Oh Lord, etc. which is true, and will appear true, as a
Prophecy, at the return of the Jews, and Christ sitting on his Throne, and
as a proposition, at the great and general Judgment: Isay. 45.22, 23. Phil.
2.10, 11. So that he that will exclude the persons of men, or any of them from
the death of Christ, and his resurrection, and this fruit of the same
mentioned, Acts 17.24-31. and Psalm 86.9. Does likewise as much exclude their
persons, or for many persons from being created, and preserved by God: But had
Mr. Garner observed, or would any man observe how the Holy Ghost gives us to
understand the word, All, when spoken by God of his works in, and by Christ,
when of creation, when of a restoration by, and in a public man, when of Son
like privileges, when the word, All, is in such speeches used as a
proposition; and when as a prophecy; he should see it in the largest extent,
the word in such a sentence can bear, and that as a ground, when his servants
speak of the same, it is in the largest sense that can be suitable to his
servants; therefore concerning me, and those of my mind, Mr. Garner, with the
approbation of Mr Knowles, has written a notorious and plain un-truth and
slander: page 57. In saying that by All, in Isay. 53.6. we understand all
persons from first to last; we have no cause so to do, for in that, when God
speaks of his giving his Son to dye for All men, he means all from first to
last, is a good ground for men to speak of all men in their time, and to whom
they speak, and so for the Prophet to speak of all Israel: But with this
slander, he has written as false doctrine in his interpretation, that All, is
only we, who do enjoy peace with God, whereas he meant all Israel, as is
evident, John 8.39. as the Apostle includes, unbeleeving Gentiles with himself,
and stretches All, to the utmost a servant may, without limmitation: Acts
17.24-31. But enough is shown before about the word, All, which in so many
Scriptures is abused by M. Garners Reason, and a forced and stinted sense put
in it: 1.

5. The word. Taste, in Heb. 2.9 should taste death; the natural meaning of
these words, he conceives (and lays his conceit for a ground of Doctrine and
truth) is not his suffering of death; but an effect, and fruit of his suffering
of Death, and being crowned with glory, and says he; we are to understand the
words. Tasting death, to be a sweetning or rellishing of death, a making of
death tastfull, savory, sweet, useful, and gainful, page 44. now for answer:

That Jesus Christ, by his death and resurrection, has taken out the sting and
curse of the first death, so as in it self, it is to no man a curse, nor is
able for ever to detain those that dye, But they shall be raised, and made a
live again, and so it is made less dreadful, more easy, and but as passage
to immortality to every man, is a truth affirmed in Scripture (though by Mr.
Garner denied) 1 Cor. 15.21, 22-54, 55, 56. 2 Timothy 1.10. though the choice
benefit be to Believers, Eccles. 7.1-8. 1 Cor. 15.57, 58. so that through the
mediation of Christ, and only his own personal death is made savory, and
gainful to them Romans 5.8-10. Rev. 1.5. 1 John 1.7. but their-through even
their own dyings also, 2 Cor. 4.11 to 18. Phil. 1.21. 2 Cor. 1 5-9. And had the
word Taste, such a meaning in this Heb. 2.9. it would still confirm the truth
Mr. Garner opposes; seeing by Christ death is made more easy for all men, and
so as all men shall be brought out of it, and yet a specialty for Believers,
which overthrowes Mr. Garners drift, but this being plainly set forth in other
places of the Scripture, and no so plainly in this word Taste, we are still to
try whether Mr. Garners private sense, having no other place to second it, will
stand or not; first, he prepared his way by his reasonings, and they are diverse.

1. He, no where finds the death of Christ, no where called a tasting death,
but what strength is in this; what if it be so called here; and what if the
denying of some of those for whom he dyed be so called, is not that equivolent?
And that it is so, see Mat. 16.28. with 17.16. Mark 9.1-6. Luke 9 27 32. yea,
and even the Jews though they saw not the spiritual life, and so minded not
the spiritual death Christ spoke of at that time, yet understood, seeing, and
tasting death for dying, John 8.51, 52. so sight, or tasting, was understood
and that rightly by old Simeon, Luke 2.26. so that there is no weight in this
reason.

2. He conceives, to take Tasting Death, for dying, implies a needless
repetition, and much hashnesse in the words, as that he suffered death, that he
should suffer death; but there is no ground for this his conception; if he
could nor have seen to have read the words otherwise, yet then he might have
taken Death in the first place, for his foregoing abasement, and sufferings
(which in Scripture are called Deaths also: 2 Cor. 1.9. and 4.10, 11. and
11.13.) and so have suited it with other places speaking of his abasement, and
sufferings, that he might dye, as Phil. 2.7, 8. Heb. 2.14. and 10. But the
words are plain, to set forth that exalted one, even our Lord Jesus Christ, of
whose exaltation he speaks; and how far the subjecting all to him, is
already fulfilled, concerning himself: And in this, Heb. 2 9 two things he
shows concerning him, whom by faith we now see crowned with glory, as first,
the end why he was abased, namely, That he migh suffer death, he was made a
little lower then the Angels, verse 7. and this the same he that is crowned
with glory, as verse 7. Who was made lower then the Angels, for suffering
death, that he might suffer death, and so overcome death, as verse. 9.14.

Secondly, the manner, and for whom, and that was, That by the grace of God he
should taste death for every man, agreeable to that, 2 Cor. 5 14 15. and so the
words, crowned with glory and honor, import not that it was so before his
suffering death, but referring to that said verse 7 may be read as in a
parenthisis; and yet truly he was much glorified, in being made such a public
man, and filled with might, to suffer, and overcome such a death, and so to
read the words in order, Then tasting Death, is not only dying, but also
instructive to us in two things about his death, as namely;

1 Tha the only grapled with the sting, curse, and strength of the first death,
that he, and he only, tasted, or felt indeed, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4 55-52 2 Cor 5.21.
Gal. 3 13. and,

2. That he stayed not long in death, no not so long as to see corruption of his
body, but soon overcame it, and rose again, Acts 2.29 31. But this is shown at
large for All, in the 12 charter of the opposed Treatise, and not refuted by
this opposer: And so his third reason, as absurdly raised, is fallen.

Secondly, for the sense it self of the word, taste, he has given it in his
own name, and though he pretended at first to refuse the natural, and openly
appearing sense of the words, because he could not find it in another place;
yet he has presumed to put his fancyed sense upon it, without any allowance
from this, or any other place, either from the word in the original, or in any
translation, or in any customary speech; for though the Noune taste. may some
times signify, savoury, and some times bitter, yet to make tastfull; it
signifies not, that is, another word: But the verb taste and so taste, or
tasting, which may signify feeling or savouring either sweetness or
bitterness, to signify to put a taste in a thing, and so to make it sweet, or
savoury, is no wherefound; and if we should so read the Scriptures we should
multiply absurdities, so that in this he has advanced his reason, to force a
strange sense to an evil end 1.

6. The word World, is abused by him, and a limmitted sense forced on it as if
in such and so many places, it signified, the Gentiles, or all Nations opposed
to the Jews, or rather according to his drift; a few here, and there a small
number (comparred to the rest) among the Nations, or Gentiles, opposed to a
small remnant of the Jews; for so is his drift and meaning, though he strive
to color it with words, and so he has abused John 1.29. page 74. John 3.16.
page 82. John 6 51. page 101, John 12 47. page 126. 2 Cor. 5.19. page 1 18. and
1 John 2.2. page 97. In which places, the text it self bears out a larger
sense, and that the answer to him about these, and other places abused by him,
may be the briefer, let thi^ be noted, that the word World, when it is in Gods
own sayings, and of his works by Christ used for the world of mankind: It most
usually and frequently fignifieth natural men, as they come from the first
Adam, and bear his Image, and are preserved through Christ, whose light shines
on them, and yet they remain in their blindness and natural state still, and
so we are taught, John 1.3. to 11. verse 3. All things made by Christ, verse 4
in him was life, and the life was the light of men: verse 5. And the light
shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not, and then more
means used to testify of the light to verse 9. where he is affirmed The true
Light which lighteneth every man that comes into the world; and having spoken
of the world of mankind, says verse 10. He was in the world (by his light,
mercies, and means vouchsafed from the beginning, and in fullness of time in
his bodily presence, and the world was made (created, preserved, and stored
with good things) by him, and the world knew him not (so explicating verse 4,
5.) and verse 11. He comes to his own (he gave to a certain people of the world
more means, and came to them by his word, and Orracles, and put his name upon
them, and called them his, and in fullness of time came in personal presence,
and preached by his messenger, and himself to them) and his own received him
not, they believed not one him, so explicating, verses 6.7, 8, 9. And so though
a distinct part of the world, yet the world still, all concluded under sin,
and under unbeleefe, Romans 3.9, to 13. and 11.32. and so lying in darkness, and
under the power of Satan, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, and so the whole world lies in
wickedness, 1 John 5.19. but when al have sinned against some light, and have
refused Christ, and he by the power of his grace does overcome some of them to
believe in Christ, and so to receive him, he therein bringing them out of the
power of darkness and Satan, into his light and Kingdom, and giving them the
privilege to be the Sons of God, John 1.12, 13. Acts 26.18. Col. 1.12, 13.
they are then not reckoned of the world, though in the world, but from above,
borne of God, a people chosen out of the world: John 1 13. and 3.3.5, and 15 19
and 17.14, 15. But so much is said of this in the 13. chapter of the opposed
Treatise, and nothing said by the opposer to refute it, that more need not be
said till that be refuted: But it is meet that none be wronged, let us
therefore consider well the sense that Mr. Garner with Mr. Knowles approbation,
imposes upon so many places: as namely: That by the word World, is meant the
Gentiles, or Nations of the Gentiles, opposed to the Jews, or that one Nation
(he might as well have said, two Nations) of the Jews; though he do not
always speak true in this, yet it had been more tolerable if he had said no
otherwise, but under these terms, pretending, to unvaile great mysteries, to
cast on foggy mists; and under the terms of the Gentiles, all Nations, the
World, and the whole world, to affirm only those to be meant, who are the
fewest and smallest company; a few opposed to a remnant: There is no warrant
for this; But then also to set forth even that very company, that by the
testimony of the Holy Ghost, are chosen out of the world, and not of it, though
in it, and hated by it, to be the world, and the whole world, is so
contradictory to plain Scripture, and all right understanding, that he had need
persuade that a mist may be counted a mystery, to have such a sense received:
But let no wrong be offered, but the places considered.

1. John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes (or bears) away the sin
of the world; why must the Gentiles opposed to the Jews, be meant here in the
9, 10, 11. verses that were quoted, and explicated, in the 13. chapter of the
opposed Treatise: Its evident, that by the World, is meant the world of
mankind, even all natural men, remaining yet in unbeleefe, and no word through
this chapter gives us to understand the word World, in any other sense then for
all men, Jews and Gentiles, abiding in unbeleefe, and so a part may be called
by, and spoke of, and too, in the name of the whole, so as the whole is not
excluded, but included; and so the Jews even all, and so many of them as had
not yet believed on Christ, were also of the world, and called the world, let
us see how the spirit, by this Evangelist gives us to understand the word: Said
not our Savior to the Jews that did not believe on him, John 8.22, 23. Ye
are from beneath) is not that kept by Satan from believing, and so receiving
their documents from below, 2 Cor. 4.4. James 3.15.) I am from above (he came
from God, and received all of God, and those borne of God received him, and so
were not of the world, John 1.12. and 17.14.) ye are of this world etc. Again,
was not Jesus Christ a Minister of the Circumcision, did not his ministry in
preaching principally appertain unto them, and was not this his ministration
the light of the world, which he was while he was here in the world? For I hope
in another respect; he was the light of the world, before his taking flesh, and
is still since his ascension; now when be was amongst the Jews, and showing
mercy to a few, said he not while, or as long as I am in the World, I am the
light of the world, John 9.5. and speaking of those that unfainedly believe on
him, says he not, that they are not of the world, but he has chosen them out
of the world, and that the world hates, and has hated them: John 15.19. and
17.14. now were they not of the Jews before, and then the world did not hate
them, John 1.1-7. And did he not choose them out from among the unbeleeving
Jews? And were they not the Jews that hated them for their ministration,
which while Christ's personal presence was with them, extended no further: Is
it not as evident as the light, that the unbeleeving Jews were a part of the
World; and also called together with unbeleeving Gentiles, the World; Now when
John Baptist, whose ministration appertained to the Jews, was preaching to
prepare the way of the Lord, and calling the Jews that did not yet believe, to
repentance, and faith, and laying before them a foundation for both; that he
should point to Christ, and set him forth as the Lamb of God, that takes away
the sins of other Nations opposed to them, what a gross, and absurd
concepiton is this, and how derogatory to John's ministration.

2. John 3.16. Our Savior Jesus Christ himsefe was preaching to Nicodemus a
Jew, and laying down the Doctrine of the foundation of the new birth, and the
ground why who ever believes on Christ should not perish, as he had
fore-shown, verse 14, 15. He says, verse 16. For God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son (which is explicated 1 John 4.14. The Savior
of the world, and then he says not, that the world) but that whosoever
believes on him (in which believing they are chosen out of, though remaining
yet in the world, that these Believers) should not perish, but have everlasting
life, ver. 15, 16. and mind his ground, verse 17. For God sent not his Son into
the world to condemn the world, (that was not the end of his first coming,
but that the world through him might be saved; (and if once so saved, they
should not be such a world) and now mind his distinction of the world into its
parts, those that in believing are chosen out of it, and yet remain in it, and
those that by their unbeleef remain not also in it, as Believers also do, but
of it also; and so are still properly called, the world, as its said verse 18.
(not the world) But he that believes on him is not condemned; But he that
believes not is condemned already (mind the ground, from verse. 14, 15, 16,
17.) because he has not believed on the name of the Son of God (and now mark
these are still the world) verse 19. And this is condemnation that light is
come into the world, and m^n love darkness rather then light, see what is here
meant by the World; And is any man so foolish to think Christ told Nicodemus a
Jew, of Gods love to the Gentiles opposed to the Jews, to bring him in to
believe, or that the chosen generation that are borne of God, and one in
Christ, partakers of all his Son like privileges, must the greater part of
them perish for their unbeleefe, as is affirmed of the World here, that he
says means them.

3. John 6.51. Our Savior speaking of the life he has procured to, and for
the World, distinct from eternal life, which only those that feed on him (and
therein come forth of the world) receive, as is fore-shown: Thinks he that the
life of the Jews was not procured by Christ, or that the Jews in feeding on
him, should not have eternal life: And our Soviour being here preaching to the
Jews: he shows the same absurdities, in saying the World, here means the
Gentiles, opposed to the Jews.

4. John 12 47. He that reads this, may see clearly from verse 34 to verse
42. and so to this 47. That our Savior spoke to the Jews, and that in the 20.
versae makes nothing against it, for it is not said those Greeks, before this
speech, and if they did, that hinders not, for if they were Greasians, by
nature, yet they were Prosselited, and so Isralites by profession, and so one
and the same Nation with the Jews, and not then reckoned Gentiles opposed to
the Jews, Exodus 12.48, 49. And yet its not certain, they were Grecians by
nature, for even Jews as well as others proselited, were called by the name of
the country where they were borne, and lived, Act. 2.5. to 12. So that however
it go, yet our Savior spoke to them of the Jewish Nation; And that also by the
world is here meant men in natural state, and unbelief, more specially is
evident, for he says, verse. 47. And if any man hear my words, and believe
not, I judge him not, (is not this unbelievers), and mark the reason; For,
says he, (speaking of his first coming and ministration) I came not to judge
the world, but to save the world: Now shall any conceive, as if our Savior
gave a weak and forcelesse ground, as, I judge not him that believes not, for
I came not to judge, but to save believing Gentiles; sure that could be no let
to his judging unbeleevers; besides, How shall the Gospel of Christ judge them
that reject Christ, if there were no truth to them in the Word preached to
them, verse. 48, 49, 50 see the opposed Treatise, chap. 13.

5. 2 Cor. 5.19. Its manifest here, that the world, is the world of mankind,
that must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, for many of whom
great terror is feared, etc. as is shown in the opposed Treatise, Chapter 13.
where is Answer sufficient for this, not at all taken away by this opposer.

6. 1 Jo. 2.2. Fore-answers may clear his perverting of this place also: It
being manifest that the opposition is between believers, and unbeleevers; and
for his Exposition, as it is a denial of Christ come in the flesh, so it
crosses much truth himself calls mysteries, for about Christ's taking the
nature of men, and dying for men, there never was difference made between Jew
and Gentile, he that makes the difference to be in that, denies him to be the
Savior of the world; The difference came in after Circumcifion, about freedom
for enjoyment of privileges; And he that by distinction maintains that
difference now, denies Christ to be come in the flesh; and what shall we say
of him that in respect of propiciation, and advocation, in speaking of peace,
pardon, and righteousness, etc. keeps, and holds forth the distinction
between Jews and Gentiles, and considers Gentiles in Christ, opposed to Jews
in Christ; when in these things it is affirmed, there is neither Greek not
Jew, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or free, but Christ is All, and in All, Coloss.
3.11. Gal. 3.28. But I forbear to say what might be said in this, and is
already in the opposed Treatise, 1.

7. The word, Might, in Joh. 3.17. which in this place (says he) does carry
the force of an undoubted and absolute cortaintie; and is as much as shall
certainly be saved: He might be answered here with a flat denial; But I will
deal fairly, and faithfully with him; he knows I am no linguist, and that I
must go by my Dixionary, the name or nowne, Might, signifies power, strength,
force; But the word, or verb, Might, fignifies aften, but potentiall, that
might or may be; and in the Scripture, when it is joined to another word, it
frequently points out one medium effected, that another business may be
effected thereby: And this word, Might, is spoken sometimes Applicatively by
those that enjoy a first fruits of that other business effected by the first
m^dium; and then, Might speaking of a thing fore-done, for the procuring of
that experimentally enjoyed, must needs carry the force of a certainty, and
such are all the places he has quoted, Gal. 1.4. and 4.4.5. Ephesians. 5.25 26,
27. Tit. 2.14 And we neither will nor need deny that force to be in the word in
those places; which yet in his own quotation of them hold forth the
distinction, between the business done by, and in Christ with God for men,
that he might work in men to bring them to God; and that he does thereby so
work in men; which himself has so mightily opposed, and we will grant him
yet a little farther, that the word [Might] has sometime reference to Christ
only, and then it has the force of an absolute certainty, as Heb. 2.14 And
sometime it has reference to those that by grace are made one in Christ, and
reckoned after Christ, and to some peculiar privileges of theirs, and then it
also has much force of certainty, as Heb 9.15 But sometimes it is used more
generally about the death and ransom of Christ, and the means and ministration
procured thereby, with the end thereof, and of any motion of spirit sent forth
therein, and has reference to such as are not yet brought in to God, as are
yet in unbelief: And then the word [Might] though it have a hopefulnesse for
all, and a force of certainty for such as are overome to believe, yet not such
an absolute certainty for all it concerns, that without all doubt they shall
certainly believe, and be eternally saved; surely all that pains and cost was,
that they might bring forth good grapes and yield him the fruit of his
vineyard, which yet they did not, Esaias 5.1-7. Luke 20.9. to 16. But to come to
the word [Might]. Concerning all Nations, whom he made, etc. Act. ^7, 27. That
they should seek the Lord; if happily they might seek after him, and find
him, though he be not far from every one of us; and concerning the Jewish
Nation, in a prophetie of Christ's preaching, and declaration of the testimony,
and Law given them to declare to their children, Psalm. 78 6, 7, etc. That they
might know etc. That they might set their hope in God, and not forget his
works, but keep his Commandments, etc. might not be as their Fathers, A
stubborn and rebellious generation, etc. Now if any with a brazen face would
say; Might, here had the force of an absolute certainty; the sequel in both
places will prove him false, for they did not all so; but to come to the very
Text thus by him abused, Joh. 3 17. For God sent not his Son into the world
to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. Here if
[Might] have the force of an absolute certainty, the world shall certainly be
eternally saved (or otherwise then in, and by himself ransomed, and preserved,
and means used that they might repent, believe, and so be saved) How is that
true, our Savior says of the same world distributed into parts, verse 18. He
that believes on him is not condemned; but he that believes not is condemned
already, etc. verse. 19 36. Where were Mr. Knowles, and Mr. Garners eyes that
durst presume to force such a contradictory sonse on this place; But let us see
this very word [Might] in this Evangelist, and and take the interpretation from
our Saviors own mouth, Joh. 5 32, 33, 34 There is another that bears
witness of me, etc. (now did not John bear witness of the light, that all
men through him might believe, Joh. 1.7. And are not here many of them to whom
he did bear witness, that did not believe: Besides, our Savior in this John
5, farther instiucting and teaching these Jews, Does he not say expressly,
verse. 34. These things, I say, that Jee might be saved (behold the same word
that is in John 3.17) and yet does he not say to the same Jews, Ioh. 5.40. Ye
will not come to me that ye might have life. Oh how contrary is the mind and
exposition of Christ, to the mind and exposition of Mr. Garner, whose corrupt
sense is of ill consequence viz.

8. The words, Gave, Give, Send, Sent, Joh. 3.16, 17. we are every where in
Scripture, speaking of this business, says he. page 79. To understand therein
the everlasting blessedness, and salvation of those for whom God Gave, Sent,
etc. This is so contrary to Scripture, and truth, that nothing need be said
thereof, the next verses 18, 19.36. confuting it, 1 Cor. 6.8. Mark 12 2.8. and
Joh. 6.32. My Father gives you the true bread from heaven; And what was this
less then that, John 3.16, 17. and yet they mist that everlasting
blessedness, etc. John 6.66. 1.

9. The words, Takes away, in Joh. 1.29. Takes away the sin of the world:
Here, and elsewhere, he says, the words Takes away, is, He certainly,
fully, freely, powerfully, and for ever takes them away (and this in some
sense might stand, but he stops not here, but proceeds, and says) it
signifies, a perfect powerful, absolute, and complete removeall, and that for
ever, yea, of the dominion, lordship, merit, wages, power and strength of
sin, so as the one, or the other, shall never return any more; yea, so as
makes to the perfection, and salvation of those from whom he takes them away,
etc. pages 66, 67, 68.

Are not here glorious and high words? Are his own sins thus taken away
think you? (what ever they may be hereafter:) Is he already so much freer then
the Apostles were in their times? To. 7.15.24 and 8.1 2 23. Jam. 4.^ 1 John 1 7
8, 9. But let the business be weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary; Takes
away, both in Scripture, and common use of speech may be truly and rightly
understood: 1. Of one that has taken sin out of the way: 2. Of one that does
it, that is ordained to, and able for it, and will do it in all them that come
to him: 3. Of one that has done it in all that have come in to him; And in all
these senses, it is meant of Jesus Christ.

First, For Taking out of the way: We have two things to note, how sin lies
in the way between God and men, to make a separation, and so to stop the
passages, and make it impassible, either for the mercies of God to be extended
to men, or for men's approach to God: And these are;

1. That great offense of our first Father Adam by which sin entered into the
world, and death by sin; so as all have sinned, and in their receiving of their
being from him, are guilty of, and defiled with and under the power of sin, and
so subject to Law, and Death, Romans 5.12.18, 19 And the truth of God
necessitates his Death; and his Justice necessitates his suffering the curse;
and till both be done, and overcome, there can no mercy be shown to men, nor
is there any passage open for their approach to God; The Winter abides for
impassibility of the way, Heb. 9.22. Now Jesus Christ as a public man in the
nature and stead of all, being manifested to take, away our sins, and being
made a curse for us; and in rising Just, and a Conqueror, offering himself a
sacrifice to God, has done this work, fulfilled truth, and satisfy Justice,
and so mercy and truth meet; and truth is sprung out of the earth, and he has
abolished death, removed out of the way that which was contrary to us, opened a
gate to life, procured mercy to be showed us, so as the Winter is past, the way
passible, and righteousness flows down from heaven, 1 John 3.5.6. Psalm.
85.10.11. 2 Timothy 1.9. Cant. 2.11. Psalm. 136. and 145. So far are all men
indebted to Jesus Christ for so taking sn out of the way, that mercies are
shown them through him, and a gate opened that they might enter, Psalm. 75.3.
Romans 14.9. which might move to submit to him; Though Mr. Garner by denying
this, teach the greatest part of men to deny the Lord that bought them.

2. This Door opened through Christ, and these mercies extended testifying of
him, and calling to him, Act. 14 17. and 17.24.28. Romans 2.4. God being well
pleased in his Son, and delighting in him, looks down from heaven upon the
sons of men, to see if there be any that by all this his goodness extended,
will understand, and seek after him; but alas, men coming to understanding,
and the light of his mercies shining on them, they yet abide in darkness,
impenitencie, and unbelief, hardening their hearts against his mercies, etc.
Psalm. 14. and 53. with Romans 3 10.19. And this most properly is called, The
sin of the world, John 1.4, 5-10, 11. 1 John 5.19. And its terrible to
persist therein, Psalm. 68.18.21. For this provokes more highly then the former;
so as from the love God bears to his Son; it would stop all continuance of
mercies and means, and cause the shutting of the door to repentance and life,
but that even this Jesus, against whom they so sin, does mediate for them by
virtue of his sacrifice, and takes this sin also out of the way; that he
procures lengthening the days of his patience, and continuace of mercies and
means with some strife of spirit to them, 1 Timothy 2.5. Luke 13 6 9. Esaias 53 12.
And for the taking away of their sins, are all men beholding to Christ: yea,
this may be often done, even for some that have sinned deeply, and though
crying in their distress, yet their heart, not upright with him; And they may
come after, for provoking him that so often forgave, and took away wrath, to be
abhorred. See this express. Psalm. 78 37, 38, etc. Numb. 14 17 20. And the more
and ofter Christ has so taken sin out of the way, and removed wrath from men,
the more are they engaged to seek and submit to Jesus Christ, nor can all Mr.
Garners glorious words free them from that engagement.

Secondly, For having fitness, power and readiness, to take away sin even out
of the consciences, and nature of men, and so to be ordained, and set apart as
the He; and the only He, that both can, and will do it in all that in
believing come to him; and is so set forth, and pointed out, that men might
know where to seek and find this; and this also is Jesus Christ the Lamb of
God, by reason of what he has suffered, and done, and received; He is the
Atonement, and propitiation for our sins, even when we believe not, Romans 3 24
and 5 18. 1 John 2.2. and set forth also to be a Propitiation (which sure he is
before set forth) through faith in the blood, to declare his righteousness for
remission etc. Romans 3.25 26. And so there is blessing in him for all Nations,
so as who ever of them, though ungodly, are by his grace drawn in to believe
on him that justifies the ungodly; he receives remission etc. Act. 10.43-46.
Romans 4.5. And so is he set forth, The Lamb of God which etc.

But now here is to be noted; that as Jesus both so has in the two former
respects taken, and takes away the sin of the world; and likewise both is, and
is set forth, the Propitiation for their sins; that has propiated, yea, even
the Propitiation through faith in his blood, able, and ready to take sin out of
the conscience, and nature of all that by his goodness come in to him in
believing on him, Act. 10.43. even so also, this is noted, and that also upon
the very same ground.

1. That those who by all this goodness of God in and through Christ, and by
all these engagements unto Christ, by what he has done for them, and does to
them, and has to bestow on them, are not, and will not be drawn from their
own ways to him, but loving darkness rather then light, remain impenitent,
and unbeleeving, and so they remain still under guilt of sin in conscience,
Joh. 16.8, 9. Under condemnation, Ioh. 3.18, 19. Under wrath, and cannot see
life, Ioh. 3.36. and therefore under sin and condemnation, and wrath, and
cannot see life; even because by all this light and mercy shown, they have not
been prevailed with to believe on his Name, Ioh. 3.18.36. and 16.8. and so they
remain of the world still, lying in wickedness, 1 John 5.19.

2. That such as are overcome by his Spirit, in the appearance of his so great
grace to believe on him; they though ungodly, of the world, and sinners when
they are coming in to him, yet being prevailed with to come in believing on
him, he forgiveth, justifies, washes with the virtue of his blood from the
sins of the world, and so enableth them to receive remission of sins, and to
depend on him for eternal life, Romans 4.5.22.25. and 5.1-6. 8-10. Act. 10.43.
And so in all and every respect he is most truly called, The Lamb of God,
which takes away the sin of the world, or sins of the world.

But now this is to be farther noted; That so many as are by his grace brought
in to believe on him, and so united to him as they are cleansed from the sin of
the world, and begin to partake of the Divine Nature, being borne from above,
and so washed, 2 Pet. 1.2, 3. Joh. 3.3.5. even so though they be still in the
world; yet they are not of the world, nor according to the account of God, and
those taught of God, now reckoned of the world, Ioh. 15.19. and 17.14. but
brought out from the power of darkness and Satan, Act. 26.18. Coloss. 1.13. in
which before they were, and the world still lies. 1 John 5.19. But these are
now borne of God, sons of God, Ioh. 1.12, 13. Gal. 3.26. The seed of Abraham,
the heirs and Israel of God, Gal 3.29. and 6.16. Yea, Sion, Jerusalem, a
people chosen out of the world, Joh. 15.19. 1 Pet. 2 9, not the world: But now
these; while in this life however justified in conscience and spirit made alive
for righteousness sake; and their persons as they are one with Christ, and
partake of the Divine Nature, are sons of God presented in, and through Christ,
spotless before God, and so delighted in; yet as they still carry old Adam
about them, and so have still the flesh, in which dwells no good thing, but an
evil inclination, anoying with its sinful lusts, which God approves, or
justifies not; so by reason hereof, and the temptations of the world, and
Satan, it so falls out, that even believers in many things offend All, and
sometimes some more grievously, Romans 7.15.24. James 3 1, 2. 1 Ioh. 1.9, 10 1
Cor. 5. So that though in spirit, and in respect of their union with Christ and
state of sonship, and being reckoned after him, and so justified; yet in
respect, and the evils of their ways, with which God is not pleased, nor does
justify; but testify displeasure against; they need still to have their feet
washed, and their ways healed, and so their evils, and sins to be still taken
away, till they, and all that which concerns them be perfected, Psalm. 138.8.
Joh. 13.10. Romans 7.14.24. And on this ground of the former done, it is
believed, Isa. 26.12. and prayed for, Psalm. 85.4-6. And this does Jesus Christ
by his everliving to entercede for such, Heb. 7.25. And by virtue of the
spiritual application, and sprinkling of the virtue of his blood, Heb. 9.12.13
14. and 12.24. 1 John 1.7. Now as these in whom he does this, are not the
world, but his Church, and peculiar people; so this work is not expressed in
those terms, Taking away the sins of the world; But the sanctifying,
purging, or taking away the sins of the people, Hebr, 13.12. and 2.17. Tit.
2.14. And The washing, and cleansing of his Church, that in due season he may
present it as spotless to himself; as he now presents it in himself to his
Father, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. And of this sort is that, Isa. 6.7. Romans 11.27. and so
not serving for Mr. Garners ill purpose. 1.

10. The word [Not Imputing] 2 Cor. 5.19. (where it is said) God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses to them;
This he makes all one, and the same with Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered: Blessed is the man to whom the
Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile; (which
latter expression, not mentioned by Paul; two other are put in for it, namely)
Imputes righteousness, and will not impute sin, Romans 4.6, 7, 8. All the same
(says Mr. Garner) with that 2 Cor. 5.19. in pages 116, 117. But on what
ground: Is it any where said, The world believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, or that God imputes righteousness to the world, or that there is no
guile in the spirit of the world, or that God will not impute sin to the world;
or blessed is the world, etc. All which is affirmed of those mentioned, Psalm.
32.1, 2. Romans 4.4-8. Sure he that could treat so of the time of which this
was spoken, might also have seen it spoken of the first Judgment that was to
come on mankind, in which God went to Judgment with his Son, and was
imputing to, and charging on him, and not on the world, their trespasses; and
on that gound will impute sin to the world, for not believing on, and
submitting to him, John 3.17, 18.

But enough of this, and remaining yet unanswered in the opposed Treatise,
Chap. 13. page 66, 67. as also in showing his forced sense on the words, Takes
away sin, in John 1.29. yea, and what will Mr. Garner say of such as have their
sins freely forgiven, and yet afterward both charged with sin, and condemned
for it, Matthew. 18.23. to 35. I hope he will not say. It was such a forgiveness
as is mentioned, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 4.5, 6, 7.

11 The word [Love] in John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son: This, says he, is the everlasting powerful, quickening,
pardoning, and saving love of God in his Son, page 78. (and had he gone no
farther, I would have endeavored to take it, but he adds) Drawing everlasting
love of God to them (yea, he makes it the same with that he had said before)
that the world should be accounted the people of God, and obtain remission of
sins, and salvation by the death of Christ, (to which he abusively quoteth
many places of Scripture, not one of them saying for) page 75.

For answer to him first let the Text be read. Joh. 3.16. where the words are
not, That God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son that the
world should not perish, but have everlasting life; This is Mr. Garners
doctrine, not Christ his Doctrine, or saying; but Christ his saying is; God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him (where is a Distribution sure, Whosoever of the world believes in him)
should not perish, but have everlasting life: (And then it follows) verse. 17.
For God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved; (now his first being sent, and coming into
the world, was not only to dye, and rise, and offer sacrifice; but also to
bear witness of the truth; to preach the Gospel of peace, and that to this
end, that all through him might believe, and be saved, yea, even those who for
not believing were not eternally saved, John 14-7.10.11. and 5.34-40. and
12.46, 47, 48-50. And those that through believing on him partake of this
special salvation, were chosen out of the world, and not reckoned of the world,
John 1.12, 13. and 15-19 and 17.14. And the residue remaining in unbelief,
were reckoned the world still, and so it follows here in the Distribution)
verse. 18. He that believes on him is not condemned (as the world is. 1 John
5.19.) But he that believes not is condemned already, because he believed not
on the Name of the only begotten Son of God; (now mark the explication of
the condemnation of the unbeleevers, who are still reckoned. The world) verse.
19. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world (and is not
this Christ, and the Gospel, and love, light and mercy, held forth there
through, as verse. 14, 15. chap 1457. 9.10.11.) And men loved darkness rather
then light, etc.

Now let Mr. Garner view his charge on others, page 76, 77. and say, Who
wrangles with God, and questions the wisdom of the Holy Ghost for speaking to
us after another manner? Does not he that charge his sayings and expressions,
with error, absurdities and falsehood, and presumes to put independent senses
on his words, and after his phrases, and teach him how to speak? And why
should any of us so do? But secondly, let this also be noted, that though God
be love it self; and so love in him is infinite, glorious etc. yet no love
proceeds from him to, nor can be said to love any of fallen mankind; but in the
gift of his Son, and through his Son: And whom in that gift of his Son, and
through him God is said so to love, as to do them good, and that set forth for
our example; we may see, Matthew. 5 44. to 48. Whence when men by his goodness
shown, and means used by Christ, do not come in to believe, and submit to
him, but take offense, and stumble at, and rebel against him; They are said,
to fight against him without a cause, for his love; to be his adversaries; to
reward him evil for good, and hatred for his love, Psalm. 109 3.4, 5. And when
for contempt of, and rebelling against his love in the fruits thereof he says
(where their wickedness is found) there I hated them, and I will love them no
more, Hosea 9 15. Oh how cross is this to Mr. Garners sense! And yet thirdly,
we might note the Distinction and difference in the streamings of Gods love;
between his love of the world of mankind; and his love of his only begotten
Son that has done his will for mankind, and how of those that believe in
Christ that he loves them, as he loves his Son; But he is no where said to
love the world, as he loves his Son, but enough that remains yet unanswered
by Mr. Garner, and may discover his forced sense upon this place, and clear
all his quotations from siding with him, is already shown in the opposed
Treatise, chap. 15. page 89 to. 94. Though Mr. Garner plead never so much for
wicked men, to make them believe their sins are not against, much less ill
requitals of such love 1.

12 The word Reconciliation, or Propitation, or Atonement (and the like of
pardon, or purgation) 2 Cor. 5.19. Reconciliation here in these words where it
is said, God was in Christ reconciling etc. Is (says Mr. Garner) no less then
Remission of all their sins through faith in Christ, then making them the
righteousness of God by Jesus Christ, page 116. giving them remission of
sins, and putting them in a condition of perfect righteousness, and true
blessedness through faith in Christ, wrought in them by the power of God in
the ministry of reconciliation: No less then salvation through faith in Christ
page 119. (and mind his after explication. says he) No taking away of sin,
no Redemption, Reconciliation, or Atonement wrought for any but by the
sprinckling, or application of the blood of Christ upon them, neither is it any
other way of use to us, neither does it any other way speak good for us before
God, but as it is sprinkled on our consciences by the power of the Spirit: page
194. Neither are any persons redeemed or purchased with the blood of Christ,
not have they any part in his death and blood shed, who have not their
consciences sprinkled with the blood of Christ, neither does his blood any
other way redeem purchase, reconcile; or make Atonement etc. Surely were it not
for the sake of some others, I should no otherwise answer these greiveous
blasphemies of the death, Resurrection, and presenting of the virtue of the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, and his invaluable Sacrifice offered to God his
Father, then they did Rabsh^kah; with silence, Isay. 36.21. For he knows that
in the opposed Treatise, it is shown by, and according to Scripture that there
is none reconciled in heart to God, none Redeemed from among men to God, no
purgation in Conscience, but by the spiritual sprinckling, and application of
the precious blood of Christ, and so in the application, and receipt of that
reconciliation, propitiation, Atonement, Redemption, purgation and
righteousness, which Jesus Christ has by, and in himself wrought with God
for men, and in whom it is perfect and complete, before any receive the same;
and though here through many mercies by him be reached unto men to draw to him;
yet this Atonement, etc. is received no other way, but in receiving him, in
whom it is, and from whom it is never divided, as is also shown in that other
Treatise, of the discourse about the precious blood of Christ; And in this
Reply also, which distinction he has striven to confound, and yet now in his
fashion he would seem to acknowledge it, but to the greatest dishonor to
Christ, and in fury to men, and to Saints also, that ever I saw in any writer,
that confesses Jesus that was borne in Bethlehem, and of the Virgin Mary, to
be the Christ, which yet I hope in part he does, but here in these
affirmations, it is evident without any wresting or gloss.

1. He has denied, That Christ by the virtue of his blood, and Sacrifice
offered to God, has purchased All men, of God, and received the right of
Lord-ship over them thereby, and so a power and right of judgeing them by his
Gospel, and aggravation of their sins, by his blood shed for them, and
mercies extended there through to them: For he has peremtorily affirmed that
there are no persons purchased with the blood of Christ, who have not their
consciences sprinkled with his blood; and that his blood does not any otherwise
purchase then by sprinckling upon the Conscience: And so has plainly denied
the truth of those sayings of the Holy Ghost, To. 149 12. Phil. 2.9, 10, 11.
Acts 10.36 42. Psalm 2.6.10.

2. He has fully denied all that preparation and provision of Redemption,
Reconciliation, Atonement, righteousness, life, and Spirit, which God by
virtue of the precious blood and Sacrifice of Christ presented to him, has
made in Christ to be preached to men, to invite them to come in to him and
receive it, yea, for any, but those that are come in, and have it already; for
he affirmed that there is no taking away of sin, no reconciliation,
Redemption, or Atonement, wrought for any, but by the sprinckling, or
application of the blood of Christ upon them) which is sure in their
in-comming, and within them) and so has denied the truth of these Scriptures,
Joh. 14 5 9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 5.10.14.19, Prove. 9.2.6. Mat. 22.1.14.

3. He has also denied the will of the Father, that all should honor the
Son as they honor the Father, John 5.23. for he denies the Lord Jesus
Christ, the glory of all the mercies, light, means, and spiritual motions, he
by the virtue of his blood and Sacrifice offered to God, has procured for, and
extends to the Sons of men, to call, invite; and move them to repentance,
and turning in to God, for he says plainly, neither is his blood any other way
of use to us, neither does it any other way speak good for us before God, but
as it is sprinkled upon our consciences by the power of the Spirit: And so he
has denied the truth of that affirmed in John 1.4 11. Psalm 75 3. Col. 1.17.
Romans 2.4. Acts 14.17. and 17 26.31.

4. He has also denied the mediation of Christ between God and men, by virtue
of his blood and Sacrifice offered to God 1 Timothy 2.5. Isay. 53.12. yea, and
also his special Advocation, and intercession, by virtue of his precious blood
and Sacrifice with God, for Believers, 1 John 2.1. Heb. 7 25. In that he says;
his blood is no other way to us, neither does it any other way speak good for
us before God, but as it is sprinkled upon our consciences; now in sprinckling
on the conscience, it speaks peace and good to us, and purges within: And if
it had not spoke good for us, and Christ by it had done nothing with God for
us, what is that which brought it to us, or is he of their mind, that thinks
their was no dying of Christ for us, but his dying in us; I hope he is far
from that, but I fort ear, though here is just cause to say further, only he
has denied one part of that mediation mentioned Heb. 9 15.

Thus has he altogether denied, and raced the Gospel, as it is set forth to
be preached to unbeleevers, as a truth, that they might believe, and in
believing might receive, and for not believing be under sin; for he has
affirmed, their is no Redemption no Reconciliation, no Atonemen, (and so no
sin taken out of the way, no pardon, no life obtained, wrought, or made with
God by Christ, or received into the hands of Christ, for men to dispense to
such as believe, that it might be preached to them in his name, that they might
believe (as Paul did to such as yet believed not, Acts 13.36, 37, 38.) but this
man's sayings give out, that of all this there is nothing done with God for any;
by Christ his Dying, Resurrection, Ascension, offering Sacrifice, and mediation
by virtue of all with God, nothing has his blood done for any, till by spirit,
it be sprinkled on their conscience, nor does it any thing with God for any by
his presentment of it to God, nor any other way but by sprinckling upon the
conscience, and sure that is not till they be made Believers, so as they come
to the blood of sprinckling; so that till men be Believers, and first washed by
his blood, there is, by Mr. Garners doctrine, nothing done for them by Christ
of any worth to be told them, to bring them to believe: But there was nothing
2. Cor. 5.19 to occasion such gross conceits; for it is not said of the world,
God has reconciled the world to himself by Jesus Christ, as it is said of
Believers verse 18. nor is it said, God will not impute sin to the World, as
it is said of Believers Romans 4.5.8. nor is it said, God is in Christ reconciling
a part of the World, and so is now, and will be hereafter, neither is it said
verse 21. God made him to be sin for us, and we were then, and therein made
the righteousness of God in him, but it is said, That God was in Christ
reconciling etc. and this set forth as the word of reconciliation put into
their hearts to minister to the world: But so much is said of this in the
opposed Treatise, and this reply, that more need not be said to show the error
of his gross conception, neither was there any thing in the Sacrifices and
purifications under the Law, to occasion in him this gross conception, for he
that reads Moses, and the after histories may see, that there were many for
whom sacrifices were daily offered, and the water of purification made, that
yet for not approaching, and for not being sprinkled were unclean, and to be
cut off, else Israel had not been so often punished Besides, the Gospel being
before even the first Testament; and the sprincklings of the first Testament,
shadows of the sprinckling of the New Testament, which is the choice of the
Gospel, and not to be preached to all men, as the beginning of the Gospel;
about which we treat is, and so this abuse of so many Scriptures to such an
end, has more evil in it then he was aware of, nor do I suppose here to
discover it; such as experimentally know what the new Testament is, will
discern his imiscarrages in this, so that in this, all his senses forced on
words, he has hitherto plainly tought men to deny Christ's Lord-ship over them,
and him to be the author of mrecies extended to them or that there is any hope
etc. yea, even the Saints to deny the prevailency of his intercession before,
or to procure spiritual application; but I am weary with beholding such
unsavory shifts, only it is meet to take notice of the truth, and fulfilling
of those words: 2 Peter 2, 12, 13. For the word Advocation, he takes away the
peculiarity of it, being the special and peculiar part of the intercession of
Christ: And to help it, that his sayings might seem right, he slanders others,
saying; they do separate between the Propitiation, and the Advocation, and
gives out as if they held, that Christ dyed for many for whom he did not Rise,
Ascend, and intercede, pag^ 94, 95 189. And as if some might receive the
propitiation, and not receive the benefit of his Advocation, to which I might
answer with Psalm. 52.3.4. fit weapons for his drift: But all that have read the
opposed Treatise, may know the falsnesse of his charges, and such as read and
believe the Scriptures may see the weakness of his arguings; to make in our
speakings, the Death of Christ, and the Resurrection of Christ, and his
offering himself a Sacrifice to God, distinct works, and to say, the one was
before the other, and the one is not the other, and yet that in altogether he
has made the Propitiation, and is become The Propitiation for the sins of
the whole world, is no deviding of these: Again, to say he is the Propitiation,
before set forth so to men, and to call his making peace with God for men, and
his preaching peace in being, set forth as a propitiation through faith in his
blood etc. and the work of the Spirit inabling by faith to receive him (to
call these I say) distinct works, is not deviding, for whatsoever is in him
for any, that they might believe, yet he is no Propitiation to, or in any, till
they believe, so the mediation of Christ, with God for men, by virtue of his
propitiation considered as a distinct work, is no separating between them:
Again in this mediation to consider the difference between that which is
general for the World, John 17 21 23. Isay. 53.12. and that which is peculiar
for Believers that come to God by him, which is his special intercession: Heb.
7.25. and 9.14, 15. John 17.9.20. and called Advocation, 1 John 2.1. is no
separating between Propitiation, and Advocation, yet is Christ no where called,
the Advocate of the World, no, the Apostle does not say so much, as if any man
sin, he has, but we (Believers) have an Advocate etc. and this general
intercession of Christ for all men, and his special intercession for
Believers, by virtue of one and the same Propitiation, is a ground for such as
yet believe not, to believe, and the medium that produces it likewise, and a
ground of special consolation to Believers, to whom it was a motive,
instruction, and pattern, how to pray for all men and how to pray for
believers: But M. Garners sense and interpretation, shuts the door of hope
against all that already believe not, and so takes away the ground of
lawfulness for praying for all men; for Kings, Magistrates, or Subjects, yea,
for any of them, till we know them first to believe; but enough was said for
this in the opposed Treatise, that he has not answered, as may there be seen,
c 5. p. 32. c. 11. p. 58, 59. c. 17 p. 1 9 112. and 192.

XV.
To come toward an end, the last of his ways to prove his business, that I
will mention, is a pretense of unvailing Mysteries, the truth is, I should have
conceived the florrishing Title to have been put on by the Printer, and not
himself, as it befell me in the Title of the Treatise he opposes, but that I
find this in Master Knowles Epistle to the Churches: There are diverse mysteries
concerning our Redemption by Jesus Christ unvailed in this small Treatise, yea,
such by his affirmation, as will make known the knowledge God has given Mr.
Garner: And Mr. Garner in his Preface calls it, this ensuing and unvailing
Treatise, and so confirms the Title. Mystery unvailed, and the truth unvailed
by Robert Garner: A fair pretense, and confidently affirmed, to make his
opinion to be received; but yet he must give us leave to try all things, and so
this pretense, that we may embrace and hold fast that which is good, and
refuse the rest.

1. It might be queried what he means by Mysteries, whether that which is
hidden, and now by him first revealed, and then he should show himself rashly
puffed up with his fleshly mind, intruding into things he has not seen, as will
appear, 1 John 3.2. Col. 3.3, 4. and 2.18. or whether he mean that which was
hidden and kept secret with God, but now has bin manifested in the person, and
by the Spirit of Christ, and by the Apostles made known and left upon Record,
and then his pretense has a secret denial of Christ come in the flesh, and of
the truth of the Apostles record and testimony, Romans 16.25, 26. or whether he
means, that which was hid, and is made known, but has a depth of excellency
in it beyond conception, and then he usurpes the office of the Holy Ghost, 1
Cor. 2.9, 10-15. or whether he mean it of that which is manifested and made
Known, but veiled so with superstitions, false glosses and interpretations,
that till confuted, men cannot rightly see that which is: This is the fairest
and best sense to take him in, and thus I conceive his meaning to be, though
herein he wrong and rob others of their due, and arrogate to himself boasting
of other men's line,

2. It might be demanded which of, or how many of the Mysteries he means,
seeing he pretends unvailing mysteries; for the Scripture, and Spirit therein
speaking of this glorious life and blessedness in and by Christ, calls it the
mystery, Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 3.3, 4 9. Col. 1, 26, 27. The mystery of God, Col.
2 2. the mystery of Christ, Col. 4.3. the mystery of the faith, 1 Timothy 3.9. the
mystery of godliness, verse 16, the mystery of his will, Ephesians. 1.9. the
mystery of the Kingdom, Mark 4.11. yea, the wisdom of God in a mystery, 1
Cor. 2.7. So that as God and Christ is on, so the mystery is one, which I say
not to fault his saying, mysteries, for which some destinctions he may so say
rightly, Mat. 13.11. (but then he should not have cried down distinctions as
divisions and separation, when he must be driven to use them, and shall not be
so charged) for the same that he calls unvailing mysteries, he calls the truth
unvailed; and I will take him every way in the best and most favorable sense;
for the truth; or this life and blessedness in Christ, the wisdom of God and
the power of God may be considered, as it was ordained and prepared of God in
Christ, and so was in him perfect, even Propitiation, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, redemption, everlasting Covenant, inheritance, Kingdom, glory,
union, and fellowship with God, and eternal life; all was prepared by God in
Christ, 1 Peter 1.20. and in Christ, John 1.4. and was with the Father, 1 John
1.1, 2. though hid with God in Christ, Col. 3.3. And also it may be considered
according to the several degrees of Gods revealing and giving, and so Jesus
Christ the Propitiation in the very nature of man, to take away sin, abollish
death, and overthrow the works of the Devil, that so such as believe in him
might have life, and the reside reserved to judgment, this was made known in
some measure, and believed also, before any difference was between Jew and
Gentile 1 John 3.5, 6. Gal, 3.15 Jude 14, 15. Heb. 11, 2 7. So that I conceive
he means not this discovery: Again, God made known to Abraham the Gospel more
fully, and so made known to him that Christ should come of him, That in him all
Nations should be blessed, revealed to him the everlasting Covenant, for the
spiritual seed, the multiplicity, union and stability of the same seed, and
their certainty of enjoying the inheritance, and made that Covenant fore
confirmed in Christ with Abraham, for all the spiritual seed, which yet made
no difference between Jews and Gentiles, according to the flesh, Genesis 12.3. and
15.5.6. and 17.1-8. and 22.17. Gal. 3.8, 9.16.29 but I will not charge it on
him, to mean it of this discovery.

Again, that Christ should suffer and overcome, and see his seed, and of the
travel of his soul, and that he should be Gods salvation, and show forth
judgment to the Gentiles, and that God would make a new Testamentall Covenant
with his People, and power out his Spirit on all flesh, was still further
revealed to, and by the Prophet: Isay 53. and 42.19 6. and 49 6 Jer. 31. Joel
2. Neither did this put the difference between Jews and Gentiles: Yet I cannot
though feign I would, clear him from intending it of this discovery, but I
pass it yet; as also the showing what made the difference, and wherein it was,
of that in fit place.

But all this while, the manner of his coming, his Birth, exile, return,
manner of life, his preaching, with the manner of all his sufferings, death,
burial and resurrection, ascension, offering Sacrifice, exaltation, and
filling in our nature, with the pouring out of the Spirit, and giving the
precious promises of the new Testament, though fore mentioned by the Prophets,
yet not clearly, but as a thing still hid with God, till it come to be
fulfilled and acted by Jesus Christ our Lord, the Holy Ghost also bearing
witness of him; and then, and so was this mystery unvailed, Luke 24.44-48.
Romans 1.15. and 16.25, 26. 2 Timothy 1.10. And the Apostles were the first makers
known and revealers of this Mystery, so as Mr. Garner cannot be the unvailer in
this sense, nor I suppose does he so mean, though of these things I suppose he
means, for to them one head of his mysteries are belonging: And yet further,
the Gentiles free participation of the benefit of al these things by the Gospel,
and so to be fellow heirs, and of the same body, and to have fellowship in all
the privileges of Israel, without Circumcision or any outward observance to
under them to the Jews, and to make them of the Jewish Nation, this also was
not clear but a hidden thing, till performed by Christ, and testified by his
Spirit, and so it was manifest to the Apostles, who were the first declarers
and makers of it known, Acts 10. and 11. Col. 1.23.26, 27. Ephesians. 3 4, 5, 6, 7.
And in this sense Master Garner cannot be the unvailer, nor I believe will say
he is; though of this and the former he must needs be understood to mean by
Mysteries: For the glory of Believers estate at the appearing of Christ though
revealed that it shall be, and they shall be like Christ, yet how glorious, and
what that same is, is a thing that is still hid in God with Christ, and will
not be manifested till he do come again in glory, and appear visibly, Col. 3
3, 4. 1 John 3.2. and I hope M. Garner would have none to count him the
unvailer of this.

3. It might be questioned what he means by Vnvailing, whether the
manifestation and evidencing that it might appreare; but that is the work of
God in and by Christ effecting, and the Spirits testifying as is shown, or the
first making known, publishing, and witnessing, but this was the business of
the Apostles and first witnesses, who had the whole Gospel immediately from
Christ his own person as is shown, or whether he mean only the blowing away of
some mists, and removing some darkness cast on by men's deceits,
interpretations, and glosses, this is the most charitable sense to understand
him in, though in this sense he is not an unvailer, but a gleaner out of those
that have done it, yet in this sense I understand him.

4. It might also be inquired, how he conceived that he should unvaile
mysteries, whether by setting them forthinwords, or by some spiritual shine
and demonstration removing the veil from the heart, and giving an eye to see,
surely this latter he is far from presuming to do, knowing it is the
peculiar work of the Holy Ghost. John 14.26. and 15, 26 and 16.13, 14. 1 Cor.
2.10 11. But the former he must needs intend to do it by, and with words,
which if he intend rightly to do, he must do it by the Scriptures of the
Prophets and Apostles, for so is the commandment of the everlasting God, Romans
16.25, 26. their sayings are a light. 2 Pet. 1.19 and not lift up by his
understanding to find out better and fitter words to express the mind of God
in, and call the plain appearing sense his words and sayings hold forth, a
corrupt sense, and then say, they most be understood under another notion, and
call his formed sayings the true sense, and the mind of God, as is usual with
him, his constant drift being not to unvaile, but to veil the Scripture
sayings, and therein he is not like to be very profitable in unvailing
mysteries: But let the Reader of his Book parpend how many mysteries he has
unvailed: Mr. Knowles says their are diverse of them, and himself calls his
whole Treatise an unvailing Treatise, surely his confounding of things, that
are by the Spirit in the Scripture language distinct, and his private sa^cied
senses forced on many words, in many places of Scripture should be put in to
make many; but they are mists not Mysteries unvailed: But I will note those he
expressly calls Mysteries, and though they might be all expressed in three, yet I
will do him right to be as numerous as I may.

THE FOVRTH PART.
I. Mystery Unvailed.
THat there is no way to life and salvation but through Jesus Christ only. p.
33. the only way to life everlasting, is through believing in the Son of God,
page 88. there is no remission of sins, reconciliation, or redemption, but
only through faith in the blood of Christ: The two former sentences verily
true, and the latter if he had put it in, no reconciliation etc. received, but
only through faith (for it is in him before receipt) and taking it so, I
acknowledge this first of them a most sweet, precious, and useful truth, but
this acknowledgement is too scant to bear the name of the Mystery, for whether
men believe it or not: He is the way the truth and the life: John 14.6. The
Christ the Son of the living God, the Savior of the World, the Lord of all,
the head and Husband of the Church, That whosoever believes on him, may
receive remission of sins, etc. And this was declared before his
manifestation in the flesh, by the Prophets Isay. 28.16. Acts 10.43. and the
Apostles more fully and clearly have set him forth, both Jesus to be he, and
that there is no other: Acts 4.10, 11, 12, And as for the rubbish and mysts
brought in by the Superstitious, exalters of Justification by works, blessed
be God, they have been removed by diverse of Gods servants before our days, and
this part of truth more fully, and clearly held forth by many in our days,
then in his Treatise. who yet have not styled themselves the unvailers, though
teachers thereof, yea, such the blessing of God, that very many, yea, some
children under 14. years of age know and believe not only the negative, but
that, and the affirmative part of this also, so that we can no way count Mr.
Garner, the unvailer of this Mystery, yea, we cannot overlooke his evil drift
in his pretense of unvailing this Mystery, even to veil and cast a mist on 2
Cor. 5.14, 15. John 3 16, 17. and 1 John 2 2. to hide (that he might deny) the
extent of the grace of God, and his preparation in Christ for men, and tender
to them, and so shut the door against the greatest number of men, from having
any right, or liberty to look to Christ to be saved, or any hope in so doing.

II. Mystery.
That Christ dyed for all, that is, for all Nations, or all kindreds of people,
both Jews and Gentiles, that so all Nations of the world might enjoy life, and
salvation through the death of Christ, page 34, 35 and 124. though the latter
part of his expression be very scant, and not as Scripture expresses, yet this
rightly understood without wresting is also true and useful; but this sure was
declared by the Prophets, and more plainly by the Apostles, Luke 24.26, 27. 1
Cor. 15.3.4. And is taught by many; but his drift in pretending to unvaile this
Mystery, is to cast a veil on, 2 Cor. 5.14.15. and other places, as if full of
darkness, and equivocation, that he might deny All, to be All, and call the
smallest and fewest number in all Nations, all Nations for which he has no
ground, nor when Christ first undertook for mankind, were there such
diversities of Nations; And as all were made of one blood; so in that Nature,
he dyed, and rose, and when he rayseth them for whom he dyed, and rose, it will
not be with such distinctions of Nations, kindreds, and degrees, so that this
is a very poor shift to evade plain Truth withal.

III. Mystery.
That the grace of God by the death of Christ is more abundantly enlarged and
stretched forth then in former ages, page 98 99. Those Mysteries of salvation
under many shadows, was limited only to the Jewish Nation, now by his
appearing and suffering in the flesh; Those Mysteries are not only more clear
in themselves, as being wholly unvailed by the Sacrifice of himself, but also
the benefit of them is enlarged far, and wide unto all the Nations of the
earth; who before had never heard of, nor known the sweetness of them. page
130, 131. The first saying is verily true, and the latter also, as it may be
understood of the sufferings, Sacrifice of Christ by his Spirit made known,
and so its sweet, and useful, and was foretold by the Prophets that it should
be so, Isa. 44. Joel 2. and by Apostles, and others experimented and witnessed,
Act. 2. and 10. Heb. 2.1 4. And is so in some measure to this day; and if then
wholly unvailed, why presumes he to pretend to unvaile, besides the benefit of
the Death, and Sacrifice of Christ has in some sort been participated of, by
all Nations from the beginning of the world, and still is, Joh. 1. 4 5-9, 10.
Act. 14.17. and 17.26.28. And for tasting the sweetness of the choice
privileges manifested, and abundance of grace powered forth, it is hard for him
to prove, that all and every Nation, and kindred, Among the Turks, Tartars,
Pagans, Indians, and Salvages do taste thereof. Though the fewest amongst all,
be not all Nations etc. Though his pretense of unvailing, be to cast a veil on
what the Apostles spoke without vailing, 2 Cor. 3.14. Act. 13.47. 1 John 2.2.
and 4.14. That he might limit the extent of truth delivered by them.

IV. Mystery.
That Manna was appropriated by God to the Jewish Nation only, but this true
Bread Jesus Christ, he is not limited unto the Jewish Nation only, as that
Manna was, but he is sent of God to give life; everlasting life unto the
Nations of the Gentiles, the Heathen, the World, p. 101, and 102. This he calls
A glorious Mystery: But sure, had he understood it, he would have expressed it
rightly, and so I should have confessed his saying true; but as he has expressed
it, I know not well how to say, it is truth; for its not proveably that Manna
was restrained to the Jewish Nation only, for a mixed multitude went up with
them out of Egypt, and they were not Israelites, or Jews neither by birth, nor
circumcision, for then had they been counted the same; but how to understand a
mixed multitude distinct from Israel, we see in comparing Exo. 12.38 and Neh.
13.3. And this mixed multitude, that also had of the Manna, and did first loath
and murmr, did stir up the children of Israel to murmur, Nu. 11.4.10. Egypt
typing the worldly state; If the fewest of all Nations be all Nations, as Mr.
Garner would have us understand, how many Nations did then partake of Manna;
let him tell us next. But again, that Jesus Christ was, or is sent of God to
give everlasting life unto the Nations of the Gentiles, the Heathen, the World,
he affirms in his own name, as if he were God; for he has no place of
Scripture so saying, for though he give life to the world, yet everlasting
life, he neither gives, nor was sent, or is appointed to give, but only to
those that by the heavenly call are brought in to believe on him; who are
therein chosen out of the world, and from among the Nations, and no Heathens
then, Joh. 3.16. and 6.40. and 17.2 14, yet sure there is a glorious Mystery
unvailed in the Scripture, showing all that was typed or shadowed by Manna,
found and fulfilled in and by Christ Jesus.

1. Manna, was sent from Heaven; corn of Heaven; for which the People did,
neither Plow, Sow, nor reap, but it was prepared, and freely given by God to
relieve the people in a great straight Exodus 16.4. Psalm 78.24 So Jesus Christ
was not of man's devising or getting, but prepared and sent of God, that the
lost world might be saved: 1 Peter 1.20, Job 33.24. John 3.16, 17. 1 John 4.14.
And the same may be said both of the Gospel 2 Peter 1.16.20. and of that light
and mercy vouchsafed through him to men, John 1 4, 5 9. how much more of
eternal life given to Believers: 1 John 5.11, 12. Romans 6.23. in with, and by
Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. Manna, was both corporal meat in some sense, to preserve the natural life
for a season, that they might have time of repentance and seeking the Lord;
Exodus 16.35. Psalm 78.25. and in some sense it was spiritual meat, being a
type of Christ the bread of life; John 6.31, 32, 33. an ordinance or medium, in
eating whereof, they might have looked up to Christ and fed on him; and so
shadowing the Gospel and supper of the Lord, and other his ordinances, more
clear mediums: 1 Cor. 10.1 5. And it was one instruction to live by faith, and
a probation whether they would or no, Eezek. 16.4. Deuteronomy. 8.1.2, 3. even so
Jesus Christ is he that gives life, light and mercy to the world, that they
may have space and means to repent and come in to him: John 1.4, 5-9. and 6.33.
Acts 17.24 28. Col. 1.17. And he it is that has given and gives his Gospel,
the supper and other ordinances, as spiritual meat and mediums, in eating
whereof, men believing might even feed on him, 1 Cor. 10.14.15, 16, 17. And he
himself is that bread of life, which whosoever feeds on shall live for ever,
John 6.48, 49, 50, 58 And as all his Gospel, ordinances and mercies instruct
to, so he himself leads those that feed on him to live by faith: Gal. 2.20.
And the teaching, tender, and offer of him is a probation of men: John 3, 18,
19, 20. all this clear in and by Christ.

3. Manna, was a healthful and sufficient food, and spiritual meat for them
all; all Israel and the mixed multitude; and common for them, so as their
natural lives were preserved by it, and they might have received instruction
by it, in eating it to have looked to Christ that was to come, and learned to
live by faith: Exodus 16.4.18.35. Number. 11.4 8. Neh. 9 20. Devt. 8.1, 2, 3, 16.
And yet with those that in eating this corporal and spiritual meat, did not
receive instruction to look to Christ, and live by faith, God was not well
pleased; but they perished, 1 Cor. 10.1-10. even so Jesus Christ is the savior
of All men, 1 Timothy 4 10. and a sufficient Savior for the World, John 3.17.
John 4.14. and he has a common salvation, Jude 3. His light and mercy
extends to all, to preserve their natural life, and lead to repentance, John
1.4, 5 9. and 6.33. Romans 4.2. His Gospel to be preached to all Mark 16.15.
and that, and his Ordinances, spiritual meat for all that come out of
Egyptian darkness, to the acknowledgeme^t of the Gospel; that in eating such
spiritual meat, they might come to Christ and feed on him, which those that in
eating spiritual meat do not, God is not well pleased with them, Judge. 3.4, 5.
1 Cor. 10.1 11. but to all that come in by faith to feed on him, he gives
eternal life, John 6.

4. Manna, was ground in a Mill, or beaten in a mortar, and then Baked, fried
or sodden, and so was their meat to eat, Ex. 16.23. Numb. 11.8. So Jesus
Christ suffered, and dyed for our sins, and rose for our justification, and
by the eternal Spirit offered up himself a spotless Sacrifice to God, and by
virtue of all this, and nothing less then this, is he the bread of life, John
6.48 62, 63. and gives life to the world, John 6.33. and eternal life to
those that in believing feed on him. John 6.47.

5. Manna, fell and came down in and with the dew of Heaven, Exodus 16.14 13.
Numb. 11.9 Even so Christ was freely given in the love of God, John 3.16. and
all mercies extended through him, are fruits of his grace, Romans 4.2. But he
himself is made known* and given to men in, and with the Gospel, 1 Peter 1.21
25. that is dew, Deuteronomy. 32.2, 3. and by the Spirit that is heavenly Dew: John 15
26. 1 John 5 6. Isay. 44.3, 4. much more might be said, as, How Manna was
gathered on the six days, and not on the Sabbath, so Christ and his Gospel,
to be embraced in this life, or else he will not be found after, and how that
as Manna was sweet to the taste, so Christ and his Gospel: but I forbear
either further similitudes, or dissimillitudes, others have by the Scripture
shown them before Mr. Garners time or mine; so that he in this has unvailed no
mystery, but strove to cast a vail on John 6.33 51. to obscure the plainly
appearing sense, and to make men believe that the life of the world, and the
life of Christ, that eternal life he gives to them that in believing he draws
out of the world; is all one and the same life: a gross and absurd conceit.

V. Mystery.
That the real manifestation and suffering of Christ in the flesh; his
personal Death upon the Tree, was more wonderful glorious, and mystical in
respect of the declaration of the wisdom, power, and grace of God which did
more wonderfully shine forth in it, then either the promises or shadows of his
Death, so it was more wonderful and glorious then those, in respect of the
power and fruit of it also, which was the breaking down the partition wall,
which was between Jews and Gentiles, it was the beginning of life, and
salvation unto all Nations of the world, p 111, 112, 113, 114 and 126. He calls
'it the glorious saving power of the Death of Christ, and surely I am ready to
acknowledge the dying of Christ, precious, powerful, glorious, etc. and the
Death of Christ exceeding in power, glory and fruitfulness, and that to
Gentiles also: But this has been unvailed by the Apostles, and is clearly held
forth in preaching and writing generally; and so not unvailed by Mr. Garner;
who has rather veiled the plainly appearing truth, then unvailed the mystery
in his expressions; for the Death of Christ was gloriously, and savingly
powerful, even before his actual dying, and that to mankind; and in Believers
from Adam to Noah, and from Noah to Abraham, before there was any Nation of
Israel distinct from Gentiles; Heb. 11.1.8. and when that distinction was; it
did not limmit the power of his Death to Israel, muchlesse did it limmit it to
the jews; it only limmitted the enjoyment of the privileges of the first
Testament to them, and yet not so but that the door was open for any Gentile of
any Nation, in submitting and coming in by Circumcision to be one people with
them, they might enjoy, Exodus 12. and 13. though through the pride of the
Gentiles, this became a partition wall: And yet farther through Christ was much
glorified, in being enabled to dye such a death, and mercy and truth met
therein; yet the Holy Ghost speaks of the personal sufferings and dying of
Christ as of an abasement Isay. 53. 2 Cor. 5.21. Phil. 2.7 8. and of his
resurrection, as that wherein he was mightily declared to be the Son of God
Romans 1.4. and says expressly, notwithstanding his denying, that if he had not
risen, we had been yet in our sins, and faith and preaching vain: 1 Cor.
15.17. And that he is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior etc. Acts 5.31. and
received (spirit) gifts in the man (for men) even for the rebellious also, That
the Lord God might dwell among them, Psalm 68 18, and by this spirit making
known, and applying the death of him that is risen, that was once dead, and is
alive for evermore, it is that his death is so glorious, powerful, and saving
in men, as is foreshown; But Mr. Garner says expressly, that to dye for men,
and to gather them together in one, is one and the same thing, page 126. so
that he does but talk confusedly when he talks of sprinckling, for
blood-sheding and blood sprinckling are by this saying one and the same thing,
so that here he vailes the mystery in Scripture unvailed,

VI. Mystery.
That Christ was fore promised to be a light in the Gentiles, revealing in them,
and giving to them remission of sins, salvation, life everlasting, through
says in Christ: page 128 And that unto all those to whom he is a light (which
himself expounded in many places to be all the Nations of the earth, All men,
the World, the whole World, the Gentiles etc) he reveals himself in them,
drawing their hearts to believe in him unto life everlasting; page 129. This is
the main and bottom matter, the grand mystery, and swaying and interpreting
truth, which though in many places he puts down in his own name, yet he takes
it for granted none will deny it; this streams through his Book from the
beginning to the end, and is the ground of his forcing his private sense on so
many places of Scripture, this is it led him to such expressions in his
unvailing Mysteries: This is it with which he answers Mr. Lambs reasons; this
is the maine matter and bottom proof for his confounding the destinctions at
first, and for raising his conclusions at last; and to speak as the truth is,
if he have unvailed any one Mystery, this is it, but whether it be a mystery of
truth or no that remains to be tried; for he has brought no proof nor
testimony for the truth of it, but his own affirmation, and Mr. Knowles
aprobation, and that is to light for proof; for we have no Rabby to take any
point of faith from, for his own authority or testimony but only Christ, Mat.
23.8. nor are we to esteem any light in his sayings, that adds to, or takes
from, or speaks besides, and otherwise then the sayings of Christ in the
Gospel. Isay. 8 20. Gal. 1.6, 7 8 9. Rev. 22.18, 19. Besides Mr. Garners
expressions are somewhat harsh and dangerous, giving to much aprobation to the
opinion of those that will speak as gloriously of the death of Christ as he,
and yet concerning Jesus that was borne in Bethlehem, ^e out of us dying and
rising, and offerering Sacrifice for us, and so a propitiation with God for us,
and this made known to us, concerning that in his person without us, by word
and Spirit and all effecacies thereof, are nothing but Christ after the flesh,
and knowing him after the flesh; And they exalted a Christ, that is the Son of
God, the Savior, the propitiation, they say, and in every man, Dying in a man,
and rising in a man, and this their happiness, when this in them is revealed
to them; quite besides the Scripture; the next step to Athisme; And Mr. Garners
expressions are come very near to it; but to say the least in this expression
of his mystery that with faithfulness can be said, he wrongs the Scripture:
Isay. 52.15. and 9.1, 2. Mat. 4 14, 15. That speaks of Christ personal
coming to the Jews, and preaching the Gospel to them, and that Gentiles also
might enjoy the same, As if Zabulun and Napthaly, because bordering upon, and
in the way of the Gentiles were Gentiles, and as if the Gospel preaching by
Christ, come in the flesh were not a great light among them yea, no light, but
only to those in whom Christ was revealed, giving them remission of sins and
everlasting life; yea, he alters the language of the Holy Ghost, who speaking
of the life and propitiation in Christ, and the Salvation in him as set forth,
shining and tendered in the Gospel, says; It is for men; John 1.4, 5.9. The
world, 1 John 2.2. All Nations to the ends of the Earth: Act. 13.47. But
speaking of the same received and enjoyed, he says it is in believers that are
borne of God: John 1.12, 13. and 3.3.5-16. a people chosen out of the world and
not of it, John 15.19. and 17.14. redeemed unto God out of every kindered,
tongue and people, and Nation: Rev. 5.9. yea, he contradicts the very
testimony of the Holy Ghost, that says of the life of Christ, John 1.4, 5. It
is the light of men, and the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not: But this man says, he is a light of, or to none but
those in whom he reveals himself, and draws their hearts to believe on
him, and so also denies the doctrine of Jesus Christ; John 3.19. that says;
This is the condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness etc. and hate the light; which this man denies, saying, that Christ
is no such light to any, that they may take offense at it, or so as they may
for that be condemned, for if he extend any light, they believe, etc. surely
our Savior said well, Mat 6.23. If the light that is in a man be darkness,
how great is that darkness! And so if Mr. Garners grand opinion and most
esteemed truth and Mystery, that must season all the rest, be filled with so
much darkness, no marvel his whole Treatise be full of darkness: To conclude
his mysteries with his affirmation concerning Jesus Christ, being a light to
the Gentiles etc. That mystery was not in being till Christ's manifestation and
suffering in the flesh, page 115. and 123. and 131. I confess this is my
sterially expressed, and had need to have been better explicated, that it might
be acknowledged true, for certain the word, the Son of God, that is the
Christ, in whom is all the mystery of God, and the life in him, that is the
light of men was verily in being before he took flesh: John 1.2, 3, 4.14 1
John 1.1, 2. yea, and the calling of the Gentiles was fully in the Scriptures of
the Prophets, though the flesh of Christ and his actual and personal death,
resurrection, and Sacrifice, was not so in being, till acted, and then the
mystery concerning Gentiles co^version, not made known in his dying but by his
Spirit after his resurrection and ascension, Acts 2. and 9. and 10. and 11 Col.
3.5. So that in all this view of his expressed Mysteries, one may clearly see,
that 1. he has only pretended to, and boasted of, but not unvailed any
mystery. 2. He was out of his place, and out of the way of Christ and those
taught of him, to pretend and assay to talk of the high, and deep mysteries,
when he is discoursing of the beginning of the Gospel of Christ, the
foundation of repentance to draw in unbeleevers to believe, and help forward
the weakest: Christ and his did not so: John 16.12. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. 2 Cor. 3.12.
and 4.2. Heb. 5, 12.

3. He took a wrong course to discover mysteries, in that he strove to find
them in, and fetch them out of such words as, All men, All nations, the world,
the whole world; It had been more seemly to have done it in, and out of the
names and titles of Christ and his members, as Jesus Christ our Lord, the Son
of God, the Savior of the world, Emanuel, the seed etc. though indeed the
mysteries are unvailed in full sayings of the Gospel.

4. He wrongs the sayings of the Gospel, in pretending as if the sayings
therein about the foundation, and things absolutely needful to salvation, were
dark and full of mysterious equivocation, as his own sayings are, that so he
might have his fancies admired and received for truth, as is shown in this
reply.

5. In all his acknowledgements of truth, he has come short of those that have
gone before him, if not of those he opposes, let their writings testify.

6. In all his pretense of unvailing Mysteries, he has missed the very
mentioning of them, as Scripture does, which are plainly unvailed and set forth
therein. and yet in such words of wisdom and truth (without any equivocation)
as by reason of the veil over the heart, till it turn to the Lord, none
clearly see, prize, or understand, without some spiritual illumination, and
opperation of the Holy Ghost; that turns the heart to the Lord, and gives
both the eye to see; and some experimental taste thereof: 2 Cor. 3 17 18. As,

1. The freeness, riches, and glorious love of God in the gift of his Son,
and the reconciliation wrought, and hope laid up in him, this shining through
the death of Christ upon the heart of a man, so as when a man is found in his
filth and enmity, and sees nothing in himself, to difference him from others,
or encourage him to look to God; yet such the power of his death when this
love is commended through it, and the power of the love through it commended,
as it pulls a man from out of himself dependances and delights, and from the
worlds state, way and fellowship, and reconcileth him to God, enabling him to
believe on Christ, renewing the heart etc. Romans 5.5 8.10.11. Tit. 3.4 5, 6, 7.

2. The special interests, privileges, and gifts confirmed on these that are
so brought in to believe, even all the privileges of the new Testament, even
the holy Spirit to mind them of Christ, and teach them the things of him, and
write his mind in their heart; to lead them, indue them, with gifts, make them
useful etc. John 1.12, 13. and 14.16, 17, 26. and 16.13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 2.9,
10.11. Heb. 9.14, 15.

3. The intercourses of love; the streams and springs, the secret hints of
light, and whispers, the co^munications and receipts, between Jesus Christ and
the heart of the Church, or souls of unfeigned Believers: Cant. 1. and 2. and 3.
and 4. etc. In all which, is some experimental knowledge of that great
mystery, God manifested in the flesh etc. These are mysteries plainly declared,
and evidenced in words of truth and wisdom, that are a light, yet rightly
known, discerned, and prized of none without the spiritual teaching of the
Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 2.8.15

7. He has come short of expressing those mysteries, or that mystery he has
most busied himself to unvail, which also though with brevity, is more plainly
and fully expressed in the Treatise that is by him opposed, as may be there seen
in chap 14. page 78.81, 82, 83, 84. And Oh that he rightly knew this mystery as
it is unvailed; That the Gentiles should be fellow-heires, and of the same body,
and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel: Ephesians. 3.6. By
circumcission, and being endeered too, and made one with the Jews by Mosaicall
observances; It was not doubted, by any of the Believing Jews in the primitive
times But without this, and only by the Gospel, this was not so known before
now what was their inheritance, what was their body, how did they partake of
the promise; did not the Word, Oracles, Covenants, and services of God
belonging to them, and to their children, Romans 3.2. and 9.4, 5. Acts 2. was not
in their body, Israel, and the Israel of God, the outward, and the inward
Church, had not they heirs in hopefulnesse, and heirs indeed, were not their
Infants discipled: I conceive; They that know the Gospel and this mystery,
well, would not deny the Infants of professed Believers, to be received into the
Church by Baptism with water, nor renounce that to take up another; And it yet
seems strange to me, that any of the same says and Judgment with me in the
Gospel, should be of the same opinion, and practice with him about the
Ordinance of Baptism: But I love them in the truth we believe, not the less,
nor shall shrink from witnessing it, because he has joined me in his Treatise
with them, nor like his cause the better: And in answering thus far his whole
Treatise is answered; and in the Treatise he opposes, particular answers may
be found at large; which I will not again transcribe, Mr. Lambs Reasons abide,
and are so weakly answered, that more then is said need not be said; and if it
were, M. Den or he, I question not have, or will do it, only this I say, by such
ways and dealings with the Scripture, as he has gone in if it were received,
any heresy may be countenanced and all the grounds of Religion denied, and
Paganism, or Athisme ushered in, give but way, under pretense of unvailing
Mysteries, to deny the sayings of the Scripture, to have the sense they import,
for another sense, by other words to be brought in, and whether then may one be
drawn from one to another till they come to nothing; wherefore my desire is,
that all men would heed the Scripture, and take heed to the plain sayings of
the Gospel, and suffer the Grace of God appearing therein to reprove and take
us off from every folly, and to inamour our hearts with God and Christ, and so
carry us to live by faith, and walk in love, as the Gospel of Christ
directs us.

And know, that Gospel is true and good in all it says, and that of, for, or
to every one, Oh far be it, that any called Christians, should make the Gospel
of Christ like the Lottaries of some men, in which are more blancks then
prizes, and where men must cast faith at an adventure, and such as declare it,
sound it before all, not knowing to whom it belongs, let it light where it
will; nor as Mr. Garner, that sets forth such, and so many works of the Spirit
in a man to know Christ dyed for for him, and must call on men first to forsake
vain confidence, and turn from their evil ways, and then believe, and says
no propitiation, no life that is perfect in Christ for men, til by believing it
be in them, and yet unsayeth again, and cries down every thing in a man, to be
as a preparation to believe; In which he does well, but his doctrine affords no
ground of faith without it. For upon what ground should any man forsake vain
confidences, and evil ways, and then believe, if there be nothing true in
Christ for him before he believe, surely if this be not a sandy or aerie
foundation, no other can be so: But know that the Gospel is good news for and
to every one to whom it comes, which could not be (howglorious soever) if not
true, and true it will be found to all, so as if they do not receive it, and
suffer it to save them, it will be their judge, and send them without excuse to
condemnation, whence even such as refuse the tender, are willed to be sure, the
Kingdom of God was come nigh to them, and that the word they refused to suffer
to save them, shall judge them: Luke 10.5.11. John 12.47.50. These. 2.10.11, 12.
Wherefore take heed that none of us refuse to receive the love of the truth
that we may be saved; but attend and yield there-too; and be not deceived,
God, will not be mocked, nor suffer Mr. Garners Mysterious deceits, though
approved by Mr. Knowles, to keep, or withdraw us from belief and obedience to
the Gospel, and sayings of Christ; And so I for bear any farther following
him, in any farther discovery of his errors, absurdities and slanders, only
entreating God for the sake of Christ, to give both him and me, and every of
us, more light and understanding in, and hearts more submitted to the truth of
God in Christ, that so we may rightly speak it, and walk in it, and so
prays his friend, and the friend of all that love the truth, though
differences in some circumstances be found in expressions, or walkings.

Thomas Moore.

A REPLY TO Mr. T.W. HIS pretended Confutation of T. M.
THAT there was value, and worth enough in Christ's death (in regard of the
sufficiency, and excellency of the price) for the redeeming all men in the
world, is granted on all hands, says Mr. T. W. He has fairly granted, if
fairly expressed; for it is in the expression doubtful to my understanding in
what sense he takes Christ his Death; whether simply for the Act of his Dying,
as some of his after-sayings, page 4. l. 3. last and elsewhere give occasion
to think he does. But the Holy Spirit by the Apostle tells us, If Christ be
not Risen, believers are yet in their sins, faith vain, preaching the Gospel
vain, etc. 1 Cor. 15.14.17. or whetherhe mean it of the virtue of his blood,
Dying, or Death, as he is risen just, and ascended to heaven with the virtue of
that his own blood; having by the eternal Spirit offered himself a spotless
Sacrifice to God, and obtained eternal redemption, Heb. 9.12.14. And if he
take in all this, as I suppose he will exclude no part thereof; And though all
this be often encluded in the expression of Christ's Death, Romans 5.10. Blood, Rev.
1.5. Ransom, 1 Timothy 2.6. Sacrifice, Heb. 9.26. Yet I suppose, in our blessed
Saviors acting of these he will allow Distinctions considerable, between
Christ, his Dying, and Rising, and Ascending, and offering himself a
Sacrifice; Though our faith without any separation look at, and receive all as
one; But the questions here to be answered for right understanding his meaning
are, first, with whom Christ had to deal with God or with men, I yet suppose
he will confess that in acting all this he had to deal with God, and that he
in all this gave the ransom, offered the Sacrifie to God, and made the
Atonement with God, 1 Timothy 2.5.6. Secondly, For whom Christ did this, and
presented his Death, and offered his Sacrifice to God; and I am loath to
conceive otherwise of him, but that he will confess, it was for men, though he
answer in speaking of his dying, or laying down his life, page 64. l. 30. That
redemption belonged to Paul not as a man; but as an elect vessel: A secret
indeed, no where as redemption was effected by Christ in his own body, set
forth in the Scripture, which tells us, That all are by nature dead in
trespasses and sins, under sin, etc. without difference, Romans 3. Ephesians. 2. And
that Christ dyed for the ungodly, and unjust, and for our sins, and surely
men are ungodly and unjust, and sinners as they are men, and not as they are
elect vessels, Romans 3.10-20. But that it was for men is evident, 2 Cor.
5.11.14, 15. 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. Thirdly, for what Christ thus gave himself to God,
whether for this; that for, and upon this very gift, men should be at peace
with God, one with him, and God now without any more done take all sin out of
them, or from off them, and so all punishments and deaths, and fill them with
eternal life, embracing them as sons in his delightful love, or whether it
was for this; that for, and upon that very gift, Jesus Christ might have the
dispose, and be the Lord of all, Romans 14.9. Psalm. 2.7.9. And be the Savior of
the world, 1 John 4.14. Isa. 49.6. And the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world, Ioh. 2, 2. And be filled with authority, power, and spirit to
preserve men and creatures for their use, and to use means, and send forth
spirit in the means to move men to repent and seek the Lord, Matthew. 28.18.
Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. Psalm. 75.3. and 68.18. Romans 2.4. And to be the Judge of all,
to absolve all that by his grace in the means are prevailed with to believe on
him, Mat. 9.6. Act. 10.43 And to condemn such as hold the truth in
unrighteousness, and so persist in their impenitencie, unbelief and
rebellion, Ioh. 1.18, 19. Psalm. 68 18-21. And that being thus made perfect, he
should be the Author of eternal salvation to all that obey him, Hebr. 5, 8 9.
And throw into a second death all that rebelled against him their right and
lawful Lord that bought them; and abolished the first death for them, 2 Pet.
2.1. 2 Timothy 1.10 With the Devils also for that they usurped to deceive, and
draw men to rebel against his government.

Now whether of these ways, Mr. T. W. will answer this question; Charity bids
me make no resolution, because if he should answer the former way, as his
writing gives occasion to suspect; then I know no full or plain sentence of
Scripture to express, or countenance his Answer with; nor can Iunderstand, how
he can free his saying from charging God with injustice, for receiving a
sufficient price and detaining that for which it was given, in suffering such,
as by such saying ought to be freed still to be born under guilt, and
defilement of sin, and to remain many days under the power the darkness
and sin, and Satan, and afflicted with punishments and death; nor can I see
how he will avoid derogating from the great mediation, and exercise of the High
priest hood of Jesus Christ, which Scripture shows to be at the Right hand of
God, and by virtue of his Death and Sacrifice offered to God wherefore I will
not so conceive of his meaning; but if he Answer in the latter; though it be
with more apt, and fit expressions then he grants all that T. M. has
labored to maintain for how else will he understand the sufficiency of the
death of Christ, we are not questioning, what is the sufficiency of God the
Creator, as Creator; The Death, Resurrection, and Sacrifice of Christ is
certainly a creature; though such as in which the Creator is yet as Christ is
the first borne of every creature; The first borne from the dead, the second
man, made a quickening Spirit; so all this in him a new creation; now how there
should be a sufficiency in any created being, though possessed with God for
redeeming any, for which there neither is, nor ever was any intention, or will
of the Creator, I cannot understand indeed if he had said, it might have been
sufficient, if God had so willed, I might, and would have spared this and given
another Answer: But he plainly confesses, There was value and worth in Christ's
Death (in regard of the sufficiency and excellency of it) for the redeeming all the men in the world; And if there was such value and worth for sufficiency in
it. It is so in it still (compare John 1.4.5. with 1 Ioh. 1.1, 2 3.) The Word
of the Lord endures for ever, I say 40 8. 1 Pet. 1.24, 25. And we are to
follow those the end of whose doctrine and conversation is, to set forth Jesus
Christ, The same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13 8. And so
whosoever miss, it is for not receiving the tenders of it in the means, Prove.
1.23, 24, etc. So that Mr. T. W. in this saying has secretly granted that
which he openly opposes; but yet he says, whether Christ in Gods intention,
and his own performance so paid a ransom for all, and every particular man,
as thereby to make satisfaction, and procure reconciliation with God for them,
is the thing in question: This T. M. undertakes to prove, says Mr. T. W. He
means not that T. M. goes about to prove that this is the thing in question
that rests for himself to prove; But that T. M. undertakes to prove this thing
that is in question; but he should either have put down T. M. his own
expressions, or else not after have slandered him, p. 3. l. 5, 6, 7. saying,
That Christ intended to reconcile all men to God by the reconciliation wrought
in his body with God for men; which, says he, are Tho. Moore his own words,
but as he has annexed them, they are Mr. Tho. Whitfeild his own surmises:
And therefore seeing he has not set down the question either as Doctor
Davenant did, To which I yielded in my Book, nor as I there expressed it, nor
kept close in his Treatise in answering to that he expresses as mine; I must
a little open the business, before I yield him this to be mine; And so I
confess my self to conceive that I understand and believe, that in the
beginning God made one man, a living soul, and that he made him righteous, and
a public man, Genesis 1.26.27. 1 Cor. 15.45. That he made them superior, and
inferior, male, and female, fit for increase by generation, and called their
name Adam, 1 Timothy 2.13. Genesis 1.27. and 5.2. And that God at the first created
all men in his creation of this man, and made all men righteous, in making this
man righteous, Eccles. 7 29. So as what this Adam was in his public place in
which he then stood all men were in him, for he was all men; and what God
adorned, and furnished him withal, he did it in him to all men: And the
opportunity of eating of the Tree of Life; with the charge not to eat of the
tree of Knowledge of good and evil, and affirmation of Death in dying to Dye
in the very day he should eat thereof; given to this man was given to all men
in this man; And this public man eating of the fruit of the forbidden tree;
he sinned, and so lost the Image of God out of his heart, and fell under the
guilt, and power of sin; and so under the power of the Law and of death, etc.
And what he did, all men did in him; so as in him all men sinned, and fell,
Romans 5.12. And the Almighty convicting him of sin; convicted all men of sin, so
that by this one offense, or the offense of this one, unto all men to
condemnation, that is, on all men in a public man; yet not at the first on
them as individuals, and particulars, yet so as all the individuals, when ever
they come forth by propogation from him, as they are of him in that Nature they
partake of, and are under the guilt, and partake of the same misery in bondage
to law, sin, and death, Romans 5.19. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. So that by reason of the
sentence gone forth from the Almighty, Genes. 2.17. (more unalterable then that
of the Medes and Persians, Hest. 3 and 8) Truth and Justice required a present
imposing of the execution of that Death and curse, which is the first Death
according to the just judgment of God, without a mediator, and that all men
must have perished in; if God had not found out a remedy, for without sheading
blood, no Remission, Heb. 9.22. But now this I believe; that as God in his
purpose of making man, did see that man would fall: So in his purpose, and
Council he provided the remedy in his Son before the world was, 1 Pet. 1.20.
And presently upon the fall in the very same moment this business was done and
acted, in respect of agreement, conceit, Tender, and acceptance between God
and Christ the Son of God, to take into union of Person the nature of man, to
be made flesh, under the Law, and bear the imputation of sin; and so to dye,
and rise, and offer sacrifice for man, which God accepted, and so filled him in
the nature of man with all fullness of grace and truth: so that here is a
propitiation, life from the dead, and a new creation in; And a new heaven, and
earth for this second Man; And spirit to quicken, etc. Psalm. 40. Heb. 10.5.10.
So that here are two men, two Adams, the first, the last, 1 Cor. 15.45. etc. So
that the virtue of the Death, Resurrection, and Sacrifice of Christ was from
the beginning, so as thereby men were either saved, or left to the judgment of
Christ; Though the fruitfulness thereof was neither so apparent, nor abundant
till it was really acted in our nature by Christ, John 1.1-17. John 1.1, 2. so
that there is no Divinity in this Argument of Mr. W. That because many were
damned before Christ actually Dyed, therefore Christ dyed not for them, page
4.36, 37. page 11. l. 4. he might as well have said many were saved before
Christ actually dyed, therefore he dyed not for them: But passing such
Arguments as of no force to enlightened believers, Scripture shows us two
things wrought by God in the gift of his Son, and obtained of God, and effected
by Christ, by virtue of his Death, Resurrection, and offering himself a
Sacrifice to God, and receipt of Spirit in the man: viz. 1. A supportation of
the old or first creation for a time, Psalm. 75.3. Col. 1.17. Heb. 1.3. In which
there is both time, and space given that men might repent and come in to their
Lord, 2 Pet. 3 9. Rev. 3.21. And also means and some motion of Spirit to sead,
and move to repentance, and seeking the Lord, Rom 2 4. Act. 14 17. and 17 26,
27. Genesis 6.3. Psalm. 68.18. And 2. A new creation, in which is pardon, Peace,
justification, life from the dead, or eternal life, and inheritance, Revel.
21.5 which all that by grace are brought into union with Christ partaking of, 2
Cor 5 17. Here in this life in spirit in a first fruits, Romans 8 10.23. In the
Resurrection in fullness both in soul and body, Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2. Now in
these two men, the first, and the last man, all men are considerable; The first
a natural man; The second a spiritual; In the first difference of sex, and
degree; In the second, not so. The first fallen: The second having undertaken,
has restored that fallen nature: And thereby preserves the first with that
creation for a time, so as generations come forth from him, the distinctions of
sex, and degrees remaining preserved, and ordered by him for the time, and
has also a new creation for all that come forth of the first Adam, and by the
means he uses come in to him; But as none come in to the second Adam, that
came not forth of the first; so none come forth of the first Adam, whose nature
the second has not taken, and for whom he has done nothing by which they might
partake of him, and for refusal thereof be justly judged by him: but these two
Adams are not both natural to have their several posterities by generation.
The second is a spiritual man, and his seed is of such as come in to him by
regeneration; It was therefore something unsavory, and of no force to prove
any thing, so to exptesse his comparison, and the opposition of the two Adams
with their several posterities, and then mention the supposition of a third,
page 68. line 17, 18. unless Mr. W. could show a posterity coming forth of
the loins of the Man Christ, or a Generation coming in to him, who never came
forth of the first Adam; and so were first of his posterity: But to the
business as I am helped to understand; but by Scripture, and also by reason
subdued to believe God in his own sayings.

If Jesus Christ in the beginning did by his consent and agreement with God his
Father become the second Man, the last public Man, and so under-tooke for the
first man, the first public man, who was all men: Then he under-tooke for all
men, Romans 5.12.14. 1 Cor. 15.22.45, 46, 47. If he took the nature of the first
Adam that was all men, and not only a part of that nature, or some part of the
nature of Adam, but the whole nature of whole Adam, then he took the nature of
all men Luke 3.23.38. Act. 17.26. If Jesus Christ became under the Law, and
stood in the stead, and bare the sins of the first Adam, and dyed for his sins,
in whom all sinned, and fell under Law, and whose sin, was the sin of all men:
Then surely, he was made under the Law for, and stood in the stead, and bare
the sins, and dyed for the sins of all men; Though the gift in, and by Christ
exceed the offense, Romans 8.3. Gal. 3.3.4. Romans 5. And if Jesus Christ took not
on him the difference of sexes and degrees, or any of the excellencies, or
furniture of the first Adam; but only the nature, which was one in both sexes,
and each degree; Then he came, and dyed for all men in both sexes, and every
degree, not so much respecting sexes, or degrees, as the nature of men for
whom, and for whose sins he came, and dyed, and so for them, as men, ungodly,
and sinners, and not as elect vessels, and a holy generation, though to make
such; and even from the roof and beginning of all it is evident; That Jesus
Christ the second public man undertook as the second man; A public person
for the first man a public person, and so for all that were in him, and by
propogation to come of him; that they might not perish in this first judgment
and death, but to be given him into his dispose; to preserve alive a time; that
they might live to him in this life, and after death to raise them, and bring
them alive before him, to be judged by him, in another judgment to another
life, or to another death, according to the Gospel: Romans 14 9-12. 2 Cor. 5.10,
11 14, 15. Phil. 2 7-11. Romans 2.16. and so the holy Ghost, teaches us to
understand the business, saying, As by the offense of one, unto all men to
condemnation, even so by the righteousneosse of one unto all men to
justification of life: Romans 5.18. that is, as is aforesaid in the other; in the
public man that undertook for all men, and that so as their lives are
preserved a time, and the old creation for them, that such as come into him by
the means he uses, while he preserves them in this old creation, may partake
of the new creation in him, and such as perish in rebellion against him, may be
brought to another judgment, and sentenced to a second Death. And so, and in
this sense, Jesus Christ has dyed, and given himself a ransom for All men;
so as he has made an atonement with God, and is himself become the
propitiation for their sins, that it may be declared or testified in some
fruits of his goodness, to lead to repentance and seeking the Lord, that so
such as are by grace brought in to believe, may be reconciled unto God, and
receive remission of sins, and eternal life, and those that perish in
refusal and rebellion, be justly sent down to a second Death; which is a
foundation and ground of, and motive to repentance, faith, and obedience for
all men, set forth in the Gospel; showing in all this, their obligation to
Christ, with encouragement to come in to Christ, and terror to all that
rebel: If Mr. T. W. his expressions may be taken in this sense, it is yielded
as a true report (or else not) for this is that which Mr. T. W. opposes and
which T. M. endeavors to show proved in the sayings of holy Scripture, for
otherwise to prove, he is still less; being no Linguist, for knowledge of
diverse tongues; no Arthist in Logic, either according to Aristotle, or Ramus;
nor learned in Philosophy, either morrall, political or natural, either
Epicurian, Pithagorean, Stoicke, or Platonist, or were he, yet he could not
think meet by these, to square, mould, and prove Divinity; but only what God
says in his word, as he is helped to understand, he desires to believe, and
takes his sayings to be proof enough, and of more worth then all the reasons
and arguments of men against them. But Mr. T. W. says, that for proof, T. M.
makes use of three things, which he makes the principal ground of his Doctrine.

That which he calls the first ground for T. M. his proof is, The distinction
between the Redemption, reconciliation, and salvation, which Jesus Christ
effected in his own body with God for men, and that he effected by his Spirit
in men God; this says Mr. T. W. is not agreeable to Scripture, To which I
answer, I have been so told by such whom he reproacheth, as lay preachers, but
not by any professed Divines, before I read it in Mr. T. W.

2. This distinction, and four more, one about the distinct ends of his death,
another the distinct manner of mentioning those ends; another about the diverse
ways of propounding his death, and another about the difference of the extent
and force of the same word in Scripture; I used for clearing the business in
stating the question: But seeing so many of those he reproacheth as lay
preachers, affirm them my proofs, and now it is so affirmed by two Clerks
professed Divines, though of contrary judgment and practice, let them so
stand, each of the five distinctions being of the like force to prove, and
four of them not faulted by Mr. T. W.

3. This distinction he faulteth, is in the Treatise shown expressly in the
Scripture there quoted, page 2. to 14, 15. and nothing there disproved in any
quotation, but remains full enough to answer all he has said to fault it,
besides the distinction, and that which it now acknowledged a proof for, are
both shown in that Treatise, and in the first part of my answer to Mr. Garner,
to be plainly set forth, and proved in the Scripture.

4. His way of faulting the distinction, is by framing reasons and calling
Scripture to make a consequent with though I hope he will not justify the
Saduces so reasoning from Scripture, Mat. 22. as diverse in our-dayes also have
done, to deny the reurrection of the body) But this with all that follows in
his leasons is answered, and the abuse of Scripture therein shown before in
that Treatise, in diverse places, to which he has said nothing and again in the
first and third part of the Reply to M. Garner, so as for answer, no more need,
but only to desire the Reader to peruse the same; though the Reader of his may
see,

1. In his first reason, much weakness; for whatever reconciliation be wrough
with God in Christ by his Death; yet no men are reconciled to God, but by the
spiritual application thereof, when the love of God is there through commended
to the heart, which slayes the enmity there, and reconciles to God, in receipt
of the atonement, whence the words, while we were etc. and being now
justified, and we have now received Atonement: Romans 5.8 9.10, 11. The
Colotians were enemies in their minds, by wicked works in which they walked,
after Christ had dyed, yea, and made peace, in presenting the virtue of his
death before God also, and by application of this were after reconciled to God:
Col. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Besides, he is not able to prove, that the Death of
Christ is agreater work then the resurrection of Christ, nor that the
reconciling to God, by love commended through the death, of Christ a greater
work, then the further saving by the power of the Spirit of life, by which he
rose from the dead; which sounds harsh to Ephesians. 1.17.19, 20. though his so
saying acknowledges the distinction.

As for his altering the Text, Romans 8.32. it may be said, God does not give an
un^glorified Son to his, but having delivered him up for us all; it is not
said, how shall he not deliver up all things for us, but as he said, if he give
him to us (who was delivered for us, and is wisdom, righteousness etc.) how
(says the text) shall he not with him (in giving him) freely give us all
things, which makes nothing for Mr. W. his Reason.

2. His next reason is answered in the Treatise opposed, and in reply to Mr. G.
Its no where said, that the world has Redemption through his blood, nor that
God will not impute sin to the world, though Mr. T. W. take liberty to confound
and limit general propositions with special applications, and to blot out
difference between present, preterperfect, and future tense, here, and else
where.

3. His third Reason, is dubious and forceleffe, and answered in the Treatise
opposed, and in reply to Mr. Garner, about the word, Advocate.

4. His fourth Reason is grounded upon an oversight of the change of person, in
the Apostles speeches, from verse 14 to 21 in 2 Cor. 5. and mis conception of
the word, might, as is shown in reply to Mr. Garner, about that word.

5. His fifth Reason has an equivocation in the words, has reconciled, which
should be, has wrought reconciliation in his own body, or reconciled the
nature of mankind in himself for all mon, and then his consequence is not true
of all men, nor does a Peter 1.3. speak of any more then, the then Believers,
yea, in those words not of all them, as the next verses, the change of persons
show, and so prove not Mr. Garners sayings at all.

6. For his sixth reason, I forbear to note what appears in it, I desire to
deal reverently with him, and not to provoke him, for Christ by his death,
resurrection and Sacrifice, has purchaced all men of God, and wrought
reconciliation in their nature in himself for them, and does use means that
it might be applied to them, which if they persit in rebellious resusing, and
when he opens their eyes, will not see, their saying, if he give them up, and
do no more, he is but a half Savior, will neither help themselves, nor hurt
him.

7. His seventh reason is grounded on a slander, as is fore shown, and built up
with queries, to which answer enough, is both in the Treatise, and in the reply
to Mr. Garner, and all the world being Christ's, out of which those that are
chosen in the heavenly call to him, are his peculiar, and have his Spirit: I
marvel at his passages in this business, as if some were his peculiar, before
they have his Spirit, and after shall have, or as if the greatest number of men
were their own (as evil men say, Psalm. 12.) for if they be Gods, and not their
own, then they are Christ's also, and that by virtue of his ransom: Psalm. 26.9

That which he says is the second ground of T. M. proof is, A distinction
between a common salvation, which Christ has purchased for all, and a special
salvation, which he has purchased for Believers, this T. M. disclaimes, and
marvels tha^ so learned a man and professed Divine, professing the examination of
my Book, should under his hand affirm such a thing: For,

1. I was about the first distinction still, and coming to treat of the second
branch, the redemption, reconciliation, and salvation, which by his Spirit,
discovering, and applying, the former he works in men; I mentioned, how he
was fitted for it, and how he proceeds to effect it; in which I showed, how
the Scripture shows a common salvation, in which also there is a witness and
tender, to draw men toward the special, and so that their is a special
falvation, in all which I spoke not of purchase, but dispensation, which Mr. T.
W. could not but see, and why he has altered the business, and misreported my
sayings, let the reader judge.

2. I do not conceive so grossly, carnally, and scantily of Christ, as if he
were not the Savior, and author of salvation; but only a purchaser of it, only
a bargain maker with God, a purchaser of some things for the Father to give to
another, I believe him so to have purchased, as to have all into his dispose so
as he has power to forgive, sins, and to give eternal life and is able to
save, and able to destroy; yea, the Father does nothing without him, but
whatsoever the Father does, the Son does the same, and God would have all men
honor the Son as they honor the Father: Mat. 9. John 5.

3. This second of his reported my grounds, being his own framed position, to
answer, it is meet himself deal with it, and not I, whom it concerns not;
and what concerns this business of mine, is already fully and largly
answered in the Treatise, which became him to have answered, and not to fly
that, and frame prositions and objections, as him best likes, and as he
conceives his reasons might best answer, and yet there is still farther answer
to all he says in this Reply to Mr. Garner, in the first part, on Hebrews 5.9.

1. As for the common salvation mentioned, Jud. 3. though I but quoted the
place after this saying, The faith of this common salvation, is as the oppening
the door to the special Text, p. 11. And so gave no occasion of his, if
salvation be taken in a special sense, for I desire not to take any part of
the salvation wrought by Christ in his own body, or extended by virtue thereof
to men in a carnal sense, but spiritually, in regard of the salvation, because
it comes from the Lord the quickening Spirit, and has evidence, and motives in
it to spiritual good, even that part of it, which is in preservation of the
old creation, how much more that which exceeds, and has its ends and tendancy
toward eternal life, though it be not eternal life which is the special,
but what salvation is meant Jud. 3. whether the common, in belief whereof the
special is received, or the special only, I have the Reader for answer to
consider what is said, Jud. 4, 5. of the types some destroyed, after saved; and
for the sanctification etc. mentioned, consider Heb. 10.19 for whom surely he
prayed, and was as dilligent as for these, other Reply I make not, least I
should occasion his zeal to become fury.

As for his affirming the salvation no larger then the faith, and because the
faith of the salvation is not given to all, therefore the salvation was no
farther common then to them that had it: His undertaking to be a Minister of
the Gospel to many nigh Rutland, Lincoln shire, and Yermouth, who at that
time had not that faith given them, does confute his saying, though one might
also say, there is more in the salvation wrought by Christ both common and
special, then any words in doctrine can fully set forth without divine Spirit
to discover, or will be fully manifested, till no more need of such mediums to
see through, whence that 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2. and more then our faith can
fully apprehend, and for more then at that time had, or yet have that faith,
and for that he says of 1 Timothy 4.10. It is still life divinely spoken, and I
am sorry it has been declared by his pen, viz. that these words are not spoken
of the second person; of Christ as Mediator, but of God, by whose providence
all men are preserved, especially Believers, Oh that those called.
Anti-trinitarians, might not read this saying of Mr. T. W. for they deny not
Christ as Mediator to be a distinct person, but only that in this one Almighty
living God, there should be three distinct unseparable, undevided, as I believe
there are in this one God, though they say but one person, and that the Father,
and what less says he, that says plainly, These words are not spoken of the
second person, surely he meant not so, he believes the second person to be the
same one living God that the Father is, nor is his after sentence of Christ as
Mediator any help, or less free from error, for whatsoever things the Father
does, these also does the Son likewise, John 5.19. to 27. And the Father has
given him Authority to execute judgment, also because he is the Son of man,
he it is by whom the Earth and the Inhabitants there of are upheld, and by whom
all things consist; Psalm 75.3. Col. 1.17, 18 nor is there any preservation of
mankind fallen into sin, nor of creatures for his use, but through a
Mediator, for God whose mercies are over all his works, is holy and righteous
in all his ways, Psalm 85.10. and 145.8.17. So as all providence is by God in
Christ, and all dispensation of mercies, and means through him; surely he
might have learned a more divine exposition of the words [God who is the
Saviour] from Paul (if he despised him not, because sometimes he was a
Tent-maker) who opens, and gives the sense of that, Isay. 45.21, 22, 23. no God
else besides me, A just God, a Savior, I am God and none else, unto me every
knee shall bow, as meant of Jesus, Phil. 2.10. But Mr. W. faies here, the word
signifies no more, but a preservation, and I pray does not that word reach far
enough, surely such as know the original, as well as he say, its the same
word, Luke 2.10 unto you is borne this day a Savior, which is Christ the Lord,
to which Mr. T. W. gloss might reply, that can be no such good tidings of
great joy unto all people (that are fallen into sin) or that is no more but a
preserver, which God was from the beginning, and is of all men without Christ
as Mediator, these are dangerous glosses; yea, the same word say some is
frequently used for Savior, in the Apostles writings: The rest that follows,
is fore-answered here page 4. But when the wisdom of man will presume to teach
what must be wisdom in Christ, we are not like to judge a right of any thing;
nor will his death or ransom be found to be in vain, of such as are by him
judged, to be a second death, which I have writ at large in the discourse of
the precious blood of Christ, chap. 11.

2. As for his objection set down as mine; Christ death is not in vain for
those who are damned; for hereby they are freed from origin all sin; this is
neither my opinion nor faith, nor any such thing in my Book; surely if I
should say, he was nonplust, to give a fair answer in reproving what was there
said, and so devised this objection, that he might hint to such as never read
my Book, as if I held it, and so might seem to them to have confuted me, when
he has done nothing less; though all his answers to it, if they were bent
against Christ his dying for all men; they are as much against his dying for
any as for all.

3. As for that he puts as my objection, quoting page 39. Christ's death is not
in vain, though all be not savad, for he dyed to make them savable: and to open
a door that they may be saved; in this also he wrongs me, both in word and
sense; could not such a one as Mr. Whitfield, have answered my sayings, without
framing them into a mould fit for his own turn, the one half of his saying,
none of mine, and the rest altered, which also was not brought in to such an
end, as he that reads chapter 7. may see; and my words are in page 39. That
Jesus Christ has so dyed for every man, that he has redeemed all mankind and
satisfied Gods justice, and is become the propitiation for the sins of all
men, and has made them savable, and opened the door that they might be saved;
and is so faithful and able, and uses such means, that whosoever perishes,
it will be through their own fault, and to the same purpose more largly before
page 36. and before that after an explication of the business, page 11. that
as he has in himself so saved all men; so being assended, he does by virtue
of his death, and the redemption wrought in himself, u^e such means, and in
some seasons so put forth spirit therein that he makes all savable, so as there
is a possiblenesse in, and through him, and possibility with him, for all men
to come in to him, to believe on him, and in believing to be eternally saved,
Joh. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. with farther explication, for that an examiner of less
conscience and skill, then Mr. T. W. professes to have, might have seen to
have reported righter, and understood better, then to say he knows not well
what can be understood by making saveable, unless a purchasing a possibility
of salvation for all, and for all, surely a wise man would not use so many
reasons to fault he knew not what; but the Treatise declared my meaning fully;
How I understand That Jesus Christ has, and does make men saveable; where (as
in the other Treatise is shown the double enmity mankind fell into by sin.

And so first, how man's fall necessitated him in the day of his sinning, in
Dying to Dye; because of the truth and justice of God; so as without death, no
remission of sin, and without resurrection, no justification, for God cannot
lie, or be untrue, or unjust, so as here was a bar removed by Jesus Christ,
who Dying for all, all dyed, 2 Cor. 5.14. Though to the dishonor of the Death
of Christ Mr. W. say, God was able to save men even before Christ was given to
dye, by what way and means he should think best: Though I believe Christ was
given to Dye, (though not sent forth to act it) in the first moment of Adams
fall. But;

Secondly, the fall and sin of man did so corrupt the nature and disposition of
man, that though the death be suffered by Christ for him, he will not come in
to God; if something be not done to change his nature and will, and draw him
God ward, and for this Jesus Christ has ascended to heaven; and received
spirit in the man to send forth even to the rebellious, that the Lord God might
dwell among them, which he also does send forth, Psalm. 68 18. And so as in my
Treatises may be seen: I understand Jesus Christ makes men saveable.

1. In himself, as he is the second man, the last Adam that stood in the
place, and undertook for the first public man; for him, and all that were in
him, having taken the same nature, and in it dyed; fure for the first Adams
sin, or else for no man's sin, and if for his sin, then for all men's sin, or
else his sin was not al men's sin, and he is in that nature risen just, and has
offered up himself a Sacrifice for man, and is now in man's nature glorified,
so that in him is peace, righteousness, etc. So as in him as the public man,
the nature of all mankind, is as fully, yea, more abundantly saved, restored
and enriched with glorious salvation, then it was fallen in the first Adam: and
this is as really in him for mankind, as the fall, and death of the former was.

2. This salvation, and life in Jesus the second public man, is as virtuous
and more virtuous, and powerful in him, and fuller of efficacy, to make all
that by grace come in to him like himself, then the sin and death of the
former, to make those that by propagation come forth from him, like him: And
both these are evident Romans 5.12.14.18, 19. 1 Cor. 15.45, 46 47. 2 Cor. 3.18.
And this is great salvation, actual salvation in Christ for men before it be
preached, or he set forth as the propitiation, Romans 3.24, 25. Heb. 2.2-4.

3. He by virtue of this he has done, and is become with God for men, is now
the Mediator between God and men, and so procures of God for men, and
extends toward them, the preservation of the creatures for their use, and
space of repentance, Psalm. 75.3. 2 Pet. 3 9. which the Apostle calls Salvation,
and wills us so to account it, 2 Pet. 3.15. The Dispensation of means, and
mercies as testimonies of his goodness, Acts 14.17. which the Apostle says,
is to lead to repentance, and seeking the Lord, Act. 17.26, 27.30 31. Romans 2.4.
And with these means, at some seasons, some strift and motions of his Spirit to
reprove etc. Genesis 6 3. Prove. 12.23.24. And this with so much efficacy, that at
some or other enlightens every one in some measure that comes into the world
that was made by him, John. 1.9.10. And by his works manifests some truth in
men, Romans 1.18, 19. and so striveth with them. But all this more openly, and
abundantly where he sends the Gospel which is a preaching of great salvation,
Heb. 2, 3. wherein also is some presence of Christ by his Spirit to discover,
witness, reprove, draw to, and apply salvation: Though many break all bands,
Joh. 15.26, 27. and 16. Mat. 28.20. Hosea 11.3, 4, 7. And this, that they might
believe, Joh. 1 7 and be saved, Joh. 5.34. And this with so much prevailency
that he brings them in some measure to see, and hear, and touches their
hearts; Though diverse like not the light, and, so willingly close their eyes
and ears, and harden their hearts, Joh. 3.19, 20, 21. Act. 28.27. And all this
is actual salvation, and extended that men might come in to him, and partake
of eternal.

4. He has eternal life, and salvation to bestow on every one of them that in
these his drawings come into him, Joh. 17.3. Heb. 5 9. And all this was in, and
by Christ from the first beginning of his undertaking with God, as is
fore-shewne; though since his coming in the flesh, more manifest, and in the
fruits more abundant: And this is meant by his making all men saveable; so as
those empty, and undivine reasons of; A purchasing only a possibility of
salvation; Of the ineffectualnesse of Christ his death before his acting it; Of
restraining the word Death, to the act of his dying; Of redeeming God, of
making salvation actual by faith (faith being neither Discoverer, nor Applyer;
but only the receiver of what he by Spirit in the means discovers and applies.)
Of urging that, if a potentiall wrought (that should be the phrase) Then no
actual; as, If he the God of the Valleys, then not of the Mountains, are of
no force, and beseemed Lay-preachers better then Mr. T. W. As for the other
objections of his own framing, I may leave them to his own Answering, though
he might be bold: There was a door before so opened, as 2 Timothy 1.10 (as there
was a well before Hagar saw it, Genes. 21.19.) else not only some, but all,
both Jews and Gentiles, before Christ came in the flesh, are perished for
ever: But I may not slip over his Answer of his own framed objection; That if
Christ Dyed not for all, they want a foundation of faith; To which he replyeth,
No. For the foundation of both our faith and obedience, is not the secret, but
the revealed will of God which enjoynes every man to believe on him whom the
Father has sent, etc. Surely here he has said something, if he would either
stand by it, or make any thing of it; But according to his direction we must
search to that in another place, and here and there I will make the best of it
that I can.

1. As God is one, so his will, and though there be much more secret then is
yet revealed, yet has he not in his word revealed any one thing for men to
believe as his mind, that is contrary to his will that is yet secret; his
sayings are all true, certain, etc. Prove. 8.6 9. and ^2.20, 21. what an
intimation of a heavy charge is this to the sayings of the God of truth.

2. A Minister of the Gospel, or a Believer, ought to meddle no farther about
the will of God concerning any thing in their declaration, then what by word or
works he has revealed, Deuteronomy. 29.29. to which those who are submitted; when
God says, his Son dyed for all, will not conceit another secret meaning, and
use reasons to scare men from belief of his testimony.

3. The foundation of Repentance, faith, and new obedience is not the
injunction to believe etc. But that which is to be believed; even Jesus Christ
as he is set forth in the Gospel: Isay. 28.16. Acts 4.10, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 3.11.
And for whom there is not the Christ that has dyed for their sins, and rose
for their justification, there is no foundation for repentance, or faith, nor
is there any injunction for, or liberty to, or hope in it for any man to repent
or believe, or to look to Christ for salvation, if where Gospel comes, they
do not first believe, that Christ dyed for their sins, and rose for their
justification, 1 Cor. 15.1 4 17. so that in this grant, Mr. T.W. has run
himself into such snares, as he snares himself worse to get out again,
saying every one is enjoined to believe on Christ page 7. And yet that it may
be denied, that all men are bound to believe on Christ, page 68.

Put a duty to believe instead of Christ, for the foundation of faith, page 7.
Proclaiming such commands as God gives for men to walk in, to be some of them
contrary to the inward mind of God, and some contrary one to another, surely if
Enthusiastes may be granted, this denies them nothing, but how may this
appear; he says, God gave Abraham a command to kill his Son, and then
another not to kill, which latter being his purpose, was cross to the former
command page 49. and 84. But where will he prove this, not in the revealed word
of God, for that tells us, God bad Abraham offer his Son for a burnt offering,
and so much was revealed, Genesis 22.2. And Abraham not knowing that this
contained any less then to offer him up a burnt offering, he did offer, and
intended to slay (there was his trial) but the latter command though crossing
Abraham's intentions, did enlighten his understanding, and so he saw not one
command crosing another, but obeyed both, in offering his Son, Heb. 11.17.
and not slaying him, but offering the Ram a burnt offering: And as for Pharaoh,
he had hardened his own heart long before, nor was Gods hardening any other but
the withstanding that opperation, by which he had before been moving his heart,
and so justly for his rebellion, and cruelty, leaving him to Satan, yet did he
command nothing in charging him to let his people go, but what he would have
done; there being a people to be let go, and he had done well if he had
willingly yielded it; but he brought him to it at last, as he will one day all
those that in the day of grace refuse to acknowledge Jesus Christ the Lord,
bring them to it, Phil. 2.10, 11. Oh what spirit is that which so sets out the
command of God, that he is feign to plead the equity of them, with that Romans
9.20. did the Apostle so in that place, or has God done so Ezekiel. 18. surely
his commands are righteous altogether, Psalm. 19. I set pass that might be said
in that which follows page 7. to avoid provocation: But as he deals with the
command, so he is as cross to the Apostles, in setting forth the Gospel to be
believed, consider page 169. First, says Mr. T. W. no man is bound to believe
Christ dyed for him, till he seele his need of him, and be humbled, but first
to believe that God has given his Son, to purchase redemption for all
repenting sinners, Now what Gospel is this; what humiliation and repentance is
that, and whence comes it, that must be before a man believe so much as that
Christ dyed for him, Christ dyed for the ungodly, his enemies, etc. But such as
have repented, are not so called; yea, the Apostles have preached the death and
resurrection of Christ for men, to call and move them to repentance: Acts 13.37
39. 1 Cor. 15.14.

Secondly, he says it is their duty to see, and feel their sins, and be so
humbled for them, as thereby they may be brought to repentance: See here, they
must not see their sins by this doctrine, as Christ was made finne, and a
curse for them, nor look upon them, as they have pirced him, and so come in to
him, for they may not yet believe that he dyed for them; how cross is this to
the Scripture, Zach. 12.10. and the Apostles preaching of repentance, who set
it forth as the gift of Christ that is risen from the dead, and exalted, and
urged it one that ground that in believing it might be effected: Acts 2. and 3.
and 13. and 17.31.

Thirdly, he says that when they are truly humbled and brought to repentance,
it is their duty to renounce their own righteousness, and rest on Christ alone
for salvation; strange doctrine, that a man should rely on Christ, before he can
believe that Christ dyed for him; surely Paul was otherwise led; the knowledge
of Christ produced his repentance, faith, confidence, and not these that Phil.
3 7, 8, 9.

Fourthly, he says, that doing this, they ought to persuade themselves that
Christ dyed for them, etc. here is right, the cart to lead the horse, and the
building made the foundation; surely the Apostle receiving the atonement,
throug divine love manifested in his death, did let go his own righteousness,
and depend on him to besaved by his life Romans 5.8.10, 11. Thus have I noted the
Gospel and says Mr. T. W. sets forth: Oh you that through grace believe, is
not this a humane faith, did such a faith ever support you in a day of trial;
and when God by Spirit in the word of grace testified of his Son, and in
discovery of his rich grace to your heart brought you in to believe, did not
that melt, humble, and work repentance in you, or were you left to view and
reason from such things in you selves, to parswade your own hearts to believe,
I must a peale to believers in this; and so to M. T. W. his own heart, because
of that 1 John 4, 5, 6. That which he says is the third ground Tho. Mocre
brings to prove that Christ dyed for all, is those general expressions which
the Scripture uses in speaking of Christ's Death.

Surely if I can find him right in none of his heads of proceeding, it is time
to let answering of him alone: 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. not an expression only,
but the whole sentences: I writ to testify the truth of them in the sense the
words import; whatsoever Title was put on my Book, of which I need not be a
shamed; but before I began to prove, I endeavored to clear the business by
several distinctions in five several chapters, containing 32 pages, and now I
have by reason o^ his, and another not the worse because a Shoo-maker, and
another, not the worse because an Apothecary, seeing they are Christians,
calling them proofs, yielded them so to be, and out of the first distinction,
Mr. T. W. has affirmed two grounds, though he has disproved nothing by it,
then in the first chapter, I showed how the question is stated by diverse, the
first as I had it from such as Mr. W. calls lay-preachers, and that I opposed,
and that is it Mr. T. W. labors to maintain; the second as it is stated by
those called Arminians; which I also have confuted in the Treatise; the third
as some Ministers have stated it, the fourth and fifth as some learned, sober
and judicious Ministers in great place, whom I love and reverence as godly,
howsoever they be affected toward me; have stated it; the sixth, as some
learned writers are reported to have stated it; the seventh, as it was stated
in the Synod of Dort, which I approve as good and true, the last, as Doctor
Davenant stated it, to which I stood page 33.36. Then I began to prove by
opening the question, and answering it in twelve answers by plain sayings of
Scripture, without interpretation or glosses, chapter 7. page 37.38, 39. which
when Mr. T. W. can do to prove Christ dyed not for all, or only for an elect
company, or that all he dyed for shall have eternal life, or that there is a
world yet in Scripture called a believing world, that are the sinners and
unjust for whom Christ dyed, he may be credited, else he does nothing to
purpose, then I proceeded to more enlarged proof.

1. By considering Christ as the common person, in the room of all mankind, of
whom the first was a figure, chapter 8. page 40 49.

2. By considering the joint mentioning of creation, and redemption by Christ
chapter 9 page 49 52.

3. By considering the constancy of the Scripture, in changing the person, when
having mentioned the general it mentions any special, chap. 10. p. 53.54.

4 By considering 1 Timothy 3.6. and Heb. 2.9. in the force of the words, the
scope and circumstances of the places, chap. 11.12. p. 55, 56.

5. By considering like places of Scripture, speaking in like manner: chap. 13.
p. 66. 70. To all which M. W. has said nothing, to confute any one argument.

6. By adding six arguments, to satisfy such as must have reason satisfied,
with addition of 18. several proofs: chap. 20. page 129. to 137. with
addition of more proofs chap. 21. p. 138. 143. with removeall of doubts: chap.
22. now Mr. W. only pitches upon the general expressions, the sixth of the 18.
proofs p. 233. Did this learned man examine my Book well, or go about to
answer me, to call this my third ground, and to say nothing but that which is
already answered in the Book; and the least refuted by him, that for answer to
all I need but say, read the Treatise again and for such general words as,
All men, Every man, the World; he takes pains to no purpose. The Treatise
shows as many significations as he; but how it is taken, when it is spoken by
God of his great works, by and concerning his Son; in this he has done
nothing, and all he has said is fully answered in the Treatise, chap. 5 and
11. and 12. and 13. And at large in answer to Mr. Garner, as for the objections
I answered, I never meddled with them, so long as I looked on them as School
disputes, framed against Arminius by learned men, who in their grounds of
Religion have confessed as much as I say; but when they were sent me by a
Gentleman (sometime as report is, a Black smith; no dishonor to him in the
eyes of the wise) in opposition to the truth; I have so answered them, and Mr.
W. has strengthened my answers, by faulting, and not confuring any one of
them, as he that reads may there see; In which all his (here now molded)
objections, queries, and reasons are answered, and again in answering the same
things to Mr. R. G. on the same words, in the second and third part of that
Reply, only I shall here hint some things, as answers to some new expressions
of his.

1. I believe according to Scripture, two Adams, or men, the first natural,
the second spiritual, and the sayings of Scripture, as they are of things
belonging to the first, I understand in a natural sense; and as they are of
things belonging to the second, I understand in a spiritual sense; and yet
both in that sense, the words in such sayings imports, which is rightly called
the litterall sense, 1 Cor 15.45.48. And this in answer to Mr. W. p. 8.9. whose
cross and carnal expressions, I forbear to put to trial.

2. I never said nor writ, that every child can understand such a figure as
this; the Pot seethes over; where the subject is put for the adjunct; alas many
Children may take the fastened grumble on the outside, as well as the pottage
within, for an adjunct: But I said, such a saying may be understood by mean
Country people (that know not what to call such figures) yea, and profitably,
so as the end of such a voice, being to hasten the Mother to save the pottage
from being lost, which if she stay to here a Clearke open the figure, and
being delighted in hearing how figurative the child's speech was, all may be
lost; I apply it not; But in the other figure, though a part be sometimes put
for the whole, that excludes not the whole, or else that he calls a part is the
whole: But that God made all Nations, should be a figure put for part; and that
God made Israel should be the proper speech to limit, and explicate, I hope
Mr. T. W. will not say; and this for answer to his p. 13.

3. I am not willing to urge his taking men off from believing the resurrection
of all men from the testimony of Scripture, to take it on his word, 1 Cor. 15.
For since by man death (is not that the death of all) by man also the
resurrection of the dead (is not that as large as the former; did death befall
any more by the first man, then were made righteous in him, and he stood for,
and they sinned in him, and shall any more be raised by the second then those
whose natures he has taken, and for whom dyed, and rose, let Mr. W. prove
that, till when I prefer the text v. 22. For as in Adam all dye, evenso in
Christ shall all be made alive, though I believe a more abundant, and
excellent life for such as by grace are one in him.

4. I am sorry for his rashness and bold adventure, to give occasion of
strength to those that would hold many Gods, and have many wives, and be
justified by their own works, as if the word, But, or, only, or that which is
as much or more, were not in the Scripture for these, what are not men's words,
and humane righteousness plainly excluded in our justification before God:
Romans 3.20.21 27, 28 and 9.32, and 10.3. Is it not plainly said, there is but
one God, 1 Cor. 8.6. and says he not expressly Isay. 45.21, 22. No God else
besides me, none besides me; I God and none else, and surely though men should
love their enemies, and their Brethren, and their Children: And I am persuaded
Mr. W. would those at least, where he is Minister should love him, and that
with true and faithful love also, and yet this is more then to love their
wives only: But if Mr. W. mean it of that peculiar love and fellowship that
ought to be between man and wife, I suppose he better knows the law of nature,
the law mortal, and Leviticall, then so to object, did not God make twain
one? Has he not forbidden to take another to vex her life? Has he not
forbidden fornication, Adultry, etc. Is there another Minister besides M. W. or
any judicious among the people that will thus reason, when he can show the
place in holy Scripture, where it is said of any part of the world or any sort
of men in the world, Christ did not dye for them, or that he dyed not for All,
that he is not the Savior of the world, not the propitiation for the sins of
the whole world, then he may to some other sayings put in his but, or only:
Besides its shown in the Treatise, as much restraint in some applicatory saying
about Creation, Fall, Death, Resurrection, Judgment, and that some for whom
Christ dyed, perish: And this for answer to page 14.

5. I have his putting that for Scripture which is none, as that God hated Esaue
before he was borne, and such stuff, as answered enough, as also his intimate
farthering a falsehood upon the Apostle, who never said all Christ dyed for are
justified by his blood, or have their sin forgiven, and shall be eternally
saved: I well perceive where the Scripture untranslated, how some would
misreport them, to serve their own turns with, but read the Treatise, and
there is answer un^^moved by Mr W.

6. He wrongs me in saying, that I grant that the word world, may some times be
taken for the better part of them, namely, the Elect. But my Treatise says
otherwise; That by the world in Joh. 17. is meant all the uncalled, whatsoever
they are in Gods decree, of which they called are not; and for which world
clearly distinct from all the called that believe Christ prayed for a blessing
on the ministration of the called, that the uncalled (the world distinct) might
believe, verse. 21.23. from which Mr. W. flies when he comes at it, as fearing
it would confute his confutation: As for all that follows, it is so far from
answering any thing that the Treatise remains still answer enough: Besides, I
go by plain sayings of Scripture, and not by Sillogismes in my Answer to the
Objections; and his sillogisme is slenderly proved.

All those, and only those who are elected, are likewise redeemed, called,
justified, glorified; This his proposition.

Now I may make the Assumption, not in two diverse terms, and so forcelesse, as
he did: But in one, viz. But Mr. T. W. is not glorified; let himself make the
conclusion, and prove it.

But his main strength for confutation is in his Title, and Epistle wherein he
sides with, and humors the profane and scoffing company in using the language
many do, when they are pouring in strong drink, and pouring out oaths with
Jeering and reproaches. But what he means by lay-preachers, I am left to guess:
I know the Scriptures distinguish between Governors and people, as I hope he
will not call the Governors, our King, Parliament, and Magistrates Lay; or of
the people, but Magistrates; so I hope he will acknowledge himself a subject,
one of the people; True, before Christ came in the flesh, there was a
distinction between Priests and Levites, and the rest of the people of Israel;
but now since Christ has carried our nature to the right hand of God, he is
the high Priest; and all that unfainedly believe, are the spiritual Priests, 1
Pet. 2.5-9. and the distinction is between the Church that is Gods inheritance,
and the world out of which they are called and chosen; And this Church is the
pillar of truth; the light of the world, and has its authority for preaching
each according to the faith, and gifts given from Christ, and not from men,
Romans 12.3. 1 Cor. 12.3 11. Ephesians. 4 7 12. 1 Pet. 4.11. Though liberty of doing
this in public places is from the Governors. And that in the Church it self
is a Distinction between Officers called Bishops, or Elders and Deacons; and
the rest of the brethren: And he that usurp an Office without a Church call,
let him bear his reproof; True, when the Bishop of Rome began to usurp
authority over Princes, Then he, and his Ministers were called spiritual, and
the Clergy as if they were the Church; and the Magistrates and people
together, as their inferiors, called the Lavty; But I find not that language
in the Apostles writing: And I hope because of the Covenant; it is not the
meaning of Mr. T. W. But only he means men that are not in his order, and so
called as himself, and then he begins wrong, for without disparagement to him,
or them be it said, the opinion he maintains is that which such teach; And the
objections I answered, I had them all in writing from a Gentleman, that very
like sometimes has been a Blacksmith, the calling the Distinctions proves,
and faulting them. I had first from an Officer, sometime a Shoo-maker; and the
opposition from some other Gentlemen of other callings; And I hope Mr. Garner
will not be ashamed to say, he was an Apothecary: nor I am persuaded will be
glory in having Mr. T. W. of his side. As for his charging them with wandering,
I have known some of his Order, for calling, have so done from place to place,
to get their living, which I think he approves not, but going where ones
calling, and Gods providence leads, is not wandering, though it were from
Northamptonshire to great Yarmouth, and from thence thither again: I wish he
may requite none evil for good.

As for Tho. Moore. He believes the Doctrine of the Gospel in the plain sayings
thereof true, and good, and will acknowledge any swarving of his there from to
be his error, when by those sayings it is shown him; But carnal reasonings,
or Philosophy he will not yield to, to wave those sayings by: As for his being
a Weaver some twenty years since, he has no cause to be ashamed of it,
unless for his entering it contrary to the counsel of his deceased father,
and without consent of his then living friends, and some correction from God on
his body, till by providence he was drawn from it; nor has he any cause to
glory, for having the same authority for school-teaching at that time, that Mr
W. had for preaching. As for Wells, it is a Coast Town nighet Yarmouth, and
further from North^hampton Shire, then Vpwell, o^ (...) in which he lived. But
this but a little mistake, for (...) that takes greater things on trust, and
will undertake to describ^ and censure those whom he never knew, nor correct
his mistakes, when by reading he might have had some knowledge to have set
down opinions righter. As for that he says T. M. has of late taken on him
the office of Teaching, if he had said near twenty years ago he received
authority for Schoole-teaching, he had kept within some bounds of truth; but
for teaching or preaching Gospel, I know not what he means by Office, for
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers; were all Teachers and
Preachers of the Gospel; the words of prophecy, exhortation, wisdom,
knowledge, faith, etc. are all for teaching Gospel; the manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every believer to profit withal: And teaching, and
preaching of Gospel, and that to conversion, or edifying souls, has been by
reasoning, or conference, Joh. 4. Act. 17. By declaration of Gospel with
exhortations etc. Act. 10. and 13. By preaching Jesus from a portion of
Scripture met with, or occasionally put to one, Luke 4.17-20. Act. 8.34 35. or
reading the Sayings of the Gospel; as written, and explicating the sense of
hard words, Nehem 8 8. Act. 15.21. Rev. 1. or by taking a text, and according
to premeditation, and help of Authors, to Analis, and divide, and propound
Questions and Answers; to divide and sub-divide into parts; To raise doctrines,
make reasons, answer objections, frame uses methodically: which of these he
means to be peculiar to an Office, for we read of both Officers and
Brethren teaching: nor did T. M. ever yet, though offered liberty in a public
place, or will he assume to teach therein, nor in any sort farther then by the
call of those that have authority over the place, though the Prayers, the
approbation etc. of as ancient, learned, and godly Ministers as Mr. T. W. was
not wanting twenty years since to T. M. I shall therefore forbear farther
proceeding in this folly with him, and suffer him to glory in the flesh, with
those that reproached our Lord and Master for having been a Carpenter, and his
Disciples for being unlearned, or having been Fishers, Toule gatherers,
Tent-makers; And thank God that through Mr. T. W. I may bear my part of his
reproach: But as for the seducement, wherewith he fears the people in the
Kingdom of England should be seduced, namely, lest they should by the
Scripture be brought to believe that Christ Dyed for them and their neighbors,
and so to own their sins, as that for which Christ suffered, and him as their
Lord, that in belief of the love of God herein, they might loath themselves
and their sins, and their own works, and be ashamed of sinning against so
gracious a God; and so love God, and Christ, and live to him, and love others
for whom Christ Dyed, and walk in that faith and love, and acknowledge all the
mercies of God to men, as fruits of free grace through Christ; and so to
imitate him, as is as at large shown in the 24. Chap. of the Treatise, and from
this he scars men, as if to be led to it, were as the following Absolon out of
Jerusalem; But though many good uses are to be made of that Story; yet seeing
he will needs make an Arigoricall application of it; So let it stand in this
case: Jesus Christ he is the David, the Shepherd, the Judge; he has declared
his mind, and shown every man's condition his way, and portion in his Word,
which is a light, to which men taking heed do well; Till the day do dawne, and
the Day star arise in their heart: But if any will Absalon like blame this King
because any wait so long before the day dawne in their heart, and he has not
appointed another Judge to be in his place, to determine more speedily how men
shall understand, and believe; persuading the Kings sayings are doubtful, and
affords not every man right: And then in pretense of humility, love, and
learning say, Oh that I were judge to interpret, and give the sense, and I
would do every place, and every man right and set him how, and what to believe
and do, that men might not wait so long on his sayings; he that does this, let
him be compared to Absalon, and those that follow them, to such as followed
him: I say no more to that.

As for Arminianisme, sure, it must be some private opinion of Arminius, and
not the doctrine or sayings of Scripture; neither was he such a one, as Mr. W.
calls Lay-preachers, and whether he has set down his opinions right, or not, I
do not know; only this I know, they have been more soundly confuted by others
that I might name: And I am sorry that they are so revived, as to endanger
their spreading by weak confutations; But as I understand the difference is
thus:

First, According to Scripture: Christ Dyed for all, 2 Cor. 14.15. so I
confess. Arminius: He Dyed alike for all; this I believe not. T. W. He Dyed
not at all, intentionally for all.


Secondly, According to Scripture, Jesus extends grace in light, and means to
all, to lead to repentance, Ioh. 1 4 ^1. Act. 14.17. and 17.24.28. Romans 2.4.
Arminius: He offers and extends grace alike to all. T. W. He extends grace to
most men not at all.


As for the other points, they are besides this business, though in my writing
I have confessed election of persons, and denied any thing in nature, to will,
or further conversion, and the total falling away of any by grace, ingr^fted
in, and m^de one with Christ; So as Mr. T. W. has but slandered me, to give
out, as if I held Arminianisme; and gulled his Reader, in making as if he
confuted me, which if he by Scripture could have done, there was my faith in
those things I writ plainly set forth, enough for all his book to have
answered, which his fl^ing gives me occasion to think he could find no Answer
rightly to confute me, and so he devised something that is not mine to
confute, as if he confuted me; for I profess, if by Scripture he had shown
me any error in my Treatise, and confuted it, I would have thanked him; But
because Mr. W. speaks of diverse erroneous opinions, and shows them not, nor
any good usefulness to which his negative doctrine tends; I do here infer
those parts of truth for which I have been much defamed.

1. That Jesus Christ has given himself a ransom to God for all men, and by
virtue thereof is the Mediator between God and men; and extends means to
lead to repentance, ready to receive such as are prevailed with all to come in
to him, and this the ground of repentance, faith and love, as the Treatise
shows, though for this I be sl^ndered, as a Papist or an Arminian, for want
of better arguments.

2. That men's in-comming into Christ, and knowledge of peculiar in^erest in him
is by the holy Spirits enlightening the word of grace, and so discovering and
witnessing Christ to their heart, and commending the rich and free love of God
through Christ, and what he has done for sinners, so to their hearts, as to
enable them to believe, Tit. 3.4.7. Rom 1.5 8 10, And this the root of all
true humility, confidence, love. etc. which are thereby proved sound; else not:
Thus leaving Christ by his Spirit to manifest his own things: Ioh. 16.12, 13. 1
Cor. 2.9-12. Though by such as themselves undertake to be otherwise manifesters
of men's happy condition; I be reviled for this by them as a manifestation.

3. That those thus brought in to believe in Christ, have his mind writ in
their hearts, and so the love, grace, and Spirit of Christ to quicken their
spirit, and to move and lead them, according to Christ, by the law of grace,
faith, etc. Though the flesh or outward man be under the law still, and no
farther free, then the Spirit of Christ makes free; And for this, by such as
strike against the end of the law, I am reproached for an Antinomian, Romans 7.
and 8 1, 2.4.

4. That such as are by grace thus led to live, and walk in, and by the Spirit
of Christ, and so in Christ as they have received him do enjoy fellowship with
the Father and the Son, and there-through receive insupernaturall, and
spiritual shines and infusions of divine love; and therein dispensation of
spirit, and spiritual visits in discovery of Mysteries, hints, motions, and
operations, which effect springs Ascending to God, and streaming toward
brethren all in; with and according to the word of grace, Ioh. 14.26. and
15.26. and 16.12-15. 1 Ioh 1.3, 4. etc. do show: And for this, by those that
are strangers to supernatural, and spiritual teachings I must be defamed, as
an Enthusiast, though in coming to trial; the defamers will not stand to the
plain sayings of Scripture, and would drive from resting on the Word and
Spirit both in one; A ready way to take all from humane Testimonies.

These are the opinions cried out against, which I have nor set down to gain
approbation from any unbeleever. But only to prevent such as are taught of God
from harming themselves by receiving rumors; and from such I shall gladly
receive farther information; Knowing amongst us the difference will be, or is
very little in the three latter: And I hope God will in due season bring us to
agreement in the first, in the mean time let us keep the unity of the spirit
in the bond of peace, as prays the unworthiest amongst them.

Tho. Moore.

FINIS.
Errata.
IN Epistle page 2. line. 3. for rough read through. in Treatise, p. 1. l. 9
for by himself, r. by him in himself. l. 14 for exceeding r. exceedingly p. 2.
l. 4. blot out first p. 5. l. 6. for thee, r. be. p. 7. l. 28. for our, r. one.
p. 8. l. 1. for impart, r. import, l. 4. for exeptation r. acceptance. l. 5.
for or, r. are disobedient p. 10. l. 6, for 209. r. 109. l. 25. for Jews, r
Jaws. p. 11. l. 15. for 1 Pet. 3, 4. r. 2, 3, 4. l. 24. for. 6.8.10. r. 5. 8.
10. l 27. for Assurement, r. Allurement l. 28 for apeareth, r. operateth. l.
37. for. 8. 10. r. 2.10. p. 13 l. 18. for 4 r. 40. l 23. for or, r. on. l. 35.
for or. a. p. 16. l. ^. for propitiation r. proposition. l 27. for refused, r.
refuted. l. 34 for wroth, r wrought. p. 19 l. 10. for laguage, r. linguist. l.
14. for redemo, r. redimo. p. 23. l. 33. for 29 r. 26 p. 24. l. 13. for 16 r.
18. l 16. for intent, r. extent, l. 34. for memorial. r. removeall. p. 17. l.
^. to mankind, add to. l 12. for spirit, r. Priest. p. 26. l. 32. for offered,
r. after. p. 27. l. 6. for that, r. them. l. 19. for thirdly, r. thereby. l. 20
for As, r. 4. p. 21 l 8 r. Heb. 1. 3. l. 12. for Good, r. God. l. 33. for Romans
25. r. 9.25. p 31. l. 7. for refused, r. refuted. l. 15. for or, r. for. p. 32.
l. 20 for beer, r. so l. 29 for 33. r. 133. p. 24. l. 9. for by, r. be. l. 15
for especially, r. expressly. l. 17. for 20. r. 12. p. 25 l. 14. r. for hear,
r. heave p. 29. l. 30. for if, r. it. p. 31. l. 28. for changed, r slandered.
p. 30. l. 8. for sancy, r fancy. l. 23. for men, r. me p. 33 l. 34 for largest,
r. largeness. p. 35. l. 4 for indifferently, r. indefinitly. l. 22. for
romist, r. remist. l. 23. for (one) r. on p 38. l. 20. for where two, r. were,
to. p. 39. l. 36. for righteousness, r. reigning. p. 44. l. 28. for intdened,
r. extended p. 46 l. 10. for them, r. him. l. 11. for them, r. him. l. 33. for
believe, r beseem. p. 48. l. 2. for have, r. leave. p. 49 l. 12. for his, r.
18. p. 50. l. 28. for universalltyes, r. universalities. p. 51 l. 10. for word,
r. world. l. 27. for indivinity, r. indifinitly. p. 52 l. 8. for of, r. if. l.
20 for him, r. sin; p. 53 l. 18. for Air, r. fire. p. 57. l. 32. for Joh. 2.
r. Joh. ^. p. 58. l. 18. for not, r. But. l. 20. for forms, r. former. p. 59.
l. 29. for Judge, r. Jude. p. 60. l. 28. for words, r. those words. l. 29. for
make, r. to make. l. 30 blot out to. p. 62. l. 27. for 109. r. 106. p. 63. l.
14 for 23. r. 13. p. 69 l. 5. for 2 Timothy r. 1 Timothy p. 71. l. 35. for fold, r.
hold p. 73. l. 21. for Act. 17.2. r. 17.25. for. 35. r. 75. l. 32. for 126. r.
136 p. 74 l. 16. for seasable, r. sensible. l. 28. for Ioh. 6.5 r. 6.5 1. l.
33. for honor, r. owners p. 75. l. 31. for 2 Cor. 14. r. 2 Cor. 5.14. p 76. l.
9. for 1 John r. Ioh. 6. p. 81. l. 13. for 14, 15, r. 44, 45. l 27 for every,
r. ever. p. 84. l. 3. for 18 r. 28. p. 85. l. 23. for and, r. not. p. 86. l. 1.
for denying, r. dying. p. 90. l. 28. for concepiton, r. conception p 95. l. 7.
for viz. r. p. 96. l. 20 for satify, r. satisfied, p. 97 l. 12. for continuace,
r. continuance. p. 98. l. 7. for propiated. r. propitiated. p. 99. l. 24. to in
respect, add of the flesh, p. 101. l. 1. r. saving love. l. 6. for for, r. so.
p. 102. l. 1. for another, r such a. l. 7. add he p. 104. l. 2. for insury, r.
injury. l. 29. for 14. r. 1. 4 p. 105. l. 11. to way add of use p. 106. l. 30.
for suppose, r. purpose. l. 32. before all, r. and p. 107. l. 2. for 12. 13. r.
1. 2. p. 110. l. 7. for gall, r. genesis l. 35 for come, r. came. p. 117. l 4. for
Joh. 4. r. 1 John 4. l. 13. for Judge, r. Jude, p. 118. l. 14. for beginning,
r. bringing. l. 35. for through, r. though. p. 119. for denying, r. dying. p.
12 3. l. 30. for indeared, r. undered. l. 36. for belonging, r. belong p. 129.
l. 22, for Ioh. 2, r, 1 Ioh. 3, p, 131, l. 24, for conceit, r, consent, p, 132,
l, 1. for Ioh. 1, r, 1 John 1, l, 4, for 36, r, line 36, l, 20, for partaking,
r, partake, p, 133, l, 9, for But, r, Both, l, 35, for roof, r, root, p, 134,
l, 16, for perish, r, persist, l, 25, for perish, r, persist, l, 35, for
stillness, r, skillesse, p, 135, l, 12, for effected, r, effects, l, 32, for
it, r, it is, p, 136, l, 14, add the. p, 137. l, 18, for Garner, r, W, l, 25,
for persit, r, persist, p, 139, l, 5, for Text, r, Treat, l, 6, for special,
r, spiritual l, 16, for have, r, leave, l, 35, for life, r, less, p, 140, l,
28, and 29, for preservation, r, preserver, l. 34, for or, r, for, p, 141. l,
5, blot out be, p, 14^, l. 4, for for, r, so, p, 143, l, 29, for Prove. 12. r,
Prove. 1. p, 144, l, 26, for bold, r, told, p. 145, l, 35, for denies, r, deny,
p. 146, l, 13, for withstand, r, withdraw, l, 28, for 169, r, 69, p, 148, l,
13. for first, r, sixth, p, 149, l, 18, add Answer not in the, l, 35, for now,
r, new, p, 150, l, 23, unto a figure (add) the whole, p, 151, l, 3, for words,
r, works, l, 17, to her, add during her, l, 29, for loave, r, leave, l, 34,
for where, r, were p, 152, l, 3, for they, r, the, p, 154, l, 33, for
unlearned, r, unlettered, p, 155, l, 6, blot out the last, as, l, 10, for
arrigoricall, r, Allegorical, l, 31, for 2 Cor. 14, r. 2 Cor. 5, 14, p, 156,
l, 5, for infer, r, insert, l, 19, for manifestation, r, manifestarian, l,
25, for 4, r. 14,

For Mr. Knowles it was in my Copy according as to his Epistle Knollis.


