To the Honorable the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled: Is humbly
Represented to You a short View, or Abstract of several Letters, which I
happened to look over, some time since; which Letters were sent from John
Dutton Colt Esquire late Collector of His Majesty's Customs of this Port of
Bristol, Directed to Daniel Ballard his Clerk, then Manager of that Revenue in
his Absence.
WHICH Letters consist of his being Concerned in Trade and Shipping, contrary
to Act of Parliament, and the diligent Care he took in disposing of the Narrow
and Clipped Money, whether for the Interest of the Government, or his own, Your
Honors will be the best Judges.

December the 4th, 1693.
A Receipt for 10 l. toward paying a Second Expense for the Ship Betty
Privateer, Received by Capt. Earl, of Daniel Ballard, upon Account of the
forementioned Collector.

The 7th of December, 1693.
As to the Betty Privateer, you must pay my Share till she can Sail.

Another of the same Month.
I am glad the Privateer is Sailed.

February the 24th 91/4.
Let me hear how things go on: I am sorry there is any Loss at the Glass-House,
but that must be as well as others: I should be glad to hear you had Custom
enough for your Bottles; the Betty Privateer got well and quick.

April the 10th, 1694.
Go to Capt. Earl; give him my Service, and desire to know what he has done
for the Owners toward defraying of our Great Charge. I desire to know what he
has done: I hope some good for Us, which I desire to know, and what the
Privateer is to do farther.

April the 14th, 1694.
If the Joseph, or any Ship Arrives where Mr. Carey is concerned in, let me
know; I mean by Mr. Carey, that any Ship he is concerned in; Immediately give
me Notice.

November 17, 1694.
If any Money should be drawn upon you to pay by Mr. Knight, or any other hand,
for the Officers or Soldiers that Quarter in Bristol, pay none till you
acquaint me, or that they do agree to allow for such Return 3d per Pound; this
I will have, if you pay any upon Return, for the Soldiers Use and Quarters.

November the 22th, 1694.
I shall send down Capias's very suddenly against all the Merchants to take
them all up, and hold them to Special Bayl; therefore Acquaint Mr. Carey, Mr.
Alderman Pope, and other Friends, for 'twill not be in my Power to serve them
any longer. Once more I desire you to speak to Mr. Carey, Mr. Pope, and other
Friends.

The last of January, 1694.
Mr. Alderman Pope must pay all, but deliver the enclosed; but say nothing of
it. See what he says to you about my Money; Read Alderman Pope's Letter
enclosed; Seal it, and take his Answer and send it to me.

March 10th, 1694.
Bring up all the Bonds due to the King; also those Bonds of Stancome and
Wheeler; as to that Bond of Mr. Carey's, given the last Year, leave that in the
Iron Chest.

March 30, 1695.
I hope Mr. Baker has paid Mr. Hall of Sturbridge for the Clay, and if not, let
it be done forthwith, Mr. Gray asking me for it. I hope the Act for Glass
Bottles will take place, and the Cole; if so 'twill be a great Advantage to Us,
because the Glass Houses here and Mark this.
elsewhere that have Cole Water born, must and will lay down, since they cannot
work so Cheap as us; we shall have the Inland Trade much to our selves,
therefore rest satisfied with as many Bottles as you can at present.

May the 2d. 96.
Remember after the fourth of May, to buy bad Silver by the Ounce, or else 3 s.
or 4 s. in the Pound for broad Money the People will give; Be sure cull out all
the broad Money, and keep it till I come home to order it, not letting any body
know it; Mind what I now say to you, I mean People will give bad Silver and
small Clipped for broad Money, as they do here 20 s. bad Clipped for 16 s. broad
and passable Money.

Another.
My Service to Mr. Bailey; you may acquaint him, if he has any bad Silver
Money, now is the time to be rid of it.

October the 29th, 1696.
We have made a Vote that Clipped Money and Hammered Silver Money shall go by
Weight at 5 s. 2d. by the Ounce betwixt Man and Man, and in Taxes and at the
Mint, for 5 s. 8 d. by the Ounce, as now; therefore keep this to your self, and
get what Weighty Hammered Money you can, which we may make the 8 d. Advantage
of; Mind this.

These Letters, with many others, were delivered into the Hands of Esquire Henly of
this City; with a Note under the hand of Jo. Elbridg his own Writing,
containing a Particular of several Sums of bad and Clipped Money, paid into the
King's Receipt by the forementioned Collector John Dutton Colt and others;
which Note will lead Your Honors to a farther Enquiry into the many Frauds and
Concealments of this place. This I do for the Interest of the Government, and
Service of my Country, as will appear, if duly and strictly Examined into,
which is left to Your Honors Great Wisdom.

l. s. d. The said John Dutton Colt is Debtor 43519 19 3 Creditor 30851 14 6
The Balance 12668 4 9 43519 19 3 l. s. d. Memorandum, A Privy Seal appears to
Discharge 2000 l. of the abovesaid Balance. So there remains due to the King
from the said John Dutton Colt, to Balance 10668 4 9

Your Honors most faithful
Bristol Jan. 3d. 1699/700

