THE LIFE OF A SATIRICAL PVPPY, Called NIM.

WHO WORRIETH ALL THOSE SATYRISTS HE KNOWS, AND BARKS AT THE REST.

By T. M.

LONDON, Printed by for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1657.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and most eminent GEORGE Duke of BUCKINGHAM, etc:
Great Sir,
EXpectation flattering my hopes, shortened the way from London hither: but now
the Servants slow aspects, and reserved behaviors, might scare young modesty,
from venturing to approach. Yet I excuse the small address, they suffer to your
noble person, by saying, they know the worth of it: therefore make it not cheap
to every Eye. And in supposing all Strangers to be Suitors, they proclaim your
abode the very Seat, where all Justice does inhabit. Here I arrive empty of
mercenary Thoughts; for Duty has preferred me to such a strange ambition, that
I do even give unto your gracious self Nim, and Bung his man, both born to
attend your Lordships mirth. It was made, transcribed, and bound up yours, nay
I was so zealous in curiosity, that but this Copy (besides the Original) is
extant Had not learned friends (after perusal) urged me to this boldness, Nim
had known humility, who now discovers the inside of them* who most envy your
Graces high, deserved happiness, whilst every jest proves by interpretation
serious, though he nominates none. If in the least kind he degenerate from my
chaste intents, tear it* into a form more displeasing then your Anger* All my
present suit is, your Grace would deigne to read it* which when confirmed by
promise, I shall return to* London, and publish my success.

Your Graces humblest Servant T. M.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. NIM, after his Proem to the Reader, discovers the place of his birth:
and why the relation of his Childish proceedings, is omitted. CHAP. II. Nim
tells the Story of his Patrons death, with other circumstances worth the
reading. CHAP. III. Nim reports the conditions of his Patrons Heir; with the
reason, and manner of his departure from him. CHAP. IV. Nim riding toward
London is overtaken by a Citizen; who tells them a merry story: besides their
discourse, together with the fashion of their Host in Mayden-head, is in this
Chapter most punctually related. CHAP. V. Nim perseveres in relating what befell
them in the Inn: rides from thence to London, acquaints you with a Feast worth
the laughing at: treats of the City-Cries, and promises graver stuff
hereafter. CHAP. VI. Nim most wittily reveals his admirable Dream, urnes
Satyrist, and omits not the relation of those reasens, which induced him to it.
CHAP. VII. Nim being drunk* goes to hire a Servant in Paul's, and after a sober
description of the Church, and Walkers, recounts how strangely he was supplied
with one. CHAP. VIII. Nim acquaints you with his first proceedings in his
Satyricall calling; and inveighs against Threee Men, who publiqnely profess
themselves to be of the same vocation. CHAP. IX. Nim does in particular
exclaim* against all those Satyrists, who hide themselves, yet publish their
Writings: shows reasons for so doing: with a trick that he has, bobs
privately: delivers a brief superficial Character of the Hollanders, and
relates in what manner he spent part of his time in London, when attended on by
his Man Bung. CHAP. X. Nim being desirous to make thee laugh, does in this
Chapter report a notable merry accident, which befell his Man Oliver Bung. CHAP.
XI. Nim takes occasion to present thy acceptance with a Character of a Whore,
and has graced his expression, by the relation of Bungs most witty revenge.
CHAP. XII. Nim complains of Bung's villainous service, intends to be rid of him,
declares what himself has spent since he came to London: and discourses most
wittily upon a Book, called, An invective against the Plebeians and Citizens of
London. CHAP. XIII. Nim ripps open the Hearts of Citizens, condemns them
justly, builds another Castle in the Air, and relates the pretty fashion of it.
CHAP. XIV. Nim mentions his proceedings against some of the Nobility; and what
success he had: afterward (in a Pamphlet) discovers all the defects of his
own penning: sends Bung to sell it: whose bad adventures, moove him to rail on
Fate. CHAP. XV, Nim's Hostess denies to trust him, he fasts two Days, pawns
his Clothes; then resolving to part with Bung, sends for him to a Tavern, and
gives him learned Counsel. But after Bungs reply, he does change his mind, and
returns with him, to his Patrons Heir: promising (on a smooth condition) to
bless this Book with a second Part.
FINIS.
THE LIFE OF A SATIRICAL PUPPY; Called NIM: WHO WORRIETH ALL THOSE SATYRISTS HE
KNOWS, AND BARKS AT THE REST.
CHAP. I.
NIM after his Proem to the Reader, discovers the place of his Birth; and why
the relation of his childish proceedings, is omitted.

IF by divulging my defects, I present in some particular thine* to thy
remembrance; it will not only recompense my labor in Writing, but thine in
Reading. I make the whole World my Confessor: preferring a public
commiseration, before a private shrift. What I have done, I have done: nor
shall thou behold my Penitence, until thine* Eyes arrive to the end of our
History. If thou find my faults capital, seek out my excuse in thine own
guilt; and then blush for us both. I entend to wrong no man but my self, as
knowing where I may most presume of pardon: therefore extract no dangerous
sense from any coorse, ambiguous phrase. If thy approbation cease on my advice,
may all the labor I spent to revive my griefs, beget mirth and thy future ease.

First, to prevent all inquisitive expectation concerning my Parentage, I will
relate it to you. My Father was a Gentleman by birth, though Time has stolen
away his Coat, and disguised him in necessity. My Mother (subject to the same
fortune) may plead the like in her defense: lest detraction (advantaged by
laing hold on my behavior in the World) might wrong her Ancestors. He was never
staked to a certain place of residence: but went on Pilgrimage fourteen years
to visit the Shrine of Saint Charity; at last found it Wintring, (or at least
very cold) in Hackney, three Miles distant from London.

The fat Miller there (a notable old Thief) made him his Tenant: but he gul'd
his own Conscience with an excusive Proverb (fallere fallentem non est fraus)
and him of five years Rent, with running away. Leaving me (very young) as
pawn to the Parish for that, and other borrowed Money, till Fortune, and his
honesty, could procure my redemption. But as the Miller swore in a prophetique
fury, (that will never be) so it has proved: nor have I since so much as heard
from him, or can devise whither he went. Therefore in revenge of such
unnatural dealing I will quite exempt the memory of him from our Story, and
return to the Miller: as I needs must, since Necessity is my Guide, and has
left me no where else to go. His Countenance (poor Man) lowers in a most
preposterous form: for his Eyes are heavy, which naturally require the light.
His plump Cheeks (that were wont to be so immodest as to kiss his shoulders)
resemble now Famine painted on a clean Trencher. His great Belly (that barred
him the sight of both his knees) is grown invisible it self. All his
discourse tends to the description of my Fathers dexterity in running away,
which he admires with Curses.

There is a goodly Meddow joining to his House, encompassed with a River: whose
beauty in the Summer, did often invite my wantonness, to sport with May-Flies,
dabble in the water, hunt my shadow: all which expressed how truly senseless I
was, that a Compelled Charity from diverse men, maintained my being. If the
sottish old Man met me there, he would even sindge his Beard with a scorching
sigh, and quench the Liquid flame again with Tears. Villain (quoth he) Where
is my Rent? a plague upon your Fathers dexterity! his London debts, that were
due to him on Whitsunday was Twelve-moneth! his Christmas-tales! his
costly-invitations; my Wife, my two Sons, and my self to a buttered Parsnip,
three poach't Eggs, and a dride Cucumber. Go from my sight, you Bastard: Mun
you live so merry (with a pox) upon other Men's costs? your greasy chops
(thanks to my sins) does cost me for my share, two pence a week. None of
this could my young capacity apprehend; wherefore Nature did not only make
ignorance worthy his envy, but a defense to me, and offense to him. It was not
long after when Fortune expressed her smiles, in delivering me from thence: for
on a Tuesday night, a Gentleman (hot and dry with hard riding) lighted at the
Mill, proffered money for a Cup of Beer, and had it: I held his his Horse. The
Miller (who greedily expected some occasion, whereby he might proclaim his
formerlosse, and present Charity) accuses me of cheating Boys at play, how I
had just my Fathers tricks even by succession, at last blurts out all. The
Gentleman marking my sparkish behavior, and with what an innocent resolution I
stood in defense of my Father, earnestly enquires after my name, which was no
sooner told him, but he took me by the hand, and called me Kinsman: for he
himself was a Gloucester-shire NIM, but whether there were any propinquitie of
blood between us, I could never yet learn. Well, he was a wealthy old
Bachelor, and my good genius did so far collogue with his, that without
entreaty he promised to discharge the Parish of my Person within a week: his
action pursued his promise too, as fast as a good Horse could bring it to me,
and me to him. Under whose charge I lived, till I was one and Twenty years
old: where, and in what manner I omit to discover, it being (indeed) nothing
pertinent to that grave stuff, wherewith I intend to line my Book. For what
passages can such green years afford, worthy thy knowledge or my description?
none at all: yet some have that way (heretofore) caught the approbation of
learned Readers, when in another way, they have quite lost themselves. So great
a difference is there between the Times past and ours: for Fancy (whose
Weakness then foild off the defects of a bad writer) is now turned to a
second Zoilus, and dulles the edge of her own delight, with absurd Carping. So
singularly excellent likewise is natural instinct, admitting no second quality
to pass approved under her expression. But howsoever each circumstance that my
proceedings did beger after my nonage (impartial of my future Fame, or the
name of NIM) I will relate.

CHAP. II.
NIM Tells the Story of his Patrons Death, with other circumstances, worth
reading.

THe World had not owned me full one and twenty years when my good Patron dyed;
being old, and rich: but too well stored with Kinsmen; there were more NIMS
besides my self. Wone Baby came post from Gloucester, and arrived at our House
two days before the Funerals were sollemnized. A second squint-eied-Fop of
Teuxburie, that could scarce perceive a Mountain through a Prospective (Horst
on his covetuous desires) arrived there, the Funeral day: not to mourn (heaven
knows) but upon a certain Physical advertisement, that Gold is sovereign for
the Eie-sight. My fortune proved worth a Hundred Pounds, which the good man
left me by Will: in recompense of which, and all former courtesies, I am
pleased to extract him a second life, from the true relation of the manner of
his Death.

He lay sick of a burning Fever a long time, his death being deferred more for
the Physicians gain, then his ease, or probability of ever recovering: A
necessary knavery in them, and Lawyers, to make men give money for pain and
trouble. Five hours before his departure hence, he bad me write his Will. The
disposing a thing of such consequence to the weak managing of our decayed
senses, and last minutes, expressed in him that counterfit hope of longer life,
which covetous men force from dead Hearts, and six to oppose sense; most
apparent in contradiction.

His sick Groans accompanying his words, argued (me-thought) with what an ill
will he parted from those gifts, and how sorry he was, he could not make his
soul Executor. A great mind he had to erect an Almes-house for decayed
Soldiers: but a poor beneficed Parson (who stood by) smothers in his own
particular want, the knowledge of that superfluous height which generally his
Tribe live in, and strives by the force of zealous phrase, to make himself
disposer of another Charity: pleading how much the building of a College,
with allowance for Twenty Fellows, would increase Learning, and memorize the
noble Given. The Physician (who till now sat silent on the Bed) speaks in
approbation of the sick man's former intent, and maintains with lusty Argument,
how necessary it is, poor Soldiers that lose their Limbs abroad, in defense
of their Country (returning not rich enough to buy Wooden ones) should be
relieved, lest necessity arming them with an excuse; they conspire with
foreign Enemies to besiege Ingratitude at home. The Parson being crossed,
fell from modest discourse, to impious railing, and mixing serious absurdity,
with a leaden wit he bandies Jests: amongst the rest this one was noted,
because he laughed at it him self. Sir, (quoth he) belike Soldiers want Purses
for you to purge, and the Devil has possessed you with an imaginary
inconvenience that follows good deeds. You are grown weary too of ministering
Physic to poor Men gratis, your Charity is cold, and lacks a wrought velved
Gown to warm it: or your Worship would ride a Cock-horse, and change
Foot-clothes every Spring. No (replied the Physician) Custom and rugged War is
in the Soldier an Antidote that prevents the very effects of sickness: nor
Cannon, nor Sword makes any work for us: therefore if any man (in that kind)
be guilty of Covetuousnesse, it is the Surgeon, to whom address your
accusation. Yet I most admire how you can apply Pride to us, for being a thing
that becomes no man we seldom wear it: but (contrary to the Proverb) it
becomes you worst, though it be now in fashion with you. Your chief Men, that
should be fixed in a Civil posture, thereby to nourish comely imitation, have
cast off ancient decency, and charm the eyes weak censure to an affectation
of the Italian habit. Their state is more reserved then a Princes, or an old
French Courtiers, who in his proudest distance, fears his worth too much
undervalued. A fortunate Petitioner may (happily) with much obsequious phrase,
recover from some under Chaplain an Emperious Nod, and dance attendance but
half an hour longer, according to the last addition. This made the Parson
stronger in defiance: for all the company took his part, and enforced the
Doctor to confess it malicious detraction, which presently he did.

But now return we to my sick Patron, who hearing his charitable motion begot
such striffe, concludes negatively both ways: and presently after, lost the
use of both his Eyes, denoting it with a piercing shreek, whilst we that were
in the Chamber (amazed at so sudden an alteration) tire the Collerick
Physician, with absurd questions. The blind man can see no more hope now of
longer life in this world, no though the Doctor durst once more be so impious
to make him spectacles of covetuous flattery, therefore he grows holy, prays,
and talks of Heaven, which the Parson having by divine mercy fully assured
him, he suddenly likewise lost his speech* some applying it to the Heavenly
comfort he received, as if silence expressed it, to be above expression. Others,
that (according to the Batavian Philosophy) hold the Soul dividuall in her
self, and each member particularly to enjoy some particular part of her, would
needs persuade me the Tongue dyed then, that the Soul of it might go before
to bespeake room for her fellows. It was not long after when all his Limbs
disclaimed motion, and he life: his estate unfurnisht with an Executor, by
reason the time which he reserved to determine of one was too short, but the
Gloucester Man (being his Nephew) disinherited the other, whose hopes were
strengthened by a promise the old Man made five years before his death; not by
any home alliance, for he was no more then his Cosen thrice remoov'd. They
which followed the Coffin to burial, went wetshod in those affectionate
Tears, which flowed so abundantly from the young Heirs Eyes. I never think
on it, or on Doting Lovers, but I call Nature an Enemy to Love: who suffers it
never to be expressed with apparent demonstration; but when it is expressed,
unnecessary or hurtful. I did a month after his decease (whilst his memory
was young, lusty, and able to overcome detraction with disproofe) publish him
to the World in an impartial Character, but it is requisite I bar thee the
sight of it, because (being lost) I cannot show it: yet if a desire to increase
in knowledge, cause thee to think thy self wronged, be recompensed in reading
this Dialogue between Death and me.

NIM.
Death, what crochet came into thy mind,
To strike my honest Patron blind
Ere 'twas with him perpetual Night?
Come tell me, did not thou suppose
His Soul the way to Heaven would lose,
By being thus deprived of sight?
DEATH.
No, Nim, I brought it so to pass,
Because that he a Coward was
And had a very little Heart.
Therefore (to find it) did devise
A way to pluck forth both his Eyes,
And stick them fast on this my Dart.
NIM.
Death, now thou do him double wrong,
For when St Albons Bells were wrung
By great Devils in the Steeple,
He Valianrly climes up the Stayrs,
Armed only with a Dozen Prayers,
Which were heard by all the People.
DEATH.
Why true, but do not thou know Man
The Tongue is Weapon to a Woman,
And sharper far then two-edged Swords
Which makes in all consequence
His Heart not strong, but his Defense,
If they Speak blows that fight with Words.
NIM.
Go, base Detractor, do not strive
To kill his Fame, keep that alive
The reason why he prayed there,
Was that (being dark) the Devil
Might know him from an Infidel
And not for Pidgeon-Liverd-Feare.
DEATH.
This style of base will (thou shall see)
Call back my purposed Lenity
And be revenged on Brittanie
When e're long thy dead Muse must come
(Wafted on Tears) to Elysium,
Where there is Sack, yet none for thee.
NIM.
I, my Muse, and Country, care not a Fart,
For thee, thy envy, or thy fatal Dart:
Nor think I any there Canary have
At least my Patron thought it not; for he
Took his departure hence so heavily
That eight could hardly lift him to his Grave.
Thou shall never so much admire my Courage, as in this my conference with
Death; for though he frights other Men's Souls from their Bodies, yet can
thou pick from these Verses no defect that does express more then a very
little fear; they went rather a timorous pace then smoothly from my Tongue:
which I discover to nourish thy Detraction not my glory.

CHAP. III.
NIM reports the conditions of his Patrons Heir; with the reason, and manner
of his departure from him.

A Passionate, Man is a learned Beast; being moov'd, nor Man nor Beast: for he
wants the sense of the one, and in some kind the unsensibilitie of the other.
He takes the quickest cure for his disease of any; for the next way to end his
life, is his only Physic. I cannot in modesty avouch that my Patrons Heir did
counterfeit his Passion, for to pensist in the disease, is their cure because
it is their Death, and no man can counterfeit Death unless he will be buried
alive. Besides to root in us a contrary opinion of him, we will only remember
how his Uncle maintained him Ten years under his own Roof, which fatherly
Charity (proclaimed constant likewise by Time, who is best able to judge of
constancy) could not but beger a superstitious love, which still labors to
requite with prodigall-Gratitude, yet is never weary nor spent.

When he was returned from the Funeral, and by the consent of the whole
Country had taken possession of all, he gave charge his Unkles Wardrobe should
be chested up, and kept as Relics; only his Gloves, Points, and Garters he
bestowed upon the Overseers, and others whom his choice picked out, best to
deserve their worth: conjuring each Man (for the deceased parties sake) never
to part from them, whilst they (who before blessed him in his Uncles name, still
mentioning the affinity of old acquaintance, in expectation of Rings*) now
curse his thrifty Superstition, divulging abroad how well his liberality has
requited their pains: though I blamed those poor gifts from him, as nothing
but an old simplicity of Love that values things according to a self
estimation. A strange dejected humor possessed him three Months, his actions
were quite void of formality, his domestic affairs by himself neglected, and
managed by men more officious then honest. Being advised by his friends to
settle his Estate, he made answer he could not live long, therefore would busy
his Soul only with heavenly meditations. How (quoth I) God forbid your Worship
should disparage the success of your new Fortunes with such fond surmises.
Nature in you is so lusty, that it almost breaks the Bonds of Continence: full
of presuming strength, challenging all sickly operations to a defiance, our
youthful blood, hardly to be tamed with those examples weh experience does
demonstrate. I confess (replied he) my immediate Heir cannot warrant his hopes
either in my years or complexion, but I have a divining spirit which prompts
me to superstitious observations, and breeds a confirmation stronger then thy
opinion can remove. I answered, when our pensive thoughts do still accompany
our hearts, they are (like our voices accompanying our Maiden-heads) both lost
together. His melancholy dull humor could apprehend nothing, but the next
morning sent post to London for a Stone-cutter, who being come, was entertained
as if he had feasted his content. They allotted the morning to consult of
businesses, wherein my advice was equally accepted with the best, although the
Worke-mans gain furnished them with fashions of more curious invention,
handsome, in being costly; at last it was concluded two hundred pound should be
bestowed upon a Marble Tomb to cover my Patron: the fashion of it it is
impossible to relate, for patience would tire her self in the description,
being composed of naught but quirks, and various whim-whams.

Alteration appears never more deformed, then when it appears in Tombs, or
Churches, where Antiquity shows most reverend, most sacred and begets
Ceremony; Cerimony, Superstition: but who has more cause to accept of our
blame, then such as will not limit their expense, according to that compudent
Thrift, expressed in ancient Monuments, but strive with a zealous prodigality to
exceed all the ways, modest Art can invent to consume their Money. The
Stone-cutter (like Time) went swiftly away from us, but never came back again:
for our Heirs mind did change, differring the work till the next Spring. He
whose costly experience had too well acquainted him with such inconstant
humors, labourd to prevent what he suspected by a sudden dispatch: but the
message was delivered, before the stuff that should have bin sent to us was
packt up: and gladly did the Stone-Cutter take a small satisfaction for what he
had begun, as confident it would never be effected. Premeditation in this kind
(quoth he) prevents Action. Charitable deeds should be bestowed e're we can
have leisure to examine why? Or on whom they are bestowed: Our Natures* being
prone to censure fair Desert, with fowl Detraction, and esteem that which is
not altogether necessary, superfluous: telling us likewise we should not commit
Evil that Good may come of it; but Toombs consume the money of the Living, to
preserve the Fame of the Dead. Therefore he that will have a House for his
Memory to dwell in, must build it himself, lest being unhows'd, it die for cold,
and we starve for want of Custom.

This sudden change in our Heirs mind, did prognosticate a general alteration,
though his affairs were constant to the disposure of his Passion three Months:
a time long enough to contradict the Proverb which says, Violent things, are
never permanent. He that did eat rather to satisfy those hungry Worms, that
will batten by his Death, than Nature that maintains Life: whose Soul was in
his Mouth, even ready to depart with the next Sigh, now makes a Physician his
Steward, feeds by prescription, is more punctual to abstain from Meat, that is
out of season, then a sick Epicure: and hopes he shall live till Time, may
throw a Dart at Death. After his estate was settled, he took order to discharge
the House of poor me: being moved to antipathize from his Uncle in so
uncharitable a deed by my presuming insolence, that appeared most commonly when
I was drunk. Once my Tongue reeld so much, to say I had more interest in the
House then he, which was too soon disproved by his thrusting me out of it. On
that Morning prefixed for my departure, he brought into my Chamber the Hundred
Pounds, left me by his Uncle, which being delivered me in a legal manner, he
commends to my own Vainglorious approbation, my Ingenious Countenance, Comely
Person, and natural wit: withal, told me my Schollership expressed both costly
breeding, and great Industry; therefore I was strong enough to erect my own
Fortunes: with a great deal of good Counsel, which I valew'd, as coming from
one whose Experience seemed younger then himself. There were few Tears shed
between us at parting; neither did he bestow any thing on me more then what
Custom holds necessary to maintain Complement, (a Cup of Beer) or Complement
necessary to maintain Friendship: A promise of welcome when I shall call upon
him riding that way. Well, horst I was, and well stored with money, having
besides my Portion, the worth of fourscore Pounds in Jewels, which my wicked
providence (advantaged by the Old Man's sickness) pocketted up, to withstand all
unfortunate assaults. Thus the way enforcing my Steed and I, to take an
unmannerly farewell (by making our Arsses his opposite Object) we rod toward
London.

CHAP. IV.
NIM, riding toward London, is overtaken by a Citizen, who tells him a merry
Story; besides, their discourses, together with the fashion of their Host in
Mayden-head, is in this Chapter most punctually related.

IT was a fair Morning, the way fairer, which pleased both me, and my Horse.
All my Care I cast into that Pocket which contained my: Money, as the
naturallest Companion for it. My Thoughts seemed to me heavier then my self,
but not to my Horse, because I felt their burden; he mine. My conceit wandered
like a Northern-Shepheards Tongue, when (half drowned in a Wessail Bowl) he
tells the Story of a Lad that went to seek his Fortunes. Three hours before I
came to Mayden-Head, I was overtaken by a London Citizen, who rode like an
Admirer of the skill of Horsmanship: or as if he were hearing a Story of one
that killed himself by falling from his Saddle; with such a Complementall-fear
did he embrace the Horses Neck: committing the protection of all his Limbs to
several supporters, but his Legs wholly to his Stirrops. Well overtaken,
Friend (quoth he); good Highway Rhetorique! produced to maintain Custom, but
chiefly to express him self not bred, though born a Cockney; or not his Child,
that being to journey forth in Rainy weather, told his Wife he had a trick to
prevent all Clowdy inconvenience, by riding under the Pent-howses, even from
London to Cambridge. Some men dote so much upon their expression, that, though
want of reading bar them a tale pertinent to the Matter, Time, and Place; yet
will they piece discourse with an old story: The remembrance of which his
Grandfather recovered by the Art of Memory; but he assures it (by some handsome
oath) to be lately done; laying his Scene afar off, lest he should betray
himself, to an eminent disproof. Just such a one encountered with my
conversation: who fed my Ears with relating, what I have here set down.

Two Kentish Gentlemen, Friends, and worthy of Fortunes envy, were both their
ruins of her Conquest; expressed in their exstream impoverishment: which forced
Invention to beget dishonest shifts. So much does Equivocating Necessity ridle
in her Actions; basely preventing base living: amongst the rest, this one
arrives to our knowledge.

A certain rich Creditor of theirs rode into Oxfordshire, about a Purchase he
had lately bought: These Gallants (hearing of it) plotted now to enrich
themselves by his return; at last agreed, that six of their Companions, should
set upon him on the highway; dissembling as if they intended not only to rob
him of his Money, but also of his life: Whilst they two (appearing to ride that
way by chance) fight stoutly in his defense, and obtain the Victory, by putting
the rest to flight; not doubting, but this being carried too close for his
discovery, might move him really to consider their counterfeit kindness, in a
large requital. He had no Kinsman on whom his love could bestow the keeping of
his Purse-strings to a peculiar profit; which strengthened their hopes. Having
by a diligent inquiry got to know the time of his return, they all attended
him under a Hill; three Miles distant from Town or Village. One of the Six
served as Scout, to prevent impediments, both by discovering his coming, and
the passing by of others. But the Coast was clear, and the Sun almost set, when
they behel'd their Creditor, walking down a Hill; singing of Psalms, attended
on only by wone Man, who seemed furnished with two defensive Weapons; an old
rusty Sword, and a liberal Hand: not to strike, but to give away his Purse,
which was his politic device, to prevent robbing. Well, if he had valor in
him, he was afraid to show it: besides it dwelt at least a furlong from his
face; for the cowardly form of that could not but encourage an Enemy. The Six
presently (upon a watchword) assault them from behind a Hedge. Stand, deliver
your Purse? are words of no force here: the Master being old, weak, and unable
to support his fear, fell down to complement with their mercy. The Servant
(being lightened by flinging them his Purse) ran away: but they (lest he should
have raised a hue-on-cry) brought him back again fast bound. Now pleads the old
Man for his life, his Prodigal fear offering Emperors ransomes: whilst they
seem to abandon all remorse, crying blood, blood! the Villain will reveal us,
the Villain will reveal us. He swears by all oaths extant in his memory, he
never will. But by this time his two Champions sallied forth, saying, what
noise is that? keep the Kings peace ho! and calling him by his name, they
cheer him up with comfortable words, and counterfeit blows, which were
received by the supposed Thieves, with as little hurt as Cowards could wish
for. The old Man (doubtful of the success) considering such an advantage on
the adverse parties side; swore those Six Gentlemen, to be his honest Friends,
and what they did, was but in jest: thinking if the other two were overcome,
this would save his life. But it was their Qu' now to fly, as vanquished by two
opposers, which they did with exquisite dissimulation; carrying along with them
Fiveteen Pounds. Our two Gallants are yet to receive the Fruit of their
labors: The old Man having naught about him now to bestow upon them, but
thanks, which they seemed to receive in ample satisfaction; He earnestly
enquires after his Man, whom they all smelt out presently, by reason of an
immodest expression of Fear: offensive to their Noses, and his own Breeches. It
proved something troublesome to unbind him, for every man employed one of his
Hands to stop his Nostrills withal. At last (with much ado) they all became
Horsemen again, and rode a pace toward the next Town: he being very desirous
to send hu-on-cry after them for his Money, but by the force of premeditated
reasons, he was persuaded to the contrary They had scarce entered their Inn,
but he relates unto a public Auditory what happened unto him, still interposing
between his own danger, the Valor and kindness of those two Gentlemen, his
Debtors. But they strengthen their well composed plot with reporting that he
most ' valiantly behaved himself before they could come to his rescue.
Flattery (that old siin) agrees best with Age, where Folly is grown out of her
own knowledge, and often mistakes her self for Wisdom: the implication of the
word, being lost, when applied to Men of full desert. It is a poor beggarly
vice, yet still accompanies the rich. It is a Thief that steals away the Heart
through the Ear, and for that theft hangs on it like a Jewel ever after. It
works the Soul from a compudent giving to a doting prodigality; and has
caught this man too: who though his knowledge blushed in what it knew, and gave
the Lie to his own forced belief; yet did he hugg a second Youth within him,
and talked of what he could do, setting aside great advantage: non Hercules
contra duos. The next Morning they rode to his House; where thanks, and welcome
did no more appear shaped in words, but in little Baggs of Money, which were
delivered with a courtlike entreaty of acceptance: he striving to prove, there
was no disparagement in the receipt of them. Their old Bonds likewise he freely
restored saying, Since Fortune (who is blind to all men's deserts) could not see
theirs, he was glad this occasion had given Eyes to his Duty, that can direct
him on whom he may still bestow, yet never impoverish himself. They had what
they desired, and therefore pretended business which must needs occasion their
departure from him. His humor is still constant to extremity in kindness,
and stays them to Dinner, where there was good Cheer and Mirth. But by and by
one knocks at the Gate, whose entrance being licensed, he asked for the Master
of the House; the Servants perceived him to be drunk, therefore denied at first
their Master was at home: Well, anon the old Man rises from Dinner to know his
business. After a little complement between them, this drunken Gentleman
discovers himself to be one of those Six men that robbed him, and beggs his
pardon for it, which being granted, he reveals' likewise the whole drift of
those two Champions, who are now his Guests. Owls (as they were) to trust a
secret in a Drunkards Breast, whose love to the taste of Wine, seats his Heart
upon his Palate, which being so near his Tongue, he cannot choose but speak his
Thoughts. He (poor man) was struck with a fretfull admiration; yet thought it
not a fit time to lowre now, being diverse of his Friends were there at Dinner
with them, who (unless they could digest his Looks) would stomach his Meat in
a displeasing Sense: therefore contrived a way to end all with merriment. Six
of his Servants he commanded to robb the two Gentlemen in his Parlour, of what
he had bestowed upon them, counterfeiting likewise an intent to kill them:
whilst he, and his Shit-breech Man, should come in (as it were by chance) and
save their Lives. This was acted to the life, whilst my two Gallants, (being
poopt of what they enjoyed merely to feel misery in the loss) departed the
House, only furnished with his pardon.

Such Tales as these banished tedious Time, and pensive consideration, till we
arrived at Mayden-head, Twenty two Miles distant from London; where was an Inn
preferred to my acceptance by my Cyttizens commendations, who knew the Servants
Names, as well as if he had binne their Godfather, though the House never ownde
his company but one Night: men of his Coat desiring much acquaintance, because
they will lose by none. The money which I had about me, I convayd under my Bed,
and so to supper we went. The House was full of Guests, which made our Host
limit his Person, to a quarter of an Houers tariance with each company. Every
Room did but borrow him of one another, which shows (though no Man's Particular
command had interest in his service, yet (he had least interest in himself. His
Wife supplyd his absence to all Companyes, for he could do nothing else but
talk to them, and her Tongue was heard every where. She it is, whose Beauty
clips the Wings of a Travailers swift desire, and begets the ease of his
plodding Beast, for her House appears his Journeys end; but her Company
multiplies the Reckoning above the reach of Arithmetique. The Cittisen had the
discourse at Table, which consisted (for the most part) of the antiquity of
his Company: he being a woollen Draper. Sometimes he described the humors of a
deceased Round-Cap, his quondam Parishioner; which were all absurd, and nothing
witty: yet he laughed at them heartily, and I at him. All his own proceedings
(in Eight years Prentiship) he related to me. How long he bore the
water-Tankard, scrapt Trenchers, and made clean Shoes: discovering a
selfe-admiration, that such mean Offices could bring him to the height which
now he lives at. Next he reported how many Servants he keeps; upon what
conditions he has bought the lease of his House: how long his father, and
himself have lived in that Parish, and what Offices they have undergonne, with
diverse other things impertinent to any Man's knowledge: not omitting to reveal
(in a grave manner) how unworthy he was to be Constable, or Churchwarden,
would willingly have fined for it, but the Parish (forsooth) did more need his
Advice, then Money. After Supper he expressed his liberty (in being from home)
with a distracted Mirth, as if he were suddenly to recover so much of his Heart
blood, as he has sighed away, when pennd within the City Walls, It is a
certain observation; They are the civilest at home, and rudest being abroad.

But now my Host and his Wife came both up to stay and taulke with us. Surely
he was the very Maiden head of his Mother, begot, his father being asleep, or
but Practicioner in that art, as apeard by the workmanship of his face and
Body, so illfavour'd and deformed was he: Her shape proclaimed Nature prodigal
of her riches, and vainglorious of her cunning, so generally handsome was she;
yet seemed to doat upon his feature, it is wondrous strange, but Love is blind:
which made my Muse (though dulled with a gross Supper) sing thus;

Let none hereafter dare to blame
The Gods, for making Cupid blind,
Lest his offense be plagued with shame,
And all Men's hate, beseige his mind:
For by this Couple we do plainly prove,
That without blindness; there could be no love*
Short and sweet, quoth my Poeticall-Cittisen, who begged them to show his Wives
Brother: a Counselors Clerk, but an excellent Poet believe it. Our Hostess
fell fast asleep, as she sat by the fire side: her Husband waked her with
saying, she was always sleeping, or talking. This stird up a strange frivolous
question: Why a Woman is more drowsy, and talkative then a Man? I made answer
thus, Because she was made of Adam's flesh when he was asleep; secondly she
was made of his Rib, the Rib lies near to the Heart, the Heart is Master of
Thoughts, and thoughts beget words. This liked the Cittisen so well, that he
desired to be farther acquainted with me, as afterward he was; though to his
cost; in what kind, thou shall understand 'ere long: but now we both went to
Bed.

CHAP. V:
NIM perseveres in relating what befell him in the Inn, rides from thence to
London, acquaints you with a Feast, worth the laughing at; treats of the
Citty-Cries, and promises graver stuff hereafter.

Morpheus destroy these vigilant Cariers, these unquiet disturbers of rest,
that bawling (like Demi Cannons) rent the Porches of my Ears. Were my Eielids
cut off, I could not be wider awake then I am now, though it be just three a
Clock: the purblind Night newly turned a Bawd to Letchery; the time when
Spirits, Ghosts, and Payries visit Toombs and Churchyards, whose
unsubstantiall shapes steals away our motion, scare our Reason from us. Yet
durst I go rownd about the World, unarmed, with Bedes, or blessed with Crucifix:
wear my Soul within my Scabbard, my Life ti'd to my Heel, as careless of
success: with such an angry valor, was I inspired at that time, because
deprived of sleep. But by and by, the modest Morn blushed in the East: and the
Sun (to recompense those Tears shed by weeping Plants) showed forth his
Head: guilding the tops of lofty Trees, placed there by unequal Nature, to
intercept that Comfort, which Shrubs lose by their low-humilitie. The elevated
Lark leaves his dewy Bed to welcome him, and drops down tir'de, by striving to
clime higher, then his Voice. I bad farewell to sleep, and called up the
Chamberlain, who brought me word the Citizen (being very sick) desired my
company. To his Chamber I went, found him groaning in the Bed, encompast with
Tokens of his Wives careful Love; three Night-Caps, two Waste-Coates, a large
Tiffany to keep his Neck warm, two pair of Italian-Drawers, and a little
Downe-Cusheon: which being thrust into his Codpisse, makes his Breech
(forsooth) unsensible of a hard Saddle, or a trotting Horse. His sighs kindled
pity in the Hostess, whose Experience was his Physician, and brought him a
Posset, cleerd with the juice of sundry Herbs, which procurd him his health
suddenly. So our Reckoning being paid we rod a modest pace toward Branford,
from thence to London: where (after he had directed me to a handsome Lodging,
and the place of his own abode) we parted.

I had no friends in the City but my Gold, which I esteemed so much, that I
made it Bedfellow to my Thoughts. Yet there was a Merchant who has sworn
heretofore he loved me, but how? as. Wise men love Money; for the use of it.
Whilst my Patron lived, I could have done him a courtesy; but now the case was
altered, and therefore his friendship dead. Neither did the place ever harbor
any acquaintance of mine, besides him, but only one Man (a Cambridge Scholar)
whom envious Death took from me at Tiburne; he was brought to that fatal end
by a Cart, though indeed the main occasion was his unfortunate Lust. Let not
the Reader, accuse me of tedious digression from our matter, if I relate the
manner of it.

His violent Love seasd upon the Beauty of an Inkeepers Daughter, who was
thirty years old, and a Maid: her Chastity being starved for want of
natural consideration: and her Fort vanquished, by an unboned Member (the
Tongue) for that, that is it, which charms a Woman's credulous mind to
believe, what she dares not feel, and feel because it is more delightful then
to believe: let it suffice, the Scholar often knew her in the Hebrew phrase.
One Night amongst the rest, she (being enflamed with a covetous love, futurly
to own his Person, and estate as a Wife) contrived a way how her father, and
Mother might (as if by chance) come into the Chamber, and find them in the
midst of immodest action, so afterward enforce him to marry her. She could not
carry the plot so close, but he perceav'd, her knocking with a Bedstaffe, was
Porter to their entrance. From out the Bed he leaps (untamed with his amorous
combat) fastens on his good Sword, which bravely he advances in defiance. Her
divided Spirits being sent abroad, severally to withstand Fear, and Shame, she
creeps between the Sheets, and winks* a true Coward! whose senseless
imagination commits the protection of his whole Body to his Eie-lids, and
bullwarks it with closing them, as though he can feel nothing but what he
sees. The Mother (running forth to cry for help) is intercepted, by
intercepting the Door. The father strives with a Joint stool to beat him
thence, which he by mere strength took from him, but with loosing the
forepart of his Shirt, the loss of which got under his subjection the old
Woman* who blushing to behold his manhood, ran (as frighted) behind the Bed,
whilst he immodestly (though for modestys sake) turned his Breech toward them,
and sought backward. The scufle grew now hot, and loud; therefore he (fearing
it might wake the Servants) swore if he once more turned his face, he would
kill them all, which made them quieter. His Doublet, and Stockings being
nearest his reach; were put on; in two Hours space, not sooner; because his
right Hand was wholly employed to manage his Sword: least the father
(advantaged by any thing) might recover the Door. The Mother came backwards to
deliver him his Breeches, and so by chance stumbled over a Stool; her Husbands
Eyes looked red as fire, some thought with anger, but sure I think they blushed
to behold that, which made him put out the Candle. The dark bred fear in all,
but especially in my (...) Scholar, who hearing the Servants raised by the
Woman's cry, and not able to find his Breeches, ran down the Stayres without
them; then climes over the back Gate into a narrow Lane, where after he had
awhile accompanied the Northern Wind, a Drunkard (passing that way) reeled
sull upon him, and falling fell fast asleep upon the Ground, whilst he
deprived him of his Breeches: but by reason of too much fearful haste, and
want of light, wore them, as he pulled them off, with the Linings outward. O
Wine! good for none but the fiery Zwitzer, who loves to have his face, richer
then his Purse: thou that ridlest in operation, and makes this Drunkard happy
by depriving him of sense, for though his bare Breech kissed the cold stones,
he slept sowndly: whilst our Scholar (walking through the neighbor Street) is
taken by a Watch. The parlous Constable (spying how unhansom he was dressed)
suspected him guilty of some bawdy business, and laughing sufficiently at him,
sent him to the Counter. But one sorrow treads upon the Heel of another (so
swift are they in pursuit, when once running to us) the way to the Counter is
through that Lane where the Drunkard was, who by this time had recovered his
senses, and walked shivering up and down, in search of his Breeches. The
Watchmen spying his white Shirt) stood still, supposing him to be a Ghost. The
Scholar perceived his theft would be discovered; yet was loath to run away,
because loath to be taken by another Watch* he liked this so ill. One of his
Guardians (being fortified with an old charm) marches crosse-legg'd, spitting
three times East-South-West: and afterward prefers his valor to a Catechizing
office. In the name of God (quoth he) what art thou? whence do thou come?
what make thou here? he answered, he was not himself half an Hour ago, but
now he is a Man as others are; of Gods making; only some Villain had stolen away
his Breeches. My acquaintance was found to be that Villain; his Buttock's once
more disrobed, his secret parts too apparently discovered: And in that manner
both were carried to the Counter.

But now let us return to what occasioned the relation of this Jest. After he
was delivered thence, upon promise to marry his Whore, he met her Father riding
toward Windsor: and being enflamed with the remembrance of this disgrace,
killed him upon the Highway, for which fact, Tiburn deprived me of him.

Thus destitute of any Friend, to whom I might commit the keeping of my Money,
I bought me a strong Trunk, and therein enclosed it. My Lodging was in
Chancery Lane, my Landlord, an old Attorney, who by frequent walking to and
fro, about Law-businesse, knew the form of every Stone, which paved the Ground,
between that place, and Westminster Hall. I observed nothing that Day worth
relation, unless it were the City-Cries: I mean, how every one has got a
differing pronunciation, from intelligible English. Either they have worn out
the parts, wherein those Syllables are particularly molded, by a continual
usage (considering they speak in any other kind plain enough) or else many of
their words, (progressing through their Noses) are drowned in that flood which
cold purges from the Brain. I asked an Oyster-Wench once, what it was she
cried? She bad me look into her Basket. Why (quoth I) can I sind your words
there? Yes, she answered, really shaped too: Did not our Ware speak for
themselves, little would be gotten by them; for we cannot foyl them off with
trim Language, which my Ears witnessing, I must needs believe. But leave we
these Jeasts, these superficial expressions of a full Brain. A Comick-Fancy
wrinst in sparkling Claret, orwrapt in the Leaves of April Violets, could not
wander in alacrative Sense, more then I do now. I tell thee Render, I will be
grave, I vow I will: and shortly write things worthy thy serious observation.
In the mean time let me commend to thy reading, this Dream; born the first
Night I lay in London.

CHAP. VI.
NIM most wittily reveals his admirable Dream, turns Satyrist, and omits not
the relation of those reason which ininduc'd him to it.

The Description of a Grove
MY sleepy imagination carried me into a melancholy Grove, whose courteous
Trees by embracing one another, imprisoned the Western Wind* whilst the
sweetness of the place made it in love with bondages for passing through those
Boughs, adorned with close whispering Leaves, it sighed at liberty. The Birds (
cag'd in Thickets) sung sadly. The mournsul Grass always wept for the absence
of the Sun, and with a morallizing Countenance, seemed to exclaim against those
tall-Trees; which like great ones in a Commonwealth, deprive the less of
comfort by combining in their mischief. In this Grove I met an aged Pilgrim,
whose body being tired with Holy jaunts, his wandring-zeal tamed with a
superstitious Lamenesse; lived there, impounded in a narrow Circuit. His looks
were as serious as his talk; his Beard knew little of the Barbers skill, but
grew like his Experience, me thought longer then his Age* He brought me to a
Cave, whose swee Mouth watered at a Crystal Spring, which ran close by it: and
called to us from thence, one whose Tongue spoke him a Scholar* His Garments
seemed only fashionable, in being quite out of Fashion. His Arms, and Thighs
were folded in the Leafs of old Manuscripts: a parlous necessary (though cold
humor in him) to dissuade nakedness from being sensible of the Northern Wind.
After many denotations of a troubled Spirit, he charmed attention with this
Speech.

The Scholars Speech.
Farewell Philosophy; and that prying knowledge, which, discovering Natures
secrets, makes a modest apprehension blush, wraps wonder it self in a strong
amazement, and sooths the Athiest in his damned belief; who terms the Souls
Immortality a Childish superstition, and forged by politic Statesmen, to
suppress Vice in the Commonwealth, which otherways would ruin Government.
Farewell Astronomy; an Art that best becomes the labor of a Schoolboys weak
Capacity: for every Fool can find his fatal-Star without a Perspective, and
feel it, though fixed a Thousand Leagues above his reach. Or what is he that
only looking on a Comet, cannot prophecy a Ruin? since his own Guilt does
prompt him. Farewell Physic; thou that circumventest Death, and with
comfortable Herbs preventst Autumn in Man, by a perpetual Spring. Farewell that
thriving Spirit; which with the heig it of Knowledge makes Experience seem an
Ass; deep Policy, shallow Surmises: Farewell Rhetorique; and that smooth phrase
which makes the Courtier appear a disguised Saint, which screws up Fancy to a
belief repugnant unto Sense, and works the silly, Auditor to delight in his own
undoing. Farewell Poetry; thou trim Composer of disjuncted Sense; thou that with
handsome Ornament do cloth a Lie in a true shape: Thou that ravishest the
Mechanics mind, to his delight, not torture; for though a dull apprehension
bar at first thy pleasing entrance, yet he loves thee for it ever after.
Farewell that sweet inspired rapsody which cue's fluent expression into perfect
sense: which in descriptions really describes, corrects Nature, and makes it
seem more natural. O farewell for thy Laurel only flourishes on the dry Heads
of those, who can but lamely imitate, and withers on moist diviner Brows.
Farewell in general the Scholars trade, since what to others is a comfort, is to
him a orment; for he is tir'de with Hope, and tamed by Ignorance: Ignorance!
She that is only fortunate in ambition, yet fixed on high, esteemed less in
the Eyes of those, that with admiration gaze below.

Here the Pilgrim (being loath to let his sick, overworn patience, serve as
bridle to his Tongue) commands a silence, which he obay'd by straight returning
into the Cave. O how he weighed each word to the very poyse of Accenting.
Cicero either whip thy Tongue, or hereafter let thy Ghost be deaf to thy
disparagement. Had my Ears been long enough to have reached him in the Cave, I
had killed the Proverb in contradiction, graced what an Ass wears to the
contempt of all, and made his name worthy any Man's acceptance.

The Soldiers Speech after this his description.

Soon after him bussels forth the ruins of a lusty Man: one that strove to
tire Misfortune with a counterfeit comtempt of it, little blessed with outward
Habiliments; for his ambitious Stockins did dislocate his Doublet, and served
instead of Sleeves: whilst the Elbows made Casements of necessity and peeped
out. Scarce had he any one Limb sufficiently clothed to keep warm the
Spectators Eyes. His Skin was pinckt quite over with thrusts, fearfully stolen
by the Rapiers point of some opposing Coward. His Face ( carved by the pattern
of his mind) was rough, and seemed secondly begot by the careful gain of a
bungling Surgeon. The carriage of his Body expressed him a Travailer, as if he
had got the theorique of all Country postures, and lost the practique of his
own. He spoke as if his Tongue (lately come from far) had brought good
utterance home, for these were his words.

His Speech.
Farewell lustly-Warr! thou that with bloody Justice, do bravely arbitrate,
'tween Princes rights, and Soldiers Valors: farewell unbullwark'd Resolution!
thou careless Spark, whose father was a Roman: thou that exalts each Nerve to
an ambitious hight, lifting the Body up to overreach Danger: farewell that
bewitching Winter which the sprightfull Drum, tunnells through our Ears into
our flesh, when our Bloods freeze, and our Gorges heave at Peace, when we
esteem Life below esteem, when the long Pike (that bars closing with the
Enemy) seems an impediment to true Valor, and the Sword, within the Scabbard,
looks like Glory hid. farewell the loud Trumpet with whose voice, rewording
Echoes scolde, whose cheerful harmony makes the wanton Heart dance in a
Breast besiedg'd with Swords: farvvell the shrill Fiffe, which drovvnds in the
Covvards Ear Terror, composed of dying Groans, and hideous shreeks: farewell
the glorious Troop of comely Horse! in whom Pride (as fitting none but Beasts)
sits handsomer then in the Riders looks farewell the bawling Cannon (Deaths
bloody Executioner) from whose wide mouth Destruction (roundly shaped) wraps it
self in a Case of disturbed Air, dismembers lofty Steeples, pats away
aspiring Pinnacles, and steals at once a whole Rank of Mortals: farewell
learned Strategems! deep Circumvention! wholesome Policy! and sound composing
of dangerous-Inductions: farewell Death! thou that begetst the Soldiers life;
who only breaths in honor: farewell life! thou that begetst the Soldiers Death:
who now lives smoother'd in disgrace.

After he had thus talked awhile ( bodying each word with active emphasis) he
returned also into the Cave, being indeed interrupted by the hasty presence of
one, whose grief brust from forth his Eyes, because so long barred of passage
through his mouth. He was of person well shaped, and proper* resembling the
decayed remnant of a noble Stock. His Countenance (somewhat withered with
infectious Grief) caused him to look like the very contempt of Happiness: as
if he outlived his own desire, was made an experiment by his cruel Pate, to
try within a Hairs breadth the sufferance of a Man: or had binne wracked to
confess the strength of Misery, and now warranted by Experience, what before
he did deny in happy Ignorance. He wore his Apparel (as he wore his Life)
quite out of Fashion, and took his farewell thus.

The speech, of a decayed Gentleman.
Farewell all those nice points of Honor, which in the observing makes
Reputation but a Trouble: farewell that haereditary respect, borrowed from the
merits of our Ancesters: by which we enrich their fame, and impoverish our
own: farewell Gratitude, thou core of a noble Heart, that by Requital makes
thy self a Beggar: that sknorst to poyse thy thanks with the success of a
free Gift, but with the kind-disposition of the Giver: farewell Temperance!
thou physical preserver of natural blessings, thou strengthner of those
instinctive-faculties, which belong to each particular Sense: thou that can
best (with palpable demonstrations) distinguish Men from Beasts: farewell
Hospitality: thou thrifty Prodigal, and ancientst Herald to proclaim us
Gentlemen: farewell that handsome, decent Courtesy, which makes the Vulgar
proud of having Lives, for our commands to tread upon: farewell Decorum; and
that sweet premeditating judgment, which crowns Action with a blessed
conclusion: farewell Friendship! thou covetous engrosser of all Earthly
Comforts! thou that (with honest equivocation) includ'st two Men in one, tiing
together their very heart strings in a true love knot: tempering their minds,
as if they had molded one another, in their wishes. Their winged industry
(begot by mutnall exchange of care) makes the conclusion of a weighty
business, come to prevent expectacie: is never tired, but staked in officious
motion, and constant to variety of comforts, O! Farewell, Farewell Patience:
that Rose-lipp'd Cherubine, who heretofore was beauteous, as the Infant morn
in the East, when Sol does paint her; but now she is ugly, old, and Haglike
withered, for unnatural wrongs have so infected her.

The description of a forsaken Virgin.
Here concluding with a sigh, he returns also from whence he came, leaving his
room supplied by a creature purposely made to please curiosity in a detracting
lovers Eye. I tell thee Reader she was the pretiest little Thief, that ever
wanton Imagination hugged to defile; so far above description, that if I
durst attempt it, I should leave (unreach'd) just so much Argument, as might
serve Marots Muse to compose a fit Mistress, for his Husband. Grief in her
seemed a handsome Pession; nothing did ill become her but her Fortune,* I
cannot say the Garments which she wore were coorse and base, because her beauty
needed no baseness to foil it off: neither is it possible Fate could be so
hard-hearted, as to apparel her in want: No? that were a thought most lame in
reason: for though her Gown was made of homespun stuff, I am sure she wore
Golden Hair and wept Pearls: how! did she weep? I must not say so, lest thou
weep to think on it, but never so handsomely as she did. If the gray Hypocrite
(whose years speaks him old, and exact in a disguised behavior) had but
looked on her, he would have sworn the Politician studies only to undermine
himself: for naked-Innocence grew on her face in such a pleasing shape, that
Sinners (who before were married to their Guilt) plead repentance, and proffer
love to it. She never knew Man, with a knowledge more dishonest then what
harbors in her Eyes, only by sight: yet some Arch-Rogue, some damned Lover,
(choked with too much happiness) has done her wrong: whose errand now she
will deliver to the World, I mary will she, and that sowndly too. Sorrow 'ere
while sat on her Tongue, like bad expression, and her Words were quartered in
the utterance: but now she will brook no more, her Tipett is unpin'd stands up
(like a Beacon) to foretell a War of words, she must scolde, which she did
thus; but other ways then thus she could not scolde.

Her Speech.
Farewell the Uirgins peace, true Content; and all those ravishing effects which
harmless thoughts beget: when our dull Spirits are tickled with a frozen Joy:
when the flash of Lightning cannot sindge our Souls: nor the noise of Thunder
fix us to a fearfull-admiration, ay me farewell. And farewell Love! thou
unnatural Thief, that requit'st obsequious passion, with stealing the motives
of those comforts: O hateful Love! improper word, that do imply a double
sense, the good to shadow 'ore the bad: thou that toylst only to be weary, and
consum'st more content, than eminent hopes can give satisfaction for. Farewell
Faith in men! who never had any strong enough, to keep unbroken their weak
words: subtle, wicked Men, who disguising falsehood in big Oaths, sooth our
fond credulity, to a pitiful consent. Such a one robbed me of my Heart, and
returned it to make my Guilt exceed his: for no offense deserves punishment so
much, as to receave, or live by, what was stolen. His name bears such a
sympathy with Sorrow, that falling from my Lips, my Tears would drown it*
farewell my well tuned Voice! which made my Tongue a Pillory; for more Ears
were naild to it, then offenses could condemn: which Made the Nightingall
blush when we have sung together; for Men would tell her! she had lost her
Mayden-head: farewell my Lute, whose strings are now as dumb as Silence, and
shall never more be pegd to rob the Auditor of wonder: farewell all happiness,
for the Time now, is married to my Fortune, and begets more woes, then my poor
estate of Patience is able to maintain.

Her last word lost half its accent, she being interrupted by a little Dove,
who with an accustomed tripping familiarity, allured her harmless Fancy to go
aside, and sport with it: So light in alteration is leaden Sorrow, when
dwelling in a Heart not guilty of its Birth. Though the Pilgrims hot desires
were mortified by Age; and his courageous Blood tamed by a reserved diet; yet
he seemed to bemoan her with an amorous Pity: was about particularly to
acquaint me with the rank, and conditions of all his Captives, likewise how
they came thither: But I waking, deprived him of further labor, my self of
trouble.

This Dream needed no help from Egypt to expound it, for the Time (with real
examples) served as Interpreter. My Brains and Heart met in consultation a
whole Week before they could advise me what course of life to take: at last I
resolved to turn Satyrist: being induced to that holy calling by these four
reasons. The first was, a Divine inspiration, which my Young turbulent zeal
extracted from the Dream. Secondly, because the State at that time felt
alteration; and diverse great ones (placed before as high as Fortune her self
could reach) sat then on her footstool, humbled below vulgar respect.
Thirdly, I being yet to choose acquaintance, strove rather to have my wit
prefer me to the better sort at first, than that necessity should furnish me
with such, whom afterward I would scorn to acknowledge; the World always
censuring a Man by the fashion and demeanor of his Companions. Fourthly, my
Purse was then sufficiently stored with Money: an Argument that might easily
persuade the World, I wrote to defend Virtue, not my own Poverty: As for those
qualities which compose a perfect Satyrist, I had enough to proclaim Nature
Prodigal, and Art is soon attained by industry. I traveled far in History, and
knew the World by report, as well as if my pains had been a Tutor to my
Knowledge. How I proceeded afterward, thou may partly understand by reading
the next Chapter.

CHAP. VII:
NIM being drunk, goes to hire a Servant in Paul's, and after a sober
description of the Church, and Walkers, recounts how strangely he was supplied
with one.

COnsideration had so much dulled my Spirits, and black'd my Blood, that I
resolved one Morning to drown it in a Cup of Sack. To the Tavern I went, but
being incredulous of those commendations which the Drawer sold with his Wine,
and covetous to arbitrate judiciously; I tasted it with my Brains: For though
it be more natural, the Palate should give judgment in this kind* yet their
verdict is preferred in Capital controversies, and therefore set so light by
this when I say light, you may take it in a contrary sense, as if my Legs were
unable to support my weight; Unable to support my weight? Very well Goodman
Nim! Goodman Fop! Goodman Doggs-Nose! now my sneaking modesty creeps from the
matter, and minces it with ambiguous phrase? Is it not time to leave this? ha?
well, howsoever Reader do thou suppose I was drunk, stark drunk but not with
Wine? rather with Liquor distilled from a Woman's Brains, and mingled with
juice, squees'd from a melancholy Heart; for so variable, and unproportion'd
were my humors. To beat the Drawer, cut off the Heels from my shoo's, were
only Peccadilloes (as the Italian says) Pigmy-faults: but I forsooth
(distasting the House attendance) must in all post have go hire a Servant; a
Fellow of some Soul! whose service must not merely consist in the strength of
his Lims, but in the apprehensive quality of his Brains. Where to get such a
one suddenly, I could not tell, unless in Paul's? which Church easily to pass
over is impossible, it is so high: therefore something we will say of it. Only
let us refrain to express with a pittifull-description the ruins of Time,
because for the most part they are placed above our reach: even on the top of
the Steeple. St. Gregory's being compared to it, looks like a Church, whose
charge of building was at the benevolence of a poor Usurer; or dedicated to
some undeserving Saint, who meant to show his humility in the acceptance. The
use of those Walks within, I do more pity, then admire their spacious state:
For would thou know where the young Wards undoing is contrived? go thither,
thou shall perceive his Guardian newly entered, puffing with haste, and
sweating by an unaccustomd labor he has taken, to be there half an hour
before his politic Companions: a space sized out to advantage his old
judgment, to prevent with premeditation all countermines: His Conscience
presenting to his guilty fear a punishment, before the Sin be quite committed.
Would thou know where the Usurer, and his Scrivener consult to cheat the
young Heir of Morgag'd Land? Why there too: and are as easily distinguished from
other Men by their walking, as from one another by their Garments. The Usurer
(hating the charge of a fashionable Hat, or all Uostly care to preserve his
withered Beauty) wears his high-Crownd, according to the old ambitious form:
with narrow Brims, lest it might bar his covetous Face, the reflection of the
Suns golden Beams. His long Cloak, Bumbas-Doublet, and Trunk Hose are
threadbare: only observe his left Thumb, Gloves, and Posey ever sticking in
his Girdle: which is a Custom graver then his Beard. He moves in bawdy pace,
much like a diseased French Man up a Hill: his weak Legs being unable to
support his old Carcass: How! can a Usurer live till he be old? Yes, because
his Soul is not worthy the Devils acceptance. The Scrivner is more formal in
his Apparel: his whole credit (indeed) depending on a comely outside. Near
them, behold two leane-Gallants composing of a cheat, One with his Nails dig
s fresh inductions from his busy Head: the other (twirling his Band-strings)
finds there a way to tie all up with a strong conclusion. Not far off likewise
walks another, whose continual diversity of Garments, proclaims him descended
from the Man-in-the-Moone, that changes outside every Month. He wears a long
Scabbard with a Hilt in it, but never a Blade, for that was broak in striving
for the Wall, and the Money which should buy an other, spent to reconcile
himself to his Adversary: for they fell out of purpose to drink together, not
like Dutch Men, who drink to fall out. Another in an melancholy trance, marches
with his Eyes fastened to the Ground: whilst his imagination wanders, like my
Pen from the matter to which I must now return.

Just when I was reading Papers pasted on the South Gate, a lusty young fellow
(who perceav'd that I was drunk) pulls me by the Cloak, desiring some private
conference with me: my knowledge never saw his face before, nor could his
business come within the reach of my suppose. Well, I walked with him some
half a score turns. Time and discourse he spent in inquiring where I was
bred? what Gentlemen of note I knew in Glostershire? I told him of diverse,
whose names seemed better acquainted with his Ears, then their Persons with
his Eyes: withal asked what urged in him this earnest examination? faith Sir
(quoth he) no harm, but I desire you to give me a Crown for a private reason
to my self. No thanks heartily quoth I: your private reason appears to me a
public cause ( want) which though poorly worn by others, seems in you a
fantastical Cloak, to hide, what you cannot show. This could not suffice
him; the Rogue purss'd his Brows in a scornful form, laughed (as it were)
at my foolish thrift: and with active words, subtly composed, persuaded
me, it was a thing vvonderfull necessary, or consequent in hidden sense, his
desires should be accomplished. Come, come (quoth he) give it me, pish-give it
me I say: why thou fool! thou Enemy to thy own good fortunes! fling it
quickly, or I Will not stay to receave it. My drunken Brains could not apprehend
this new impudence: the money I strait vvays threvv him; he as nimbly convayd
it into his Pocket: and marching forvvard hurls his Head over his left
Shoulder, gives me this revvard. Be rich, be happy, I say be happy; for thou
were borne (young Man) in a happy Hour-farevvell. These words strengthened
those surmises in me, whom wine had made vveake. My suppositions concerning
his quality were diverse, and killed one another in contradiction: but at last
memory seasd on that Philosopher's opinion, who held, every Man's Good Genius
offers his service to him, once before he be Thirty years old: yet is
generally refused by that fear, which spiritual Shapes beget, when our
understanding is scared from us. Now my imagination undervalue'd desert so much
as to think this my Good Genius in the shape of a Beggar. I had three reasons
which wrought me to this conjecture, and may likewise induce thee to believe
it an accidental truth. First I was drunk, a strong one, exstracted from my
irrationable-weaknesse: for we are aptest to credit impossible things, when
the Soul consideration is drovvn'd: which should dialogue with the Heart,
before we conclude to approve of any thing. Secondly the rawnesse of my Youth:
which does most palpably excuse my imbecillitie in distinguishing Truth from
falsehood, when you call to mind how he disguised both, in a subtle unknovvne
shape. Thirdly my beautiful Face vvrapt me in such a vainglorious estimation
of my Merits; that I thought Fortune could not be too kind, nor I covetous:
for Beauty in a Man begets only a selfe-dotage, his imagination being his
flattering Glass: where he beholdes what he can never find (that is)
something to attract amorous-amazment from the Spectators Eyes: but indeed it is
no beauty, in being beauty, it is -- I vvot not what: a superfluous ornament
which vvanton Mayds do envy more than love: which wise Women scorn as a
thing more inconstant then their humors, and less becoming. But now to our
purpose.

I was devising with a fearful doubt, and Hopeful amazement what to say: at
last asked, whether Heaven had sent him thus disguised, to proffer me his
service? the Rascal (as I understood afterward) was newly discarded by his
Master, and glad of any Man's entertainment: therefore told me (if I pleased) he
would serve me with all his Heart, little suspecting what I meant; but supposed
so much of my Language, which appeared improper in his apprehension, to proceed
from superfluous draughts. Well homewards I reeled, ravished with possessing a
certain kind of I knew not what: but still glanced back mine Eye, expecting
when my Good-Genius would transform into a caelestiall shape: though he (a
plague on him) was constant in the form of a Roguish face, and changed only in
behavior: for enough I had of such observance as belongs to a new Master. The
Wind had entered my Pate, as soon as I my Lodging: so that I was feign to go
to Bed, where I fell presently fast asleep. He boldly called for a Pair of
clean Sheets, and Trukled under me: never attempting to pick my Pockets:
though wickedness was advantaged with an occasion so provocative. About
Midnight I waked and hearing one snort at my Beds feet, was stricken silent
with a fearful admiration. My Thoughts examined my Heart concerning the last
Days actions: my Heart summond the assistance of my Memory: so that I recovered
by peecemeale the knowledge of what befell me in Paul's: how my Good Genius
brought me to my Lodging: who must (by all present consequents) be he that now
disturbs my Ears: which when perused with sober cogitation, seemed both
strange, and ridiculous. I consumed three Hours in tedious suspense, until
(stepping from between the Sheets) the Sun Beams usherd my person within
his reach: where I beheld an illfavour'd face, adorned by a fashionable Beard.
My Hand (troubled with the Cowards-Pallsey) I thrust toward him, to try
whether I could feel what I saw; in fine, found him a substantial Spirit, a
human-Genius: so returned to consider of it on my Pillow. At Six a Clock he
rose, and after some obsequious diligence in the way of service, delivered to
my inquisitive mind what thou have read: whilst I finding him indu'd with a
notable shifting wit, stood to a drunken bargain: his name was Oliver Bunge.

CHAP. VIII.
NIM acquaints you with his first proceedings, in his Satyricall calling; and
inveighs against three Men, who publicly profess themselves to be of the same
vocation.

NOthing can be so acceptable to a judicious Capacity, as natural expression;
that is, to body out of matter with imaginary substance, to write (as it were)
by inspiration, to make real what Art but counterfeits, and with forced rapsody
labors only to discover her imperfections. I strove to be, (what others could
but seem) a perfect Satyrist. Cource Cynical diet sowr'd my disposition,
bitter'd all my thoughts, by eating passage for my Gaul, to overflow my Heart:
and Custom settled my mind in affection of that, which before seemed unnatural
to it. A Satyrist hates only what he envies: 'twas formal in me to hate, and
consequent in sense to envy: but whom to envy (unless those great ones which I
did fear to hate satyrically) I knew not: therefore went by degrees to learn,
what I was soon able to teach. Public Walks, and Theaters I often haunted: for
there Phantasy might feed to surseit: but on what? on Envy; which made me
leaner then a Spanish Chandler. Gaudy rich Apparel clothed my young Thoughts,
and after two Months space, I could curse Fortune as handsomely as a beggarly
Soldier in his drink: survey my worth (in comparison of some rich Gallants)
with vainglorious partiality, gnaw my nether Lip at him, pity my own poor
Fate with an angry Passion: sometimes tire Melancholy with impossible
suppositions; and in a serious Trance, study how to dispose of those revenews
which belong to my imaginary Empire: wherein I am more liberal then drunken
Prodigality: hurling (as it were) a Million, together with a courteous Nod, to
him I n'ere conversed withal but once; or else erect new Castles in the Air,
and strengthen their foundation with half an Hours perdurance longer then the
former (that is) to give them life just till Dinner time: but then Hunger
brought me to our Parlour-Table; where, when I beheld nothing but solid Beef,
and tough Brawn (mere antipathies to those various services which would be
equivalent with the state of an Emperor) I could not but (humbling my self)
remember there was no such matter: and so fall into a second Melancholy,
though less pleasing then the other.

Those whom I first railed at, were Men of my own calling ( Satyrists) a new
device, therefore likely to be approved of in this new World: wherein old ways
are scorned; because accustomary: though in the golden time, Custom enjoyed
more able strength then Law, was upheld by Superstition, and might commend it
self without vainglory. The chief motive that invited me to write against
them, was their ignorant disgracing of our profession. Three flourished with
vulgar approbation in my time: each of them publishing diverse Satyrs: including
stuff, not worthy to be worn by our memory, unless in derision. The first
(who claims precendencie by previvation) strove to excuse his absurd writing,
by publishing a worse fault ( he was no Scholar): O impertinent discovery of
what did most palpably discover it self! what ridling Physic did thou
minister to thy Fames health? for though the confession of thy deficiencie,
lessen thy first defect in Catholic absolution; yet thou have joynd a greater
to it. Who but an Emperick would diminish in his Patient the torment of one
Grief, by aggravating the Souls languishment with a second disease? O thou
Fool! thou Dunce! I fret as zealous of my calling, but never pity thee,
unless when I consider that Pity yields no remedy.

The second foyld off coorse phrase, and rugged Rhyme, with a saucy impudence:
his ambitious Pen (made surely of an Eagles Quill) soared to reach the actions
of great Statesmen- Cynicall behavior, and practicing the rough,
unfashionable rudiments of a Soldiers life, made him appear in our Plebeions
apprehension (whose dull guessing judgments can only censure by the outside)
the thing which he had not wit enough to be. A Cur that barked like a Cur:
unsensible, what motiv'd his unsensible Language: not able to express his weak
faculties, but in that high Satyricall strain, which did misbecome it most: for
he would be dumb two years, until the untimely fall of some new born Family
raised up his voice to kill quite their dying Fame. Cowardly Executioner! that
durst but destroy those whose offenses do condemn, and the State disarm to
suffer. But leave we thee too.

The Third is less witty, but more ambitious in preferring his factious
Spirit, to the eminent observation of our durty rabble: and by their
encouragement, rears up his leaden Muse to reach, what else dull weight might
keep below a proper Patronage. His Childish Poems, and Mungrell Satyrs are his
own Chronicle, and too much commend him; which as it is the cheapest Flattery,
so it is the worst. Many think he labored by it, to prevent the Readers labor:
but I think it an unnecessary care. Sometimes Fortune lends his dull
apprehension Eyes, to see his imperfections: occasioning her blindness as her
punishment; and him a bad chance to succeed the pretense of a good omen, by
beholding that defective which he cannot mend; no not excuse, unless in
proclaiming to the World his Youth: an old trick, yet in fashion still with
him. If thou have read his Satyr; which though proudly dedicated, is so poor in
matter, so basely obsequious for a resolute offense; thou might perceive how
his strong weakness insults over a self-conquest; how he asks too much pardon
for that fault, which he does not confess himself guilty of, or else dares
not. Sometimes he does promiscuously admire in himself a supernatural gift:
saying, It Is wonderd how my youth so much corruption can disclose. O presuming
confidence, and confident vainglory! as if ought (worth admiration) could
proceed from disclosing that, which is not hid from vulgar knowledge? besides a
squintEied Man may sooner discern blindness in another, then cure his own
imperfections: yet this young inspired Satyrist (who is only skilful in the
knowledge of what infects knowledge) does catch the approbation of diverse
Gallants: but what are they? Soldiers of the Time, bigg Thigh'd Puffs,
stronger in words then action, in Limbs then Judgment, in whom admiration is
commendation, and Ignorance Father to the first: who apprehend merely the
Authors labor, on a Subject which might express wit* but cannot distinguish
any.

CHAP. IX.
NIM does in particular exclaim against all those Satyrists who hide
themselves, yet publish their writings: shows Reasons for so doing: with a
trick that he has bobs privately; delivers a brief superficial Character of
the Hollanders, and relates in what manner he spent part of his time in London,
when attended on, by his man Bunge.

NOw though these Three did in public present themselves to our discovery;
yet know we can disclose those Men too, that murmr in obscure Corners: who
are fearful even of speaking softly; therefore proclaim to others a dumb
silence in their own prattle: who whisper with their Pens, and darkly bring
their thoughts to light in Hieroglyphicall words, personating Men in the
natures of Beasts, whose names ( literally or allegorically) does sympathize
with theirs, whom they aim at. Some of them I hated, because their Works (not
so commonly extant as mine) took from the worth of mine; yet added not to their
Fame: by reason they were loath to acknowledge those Bastards which their Muse
begot. Othersome I could not hate, but pity: because they hated themselves
with sufficient demonstration in publishing their own folly: apply my meaning
when thy labor is ill requited; by reading those Verses which so bitterly
invegh'd against our King, his royal Pastimes, and most judicious disposure of
his favor: but if a modest reverence (due to that sacred Majesty) musle thy
Eyes from beholding such unnatural blasphemy; yet strive to encourage thy
revenge, by reading those foppish ragged Lines; which some Iron-witted
Schoolboy, some Leaden-Sould-Puppy barked against him, whose complete worth,
and full desert, preferred him to be his Favorite, that is still constant in
his politic choice. Or if thou will not tempt thy patience to such a
dangerous experiment, peruse the sense of that hypocritical Satyr, which by
way of prayer for the preservation of his Sovereigns five senses, most
falslyaccusd every one, of a preposterous defect. Or if thy duty also be in
love; and that love, blind to all such Fame-murdering Libells: vouchsafe then
to read the humble Petition of that ingenious Gentleman! that parlous wit! who
to exceed in a new device; delivered it Queen Elizabeth's Toomb, and answered it
himself: a necessary satisfaction, an unnecessary request; for he that talks
to the dumb, must reply to his own speech: besides it was more probable that the
Stones would laugh, then speak: for though Elizabeth's being there should
infuse a contrary passion, yet his Jest must needs make a Stone laugh;
according to the Italian Proverb.

Well, henceforth be all your Lips sowde up, bury your words (composed of such
unwholesome Breath) in your own hollow Breasts, least they infect others. Let
your Pens no more betray your thoughts: Nor do you by mimick looks, ambiguous
action with the Head, or politic gesture of the Body, seem neutrally
inclinde in your opinion concerning dangerous demands: for this Hypocrisy
makes a Man a Stranger to his own designs, like Time; ruins where it seaseth:
and is only good in that it rewards the user with destruction. Besides if your
own particular weal cannot persuade you to silence, yet let Charity cause
you to remember, the general good of our Profession: and how you have lessend
that estimation which the World held us in, by a Cowardly preservation of your
own safeties; by a fear to discover your selves Authors of what privately you
publish: but it is known, a Satyrist should usher Action with more holdnesse,
than Resolation can beget, when danger murders Fear. Impudence in a
shrivd-Bawde does not so confidently trust to the help of equivocation, as he
to the valor of a factious Spirit. Holyzeale, and a care of his Country, are
those pretenses wherewith he should gull his own Conscience, and strengthen his
pure fame throughout the world: but your faint Courage argues Guilt, which you
seem privately to confess, as fearful of a public punishment: whilst we
that are valiant, oppose our selves to suffer, what you craftily avoid.
Therefore I conjure you once more (by the pain of my correction) to be dumb
hereafter; take heed: but especially mutter not against him, whose fame is
bullwark'd with my Soul, whose defense is my reputation* which I strive to
preserve (unmaim'd) more for the love I owe his safety, then my own Glory.
Besides your Envy, which when fastened on others, she ws pale and lean, will
then anatomize it self, and appear more deformed, then your base dishonesty.
But stay my dear Muse do not in pursuit of an Enemy, run thy self quite out
of breath: or with the Caelestiall heat of true affection sacrifize at once thy
self to a friends acceptance. There is one more yet, eminent in thy Masters
hate, whom I discover for thy Conquest. Courage my Darling for thou must fly to
Holland, where he lives that dulls our profit, with sending hither little
Pamphlets: which are new-years-guifts, for all those turbulent Heads, who pry
into the old years actions in hope of alteration. The Books are little worth;
unless value'd by the Stationer, who makes the Peoples fond estimation his
gain: and in that does us a courtesy, for though coming from far, make them
more pleasing to ignorant fancy, yet it makes them displeasing to the Purse:
which being a thing nearer their love, and tie'd with their very Heart Strings,
cannot but prefer our cheap Books to the third degree of Comparison. Some
account them learned, but it is in accusation not in commendation: for Scholars
(who have not long practiced the Practique part of what they study) are
naturally enclind to a prodigal utterance of such deep knowledge, as
unprofitable Memory does intrude into the company of Matter, which would
express more Skill, with less Art. It is a learned imperfection like*I wot
not what to call it: but they do stifle their meaning, by striving with a
multitude of Sentences to give it life: and thinking they can never make use of
al which they have read; express their Schollership with as much
impertinencie, as want of Ignorance with palpabilitie. Besides though his saucy
treatises of our State, and Government are approved of by those, that are feign
to make Report a Tutor to their knowledge, that are merely Statesmen by
reading his Books. Yet others who get Experience in their high Offices, and
ability to distinguish by their sound learning, find him unable to frame an
Idea, of what he strives really to compose much less correct that, which
Ignorance makes him dislike.

But return we now from Holland, least the gross dull Air infect our
Brains, the Boores our manners: so that we forget all the formal complement
belonging to a new Book. They are a Nation that swim in their own profitable
sweat: that have found out what sweet success depends on sudden-Industry,
therefore tire themselves with* covetous* Labor, securely to take rest. Their
fashions are most uncivil, for did not a legal punishment curb their natural
disposition, they would demonstrate more Atheistical behavior, then religious
fear. They never fight but under the Banner of Bacchus, who having safely
shrouded their Imagination in a Mote of English Beer, they can be desperate not
valiant. To call them Traitors were with blunt phrase to conclude rashely, what
others with equivocating Arguments have tediously disputed on, but never
absolutely agreed in arbitration* or rather poorly to require that saucy
Language, which they utter against his sacred Person, whom with love, and duty
I equally adore. Their Government is a compos'd-confusion of new Policy. Some
think it an Oligarchie, some a Democracie, some between both. But sure I am the
Peoples Hearts rebel to attain the first: though the ambition of rich
Merchants labors for the second, and compells them to live between both. I
only grieve that our Gentlemen, Younger Brothers (who by coming a year lag of
some nimble Fop into the World, come to soon to inherit Sorrow) should lie
Perdu in safeguard of such Pedants, for three Shillings a Week: O penurious
Necessity! and necessary Thrift! Who can Maintain a Soul with so poor a
stipend, for the love too of such ungrateful Monsters, that piece up their pay
with public contempt, and private fcoffs. I vow by the Spirit of a Nim, I had
rather cease to exsist. But I must come now to that, from which I have wandered.

Full seven Months did I labor by invective Songs to dissect from the Body of
my calling, unprofitable Members: such who were merely shapes of uneffectuall
use, thereby thinking to enter into a public Controversy, with some one
eminent in vulgar estimation, and too weak in faculties to withstand my
opposition: which had bin a choice way to have made my self famous in the
World, and particular in all Men's notice* for he that discommends others,
seems to commend him self by a dumb-comparison: and selfe-commendations the
World will pry into, in expectation of some supernatural gift, that may
excuse such immodest Vaineglory. The publisher of my Writings was my
unfortunate Rogue Bunge, who preseuted them to his old Masters, as stolen from
me* now whether they (unable to apprehend conceit) neglected to divulge them
abroad, or else (being divulged) None whom I challenged, durst take exceptions;
as fearful to invire more Anger, I know not: but sure I am they proved to me
of no effect. One merry accident (occasioned by these proceedings) I will not
omit thy knowledge.

CHAP. X.
NIM being desirous to make thee laugh, does in this Chapter report a notable
merry accident, which befellhis man Oliver Bunge.

A Certain young Gentlewoman (enricht with a compudent Portion by her disceasod
Fathers Will) grew carnally acquainted with a wealthy Ward: one that did not
long enjoy her to himself, because he was not always sufficiently provided to
please her insatiable Appetite: for it is with Maids as with Tobacconists, who
having once tasted in delight, what before with Pain they did avoid, they
cannot live without it: which made her stray for fresh pasture. At last her
Fancy lighted on a Drummer, whose name was Peel: a Fellow limm'd for
prodigality in action: made to people Countries, to beget more Men, then the
Plague devours. Her greedy Passion could not attend upon formality, or tedious
Time, till Occasion might present her with an accident that would excuso her
immodesty, in discovering such dishonest Love: but boldly she sends for him to
her Fathers House, where first she saw him (in the company of a Serving-man)
and unfolds to him her mind, which he admired, and likld: so that the next
Morning he stole her from her Friends, brought her to London, and married her.
The ward hears of it, pursues them thither; and by a politic inquisition
found out their Lodging. Of late time she had made his foolish dotage her
mirth, wherefore now he entends she shall be served with the like Sauce:
purposing to send her a Copy of Verses, wherein he would bitterly deride, her
and Peel the Drummer. Of these Verses I became Author by this chance.

Bunge passing through Fleet Street about my business, met with an old Master
of his, who accompanied the Ward, and has heretofore been: visited with my
Papers. After a little talk between them he acquainted him with what thou have
read, desired him that he would procure me to write some Verses upon that
subject, and bring them to the wards logding before night. Bunge presently
returned home to tell me the Plot, on which I wrote thus.

(1)
Whore, wonder not I write to thee
In Verse; like some lyrick Poet:
*It Is 'cause thou have rejected me.
Yet think not, that I do know it:
But know, I know that thou art come;
To know Peel's Drum-stick, he thy Drum.
(2)
Perhaps thy Folly may admire
(Since heretofore my bashful mind
Did make me dumb) how I aspire,
So soon to Thunder in this kind:
But know, I know that my great wrong
Would make him speak that had no Tongue.
(3)
With fierce Alarm you intend
To summon every Sense to come
Before this bawdy Night shall end
Trembling full faint about thy drum:
As how? I know not, but in this
They guess aright, that guess amiss.
(4)
Peel will suppose thy skin is tough
And his Stick too weak to break it
Unless his blow be too too rough,
As gladly so thou would bespeak it.
But (alas) it is played upon, and worn
By three Drum-sticks besides my own.
(5)
Not till Plagues are hot in house, and field,
Till all men die, do thou accord
With him; to venture for a Child,
'Cause whores Issues are so abhorred
That 'twere not fit the Brat should meet
A Swadling-Clout, but Winding Sheet.
(6)
Give Peel the Lie; thou mangy Drab,
Not that I deign with him to fight,
But 'cause the Lie deserves the Stab,
Which to receive it thy delight.
Now wonder not I sing so hoarce what thou have read,
For, whore, thou knoust that thou have had my Maidenhead.
These being fairly written; Bunge conveyed unto the young wards Lodging, who
was privately informed, that the Drummer, and his Wife knew of his being in
Town, therefore (to avoid his company) changed their aboade: but whither went
they? even into Turnball-Street: just the politic shift of a poor Soldier,
whose necessity is so well accommodated, with convenient assistance, to raise
him to the height of a good Fortune, that he often falls in climing, but so
low, as he can never reach it again. The House was polluted with a bawdy
Tenant: whose acquaintance my Drummer bought dearly on a Saturday Night:
reeling into the Door with a consort of base Companions. His lovesick Wife was
easily persuaded to believe the Rawd his Mothers own Sister: and the place very
convenient to conceal this stolen Marriage. Now those who before enform'd the
ward of their first lodging, dogged them also to this, and presently brought
him word, in what a stately Palace the poor Drummer entertained her. Out of a
politic prodigality he gave Bunge three Pounds for the Verses: thinking to
buy a gratitude so potent in him, that he should suppose no second service full
in requital, no though he ventured a beating by it. So whilst the Gentleman (
Bungs old Master) entertained him with impertient discourse, the ward enclosed
the Verses in an other Paper, which he sealed and superscrib'd in the true name
of his quondam Mistress, lodging at the Sign of Sun and Moon in
Turnball-Street: knowing, though Bunge had heard of the name of Peel, yet with
hers he was wholly unacquainted: besides to prevent all motives of suspicion,
he gave it him in private; saying, we are all mortal, Flesh and Blood: Young
men must be tamed when they are lusty. I am now sick of too much health, but
that superscription will direct thee to a she Galon, one that will purge the
Body of all rampant humors: wholesome she is, though poor. My own Man is a
Country- Cockney, never came within the smell of a City, never saw the Cities
Face; much less the secret parts of it, therefore is unfit to be employed in
this business. Now if thou will go, and bring her to me, by the virtue of that
Letter, I shall exceed in a gratuity: but make haste back, for you must
presently also assist us in the delivery of our Verses. The Rogue Bunge
suspected nothing, but did impudently steal a modest laughter: turned aside,
not as if he were ashamed of what he heard, but of what he was about to speak:
Quoth he (as though lost in complement) O Lord Sir! you shall not need to take
care for that necessary implement: I Will provide one against Night; but not out
of Turnball-Street: that place cannot afford a Creature worthy your Worships
embraces. The ward was glad that he insisted in strengthening a mistake, thanked
him for his kindness, and said he would use none but her: he knew she was
wholesome, but many of your brave, glorious whores are like Tedula Quinces; the
fairer on the outside, the rotner within. Bunge being greedy of sudden
employment, took his leave, well satisfied with that reply.

He was no sooner come within the reach of their Tongues, who border in that
hot Continent: but every one (as their fashion is) lured him into their
Kennell, there to cool him according to a Philosophical rule, Heat expells
Heat. The Sun attracts not Clouds faster then these Whores Passengers: in
whom Beauty draws corruption to defile it self. Bunge needed not enquire
for the sign of the Sun and Moon, because the properties of both ( heat
and inconstancy) did possess a Wench, which stood in the same Door: and
thinking that he was some starved Customer, enticed him to enter: whilst his
Eyes looking on the sign; found it expedient her request should be
accomplished.

After two Oaths sworn in defiance of her secret-parts, and three Busses
given in satisfaction for such honest unkindnesse; he enquires for that
Gentlewoman, to whom his Letter was directed. The Whore being wholly unperfect
in the knowledge of her Name, did express (by a forgetful admiration, or an
inquisitive forgetfullnesse) small acquaintance; and that very young to:
wherefore Bunge thought the Gentlewoman to be a wanton Country Wench, but not
yet of residence long enough to know the Frenchdisease: a rare ignorance! which
made his Appetite resolve to taste her, before him, that sent him to her. Up
Stairs he mounted, and the Wench led him through a Labyrinth of dark
Clossers: which the Workman seemed subtitly to hide from his own discovery: or
from every Eye, as ashamed to acknowledge the making of such sinful Cabinets;
where aged. Beds oppose each other in envious seituation. Having (I say) passed
this real Purgatory, she directed him to a Chamber; wherein he entered, and
found the Drummer, and his Less warming the Fire. Believe it Reader, even so:
for though the Fire would not warm them, they sat by it to keep away the
Wind, or to enclose the heat to a narrow dispersion, that so it might reflect
upon it self. Though it is a question whether there were any Fire at all? for
Bunge swore he could not discern enough to warm his Eyes. Which makes me
think she was enflamed with burning Love, that for his sake could be content of
such cold entertainment.

Bunge liked her face well, but supposed the Drummer to be some learned Pander;
that sat expounding to her, the mystery of that calling. When he stepped in,
they both stood up (an usual complement at the first sight of Strangers) and
gazeing upon one another with speaking Eyes; did (as it were) dumbly ask,
whether he were known to either? whilst he took her aside and kissed her.
The Drummer did not like that, yet durst not express anger, lest a Quarrel
might call up the Bawd, and Whores; so consequently, his Wife discover the
conditions of the House, who was yet ignorant of them. But this his sufferance
did turn Bunge's likely conjecture (that she was a Country Whore) into a
strong belief: for now he convayes her with an entreated force, and the
mentioning of a Letter, into the next Chamber: Peeles creepes after them in
search of the event, and fastening his Eye in a Keyhole; perceaved Bunge
laboring to make him Cuckold: whilst the Gentlewoman opposed his desires, more
with a new wonder, then an old defense, as shreekes, or loud acclamations.

The Soldier lost his Patience, but with a considering. Eye found it again:
yet so thredbare that he scorned to wear it. Therefore through the Doors he
went: demanding him, how he durst offer his Person that disgrace? Bunge knew no
safer answer then a denial: and supposed by these proceedings that Peele was
some blunt Gentleman, who had lately undertaken to be her Lover. Therefore he
deprives his Pocket of the Letter, and gave it her: telling him, how he knew
the Gentlewoman would acknowledge him better welcome, when she had read that.

Thus whilst he retired him self asside, in consideration how he might enjoy
her Body, they unsealed the Letter: found that blanke, but the Paper therein
enclosed, filled with Verses. Peele being loath to degenerat from his Brethren
of the Sword (who in this kind love to express more will, then they can
ability) undertook to read them: but indeed could not in any reasonable time.
And spying his own name by chance, was greedy to understand the cause of its
being there, resolving to tickle Bunge below, because after her help was joined
to his, he descried the wrong, and entreated her to stay there: least Bunge
(urging the base custom of the House for his excuse) might disgrace him for
bringing her to such a Lodging. But she, poor Soul, was willing to be
commanded, whilst Bunge at his entreaty, and promise to answer the Letter,
walks with him down the Stairs. Having descended one Pair, Bunge entreated
him to dispatch the Letter in the next Chamber: in the mean time he would go
up, and discourse with her about it: for he remembered now he was so commanded
by the Gentleman that sent him. Peeles fingers itch'd to be at his face: but
the Room being toward the Street, agreed not with that purpose. Therefore he
entreated him to visit the Celler: where (quoth he) having drunk a Health to
the Gentleman, you shall go up and commit your pleasure. The phrase liked him
well; so down they went. Just upon their entering into the Seller Door, Bung
desired to be acquainted with his name that he might tell the Ward to whom he
was so much beholding. He answered, his name was Peel, by profession a poor
Drummer: at which Bung stepped back whilst his Breech made as many Buttons, as he
thought to have broke with drinking. His rescue (which most commonly consisted
in the dexterity of his Heels) was barred from him by Five strong Doors.
Therefore he pulls up his Spirits, even unto his Tongue: thinking to fright the
Drummer with big words.

Just in such a Celler as this (quoth he) this -- let me see a little -- I, in
such a one as this, did my weak Arm beat Nine Rogues; that would needs enforce
me to pledge my Enemies Health. The Drummer thought that a fearful Ly, and
presently saluted him with a Box upon the Ear, seconded that with another;
which felled him to the Ground, and there kikt him. Bung scorned to resist, but
cried Murder! murder! help ho! help! The Bawd came thundering down with a brace
of Whores, to know what the matter was. Peel having acquainted them with the
cause that motiv'd this revenge, they all cried out, Geld the Rogue, geld the
Canniball. Bung applies himself once more to be rescued by an old Friend (his
Tongue) and beggs mercy from them, swearing he knew not those Verses were
enclosed in the Paper, which pacified the Whores: who brought him up to the
Street door, and thrusting him out, did shut it after him. Homewards he creeps
with his Face muffled in his Cloak. Beating he did never greatly love:
therefore wholly dedicates his Studies, how to revenge himself on the young
Ward, and Peel the Drummer, which afterward he did: but Preserve the manner
how to be related in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI.
NIM takes occasion to present thy acceptance with a Character of a Whore: and
has graced his expression, by the relation of Bung's most witty revenge.

IN our way of relating Bung's revenge, I hold it requiste to pass through
Turnbal-Street: and there admire ( Custom) which is to be ignorant in Folly:
Not like a handsome Novice: who walks by with his Eyes fastened on his Back;
prying carelessly who looks upon him? who beckens him in? if no body supplies
that expectation, then he begins to hate his own Face, to discommend what
before he praised, as purposing to sell, like the poor Stallion, his masculine
beauty. No Reader; I intend to pick out from the whole rabble a Whore: and
prefer her in a Character to thy immaginary view. If thou affect my
description, thou will loath her: such a strange Antipathie bears it with its
own sense, having (indeed) chosen a Subject that infects wit. Suppose where she
stands in a Red-Wastcot, that is more out of fashion then her Face, which was
made fifty years before it. No doubt she has worn a Gown too: but that was
when the sale of her Beauty could return the cost of it into the Bawds Purse.
Talk with her, and she will bring thee into an ignorant Jealousy, or a Jealous
suspense; who was thy Father? For she slanders all Women, to make her self
appear less common in comparison: and usually in such ambiguous phrase, which
effeminish policy affords: as thus. It may be she is, it may be she is not: but
alas, alas, I know what I know, i faith, yet will accuse no body.

She is afraid to go to Church, least the Sermon might convert her: and hates
the Story of a decayed Whore, because she affects not melancholy. Her Breath
is strong enough to overcome thy sense of smelling, and has already scorched
up her Nose: which to obscure, she wears before it a green Curtain. Being
naked, she seems an entire Scabbe; a great proportionable Boil: and her
Clothes being on her, look like plasters, yet this is she who heretofore did
mince a stolen pace as if she scorned Motion: whom Pride did become as a full
Oath does a desperate Gallant: that fichew'd with a degenerate posture of the
Chinne: tripp'd on her agill Toes like a Kibeheel'd-Fairie: that shreek'd at
the drawing of a Knife: swoonded at the sight of fat Meat: that affected
singularity in graceful Oaths, clipped the Kings English: and seemed ignorant
how rightly to call that, which wantonly she nicknam'd. Ogiddy-Headed Time!
that do so delight in alteration: that have changed the shape of a glorious,
handsome Curtezan, into the substance of a Fulsome, nasty, stinking Whore.

But now let our relation pursue Bunge: who within an Hour after he was beaten,
returned unto the VVard's Lodging: finding him at his arrival tickled with a
mad Laughter: whilst he carried himself as altogether unsensible of any
beating, and demands what motiv'd that mirth. The Ward mistaking the
dissimulation, changed his Humor into a sadder: asking whether he had
delivered the Letter to his Mistress? no (quoth Bung) she was gone forth to
Supper, in the company of a certain Sweetheart: but I left it with the Bawd:
who told me she was to meet them at Eight of the Clock in Old Exchange, and
then she would deliver it. The Ward supposed all this was true: but grieved
that the Verses were so insuccessively left in Peel's Lodging: yet in
expectation of some accidental merriment, he commanded him to meet him
likewise in the Exchange at the appointed Hour. Bung (promising to accomplish
his desires) took his leave, and went to a Tavern, whose backDore enters into
Turnball-Street: where he wrote a Note to Peele, and sent it by a Drawer;
accompanied with a Gallon of Sack. The Contents of which, desired his
Friendship, and that by the Virtue of the Wine, he might be licensed presently
to speak with him, where they would advise in composing of a Plot, how to be
revenged upon the Ward.

Peel having received the Letter, and the (...) present, returned him word, he
was sorry for what was past, and greatly desired that he would presently come
thither, to receive part of the Wine, and part of satisfaction. Bung was glad
his Plot did thrive so well, went thither; and having made Peele promise that
he would be in the Exchange about Eight of the Clock (to beat the Ward) he
runs to the Poultry-Counter: where he did Fee a brace of Sergeants to attend
Peel in Cheap* Side, that as he came back from the Exchange, they might arest
him upon an Action of Battery.

The Hour of meeting was now at hand, and Bung arrived there first. But
presently after him, marched in the Ward, accompanied only with the
Gentleman, (of whom we have spoken heretofore) who came thither purposely to
see the new married couple. Our revengefull-Polititian perceived now a gross
oversight, in the first contrivement of this geere. For whocan suppose the
Ward would come thither alone? or that having another Gentleman with him, he
was not able to restore more Blows, then Peel could give. Therefore their
Backs being turned, Bung steals out of the next Gate, and runs almost as
far as Paul's in search of a Porter. At last he hired one to fly to the
Exchange, and entreat the Gentleman (relating to him his name, and fashion of
Apparel) to come presently to the Queene's-Armes by Holborn-Bridge: for there
(quoth he) you must say his Brother is arrived very sick. The Porter delivered
his errand effectually* and the Gentleman (without inquiring who sent that
message) did take a hasty Farewell of the Ward. Bung returns thither again,
and finding him walking alone, went to him. By and by in comes Peel, and
suddenly spyed that Face, which his Fist did intend to batter: not doubting but
Bung (according as he had promised) would assist him in the assault.

The first Blow that he bestowed upon the Ward, did so stagger him, that for
the present he was unable to resist. But Bung (taking a Key out of his Pocket)
rewarded Peeles Pate with a prodigal recompense: and in the mean time the
Ward recovered strength enough, to be his own Avenger. Peele felt himself
betrayed to the mercy of two merciless Men: but stood yet stiff to his
tackling, being most pitifully mauled with Bung's Key: who did not forget
(neither) to lend some Seven or Eight blows with it, unto the Wards face:
the which he delivered so cunningly, that the Ward thought they came from
Peel; and cried out murder! swearing how Peele fought with a Smith's Hammer. He
replies again (with a loud voice) that it is nothing but a trick to excuse his
own treachery: for I my self (quoth he) have received Thirteen blows, able to
kill an Ox. The people now came thronging on to part the Combatants. Peel
being loath to be brought in public examination, stole secretly away. The
Wards Beaver Hat (bordered with Pearl, and adorned with a rich Hatband) lay
upon the Ground: which Bunge (feeling with his Foot, and favored by the dark
time of Night) conveyed into his Codpisse. The owner inquires diligently for
it, and Bung seems more diligent in the recovery: having borrowed a Light of
one that stood by him purposely to seek it, or rather to darken the appearance
of his own hypocritical Theft, at last proclaims it to be lost. Thus whilst
controversies are here decided by a busy multitude, the poor Drummer (walking
homewards) was arrested, and carried to the Countor. A while after the Ward,
and Bung were licensed to go home to their Lodgings: for the Constable (whom
this hurly-burly drew thither) was contented (since the Offensive party could
not be found) to commit a wonder, by standing to reason. And our Ward in
complementall gratulation, went home bare-headed.

The next Morning Bang's appearance was summoned to answer that arrest which
was served on Peele. He prepares himself to prove it warrantable, but thirsting
for a more full revenge, he entrears an old Friend (who was a mere stranger in
London) to enter an Action of Debt against him (in some unknown name) for
Twelve Hundred pounds; which the Knave performed, and within an Hour after,
departed from the City. Peel was cleared of the first Action by asking Bung
forgiveness: who bought that honor with Four Shillings bestowed upon a
Justices Clerk. The second kept *him in the Counter Five days: until at last
(having no Adversary to declare against him in the Court) he got his liberty:
though he had paid soundly for being a Prisoner. What became of him and his
Wife afterward, I know not. But the Wards Face did almost enrich a Surgeon:
for Bung's Key had battered it into such an ugly form, that it seemed ever
after a Bugg-bear to his own affection.

CHAP. XII
NIM complains of Bungs villainous service, intends to be rid of him; declares
what himself has spent since he came to London. And discourses most wittily
upon a Book of his, called; An invective against the Plebeians, and Cittyzens
of London.

Though my Man Bunge was possessed with a sudden Wit, and enriched with all those
qualities that compose a perfect Sharke: yet Custom did operat so potently in
him, that he could not choose but cosen himself: which does impertinently mar
those parts, that were bad enough before. He persuaded himself how I loved to
be cheated of my Money. O credulous Confidence! can belief fasten on that which
Supposition cannot reach? it is strange: unless he strove to make himself
famous by being singular in a new Opinion. One morning he presented me with a
counterfeit Hat-band: verily believing that I would pay him forty Shillings for
it. I misliked the price before I knew the quality of the Stuff; carried it
to a Goldsmiths, who being asked whether it was worth so much, laughed, and
told me it was Copper. Then I returned home again, and demanded him, wherefore
he went about to cheat me? but he inquired, of what? I answered, of Forty
Shillings. Forty Shillings (said he)? that is Money. Money! (replied I) what of
that? Mary (quoth he) for money I Will cheat my own Father if I can. A gracious
Son! but surely his Father begot him by stealth, whilst the Servants coming
scared him in the Action, for he was both a Thief, and a Coward. When I first
entertained him* (perceaving me a Stranger in the knowledge of our City
fashions) he told me, that to let him go in Cloaks linde with Velvet, would be
much for my credit. I thankt him heartily for his care, but in the performance
appeared an Heretic. Such like tricks as these made me resolve to part with
him the next Quarter Day. And it was a tardy remedy: for to tell thee the plain
truth, I had by this time (being just Ten Months since I came to London)
consumed Six score Pounds of my Estate; so there remained but Sixty Pounds
behind: which consisted in the residue of those Jewels, that were yet unsolde.
And all this proceeded through* the prodigal directions of that damnable
Rogue. Perhaps thou will admire (considering my Purse was so shallow) how I
could take so much out of it, yet never feel the Bottom, never call to mind
that I dipped not my Hand into a Fountain. It Is true indeed, it could not ever
flow, but my Hopes guided me to a flood: such a one as Jupiter made, when he
showred down Gold to Danae. It encompast a certain Castle; which I had built
in the Air: whose foundation was laid upon a little Book (then newly finished)
thinking it would have made me rich, both in Credit, and Money. But when
conjectures came to the trial, the Stationer durst not buy it, alleging that
I was not publicly known to the World, and how it is the Authors name which
makes a Book sell, not the vvorth of it. Then I answered; if it were printed, I
should soon be famous, and I was also contented to honor him with my
Maydenhead. But (quoth he) I am not contented to be so honored. I do not love
to hoyst any. Man high, with my own Purse-Strings, or stoop to lift another up.

This Book was entitled An invective against the Cittyzens, and Plebeians of
London. It treated of Plebeians first by reason of the humble course of my
proceedings: because I ever observed to ascend by degrees. Besides, Judgment
being once strengthened for ambitious Study, with the knowledge of material
matter, easily climes to apprehend, what othervvays had binne above its reach.
I could not choose but think this Book would prosper, because the Subject
savored of Divinity: being made to suppress uncivil commotions in the one,
and in the other covetous abuses.

The Blebeians did then much trouble the State, with insolent behavior. For
Ambassadors (passing through the Streets) were rudely interrupted, pointed, and
laughed at in ignominious contempt, beseig'd in their Houses, and found no
Sanctuary in their Offices: but were almost fain to beg a life of them, who
(irrationably) under vale wed it in themselves. These outrages were most
commonly committed by the basest me chanicall sont: who stilde themselves
Apprentices to attract more company. When they were once sallied forth; they
needed no encouragement to Action, for a rash self will did make them blind to
all impediments. Unless thou will suppose a couple scaling up a Wall, whilst
another, that stands close beneath them (perceaving they have got the general
applause, and himself to be idle, because no Brick-layer) serves them with
this flattering encouragement, Well done Jack, well done Dick: by the Mass, you
are no Cowards: you care not two Strawes for King, nor Kings Mate.

Now some discontented Foreigners gave out, these Mutinies did continually
revive, by the wilful permission of our City- Senators: whose actions relish
much of Popular inclination. For Authority, or Wealth (being but fortunatly
achieved) cannot alter the constitution of the Blood. Yet howsoever my censure
is more charitable: nor can any man suppose them faulty, but in a fearsull
connivencie at the execution of strict Statutes. Considering (likewise) they
must necessarily have compelled them, to be under the disposure of the Law,
before effectual sentence could pass upon them. And is there any thing more
dangerous then to encounter with armed-Rebellion? especially where the
Adversary is animated with the hope of inestimable Pillage? no surely. But me
thinks I hear it alleged, how diverse were caught, yet went unpunished: to
which I am lost in a reply. For though exemplarie-punishment has somewhat in
it that is unjust, and in particular to the prejudice of some: yet it is
recompensed by the general good of the whole. To deliver a Character of this
monster multitude, were but obscurely to represent unto thy view, what
themselves (unwilling to hide their own defect) do manifestly discover.
Notwithstanding, something we will say of them.

They are parlous in their own vocations: and proud of that skill which is
gotten merely by use, laughing at other Men with a kind of
pittyfull-disrespect; because they are not cunning in a Faculty, which is
(indeed) below the desire of knowledge. They account the Nobility, and Gentry,
but as superficial Creatures: Men that cannot by managing a Saw or Mattock
replenish a Double-Jugg. No nor maintain life by slight of hand. They hold
Scholars to be (as it were) Bl'oxford Men: unnecessary-Gutts, that study only
to grow hungry: and when they are hungry, will devour a plaguey deal of Meat,
or so. They run headlong to a boisterous Action, as though affray'd lest
Consideration might overtake them before they have begun it. But having once
begun, they scorn to desist, until the old saying be verified. Every
beginning must have an ending. They are the Children of Report, composed of
news: and fed with the noyce of alteration. Ten years Peace does make Coin
invisible amongst them, so that they forget the fashion of a Shilling. Ten
years Wars makes them call Gold, Dirt, and give it the defiance. But now
their Swords have binne long rusty, for want of Spanish-Throates to scowre
them. They seem most learned in Visiognimie, and make of their Confidence a
Perspective, through which they can behold a great Man's Heart, situated in
his Face: nay though he be a Coward, and have none at all. When they are sick,
they esteem the World to be a Buble, a transitory thing, and all men mortal.
They dye of the same Religion that the King professes:

CHAP. XIII
NIM rips open the Hearts of Cittyzens, condemns them justly. Builds another
Castle in the Air; and relates the pretty fashion of it.

LOndon was at that time possessed with more several Humors, than Action could
invent ways to express them in. High affairs seemed to succeed diversely in
effect: as though manadg'd by sundry inclinations. And opulent Cittyzens drew
much complementall observance from the Nobility. I held always an envious
Antipathy with the Sons of Fortune: therefore in that Book accused them of
diverse enormities: which if I should here re-iterate I might be thought
satyricall. Although my intent (by this Book) is to destroy that Humor in
others. Wherefore thou shall only participate of this my Description. They are
exceeding covetous; and the Sin is in them so natural, so doatingly
affected, that they neglect all modest form to hide it from a public
observation: excusing it to their Consciences with a fearful probability of
War. They never feel ease, but in Labor and trouble. Those that are rich
strive to Gentilize their Female Offspring: but evermore pay for that ambition.
As Wealth exalts them into Office, so they discharge it with their Purses, not
with their Brains. Authority (though in a low degree) heaves their Hearts
into their Mouths: for they will vent their Thoughts, as if their Lips were
opened by a Priveledge: perusing the actions of the King with a sawcy-comment,
and discover a great desire to mould his Affection in their own disposure:
though (indeed) they weigh worth, like Gold, in a payer of Scales: where the
lightest piece ascends, but the heaviest (which is the best) remains below.
The politic reason why they love Peace, is, because they hate to buy a War.
They despise War because it is good sleeping in a whole Skin. Besides they
are not valiant, even to the Fourth degree of Comparison, (that is desperate);
for they wear their Hearts in their Pursses, like Cowards, who going to fight,
carry their Ransoms in their Pockets. They always profess themselves poor,
because it is a chargeable-glory to be rich in the Kings Books. Their Religion
is weak in effect, and strong in form: depending much on Custom, more on
Superstition, and most of all on Zeal. But it is a politic Zeal: such as
preserves Government more then Religion. Or rather an exemplarie Zeal; that
does beget, and warm Faith in others, but heates not their own Souls. Now
though our opinion is more logically maintained; in that we do not argue from
particulars, but make a general accusation: yet know (Reader) there have binne
many Citizens, whose Virtue lends some lusture to their posterity.
Notwithstanding I averr the Virtue of a good Citizen, differs very much from
the Virtue of a good Man. For the one uses all virtues agreeable with a pure
godly life: the other observes only the Laws, which were made to preserve
civil commodity.

But it is time now that I return unto my self. One Morning (lying in the Bed)
I fell deeply to consider, how I migh accrue profit by the disbursment of my
Ffty Pounds. At last (according to my old Custom) I built another Castle in
the Air: laying the Foundation on my Face, and proper Person. But the
substance of it, was to furnish my self with rich Apparel: and afterward
assault the disposition of some Wealthy Lady. For my Man Bung had often told
me, that diverse Gentlemen (whom he knew) were bravely maintained by their
Mistresses. O such fruitful Land did I desire to till! which makes Labor a
delightful sport, and requites ease with Gold. As for Divinity, I would not
think on it, lest it should make me melancholy. Besides (like a damned Rogue) I
held Whoredom to be the holiest Sin that is: because Repentance cease on
the Heart, presently after it is committed.

Now, art thou strangely desirous to know the manner of my proceedings? to
understand in what kind I did shape this purposed adventure? I Will tell thee:
but first prepare to admire my Capacity, for thy knowledge never owned such a
parlous Plot before. Which was, that I should go to see a Play in Black-Fryars:
and there (by all necessary consequences, or rather inspired assurance) some
rich Lady would cast her Eye on me, and the same night me on her. Be not thou
astonished Reader, neither suppose it impossible that Nature can be so opulent,
or he that is mortal, possess such a strong Brain. For (alas Man!)
heretofore I was as full of these learned-Stratagems, as an Egg is full of
meat.

Fifty Pounds accoutred me from Top to Toe: having been very thrifty in laying
out my Money, and careful to refuse Bunges advice, for he brought me a Tailor,
whom Custom had made to steal from himself. A Slave that the Devil durst not
trust with his old Clothes; no, though he might gain his Soul in lue of the
Theft.

Thus like a true Englishman (who wears his Mother too much in his Apparel) I
entered the Theater, and sat upon the Stage: making low Congies to diverse
Gentlemen; not that I knew them, but I was confident, they would requite me in
the same kind: which made the Spectators suppose us of very old, and familiar
acquaintance. Besides (that I might appear no Novice) I observed all
fashionable Customs; As delivering my Suit to a more apparent view, by hanging
the Cloak upon one Shoulder: or leting it fall (as it were) by chance. I stood
up also at the end of every Act, to salute those, whom I never saw before. Two
Acts were finished before I could discover any thing, either for my Comfort
then, or worth my relation now. Unless it were punycall absurdity in a
Country-Gentleman: who was so caught with the natural action of a Youth (that
represented a ravished Lady) as he swore alowd, he would not sleep until he
had killed her ravisher: and how 'twas not fit such Rogues should live in a
Commonwealth. This made me laugh, but not merry.

Anon after, I spied a Gentlewomans Eye, fixed full upon me. Hope and Despair
threw me into such Distractions, that I was about to bid a Boy (who personated
Cupid in the Play) to shoot at her with his counterfeit Arrow. But she
presently disclaimed me her Object: and with the like inconstancy gazed upon
another. About the beginning of the Fourth Act, my Face withstood a fresh
encounter, given me by a Ladies Eye, whose Seat opposed mine. She looked
steadfast on me, till the Play ended; seeming to survey my Limbs with amorous
curiosity: whilst I advanced them all, to encounter her approbation. A great
desire I had to see her Face: which she discovered, by unmasquing it to take
her leave of a Gentleman. But if ever I beheld one so illfavour'd? do thou
abhor my Book. She looked like December, in the midst of April, old and
crabbed in her Youth. Her Nose stood toward the South-East point: and Snot had
fretted a prepostrous Channel in the most remote corner of her Lip. Sure she
was chaste, chaste because deformed: and her deformitic (repugnant to the common
course of Nature) might beget that Chastity: but in whom? in others, not in
her self; unless Necessity did force it. For no doubt she would be as
leacherous as the Mountain- Goat, had not Natures qualmishnesse proved a
strong contradiction to her desire: who heaved the Gorge, at her imperfect
perfecting: therefore had no Stomach to make a Man fitting her embracements.
Yet she wore Jewels, for the which I could willingly have kissed her in the
dark. And perhaps too (by gilded provocation) supplied the Office of a Husband.

Her ugliness made me suppose that nothing could be too base for her
acceptance: therefore I (following her down the Stairs) resolved to discover a
good will to her, either by a wanton gesture of my Body, or whispering in her
Ear just as she came forth into the Street, (her Usher being stepped aside to
complement with parting Company) I proffered my service to attend her home, if
she missed any of her Friends. She suspecting that I thought her to be a Whore,
told me aloud I was much mistaken. Her Brother (unknown to me) stood behind us,
and asked her; what the matter was? M'arry, (quoth she) this Gentleman takes me
for some common Creature. He with all violent dexterity struck me on the Face;
and afterward went about to draw his Sword. But I slunk through the press of
people, and very tamely conveied my self home. My Man Bunge (who attended
there all the Play-time, to save charges) saw this: and heard the Young-Gallant
swear (after I was gone) if ever he met me, he would make my Heart the Scabbard
of his Sword. These woeful tidings he brought to my Chamber, so that my costly
Experiment was now concluded, and my glorious Garments altogether useless. For
I durst not visit Theaters any more, lest I should meet with him, or Women
elsewhere, as fearful of the like entertainment.

CHAP. XIIII.
NIM mentions his proceedings against some of the Nobility, and what success
he had: afterward (in a Pamphlet) discovers all the defects of his own
penning: sends Bunge to sell it, whose bad adventures mooves him to rail on
Fate.

Tush! hang up Sadness! as a thing (indeed) only fit for the Gallows, whereto
each condemned Thief, brings as little as he can, least it might deprive him
of a minutes life, so cheat the Hangman of his Fee. There remained a way as
yet untroden on; a highway too: thou apprehendst me Reader: My Pen never had
to do with the Nobility, whereof one was most eminent in high favor, so
consequently in vulgar Hate. For vulgar hatred proceeds from Envy. Him, and all
his Kindred did I make progress through Fiddlers Noses: but in Songs of such
fortunate composure, as in half a Term made a whole Consort Usurers. Bunge by
dispersing Nine, gathered together Five and Thirty Shillings. Five he retained
for swearing to his dull Chapmen, they were well penned; the rest I received
with great joy, being the first time I sold my Wit for Money.

These Songs were seasond with bitter accusation, and not in such hypocritical
phrase, as does disguise Sense from common Capacities, but stuffed with immodest
bluntness. Enquire not what ground I had for this action, since there was so
little that I beg thou would not stand upon it: and apprehend Reader (by way
of secrecy) that Satyrists (like Dogs) bark most at Men they know not: the
reason lurks in Nature. Report is their chief Intelligencer: therefore their
accusation never singles out Vice in any particular Man, but observing the
complexion and quality of the persons make their general aim at what is most
probable to be hitten. This project was as short lived as my other: for
arriving at his Ear (whom they too much concerned) the Fiddlers were sent to
Prison, where they sung like Birds in Cages, to the tune of o woeful dumps! and
Bunge (who was pursued by a Warrant) played least in sight.

Invention was never barren, when it coupled with Necessity. In two Weeks
space I finished a little Pamphlet, that treated of English Oratory; collecting
all the defects, in my own Works, which after I had derided, were exposed to
public laughter. Amongst the rest I acknowledged an affectation in phrase;
where Nature (confident of her own abilities) too much despised Art. The
Second was that in my inserted Tales (which overswiftly pursued one another) I
sometimes lost the material relation, by finding Jeasts. Thirdly I accused my
Parenthesis of multiplicitie and length: which troubled the Reader to join the
divided sense, and recover his own breath.

Late after Supper I commanded Bunge to carry it unto a Stationer, and name
some other Author, whose authority might advantage the sale. He marches to the
Shop, and Fathers it on a great Divine, who in his Youth, begot many of like
complexion: and as bad luck would have it (being newly come from the Country)
enterd there to buy Books. The Stationer wellcom'd him, saying; I hope you
will be more reasonable then your Man, in the price of this Pamphlet,
considering the poor bargain I had of the last. What Man? what Pamphlet,
quoth the Doctor? Bunge (whose apprehension was as quick as his Feet) left them
to admire at his cheating enterprise: ran up Saint Martins-Lane, and from
thence to little Britain: where he proffered it to another, for Three Pounds,
but returned home laden with an old answer; that their Shops were too full of
such trivial stuff. A truth potent over belief! For every Coxcombe that has
so much unfortunate wit, to know his own imperfections, will give Money to have
them printed.

But O insupportable misery! can I thrive in no course? what rigled Fusse;
dry-dugg'd, mangy Witch, produced me from the Womb with horrid imprecations?
what sinister Planet governed at my Nativity? O Fortune! thou Whore! thou
Bitch! more fickle then Inconstancy! whose Alm'ner is the Southern Wind, whose
Wheel is made of a Woman's Brain-Pan. Though I had been born a Monster, left a
Beggar; yet shaped so ugly as might fright Compassion from coming near me with
her Alms: doomed to grow old in misery, to live till Time had made me a second
Cripple, who knows but kind Necessity would have turned to Patience in me: but
here Patience must become a Miracle: Since I am discarded where probability
crowned my Hopes, and might seduce unbelief her self, to confidence.

CHAP. XV.
NIM's Hostess denies to trust him, he fasts two Days, pawnes his Clothes,
then resolving to part with Bunge, sends for him to a Tavern, and gives, him
learned Counsel; but after Bunges reply, he does change his mind and
returns with him to his Patrons Heir, promising (on a smooth condition) to
bless this Book with a second Part.

Costly experiments, and Bunges attendance had so impoverished my Purse, that I
wanted to supply my Stomach. I did owe my Hostess also for a Months diet;
which failing to pay (according to my promise) and she perceaving I had few
visits from City Friends, urged her to say one Morning, she would trust me no
longer So that my last refuge consisted in pawing my Clothes, which my Childish
disposition (never made impudent by want) durst not attempt. Half an Hour
before Dinner, and Supper, I sent Bunge upon some frivolous errant: in the
mean time slunke forth, walked out a Meal, and returned picking my Teeth,
hoping to invent a shift less disgraceful. But two days fasting, and his
grim looks at home, made me weary of such modesty: so that at Night (when there
was nobody within but a little Boy) I ran to Charter Houselane: where I walked
to and fro, by a Broakers Shope, half an Hour, before Cowardly reputation
would suffer me to enter. At last in I went: and desired the the Broaker, his
Man might go home with me to fetch Two Suits of Apparel. He granted my
request, and the things being packed up before, we soon returned, but could not
borrow above Eighteen pounds, upon that which cost me Fifty: whereof Twelve
Shillings they took back for registring.

Thus my Heart being somewhat lightened by the weight of my Purse, I went to a
Tavern that was near my Lodging, and sent a Drawer home to attend Bung's
arrival, that he might fetch him, purposing now to dismiss his service,
accompany the next Wind to Gellderland, and there serve in Garrison. I
satisfied my Hunger, with Cerberus his Diet (Sopps) which being made of rich
Sack half fox'd me before he came. So soon as he had entered the Room he
swore himself out of breath. I demanded the cause, Why Sir (quoth he) is the
Air food for Men? or did you suppose me a Chamelion? I excused all by urging
his own Language, for he told me once: it was the fashion for Servingmen to
disburse Money for their diet, and require it when their Masters Exechequer was
able to repay. So having commanded a Gallon of Wine, and the Drawers absence, I
bad him sit, drink, and expect alteration. By that time I had shared half the
Wine, a strange humor possessed my Brain, and begot rare imaginations! such as
fooled Don-Quixot, uttering in a lamentable vein this high and mighty sense.

O Bunge! my Breast has entertained new Tennants since first I owned thy
service, Thoughts of too tall a stature, such as scorned those humble Roofs,
which the plain Country held as gaudy fashion, therefore went from me to
change their Mansions: but return maimed, able in nothing, unless to affirm
the Proverb; Pride will have a fall. Know Oliver! I am made an experiment by
cruel Fate, to try within a Hairs breadth the sufferance of a Man, crossed
in all designs with strange prevention. Thou art of disposition quick, and
subtle, and have discerned the World with a discreet Eye. Thy Experience is of
a full Age, and must be now thy Master, thou no more my Servant. This health to
thy good Fortunes -- There Is thy Wages; due since the last Quarter: which with
some advice (sent from my love) is all I can bestow.

When thou think upon thy poor fortunes, compare them with a meaner Man's:
for so thou may lessen in thy self the greatness of an other, and by that
aggravate thine own. The Plebeian whose natural Spirit is humbled with a
coorse Prentiship, strives for a maystery though it be only of his Trade. Do
not enrich thy self with a bawdy-industry, nor occasion thy Masters folly by
thy apt presentment of it. Sooth him not in's drink; nor by admiring his
unconquered looks, tell him it is a handsome Vice. Strive to make him more
acquainted with thy privacy, then thy self with his secrets. Be not impudent
in jeasting, for that cheats thy Wit of her reward not procuring laughter, but
derision: though the first be the true applause. Be not proud, for Time does
infect the owner of that Sin with such an ignorance, that he shall scarce
know himself. The gaudy Servant beggars his Purse, to make his Masters rich:
for Fashion, and comely thrift, bids a plain Cloak usher a golden Livory. Buy
not the envy of thy Fellows, with his favor: nor lose it by presuming on it.
Let not the poor Tennant observe thee as his Landlords Heir; whilst thou with
a saucy distance of lame state, strengthnest his credulity. Be honest in all
things, for so thou may live, to bestow this counsel on a Servant of thy
own, and end thy days in peace. When thou shall chance to talk of me
hereafter, cleanse my Fame with hiding those defects, that show me humane, and
my Fortune blind. Go, be happy.

All this while he was a greedy Auditor, but perceaving me about to take my
ultimum vale, steps up and replies thus. Sir, we are so tender of our outward
credit, that Necessity is never discovered, until it discovers it self, I
mean thorough the Ellbowes: but yours is not so little as to escape my sight,
I understood the cause why you employed me about impertinent errants: though
you expressed small charity, and less Physic, to prescribe walking for an
empty Stomach, when no satisfaction in meat, wellcom'd my return. Neither was
my fearful Experience (feeling even now the lightness of your Trunk)
ignorant how, and where it had forsook its weight. The tract and course of
poverty I have often traced, and know she is most undone in her relief. A pox
upon your grave counsel! which is framed as though proceeding from a beggarly
Patriarch. No advice is worthy of acceptance, but what accompanies a liberal
Hand: it is Money that makes a man able to keep it. You direct me how to behave
my self in service, when I have no Master: an enterprise weak and Childish;
just like your actions, since you became a Londoner: which if presented to the
World in History, would beget more laughter then esteem. Come if you will seize
on my advice, add unto your Money Fifty Pounds: furnish me for a journey to the
Court: where, by Wit, I will get relation to some Man of Rank: grow a prompt
intelligencer; and make you a Satyrist. Such a one as Kings with flattery
shall be glad to silence. A plague on all beggarly occupations! I affect them
not.

Now Reader, judge thou whether this Rogue was not able to seduce a Novice. I
could sooner eat Iron then part with him: but the next Morning, we sat in
consultation how to get this Money. At last it was resolved I should
counterfeit my self to be lately Knighted, and he ride with me to my Patrons
Heir: adding on all occasions Sir, unto my Christian-name. But stay awhile, and
let thy memory return, unto the last part of our Fourth Chapter: where I
threatened to make my acquaintance costly unto a Clothier; that overtook me on
the highway. He often visited my Lodging, and now I requited him by borrowing
his Gelding (worth Fourteen pounds) to take the air as far as Fullham but
indeed detaind him a longer Journey, and bought a Nagg for my Man Bunge. I
riding like a Knight Errant.

But how my Patron's Heir entertained me, when I returned, and all the rest of
my occurences, I am resolved to publish with great care, and industry. Which if
you ever mean to see, invoke the powers above, that what is already written may
take him, whose acceptance makes my labor, ease: whose command (by I wot not
what instinct) ties my Soul to a more delightful service, then either Gain,
or popular applause.

FINIS.

