THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY OF SCOTLAND, WITH The OATH taken by the Parliament men,
etc. Printed at Edinburgh, by James Bryson, 1641.

WHEREUNTO Is annexed his most gracious Majesty's SPEECH, To the PARLIAMENT of
Scotland, the 17. of August. 1641.

In the National Assembly at Edinburgh, the 4, day of August, 1641.
THe Assembly seriously considering the present case and condition of this Kirk
and Kingdom, what great things the Lord has done for us; especially since the
renewing of our Covenant, notwithstanding our former back-slydings and
defection: And if we either become remiss in the duties of piety, or shall
not constantly hold and keep our Religion, unto which we have bound our
selves so straightly and solemnly, what dishonor we do unto the name of God
before men, who have their eyes upon us, and how great judgment we bring upon
our selves. Upon these and the like considerations, The Assembly does find it
most necessary to stir up themselves and to provoke all others, both Ministers
and People of all degrees, not only to the religious exercises of public
worship in the congregation, and private worship in their families, and of
every one by themselves apart; but also to the duties of mutual edification,
by instruction, admonition, exhorting one another to forwardness in Religion,
and comforting one another in whatsoever distress, and that in all their
meetings, whether in the way of civil conversation, or by reason of their
particular callings, or any other occasions offered by divine providence, no
corrupt communication proceed out of their mouth, but that which is good to the
use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.

And because the means have been, and may still be despised or abused, and
particularly the duty of mutual edification, which have been so little in use,
and so few know to practice in the right manner, may be upon the one part
subject to the mocking of ungodly and wordly men, who can not endure that in
others which they are not willing to practice themselves: And upon the other
part, to many errors and abuses, which the godly through their weakness may
fall, or, by the craftiness of others, may be drawn into, Such as are error,
heresy, schism, scandal, self-conceit, and despising of others, presuming
above the common calling of Christians, and usurping that which is proper to
the Pastoral vocation, contempt, or mis-regard of the public means, idle and
unprofitable questions, which edify not, uncharitable censurings, neglect of
duties in particular callings, business in other men's matters and callings,
and many such evils in doctrine, charity, and manners, which have dolefully
rent the bowels of other Kirks, to the great prejudice of the Gospel.

Therefore the Assembly moved with the zeal of God against all abuses and
corruptions, and according to their manifold obligation, most earnestly
desiring, and thirsting to promove the work of reformation, and to have the
comfort and power of true godliness sensible to every soul, and Religion to
be universally practiced in every family, and by every person at all occasions,
does charge all the Ministers and members of this Kirk, whom they do
represent, that according to their several places and vocations, they
endeavor to suppress all impiety, and mocking of religious exercises;
especial of such as put soul aspersions and factious, or odious names upon
the godly; and upon the other part, that in the fear of God they be aware, and
spiritually wise, that under the name and pretext of religious exercises,
otherwise lawful and necessary, they fall not into the aforesaid abuses; and
specially that they eschew all meetings which are apt to breed error,
scandal, schism, neglect of duties and particular callings, And such other
evils as are the works not of the Spirit, but of the flesh, and are contrary to
truth and peace; and that the Presbyteries and Synods have a care to take order
with such as transgress the one way or other.

In the Assembly at Edinburgh the 6. day of August. 1641.
SInce it has pleased God to vouchsafe us the liberty of yearly General
Assemblies, It is ordained according to the Acts of the Assembly at Edinburgh,
1639. and at Aberdoen, 1640. That no novation in Doctrine, worship or
Government be brought in or practiced in this Kirk, unless it be first
propounded, examined and allowed in the General Assembly: And that
trangressours in this kind be censured by Presbyteries and Synodes.


