THPNODIA.

THE CHURCHES LAMENTATION FOR THE Good Man his loss: Delivered in a Sermon To
the Right honorable the two Houses of Parliament, and the Reverend Assembly of
Divines, at the Funeral of that Excellent Man JOHN PYM, Esquire, late a Member
of the Honorable House of Commons.

Preached in the Abbey-Church of Westminster, by Stephen Marshall, B. D.
Minister of Gods Word at Finching-field in Essex.

Published by Order of the House of Commons.

Esa. 57. 1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. London, Printed for Stephen Bowtell, and are to be sold
at his Shop in Popes head Alley. 1644.

To the Right honorable THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament:
Right Honorable,
THis plain piece, which (were it worthy) should be sacred to this excellent
Man, memory, comes now also devoted to your service: It should have been his
picture, but becomes your possession; and let it be inter (...), and that by
your fourfold interest.

1. In himself, whilst he lived, every one of you deservedly esteeming him as
a Friend, a Brother, if not a Father.

2. In his loss, ^or rather yours of him) which because I cannot describe,
(...)veil over with silence.

3. In the work wherein he lived, and by which he dyed; which was not so much
his as yours; or, yours, as your Countries, your Gods: in which he labored so
much, that he died the sooner, that you might have his better help toward the
finishing of it, who (through the mercy of God) live longer.

4. In this mean Sermon, which by your command comes to public view, and
therefore craves patronage in your favorable acceptance: The Lord make it yours
by a greater right; even by making the commands delivered in it to be so
ingrafted in your hearts, that you may all not only with him be cast into the
same mold, but that his Spirit may be so doubled upon you all, that you
cheerfully and without fainting may bear whatever remaining heat and burden of
the day; and at last come to the same blessed evenings-reckoning, rest, and
reward in everlasting life. So prays daily

Your most unworthy Servant, in, and for Christ Jesus, Stephen Marshall.

Die Veneris, 15 Decembr. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Master
Solicitor do return thanks to Master Marshall, for the great pains he
took in his Sermon preached at the Funeral of Master Pym, a worthy Member of
the House of Commons; and to desire him to print his Sermon. And it is Ordered,
that no man presume to print this Sermon, but whom the said Master Marshall
shall authorize under his handwriting.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do authorize Stephen Bowtell to print this Sermon.

Stephen Marshall

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE Right Honorable, the LORDS and COMMONS, and the
Reverend Assembly of Divines at the Funeral of JOHN PYM ESQUIRE.
RIght Honorable and beloved, Should a stranger Introduction.
behold the face of this Assembly, and see the Honorable Houses of Parliament,
and the Reverend Assembly of Divines, and such a great confluence of persons of
all ranks and qualities, in this mournful posture, they would say as the
Inhabitants of Canaan did, when they saw the mourning for old Jacob in the
floare of Arad, This is a grievous mourning to England; and would certainly
enquire, What Prince? what great man Genesis 50. 11.
is this day fallenin our Israel? But you, who knew the worth of this
excellent person, whose shadow lies here before you, do rather wonder that all
faces are not covered with blackness, and all bodies with sackcloth, and come
hither so fully prepared to mourn, that you even long till something be
spoken of him, that you may ease your hearts a little, though it be with
weeping. But stay a while (I beseech you) till I first deliver an errand from
God, the ground whereof you shall find, Micah the seventh, the first and second
verses.

MICAH. 7. 1, 2. Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the summer
fruits, as the grape gleanings of the vintage. There is no clusterto eat: my
soul desires the first ripe fruit.

The good man is perished out of the Earth.

THis Text, and two or three verses following, contains a sad complaint of the
Prophet The Text explained.
in the Churches name, of the small number of the good, and the great multitude
of evil men in the days wherein he lived. The paucity of goodmen is set down
in an elegant comparison: they are as the scatterings after the In-gatherings
of the summer fruit, as the grape gleanings after the Vintage, here and there a
berry in the top of a bough, not an whole cluster anywhere left to eat. She
needed full clusters; the work she had to do required many able hands, and
gracious hearts. There were clusters enough of vile ones, whole boughs, whole
trees, whole hedge rows of such were to be found every where. Every Family,
every street, Town, and City abounded with them. There were Princes that were
oppressors, Judges who received bribes, great men uttering their mischievous
desires, a world of people who lay in wait for blood, who could hunt every man
his brother with a net, that could do evil with both hands earnestly, the
best of them as a briar, the most upright sharper then a thorn hedge; but such
a thin scattering of men willing and fit for the service of God and his Church,
that if one searched as diligently as Diogenes did in Athens at noon day for an
honest man, he was hardly to be found. But how comes the Church to be thus
empty? had she never any better store? O yes! Verse. 2.
she had precious Sons, comparable to fine Gold; She had Nazarites, purer
then Snow, whiter then Milk: At the first she had her Judges, that were
upright and wise; her Prophets, that taught them the fear of the Lord; her
Priests and Levites pure, who bore the Vessels of the Sanctuary: she had her
mighty men, and the men of war; the honorable man and the Counselor, the
cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator: She had every place furnished with
men of renown, the Throne, the Camp, the Senate, the College, the City, but
in her greatest need they were well nigh all gone. How gone? Were they
apostatised? had they voluntarily left her? No neither; but even perished, cut
off before their time, and for these things she weeps, her eyes run down with
tears, and she cries out, Woe is me, because the comforters which should
refresh her soul are removed far from her. O England, England, I see thy
woeful face in this Glass: this Text holds out a type of thy sad condition.
But I proceed to the words, Woe is me, the good man is perished out of the
earth. Wherein observe these two things. First, The state and condition of the
Church in this Prophets days, The good man is perished out of the earth.
Secondly, The Churches sensiblenesse of her present condition, Woe is me for it.

The words need no great explication, only let us enquire what is meant by the
good man: Secondly, what by the good man's perishing.

By a good man in the largest sense is meant a godly man, a holy man, a
righteous man, but more strictly, here a good man is an useful man, such are
instruments of good to others, such as are good Magistrates, the pillars of a
State, who execute judgment and justice in the gate: a Mordecai, who seeks the
wealth of his people, and procures Hest. 10. 3. 2 Chronicles. 24.
peace to all his seed. Or good Ministers, such an one as Jehojada, who did
good in Israel; such an one as Barnabas, Act. 11. 24.
a good man and full of the holy Ghost, by whose Ministry much people were
added unto the Lord. A good Father in a Family; as Abraham, who teaches all his
children the Gen 8. 19.
fear of the Lord: Thus some interpret that place, Romans 5. 7. Scarcely for a
righteous man will one dye, yet per adventure for a good man some would even
dare to die: that though they would hardly die to excuse an ordinary man though
godly, yet some eminent useful man, they would not only with the Galathians
pluck out their eyes, but lay down their lives for them.

Secondly, what by perishing; how the good man may be said to perish. You know
to perish in the common acceptance is taken in the worst sense, to be cut off
from the Land of the living by the hand of God in wrath and fury, and their
souls cast for ever into the pit of Hell; but thus the good man perishes not;
though the wicked be driven away to Hell in his wickedness, yet the righteous
Prove. 14. 32.
has hope in his death. But here to perish, and elsewhere is to dye
immaturely, unseasonably, to be cut off from the place where they were
useful, and could ill be spared. Many excellent lessons do these words hold
forth unto us: As first

The Prophet makes the Churches condition his own, with Aaron bearing them on
his shoulders, on his breast plate, yea in his very heart. If it be ill with the
Church, you may discern it in his countenance, hear it by his speech. If
well, by the cherfulness of his spirit. If they be afflicted, he mournes;
if they rejoice, he is cheerful with them.

Secondly, the Prophet observes all his people, whose faces stand toward
heaven, who look another way; who are Saints, who are Children of Belial; is
diligent to know the state of his flock.

Thirdly, that it is no new thing to find in the Church of God, many evil, and
few good; in Gods field, many tares, little good Corn; in his Barn floar,
much chafe, and little Wheat; in his great house, many Vessels of dishonor,
and few of honor; many stones, few precious stones; in his drag. Net abundance
of weeds, many bad Fishes, and few good ones; in his Vineyard, many wild
grapes, and few right Grapes.

Fourthly, And this also; that even those few Godly men, which are the Churches
Treasure, are subject to Death, even immature and untimely death, as well as
others. But, I pass over all these, with a bare mention of them; and confine
my self to these two Observations, as most clearly held forth in the Text, and
suitable to this sad meeting.

First, that the most excellent and useful men, are often taken away, when the
Church could ill spare them. The Church at this time did abound (as we also
now do) with Sons of Belial, compassed about with many Enemies, and therefore
needed the first ripe fruits, many choice Instruments, and yet those very few
She had were now taken away; the good man is perished out of the Earth.

Secondly, that when God does this, it is a matter of sad lamentation; Woe is
me, the good Man is perished, etc.

The first of these, that God often takes away choicest men, Doct. 1.
Men more precious then Gold, then the fine Gold of God often takes away useful
Instruments; and proved 1. by Examples.
Ophir, When the Church has greatest need of them, has, (alas) abundance of
sad evidence; A whole Cloud of Witnesses might easily be brought in: A large
Catalogue of Examples. Abel, the first Flower that ever grew in the Lords
Garden, cropped off as soon as blown, and in him all the seed of the Woman
devoured by the seed of the Serpent; slain by the eldest son of reprobation;
So Moses and Aaron, when the Israelites were to take possession of the Land of
Canaan, to root out thirty Kingdoms, to set up both Church and Commonwealth,
these long experienced and able Leaders, Prince and Priest, taken off in the
very beginning of the work, and all seem to be left to raw heads and hands,
that know not how to manage it: so Elisha the man of God fell sick and died,
when in the judgment even of a wicked King, he was all the Chariots and
Horsemen of Israel, all 2 King. 13.
the strength they had left: So Josiah, that rare and excellent Prince, who
seemed to be created as a new Star, purposely to shine in those darksome times,
cut off in the midst of his work, for whose death Jeremiah composed the whole
book of the Lamentations: And in the Christian Church, in the beginning of it,
when all the World was to be subdued to the faith of Christ, The Harvest very
great and the Laborers but few, John the Baptist, a greater Prophet then whom
was never borne of a woman, coming in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn
the heart of the fathers to the Mal 4. ult.
children; and the heart of the children to the fathers, and the disobedient to
the instruction of the wise, taken away violently, after but two or three years
work, whiles he was making ready a people for the Lord: James the brother of
John, one of the Pillars, one of the chief Apostles, cut off by the sword; and
Stephen a rare man, full of the Holy Ghost, whose wisdom and spirit the enemy
was not able to resist, exceedingly fitted to convince the Jews, and to prove
that Jesus was the very Christ, suddenly taken off, and knocked on the head in
a popular tumult and commotion: And now of late, our Edward the sixth, another
Josiah, when this Land had been long in bondage unto Antichrist, overwhelmed
with the darkness of Idolatry and Superstition, and seemed to be purposely
raised up to bring light and salvation to this desolate Land, while he was
preparing this wilderness to be the Lords fruitful Vineyard, planting it with
the choicest Vines, and setting up a Wine Press in the midst of it, walling
it, and fencing it about, after five or six years labors, suddenly snatched
away. So the incomparable King of Sweden, brought over the Baltic Sea by the
hand of God to restore the ruins of Germany, traveling in the greatness of
his strength, and working little less then wonders for two or three years
together, and drawing the eyes of all men toward him, as the man that should
undoubtfully have delivered that woeful Country; in a moment this bright Sun
set, soon after his rising: Yea, since this very Parliament, when there was
never more work nor fewer hands; Religion to be reformed, Liberties to be
recovered, great offenders to be punished, and all the Gates of Hell opened to
hinder us, to devour us, yet of those few how many of our choicest Nobles,
Parliament men, soldiers and Ministers, has the hand of God deprived us of?
But what need we seek for more examples, when our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ was himself cut off from out of the Land of the living, when he
had not Esa. 53. 8.
attained the one half of the age of man.

This is one of the Lords strangest works, a woke By Reason. Hereby hepro vides
for his own Glory.
wherein his enemies often rejoice, and his people mourn, the reason therefore
should diligently be sought out; in which enquiry we shall find, that he,
whose works are all done with unsearchable wisdom and for excellent ends, does
hereby first provide for his own glory, and that many ways.

As first, he often takes away instruments, that it may His Power.
be known that his Church and Cause is not supported by them, but by himself
alone; that the Pillars of the Church are not borne up by any created strength,
but by him, Who measures the water in the hollow of his hand, and weighs the
Mountains in the Scales, and the Hills in a Balance; that men may know, when
the youths faint and be weary, and the young men utterly fall, the most active
and able Instruments brought to nothing, yet the Church is carried in his
bosom, and by him alone shall renew its strength, and mount up with wings as
an Eagle, run Esa. 40.
and not be weary, walk and not be faint.

Secondly, to set out his wisdom and the abundance of spirit, in providing
variety of instruments: he purposely 2. Wisdom.
takes some away to make way for others, as in the frame of the world the
variety of the creatures endued with their several abilities do all serve
for the beauty and good of the Universe: and thereby set forth the wisdom as
well as the power of the Creator: so here Moses shall have one part, Ioshuah
another; And Ioshuah shall do as excellently in Canaan as Moses in the
Wilderness, he shall honor God as much in the Military part, as the other in
the legal: Elihu a youngmen shall convince Job, and compel him to give glory
to God, when other wise and gracious men, much older then his father, had long
wrangled with him to little purpose: Elisha, who powered waterupon Elijahs
hands, shall work more miracles then his Master did: yea, Christ's Apostles I^h.
14. 12.
shall do greater works then he himself did, that the world may know that he
has abundance of the spirit. Other Kings and Princes are compelled to
preserve their chief Instruments, because when they are gone they know not
where to find a supply, but God (as he needs none so) when he pleases to use
any, can raise up stones to be children, and children to do the work of men,
and yet all these empty Pipes, further then he fills them, bubbles, easily
broken, further then he supports them. And that is the first reason.

Secondly, As for his own glory, so herein he also 2 E^r the good of his own,
of them who dye.
provides for the good of his own people, his own I say, both them that are
thus cut off, and them that remain behind. First, of them who dye, for they
are henceforth freed from their labors, from the body of sin, from the
cohabitation of it, the molestation of it, and the too often prevailing power
of it, from the fiery darts of Satan's temptations, from the conversation of
the wicked, from their oppositions, persecutions; from the worlds allurements
on the right hand, and afflictions on the left hand, from all these they are
delivered, with sa. 53.
which hitherto they had bin vexed; yea and often times taken away from greater
evils to come, and they also enter into rest, receiving the full recompense of
all their labors, not only what they have actually done, but even what they
were resolved and prepared to do if God had been pleased to employ them any
longer in his service.

Secondly, for the good of them that live, (though this seem most unlikely) who
shall lose nothing by cutting 2. Of them who live.
the pipes whereby mercies are conveyed, as long as the fountain of power and
goodness remains i^tire in God himself, who can and will issue it out by
other ways and means, to as great advantage of his people: yea, I say, he
makes them gainers by it, and that several ways.

First, He hereby cures them of one of the most dangerous evils which his
people are or can be guilty of, and that is, setting up the instruments of
their good to be Idols in their hearts, which they are extreme prone to do;
and for this very cause does the Lord often break these bubbles with the touch
of his finger, that his people may think of them no otherwise then they are,
and for this very reason some think the Deuteronomy. 34. 6.
Lord buried the body of Moses, and would never let the people know where his
grave was, because he foresaw that they would be ready to worship his dead body.

Secondly, hereby the Lord does humble his people, and awe them with the fear
of his wrath, making them sensible of it, in these heavy strokes, and quicken
them more up to prayer, and serious seeking after himself, as this Church does
in this place; Woe is me, the good man is perished, the Princes, the Judges,
the Nobles etc. are all naught, none to be trusted, neither Wife, nor Father,
nor brother, ver. 7. then follows, therefore will I look to the Lord, I will
wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me. And this lesson the
Lord taught his people by Josiahs death, Lament. 5. ver. 16. etc. The Crown is
fallen from our heads, good King Josiah is dead. Woe unto us that we have
sinned, for this our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim, but
thou (O Lord) remainest for ever, thy throne from generation to generation.
Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time. Turn
thou us, O Lord, unto thee, and we shall be turned. Now this is one of the
greatest blessings in the world, to be put into such an humble, penitent,
praying, seeking temper as this is, his death which can procure this is like to
be more advantageous then any man's life.

Thirdly, Hereby the Lord makes his Church more sensible of his power,
goodness, and faithfulness, when they shall find all these constantly
continued, even when the instruments are taken away. Thus Moses the man of God
taught the people upon the meditation of all the Sons of men returning to dust,
to stay themselves wholly upon God, who was their dwelling place in all
generations, from everlasting to everlasting, a God all-sufficient.

Thirdly, though he does this for the good of his own glory, and the good of
his own Saints, both the 3. For judgment and (...) upon others.
living and the dead, yet hereby he makes way for his wrath upon others, who
injoied them, and either opposed them, or under-valued them, or improved them
not as they might have done, this God threatens, Isa. 57. The righteous
perishes, merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to com^: by their removal the Lord opens the Sluices to
his judgments, as men pluck away the props or Pillars of an house when they are
willing it should fall down, as in Noah's time, as soon as God had housed him
in the Arc, he presently sent in the flood upon the World of the ungodly: and
in Lots time, as soon as the righteous man, vexed with the unclean conversation
of Sodom, was removed from them, presently God rained fire and Brimstone from
Heaven, and destroyed those five Cities: 2 King. 23.
thus was it in Iosiahs time, as soon as he slept with his fathers, all that
fierce wrath of God wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah and
Jerusalem, which was kept in all the while Josiah lived, brake out to the
removing of Judah and Jerusalem out of his sight.

Give me leave now to make a brief application of Uses.
this: First, Is this so, does God often times take away the most useful men,
when his Church has most need of them; then let all the Church learn never to
rest on men, how excellent so ever. I begin with this first, because it is our
great and general sin, that we either vilify or deifie all Gods
instruments, either respecting them less or more then God will have us: if God
give us any precious jewels, we deal as the Israelites did in the wilderness,
turn our golden Eare-Rings into an Idol, and thereby change our glory into our
shame and misery, offering infinite injury unto God, who gives us these means
to use, but not to depend upon; to bring us nearer to him, not as we sinfully
make them occasions to draw us further from him; this is a very great sin,
whereby we lose the taste of Gods goodness, while we choose to respect the
stream rather then the Fountain, and even take our heart off from God, and stay
too much upon the creature, making our comfort to ebb and flow according as
these weak props do break or hold, and even compel God to deprive us of them,
as Ezekiah uused the Brazen Serpent, reserving it in an honorable shrine so
long as it was but looked upon, as a monument of Gods deliverance; But when
once they went a Whoring after it, he brake it in pieces; and that they might
know, it was but Ne^ushian, a piece of Brass: thus do we break our staves in
leaning too hard upon them. It is confidently reported that the King of Sweden
a little before his death told some in ward friends, that he verily feared God
would not use him long, because the people attributed more to him then was due
to a mortal man; and I fear this sin costs us dear at this day, we have
over-valued our Parliaments, our Armies, our Treasures, our interests in the
hearts of the people, leaned too much upon them, looked too little unto God,
who has therefore brought us low in most of these. To my own knowledge, some
good men have said of some choice Instruments, whose hearts were right with
God, and zealous in his cause, These are the men who must do the deed; God will
certainly deliver us by their hands: Who when they have heard of the sudden and
unseasonable cutting off of those men, have bin forced to lay their hand upon
their mouth, and to say, What fools are we to expect any great things from
Man, whose breath is in his Nostrils. God has sadly broke all our carnal
confidence, some excellent men he has took away by death; some, whom we
over-highly valued, have been permitted to discover the falsnesse of their own
hearts; others, little less then blasted by peoples mistake, although their
hearts remain upright to God and his cause. And I verily fear, left our
relying too much upon the assistance of our brethren from Scotland by their
Armies, may more prejudice theirs and our success, then the strength of the
Enemies can do. Let us therefore be persuaded in the fear of God, to use men,
as Gods instruments, but build nothing upon them, lest our expectation prove
that of Caesar Borgia, who built infinite projects upon his interest in the
Pope, and when news was brought him of the Popes sudden death, cried out, This
I never thought upon, now my designs are all lost! Certainly, whoever looks
for much from men, how excellent soever, will prove like men who go to
lotteries, with their head full of hopes, and return with their hearts full of
blankes.

Let therefore every one whom God has fitted for Use 2.
any service, do what their hand finds to do with all their power: this is
Solomon's counsel, Eccles. 9. and upon this very ground, whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, do it with all thy might, for there is neither work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave, whither thou go; as if he
should have said, thou know not how long God will use thee, lay not up thy
Talent in a Napkin, thy Master may suddenly call thee to an account for it.
This made our blessed Lord take so much pains, John 12. and 13, 14, 15, 16,
and 17, Chapters, delivering all that excellent matter in one evening; because
he was to leave them the next Day; This made Paul continue his Preaching at
Troas until midnight, because he was the next Morning to be gone from
thence: this very Argument was thought upon and applied by our blessed Savior
unto himself, John II. who when his Disciples would have persuaded him not to
hazard himself among the Jews, who lately sought to stone him, answered, Are
there not twelve hours in the day, must I not do the work of him who sent
me, while it is called to day, when night comes no man can work: God has
fitted thee with many Excellent Talents, with Wisdom and Understanding; with
place of Office and Authority; with interest in Friends; with strength of Body,
and courage of Spirit, and by all these put some beams of his own excellency
upon thee, which is the greatest favor in the World: To be a useful man, is
at least equal with being a saved man; ply this work diligently, do as it is
recorded of a famous Minister, who wrote upon his Study door, Minister
verbies, hoc age; Thou art a Minister of the Word, attend to this work; and
think often how uncomfortable it would be to thee, if GOD should take thee off
in the midst of thy race, when thou have burnt out much of thy Candle in play,
wherein thou should have done much of thy Masters work. And Secondly, let
the thought of this keep thee from being high minded, think not too much
depends upon thee, it may be thou imaginest what great need the Church or
State, the City, Parish, or Family, has of thee, or thy parts and abilities.
Suppose they have, are these things thy own, are they not thy Masters Talents,
for which thou must be countable, and for which thou will be condemned as a
Thief, for withholding that which was their due and none of thine; but I tell
thee, God has no need of thee, thou art obliged to him for using thee, he is
not obliged to thee; he can do his work without thee, and raise up them whom
thou think meanly of, to do greater things then thou-canst imagine:
therefore whatever he pleases to employ thee in, be faithful in it, follow
his business, and do it diligently, and with an humble heart.

Thirdly, does God often take away the choicest Instruments Use 3.
of our good after this manner, then let all learn to make use of them, and
improve them to the best advantage while we have them: this our Lord teaches
upon the same ground, John 12. 35. when his hearers had propounded a needless
question, how he could say Messiah should be lifted up, that is, crucified,
whereas the Scripture says, that Christ abides for ever, instead of giving a
solution to this doubt, he replies, Yet a little while the light is with you,
walk while you have the light, lest darkness come upon you: as if he should
say, you frivelously lose your time in making no better use of the light which
shines among you, which is given you for another end, even to guide you to do
that work which alone is necessary; to get sound evidence of your being
children of the light; to enable you to lead Gospel lives, under Gospel light;
you spend your time in needless questions, and neglect this which most
concerns you, as if it were in your power to do it at your leisure: but be
not deceived, this Market will not long last, after a little while the Gospel
will be taken from your Nation, and whoever then is to seek in this great work,
will miserably wander in the dark, and lie down in sorrow. Let me therefore
persuade you to give all diligence while this light shines, to get your calling
and election made sure. Thus Christ there presses it upon his hearers, and let
us urge it upon our own souls, neglect no opportunity of drawing out from good
and useful men, what God has put into them for our good, because we know not
how long they shall abide with us: If any of us have any choice or excellent
book which is our own, we commonly read it at leisure, now and then a leaf or
two, but if it be borrowed, and we know not how soon the owner may call for it,
we sit up night and day, till we have gathered all the flowers out of it; thus
did Elisha the servant of Elias, when he once knew that his Master was shortly
to be taken from him, he would not part a moment from his presence, but
endeavored earnestly to get as much of his spirit as was possible: O, if this
wisdom were in us! that considering the Prophets, and other servants of God,
do not live with us for ever, we might use them as Jacob did the Angel, not
let them depart till we have got our blessing from them.

Fourthly, but above all, because the most useful men are Use 4.
often taken away in an ill time from us, let us make sure of God, whose
years, power, goodness, faithfulness, and truth, never fail, but are
always present and everlasting helps in time of trouble: this use the Lord
teaches his people upon the same ground, Psalm. 146. 2. Put not your trust in
Princes, nor in any son of man, in whom there is no help; his breath goes
forth, he returns to the earth, his thoughts perish: but happy is he which
has the God of Jacob for his God; whose hope is in the Lord his God, which
made heaven and earth, the Sea and all that is therein; which keeps truth for
ever: the Lord shall reign for evermore, even thy God, O Sion, unto all
generations: This use the afflicted Church made of it, Isaiah. 63. 18. When
they had considered the days of old, and how all instruments and means of
mercy had but their time, and how the Lord was always the same, they sit down
with this meditation, Doubtless, O Lord, thou art our father: though Abraham
be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, we are past receiving any
benefit from them, thou O Lord art our Father, our Redeemer, thy name is from
everlasting: This use did Asaph also make of it, Psalm. 73. when he had
considered not only the worlds vanity, and worldly men's vanity, but the vanity
of whatever earthly thing was most like for to comfort him; his flesh failed,
and his heart failed: and how that the Lord alone was the strength of his
heart, and his portion for ever, he concludes all with this, ver. 28. It is
good for me to draw nigh to God, and put my trust in the Lord God. And verily,
so long as we are strangers to this, we shall be as Saint James his
double-minded man, unstable in all our ways; as the weeds, which are driven
every way where the ebbing and flowing Sea does carry them; and as the topps
of Trees, which are driven with every wind, this way and that way: but if once
we had learned to make the most high our stay and strength, to trust in the
Lord Jehovah, Esa. 26. Psalm. 125.
we might possess our souls in perfect peace; for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength: We might be as a Rock in the midst of the Sea, not moved
with any tempest; as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but stands fast for
ever. Now what argument could be a greater spur to this, then to know the
brevitie vanity, instability, of all other helps; look upon whatever is dear,
and thought to be advantageous to thee, without which thou know not what to
do, thy father, husband, Pastor, friend, estate, life, etc. of all these thou
must acknowledge, they are but grass, the glory of them is but like a flower
in the field: but in God thou may find all the same things sufficiently,
eminently, everlastingly; an everlasting Father, an everlasting Husband, an
everlasting Friend, an everlasting Shepherd, an everlasting Portion, an
everlasting Life. Let thy soul therefore wait upon the Lord, make him thy
only help and shield; let thy heart rejoice in him, and trust in his holy
name alone, and let thy mercy O Lord be upon us all, who desire to fear thy
name, and to hope in thee alone. And thus much of the first observation, That
God often deprives his Church of most useful men, when they could ill be
spared. The second follows, which is,

That when God does take away such useful instruments, Doct. 2.
it is a matter of sad lamentation: for proof hereof we have first God
himself requiring of it; 2. Examples of the Saints practicing, thirdly, strong
Scripture-reason enforcing it. First, you have God himself so far calling 1.
God requires it.
for it, that in Esaiah 57. he charges it upon them as a great sin, and the
forerunner of a great judgment, that the righteous dye, and merciful men are
taken away, and no man considers it. Secondly, we have plenty of examples, the
whole Church crying out, Psalm. 12. help 2. The Saints practicing it.
Lord, for the Godly man cease: for the faithful fail from amongst the
children of men. You all know the great lamentation made at the death and
burial of old Jacob; Genesis 50. Deu^. 34. 2 Chronicles. 35. 24, 25.
at the death of Moses, of Samuel, of David; especially at the untimely death
of good King Josiah, how all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for him; how Jeremie
the Prophet lamented for him, and all the Singing Men, and Singing Women, spoke
of Josiah in their lamentations to this day: and made them an ordinance in
Israel, and behold their lamentations are written in the book of the
Lamentations: insomuch that the greatest mourning that ever should be in the
world, is by the Lord compared to the mourning of Hadadrimmon Zechar. 12.
in the valley of Megiddon, which was the bitter lamentation of the Church at
Josiah his death: so in the 24. of Esaiah, you shall find, that among the songs
that were heard from the uttermost parts of the Earth; even glory to the
righteous, rejoicing in that remainder of Godly men, who were found amongst
them, the Church cries out, My leanness, my leanness, Woe unto me, because
the good men were but as the shaking of an Isa. 24. 13. 16
Olive Tree, and as the gleaning Grapes when the Vintage is done: And when the
Martyr Stephen was so barbarously murdered, when devout men carried him to his
Burial, they made great lamentation over him. The time would fail to name
particular instances: I will Act. 8. 2.
add but one more, of a King, and he none of of the best; Ioash the King of
Israel, who when Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he dyed, came
down unto him, 2 Ki^. 13. 14
and wept over his face and said, O my Father, my Father, the Chariot of
Israel, and the horsemen thereof.

Thirdly, we have also strong reason out of Scripture to enforce it. 3.
Scripture-reason infor^eth it.


Because God is then displeased.


First, in regard of God, there is required sorrow, fear and trembling, at such
evident manifestation of his wrath in these remarkable judgments. When Nadab
and Abihu fell untimely by fire, which issued out from the Lord, and devoured
them, though they dyed in and for their sin, yet being the Lords Priests,
from whom better things might have been expected, God commanded that the Whole
house of Israel should bewail (...). 10 8
the burning which the Lord had kindled: Assuredly if God would have the death
of these men lamented (in whose fall his displeasure was manifested, not
against his people, but against themselves only) much more does he expect it
when he takes away our jewels, our comforts, our means and instruments of
good; not in wrath to them who die, but in sore displeasure to us who remain
alive: when our heavenly Father thus spitteth in our faces, should we not be
humbled and ashamed before him?

Secondly, From the hon^ur due to them who are 2. Because the dead are (...)
(...). Psalm 122.
thus taken away. God threateneth in his word, that the name of the wicked
shall rot, but the memorial of the just shall be blessed: the righteous shall
be had in everlasting remembrance: now it is one great degree of rottenness
to the name of the wicked, as to live undesired, so to die unlamented: which
was Iehojakim his portion, Ier. 22 18.
concerning whom thus says the Lord, they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah
my brother! or, ah my sister! They shall not lament for him saying, Ah Lord! or,
ah his glory! He shall be buried with the burial of an Ass, drawn and cast
forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. But now this is a great glory and honor
which God puts upon his servants, to have their death honored with the
sighs of his mournful people, and embalmed in their tears. Was it not a
great honor to the Patriarch Jacob, to have all the Princes and Nobles of
Egypt, and all the Elders of Israel, lament his death threescore and ten Genesis
50.
days together? Was it not a great honor to Abner, to have David and all his
people following the Beer, lifting up their voices and weeping over him, and
saying, dyed Abner as a fool dies? etc. Was it not a great honor to Elisha
the Prophet, to have the King of Israel to 2 Samuel 3.
acknowledge that the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel all fell in his death? The
like may be said of all mentioned before, and of Dorcas, about whom the Widows
stood weeping, mournfully showing her Coats upon their Acts 9. 39
Backs. I have read of Jews the eleventh, King of France, that he
counterfeited himself to die, to try whether his death should be honored with
the tears of his Court: and somewhat to this purpose, of Paulus Aemilius, whose
Son died just when he was himself to triumph; that he more joyed to see their
mourning for his Son, then in all the other glory of his Triumph: nature in
these men did draw them to breath after that, which free Grace casts-in to them
even in this World, who do worthily in the service of God, besides their
eternal reward in heaven: that as they are desired in life, so they shall be
lamented at their death.

Thirdly, in regard of our selves, there is then great cause of mourning in
diverse respects: First, because we 3. Because we our selves are hereby
endammaged. Pro. 10 21 Pro. 15. 7
are hereby deprived of so many means of our good, of their counsel and
direction; the lips of the righteous feed many, and disperseth wisdom and
knowledge: their examples are as a tree of life; they are the lights of the
world, their very presence every where a blessing: they are a blessing in the
midst of the land, wherever they go God is with them; God will give
Kingdoms for their ransom; he will rebuke the devourer for their sake: they
may stand in the Mal. 3 Psalm. 106
breach, to turn away Gods wrath, when it is ready to breakein to devour
people: they may run with their Censers, and stand between the dead and the
living, and make an atonement Number. 16. 46
for a whole Congregation when wrath is gone out from the Lord against them:
the innocent Job 22.
men may deliver the Island, and it is delivered by the pureness of their
hands: they are the very chariots and horsemen of the places where they live;
their Prayers are exceeding powerful, which can open and shut heaven it self.
What is it that the God of mercy will deny to Iam. 5. 17, 18
their prayers, who says, Ask me of things to come, concerning my sons, and
concerning the work of my hands Esa. 45 11
command ye me? In a word, they are very storehouses and granaries of good to
the places where they live; fruitful trees, affording both food and shelter,
the only excellent men of the world, they are wholly medicinable: and should
not such a loss as this be felt and lamented?

Secondly, And as their death deprives us of much good, so it often presages
and pregnosticateth wrath to come upon those they leave behind, Esa. 57. The
righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; merciful men are taken
away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
So it proved in this place, The good man is perished, the vile are left behind;
then follows, verse. 4. The day of thy watchmen and thy visitation comes,
now shall be their perplexity: It Is true, as I said before, to them who are
godly, the Fountain remains when the Pipes are cut; and there is ten thousand
times more cause of joy in their God who lives, then of sorrow for their
friends who die; but to others it is a sad prediction, that when God makes up
his Jewels, and carries them away, he has a Mal. 3. 17
day coming that shall burn as an Oven, and all the wicked shall be as
stubble, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. And indeed they are
the very (...), the only means to keep off wrath and judgment from the
places where they live: Every mercy says to such a people, as Elisha to
Jehoram, Surely were it not that I regard the presence of Jehosaphat, I would
not look toward 2 Kings 3
thee, nor see thee: and the devouring judgments say to these godly ones, as
the Angel said to Lot, We are come to destr^y this place, up get thee out, have
thee, escape hence, Genesis 19. 13. 22
for we can do nothing till thou art gone. When the Husbandman thus p(...)s
up the fence, and gathers in his crop, it is a sign that shortly you will have
wild beasts in the field: This, Jeroboam and his whole family found to be true,
who had Abijah, one child in his family, in 2 Kings 14
whom some good thing was found toward the Lord, and as soon as he was taken
away, the judgments of God broke in upon his house, and cut off him that pist
against the wall, and him that was shut up and left in Israel; and took away
the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man takes away dung, till it be
allgone. This the old world found true in Noah; and Sodom, with the rest of
the Cities, in Lot: this the Jews found true, when the Christians (admonished
from heaven) left Jerusalem and fled to Pella; soon after their departure the
enemies made a trench about them, and laid their City even with the ground, and
their children Luke 19
with them, not leaving one stone upon another: Thus fared it with the City of
Hippo in Africa, where Saint Augustine was Bishop, which, as soon as ever he
was dead, was taken and sacked by the Goths and Vandals: Luther was no sooner
translated to a better life, but the Smalchaldick war begun in Germany, wherein
all the Protestants were almost wholly wasted: No sooner was old Paraeus taken
away from Heidelberg, but Spinola entered the Town. These, and many other
instances of Gods wrath breaking in upon the departure of godly men, abundantly
manifest, that we have cause to weep and lament (not for them who thus dye,
but) for our selves, and our children, because of the miseries which we may
then justly fear are coming upon us.

Take a brief Application of this Lesson, and I have Use 1. For reproof.
done my Sermon. First, Would God have his people thus to mourn, when useful
men decay and fail, how sadly then does this reprove our general stupidity:
the Lord has made many great and lamentable breaches amongst us in this kind,
he has broken all our carnal confidences; our Parliament is weakened, our
Armies wasted, our treasure is exhausted, our enemies increased; and of those
few able hearts, heads, and hands, who abode faithful to this great cause and
work in hand, it might even stab us to the very heart to think how many of
them the Lord has even snatched away, in the midst of their work, and our
greatest need! That excellent spirited Lord, the Lord Brook; that rare man,
Master John Hampden; that true-hearted Nathaniel, Master Arthur Goodwin,
(pardon me, I beseech you, though I mention them amongst these friends, who
cannot think of them without bitterness^) How are these mighty men fallen in 2
S^m. 1. 1^. etc.
the midst of the ba^tell, ana the weapons of war perished! the beauty of our
Israel is slain in the high places: Whose heart wou(...) not b^eed, and cry
out, as David at Jonathan his death, Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
streets of ^skelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph! But now which of us lays these things
to heart? who considers the bitter things which God writes against us? No, we
are rather like that wretched people, who when the righteous perished, and
merciful men were taken away (though it were from the evil to come) were so
far from laying it to heart aright, that they banished all serious thoughts
from them, every one looking to their own way; some to their gain, others to
Esa. 56. ult. Esa. 52. 1.
their pleasure: Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our
selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant; and this even when the righteous perished. Verily this is our
carriage; the Lord deprives us of these excellent men, and we (it may be for a
moment) bewail their loss in some passionate expression, saying, There is a
brave man lost! I am sorry such a man is dead! etc. and then every one goes on
again in his own way: As I have seen a Hen (pardon an homely similitude) go
clocking and scraping in the midst of her Chickens; then comes the Kite, and
snatcheth away first one, then another, then a third, till all are gone; and
the Hen brustles and flutters a little when any is snatched away, but returns
instantly to her scraping and picking, as if she had lost nothing: Even so do
we, presently forgetting our great losses, but no man sitting alone by
himself, to enquire What God has done? and what He means to do with us? or,
what we have done to provoke him thus far against us? thrusting such thoughts
far away from us, passing by on the other side of the way, as the Priest and
Levite did by the wounded man, as if it nothing concerned us: O, Beloved, this
woeful security and regardlesnesse of ours, is one of the saddest tokens of
Gods purpose still to bring us lower; It was the Prophet Hosea his complaint
against Israel, a little before their utter ruin, Strangers have devoured Hos.
7. 9
his strength, and he knew it not; gray hairs were here and there upon him,
and he regarded it not: The loss of good men was one of his gray hairs, which
argued his declining; and his not-regarding it was the saddest evidence of his
incurablenesse; the Lord in mercy make us sensible of these heavy strokes
before it be too late, lest we prove like them of the old world, who did eat
and drink, marry and give in marriage, and would know nothing, until the flood
came, and swept them all away.

Secondly, but how exceedingly does this discover (...).
the wickedness, the divellishnesse of the spirits of a generation of men
amongst us, who are so far from bemoaning and lamenting the loss of good men,
that they have no greater joy or content, then to hear of their fall; who,
with the Edomites, rejoice over the Obad. 2.
Church in the day of their destruction, and speak proudly in the day of their
distress; who say with Tyrus, Aha, now Ezech. 26. 2
I shall be replenished, since they are brought low; who, with the inhabitants
of the earth, Rev. 11. reioiced Rev. 11. 10
when the two Witnesses were killed, and sent gifts one to another, because
those Witnesses tormented them with their prophesying whilst they lived. But
stay, profane and wicked man, (if any such be here) and let me a little reason
with thee: What such cause is there of thy rejoicing? art thou a gainer by
their deaths? do thou imagine to rest more safely, because the pillars of the
house which covers thee are taken away? have thou any surer footing, because
the bough is cut whereupon thou treadest; because the thread is cutting
asunder, whereby the sword hangs which is over thy head, art thou therefore
further from danger? or do thou conceive that God has taken them away to
gratify thee? is it possible for thee to think that they who are thus
precious in his eyes, who are to him as the apple of his own eye, are by him
removed for any advantage to thee, whom his soul ^ateth? I tell thee nay; I
tell thee, if thou weighest things seriously, thou shall find their life was
thy gain, and their death thy loss; because it assures thee, first, chat thou
art now deprived of them, who put up many a prayer for thee; who stood in the
gap, to turn away wrath from thee; for whose sake thou faredst the better
every day, God delighting to do good to the place where his children lived.
And secondly, their death assures thee, that thou also must dye: If the green
tree be cut down, the dry must not long escape; and not only die, but after
thy death thou must come to judgment, and their souls whom thou thus hated'st
will give most terrible evidence against thee, of all the ungodly deeds which
thou have ungodly committed; and of all the hatred, spite, and hard speeches,
which thou have thus long exercised and spoken against them: the very sight of
whom at that day will be more dreadful to thee, then the most terrible Lion,
at terrible as Death, or hell it self.

Thirdly, and lastly, would God have the death of (...) 3.
his Saints thus to be lamented; then (Right Honorable and Beloved) learn the
right and only way to attain that which (I know) all your Souls desire, even
to be desired whilst you live, and lamented when you dye: a thing so naturally
engraven in the heart of every man, that nothing can be more; to have an
Eternal and Honorable Memorial; Ego si bonam famam servavero sat ero felix,
said the heathen man. You have read of Herod, that Monster of men, who
perceiving the approaching of his death, caused the flower of all the Jews to
be apprehended, imprisoned, and to be murdered at the instant of his death,
that he might have lamentation to accompany his death and Funerals: nor was
there, amongst the Heathens, any thing esteemed a greater plague, then to dye
unlamented, and their Memorial to be buried in obscurity, or remain in infamy:
And I believe there is not a man in this great Assembly, who would not esteem
himself extremely miserable, to be, with Jehojakim, buried with the Burial of
an Ass; to live undesired, and to dye unlamented: Now know for certain the only
way to prevent this, and to be truly honored in life, and bewailed in death,
is to be good men, to serve God and his Church faithfully in your generation.
It may be some of you as yet do not think so, being accustomed only to be
flattered and daubed up, and made to believe that you are as great in other
men's eyes, as you are in your own; that because (with Dives) you swim in
pleasure, we are soft Raiment, fare delitiously every day, and enjoy the
worldly accomplishments of health, wit, honor, friends, etc. though in the
mean time you be strangers from God, and it may be, enemies to him, his ways,
his servants, and his ordinances: but could you know how meanly you are now
esteemed by them who are best able to judge of things that differ, even by God,
his Angels, and Saints: and could thou guess the discourses will be of thee
when thou art dead, thou would certainly think otherwise. Do but listen
abroad in the world, and thou may discern what is spoken of them, who in
their life time blessed themselves as much as thou can do: Is such a Noble Man
dead? blessed be God, who has rid his Church of a great enemy: Is such a rich
Mandead? the world is well rid of a griping Usurer, a cruel Oppressor, a
Mammonist, who had his portion in this World: Is such a great Scholar dead?
God be praised for it, his learning and parts were employed only for the hurt
of the Church of Christ: Is such an one gone? then there is a cursed blasphemer,
a profane swearer, an unclean adulterer, a swinish Drunkard, a dangerous
stumbling block, out of the way of the Saints happily removed: This or the
like talk will be of thee when thou art gone, if thy life be such a one: and,
which is worst of all, thine immortal soul for ever sunk into a lake,
burning with fire and brimstone, where is nothing but weeping, wayling, and
gnashing of teeth for evermore: but could thou with a single heart, give up
thy self to be good, and do good, every one who has interest in Heaven
would beg thy Life; and when thy work is done, and thou gathered to thy
Fathers, every godly Man's eye would lament thee, every one of their tongues
would praise thee; thy memorial should be Crowned by them all: Yea, God
himself would make thy Funeral Oration, rather then thy work should not
praise thee in the Gates; and, which is best of all, thy soul shall enjoy the
fruit of all in Everlasting life and glory.

ANd now the more particular Application of all this, brings me directly to the
sad occasion of this present meeting; even to lament the fall of this choice
and excellent man, in whose death the Almighty testifies against us, and even
fills us with gall and wormwood. I know you come hither to mourn, so fully
prepared for it, that although I am but a dull Orator to move passion, I may
serve well enough to draw out those tears, wherewith your hearts and eyes are
so big and full: there is no need to call for the mourning women, that they may
come; and for cunning women, that they may take up a wailing, to help your
eyes to run down with tears, and your eyelids to gush out with waters: the
very looking down upon this Beer, and Ier. 9. 1^
the naming of the man whose corpse are here placed, and a very little speech of
his worth, and our miserable loss, is enough to make this Assembly (like
Rachel) not only to lift up a voice of mourning, but even to refuse to be
comforted.

I know, large encomiasticall praises of the dead, unless their lives were
eminent in goodness, and free from any notable blot, are much condemned by the
most judicious and godly Divines, as a thing of very evil consequence: first,
to the Minister himself, who hereby is evil spoken of, as a man who for a
reward, or some other base respect (like unworthy Heralds) will give greatest
badges of honor to any ignoble person. Secondly, to the deceased, whilst it
occasions some others, who happily knew them better, to rake into their lives,
and lay open their former faults, which otherwise had been buried in oblivion.
Thirdly, but the worst of all is, that wicked men make this a fearful
stumbling-blocke; who when they hear such men highly commended, in whom
peradventure they knew such and such enormities, do hereupon conclude, that
our preaching for abandoning of all evil is of no great necessity, even in the
Preachers own judgment; who sends men to heaven in his Funeral Orations, who
yet lived, and (for ought they know) dyed in the practice of such things as the
Minister uses to declaime against. But I am called to speak of a man so
eminent and excellent, so wise and gracious, so good and useful, whose works
so praise him in every gate, that if I should altogether hold my tongue, the
children and babes (I had almost said, the stones) would speak: upon whose
Hearse could I scatter the sweetest flowers, the highest expressions of
Rhetoric and eloquence, you would think I fell short of his worth; you would
say, this very name, JOHN PYM, expresses more then all my words could do,
should I say of him, as they of Titus, that he was Amor and deliciaegeneris
humani: should I say of his death, as once the Sicilians upon the Grecians
departure, Totum ver periit ex anno Siciliano: should I say, he was not only
as one of David's thirty Worthies, but one of the three, one of the first
three, even the first and chief of them, the Tachmonite who sat in the seat:
should I say, our whole land groaneth at his death, as the earth at the fall of
a great mountain, I might do it without envy in this Assembly: Yea, should I
write a whole book in his commendation, and publish it, many of you would say
as a Philosopher once did, who falling on a book entitled Encomium Herculis,
said with indignation, Et quis Lacedaemoniorum eum vituperat? he thought it
time ill spent, to praise him whom none could blame: and I believe your selves
are resolved to make some such monument of your high esteem of him, that
afterages, as well as the present, shall know you valued him above my words.
But I am well pleased to be impar huic negotio: Est hoc maximum laudis genus,
quum orationis Chrysostom. hom. de laudib. Paul.
copiam virtus exuperet and magnitudo laudati; sicque vinci nobis est multo
gloriosius quam saepe vicisse. And for that I am able to say, I am presently at
a loss, having in my serious thoughts viewed him in his naturals, in his
moralls, in his graces, in his relations, in his public and private
behavior, inopem me copia fecit. I know I could not speak long, but you would
be weary of such a speaker; and I remember Salusts speech, when he was to
speak of Carthage, Praestat tacere quam pauca dicere, then I wished seriously
that it had fallen to the lot of some such able tongue, to have so
characterized and deciphered him before you, that you who now mourn for his
loss, and knew his worth, might say, This is the very image of the Man; and
might once at least be refreshed to see His lively picture represented to your
eyes, by such a tongue as was suitable to His worth, and this present Auditory;
that that might have been your refreshing, which was once Cyprians Auditors, to
hear the Martyrs praised by such an Orator as Cyprian was.

I spare to English what was Percepimus gaudia, magna solatia, magna fomenta,
maxim quod et gloriosas Martyrum, non dicam mortes, sed immortalitates
gloriosis et condig^is laudibus prosequutus es; Tales enim excessus talibus
vocibus personandi sunt, ut quae referebantur sic dicerentur qualiter facta
sunt, Cypri. Ep. 26.
spoken of the holy Martyr his Eloquence, because to do the like, is above my
Sphere, I want such a tongue, and therefore must study to be short, and shall
confine my self to that rule which Basil (worthily called the great) observed
in the praise of Gordius the Martyr. Its the custom of the World (said he)
when they would praise a man, to speak of his Family, to derive his Pedigree
through many discents, to open to the full his education, parts, and learning,
and such other accomplishments: Sed Ecclesia haec tanquam supervacua dimittit:
The Church looks only at those things which may glorify Christ in his
Saints, and thereby do good to them who remain alive. According to this rule,
I shall forbear to speak any thing of his Family, Education, natural
endowments, His clear understanding, quick apprehension, singular dexterity
in dispatch of business: His other moralleminences, in His justice, patience,
temperance, sobriety, chastity, liberality, hospitality: His extreme humanity,
affability, courtesy, cheerfulness of spirit in every condition; and (as a
just reward and just fruit of all these) the high and dear esteem and respect
which he had purchased in the hearts of all men of every rank, who were
acquainted with him; such only excepted, of whom to be loved and well
reported, is scarce compatible with true virtue: All men who knew him, either
loved or hated him in extremity: such as were good, extremely delighted in him,
as taken in a sweet captivity with his matchless worth; the bad as much hated
Him, out of their antipathy against it.

But, all these things (though most desirable and excellent in their place) I
pass over, and shall insist only upon two things, which alone are desirable in
any man, which indeed make a man more precious then Gold, then the fine gold of
Ophir: First, he was a true Christian man, a faithful servant of Jesus Christ,
one who long since was borne again of Water and the Holy Ghost, engratted into
Christ, adopted to be the Child of God justified freely by his grace, renewed
in the spirit of his mind, sanctified throughout, in spirit, soul and body:
one who had made God his portion, and Gods word his guide: who in his whole
course had left off to fashion himself according to the World, but in all
things studied to know (as his rule) what was the good and perfect will of God:
in a word, He was a true Nathaniel, in whom there was no guile.

Secondly, He was a man of a public spirit, a most useful man; He was the
good Man of this Text, wholly laid out for the public good: the public safety
was written in His heart, as men report, Queen Mary said, that Callis was in
hers: it was His meat and drink, His work, His exercise, His recreation, His
pleasure, His ambition, His all: What (...) was, was only to promote the
public good: in and for this Heliv'd, in and by this He died. And this
excellent useful spirit of His, was accompanied with three admirable
properties, wherein he excelled all that ever I knew, and most that ever I read
of: First, such singleness of heart, that no by respect could any whit sway
him; no respect of any Friend: He regarded them in their due place, but knew
neither Brother, Kinsman, not Friend, Superior nor Inferior, when they stood in
the way to hinder his pursuit of the public good: Magis amica Respublica: And
he used to say, Such a one is my entire friend, to whom I am much obliged, but
I must not pay my private debts out of the public stock. Yea, no selfrespect,
no private ends of His own or family, were in any degree regarded, but Himself
and His were wholly swallowed up in the care of the public safety; insomuch
that when friends have often put Him in mind of his family and Posterity, and
pressed him, that although he regarded not himself, yet he ought to provide that
it might be well with his Family; (a thing which they thought he might easily
procure;) his ordinary answer was, If it went well with the public, his family
was well enough.

Secondly, such constancy and resolution, that no fear of danger, or hope of
reward, could at any time so much as unsettle him. How often was his life in
danger? what a World of threats and menaces have bin sent Him from time to
time? Yet I challenge the Man that ever saw Him shaken by any of them, or
thereby diverted from, or retarded in His right way of advancing the public
good: nor could the offers of the greatest promotions (which England could
afford) in any measure be a block in His way: in that He was as another Moses
(the only man whom God went about Exodus 32. 10. Number. 14. 12.
to bribe) who desired that He and his might never swim, if the cause of God
and his people did ever sink: His spirit was not so lovv, as to let the whole
World prevail with Him so far as to hinder his work, much less to be his
Wages.

Thirdly, such Vnweariablenesse, that from three of the Clock in the morning to
the evening, and from evening to midnight, this was his constant employment,
(except only the time of his drawing nigh to God) to be some wayor other
helpful toward the public good; burning out his Candle to give light to
others. Who knows not all this to be true, who knevv this Man's conversation?
not only since the time of this Parliament, but for many years together has
He been a great pillar to uphold our sinking frame; a Master workman,
laboring to repair our ruinous house; and under the weight of this work has
the Lord permitted this rare Workman to be overthrown: and that is all I mean
to say of His Life.

And as His life, such was His Death, enjoying all the time of his sickness the
same evennesse of spirit which he had in the time of his health, with an
addition of a more clear evidence of Gods love in Jesus Christ, and most ready
subjection to Gods will, to live or dye at Gods choice; professing to my self,
that it was to Him a most indifferent thing to live or dye: if He lived, He
would do what service He could; if He dyed, He should go to that God whom
He had served, and who would carry on his work by some others: And to others
He said, that if his Life and Death were put into a pair of balances, He
would not willingly cast in one dram to turn the balance either way. This was
his temper all the time of his sickness; but as He drevv nigher to his end,
the swifter His motion was to Godwards; enjoying more abundant comfort in His
spirit, more frequently pouring out His heart in prayer: and whereas formerly
his Soliloquies and private devotions were only betwixt God and his own Soul,
now, out of the abundance of his heart, his mouth was compelled to speak, and
that so audibly, that such of his Family or Friends, who endeavored to be
near Him (lest he should faint away in his weakness) have overheard Him
importunatly pray for the Kings Majesty, and his Posterity, for the Parliament,
and the Public Cause; for Himself begging nothing, but that if His work were
done, He might be received into his Masters joy: And a little before His end,
being recovered out of a swound, seeing his friends weeping about Him, he
cheerfully told them, he had looked death in the face, and knew, and therefore
feared not the worst it could do; assuring them, his heart was filled with
more comfort and joy, which he found and felt from God, then His tongue was
able to utter; and soon after (whilsta Reverend and godly Minister was at
prayer with Him) He quietly slept in the Lord.

It may be some of you expect I should confute the Calumnies and Reproaches
which that generation of Men who envied his Life, do already begin to spread
and set up in Libels concerning his Death'; as that he dyed Raving, crying out
against that Cause wherein he had been so great an instrument: Charging him to
die of that loathsome Disease, which that accursed Balsack, in his Book of
slanders against Mr Calvin, charged him to dye of. But I forbear to spend time
needlessly, to wipe off those reproaches, which I know none of you believe. And
this will satisfy the World against such slanders; that no less then eight
Doctors of Physic, of unsuspected integrity, and some of them Strangers to
him, (if not of different Religion from him) purposely requested to be present
at the opening of his Body; and well near a thousand people, first and last,
who came many of them out of curiosity, and were freely permitted to see his
Corpse, can, and do abundantly testify the falsehood and foulness of this
Report; the Disease whereof he dyed, being no other then an Imposthume in his
Bowels.

But now (to leave this) tell me all you that pass by the way, have we not
great cause of Mourning, in the fall of such a Man! May I not say, as David to
the People, Rent your Clothes, and gird you with Sackcloth, and mourn before
Abner? Verily, when I consider how 1 Samuel: 3. 31.
God has followed us with breach upon breach, taken away all those Worthy Men
I before mentioned, and all the other things wherein the Lord has brought us
low; and now this great blow, to follow all the rest, I am ready to call for
such a Mourning, as that of Hadadrimon in the valley of Megiddon. Zach. 12. 11.


But mistake me not; I do not mean that you should mourn for Him, You his
dear children; You, Right Honorable Lords and Commons, who esteem him little
less then a Father; I mean not that you should mourn for Him, his work is
done, his warfare is accomplished; He is delivered from sin and sorrow, and
from all the evils which we may fear are coming upon our selves: He has
received at the Lords hand a plentiful reward for all his Labors. I beseech
you, let not any of you have one sad thought touching him. Nor secondly, would
I have you mourn out of any such apprehension as the Enemies have, and for
which they rejoice; as if our Cause were not good, or we should lose it for
want of hands and heads to carry it on: No, no, beloved, this Cause must
prosper; and although we were all dead, our Armies overthrown, and even our
Parliaments dissolved, this Cause must prevail; out of the mouth of Babes and
Sucklings, will God ordeine strength to quell all the Enemies of it; even the
great Enemy, and the Avenger. Nor should we much mourn, because the Enemies
rejoice: I confess it is as a Sword in our Bowels, to hear their blasphemies;
but as in relation of the Cause, their blasphemies need not trouble us; Let my
enemy (said Job) be as Job. 27. 7.
the wicked; and he that rises up against me, as the ungodly; Let them fill up
the measure of their wickedness, God Mat. 23. 32.
will the sooner take a course with them, and the more eminently and speedily
plead our Cause: but let us mourn that we have thus far provoked the Lord
God to displeasure, and to manifest it by such heavy strokes, that we are
deprived of such an Excellent Godly man, such a Patriot, such a Light, such an
Example, such a Storehouse of good, such a Jewel snatched out of our bosom,
as we all knew him to be, and that we have such a sad prediction in his death
of the increase and prolongation of our Calam^ties.

But especially (right Honorable Lords and Gentlemen) let me prevail with you
to make such use of him, that with Abel, though he be dead, he may still speak
Heb. 11. 4.
unto you; that, as a grain of corn, he may prove more fruitful when buried
under the ground, then while he lived John 12. 24.
with us upon earth. And certainly, if God sends us to the Pismire, to consider
her ways, and thereby to Prove. 6. 6.
learn wisdom; it can be no disparagement to any of you to consider his
worth, and thereby to grow better; I shall therefore make bold to propound him,
as Bishop Mountacu^e did Master Perkins in his Funeral Sermon, To be the Man
that taught England to serve God, and Ministers to preach Jesus Christ; so
Master John Pym to be the Man, whose example may teach all our Nobles and
Gentlemen, to be good Christians, good Patriots, good Parliamentmen. You all
knew him well, and knew

That he was not a man, who when he was called to the public service of his
country, lay here to satisfy his lusts, spending his time in riot and
wantonness, in gaming, drinking, whoring, etc. Take heed none of you be such.

He was not a man who proved a Traitor to God and his country, and the cause
of Religion, which he had solemnly protested to maintain. Take heed none of
you be such.

He was not a man, who (though he appeared often in the Parliament house,
yet) neither promoted good causes himself, nor willingly permitted others to
do it. Take heed there be none such among you.

He was not a man who owned the good cause so long as it was like to thrive,
and then tackt-about when it seemed to decline; resolved to secure himself,
what ever became of the public. Beware none of you be such.

He was not a man who would feed himself, or feather his own nest, or provide
for his family or friends out of the public Stock or treasure of the
Kingdom. Take heed none of you be such.

He was not a man who would favor the cause of his friend, or press too
heavily against his enemy; he was no respecter of persons in any cause or
judgment. Take heed none of you do so.

He was not a man who would consider how far any public service would stand
with his own private designs, and promote the one no further then the other
could be driven on ^ith it. Beware this be none of your condition.

He was not a man who for maintaining or propagating any private opinion, or
way of his own, would hazard the public safety. Take heed none of you be
such.

He was not a man who feared to promote the Reformation of Religion, lest
himself should be brought under the yoke of it. Take heed that none of you do
so.

Not a man living (I believe) could justly tax him for any of these; God grant
none of you may be found guilty of any one of them in the day of your account.
If you be such, or should prove such, let me tell you, it is most probable you
do but dance in a net; All good men are not Fools, some of them will discover
you: however, though we may possibly suffer a while by your wickedness, yet
soon enough to your own ruin your sins will find you out.

But in stead of these things, he was the holy man, the good man, adorned with
that integrity, constancy, and unweariablenesse in doing good, which I before
told you of: Go, and do likewise: Get such an upright heart to God; Lay out
your selves wholly in the public cause; Put both your hands to this work, and
the smaller your number is, be the more diligent, and fall the closer to it;
Set self, and selfe-respects, aside; Drive (...) designs of your own; Count
it reward enough, t^ spend, and be spent in this cause; Esteem the work^ more
worth then all your lives; ^mitate him in their things: So might you make him,
as another Sampson more advantageous to the cause of God in his Death then ever
he was in his whole Life.

You have done well thus to follow his Corpse with honor to his Bed of rest:
you have done well to appoint a Committee to consider his debts, and how he
has wasted his estate as well as spent his life in the public service, that
so his Family may find he did not all this to an ungrateful State; The Lord
reward this faithfulness into your bosoms: But would you endeavor to be like
him, to set him up for your Pattern, and not to rest till a double portion of
his spirit might be found in you, This were the greatest honor you could
possibly do unto him: So should we all bless God for his example, and your
imitation; so should you be Repairers of our breaches; so should you be even
Saviors Esa. 58. 12. Obad. 21.
unto us; so should you do worthily in Ephrata, and be famous Ruth 4. 11.
in Bethlem. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

FINIS.

