Pilkington Mayor, etc.
Martis xvi. die April. 1689. Annoque Regni Regis and Reginae WILL. and MARIAE
Angl. etc. Primo.
THis Court does desire Mr Mariott to Print his Sermon Preached at Guild Hall
Chapel, on Easter Day last, before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

Imprimatur.

April 26. 1689. Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor AND ALDER MEN OF
THE CITY of LONDON.

At GUILD HALL Chapel, on Easter Day, 1689.

By THO. MARIOTT, M. A. and Rector of Little Canfield in Essex.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir Thomas Pilkington, Knight Lord Mayor OF THE CITY of
LONDON.
My Lord,
AS your favorable Acceptance of this Discourse was more than I could
reasonably expect, being conscious to my self of my own Weakness: so, your
Command is the only reason of its appearing in public. There is sometimes a
Resurrection of the Body Politic, when it has been as it were dead and buried
under Oppression and Tyranny, which our Nation (through the Infinite Mercy, and
by the Almighty Power of God) has lately Experienced; a Mercy not only above
our Deserts, but Hopes: of which I am assured, not only your Lordship, but all
True Protestants are deeply sensible; and for which they are heartily thankful.
But it is another Resurrection which is here treated of, the Resurrection of
the Savior of Mankind, and of our own Bodies by virtue of his: no
circumstantial, indifferent point, but the great Fundamental of our Christian
Religion, and in that respect (I hope) of more general use. That you may have
part, with all good Christians, in this Resurrection at the last Day to
Immortality and Glory, and Enjoyment of your Lord in Everlasting Bliss, is, and
always shall be the Prayer of,

My Lord, Your most obliged and obedient Servant, THO. MARIOTT.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, etc.
JOHN xx. 9. For as yet they knew not the Scripture, That he must rise again
from the dead.


THese words are part of the Gospel appointed by our Church, for this Day;
guiding us to speak concerning the lofty Mystery of Christ's Resurrection;
Easter Day being kept by our Church, as a solemn Festival Day, and day of
Rejoicing for the Miracle of Christ's rising from the dead. Among our Festivals
this seems to carry the brightest splendor of Antiquity upon it, it having
been the practice of the Church from the Apostles days downward, to keep this
day in a more than ordinary solemn manner. It is the opinion of no mean
Divines, that what the Apostle says to the Corinthians, Let us keep the Feast,
1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
does look to the special and Religious Solemnization of the Feast of Easter,
having immediately before made mention of Christ our Passover.

Great difference there was among the Primitive Christians about Easter, but
this, concerning the time, not the thing. Some kept the Passover, or Easter, at
the same time as the Jews kept theirs; others afterward, so that this
occasioned no small stir in the Church: yet here it may not be unworthy of your
observation, that although they differed in their Opinion and Practice, Of the
time of keeping Easter. Vid. Epiphan. cont. Haeres. lib. 3. Tom. 1. cont. Sect.
Audianotum.
concerning this particular, the Eastern Church keeping Easter with the Jews
before the Spring Solstice, the Western Church after the Spring Solstice, or
Equinoctial; they did not in the early days, next the Apostles, separate from
each other, but, as occasion served, Communicated together. This point was in
the Council of Nice determined, that the Christians should not symbolize with
the Jews, nor with them keep the Passover before the Spring Solstice, or
Equinoctial, which was afterward confirmed by the Synod of Antioch, Syn.
Antioch. Can. 1.
and so this difference was composed. And I pray God send us as happy a
composure of these unhappy differences at this day among Protestants, as there
was in the Primitive Church of the difference relating to the Feast of Easter.
By what has been said of this early difference in the ancient Church,
concerning the time of keeping Easter; it is so much the more evident, that it
always has been the practice of the Universal Christian Church, to keep Easter
Day with a special Solemnity, in memory of Christ's Resurrection.

It was no ordinary Piety, strictness, devotion, with which the Primitive
Christians were wont to keep this Solemnity, by extraordinary fasting sometime
before, the better to humble their Souls for their Sins, and prepare them for
so joyful a Feast; and great things do they speak of this day. A Great Council
calls it, syn. 6. in Trullo. Can. 90, 91. Greg. Naz. Orat. 42.
The great Sabbath. Gregory Nazianzen calls it, The Feast of Feasts, and
Solemnity of Solemnities, as much excelling the rest of the Feasts, as the Sun
does the rest of the Stars. And in the same Oration calls it, the greatest of
days. S. Chrysostom goes so far as to tell us, S. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Sermon. 34.
de Resur. Christi.
that this Solemnity is not only a Feast on Earth, but a Feast in Heaven. To
day (says he, speaking of Easter Day) there is Joy on Earth, to day there is
Joy in Heaven: And he gives this reason of it, For if there be Joy in Earth and
Heaven, for one Sinner that repents; how much more will there be Joy in
Heaven on this Day, when the whole World was extorted out of the hands of the
Devil?

From the Birth of Christ, the World began to expect great things from a person
so born and attended with such notable Signs and Wonders; and still as he grew
up, and gave Evidence of his Virtue and Power, the expectations of men were
more raised and strengthened: But when he began to Preach, and work such mighty
Miracles as he did, how must Men's Hearts be affected and filled with hopes of
great designs to be carried on by such a Person? but see how the Scene was
altered, a little while was it, and he on whom all their Eyes and Hearts were
fixed, was betrayed; by the vulgar abused, by the Governors condemned, by
their Instruments Executed, his Hands and Feet nailed to the Cross; the Sun was
under a Cloud, the object of the Worlds Hopes and Joy expired, gave up the
Ghost, died, was buried, and lay for a while in the Grave, as other weak frail
Mortals. What a disappointment this was, and how they did lament it, you may
partly see by the Speech of the two Men going to Emmaus, Lu. 24.21.
We trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel; and besides
all this, to day is the third day since these things were done: by which it
does appear, how the Friends of Christ were pierced in his piercing, and their
hopes buried in his Sepulcher. Blessed Day was it now when the Lord arose, the
Sun, though set a while, appeared again: a new Face came upon the World, the
Enemies were brought under a Cloud, the Disciples and Friends of Christ
revived, their hope before (as it were) dead and buried, was again raised
together with their Lord and Master, who rose again, according to the
Scriptures, though for a while, even the Disciples themselves understood not
those places, which spoke of his Resurrection. For as yet they knew not the
Scripture, That he must rise again from the dead.

As to that part of the Text which relates unto the Disciples not knowing the
Scriptures, at that time which referred unto Christ's Resurrection: We might
from thence draw several Observations not unuseful for us, but that we purpose
to apply our selves wholly to the point of the Resurrection, the proper subject
of the Day; concerning which, we consider three things.

I. That according to the Scripture, Christ was to rise from the dead.

II. That Christ did truly and really rise from the dead, according as the
Scripture had foretold: for this is that which Saint John believed, and which
he does designedly prove in this place.

III. That there was a necessity Christ should rise again from the dead; which
you have in the word must: for so the Scripture did declare, that he must rise
again from the dead.

I. The first thing we enter upon, is to show, That according to the Scripture,
the Messiah was to rise from the dead. The Types in Scripture are many to this
purpose. So long ago as Adam this was typified, of whom we read, that soon
after his Creation he was cast into a deep sleep, whilst the Woman was taken
out of his side, and then awaked again: Thus the Second Adam Christ, of whom
the first was a type, slept the sleep of Death, and sleeping, his side was
wounded, whereout came Water and Blood (which gave being to his Spouse the
Church) and then after a while he awoke, revived, and rose again.

You read how Isaac was laid upon the Altar with the Wood: Now Abraham's
Sacrificing his Son thus in Will, was a type of God's giving his Son to be a
Sacrifice in very deed: but Isaac for all this, came off, and was preserved
alive; a Figure, that our Isaac the Lord Jesus, though really sacrificed, yet
should rise again, and Death should have no power over him.

Many were the Conflicts of Sampson with the Philistines, vanquishing them time
after time; of whom we read how he carried away the Gates of Gaza, Posts and
all, up to a high Hill; in all this a type of Christ, who was to have many
sharp conflicts with the World and the Devil for us, and that he should at the
last, carry away the Gates of Hell and Death, that none could hold him. Sad was
the condition of Jonas when he fled to Tarshish, when followed with a Tempest,
when cast into the Sea, when in the Jaws of the Whale, when in the Whales
Belly, but yet he gets out in a small time, and appears again upon dry land.
What was this but a type of Christ coming to Tarshish in his Nativity, followed
with a perpetual and dreadful storm in the Ocean of this World all the while he
lived, swallowed up of Death, lying in the Grave, and rising again the third
day? Truth it self so expounds it, we may believe him.

Besides which Scripture-types, many are the Scripture-Prophecies that Christ
should rise from the dead. The first Scripture which gives notice of a Christ,
does not only mention him as suffering and dying, but as rising, and
victorious. If Thou shall bruise his heel, Genesis 3.15.
noted his sufferings; yet, He shall bruise thy head, was a Prophecy of his
Victory, and made good when he rose from the dead. When the Patriarch Jacob
blessed his Sons, he thus Prophesies concerning Judah, Genesis 49.9.
Judah is a Lions Whelp, from the prey, my Son, thou art gone up, he stooped
down, he couched as a Lion, who shall rouse him up? Judah was the Tribe of
which Christ came; and here is, even by the Confession of the Jewish Doctors
themselves, a Prophecy of the Messiah: Christ it is that is here resembled unto
the Lions Whelp: in that it is said, he stooped down, he couched, therein is
set forth his suffering, when he bowed the Head, and gave up the Ghost: but
this Lion is rouzed, and there is the Prophecy of his Resurrection, and in that
it is said, Who shall rouse him up? Isid. Hisp. Com. in Genesis
thereby is noted (as Isidore expounds) that no Man should do this but himself.
When Balaam Prophesied of a Star that should arise out of Jacob, he plainly
foretold, not only the setting of this Star in his Passion, but the rising of
it again when he came out of the Grave. And if the Book of Job was written by
Moses (as the learned conclude) then Job's saying, Vid. Armach. Annal. p. 17.
several testimonies.
I know that my Redeemer lives, is another Prophecy out of Moses's Writings
concerning Christ's Resurrection.

From the Writings of Moses let us proceed to the Book of the Psalms, where,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, is undoubtedly a Prophecy of
the Resurrection of the Messiah; for so Saint Paul interprets it, and shows,
that hereby was declared and manifested, on the day of his Resurrection, Act.
13.33.
That Jesus was the true and eternal Son of the most high God. And, as when it
is said, Ps. 110.7.
He shall drink of the brook in the way, his Sufferings are foretold: So, when
it is said, He shall lift up the head, his Resurrection is signified unto us.
And again, Ps. 16.10.
Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy one to
see corruption, is a clear place to this purpose; for David cannot herein speak
of himself, who died and saw Corruption, as others; but he does foretell how
Christ, that holy one, should not lie in the Grave till he saw corruption, as
others: nor his Soul continue in Hell, but his Soul should be brought back, and
united unto his Body, and his Body raised out of the Grave. And in another
place, where the Psalmist says, I am as a man that has no strength, thereby
is noted the suffering of Christ, and his lying in the Grave; but then the
following words, free among the dead, do show his rising again from the dead;
for he is said to be free among the dead, S. Cyp. in Symb. Apost.
because he could not be holden of death, as St. Cyprian expounds it.

The Prophet Isaias in many places speaks of Christ's Resurrection; for whenas
he brings him in born in this manner, Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is
given, and then afterward says, Isa. 9.6, 7.
that Of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end: he
does suppose his rising from the dead, for had he continued in the Grave, there
had been an end of his Government; and therefore did he describe him by the
name Wonderful, not only in respect of the wonderfulness of his Nativity and
Death, but because of the wonderfulness of his rising out of the Grave. And
when the same Prophet, having spoken at large of his Sufferings, his Death, and
Burial, does tell us, that notwithstanding all this, Isa. 53.10.
he should see his seed, and prolong his days; it has a necessary reference to
his Resurrection. Nay, so punctual are the Writings of the Prophets, that they
foretell the very time when Christ should rise, even on the third day. After two
days will he revive us, Hos. 6.2.
in the third day will he raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. And in
that the Prophet speaks in the plural number, it refers to those also who did
rise with Christ, and attended upon him for the greater Solemnity of this day.
By all which we see, that according to the Scriptures, Christ was to rise
again. I proceed now to

II. The second point, which is to show, That Jesus Christ the Son of the
Virgin Mary, who was Crucified and Buried by the Jews, did most really and
truly rise again from the dead, according as these and many other Scriptures
had foretold. Let us see what Witnesses we can produce to prove this. The very
same day he rose, he appeared several times to several persons. First to Mary
Magdalene, then to Mary Magdalene and the other Mary, as they were going
together from the Sepulcher, then to the two Disciples going to Emmaus, then
unto St. Peter alone by himself, then unto the Disciples as they were together,
Thomas being absent. To these add his Apparitions at several other times. Eight
days after his Resurrection, he appeared to his Disciples, Thomas being
present: After this to seven of his Disciples as they were fishing at the Sea
of Tiberias: Again unto the eleven Disciples as they were upon a Mount of
Galilee. He appeared unto above five hundred of the Brethren at once, after
that he was seen of James apart. The day of his Ascension he was seen to the
Apostles on the Mount of Olivet, when he was taken up into Heaven; Lastly, He
was seen of St. Paul: and these were Witnesses chosen before of God to bear
record of his Resurrection, as St. Peter tells us. True Witnesses were they, no
Deceivers, as the Keepers of the Sepulcher falsely reported, saying, His
Disciples came by night, and stole him away whilst we slept. See what an
unhappy Dilemma St. Austin does run these Keepers into: either it was false
that they slept, and so, Liers are not to be believed: or it was true, and then
how could they tell what happened? Foolish madness, if they were awake, why did
they suffer it? If they were asleep, how did they know it? Enough is there in
the story to evince their Falsity, and to clear the Disciples Innocence. And in
that Christ was not seen to one alone, but to several together, even to a great
multitude, it shows they could not be deceived in this matter. If any one shall
say, these were his Disciples and Friends, and therefore their testimonies not
full enough to settle our Faith in this point, to these we might add the
testimonies of Enemies. Let Pilate be the first, who was the Man that delivered
him to the Jews to be Crucified; Vit. Tiberii.
for after these things thus passed in Judea, Pilate, who was Governor of
Jerusalem, under the Roman Emperor, wrote Letters unto Tiberius (in whose
Reign Christ was Crucified) wherein he advertised the Emperor of the Death of
Christ, of the manner of it, of the Miracles he had done in his Life, as also
of his Resurrection, to the end that he should advise and determine, whether
Christ should not be held as a God, and worshipped as a God. So that here is
the testimony of Pilate to the Resurrection, who, no doubt, being their Chief
Governor, had the best means to inform himself of the truth. To this add the
testimony of the Watch. These, most likely, were choice busy Fellows picked out
on purpose for such a design, (as let the design be never so bad, some will be
found to carry it on) and what say they? Mat. 28.11.
Some of the watch came unto the City, and showed unto the chief Priests all
the things that were done. They came, as it were, thunder struck, looking like
so many Ghosts, with their hair standing an end, and tell all the story of the
Angels descending and rolling away the Stone, and Christ's rising; for this is
that which was done, and this is that they tell them: which was so plain, that
neither could the Chief Priests any way resist the Evidence, but only through
desperate wickedness hire the Soldiers, with money, to blaze a notorious lie
to cheat the common people with. So that here is the express testimony of the
Watch, and the implicit testimony of the Highpriests themselves, to the truth
of Christ's Resurrection. And was not Saul, (afterward called Paul) for some
time, a notorious Enemy of Christ? yet afterward proved he a most courageous
Witness of his Resurrection? Now, though the Friends of Christ might have been
supposed not to speak the truth, yet, when his most desperate Enemies witness
the same, it must be acknowledged, that Christ did according to the Scripture,
rise again from the dead. If such a multitude of Earthly Witnesses, Men, Women,
Rich, Poor, Friends, Foes, Jews, Gentiles, be not enough; yet at least the
testimony of Heavenly Angels ought to be believed. Whose are those words? He is
not here, but is risen: are they not the words of a Heavenly Angel? and, if it
may be more convincing, St. Luke makes mention of two Angels who assert this:
though these be enough, yet we add to these the testimony of the Spirit sent
down upon the Apostles, on purpose to empower them to be Witnesses unto the
Resurrection of Christ through the World.

And who can think all this should be to give testimony to a Resurrection that
was not every way true and real? Some Heretics in the Primitive Times, had the
impudence so to teach, Against this opinion. Vid. Aug. lib. de Agone
Christiano. cap. 24.
that as Christ died in appearance only, so he did rise only in appearance; it
will therefore be convenient in this place to show, that Christ did truly and
really rise from the dead in the very same Body, Flesh, and Bones, which was
Crucified, and what ever tended to the perfection of the human nature. Those
unto whom he appeared, Aq. p. 3. q. 55. a. 6.
knew him to be the same who had conversed with them before. The verity of
Christ's Resurrection, does Aquinas show by many Arguments, both in respect of
his Body and Soul. That it was a true solid Body in which he rose, no
fantastic, aerial Body, is evident, because he offered it to be seen and felt;
now, a Spirit has no Flesh and Bones, as they saw and felt he had. And that it
was a true human Body, was evident to them all by the shape of it. And that it
was the very same humane Body in which he lived and died, he evidenced by she
wing them the prints of the Nails in his Hands and Feet, and of the Spear in
his side. If any wonder at this, that Christ should rise again from the dead
with Scars, they are to know, that this was not for any weakness, or inability
to cure them, but for the advancement of his own Glory, who therefore carries
them as perpetual badges of his own Victory and Triumph. S. Aug. Epist. 49.
quasi si quisquam vir fortis pro patria dimicans, etc.
As if some valiant Man, who had received Wounds in the War for his Country,
having a Skilful Surgeon that could cure them without Scars, should desire
him so to cure them, that the Scars might remain as Badges of the service he
had done his Country. Leo. Sermon. 1. de ascensione Dom. ut non dubia fide, sed
constantissima scientia teneretur eam naturam in Dei Patris concessuram throno,
quae jacuerat in Sepulchro.
The Scars would Christ have to remain also, that hereby the Hearts of the
Disciples might be confirmed in the Faith of his Resurrection; and therefore
showing them to Thomas, he says, Be not faithless, but believing. And this is
so ordered (says Aquinas) that the damned, at the day of Judgment, may hence
perceive how justly they have the Sentence passed upon them, when they shall
see him whom they have pierced. Of the humane Soul reunited to his Body, he
gave Evidence, after he arose, by the Operations of it. This reality of
Christ's Resurrection in the very same numerical Body which was Crucified and
Buried, with the same humane Soul united unto it, which did before animate it,
is well expressed, by our Church, Eccles. Angl. Art. 4.
in the Book of Articles in these words, Christ did truly rise again from
death, and took again his Body with Flesh and Bones, and all things
appertaining unto the perfection of Man's nature. In which last words we are
taught how his humane Soul was united to the same numerical Body which had been
laid in the Grave; this in a special manner belonging to the perfection of the
humane nature.

This real Resurrection did Christ effect by his own power, as the Text shows,
and the Scriptures foretold; for the Scriptures did not only foretell, that he
should be raised from the dead, but that he should Rise again from the dead,
which shows it to be his own Act. When the Psalmist says, He shall lift up the
head, it is to the same sense as those words of his own, Destroy this Temple,
and I will raise it up again. This was the Evidence (and a sufficient one) that
he was the true Messiah, the Son of God, and Savior of the World. But then it
is to be understood, that this was not after the Socinian Mode, who hold, that
God the Father raised Christ to Life, and Christ being restored to Life, did
lift and raise his Body out of the Grave, as the Man sick of the Palsy raised
himself from the Bed, or as we shall raise our selves out of our Graves at the
sound of the last Trump. And they tell us, this was all that Christ could do;
but if this was all, Christ might as well have said, Destroy this Temple, and
any one of you may raise it up; for when God had restored life unto it, any one
of them might have lifted it up, and raised it out of the Grave, and have
showed it alive. We deny not but sometimes in Scripture the Resurrection of
Christ is attributed to the Father, and sometimes to the Holy Ghost, but it is
also attributed to himself, who, as he freely laid down his Life for us, so did
he, by his own Power, raise it up again; he was not only passive in it, but
active: Nor let any object and say, What then needed the Angel to be sent
before to roll away the Stone, if he could raise himself out of the Grave?
Chrysol. Sermon. 75. Angelus revolvit lapidem, non ut egredienti Domino praeberet
aditum, sed ut Dominum mundo jam resurrexisse monstraret: conservis ad
credendum daret fidem, non ad resurgendum Domino praestaret auxilium.
for the Stone was not rolled away, by the Angel, so much to give his Body
passage out, as to give his Disciples passage into the Grave, to behold the
reality of his Resurrection; otherwise, he who came in while the door was shut,
could as well have came out while the Grave was shut. Elizeus raised another,
not himself: the Apostles raised others, yet cannot raise themselves: Vid.
Bern. Sermon. 1. de Festo Sanctae Paschae.
but Christ raised himself by his own power, which shows the Excellency of his
Resurrection above the Resurrection of others. By all which you see our second
point fully cleared, that as the Scripture had foretold Christ should rise, so
did Christ really rise, and in the same manner.

III. We have one point more, That there was a necessity Christ should thus
rise from the dead; intimated in the word must. For so the Scriptures did
declare, not only that there was a convenience that he should rise, that it may
be he would rise, it may be not, but that he must rise again from the dead.
Besides, the fulfilling of all the Scriptures foretelling it, a double
necessity there was of Christ's rising from the dead, namely, in respect of
himself, and in respect of us.

First, In respect of himself, it was necessary, that hereby he might evidence
himself to be the true Messiah, who was to come, and no Impostor, as the Jews
blasphemed. This was a special sign of him who was to be the true Messiah, and
therefore when the Pharisees called upon him for a Sign, he instanced in his
Resurrection, which was enough to convince them; and from hence Saint Peter
draws his Conclusion, Act. 2.36.
Therefore (namely, because he has raised him from the dead) let all the House
of Israel know, that God has made that same Jesus both Lord and Christ. Part
of the office of Mediatorship, was Executed on Earth, but part thereof was to
be Executed in Heaven; he ought to be Priest, Prophet, and King, not only a
little while here on Earth, but for ever, his Kingdom was to be an Everlasting
Kingdom; now, in order to the execution of that part of his office of
Mediatorship which was to be done in Heaven, necessary was it that he should
rise from the dead.

Secondly, This was necessary in respect of us, were it but to remove from us
the scandal of the Cross. Unto the Greeks nothing seemed more ridiculous, than
that men should profess to rely upon a Crucified Christ for Salvation: and to
the Jews this was a great stumbling block: how could this great offense,
arising from his ignominious death, be removed, had he not rose from the dead?
Religion had been left in a bad case, if Christ had not risen. The Gentiles
Religion, at that time, was no better than Irreligion: the Jewish Religion was
now grown such a Yoke and Burden, that the World grew weary of it, and 'twas
thought by the wisest, that it was high time there should be an end of that
Yoke: so that, had not Christ risen, the Christian Religion, which was now to
be the standing Religion, had been but tottering, and all the Professors of the
same would have sneaked away when they saw the Founder of their Religion
conquered by death, and not able to rise again. Had not Christ risen, our Faith
and Preaching had been in vain. What profit had there been in his Blood if he
had not risen? Surely none, but we had still been in our sins; that therefore
the cost of his Blood might not be in vain unto us, necessary was it that he
should rise again. As also that we might have a testimony of the Father's
satisfaction. Christ undertook to be Man's Surety, to discharge his Debts, and
thus made himself the Debtor (as you heard very well explained last Friday) so
long as the Debtor is in Prison, it is a sign the Debt is not satisfied:
therefore, that we might be assured the Debt is fully satisfied, the Prisoner
must be let out, Christ must rise, the Surety being set at liberty, now we are
begotten unto a lively hope by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead. And
necessary it was Christ should rise, as the first fruits of our Resurrection,
in which respect one of the Fathers well calls Christ, Just. Mart. Q. and Resp.
ad Graec. (...). Lev. 23.10. etc.
The Captain of our Resurrection, leading the way to us that are to follow. The
Law concerning the First Fruits is set down in Leviticus, in which we may
observe, that the lifting up the Sheaf before the Lord, did note Christ's
rising out of the Grave: and, as those Fruits had the name of First Fruits,
because they were the first that were gathered; so was Christ the first that
rose from the dead, the first that rose in Incorruption, the first that rose
unto present participation of Glory: S. Cyp. lib. de resur. Dom. Just. Mart. Q.
and R. ad orthod. q. 85. Bern. Ser. 1. de festo S. Pasch.
for all who, we read, were raised before him, did die again to take a larger
Draught of that Cup they had before but tasted of: so that their Resurrection
was imperfect and incomplete, but Christ was the first that ever rose by a
full, complete, and perfect Resurrection unto the present participation of
Glory. But that is not all, the First Fruits had a special reference unto all
the rest, so that all the Sheafs in the Field were holy by the acceptance of
that; and in that Christ is said to be the First Fruits of them that slept; it
shows, that he rose for us, that our dust might be sanctified, our Mortality
consecrated to Eternity. Christ's Resurrection has an influence upon us in
order to a twofold Resurrection; a Resurrection from the Grave of Sin unto the
Life of Grace, and to the Resurrection of our Bodies; for, besides, that it is
a strong argument for the possibility of our rising (the same power that raised
Christ, being able to raise us) it has the influence of an efficient cause
upon our Resurrection, he rising not as a private Person, but as a public
Principle; if the Head be raised, the Members shall also rise.

INFERENCES.
If Christ be risen, according as the Scriptures declared there was a necessity
he should, then will he undoubtedly come to Judgment; for why rose he, but to
receive all Power in Heaven and in Earth. Know this, Act. 17.31.
That God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the World by him, whom he
has raised from the dead. Than which nothing can be more terrible to such who
are the Enemies of Christ, and lead an ungodly Life; he whom Death and Hell
could not hold, how shall any thing hold him from revenging himself to the
full, upon such who shall be found his Enemies? If he were in the Grave, then
you might swear and curse, and be intemperate and unclean, and break all his
Commands, dreaming of Impunity; but consider, O Christians, it is not a dead but
a living Christ you thus dishonor, who will come to call you to an Account;
who, as he will be a bountiful Rewarder of them that serve him, so will he be a
most powerful Revenger of the Injuries offered him!

We will not enlarge upon so sad a Meditation at this time, it is a day of Joy,
and much comfort is there in Christ's Resurrection, especially to those who
believe in his Name. If on any day you lift up your selves with Joy, then on
this day when Christ did rise, and lifted up his Head out of the Grave, the
Jubilees in old time were the Figures of the Joys in this acceptable time; for
by the Resurrection of Christ every true Believer is set free from the hands of
his Enemies, his Trespasses forgiven, he is restored again to his interest in
that Heavenly Possession which was lost in the transgression of Adam. Here is
comfort against the fear of Death; how may you triumph over Death and the
Grave? O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? Assure your
selves, Death can have no Victory over you. Tertull. lib. de Resur. Caro
salutis est cardo, etc.
Tertullian does excellently and comfortably treat upon this point. The Body
(says he) is as it were the Hinge of Salvation; as we see in Baptism, the
Flesh is washed and sprinkled with Water, that the Soul may be cleansed. And
when the Holy Ghost was given by laying on of hands, the Body was shadowed by
laying on of hands, that the Soul might be enlightened with the Holy Ghost.
Thus in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the Body eats and drinks the Bread
and Wine, Christ's Body and Blood Sacramentally, that the Soul may feast upon
Christ, and be satisfied. It cannot therefore be imagined (as the same Father
well argues) that the Body and Soul being thus joined in the Acts of Religion,
should be separated in the Reward. Nay, we may further take notice, that where
the work of Grace is truly wrought, the whole Man is renewed, the Body as well
as the Soul; so then, if the Body be not raised, the new Man should be
destroyed, the Soul alone not making the new Man, but in conjunction with the
Body. Suffer not therefore any to shake or unsettle you in this great
Foundation-Doctrine of the Resurrection. Though Heathens and Epicures may laugh
at this as an old Wifes Fable, Vid. Min. Fell. Oct. de id^l^rum ^vanit.
though Atheists and Heretics may scoff at it as a Childish Vanity and
Madness; yet, be not shaken, though it be a Doctrine above reason, it is not
against reason. The Apostle so argues before King Agrippa, Why should it be
thought a thing unreasonable with you, that God should raise the dead? God's
word must be made good, for he is as infallible in his word as in his nature;
now, his word is, That all who are in the dust shall awake, and all that are in
the Grave shall hear Christ's Voice, and come forth. As for those who talk of I
know not what Vehicle of the Soul, to which it shall be then joined at the
great day, other than the Body, in which it here dwelt in this World, and which
is laid in the Grave, it is not only contrary to the Scripture, but to the
Doctrine of the ancient Church Epiphan. cont. Haeres. lib. 2. Tom. 1. item in
lib. Anchorat. fuse. Aeneas Gazaeus Theophrast. Tertull. lib. de Resurr. cap.
56. Dion. Areop. de Eccles. Hierarch. lib. cap. 11.
, which constantly teach, that the same Body which is laid in the Grave shall
be raised, which can no way be said of that imagined Vehicle, which never was
in the Grave. For your farther confirmation, consider the point of Justice and
Equity, if it does not require that there should be a Resurrection of the dead,
in the very same numerical Bodies, for how else should every one be rewarded
according to his Works? How can it stand with the rule of Justice, that one
Body should serve God, and suffer for God, and another Body should be rewarded;
that one Body should Sin, and another Body should be damned? As Christ did rise
in the same Body which died, so shall all men rise in their own Bodies.

Many indeed are the vain Scruples of Atheistical Spirits against this Doctrine
of the Resurrection of the Body, as, how it is possible, This is answered by
Aeneas Gazaeus, in his Theophrastus. By Justin. Mart. Q. and R. ad Graecos. In
also Q. and R. ad orthod. q. 3. Athenag. de resur. p. 43.
when crumbled into dust, and one Man's dust mixed with another; nay, it may
be, one Man devoured by another, and turned into his substance: How it is
possible, that a Man being eaten by Fishes, those Fishes again eaten by Men;
that after so many mutations, changes, mixtures, alterations of Men's Bodies,
they should be raised the very same Bodies, and every one have his own Body?
But if you be Christians who have such thoughts, give me leave to ask you what
the first Article of your Christian Faith is: Is it not this? That God is
Almighty? If you believe this, it will be easy to believe the Resurrection of
the dead after never so many changes, since that to Omnipotency all things are
possible. And certainly Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 30. quanto honestius
creditur reverti semel animas ad corpora propria, quam reverti toties ad
diversa?
this Doctrine concerning the rising of the same Body, is far more reasonable
than their Opinion who held transmigration of Souls, or the passing of Souls
into several Bodies, as St. Austin argues.

But why should we deny that power to God, which we see, (in a manner) in the
Creature? Lay a heap of all sorts of dust together, Dust of Gold, Silver, Tinn,
Wood, Iron, apply the Loadstone to this heap of dust, and it will sever the
Dust of the Iron from all the rest, and draw it to it self: and shall we not
believe, that God can know every Man's peculiar Dust, and separate it from the
rest, yea, and raise it up to Heaven? Look again into Nature, and you may see
enough to strengthen your Faith in the Resurrection of the dead. Consider the
daily Resurrections in the World, and you may see our Resurrection shadowed in
the Day and Night: The Sun sets and rises again; see you not the Fruits of the
Field, Herbs, Plants, Trees? do they not die, as it were in the Winter, and
live again in the Spring? Theoph. Patriarch. Antioch. ad Autol. lib. 1.
does not the Corn Men sow, die and rise again? Theophilus Patriarch of
Antioch, follows this Argument at large. St. Ambrose, S. Amb. Hexaem. lib. 5.
cap. 23.
and several others of the ancients urge the Phoenix to prove the Resurrection;
which instance is so common, I need not spend time in relating it. Let us
observe the workings of God in our selves, and we shall have no cause to doubt
the Resurrection of our Bodies. Consider of what a small beginning, at our
Conception, God raises so goodly a Structure as our Bodies, and you must
acknowledge him able to raise them again. Nay, of what did God make Man at
first? Did he not make us of nothing? Now, consider, whether it be an act of
greater power to raise a Body at the last day, of some matter yet remaining, or
at first to make it of nothing. Therefore, with Polycarp, Polyc. Ep. ad Philip.
we may look upon him who denies the Resurrection of the dead, as the first
begotten, and eldest Son of the Devil.

What Enemies need Believers fear, if Christ be risen? He that was too hard for
Death, will be too hard for any of your Enemies. He who has overcome the great
Goliath for you, can he not overcome the lesser Philistines? What Calamities or
Miseries can you fall into, but you may fetch comfort out of Christ's
Resurrection to support you under them? He that raised himself from the dead,
has power to deliver us from all evil. This was Job's Comfort in all his
Afflictions, the sum of whose Argument is this, God will raise me up at the
last day, therefore undoubtedly he is able (if it stand with his own Glory, and
my good) to lift me up from this Dunghill again.

Have you parted from Believing Relations? there is no reason to mourn as those
without Hope, since Christ is risen, and will raise them again to Life. And why
should we trouble our selves overmuch at the Frailty and Infirmities of these
Bodies? Christ is risen, according to the Scripture, and this corruptible shall
put on Incorruption, this mortal shall put on Immortality.

To conclude all, Is Christ risen? Let us every one look into our selves, and
see what power the Resurrection of Christ has had upon our Hearts. Risen he
is, but is he risen in our Hearts? What share have we in his Resurrection? Good
Christians feel the power of his Resurrection quickening them unto Holiness. If
we can truly say, he has quickened us together with Christ, that would be
something to the purpose. There is a Resurrection of Souls here, and of Bodies
hereafter; it is the Resurrection of our Souls here from the death of Sin unto
the Life of Grace, that is, the Fruit of Christ's Resurrection in all who are
for Eternal Happiness. He that has part in this first Resurrection, the second
Death shall have no power over him. Let us learn to live as those who believe
Christ's Resurrection, seeking those things that are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God. It is the most unbecoming Frame for a
Christian to be Earthly minded; for a Man to be grasping after the World; to
have his Heart set upon his Covetousness, to be loading himself with thick
Clay, to be still crying, Give, give, never to be contented with these outward
things, with the Hog to be rooting in the Dunghill, and wallowing in the muck
and mire of the World; Is this to live as becomes one who professes himself
to be risen with Christ? No assuredly. If we be Christians, let us not
inordinately mind these things, let our Hearts be where our Head Christ Jesus
is, let us seek the Mansions Christ has prepared for us. For our Hearts to be
panting after Christ as the Heart pants after the water Brooks, every day to
have our set times of Communion with God and Christ, to be angry at what ever
draws our Hearts aside from Heavenly things, to be frequent in Holy
Contemplations, pondering in our thoughts the weightiness of that Crown of
Glory prepared for us, to be in daily longing expectations of the coming and
appearing of our blessed Savior; this is to live as becomes those who believe
Christ is risen, according to the Scripture: To whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Walter Kettilby.
Mr Hesketh's Piety, the best Rule of Orthodoxy, 8o. -- 's Serious Exhortation
to frequent Communion, 8o. -- 's Case of Communicating unworthily, 8o. The
Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man. The third Edition, 12o. Religion
the Perfection of Man, 8o. An Exposition on the Church Catechism. By way of
Question and Answer, 8o. Mr Stainforth's Sermon, Jan. 30. 1688/9. at York. Mr
Lynford's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Feb. 24. 1688/9. Dr Scott's Sermon at
the late Lord Mayor's Funeral, March 27. 1689. The Oration of Cicero for M.
Marcellus, done into English. With an Appendix relating to the Prince of
Orange, 4to.

