MONTELIONS PREDICTIONS, OR THE Hogen Mogen FORTUNETELLER. Discovering as plain
as a Pike-Staff, the Dark INTRIGUES, and Grand CATASTROPHES, carried on, or
Designed in most parts of the WORLD.

(...)

With Allowance, May 11. 1672.

LONDON, Printed by S. and B. Griffin, for Thomas Palmer, at the Sign of the
Crown in Westminster Hall, 1672.

MONTELIONS PREDICTIONS, OR The Hogen Mogen Fortuneteller.
ALthough we have ever been of Opinion, that the best of our Modern Prophtes
have been only the most Lucky Guessers, and find the Press already oppressed with
Swarms of Prophetic Pamphlets, no less numerous, than Impertinent. Yet that
the Blind World may see our Skill, either in Astrology, or Coskinomancy (that
more Mysterious Art of the Sieve and Shears) is not a whit inferior to the
busiest of our fellow-Students, we have resolved on the Question to oblige the
Public (we mean Hawkers, and Coffee - Houses) by delivering our Sentiments on
the present Conjuncture of Affairs, induced hereunto; for that not only our
Brother, the Apollo of Clerkenwel Green, has for some time disappeared to
Mortals, being (as we are credibly informed) gone to Visit his Nurse at the
Antipodes, but also because the heretofore active G^osequil of our beloved
Pupil, the renowned Poor R^bin, is of late grown Dry and Stubbed, yielding
little more than the Dregs of Red-Lettice Wit, or nauseous Repetitions. These
Considerations we hope will be Apology enough (even in a Critic Conscience)
and to offer more Reasons for Writing a Single-sheet Pamphlet, would be Absurd
and Unmodish, since many of our great Authors now a days can show none at all
for their more Voluminous Scriblings, we cannot (to deal Heartily with or
Readers) pretend to any Visions, Apparitions, Revelations, or strange Voices,
though perhaps that excellent new Invention of, The speaking Trumpet (subtlely
managed) might put not a few Giddy Heads on that account, into a Dotage beyond
Tom in the Wood's. Angels either Celestial, or Golden, we dare not boast
Familiarity with; Comets they say are Generated above the Orb of the Moon, and
so are too high for the Jacobs-Staff of our grovelling Understanding, to find
out their particular portents. The old new Star in Cassiopeia we shall not
meddle with, though we have heard our Nodding Grandmother in a Winters Evening,
discourse thereupon so profoundly, till she fell a sleep; not trouble our self
with any Oppositions that may happen between Saturn and Jupiter, as not
desiring to Interpose in a Quarrel 'twixt Father and Son: Nor yet shall we put
our selves to the unnecessary Charges of Building up Twelve Houses (mere
Castles in the Air) in an Ill favored Schem, not but that we Ken the Knack of
those Celestial Scotch-Hoppers too, as thoroughly as the most Huffing Tailor
in the Town: But out of pure Aversion to those Hackney Roads of Figures and
Characters wherewith some pretend to Score out the Fortune of a Year, and Fate
of Empires, in Terms so uncertain and ambiguous, that they may be Verified in
any future Contingency whatever, we decline all those Amuzing Parades of Art,
and without Clouds and Amphibologies, in plain English, and in Rhyme too, that
I may appear the more Prophetic, do declare,

The Time's now come must bring to pass,
What Fates have Wrote with Pens of Brass.
That Rebel Rout, whose swelling Pride,
Princes Contemned, and Kings defied:
Before bright Sol his Journey take,
Three times a round the Zodiake,
Shall be Reduced to more Distress,
Than in the days of Royal Bess.
Great York, the Neptune of the Main,
Their Insolence shall once again
Chastise, until they are become,
Poor suppliant States of Belgium:
And at his Brothers Royal Feet,
Submissively beg, as it is meet.
That he would lay his Thunder by,
And take them to his Clemency.
But because (according to the Grand Method we have always pursued in our
Writings) a more particular Account of the grand Matters impending may be
expected, we proceed in the Style of the most celebrated Sons of Art, and with
all Caution and Sincerity, say: That from the vast preparations, both at Land
and Sea, the Declarations of War lately Published on either Side, several
Lowering Aspects of disaffected Planets, their Quarrelsome Positions at their
vernal Ingress, and diverse other Secrets in Art, we may (on good grounds
according to the Doctrine of the Ancients) Prognosticate: That some Ruptures
are at hand, or Acts of Hostility designed, or ready to break forth into Action
in some parts of the World. And since Cancer is the Horoscopical Sign of
Holland, and that none loves Buttered Crabs better than a Dutchman; we are
indu^ed to believe those very United Provinces may much be concerned in the
formidable Catastrophes, whereof these Ph^enomina are the Indubitable Prod^omt.
Not that we find by the abstrusest Rules of Geomancy, that the Hogen States are
any more likely this year to Establish the Fifth Monarchy in an Universal
Commonwealth, than Sa^othy Levy, to Revive and Recollect the Ten scattered
Tribes, for taking Possession of the Holy Land: Yet are we more than Confident,
that Sage Aphorism of the late Deceased Plagiary Tresmeg^^us in his Temple of
Wisdom, will shortly be ^^^uied to a hairs breadth, viz. That wherever contrary
Fleets, or opposing Armies happen to meet, Contests will be apt to arise, and
that several Persons by means thereof, may chance, against all Rules of
Physic, to be Let Blood in the Dog Days. About or rather much before which time
we also discover, There will be heard strange and unusual Noises at Sea, to the
great Affrightment of the Dolphins, and spoiling the Music of the Sirens:

The Planets startling from their Orbs with wonder,
To hear our Guns below out-roar their Thunder.
Immediately after which, the long contested Sovereignty of the Narrow-Seas
shall be decided by a most equal Distribution, the Surface remaining in the
Possession of his Majesty of Great Britain (the undoubted Proprietor) and his
Valiant Subjects, whilst the Bottom falls to the share of his usurping Enemies,
as the just Reward of their unparalled Ingratitude; thereby replenishing the
hungry Stomachs of Neptunes Scaly Inhabitants, who now Exercise Lex Talionis,
and by Devouring their Devourers, produce of Metempsychosis of Bodies, that
Pythagoras never dreamed of. For whereas a Dutchman is little more than
Stock Fish, and Red-herring Fleshified, our Crabs and Fresh-Cod, will now be
only Dutchmen Fishified. Thus a Ravenous Shark unnaturally Feasts on the fat
Paunch of his own Brother, an overgrown Burgomaster, whilst Margery the
Cook-maid startles to find the Finger and Sealring of Mine Here, in the Belly
of a Mackril, and the Rotterdam Frows deluge themselves in Tears for the loss
of their Swil-Bottles.

We further find by the Hermetick Learning,

(For so of late our Quacks do call,
All Tricks if Strange and Mystical.)
That Coffee-Houses (the Mint of Intelligence, and Forge of Lies) shall be
much frequented; and many a Pragmatick Fop spend his Sixpence there over
Night, to hear News, that knows not where to get a Dinner next Day; who then
with folded arms and croaking Guts, does Penance for his foolish Curiosity. To
supply these Randevouse of Idleness, with continual Novelties, the Press Spawns
abortive Pamphlets, that swarm Abroad as thick as Flies in Autumn. And Fame
sets up a Cheating Lotery, where for a Prize of Verity, you (...) forty Blanks
of Falsehood, and in a whole Volley of News scarce meet a true Report: We do not
find his Holiness much Inclinable to entertain thoughts of Marriage, but
rather that if his Fancy should grow a little Rampant the Cholick and Stone,
would mainly Obstruct his Delights in the Caresses of an Olympia. And seeing he
Labors under so many Crosses, we cannot but reprove the uncharitableness of
some Gifted Brethren, who in their Little Conventicles, Rail so desperately at
a Civil Grave old Gentleman, whom they know no more than the Pope of Rome: The
Grand Seignior may yet in spite of some foolish Prognosticators (who seven
Years have threatened him with a Peck of Troubles) Live a long time as merry as
a Fiddler, if the Mufty will but grant him a Dispensation to Drink now and then
a Glass of Sack, but his Viziers Corn cutter will probably be hurried with
multiplicity of Business: His Mightinesses Toes being sorely afflicted by
reason to tedious Marches toward Hungary. The Crym Ta^ter in the midst of his
Triumphs, is Tipped into his Grave by a Surfeit on Stewed Truans. And may the
Guardian-Angel of Green-Aprons, protect some eminent Senators nearer Home, from
being choakt with Custaras, or admitted Knights of the Noble Order of the
Bull-Feather, at a Masquerade: Stephen Ratzins, Brother Stenko, seems
Instigated by Venus, Lady of the Seventh, in his Radix Retrograte, to send an
Env^y Extraordinary to the States General, to demand in Marriage the most
Ill^ustrious Bessabel, Daughter of the much Celebrated Van-Cobler-Hewson, that
they may make a prudent provision for Futurity, and propagate a precious Seed
of Rebels and Boutefeus, to disturb the Peace of the next Generation. Munsterus
that Hermaphrodite of State, who with his Crosses in one Hand, and Sword in
the other, looks like a Royston Crow of two Colors, part per pale, Ingrail'd,
Lay and Clergy, hovers with a wary Subtlety over the Heads of the furious
Combatants* till Fortune declare on whose Crests she intends to Plant the
Laurels of Victory, or takes up the Swissers Trade, and Cries, Who bids most
for 30000. But Manet alta mente repostam, There is no playing one Game over
Twice.

Quo teneam Vultum mutantem proce a Nodo?
What shall restrain him from the Breach of 's Vows,
That to no Altar, but 's own Interest Bows.
If the Forces of the most Christian King chance to set down before Maestricht,
that unhappy Town will be in some Danger of a Seige, and rare it will be to see
there so much Belly-Timber for a Breakfast, as is Confounded at a Guild Hall
Dinner; but a dried Sprat is excellent Commons for those in a Strait, that in
their best Days thought a Red-Herring a Feast. Holland Cheese we confidently
predict, will be a dear Commodity, but Butterboxes never so Cheap and
Contemptible, it being but just all Nations should Bandy to Exterpate them, who
have Confederated to Abuse all the World. If they have any Assistance, it must
be from beyond the Line: For what Christian will be a Second to such Insolents?
Nor can they appear Formidable since the Brandy that was wont to Inspire them
with Valor is now prohibited. To conclude, Englands Genius soars high, the
Lillies flourish, and may they ever retain their Color; the Emblem of
Integrity, the Justness of our Cause, the Conduct and great Example of our
Leaders, conspire with our native Courage to bespeak a Victory. And though we
know the Innate Valor of our Noble Seamen, and others concerned in this
Expedition, needs not to be raised up by Hobling Rhyms, of a sorry Bard, yet to
fill up their other Sheet, and that the Reader may be sure to have enough for
his Twopence, we have thought very fit to add this Ballad Loyal.

A BALLAD LOYAL.
I.
YOu Sons of Honor, that dare die!
To serve your Native Land,
And for your King and dear Country.
The Shock of danger stand,
Now prepare
For the War,
Show the world your glories,
Do such deeds
As must needs
Live in future Stories.
2.
Go on brave Hero's! you cannot miss
The Road to Victory.
Where Mighty York High Admiral is,
That Soul of Gallantry,
He whose Name
Rides on Fame.
And must still more prevail,
Till it make
Flemmings quake,
And humbly strike their sail.
3.
Our Ships like floating Castles ride,
The Waves are proud to bear 'm
They deafen Thunder each Broadside,
The Dutch or Devils must fear 'm,
No place can boast,
Besides our Coast
Vessels so great and good,
So many too,
That Strangers do
Think al'our Downs a Wood.
4.
Then pray what mean these Hogen States?
(It passes our Construction)
Insolently to dare their Fates,
And tempt their own Destruction,
On Shore and Sea
Ruin they will see
On every side surrounding
Brave Monmouth's hand
Wasting their Land,
Great York their Fleets confounding.
5.
Dull Dutch! can you forget when we,
In three Fights quelled your pride,
Not long since when our British Sea
With your base blood was die, d,
And dare you then
Fight us again:
What honor can it be
To beat a new
Such Slaves as you,
Whom we before made flee.
6.
If Rebel Noll could make you bow,
And before him trembling stand,
How think you fools to resist now,
The mighty Charles's hand,
Can it be said
Against our Head
You Are likely to prevail,
Who heretofore,
Were glad to adore,
And cringe unto our Tail.
7.
Wherefore Brave English Seamen all
Rouse up your valors fire
Courageously upon them fall
Make the dull World admire,
Let not your breast
Harbor a Guest,
That treats of fear or flying,
Let not a thought
Center in ought,
But conquering or dying.
8.
So may you vanquish still and take
Rich Prizes every day:
May no tempests your Vessels shake,
Nor Rock lie in your way.
So may you bring
To our Great King
A complete Victory.
And he bestow
Again on you,
A fit Gratuity.
9.
If any of you Sacrifice,
Your hearts at Cupids Shrine.
May no Coy Wench your Love despise,
Nor to you prove unkind;
But may they all
Before you fall,
As it is indeed their duties:
It Is reason such,
As conquer Dutch
Should Triumph over Beauties;
10.
May all your Wives prove Chaste and be,
As deaf to Gallants charms,
Whilst you are out, as Penelope,
When her Lord was in Arms.
Thus will we pray
Each night and day,
Till homewards you are bound
Your deeds with praise
Your Heads, with Baise,
In glorious manner Crowned.
The POSTSCRIPT:
SInce Mr. Lillies Predictions in his admired Almanac for the Year 1654. have
made so much noise in the World, we cannot but think it convenient to
transcribe from that celebrated Author a Short Prayer, which we think as
pertinent to the present conjuncture of affairs, as any of the rest, which
follows in the said book in these word,, God grant us Unity in the Church and
give the Presbyterians so much love unto their Native Country, as to rejoice
when we worst the Dutch, and not to flag down their heads like sorrowful
Rabbis at our Successes.

FINIS.

