(...), SEU MEDICAMEN MISERIS, OR Pauperum pyxidicula salutifera.

Help for the Poor, Collected for the benefit of such as are not able to make
use of Physicians and Chirurgians, or live remote from them.

Also an Appendix concerning letting blood in the Small Pox.

By ROBERT PEMEL, Physician of Crane-brook in Kent.

Si vero occasio serendae opis se obtulerit, and peregrino, and egendo, maxim
talibus, opituleris. Hippoc. praecept. Fol. 22. LONDON, Printed by J. L. for
Philemon Stephens, at the Gilded-Lion, in Paul's Churchyard, 1650

To the Reader, and more specially to my Friends and Neighbors of Crane-brook
in Kent.
LOving friends, and Neighbors, and Gentle Reader, whosoever thou hap to be.
It Is every man's duty to be doing good to others, or to receive good from
others; for surely no man was born for himself only; yet so it falls out that
most men are self-seekers, in these days. I have here, for the benefit of the
poorer sort of people, gathered some choice and easy medicines; most of them
may soon be made, easily obtained, and that at any time of the year: yet I
would desire such as are willing to make use of the medicines in this Treatise,
to take the best time for them, especially for ointments and plasters, that are
to be made with green herbs, that such be made in the summer, when there is
most virtue in them. The chief and main inducing cause hereof was these hard
times, wherein the poor have scarce bread to eat, much less money to go to the
Physician or Surgeon; and though plenty may come again, (which I heartily
wish, and pray for) yet I hope this collection of mine may be useful to many
then, as well as now. Thus desiring a favorable acceptance of what I have
done herein. I take my leave.

Yours in any Christian service. ROBERT PEMEL.

Upon this help for the poor, collected by Robert Pemel Physician.
WHat Herbs, Flowers, Min'rals, Trees the earth does bear,
For man his use and help, prepared are:
And God the bounteous Maker of them all;
Who first them planted on earths massy Ball,
And with their various Virtues them endew'd,
Intended them unto poor peoples good;
As well as of rich Lords, and Ladies, Gent.
Poor men in pain meet help and ease do want;
But Oh the love of gold and sordid gain,
That does the Lords rich bounty much restrain!
Let a rich man lie sick, or pained be,
Upon his least request, to him does flee
The Physic Doctor, or the Surgeon,
Their Sovereign Medicines them to try upon;
And him to cure, the love of large reward,
Which there he hopes, makes him the rich regard:
But let the poor sick or diseased lie,
Let him send for them, let him call and cry;
They are as deaf as Baal to his Priests;
He has no gold to grease them in their fists.
Lo here a pitiful Samaritan,
That taking care for the poor needy man,
Does him provide of easy medicines,
Which nor are costly, nor are hard to find;
So his own Doctor in need he may be,
Without the care of any Doctors f^e.
Let then, good friends, this Author have your praise,
And thanks for these so helpful his essays:
Wherein conspires much skilful industry;
With more of love and Christian charity.
J. E.

Against Burning and Scalding.
TAke of the whites of eggs two ounces, oil of Roses (or for want thereof,
Sallet-oyl) one ounce, beat them well together. Dip fine rags in the same, and
apply them to the burn or Scald. This cures speedily, safely, and exactly, by
taking away the heat, easing pain, and leaves no scar behind.

Or,
Take one ounce of oil of Roses, of sweet cream two ounces, of honey half an
ounce, mingle them together and apply it.

Or,
Take of fresh and new Butter out of the churn, and not at all salted, what
quantity you will; boil it with a sufficient quantity of Goose-dung, then
strain it into fair and sweet Spring Water. Strain it thus, five or six times,
(for the oftener it is done, the more virtue it has) then last of all, strain
it into Rose Water, and wash it often therewith; put it up, and keep it for
your use. This Stocherus commends, and says he had experience of it in
himself, in the year 1509. Praxis Stocherj. fol. 344.

Or,
Take quick Lime and wash it nine or ten times in fair water; let it stand in
every water, two or three hours; then pour off the water and put more to it.
Take the washed Lime (being strained from the water) and add to it oil of Roses
and the whites of eggs; make an ointment and keep it for your use.

Or,
Take Lime and put it into fair water, and let it stand therein four or five
days, changing the water every day; then dry it, and make it into fine powder;
mix it with a sufficient quantity of Lineseed-oyl, and keep it for your use.

Or,
Take of old Hog's Grease what quantity you will, strain it into cold water, and
add to it a sufficient quantity of the whites of eggs, beat them well together,
then apply them to the burn or scald on linen.

Or,
Take Ivy-leaves (such as grow near the ground) Marigold-leaves,
Woodbind-leaves, and Plantaine, of each a good handful, cut them small, and
bruise them; then boil them in six or eight ounces of Hog's Grease, strain them,
and keep it for your use.

Or,
Take two handfuls of groundsel, as much of Hous-leek, of Barrowes-grease six
ounces, stamp them together, and put thereto two handfuls of new Sheeps dung;
stamp them altogether, and boil them gently at the fire, strain them, and keep
it for your use.

Or,
Take four ounces of Goose-dung, of one nights making, and of fresh Butter, or
Sheeps-suet, three or four ounces; Fry them gently in a pan together, strain
it, and wet clouts in the same, apply it to burning or scalding.

Or,
Take of the inward bark of the Elder four ounces, of Sheeps suet half a pound,
of Sheeps-dung six ounces. Fry them together, and being strained, keep it for
your use.

Or,
Take of the juice of Housleek, Plantaine, Comfrey, (the lesser of each) two
ounces, of Sheeps-dung one ounce, Sheeps-suet half a pound. Boil them together
with a gentle fire, then strain and reserve it.

Or,
Take of Mulleyn, Plantain, of each one handful, of Burnet half a handful of
Ale-hoof four handfuls. Bruise them grossly together, let them stand eight
days; then add to them of Sheeps-dung and wax a sufficient quantiy, then
strain it and keep it to use.

Or,
Take of the herb Prunella two handfuls; beat it with three or four ounces of
fresh Butter; let them stand together three or four days, then boil them with
a gentle fire, strain it and keep it for your use.

Or,
Take oil of Roses two ounces, the yolks of six eggs, beat them very well
together, and add thereto forty grains of Saffron in powder; spread it on
linen and lay it upon the burned parts.

Or,
Take of Night-shade-water, and Plantain-water, yolks of eggs, oil of Roses,
and Virgins wax, of each a like quantity. First melt the oil and wax together,
then put in the waters, and last of all the yolks of eggs by degrees, being
first well beaten together. Keep it to use.

Or,
Take a quart of sweet cream, a handful of Fern-roots, wash and clean the
roots, cut them in small pieces, then boil them in the Cream till it be a kind
of jelly. Spread it on linen and lay it to burning or scalding.

Take of Linseed-oyl four ounces, of new wax two ounces, of the whites of eggs
a sufficient quantity, mix them together on the fire, and keep it for your use.

Or,
Take four ounces of fresh Butter, then pour it (being melted) into cold water,
and wash it til it be very white, pour away the water, and keep it for your use.

If the skin be not broken, then use the juice of onions with salt in fine
powder.

Or,
Take black Soap and Honey of each a like quantity, mix them together.

Or,
Take the juice of Elder-berries and mix it with the white of an egg. Apply it.

Take heed you use not the former of Salt and Soap where the skin is off or
broken, for then it will cause great pain.

Against burning with Gunpowder.
TAke of the juice of Housleek four ounces, of the whites of three or four eggs
new laid, beat them well together till they froth, then mix the juice with it.
Dip linen cloths in the same, and lay it warm to the burned part.

Or,
Take the juice of Onions two ounces, of Linseed-oyl one ounce, mix them
together, and apply it.

Or,
Take of black Soap half a pound, of the best Honey four ounces, of Salt in
powder half an ounce: mix them together. This must not be used where the skin
is off.

For the same, if the burning be about the eyes or the eyelids.
Take of red Rose Water four ounces, of woman's milk two ounces, of the whites
of two eggs, of white Sugar Candy in fine powder one ounce and a half, mingle
them together, and keep it for your use.

If the burning be in the face, use this.
Take two ounces of oil of Roses, of red Rose Water one ounce, of the whites of
two eggs, mingle them together, and apply it.

For Burning, Scalding, Itch, Sore-Nipples, Piles both inward or outward, Kibes
or any inflammation, as also for a green wound.
TAke half a pound of Litharge of gold, in as few pieces as you can find them,
burn it in a clear fire till it glow like burning coal; then beat it into fine
powder, and put to it three pints of white wine Vinegar; boil it to a quart,
then let it stand seven hours, afterward pour it all off (from the gravel or
dross) into a pint of Sallet-oyl. Beat them well together into a Salve.

For burning and scalding it must be laid on with lint or linen cloth, and
changed every two hours, till the fire be out.

Where the skin is much off in burning or scalding, it will cause pain and
smarting. Wherefore in such cases work a little more oil into the ointment, to
allay the sharpness of the vinegar.

If the Litharge be very small pieces or in powder, you may burn it in a
fire-shovel, and it will be of equal virtue with the larger pieces.

This is commended from long experience in diverse families of acquaintance,
with the Printer of this Treatise, who dwells at the Gilded-Lion in
Pauls-Churchyard.

Against green Wounds.
TAke of the leaves of the herb called Clowns-wound-wort, or All-heal, two
handfuls; of Barrows-grease three or four ounces: bruise the herb, and frye
them together; strain and keep it for your use.

Or,
Take three handfuls of All-heal, bruise it, and add thereto of Sallet-oyl four
ounces, of Rosen one pound, of wax six ounces, of Sheeps-suet half a pound; cut
the Suet small, and the wax, then set them on the fire to boil gently, strain
it into cold water, and make roules thereof, which is excellent to cure most
green wounds. If you cannot get this herb, take Comfrey, Prunella, or Melilot,
in the room thereof,

Or,
Stamp the roots of Solomon's seal, and lay it to any green wound after it has
done bleeding.

Or,
Take Comfrey, Bugle, or Prunella, stamp them and fry them with May-Butter,
strain it, and keep it for your use.

Touching the virtues of the herb Clowns-wound-wort or All-heal, I have thought
fit to insert in this place, that which is related by Mr. Joh. Gerrard, in his
Herbal as may be seen in the last Edition thereof, Printed 1635. Lib. 2. Chap.
390. page 1005.
THe leaves hereof stamped with Axungia or Hoggs-grease, and applied unto green
wounds in manner of a poultess, heals them in short time and in such absolute
manner, that it is hard for any that have not had the experience thereof, to
believe. For being in Kent about a patient, it chanced that a poor man in
mowing of Pease did cut his leg with a sith, wherein he made a wound to the
bone, and withal very large and wide, and also with great effusion of blood:
the poor man crept unto this herb, which he bruised with his hands, and tied a
great quantity of it unto the wound with a piece of his shirt, which presently
stanched the bleeding, and ceased the pain; insomuch that the poor man
presently went to his days work again, and so did from day to day, without
resting one day until he was perfectly whole: which was accomplished in few
days, by this herb stamped with a little hog's grease, and so laid upon in
manner of a poultess; which did as it were glue or soder the lips of the wound
together, and heal according to the first intention, as we term it, that is,
without drawing or bring the wound to suppuration or matter which was fully
performed in seven days, that would have required forty days with balsam it
self. I saw the wound, and offered to heal the same for charity, which he
refused, saying, that I could not heal it so well as himself; a clownish answer
I confess, without any thanks for my good will; whereupon I have named it
Clownes-wound-wort as aforesaid, since which time my self have cured many
grievous, and some mortal, with the same herb. One for example, done upon a
Gentleman of Gray's Inn in Holborn, Mr. Edmond Cartwright, who was thrust into
the lungs, the wound entering in at the lower part of the Tho^^x or the
brest-blade, even through that Carliginous substance called Mucronata Cartilago
insomuch that from day to day the frothing and puffing of the lungs, did spew
forth of the wound such excrements as it was possessed off; besides the
Gentleman was most dangerously vexed with a double Quotidian Fever, whom by
Gods permission I perfectly cured in very short time; and with this Clownes
experiment, and some of my fore^nown help^, which are as follows.

First, I framed a slight Vnguen^ hereof thus; I took four handfuls of the herb
stamped, and put them into ^pan, whereunto I added four ounces of
Barrowes-grease, half a pint of oil olive, wax three ounces; which I boiled
unto the consumption of the juice, which is known when the stuff does not
buble at all: then did I strain it putting it to the fire again, adding thereto
two ounces of turpentine the which I suffered to boil a little, reserving the
same for my use.

In like manner, I cured a Shoo-makers servant in Holborn, who intended to
destroy himself for causes known unto many now living; but I deemed it better
to cover the fault, then to put the same in Print, which might make such a
graceless fellow to attempt the like; his attempt was thus. First he gave
himself a most mortal wound in the throat, in such sort, that when I gave him
drink it came forth at the wound, which likewise did blow out the chandle;
another deep and grevious wound in the breast, with the said dagger and also two
others in Abdomine or the neather-belly, so that the Zirbus or fat, commonly
called the Caul, issued forth with the guts; the which mortal wounds by gods
permision and the virtues of this herb, I perfectly cured within twenty days;
for the which the Name of God be praised.

Against the shingles.
TAke Doves-dung, and mix it with oil of Roses or Sallet-oyl; apply it to the
place affected.

Or,
Take Swans-dung, or for want thereof) Goos-dung, wix it with the white of an
egg, and use it.

Or,
Take Doves-dung two or three handfuls, of wheaten meal and wine-vinegar, of
each so much as is sufficient to make them into a Poultess. Apply it, and lay a
Cole-wort-leaf on the top thereof: renew it every six hours.

Or,
Take of Plantan-water six ounces of Vinegar of Roses (or in the room strong
wine Vinegar,) one ounce; mix them together, dip linen rags therein; apply it
warm to the place affected and to the adjacent parts; renew it so often as it
dries up the linen rags.

Or,
Take of the juice of Plantain, the juice of Housleek, the juice of Nightshade,
and strong wine Vinegar, of each a like quantity; mix them and use it as before.

Or,
Take half a pint of Cream, mix with it Bran or crumbs of white bread steeped in
milk, and make a Poultess thereof. Apply it warm.

Or,
Take oil of Roses, oil of Violets, oil of Chamomil, and juice of Plantain; of
each one ounce: mix them together, and apply.

Or,
Anoint the place with the blood of a Cat warm.

Against Tetters, Ring-wormes.
TAke of Barrowes-grease two ounces, of Tarr one ounce; boil them gently
together, and put therein of Elicampane in fine powder, half an ounce; with
this anoint the Tetter morning and evening.

Or,
Take red Dock-rootes, cut them into thin slices, and steep them all night in
strong wine Vinegar; with this wash the place often, or stamp the roots and
vinegar together in a mortar, and apply it.

Or,
Take of Allom one ounce, of Garlike as much; dry the Garlike and burn it to
ashes, beat also the Allom to powder; mix them with a sufficient quantity of
vinegar and honey: boil them gently to a good body (taking off the skum as it
rises,) and keep it for your use.

Or,
Take of the best Aloes one ounce and a half of strong wine vinegar three
ounces; let the Aloes be made into fine powder; mix it with the vinegar and add
thirty drops of oil of Vitriol; wash the place therewith, being first shaken
together.

Or,
Take of quick Lime four pound, quench it in three gallons of scalding water,
mix it well together and strain it, then let it settle, and keep a gallon of
the clearest for to wash the Tetter.

Or,
Take a quart of white wine vinegar, boil therein of Wood-binde-leaves, Sage
and Plantain, of each one handful, of White-Coperas four ounces, of Allom as
much as an egg; boil them to half a pint, or three quarters of a pint; strain
out the liquor, and wash the Tetter therewith.

Against Biles or Fellons.
TAke the crumes of Bread, Raisons of the sun stoned, of each a sufficient
quantity, add to them Hog's Grease, Leaven, Cowmilk, and a little Saffron; Apply
this till it break; then draw out the corruption with plasters of
Burgundie-pitch.

Or,
Take Smallage, Rue, and red Sage, of each one handful, cut and bruise them,
and mix therewith Leaven, and the Grounds of strong Ale or Beer. Apply it.

Or,
Take Rag-wort, Rue and Hyssope, of each as much as you can hold in two of your
fingers, one clove of Garlike and a little piece of sour Leaven, a spoonful of
bay Salt, and a piece of rustie Bacon; beat them together and lay it on for
twenty four hours space.

Or,
Take of fine Malt-flower a handful, of Soap as much as a Wallnut; boil them
together in beer until it be thick; lay this to the place and change it two or
three times in a day.

Or,
Take red Sage, Rue, Snailes, Bay Salt and Bacon, of each a sufficient
quantity, beat them together and apply it.

Or,
Take red Sage, Rue and Ragwort, of each a handful, cut and bruise them: Add
thereto of sour Leaven about the bigness of a Tennis-ball, of Tarr two
spoonfuls, of black Soap a spoonful; stamp them all together, and apply it
morning and evening,

Or,
Take some wheaten flour, and boil it in Beer or Ale to a good thickness, apply
it warm.

Or,
Take the leaves of Sorrel, Marsh Marigold of each half a handful, white Lilly
root a quarter of an ounce, stamp them a little together, then lap them in a
Dock-leaf and roast them in Embers. Apply it hot.

Or,
Take Bay Salt in powder and mix it with the white of an egg. Apply it.

Or,
Take half a handful of Smallage, wheaten Leaven, black Soap, the white of an
egg and wheat flower; stamp them together and lay them on a cloth to the
Fellon.

Against Kibes and Chil-blains.
TAke Pomgranate pill, bruise it, then being boiled in white wine or Vinegar;
wash the place therewith.

Or,
Take of the bitter Vetch called Orobus one ounce; bruise and boil them in
water, with which bath the place.

Or,
Take Camomill and Melilot of each half an ounce, of Marsh-mallow-roots one
ounce, Cummin-seed and Bay Berries of each a quarter of an ounce; make them in
powder, and mix therewith four ounces of Boars-grease, or Hog's Grease. Anoint
the Kibes with it.

A Rape or Turnep roasted with fresh-Butter, and applied, is good for the same.

Or,
Earthworms boiled in oil, with which anoint the Kibes.

Or,
Take the pap of Apples and Turnips of each three ounces, of fresh Butter two
ounces, of Ducks-grease, or Swans-grease, or Capons-grease, one ounce; mix them
together and apply it.

Or,
Wash the feet or hands with Brine of Beef, or with the pickle of Olives.

Or,
Bath them with Oats boiled in water and Vinegar.

Against the Itch and Scab.
TAke a handful of yellow Dock-roots, bruise them very well, then boil them in
six ounces of Hog's Grease, strain it, and being cold, add thereto half an ounce
of Brimstone in fine powder, and a quarter of an ounce of Elecampane root in
powder; mix them together, and anoint the itch therewith.

Or,
Take the juice of Scabious and Fumitorie, of each one ounce, powder of
Elecampane a quarter of and ounce, oil of Roses and white Lillies, of each half
an ounce; boil them in two or three ounces of Vinegar till it be thick. Keep it
to use.

Or,
Take four ounces of strong Vinegar, of Roch-Allom half an ounce; of Plantain,
Sink-foyl, Honey-suckle leaves, of each half a handful; boil them gently to the
wasting of half: then add to the strained liquor a quarter of an ounce of white
Mercury in fine powder. Boil them a little, and keep it, to wash the Itch with.

Or,
Boil Dock-roots, Scabious, Sope-wort, Fumitorie and Sorrel in water and
Vinegar. Bath with it.

Or,
Take water-Betonie two good handfuls, Daysie-leaves and Ale-hoof or
Ground Ivy, of each a handful, of red Dock-roots as much; bruise them well, and
mix therewith half a pound or twelve ounces of Hog's Grease, let them stand in a
crock seven or eight days; then being boiled gently and strained keep it for
your use.

Or,
Take one ounce of Saltpeter, half an ounce of Roch-Allom; boil them in a pint
of Vinegar till about half be consumed, then use it to the place grieved.

Or,
Boil Tobacco stalks in water and Vinegar; bath with it warm.

Or,
Take one ounce of Tobacco in fine power, of Brimstone in powder a quarter of
an ounce, mix them together with three four or ounces of Hog's Grease, and make
an ointment: with this anoint the body every night.

Against Bruises, and strains.
IF the inward parts be bruised, give a little Sperma ceti (which the vulgar
call Parmacitty) morning and evening with some Stone-pitch in powder. It may be
taken in Beer, Posset Drink, or Sack.

Or,
Give twenty grains of Irish-slat powdered in any of the aforesaid liquors.

Or,
Pour out the white of an egg, and put in some Sperma ceti; roast it soft, then
sup it up in a morning fasting.

If the party bleed, give him a Dram (which is half a quartern of an ounce) of
Bole-armonack powdered in Posset drink, wherein St. John's Wort and Bugle has
been boiled.

Outward means.
Take two ounces of oil of Peter, one ounce of oil of Turpentine, half an ounce
of oil of Roses, as much of yellow wax, melt the wax in the oils, and anoint
with it.

Or,
Take Solomons-seal being green, bruise it and fry it with fresh-Butter. Apply
it warm.

Or,
Take two pound of fresh-Butter; put to it of Broom-flowers and Elder-flowers
of each a good handful or more, of Sage half a handful; bruise the herb and
flowers: mix them with the Butter, then put them in a Pipkin or Crock seven or
eight hours in a Kettle of hot water, cover it, and keep the Kettle always
full of water; when it has thus boiled, take it out, and let it stand a while
(but not till it be cold) then strain, and reserve it for your use.

Or,
Take Ale-hoof, Brook-lime and Smallage, of each a handful; bruise them, and
add thereto half a pound of Hog's Grease and sheeps-suet; fry them together,
strain it, and when it is almost cold put thereto a little Spermaceti or oil of
Spermaceti; mix them together and keep it for your use.

Or,
Take Chickweed, Wheat-bran, and the Grounds of strong Ale or Beer, cut the
herb small and mix them together, then apply them warm to the place, strained
or bruised.

Or,
Take Camomill, Worm-word, of each one handful, Red Rose leaves half a handful,
of Barley meal one handful. Boil them soft in water or milk, then put
fresh-Butter or oil of Roses to it, and lay it warm to the bruised part.

Against Blackness or Blewness of the face or eyes.
TAke of Castle-Sope two ounces, of the ointment called Dialthaeae one ounce,
of Aquavitae half a quarter of a pint, melt them together and anoint therewith
morning and evening.

Or,
Take the the juice of Solomons-seal, of Unguentum album, and the white of an
egg, mingle them together, and apply it morning and evening.

Or,
Anoint with the ointment Dialthaeae mixed with a little Spermaceti.

Or,
Take the roots of blew Flower-Deluce, beat it with Rose Water, then lay it
between a linen cloth and apply it to the eyes.

Or,
Take Paper four double; wet it well in cold water, and lay it to the bruise.

Against Aches.
TAke Aqua vitae, Neates-foot-oyl, oil of Camomil, of each a like quantity;
mingle them together, and use it against cold aches.

Or,
Take oil of Exeter, Aqua vitae and Oxe-gall, of each two ounces: mix them
together, and use it.

Or,
Take four ounces of oil of Bay, two ounces of Aqua vitae; mix them together.

Or,
Take Camomil, Sage, Dill, Rosemary, of each a good handful; bruise and cut
them; then add thereto a pint of Lin-seed-oyl. Boil them together for the space
of half an hour, then put in half a pound of fresh-Butter; boil it again very
gently, strain it, and keep it for your use.

Or,
Take half an ounce of oil of Peter, oil of Spike and Philosophers oil, of each
a quarter of an ounce, oil of Exeter half an ounce, mingle them together.

To draw out Thorns and Splinters.
APply common Turpentine to the place spread upon leather.

Or,
Make a plaster of Galbanum, or Ammoniacum and lay it to the thorn or splinter.

Or,
Take a piece of Sponge, or a lock of wool, dip it in hot Urine, and apply it.

Or,
Bray Nettle roots and Salt together, lay it on.

Or,
Take the roots of Polypodium; bruise them with Barrows-grease, and apply it.

Or,
Take a piece of Foxtongue steeped all night in Vinegar, bind it fast, and in
a day or two it will draw it out.

Or,
Take black Soap, Tarr, Goose-dung, or Hens-dung; mix them together and apply
it.

Or,
Take Honey, Oxe-gall, and chalk in powder; mingle them together and lay it to
the place where the thorn is.

Against bleeding of the Nose.
TAke Olibanum, Aloes, Dragons-blood, Bole-armonack, of each half an ounce,
make them in powder, and mix them with the white of an egg and the hair of a
Hare that grows under the belly; Apply it to the temples and nod of the neck,
also put up a tent of the same into that nostril that bleedeth.

Or,
Take linen clothes and wet them well in Vinegar; apply it cold to the privy
members of him that bleedeth.

Or,
Take half a pint of Plantain water, as much strong wine Vinegar, mingle them
together, and take linen clothes, and wet therein, lay some of them to the
soles of the feet, and some on the right side, where the Liver lies, and some
to the palms of the hands, and some to the nape of the neck and to the
forehead.

Or,
Take an egg-shell and fill it with the party his blood that bleedeth, dry it
in hot Embers, make it into powder, and blow up some of it into his nostrils
with a quill.

Or,
Take four ounces of Plantain water or the juice thereof, two ounces of strong
Vinegar, one ounce of the juice of Knotgrass, one ounce and a half of
Bole-armonack in powder; mix them together, wet a double linen cloth therein,
and apply it cold to the forehead.

Or,
Take Bole-armonack, Draggons-blood, of each one ounce in powder, mix them with
the white of an egg and the juice of Plantain to the form of a Poultis. In men
that bleed, apply it to the forehead, temples and testicles. In women, to the
forehead, temples and breasts.

Or,
Burn an egge-shel in the fire till it be as black as a cole, make it into fine
powder, and let the party that bleeds snuff up some into his nostrils.

Or,
Take Aloes one ounce, Mildust half an ounce, the hair of an Hare cut very
small half a quarter of an ounce or less, mingle them together, and make Tents
thereof with the white of of an egg, and put them up into the nostrils. The
Tents are to be made with fine Flax or Tow.

Against the bleeding of a wound.
IF a wound bleed, take the white of an egg Bole-armonack, and some Mildust;
mix them together, and lay it on Flax or lint binding it fast.

Or,
Take the moss of an Oak, and lay it to the wound.

Or,
Take old clean linen, burn it as you do Tinder, and lay it to the wound.

Or,
Lay on a Copweb that is clear from filth and dirt.

Against the Piles or Hemorrhoides.
TAke two handfuls of Pilewort, roots and all, bruise it and add two or three
ounces of Hoggs-grease, boil them gently together, then strain it and anoint
therewith: also boil Pile-wort in Beer or water, and drink a good draught of it
morning and evenning.

Or,
Take burnt Muscle-shells in fine powder half an ounce, Saffron in powder
thirty grains; mix them with Honey, and anoint with it.

Or,
Beat the yolk of an egg and some Sallet oil, or oil of Roses, together with
some Saffron and Spread it on Leather, lay it to the place affected.

Or,
Take Melilot, Fenegreek, and Linseed, of each a like quantity; bruise them and
mix therewith the white of an egg, make a Poultess, and lay it to the Piles.

Or,
Take an Onion well roasted in the Embers, bruise it, and add thereto meal or
powder of Fenegreek, Linseed, and Camomil flowers, as much as suffices; put
also a little Butter and Saffron to it; make a Poultis and apply it.

Or,
Take the fat of a Hen and mix therewith the yolk of an egg, Saffron and oil
of Roses. Lay it on.

Or,
Take two ounces of Doggs-dung in fine powder, four ounces of common oil or
Lin-seed-oyl, boil them gently together, then add two or three ounces of wax,
and make an ointment.

Or,
Take oil of Violets (washed in Violet water) and fresh-Butter washed of each
one ounce, of Lin-seed-oyl half an ounce, with the yolk of an egg, and the
forementioned, make an ointment.

Or,
Take Elder leaves and boil them in water till they be very tender; with this
bathe the Fundament warm, and lay on the leaves with a piece of Cotton dipped
first in the bath.

Or,
Take two ounces of ointment of Roses, one ounce and a half of Populeon
ointment, the yolk of one egg, of Opium thirty grains; mix them together, and
anoint therewith.

Or,
Take one ounce of Linseed-oyl, and two or three Plantain leaves, stamp them,
and being gently boiled together, apply it. This does ease pain.

Or,
Take Henbane leaves and Purslain, cut them small, then take crumbs of white
Bread and boil them all in Milk, till they be soft, add also the yolk of a hard
roasted egg and oil of Roses. Apply it to the Fundament.

Against bleeding of the Piles.
IF they bleed much take the juice of Leeks, and give the party a spoonful
thereof for three or four mornings together.

Or,
Give the juice of Yarrow every morning for four or five days together.

Or,
Take of Oak leaves five handfuls, of Red Roses two handfuls, of Acorn cups
three handfuls; boil them in a sufficient quantity of water; In which quench
often red hot Iron or Steel, and so bath the Piles therewith morning and
evening.

Or,
Take of Acorn cups, or the leaves of the Oak one handful, boil them in water,
wet a red cloth therein, and apply it warm.

Or,
Take the parings of Horse hoofs, burn it in a chafingdish of coals, and sit
over it.

Against a weak Back. Inward means.
TAke one ounce of the pith of an Ox black, one ounce of Dates, cut them in
thin slices; boil these in half a pint of Muscadine, and take thereof every
morning and evening.

Or,
Take of Clary and Nep of each a handful, cut them small, then with eggs and
flower make Batter, fry it with Butter, eat every morning thereof for a week or
two.

Or,
Take as much of white and red Sanders in powder as will lie on a six pence
every morning, in five or six spoonfuls of Muscadine, for a week or more.

Or,
Take of Knot-grass, Comferie and Cinque-foyl, of each two handfuls; boil these
with a knuckle of Veal and Raisons of the Sun, a few Cloves, and a little Mace,
strain it and take it every morning with Rise in powder.

Or,
Boil Isinglass in milk, and take every morning and evening a good draught.

Outward means.
Take Comfrie, White Archangel-flowers, Plantain and Shepherds purse of each a
good handful; cut them and bruise them, then fry them with fresh Butter strain
it, with which anoint the back morning and evening warm, laying on a linen
cloth.

Or,
Take half an ounce of the plaster called Diachylon simplex, of De minio and
Diapalma, of each as much, melt them together with a little oil of Roses, and
spread a plaster thereof on linen or leather, lay it to the back.

Against the biting of a mad Dog, or any other venoumous creature.
LEt the wound be washed well with Vinegar and Honey, or Honey and white wine,
then apply some Treacle mingled with Turpentine and Butter, or else Garlic and
Onions stamped with Butter, or Sallet oil.

Give the party morning and evening some London Treacle, or Venice Treacle in
Posset drink wherein is boiled wood-sage.

To heal the sore after the Venom is out, apply a plaster of Flos Unguentorum.

Or,
Take of Rue as much as you can hold between two fingers, of Garlic, half as
much, of Wallnuts, or the husks, or the leaves of the Tree, a handful; stamp
and strain them with Ale or Beer, add thereto of London Treacle or Venice
Treacle the quantity of a nut; drink off the liquor, and lay the faeces, or
that which is strained out, to the sore.

Or,
Take a good handful of Betony, as much of wild Sage; boil them in
Posset Drink, and take thereof morning and evening with some Treacle of
Andromachus.

Or,
Give forty grains of Gentian root in powder (or more in a strong body) with
Posset drink for two or three mornings together.

If it be a mad Dog, dissolve a little Mithridate or Treacle of Andromachus in
Treacle-water, or wine Vinegar; dip rags in it, and apply it warm to the sore,
and rub the sore often with it: Afterward lay upon it a Poultess made with
Turpentine, Honey and Onions, or Garlic, buised therewith.

The liver of the mad Dog is commended, if it be given the party in powder to
drink in Posset Drink.

If Bees or Wasps sting any, presently pull out the sting if it be left
behind, and lay Honey to it, or Mithridate, or Cow Dung with Sallet-oyl.

If the eye be stung, pull out the sting presently and apply Carduus bruised
with the white of an egg, and so renew it two or three times if need require.

Against Deafness.
TAke one ounce of oil of Castor, oil of Roses and oil of bitter Almonds of
each half an ounce, Aqua vitae one ounce; boil them together till the Aqua
vitae be consumed. Put four or five drops of it into the ear a little warm
every night, and stop the ear with black wool.

Or,
Take the powder of Bayberries and boil it in oil of Lillies or Sallet-oyl,
then drop some of it into the ear every night, and stop it as before.

Or,
Boil Bayberries (being first well bruised) in white wine, and hold your ear
over the hot fume thereof two or three times in a day.

Or,
Take Marjerom, Rue, Camomill and Rose-mary, of each a like quantity, boil them
in Vinegar; take the fume thereof into the ear or ears with a Tunnel or Funnel,
after this is done, put some oil of bitter Almonds into the ear and stop it
with wool.

Or,
Take the juice of Ground-Ivie, and put it warm into the ear; stop it as before.

Or,
Take two ounces of the juice of Rue, as much woman's milk, boil it together
till it be curdled, then strain it, dip wood in the juice warm and put it into
the ear.

Or,
Take an Onion and cut a hole therein, then put into it oil of bitter Almonds
and fresh Butter without salt, boil them together gently: drop of the liquor
into the ears warm.

Against dim and sore eyes.
TAke Fennel, Vervein, Celandine, Rue, Eyebright and red Roses of each two
handfuls, distill them and wash the eyes therewith.

Or,
Distill green Wallnuts (husks and all) in a Still, and wash your eyes with the
water,

Or,
Take half an ounce of Tutiastone, or Tuttie, make it into fine powder, and put
it into four ounces of white wine, as also two ounces of red Rose Water, shake
it often together, and wash the eyes therewith.

Or,
Take of the juice of Ground Ivy, Celandine, and Daisies, of each one ounce,
put to them a little Rose Water, and white Sugar Candy in fine powder.

Against watering and itching of the eyes.
TAke one ounce of Lapis Calaminaris, make it hot in the fire, then quench it
in half a pint of white wine seven or eight times, when this is done make it in
fine powder, and put it to the wine; wash your eyes therewith.

Or,
Make a plaster of Gumelemnie, and lay it to the Temples. This will stop the
Rehume.

Or,
Take one ounce of Tuttie in fine powder, four ounces of fresh Butter without
salt, one ounce of oil of Roses, mix them together and make an ointment, with
which anoint the eyes at night.

Or,
Take half an ounce of Lapis Calaminaris, and of white Candy as much, of white
wine one ounce or more; make the stone red hot in the fire, let it cool, then
make it into fine powder; mix it with the wine, and put in the white Candy in
power; keep it in a glass for your use.

Or,
Take a good handful of young red Fennel, as much of Eyebright, one ounce of
white Sugar Candy, a quarter of an ounce of white Coperas; boil them all in a
pint of running water till about half be consumed, then strain it, and drop of
the clearest into your eyes.

Or,
Take half an ounce of white Coperas in powder, and forty grains of Orris root
in powder, add to them two or three ounces of red Rose Water, and wash your
eyes therewith, or drop some into your eyes.

Against spots in the eyes.
DRop the juice of Celandine into the eyes.

Or,
Take the juice of Ground-Ivie, and put into the eyes.

Or,
Take half an ounce of burnt Cocle-shels, as much of Olibanum, and a quarter of
an ounce of Sarcocolla, make them all in fine powder, and blow some of it into
the eye with a quill.

Against Bloodshotten and red eyes.
TAke Wormwood, bruise and mix it with the white of an egg and a little red
Rose Water; apply it to the eyes.

Or,
Put into the eye white Sugar Candy in fine powder.

Or,
Take new Cheese often washed in fair water, beat it with the white of an egg,
and apply it to the eye, or eyes.

Against the Toothache.
VVAsh your Teeth with a decoction made with Vinegar and Hysope.

Or,
Take Henbane root, bruise it, and boil it in wine Vinegar, hold the decoction
in your mouth.

Or,
If Rheum be the cause thereof, chew a piece of Pellitorie of Spain in your
mouth, and that will draw much Rheum.

Or,
Take Salt, Pepper and Garlike, beat them together, and being put into a clout,
hold it in your mouth.

Or,
Take Sage and Pellitorie, boil them in Vinegar, and hold thereof in your mouth
as hot as may be.

If it be a hollow tooth, put a little Mithridate therein.

Or,
Take lint and wet it in oil of Spike, oil of Origanum, or oil of Cloves, put
it into the hollow tooth. But the best remedy for a hollow tooth is to pull him
out.

Against an Ague. Inward means
TAke Carduus, Centory, the roots of Butter-bur, of each a quarter of an ounce,
make them into powder, of which take as much as will lie on a six pence, in
Posset Drink wherein Marigold flowers have been boiled. Give it before the fit
comes, and let them sweat.

Or,
Take a dram (which is half a quarter of an ounce) of Carduus, or Butter-bur
root in powder, give it in Posset Drink before the fit, and sweat after it.

Or,
Take a spoonful or two of the juice of Germander, and give it the party warm
before the fit comes.

In the hot fit Orreng posset is very good or Lemon posset.

Against the cold shakings of Agues.
Take Camomill and Wormwood of each a handful, boil them in Posset drink and
give thereof in the cold fit.

Against Agues. Outward means,
Take a Pickled Herring, slit him in the midst, and apply to the soles of
each foot one part warm; let it ly on six or eight hours; do this before the
fit comes.

Or,
Take Celandine, Rue, of each one handful, bruise them small, and add four
ounces of black Soap, the whites of three or four eggs; mix them well together,
bind it to the wrists and soles of the feet.

Or,
Take Venice Turpentine, spread it on Leather, strew thereon Nutmeg and
Olibanum in powder, lay it to the wrests.

Or,
Make a plaster of Venice Turpentine, and strew on it the Powder of Rue. Apply
it to the wrists.

Or,
Take a good handful of Feverfew, bruise it and add a little Bay Salt and Glass
in powder; lay it to the wrists.

Or,
Cut an Orange in the midst, and spread each part with Mithridate, lay it to
the wrists warm, and bind it on.

Or,
Take Rue and Baysalt, bruise them and lay it to the wrists.

Or,
Hang Camphor about the neck in a thin rag, or piece of silk. This has cured
many, especially children.

Against the Colic, Stone, or Gravel.
TAke Parsly-seed, Gromel-seed, of each half an ounce, of Bay Berries as much,
of Licoris one ounce, let them be bruised and boiled in Poset drink, strain it,
and drink thereof morning and evening, a good draught warm.

Or,
Boil Alexander-seed, or the herb in Posset drink; strain and drink of it as
before.

Or,
Boil one ounce of Juniper Berries in Posset Drink, adding thereto half an
ounce of Licoris; drink morning and evening a good draught, warm.

Or,
Take of time Parsly-roots, Fennel-roots (the pith taken out) and
Alexander-leaves, of each a handful, boil them in white wine and water
sufficiently, strain it and drink thereof morning and evening.

For the Colic.
Take of Cow Dung one pound, of Cummen-seed and Carraway-seed, of each one
ounce or more, bruise them and mixed with the dung, apply it to the belly warm,
adding a little Hoggs-grease to it.

Against the Cough.
TAke of Clarified Honey four ounces, and put to it of Elecampane root in fine
powder, half an ounce, or three quarters of an ounce; mix them together at the
fire, and being thoroughly hot, keep it for your use, and take often of it.

Or,
Take two hanfuls of Hyssope, Raisons of the Sun stoned four ounces, Figgs cut
in slices two ounces, Licoris bruised one ounce, boil these in a sufficient
quantity of water, strain it and take often thereof.

Or,
Take two or three handfuls of Horehound two ounces of Licoris bruised, boil
them in water, and being strained drink of it.

Or,
Take as much powder of Brimstone or flower thereof as will lie one a six
pence, morning and evening in an egg half roasted, for the space of a week.

Against the flux or looseness of the Body.
Boil the inward rind of an Oak in milk, strain it and put thereto powder of
Rice, Cinnamon in powder, also a little Sugar, eat of it often,

Or,
Take one Dram (which is half a quarter of an ounce) of the root of Tormentill
in powder, mix it with half an ounce of Conserve of red-Roses, and eat it, or
let it be given in red wine, or Plantain-water.

Or,
Give forty grains of Acorn-cups powdered in Rise milk, morning and evening.

Or,
Give a Dram of Acorn-cups powdered in Posset Drink for two or three mornings
together.

Or,
Take a pint of red wine, and put to it a quarter of an ounce of Cinamom, and
as much Plantainseed, bruised; boil them gently together, strain it, and give
often thereof.

Or,
Take Plantain, Knot-grass and Shepheards-purse, of each a handful; boil them
in new milk, strain it and being thickened with crumbs of stale white bread, eat
thereof.

Or,
Give a Dram of old Venice Treacle morning and evening for four or five days
together in Plantain water.

Against the Gout.
TAke Milk, boil it, and turn it with Vinegar, take off the curd and lay it to
the part affected.

Or,
Take ground-worms and put them into Vinegar, that they may be purged from
filth, then take half a pound of them and a pound of Hoggs-grease, beat them
together and lay it on.

Or,
Take a pickle-Herring and pull away the bone, stamp it very small then put to
it one ounce of Unguentum Populeon and a little Bole-armonack in powder, as
also some red Rose Water; Apply it cold to the grieved place.

Or,
Take red Rose-leaves, Camomill and Melilot, of each on handful, of Linseed
bruised or powdered one ounce, of the crumbs of white Bread half a pound, boil
them in milk to a Poultess, adding therefore six pennyworth of Saffron and the
yolks of two eggs. Lay it on to the grief.

Or,
Take oil of Roses and wax of each four ounces Saffron a quarter of an ounce,
melt the wax in the oil, and put in the Saffron in powder, then add the yolks
of two eggs, make an ointment and keep it for your use.

Or,
Take a pound of Raisons of the Sun stoned, bruise them, and apply it to the
affected part.

Or,
Beat a Sheeps-head all to pieces, boil it with two handfuls of Mallows, and
as much Balm, till the bones fall out; bath the member with the liquor morning
and evening.

Or,
Bath the member in Seawater.

Or,
Take dregs of strong Ale or Beer, and put therein crumbs of Rye Bread; boil
them to a poultess, and apply it.

Or,
Take Wormwood, Walwort, and Bran of Wheat, of each two handfuls, bruise the
herbs and add two handfuls of Cow dung or Horse-dung, let them be boiled in
Vinegar, till the Vinegar be almost consumed, then apply it warm.

Or,
Take a handful of red Rose leaves and a pinte^ new milk: boil them with
crumbs of bread to a Poultis, and apply it warm.

Or,
Take a spoonful of Bay Salt, as much gray Soap, and the quantity of Wallnut of
Boares grease, Rue and Sage, of each half a handful. Beat them altogether, and
lay it on a cloth to the place affected, renew it once a day.

Against the yellow Jandise.
TAke a handful of Angelica-leaves, bruise it, and add Sheeps-dung and
Goose-dung of each half a handful, steep them all in a pint and a half of Ale
or Beer for one night, strain it and drink thereof a good draught, morning and
evening.

Or,
Take of Sheeps dung half a handful, of Goose-dung as much, steep them in a
pint of white wine or Ale, one night, strain it, and drink thereof morning and
evening.

Or,
Take a good handful of red Nettle crops, boil them in a pint of Ale or Beer,
strain it and drink a good draught morning and evening warm.

Or,
Take of Broom-flowers bruised, a handful of Saffron the weight of six pence,
of the juice of Celandine two or three spoonfuls, of Earthworms washed clean,
a small handful; steep them in a pint and a half of white wine one night, then
boil them gently, strain it, and drink thereof first and last.

Or,
Let a live Tench be applied both to the right side (where liver is) and to the
soles of the feet.

Or,
Take the yellow bark or rind of the Barberie-tree and bruise it, then let it
be boiled in white wine or Posset Drink, when it is near boiled put in some
Saffron, and boil it gently a while, strain it and drink thereof morning and
evening.

Against the Small Pox or Measels.
GIve a little Saffron powdered in in milk morning and evening.

Or,
Give some London Treacle to bring them out. It may be given in Dragon-water or
Carduus-water.

Or,
Take of the herb Scabious half a handful, or a handful of Figs sliced, six in
number, of Licoris bruised half an ounce, of Hartshorn as much; boil them in a
pint of Spring Water or Posset Drink to about half a pint, strain it, and put
thereto three or four pennyworth of Saffron in powder. Give four or five
spoonfuls thereof morning an evening warm.

Or,
Take of Lentils (the husks taken off) or Tares four ounces, of Figgs in
number ten, of Raisons of the Sun stoned two ounces, of Fennel-seed bruised a
quarter of an ounce; boil them in three pints of water till the third part be
consumed; when it is near boiled put in twenty grains of Saffron, and let it
boil gently, strain it and give three or four ounces hereof to drink warm
morning and evening.

To preserve the eyes.
Take of red Rose Water four spoonfuls, of woman's milk two spoonfuls, of white
Candy in fine powder half a quarter of an ounce; mingle them together and drop
some of it into the eyes warm.

Or,
Take red Rose Water and put a little Saffron in powder therein, wash the eyes
therewith warm.

To preserve the Throat.
Let them hold often in their mouth white or broun Sugar Candy, or the juice of
Licoris.

Or,
Give them Honey of Roses or Syrup of Mulberies warm.

To preserve the Lungs.
Make them Barly-water with Figgs, Anisseed, Raisons and Licoris. Let them
drink often of it warm.

Let them that have the Pox be kept warm, but not too hot; give them broth and
beer warm. Let their broth be made with Hartshorn, Sorrel and Mary-gold
flowers. They must not eat any meat till the Fever be gone; let them avoid
wine, strong beer and hot Spices. When the Fever is past, they may eat meat of
light digestion, poched eggs, and Bread and Butter They may drink with a Tossed
and a little Sugar, and after they have drank, let them eat the Tossed, for this
will cleanse their mouth and Throat.

If the Pox strik in, give them Mithridate, Diascordium, or Bezarstone, from
two grains to five or six grains.

After eight or ten days you may anoint the face with these following means.

Take fat Bacon, roast it, and let it drop in fair water, then take the
droppings and wash it often in red Rose Water or Plantain-water; with this let
the face be often anointed.

Or;

Take of oil of Roses half an ounce, of Sperma ceti half a quarter of an ounce;
mix them together by melting at the fire, stirring them till it be cold, then
anoint with it.

Or,
Anoint the face with oil of bitter Almonds and a little Sperma ceti mixed
together.

Or,
Take Elder-leaves one handful Marigols two handfuls, of French Mallows or
ordinary Mallows one handful, Hoggs grease half a pound, bruise and boil them
till the herbs be dry, strain it and anoint therewith.

Or,
Take a quarter of an ounce of Cerusse, or Chalk often washed in fine powder
add to it two ounces of thin Cream, mix them together, and anoint therewith.

To take away the spots in the face after they are well.
Take the juice of Lemons and mix with it a little Bay Salt in powder, wash the
face gently with it, or dip clouts in the juice of Lemons, and wash the face
therewith.

Against the Dropsy.
TAke green Broom, and burn it in some clean place that you may save the ashes
of it: Take nine or ten spoonfuls of the same ashes and boil them in a pint of
white wine, till the strength thereof be out, then strain it make three
draughts of the wine. Drink one fasting, another at three of the clock in the
afternoon, and the other last at night.

Or,
Take a good handful of the herb called Bitter-sweet, bruise it, and boil it in
a pint of white wine, strain it, and drink thereof morning and evening.

Or,
Take half a pound of Cow Dung, Anisseed and Cuminseed in powder, of each two
ounces, mix them together and lay it on warm to the swollen belly or legs.

An Appendix concerning Phlebotomie in the Small Pox.
Because the vulgar do so much cry out of letting-blood in the Small Pox, yea
count it such a piacle or mortiferous error I thought it necessary to satisfy
them (if it may be,) that there no such danger as they suppose.

Whether letting blood be safe in the small Pox.
Whether Phlebotomie, or letting blood, may safely be used in the Small Pox?

Sol.
TO answer this question, we must consider the small Pox ante eruptionem, before
any spots appear, and post eruptionem after the spots appear. In the beginning
before any spots appear, especially in a full body, on the second day,
Phlebotomie may safely be done. That this may not seem my own I shall cite my
authority; and first I will begin with Duncanus Liddelius, who says,
Incipiente morbo, Liddelius de seb. l. 3. cap. 9. fol. 273.
ubi adest sanguinis redundantia, si vires and aetas permittant nil melius
putatur, quam a venae sectione initium facere; In the beginning of the small
Pox where blood does much abound, if strength and age permit, no remedy so safe
as letting-blood. And again, Tutissimum est in variolis and morbillis sanguinem
de trahere intra quartum diem si sit plenitudo magna aut febris arduus; It is
most safe in the small Pox and Measels to draw blood before the fourth day, if
there be any great fullness or burning Fever. Hollerius says thus, Primo aut
secundo die sanguis detrahendus est: Hollerius de morbis internis fol. 827.
on the first or second day blood is to be drawn away. And he goes farther, and
gives a reason, Sic enim melius transpirat corpus. Putredinis causa
intercipitur, levatur natura, and si quid vitii eliquum est, celerius in
superficiem corporis repurgatur, etc. For by letting blood respiration is much
helped, and the cause of putrefaction is intercepted, nature is eased, and the
corrupt humors are more speedily sent from the Center, to the Circumference;
otherwise there is great danger, least by too much putrefaction the Fever be
increased, and Nature too much oppressed with a multitude of humors, that at
last it bring a suffocation to the Patient. So that we see Phlebotomie is so
far from hindering the coming forth of the Pox, that it is a great help to
their more speedy coming forth.

Fuchsius has these words concerning letting-blood in the small pox, Fuchsius
de med. mor. lib. 5. cap. 8. fol. 581.
Si adulti corripiuntur exanthematis, initio curationis, si corpus plenum
fuerit, sanguis mitendus, idque faciendum antequam appareant exanthemata: If
adult or grown persons be taken with the small Pox, in the beginning, if they
have full bodies, blood is to be taken away, but let it be done before the
spots appear. Of this opinion are most of the Learned Physicians, Mercurialis
edict. 1623. Faventinus, venetiis. 1554. Pet. Paschalis Ludgduni 1631.
Mercuriales de morb. puer. lib. 1. fol. 24. Farentin. empiric. fol. 390. Pet.
Pascalis de feb. fol. 117. Pet. Paulus de cur. morb. lib. 2. c. 10. fol. 209.
Pet. Bayrus tract. de Peste, fol. 820. Heurnius de feb. fol. 139. Pet. Paulus
Lugdunj. 1587. Pet. Bayrus, Lugdun. 1578.
Rondeletius method. curand. fol. 626. Gordonius de feb. fol. 52. River. prax.
med. fol. 157. Sennert. de feb. fol. 480.

I hope it does now plainly appear, Heurnius Lugduni Batavorum. M.IC.IIC.
that there is no such danger (as the most conceive and imagine) to let blood
in the small Pox, all the circumstances well considered. Rondeletius edit.
1628. Gordonius, Lugduni. 1574.
But to make it more plain, I shall bring two or three instances of children
that (having the small Pox) have been let blood. Riverius, Goudae. 1649.
Amatus Lucitanus let a child blood of five years old that had the small Pox,
and took away four ounces of blood, Sonnertus, Parisiis. 1633.
who soon recovered. Amat. Lucitan. Cent. 3. curat. decima sexta. And he let
blood another child of seven years old, Amatus Lucitanius Curation mediciis.
Centur. 4.
and took away six ounces of blood. Cent. 1. curat. decima. And Avenzoar let
his Son blood at three years old, who soon after recovered. Basiliae 1556.
Pet. Bayr. tract. de peste fol. 821. Now if children be let blood in the small
Pox, much more may grown persons be let blood before any spots appear.

But happily it will be objected, Object. of the vulgar.
that many that are let blood in the small Pox dye, which happily might have
lived, Answ.
had they not been let blood: to which I answer, they may dye after letting
blood for these reasons.

1 First because they wanted

Secondly, because they wanted

Thirdly, because their glass is run, and the Almighty has set their time
beyond which they cannot pass; for Statutum est omnibus semel mori; it is
appointed for all men once to dye; and what man lives and shall not see death?
Quod natura negat, reddere nemo potest, and contra vim mortis non est medicamen
in hortis. Therefore let not the vulgar judge rashly, Phlebotomie to be the
cause.

Some Erumpentibus pustulis fas est sanguinem detrahere non semel duntax^t, sed
bis terre pro ratione and nessitate indicationum. Pet. Paschal. de fob. fol.
117. History.
Physicians go yet farther, and give counsel to let blood though the spots
appear, in full and plethorick bodies where the Fever is violent, and that not
only ounce, but to reiterate Phlebotomie; which course I durst nevet attempt
nor venture upon; yet I once knew a young man about seventeen years old of a
full body, after the Pox were come forth, that was let blood, who soon after
recovered but before he lay senseless. But in such cases I wish practitioners
to be very Caeterum perpetuum non est abstinere Phlebotomia, cum jam papula in
superficie corporis extiterunt. Etenim fit aliquando prae copia vitii, ut and
plurimum reliquum sit in corpore, urgeat vehementer difficultas spirandi gravis
fit febris: quo tempore si nihil repugnat, vena secanda est, Holler, de morb.
intern. l. 2. fol. 828. Pet. Bayrus de peste f. 820. Faventius empiric fol.
390. Hercules Saxonia, Venetiis 1620. fol 10. Ioh. Baptist. Montanus Basiliae.
8.
cautious, of letting blood, for fear of hindering Nature in expelling the
venomous humor, as also to prevent the calumny of those that are too apt to
censure the best actions, and the most painful labors of the learned,
especially if it happen that the Patient dye of the disease. I might here also
answer an other question concerning letting blood in Pestilent Fevers when any
spots appear, but those that desire satisfaction herein, let them consult with
these following Authors, viZ. Hercules Saxonia de feb. fol. 150. Montanus de
feb. pestil. cap. 50. fol. 463, 464, 465, 466. Pet. Salius diverse. de feb.
pestilent. cap. 24. Pet. Salius Bononia. 1584, 4. Massaria Lugduni. 1634. fol.
fol. 200. Massaria lib. 2. de peste fol. 530. 531.

An Alphabetical Table of the diseases in this small Treatise.
A
AChes. p. 27, Agues p. 46.
B
BAck to strengthen p. 35. Bees stinging thereof. p. 39. Biles or Fellons p.
17. Biting of venomous beasts p. 37. Blackness of the face and eyes p. 26.
Bleeding at the Nose p. 29. Bleeding of wounds p. 31. Bruises or strains p. 23.
Burning and Scalding p. 1. and p. 8. Burning with Gunpowder p. 7. Burning of
the face and eyes p. 7.
C
CHilblains and Kibes p. 20. Colic and Stone p. 48. 49. Cough p. 50.
D
DEafness p. 39. Dropsy p. 60.
E
EYes, black and blew p. 26. Eyes blood-shotten and red p. 44. Eyes dim p. 41.
Eyes, spots therein p. 43. Eyes watering and itching p. 42. Eyes burnt with
Gunpowder p. 7.
F
FEllons, see Biles p. 17. Flux or looseness p. 51.
G
GOut p. 52. Gravel or Stone p. 48.
H
HEmorrhoides, see Piles p. 32.
I
IAndise p. 55. Itch and Scab p. 8. and p. 21. Inflammations p. 8.
K
KIbes and Chilblains p. 8. and p. 20.
L
LOoseness or Flux p. 51.
M
MAd Dog, biting thereof p. 37. Measels or small Pox p. 56.
N
Nipples of women's breasts being sore p. 8.
P
PIles p. 8. and p. 32. Piles bleeding p. 34. Pox small, or Measels p. 56.
R
RIngworm, see Tetter p. 16.
S
SCab, Itch p. 21. Shingles p. 14. Splinters or Thorns to draw out p. 28.
Strains p. 23. Scalding p. 8.
T
Tetter p. 16. Thorns and splinters to draw out p. 28. Toothache p. 44.
W
VVOunds green p. 8. p. and 9. VVounds bleeding p. 31.
FINIS.

