ANTI-PARAEUS, OR, A Treatise in the Defense of the Royal Right of KINGS:
Against Paraeus and the rest of the Anti-Monarchians, whether Presbyterians or
Jesuits.

Wherein is maintained the unlawfulness of opposing and taking up Arms against
the Prince, either by any private Subject, inferior Magistrate, the States of
the Kingdom, or the Pope of Rome.

Confirmed from the dictate of Nature, the Law of Nations, the Civil and Canon
Law, the Sacred Scriptures, Ancient Fathers, and Protestant Divines.

Delivered formerly in a Determination in the Divinity Schools in CAMBRIDGE,
April the 9th. 1619. And afterward enlarged for the Press by Learned Dr. OWEN.

Now Translated and Published to confirm Men in their Loyalty to their King,
By R. M. Master in Arts.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1642.

To the Honorable Sr. THOMAS GLEMHAM KNIGHT, Collonell General and Governor
of the CITY of YORK,
Sir,
A Breast Fortified with Loyalty is the CITY of Refuge this Work flies to,
whereof your Noble Self being Governor, it craves with Boldness a Gracious
Entrance, and doubts not of your Favorable Protection. If my particular Duty
did not engage me, your Noble Worth would soon Invite me to Dedicate my
Labors to your Honorable Patronage; for who shall better Patronize that Work
whose Subject is Loyalty, than he who is a Loyal Subject? who better encourage
the Pen in the Cause of Kings, than he, who with Glory has engaged his Sword
in the Kings Cause? But Sir, I will not detract from your Worth by presuming to
declare it; being a thing better known by your Actions, than I can express by
Words. Only this; whilst this CITY gloryes so much in being under your
Government, the Soldiers under your Command, give the Scholar leave to glory
in being under your Patronage. Go on Sir in your Loyalty to the Crown, and God
shall Crown your Loyalty, let your aim still be Gods Glory and your
Sovereigns Honor; and that shall make for your Souls Happiness, and this
Kingdoms Peace. Sir,

York, March the 10. 1642. Your most humbly Devoted Servant, R. MOSSOM.

To the Reader, wishing Loyalty and Peace.
COurteous Reader, If thou inquire after the Author, know he was a Man of so
much Piety as to write nothing but what his conscience told him was the Truth;
and of so much Learning, as to maintain the Truth he writ. Howsoever, then,
thou do censure the weakness of the Translatour, yet cast no aspersion upon
the Author. Let him Rest, who is departed to his Eternal Rest, and has left
this Work as a Lecture of Loyalty, which if thou read shall either help to
convince thy Conscience or (without Repentance) to condemn thy Soul.

Take heed therefore to thy self, that whilst thou resists a Gracious King thou
resist not the Holy Spirit too, who is the Spirit of Truth. It is as well out
of love to thy Soul, as duty to my Sovereign, that I have published this
present Treatise in thy Mothers Tongue. That if thou have lift up thine hand
against thy King in Rebellion, thou may lift it up again to God in Prayer for
Pardon; and that as thou desire to profess thy self a true Christian, thou
may declare thy self a true Subject. This Work was written above twenty
years since, and therefore free from the prejudice of the Times, envy and
flattery. And know such has bin my faithfulness in the Translation, that I
have rather chosen to lose of the Luster of the Style, than to detract from the
Sincerity and Truth of the Matter. The Language is plain, being intended
(especially) for the Vulgar, who most need instruction in this lesson of
Loyalty, their disobedience arising from their Weakness, though others from
their Wilfulness, whose Judgment will be the greater. Let me prevail with
thee (Christian Reader) to lay aside all private Respects, which may prejudice
the Truth of this Work, for Saint Augustines rule is most firm, quamdiu
blanditur sibi and dulcis est iniquitas amara est veritas, Truth will taste
bitter to that Palate which pleases it self with the sweetness of Impiety.
Do thou with as much Sincerity read, as the Author writ, and when thou art
convinct in judgment how great an Impiety it is to rise up against a most
Wicked Prince; consider what an height of Impiety they arise to, who rise up
against a most Pious King? if they receive to themselves Damnation who resist a
Nero, a persecuting Emperor, what shall they receive to themselves who take up
Arms against our Charles, a most gracious Sovereign? if it be a Sin to
oppose that King who violates; how great a Sin is it to injure thy King who
protects the Laws of the Kingdom? I will not detayne thee longer from that
Satisfaction thou shall receive in perusing this Book; there thou shall find
all the Adversary's objections fully answered; the truth it self fully
cleared; be obedient to the Truth and I doubt not but thou will be loyal to
thy King. If otherwise, take this with thee at thy Farewell. Qui insurgit in
Christum Domini, insurgit in Dominum Christi: he that rises up against the
Anointed of the Lord, rises up against the Lord of the Anointed.

The Preface.
AFter that the People of Israel had escaped the darkness of Egypt, and the
Wilderness, they were infested from the East by the Ammonites, from the West
by the Philistines, from the North by the Assyrians, and from the South by the
Egyptians; So even now the Faithful Flock, is every where from every place
Impugned, whilst Tyranny rages, Heresy prevails, Schism overspreadeth,
Hypocrisy deceives, and all Impiety increases, against the soundness of
Faith, the fervor of Charity and the integrity of Life; to the seducing (if it
were possible) the very Elect of God, whom Christ has committed also, to the
Trust of Kings, by whose Laws the Church is fortified, and by whose Arms she is
defended; against the incursion of the Enemies, the perfidiousnesse of Heresy,
the divisions of Schism, the flattery's of Hypocrisy, and the corruption of
Manners. Deceitful Ministers leave no stone unmoved, that they may exclude the
King from the charge committed to him, which they endeavor, by denying the
Authority Regal in matters Ecclesiastical, by taking away the Royal Power in
matters Political, and by usurping the Sovereignty in both.

The Authority Ecclesiastical is denied, by the Papists.
Christians ought to be subject to Kings as Supreme; that is true indeed, but
in those things only which appertain to the State Politic. So Bellarm. de
Pontif. l. 1. c. 7.

By the Disciplinarian
The Civil Power is referred to things Earthly and Temporal; but the
Ecclesiastical is referred to things Spiritual, and which appertain to the
Worship of God: from whence it is, that the Ecclesiastical Power is usually
styled jus poli, the right of Heaven, the Civil, jus soli, the right of Earth
So Bucan loco. 43. Sect. 5.

Majesty must creep on the ground, whilst those our Spiritual Masters, placed
in the Clouds, do from high behold it below them, and despise it as profane.
Augustine was of another mind, In quaest. mixed. 35.
when he taught, That the King has the Image of God, as the Bishop the Image
of Christ, yea, by so much the more excellently does he express the Divine
Image, by how much the glory of a Judge is more excellent, and his Majesty more
illustrious then that of the Priest. I appeal to your own Consciences (good
Men) what and how great think you was the Power of ancient Emperors? by whose
sacred command Churches have been dedicated, Bishops invested, the Clergy
exempted, and Synods assembled, in which themselves sat Presidents, and
confirmed their Decrees; thereby establishing the Faith, overthrowing Heresy,
ob^iging Clergy and Laity to the worship of God, oppointing all things
requisite for the exercise of Religion, and ordering by their Laws the form
of outward Worship; and all this they did by a lawful power, as Socrates in
prolog. l. 5. and as Saint Augustine expressly and elegantly, de civit. Deil. 5.
c. 24. yea to the safety of humane things, and necessity of the Church, as one
of the Popes himself has confessed. Leo ad pulcherimam Augustam, where he says,
Humane things cannot otherwise be safe, than as they pertain to the Divine
Profession, and be defended by Regal and Priestly Authority.

The Power Civil is taken away by the Papist.
Supreme Princes are obnoxious to the Laws, by all Law, Natural, National,
and Positive; and it is in the power of the Commonwealth to require again the
authority it has committed to the Prince for the public good, and to
exauthorize the King if he shall evilly administer. So Parson. in Doleman. par.
1. c. 4.

By the Disciplinarian.
The Tyranny and unjust Violence of the Superior Magistrate ought to be
restrained by the ordinary power; which in every Polity is either the Inferior
Magistrate, or the consent of the People. So Paraus in Epist, ad Romans c. 13.
quest. 4. prop. 2.

The Sovereignty is usurped in both, by the Papist.
Judgment concerning the King belongs to the Pope, to whom is committed the
charge of Religion; therefore it is the Popes right to judge the King to be
deposed, or not to be deposed. So Bellarmine de pont. l. 5 c. 7.

By the Disciplinarian.
The Presbytery is erected in the Church as Christ's Tribunal: Who then shall
exempt Kings and Princes from their Sovereignty not humane but divine, and not
be guilty of Treason against the Majesty of Christ? So Beza de presb. p. 116.
Hence forwards, let Kings cease their care of Religion, the Pope will undertake
that charge, and so will the Presbytery; the Pope in his Kingdom, the
Presbytery in it is Dominion. If any Secular Prince shall put in his sickle, to
cut down this standing corn of the Popes, or this new-sprung herb of the
Presbytery, he shall not escape unpunished; the Popes thunderings, and the
Consistoryes lightnings shall pursue him* the People equally bewitched with
error, one where assists the Pope, another where the Presbytery, but every
where resists the King, that he may learn poor King at length,

To hold his Scepter, and to lay it down
At's Peopl's favor, and at's Peopl's frown.
About four years since when according to the order of our University, (after
I had taken the degree of Doctor) it was imposed upon me to determine a
controversy in Divinity; my duty did require me to assert the free and
absolute Power of Kings against David Paraeus, and the Anti-monarchians. Which
assertion, when I had intended to have kept reserved; provoked by the rashness
of an heady young man in Oxford, I have presented to public view, having been
more severely examined, and more largely explained. I appeal to thy own
Conscience, whosoever thou art (O Christian and Faithful Subject) whether does
this usurped Tyranny over the Lords anointed ones, favor at all of the Spirit
of Truth? is not this discording concord of false Brethren, fit to be committed
to the fire? fit to be exploded with the unanimous contempt of all Christians?
the Fathers of old both thought and writ more holily, both according to the
Prescript of the divine Law, and Rule of the Gospel.

Tertullian. God alone it is, in whose power only Kings are, to whom they are
second, after whom they are first, above all men, before all Gods. in Apologet.

Agapetus. The Emperor is equal to every man in the natural essence of Body,
but equal to a God president over all in the powerful excellency of Dignity;
for he has not on Earth, any higher than himself. Therefore it behooves him,
as a God, not to be carried away with wrath, as a Mortal, not to be lifted up
with pride; for though he be honored with the divine likeness, yet is he
framed of the earthly dust whereby he is taught, that he preserve a just
equallity toward all. Paraenet. ad Justin. Imperat.

Gregorius Magnus. Therefore is there power given to the Emperor from Heaven,
over all men on Earth; that the way to Heaven might be laid open, and the
further spread, that so the earthly Kingdom might be subservient to the
Heavenly. Epist. 91. l. 1.

This most sacred Majesty which God himself has ordained, Christ confirmed,
and the Orthodoxe Church perpetually reverenced, I now endeavor to vindicate
from the injury of seditious men; and that with solid Reasons drawn even from
Nature, the Law of Nations, the Civil Law, Canon Law, the word of God, the
sayings of the Fathers, and the writing of the Protestants. All which are so
truly, fairly, and sincerely alleged; that I neither fear the Judgment of
the Reader, nor the calumny of the Adversary. Thou pious Reader, and Loyal
Subject, live well, and farewell.

If ought thou know that better is to me impart;
If not, use these with me, and so thou friendly art.

The Contents.
The Question stated, Page 1. The Terms explained, page 2. The Agreement of
Presbyterians and Jesuits, page 3.
The four Propositions of Paraeus are refuted.
Concerning 1. the Excommunication of Kings, page 5. 2. the Power of the
inferior Magistrate, page 11. 3. the duty of a private Man, page 47. 4.
private revenge in case of necessity, page 57.

The absolute Power of Kings is confirmed.
From the Dictate of Nature, page 68. the Law of Nations, page 69. the Civil
Law, page 74. the Canon Law, page 77. the Holy Scriptures page 78. the Ancient
Fathers, page 84. the Protestant Divines, page 85.

ANTI-PARAEVS. The question Stated.
The Position: It is not lawful to resist the King, violating the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom.
Diverse Men in this our Age, have handled this controversy Diverse Ways,
whilst the Pontificians contend to have the Royal Scepter submit to the Roman
Purple, the Presbyterians to the States of the Kingdom, and in some cases to
the provoked Multitude; and the Protestants to God alone. David Paraeus, A
Palatine Divine, in the Year 1612. writ very elegantly coucerning the Lawful
Right of Kings, in the behalf of the then Sovereign and most potent Prince,
King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, against the Papal Usurpation,
against Bellarmine, Becanus, and other Popish Parasites of the same mold. The
Printer Dedicated that Tract to the same Sovereign, in which the foundation of
that Pontifician Tower is rased, the sophistical disputes of Bellarmine are
confuted; the vain Arguments of Becanus refell'd, and the cunning Impostures of
the Canonists forcibly retorted. Yet, as if he had drunk deep of the A Lake
that Waters the Borders of Genevah and Lausama.
Lemanian Lake, he brandishes the inferior Magistrates Sword, against Kings
and greatest Emperors, and affords no less dangerous, than impious Arms, to
the confused and incomposed multitude, and this in many parts of that Tract,
out of which receive these few selected.

The violence and tyranny of the Superior Magistrate ought to be restrained by
the Ordinary Power, which in every Polity is either the inferior Magistrate,
or the consent of the People. This David Paraeus has quaest. 4. Tract. de
potest. civ. rat. 1. Against Bellarmine, Becanus, Danaeus, Paraeus, and the
rest so devoutly addicted to the Popedom, or the Presbytery. I confidently
aver, That neither the Roman Bishop, the States of a Kingdom, nor the
Tumultuous Commons, have any power over Kings which offend, or violate the Laws
which they call Fundamental; and this I shall manifest and evince by many
strong Reasons, that I may give some light to the weaker sort of Men,
distracted with variety of Opinions; that as Men placed in a Watchtower, they
may a far off discover; or as Men sailing in the Haven, they may without danger
escape those gulfes of errors, and Whirle-Pooles of Falsehoods, with which the
Writings of Papists and Puritans do plentifully abound. But in the first place
to the taking away all ambiguity, I will explain the Terms of the Question.

The Terms of the question explained.
I call him King who has a Supreme Power, subject to none. In the Word
Resist, I comprehend all Power of gainsaying, all commotion or confederacy
against the Royal Majesty, a Violator of the Fundamental Laws, is, (according
to the Theological Politics) such an one as does overthrow either all, or the
chiefest established Laws of the Commonwealth. The Puritan-Papists tell us, the
Fundamental Laws, are (I know not what) contracts or conditional Covenants,
betwixt the King and the People, entered and established by Oath at the Kings
first Inauguration; which being broken, they will have the People free, and
loose from all Bonds of Allegiance and Religion to their Sovereigns, the Kings
being ipso factor, null and divested of all authority. As if that Sacred
Majesty given by God, were conferred by the People, and that upon certain
conditional Laws; at whose pleasure it is to be resigned. Which madness, I
will clearly refute from the Dictate of Nature, the Law of Nations, the Civil
Law, Canon Law, from Sacred Scripture, Orthodox Fathers, and the most famous
Pastors of the reformed Church; who, as they have bid adieu to the Popedom, so
have they not sworn to the Dictates of the novell Presbytery. But first give me
leave to show the seditious agreement of Papists and Puritans against the
Majesty of Kings.

The agreement of Papists and Purita^s against the Majesty of Kings.
Robert Bellarmine an excellently Learned Cardinal, most accurately skillful in
unloosing the Knots of Controversies; yet Lib. 5. de Pontif. he does so involve
this power of restraining Kings with so many subtilties; that he receives no
better style from Carerius than Atheist and Politician. Yet, under the Mask of
Mathaeus Tortus does he impose the same upon the English Papists, as the
foundation of the Catholic Faith. And in a Tract, concerning the Temporal
Power of the Pope, against Barclay, he concludes the same clearly and briefly
from many Arguments, reduced to four heads.

First, from the authority of some Writers, Italian, French, Spanish, German
and English; of whom Gregory the seventh is the first, Nicholas Sanders the
last, he the Head, this the Tail of that Beast in the Revelations. Secondly,
from good Scripture, but bad interpretation. Thirdly, from political Reasons.
Lastly, from Examples.

Of all them which stand on the Presbyterian side, Lambertus Danaeus is the
most Learned, and in resolving controversies the most perspicacious. After
those many and wearisome labors against the Pontificians and Lutherans, when
he was now grown old; he put forth his Christian Polity as his last work, and
in lib. 3. c. 6. he propounds (as he calls it) this noble question: whether
Christian Men, and Pious Subjects may with a good Conscience change and
abrogate a constituted Polity, and choose to themselves another? He answers,
That, the Supreme Magistrate violating the Fandameutall Laws of the Kingdom,
may be deposed by godly Subjects, and that with a good Conscience: And lib. 3.
c. 6. he affirms; That, Judgment upon the Superior Magistrate, who exceeds
the bounds of his duty, or performs not his duty as he ought; belongs to the
States of the Kingdom: And this he endeavors to fortify with a sour square
Army, like to the Macedonian Phalans. First from Political Reasons. Secondly,
from the authority of Gods Word. Thirdly, from the Opinions of the Prudent;
namely, John Calvin, Brutus Junius, and George Bucanan. Lastly, from Examples,
and those of the Ancients; namely, the People of Israel, the Lacedaemonians,
Athenians, and Romans: also those of later times: namely, French, Spanish,
Germans, English and Scotch. And against Bellarmine, Controvers. 3. lib. 3. c.
7. he confesses plainly, That, the King which is an Heretic ought to be
depesed; but that, not by the Bishop of Rome; but by the States of the
Kingdeme. Those things which have been occasionally, here and there touched upon
by others, are all collected into one sum, and digested into Method by David
Paraeus; which he concludes in four Propositions; each of which I will set
down, least I should seem to let any thing escape.

The first Proposition.
David Paraeus. The Bishops and Pastors may and ought (upon the consent of the
Church) deliver up the contumacious Magistrates unto Satan until they do
repent.


Doctor Owen. first Propesition of Paraeus confuted,
In these few words, do lurk not a few errors. Contumacy is a Law Term, which
the Lawyers define to be; a Disobedience against the Superior; as often as the
Subject, being cited in a due course of Law, does not appear, does not obey,
or depart without License. The Supreme Magistrate, being inferior to God
alone, is not subject to Man, and therefore neither can, nor ought to iucur the
guilt of Contumacy. Some speak with good reason (says John of Paris) that, not
every offender is a fit matter upon which or can work with effect. but that
offender when is a Subject, Kings cannot properly be said to be contumacious.
and therefore the foresaid power has not effection the Offender, unless when
subjection is presupposed; which makes a Man to be a fit matter, upon which the
Keys may have their Act with effect. de potest. Regia and Papasi. c. 13.

A King in his Kingdom is not subject to the Episcopal Jurisdiction, as it is
penal and coercive, How the King is not subject to the power of the Keys.
but is superior in Order of Power; as Augustine affirm's expressly. Moses was
in the midst betwixt Aaron and God, Aaron in the midst betwixt Moses and the
people, etc. In Exodus quest. 10. Those Bishops therefore and Supercilious
Pastors, who send out their citation, or put forth their accusation against
their Prince, are impious against God, whose Ordinance they resist; seditious
against the King, over whose sovereignty they insult; Traitors against the
Common wealth, whose Peace they disturb. I believe Paraeus can never show,
where any one of the Apostles sat Judge of Princes. I read the AEpostles stood
to be Judged, but I never read they stood Judging, says Saint Bernard, de
considerat. l. 1. c. 6.

The consent of the Church not required in the act of excommunication.
Whereas he says, (upon consent of the Church) without doubt he does but catch
at popular Applause, by subjecting Princes to the censure of the Pastors, and
the Pastors to the Judgment of the People. The Apostles had the power of the
Keys from Christ, and the Bishops have it from the Apostles, without
reservation of the Churches consent. Augustine calls this power, the Episcopal
judgment; de corrept. and great. c. 15. and Beza himself has exploded this
Consent out of a well constituted Church, as wicked, dangerous, and dissonant
to the Word of God. in Epist. 83.

To deliver unto Satan] (which he improperly attributes to excommunication) was
an extraordinary power granted to the Apostles for a time: What is meant by
delivering unto Satan.
according to the more commonly received opinion of Ancient and Modern
Divines. Consult S. Ambrose upon that 1. Tim. c. 1. S. Chrysostom upon 1 Corinthians. 5. hom. 15. S. Aug, against the letters of Petilian. l. 2. c. 10. S.
Hierome, Bid, Theodoret, Occumenius, Theophylact and Sedulius: all upon that
(1 Cor. c. 5.) of the Apostles to deliver to Satan which all of them do
understand, to be meant of that corporal affliction, which the Apostles did
inflict: not by the power of the Keys, but by the power of working Miracles.
To which I add the Divines of later times, and those of better note and
sounder judgment, Thomas Bilson lately Bishop of Winchester, Peter Martyr,
Thomas Erastus, and Benedict Aretius; I am fully persuaded (says that Reverend
Bishop) that S. Paul in revenging that wickedness, would have some footstep
remain of that wonderful power and virtue, which he received from Christ to
revenge impiety; whereby the imitation of so great a wickedness, might hereafter
seem dangerous to the rest, etc. in his perpetual government of the Church, c.
8.

The Apostles (says Peter Martyr) had the Devils subject to them, and by them
they might sometimes punish offenders to the furtherance of their salvation,
therefore to whom this gift is not imparted, they ought wholly to abstain from
the exercise thereof. locor. com. clas. 1. c. 8. sect. 9. The power of
delivering unto Satan, (as Erastus has it) which was given to S. Paul, was
not so necessary for the Church, that it should become an ordinary power.
Confirm. These. lib. 41. cap. 7. To deliver unto Satan was a power delivered
unto the Apostles (says Aretius) of punishing the notoriously contumacious,
which afterward ceased. Upon the 1 Timothy c. 1. From the miraculous power of the
Apostles to the ordinary jurisdiction of Pastors, is a most frivolous
consequence, for what did extraordinarily belong to the Apostles, had its end
with the Apostles: but grant we that this delivering unto Satan, has no other
signification, but that of Excommunication; it will not from hence follow, That
it is lawful for Pastors to exclude the Supreme Magistrates from converse
with their Subjects. The prescripts of the Gospel, of making the wicked
ashamed, avoiding the company of the Scandalous, and rebuking the obstinate,
whilst there was no Man in the Church, entrusted with the Sword, to the revenge
of evil doers; are not rashly to be applied to the disgracing, deserting, or
rebuking the Magistrate. Note.
For the rule is, Those things which by the Prophets and Apostles are set down
in General, ought not to be pressed to the everting those things which are
commanded by them in particular. God in the Law and in the Gospel has given
especial and express commands for Subjection, and Reverence to Magistrates;
yea, though foully polluted with vices, with tyranny and impieties; as, that
such were those, of whom our Savior and his Apostles spoke, cannot be denied.
Therefore no consequence of a general Precept ought to be wrested, against the
express and special Command of honoring the Magistrates: least we make the
divine will changeable, or repugnant to it is self; which to say were horrible
wickedness and blasphemy, and to believe it a grand impiety and heresy. Gregory
the 7th. by an unheard of example presumed to attempt this, Paraeus has trod in
Hildebrands steps and has conveyed that to the Pastors of the reformed Church;
which was most vile in the Pontifician Kingdom; which an Ambrose would never
have done, nor any holy and Orthodox Bishop in the Church of Christ has ever
done.


David Paraeus. The first Proposition proved by exemples.
By the Examples of the Prophets, of Elijah, who in Word resisted wicked Ahab;
Jeremiah, wicked Joachim; John Baptist, wicked Herod; and Ambrose, Theodosius;
for unjust slaughter, etc.


Doctor Owen. The Examples cleared.
Elijah did recall the King from his error, and confirmed the People in the
Truth, both by Word and Miracles; he shut not out the King from the Company of
his People for his impiety, he withdrew not the People from their Subjection to
the King, he delivered him not as contumacious unto Satan; he commanded not
Obadiah that good man, nor any other to refrain Communion with that wicked
King.

Jeremiah reproved the impious King; I neither read, nor believe, that in Word
he resisted the King; of whose Peaceable Doctrine, and no way seditious Life,
Calvin speaks in these words, Jeremiah (says he) does not only command the
Jews to bear patiently the punishment inflicted upon them; but will have them
to be subject to Nebuchadnezzar; and not only forbids them to be seditious,
but will have them to be so Obedient from their Hearts, that God may be
witness of their free subjection and obedience, these are the Words upon the
29. of Jeremy verse 7.

Herod the Adulterer, at the request of the Damsel Dancing before him,
beheaded John: The Innocence of the Prophet, or the cruelty of the Tyrant, was
not unknown to Christ; yet did He not revenge the Prophet by force of Arms, He
did not deprive the Persecutors of His Kingdom, He did not deliver him unto
Satan, He did not animate the People against the Tyrant; being an example unto
us, that we strive not against perverse Kings and such as are wickedly
opinioned concerning God

Ambrose did not resist Theodosius with threatening Words, but Exhorted Him with
calm Language: I Council (says he) I entreat, I beseech, I admonish, I have
no cause of contumacy against thee, but of fear, I dare not offer, if thou be
present. This Ambrose tells us concerning this his Act, In Epist. 28. They who
Interpret this fact of Ambrose, to be Excommunication (as Excommunication is
taken for the Act of exterior Power, and superior Jurisdiction) they do much
wrong to the Truth of the History. Ambrose had not (such as the Puritans Dream
of) a Presbytery erected as Christ's Tribunal, from whose Government, who so
exempts even Kings, shall be accounted guilty of high Treason against the
Majesty of Christ, as Beza Writes, De Presbyter. and Excommun. p. 116. Nortons
Edition.

Ambrose did not decree his Letters of Summons against Theodosius, neither did
he send a Messenger to cite him being absent, or accuse him of Contumacy being
present; and judicially condemn him. Neither did he decree him to be
Excommunicated, not sentence him Excommunicate, nor exclude him (out of the
holy Congregation and Divine solemnities) from the company of the Faithful. I
will dispatch the whole matter in a few words; The true Relation of Ambrose his
Act concerning the Emperor Theodosites.
The Bishop withheld the Emperor from the Sacred Mysteries, by no Act of
Jurisdiction, but by intermitting his public Ministry, and Sacerdotall
Office; who would neither perform Divine Service, nor Administer the Holy
Sacrament, so long as the Emperor was present; which every Pastor though no
Bishop might lawfully have done, if he had happened upon an impenitent sinner,
or such an one as did trample upon those Sacred Mysteries with manifest
contempt; according to the Doctrine of the ancient Church, as Saint Chrysostom
witnesses in Matthew. Hom. 83. And according to the opinion of the Church of
England, as Bilson (the Augustine of our Age) does witness in his answer to
Cardinal Alanus, part. 3. page 366.

But in this Act, Ambrose that good Bishop did not do well, whose default many
have endeavored to excuse, no man could approve; or can indeed any godly or
Just estimator of the truth. He caused the good Emperor (pious, faithful,
penitent, acknowledging his offense publicly, and deprecating the same
earnestly) to refrain from the communion of Prayers, hearing of the Word, and
participation of the Sacrament; which Christ himself would not have done, who
admitted Judas to the holy Assembly (of his Apostles) and has commanded us to
forgive our Brother as often as he shall repent.


The second Proposition.
David Paraeus. Subjects, not private, but constituted in the inferior
Magistracy; may lawfully, even with Arms, defend themselves, and the
Commonwealth, and the Church, or true Religion, against the superior
Magistrate. These conditions being supposed.


Doctor Owen. The second Proposition of Paraeus confuted,
The inferior Magistrate in a Kingdom, has no authority, but from the King
and under the King; which if he abuse against the King or Commonwealth, he is
deprived at the pleasure of the King, and suffers punishment for the ill
ministration of his Office; not on the contrary. This power of the Inferior
over his Superior, is not established by God, but is introduced by Divellish
malice, or Humane presumption, against the Divine Ordinance, contrary to the
Order of Nature, and equity of Law. Paraeus saw the harshnesse of this
Proposition, and therefore has mollified it with some Moderating Conditions.


The first Moderating Condition.
David Paraeus. When the Superior Magistrate does degenerate and become a
Tyrant.


Doctor Owen. This is not to provide a remedy against evil Kings, but to help
forwards and add to the public calamity; and indeed to deceive the Reader:
When he Degenerates (you say) into Tyranny. But tell me (Paraeus) seriously
(seeing what is Sacred ought not to be eluded) how and when does he degenerate?
he which is a Tyrant in your Judgment, may perchance be a King in mine; and
whom you suppose to be a very good Prince, I may justly conceive a very Cruel
Tyrant. In this variety therefore of Opinions, the question will be, Whether
has he degenerated? you affirm: I deny: Therefore the Accuser is to be
brought forth, the guilty Arraigned, the Witnesses Produced, and this before a
Competent Judge, There is none on Earth under God, that can be a competent
Judge over Princes.
such as indeed there is not any on Earth under God; which, Scripture teaches,
the Church beleiveth, Reason persuades, and the Public Safety requires.

The Scripture teaches: The King does whatsoever Pleases Him; Where the Word
of a King is, there is Power, and who may say unto him, what do thou,
Ecclesiastes, 8. verse. 3.4.

The Church beleiveth, No Man (says Cyrill) does vilify the Laws of Kings
unpunished; saving Kings themselves, in whom the Crime of prevarication has no
place; for it is wisely said, That he is wicked, that says unto the King, thou
do unjustly, in Joan. l. 12. c. 56. These are his Words, according with the
sense of the Scriptures, and the unanimous consent of the Church; for as God is
the Supreme Head of all, who Judges all and is judged by none; So Kings,
Princes of the World who Correct and Judge others, may be Corrected or Judged
by none, but by Him only, to whose power alone they are Subject. Which King
David had an eye to; who when he was an Adulterer and Murderer, prayed for the
Divine Mercy, saying, Against thee only have I sinned; For I acknowledge none
other my Superior on Earth save thee alone, besides thee I have no Judge, who
may or can compel me to Trial, Sentence, or Punishment for my wickedness.
Whence is that of the Poet.

The People to their Sovereign's Scepter brings
Their awful reverence, and to Jove, their Kings.
Reason Persuades, The King is Head of the Body Politic, the Members neither
ought to Judge the Head, because they are below it; neither may they cut it
off, because thereby they even cease to be Members.

The public safety requires, The King being condemned, will not yield to the
Conspirators, although their strength exceed his an hundred fold; He will call
to all the Kings about him for help, He will seek to His Friends, Allies,
Confederates* he will Muster His Merconary Soldiers, and will in Fury
Vindicate the injury that is offered him with Fire and Sword, and (which is
often found true by direful experiments) His Kingdom being lost, the ruin of
the Commonwealth is to Him a miserable Comfort, and sad rejoicing.

Evil Princes seldom removed by violence, with benefit to the Commonwealth.
Grant (which yet is not to be granted) that a Tyrant may be reduced into Order,
or ejected out of His Kingdom by the Inferior Magistrate; yet is He neither
reduced nor ejected, without great damage to the Commonwealth* the Death of
Caesar brought no remedy to the Romans, but a greater mischief. Nero perished,
but with no good success; The next Year which followed after His Death, felt a
greater measure of calamity, and abundance of bloodshed, than the nine years
which He reigned with Tyranny. The Athenians drove out one Tyrant, and brought
in Thirty: Rome by renouncing Kings, did not take away Tyranny, but changed it.
That of the Countryman is old, Antigonum effodio, I Dig up Antigonus, when an
ill Lord was succeeded by a worse. And who is it that knows not the Fable of
the Ulcerous Man? When the Passenger would have driven the Leeches from off his
sores, it is said he cried out, Suffer, oh suffer them to be: these being full
suck less, but being struck off others will come on, which feed more hungerly,
and bite more sharply. Histories do relate, That many Tyrants have been expold,
many slain, but seldom with benefit to the Commonwealth. The slaying of a
Tyrant cannot be with a good Conscience.
Grant it, that the slaying of a Tyrant is for the Common Good; yet can it not
stand with a Good Conscience, because it is forbidden by God.

In a Tyrant three Powers concur; of a Father, of an Husband, and of a Master.
The Sons cannot banish their Father; the Wives may not desert their Husbands;
nor the Servants chastise their Masters; much less may the Subjects deprive
their King of his Dominion. But be it so, that they may, if he degenerates into
a Tyrant; since there are many kinds of Tyrannies, shall they all have the like
reason of condemning the King? where the punishment is not proportioned to the
fault, it is unjust, and the forerunner of a greater Tyranny.

You cannot be ignorant (Paraeus) that there is a threefold distinction of
Tyranny: one does rage against the humane Laws for a private Benefit, with a
public mischief: another does violate the Divine Law, to the dishonor of
the Creator: A third does trample upon both Humane and Divine Laws, contrary to
all Justice and Piety. I confidently aver, That all Tyranny, whether it offer
Violence to God or Man, ought to be suffered; and may not be abrogated, but by
him, who alone does unloose the Bond of Kings, and girdeth their Loins with a
Girdle, Job. 12.18. Solomon sinned most wickedly, by Polygamy and Idolatry,
without the diminution of His Majesty, or amission of his Kingdom; Ahab
Tyrannously murdered Naboth, persecuted the Prophets with Exile and Death; he
banished Gods true Religion, and by his Authority established Baals false
Worship, whom neither the Inseriour Magistrate, nor consent of the People
presumed to repress for his Tyranny. I confess Jehu did it, by a Power
Extraordinary given to him from Heaven, not committed to him from the Laws.
What then could not be done without the Heavenly Oracle; at this Day cannot be
done, without the contempt of the Divine Deity, contumely to the Sacred
Majesty, and mischief to the Commonwealth. Hence is that of Peter Martyr, God
Armed one only Jehu against his Lord, which as it was peculiar, so is it not to
be drawn into example: Note.
And after a few words, he tells us, That certainly if it be lawful to cast out
of their Kingdoms those who rule wickedly; no Princes or Kings will any where
be safe; for although they govern justly and piously, yet can they not always
satisfy the People. loc. com. Clas. 4. c. 20. p-965. Neither does this
moderating condition swerve more from true Divinity, then from Civil Policy;
as Bodine has observed, de Repub. l. 2. c. 5. If the Prince be absolutely
supreme, as are the true Monarchs of France, Spain, England, Scotland,
AEthiopia, Turcia, Persia, Muscovia, whose Power is not doubtfully questioned,
nor their high Sovereignty with any of their Subjects divided; in this case it
is no ways lawful for any one in particular, or for all in general, to
attempt any thing de facto, or by Order of Law, against the Honor and Life of
the Prince of Monarch, although he has committed all the kinds of wickednesses
and cruelties which tongue can name. For as concerning the Order of Law, the
Subjects have no jurisdiction over the Prince, on whom depends all the power
and authority of Commanding; and who not only can recall, from the Magistrates,
all the power of Judicature committed to them, but also he being present, the
power and jurisdiction of all Magistrates, Corporations, Colleges, Orders, and
Communities does cease; as we had said before, and shall speak more fully
afterward: Thus Bodine.


The Second Moderating Condition.
David Paraeus. When he will enforce them, or others of his Subjects to
manifest Idolatry, or Blasphemy.


Doctor Owen. Christ, he lived under the Empire of Tiberius, the Principality
of Herod, and Praesidency of Pilate. The Apostles flourished under Caligula,
Claudius, Nero, Demitian. All Christians lived under Persecutors, for the the
space of three hundred Years. Hiberius, Hosius, Athanasius, Nazianzen, Hilary,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, Hierome, and many others watered the Church of
God with their holy Life, and sound Doctrine, above a thousand Years from the
Birth of Christ; of whom not one has once opened this Mystery. But I will nor
contest with your (Paraeus) from their negative authority. Christ submitted
himself in all things (not forbidden by the Divine Law) to Tiberius, Herod,
Pilate; He himself performed all the duties of Subjection, and gave command
that all Christians should perform the like. The Apostles declined neither to
the right hand nor to the left, from the Doctrine of Christ. The Christians
which were at Jerusalem when James suffered Martyrdom, were more in number,
and greater in Power than were the Persecutors of the Apostles; But through the
fear and reverence they had of God, they suffered themselves to be slain by a
few, rather then that they would slay any: as that Roman Clement relates it,
recognition, lib. 1. f. 9. With the Sect of Christians (says Tertullian) it is
lawful to be slain it is not lawful to slay, in Apolog. None of us (says
Cyprian) when he is apprehended, resists; although our number be the greater,
ad Demetrianum. The Soldiers under Julian the Apostate (says Augustine) did
distinguish the Lord Eternal from the Lord Temporal; and yet for the Lord
Eternal, they were subject also to the Lord Temporal, Upon Ps. 124.

Because I fear God (says Gregory the Great) I fear to intermeddle in the
Death of the Lombards, In Epist. ad Sabinianum. As for mine own particular
(Paraeus) If Kings shall draw Men on to Idolatry, I had rather imitate the
Saints in their observancy, than you in your insolency; and that I should choose
this rather, the Divine Law does admonish and incite.

A Law is extant against those who shall seduce, and draw aside to Idolatry and
Blasphemy, Deuteronomy. 13.6. If thy Brother the Son of thy Mother, or thy Son, or thy
Daughter, or the Wife of thy bosom, or thy Friend, which is as thine own
Soul, entice thee secretly; saying, Let us go and serve other goods, etc. The
Law is express concerning a Brother, a Son, a Daughter, a Wife, a Friend; but
as concerning a Father, in Husband, a Master, there is not a Word in the Law.
The Law therefore extends not it self to them therefore the Son is not bound
to appeach his Father, nor the Wife her Husband, nor the Servant his Master,
secretly enticing, or forcibly compelling him to Idolatry and although the
appeachment of Father, Husband or Master is not expressly forbidden; yet because
God gave an absolute and perfect Law, to which nothing may be added, and from
which nothing may be detracted; that is understood to be forbidden, which is
not expressed; but especially because, Penal Laws are to be restrained, as
Tostatus has it upon Deuteronomy. 13. q. 3. That which is not lawful to do, or at
least, which God requires not to be done against a Father, an Husband, or
Master, we may by no means do against the King, who (as is before said) is the
Father of His Country, the Husband of the Commonwealth, and the supreme Lord
of all His Subjects.

Lastly, this Condition is repugnant to the Evangelicall precepts; for if they
be Blessed, Note.
who do suffer Persecution for Righteousness sake; then are they not Blessed,
who will not suffer Persecution for Righteousness sake; because, in that they
do nor suffer, but rise up against their Persecutors, they are convinced of
sin, and by sinning get to themselves Damnation.


The Third Moderating Condition.
David Paraeus. When some horrible injury is offered them.


Doctor Owen. Christ himself suffered horrible injury, which Peter willing to
Vindicate, he was repressed by our Lord. The Persecutors in the times of the
Primitive Church, did afflict the Christians with horrible injuries, and under
Constantius the Arrian Emperor, the Catholic Faith, did suffer the most
Horrible of Injuries, which in the former and purer age of the Church did not
so much as think of Revenge. Baronius himself will witness it, who writing
about the Year 350. says, When Christians first began to be Antimonarchians.
He first the Christians Captain enraged, with a cursed desire of reigning,
conspired against the Christian Emperors, whereas in times past, not so much as
a Common soldier could be found, who sided with the rebelling tyrants against
the Emperors, although they were Heathens and Persecutors of Christians: From
Christ, those Christians, and true Catholics, did the Faithful learn their
patience under the Turkish cruelty, and the Protestants under the Popish
Tyranny: which I think (Pareus) I will speak freely. The evils which follow
upon the Doctrine of Antimonarchians.
You do horrible injury to Christ himself, all good Christians; yea, even to
mankind, by this your Doctrine; which now rages throughout the Christian
World, to the conspiracies of Citizens, slaughters of Princes, and
proscriptions of Kings, to the ruin of the Faith, and almost utter destruction
of Christianity it self.

Paraeus condemned by King James, the Bishop of London and his Clergy, and by
the whole Universitie of Oxford.
From whence it was, that the most Sovereign King, Head (under Christ) of the
Church of England, the true Defendor of the Catholic Faith, and assertor of
the Christian Truth, purged your Commentaries with sire: The Bishop of London
(a Man greater than praise can make him, born to the good of the Church, of the
Country, and of Learning it self) together with his whole Clergy, condemned
this your fourth question, concerning the Civil Power of Heresy and Sedition.
Your four Propositions, brought to strict Examination, the Universitie of
Oxford did not weigh in a Popular Scale, but corrected them by the Goldsmiths
Balance; and that by a Public Decree of the whole Universitie.

Why might not our Sovereign King commit to the revenging Flames? why might not
the Orthodox Bishop pass sentence and condemn? why might not the Academian
Muses altogether banish? what Christ, the Apostles, Fathers, Schoolmen,
Protestants, and more moderate Papists have all, at all times, in all places
utterly rejected. Of so great an heap, I will give you a small handful.

Antimonarchians opposed by Christ
Christ. I say unto you, that ye resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite
thee on the one Cheek, turn to him the other also, Math. 5.39.

Apostles.
Peter. This is thankworthy, if a Man for Conscience toward God endure grief
suffering wrongfully; for what glory is it, if when you be buffeted for your
faults you take it patiently? but if when ye do well and suffer for it ye take
it patiently, this is acceptable with God, 1 Pet. c. 2. v. 19.

Ancient Fathers.
Tertullian. One Night could work our revenge abundantly with a few
firebrarnds, were it a thing lawful with us to render evil for evil, far be
it that the Divine Sect should either seek revenge by humane fire, or grieve to
suffer that whereby it is approved. So he in his Apology. Tell me (Paraeus) how
could Tertullian live under the Sword of Persecutors without horrible injury?

Nazianzen. Julian was repressed by the Tears of Christians, which many
abundantly shed, having that only remedy against the Persecutors, in Julian.
orat. 1. They had other remedy ( Paraeus being Judge) If Julian the Apostate,
the vilest of Emperors, had offered some heinous injury to the Christians.

Ambrose. It was required of me that I should appease the People: I answered,
It was my part and Duty not to stir them up; it was in the hand of God to
appease them. Epist. 33. It had been here your part (Paraeus) to have stirted
up a Popular Revenge for the heinous injury offered by the Arrian Emperor.

Prosper of Aquitania. Let present evils be endured, till the promised bliss
be obtained; let the unfaithful be born with by the faithful, and the
plucking up the Tares differed; although the wicked rage, yet is the cause of
the just even in this time the better; who, by how much they are assaulted the
more fiercely, by so much they are Crowned the more gloriously, Sent. 99.
Declare to us (Paraeus) what shall be the violence of the wicked against the
Righteous, without horrible injury? my dullness cannot apprehend it.

Bernard. If all the World should conspire against me, to force me to attempt
any thing against the Royal Majesty, yet would I fear God, and not dare rashly
to offend the King ordained by him, for I am not ignorant how I have Read, he
that resists the power resists the ordinance of God, Epist. 170. to King
Lewis. Dare thou not (Bernard) to remove the horrible injury, offered even to
the whole Clergy? all whose goods King Lewis had invaded; and which was worse,
he would hear no admonitions for Amendment or Restitution, as Robert Gaguinus
has it, lib. 6. without doubt either Bernard erred, or Paraeus dotes.

Schoolmen.
Let us turn aside (if you please) into the Schools, where presently will meet
us our Countryman, Alexander de Hales, who concerning the Duty of Subjects
toward their Princes, has these words: The evil ought to be subject for the
fault of their unreasonablenesse; but the good f^r that Duty they owe to the
Divine Ordinance, and the benefit of purging themselves. From whence Ambrose
upon that, Princes are not a terror, etc. If the Prince be good, he does not
punish, but love him that does well; but if he be evil, he does not hurt, but
purge: he is not therefore a terror to him that does well: But the wicked
ought to fear, because Princes are appointed to punish the wicked. Thus he,
part. 3. quest. 48. memb. 2. art. 1. Do thou hear (Paraeus) the Power of the
Superior, though cruel and unjust, does not hurt, but purge the Righteous.

Will you hear Aquinas? The Faith of Christ is the beginning and cause of
Righteousness, and therefore by the Faith of Christ, the order of Justice is
not abrogated, but confirmed: and the order of Justice requires, that the
Inferiors obey the Superiors, otherwise the state of humane affairs cannot be
preserved* and therefore the Faithful, by the Faith of Christ are not excused
from their obedience to secular Princes, in 2.2. q. 104. art. 6. Have you it
now (Paraeus) Faith does not subject the Superiors to the Inferiors against
the Order of Justice; neither does it permit the Power of the Sword to the
Subject against the Prince upon any cause, because that inordinate Power would
tend to the destruction of all humane things.

See the seventh reason from the opinion of Protestant Divines.
The Faithful Flock of Christ, long since, and at this Day obey the Turk, not
without horrible injury, yet are they Subject, and always have been, not for
wrath, but for Conscience sake; and amongst the Protestants, Luther,
Melancthon, Brentius, Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Tyndall, and Barnes do
condemn this error with an Anathema. To whom I add the famous Example of a
brave Prince; an Example acceptable to God, wholesome for the Commonwealth,
honorable to the Prince: which I would have thee Read ( Paraeus, that thou
may learn to be wise) in Berchet, in explicat. controversiae Gal licanae. c.
7. Servinus pro liberate Ecclesiae, and Statu Regni. Tom. 3. Monarchiae
Romanae. p. 202.
Berchetus, and Johannes Servinus: I will relate it in brief, When in France
(after the Massacre in Paris) the reformed Religion seemed as it were deserted
and almost extinct (which I think could not be done without horrible injury: A
certain King, powerful in strength, rich in Gold, and dreadful in his Navy;
with whom when the King of France was at odds, he dispacht a solemn Embassage
to Henry King of Navarre, and other Protestants it was commanded the
Ambassadors, that they should set the Protestants and Papists at strife
together, and to Arm Prince Henry (who lived at Bearne under the Government of
the Christian King) against the King; which they endeavored with all Art and
cunning attempt, Note.
but in vain. Henry a good Subject, and as another David, being himself to be
King, he would not fore-run the Day of the Lord. The Ambassadors offered large,
rich, and bountiful Conditions, amongst the rest there was tendered three
hundred thousand Crowns in readiness to make preparation of War, and a
necessary sum for continuing the War was to be paid every Month. Henry a
faithful Christian, a good Prince, de prived of his Wife, removed from the
public Administration of the Commonwealth, and for whose sake, the King had
banished very many Protestants,, and slain their Pastors (I would have you
Paraeus to acknowledge the words of your own Bucan) yet did not Henry stretch
out his hand against the Lords Anointed; he would have none of their Gold, he
refused the Conditions, and dismissed the Ambassadors; as Witness of his Faith
toward God, his faithfulness toward his King, and his peaceable mind toward
his Country. There remains now no starting hole for you (Paraeus) here was an
horrible injury done to the Inferior Magistrate as well as others, yet because
a Lawful Power was wanting to Henry (which you Dream to be ordinary) against
the Power ordained by God; he chose rather according to Christ's precept, to
suffer a Grievous Injury with patience, than according to your Prescript, to
resist the Power ordained by God.

What has been the Religion of the Protestants.
This is (Paraeus) and ever has been the Religion of the Protestants, not to
offer but to suffer injuries; to render good for evil, and not to repress
Persecutors placed in Authority by Force or Sword, but procure their favor by
Patience, Love, and Benevolence; which truth, even the more moderate Papists
themselves do not abhor, who are averse from the Tyranny of the Papal
Monarchy, and the popular Anarchy of the Puritans. William Barclay may be one
in stead of all, his Words are these: Oftentimes there happens causes, for
which we are not bound to do the commands of the Magistrate, namely; when he
commands contrary to the commands of God. But there can be no cause why we
should resist him, executing the unjust sentence of condemnation, Note.
and requiring punishment out of malice, under pretense of Authority, because
he has power ordained him by God, which if he abuses, he is to be restrained
by lawful means, not by the violence of the Subjects, and after a few Lines,
Nothing remains to the guilty, but that he commit his cause to the knowledge of
the Omnipotent God, and that he expect his Judgment who is King of Kings, and
the Judge of all Judges, he will undoubtedly chastise and correct the injustice
of the sentence by the severity of his eternal Justice: Thus he, lib. 3. c.
10. Remember (Paraeus) this your horrible injury, and repent.


The Fourth Moderating Condition.
David Paraeus. If they cannot otherwise be safe in their Fortunes, Lives, and
Consciences.


Doctor Owen. O the Blindness of the Primitive Church, of the Ancient Fathers!
to whom that light of a New Gospel has not shined. Those men born to misery
(or this Divinity is false) have altogether erred, who were so willing
patiently to undergo the pangs of Martyrdom, and when they were both the more
in number, and the stronger in power, would not by Force and Arms defend their
Fortunes from the Tyrants, their Lives from the Persecutors, or their Faith
from Heretical Kings.


The first Moderating Condition.
David Paraeus. That under pretense of Religion or Justice, they seek not their
own.


Doctor Owen. Justice and Re^igi on the pretense of Rebellion.
A Subject (of what condition soever he be) who resists the King, seeks not his
own, but covers other Men's Goods, yet obtains them not, unless he pretend
justice and Religion. Lucifer himself does not deceive Men, but as transformed
into an Angel of Light; neither does Vice deceive any Man, unless it assume
the name of Honesty.

What need of pretense Paraeus? Rebellion it self is Justice and Religion; and
by how much any is more expert in Treachery and Treason, by so much is he
accounted the more Just and Holy. I would to God this our Age were not an
eyewitness of this Religious Justice. Let an inferior Magistrate enforce his
Superior into Order, though to the diminution of Majesty. Buchanan (a Man, if
we give any credit to the Consistorians, T. B.

L. D.


most excellent and the light of his Age) he will cry out prosently, an Act
just, holy, and praise worthy, and that not in one place alone, but almost in
every page of four Books, which he composed to the envy of one Prince, and
the injury of all Kings.

Traitors magnified by the Papists.
Let Parry draw his Dagger; he shall forthwith receive Apostolical Benediction,
for the Remission of his sins, and Salvation of his Soul. Let a Monk stab a
King, he shall be extold in the praises of slaying Holofernes, even this in the
Consistory of the Pope.

Let a Traitor attempt the Destruction of King and Kingdom by Gunpowder, he
shall be inserted into the Catalogue of Martyrs. Let Castellus strik at the
throat of a King, or break his tooth, he shall be honored to eternity under
the name of Franciscus Veronensis Constantinus, in the Elogy of John Boucher;
hear ye Catholic men what the Father the Jesuit thinks of those holy men and
Religious. If they escape death, they are admired as great Worthies; if it
happen otherwise: they fall by their noble endeavors, a Sacrifice acceptable
to the Gods, acceptable to men, even to the Memory of all posterity.

By the Presbyterians.
Hear also a noble pair of Puritan Brothers, Were it lawful for me to make a
Law; I would command rewards to be appointed to the slayers of Tyrants, not
only by all the People, but by each of them: as it is commonly wont to be done
to them, who have slain Wolves or Bears, or caught any of their Whelps, Buchan,
de Jure Regni, p. 31. All Citizens which are lovers of their Country, and which
desire the safety of the Commonwealth, ought to adjoyne themselves to the
inferior Magistrate, against the Supreme; and those same men (Victory being
gotten) are to be preferred before the rest, in obtaining the dignities of the
Kingdom, and before them especially who gave back, and adjoined not themselves
to him. Thus Danaeus de politia Christiana, lib. 6. page 460.

Who does not abhor this monstrous kind of Doctrines? in disproving whereof,
he does but misuse his pains, who abounds with leisure and Learning. Let pass
this pretense (Paraeus) it is not lawful for the Subject to resist the King,
We may not resist the King upon any pretense of Religion or Justice.
though a Tyrant, upon any cause whatsoever; either of true Religion, or of
Justice, without injury to the Divine Law, the Gospel of Christ, and Tradition
of the ancient Church. Moses had the true cause of Justice, who revenged his
Brother upon the Egyptian. Peter had a true zeal of Religion, when he would
have delivered his most innocent Lord, oppressed with most horrible injury,
from the hands of his Persecutors. Yet did Moses offend, and so did Peter; both
(that I may use the words of Saint Augustine) did exceed the rule of Justice:
he (that is Moses) offended, through the love he had to his Brother; and the
other (that is Peter) through the love he had to his Master: against Faustus
Manichaeus, l. 22. c. 70.

That which was not lawful, long since, for Moses in the behalf of his
Brother; that which was not lawful for Peter, in the behalf of his Master,
and the Religion of Christ* is not at this day lawful for any man, for
Religions sake, whether it be Roman or Reformed; unless it be by a New Gospel,
not yet fully revealed to the Christian World. That Decree of the ancient
Council held at Eliboris, is well known. If any shall That is, without lawful
authority.
break in pieces the Idols, and there (or then) be slain; because it is not
found commanded in the Gospel, or practiced by the Apostles, it has pleased us
(to decree) that he be not received into the number of Martyrs, Can. 60. Yea,
the former and purer Church has detested this Justice and Religion, more than
either Dog or Serpent, of whose praise Saint Augustine speaks De Civit. Dei, l.
22. c. 6. The City of Christ, though it was a stranger on Earth, and had great
troops of people against the wicked persecutors, yet did it not fight for
temporal safety; but rather not resist, to obtain eternal safety.

To take up Arms against a Tyrant were it lawful, yet is it not expedient.
True Religion was always humble, and the conserver of Kingdoms. The false
Religion, that has always set Kings at odds, and Armed the Subjects against
their Superiors; from whence it appears, this is not the true Religion; but
such as has put on the fair show and specious mask of Piety; and the better
the Author is of which it boasts; the more detestable it is.

I will say further; were it a thing Lawful, yet were it not a thing
expedient: For the miserable People whilst they endeavor to shun the Scylla of
one Man's Tyranny; they fall headlong upon that Charybdis of many Tyrannies. All
things shall be exposed to devastation, and destruction: The Peasant will
insult over the Nobleman; the Servant, over his Master; the Robber, over the
Rich; the Oppressor, over the Citizen; the Adulterer over the Matron; the
Lecher over the Virgin; the Pyrat over the Merchant; the Thief, over the
Traveller; and the Spoyler, over the Husbandman: Lastly, one Man will be a
Wolf to another. This evil ^iberty will endure no Law; no Law will make a
most miserable Commonwealth; when every man may do what seems good in his
own eyes, as it was in those Days, when there was no King in Israel.


The Sixth Moderating Condition.
David Paraeus. A favorable Interpretation being always reserved, and the
ordering of an unblameable defense according to the Laws.


Doctor Owen. It is not an unblameable Defense, but a most detestable Sedition
to resist the Superior. The places of Scripture against this Sedition are so
clear and manifest, that they cannot be eluded by any sly evasion, Prove. 20.22.
Romans 12.19. 1 These. 5.15. 1 Pet. 3.9. whosoever therefore shall offer violence
(unto any man) not commanded by an ordinate power, is guilty of sinning; both
against the Divine and humane Majesty. To the Moderating Conditions, he has
adjoined some Reasons, whereof the first is,


David Paraeus. Because the Superior Magistrate is subject to the Divine Laws
and to his Commonwealth; which appears in Deuteronomy. chapter 17. Joshua 1.8.


Doctor Owen. Paraeus his Reasons answered.
That the King is subject to the Divine Laws, Who denies? he is subject also to
the Laws of the Commonwealth, though not in the same manner; to the Divine Laws
absolutely; and to the Laws of the Commonwealth, not for 'its coaction, but
direction; as Thomas witnesses; The Prince is said to be free from the Laws as
concerning the coactive power of the Law; because no Man can pass Sentence of
Condemnation upon him: but as concerning the directive power of the Law, he is
not free, 1.2. quest. 96. art. 5. ad. 3.


David Paraeus. The Law of God, does not only forbid Tyranny, but also
commands it to be lawfully restrained. He that sheds Man's Blood, etc.


Doctor Owen. God the only remover of Tyrants.
He that is Lord of all forbids Tyranny, and takes it away, when, and how he
will; at his command Jehu unsheaths his Sword; where God commands not, Peter
puts up his Sword, even in the cause of Christ. For if any will betake himself
to his Arms, without the command of his Superior, he shall presently hear, He
that strikes with the Sword shall perish by the Sword; For God will not have
an evil taken away, but in a lawful manner, and by lawful means. Though
therefore it be just that Tyrants should suffer; yet most unjust that Subjects
should inflict punishment. God brought against Pharaoh, Frogs, Flies, Locusts,
Hail, and other Plagues of that sort; he did not stir up his Subjects against
him. Against the Kings of Judah and of Israel, he armed the Foreign Enemy,
not the native Citizen. That place in Genesis 9.6. Fevardentius long since wrested
to the same sense, whom Paraeus now follows; but with little credit. For God
will not that Man's Blood be shed, but by a Man Invested with Authority: as
Saint Augustine concludes directly against Faustus Manichaeus, lib. 22. c. 70.
but to no Man living is there Power or Jurisdiction given over the Superior
Magistrate, as O tho Frisingensis has it: For seeing it is a dreadful thing
to all Men, to fall into the hands of the living God, to Kings (who have none
above them but God whom they may fear) it is so much the more dreadful, by how
much they may si^ with the more freedom, in Epist. ad Freder. AEnobarb.


David Paraeus. Also because the Emperor witnesses himself that he would
not, that his decrees should have place in judgments against Law; but that
they become void, if by chance they be known to depart from Justice, and lib.
4. cap. de lege Princip. A voice it is worthy the Majesty of a King; to
profess himself bound to his Laws.


Doctor Owen. What? shall that which is granted for Public Peace and Justice
sake, be turned to an occasion of Parricide? Emperors, they are the Authors,
Interpreters, and Defenders of the Laws, to which they freely submit
themselves, but are compelled by none. That which the Clemency of the King does
indulge to the Prelates, Nobles, or Commons, does neither diminish His Majesty,
nor confer upon them any Right or Power above the Prince; who so desires more,
let him consult Barclay against the Monarchomachi, lib. 3. cap. 15. the Apology
for Kings, cap. 34. Saravia de imper. author. lib. 4. c. 11. and Joannes
Roffensis, de Vsurpata Pontif. potest, l. 2. c. 8.


David Paraeus. Therefore also the Tyranny and Robberies of the Superior
Magistrate, ought to be restrained by the ordinary Power; which in every
Polity, is either the Inferior Magistrate, or the consent of the People.


Doctor Owen. Princes though wicked are not to be reviled.
Tyranny and Robbery, are the revilings of Magistrates, unbeseeming a Divine,
not savouring of the Spirit of the Prophets. There were very many Kings of the
Jews, and have been in the Church of Christ, who have Reigned Tyrannously,
Worshipped Idols, forcibly drawn their Subjects to Idolatry, and afflicted the
innocent with horrible injury; of whom not one in all the Sacred or
Ecclesiastical History, or in the Ancient Fathers, is called by the name of
Tyrant or Robber (if we except but the revilings of Lucifer Calaritanus against
Constantius) that we may learn, that Kings, Gods Vicegerents, though they abuse
that Power, are not to be reviled with a reproachful Tongue. The Actions of
those who are set over us (says Gregory the Great) are not to be struck at by
the Sword of the Mouth, no not even then, when they are judged justly to be
reproved; but if the Tongue at any time slip out against them, though but in
the smallest matters, it is necessary, that the Heart be afflicted in
repentance, that he may return to himself; and seeing he has offended the
Power set over him, he may tremble at the judgment of him, who has set the
Power over him, thus he, Pastor. part. 3. adm. 5. fol. 16. This Conclusion
gathered from false Propositions, is seditious, and destructive of all
Monarchy: For if the chief coercive Power in every Polity be in the Inferior
Magistrate, or the consent of the People, the World will not have in it one
Monarch; which let them look to, to whom the Power, the Right, and rule of
Government belongs.


David Paraeus. Because it is the duty of the Inferior Magistrate, no less
then of the Superior, to defend the Life and safety of the Subjects against
the horrible injuries, and unjust violence of Robbers and Tyrants, whether
Foreign or Domestic; which is proved, because of them it is said. He is the
Minister of God for thy good, He is not a terror to good Works, but to the
bad; He bears not the Sword in vain, he takes vengeance on him that does
evil, etc.


Doctor Owen. Kings not liable to be punished by the Inferior Magistrate.
Paraeus in the Explication of that Text in Genesis 9.6. followed Fevardentius*
here he is plain Buchanan, contrary to the Sense of St. Paul, and the unanimous
consent of the Church. For the actions of Kings cannot be brought to
punishment, because they have no Man to be a competent Judge over them: the
Inferior Magistrate is Subject to the Superior, by whom he suffers the
punishment due unto his committed wickedness, the Superior is held guilty
before God alone, not before any Mortal Man, as Tostatus most truly: If any
of the Rulers over Ten had sinned, he was brought to his trial before the
Rulers over Fifties; if any of them had sinned, he was brought to his Trial
before the Rulers over Hundreds; if any of them had sinned, he was brought to
his trial before the Heads over the tribes; if any of them had sinned, he was
brought to his trial before the Seventy Elders; if any of them had sinned, he
was brought to his trial before Moses; if Moses had sinned, He had God alone
to be His Avenger. Thus he, upon Numb. 25.9.


David Paraeus. Also, because the Inferior Magistrates are therefore added to
the Superior, both that they may be Companions in their Government, and also,
that they may moderate their immense Liberty; which, therefore, when they do
bridle, they use the Authority and Sword, delivered unto them by the Divine
Power, by a Lawful calling.


Doctor Owen. A great error of Paraeus discovered and disproved.
Here Paraeus is shamefully deceived, with hazard to them who are so addicted to
him, as a tried Man, for his singular Learning; that they think they may safely
Believe, whatsoever he Affirms; and Reject whatsoever he Disallowes. For there
is not in the Sacred Scripture any Foot-step of this Authority, which he averts
to be delivered by the Divine Power. God the disposer and preserver of
Political Order, never instituted this pretended Power; God (I say) not the
People designed Moses, Josuah, and the Judges, and guirt them with the Sword.
Moses Gods Vicar, He numbers the Heads of the Tribes, constituted the Seventy
Elders, appointed the Tribunes, Centurians, Quinquagenarians, and Decurians;
who ever acknowledged themselve, nor Companions to Moses in Government, but his
Subjects. And all the rest of the Kings, always chose to themselves
Counselors and Inferior Magistrates, both to lessen their care and
carefulnes, and that they might have Helpers in handling and dispatching their
more difficult matters; not that those Magistrates may make any Law to moderate
the Royal Liberty, or to revenge their Tyranny; he affirms, but proves not,
that the Inferior Power is added to the Superior for revenge and wrath. If it
be commanded, it is presumption, and shall procure punishment, not reward,
because it redounds to the disgrace of the Creator; (says Augustine) that the
Servants should be honored, the Head being despised* and that the followers
should be reverenced, the Emperor being contemned. This Addition therefore is
point blank against the opinion of the Fathers and Protestants (of whom we
shall speak in due place) as also the most Learned Men, who have in this our
Age, illustrated the Civil Polity with their writings: consult Bodine de
Repub. lib. 2. cap. 5. the Apology for Kings, cap. 27. Barclay against the
Monarchom. lib. 3. cap. 6. Berchet in explic. controver. Gallic. cap. 2.
Saravia de imper. author. lib. 2. cap. 36. Sigonius de Repub. Judaeor. lib. 7.
cap. 3. Note.
The Magistrates which are above the People, are below the King; whence it is,
that neither the People may resist the Magistrate, nor the Magistrate resist
the King, without Sacrilege. Christ himself has taught, and so the Apostles,
and the Disciples of the Apostles, and all Interpreters of Divine and Humane
Laws have taught us, That the greater neither ought to he judged, nor condemned
by the lesser; Neither was it ever lawful for the Pope, Nobility, or People,
to chastise the King, till Hildebrands firebrands were kindled, to the setting
on fire all Christendom. This Doctrine therefore is novell and Insolent;
whereof there is not extant in either the Old or New Testament, any Precept, or
probable Example. If there be any, let it be produced, and I will yield my
self conquered, and become slave to the Fathers the Jesuits, and to the
Brethren the Puritans. We have this truth cleared and confirmed in Writings
which shall remain, committed to Posterity, by Thomas Bilson late Bishop of
Winchester, in the seventh Chapter of his Perpetual Government of the Church,
and Peter Greg. Tholos. de Repub. lib. 5. cap. 3. number. 14.15.16.


David Paraeus. In whose power it is to constitute; in their power it is to
restrain or take away those, who rage in a disorderly violence: but they are
constituted, either by the consent of the People, or by the Senate, or by the
Electors, or by other Magistrates; Therefore these do well, when they either
restrain or take them away.


Doctor Owen. This Assertion is Capital, which the Emperor will not admit,
the King will not suffer; which Bellarmine himself does affirm to be rejected
by the consent of all Divines, that it is not necessary for me to refute it.


David Paraeus. A Magistrate that is mad, is justly removed by Public
Authority; as Nebuchadnezzer being turned into a furious Beast, was driven out
from the Company of Men, Dan. 4.31.


Doctor Owen. The casting out of Nebuchadnezzar was extraordinary: as there are
many things by Divine command in the Sacred Scriptures; How Nebuchadnezzar was
driven out is uncertain.
which without Sacrilege cannot be drawn into example. Howsoever, the manner
of his casting out, is doubtful and uncertain, Calvin being Witness: It is
uncertain, whether God smote this King with fury, so, as that he fled away, and
lay hid for some time; (they are the words of Calvin) or that he was cast out
by a Tumult, and Conspiracy of his Nobles; or else by the consent of the whole
People. This is doubtful, because the Histories of those times are unknown to
us; and that indeed he was not turned into a wild Beast; the same Calvin will
tell us: It is probable (says he) that he was so astonished, that God left him
the Form of a Man, but took away his reason. This Calvin upon Dan. 4.32. From
a Miraculou; Act, and from doubtful and uncertain Circumstances, to gather a
sure and certain rule, is the part of him who has little Brains in his Head.


David Paraeus. A raging and cruel Tyrant is like to a mad Man.


Doctor Owen. All these are very ill compared together. Every private Man is
Armed by the Divine Law, the instinct of Nature, and public Authority,
against Robbers and violent spoilers: a Tyrant being seated in an higher Power,
is liable to punishment by no Humane Laws, being safe in the height of his
Empire. Whence it was, that David, not ignorant of the Divine Ordinance in the
Office of the Regal Order, he honored Saul (a Tyrant, and defiled with all
kind of wickedness) as yet placed in that same Divine Ordinance, least he
might seem to do injury to God, who has decreed honor to those Orders. For
the King has the Image of God, as the Bishop the Image of Christ. So long
then, as he is in that Divine Ordinance, he is to be honored, if not for
himself, yet for the Orders sake, as Saint Augustine has it, The Reason not
the same for a tyrant and a mad King.
in queast. out of the Old Testament, qu. 35. Neither in all things, is the
reason the same, for a Tyrant, and for a mad Man. Tyranny does proceed from
Pride, Covetousness, Cruelty, Wickedness, and innate Malice. Madness does
not proceed, but from ill affected Nature; and the Laws do not punish
Disseases, but Impieties. A Magistrate that is Mad (says (Paraeus) is justly
removed; justly good Sir? that is just, which agrees with the Rule of Justice,
this opposes all Rule. The Law of Christ deprives no Man of his Right; by the
Law of Nations, Kingdoms are not possessed by Virtue, or Wisdom, but descent. The
Civil Laws do not permit any defect in the mind, to be any hinderance, whereby
Kings may be accounted Legitimate; to whom they prescribe a Protector, an
Assistant, or Minister of State to be appointed, least the welfare of the
Subjects, and safety of the Commonwealth be put to hazard; concerning whom,
consult the Apology for Kings, cav. 20. Barclay contra Monarch. lib. 5. cap. 9.
and Saravia de imperandi authorit. lib. 4. cap. 39.


David Paraeus. The same is confirmed by worthy Examples, both Sacred and
Profane. The Israelites oftentimes by their Judges made Insurrection against
the Neighboring Tyrants, by whom they were cruelly handled.


Doctor Owen. There is nothing that can be produced so wicked, so absurd, or so
foolish, whereof an Example may not be drawn out of Sacred and Profane History:
but these examples (Paraeus) prove nothing; Why the examples of Paraeus prove
nothing.
because they are all, either unlike, or false, or only of Fact, or unjust in
particular: From the Acts of the Judges, by Gods extraordinary command, he
collects that ordinary rule. How falsely, learn of Saint Augustine upon Judges,
cap. 20. This vain Argument is met with also, by the Author of that Book, de
Regimine Principum, which is carried about under the name of Thomas Aquinas. It
has been thought by some (says he) that it beseems the valor of courageous
Men to slay a Tyrant, and to expose themselves to the danger of death for the
Liberty of a Multitude; an Example whereof is had in the Old Testament; For
Ehud killed Eglon; but this agrees not with the Apostles Doctrine; for Peter
teaches us to submit with reverence, not only to good and gracious Masters,
but also to the froward; for this is thank worthy, if a Man for Conscience
toward God, endure grief suffering patiently; whence it was, that when many
Roman Emperors, did tyrannically persecute the Faith of Christ; and a great
multitude both of the Nobles, and of the People were converted to the Faith, it
was praised, not for making resistance, but suffering death, lib. 1. cap. 6.


David Paraeus. Exechias, the holy King, fell away from the Assyrian Tyrant*
and when he raised War against him, he defended himself by Arms, 2 King. 18.


Doctor Owen. The King of Judah, subdued the King of Assyria, in a just War.
Therefore it is lawful for the Inferious Magistrate to remove the Prince, who
is Supreme, for his impiety, frenzy, or tyranny, a very peremptory
conclusion, not to be retorted with words, but blows.


David Paraeus. It matters not, that these were Foreign Tyrants, for domestic
Tyrants differ nothing from Foreign; yea, they are the rather to be
repressed, because they are perjured, and the more hurtful.


Doctor Owen. Shall I believe (Paraeus) that there was no difference (as
concerning the debt of duty) between the King of Judah, and the Subjects of the
King of Assyria? not so truly, were you Pythagoras himself. Neither is that
always lawful, in those things which are more hurtful; which is lawful, in
those things which are less hurtful. Seditious Preachers (the Baptist being
Witness) are a Generation of Vipers; yea, peradventure much more hurtful than
Vipers, because Vipers do but hurt the Body; those Preachers destroy both Body
and Soul. Therefore as any man may slay a venomous Viper; so is it lawful for
any Man to slay those Tribune-like Preachers: A consequence that would prove
fatal and destructive to Jesuits and Puritans; but to set down an absurdity is
not to answer an Argument: I will therefore declare the unfitness of this
Comparison between Domestic and Foreign Tyrants. The unfitnes of the
comparison between foreign and domesticke Tyrants.
Those Tyrants whatsoever, who have a Lawful Power over us, we are commanded
to obey, we are forbidden to resist. For there is no difference between a good
Prince and a wicked Tyrant, found in Sacred Scripture; as concerning the
honor, reverence, and service we are to give to them. It is not lawful
therefore to draw the Sword against them; because they who resist, resist God,
and get to themselves damnation. No Law, whether Divine or Humane, has set
over us private Tyrants, Spoylers, Domestic or Foreign Robbers; in no
Obligation therefore are we bound to them, no service do we owe them; neither
are we hindered by any reverence of Authority, or necessity of Subjection; but
that we may smite them smiting us, and repel the injuries they offer us.


David Paraeus. So the People resisted Saul when he would have killed his
Son, 1 Samuel 14.45. Ahikam defended Jeremy the Prophet against the King
Jehojakim, when he would have slain him, Jerem. 26.24. The Captains over
Hundreds and the Princes took away Athaliah the Tyrant, 2 Kings 11. The
Macchabees defended themselves and their Commonwealth, against the Macedonian
Tyrants, etc.


Doctor Owen. How the People delivered Jonathan from Saul.
The People delivered the Son of Saul from death, (when he was condemned by
his Fathers sentence) not by Arms, but by entreaties: the People appeal to
Saul and his own Conscience, in the presence of the living God; that laying
aside the account he had of his Oath, he would have an account of the Law; as
if they had said, is it according to Law, that he should receive the least
harm, who (following God) has wrought so great Salvation for the People? So
Tremelius and Junius in their Annotations upon the place. The People delivered
Jonathan, that he might not dye; whom the King slew not, being overcome with
the instant request of the People. So Gregory the Great, in 1 Reg. cap. 4.
Ahikam the chief Magistrate under the King, defends the Prophet, not from the
Tyranny of the King, but from the fury of the People; as is evident from the
Text. How Ahikam defended Jeremiah
The hand of Ahikam was with Jeremiah, that he might not be delivered into the
hand of the People, to put him to death; the hand of Ahikam, that is, (Says
Tremelius) the Authority and Help: for Ahikam had been now a long time
Councellor in the Kings Court, and therefore his Authority could do much, thus
he. It is one thing to appease the Tumult of the People, by the Authority of
the King; and another thing, to rise up against the King in a popular Tumult;
that is the duty of a good Man and a faithful Magistrate; this the part of a
Rebel and Traitor to his Country. Of Athaliah I shall speak in due place. The
Macchabees, were not lawfully subject to the Macedonian Tyrants, and therefore
might freely defend themselves and the Nation, from the incursions of the
Tyrants, and repel the injury offered them, by force of Arms. Weigh well (ye
Academian youth) the strength of these consequences. The Judges, who (besides
the right of supreme Government) had a special command from God, they slew
their Enemies. King Ezekiah warred against the King of Assyria. Jonathan (at
the deprecation of the People) escaped the punishment of death. Jeremiah is
delivered by the hand of Ahikam the Kings Councellor, from the fury of the
People. The Macchabees defended their Nation from hostile invasion. Therefore
the Inferior Magistrate may and ought to restrain the King. There is none
amongst you so unskilful in Logic as not to know, that these conclusions do
no whit agree with their premises. These vain Sophistical Arguments therefore
do blemish Paraeus, either with gross Ignorance, or notorious malice: if he
sees not the Fallacies, he is as blind as a Mole; but if wittingly and
willingly he strives to cast this mist before your eyes, and the eyes of other
young Students, he has the greater sin.


David Paraeus. Thrasybulus cast out the thirty Tyrants out of Athens. The
Romans, they banished the Kings which ruled wickedly; they compeld the Consuls
to lay down their Magistracy: they Judged and deposed Nero and Maximinus, who
were Tyrants.


Doctor Owen. These Examples are only of Fact, and do not infer any right; and
because they are unlike, they conclude nothing.


David Paraeus. The Electors deprived Winceslaus of the Empire.


Doctor Owen. Done it was, I confess, whether done by equity or injury, let
others determine: let him tell us, that can; What is the Authority of the
Imperial Majesty? or what is the Power of the Electorall dignity? I am not
ashamed to be ignorant, who have spent my time in the study of Divine, not
Politic matters: it was do^^ also peradventure to the Public good; but is
it therefore to be imitated? Poison has been a Remedy to some, which yet the
Physicians do not number amongst their wholesome Medicines.


David Paraeus. Lastly, Trajanus is praised in Dion, because, that delivering
the Sword to the Prefect of the Praetorium, he said; if I command things Just,
use this for me; if unjust, against me.


Doctor Owen. Trajanus his Speech to the Tribune of the Soldiers approved.
Paraeus did not draw the praise of Trajanus out of the Fountain of Dion, but
the rivulets of Bucan; For Trajanus delivered that Sword, not to the
Praetorian-Praefect, but to the Tribune of the Soldiers. The Emperor was
indeed worthy of all praise; who freely of his own accord, not by any others
compulsion, did that, which was acceptable to God, profitable to the Subjects,
and worthy of an Emperor. These and the like favors which Princes vouchsafe
of themselves, do indeed procure to them the affection and good will of their
Subjects; but confer upon the People, or Inferior Magistrates no right at all
over their Princes.


David Paraeus. Let the judgment also of Luther be seen, and of the Divines,
to the Lawyers of Wittenberge, concerning this question; and Peter Martyrs
Commentaries upon Judges, cap. 1.


Doctor Owen. Luthers ^^inion concerning this question.
Luther, and the Divines do speak, not of a King invested with an absolute
Power; but of Princes admitted upon condition, which as well the writings of
Luther, as Sleidans Relation of Luther, do Witness. Concerning Tyrannical and
Idolatrous Kings, thus did Luther both teach and write. What therefore was to
be done? were the Kings to be banished out of their Kingdoms? or Forces to be
raised against them? No. They were not to be obeyed, but the greatest
extremities to be suffered; which the example of Daniel, and of his Companions
do declare. Thus Luther in Thesaur. artic. loc. de Magistratu. When the Duke of
Saxony and other Princes of the Empire (says Sleidan) met together at
Smalcaldia, to deliberate concerning: the undertaking a defense against the
hostile violence (if by chance any should happen) before the League was
entered. There were admitted to the Council not only Lawyers, but also
Divines; Luther he always taught, that we ought not to resist the Magistrate.
But when the Lawyers in this deliberation taught, that it was permitted by the
Law, sometimes, in some cases to resist; and that they declared, that then the
matter was brought to that case, of which the Laws amongst other things makes
mention. Luther ingenuously professed, that he knew not this was lawful, and
because the Political Laws are not impugned, or abolisht by the Gospel; he
said, a League might be entered for a Defense; whether Caesar himself, or any
other in his name, should make war against them. Hitherto Sleidan concerning
the judgment of Luther. Neither has the opinion of Peter Martyr any other
meaning. This manner of dealing with Authors is very ill: that, what they have
writ concerning one kind of Polity, should be wrested to another, contrary to
their Sense and meaning.


The Third Proposition.
David Paraeus. It is not lawful for Subjects (merely private, without a
Lawful calling) to take up Arms, either to invade Tyrants before danger; or to
defend themselves against them in danger; or to revenge themselves upon them
after danger, if they may be defended by the ordinary Power.


Doctor Owen. These are but deceitful Flatteries, framed to the destruction
and eversion of Commonwealths: I will not repeat the Vanity of that
distinction of Subjects, into private Subjects, and Inferior Magistrates, this
has been sufficiently discust before. Whosoever they are of what name or Title
soever they be, if they be Subjects, they ought not to rise up against their
Superiors, to resist their Lords with Force and Arms, or to remove them from
their dignity, or deprive them of their Honor; because there is no Power given
by God, or granted by Man to the Inferior against his Superior. How
mischievous that pretense of a lawful calling it.
The Pretense of a Lawful Calling, opens a gap to all Impiety, and all kind of
Injustice. It will be an easy thing for any Man to pretend this Lawful
Calling, and to accuse even the best Prince of Tyranny: Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram will not spare Moses. Achitophell will be enemy to David. Jeroboam a
wicked Servant will thrust out the Son of Solomon. A Military fury will lay
violent hands upon Alexander Severus. Yea the Jews have a Law against Christ
the King of Kings, and according to that Law he ought to dye. Grant it
(Paraeus) that it is lawful, to restrain Kings which Reign Tyrannically, and
then no Kings (by what calling soever) will be safe. Although they live Holy,
and govern Justly, yet shall they never satisfy Seditious Men.

Theordinary power opposes Divine Law, Reason, and Nature.
The Ordinary Power which Paraeus suggests, does oppose the Divine Law, Reason
and Nature; has the Son any Power over his Father, though cruel? Have the
Servants any Power over their Lord, though churlish? Has the Wife any Power
over her Husband, though unkind? and is the condition of a King any whit worse?
Every Power which is of God (says the Apostle) is an ordinate Power; but this
Power which he calls Ordinary, is not Ordinate, which subjects the Superior to
the Inferior; the Head to the Body; the Lord to the Servant; and the King to
the Subject. The King is Supreme over all; if once he admit a Companion, or
Superior, he is no longer King. To this captious Proposition, he has adjoined
some Reasons, which I will briefly run over.


David Paraeus. Because this were to take the Sword away from God, and a thing
not permitted by the Laws.


Doctor Owen. He that takes it away, whether he be a Private Subject, or
Inferior Magistrate, he shall suffer punishment as a Traitor to the Divine and
Humane Majesty.


David Paraeus. Because the Subjects are bound to obey a wicked Magistrate,
whilst they are not compeld to do any thing against God.


Doctor Owen. These Words are not clearly and plainly enough set down, which
may be understood two ways. First, That the Subjects ought not to obey in
those things which the Prince shall command against God. This I confess to be
true; of which there is no controversy in the Church of God. Secondly, That
the People ought not to obey that Prince any longer, in any thing; when once he
shall command any thing obstinately against God. Which opinion the Jesuits and
Puritans stiffly maintain, who contend with all the force they may, to persuade
the Subjects, That Kings who do not observe the Law of God, or hinder those
that are observers of it, or be persecutors of them, and (that I may speak in
one Word) who do not govern according to the Prescript of the Divine Law, they
do (ipso jure) lose their Kingdoms, and deprive themselves of all Honor,
Dignity, and Power. They who list to take in this Dunghill, let them read
Joannes Baptista Fichlerus, The names and writings of the Antimonarchians
de jure Magistrate. and offic. Subdit. fol. 15. Franciscus Fevardentius upon
Hester, page 89. Creswell in Philopat. page 194. Vindicias contra Tyrannos,
quest. 3. page 189. The Tract de jure Magistrate. quest. 6. page 155. and 275.
Lambertus Danaeus de Politi^ Christiana. lib. 3. cap. 6. page 221. Joannes
Althusius in Politicis, cap. 14. page 146. and cap. 15. page 195. Whose raging
madness all true Catholics do, and have detested. For, The power of Rule is
not founded in Grace; which neither can Goodness confer, nor Wickedness
take away.


David Paraeus. In which case also, we must rather dye, than unlawfully resist.
We have the Lacedaemonians for an example; who, when the Conquer^urs commanded
those things which were against their Laws and Customs; they said, If y^
command things more harsh than death, we will rather dye. And Aristotle in his
Ethics, does advise, rather to dye, than to suffer a Man's self to be compelled
to dishonest things, lib. 3. cap. 1.


Doctor Owen. Resistance of the Superior unlawful.
Speak out Man, that we may know you: Do you believe there is any lawful Kind
of Resistance for the Inferior against his Superior? Christ the eternal
Lawgiver, does simply condemn all unsheathing of the Sword, without the order
of authority. Paul the Interpreter of the Law, forbids the Faithful all
resistance. Peter the chief of the Apostles, commands Subjection to every
Creature which has an higher Power; where, all is spoken properly of
Superiors, without a difference of good or bad; and to all Inferiors
indifferently, without limitation of either Layity or Clergy, of Order, Degree,
or Dignity. Parae^^ therefore does ill distinguish here, where the Divine Law
admits no distinction; the Admonitions of Philosophers, and Examples of the
Heathen, may induce to the information of Manners; to the explication of
Loyalty, or confirmation of the Faith, they avail nothing: in these we have a
more firm Word of Prophecy, and more famous Examples of Saints: Thou shall
not speak evil (says Moses) of the Ruler of thy People, Exodus 22.28. Touch
not mine Anointed (says David) 1 Cron. 16.22. Rise not up against the King,
Prove. 30.31. Who may say unto the King, what do thou? Eccles. 8.3. Curse not
the King no not in the heart, Eccles. 10.20. as for Examples; David that famous
Prophet, when he had King Saul guilty of Impiety, Tyranny, and great
wickedness, delivered into his hands, yet would he not touch him. By which
Example, he would instruct men, that the punishment of Kings is to be committed
to God alone; and that it is not lawful for any Man, not only to lift up his
hand against the Prince; but also, to violate that Sacred Majesty, Note.
so much as in Word. Elijah did not resist, but fly from Ahab, that Enemy of
Religion; neither did he stir up any to Rebellion. Isaiah sawn into two by
Manasses; Jeremiah shut up in Prison; Daniel cast to the Lions; the three
Children thrown into the hot fiery Furnace; Amos struct through the Temples;
Zacharias overwhelmed with Stones at the Threshold of the Temple; Peter
Crucified with his Head toward the ground; James slain by the Sword;
Bartholomew beat with Clubbs; Matthew and Paul beheaded; that I say nothing of
the glorious Company of Martyrs, who have honored the Church of Christ by
their holy life, and propagated the fame by their precious death. But what
Popular tumult was amongst them? Who of them was an Author of Rebellion? Which
of them put the Inferior Magistrates in mind of this duty, or employed their
aid by way of Petition or Appeal? Which of them did either curse or revile
their Persecutors. The Christians of ancient Faith, would not oppose themselves
against the Superior Power in Defense of the faithful Brethren; They thought
it much better, that the Just should suffer (though unjustly) for true Justice
sake; than that they should offer any violence to the Magistrates (under
Pretense of feigned Justice) though wicked Persecutors.


David Paraeus. By the Example of David, refusing to kill Saul a Tyrant, when
it was in his Power to do it, 1 Samuel 24.26.


Doctor Owen. When it was in his Power Paraeus? That is most properly in a Man's
Power, which is a Man's Right; so that, what he does, he does Lawfully. Yea, but
David might have done it Lawfully, says Bucan, loc. 49. Sect. 77. yet he would
not do it. David the greatest opposers of Antimonarchians
David therefore was herein the worst of Men, a Violator of the Public Peace
and true Piety, an Enemy of his Country, a Neglector of his Friends, (...)
Desertor of his Duty, who, with one Act, and little or no Labor, by the Death
of the Tyrant (whom he might have slain safely and justly) had delivered the
Church from error, the Commonwealth from Tyranny, his Fellow Sufferers from
Injury, and himself from Persecution. David wanted many Teachers, such as we
have (at this Day) abounding amongst us, as well in the Reformed, as in the
Roman Church, who might have admonished him of this duty; where there as a
private Man, yet suffering horrible injury; or as an Inferior Magistrate,
Invested with the ordinary Authority. Of whom I would ask one question;
Whether or no have the Subjects, Private, or such as are placed in Magistracy,
any greater Right, or Lawful power against the King, than that which David had
against Saul? The Author of that Book called Vindiciae contra Tyran. does
affirm, That David could do nothing against Saul, for the defect of the
Ordinary Power: because he was not one of the States of the People: whom
Paraeus also in this place ranks with the Common People, and private Subjects.
What? was he a Man famous in Peace, powerful in War, Son in Law to the King,
appointed by God for the Kingdom, who went in and out before all the People,
whom all so dearly loved, and above all so much honored and reverenced? And
was not he one of the States of the People? This one only Example (were there
not another to be found in Sacred or Profane History) does demonstrate by a
necessary Consequence; That no private Subject, or public Magistrate has any
lawful Power against the King: whom they may either punish with Death, thrust
out of his Kingdom, reduce into Order by violence, or deprive of his Dignity.


David Paraeus. Lastly, the Arguments brought in the beginning for the negative
part, do all tend to this, and only confirm this Proposition of the duty of
Christians, who are merely private Men.


Doctor Owen. Against these Positions which Paraeus undertook to prove, (and I
believe will prove, That is never.
ad Graecas Calendas) he brought in the beginning of this Question, some places
of Sacred Scripture, viz. Romans 13.2. 1 Pet. 2.19. Math. 5. Romans 12.4. and 17. 1
Pet. 3.9. All which he will have to be Spoken and Understood of merely private
Men. Calvin also found out this very way of evading: for after he had heapt up
diverse Precepts, and Examples, out of both Testaments for Obedience he blows
all away as it were at one blast. Of private Men (says he) I always speak;
for if there be any popular Magistrates, appointed for the moderating the
licenciousnesse of Kings (such as were in times past the Ephori, Tribuni,
Demarchi, and which power is enjoyed by the three States in every Kingdom, when
they sit in the That is, in Parliament.
chief Assembly) I am so far from forbidding such, to restrain that raging
licentiousness of Kings; that I affirm, if they wink at Kings, who rage and
insult over the poor Commons, they are not guiltless of wicked treachery,
Jnstit. l. 4. cap. 20. sect. 31. Beza follows Calvi^. There is no other remedy
(says he) propounded to private Men subject to a tyrant, but amendment of
life, and Prayers, and Tears, which the Lord in his time will not despise. But
as concerning those Popular Officers, he answers in these words; This burden is
laid upon the Superior powers (such as are the Septemviri in the Roman Empire,
whom they call Electors; and the State of the Kingdom in almost all
Monarchies) that they restrain the raging Tyrants; which if they do not, they
shall answer for their persidiousnesse as betrayers of their Country. Thus Beza
in Conf. c. 5. p. 171.172. the Author of that Book called Vindiciae cont.
Tyran. follows Beza: whose Words are these, Christ, because his Kingdom was
not of this world, fled into Egypt, and withdrew himself from tyranny. Paul,
because he describes the duty of every Christian, and not of Magistrates, he
teaches to obey even Nero himself. qu. 3. page 203. 204. From this Fellow, of
an unknown Name, did Lambertus Danaeus draw his Polity. In a godly
Commonwealth (says he) Judgment upon the Supreme Magistrate does not belong
to any one private man in the Commonwealth, not to one or other only of the
Judges, Magistrates, or Princes of the Kingdom; but to the whole States of the
Kingdom. etc. de Politia Christiana lib. 6. cap. 3. p. 413. Bucan draws this
cord longer yet, and that which others attribute to all in general, he to each
one in particular. The Subjects (says he) shall not rightly withdraw their
obedience; yet notwithstanding, they who are in any part partakers of the
administration of the commonwealth, as Governors, Senators, Consuls, States,
or Tribes, ought to moderate the Violence of Princes, loco. 49. Sect. 76.

After him, in the next year following, wrote Joannes Althusius, Doctor of
both Laws, that, All the Ephori together, are the Supreme Magistrates
Superiors, when representing the people, they do any thing in the peoples
name; But each of them several is the Magistrates inferior. de Politicis cap.
14. page 142. and afterward, The people have not the power of punishing the
Magistrate; but the States only. page 161. Peradventure from him Paraeus
borrowed that distinction, not from Tertullian, Cyprian, Nazianzen,
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, or any other of the Fathers, of the
first or middle Age of the Church. Gregory (not the Great, but the wicked)
Hildebrand delivered this burning Firebrand to our Political Divines. The
diverse names of the usurped power over Princes.
Observe (ye Academians) amongst diverse Men, the diverse Names of this usurped
Power. Calvin has it, the popular Magistrates; Beza, the Superior powers;
Junius Brutus, the Nobles of the Kingdom; Bucan, the partakers of public
Administration; Althusius, the Ephori; Paraeus, the Inferior Magistrates. So
that amongst those Authors, I find so many Names of that Power, as there are
Heads of that Beast, Revel. 13.1. But letting Names pass, let us search into
the Thing ir self. Peter long since said, be ye Subject to the King as
Supreme. 1 Pet. 2.13. fie, St. Peter, fie! the King is not Supreme! the
Inferior Magistrates are Supreme! those Magistrates censorious Rod is ever to
be feared by the King, being ordained for his Correction, Deposition, or Death;
according as the Wrath of the Ambitious Nobility, or the Fury of the Provoked
Multitude shall suggest. But howsoever the matter is, it shall be more safe to
err with St. Peter's spirit, than to be otherwise opinioned with those Men.
With your leave therefore (Paraeus) what Optatus Milevitanus wrote long since of
Donatus, may I affirm of those Ephori. Since there is none above the Emperor,
but God alone who made the Emperor; whilst the Inferior Magistrates do exalt
themselves above the Emperor, they do as it were exceed the bounds of men; by
esteeming of themselves as God, in not reverencing him; who, after God, is to
be feared of men de schism. Donat. lib. 3. p. 85. which how well, and according
to the Rules of a Commonwealth this done, I appeal to your own Conscience
Paraeus, and so hasten to your last Proposition.


The fourth Proposition.
David Paraeus. Yet is it lawful for Subjects merely private, in a present
danger, to defend them and theirs against a Tyrant, as against a private
Robber; if the Tyrant shall offer violence against them as a Robber or
Ravisher; they not having the possibility of imploring the ordinary power; or
any other means to avoid the danger.


Doctor Owen. Monstrous Doctrine! altogether unworthy to be Propounded, or to
be refuted. Neither did it become Paraeus (ancient in years, and famous for
learning) to deceive the Reader, with an undiscreet confusion of things, which
are most disjoined, and ought to be considered in a different respect. A
Surgeon runns a man through, the same thing in the same manner is done by a
Robber; the one deserves a Reward, the other a Haltar. Sometimes the Prince
does the same thing, and in the same manner that the Spoyler; as often as by
force of Arms he reduces into order an obstinate Enemy of the State, but not
both by the same Right; because the Prince has his Sword for revenge, which
the Spoyler does usurp for Rapine. Whosoever therefore shall say, the Subject
has the same Right over the Prince that punishes, that the Traveller has
over the Robber that spoyleth, he has no forehead. But the Prince offers
violence to some man, upon a cause not sufficiently just, and lawful; yea
altogether unjust and unlawful; namely, Saul to David, and the innocent
Priests; David, to Uriah; Ahab, to Naboth; Joash, to Zachariah; Manasses, to
Isaiah; Pilate to Christ; and peradventure, Theodosius to the Thessolonians.
Under Saul, David, Ahab, Joash, Manasses, lived Priests and Prophets famous for
their holiness, inspired with the holy Spirit. Under Christ lived Zachaeus,
and Nichodemus; Inferior Magistrates, men pious, and expert in Sacred and
Political matters. No age brought forth more holy, or more orthodoxe Bishops
and Priests, then under Theodosius; yet have they not made known to us this way
of avoiding the Violence of Tyranny. It is, shall be, and has been the common
opinion of all Catholic men, agreeable to the Writings of the Prophets, the
Precept of Christ, the doctrine of the Apostles, and the practice of
Christians; that, the King which sins, has God alone to take vengeance, from
whom alone he takes his being; whose Court he cannot decline, and Judgment he
cannot elude; he ought not to be violated by men, although he degenerate into a
Tyrant, and abuse that power which he has received from God. Which seeing it
is so, it remains, that I weigh well what remains of your new Divinity.


David Paraeus. Because, against whom defense by the Magistrate is lawful,
against them private defense is lawful in case of necessity; when that which
is done by the Magistrate cannot be had, because then, the Laws arm them also,
who are private men. But in case of necessity defense is lawful, by the
Inferior Magistrate against the Superior, and by the Superior against the
Inferior. Therefore, also then private defense is lawful.


Doctor Owen. The absurdity of this reason concerning private defense.
Paraeus follows his old wont. He confounds things different, and unlike, as if
they were the same, and by comparing things different, he cunningly draws the
unwary Reader into the Trappe. Those things which are invol'd by him in a
multitude of words, I will declare more plainly. The son has the same Power
over the Father, that he has over the Servant; the Wife over the Husband,
which she has over the Handmayde; the Servant over the Master which he has
over the Slave; the Mariner over the Ship-Master which he has over the
Pirate; The Subject over the Prince, which the Traveller has over the Robber.
He that proves this, shall be crowned with Hellobore, and drink till he
surfeit, The purging Juice that whole Anticyra affords.

That which follows; concerning the threefold Power of the Superior against
the Inferior, and the Inferior against the Superior, and of private revenge
against them both, is turned over and over, and with it is confused turnings,
exceeds my capacity, neither have I what to answer. Yet the Divine Law has;
which is the Rule of our words and actions, which no man ought to swerve from.
Concerning the King it is commanded, Destroy him not, for who can lay his hand
on the Lords anointed and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9. Christ the eternal
Lawgiver, and the faithful Interpreter of the Law given; The Apostles whom
Christ endued with the graces of the Holy Spirit, and with infallibility of
Judgment, for the direction of all Christians: The truly Apostolical Men,
and all Christians, who in the time of the ten Persecutions, have illustrared
the whole World with their Faith and Charity, and sealed the Orthodoxe Doctrine
with their Blood: Christ, (I say) the Apostles, and Apostolical Men, all
patiently suffered Kings most infamou^ for their Tyranny, Wickedness, and
Cruelties; and not only patiently suffered, but also performed all Honor and
Reverence to them; and taught all indifferently to do the same, by Word and
Example; Not for wrath, but for Conscience sake, as in the presence of the
living God, who alone is the Witness (greater then all exception) of their
innocence, and free Subjection. That which Christ taught, and did, a Christian
ought not to gainsay; and if he do (were he an Angel) he shall incur the
heavy course of an Anathema.

The King that Steward which the Lord, not the Servant may cast out.
Besides, the King is the Minister of God, and that great Steward, which Christ
has set over his whole Family. If that Steward shall begin (as that wicked
Servant in the Gospel) to despise his Lord, to neglect his duty, to smite his
Fellow Servants, to eat, drink and be drunken: it is not in the power of the
whole Family, not of the Pope, not of the States of a Kingdom, not of the
promiscuous Vulgar (if they be in the Family of Christ) to remove the Steward,
constituted, and for over them all, by their Lord; the coming of him, that
appointed him, is to expected; who alone can call the Steward to account, and
put him out at his pleasure. Therefore (Paraeus) you do talk in vain, of a
lawful Means to depose Kings. quest. 3. page 49. Yet neither can commend the
Author nor design the Executor, nor determine the form thereof. I inquire for
the Author in the Word of God, not in your Commentary's; which being without
witness, is without Reason and deserve no belief. I desire the executour, not
confirmed by humane Appointment, but by Divine Authority. It is Adulterate,
Impious, and Sacrilegious (says Cyprian) which is instituted by humane
presumption, that the divine ordinance should be violated. That which you
inculcate concerning the Brethren of the Kingdom, is a mere Dotage, and has
no being but in your brain. God is not the Author of this Anarchy, neither
may man be the Executor. One man compared with another, is either his
Superior, his Equal, or his Inferior: the Superior is no way's Subject to
the Inferior; the Inferior is every way Subject to the Superior, and an
Equal has no Rule over his Equal. That the matter may be the more evident in
this Supposition, view well the Jewish Polity, The manner of the Jewish Polity.
with the degrees and order thereof; the Decurians are above the people; the
Quinquagenarians above the Decurians; above them, the Centurians, over whom the
Tribunes bear rule; over them the Seventy Elders; of whom Moses alone is Judge:
who is Subject neither to each several, nor to all jointly, but to God alone.
He himself (that I may use the words of Ambrose) was held by no Laws, because
Kings are free from the bonds of offenses; and are not called to puishment by
any Laws being, secure in the power of their Empery. Thus he upon the 50 Psalm.

As concerning the Mean themselves; I deny not, but that there are some
ordained by Christ; which the Saints long since have used, The means to avoid
or destroy Tyranny.
and Christians ought always to use: such as are Flight, Patience, Prayers and
Tears. Christ himself sought his safety by Flight; The Martyrs offered up
their Souls to God with patience, and by Patience the Confessors preserved
the Faith entire. By Prayers the Sons of the Church have still overthrown the
Tyrants, whose Ensigne-Bearer, and Captain of the Lords Host Saint Ambrose has
these words. I know not how to war, I know how to greive. I can weep, I can
mourn; against Arms, Soldiers, Goths, my tears are my we apons, otherways I
neither can nor ought to resist. In his Oration against Auxentius, post Epist.
32. Basil the great well appointed for Battle, I will not (says he) betray
the Faith through the loss of Goods, through Banishment or Death; I have no
wealth more than a torn Garment, and a few Books; I sojourne on Earth, as
ever about to leave it; my weak Body having received one stripe, will over
come the sense of Pain and all Torments. In Lonicer. theatr. historic. page
154.

To him adhears Chrysostom, no light-armed Soldier, When I was driven from
the City, I said within my self, if the Queen will have me a Banished Man, let
her banish me: the Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof; and if she will
cut me into two, let her cut me; Isaiah suffered the like, if she will cast me
into the Sea, I will call to mind Jonah: if she will cast me into the Furnace,
the three Children suffered the same: if she will throw me to the Wild Beasts,
let her throw me, I will remember Daniel cast into the Den of Lions. If she
will stone me, let her stone me; I have Stephen the Proto-Martyr my companion.
If she will take away my head, let her take it; I have John Baptist my
Companion; and if she will take away my Substance, let her take it; naked came
I out of my Mothers womb and naked shall I return. in Epist. ad Cyriacum.

Let Bernard that stout Champion come upon the Stage; Whatsoever you please to
do with your Kingdom, with your Soul, and your Crown; we the Sonns of the
Church can by no means dissemble the injury's, contempt, and trampling upon our
Mother. Verily we will stand and fight unto Death (if need be) for our Mother,
with those arms that are lawful, not with shields and with swords, but with
prayers and tears unto God. Epist. 221. Those men scarce hoped for Glory in
the (Heavenly) Country, unless it were by patience in the way (on Earth:) they
would not be delicate Members under a thorny Head. Since Paraeus is conceited
otherwise, let him raise himself a Ladder, that he may climb up to Heaven
alone.


David Paraeus. The second Reason. Because, to take away public or private
defense, against the horrible cruelty of Tyrants, were to confirm their
licentiousness infinite; whereby civil Society would be plainly destroyed,
and especially the Church, because the worse part would take away the better.


Doctor Owen. Public or private defense by Arms, how dangerous.
The second Reason, is grievous to Kings, unprosperous to Subjects, and odious
to all Peaceable Men; because it will make the multitude so insolent and
unruly, that they will obey neither the Laws, nor their Kings, if they shall
displease them, and will open not a Window only, but even a large Gate to men,
for the still devising and attempting new Matters, under the pretense of
restoring the Commonwealth. For the reverence of Supreme Power being taken
away, and Majesty contemned, wicked hands will soon be upon any man, and the
best Kings shall perish by the same fate, that Tyrants; So in humane things
there shall be nothing kept sacred, or inviolate; as the Ancients have
observed, and they who are now alive do perceive and bewail. The Society of
men is made firm, and the communion of Saints preserved not by Humane
Prudence, but by the Divine Providence; that it cannot be destroyed by any
^^^elty of Tyranny. He that is our God does permi^ ^^ranny when and how long he
will's; and does dispose of the Ministry of Tyrants to the Punishment of
Impiety, and Trial of Faith: Neither is he less merciful and gracious, when
he castneth our offenses by cruel Tyrants, for the salvation of the perishing
Soul; than when he bestow's Blessings upon us by merciful Princes, for the
comfort of this present Life. Neither can the worse part take away the better;
because God will not give his holy ones as a prey unto their teeth, who casts
his Vessel into the Furnace of Tribulation, to strengthen not to break it.
and Tyranny does keep under Gods people, that they may be pressed for their
amendment, not oppressed for their ruin; whence Theodoret says, As often as
Tyrants sit at the stern of the Commonwealth, or cruel Lords administer the
Household affairs, the wrath of God is to be appeased, by holy Prayer, and
serious amendment of Life; and a mitigation of the present difficulties and
troubles is to be prayed for. Thus he, de provident. orati. 7. which good and
wholesome Remedy the ancient Christians had try all of, whose Glory was in the
Cross, How the ancient Christians behaved themselves under Tyrants.
and whose Triumph was in Patience; who as long as they could, they willingly
enjoyed the benefit of Life; and when they could not, they willingly endured
the sharpness of Death; always faithful to their God, in under going
Martyrdom, least they should offend the Divine Majesty: Loyal to the King;
not, in doing the Sin he commanded, but in suffering the Punishment he
inflicted. Paraeus, he describes a Remedy worse than the Disease; wherewith, as
it were with a Butchers Knife, he cuts off the King from the Commonwealth, and
makes the inferior Members to rule over the Head, even against Nature; by
subjecting the Supreme Magistrate to the ordinary Power of the Inferior
Magistrate, and when this Power cannot be implored, to the private revenge of
the Tumultuous People which Remedy God did neither institute before the Law,
nor establish in the Law, nor vouchsafe by the Prophets, nor reveal by Christ,
nor promulge by the Apostles, nor publish by the Catholic Fathers, nor decree
by Orthodox Counsels, whereby I the more wonder, that this man, (of no small
learning, and verst in the Sacred Scriptures, Ancient Fathers, and
Ecclesiastical History) should so rashly turn aside from the Law of God, the
Gospel of Christ, the Doctrine of the Apostles, and opinion of the purer
Church, to the error of the Modern Anti-Monarchians.


David Paraeus. Without doubt, the Law of God does not so establish the
licentiousness of Tyrants, that in the mean time humane society be destroyed


Doctor Owen. Note.
God shall henceforward sit idle in Heaven, neither taking care of the Earthly
Kingdoms, nor holy Church; let all perish, and come to ruin, if the Ambitious
States, or Seditious Commons do not come in to help. What else is this, but to
exalt the Arm of Flesh, the Wisdom of this World, the humane (that I may not
say Devilish) Power above God himself, and against his divine Ordinance; to
the subversion of Piety, the destruction of Peace, and ruin of all
Commonwealth. All Laws are either given by God, or established by Man, that
men may live peaceably and holily in a Commonwealth; and that those things may
be avoided which do hinder either Peace or Holiness, I appeal to your own
Conscience Paraeus, is it not better, safer, and securer, to the propogation of
piety, and preservation of peace, to suffer the Tyranny of one (though more
cruel than Nero) than to set all the Members of the Commonwealth at odds, and
to cast the whole State upon the greatest and most certain Dangers. For the
King cannot be so destitute and forlorn, but that he will have many of the
States of his Kingdom to be joined with him, and companions of his
wickedness; with whose help he being assisted, he cannot forcibly be reduced
unto order, without bloody Slaughters, and the public Calamity. But a Kingdom
never becomes so miserable under that King, though most cruel, as for the most
part it happens to be, in a civil War; Gods providence in the order of
Superiority.
So that God seems in nothing more to have provided for the public good, than
by setting the Superior above the Inferior, and subjecting the Inferior to
the Superior; that no man presume to rise up against the King, whom God has
placed above all; and being so placed he has not left to humane Trial, but
reserved to his divine Judgment. He blasphemes therefore against Heaven, who
attempts evil in heart, mouth, or hand, against a Tyrant justly possessed of his
Kingdom.


And thus far concerning the Propositions of Paraeus, and the Reasons of
them, not good and well applied Reasons but weak and frivolous; framed to the
deceiving of the People, and ruining of Kings, and their Kingdoms. I will now
return, to the confirming the truth of my Assertion concerning the absolute
power of Kings.

Those men agree well amongst themselves concerning the thing; it is concerning
the manner, that Bellarmino Danaeus and Paraeus do contend* neither may we see
the contrary in the rest of the Followers of both Sects. I insist only upon
these three because they are of so great note amongst their followers, that
none of the Papists will contradict Bellarmino; none of the Puritans gainsay
Danaeus and Paraeus: Know these and know all.

The first Reason of the absolute power of Kings, from the Dictate of Nature.
Nature it self does oppose this Puritan-Papisticall Tenet: from which
fountain, the Authority of Rule, the Necessity of Obedience; the Honesty of
Life, the filthiness, and punishment of Vice; the goodness and reward of
Virtue do stream forth. And those Wise Men (whose Prudence in making Laws
Antiquity so much admires) discerning good from evil, just from unjust, honest
from dishonest have published most wholesome Laws. Whence Basil the great: The
Princes of the whole Earth are sacred, even for the propriety of nature it
self to good; who her self bestows this Empery upon them* in psalm. 44. In
this, says Cyprian, whole Nature does agree: there is one King to the Bees,
one Captain among the Flocks, one Governor among the Herds, de vanitate Idol.

St Ambrose (lib. 6. cap. 21. concerning the works of the six Days) he
observes an admirable dispensation of Nature in the hives of Bees. Bees defend
their Kings with the chiefest protection, they think it honorable to dye for
the King; the King being insafety they alter not their judgment, they change
not their mind; the King being lost they forsake their faith of keeping their
offices; because he who had the principallity is slain. The same has Hierome.
lib. 1 epist. 3. Let him that fights against Monarchs go to the Bees, let him
consider their ways that he may learn to fear God and honor the King. From
the dictate of Nature, I hasten to the Law of Nations the Lawyers call that the
Law of Nations which is equally observed by all Nations. Whence Augustine; It
is a general covenant of humane society, to obey their Kings. confess, lib. 3.
cap. 8.

The second Reason of the immunity of Kings from the Law of Nations.
Although the Acts of Ancient Kings, for a great part of them are lost by the
injury of the Times, or sloth of Men; yet from them that are extant in the
Relics of Historyes, it will evidently appear, both that all Nations have
obeyed their Kings, and that all Kings have excercised an absolute Authority,
circumscribed with no bounds of conditions. Let the Annalls of all Nations be
turned over, it shall no where be found, that such a bridle is cast over Kings;
that they must submit their scepters to the will of the People; or that they
should receive from the Nobles, a Law to moderate their Royal Jurisdiction.
Which thing Cicero has observed in his oration for King Deiotarus, before
Caesar most expert in the Law and History 's. It is so unusual a thing (says
the Orator) for a King to be guilty of a capital crime, that before this time
it was never heard of. Artabanus also Viceroy of Persia (not without a Jeere,
deriding the lightness of the Graecians) mocked Themistocles: You Grecians
(says he) care for nothing more than Liberty and Equallity; but we Persians do
think it most excellent, and most sacred of all things, to give Honor and
Reverence to the King, as to the Image of the living God; who rules and governs
this whole World. What Artabanus delivered by the instinct of Nature, Augustine
and others of the Ancients delivered by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
whose sayings, produced in their place will have the more Weight.

That which those Political Divines do so often repeat concerning the
Lacedaemonians, Athenians, and Romans, is a mere dream. After that Theopompus,
the last King of the Spartans had joined to his Son, and his future
Successors, the Ephori; the name of King became an empty Title amongst the
Lacedaemonians; having altogether lost the authority, which before Theopompus
all the Kings had absolute and most free. The Athenians after that they ceased
to be under Kings, they endured no kind of Government long, being impatient of
the present, and desirous of new; at length they were ruined by an Anarchy. The
People of Rome bewiched with the sweetness of liberty, after the example of
the Graecians, they changed their Kingdom into a Democracy; and established a
Law, never to reduce their Kings. But by their foreign Wars, and civil
Discords they learnt at last, that there was no Remedy for their decaying
Country, but to be governed by one. Therefore they created a dictator, of a
free Power and Rule; free from giving any account of his Words and Actions;
from whom there should be no appeal, and to whom was permitted to imprison,
punish with bonds, or death, any man of the Nobles, or of the Patrician Order,
the cause not declared.

What the Puritans have devised concerning the States of the Kingdom in
England, France, and Scotland, I dare not call them old wives fables, since
that they are shamful lies so lately broached. For how great the Power, and how
sacred the Majesty of our Kings is, I had rather draw from the full fountain of
the ancient Parliaments of this Kingdom, and of men most expert in the Laws of
England, living in former ages; then from the muddy standing pooles of Modern
Politics. There is in Thomas de Walsingham, an Epistle in the name of the
whole Kingdom, from the Parliament held at Lincoln, about the Year 1301.
inscribed to the Roman Bishop; wherein the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
with all the Commons do speak to the Bishop concerning the pre-eminence of
the King of England in these words following; We know (most holy Father) and it
is a thing notorius, from the first institution of the Kingdom of England as
well in the times of the Britains as of the English, that certain and direct
power of Rule has belonged to the King; and that the Kings of England by the
free pre-eminence of the Royal Dignity, and by the custom observed at all
times, have not answered, neither ought to answer any thing, before any
Ecclesiastical or Secular Judge, etc.

Henry de Bracton Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench (under Henry the
third) a Man most learned in the English Laws, has these words; There are
under the King free men and servants; and all under him, and he under none, but
God only. If a man be injured by the King; (since no urit can run against the
King) there is place left for petition, that he would correct and amend his
fact: if he do not, it shall be a sufficient punishment, that he may expect God
his avenger; Concerning Royal Charters, or the Acts of Kings, neither private
persons nor Justices ought to dispute. This is cited in that Oration of the
most honorable Lord Elismer, Viscount Bareley, late Chancellor of England;
most expert in the Laws of England; which oration he made in the Exchequer
chamber in the year 1609. page 108. it is cited also by the Lord Bishop of
Rochester de usurp, pontif. potest. lib. 1. cap. 8

What was the authority of the States of France, in former times over their
Kings which offended, Pasquerius does relate, lib. 1. antiquit. Gallic. Lewis
the 11. did urge the Senators and Councillors, that they would be the
Authors of a certain Edict, which they refused to do, because it seemed to be
unjust. The King full of wrath, threatened death to the whole Senate; Vacarius
the President of the Council, approached the King with the whole Senate clothed
in Purple; the King astonished at the coming of the Senate all in Purple; he
asked, wherefore they came and what they would? Vacarius answered for them all,
We seek for death, which thou so wrathfully threatened us with: Know this, O
King! we will assuredly dye, rather than do any thing against our Consciences
and duties. Thus Pasquerius. Those States had learned, not to punish the King
offending; but to lay down their lives at the will and command of the King, And
in their general Council held at Paris Anno Domini 1614. it was propounded;
That there was no earthly power, spiritual or temporal, which has any right
over the Kings of France, to remove the sacred persons of Kings from their
dignity, or to absolve their Subjects from their Loyalty and Obedience, which
they for ever owe them, upon any cause or pretense whatsoever,

When the Scotch Nobility had endeavored Sedition against Ferchardus the most
wicked King of the Scots, Colmannus the Bishop did restrain them, and
admonished the King; that the divine vengeance would shortly overtake him: The
King a while after being wounded at a hunting, and sick of the lousie disease,
he cried out; That all the evils were befalne him, because he hearkened not to
the holy Bishop, when he so well admonished him. Afterward Colmannus
comforting him he repented, and quietly departed. Well done, good and faithful
Bishop! Thou recalledst the People and Nobles from Insurrection, thou
repressedst the Seditious, thou did openly admonish the King, and that
modestly, yet freely too; thou did not do it privily with raylings to the
stirring up the people; Thou perswadedst, that he is not to be chastised at the
pleasure of the States, but left to the divine Revenge. I will add some heads
of the Royal Law among the Scots out of Hector Boethius lib. 12.

In profane matters, let no man determine the Law, but whom the Royal Majesty
shall appoint. Let all Law be determined, Assemblies cited, Counsels called in
the name of the King alone. Let no man obtain the Magistracy, by any other than
the Kings authority. If any man shall swear Allegiance to any but the King,
let the crime be Capital. Let no man possess ground, farm, or field by any
other then the Royal Authority. If any man shall enter league with another,
professing faith and loyalty, against any man, let him be punished with death.
If any man without the command of the King, shall have men in Arms, let him
expiate his crime with death. If any of the Nobles shall contract affinity with
those of another Dominion, let him be punished with Death.
These, and more like unto these are to be found in Boethius.

As for other Kings and Kingdoms, let them look to it whom it concerns. So
that we have the Imperial highness of our Lord and King (then which the Sun
has not seen any thing more just, more learned, or more holy,) preserved whole
and entire against all the machinations of Papists, and of Puritans. Blessed be
the name of the Lord, who in these our day's, (wherein he foresaw so many
scandalls of Heretics and Schismatics would arise) has placed King James in
the height of this Dominion to the comfort of the Christian World, the increase
of the Catholic Faith, and the safety of the Churches Peace; that the Royal
Power and the Sacerdotall Office may still flourish.

The third Reason of the Royal Prerogative from the authority of the Civil
Law.
Amongst the Interpreters of the Civil Law, do every where meet us, these
expressions of the Emperor, that he is the The Emperor does punish his
Subjects wheresoever they offend; and the Reason is, because he is of Right the
Lord of the World. So Baldus C. lib. 4. tit. 42. de Eunuehis.
Lord of the World, Although he be the Vicar of God. Baldus C. lib. 6. tit. 8.
de jure aureorum annulorum.
Gods Vicar on earth, Jacobus Omphalius lib de officio and potest. princip. c.
10
the living Law, The Prince has the fullness of Power. Baldus again lib. 4.
tit. 52. de commun. rerum alienat.
the fullness of Power, The Prince is free from the Laws, because he is subject
to none neither is judged by others. Hostiensis Sum. lib. 1. Rubr. 32. de
officio legati. and he cites ff. lib. 1. tit. 3. l. 30. where the same words
are had.
the free and The King in his Kingdom can do all things, even out of the
fullness of power. Corsetus Siculus tract. de potest. Reg. part. 5. number. 66.
absolute Power; He that disputes concerning the power of the Prince, whether
he has done well, or no; he is sacrilegious: So the Marginist upon Angelus
Perusinus C. lib. 9. tit. 29. de crimine sacrilegii l. 2.
Disputation concerning the Privilege of the Prince is sacrilegious, Instit.
lib. 1. tit. 2. de jure natural. Gent. and civil. and Claudius Cantiuncula in
the same place.
that which pleases the King has the force of a Law, To restrain the
Supreme Power, belongs to them who neither acknowledge the Imperial Power,
nor how great a distance their is between a private fortune, and the Regal
Dignity. Doctores in l. 3. been a Zenone C. lib. 7. tit. 37. de quadriennii
proscriptione.
the power of the Prince is not to be restrained, The Prince is bound to no
form, neither is a Reason to be required of him, why do thou so? ( Baldus C.
lib. 7. tit. 50. sententiam rescindi non posse: l. 3. impetrata.) Because
seeing the King is the Cause of Causes, a cause is not to be required of his
power* since that of the first cause there is no cause given. So Baldus again
decret. l. 2. tit. 16. Vt lite prudente nihil in novetur. upon 3 Eccles. number. 7.
if the Prince shall do any thing out of the fullness of Power, no man may say,
why do thou so?

Lastly, William Barclay does infer from Bartolus, Baldus, Paulus,
Castrensis, Lodovicus Romanus, Alexander, Felinus, Albericus and others; That
the Prince upon certain knowledge can do all things, above the Law, without
the Law, and against the Law, the Prince alone may constitute an universal
Law, the Prince owes an account to God only. The Prince is free from the
Laws. And it is a rash thing to desire the Royal Majesty should be limited
with any bounds. contra Monarchum. l. 3. cap. 14.

There are more of this sort in Pet. Greg. Tholosan. de Repub. throughout his
sixth book. In Adam Blacuodaeus in his Apology for Kings c. 25. and 31. and in
Adrian Saravia de imperandi authorit. lib. 2. c. 16. and 17* from whence it
does necessarily follow, that the authority of the People is nothing, the
authority of the Inferior Magistrate is above the People, but below the King;
by whom he is, and to whom he is Subject: but the Royal authority is free and
absolute. For that Power is free which cannot be condemned by man's judgment,
nor ought to be compelled: and the absolute power, is (under God) Supreme, in
every part perfect, which can neither be increased, nor ought to be deminished
without offering injury to the divine Diety, because God is the Author and
Ordainer of it. For where there is a Majority, there is a power of commanding;
to the rest there remains a necessity of obeying; as the Lawyers speak.

The fourth Reason from the Cannon Law.
Many things are alleged in the behalf of Kings even from the Cannon Law
also, against the insolent haughtiness of the Pope. First it is inferred; that
the secular Princes are not subject to the Pope; because God has disposed
Secular affairs not by the Pope, but by the Emperors. did. 8. cap. quo jure.
Innocent the third does acknowledge the authority of the Kings of France, which
he neither intends to disturb or deminish. de judiciis cap. Novit. the same
Pope also confesses, that the same King has no Superior in temporal things.
qui Filii sunt legittimi. cap. per venerabilem. Honorius the third presupposes
himself a fit Judge concerning the birthday of the Queen of Cyprus: but
judgment concerning the right of succession (he confesses) does belong not to
the Pope, but to the King. de ordin. cognit. cap. Tuam. Allexander the third,
he would not take knowledge of the possessions of some English men contending
before him, least he should seem to detract from the right of the King of
England. Qui Filii sunt legittimi, cap. Causam.

To whom knowledge concerning the Rights of private men does not belong; he
ought not to judge of Kings, and their Royal Crowns, and Kings who would not
acknowledge the Roman Bishop, (bearing himself the Vicar of Christ and the
Universal Bishop) their Superior; they will not endure the States of the
Kingdom, or the promiscuous multitude (a wild beast of many heads) to be
above them. You will say, what then? shall the Royal Majesty be immense
enclosed with no Limits? not liable to be punished by the Pope, nor by the
Nobles of the Kingdom, nor at least by the whole multitude? not at all. The
King has the place of God on Earth, and has his authority from Heaven; he acts
the Person, and bears the Image of the eternal King: to whom alone he is
bound to render an account of his words and actions; being secure from all
constraint through the Majesty of his Royal Dignity. Which I shall evince by
most firm reasons drawn out of the old and new Testament.

The fifth Reason from sacred Scripture
What High Priest* what Synod of Priests; what Senate of the Nobles, or what
promiscuous Multitude ever excercised the ordinary Power against Saul defiled
with all impiety? against David guilty of Adultery, and Murder? against Solomon
guilty of Poligamy and Idolatry? against other Kings of Judah, and Israel,
miserably profaning the Temple of God, wickedly polluting the divine Worship,
drawing the People in heaps to Idolatry, drunken with the blood of the
Priests, of the Prophets, of the Nobles and all innocent Men; even most defiled
with all kind of wickedness? David he spared Saul, and because he had cut off
the skirt of his Garment, his heart smote him and he greatly trembled. Jeremiah
taught the Captives not to fight against the King, but to pray for the King.
Ahasuerus had by his public decree destinated all the Jews unto slaughter, at
an appointed day; the People fortified themselves with Prayers, with Tears,
with Fasting, with Sackcloth and Ashes; not with Revilings, not with Lyings in
wait, not with Treasons, not with Arms. Mordecai did not admonish the Queen to
take away the Tyrant by poison, but by fastings and prayers to God, and humble
supplication to the King, to avert the heavy falling of that mischeife which
hanged over them: which Buchanan does not deny, in whose seditious dialogue
concerning the Right of Kings with the Scots, are these words; The Kings of the
Jews were not punished by the Subjects, because from the beginning they were
not created by the Subjects, but given them by God, by the best right therefore
he that was the author of the Dignity, the same should be the exactor of
punishment. Thus Buchanan.

But seeing he could not well unloose this knot; he cut's it into two with the
sword of a Lying tongue; to wit, That the Scotch Kings are not given by God,
but created by the People; and that whatsoever right they challenge to
themselves, they have it from the Commons; and that the Multitude has the same
right over the Kings which the Kings have over each one of the Multitude. Tell
me Buchanan, I pray; why shall not the Kings of all other Nations have the same
immunity that the Jews? they also have no Author, and accknowledge no Author
but God. Moses does witness that God the Creator of the whole World, presently
after the Flood, ordained the Sword to be the avenger of Bloodshed; and
established Servitude to be the punishment of the Father that was mocked. In
which all the parts of civil Jurisdiction, and Royal Power are
Synecdochically understood. Job also does witness, that God alone it is who
unlooseth the bond of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle. I suppose
he speaks concerning the Kings of the Gentiles, the Polity of the Jews, was
not as yet constituted by the hand of Moses, by me Kings reign, and Princes
decree justice, says the Holy Ghost, Prove. 8. Christ witnesses that Pilat's
power was given him from Heaven. Saint Paul has writ, that there is no power,
but of God. From him is the Emperor, from whom he is Man, before he be
Emperor, says Tertullian. From him he has his power, from whom he has his
spirit: And as Irenius has it. The Earthly Kingdom is appointed by God for
the benefit of the Gentiles, and by whose command Men are borne, by his command
Kings are made. Augustine is yet more plain and more full. It is God alone, who
gives earthly Kingdoms both to the good and to the bad, and this not rashly,
or as it were by chance, because he is God; but according to the order of
things, and of the times; hidden from us, but most open to himself. Thus
Augustine de Civ. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 33. Yet do the Papists and Puritans devise
many things out of the Scriptures, (a thing usual with Heretics) contrary to
the genuine meaning thereof; with which I will not detain you; they are so
unsound and unsavory that they will deceive no man, but such an one, as is
void of Reason, or altogether ignorant of ancient History.

I have already spoken of Paraeus. Bellarmine, and Danaeus, do most of all
insist upon Examples of the ten Tribes who revolted from their natural King
to a man of servile condition of the Men of Libnah, and the Edomites, who
rebel'd against Joram. And of the Kings Amaziah, Vzziah, and of the Queeen
Athaliah, to which I answer: The defection of the ten Tribes from their
natural King to Jeroboam; the Rebellion of the Edomites, and of the men of
Libnah; and the slaughter of Amaziah by the men of Jerusalem, do contain the
Truth of the thing done, but not the equity of the fact, as Augustine most
truly. We may not therefore believe a thing must be done, because we read that
it has been done; least we violate the Precept, whilst we follow the Example.
In the History of Vzziah and Athaliah, I see no difficulty; nothing is there
done, which is not according to the equity of Reason, and the prescript of the
Law. Vzziah being diseased could not be conversant in the affairs of the
Kingdom; by reason of the contagiousnesse of his disease he is removed from
the company of the Courtiers, and assembly of the People. In the mean while his
Son govern's the Commonwealth in his Fathers stead, yet before the death of
Vzziah, he neither affected the name nor assumed the title of King. And as for
Athaliah, Jehoida the Chief Priest showed the surviving Son of the deceased
King (whom he had six years hid from the fury of Athaliah, the Murderesse of
the Royal offspring) to the Princes and Centurions whom he had gathered together
at Jerusalem. They all acknowledge the Child their true King; being so
acknowledged they crown him, being crowned they salute him with joyful
acclamations, God save the King: after that, neither by their own, nor by the
Priestly Authority, but in the name of the lately crowned King they deposed
Athaliah, as guilty of Treason and Murder, by force and arms. Jehoiada acted
the chief part, but not as chief Priest, but as chief of the Tribe of Levi,
being ancient in years, expert in the divine Law, provident against the
dangers which are imminent, the Preserver of the young King and the next
Kinsman. The law of God does not permit to touch Kings with a violent hand, to
revile them with a railing tongue, or to think of them with a malicious heart.
The Gospel of Christ forbids resisting. Tyrants; Peter and Paul forbid
resisting Persecutors and Slayers of Christians. Bellarmine answers, that
Laics of what order or dignity soever they are, are thus bound by the Law,
Gospel and Apostolical Precepts, but not the Roman Bishop* the Vicar of
Christ, and the universal Lord of the whole World for which he is styled by
Danaeus, the grand Impostor, a flatterer of Capitoline Jove a Lyor, a
Blasphemer, and a Madman. But (says Paraeus in his foresaid book, page 49.
The Pope and the Church have not power to depose a King that is an Infidel;
because deposing ought to be according to the Laws. But the Laws do not grant
this power to the Pope and to the Church, but to the Brethren of the Kingdom.
(and as Danaeus has it) it belongs to the godly States in every Commonwealth
to chastise those Kings which offend and depose those which are obstinate. The
Pontificians again cry out, a Puritan, by whom he is styled an Atheist a
Politician, and Seditious; and affirm that this power of chastising Kings and
deposing them, does no ways properly belong to the Barons, or Peers of the
Kingdom or to the Multitude, for the defect of coactive Jurisdiction* which
Vassalls (for so they speak) have not against their Lords. So Jaco. Anthon.
Marta* de jurisdict. lib. 1. c. 23. number. 18. and Carerius de potest. Pontif.
lib. 2. cap. 3. number. 6. Whether (Learned Sirs) will you have the Pope, or the
Popular State, the Avenger and Judge of wicked Kings. Neither (I confess
ingeniously) does please me. But that I may ingratiate my self into their
favor, whom I so lately provoked, I suppose both opinions to be true, that all
Kings Emperors and supreme Magistrates are obnoxious to the Pontifician, and
to the Tribunitian Power. Yet that any man be justly condemned, the course of
the Court it self does require these two things: the desert of the Crime, and
the order of Power, I would have those Puritan-Papists to tell us, from whence
this Pontificiall, and Popular power is.

Without doubt it is not from Christ, who yielded both obedience and tribute to
Tyberius Caesar, no good Emperor; who reproved Peter smiting with the sword
and commanded him to put it up. Not from Paul who will have every soul subject
to the higher Powers. Not from Peter who subjecteth all, without difference, to
the King, and to those (not Tribunes which are constituted by the People, not
Legates which are sent out from the Pope,) but Magistrates which are appointed
by the King: from whence it necessarily follows; that all coactive power, and
secular dignity does issue from the King. whose sacred Majesty he that
violates, shall be guilty of treason not so much against the humane as against
the divine Majesty, and what Bernard long since said, (ad Archiepiscop.
Senonens.) may I now say to the Commonalty and Nobility; Let every Soul be
subject; if every soul, then yours; who has exempted you from the generallity
the that endeavors to exempt attempts to deceive; rest not upon their
counsels who though they be Christians, yet think it a disgrace either to
follow the example, or obey the precepts of Christ. Epist. 24.

The sixth Reason from the Authority of the Fathers.
In the primitive Church of an unspotted faith, beautified with candid
innocence, and purple Martyrdom there is a deep silence of this power. Indeed
those Ancients choose to suffer any thing for righteousnesse-sake, and to be
crowned with Martyrdom, rather than by repelling violence with force, or by
resisting public Anthority to be accounted guilty of impiety against God, or
rebellion against the Emperors.

Justin Martyr in his Apology for Christians to Antonius Pius describes the
duty of Subjects. That we may worship the true God (says he) we willingly obey
you Emperors, whom we acknowledge Kings and Princes, and we pray that there
may appear in you equal wisdom joined with your Royal Power. Tertullian
also to Scapula President of Carthage. Concerning the Majesty of the Emperor
we are defamed, yet cannot the Christians be found to be either Albinians,
Nigrians, or Cassians; a Christian is no man's enemy, much less the Emperors;
whom (knowing him to be constituted by God) it is necessary that he reverence,
and honor, and that he desire his safety, with the whole Roman Empires, we
reverence the Emperor therefore, as second to God; and what he is, he has
received from God, inferior only to God, etc. The same Author in his
Apologeticke relates the prayers and devotions of the Christians; For the
Emperor persecuting the Church; The Christians with their Arm's spread because
they are innocent, with their heads bared because they blush not; lastly from
their hearts they pray for all Emperors, a long life, a secure Empire, a safe
home, Valiant Armies, a faithful Senate, a loyal People, a peaceable World,
and whatsoever is the desire and wish of Man, and of Caesar. The Founders of
the Presbytery, were wont to pray otherwise in Scotland. From the Guysian
blood good Lord deliver us. The most desperate Contrivers of that
Powder Treason, prayed otherways in England, whom I think it were fit they were
parg'd with Hellebore rather then refuted with Reason.

Holy Athanasius speaking of the supreme Empery of Kings has these words ( ad
Antioch. quest. 55.) As God is King and Emperor over all the World, and does
exercise a power over all things which are in Heaven and in Earth; so is the
Prince and King set over earthly things, who of his own accord does what he
will, even as God himself.

The day would fail me if I should recite to you the testimonies of Ignatius,
Arnobius, Iraeneus, Lactantius, Ambrose, Hierome, Basil, Hillary, Chrysostom,
Nazianzen, Cyrill, Optatus, Milevetanus, Leo the first, Fulgentius, Gregory the
first, Bernard and others. And Augustine shall be one for all, Epist. 42. (ad
fratres Madaur.) Ye see the Temples of Idols, partly decayed without repair,
partly thrown down, partly shut up, partly changed to other uses, and the Idols
themselves either broken, or burnt, or destroyed, and the very powers of this
world, (which sometime for these Idols sake persecuted the Christian people)
overcome and subdued by Christians, not resisting but dying.

The seventh Reason from the Authority of Protestants.
The Protestants vary not an haire's breadth from the Doctrine of the Ancient
Church. Yet is it an usual thing with the Papists, to accuse the Church
(purged from the dregs of Popery) both, of defection from the Catholic Faith,
and of Sedition in a constituted Polity. Hear from Cardinal Alanus the common
calumny of the Papists ( in respons. ad Jnstit. Brittan. c. 4. The Protestants
(says the Cardinal) desperate and factious men, So long as they have Princes
and Kings indulgent to their wills, they know well how to use that prosperous
estate of Fortune but if their Princes cross their desires, or the Laws be
against them, presently they break the bonds of Loyalty, despise Majesty every
where, they rage with Slaughters, Firings, and Plunderings, and run headlong
into the contempt of all divine and humane things. Thus he. To the wiping off
this foul calumny, I will set down a few sayings of a few men, that the
Adversryes may blush, if they have not wholly cast off all shame of Man, and
fear of God. As for the followers of the Presbytery, I number them with the
Jesuits (whose manners they imitate) rather then with the Protestants, I call
God to witness, I never yet found any man devoted to the Idol of the
Pre^bytery, who was not as great an anemy to the Regal Majesty, as to the
Episcopal Dignity.

Sleidan does express the opinion of Luther at large, com. lib. 5. From whence
I have taken these few words; No man (says Luther) who moves Sedition can be
excused, although he have a just cause; he must repair to the Magistrate, and
attempt nothing privately. All Sedition is contrary to Gods precept, who
disalowes and detest's it. Thus he.

Philip Melancthon neither thought, nor spoke otherwise. Although it be the
Law of Nature to repel force with force; yet is it not lawful by force to
repel the force exercised by the Magistrate. Although we seem to promise
obedience, upon this condition, if the Magistrate command things lawful; yet
is it not therefore lawful to repel the unjust force of the Magistrate by
force. Although Empires be obtained and possessed by wickedness, yet the
Ordinaion of the Empire is the work of God, and the good creature of God.
There is therefore no force to be taken up against the Magistrate. These words
has Melancthon in Luther, Tom. 1. page 463.

Brentius dissents not from them, the Government of a Prince (as he has it in
Resp. ad Art. Rustic.) may be evil two ways. First when any thing is
commanded contrary to the Faith, as to renounce God. Here is the Apostl's
saying good, We must obey God rather than Man. Let not the Subject by any means
use violence against the Magistrate; let him suffer any evil patiently, let
him not strike again, but be quiet, and suffer any discommodity rather than
obey his wicked command. Secondly the Government of a Prince may be evil,
when any thing is commanded contrary to public Justice; of which sort is the
exaction of a man's goods, or the punishing of his body; in those kinds of
injuries Obedience becomes a Subject: for if he betake himself to Arms, his
sentence is past, he that smites with the sword shall perish by the sword.
Thus Brentius

Under Henry the eight, Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, together, with the
Bishops, and other the the more famous Divines of the Kingdom, in a book
concerning the Institution of a Christian man, has these words. If Princes
shall do contrary to what their duty requires, they have not in this world any
Judge set over them by God; but are to render an account to God who has
reserved to himself alone, the judgment of them. But it is horrible
wickedness for the Subjects to raise Sedition or Rebellion, although their
Princes be evil. But God is to be prayed unto, in whose hand are the hearts of
Kings, that he would alluminate them by his Spirit, whereby they may rightly
use the Sword committed to them, to Gods glory. Thus they.

Least any man should slanderously report that this was feigned, and therefore
spoken to flatter the King; I will add the opinions of others the most learned
of that age; who lived under the Cross of Persecution, who wrote in the
troublesome time of Banishment, and who suffered most cruel Death for the
Truth of Christ.

William Tyndall (an Exile for Religions sake, and Martyr under Charles the
fifth) put forth a Book concerning a Christian man's obedience in the
nineteenth year of Henry the eight's Reign, (when the Cardinal a Butchers
Son led away the Lambs of Christ by flocks to the Slaughter) in which he
describes the authority of the King, and the duty of Subjects, according to the
rule of the Gospel. David (says Tyndall) spared Saul; if he had slain him he
had sinned against God. In every Kingdom the King (who has no Superior)
judges of all. He that attempts any mischief to the Prince, being a Tyrant or
Persecutor, or with a stubborn hand touches the Lords anointed, is a Rebel
against God, and resists Gods Ordinance. As often as a private man offends, he
is held guilty to the King, when the King offends he ought to be reserved to
the trial and vengeance of God. And as it is not lawful to resist the King
upon any pretense whatsoever so is it not lawful to rise up against the
Magistrate, who is sent by the King, to execute those things which are
commanded by the King. Thus he. Robert Barnes condemned to the fire in the year
1541. in a Tract concerning humane constitutions, he prescribes the best form
of obedience to Subjects living under wicked Princes. If the King (says he)
endeavoring to root out the faith of Christ, shall forbid the hearing of the
Word, or receiving of the Sacraments under the penalty of some great Fine, or
danger of Death; God is to be called upon with faithful prayers, the King
petitioned with humble supplications, that he will be pleased to revoke his
decree; if he will not do it, it becomes a loyal Subject to cleave to the
Truth, and patiently to bear the violence offered by the King. He that cannot
fly a raging Persecutor, let him patiently suffer the loss of goods, the
tearing of his members; yea a Christian ought to suffer most cruel death for
the truth according to the example of Christ; whosoever shall rebel for
Religions sake shall be guilty of eternal damnation. Thus Barnes.

They who in the Reign of Queen Mary renounced Popery, and refused to believe
the breaden God, were constrained to undergo the most exquisite kinds of
torments, and after many Calamities, Miseries, Chains, Fetters, Hunger, Thirst;
Cold and other Punishments, great without measure, many without number; being
condemned to the Flames, they offered up their holy Souls an acceptable
Sacrifice to God; of whom not any man either in his fore-spent life, or brought
to the place of punishment being now laying down his life, did contemn the
royal Majesty, though so cruel. No man cursed the Queen (destroying her
People the Church of God contrary to her public protestation) no man was
found who refused obedience, yea no man who did not humbly pray for her. So the
Men of God, and dutiful Subjects by leaving to posterity a famous example of
obedience and patience, by leading an innocent life, free from sedition, they
sealed with one and the same blood the duty of Allegiance and the purity of
their faith.

We have not now place to speak of the Protestants under Ferdinand, Maximilian,
and Radolphus, Emperors of Germany, and under Elizabeth of blessed memory
Queen of England, (God I hope will grant an opportunity) I cannot pass by one,
anointed by the Lord with the oil of saving Grace, and singular Knowledge
above his fellows, the pillar of the Church, the prop of the Commonwealth, a
most expert Champion of Christ against Antichrist and the new Arrians, a most
invincible Warrior in the cause of Kings against the Papal Tyranny, the
Cardinal impostures, and Puritannicall seditions; the restorer of the
Episcopal Dignity, and most eager opposer of the Presbyteriall Anarchy, the
Defendor of the Catholic Faith, the truly peaceable King, in his golden
treatise concerning the true Law of free Monarchy. page 48. The wickedness of
him that rules, ought not to subject the Ruler to them, over whom God has
appointed him to be Judge: if it be not lawful for a private man to prosecute
an injury against a private Adversary, seeing God has committed the sword of
Vengeance to the Magistrate alone; how much less do thou think it lawful
either for all the people in general, or some in partiticular, to usurp the
sword, (to which they have no right) against the public Magistrate, to whom
alone it is committed. Thus the most royal King.

Seeing the Papal and Tribunitian power is contrary to Nature, is disalowed by
the Law of Nations, the Civil and Cannon law; seeing it can find neither
foundation in the Word of God, nor patronage from the Ancient Fathers, nor
entertainment with the most learned of the Protestants; but is rejected,
antiquated, and exploded by all with one mouth; I confidently aver, that it is
the mere devise of Papists and Puritans, (seditious men) odious to God,
injurious to Kings; devised to the ruin of the Commonwealth, and destruction
of Religion. Therefore I conclude according to the Dictate of Nature, the Law
of Nations, the Civil and Canon Law, the sacred Scriptures, the Orthodox
Fathers, and most Famous Doctors of the Reformed Church. It is not lawful to
resist the King violating the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

1. Pet. 2.17. Fear God, Honor the King.


FINIS.

