A SERMON Preached at St. GEORGE'S Church AT WINDSOR, September. 27. 1685.

By EDWARD PELLING, Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Somerset.

Printed by Order.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Keble, at the Turks Head in Fleet Street, and Walter
Davis, in Amen Corner. 1685.

A SERMON Preached at St. GEORGE'S Church AT WINDSOR, September. 27. 1685.
1 PET. 3. 13. And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good.


IT may seem very strange, that words to this purpose should drop from St.
Peter's mouth; if we understand them so, as if good Men could not be entreated
after an evil manner. For the whole History of those times wherein the Apostles
lived, contradicts this Assertion, if we take it Universally, and at large.
Stephen had been already stoned; and at the same time a great persecution was
raised against the Church at Jerusalem, Act. 8. James the Brother of John was
killed, and St. Peter himself had been committed to Prison, Act 12. And how
many sorts of ill usage did Paul and Silas, and the rest receive at the hands
of Infidels, in those times? Nay, our Apostle himself supposes that good men
might suffer for their righteousness, at the Verse immediately following my
Text; But and if ye suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye, and so on.
Either then we must deny plain matters of Fact; or else we must suppose the
Christians of those times not to have been followers of that which is good; or
else we must conclude that St. Peter had in this Place a further meaning,
besides that which lies open to our first view.

Therefore in discoursing upon this portion of Scripture, I shall

1. Show what is the full and genuine sense of the words.

2. Demonstrate the Truth of that, which St. Peter does here intend.

3. And so, in the third place, bring down the whole to our own Practice, with
respect to those Circumstances which we our selves are in at this present
juncture.

As to the First, the Apostles meaning must needs be this; that none will hurt
us, if they have a true respect for Virtue and Goodness, as long as they see us
follow that which is plainly and manifestly good; as long as they are
satisfied, and convinced of our Integrity; as long as we discharge our
Reputation as well as our Consciences; as long as our Light so shines before
men, that they see our good works, and cannot but confess, that of a Truth our
Conversation is honest and upright, and Si semper ea quae Plane bona sunt
imitemini; Grot. in Loc.
in every respect, such as does become the profession of Christ's Religion.
Sometimes it is not enough for us to be innocent, unless our Innocence does
appear, so that we may be able to stop the mouths, and put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men, if their foreheads be but tollerably tender. It was
the very case of Christians in the Apostolical Age: Though Piety and Virtue was
the great care and employment of their Lives; though they valued a good
Conscience above the whole World, yet strangers to the Faith were every where
mistaken in them, and 'twas a long time before they could conquer those strong
prejudices they had entertained against them. The Jews on the one hand looked
upon them as Innovators and Heretics: Though their Religion was not any new
thing, but a Reformation of those abuses which had crept into the Church Vide
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib 1. c. 4.
by degrees, yet their new Name gave offense (for they were first called
Christians at Antioch) and their Enemies believed that their Faith was New
also. Where was your Religion before Christ? As those superstitious people were
ready to object. They were angry at the supposed Novelty of the Christian
Religion; though if that was a Reproach to the Reformation then, that it was of
so late a date, the quarrel seemed to be with God himself, because he sent not
his Son sooner into the World. On the other hand, the Pagans looked upon the
followers of Jesus as a seditious sort of men, that carried on an interest in
opposition to the Interest of the Roman Empire? Christ himself was reviled as
Caesar's Enemy; and his Disciples had the Character of people that turned the
World upside down, that did all things contrary to the decrees of Caesar, Act,
17. Many violent prejudices were against them, and the generality of people ran
away with abundance of gross mistakes concerning them and their Religion, which
nothing but time and Patience could possibly Remove. And therefore St. Peter's
business in the Text was, to persuade them, not only to be followers of that
which was Good (for so they were already) but moreover to give all possible
Demonstrations of their integrity. And that this was the Apostles sense appears
clearly from those words, but three Verses after my Text, that whereas men
speak Evil of you, as of Evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse
your Good Conversation in Christ. Nothing could make their Enemies ashamed, but
Notoriety of fact; the way to make them blush was to let them see what horrible
mistakes they were under; then they would be ashamed, when 'twas made clear and
apparent, how Hoc ipsum eis pudori erit, ubi apparuerit ex factis vestris quam
recta et pura sit Christiana Religio. Grot. in 1 Pet. 3. 16.
Right and pure the Christian Religion was; as the learned Grotius has noted
upon that place.

So that the full meaning of the Apostle here, is this, that when once we give
plain and unquestionable Proofs that we are really followers of that which is
Good; when once we make it clear and evident to the World, so that all Men of
sense and common honesty must needs grant that we are so, we have reason enough
to believe then that all things will go very well with us; especially when such
as are a terror to evil doers, domot^act upon any mean, any dishonorable, any
base designs, but profess a due regard, and love for goodness, and therefore
cannot be rationally supposed to be willing at any time to afflict it, unless
it be unfortunately upon misinformation and mistakes; which was indeed the case
of the Primitive Christians; but cannot be ours now, unless the fault be our
own first.

2. The sense of the Text being thus cleared, I proceed, in the second place,
to Demonstrate the Truth of the thing. And for the clearing of that too, many
arguments might be offered to your consideration.

1. As, First, concerning the good Providence of God, which never fails such
good men, as conscientiously and honestly act in subserviency to the Honor and
Interest of true Religion. And when all is done, that lies in the power of
Second and subordinate Causes, The Providence of God is the only certain and
infallible security we may depend upon with confidence. Every thing in the
World but Providence, is uncertain and contingent: It Is this that is the great
security for all Societies, States, and Kingdoms to trust to; nay the only
stabilement, the whole frame of the Universe depends upon, which without this
Prop and Stay, had been long ago shattered into its Primordial Chaos. So that
when men of Atheistical Spirits laugh at us as a sort of credulous and easy
people, for casting our selves upon Providence in all Cases; Our answer is not
more religious than it is rational, that we trust to that which has hitherto
preserved and supported the whole world.

2. Besides, Secondly, there is in all men such an operative and stirring
Principle (common to Mankind, because fixed and radicated in our common nature)
that tho Goodness may seem somewhat hard in its practice, yet it is very
pleasant and lovely to the Eye; and nothing is more apt either to be commended,
or protected by those, who under God do superintend the affairs of the World;
especially by those whose Spirits are refined from the Feculency of savage and
sordid natures; whose Souls are truly generous and great; whose tempers are
humane; and who go upon Principles of Honor; tho their Judgments may be
possessed with several Notions that are different from other men's. Tiberius was
none of the best of those Roman Emperors that were Heathen, and yet we are
told by Tertullian, who was so excellently skilled in the Laws Tiberius cuius
tempore nomen Christianum in seculum introivit, annunciata sibi ex Syria
Palestina quae illic veritatem ipsius divinitatis revelavelaverat, detulit ad
Senatum cum praerogativa Suffragii sui. Tertul. Apol. c. 5.
and History of Rome, that when Tiberius heard of the Miracles which had been
done by our blessed Savior, and was thereby constrained to believe that he was
both a good man, and a divine Person, he moved the Senate, that Christ might be
put into the number of their Gods. Some say, that Pilate himself Vide Laurent.
de la Bar Annotat. in Tertul. Apolog.
sent the Emperor an account of the works and innocence of the blessed Jesus,
and though Pilate excused the Judgment he had given against him, being Quibus
persuasionibuo seductus ipse, fidem querelis eorum adhibui, etc. Ep. Pilati.
imposed upon and deceived by the Jews, yet Tiberius condemned him to death
because he had any hand at all in the death of Christ. Which Story, if it be
true, is an argument, that if Tiberius himself had been then in Pilates place,
he, tho an Heathen, would have protected our Lords innocence, who was
afterward such a friend to his memory. This is certain, that Pilate's wife
sent importunately to him as he sat upon the Judgment Seat, to hinder all
bloody proceedings against our Lord, because she was satisfied that he was a
Just Man (for so she called him, S. Matthew. 27. 19.) 'Twas the sense of our
Saviors innocence, that made that woman so earnestly to interpose, tho she was
guided only by natural Conscience.

But it is not time for me yet to meddle with the History of those first Ages
of Christianity. It is a passage, that casually fell under my hands; and it
confirms a little this observable Truth, that substantial and solid Virtue
never suffers in any high degree, where it is thoroughly known and discovered;
unless by chance and by some special permission of God it suffers at the hands
of some anomalous Creature, some monstrous Figure of a Man (as Pilate was) that
has cast off all regard to Humanity, and Honor, and true Greatness, as well as
bid defiance to all manner of Religion.

3. I might add, in the third place, that the following of that which is Good
(especially if we follow it so as our Savior did, and as he has chalked out
the way to us) has such a Natural Tendency to Promote; even the Secular
advantages and welfare of all Mankind, that few who understand, none that
value their own Interest, will be either so Ungrateful, or so Impolitick, and
so much enemies to themselves, as to injure Men whose Principles and Practices
apparently tend to the common Good of All. Such is the Nature of those
admirable Virtues, which our Lord has left us to transcribe, that no other
Institution whatsoever can serve more to the Advantage, or so much to the Quiet
and Peace of the World, as our Religion does, when it is Conscientiously and
Honestly observed. We are bound to follow Peace as well as Holiness; to love
one another, and even our implacable Enemies; to study to be Quiet, to do every
Man his own Business, and to abide in his own Calling; not to do Evil, though
for Good ends; but to commit our selves to God in Well-doing; to be Humble,
Gentle, and Meek; to pay Tribute to whom Tribute is due, and Honor to whom
Honor; to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as well as to God the
things that are Gods, to be subject to Principalities and Powers; to obey
Magistrates; and to be subject not only for wrath, but also (and chiefly) for
Conscience sake. And who is he that will harm us, if we be found to be
followers of that which is Good, according to these Measures and Rules? He is
the Minister of God to us for Good, says the Scripture, Romans 13. 4. And if
Experience tells him, that we are Servants to him for his Good too, we have no
reason to fear the Edge of that Sword, which is never drawn to cut off a Friend.

4. But for the full proof of this Assertion in my Text, that none will harm
us, if we be known to be followers of that which is Good, I shall take leave to
search a little into the History of the Primitive Ages, and Examine how Matters
went with Christians in those Times, as often as they made it appear that they
were followers of that which was Good. For if it can be proved, that as they
cleared their Integrity, so they found Ease, and Encouragements, even under a
Heathen Government, there can be no room for any inordinate Jealousies among
Us, whose Lot (God be blessed) is fallen in a Religious and Christian state, if
we be careful to acquit our selves to the whole World, by discharging our duty
with Fidelity and Courage, as the Ancient Christians did theirs.

Now nothing can be clearer out of the Writings of all the Old Apologists for
Christianity, than that the Pagans were infinitely mistaken in their Opinions
of the Church, and that they used the Members of it hardly upon those wrong
Presumptions: To Rectify these mistakes, and so to make their Enemies to be at
Peace with them, the Doctors of the Church desired nothing more, than that the
Emperors would please to Examine their Doctrines and Manners: They wondered at
the Rashness of their Tormentors; and laid the blame of their violent and
unjust proceedings upon their gross Dolemus de Ignorantia vestra, etc. Tertull.
ad Scapulam. Ita utrumque ex alterutro redarguimus, and Ignorare illos dum
oderunt, and injuste odisse dum ignorant. Id Apolog. adv. Gentes. Cap. 1. Illud
solum expectatur, quod Odio publico necessarium est, Confessio Nominis, non
Examinatio criminis. Tert. Lib. Supr.
Ignorance: For they were tortured for the sake of their Name, because they
called themselves Christians; the Pagans enquiring no further, whether they
were Thieves or Rebels or any other Criminals in the Eye of the Laws, but
taking all for granted, that the Wickedness of Men could lay to their charge.
This was a very hard case; yet those Excellent Christians submitted to it with
Patience and Cheerfulness, hoping that in time the Experience of their Enemies
would convince them, and engage them to be favorable to Christianity. And it is
very Remarkable and Apposite to our purpose what Tertullian observed,
Testimonium ignoran^ae est, quae iniquitatem dum excusat, condemnat; cum omnes
qui retro oderant, quia ignorabant quale esset quod oderant, simul ut desinant
ignorare, dessent and Odisse. Tert. Apol. cap. 1.
that all those who had hated Christianity, because they knew not what it was,
as soon as ever their Ignorance was Removed, their Hatred ceased also; This is
a plain Evidence of what I am now shevving, that when good Men acquit
themselves well to the World, it ever goes well with them: But for our
plenary satisfaction in this point, let us look a little into some particular
instances.

The first that raised a general Orientem fidem Romae primus Nero cruentavit,
Tertul. in Scorpia Vide and Apol. cap. 5.
Storm against the Church was Nero. But tho he was infamous for his Sanguinary
and barbarous temper, yet to me it seems manifest that his cruelties Afflicti
suppliciis Christiani; genus hominum superstitionis novae ac malificae, Suet.
in Nerone, Sect. 16. -- Quos per flagitia invisos, vulgus Christianos
appellabat, Tacit. Annal. lib. 15. -- Exitialis superstitio, id. ibid.
were grounded upon his perfect ignorance of the Christians Innocence; for they
were represented then as people of a new and mischeivous Religion (as Suetonius
said) as a deadly and pernicious Sect (says Tacitus) that were generally
hated; -- Haud perinde in crimine incendii, quam odio Humani generis convicti
sunt. Tacit. ibid.
and therefore the fittest (as the Emperor thought) to have the guilt of
burning the City of Rome fixed upon them. Particularly they were abused (as I
observed before out of the Acts of the Apostles) as Movers of Sedition, and
enemies of the Roman Empire: The belief whereof past currantly at Rome, where
they made no distinction between Christians and Jews, because Christianity came
out of Judea; and considering how restless, factious and ungovernable the Jews
had been, not only in the Vide Jos. Scaligeri animadvers. in Eusebius. Chron.
page 192. number. MMLXIX.
beginning of Nero's Reign, but also in the time of his Predecessor Claudius
(as Josephus does Vide Joseph. Antiq. Judaic. lib. 19. cap. 4. and lib. 20. c.
1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Item de bello Judaic. l. 2. c. 20, 21, 22, 23. Vide and
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 11. and 21.
acknowledge the Emperor, took up a mortal and flaming haued against the
Christians, supposing them to be as troublesome and as the rest,

But when Vespasian came to the Throne (that Humane and Good-natured Prince,
who was wont to weep even at the Caeterum neque caede cujusque unquam laetatus,
justis supplicis illachrymavit etiam and ingenuit. Suet. in Vespasian.. 13.
Just sufferings of Criminals) all Bloody proceedings against our Religion were
stopped. For he had been at Jerusalem in Person; and having observed there the
vast difference between the Turbulent and Obstinate temper of the Jews, and the
Peaceable behavior of the Christians, he was particularly Favorable and Kind
to these: So that though he had Ruined the Jews (as Tertullian observes) and
though he strictly searched after all the Royal Posterity of David, with a
design to take them off (as Eusebius. Hist. Lib. 3. cap. 12.
Eusebius tells us) yet both those Ancient Writers do agree -- Nullus
Vespasianus, quamvis Judaeorum debellator, etc. Tertul. Apol. Cap. 6.
that he -- (...). Eusebius. Hist. Lib. 3. Cap. 17.
used no manner of Severity to wards the Christian Profession.

The next cruel Emperor was Domitian; Domitianus, portio Neronius de
credulitate, Tertul. Apol. cap. 5.
a limb of Nero (as Tertulian calls him) that not only banished St. John into
Patmos, but miserably vexed the whole Christian Church. The Occasion of his
barbarity was no other then Herod's fear, that Christ would come, and take his
Empire from him; which fear was increased by a false suggestion, touching the
Seditious Spirits of Christ's Disciples. But lighting happily upon some of Vide
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 20. Sed q^ia homo, facile caeptum repressit,
restitutis etiam quos relligaverat, iniquit Tertullianus de Domitiano.
them, and (as they say) some of our Blessed Saviors own Kindred; and finding
upon examination, that they were a plain and honest sort of Men, that paid
Tribute, and wrought diligently in their vocation with their own hands, and
lived quietly, and hoped for no Kingdom but that in another world; he straight
gave over his severity, being fully satisfied, that Christians were followers
of that which was Good.

Hence on to the time of Trajan, we hear no more of the Christians sufferings.
Then indeed the Instruments of death were used afresh against them, upon the
old stale presumption, that they were Evil doers. But Pliny writing to Trajan
was so just to the Christians, Vide Ep. Plinii Trajano, and Trajani Plinio;
Plin. Ep. l. 10. Item Tertul. Apol. c. 1. and 6.
that he told the Emperor, all he found by the Christians was, that on a
certain day they were wont to meet together, and Sing Hymns to Christ, and
bound themselves by a Sacrament, not to be guilty of Thefts, or Robberies, or
Adultery, or breach of Faith, nor of any other Crime. Whereupon Trajan ordered,
that the inquisition against Christians should be presently stopped; and so the
Rage of that time went soon off, when 'twas discovered what a good sort of Men
the Christians were.

Then came the Emperor Adrian, who, though he made no Tertul. Apol. c. 6.
new Edicts against the Christians, yet permitted those that were to Quarta sub
Adriano perjecutio numeratur; Sulp. Sever.
be put in force, supposing (as others before him did) that Christians were a
troublesome and intractable Sect, especially upon that Rebellion of the Jews,
which fell out in the beginning of Adrians government. Eusebius. in Chronico.
But when Aristides and Quadratus had presented their Excellent Apologies to
him, he found that he had been deceived in his Opinion, and so proceedings were
presently mitigated for he wrote a Letter to Minucius Fundanus the Proconsul of
Vide Just. Martyr. Apolog p. 99 and 100. Item Apol Melitonis in Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. lib.
Asia, Aelius Lamprid. in vit. Alex: Sever.
and to many more of his Officers in several other parts of the World,
requiring them to deal mildly with Christians, and reprehending such as
wrongfully brought them into Trouble. Nay one Pagan Historian reports of this
Emperor Adrian, that himself built a Temple and dedicated it unto Christ, and
Worshipped him as a God.

To go on further, afterward in the Reign of Antoninus Pius, though here and
there diverse Post Adriaanum Antonino Pio imperante, pax Eccles^is fuit, Sulpit.
Sever. lib. 2.
Christians suffered by the officious malice of some inferior Ministers of
State; yet that merciful and Generous Prince (who was wont to say, He had
rather save one Citizen, than kill a Thousand Enemies) soon restored Peace unto
the Church. The reason was, because that great Luminary of the Church Justin
the Philosopher, and at last a Martyr, wrote an excellent Apology to Antoninus,
and the whole Senate complaining of the injustice of proceedings, and showing
the innocence of the Christians Doctrines, Rites, and Lives. Upon which the
Emperor being now satisfied, that those men were followers of that which was
good, did in a Letter to the Common Council of Asia, and to all the Greeks
(which is yet extant) sharply blame his Officers for their rashness; and
ordered, that no Christian should suffer more, unless he attempted the
disturbance of the Empire; which he was morally assured, no true Christian
would go about.

Indeed his Successor Aurelius Antoninus most grievously afflicted the Church
in several places Vide Justin. Apol. in fine. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5. c. 5 Tertul.
Apolog. c. 5.
of the Empire. For new accusations were invented; and therefore New Edicts
were published against them. But all this while even that Emperor seemed to have
been mistaken concerning the Church; for it is not credible that a person of
such great worth as Antoxinus was of (being an exquisite Philosopher, and a
Stoic) would have been so cruel to good men; but would have spared them at
least, for common Morality and Virtue sake, had he been satisfied of their
Integrity. However, when S. Melito, Apolonaris, Athenagoras, and some more,
openly vindicated themselves and their Brethren, and desired nothing but that
Justice might be done them, it had a mighty Effect and Influence upon the
Emperor; though nothing wrought on him so much as the Miraculous Rain which
fell at the Prayers of the Christians, when he and his Army were in the bowels
of Germany ready to perish for want of Water: then he was Convinced, that God
was with the Christians; and so set out an Edict, that they should be kindly
used for the future, and that whosoever should accuse a Christian only under
the Notion of a Christian (as if that were Crime enough) should be burnt alive.

And so the course of the World went tollerably well, till Severus gat into the
Throne; De Severo vide Tertul. ad Scapulam.
nay indeed for some time after: For at first he was very favorable to our
Religion, having some Knowledge of it, and a kind Opinion of its Professors.
For (as we are told by Tertullian, who flourisht in his time) he entertained
one Proculus, a Christian in his own Palace, and was not displeased though he
knew, that Proculus instructed his Son Antoninus Caracalla in the Christian
Religion; he was gracious to many of the Roman Nobility, whom he knew to be
Christians, and protected them from the Rage and fury of the populace. 'Twas
pity indeed he did not go on, when he was in so good a way; but the truth is,
many great men there were, that were pertinaciously addicted to Heathen
Superstition and Idolatry, and never left raising and carrying of lies to his
Ears against the Christians; and he believing them upon their report, became
quite another man, if I may so call that Barbarous Wretch; which provoked
Tertullian to write his admirable Apology; wherein he vindicated the honor of
our Religion, and the innocence of its professors; which though it had little
effect upon Severus himself, yet it had upon his Son Caracalla, so that his
Reign was peaceable, as his Successors was too; till Maximinus made foul Work
again: But we need not wonder at him; for he was a man of sordid Birth, and
Brutish inclinations; first a Shepherd, then a Robber upon the High ways, next
a Soldier, and at last a Prince forsooth, though a Prince that would
understand nothing but Arts of wickedness, and therefore deserves Tert. Apol.
c. 5.
to stand by himself. If you reckon from Nero downward, you will find
Tertullians Observation True, that of all the Roman Emperors to his time, there
was none that had any ordinary regard for Natural Religion or Humanity, who
offered violence to the Christians; when once they thoroughly discovered what
the Nature of Christianity, and the temper of Christians was.

And the same Observation I might pursue further on still, even to the days of
Constantine; had I time to do it, and were the thing necessary, after what has
been showed already. For still as our Religion appeared (I say industriously,
Our Religion; for that which was then the Apostolical and Catholic Religion
there, is ours now; as it appeared) in its Native Beauty: it ever commanded,
first the Pity, then the protection, and at last the Love of all that had
Souls, of all that had any value for Virtue and honor, till in the end Princes
themselves were enamored with it, and counted the Cross the Noblest Ornaments
of their Crowns and Scepters.

3. But I shall not make any more Historical Observations, presuming that these
few are sufficient for the confirmation of the point in hand. Whence I shall
now by way of application of this whole matter, put that question of the
Apostles in the Text with reference to our selves, And who is he that will
harm us, if we be followers of that which is good? Had the Primitive
Christians, been of some men's temper; had they taken such a prospect of times,
as some among us are ready to take, whose fears are apt to reach as far as the
Worlds end; it is a wonder if they had not answered St. Peter thus, Nero will
undoubtedly hurt us, and so may Vespasian and Titus too, nay Constantine
himself, for ought we know, to be sure such a one will, if we be not so
Politic as to exclude him before hand, and provide some strong Association in
time. But this was not their Temper, nor St. Peter's Jealousy: All that he had
to direct them, and all that they had to take care of, was this, to be
followers still of that which was good, and to follow it so, as to approve
themselves to God, and to the World, to make it plain and manifest, that
Virtue and a good Conscience was their whole study; this, this was that, which
carried them out, which supported the Honor of Religion, which secured its
Interest, which made it lovely, stable, prosperous, even in times of Heathenism.

Now if we too take this Christian, this Prudent and effectual course, who is
he that will go about to annoy us? Little Troubles indeed we must never expect
to be free from as long as the World stands: For the Church of Christ has
ever been vexed with some Briers or other, some Thorns have ever been in its
sides; nor has Our Church been without them; we have had some Brambles of our
own growth, that have made our Church not only smart, but bleed too: Nay, we
have had such of late, as like that Bramble in the parable, Jud. 9. would in
all haste have been Reigning over us, and would have devoured all the great
Trees in Lebanon. Perhaps we may never be free from those scratching, but
contemptible Shrubs as long as the old Curse continues upon the Earth; some or
other may still be springing up among us: But the Church can never dye of a
Thorn; nor can such paultry things do us any considerable injury, especially
when they are over dropped by the Tall Cedars; while we shall be protected under
their shadow, if we do but know and adorn our Station, and grow in Grace, and
be manifestly and plainly mindful of that which is good.

What hard Usages did yet Primitive Christians undergo, who were taught, not
with Briers and Thorns only, as the Expression is, Jude 8. but with Harrows and
and Axes too? And yet you see what advice was given them here in the Text; and
because experience and matter of Fact is such a strong argument. I have
particularly showed you how successful that advice was, and even in those most
discouraging times, when Tyranny was the Government, and Paganism was the
Religion of the World.

Blessed for ever, blessed be God, this is infinitely far from being any part
of our Case; Nay, but that some love to be ungrateful both to God and Man,
methinks we should all look upon our selves as obliged (I am sure, we are
highly bound) to tender Heaven our most hearty Thanks, that notwithstanding all
our High and Monstrous Provocations (that which is proper for us always to
consider and think of) God is still so propitious to us, as that we have a very
fair prospect, touching the security not of our Persons and Fortunes only, but
of that too, which is and ought to be, far dearer to us than our very Lives; I
mean, our Established and incomparable Religion.

Having therefore such encouragements, and those grounded upon such
Foundations, let us, in the Name of God, once more observe the directions in
the Text, and show our selves still hearty followers of that which is good. We
may be sure no valuable injury can be done us, if we our selves be but careful
to do Our part; that which is both our Duty and interest to do. Therefore
instead of leaping over our Line, to trouble our selves and the World with
inordinate Fears, let us seriously apply our minds to our Business, our proper
and necessary business; not doubting, but that which served so to carry out the
Old Christians, will serve much more, to secure us, not from Calamity only, but
even from danger of it: Two things especially were unjustly laid to their
Charge, viz. that their Religion was New, and that they themselves were wicked:
When once these two points were fully cleared, Sovereign Princes became not
their Friends only, but their fellovv Christians too.

Now as to the first of these (an accusation, which has been unjustly laid
to Our charge too) we have made it abundantly evident to all sober and
teachable, though prejudiced persons, that our Faith is that which was once
for all delivered unto the Saints. This we will for ever abide by, this we
will be bound to make evident still. But if men will not see our Evidence,
we confess it is not in our power to work such a Miracle, as to put eyes
into the blind, and force them to see, whether they will or no; and yet I
cannot tell, but time and Constancy may do even that too, as it did in the
former Ages of Christianity.

As Our Faith is manifestly Pure, Catholic, and Apostolical; so let us do it
that Honor and Right (now especially) as to make it plain and Evident to the
World, that our manners are suitable thereunto. This was the Great Evidence
that in ancient times did by degrees so affectually convince the Enemies of our
Religion; for by observing the Excellent Lives of Christians, they were
Naturally led first to a search, then to an Admiration, and in the end to the
profession of our Doctrines, and by these means our Religion came not only to a
quiet, but to a Regnant condition in the World.

For your imitation and Encouragement in this Case, shall I now at the close of
this Discourse tell you, what those good things were, which were then so taking
and amiable in their Eyes? Why, in short it was this; an entire, sincere, and
Universal Practice of the precepts of Christianity. St. Paul has drawn up all
into a short Summary in Philip. 4. A place, where he advised the Philippians to
be careful for nothing, meaning the things of this World, which the generality
of men are apt to be most careful for: Be careful for nothing, ver. 6. and then
he adds, ver. 8. Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are Honest, whatsoever things are Just, whatsoever things are Pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of Good Report; if there be
any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things. These things the
Primitive Christians had learned, and received, and heard, and seen in the Holy
Apostles; as it follows there; and as they did and practiced these things, so
the God of Peace, was still with them, till he made their very Enemies to be at
Peace with them also.

Yet by the History of those times I observe, that there were some special and
particular Virtues which the Pagans took great notice of, and were induced to
be very favorable and kind to the Christians for. As Severus the Emperor was
exceedingly pleased with that Command of our Blessed Saviors, so that he had
it engraved upon his Plates, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you,
even so do you unto them: In like manner other Princes were pleased and taken
with some singular Remarks in the Lives of Christ's followers, which they
observed perhaps above other things, because they did most conduce to the
Honor, and interest, and peace of their Government: And these were the things,
The Primitive Christians were very diligent and honest in their several
Callings; they minded their own business, not meddling with matters that were
out of their Sphere, especially with the business of their Governors: They
studied to be quiet, and as much as in them lay, lived peaceably with all men:
They were just in their dealings with all men; and very Candid, and charitable
in their censures of their Rulers. They abhorred that Villainous Practice of
suspecting and reviling Magistrates: They were afraid for Conscience sake to
raise and disperse lies, to render Princes odious; but did ever put the kindest
Constructions upon their Counsels and proceedings, that they were capable of.
They would not by any means affront them, or contumeliously use them, or speak
evil of them, or pray backward for them (I mean, pray for their i^l fortune or
ruin, as some pestilent Men would now adays make us believe) no they behaved
themselves toward them (though mortal Enemies to their Faith) with modesty and
reverence, and all due respect. They paid them their Tribute Money honestly;
they served them in their Wars with all Fidelity and Courage. If any thing was
required of them, which was inconsistent with a good Conscience, and the Laws
of Christ, they would decline it indeed, even unto Death, but still with
tenderness, and a Religious regard to the Honor and Authority of the Emperor.
They looked upon him as Gods immediate Minister, next to God, and subject only
unto him, and therefore unaccountable to any in this world; and accordingly
they feared, and honored, nay loved him, because he was Gods Deputy here
below, and in the Earth Supreme. They never went to their Devotion, but the
Emperor had a great share of it; and even when times were ominous and
threatening, then too they would pray for his Health, and long life, for Victory
in his Arms, and for his welfare and good success in all his just
Undertakings. As for resistance, they detested and disclaimed the very thoughts
of it, so that they would suffer themselves to be cut in pieces rather than
they would rebel, though several Laws were on their side, and they had the
Sword in their Hands, and had strength and Forces enough to to make the whole
Empire tremble. In all lawful instances, none more ready to obey, none more
faithful in their obedience; but in other Cases, none so willing to dye at
their Princes Feet, as the Christians were.

These are some of those things which are honest, and just, and pure, and
lovely, and of good report; and by following these good things, the World was
at last satisfied, that they were good men; and so the Church by degrees
wrought it self out of those difficulties and hardships, which it felt and lay
under, when our Religion first entered into the World.

Happy shall we be now, if like the Old Christians, we be thus followers of
that which is Good; so that all men may see, and be convinced that we are so.
This is that which will be a security to our Church an Honor to our Religion,
a Comfort and satisfaction, as well as a security to our selves: It Is that
which will not only bring Peace to us in this Life, but will bring us all to
those unspeakable Joys and Comforts in another, where infinity of pleasure is
laid up in store, as the endless portion of all those Blessed Souls, that Love
the Lord Jesus in sincerity.

FINIS.

