A WREN IN THE Burning-Bush, Waving the Wings of CONTRACTION,
To the Congregated clean Fowls of the Heavens, in the Ark of God, holy Host of
the Eternal Power, SALVTATION.
THE Bird which sat mute under the shadows in the Desert, most melodiously is
become a chirping, chanting Song of Harmony in the Woods of the
Pomgranate-Trees, whose Boughs hang sevenfold laden with increase in the
seventh year, wherein there is neither reaping nor gathering, but all is
offered in fullness to the Lord God of the whole earth.

She makes the Woods to ring with her harmonious sound,
She does in Valleys sing, and Echoes sweet rebound.
Her Wings are as Orions beams, and her golden Feathers as the Rays of the
Pleiades; her Hight is as the course of the Sun, which from the Heavens gives
light to the whole earth; she lifts up her head at the Horizon of the East, and
her breathings have reached the shutting deeps of the West; Shiloes Brooks run
equal with her footsteps, her path is in the green Valleys. Who has born up
her Train in the way, and is not an Angel of God? Her young are the Snow-white
Turtle-doves, perfect, without party-colour, they yoke but to one peculiar
Mate, and in the life of love do lie down in his Breast, buried at the last
gasp.

Ah my Soul! Where do thou dwell? Yea, Where is the Bed of thy reposes?
Kindled spices are a fervor about me, environed with their Fames and Flames;
Wherefore I step and bow the head, and proceeding do bend the knee, and in the
nigh approach am fallen flat on the ground before the Altar of the Holiest of
Holiest; for the glory of God is too wonderful for my view, who rides upon the
wings of Cherubims.

Oh! Eternal, touch my tongue, that my voice may sound thy praise, that the
Feast of thy Sons, and the Banquets of thy Daughters may be mingled with the
melody of my mouth; thou have strained my Strings with the twists of Trial, and
woond up my Keys to the Highest; Wherefore instruct my hand to quaver upon the
Vial, that thy Virgins may dance at the Tune; thy strength has squeezed my
Vine-press, let thy strong men taste of my Cup, for the Wine is as liquor of
Life; Ah! my God, Thou have filled me with the heavenly good, I will ponder thy
Power and praise thy Name, for thou have covered mine innocence with the
immensity of the deeps of mercy; it is thou, Oh Lord God, who art my only sure
hope and strength of Salvation.

Remembering the Host, remembering the Angels, having thoughts of the Saints of
God, and calling to mind the Lambs of the Flock, my life is as the fume of
burning incense, ascending from the glowing Coals; for the voice of the Turtle
has exasperated my Spirit, whereby my life is as an Hymn in the amiableness of
my Loves Breast; How shall I break open deeps to Remonstrate my Love? The
profundity of that Love which flows in the Sea of simplicity, and ascends
in flight with the Wings of enamouredness, to the heavenly Host of the Most
Pure God, whom his own right hand has planted in the Power of the Celestial
Grace of Election, and therein are to him Priests, Prophets and Kings,
inhabiting the holy Mountain, which has its situation on the top of all
Mountains, and in the same do sit on Thrones in the regal and imperious Power
over all the twelve Provinces of the old Earth and old Heavens, which you have
found as dissolving Snow, under the trampling of your burning and flaming feet,
which God has made (to his own Glory) the foundation of the Pillars of the new
Heavens, and firm support of the new Earth also. Oh! how gloriously beautiful
are your feet which bring the glad Tidings of the everlasting Gospel of
perpetual Peace.

Oh! oh! my Beloved, my Beloved, to explicate a little, I may make entrance
with the Wisdom of Solomon, yea, and after, having exceeded his Phrases, yet
the vastness of my Love to remain the same, which I never found Arts most
excelling Stage of Narration, sufficient to fathom out unto you.

That wise man wrote of the three earthly powers, Armies, Wine and Women, and
concluded Women to be the forceablest; Have not all these in my Pilgrimage
battled with me? Yea, although the least indeed within me, yet even as face to
face with me in such measure as to Remonstrate would fill up many long lines,
with the like Characters as these of Ink; Nevertheless, All, yea and seven
times more then all these in full force coming as floods of impress upon my
little City Walls, never did equal nor parallel the strength, vigor and virtue
which is in the least Lamb of the Sheepfold.

Moreover I declare, though the said three might yet attempt my Tower (to wit)
an Army, as the force of seven Armies; and Wine with seventy times seven, the
strength of the strongest Wine; and Women, with seventy times seven hundred
times their strength in the excellency of beauty, luster and love, yet I am
persuaded in the pure fear, dread and power of God Almighty, that they all
would not touch my life, or make me defile the bed of my Marriage; But I
testify, the thoughts of the countenance of one Lamb overcome me in the Ocean
of Eternal Love, which of a truth I feel and find in me, granted by the good
hand of God, stronger then the first and last Enemy which is Death, or Lord and
power of darkness, upon the which my Love, which is very life, trampleth as
Cells in the infernal places in the utmost obscurity, in which Love (through
perfect fear) I find my Soul established and life completed.

Furthermore, my dearly beloved Sisters and Brethren, You know the natural
influences of the old Courses, (viz.) the love of the Child to the Parents, and
the Mothers bowels to the fruit of her Womb; yea, and the love of her who
forsakes Father and Mother and cleaves to her Husband, whose desire is after
her own flesh, concerning and super-ascending which, I testify (as one who has
ample knowledge of the Principal and Rarest part of the first affection) unto
you my infinitely beloved in the Eternal virtue; that, as the bright Heavens in
height are exceedingly above the dark face of the low earth, so is my Love to
you, (Oh! my Love, my Love, oh! to you Gods own everlasting inheritance and
treasure exceeding all which is of, or has relation to the first birth of the
flesh, fleshly in its most endeared natural streams and floods of the fullness
of that love and affection. And although I have thus far made an entrance of
oration, yet am still as far from emptying my self of the incomprehensibility
of his treasure, as is the entrance of the East Wind, (which no man knows from
whence it comes) to the utmost passage of the West, whither it flies, the
which no man knows whither it goes.

Casually therefore in righteousness, (forasmuch as this Love shall prosper,
the other pine and wither; This shall live, the other dye; This in God is
infinite and endless, the other with the Fabrics fall fully finished) I
recommend your living Spirits in one word, which is your drink, food, raiment
and life to feel me, and reach the pure openings of my innocent bosom to you
all, without respect to any man's person, from him who sits on the throne, even
to him who is a doorkeeper of the house of the Lord, or a Sweeper of the
entrance of his holy habitation, whereof this is the sum; Lambs, your life is
my love, and my life to the uttermost hour of the Cisterns death; and
thenceforth a Crown of life for ever, Amen. Of which, this is the sure earnest,
The Cross on my back, and Crown of Thorns on my head.

And whereas I have a continual Cloud of witnesses in my view; and an
immovable Pillar of Testimony, solidly pitched in my most internal habitation
and dwelling; that you the Quakers and Tremblers, (who do purely dread and
tremble at the Word of the Lord God) are his chosen Generation, his Royal
Priesthood, and most peculiar and everlasting inheritance. Furthermore, having
the ample assurance (in the glorious light of the Supreme Council) that the
holiest preceding ages never saw days exceeding the glory of your blessed day,
which wonderfully in one has sprung up from on high, and visited you with such
a portion of the virtue of God, which although signs and miracles are
plentifully written of and believed, and the gift of Tongues and languages
given to diverse in the primitive days; Nevertheless, I John, do bear herein a
true record and witness of God, testifying, That Abraham who talked with God
in the Tent door, And Lot who entertained the Angels in Sodom. Noah who built
the Ark with Gopher wood, And Moses, who through the Red Sea, led Israel out of
Egypt, they saw not such a glory as now is revealed among you.

There were also among the Holy Apostles, who prophesied of you and of your
time; They at a distance saw your day and rejoiced, who witnessed to the
Brethren, saying, He that shall come will come, and will not tarry: and again,
He shall come the second time without sin unto Salvation. And thus, unto you he
is come, in whom the promise (by his coming) is completely perfected.

If you therefore I should forget, and bury the thoughts of the Sanctity and
celestial excellency of your life and virtue, in the dark grave of the black
belly of Oblivion; Then would my fresh green laurel leaf become as a
fire-scorched-skin of a wild beast, and the scent thereof as the smoke of
Sulphur unto me: my Palm branch would be as a burning Torch consuming my Reins
within me, and my Psalm and Song of Hosanna be as the girdings of howlings
about me. Alas! should I defile the bed of my Spouses Virginity, with the
Daughters of Jesabels attire and beauty, then would the curtains of my Love be
as the flame of the Lake, and her bed fall as vengeance upon me. Wherefore, Oh!
my wholly Beloved, my Love shall run in the Cannel of fear, and her courses as
the streams of carfulness toward thee; of which current and conduit I wait
under seal of Salvation, that the perfection of all virtue is only and alone
retained in the life of the perfect fear of the Lord God, in which there is no
unbelief or Spirit of doubt; for the perfect Love, held in the perfect fear,
casts all that fear out which arises of the spirit of distrust.

Gods chosen and peculiar Number, of all Statures, Conditions, and
Qualifications, The greeting of his Simple Servant, your beloved Brother. YOung
begotten by the Immortal seed, wait for the day of your Travail, and in the
pangs thereof, look to your Deliverer, doubt not, that you dye not, for the
Salvation of the Woman is in Childbirth. Be patient, and of a pure contented
Spirit, and lo, the sudden moment will show thee the Travail of thy soul, and
thy pain shall pass swiftly from thee; beholding a Man-child, thou shall
remember thy sorrows no more.

Trial to every hearer and sayer, to know the hearer from the Bearer, The
Sayer from the Doer. Do thou speak of Canaan, and dwell joined to Egypts
fleshpots? there is a Sea and a Wilderness separates thee. Do thou speak of
Jerusalem in the City of Sodom? the walls of her Lusts do bind thee. Do thou
speak of Sion in Mystery-Babylon? her excelling magnanimity, merchandise,
music and sorceries have enchanted thee: Thou art the invassal'd work of her
witchcraft. Why preachest thou the pleasures of Paradise, dwelling in the
Dungeon of darkness? Read thy nature, and read thy Father, of the Liar, the old
Serpent; of the envious Cain, of the proud Lucifer, of the earthly Esau, of the
mocker Ishmael, of the treacherous Judas, of the persecuter Pilate, of the
Glutton Dives, of the false Prophet Baal, of the hireling Balaam, besides more
then are now utterable. Each actor read thy descent from thy own Fathers
Loins. Oh! Professor, have thou seen the slaughter of thy fleshly desires?
remains there nothing which would be something? If thou have but forsaken all
things, to be reckoned something, what is thy advance otherwise but a vain
Vapor? Know thy seat in the secret paths, for the Lord searches the heart
Answer the Light, and thou answerest God, and the questions of his sincere
Servants. No Zoar, but by forsaking Sodom; No Canaan, but through coming out of
Egypt; No Sion, but by burning of Babylon; No Paradise, but through the flaming
sword; No Crown but through the Cross; No Heir, but through travel and pangs.
The Consecration of Bread is not for Dogs food, nor Manna for swines meat.
Balaam has his hire to day, and the morrow gives his full wage; Woe, Woe to
all his mercenary Members.

BABES, Feel your hunger, and moderately suck the Breasts of your Mother, not
bruising the Paps with the young sharp teeth of the mouth of greedy desire;
Repose in her Bosom all the night long, and she will arise and deck thee at
the dawning of the day; she will hold thee in the arms of her Love, and hug
thee in the bosom of her joy.

WEANED CHILDREN, Eat your Pap and glut not; Fear, lest you loath the
nourishment of your life; hate not the Breast because of the wormwood, for the
bitter herb was put to wean you; still the breast is unchangeably the same.

And you of the Number that learn to Tattle with the Tongue, hearken to the
Instruction of your Teacher within, that you may quickly attain to the distinct
and perfect sound of Syllables; and by his Doctrinal precepts in short
progress, become as Orators of the Council of God: then will thy voice be a
delight to thy Mother; thou will hang as a Jewel on her neck.

YOUNG MEN, Drink Wine and refresh you, but be not drunk; Fear lest your
nakedness be seen in a dead sleep, where there is none to cast a Garment over
you; grow in prudence, and a double portion shall endow thee in the Marriage:
Thy youth not being prodigal, but provident, will acquire the mantle of Praise
spread on the shoulders of Wisdoms beloved-Son, and in his house of antiquity,
shall have the seat of a hoary head.

DAMSELS and VIRGINS, watch in the Chastity to keep it; Fear lest the product
of a moment reduce you to that which is the grief of an old age; For then
feebleness joins to Joints, and weakness seizes on Sinews, and well-set hair
drops down on the ground, and baldness shows the shame of thy youth: but
Garlands shall be the glory of thy virginity; thy blood shall be as the blush
of a Rose, and thy face as the white Lilly; thy Mother will deck thee as a
Damosel Bride, for the Prince of the Scepter of Judah; he will make thy breasts
the bed of his pleasure, and will give thee the strength of his might; thou
shall conceive the seed of his Loins, and bear Children like Angels of God;
thou shall see thy Travel and live, thy countenance shall be the compass of
life; thou shall see the issue of the day which shall never waste nor decay.

LABOVRERS, Labor, not straining your strength beyond the measure of fear,
lest you should return from the stage as maimed members; Laboring in the
equal proportion, thy work shall proceed as prosperous, and waiting for the
early and later rain, through the passages of winter and summer seasons, thou
shall reap a full harvest, and gather thy Corn into thy Barn; Thou shall eat
the bread of thy Labors, and thy Soul shall be satisfied with the good; The
Virtue shall cover thy Kidnyes with fatness, and make thy Belly as an
Oyl-brook.

And oh! ye MINISTERS at the Altar, in the Temple of the holy God, who are as
continual fuel to the fire, and as a Sacrifice in the midst of the flames; my
living eternally beloved Brethren and Sisters in the Almighty power of the most
high, I JOHN a low and tender Disciple of the Spirit of life, in Commission of
the Supreme; to you all, do transmit the fruit of the seed of the holy word of
acceptance, praying God and exhorting, Persevere in the race; Let every thorn
which pricketh in the side be as a heavenly Spur, provoking you to a swift
course. Though I am as the least of Gods thousands, yet surely the virtue of
life is ready at my hand. I am full, I am full, even as the laden-ship, even
full to the upper deck; but the hand of wisdom does lock up my hatches; the
substance is yours in the safe hold. Oh! ye deep Wells, filled with the waters
of the fountain, disperse ye as showers, and spread as the rainy clouds. Oh!
water, water the plants, be ye as overflowing streams to the tender Vines in
the smooth Valleys. Let the voice of resurrection descend from your Sphere in
the unchangeable Courses of life; Let the breath of your Nostrils be as the
Winds of the Heavens, dispersing the night clouds; and let the virtue of
Restoration, as naturally drop from your mouths, as the discension of the early
dew, and as the salt Seas do flow with their constant savor, that the weak may
be strong with the vigor of your virtue, and the strong as him that has
received a sevenfold measure of valor. God Almighty cloth you with the robe
of honor, and lead you as Lambs in the life of Jesus, in the power of his
Ministry, to the end of your race, and Angels shall follow your footsteps, and
bear up your train after you; Diadems, Garlands, and Crowns shall settle on
your heads for ever.

TRIBVLATED, The beloved Brethren in Prisons and Dens for your pure consciences
toward God, Dwell in the patience under the sweet chastizements of your Peace;
Pure Lambs and persecuted ones for Gods Truth and seeds sake, rest in your
innocence, yielded to the slaughter according to the example of your
forerunner, always loving your Enemies, praying for your persecutors, let
content be your Crown for ever, so live, and so dye, and your blood of life
will lastly give you the Dominion over all, and the innocence thereof speak to
the face of God in Judgment, of the earth which drank it; your souls shall not
miss of their expectation in the bosom of God, for his Breast shall be your
Bed of repose, for whose righteousness sake, you love not your liberties, nay
nor lives unto the death.

Most dear ones, I am your Brother in the same blessed Kingdom of the
Tribulation, Patience, and Content, instantly ministering my Spirits everlasting
love to you. Oh! ye made worthy in the heavenly Calling of the acceptance of so
blessed a Service; Peace be unto you, and all Gods flock, Amen.

Written in prison, by J. P. 9th. 4th. month, 1660. Let this be read with the
Spirit of life, in all your holy assemblies.
To the Seed of the Kingdom, Plants of the Paradise of God; most purely and
everlastingly beloved Brethren and Sisters, in the immortal life,
Congratulation.
Can I forget that womb whose Travails were
For me more grievous, then which flesh could bear?
Or bury in Oblivions Grave, that Breast
Which suckled me? or Cradle of my rest?
Can I forget my friends as deadly foes?
Or scorn the bed of heavenly joys repose?
Or loath the waters sweet, of Jacobs well,
Like Sulphury streams of the infernal Cell?
Can I forget that hand and living bread?
Which in sore famine, freely has me fed;
Or drown in deeps the thoughts of Gods own breath
To burst like Judas, strangled unto death?
Nay, for in God, most merciful and just,
Abides my confidence, faith, hope, and trust.
Ah Sion, Sion, thy most glorious life,
Is all to me, my joy, I am thy wife:
And therefore if I should make sleight of thee,
Then all thy good would be a sting to me;
Then would my Bow against me surely bend,
And all my darts into my body send,
And all the pointed Arrows of my Quiver,
Would sorely stick fast in my heart and Liver.
Then would my sword which on my Loins is bound,
Fall sharp on me, and leave a mortal wound:
Yea, then the Teeth of this my Instrument,
Would flesh from bones, and all my intrals rent.
My honey would become as Rue and Gall,
And heavenly showers like snares of fire would fall
Upon my head, yea then my pleasant Wine,
Would be as molten lead; And this straight Line,
Would mark out all, even as an equal due,
Which gives clear sight that God's most just and true.
The oil which burns within this Lamp of Gold,
Would also me in flames of fire fold:
For then would Shilo all his currents make
To me, like as the fiery burning lake;
Should I become like as a turning vane,
Then this my bread would be my deadly bane.
My marrow would become like pitch and tar
In dreadful flames; yea then the morning star,
Which has revealed his glorious shining light,
Would gird me in the hideous howling night;
But surely I to Gods own mercy have
Committed all, whose grace does freely save;
Weakness is mine, but strength's in Gods own hand,
By which alone, in fear, I live and stand:
In baptismes fire, exceedings John's, who lead
To Jordans deeps, whom Herod did behead.
Ah! Babes most dear, with you in that I am,
Which gives to see me as a patient Lamb,
In pure content, bearing the yoke and Cross,
Esteeming mortal, but as dung and dross;
In taste of virtue, of the heavenly seed,
At Gods own Table with you all I feed;
With each low worm in his own proper measure,
I drink a dram of the sweet wine of pleasure,
My soul in ardency of life does say,
I am as near you as the light the day.
As firmly fixed like flesh unto your bones,
As in the mountains solid rocks and stones:
As real in you though no flesh can see,
As is the Sap in the green Olive Tree:
I Have chosen you like as the Turtle Dove,
To be dissolved in this most constant Love.
I want the words of wisdoms deep profound,
To show how deep you are planted in this ground:
What shall I say unto my heart within?
Where can thou end, but where thou did begin;
And there the Rivers run, exceeding measure,
What shall I say of this my Loves vast treasure;
You have much more then this weak hand can write,
For all is yours which Spirit does indite;
My Spirits also with and in you all,
Who by the same are saved from the fall.
Can I within me less affection find,
Then worms or beasts who love their proper kind?
Nay Lambs, ye know in living substance well,
That my Brooks current, mortal does excel.
For this my stream toward the deep does run,
As does my flame ascend toward the Sun.
No wise Philosopher did ever know
The moving Cause, why Seas do ebb and flow;
Nor of them all within their Tombs do lie,
E're saw the Love, which moves the Sun to fly,
In Course most swift round heavens widest wheel,
But Gods Host now, the cause and life does feel.
The lesser to the greater is well known,
And each true nature moves toward its own.
Here Is fire below, the greater flames above,
Till twain are joined, they do yearn both in Love.
Th'ore whelming floods which on the earth were sent
In Noah's day, dropped from the firmament;
Besides, you see how raining clouds do bring,
Refreshing showers in pleasant time of spring;
And fills the fountains which are here below,
And still the streams unto the Seas do flow,
And all their Tides, wherein they always move,
Show their affection, to the Seas above.
Now read me and my Love, which tongue cannot speak,
To you my life, which death, nor hell can break;
Yet still I pray, in fear, that God defend
Me, from the ill, and save me to the end.
Amen. J. P.

BRETHREN and SISTERS, Look purely to your proper life, to be able to stand the
Trial of the day: Happily you may know what you are to day, but who can say
what he shall be to morrow? Let none look out at me, but within to feel me, for
I look up to God, and the cup which I patiently swallow is honey-sweet in my
belly; God has heard my prayers, and answered me, wherein my soul is
refreshed, whose favor I besought with watches and careful tears, that you
might know, and now it is enough that you do know, that I have lived, and in
the life do live as an offered Sacrifice to dye in God: And therefore now for
the fabric quickly to stretch on its last bed, and there to sleep the long
sleep, it is but one to me, as to walk, or rather, it is better to me for it to
repose in her mothers womb, for lo I shall live and not dye.

All dear sucking Lambs and Sheep of the fold, pray for me every where, Pray in
the Spirit and cease not, for the lowest groan God hears.

HOLY SEED, Be pure unto the end, and the Crown and Kingdom is yours. So the
Father in his Love, keep you in the Love and Unity, and make your day as the
spring which covers the earth with green.

J. P.

ABRAHAM believed, and his faith was imputed to him for Righteousness; And
Moses in the same steps marched through the Red Sea, and the Children of Israel
followed him and were saved; but the presumption of the enemy God drowned in
the deeps thereof; Ah! how many were his works of power to a murmuring people
in the wilderness? and how wonderfully also did he always save Israel, in the
extreme deep times of trial?

Oh seed of the holy one, all most dear and precious plants of the heavenly
Kings renown, I have always in Spirit been among you, and frequently have
transmitted my exhortations in the fullness of the bowels of Love and life unto
you, saying, wait for the Trial to stand it, and bear it, for the Lord God
will have Gold and no Tin. He will have Turtle-Doves perfect white, and no
party-colored birds. And therefore again I say, O ye bones, be joined with the
Sinnews; O ye veins, loose not your blood, for that is the life of all
Creatures; But Lambs, be ye patient and content, and look up and wait a while
and you shall see, and stand in the power, and the power will stand in you, and
in it pray the Father, and the Father will hear you.

And grieve not if a Thistle or Thorn should blossom, for lo the North wind can
blast it, and then it will fall to the Grave of forgetfulness: Consider my
Brethren, who made the Rose, a Rose? and cannot he also make the Bryar a Lilly?
and has not our God made that of good, which the Son of man thought would
never be for a service of good? however trials shall be for your everlasting
good, as you abide to the day.

I testify to you, that all Nations is but as one man, and him as the dust of
the ground before the Lord God; And who can say, of what God Almighty made the
dust? yea, or the Globe of the whole earth: Ah Lambs, am not I your Brother in
the heat of a hot day? The Lord our Righteousness keep you, as his mercy
preserves me an object for your pure eye to look on; but look ye not out, but
dwell within, for, from the presence of the Eternal power, I speak, The earth
shall roll as a smooth iron ball cast down a steep hill, which finds no let
until it is fallen to the bottom thereof; until that the King reign whose
right of due it is; and therefore, under the Scepter of his Government, dwell
ye in the peace, and in the pure content, and his favor will countenance you
beyond your hearts expectation; And this is the Word of the Lord God, which
changes times, unto all Gods people upon the face of the earth, to whom my
whole Soul and Spirit is knit, and united in the perfect life of the living
body.

John the prisoner of Christ
9th. 4th. Month, 1660.
THE END.
London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1660.


