THE Royal Martyr.

OR, KING CHARLES The FIRST no Man of BLOOD but A MARTYR for His PEOPLE.

Being a brief Account of His Actions from the beginnings of the late unhappy
Wars, until He was basely Butchered to the Odium of Religion, and scorn of
all Nations, before his Palace at White Hall, Jan. 30. 1648.

To which is Added, A Short History of His Royal MAJESTY Charles the Second,
KING of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Third Monarch of Great Britain.

In all his Sufferings and Solitudes more then CONQUEROR, Romans 8.

Salus Populi Salus Regis.

^ondon, Printed for Henry Bell, and are to be sold by most Book sellers* 1660*



TO THE KINGS Most Excellent Majesty.
Dread Sovereign,
THe occasion of these few lines is neither to renew your sorrow, nor stir up
your Majesty to revenge; I know you have learned a better lesson from our
blessed Lord and Savior, to forgive your enemies; neither is it my design to
plead for that which I even tremble to write, viz. Regicide, I know the world
expects some should be made examples of Justice, God forbid that
blood-guiltiness, especially of our King should go unpunisht. But that Justice
and mercy might kiss each other. These ensuing lines were writ in the midst of
your and our sufferings; the only end both in writing and publishing was to
Vindicate your Royal Father, our Dread Sovereign of blessed memory, thereby to
make a more easy passage for your most Excellent Majesty to ascend unto the
Royal throne of your famous Progenitors: And now seeing God at last by his
wonderful and most miraculous Providence, has brought your Sacred Majesty to
your just Rights and Dominions, I make bold in all humility to prostitute both
my self and this small Tract at your Royal Feet, beseeching your Clemency to
accept of this small Mite of my Loyalty, begging your gracious pardon for my
great presumption, beseeching Almighty Jehovah the God of your Fathers to
redouble in you your Fathers Graces and Virtues, and recompense to your Majesty
for all your unparalelled sufferrings and patience, in the perfect obedience
and affection of all your Subjests and establish your Royal Throne here on
Earth, and at last give you a Crown of Glory in the highest heavens,

so prays,

Your Majesty's Loyal, Humble, and most obedient Subject, W. H. B.

King Charles the First no Man of BLOOD: But a Martyr for his PEOPLE.
THat there has been now eighteen years spent in Civil Wars, abundance of
Blood shed, and more Ruin and misery brought upon the Kingdom by it, then all
the several Changes, Conquests, and Civil Wars it has endured from the time
of Brute, or the first Inhabitants of it; every man's woeful experience (some
only excepted who have been gainers by it) will easily assent unto.

No marvel therefore that many of those (who if all they allege for
themselves, that they were not the cause of it, could be granted to be true)
might either have hindered or lessned it, would now put the blame of so horrid a
business from themselves, and lay it upon any they can persuade to bear it: And
that the Conquerours, who would bind their King in Chains, and their Princes
with Fetters of Iron; and think they have a Commission from heaven to do it
(the guilt of it being necessarily either to be charged upon the Conquerours or
Conquered) are not willing to have their Triumphant Chairs, and the glories (as
they are made believe) that hang upon their shoulders defiled with it; but do
all they can to load their Captives with it: But howsoever, though the success
and power of an Army has frighted it so far out of question as to charge it
upon the King, and take away his life for it; by making those that must of
necessity be guilty of the fact; if he should have been (as in all reason he
ought to have been acquitted of it) the only Judges of him.

It may well become the judgment and conscience of every man that will be but
either a good Subject or a Christian, not to lend out his Soul and Salvation so
much on trust, as to take those that are parties, and the most ignorant sort of
men's words for it: but enter into a most serious examination of the matter of
Fact it self, and by tracing out the footsteps of Truth, see what a
conclusion may be drawn out of it. In pursuance whereof (for I hope the
Original of this Sea of Blood will not prove so unsearchable as the head of
Nile), we shall enquire first of all who raised the fears and jealousies.
Secondly, represent and set down the truth of the matter of Fact, and
proceedings betwixt the King and Parliament; from the tumultuous and seditious
coming of the people to the Parliament and White Hall, until the 25 of August,
1642. when he set up his Standard at Nottingham, and from the setting up of his
Standard until the 13 of September 1642. when the Parliament by their many Acts
of Hostility, and a Negative and Churlish answer to his propositions, might
well have put him out of hope of any good to be obtained from them, by messages
of peace sent unto them. Thirdly, whether a Prince or other Magistrate,
laboring to suppress or punish a rebellion of the People, be tied to those
rules are necessary to the justifying of a War if it were made between equals.
Fourthly, suppose the War to be made with a neighbor Prince, or between
equals, whether the King or Parliament were in the defensive or justifiable
part of it. Fifthly, whether the Parliament in their pretended Magistracy have
not taken lesser occasions to punish or provide against insurrections,
treasons, and rebellions as they are pleased to call them. Sixthly, who most
desired Peace, and offered fairliest for it. Seventhly, who labored to shorten
the War, and who to lengthen it. Eighthly, whether the conditions proffered by
the King, would not have been more profitable for the People if they had been
accepted, and what the Kingdom and People have got instead of it.

CHAP. I. Who first of all Raised the Fears and Jealousies?
THe desiring of a guard for a Parliament because of a tale rather then a plot;
That the Earl of Crawford had a purpose to take away the Marquis of Hamiltons
life in Scotland; the refusing of a legal guard offered by the King; and his
Protestation to be as careful of their safety, as the safety of his Wife and
Children; The dream of a Tailor lying in a ditch in Finsbury fields, of this
and the other good Lord, and Commonwealths men to be taken away; The trayning
of Horses under ground, and a plague plaster (or rather a clout taken from a
galled Horse back) sent into the House of Commons to Mr. Pym. A design of the
Inhabitants of Covent Garden to murder the City of London; News from France,
Italy, Spain, and Denmark, of Armies ready to come for England; and a
supposition, or feverish fancy, that the King intended to introduce Popery,
and alter Religion, and take away the Laws and Liberties of the People, and
many other the like seditious delusions, the People (so much as their misery
will give them leave) have now found out the way to laugh at; either came from
the Parliament party, or were cherished and turned into advantages by them. For
they had found the way, and lost nothing by it, to be ever jealous of the King;
And whilst he did all he could to show them that there was no cause for it,
they who were jealous without a cause, could be so cunning as to make all the
have they could to weaken him, and strengthen themselves, by such kind of
artifices.

But he that could not choose but take notice that there were secret ties and
combinations betwixt his English and Scortish Subjects, the latter of whom the
Earl of Essex and Sir Thomas Fairfax themselves understood to be no better then
Rebels, and therefore served in places of Command in his Majesty's Army
against them: That Sir Arthur Haselrig had brought in a Bill in Parliament to
take the Militia by Sea and Land away from him, saw himself not long after by
a printed Remonstrance or Declaration made to the People of all they could but
imagine to be errors in his Government, arraigned and little less then deposed:
The Bishops and diverse great Lords driven from the Parliament by tumults; Was
enforced to keep his gates at Whitehall shut, and procure diverse Captains and
Commanders to lodge there, and to allow them a Table to be a guard for him; and
had been fully informed of many Traitorous Speeches used by some seditious
Mechanics of London, as that it was pity he should Reign, and that The Prince
would make a better King; was yet so far from being jealous, or solicitous to
defend himself by the Sword and power which God had entrusted him with, as
when he had need and reason enough to do it, he still granted them (that he
might not seem to deny what might but seem to be for the good of his people)
every thing they could reasonably ask of him, or he could but reasonably tell
how to part with (though he could not be ignorant, but an ill use might be made
of them against himself;) As the putting down of the Star Chamber, and high
Commission Court, the Courts of Honor, and of the North and Welsh Marches;
Commissions for the making of Gunpowder, allowing them approbation or
nomination of the Lieutenant of the Tower, and did all and more then all his
predecessors put together, to remove their jealousies. And when that would not
do it; He stood still, and saw the game played on further; many Tumults raised,
many Libells and scandalous Pamphlets publicly printed against his person and
Government, and when he complained of it in Parliament, so little care was taken
to redress it, as that the peoples coming to Westminster in a Tumultuous
manner, set on, and invited by Pennington and Ven, two of the most active
Mechanic Sectaries of the House of Commons, it was excused and called a
liberty of Petitioning: And as for the Libells and Pamphlets, the Licensing of
Books before they should be printed, and all other restraint of the Printing
Press were taken away, and complaints being made against Pamphlets and
seditious Books, some of the Members of the house of Commons were heard to say
the work would not be done without them; and complaints being also made to Mr.
Pym against some wicked men which were ill affected to the Government; He
answered, It was not now a time to discourage their friends, but to make use of
them: And here being as many Jealousies and fears as could possibly be raised
or fancied without a ground on the one side; against all the endeavors could
be used on the other side to remove them. We shall in the next place take a
view of the matter of Fact that followed upon them, and bring before you.

CHAP. II. The Proceedings betwixt the King and the Parliament from the
Tumultuous and Seditious coming of the People to the Parliament and White Hall
till the 13. of September 1642. being 18. days after the King had set up his
Standard at Nottingham.
WHen all the King could do to bring the Parliament to a better understanding of
him, did, as they were pleased to make their advantage of it, but make them
seem to be the more unsatisfied; that they might the better mis-represent him
to the People, and petition out of his hands as much power as they could tell
how to persuade him to grant them, and that he had proofs enough of what has
been since written in the blood and hearts of his People, that the five Members
and Kimbolton intended to root out Him and His Posterity; subvert the Laws and
alter the Religion, and Covernment of the Kingdom, and had therefore sent his
Sergeant at Arms to demand their persons, and Justice to be done upon them,
instead of obedience to it, an order was made: That every man might rescue
them, and apprehend the Sergeant at Arms for doing it; which Parliament Records
would blush at. And Queen Elizabeth (who was wont to answer her better composed
Parlaments upon lesser occasions with a Cavete ne patientiam Principis
laedatis, and caused Parry a Doctor of the Civil Laws and a Member Camden
Annalls Eliz. 99. 103.
of the house of Commons by the judgment and advice of as sage and learned a
privy Council and Judges as any Prince in Christendom ever had, to be hanged
drawn and quartered for Ibidem p. 391. 394. and 395.
Treason in the old Palace of Westminster when the Parliament was sitting) would
have wondered at. And 4. of January 1641. desiring only to bring them to a
Legal trial and examination, went in person to demand them, and found that
his own peaceable behavior, and fewer attendants (then the two Speakers of the
Parliament had afterward when they brought a whole Army at their heels, to
charge and fright away eleven of their fellow members) had all manner of evil
constructions put upon it, and that the Houses of Parliament had adjourned into
London, and occasioned such a sedition amongst the people, as all the train
bands of London must guard them by Land, when there was no need of it, and many
Boats and Lighters armed with Seamen and murdering pieces by water; and that
unless he should have adventured the mischief and murder has been since
committed upon him, by those which at that time intended as much as they have
done since; it was high time to think of his own safety, and of so many others
were concerned in it having left London but the day before, (upon a greater
cause of fear then the Speakers of both Houses of Parliament in July 1647. to go
to the Army) retires with the Prince his Son (whom the Parliament labored to
seize and take into their custody) in his company toward York, 8. January
1641. A Committee of the House of Commons sitting in London, resolved Vide the
vote in M. Vicars Book entitled God in the moun. p. 78
upon the question; That the Actions of the City of London, for the defense of
the Parliament were according to Law, and if any man should arrest or trouble
any of them for it, he is declared to be an enemy to the Commonwealth. And
when the King, to quiet the Parliament, 12. January 1641 was pleased to signify
that for the present he would wave his proceedings against the five Members and
Kimbolton, and assures the Parliament that upon all occasions he will be as
careful of their Privileges as of his Life or his Crown: Yet the next day
after, they Collect. of Parl. and Decl. and Kings Mes. and Decl. p. 50.
Declared the Lord Digby's coming to Kingstone upon Thames but with a Coach and
six horses in it, to be in a Warlike manner, and disturbance of the
Commonwealth; and take occasion thereupon to order the Sheriffs of all
Counties Ibid. 51. Ibid. 52.
in England and Wales, with the assistance of the Justices of Peace and trained
bands of the several Counties to suppress any unlawful Assemblies, and to
secure the said Counties and all the Magazines in them.

14 January, 1641. The King, by a second Message, professes to them he never
had the least intention of violating the least privilege of Parliament, and in
case any doubt of breach of Privileges remain; will be willing to clear that,
and assert those, by any reasonable way his Parliament shall advise him to: But
the design must have been laid by, or miscarried, if that should have been
taken for a satisfaction; and therefore to make a quarrel which needed not,
they Order the morrow after a Charge and Impeachment to be made ready against
Sir Edward Herbert the Kings Attorney General, for bringing into the House of
Peers the third of that instant Ibid. 53.
January, by the Kings direction, a Charge or accusation against Kimbolton and
the five Members, etc.

In February 1641. Seize upon the Tower of London (the great Magazine and
Storehouse of the Kingdom) and set some of the train-bands Ibid. 77. and 78.
of London, commanded by Major General Skippon to guard it.

1. March 1641. Petition for the Militia, and tell him; If he would not grant
it, they would settle and dispose of it without him: And the morrow after
resolved upon the Question, That the Kingdom be forthwith put in a posture of
defense, in such a way as was already agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament:
and order the Earl of Northumberland Lord high-Admirall, to Rig, and send to
Sea his Majesty's Navy; and notwithstanding that the King 4 March 1641. by his
Letter directed to the Lord Keeper Littleton had signified that he would wholly
desist from any proceedings against the five Members and Kimbolton: Sir John
Hotham, a Member of the House of Commons, (who before the the King had accused
the five Members and Kimbolton, had by Order of Parliament seized Vide the
Petition of some Holderness men to the King, 6. July, 164^.
upon the Town of Hull, the only fortified place of strength in the Kingdom,
and made a Garrison of it) summoned and forced in many of the trained Soldiers
of the County of York to help him to guard it.

And the eight of March 1641. before the King could get to York, it was voted,
That whatsoever the two Houses of Parliament should Vote or Declare to be Law,
the people were bound to obey: And when, not long after, the King offered to go
in person to suppress the Irish Rebellion: That was Voted to be against the
Law, and an encouragement to the Rebels; and they Declare that whosoever shall
assist him in his voyage thither, should be taken for an enemy to the
Commonwealth. And 15 of March, 1641. Resolved upon the Question, that the
several Commissions granted under the great Seal to the Lievtenants of
several Counties were illegal and void, and that whosoever should execute any
power over the Militia, by color of any such Commission, without consent of
both Houses of Parliament, should be accounted a disturber of the Peace of the
Kindom.

April 1642. Sir John Hotham seizes the Kings Magazine at Hull, and when the
King went with a small attendance to demand an entrance into the Town, denies
him; though he Ibid. 153.
had then no Order to do it: Notwithstanding all which, the 28 of April 1642.
they Vote, That what he had done was in obedience to the commands of both
Houses of Parliament, and that the Kings proclaiming him to be a Traitor was a
high breach of privilege of Parliament; And Ordered all Sheriffs and Officers
to assist their Committees sent down with those their Votes to Sir John Hotham.
In the mean time the Pulpits flame with seditious invectives against the King,
and incitements to rebellion, and the people running headlong into it, had all
manner of countenance and encouragement unto it; but those Ministers that
preached obedience, and sought to prevent it, were sure to be imprisoned, and
put out of their places for it.

Sir Henry Ludlow could be heard to say in the House of Commons, that the King
was not worthy to Reign in England; And Henry Martin, That the Kingly Office
was forfeitable, and the happiness of the Kingdom did not depend upon him and
his Progeny: And though the King demanded Justice of them, were neither
punished nor put out of the House, Nor so much as questioned or blamed for it.

The Militia, the principal part of the Kings regality, without which it was
impossible either to be a King, or to govern, and the Sword which God had given
him, (and his Ancestors for more then a thousand years together had enjoyed)
and none in the Barons wars, nor any Rebellion of the Kingdom since the very
being or essence of it, durst ever heretofore presume to ask for; must now be
wrestled for, and taken away from him.

The Commissions of Array, being the old legal way by which the Kings of
England had a power to raise and levy men for the defense of themselves and the
Kingdom, Voted to be illegal. The passage at Sea defended against him, and his
Navy kept from him by the Earl of Warwick; whilst the King all this while
contenting himself to be merely passive, and only busying himself in
givinganswers to some Parliament Messages and Declarations, and to woo and
entreat them out of this distemper, cannot be proved to have done any one
action like a War, or to have so much as an intention to do it, unless they can
make his demanding an entrance into Hull, with about twenty of his Followers,
unarmed, in his Company, and undertaking to return and leave the Governor in
possession of it, to be otherwise then it ought to be.

5. Of May 1642. The King being informed, that Sir John Hotham sent out
warrants to Constables to raise the trained bands of Yorkshire, Ibm. 169. 170.
writes his letter to the Sheriff of that County to forbid the trained bands,
and commands them to repair to their dwelling houses.

12 Of May 1642. Perceiving himself every where endangered, and a most horrid
Rebellion framing against him, and Sir John Hotham Collect. Par. Decl. 183
so near him at Hull, as within a days journey of him; he moves the County of
York for a troop of Horse, consisting of the prime Gentry of that County, and a
Regiment of the train-bands of Foot, to be for a guard unto him, and caused the
oath of Allegiance to be administered unto them. But the Parliament thereupon
Vote, that it Ibm. 29.
appeared, the King seduced by wicked Counsel, intended to make a war against
them (and til then if their own Votes should be true must acquitt him from any
thing more then an intention, as they call it, to do it) And whosoever should
assist him are Traitors by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. The Earl of
Essex Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household, and all other of the Kings
Household Servants forbid to go to him, and the Kings putting some of them out,
and others in their places, Voted to be an injury to the Parliament. Messengers
were sent for the apprehending of some Earls and Barons about him, and some of
his Bedchamber, as if they had been Fellons. The Lord Keepers going to him
with the great Seal when he sent for him, Voted to be a breach of privilege,
and pursued with a warrant directed to all Mayors, Bailiffs to apprehend him.
Cause the Kings Rents and Revenues to be brought in to them; and forbid any to
be paid him; Many of his Officers and Servants put out of their places for
being Loyal unto him, and those that were ill affected to him, put in their
Rooms; and many of his own Servants tempted and procured by rewards and
maintenance to tarry with them and be false and active against him.

The twenty sixth day of May 1642. a Declaration is sent to the King; but
printed and published before he could receive it: That Whatsoever they should
Vote, is not by Law to be questioned, either by the King or Subjects; No
Ibidem p. 297. and 298
precedent can limit or bound their proceedings. A Parliament may dispose of
any thing wherein the King or peopl have any right. The Sovereign power resides
in both Houses of Parliament. The King has no Negative voice. The levying of
War against the personal commands of the King, though accompanied with his
presence, is not a levying of War against the King; but a levying War against
his Laws and authority (which they have power to Declare) is levying of War
against the King. Treason cannot be committed against his person otherwise then
as he was entrusted. They have power to judge whether he discharge his trust or
not; that if they should follow the highest precedents of other Parliaments
Paterns, there would be no cause to complain of want of modesty or duty in
them, and that it belonged only to them to judge of the Law.

27 Of May, The King by his Proclamation, forbids all his Subjects and trained
bands of the Ibid. 301.
Kingdom to Rise, March, or Muster. But the Parliament, on the same day Command
all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace and Constables within one hundred and 50
miles of York, to seize and make stay of all Arms and Ammunition going thither:
And Declaring the said Proclamation to be void in Law; Command all men to
Rise, Muster, Ibid. 305.
and March, and not to Muster or March by any other Authority or Commission,
and the Sheriffs of all Counties the morrow after, Commanded with the posse
Comitatus to suppress any of the Kings Subjects that should be drawn thither by
his Command; Secure and seize upon the Magazines of the Counties. Protect all
that are Delinquents against him, make all to be Delinquents that attend him;
and censure and put out of the House of Peers, nine Lords at once, for obeying
the Kings summons and going to him.

3 June 1642. The King summoning the Ministers, Gentry, and Freeholders of the
County of York, declared to them the reasons of providing himself a guard, and
that he had no intention to make a War; and the morrow after forbad the Lord
Willoughby of Parham to Muster and train the County of Lincoln, who under
color of an Ordinance of Parliament, for the Militia, had began to do it.

10. June 1642. The Parliament by a Declaration signifying, That the King
intended to make a War against his Parliament; invited the Citizens of London,
and all others, well affected (as they pleased to miscall them) within eighty
miles of the City to bring money and plate into the Guild Hall London, and to
subscribe for Men, Horses, and Arms, to maintain the Protestant Religion, the
Kings Person and Authority; free course of Justice, Laws of the Land, and
privileges of Parliament; and the morrow after send 19 propositions to the
King; That the great affairs of the Kingdom and Militia, may be managed by
consent and approbation of Parliament, all the great Officers of Estate, Privy
Council, Ambassadors, and Ministers of State, and Judges to be chosen by them;
that the Government, Education, and Marriage of the Kings Children be by their
consent and approbation, and all the Forts and Castles of the Kingdom under
the Command and Custody of such as they should approve of; and that no Peers to
be made hereafter, should sit or vote in Parliament without the consent of
Parliament; with several other demands (which if the King should have granted,
would at once in effect, not only have undone and put his subjects out of his
protection, but have deposed both himself and Collect. of Par. Mes. and Dec.
370. 370.
his posterity) and then they would proceed to regulate his Revenue, and
deliver up the Town of Hull into such hands as the King by consent and
approbation of Parliament should appoint.

But the King having the same day before those goodly demands came to his hands
(being a greater breach of his former privileges then his demanding of the
five Members and Kimbolton, it it had not been lawful for him so to do, could
be of theirs) granted a Commission of Array for the County of Leicester to the
Earl of Huntington, and by a letter sent along with it, directed Ibm. 346. and
348.
it for the present only to Muster and Array the Trained Bands.

And 13. June 1642. Declared to the Lords attending him at York, That he would
not engage them in any War against the Parliament, unless it were for his
necessary defense: whereupon Ibid. 349. 350.
the L. Keeper Littleton, who a little before had either been affrighted or
seduced by the Parliament to vote their new Militia, The Duke of Richmond,
Marquess Hartford, Earl of Salisbury, Lord Gray of Ruthen (now Earl of Kent)
and diverse Earls and Barons, engaged not to obey any Order or Ordinance
concerning the Militia had not the Royal assent to it.

And fourteenth of June 1642. Being informed, Ibid. 350.
That the Parliament endeavored to borrow great sums of money of the City of
London, and that there was great labor used to persuade his Subjects to
furnish horse and money, upon pretense of providing a guard for the Parliament:
By his letter to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London disavowing
any purpose of making a War, declared; That He had not the least thought of
raising or using of Forces unless he should be compelled to do it for his own
defense; and forbids therefore, the lending of money or raising of horses.

And within two days after, the Lord Keeper, Duke of Richmond, Marquess
Hartford, Earl of Salisbury, Lord Gray of Ruthen, with 17 Earls and 14 Barons,
the Lord Chief Justice Bancks, and sundry others of eminent quality and
reputation; attest His Majesty's Declaration and profession that He had no
intention to make a War, but abhorred it; and, That they perceived no Councels
or preparations tending to any such design Ibid. 356. 357.
and sent it with His Majesty's Declaration to the Parliament: In the mean time
the Committee of Parliament (appointed to make the propositions to the City of
of London, for the raising of Horse) viz. 15. June, 1642. Made report to the
House of Commons; That the Citizens did very cheerfully accept the same, there
being (for indeed there had been some design and resolulution a year before
concerning the melting of plate to raise moneys) already great store of plate,
and moneys brought into Guild Hall, for that purpose; and an Ordinance of
Parliament was made for the Earl of Warwick to be Lord Admiral, and keep the
Navy, though the King had commanded him on pain of treason to deliver up the
Ships to him: And the Lord Brook sent down into Warwickshire to settle the
Militia.

17. June, 1642. Committee of both Houses was appointed to go to the City of
London to enquire what store of Horse, Moneys, and Plate were already raised
upon the Propositions.

18. June, 1642. The King by his Proclamation, Disclaiming any intention to
make War against his Parliament forbids all levies of Forces without his
Majesty's express pleasure signified under his Great Seal.

And 20. June, 1642. Informing all his Subjects, by his Proclamation of the
Lawfulness of his Commissions of Array; That besides Collect. Par. Decl. 373.
374.
many other Warrants and Authorities of the Law; Judge Hutton and Judge Crook
in their Arguments against the Ship Money, agreed them to be Lawful; and the
Earl of Essex himself had in the beginning of this Parliament accepted of one
for the County of York. Gave his people to understand; That he had awarded the
like Commissions into all the Counties of England, and Dominion of Wales to
provide for, and secure them in a legal way; left under a pretense of danger,
and want of Authority from his Majesty to put them into a Military posture they
should he drawn and engaged in any opposition against him, or his just
Authority.

But 21. June, 1642. The Lords and Commons Ibid. 376.
in Parliament Declaring The design of their Propositions of raising Horse and
Moneys was to maintain the Protestant Religion, and the Kings Authority and
Person, and that the Forces already attending his Majesty, and his
preparations at first colored under the pretense of a guard, (being not so
great a guard as they themselves had constantly for 6 months before) did
evidently appear to be intended for some great and extraordinary design (so as
at this time also they do not charge the King with any manner of action of War,
or any thing done in a way or course of war against them) and gave just caufe
of fear and jealousy to the Parliament (being never yet by any Law of God or
man accounted to be a sufficient cause or ground for Subjects to make War
against their Sovereign) did forbid all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other
Officers to publish His Majesty's said Letter to the City of London, And
Declare that if He should use any force for the recovery of Hull, or
suppressing of their Ordinance for the Militia, it should be held a levying
War against the Parliament; and all this done before His Majesty had granted
any Commission for the levying or raising of a man; and lest the King should
have any manner of provision of War to defend himself, when their Army or Sir
John Hotham should come to assault him; Powder and Arms were every whera
seized on, and Cutlers, Gun-Smiths, Sadlers and all Warlike Trades ordered not
to send any to York; but to give a weekly account what was made or sold by
them: And an Order made the 24 of June, 1642. That the Horses which should be
sant in for the service os the Parliament, when they came to the number of 60.
should be trained, and so still as the number increased.

4. July 1642. The King by his letter under his sign Manual commanded all the
Judges of England in their Circuits, to use all means to suppress Popery,
Riots, and unlawful assemblies, and to give the people to understand his
resolution to maintain the Protestant Religion, and the Laws of the Ibid. 442.
Kingdom, and not to govern by any arbitrary way; and that if any should give
the King or them to understand of any thing wherein they held themselves
grieved, and desired a just reformation, He would speedily give them such an
answer as they shall have cause to thank him for his Justice and favor. But
the same day a Declaration was published by both Houses of Parliament,
commanding that Ibid. 449.
no Sheriff, Mayor, Bailiff, Parson, Vicar, Curate, or other (Sir Richard
Gurney the Lord Mayor of London, not many days before having been imprisoned
for proclaiming the Kings Proclamation against the bringing in of Plate, etc.)
should publish or proclaim any Proclamation, Declaration, or other paper in the
Kings name which should be contrary to any Order, Ordinance, or Declaration of
both the houses of Parliament, or the proceedings Ibid. 450.
thereof; and Order, that in case any force should be brought out of one County
into another to disturb the peace thereof, they should be suppressed by the
Train Bands, and Volunteers of the adjacent Counties. Shortly after Sir John
Hotham fortifieth the Town of Ibid. 453.
Hull, whilst the King is at York, seizes on a Ship coming to him with
provisions for his Household, takes Mr. Ashburnham one of the Kings servants
prisoner, intercepts Letters sent from the Queen to the King, and drowneth
Ibid. 459.
part of the Country round about the Town; which the Parliament allows of, and
promise satisfaction to the owners.

5. July 1642. They order a subscription of Plate and Horse to be made in every
County, and list the Horse under Commanders; and the morrow after, Order 2000
men should be sent to relieve Sir John Hotham in case the King should besiege
him; to which purpose Drums were bear up in London, and the adjacent parts to
Hull, The Earl of Warwick Ordered to send Ships to Humber to his assistance,
instructions drawn up to be sent to the Deputy-Lievtenants of the several
Counties to tender the Propositions for the raising of Horses, Plate, and
Money. Mr. Hastings and diverse of the Kings Commissioners of Array impeached
for supposed high Crimes and misdemeanors; and a Committee of five Lords and
ten of the House of Commons ordered to meet every morning for the laying out of
ten thousand pounds of the Guild Hall moneys for the buying of 700 Horse, and
that 10000. Foot to be raised in London and the Country, be employed by
direction of the Parliament; and the Lord Brook is furnished with 6. pieces of
Ordinance out of the Tower of London to fortify the Castle of Warwick.

And 9. July, 1642. Order, That in case the Earl of Northampton should come
into that County with a Commission of Array, they should raise the Militia to
suppress him; And that the Common Counsel of London should consider of a way
for the speedy raising of the 10000 Foot, and that they should be listed, and
put in pay within four days after.

11. July, 1642. The King sends to the Parliament to cause the Town of Hull to
be delivered unto him, and desires to have their answer by the 15 of that
month, and as then had used no force against it: But the morrow Ibid. 452.
after before that message could come unto them they resolve upon the Question:
That Ibid. 457.
an Army shall be forthwith raised for the defense of the Kings person and both
houses of Parliament; Ibid. 457.
and those who have obeyed their Orders and Commands; in preserving the true
Religion, the Laws, Liberties, and the Peace of the Kingdom; and that they
would live and dye with the Earl of Essex, whom they nominate General in that
cause.

And 12. July 1642. Declare; that, they will protect all that shall be employed
in their assistance and Militia.

And 16 July 1642. Petition the King to forbear any preparations or actions of
War; and to dismiss Ibid. 465. and 483.
his extraordinary guards, to come nearer to them, and hearken to their advice:
but before the Petition could be answered, wherein the King offered when the
Town of Hull should be delivered to Him he would no longer have an Army before
it, and should be assured that the some pretense which took Hull from him, may
not put a Garrison into Newcastle, (into which after the Parlaments surprise of
Hull, He was enforced to place a Governor and a small Garrison) He would also
remove that Garrison, and so (as his Magazine and Navy might be delivered unto
him; all Armies and Levies made by the Parliament laid down, the pretended
Ordinance for the Militia disavowed, and the Parliament adjourned to a secure
place he would lay down Arms and repair to them, and desired all differences
might be freely debated in a Parlamentary way, whereby the Law might recover
its due reverence, the Subject his just Liberty. Parlaments their full vigor
and estimation, and the whole Kingdom a blessed Peace and Prosperity, and
requiring their answer by the 27. of that July, promised, til then, not to make
any attempt of force upon Hull; had armed their General with power against him,
given him a Commission to kill and slay all that should oppose him in the
execution of it, and chosen their General of the Horse.

8. August, 1642. Upon information that some of the Town of Portsmouth had
revolted to Colonel Goring (being but sent thither with a message from the
King) and Declared for his Majesty: Order forces to be sent thither speedily
to beleaguer it by Land, and the Earl of Warwick to send thither 5. Ships of
the Navy to prevent any foreign forces coming to their assistance, and upon
Intelligence that the Earl of Northampton appeared with great strength at
Banbury, to hinder the Lo. Brooks for carrying the picces of Ordnance to
Warwick; Ordered 5000 Horse and Foot to be sent to assist him.

9. August 1642. Upon information that the Marquis of Hartford and diverse
others were in Somersetshire demanding obedience to the Kings Commission of
Array, and to have the Magazine of the Connty to be delivered unto them: Gave
power to the Earl of Essex their Lord General, the Lord Brook and others to
apprehend the Marquis of Hartford, and Earl of Northampton, and their
accomplices, and to kill and slay all that should oppose them. And the day
following gave the Earl of Stamford a Commission to raise forces for the
Suppressing of any should attempt for the King in Leichestershire or the
adjacent Counties.

And on the eleventh of August, 1642. Upon the Kings Proclamation, two days
before declaring the Earl of Essex and all that should adhere unto him in the
levying of Forces, and not come in and yield to His Majesty within six days to
be Travtors^ vote the said Proclamation to be against the fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom; Declare their resolutions to maintain and assist the Earl of
Essex; and resolve to spend no more time in Declarations and Petitions, but to
endeavor by raising of Forces to suppress the Kings Party (though all that the
Kings loyal Subjects did at that time for Him, was but to execute the
Commission of Array in the old legal way of the Militia) and within a day or
two after ordered the Earl of Essex their Lord General to set forth with his
Army of Horse upon the Monday following; but not so much as an Answer would be
afforded to the Kings Message sent from Hull, where, whilst He with patience
and hope forbore any action, or attempt of force, according to His promise, Sir
John Hotham sallied out in the night, and murdered many of his fellow subjects.

12 Angust, 1642. The King, though He might well understand the great leavies
of Men and Arms ready to march against Him, by a Declaration published to all
his Subjects, assures them; as in the presence of God; That all the Acts passed
by Him in this parliament should be as equally observed, as those which most of
all concerned His own interest and rights; and that his quarrel was not against
the Parliament, but particular men; and therefore desired, That the Lord
Kimbolton, Mr. Hollis, Sir Hen: Ludlow, Sir Arthur Hasilrig, Mr. Strode, Mr.
Martin, Mr. Hampden, Alderman Pennington, and Captain Venne, might be delivered
into the hands of Justice, to be tried by their Peers, according to the known
Laws of the Land; and against the Earls of Essex, Warwick, Stamford, Lord
Brooks, Sir John Hotham, Major General Skippon, and those who should exercise
the Militia by virtue of the Ordinance, he would cause Indictments to be drawn
of high Treason upon the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. and if they submit to trial, and
plead the Ordinance, would rest satisfied if they should be acquitted. But when
this produced as little effect as all other endeavors He had used for peace,
He that saw the Hydra in the mud and slime of Sedition, in its Embrio, birth
and growth, and finds him now erected ready to devour him; must now (though
very unwilling to cast off His beloved Robe of Peace, forsake an abused
patience, and believe no more in the hopes of other remedies had so often
deceived Him: but if He will give any account to the Watchman of Israel of the
People committed to his charge; or to the people of his protection of them, or
any manner of satisfaction to his own judgment and discretion) betake Himself
to the Sword which God had entrusted Him with: and therefore makes the best use
He could of those few friends were about Him* and with the money which the
Queen had not long before borrowed, and the small supplies He had obtained of
His Servants and Friends about Him (who pawned and engaged their Plate, Jewels
and Lands for Him) with those Lords and Gentlemen that willingly offered to
bear Him company in His Troubles; provides what Men and Arm^* He could in His
way toward Notting ham, where He intended to set up his Standard.

But the Parliament about the 23 of August, 1642. having received some
information that He intended to set up his Standard at Nottingham, Declare:
That now it appear^ to all the world, that there is good ground of their fears
and jealousies (which if ever there had been any, as there was no cause at all
of any* more than that meaning to murder and ruin Him, they were often afraid
He should take notice of it, and seek to defend Himself; there was by their own
confession till this time no manifest or certain ground appearing, that He
intended to defend Himself against the Parliament) and therefore order: That
all that shall suffer in their Estates by any force raised by the King, without
consent of Parliament, shall have full reparation of their damages out of the
Estates of the actors, and out of the Estates of all such persons in any part
of the Kingdom, who should persist to serve the King in this War against the
Parliament; and That it should be lawful for any number of persons to join and
defend themselves; and, That the Earl of Essex, their General should grant out
Commissions for Levying and conducting forces into the Northern parts, And Sir
John Hotham the Governor of Hull assist them; and command also the Sheriffs of
the County of York and the adjacent Counties, with the power of the Counties,
and Trained Bands to aid them, and to seize upon all that shall execute the
Commission of Array for his Majesty, who was thus sufficiently beset by those
that intended what since they have brought to pass against Him.

25. August, 1642. (being some days after the Earl of Bedford had marched with
great forces into the West) that His Subjects might be informed of His danger,
and repair to his Succor; setting up his Standard at Nottingham; being a thing
of mere legal necessity; if He would have any at all to come to help Him, and
not forfeit and surprise those that by tenure of their Lands or by reason of
Offices, Fees, or, Annuities enjoyed under Him, were more immediately bound to
assist Him.

And yet here He must weep over Jerusalem; and once again entreat the Parliament
and His Rebellious Subjects to prevent their own miseries; and therefore sends
the Earls of Sonthampton and Dorset to the Parliament to desire a Treaty,
^ffering to do all on His own part which might advance the Protestant Religion,
oppose Popery and Superstition, and secure the Laws and Liberties of His
Subjects, and just p^iviledges of Parliament: Which after several scorns put
upon those noble Messengers, as denying the Earl of Southampton to come and
sit in the House of Peers (as a right by birth and inheritance due to him) and
causing the Sergeant at Arms of the House of Commons to go before him with the
Mace as they use to do before Delinquents: They refuse to accept of, unless the
King would first take down His Standard, and recall his Declarations and
Proclamations against them. To which the King the 5. September, 1642.
(notwithstanding the Earl of Bedford had with great forces in the mean time
besieged the Marquis of Hartford in the Castle of Sherborn in Dorset shire)
replying, That he never did Declare, or intended for to Declare both his houses
of Parliament to be Traitors, or set up his Standard against them: much less to
put them and the Kingdom out of his protection: And utterly protesting against
it, before God and the World, offered to recall his Declarations and
Proclamations with all cheerfullness the same day that they should revoke their
Declarations against those that had assisted him; and desiring a Treaty, and
conjuring them to consider the bleeding condition of Ireland, and the danger of
England, undertakes to be ready to grant any thing shall be really good for
his Subjects; which being brought by the Lord Falkland, one of his Majesty's
Secretaries of State, and a Member of the House of Commons, and not long before
in a very great esteem with them (all the respect could be afforded him being
to stand at the Bar of the House of Commons, and deliver his Message to them)
had only an answer in a printed Declaration of the Lords and Commons returned
unto him, That it was Ordered and Declared by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, That the Arms which they have been forced to take up, or shall be
forced to take up, for the preservation of the Parliament, Religion, and the
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, shall not be laid down until his Majesty
shall withdraw his protection from such Persons as have been voted by both
Houses of Parliament to be Delinquents, or that shall by both Houses of
Parliament be voted to be Delinquents (which after their mad way of voting
might have been himself, his Queen, or his Heir apparent) and leave them to the
Justice of Parliament according to their demerits, to the end that those great
charges and damages wherewithal the Commonwealth has been burdened since his
Majesty departed from the Parliament, might be born by the Delinquents and
other malignant and disaffected persons, and that those who by Loans of money
or otherwise at their charges have assisted the Commonwealth, or shall in like
manner hereafter assist the Commonwealth in times of extreme danger (and here
they would also provide for future friends and quarrels) may be re-paid all
sums of money lent for those purposes, and satisfied their charges sustained
as out of the estates of the said Delinquents, and of the Malignant and
disaffected Party in this Kingdom.

And to make good their words of 8. September 1642. Before their answer could
come unto the Kings hands, Ordered certain numbers of horse and foot to be sent
to Garrison and secure Oxford, and the morrow after (before the King could
possibly reply unto it) their Lord General, the Earl of Essex marched out of
London against him with 20000 men, horse and foot, gallantly armed, and a great
train of Arti^lery to attend him; notwithstanding all which, and thos^ huge
impossibilities every day more and more appeared of obtaining a Peace wit^
those who were so much afraid to be loser^ by it, as they never at all intended
it.

The King must needs send one messag^ more unto them, to try if that might no^
give them some occasion to send Him gentle^ conditions; and therefore 13.
September 1642. (Being the same day they had impeached the Lord Strange of
High Treason for executing the Kings Commission of Array, and Ordered the
propositions for furnishing of horse, plate, and money, to be tendered from
house to house, in the Cities of London and Westminster, and to be sent into
all the Shires and Counties of England to be tendered for the same purpose, and
the names of the refusers to be certified.) Mr. May, one of the Pages to the
King, comes to the Lords House in Parliament, with a Message from Him, bearing
date but two days before; That although He had used all ways and me anes to
prevent the present distractions and dangers of the Kingdom, all his labors
have been fruitless, that not so much as a Treaty, earnestly desired by him,
can be obtained (though he disclaimed all his Proclamations and Declarations,
and the erecting of his Standard as against his Parliament) unless he should
denude himself of all force to defend him from a visible strength marching
against him; That now he had nothing left in his power but to express the deep
sense he had of the public misery of the Kingdom, and to apply himself to a
necessary defense, wherein he wholly relied upon the providence of God and the
affection of his good People, and was so far from put ting them out of his
protection, as when the Parliament should desire a Treaty, he would piously
remember whose blood is to be spilt in this quarrel, and cheerfully embrace it.

But this must also leave them as it sound them, in their ungodly purposes; for
the morrow after being the 14. day of September 1642. Mr. Hampden, one of the
sive Members (by this time a Colonel of the Army) brings letters to the House
of Commons from the Parliaments Lord General, that he was at Northampton in a
very good posture, and that great numbers of the Country thereabouts came in
daily unto him, and offered to march under him, and that so soon as all his
forces that are about London shall come up unto him, which he desires may be
hastened, he intended to advance toward his Majesty: and it was the same day
voted, That all things sealed by the Kings Seal since it was carried away by
the Lord Keeper Littleton, should be Null, and of no force in the Law, and that
a new Seal should be provided.

The King therefore seeing what he must trust to, 19. September 1642. being at
Wellington in Shrop-shire in the head of such small forces and friends as he
could get together, (for the Parliament that very day had received letters, That
the King but the week before, having a muster at Nottingham, there appeared but
about 3000 foot, and 2000. horse, and 1500 dragoona; and tha^ a great part of
his men were not provided with arms) made his Protestation and promise as in
the presence of Almighty God, and as He hoped for his blessing and protection,
to maintain to the utmost Ihm. 614.
of his power the true reformed Protestant Religion established in the Church
of England, and that he desired to govern by the known Laws of the Land, and
that the Liberty and property of the Subject should be preserved with the same
care as his own just rights, and to observe inviolably the Laws consented to by
him in this Parliament, and promised as in the sight of Almighty God, if He
would please by his blessing upon that Army raised for his necessary defense,
to preserve him from that rebellion, to maintain the just privileges and
freedom of Parliament, and govern by the known Laws of the Land. In the mean
while, if this time of War, and the necessity and straights he was driven to,
should beget any violation of them, he hoped it would be imputed by God and man
to the Authors of the War, and not to him who had so earnestly desired and
labored for the peace of the Kingdom, and preservation thereof; and that when
He should fail in any of those particulars, He would ex^est no aid or relief
from any man, or protection from Heaven.

And now that the stage of War seems to be made ready, and the Parliament party
being the better furnished, had not seldom showed themselves, and made
several traverses over it (for indeed the King having so many necessities upon
him, and so out of power and provision for it, might in that regard only if He
had not been so unwilling to have any hurtcome to his people by his own
defending of himself, be backward and unwillingly drawn unto it, we may do well
to stand by and observe who comes first to act upon it.

22. Of September 1642. The Earl of Essex writes from Warwick that he was upon
his march after the King and before the 6. of October following had written to
the County of Warwick with all speed to raise their Trained bands and
Volunteers to resist his Forces if they should come that way, and to the three
Counties of Northampton, Leicester and Derby to gather head and resist him if
he should retire into those parts; and by all that can be judged of a matter
of fact, so truly and faithfully represented, must needs be acknowledged to
have great advantages of the King, by the City and Tower of London, Navy,
Shipping, Arms, Ammunition, the Kings Magazine, all the strong. Towns of the
Kingdom, most of the Kingdoms plate and money, the Parliaments credit and high
esteem, which at that time the people Idolized; the fiery Zeal of a seditious
Clergy to preach the people into a Rebellion, and the people head-longly
running into the witchcraft of it: When the King on the other side had little
more to help him the^ the Laws and Religion of the Land, which at that time
every man began to ^i^construe and pull in pieces, had neither men, horse,
arms, ammunition, ships, places of strength, nor money, not any of his party or
followers, after the Parliament had as it were proclaimed a War against him,
could come single or in small numbers through any Town or Village, but were
either openly assaulted, or secretly betrayed, no man could adven^ure to serve
or own him, but must expose himself and his Estate to be ruined either by the
Parliament or people, or such as for malice or profit would inform against him.
All the gains and places of preferment were on the Parliaments part, and
nothing but losses and misfortunes on the Kings: No man was afraid to go
openly to the Parliaments side, and no man du^st openly so much as take
acquaintance of his S^veraign, but if he had done a quarter of (...) which Ziba
did to David when he (...) the (...) ^^^ves of bread, or old Barzill^^, (...)
(...) the Gutite, when he went along with him when hi^ Son Absalom rebelled
against him, They should never have escaped so well as they did, but have been
sure to be undone and sequestered for it. So much of the affections of the
people had the Parliament cosened and stolen from them, so much profit and
preferment had they to persuade it, and so much power to enforce those, that
otherwise had not a mind to it, to fight against him; Who thus every way
encompassed about with dangers, and like a Partridge hunted upon the Mountains,
marches from Shrewsbury toward Banbury, persuading and picking up what help
and assistance his better sort of Subjects durst adventure to afford him: in
the way to which;

On Sunday the 23. of October 1642. (for they thought it better to rob God of
his Sabbath, than lose an opportunity of murdering their Sovereign) the Earl
of Essex and Parliament-Army pouring in from all quarters of the Kingdom upon
him, had compassed him in on all sides; and before the King could put his men
in Battel-Array, (many of whom being young Country fellows, had no better arms
than clubs and staves in their hands, cut out of the hedges) and put his two
young Sons, the Prince of Wales and the Duke of York, in the guard of a Troop
of horse at the further end of the field, and had finished a short prayer, a
bullet of the Earl of Essex's Cannon grazed at his heels as he was kneeling at
his prayers on the side of a bank (for Blague, a villain in in the Kings Army,
having a great pension allowed him for it, had given notice in what part of the
field the King stood, that they might the better know how to shoot at him.) But
God having a greater care of his Anointed than of their Rebellious pretenses,
so ordered the hands of those that fought for the King, as the Earl of Essex
was so laden with Victories, as he left five of his men, for one of Kings,
dead behind him; lost his Baggage and Artillery, retired back to Warwick, and
left the King to bless God in the field; where he supped with such victuals as
the more loyal and better natured neighbors sent him, when the worser sort
refused to do it, and lying there all night, sent warrants out the next day to
the neighbor Parishes to bury the dead; drew off his Ordnance, and marched to
Banbury, and yet he could not forget to pity those were at such pains and
hazard the day before to murder Him, but before he went out of the field sent
Sir William Le^neve Clarencieux, King of Arms to Warwick, whither the Earl of
Essex was fled, with a Proclamation of pardon to all that would lay down arms;
which though they scornfully received, and the Herald threatened to be hanged if
he did not depart the sooner, cannot persuade Him from sending a Declaration or
Message to the Parliament, to offer them all that could be requested by
Subjects; but all the use they made of it was to make the City of London
believe they were in greater danger than ever, if they sent them not more
moneys, and recruited the Earl of Essex his broken Army; and to cosen and put
the people on the more to seek their own misery, a day of Thanksgiving was
publicly kept for the great Victory obtained against the King. And Stephen
Marshall, a Factious bloody Minister, though he confessed he was so carried on
in the crowd of those that fled from the battle, as he knew not where he was
till he came to a Market Town which was some miles from Edgehill, where the
Battle was fought, preaches to the people (too little believing the Word of
God, and too much believing him:) that to his knowledge there was not above
200. men lost on the Parliaments side; that he picked up bullets in his black
velvet cap, and that a very small supply would now serve to reduce the King,
and bring him to his Parliament.

And here ye may see Janus Temple wide open, though the doors of it were not
lift off the hinges, or broken open at once, but picked open by those either
knew not the misery of the War, or knowing it, will prove to be the more guilty
promoters of it. That we may the better therefore find out (though the matter
of Fact already represented may be evidence enough of it self) who it was that
let out the fury and rage of War upon us, we shall consider;

CHAP. II. Whether a Prince or other Magistrate, laboring to suppress, or
punish a Rebellion of the People, be tied to those rules are necessary for the
justifying of a War, if it were made between equals.
WAr was first brought in by necessity, where the determining of controversies
between two strange Princes of equal Power, could not be had, because they have
no superior: A Rebel therefore cannot properly be called an enemy, for Hostis
nomen notat aequalitatem; and when any such Arms are borne against Rebels, it
is not to be called a War, but an Exercise of Jurisdiction upon traiterous and
dissoyal Persons, atque est ratio manifesta, says Albericus Gentilis, qui enim
jure judex est and superior, non jure cogitur Alber. Gentil. 223.
ad subeundas parts partis and aequalis, and non est bellum cum latronibus
praedonibus aut piratis quanquam magnos habeant excercitus, and proinde nec
ulla cum illis belli jura, says Besoldus: Besoldus in dissert. de ^ure Belli
77, and 78.
The Romans who were so exact and curious in their public denouncing of War,
and sending Ambassadors before they made War against any other Nation, did not
do it in cases of Rebellion and defection; and therefore Fidenatibus and
Campanis non denunciant Lib. Alber. 23.
Romani. And Cicero, that was of opinion, that nullum bellum justum haberi
videtur nisi nunciatum, nisi indictum nisi repetitis rebus stood not upon those
solemnities in the Cataline conspiracy; for the rules of justifying a War
against an enemy or equals as demanding restitution, denunciation, and the
like, are not requisite in that of punishing Rebels; Pompey justifies tbe War
maintained by the Senate against Caesar (not then their Sovereign) with neque
enim vocari praelia justa decent etc. Cicero Lucan. li. 2.
did not think it convenient to send Ambassadors to Anthony, nor entreat him by
fair words; but that it was meet to enforce him by arms to raise his siege
from Mutina; for he said, They had not to do with Hambal an enemy Cicero Phi^*
lipic. 5.
to the Commonwealth, but with a rebellious Citizen. The resisting of the Kings
Authority when the Sheriff of a County goes with the posse Comitatus, to
execute it, was never yet so much as called a War, but Rebellion and
Insurrection, or Commotion, were the best terms bestowed upon it [such attempts
are not called Wars, but Robberies, of which the Law takes no other care of,
but to punish them] The haste that all our Kings and Princes in England have
made in suppressing Rebellions (as that of the Barons Wars by Henry the 3. and
his sending his Son the Prince to besiege Warren Earl of Surrey in his Castle
of Rygate, for affronting the Kings Justices, saying, That he would hold his
Lands by the Sword: That which Rich. 2. made to suppress Wat. Tiler, H. 6. Jack
Cade, H. 8. Ket and the Norfolk Rebels, and Queen Elizabeth to suppress the
Earls of Northumber-land and Westmerland) may tell us that they understood it
no otherwise than all the Kings and Magistrates of the world have ever
practiced it [by the Laws of England, if Englishmen that are Traitors go into
France, and confederate with Altens or Frenchmen, and come afterward and make
a War in England and be taken prisoners, the strangers may be ransomed, but not
the English, for they were the Kings Subjects, and are to be reckoned as
Traitors, not strangers:] And the Parliaments own advice to the King to
suppress the Irish Rebels that ploughed but with their own Heyfer, and
pretended as they did to defend their Religion, Laws and Liberties; and the
opinion also of Mr. President Bradshaw (as Sir John Owen called him in his late
sentence given against the Earls of Cambridge, Holland, and Norwich, Lord Capel
and Sir John Owen, whom he mistakenly (God and the Law knows) would make to be
the Subjects of their worfer Fellow Subjects, may be enough to turn the
question out of doors.

But lest all this should not be thought sufficient to satisfy those can like
nothing but what there is Scripture for, we shall a little turn over the leaves
of that sacred Volume, and see what is to be found concerning this matter.

Moses who was the meekest Magistrate in the world, and better acquainted with
him that made the fifth Commandment, than these that now pretend Revelations
against it; thought fit to suppress the rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram
as soon as he could; and for no greater offense than a desire to be coordinate
with him, procured them to be buried alive, with all that appertained unto them.

When Absalom had rebelled against his father David, and it was told him, That
the 2 Samuel 15.
hearts of the men of Israel were after him, David, a man after Gods own heart,
without any message of peace, or Declaration sent unto his dear son Absalom, or
offering half or any part of his Kingdom to him, sent three several Armies to
pursue and give him battle.

When Sheba the son of Bichri blew a Trumpet and said, We have no part in
David, every man to his tent, O Israel; and thereupon 2 Samuel 20.
every man of Israel followed after him and forsook their King; David (who knew
that Moses would not make a War upon the Amorites, though he had Gods
commandment for it without offers of peace, and messengers sent first unto
them) said to Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah within three days; and when
he tarried longer, said unto him, Take thou thy Lords Servants and pursue after
him, lest he get him fenced Cities, and escape us.

For they that would take heed of Cocatrices, have ever used to kill them in
the shell. Bodm, page 736.
And diligenti cuique Imperatori ac magistrains danda est opera (says Bodin)
ut non tam seditiones tollere quam praeoccupare student. For sedition (says
he) once kindled, like a span of fire, blown by popular fury, may sooner fire a
whole City than be extinguished. Et tales igitur pestes opprimere derepente
necess^ est; Princes and Sovereigns who are bound to protect and defend their
Subjects, are not to stand still, and suffer one to oppress another, and
themselves to be undone by it afterward.

But put the case the Parliament could have been called a Parliament when they
had driven away the King, which is the Head and Life of it, or could have been
said to have been two Houses of Parliament, when there was not at that time
above a third part of the House of Peers, nor the half of the House of Commons
remaining in them, and what those few did in their abfence was either forced by
a Faction of their own, or a party of seditious Londoners (for indeed the War
rightly considered, was not betwixt the Parliament and the King, but a War made
by a factious and seditious part of the Parliament against the King, and the
major part of the Parliament) and had been (as it never was nor could be by the
Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom) coordinate and equal with the King, and
joint-tenan^^ of the Kingdom; it would have been necessary to make ^ War as
just as they could, and to have done all that had been in order to it: and
therefore we hope they which pretend so much to the Justice of the Kingdom,
will not be offended to have the Justice of their Wars something examined.

CHAP. IV. Suppose the War to be made with a neighbour-Prince, or between
equals; Whether the King or Parliament were in the defensive or justifyabie
part of it.
PL^rique says learned Grotius, tres statuunt bellorum justas causas,
defensionem, recuperationem H. Grotius. de jure pa^is and belli.
and punttionem. For any defense the Parliament might pretend a necessity of,
The King neither assaulted them, nor used any violence to them when they first
of all granted out their Propositions and Commissions of War, unIess they can
turn their jealousies into a Creed, and make the Kings demanding the five
Members and Kimbolton (being done by warrant of the Law of the Land, and the
Records and precedents of their own Houses) appear to be an assaulting of them.
Or if any reasonable man knew but how to make that to be an assault, or a
necessary cause of War for them to revenge it; the Kings waving and
relinquishing of his charge afterward against them, might have certainly been
enough to have taken away the cause of it (if there had been any) howsoever, a
War^, made only to revenge a bare demand or request of a thing and was neither
so much as forced or a second time demanded of them, but totally laid aside and
retracted, can never be accounted just.

As for the recovery of things lost, or taken away, The Parliament it self, had
nothing taken from them, for both they and the people were so far from being
loosers at that time by the King, as the Remonstrance of the house of Commons
made to the people 15. December 1641. of the Kings erroun (as they please to
call them) in the government Collect. of MessR ^. mon st. and Declar. 15.
(but indeed the errors rather of his Ministers and themselves also, in
busying him with brawles and quarrels and denying to give him fitting
supplies) mentions how much and how many benficeial Laws the King had Iom. 45.
etc.
granted them. And so the Parliament and People being no loosers, and the King
never denying them any* thing could in honor o^ conscience be granted them;
That part of the justifying of a War will no way also belong to them.

But if the punishment for offenses and injuries past (if they could be so
properly called) being a third cause of justifying a War, could be but imagined
to be a cause to justify the Parliaments war against the King; Yet they were
to remember another Rule or Law of War, Ne nimis veteres causae accersentur.
That they do not pick quarrels by raking up past grievances, that it be not
propter leviusculas injurias; or for trifles. For when the King Besoldus in
dissert. philolog. p. 58.
(who if he had been no more then coordinate with them) had called them to
Council to to advise him, followed their advice in every thing he could find
any reason for, taken away all grievances, made a large provision to prevent
them for the future, by granting the Trienniall Parliament, and so large an
amends for every thing they could but tell how to complain of; there was so
little left to the People and the Parliament to quarrel for, as they were much
behind in thankfulness for what they had got of him already.

Or if any other causes or provocations should be imagined as misusing the
Parliaments Messengers, or the like; we know the King (unless it were by his
patience and often Messages for peace) was guilty of no provocations; but on
the contrary though he had all manner of scorns and reproaches cast upon him,
and his messengers evil entreated by them, could never be brought to return or
retaliate it to any of theirs.

But nothing as yet serving to excuse them, It will not be amiss to examine the
causes as they are set down by themselves, to justify their war, and so we may
well suppose there are no other.

A war against the King for safety of his own Person was needless (and then it
comes within that rule of war and law of Nations, Ne leves sint causae be^li,,
not to make a war unnecessary: for the King would look to that himself; and
as they were his Subjects they, as well as every honest Subject were bound to
defend and assist him, but not whether he would or no; and in such a way of
defense, as would tend to his ru^ne rather then his safety. For ^urely should
any stranger of another Kingdom or Nation have casually passed by Edgehill
when the Kings and the Parliaments (...) were in fight, and have been told that
the King shot at them for the safety of his own Person, and that they also shot
against hi^ for the safety of his own Person; and being a^ked which of the two
parties he believe did really or most of all intend the safety of it? we
cannot tell how to think any man such a stranger to nature, reason or
understanding, as to think the King should not fight as the Dictates of nature
persuaded him to: or that the King could tell how to fight against those that
fought for him: or that if he should be so hugely mistaken in that one year or
Battle, he should be in several ^^her years and Battles after.

To (...) the de^ence of the Religion establish^d (as they made also the people
believe) that was as needless; when the King offered to do every thing might
help to promote it: and they are so little also to be credited in that
pretense, as we know they did all they could from the beginning to ruin it;
took away Episcopacy, the hedge and bounds of it, brought in Presbytery to
preach up and aid their Rebellion, and when their own turns were served,
encouraged Conventicles and Tub Preachers to ^ud down the Presbytery: And being
demanded at the Treaty at Vxbridge by the Kings Commissioners what Religion
they would have the King to establish, were so unprovided of an answer, as they
could not resolve what to nominate, nor in any of their propositions afterward
sent to the King, though often urged and complained o^ oy the Scottish
Commissioners, could ever find the way to do it, but have now set up an
Independent extemporary enthusiastic kind of worshipping God (if there were any
such thing in it) or rather a religious Chaos or gallimaufry of all manner of
heresy,, errors, blasphemies, and opinions put together, not any of the
owners of which we can be confident will subscribe to that opinion, that Wars
may be made for Religion, or that Conscience ought to be forced by it.

As for the restrictive part of the Laws, to keep the people in subjection, we
can very well persuade our selves no such War was ever made yet in the world,
nor any people ever found that would engage in a War for that they obeyed, but
against their wills; And for that part of the law that gives them the Kings
protection, privileges, immunities, and certainties of deciding controversies
(which are more fitly to be called the Liber^ies of tbe people, than to have
45. of the house of Commons, or a Faction to make daily and hourly Laws, and
Religion, and Government, and vote their estates in and out to pay an Army, to
force their obedience to it) if we had not outlived the Parliaments disguises
and pretenses, saw them now tearing up by the roots, that there may be no hope
of their growing up again, and setting up their own, as well as the ignorant
and illiterate fancies of Mechanics and Soldiers in stead of them; we might
have said that also had been needless, when the King had done abundantly enough
already; and offered to grant any thing more could in reason be demanded of him.

And as touching their privileges of Parliament, they that understand but any
thing of the Laws of England, or have but looked into the Records and Journals
of Parliament, can tell that all privileges of Parliament (as King James said)
were at first bestowed upon them by the Kings and Princes of this Kingdom, That
privileges of Parliament extended not to Treason or Felony, or breach of the
Peace. That 32 Hen. 6. Sir Thomas Thorp Speaker of the House of Commons, being
arrested in execution in the time of the prorogation of the Parliament, the
Commons demanded he might be set at liberty according to their privileges:
whereupon the Judges being asked their Council therein, made answer, That
general supersedeas of Parliament there was none; but special supersedeas there
was; in which case of special supersedeas, every member of the House of Comof
Commons ought to enjoy the same, unles in causes of Treason, Felony, or breach
of the Peace, or for a Conde^mnation before the Parliament: After which answer
it was determined, that the said Sir Thomas Thorp should lie in execution, and
the Commons were required on the behalf of the King to choose a new Speaker,
which they did, and presented to the King accordingly. That Queen Elizabeth was
assured by her Judges, that she might commit any of her Parliament during the
Parliament, for any offense committed against her Crown and Dignity, and they
showed her precedents for it; and that primo and tertio Caroli Regis, upon
search of precedents in the several great cases of the Earls of Arundel and
Bristol, very much insisted and stood upon, the House of Peers in Parliament
allowed of the exception of Treason, Felony, and breach of the Peace.

For indeed it is as impossible to think there can be any privilege to commit
Treason, as to think that a King should privilege all his Nobility, and every
one of his Subjects that could get to be elected into the House of Commons in
Parliament, to commit Treason, and to take away his life in the time of
Parliament, whenever their revenge, or malice, or interest should find the
opportunity to do it; or that, if it could be so, any King or Prince would ever
call or summon a Parliament to expose himself to such a latitude of danger, or
give them leave to sit as long as they would to breed it: or that privileges
of Treason can be consistent with the name or being of a Parliament to consult
or advise with the King for the defense of Him and his Kingdom; or that when
Felony and breach of Peace are excepted out of their privilege, Treason, that
is of a far higher nature, consequence, and punishment, should be allowed them;
or if there could have been any such privilege, and a meaner man than their
Sovereign had broke it, a small understanding may inform them they could not,
without breach of the Peace, have fought for it against a fellow-subject, and
then also could not their privileges have reached to it, but the King might
have punished them for it: and if they cannot upon a breach of privilege (as
it was adjudged in Halls case) without the Kings Writ, and the cause first
certified in Chancery, deliver one of their own setvants arrested: It is not
likely any warrant can be found in Law to enforce the King to reparation,
though he himself should have broken it; but to petition the King for an
allowance of that, or any other privilege, as well in the middle, as any other
time of their sitting in Parliament, as they always do at the presenting of
their Speaker in the beginning of it. Wherefore, certainly the people never
gave the Parliament Commission (if they could have given a Commission to make a
War against their Sovereign) to claim that was never due to them, or to fight
for that was never yet fought for by any of their Forefathers, nor ever
understood to be taken from them, much less for their ayrie innovated pretenses
rather than privileges, which have since eaten up all the peoples Laws and
Liberties, as well as a good part of their lives and estates with it, and are
now become to be every thing their Representatives will and and arbitrary power
have a mind to make it; who have so driven away their old legal privileges by
setting up illegal and fantastic kind of Privileges (as they are pleased to
call them) instead of them, as there is nothing left of the Parliament like a
Parliament, neither matter, nor form, nor any thing at all remaining of it;
For, the upper and lower Houses have driven away and fought against the King,
who was their Head: the the lower after that, have driven away the upper, and
45. of the House of Commons (whereof eleven are great Officers and Commanders
of the Army) have after that imprisoned and driven away four hundred of their
fellow members: And from degenerate and distemperate piece of a Parliament,
brought themselves to be but a representative, or journey-men-voters to a
Council of their own mercenary and mechanic Army; and may sit another eight
years before ever they shall be able to find a reason to satisfy any man is
not a fool or a mad man, or a fellow-sharer in the spoils of an abused and
deluded Nation, Why the Kings demanding of the five Members and Kimbolton by
undeniable warrant of the land and the Records, and precedents of their own
houses upon a charge, or accusation of Treason, for endeavoring amongst (...)
other pieces of Treason, to alter the Government, and subvert the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, which the Parliament, and they themselves that were
accused, have more than once declared to be Treason; should be taken to be so
great a breach of privilege in the King their Sovereign, when the forcing and
over a wing the Houses of Parliament by the Army, their servants and hirelings,
demanding the eleven Members, and imprisoning and banishing some of them, upon
imaginary and fantastical offenses committed against themselves, or they could
not tell whom; shall be reckoned to be no breach at all of privilege, and the
forcing of the Houses by the same Army within a year afterward, by setting
guards upon them, violently pulling two of the Members of the House of Commons
out of the House, and imprisoning them, and 39 more of their fellow members all
night in an Alehouse, and leading them afterward to several prisons, with
guards set upon them, as if they had been common malefactors, can be called
mercies and deliverances, and a purging and taking away rotten Members out of
the House of Commons*

But now that we can find nothing to make a defensive or lawful, nor so much as
a necessary War on the Parliaments part: for (causa belli, says Besoldus,
correspondere debet Besoldus dissert. p^i. log. pa 88.
damno and periculo) the Parliament fears and jealousies were not of weight
enough to put the people into a misery far beyond the utmost of what their
fears and jealousies to them did amount unto, we shall do well to examine by
the rules and laws of War and Nations, the ways and means they used in it.

Injustum censetur bellum si non ejus, penes Can. quid culpatur 23.
quem est Majestas, authoritate moveatur; a war cannot be just if it be not
made by a lawful authority: Armorum delatio and prohibitio ad Principem
spectat: It belongs to the Prince to Da. D. Bocer de b^ll^ cap. 5. Besoldus de
juribus Majestati, cap. 6. 7 Edw. 1.
raise or forbid Arms; and the Records of the Parliament (which we take to be a
better sense of the House then their own purposes) can inform them, that the
Prelates. Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of the Realm did in the seventh year of
the reign of King Edw. the First, declare to the King, That it belongs, and
his part is, through His Royal Signorie straightly to defend force of Armor,
and of Armor, and all other force against his Peace when it shall please him,
and to punish them which shall do the contrary, according to the Laws and
usages of the Realm, and that thereunto they were bound to aid their Sovereign
Lord the King at all seasons when need shall be.

How much ado then will they have to make a War against their Sovereign to be
Lawful? or (if by any Warrant of Laws, Divine or Humane, they could but tell
how to absolve themselves from their oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, and their
very many protestations and acknowledgements of Subjection to the King) find a
Supreme authority to be in the People, at the same time they not only styled
themselves, but all those they represented to be his Subjects.

Or, how will they be able to produce a warrant from the People, their now
pretended Sovereigns (till they shall be able sufficiently to enslave them) to
authorize them to make a War to undo them, when they elected them but to
consent to such things as should be treated of by the King and his Kingdom? Or
how could a tenth part of the people give warrant to them to fight against the
King, and the other nine parts of the people? Or can that be a good warrant
when some of them were cheated, and the other by plunderings and sequestrations
forced to yield to it? Or could the pretense of a War for defense of the Kings
person, and to maintain the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the people, be a
warrant to the Parliament (which never sought any for the King and People, but
to take away the Sovereignty from the one, and the Liberties of the other) to
do every thing was contrary unto it? But if that could have legitimated their
actions? as it never did or will be able.

There is a two fold rule of Justice in the practice of War and Nations, si
bellum geratur sine denuncaitione in captivos tanquam latrones animadverti
possit; It is a thievery, rather than a War not denounce or give notice of it
beforehand: and in that also the Parliament was faulty, for they took Hull and
Portsmouth and the Kings Navy and Magazine from him when he hoped better
things of them, and sent out their Armies and the Earl of Essex against him
whilst he was in treaty with them, and offered all that he could to have a
peace with them.

Bellum item impium injustumque sit si modus debitus non observetur; A War is
unjust if there be not a due way of proceedings held in it, which especially
consists in not hurting the innocent women and Children, and in this also
they will fall short of an excuse. For how full is every Town and Village of
the Truth as well as the complaints of the unchristian usage of old and sick
people, Women and Children, beaten, wounded, or killed upon no provocation,
Women and Maids ravished, and their fingers cut off for their rings, Old Best
of Canterbury hanged up by the privities, others tortured, and had burning
matches tied to their fingers to make them confess where their money was, Women
and Children, sick and aged Persons starved for want of the sustenance they had
taken from them; Husbandmen had their corn and hay spoiled in the field, and
the barn, their sheep, cattle, and provisions devoured, houses ruined or burnt,
and their horses that should help to plough and do other works of Husbandry
taken away, in so much as some were enforced to blind and put out their horses
eyes, that they might not be taken from them; Churches that escaped defacing,
profaned, and made Stables, or Goals or Victualling, or Bawdy houses,
Monuments defaced, and Sepulchers opened, as were those of the Saxon Kings at
Winchester, and the priests and Ministers not so much as suffered to weep
betwixt the Porch and the Altar, but their benesices and livelihood taken from
them by Wolves put in the Shepherds places; had their Books burned, and all
their means and maintenance plundered from them; and those that were neutralls,
and m^dled on neither side but lived as quietly as they could, either totally
undone, or cast in prison, not for that they did them no hurt, but because they
might do it, and if they were not imprisoned their Lands, money, or goods were
sure to be in the fault and taken away from them.

Ut bellum illaesa conscientia geratur, necesse Besoldus Ibid. 95.
est ut adsit intentio bena; there ought to be a good intention to make the
War conscionable; which in this appears to fail also. For the Charge against
the five members is now as true as it was then, they meant to ruin the King,
and they have done it, and to alter the Government, and subvert the Religion,
Laws, and Liberties, and they have done a great part of it, and as fast as they
can are pulling down the remainder.

Quaerere debemus victoriam rationibus honestis, Du. picart observat. decad 10.
colle 2. and Facius axiom bell 10.
ne salutem quidem turpibus; We ought to pursue victory and the just ends of
War by honest and lawful means, and not to do foul and dishonest things to
procure our safety; from the latter of which, the mad fears and jealousies
which the Parliament made use to usher in their pretenses, their fayning of
Victories and scandaling the King and his actions, not to insist upon their
buying the Kings servants and secrets, Battles, Towns, and Garrisons; and
making too many Judases of all that were about him, will hardly be able to free
them; or if they could, the making use of men and money intended for the
support of Ireland, and leaving them wallowing in their blood for seven years
together, whilst they were ruining their King that would have helped them,
violating of their oaths of allegiance and Supremacy, which many of their
Members had taken six or seven times over breaking their oaths, taken in their
protestation and National Covenant, and not so few at one hundred solemn
promises, and undertakings in their several Petitions, Remonstrances, and
Declarations; forcing the People to take the Protestation and Covenant, and
compel them as soon as they had taken it, to break them, and by cozening and
forcing them into Rebellions and perjuries, cheat them out of their Religion,
Loyalty, Laws and Liberties: will without very good advocates be sure enough to
condemn them: and if the great Turk carrying the Covenant which Ladislaus the
unfortunate King of Hungary was persuaded to break with him as an ensign of
public detestation in the battle wherein he sl^w him; invoked the God of the
Christians to help him to revenge so great a treachery; there will be more
reason now for all that are but Christians, or but pretend to any morality, ^o
carry in their banner, the Po^rtract of the Kings bleeding Head, as it was cut
from his shoulders, and make War in revenge of the Master piece, and totum
aggregatum, of all manner of wickedness and perfidiousness, who besides all
their own and the Peoples oaths taken to defend him, when those they called
Deliuquents (some few only which were specially named and excepted) for
obeying the known Laws of the Land as well as their oaths and consciences, were
never questioned for their lives; but suffered to compound for their Estates;
would not suffer the King, that was neither a Delinquent or excepted Person, to
enjoy either his Life or Estate, though to save his people and keep them from
killing one another, he yielded himself became a Prisoner upon the public
faith of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

Paxaequa non est recusanda Licet victoriae spes adsit (says Besoldus) A good
or fitting Peace is not to be refused though the victory were certain: And in
this also the Parliament will be as far to seek for a justification as in the
other: For instead of offering any thing which was likely to bring it, they
caused men and women in the first year of their War to be killed because they
did but petition them to accept of a peace; and in the third and fourth year of
their War plundered and robbed others that petitioned them but to hearken to
it, and put out of office, and made all as De^^linquents in the seventh year of
the War that did but petition them for a Treaty with the King, and refused
all the Kings many, very many Messages for peace, not only when he was at the
highest of his success in the War, but when he was at the lowest, and a
Prisoner to them, and conjured them as they would answer at the dreadful day
of Judgment to pity the bleeding conditions of his Kingdoms and People, and
send propositions of Peace unto him, quarters and half years, and more then a
whole year together after the battle of Naseby (insomuch as their fellow
Rebels the Scotch Commissioners did heavily complain of it) were at several
times trifled away and spent before any propositions could be made ready,
though those which they sent to Oxford, Uxbridge, New Castle and Hampton Court,
were but substantially and materially the same with their nineteen Propositions
which they made unto the King before the Earl of Essex was made their General,
and in all the Treaties, made Propositions for themselves and the Sovereignty
and great offices and places of the Kingdom, but would neither for Gods sake,
or their Kings sake, or their Oaths or Conscientes sak, or the Peoples sake, or
Peace sake, which the People petitioned and hungered and thirsted for, alter or
abate one Jota or tittle of them, but were so unwilling to have any peace at
all, as six or seven Messengers or Trumpeters could come from the King, before
they could be at leisure or so mannerly as to answer one of them, but this or
that Message from the King was received and read, and laid by till a week or
when they would after: and the Kings Commissioners in the Treaties must forget
their due titles of Earls, Lords or Knights, because the King had made them so
since the beginning of the War, or else must be neither Treaty nor Peace there.

At Uxbridge the time of the Treaty limited for 20. days; and at New Castle for
10. and though the King and his Commissioners at Uxbridge almost petioned for a
cessation in the interim of that which was at Oxford, it could not be granted,
nor have a few days added to it; and if the King could in honor and conscience
have granted all the other parts of the Propositions, must grant them an act,
not only to consiscate the Estates of his Friends and those that took up arms
to save his Life and Estate, but to take away their Lives also, and not only
that, but to condemn of high Treason, and attaint their blood, when they that
fought against them were only guilt^, a thing so unfitting and unusually stood
upon, as it was never asked in any treaty or pacification among the civilized
or mor barbarous heathen, and amounts to more then Adonibezeks causing the
thumbs and great toes of his captive Kings to be cut off, and making them to
gather the Crumbs from under his table, or Benhadads demand of Ahabs silver and
gold, his wives and Children, and whatsoever was pleasant in his eyes, which
the Elders and people of Israel persuaded Ahab not to consent unto, but was a
thing purposely contrived and stood upon to hinder a peace; was not to be asked
or granted by any that could but entitle themselves to the least part of reason
or humanity; a demand Bajazet would not leave his Iron-Cage to yield unto; a
thing nature it self would abhor, and the worst of Villains and Reprobates
rather loose their lives then yield to: would never be demanded by any nor
granted by any but his Equals.

And if their desiring of a War more then a peace, and to keep the King out of
his own had not been the only cause of such unnatural and barbarous
propositions it may well be wondered, why they that have made to themselves (for
we cannot believe they have found any law or warrant to ground it upon) a power
to take away the Kings life upon a color or pretense of an unread, as well as
unheard of piece of Justice; should need to strive so hard with the King, to
give them a power to do that they are now so bufie to do of themselves: and as
if they had been afraid all this would not be enough to keep the doors of
Janus, or the Devil open, for fear lest the King should trouble them with any
more offers or Messages of Peace: a vote must be made in February 1647. that it
should be treason in any man to bring or receive any more Messages from him
without consent of Parliament. But suppose (that which is not) that the
Parliament could have but found any thing but some what like a cause or
justification of a War against their Sovereign (for notwithstanding all their
hypocritical pretenses, so as it was at first intended, and so it has been
proved to be ever since) to whom their Masters the People (we mean as to the
house of Commons) had sent them to consult with, not to make a War against him:
they might have remembered that saying of Cicero, (if they had found nothing in
the Book of God, and their own Consciences to persuade them to it) That du^
sunt genera decertandi, unum per disceptationem, alterum Cic. 1. de offic.
per vim, and ad hoc confugiendum non est si uti superiori licebit: There are
other ways to come by pretended rights, than by a War, and we ought never to
make use of a War (which is the worst of all remedies) if we may obtain it by a
better. Hen. 2. King of England was made a Judge between the Kings of Castile
and Navarre, The Rebellious Barons of England in the Reign of King Hen. 3.
referred their Jov. lib. 1.
controversies to the decision of the King of France and his Parliament at
Paris: And the blood of this Kingdom which ran so plentifully in those unhappy
differences, was by that means only stopped. Charles the 4. Emperor was made
a Judge of the differences Polidor 13. 20.
betwixt the English and the French Kings: For as Albericus Gentilis says
well; Intelligendum and eos qui diffugiunt genus hoc decertandi Albericus
Gentilis Cap. 3.
per disceptationem, and ad alterum quod est per vim currunt, illico eos a
justitia, ab humanitate, a probis exemplis refugere, and ruere in arma volentes
qui subire judicium nullius velint: They that rush into a War without assaying
all other just means of deciding the controversy for which it is made, and
will judge only according to their own will and opinion, do turn their backs
to Justice, Humanity, and all good Examples. And in that also the Parliament
will be found faulty: For the French King and the Estates of the united
Provinces, did by more than one Request and Embassy severally and earnestly
mediate to make an accord betwixt the King and his Parliament, and desired to
have all things in difference left to their Arbitrament; but their Ambassadors
returned home again with a report how much they found the King inclined to it,
and how satisfactorily he had offered; and how much the Parliament was averse
to their interposition; and altogether refused it.

But we have tarried long enough among the Parliament party, from thence
therefore (for it is time to leave the company of so much wickedness) we shall
remove to the Kings party (and yet that may cause a Sequestration) and examine
for a fuller satisfaction of that which by the rule of contraries is clear
enough already, if he were not on the defensive and more justifiable part of
the business.

The King as he was Defensor and Protector subditorum suorum, and sworn to see
the Law executed, had not the Sword nor his Authority committed to him in vain:
And if he had had no manner of just cause of fear, either in his own Person or
Authority, or no cause given him in re laesae Majestatis, the imprisoning of
his Subjects, and plundering and taking away their estates from them, long
before he had either armed himself, or had wherewithal to do it, had been
cause as sufficient as to cause a Hue and Cry to be made after a F^lon, or
raise the posse Comitatus to bring him to Justice; and might by the same reason
do it in the case of more: and by the same reason he might do it by the help
of one, nothing can hinder but by the same reason he might do it by the help
of more.

When Nathan came to David with a parable, and told him of the rich man that
had taken the poor man's only sheep, he that understood well enough the duty of a
King, was exceeding wroth against the man, and said, As sure as the Lord lives
this man shall surely die. And can any man think that the King when he saw so
much Sedition and Treason among the people countenanced and cherished, tumults
grow up into outrages, outrages to parties and warlike assemblies, propositions
made to bring in Horse and Money to maintain an Army against Him, and many of
his Subjects daily, imprisoned, sequestered, undone or killed, can be blamed if
he had a great deal sooner gone about to defend both himself and his people?
For who (says St. Jerome) did ^ver rest quietly sleeping near a viper? Est lex
una and perpetua salutem omni ratione defendere Jerome. Ep. 47.
and haec ratio doctis, necessitas Barbarts, mos gen ibus, feris natura ipsa
praescripsit, and haec non scripta sed nata lex, says Tully (that great master
of morality) Reason, Necessity, Custom, and Nature it self, have made
self-preservation to be warrantable. Cicero pro Milone.


Nemo exponere se debet pericu^is sed obvi^m offensioni eisudum, ^non m^do quae
est in actu, sed quae est in potentia ad actum, and ^ustus metus justum facit
bellum, say the Civil Laws; and where there was not nuda cogitatio, or a bare
intention only to ruin the King, but so much over and over again acted, as
might well occasion more than a fear and apprehension in him of what has since
been brought to pass against him; no man certainly without much blindness or
partiality can think it to be a fault in him to seek to defend himself, when
the Parliament did not only long before he raised any forces to defend himself,
but at the same time when he was doing of it, make the people believe his
Person was in so much danger, as they must needs take up Arms to defend Him.

And how much more warrantable then must it be in the Kings case, when it was
not only an endeavor to defend himself, but all those that have been since
slain, and undone, and ruined, for want of power enough to do it?

Defense is by the Civil Lawyers said to be either necessary, profitable, or
honest: Nec distingui vult Baldus sive se, sua, suosve defendat, Baldus 3.
consid. 485 and confid. 3
sive prope, sive posita long; A man is said to defend himself when it is but
his own goods, estate, or people, whether near or further off; Necessaria
defensio ejus est, and factum ad necessariam defensionem contra quem veniat
armatus inimicus, and ejus contra quem inimicus se paravit; It must needs be a
necessary defense against whom an armed Enemy is either marching or preparing.

Vtilis defensio, quum nos movemus bellum verentes ne ipsi bello petamur; when
we make a war to prevent or be beforehand, when war or mischief is threatened
or likely to come upon us; for as Nicephorus the Historian says, He that will
live out of danger, must occurrere malis impendentibus, and atnevertere, nec
est cunctandum aut expectandum, etc. meet and take away growing evils, and turn
them another way, and not to d^lay, and be slack in it.

Honesta defensio quae citra metum ullum periculi nostri, nulla utilitate
quaesita, tantum in gratiam aliorum suscipitur: When for no fear of danger to
our selves, and for no consideration of profit to our selves, but merely in
favor or help of others the war is undertaken. Wherefore certainly when the
King may be justly said to tarry too long before Alberic. Genti. lib. 1. Dec.
25.
he made the second and third kinds of defenses, either to prevent the danger
and fury of a War against himself, or to help those that suffered and were
undone in seeking to defend himself, and was so overmuch in love with Peace, as
he utterly lost it, and could never again recover it; and was so much mistaken
in the love and religion of his Subjects and Parliament promises, and the
impossibilities of such horrid proceedings against him, as all his three
Kingdoms were in a flame of War, and strong Combinations made by two of them,
and the Pulpit every where flaming, Seditious exhortations against him, his
Navy, Magazines, Ports, Revenues, Mint, strongest Towns and places seized on,
Armies marching against him, and he only and a few friends and followers pend
up in a corner, had an enemy and a strong Town at his back ready every day to
surprise him, and several Armies marching and in action before and round about
him, before he granted out any Commission for War, or had or could make any
preparation for it; and had so many to help and defend besides himself, it
would be too much injury, and too great a violence to all manner of reason and
understanding, to deny him a Justification upon the first sort of defenses, if
the two latter will not reach it, for the first cannot by any interpretation
go without. For haec est necessit as (says Baldus) quae bellum justificat
quum in extremo loco ad bellum confugitur. Or if with Grotius Bald. 5. Cons.
pa. 439.
we look upon it another way, and make the Justice of War to consist, 1. in
defensione. 2. in recuperatione rerum. 3. in p^uitione. The King, before ever
he went to demand Hull, or before ever he desired a guard of the County of
York, had cause enough and enough to do it; and it would be hard if a great
deal less then that should not be able to deliver him from the censure or blame
of an offensive or unnecessary War. When that which was made by David upon the
children of Ammon, and that of the late glorious King of Sweden against the
Emperor of Germany; the former for misusing, the latter for encroaching upon
him, and not receiving his Ambassadors, found warrant and necessity enough to
do it. But what could the King do more in his endeavors and waiting for a
Peace, or less in his preparations or making of a War? when the least, or one
of the hundred provocations or causes we dare say plainly here set down in the
matter of fact, has hitherto among the wisest Princes and Commonwealths in the
World, been reputed a just and warrantable cause of War.

Homicide by the Laws of England shall be excused with a fe defendendo, when
the assaulted has but simply defended himself, or retired in his own defense
so far till by some water or wall he be hindered from going any further. Death
and destruction marching toward the King, Hull fortified and kept behind him,
and all manner of necessity compassing him in on every side, could then do no
less then rouse him up to make his own defense; and he must be as much without
his senses, as care of his own preservation, if he should not then think it to
be high time to make ready to defend himself, and necessity enough to excuse
him for any thing should be done in order to it.

The Parliament and He (as this case stood) could not be both at one and the
same time in the defensive part; For they had all the Money, Arms, Ammunition,
and strength of the Kingdom in their hands, and multitudes of deluded people to
assist them; and so hunted and pursued from place to place, as it was come to
be a saying and a byword among the apprentices and new levied men at London
they would go a King-catching: and were not likely therefore to be guilty of
so much patience as the King, who was so much in love with peace, and so
thirsted after it, as that, and his often sending Messages and Propositions for
it, would not suffer him to make use of any victories or advantages God had
given him. Twice did he suffer the Earl of Essex to attempt to force him from
Oxford, and Sir Thomas Fairfax once to beleager him, when he had Power enough
to have made London or the associate Counties the Seat of the War, and it would
be something strange that he, who when he had raised forces against his
Scottish Rebels, and found himself in the Head of so gallant an Army, as he had
much ado to keep them from fighting, and his enemies so ridiculously weak, as
he might have subdued them; but with looking upon them but a fortnight longer,
could not be persuaded to draw a Sword against them, would now begin an
offensive war without any power or strength at all against those that had
beforehand engrossed it: or what policy or wisdom could it be in him to
begin a War without Money, or Men, or Arms to go through with it? or to
refuse the assistance of his Catholic Subjects, and Foreign Friends and
Forces? or to spend so much time in Messages and offers of Peace, to give them
time and ability to disarm him, and arm themselves, if he had not utterly
abhorred a War, and as cordially affected peace? as he offered fair enough for
it: Or if we could but tell how to say that the King did begin the War? (when
what he did was but to preserve his Regality, and the Militia and Protection of
his people, which the Parliament in express terms, as well as by Petitioning
for it, acknowledged it to be his Own; being but that which every private man
that had but money or friends, would not neglect to do.)

Did he any more in seeking to preserve his Regality, then to defend and keep
himself from a breach of trust they fought to make him break? Or did he any
more then seek to defend himself against those did all they could to force him
to break it? or could there be a greater perjury, or breach of trust in the
Kingly office, than to put the Sword which God had given him, into the hands of
madmen, or fools, or such as would kill and slay and undo their
fellow subjects with it? or to deliver up the protection of his people into the
hands of a few of their ambitious fellow subjects, did as much break their own
trust to those they represented in asking of it, as the King would havedone if
he had granted it? or why shall it not be accounted an inculpata tutela in the
King to preserve and defend that by a War, the Laws of God and Man, his
Coronation Oath, Honor, and Conscience, and a duty to Himself and his
Posterity, as well as to his people, would not permit him to stand still, and
suffer to be taken away from him.

But if the King by any manner of construction could be blamed or censured for
denying to grant the Militia, which was the first pretense of beginning of the
War, by those that sought to take it from him (for till the besieging of Hull
the 16. of July 1642. after many other affronts and attempts of as high a
nature put upon him, the most malicious interpretation of the matter of Fact,
cannot find him so much as at all to have defended himself, as to have done any
one act of War (or so much as like it) who shall be in the fault for all that
was done after, when he offered to condescend to all that might be profitable
for his people in the matter of Religion, Laws, and Liberties? Or was it not a
just cause of War to defend himself and his people against those would
notwithstanding all he could do and offer, make a War against him, because he
would not contrary to his Oath, Magna Charta and so many other Laws he had
sworn to observe, betray, or deliver up his people into their hands to be
governed, or rather undone by a greater latitude of Arbitrary power then the
great Turk or Crim Tartar ever exercised upon their enslaved people, and put
the education and marriage of his own Children out of his power, was never
sought to be taken out of the hand of any Father who was not a fool or a
madman, nor yielded to by any who would have the credit to be accounted (...)
wise; or because he would not denude himself of the power of conferring
honors, or vilify or discredit his great and lesser Seals, and the Authority
of them, from which many men's Estates and Honors, and the whole current of the
Justice of the Kingdom had their original, and refused to perjure himself by
abolishing Episcopacy, which Magna Charta, and some dozens of other laws bound
him to preserve? Or if that be not enough to justify him in his own defense,
had he not cause enough to deny, and they little enough to ask Liberty of
Conscience, and practice to Anabaptists, Blasphemers of God, denie^s of the
Trinity, Scriptures, and Deity of Christ, when the Parliament themselves had
taken a Covenant to root them out, and made as many of the people as they could
force, to take it with them? or had he not cause enough to deny to set up the
Presbyterian Authority, would not even have taken away his own Authority, but
have done the like also with the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, and the
ruling part of that they now call the Parliament utterly abhor; or if all that
could not make the War be made to be defensive and lawful? had he not cause
enough to deny, and they none at all to ask that he should by Act of Parliament
consent to make all those to be Traitors that took his part, their Blood and
Posterities attainted, and their Estates forfeited? when as some of the
Parliaments own Members were heard to say when those Propositions were sent to
him; That if he yielded unto them, He was the unworthiest man living, and not
fit to be a King.

For certainly, if the Laws of God and man, and the understanding of all
mankind be not changed, there was never a juster, more defensive, unwilling,
and necessitated War, than that of the Kings part, since man came out of
Paradise. And if such a War should not be lawful (after so many provocations
and necessities for the defense of himself and his People, and so many
after-generations, this War of the Parliament, and the curse of it, is like to
ruin and leave in slavery) under what censure and opinion may that of Abraham
with Chederlaomer the King of Elam, Genesis 14.
and Tidal King of the Nations be, when he fought with them to rescue his
brother Lot, and his goods, and was blessed by Melchisedec the Priest of the
most high God, for doing of it. Or of the War which the Tribes of Israel made
against the Tribe of Benjamin, Judge. 20.
and the men of Gibeah, for committing lewdness and folly in Israel: that of
David to 1 Samuel 30.
rescue his Wives that were carried away captive by the Amalekites, or to fetch
home the 2 Samuel 6.
Ark of God from the Philistines; that which Ahab made with Benhadad the King
of Syria, 1 Reg. 20,
who was not half so tyrannical in his Propositions as the Parliament, were
approved of in Sacred Story; or that which was made by Judas Machabeus and his
Brethren, to rescue the decayed estate of the people of the Jews; or that which
was used to be made by the heathen pro aris and focis, were never yet so much
as suspected to be unlawful: How shall this of the Kings be condemned, that
had as much as Abraham, David, Ahab, against Benhadad, Judas Machabeus, and the
1 Macc. 3. v. 43.
tribes of Israel, or those heathens that made it pro aris and focis, put them
altogether to warrant it? Or by what reason or Law, is any man by the Laws of
England excused for killing a man in his own defense, when he is necessitated
or hindered by a Wall or a Water, that he can go no farther? or for killing
thieves that come to assault or rob him in his house or castle? If the King
shall be hunted from his house through all the parts and corners of his Kingdom
for his Life; and not only for his Life, but his Honor; and not only for his
Life and Honor, but his Conscience? and yet must never draw his Sword, or seek
to defend himself, or have any body else to do it for him? Or how have all the
Kings, Princes, and Magistrates of the world hitherto governed, and defended
themselves, and their people? or shall ever be able to give an account of the
people committed to their charge, if they may not be at liberty to make a legal
use of the sword, power, and reason God has given them? Or how can those
State-riddles (like those of Sphinx, only made to destroy men with all) that
they fought for the King and Parliament, as is alleged in many of their Orders
and Declarations? and that the War was a Rebellion raised against the King and
Parliament; as is expressed in the Ordinance of Parliament for association of
the Counties of Pembroke, Cardigan, and Carmarthen; be ever understood by any
rules 8 June, 1644.
of sense or reason; if he were on the offensive part of the War, and had begun
it against them? But if any shall be so in love with the sense of the House of
Commons, as to be out of their own senses, and think that though there be no
manner of evidence or proof to be had for love or money, that the Parliament
were constrained to defend themselves by a War: yet the Kings admitting of the
Preamble of the Parliaments Propositions presented to him at the Isle of Wight,
that the Parliament was necessitated to take up Arms in their just and lawful
defense; make^ him (who must needs be best acquainted with his own actions) to
be so clearly guilty of all the blood has been shed in these Wars, as it puts
to silence all that can be now alleged or said in his behalf.

They that made the Preamble, and placed it in limine and threshold of the
Treaty, on purpose to catch and ensnare him (for either he must have denied it
at the very beginning and entrance into the Treaty, and leave hi^ Kingdoms and
People to wallow in the blood and misery their Parliament Idols had brought
them to; and have all the blame laid upon him for hindering a Peace he had so
much longed and labored for; or put himself, and all his Loyal Subjects that
helped to defend him, under the burden of those Sins and Shames the Parliament
themselves had all the right to) can tell their undone and deluded Proselytes,
how much the King stuck at it, how unwilling he was to break off the Treaty,
and was unwilling to wrong his own Innocence; and that when the Parliament
Commissioners had not any thing either in Law, or Truth, or Reason, or
Argument, to persuade him to yield unto it, but laid it only as a case of
necessity before him (though there was no such preamble at the Treaties of
Oxford and Uxbridge, nor any such necessity at those times insisted upon) that
unless he would take the guilt upon himself, his too Houses of Parliament and
the people had engaged with them must necessarily be guilty of Treason and
could not have any security from the guilt and punishment. The King be ^^aning
himself and People that must be thus shut out from any hopes of peace,
entreated some expedient, or medium might be found out to reconcile the
difference: But Cains sins being greater then could be forgiven him, unless
Abel can be brought to say he killed Cain; they that could afterward find an
expedient for 21 of their great Council of State that refused to subscribe to
the lawfulness of murdering the King, after it was done, could find none at
all for the King to purchase a peace for the People (though many kinds of ways
and expedients, as allowing him to make the like preamble to his own
Proposition, or the like might have been easily contrived and thought upon. For
the truth was, the Independent party desired no Peace at all, and the
Presbyterians desired it only to get into their hands the Kings Power and
Authority, and lay the guilt of all the blood they had shed for it upon him;
and both of them were so well content to have him allow of the preamble, as the
latter, thought himself safe and out of controversy if the King took the blood
upon him; and the former, that it would prove no small advantage or color, to
take away his Life for confessing himself guilty of it, by allowing of the
preamble; in this unparalled demand, never before stood upon By Subjects to
their Prince, or Conquerours to their Captives. Nero himself was so far short
of it, as though he had cunning enough when he set Rome on fire, to lay the
fault upon the Christians, had not Villainy enough to torture and seek to draw
them to a confession, that they did it.

The King after Protestation that he could not without manifest injury to the
Truth, and a violation of his Honor and Conscience, take upon him a guilt,
could no way be charged upon him, or those that appeared in his defense, was
yet for peace sake, and his peoples sake, content to say; It will be a great
self-denial to take this supposition of a guilt upon my self, and a Christian
virtue to undergo any affliction that may be for the good of my People: and I
am confident those that have adventured so much for me, will be content to
share with me for so good a purpose in the suffering for it. I shall therefore
conditionally consent to the Preamble; so as there follow a conclusion upon the
whole matter in Treaty and Propositions betwixt us; otherwise it is but sub
modo, and conditional; as it is always to be understood in this Treaty, that
nothing agreed in part betwixt us, shall be binding, unless there be a
conclusion upon the whole. And here let the Truth be judge, if the King did not
abundantly endeavor to save his People, and if the Parliament had not need of
a Justification, when they used all manner of force and shifts, to have the
King take the fault upon him: they therefore that shall consider that the King
was a close prisoner, robbed and bereaved of all he had (but his Honor and
Conscience, and a great measure of knowledge and understanding, and the hearts
of his Loyal Subjects) was debarred of all friends and comforts, pent up and
used with all manner of hardship and extremities, and every day like to be
murdered, that conditions adimpleri debent priusquam sequatur effectus, are but
inserted or added, in casum incertum qui potest tendere ad esse, aut non esse;
and depend on subsequencies or following effects, which not happening or coming
to be performed according to the intent of the conditions, makes them to vanish
and expire, as if there no such matter at all had been acknowledged or
expressed in them: That Cook, his accuser, who when he comes to be hanged for
it, will never be able to prove that the People substituted, or gave him
warrant for to accuse him. And Bradshaw, who sat higher in the pageant of
Justice, and the rest of his fellow-murderers, took the Kings conditional
consenting to the Preamble, to be so little for their purpose, as they never so
much as mentioned it: must not only acquit him of any confession or guilt to
be inferred from his conditional yielding to that Ambuscado Preamble, but
dissolve into wonder and admiration, that he who in his Royal Meditations, and
Conference with death, upon the Parliaments Votes of non address, and his
closer imprisonment at Carisbrook-Castle, had clearness of Conscience enough to
say (for as for his judgment we hope it cannot be suspected, when Mr. Carill
the Independent, and Mr. Vines a Presbyterian Minister, could say he was a
second Solomon; and the Parliaments Commissioners at the Isle of Wight report
him to be the master of the greatest wisdom and understanding) That he had the
feast of a good Conscience, and the brazen wall of a judicious (...), Cap. 28.
integrity and Conscience! doubted not but his Innocence would find God to be
his protector! rejoiced in the comfort of imitating Christ's example in
suffering for Righteousness sake! and thanked God he could pray for them, that
God would not impute his Blood to them, further than to convince them what need
they had of Christ's Blood, to wash their Souls from the guilt of shedding His!
And was afterward in the face and view of Death and his Murderers, heard to
say upon the Scaffold, He never did begin a War with the two Houses of
Parliament, and called God to his witness (to whom he was shortly to make an
account) he never intended to incroach upon their privileges, but they began
upon him; It was the Militia they began upon, though they confessed it was his,
and that any that would look into the date of their Commissions and his, might
clearly see that they began these unhappy troubles; and hoped God would clear
him of it! Could be so much more than a man, and so great a protector of his
People, as not only to be content to be robbed and dispoiled of all that he
had for their sakes, but to save the Lives and Estates of his People, when
there was no other way to do it, deliver up himself (so as a Peace and
Agreement might have followed upon the Treaty) to the unjust Censure of Robbing
and Spoiling those that had robbed and undone him.

But now that we have hunted this Parliament Proteus through all his disguises
of Parliament privileges and pretenses, and are lamentably assured a great and
accursed thing is committed in our Israel, and the anger of the Lord is kindled
against us; it may be labor well bestowed (though here is sure enough already
said and proved, that the King was in the defensive and justifiable part of the
War) to send into Achan's tent, and search and see what is there to be found
concerning this matter; and here we find the Lord Say, the Lord Brooks, and
their accomplices, had not long before the King had summoned them to that which
is now called the Parliament, settled and conveyed their estates, to prevent
any dangers might happen upon their intended enterprises; Peard the pragmatique
Parliament Man was heard to say a little before this holy War began to break
out, That the Government of the Kingdom would within a year or two be altered.

A little before the second Scottish Invasion, History of the Marque Montrosse
his actions in Scotland.
Hinderson the Scotch firebrand confesses the Covenanters of both Kingdoms were
unanimously agreed to bring the King to their lure before they laid down Arms:
the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms in January, 1643. professes they will
never lay down Arms till the pretended reformation be accomplished; many
Declarations and Remonstrances of the Parliament (if they may be so called) and
the Army, mention the original power and Sovereignty to be in the people, the
common Rights and Freedom of the Nation, and the opportunities God has put
into their hands. An Ordinance of Parliament 20 October 1645. concerning Rules
and Directions for Triers and Judges of the ability of Elders, declare it was
the wonderful providence of God in calling them (which he never did by force
of Arms, Hypocrisy, Treason, Rebellion, and usurping of Regal Authority) to
the great and difficult work of reformation and purging the Church. The Lord
Fairfax and his General Council of Officers in their Remonstrance of the 16
November, 1648. made to the Parliament, call the putting down of Monarchy, and
the establishing of their unjust ends, the public interest originally
contended for on the Parliaments part; and the Declaration and Votes of those
that call themselves the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, 1 January
1648. affirm the bringing of Delinquents to punishment (which if they had been
Delinquents, is certainly a part of the Kingly Office) the main, if not the
only end of making this War. And in another place thereof acknowledges the
rooting out of Episcopacy, and bringing Delinquents to punishment to be the
only motives that induced them to undertake this War.

And though Achan will neither confess nor be brought to punishment, till the
wrath and never-failing judgment of God shall bring them and their sons and
their daughters, and their successes, and the Asses that follow them to be
consumed in the field of Achor: and the Fig Leaves which they have patched
together to palliate and hide their nakedness, cannot keep out the eyes and
understanding of a ruined Nation bleeding under the burden of their iniquity;
but whether ever confessed or never, will be as plain as the most infallible
demonstration; they were never necessitated to make a War, but were so far from
the Justification of a defensive War, as that they were altogether in the
offensive. For beside all that has been said to prove them guilty of the blood
and misery of this Nation, who can think, or be believed (if he should be so
mad as to say it) That they were forced to make a War for that was none of
their own, or to take away tenures in Capite, which was a principal Flower of
his Crown; or for a Reformation of Religion, was already the envy and ambition
of the best of the Reformed Churches, or to commit Sacrilege and abolish
Episcopacy, which at the least was of Apostolical institution; or to preserve
the Statute of 25 E. 3. concerning what was Treason; when they themselves
committed most of the Treasons were mentioned in it, and more than their
forefathers and the makers of that Statute ever thought on. But that we may do
all the right we can to them have done so much wrong, and the better carry on
our judgments to a certain conclusion of that which God and all good and just
men know to be true enough, it will not, we hope, be impertinent in this our
search and disquisition of the truth to proceed to the enquiry.

CHAP. V. Whether the Parliament, in their pretended Magistracy, have not taken
lesler occasion to punish or provide against Insurrections, Treasons, and
Rebellions, as they are pleased to call them.
ALl in the neighborhood of their Proceedings, that know but any thing of them
can tell it: The Parliament have not been wanting to their own preservations
and purposes in the exercise of the greatest jealousy, vigilance, terror, and
authority, over those they could get within their jurisdiction: Witness Edward
Archer, who was whipped and punished almost to death for speaking but his ill
wishes to the Earl of Essex, when he was marching out of London with their Army
against the King: the imprisonment of their own Members, for speaking against
the Sense and Cabal of the House of Commons; men and women, old and young, shut
up under Decks, ready to be stifled a shipboard, upon suspicion that they
affected the King; hanging of the two Bristol Merchants, Master Bourchier and
Master Yeomans, for an endeavor to deliver to deliver up Bristol, putting
Colonel Essex out of the Government of that Town, upon suspicion of favoring
the enterprise; hanging of Master Tomkins and Master Chaloner, for a purpose to
force the delivery up of some factious men to Justice; banishing Master Waller,
an eminent Member of the house of Commons, for the contrivance of it; searching
the houses of foreign Ambassadors, and intercepting and opening their Letters;
beheading Sir Alexander Carry for an intention to deliver up Plymouth, and Sir
John Hotham (who adventured first of all to set up their authority, and was
magnified, and almost adored for it) for an intention only to deliver up Hull
to the King; executing of his son, for joining with his father in it; hanging
Master Kniveton, one of the Kings Messengers, but for bringing his Majesty's
Proclamation to London for the adjourning of the Term (being a greater
mis-usage then David's Messengers received from King Ammon) imprisoning,
starving, and undoing of any that durst but own the King, or send, or bring any
Message from him or his party, or that did but give any aid or assistance to
him, to which their Oaths and Consciences, and the juggling Covenant (they
themselves took, and forced upon them) did oblige them; shooting and
cannonading of the Queen when she came but to aid her husband, and chasing and
shooting after her at Sea a year after, when she was going back into France
from him; sequestring wives and mothers that did but relieve their husbands and
childrens wants when they returned out of the Kings service, putting thousands
of the Orthodox Ministers out of their Benefices and livelihoods for using the
Common Prayer Book, preaching true Doctrine and obedience to the King, or
praying for him at the same time when they pretended liberty of Conscience, and
prescription of Religion, voting the Prince a Traitor, for wishing well or
being in company with his Father (for he was too young to do any thing else for
him) and making, or rather supposing charges of High Treason against those that
either fought for the King, or counseled him how to defend himself; for but
obeying the known Laws, they themselves made the world believe they made some
part of the War for, ordering all to die without mercy that did but harbor the
King when he fled in a disguise before their Armies, condemning men by a Court
Martial after the War was ended, and shooting them to death but for words or
intentions. And if this and many things more might be said of it, be not
enough, what means so many Sequestrations, and the bleating and lowing of men's
Sheep and Oxen taken away from them since the War was ended, but for words
spoken either for the King or against them; husbands and fathers undone for
what their wives or children did without their privity; the Mayor of London and
diverse Aldermen imprisoned but upon a suspicion of joining with the Scots, or
something in pursuance of the Covenant they forced them to take, or else would
have undone them for refusing of it, Garrisons and Armies with free-quartering
and Taxes kept up after the War was ended, and the people like sheep devoured
to maintain them; so much complaining in our streets, and taking away the fifth
part of many men in whole Counties, as Essex, Kent, etc. for joining with some
of the Kings Forces, or for being forced to send provisions to them (when they
took up Arms, some in pursuance of the Covenant, and others of them to deliver
the King out of prison) and causing the Soldiers not only to cut and kill
diverse of the County of Surrey in the very act of Petitioning the Parliament
for a Treaty of Peace with the King, and sequester many of them for putting
their hands to it, with disabling the Citizens of London for bearing any office
in the City or Common wealth, for but putting their hands to the petition for
the Treaty, though Cromwell himself had not long before set on some to petition
for it; and the ruin and undoing of 2 parts of 3 in the Kingdom, very many of
whom did nothing actually in the Wars, but were only sacrificed to their
pretended reasons and jealousies of State, do sufficiently proclaim, and remain
the woeful Registers to after-generations of this lamentable assertion. If the
King could have gotten but so much leave of his mercy, and a tenderheartednesse
to his people, as to have used but the fivehundredth part of the Parliaments
jealousies, and sharp and merciless authority in the managing of this War, so
much of his Kingdoms and people had not been undone and ruined, nor the
Parliament put to so much labor to coin faults and scandals against him, nor
to wrest the Laws to nonsense, and the Scriptures to Blasphemy, to justify
their most horrid act of murdering him, but for seeking to preserve the Laws
and Liberties of his people, who are now clearly cheated out of them. And here
our misery tells us we must leave them, and in the next place shall remember
(for indeed it is so plain it needs no enquiry.)

CHAP. VI. Who most desired Peace, and offered fairliest for it.
TH'bundant satisfaction the King had offered them from his first summoning of
the late Parliament, to their dissolving of themselves, by dissolving him who
gave them all their Life and Being: That which he did, and all which he would
have done; so many Declarations, Answers and Messages penned by himself,
intending as much as his words could signify, and were believed and understood
by all at that time, that were not interessed or engaged against him, and by
many of the eagrest of them also, that had no hand, or looked to have any
profit in the murdering of him (for a Trial of a King without either warrant
or color of Scripture, or the Laws of the Kingdom, or the consent of the
major part of the people (if that could have authorized it, cannot, nay will
not by all the world and after-ages be otherwise interpreted; unless we shall
say Ravillac might have justified his killing Henry the Fourth of France, if he
had but had the wit to have framed or fancied a Supreme Court of Justice, and
have Sentenced him before he had done it) will be as pillars and lasting
Monuments of this Truth, The King was the only desirer of Peace, and labored
and tugged harder for it than ever Prince or King, Heathen or Christian, fince
Almighty God did his first days work, did ever do with Superiors, Equals or
Subjects; and it will be no wrong certainly to David (whose sufferings are so
much remembered in all Christian Churches) complaining so bitterly that he
sought peace with those that refused it, and in the mean time prepared for War
against him. To say the King did suffer more, and offer more, and oftener for
peace than ever he did (for any thing is extant or appearing to us) for surely,
so many Messages of Peace as one and twenty in two years space, from the 5. of
December 1645. to the 25. of December. 1647. sent to the Parliament after so many
affronts and discouragements, must needs excuse him that offered all could be
imagined to be for the good and safety of his people, and condemn those, that
not only from time to time refused it, but adhered so much to their first
intentions, as all the blood and ruin of the people could not persuade them to
depart with the least punctillio of it; though the King before the Isle of
Wight-Treaty, offered so much for the Olive Branch, as to part with the Militia
for term of his life, and in a manner to un-king himself, and was afterward
content to do all that his Coronation Oath, Honor and Conscience, could
possibly permit him to do; and to purchase a peace for his people, was content
to have born the shame and reproach of what his enemies were only guilty of*
insomuch as the Lord Say himself, and most of his ever-craving, never safe
enough Disciples, confessed the King had offered so much, as nothing more could
be demanded of him. They therefore that can but tell how to divide or put a
difference betwixt white and black, night and day, and the plainest contraries,
must needs also acknowledge the King offered all, and the Parliament refused
all: The King was willing to part almost with every thing, and the Parliament
would never part with any thing: The King was willing for the good of his
people to give away almost every thing of his own, but the Parliament would
never yield to part with any thing was not their own. And thus may the account
be quickly cast up between the King and Parliament, who would have saved the
people from misery, and who was most unwilling to make an end of it. But that
we may not too hastily give the sentence to try the business, a^ they use to
do at the Council of War, or the new invented way of Justice, sitting with
their Will, or the Sword only in one hand, and no Balance at all in the
other. We shall in the next place examine.

CHAP. VII. Who labored to shorten the War, and who to lengthen it.
THe odds was so great betwixt what the Parliament labored to get, and the
King to keep, as that which sways the balance in most men's actions, will be
argument enough to conclude they were more likely to lose by a peace than a
war; therefore the more willing to continue it: and if their own Interests
would not put them so far upon it, their vainglory and ambition would be
forward enough to persuade them to it; and if not that, the success of their
arms, or miscalled providence, would make them look (as experience tells us
they did) upon any tenders of peace, as Alexander the Great did upon Darius his
offer o^ half his Kingdom: and if not that, their fears and jealousies now
grown greater by wronging of the King, than ever they were when they suspected
him, could never think it safe to let an enraged Lion into his Den they had
so long kept out of it. But the King could not fight for his own, but he must
adventure the undoing of his own; and could not but know, that so much as was
lost of his Subjects, would be so much lost of a King; and therefore does all
he can to preserve a People, had no mind to preserve themselves; and before He
had gathered up the Bays He won at Edgehill, sends a Proclamation of pardon
to those, that the day before did all they could to kill him; and in all his
actions of War afterward behaved himself rather like a weeping Father defending
himself against the strokes and violence of disobedient children. Had the
Parliament accepted of his offers before he came to Beverley, or besieged Hull,
he had never set up his Standard at Notsingham; or had they loved his People
but half so much as he did, their Armies had never seen his Banners disp^aid a^
Edgehill. Had they hearkened to his many endeavors for Peace after that
Battle, and not sought to surround or ruin him when he came so near as to
their very doors to entreat for it, they had never been troubled to frame an
Accusation against him for defending himself at Brainford, Had his Treaty at
Oxford been proceeded in with the same desires of Peace he brought to it the
blood that was shed at ^^versham-bridge had been kept for better purposes; had
he sought his own advantages, he had not besieged Gloucester; or had he not been
so unwilling to put the People in it to the hazard of a storm, might have taken
it; had they not sent their General to assault him at Gloucester, whilst he was
as David besieging the strong Hold of the Jebusites, that withheld it from his
obedience, and sought to ruin and undo Him as well as his Loyal Subjects, he
had not fought with them afterward at Newbery; had not his Olive-branches been
flung in the fire by those He sent them unto, he had not been put to defend
himself at Cropredy-bridge. Had any thing been able to prevail with the
Parliament to pity their Fellow Subjects, he had not taken such a tedious and
dangerous march to relieve those they would have ruined at Bodmin in Cornwall.
Had the Treaty at Vxbridge taken effect, he needed not afterward have
adventured so much to defend himself at Newbery. Had not the newmodell'd Army
after so many tenders of Peace, refused by their masters, been sent out to
destroy him, he had not been put to the trouble of taking Leicester for his
security. And had not he been surrounded and almost surprised by them, might
have reserved himself to a better success and advantage than he had at Naseby.
Had his voluntary resigning up of the remainder of his Armies and Garrisons been
able to persuade any thing with them, there had not been so much as a relic
of War left in the Kingdom; or could so many Messages for Peace, and so many
Petitions of the People for it, have made but any impression on the Parliament,
so many divisions, parties, and insurrections, had not since broken the Harps
of the Children of Israel, nor should the drums have out gone the voice of
the Turtle. He that could not bring himself to the common actions of War to
hang a Spy, insomuch as when one of them was hanged before he was told he was
taken, he was entreating the Governor of Oxford to spare him. He that when he
had John Lilburne, one of the most factious that were against him, Wingate and
Darley Parliament Men, Colonel Ludlow an actor of that Treason his Father had
not long before spoken against him, and Dr. Bastwiek one of the bellows and
principal factors of this horrid Rebellion, did no more than imprison some of
them, and giving the rest a legal Trial, showed them what the law they made
filly People believe they took up arms to maintain, would judge of them; and
suffered them to be exchanged to do what they could afterward against him: He
that when he had taken 400 prentice-boys in the fight at Brainford, did but
dismiss and pity them; and when he had compelled the Earl of Essex the
Parliament-General at Lestithiel in Cornwall to fly away by Sea in a
Cock-boat, and leave all the Artillery and Foot of his Army to his mercy, did
no more but disarm them, and take an oath of them never more to serve against
him; and being then in the height of his prosperity, sent a Message and Offer
of Peace to the Parliament, who were low enough at that time (if their designs
would have given them leave) to have received it: He that could say he should
be more afraid to take away any man's life unjustly than to lose his own! was
not likely to be guilty of blood-seeking, or the shedding of it: He that had
experience enough how much his Life and Crown were sought for, yet to show them
the way to peace, and to take off all pretenses to hinder it, could sheath his
own Sword, and put himself into the hands of those he had so little reason to
trust, as he knew them to be the great contrivers of the War against him;
caused the Marquess of Montrosse, one of his mighty men of War, to disband,
when he was master of a strong and (not long before) fortunate Army in
Scotland; commanded Newark, Oxford, Wallingford and Worcester, very strong and
almost impregnable Towns and Garrisons in England to be delivered up, and all
acts of hostility by Sea and Land, and all the preparations his friends could
make either in foraign parts or at home to cease: He that could endure five
years Ballading, Libelling, and Preaching against him, and such heaps of
numberless affronts and injuries of all kinds done unto him, and two years
imprisonment afterward; yet so long as he enjoyed but the liberty of Pen and
Ink, or a Messenger to carry it, did so tire them with Messages and Offers of
Peace, as they voted it to be Treason for any to bring any Message from him,
and notwithstanding all that, made shift to throw a Message or Declaration to
his People, made up like a ball, out of the place of his close Imprisonment at
Carisbrook, was not like to desire the lengthening that war he did all he could
to avoid, and offered so much to make an end of; but on the contrary, if we
take into our consideration the more than Gothish unheard of inhumane
crucities, acted and done by the Parliament against their better
Fellow Subjects, their Plunderings, Sequestrations, and racking of every man's
estate they pleased to call Delinquents; severities in all their actions,
standing upon every punctilio or word, or superscription of a Letter, and not
abating a tittle of their demands, as if they had been the Decalogue, or some
other place of Scripture (though rivolets of blood, hundred thousands of ruined
families, and thronged Hospitals of sick and wounded men, Widows and Fatherless
cried aloud to them for Peace) and their killing and murdering those that but
petitioned for it; and a foundation laid of a new war may last as long as that
of the Netherlands and Germany. There will be enough and enough again to insure
us of this most clear and evident truth, the King did all he could, and more
than any man else would have done to obtain Peace, and the Faction of
Parliament all they could to avoid it; for certainly if there be any rules of
Learning, Truth or Reason, left us to judge by, he must be sequestered of all
his brains that can but endeavor to make a doubt whether the King did not more
resemble the true mother of the Child in the case before Solomon, who did so
much, and offered to part with so much to save the life of it, than the
Parliament, that would have it more than divided, and to be cut and torn all to
bits and pieces, and would do nothing at all to save, but every thing to
destroy it. And now we have seen a King undone and imprisoned for his
endeavors to protect his People, and bring again beloved Peace to those that
would not entertain it: and heard the report of his murder (for most of the
Peoples eyes have not seen it, nor have their hearts acted in it) we shall, as
most men do (after they have lost a good offer or opportunity) enquire.

CHAP. VIII. Whether the Conditions offered by the King would not have been
more profitable, if they had been accepted; and what the people have got
instead of them.
IN order to which, though so woeful and over-and-over-bitterly -Tasted, Seen,
Felt, Heard and Understood, Experiences of the miseries have come unto us by
the Parliaments not accepting the gracious offers and conditions the King made
unto them, may make it to be as needless to enquire of them, as for a man to
ask where to find Paul's Steeple in London when he is in Paul's Churchyard, or
to enquire for the Sun in the dog days, when he and every man else may see or
feel the effects of it; we shall be content to consider what the King offered,
and what the Parliament would have had him to grant. What the King would have
done, and what the Parliament have done; and by that see which would have been
the better bargain.

The King like a pater patriae offered over and over to grant all manner of
Laws and Liberties, which might be good and wholesome for his People, and only
denied to grant those things the granting whereof (as he said himself) would
alter the fundamental Laws; and endanger the very foundation upon which the
public happiness and welfare of his People was founded and constituted; or to
give them stones in stead of bread, or Scorpions in stead of fishes. But the
Parliament meaning to feed the People neither with bread nor fishes, ask the
Royal Sword, Crown, and Scepter, Coronation Oath, and Conscience, and an
Arbitrary Power to govern and domineer over their fellow Subjects, and to
enslave those that trusted them: And though the King had already granted enough
to preserve the Laws, Lives, Religion, and Liberty of the People, and was so
willing, almost at any rate, to purchase a peace for himself and his people; as
he was content to part with his Sword and Militia, and diverse other parts of
his Regality during his life: Yet that would not serve the turn, 'twas Naboths
Vineyard, not Ahabs Fast, made all the business: the Parliament, that
pretended so much to deny themselves, and to dote upon the people, do
notwithstanding all they can to continue the War, and to cozen and force the
peoples blood, estate, and conscience out of them; and they must never give
over paying of Taxes, fighting and fooling, till they enable them to imprison
their King, and not only murder him, but thousands, and many ten thousands of
their fellow subjects, and the Laws, Religion, and Liberties of the people.

And now that they have done more than the men of the Gun-powder-treason
intended to do; and all England are become like sheep without a Shepherd;
wandering on the mountains, and thousands of Wolves by Votes and Ordinances, and
miscalled Acts of Parliament appointed to feed them; four or five years sad
experience in the Wars of the Parliament against the King, and almost as much
more time spent in settling and subduing the people, making them like Camels, to
kneel down to take up their burdens, labor, and travel hard, and endure hunger
and thirst under them; yet yield up their veins to be pricked for blood to
enable their drivers to furnish them with a new supply of burdens, when they
shall be discharged of what they have laid upon them, may easily show us a
difference as big as a mountain betwixt our old good Laws and Liberties
enjoyed under a gracious King, who had an estate of inheritance large enough of
his own, besides an oath to oblige him to protect us; and a Hell upon Earth,
and the most Slavish of all the Governments were ever yet put upon a Nation, by
men of as little wit and estates as they have honesty; having no other
obligations upon them but their own abominable designs and interests. For which
of the people, unless those that have traded in their neighbors blood and
ruin, but has made their complaints of their undoing?

The Religion of the Kingdom, once so glorious, is now cut into fancies and
blasphemies; the Churches where God was wont to be worshipped, either defaced,
or pulled down, or made stables for horses; the Laws of the Kingdom, that were
consonant to the Word of God, and had in them the Quintessence of all could be
found to be extant in the Laws of Nature, Nations, Civil Laws, or rectified
Reason, and whatsoever the wisdom and care of all former Kings in Parliament,
or the usage and customs of this or any other neighboring Nations could bring
to its perfection, and were wont to nourish and preserve peace and property,
among us voted out, or into that sense, or to^^er interest, to that every thing
or nothing, or to that nonsense according as the Lawless, Unlimited, Unjust
and Ignorant will of fellow subjects shall please to misuse them in the Voting
house, or place of bandying aies or noes. (For a Parliament, which in its legal
and primitive Institution, consisting of King, Lords and Commons, and the right
use of it, is so venerable, as no man (as our Laws say) ought so much as to
speak or think dishonourably of it, we cannot without violence to the Laws,
and our reason and understanding call it) where pu^lique orders are made
without hearing of all, or any parties interessed, a piece of a cause heard by
some, and none at a^l of it by others; votes and parties made and packed and
lent to one another beforehand, and the best of the Faction, and Juglers,
carry all the business as they have a mind to it. A way of Justice worse than
that (^f there were any in it) of a lawless Court said to be kept yearly on a
Hill betwixt Raleigh and Rochford in Eeslx, the wednesday afterevery Michaelmas
day, where the Steward, or Judge sits in the night after the first
Cock-crowing, without any light or candle, and calls Weavers Funcral Monu.
ments, page 605.
all that are bou^^^ to attend the Court, with as low a voice as possibly he
may, write orders with a coal, and they that answer not are deeply amerced: For
that being a particular punishment long ago inflicted upon the Tenants of
certain Manner in Raleigh hundred, for a conspiracy against the King, is but
once a year, some shift, or chance, or mercy of the Steward, or an appeal, may
take a way the inconvenience of it. A way of government worse then to be
subject to the rule of so many fools, for they might perchance do that would
be just; or so many Knaves, who but in playing the Knaves one with another, or
for reward, might sometimes do that which was right, or Madmen, which at
intervals might do something which was reasonable, worse then for every subject
of England to be put to play at dice for his life, or estate, or any thing else
he should crave a Justice to get or keep; for then he might by skill or chance
obtain something: In fine, worse then any example or way of Government the
world has as yet produced, and can have nothing worse but Hell it self.

The Parliament and privileges of it are destroyed, and every man's life and
estate in no better a condition then at the pleasure of the next pretenders to
it. All the Charters and Liberties of Cities and Corporate Towns, Corporations
of Trade, and Companies of Merchants made void; all the Merchandise, Trade, and
Manufacture of the Kingdom laid open, and in common to every one that will
intrude upon it; all that is in the Law concerning our Lives, Estates,
Liberties, and Religion, made void and dependant upon the Arbitrary Independent
power; all that is in the Law concerning Navigation, the Kings Protection of
his people; certainty of Customs, Trade and Intercourse, Leagues and
Correspondencies with Foreign Princes expired or annihilated, and all that our
Forefathers have obtained by way of Laws and Settlement, and certainty of
Estate, are now at dispose of our vote-mongers; who in stead of a most pious
and gracious King governing by known Laws, have set us up 43. or 50. Kings,
and ten times as many more Knaves and Fools, who will govern by no Law but such
as they shall call Laws and make themselves; can be accusers, witnesses and
Judges, at one and the same time, and if need be, condemn and take away men's
Estates first, and try them after two or three years Petitioning for it: a
bondage and slavery in the general more then ever any of our Ancestors tasted
of. For the Romans, whose Justice and Morality at home, and Virtue and
Temperance abroad, made them free enough from Tyranny, did but make them as
Tributaries: The Picts made but temporary incursions, and a wall could be made
against them: The Saxons and Danes brought us good Laws; and William the
Conqueror was content to restore them. And all that succeeded him since,
understood a government by Laws to be their own as well as the peoples
security: but this which they have now brought upon us, and would keep us
under, is a misery beyond that was suffered under the 30. Tyrants of Athens,
Spartan, Ephori, or Romes Decemvirat, for there were something of Laws and
Rules to govern by: The Children of Israel in the Egyptian slavery, had a
property in their goods and cattle, and were at liberty to serve a better God
then that of their Masters; and though they had their burdens doubled upon
them, were not killed, imprisoned, or sequestered, for petitioning against the
sense of Pharaoh. The Jews in Captivity had so much liberty of Conscience
allowed to them, as to play upon their Harps, and sing the Songs of Sion in a
strange Land. The frozen Russians, though so dull and ignorant, as when they
are asked any matter of State, or difficulty, make answer, God and the great
Duke knows, breath not under so Arbitrary and lawless a government. The
Grecians had not their Laws, Religion, and Liberties, as we have, all at once
taken from them; nor can the sufferings of them or any other vassals of the
Ottoman Port, or those that live under the Crim Tartar, equal the one half of
our English slavery.

Into which we had never fallen or come at all, or so long groaned under, had
we but served God and the King, as we ought to have done, and not wr^sted the
sense as well as the plain words of the Scripture, and the Laws of the Land,
to enable the sons of Zerviah to be too hard for us, and bring all manner of
mischief, confusion and wickedness upon us, more then Romes and
Constantinoples Antichrist ever brought upon a people, and from which the King
had delivered us, if we had not Cursed, Reviled, Prayed, Contributed, and
Fought against him for endeavoring to Protect us. How gracious then was he who
endured the heat of the day, and cold of the night, to preserve a great deal
more for us then Nabals sheep could amount unto; yet being worse used then ever
David was for it, could not tell how so much as to threaten to do that which
David had so great a mind to do, but fought as long as he could to Protect
them, would not so much as defend themselves, but did all they could to ruin
those that defended him. And how much was he beyond Codrus the Athenian King,
the Roman Curtius, or Decii (if all that the Ancients wrote of them were true)
who sacrificed themselves, but not their Estates and Posterity to preserve the
Public; and how good beyond example, or the credit of any History, who made
himself a Martyr for his peoples lives and liberties, and endured so many
deaths, and suffered more indignities then all the Kings of England put
together, have ever endured to preserve a people, have (for a great part of
them) either by Rebellion, or an accursed Newtrality, helped to ruin him: and
when he knew whatsoever Conditions or Propositions he should be forced to yield
unto, would by the Law of God, as well as the Civil and Common Law, the Laws
of Nature and Nations, and the dictates of every common man's reason and
apprehension, have been void in the very making of them, and could not have
reached to his Posterity, and that if he would but have surrendered up his
people, and gone along with their new Masters in their Arbitrary and Tyrannical
government, as some of his last words upon the Scaffold plainly intimate, and
sided with 20. or 30. of the Faction, and delivered up the sheep to the Wolves,
he might, no doubt, have had a good part of the Fleece to his own share; or but
wirh Sampson have pleased himself with revenge, and delivered up a people to
Slavery, were at so much expense of Treasure and Blood, and their own Souls,
to bring their Sovereign to it; might have worn the Title of a King, and played
the wanton with Sardanapalus in the company and delight of women, pleased his
palate with Vitellius, his pride, if he had any, with Bassianus, his cruelty, if
he could ever have been guilty of it, with Commodus, and with Childerick the
lazy King of France, in a Chariot decked with garlands, whilst others governed
for him, been at certain times of the year only exhibited to the people, and
like the Minotaure of Creete, wallowed in the labyrinth of Parliament
Privileges, and devoured his people, did notwithstanding refuse to do any
thing might help himself, either to purchase his own quiet, or so great a
Liberty, and would neither for any good might come to himself, or any evil
might be cast upon him and his Posterity, be persuaded or threatened from the
protection of his people, who (if he had not taken more care for them then they
did for themselves) must, if he had yielded to all the Parliament-propositions
(for then they might have imagined mischief by a Law) have from time to time
been engaged in any War their Taskmasters had a mind to put them upon, must
have been excised, plundered, sequestered, ruined, and undone; sworn and
forsworn; constrained to swear to do a thing to day, and the next day swear
not all to do it: The son set to kill his Father, and brothers forced to fight
one against another, and have all their Holy Days turned to
Thanksgiving-dayes, that they are undone, or Fasting-dayes that they may be
undone soon enough. And if at any time that thing they call a Parliament should
think it fit to make a Directory to the Alchoran, and to order every man to
turn Turk, and the King as their Henry Scobel, or Town Clerk but subscribe it,
their Spiritual as well as their Temporal Estate, and their Souls as well as
their Bodies, must be voted and forced to it.

And now let the people that have tasted too much of such a kind of happiness,
and are like to continue in it, as long as their misery-makers can by any help
of the Devil or his Angels hold them to it; consider whether they or their
forefathers (though some have thought themselves to have wit enough to
adventure to call them fools) were the wiser; whether they that settled the
Government, and were contented with it, or they that pulled it in pieces, and
whether the tearing up of the fundamental Laws of Monarchy, Peerage,
Parliament, and Magna Charta, even since this day the King was murdered for
defending of them, which every one but themselves desired to uphold, be not
enough (besides the Scottish combination, and the plots to ruin Monarchy, and
the King and his Posterity, before the five Members and Kimbolton had so for
engaged themselves in it) to inform them, if nothing else had been demonstrated
unto them: That the King did all he could to preserve the Laws, Religion, and
Liberties of the people (which diverse pieces of his coin will help to
perpetuate the truth as well as the memory of) and the Parliament all they
could to destroy them: And that as he actually endeavored to defend them, so
have they as actually undone and destroyed them. And let the greatest search of
History can be made, or time it self be Judge, if ever any war was more made in
the defensive, or upon juster grounds, or greater necessities, or if ever any
King before fought for the Liberties of those he was to govern, and for Laws
to restrain himself withal: or if it were possible for him to suffer so much in
any man's opinion, as to have it thought to be unlawful, or that he was a
murderer of his people, for seeking to Protect them. How shall any King or
Magistrate be able to bear or use the Sword, when they themselves shall be in
continual danger to be beaten with it?

King Edward the second of England was not murdered for the blood that was
shed in the Barons Wars, though some of them had drawn their swords but in
performance of his fathers will, to take away his favorite Gavestion from him.
King Rich. 2. in those many devised Articles charged against him, was not
deposed for the blood was shed in Wat Tilers Commotion; nor Hen. 6. publicly
accused for that of Jack Cades Rebellion, and the most bloody differences of
the White and Red-Roses; nor Queen Elizabeth for all that was spilt in reducing
Ireland, when her favorite the Earl of Essex made it to be the more by his
practices with Tyrone; nor for the blood of Hacket, who pretended to be Christ;
nor of Penry, and other Sectaries (lesser Incendiaries than Burton, Prynne, and
Bastwick) for disturbing the Commonwealth; the great Henry of France was not
endeavored by his Catholic Subjects to be brought to trial for shedding so
much of their blood to reduce them to his obedience, nor by his Protestant
Subjects after he was turned Catholic, for spending so much of their blood to
another purpose than they intended it. Nor have the stout-hearted Germans
(though many of them great and almost free Princes) in their late Peace and
Accord made betwixt the Swedes and the Emperor, thought it any way reasonable
or necessary to demand reparation for those millions of men, women, and
children, houses and estates, were ruined and spoiled by a thirty years War to
reduce the Bohemians and Prince Elector Palatine to their obedience.

For what rules or bounds shall be put to every man's particular fancy or
corrupted interest, if they shall be at Liberty to question and call to account
the authority God has placed over them? Shall the son condemn or punish the
Father for his own disobedience? the Wife her Husband for her own act of
Adultery? or the Servant the Master, for his own unfaithfulness? or can there
be any thing in the Reason or understanding of man, to persuade him to think
the King was justly accused for the shedding of his blood which the accusers
themselves were only guilty of? And Bradshaw himself (like the Jews high
Priest, confessing a truth against his will) in the word he gave instead of
reason for murdering the King against the will and good liking of nine parts
in every ten of the Commons of England, could make his Masters that call
themselves the Parliament of England to be no better then the Tribum plebis of
Rome, and the Ephori of Sparta, the former of which for manifold mischiefs and
inconveniences were abrogated, and laid aside, and never more thought fit to be
used, and the latter (not being half so bad as our new state Gypsies) killed
and made away to restore the People again to their Liberties.

But the opinion and Judgment of the Learned Lord Chief Justice Popham (who
then little thought his grandchild Colonel Popham should join with those that
sat with their Hats on their Heads, and directed the murder of their
Sovereign: and if he were now living would sure enough have hanged him for it)
and those other learned Judges, in the case and Trial of the Earl of Essex, in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, That an intent to hurt the Sovereign Prince, as
well as the act of it was Treason: And that the Laws of England do interpret
every act of Rebellion or Treason to aim at the death or deposing of the
Prince. For that Rebels by their good will never suffer that King or Prince to
live or Reign, that understands their purposes, and may revenge them, agreeable
to that of the Civil Law: That they that go about to give Law to their Prince
will never suffer him to recover Authority to punish it; is now written in the
blood of the King, and those many iterated complaints of the King in several
of his Declarations published to the people (in the midst of the Parliaments
greatest pretenses and promises) that they intended to take away his life, and
ruin him, are now gone beyond suspicion: and every man may now know the
meaning of their Canoneers levelling at the King with perspective glasses, at
Copredy bridge, the acquitting of Pym the Innkeeper, who said, He would wash
his Hands in the Kings hearts-blood, stifling of fifteen or sixteen several
indictments for treasonable words; and Rolf rewarded for his purpose to kill
him, and the prosecutors checked, and some of them imprisoned for it. For the
Sun in the Firmament, and the four great quarters of the Earth, and the Shapes
and Lineaments of man are not so universally known, seen or spoken of, as this
will be most certain to the present, as well as after ages. The end has now
verified the beginning, and Quod primum fuit in intention ultimo loco agitur,
Seven years hypocritical Promises and practices, 7. years Pretenses, and seven
years preaching and prattling have now brought us all to this conclusion as well
as Confusion. The blood of old England is let out bygreater witchcraft and
cousenage then that of Medea, when she set Pelias daughters to let out his old
blood, that young might come in the place of it; the Cedars of Lebanon are
devouted, and the Trees have made the Bramble King, and are like to speed as
well with it as the Frogs did with the Storke that devoured them; And they have
not only slain the King who was their Father, but like Nero, rip't up the
belly of the Commonwealth, which was their Mother: The light of Israel is put
out; and the King, Laws, Religion, and Liberties of the people murdered, an
action so horrid, and a sin of so great a magnitude, and complication, as if we
shall ask the days that are past, and enquire from the one end of the Earth to
the other, there will not be found any wickedness like to this great
wickedness, or has been heard like it. The Severn, Thames, Trent, and Humbar,
four of the greatest Rivers of the Kingdom with all their lesser running
streams of the Island in their continual courses, and those huge heaps of
waterin the Ocean girdle of it in their Restless agitations will never be able
to scour and wash away the guilt and stain of it, though all the rain which
the clouds shall ever bring forth, and impart to this Nation, and the tears of
those that bewail the loss of a King of so eminent graces and perfections be
added to it.

Quis cladem illius diei? quis funera fando
Explicet? aut possit lachrymis aequare dolores?
Gens antiqua ruit, multos dominata per Annos.
AN EXACT LIST OF The Names of those pretended Judges who sat, and sentenced
our late SOVEREIGN KING CHARLES the First, in the place which they called the
High Court of Justice, Jan. 27. 1648.

And also of those thirty five Witnesses Sworn against the said KING; The
Sentence read against him; With the Catalogue of the Names of those that
Subscribed and Sealed the Warrant for his Execution.

And the manner of his Cruel MVRDER.

London, Printed by Henry Bell, and are to be sold by most Book-sellors, 1660.

The Names of the pretended Judges, who gave Sentence against the late King,
January 27. 1648.
LXXII in Number.
John Bradshaw Lord President. Oliver Cromwell. Henry Ireton. Sir Hardress
Waller. Valentine Walton. Thomas Harrison. Edward Whaley. Thomas Pride. Isaac
Ewer. Lord Gray of Grooby. William Lord Mounson. Sir John Danvers Sir Thomas
Maleverer. Sir John Bourcher. Isaac Pennington. Henry Martin. William Purifoye.
John Barkstead. M^^thew Tomlinson. John Blakeston. Gilbert Millington. Thomas
Chaloner. Sir William Constable. Edmund Ludlow. John Hutchison. Sir Michael
Livesey. Robert Tichburne. Owen Roe. Robert Lilburne. Adrian Scroop. Richard
Dean. John Okey. John Harrison. John Hewson. William Goffe. Cornelius Holland.
John Carew. John Jones. Thomas Lister. Peregrine Pelham. Thomas Wogan. Francis
Alleu. Daniel Blagrave. John Moor. William Say. Francis Lascels. John Chaloner.
Gregory Clement. Sir Gregory Norton. John Venn. Thomas Andrews. Anthony
Stapley. Thomas Horton. John Lisle. John Brown. John Dixwell. Miles Corbett.
Simon Meyne. John Alured. Henry Smith. Humphrey Edwards. John Frye. Edmund
Harvey. Thomas Scot. William Cawley. John Downs. Thomas Hammond. Vincent
Potter. Augustine Garland. Charles Fleetwood. John Temple. Thomas Wait.
Counselors assistant to this Court, and to draw up the Charge against the
KING, were Dr. Dorislaus. Sergeant Danby, Sergeant at Arms. Mr. Ask. Mr. John
Cook Solicitor. Mr. Broughton Clerks to the Court. Mr. Phelpes Colonel
Humphrey Sword Bearer.

Messengers, Door-keepers and Criers, were these; Mr. Walford. Mr. Radley. Mr.
Pain. Mr. Powell. Mr. Hull. Mr. King.


The Sentence against the said King, Jan. 27 1648. which was read by Mr.
Broughton aforesaid, Clerk.
WHereas the Commons of England in Parliament have appointed them an High Court
of Justice for the Trial of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom he had
been three times convented, and at the first time a Charge of High Treason and
other Crimes and Misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the Kingdom of
England, etc. as in the Charge which was read throughout.

To which Charge, he the said Charles Stuart was required to give his Answer,
but he refused so to do; and so expres^ several passages at his Trial in
refusing to answer.

For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court does adjudge, That the said
Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and public Enemy, shall be put
to death, by severing his head from his body.

This Sentence (says the President) now read and published is the Act,
Sentence, Judgment and Resolution of the whole Court. To which the Members of
the Court stood up and assented to what he said by holding up their hands.

The King offered to speak, but he was instantly commanded to be taken away,
and the court broke up.

The Names of thirty five Witnesses produced and Sworn in the said pretended
Court, to give Evidence against the King.
Henry Hartford of Stratford upon Avon in Com. Warwick. Edward Roberts of
Bishops Castle in Com. Salop, Ironmonger. Will. Baines of Wrixhall in Com.
Salop. Robert Lacie of Nottingham, Painter. Robert Loads of Cottam in Com.
Nottingham, Tyler. Samuel Morgan of Wellington in Com. Salop, Feltmaker. James
Williams of Rosse in Com. Hartford, Shoemaker. Richard Pots of Sharpreton in
Com. Northumberland, Vintner. Giles Grice of Wellington in Com. Salop, Gent.
William Arnop of John Hudson of John Winston of Dornotham in Com. Wilts. George
Seeley of London, Cordwainer. John Moor of Cork in Ireland, Gent. Thomas Ives
of Boyset in Com. Northampton, Husbandman. James Cresby of Dublin in Ireland,
Barber. Thomas Rawlins of Hanslop in Com. Buck. Gent. Richard Bloomfeild of
London, Weaver. John Thomas of Langallan in Com. Donbigh. William Lawson of
Nottingham, Maulster. John Pinegar of Damer in Com. Darby, Shoemaker. Humphrey
Brown of Whitsundine in Com. Rutland, Yeoman. David Evans of Abergeveny in
Com. Monmouth, Smith. Robert Holmes of Robert Williams of Samuel Woorden of
Lineham in Com. Wilts, Gent. Thomas Read of Maidstone in Com. Kent, Gent.
George Cornwall of Aston in Com. He. reford, Forgeman. William Jones of Uske in
Com. Monmouth, Husbandman. Arthur Young Citizen and Barber-Chirurgion of
London. Diogenes Edwards of Carston in Com. Salop, Butcher. John Bennet of
Harwood in Com. Ebor. Glover. William Cutbert of Patrington in Holderness in
Com, Ebor. Gent. Richard Price of London, Serivener. Henry Gouch of Gray's Inn,
Gent.
The true manner of proceeding to take off the Kings Head, according to the
Sentence given as aforesaid.
SIr Hardress Waller, Colonel Harrison, Commissary General Ireton, Colonel
Dean, and Colonel Okey, were appointed to consider of the Time and Place for
the Execution of the King, according to his Sentence, given by the (pretended)
High Court of Justice.

Painted-Chamber, Monday January the 29th 1648.
UPon Report made from the Committee for considering of the Time and Place of
the Executing of the Judgment against the King, that the said Committee have
Resolved, That the open street before Whitehal is a fitting place: And the said
Committee conceive it fit, That the King be there executed the cuorrow, the
King having already notice thereof.

The Court approved thereof, and ordered a Warrant to be drawn to that purpose,
which Warrant was accordingly drawn and agreed to, and Ordered to be engrossed,
which was done and signed and sealed accordingly, as follows.

At the High Court of Justice for the Trying and Judging Charles Stuart, King
of England, Jan. 29. 1648.
Whereas Charles Siuart king of England, is and stands Convicted, Attainted
and Condemned of High Treason, and other Crimes, and Sentence on Saturday last
was pronounced against him by this Court, to be put to Death, by the severing
his head from his body, of which Sentence Execution yet remains to be done.
These are therefore to will and require you, to see the said Sentence Executed
in the open street before White Hall upon the morrow, being the 30. day of this
instant Month of January, between the hours of Ten in the morning, and Five in
the afternoon of the same day, with full of, fect; and for so doing, this shall
be your sufficient Warrant: and these are to require all Officers and Soldiers
and other the good People of England to be assistant unto you in this service.
Given under our hands and Seals.

To Colonel Francis Hacker, Col. Huncks, and Lieutenant Colonel Phray, and to
every of them.
Sealed and Subscribed by, John Bradshaw President. Thomas Gray. Oliver
Cromwell. Edward Whaley. John Okey. John Danvers. Mich. Livesey. John Bourcher.
Henry Ireton. Tho. Maleverer. Jo. Blackston. Jo. Hutchison. William Goffe. Tho.
Pride. Henry Smith. Vincent Potter. William Constable. Rich. Ingoldsby. William
Cawley. John Barkstead. Isaac Ewer. Val. Walton. Peter Temple. Tho. Harrison.
Joh. Hewson. Pet. Pelham. Richard Dean. Robert Titchburn. Hump. Edwards. Dan.
Blagrave. Owen Roe. Will. Purifoye. Adrian Scroop. James Temple. Aug. Garland.
Edmon Ludlow, Hen. Martin. Jo. Alured. Robert Lilburn. Will. Say. Anthony
Stapley. Gregory Norton. Tho. Chaloner. Tho Wogan. Simon Meyne. Tho. Horton.
Jo. Jones. Jo. Moore. Hadress Waller. Gilbert Millington. Chapter Fleetwood. Jo.
Venn. Greg. Clement. Jo Downs. Tho. Wait. Tho Scot. John Carew. Miles Corbet.
In all Fifty eight.


Ordered, That the Scaffold on which the King is to be executed, be covered
with black.

The warrant for executing the King being accordingly delivered to those
parties to whom the same was directed, Execution was done upon him according to
the Tenor thereof, about two of the clock in the afternoon, of the said 30th.
of January, 1648.

The fatal day of the said Execution, being Tuesday, January, the 30. 1648.
HIs Majesty continued in prayer all the morning, and receive the Sacrament
just at Ten of the Clock before noon, he was conveyed on foot from St. James's
Palace to Whitehall, guarded by a Regiment of foot Soldiers, part before, part
behind, with Colors flying, and Drums beating, his private guard of Partisans
about him, and Dr. Juxon Bishop of London, next to him on one side, and
Colonel Tomlinson on the other; being come to Whitehall, he continued in his
Cabinet Chamber at his devotions refusing to dine, only about 12 a clock he eat
a bit of bread, and drank a glass of Claret Wine; from thence he was conveyed
into the Banqueting house, and the great window enlarged, out of which he
ascends the Scaffold, the rails being hung round, and the floor covered with
black, His Executioners disguised with Vizards, yet was his Majesty not
affrighted: He showed more care of the people living, then of himself dying:
for looking upon the people, whom the thick guards of Soldiers kept a great
distance off, and seeing he could not be heard by them, omitting (probably)
what he purposed to have spoken to them, therefore turning to the Officers and
actors by him, he delivered himself in a short but excellent) Speech, which
being ended, he meekly went to prayers, and after some heavenly discourse
between him and the Bishop, having prepared himself, he lifted up his eyes to
heaven mildly praying to himself, he stooped down to the block as to a
prayer-desk, and most humbly bowed his generous Neck to God, to be cut off by
the Vizarded Executioner, which was suddenly done at one blow. Thus fell King
Charles, and thus all Britian with him.

A SHORT HISTORY OF His Royal Majesty, our most Gracious SOVEREIGN Charles the
Second, KING of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
etc. Third Monarch of Great Britain.

London, Printed by Henry Bell, and are to be sold by most Booksellers, 1660.

A Short HISTORY OF His Royal Majesty, King CHARLES the Second, etc
HAving I hope sufficiently cleared his late Royal majesty from that execrable
sin of blood-guiltinesse, (to every one that is not wilfully blind) I shall now
crave leave to give the Reader a short account of the Life, and hitherto
sorrowful Reign of our most Gracious and Dread Sovereign Charles the Second,
King of England* Scotland, France and Ireland, Defende^^ of the Faith, etc.

No sooner was this mighty Prince, barbarously butchered before his own doors,
to the astonishment and grief of the greatest part of his Subjects throughout
his Dominions; And the three Lords Hamilton, Capel, and Holland, which had The
government of the Kindoms ^ changed,
taken up Arms in his late Majesty's defense; but now Monarchy, the darling of
the people, together with the House of Peers, is voted chargeable, unnecessary,
and useless: and the Government changed into a Free State: neither did this
mutation happen for want of such as by a lineall descent, and according to the
usage of this Nation might pretend a Title to the Crown; for there was a
plentiful issue of his late Majesty, both male and female then surviving, but
from the aspiring greatness of some who had wrested the power into their own
hands, to this end it was ordered by the then Juncto sitting in Parliament,
that all public Writings should be issued out under a new Test and Style, and
a new great Seal should be made and the old one broken, that the Inscription
and Stamp of the Coin shall be altered also. It was Enacted and Proclaimed that
none upon pain of high Treason, should presume to declare and publicly promote
Charles Stuart Prince of Wales, eldest Son of the late King, or any of the rest
of his Children to be King of England.

Nevertheless, there was not wanting those who ventured their lives and
fortunes in asserting the Title of his Majesty to the Crown of England, to
which end this following Proclamation was Printed and dispersed in several
places of London.

We the Noble men, Judges, Knights, Lawyers, Gentlemen, Freeholders,
Merchants, Citizens, Yeomen, Seamen, and Free men of England, do according to
our Allegiance and Covenant, by these presents heartily, joyfully, and
unanimously, acknowledge and Proclaim the most Illustrious Charles, Prince of
Wales, next Heir apparent to his Father King Charles, (whose late wicked
murder, and all consents there unto, we from our souls abominate) to be by
hereditary birth*right, and lawful succession, rightful, and undoubted King
of Great Britain, etc. And we will constantly and sincerely, in our several
places and callings, defend and maintain his Royal person, Crown, and Dignity,
with our Lives and Estates, against all opposers, whom we hereby declare to be
enemies to his Majesty and Kingdoms, in Testimony whereof we have caused these
to be published throughout all Counties and Corporations of this Realm the 1.
day of February, In the first year of his Majesty's Reign.

But so totally was the Kings party suppressed in all parts of the Kingdom,
that the Proclamation was of none essect, K. Proclain Ireland.
none daring to appear for the Royal Interest.

Yet his Majesty's greatest hopes and expectations were from Ireland, where the
several factions united together, Proclaim him King, and bend all their whole
strength against the Interest of the Commonwealth of England, and in a short
time became so formidable, and prevail so much, as the possessed all the strong
Holds of that Country -- Dublin and Londonderry are excepted, both were
straightly besieged, the former by a gallant Army of 22000 men, under Marquess of
Ormonds Army defeated be*
the Marquess of Ormond, the latter by a party of the Irish Rebels: He had
likewise adjoining to the Territories of England, the Islands of Scilly, Jersy,
and Man which places served as a retreat for that small Fleet that was left
him, being the remainder of those Ships which had deserted the Parliaments
Navy, and revolted unto him. This while his affairs in Ireland were at the
height; they began as suddenly to decline, for there being about 3000 Horse and
Foot safely landed at Dublin (as the forlorn of a greater body) they were
joined with what other forces they then could make all which did not make above
9000. at the most, were commanded by Colonel Mich. Jones, who sallying forth
of Dublin, did not only raise the seige, but also utterly routed the whole
Army, the Marquess of Ormond himself hardly escapeing, about 2000 were slain
in the place, and in the pursuit some thousands were Siege of Lon.-Derry
raised by Sir Charles Coot,
taken prisoners, as like wise all their Ordinaces, Ammunition, Carriages, and
Provision; The siege of Londonderry, was also raised by a resolute sally of
Sir Charles Coot forcing Sir Rob. Stewart, and Col. Merven to retire immediately
upon this success, not to give the Royal party any time to recover strength.
All disturbances being quieted in England, The Levellers at Burford being
suppressed by General Fairfax: Oliver Cromwell, then Crom-lands with an Army
in Ireland.
Lieutenant General of the Parliaments Army, landed with a powerful Army
about the midst of August, 1649. invested with the Title and Authority of Lord
Governor, or Lieutenant of Ireland, presently after him followed his son in
law Major General Ireton, with about 40. Sail of Ships, soon after Drogheda
was taken by Storm, not without some difficulty and loss; and that he might
terrify other Garrisons, that should stand out, put Sir Arthur Aston and all
that were in the Town to the Sword, which was about 3000. Then followed the
taking of a number of considerable Towns and Castles in all parts of Ireland.

Besides several Field-battells, gained over the Lord Inohiqueen, the Lord
Ards and Clanduboys with Lieutenant General Farrell and others of his
Majesty's party, by the Lord Broghill, Sir Charles Coote, Collonell Venables,
Zanchy, Reynolds, and Hewson: so that in less then a years time Ireland was
subdued to the power of the English Commonwealth. Much about this time happened
a general defection of the English Plantations, from their obedience to the
Parliament, viz. Virginia and the Caryb Islands publicly own the Royal
Interest, whereupon all Traffic and Commerce is prohibited, through which
means they are driven to great streits; and presently after by a Fleet of Ships
from England, under the Command of Sir George Ascue, they are brought unto
conformity. The King having Constituted Prince Rupert Admiral Prince Ruperts
fleet blockt up at Kings sale.
of his Fleet, did much harm to the English Coasts, and takes many rich prizes,
was at last blockt up in the Harbor of Kings Sale, the Town presently after
taken by Cromwell; The Prince is forced to leave three of his Ships behind, he
had enough to do to get clear off with the rest; at length he arrived at
Lisbon, the imperial City of the King of Portugal, and craved his protection,
which was not denied them, which was the occasion of a great Contest between
that King and the State of England, other designs were set on foot by his
Majesty's Loyal Subjects, for the obtaining of his Right.

The first was of James Graham Earl of Montross, for the raising of what force
he cold in Holland and else where, to invade Scotland.

The 2. was the procuring a Treaty betwixt his Majesty and the Scots: to give
more life to these undertakings, Ambassadors were dispatched to Spain, Italy,
Denmark, Sweden and Russia, etc. In the name of CHARLES the Second, King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith. The effect of whose
Embassies were little else but Complements, pleas, and excuses for neither men
nor money could be got.

Montrosse, According to his Majesty's instructions having got together very
considerable supplies of men and moneys at length lands in the North of
Scotland, where he had not long been, but Colonel Straughan, Colonel Kerr,
Colonel Mountgomry, and Lieutenant Colonel Hackets Troop, and another
amounting to 230 approach and give battle, whereas Montrosse was at least 1200.
and their Chief-Leaders such resolute and expert soldiers unless struck with
fear of Lesley's great Army coming against them: however so great was the
defeat that the whole body of Montrosse was engaged in the battle.

There escaped not above 100 from being either taken or slain, amongst the
prisoners, ners were S. Joh. Vrry, Major General of Montrosses Army, the L.
Fendraught. Col. Gray, Lieutenant Colonel Stewart, with a great number of
other considerable Officers; Montrosse himself made a Shift to escape for the
present, his horse together with his Belt and his Coat with the star being
found made it conjectured that he had been slain in the field. In this fight
the Royal Standard was taken, upon which was portraited the Head of the late
King lying a bleeding, with their Motto, Judge and revenge my Cause O Lord! The
Lord Pitsferd son being Standard Bearer, was slain; so welcome was the news of
this Victory to the State and Kirk of Scotland, that they bestowed a reward
upon Stranghan, 1000l. Sterling, and a chain of gold! upon Lieutenant Colonel
Hacket 1000. Mark Starling: But that which Crowned this Victory to them with
the highest joy and satisfaction, was the getting Montrosses person into their
hands; For he having wandered so long in the woods, to avoid being detected,
till driven to that necessity, he was forced to eat his gloves, and gnaw a
piece of his flesh for very extremity of hunger, was at last discovered by a
Country fellow, and by a party sent to apprehend him, was dragged out of a
Caveor hollow Tree: he was no soonertaken, but was Imediately sent up to Edin.
whose Streets were filled with infinite crowdes of people to see him, while he
was brought into the City in a Cart, in which was placed a Chair for him to sit
in, whereunto he was bound with Ropes, and sat bare headed, his Hat having
been taken off his Head by the executioner who rode before him with his Bonnet
on; some pitied, but the most insulted over him. Being summoned to appear
before the Parliament, he came into the house apparrelled with a rich suit,
thick overlaid with costly lace, and over it a Scarlet Rocket, a Beaver hat,
with a hatband, and other suitable abiliments, all which he caused to be made
him immediately upon his coming to Edinburgh; as soon as he was brought to the
Bar, the Lord Chancellor who according to the custom of that Kingdom is
always Speaker told him that he must kneel at the Bar, whereunto he answered,
my Lords I shall withal my heart observe any posture you shall appoint me to
appear before you in, whereby I may manifest to you that I freely submit to the
Authority of Parliament, and to this present Parliament in a more special
manner, because you have concluded so near a conjunction with his Majesty my
Master in the late Treaty; Then the Chancellor made a speech unto him, the
substance was this,

Sir I am commanded to mind you of the last Judgment of God befaln yon for
your persideous breaking of the Covenant which might justly provoke God thus to
divert your Counsel and affairs for having been so eminent an actor and Author
of mischief against this Nation: You abandoned the Covenant, and despised the
Oath of God, and did invade your native Country, and with most inhumane
barbarous cruelty did wast and burn diverse parts of it, and have spilt much
blood of his Majesty's good subjects, and for these crimes you are
excommunicated by the Church, and fore-faulted by the Parliament of this
Kingdom, and to this day you have remained without the least show of
repentance; and now God by his providence has justly brought you hither to
receive the sentence of your condemnation: Hereupon Montresse humbly desiring
to know of his Lordship whether he might be permitted to speak what he had to
say for himself; he was told by the Chancellor, the estates in Parliament did
give him free liberty to speak what he could in his own defense.

His answer, My Lord, I am glad I have liberty to answer for my self, though I
am your Prisoner yet my cause is good, nor is there any breach of your Covenant
on my part in which I swore to be true to his Majesty, his Heirs, and
successors Concerning what I have done in relation to the Wars and affairs of
this Kingdom, I have not only a general Commission but particular Orders from
his Majesty which I was engaged to obey by my Covenant. Concerning my coming
over now, I was ascertained that you did comply with his Majesty to the present
affairs, in which he has employed me, and it was upon that account that I have
acted, I desire to submit unto this present Parliament, and the Authority
thereof to be my Judges in this case, whom I own as a true Parliament by
Authority from his Majesty, and shall be content however it shall please God to
deal with me, as for my life, if you take it a way by this authority, its well
known I regard it not; Death is a debt which we all owe, and must once be paid
by every one. I shall be willing, and much rejoice to go the same way my Master
passed before me, it is the joy of my heart not only to do but to suffer for
him. After the Prisoner had been had in, and withdrawn, the Parliament agreed
unanimously upon sentence of condemnation, who being again called in, the
Chancellor commanded to be read, which was as follows.

You are to be carried back to the place Sentence in Parliament
from whence you came from thence to morrow morning being 20 May, 1650 you are
to be carried to Edinburgh Cross, there to be hanged upon a Gallows 30 foot
high, for three hours space, then to be taken down, and your head to be cut off
upon ascaffold, and hanged on Edinburgh Talbooth; your legs and arms to be
hanged up in other public Towns of this Kingdom; and your body to be buried at
the place where you are executed.

Which Sentence he heard with an unmoved countenance, and desiring to be
further heard, was presently stopped by the Chancellor, who commanded he
should presently be removed back again to Prison. The appointed day for the
executing of his Tragedy being come, he was led forth to the execution, where
he suffered accordingly. Thus dyed the glorious assertor of his Majesty's right.

Next to Montross was executed Sir John Vrry, Colonel Spotswood, and others
that were chief actors, etc. The English now send to strengthen their alliance
with the united Provinces, Doctor Dorrislaw went as public Agent, thereby to
keep a good correspondence betwixt the two republics, where he had not long
been ere he was slain by six Assistants, that brake into his lodgings at the
Hague, in a disguised habit, and so escaped punishment.

His Royal Majesty having long expected the Scots message at St. Germans
resolved upon a removal to the Isle of Jersey, a little before his departure
out of France, the most valiant Duke of York came to him, as also to the French
King and Cardinal Mazarine, of whom he desired aid in the behalf of his
brother, but the Cardinal put him off with a few specious pretenses; only the
Duke was presented with 100000 Crowns. About the beginning of September his
Majesty accompanied with his brother the Duke of York, and diverse other Lords
and Gentlemen to the number of about 300 persons landed in the Island of
Jersey: upon his first Arrival he was proclaimed King. The Lord Jermyn made
Governor of the Island, under whom Sir George Carteret was constituted Deputy
Governor. Guernsey being possessed by the Parliaments forces, a Declaration
was sent thither inviting the Governor and people to submit to his Majesty's
obedience; But this invitation did little avail. By this time the several
Transactions that were between his Majesty and his Kingdom of Scotland had
brought forth a Treaty at Breda in the Netherlands, a Town of special note
belonging to the Prince of Orange. And Master Windram Lord of Libeton is sent
Commissioner from the States of Scotland, to Treat with his Majesty; who being
safely arrived, presents his Royal Majesty with the desires and offers of the
States of Scotland, which were to this effect.

1. That he would sign the solemn League and Covenant. 2. That he would pass
diverse Acts of the Parliament of Scotland. 3. That he would put away all
Papists from about him, and let none but known Protestants be of his Counsel,
That he would give a speedy answer to their desires. Besides this his Majesty
has great hopes of raising a sufficient force in England, among the friends to
his Royal Interest. Upon this design several are sent from Jersey, into the
West of England, amongst whom two Principal men, Sir John Berkley, and Col.
Slingsby, who went up and down to their confederates, earnestly stirring them
up to take up Arms for his Majesty, but these were discovered by a Country
fellow, and are taken by Cap. Rochwich, and are sent Prisoners to Truro in
Cornwall. After many consultations, and gracious condiscentions of his Treaty
concluded.
Majesty, The Treaty is at last concluded; and now the Kingdom of Scotland make
great preparations for his reception, to this end two rich houses in Edinburgh
are richly furnished, and the Parliament Preparat. for his Maj.
take into consideration the nominating of Officers for his house About the
beginning of June, 1650. his Majesty hasts from Breda to the Hague. Thence to
Scheveling, where he took Shiping, and at last in despite of fow^ weather and
the English King Fishers that lay there to intercept him, he landed at Spey in
the North of Scotland, In the mean time the Parliament of Scotland, bend their
consultations for the raising of an Army for the use of his Majesty, the Earl
of Leven is made General of the Foot, and Holborun Major General; David Lasley
Lieutenant General of the Horse, and Mountgomery Major General. The Supreme
command of the whole Army is reserved for the Kings most excellent Majesty
himself, whom at his Arrival they entertained with high complements, and much
acclamation, and seemed to congratulate his coming, with much demonstrations
His Maje. proclaimed K. Edinbur. Cross;
of joy and affection. And on the 15. July following, solemnly proclaim him
King at Edinburgh Cross. About this time the English send a complaint to the
King of Spain, about the death of one Ascam who wassent thither as Agent from
our new Commonwealth, who the first night he came to Madrid, sitting at dinner
with his Interpreter Segnior Riba, six black Devils in the shape of men knocked
at the door, had easy access, and being entered, Master Ascham rose up to salute
them; whereupon the foremost stabbed him in the head, his interpreter
endeavoring to escape was also stabbed in the belly. The Republic of England
receiving good intelligence that his Majesty and the Kingdom of Scotland were
agreed; After a serious and solemn debate, Voted that Thomas Lord Fairfax, with
an Army under his command, should march Northwards, But that noble and truly
valiant Commander, could not be entreated to fight against his sacred Majesty,
and our Brethren of Scotland, and hereupon laid down his Commission.

Which was forthwith conferred upon the Archest of Traitors Oliver Cromwell,
who presently after arrived out of Ireland, leaving Ireton his son in Law as
Lord Deputy in his room; Accordingly Orders were issued forth, for the speedy
advance of the Army in Scotland, who had no sooner taken their march but the
Scots take the Alarm, and send two or three papers to Sir Arthur Hasilrig then
Governor of Newcastle, to expostulate the case about the sudden approach of
the English Army, alleging the Covenant or large Treaty of Union betwixt the
two Kingdoms, and other circumstances of the like nature, but all proved
fruitless. The Parliament then publish a declaration, showing the reason of
their Armies advance toward Scotland: The English Army is now at last at
Dunbar, where the Scots have the English at a great disadvantage: nevertheless
the General and his Officers finding the Army unfit for further delays,
resolved the next morning to fall upon the Scots, who being imbattlled by break
of day, the word of the English was the Lord of Hosts, and that of the Scotts
was the Covenant: after an hours dispute the Scots were wholly routed, there
was slain 3000, the Lord Libberton, Colonel Lumsden mortally wounded, 1000.
taken, together with Sir James Lumsden, Lieutenant General of the Foot. And
about 260 other Officers 200 Colors 15000 Arms, and 30. pieces of Ordnance.
At London was apprehended, condemned, and executed, Colonel Eusebius Andrews,
who being taken with a Commission from his Majesty, was beheaded at Tower Hill,
September 8. That most excellent Princess Elizabeth daughter to our late
Sovereign, dyed at Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight. Upon these sad
disasters his Majesty went secretly away to the North of Scotland; upon which
the Committee of Estates are much troubled, chiefly for that they feared he
would join with Middleton; they send Major General Mountgomery with a party of
Horse to endeavor by earnest supplications to bring him back to Saint
Johnstons, which at the first he utterly refuses, but at last condescended to
retire with Montgomery about the later end of October the Prince of Orange
departed this life, whose death was much lamented by his most gracious Majesty,
having received from him many high Testimonies of friendship and good will,
about ten days after the Princess of Orange was delivered of a Son, which did
in part mitigate her grief for the Princes death. After three months siege the
Castle of Edinburgh was surrendered up to Cromwell, December 24. 1650. with all
the Ordnances, Arms, Edinburgh Castle sur. to the E^gl.
Magazine, and furniture of War thereunto belonging. Notwithstanding the hard
fortune his Majesty's forces hitherto had undergone, several designs. were
set on foot. At this time there was one Benson executed at Tiburn, for acting
by virtue of a Commission from his Majesty; upon the same account there rose a
great number in the County of Norfolk, but were soon dispersed and taken. About
this time Sir Henry Hide being Commissionated by his Majesty, Ambassador to the
grand senior at Constantinople stood in competition with Sir Thomas Bendish,
whereupon they had a hearing before the Vizier Bassa; The result whereof was,
that Sir Thomas Bendish should dispose of Sir Henry Hide as he thought good,
who was straight way sent to Smyrna, thence into England, and there condemned,
and executed as a Traitor before the Royal Exchange London. The War now in
Scotland was almost at a stand, by reason of the sharpness of the Winter. The
grand business now in agitation, is the Corronation of his Majesty, which was
accordingly performed at Scone, Jan. 1. 1651. with as much Pomp and Ceremonies,
as the present State of affairs would permit. The Parliament considering how
prone the people would be to adore the shadow of his late Majesty of glorious
Memory caused his statue formerly set up at the West end of Paul's Church to be
pulled down, and that also in the Royal Exchange, over which they caused to be
writ this Motto, Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus Anno Libertatis Angliae Restitutae
primo, Jan. 30. 1648. they also caused the Kings Arms to be defaced, and taken
out of all Churches, Chapels, and places of Judicature, throughout their
Dominions. The 29 of May being his Majesty's birth day, was celebrated in
Scotland with much joy and feasting. About this time in London was discovered a
most dangerous plot (as they were pleased to call it) contrived by the
Presbyterians, Mr. Christopher Love, Mr. Gibbons, Major Alford, Major Adams,
Colon. Barton, Mr. Blackman, Mr. Case, Mr. Cauton, Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Jackson,
Mr. Robinson, and many others were secured and examined before a High Court of
Justice: Mr. Love, and Gibbons were beheaded, August 22. 1651. on Tower Hill;
the rest upon their humble petitions and acknowledgements of their Crimes, were
released and pardoned.

The Scots having now completed their Levies to the number of 15000 Foot, and
6000. Horse marched on this side Sterling, to a place called Torwod, where they
were faced by the English, but could not be drawn to an engagement, though the
English much desired it; at last the English attempt the Scotts by ascending
the Hill, which being done after a shot dispute the Scots are utterly routed,
2000. or there abouts were slain, and 1400. were taken prisoners; whereof Sir
John Brown Commander in chief was one, with Col. Bucanan, and many others of
quality. Immediately upon this was surrounded the strong Castle of Inchygarvey.
July 27. The whole English Army appear before Brunt Island, which after some
Capitulations was also yielded up. this was no sooner done but the main body of
the English Army attend more eminent service, viz. The Pursuit of his Royal
Majesty, who with an Army of 16000. Horse and Foot, enters England by way of
Carlisle; accordingly the infantry were boated over Fife with as much
expedition as could be; and presently after the Horse: the truly Valiant then
Lieutenant General Monk was left in Scotland with a party of 7000 Horse and
Foot, who straight way took in the strong Town and Castle of Sterling,
Aberdeen, Abernets, Dundee, Dunotten, and Dunbarton Castle with several others.

So that now the whole Realm of Scotland was (...) wholly subdued and made
Tributary to the Republic of England. His Majesty now at last with the Scots
Army entered Worcester; from whence the King sent his Royal letters commanding
Sir Thomas Middleton to raise what forces he could for him, and the like to
Colonel Mackworth Governor of Shrewsbury, but all to no purpose. His Royal
Majesty was proclaimed King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, in most of
the Market Towns as he came to Worcester: about two or three days before his
Majesty's arrival at Worcester, The Earl of Derby having landed at Wy Water in
Lancashire, came to him with 250. Foot, and 60 Horse, which he brought with him
out of the Isle of Man, but immediately he returned back into Lancashire, to
raise a more considerable force, which with the influence he had in those
places, he soon got together a body of 1500. to prevent their conjunction with
his Majesty's forces, Cromwels Regiment and Lilburns join together, and after
one hours dispute, the Earl of Derby's party was worsted, the Earl himself
wounded, hardly escapes to Worcester, leaving his George and Garter behind him;
of the Kings party the most considerable that were slain were the Lord
Widrington, Sir Thomas Tilesly, Colonel Mat. Boynton, Sir Will. Throgmorton,
etc.

Not long after Cromwell with his Army came before Worcester, which was
presently dispersed about the City in Order to a close besieging of it;
hereupon the Scots Salley out of Worcester, but are repulsed with some loss.
The next re-encounter was the pass at Vpton which the truly Valiant Major
General Massey kept for his Majesty, but he being too much over powered by
Lamberts Horse and Dragoons, which came from Evesham, and with Fleetwoods
Brigade, was forced to retreat, he himself being wounded.

The Third of September (being the same day twelve Month on which the Scots
were sorely beaten at Dunbar) was that black and fatal day on which the Royal
interest received their dreadful wound, the fight was maintained with great
Valor on his Majesty's part, but being greatly over powered, his Majesty's
Forces were totally routed both Horse and Foot, their Works and Fort Royal
were taken, their Canons turned upon themselves, the City was straightway
entered and searched, the most of the Scotts instantly were slain and taken, in
this engagement near 10000 were taken prisoners, and about 3000 slain; His
Majesty perceiving the day hitherto lost, begins now to shift for himself, (the
people generally as they fled-confusedly, cry out, O save the King, save the
King!) he presently withdrew himself to the house where he quartered, and took
of his treasure what he could conveniently carry with him; just as Colonel
Cobbet was entering the fore part of the house, his Majesty was slipped out by a
back way, together with the Lord Wilmot, striking into the most private and
unfrequented way to avoid the hot pursuit and strict enquiry that was made for
him: The Earl of Derby was taken prisoner in the pursuit by Lilborn, whose
hands he had narrowly escaped not many days before; together with the Earl
of Loderdale, the Earl of Cleveland, Shrews-burry, and Lord Wentworth, with
many other persons of quality in the main fight were taken, Duke Hamilton, Rob.
Earl of Carnworth, Alexander Earl of Kelley, John Lord Synclare, Sir John
Packington, Major General Mountgomery, Mr. Richard Fanshaw, the Kings
Secretary, the General of the Ordnance, the Adjutant General of the Foot, the
Marshall General. 6. Collo. of Horse, 13. of Foot, 9. Lieutenant Collon. of
Horse, 8. of Foot, 6. Majors of Horse, 17. Majors of Foot, 37. Cap. of Horse.
72. Cap. of Foot, 55. Quarter Masters of Horse, 72. Cap. of Foot, and a number
of other inferior Officers, 158. Colors, the Kings Royal Standard, his
Collar of SS Coach and Horses, and other things of great value. Major Genesis
Massey though he had made a shift to escape out of the field, yet by reason of
his wounds and sick condition of body, surrendered himself to the mercy of the
Countess of Stamford, whose son nevertheless the Lord Gray of Groby secured
him as a prisoner, and sent him up to the Parliament so soon as his wounds were
cured; Leivtenant Genesis David Lesley, and Leiut. Genesis Middleton were both taken
at Blackstone Bridge, between Hallifax and Raesdale, and sent Prisoners to
Leverpoole.

Near this time most of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland were taken at a
place called Ellett, in that Nation, where they were assembled to propagate
their Royal designs; such was the sad events which attended his Royal
Majesty, that he who a few days before was proclaimed King of Great Britain,
had now neither Camp, nor Garrison, nor lodging to fly unto for safety or
shelter. For now the Juncto at Westminster profer ^00 Sterling to any that
shall detect the Kings Royal person, which notwithstanding he escaped after
this manner. Viz. After the great and fatal fight at Worcester, between his
Majesty's forces and the Cromwelian Rebels, the field being lost, not for want
of courage, by the King party, but by those numerous supplies, who served only
like the Turkish Asapi, to blunt the Royal swords, so that their wearied arms
no longer able to hold out, were forced to retreat, and at length
(notwithstanding the generous example of his Majesty, who performed things
worth wonder) to a disorderly flight: yet it is worthy of observation, that upon
Cromwells advance near the City, his Majesty in person, and in the head of the
Horse, drew out against him, and that with so much valor and courage, that
Cromwells own lifeguard, and the best of his old Soldiers, who were thought
almost invincible) were forced to retire till seconded by Fleetwood, Disbrow,
Lambert and others, (who over powered the Kings forces, being above five to one:
and so loath was his Majesty to decline the field, that upon his earnest
endeavors to have his horse and foot rally, twice had he his Horse shot under
him, and at length was forced to shift for himself, and to provide for his own
safety; and so with some Nobles and Servants, not without a great deal of
difficulty, forced to quit the field, and by the most unfrequented Roads that
they could possibly find out, rod to a Farmhouse of a Noble gentleman on the
Borders of Staffordshire, where they no sooner arrived but his Majesty disrobed
himself of his Princely Ornaments and Accoutrements, and Particularly of a
Chain of Gold or Spannar-string worth three hundred pounds Sterling, the
present of a Scottish Lady which he bestowed upon a servant of his there
present: which done, for his farther disguise, he proceeded to the cutting off
his hair, and the Cot affording neither shears nor Scissars to perform it, it
was by the Lord Wilmot cut off with a knife. And now every one is commanded to
shift for himself, and this poor Prince left alone to the sole protection of
the Almighty, he choosing none but one friend to accompany him, with whom he
wandered into a Wood, within four mile, (say some) of Wolverhampton, where
finding a hollow Oak, he was now content to make it his Palace, for here he for
some days concealed himself, his Friend still toward night going out to
provide him some refreshment during this his solitary confinement. In the
meantime the Lord Wilmot who was commanded with the rest to seek his fortune,
was by chance pursued by some soldiers, but meeting with a Country fellow
formerly a soldier in the old Kings Army, he was by him secured though
somewhat strangely, for he carries him into a Malthouse belonging to Mrs. Jane
Lane, and having no other convenient place to hide him in, clapped him under the
kilne, though there were then some fire in it, and the malt smoking on the
top. In the mean time the soldiers then in pursuit of him, entered the house,
and having made about three quarters of an hours search every where else, but
not at all suspecting the kilne, where they saw the fire, they departed, and
the Lord Wilmot was taken out of the kilne almost ready to faint with the
extremity of the heat. The Country fellow having thus secured this Lord,
acquaints Mrs. Lane with what he had done, and she extremly glad of it, gets
him to her house, where in conference she enquires of the Kings safety. The
Lord Wilmot gives her the former relation of his miseries and distress, which
forces tears from the tender hearted Gentlewoman, she earnestly entreats him to
take some course for the finding out of his Majesty, and conducting him to her
house, she being resolved to venture her life, had she ten thousand, for the
saving of his Royal Majesty's.

The Lord Wilmot glad of so happy an opportunity to serve his Majesty, and so
great a probability of securing him, the next night finds him out, and conducts
him from the Royal Oak to the House of Mrs. Jane Lane, where after a large
condoling of his hard fortune consultation was had for a convenience for his
escape beyond sea, and at length it was concluded, that Bristol would be the
most convenient place to take shipping, That his Majesty should ride before
Mrs. Lane by the name of William servant to Mr. Lastell her father in law, who
was likewise to go with them; and thus it was immediately given out, that Mr.
Lastell and Mrs. Lane were to take a journey into the West, to visit some
friends, and shortly after they set forward. In this journey there happened
many accidents worthy commemoration, and first, the Kings Majesty riding now as
servant to one of the faithfullest of his Subjects, in a Livery Cloak, though
not without that respect that durst be given to him; complains to Mrs. Lane
that the cloak wearied him, whereupon she desires Mr. Lastell to carry it, and
long they had not trid so but they meet upon the Road her brother in law, who
amongst otherquestions demanded of her, if her father must carry her man's
Cloak, to which she readily answered, that it was so big that it often
endangered the throwing her off the horse, and that she had therefore desired
him to carry it. The next and most important accident of all was, that coming
into a town, which they were to pass through, there was a Troop of Horse there
to be quartered drawn up, which caused some fear, but at length with a
resolution they passed on, and the Captain taking them for honest travelers,
made his Troop open to the right and left, and so permitted them to pass.
Another accident there happened, which one may say was almost comical in this
Tragedy, Mrs. Lane coming into the Inn leaves his Majesty under the name of
William her servant in the Kitchen, with whom the maid enters in to discourse,
she asks him where he was born, and what trade he was, he answers at
Brumingham, and a Naylors son, and after a great deal of other discourse, the
Jack being down, the maid desires him to wind it up, which he willingly
undertakes, but goes the wrong way about it, and somewhat prejudices it; at
which the maid grew angry, asking him where he was bred, and telling him he was
the veriest ^lownish booby that ever she saw in all her life; which railing of
hers made his present misery go out of the room smiling.

Mrs. Lane notwithstanding his Majesty went as her servant, yet had a greater
respect for him before others, pretended him her Tenant's son; but on the Road
she would always ask what he would have to dinner or supper, and what piece of
that he liked, which she would always be sure to get made ready and give him,
he still sitting at the lower end of the table.

But to come to the end of their journey, being arrived at Bristol they lodged
at the house of a Noble gentleman there, and kinsman to Mr. Lastel: the King
finding it to be a house of great resort, feigns himself sick of an Ague, and
so keeps his Chamber all the day, coming down only at nights; but one night
coming down and being somewhat cold craves a glass of Wine of the Butler, who
carries him into the But lery; this Butler having before served his Majesty's
Father in the Wars, looking earnestly upon him, suspected him to be the King,
so easily will Majesty appear though veiled in the utmost disguises, and
thereupon pulling off his hat, told him very ceremoniously, That he might
command what wine he pleased; of which the King took no notice, but drinking
off his Wine went out; yet the Butler could not satisfy his suspicion, but
went up to Mr. Lastels, and demanded of him how long he had had that servant,
whereupon Mr. Lastels was very angry at his boldness, in daring to ask him such
a question; but the Butler still persisted, and whispering told him that he
believed it was the King, where upon Mr. Lastels seeing he was discovered,
sends immediately for his Majesty, whom he acquaints with the Butlers discovery
of him, with whom the King was somewhat angry, in regard he did not first
acquaint himself with his suspicion, it not being impossible, but that Mr.
Lastels might not have known him to be the King; but upon pardon asked by the
Butler, it was granted by the King, and he afterward proved very instrumental
in his Majesty's conveyance through the Country.

But here at Bristol the chief design they had in hand failed them; for though
there were a little Barque lay there, judged most convenient for the business,
yet the Master would for no reward transport a single person, though he was so
honest as only to deny it and made no further search or inquiry concerning the
person, which might perhaps have tended to a discovery.

This design here failing, his Majesty desired to be brought some miles
Westward to the house of a worthy gentleman whom he knew to be a trusty friend;
where coming in he finds the gentleman in the field with his servants; having
discovered himself to him, he was by him conveyed to a convenient stand till
night, (having first taken leave of his true friends, who had thus far
conducted him with the danger of their Lives and Estates,) from whence he was
in the dusk conveyed into the house, and there carefully concealed for a week,
till such time as preparation could be made in some Western Port of a passage
for him; but coming afterward there where it was provided, chancing to dine
with a Parliament Colonel then there, he thought it the safer to loose the
benefit of that passage, then adventure to imbarque himself singly, which
might breed suspicion, and perhaps have been the means after so many
deliverances to have betrayed him into the hands of his enemies.

This passage then likewise failing him he then returned back to the place from
whence he came, and concealed himself three weeks longer, till in the end it
being resolved on, he by the assistance of Mr. Ph. was conveyed through the
most by-ways they could imagine to a gentlewomans house in Sussex, where he lay
till a person of true worth and honor made provision of a faithful Master,
who with a small Vessel wafted him to a small Creek in, Normandy, to the great
content of the Kings sacred Majesty, and all his Loyal Subjects and to the
honor of the Master with due reward, as in time may appear.

Soon after this the Juncto at Westminster took order for the reducing of the
two Islands Jersie and Man: about this time dyed General Popham, one of the
Generals at Sea, and IretonCromwells Son in Law of the plague in Ireland. No
sooner had the English brought things to some quietness at home but now new
stirs begin to appear abroad; The Hollanders being offended at an Act made by
that piece of Parliament then sitting at Westminster, for the increasing of
shipping and encouragement of Navigation break out into an open war, and the
first act of Hostility was May, 16. 1652. When Van Trump Admiral of the Dutch
Fleet, with about 40 two sail coming into Dover Road refused to strike sail,
hung out a Red flag, the usual sign of defr^me, and gave a broadside to Blake
the English Admiral, which occasioned some hours sharp dispute, wherein the
Dutch had the worst; they lost in this fight two ships and 150 men. But of this
action the states of Holland would not be concerned, because as they said, it
was done without their approbation, and a little the beter to palliate the
business, they dispatch their Ambassadors over into England, to renew the
Treaty: the effect of which proved an open war betwixt the Commonwealths,
which was now publicly proclaimed on both sides. In July Sir George Ascue with
a Squadron of Ships being left to guard the narrow Seas, discovered a Fleet of
Flemmings between Dover and Callice being about 80. of which ten were taken and
burnt, the rest ran a shore the Coasts of France; Sir George Ascue as he was
sailing Westward to guard the Seas, and conduct home the Marchant-men that lay
at Plymouth on the 16. August, between one and 2. in the afternoon, they had a
sight of the Dutch Fleet, they presently made what have they cold toward them
to discover their number, which was about 60. sail of men of War, and 30
Marchant-men; the English were 38. sail, and 4. Fireships, and 4. Scouts; they
came up to the enemy about 4. in the afternoon, and began the fight with much
Gallantry and high resolution; this engagement continued feirce till night
parted then not without some loss to the English, but much more to the Dutch.
Sept. 27. General Blake with his Fleet discovered on the backside of Goodwin
Sands about 60. sail of Dutchmen of War, under the Command of Admiral de Wit,
which bout was called the Kentish Knock, they shamefully flying from the
English though far more in number, were miserably beaten by General Blake; Upon
the Neck of this breach came into England an Ambassador from the Queen of
Sweden, where he ended his life before he effected any thing; another also from
the King of Denmark, who also seeing no probability of peace between these
Nations, departed out of this Kingdom.

In the Levant Seas asmal Fleet of the English wereset upon by ^^-sail of Dutch
who over-powering them in number, took and blew up 5. English Ships; About the
beginning of December General Blake himself engaging with the whole Fleet of
the Dutch, came of with the worst loosing the Garland and Bonaventure, and some
other Ships. About the ending of February the Dutch were miserably overthrown
by the English between Portland and the Ifle of Wight; In the mean time arrived
an Extraordinary Ambassador from the King of Portugal to the Parliament, which
after many Addresses and Treaties concludes a peace, with Obligation to satisfy
the English Merchants

From France also the English were courted by two parties, by an Agent from the
King of France, desiring a release of those Ships taken going to the relief of
Dunkirk; and by 4. Deputies from the Prince of Conde, craving aid against the
Cardinal and his Creatures; who had straightly besieged the City of Bourdeaux,
but they both proved ineffectual.

And now happened a very strange Alteration in the Scene of Affairs in England,
Cromwell whose ambition was now ripe, and who knew he might take a very fit
opportunity, to usurp that that power he had so long gaped for, the people of
these Nations being weary of the actions of this Parliament, and there dilatory
proceedings, and apparent intentions of perpetuating themselfs, and to defraud
the people of their ancient, and undoubted Liberties of equal and successive
representatives, * entered the Parliament House, attended with some of his
principal Officers, and there delivered certain reasons, why a Period ought to
be put to that Parliament, which was presently done; the Speaker with the rest
of the Members, some by force, some through fear, and some murmuring departed
the House, and the better to satisfy the wiser sort of people, Cromwell and his
Officers publish a large Declaration, showing the reasons of his dissolving
that Parliament; Thus, that part of the Parliament, who had basely murdered
their King, and Usurped an Authority, over these Nations are turned out of
Doors, to the scorn and derision of the whole Nation by their Servant Oliver
Cromwell.

Thus that part of the House of Commons which then sat (afterward better known
by the name of the Rump) being dissolved, their power was wholly devolved into
the hands of their aspiring General; who least the Magistrates and other
public Ministers of the nation should be startled at this so sudden change.
This following Declaration was published.

WHere as the Parliament being dissolved, persons of approved fidelity and
honesty, are (according to the late Declar-tion of the 22 of April last) to be
called from the several parts of this Commonwealth to the supreme Authority;
and although effectual proceedings are and have been had for perfecting those
resolutions; yet some convenient time being required for the assembling those
persons, it has been sound necessary for the preventing the mischiefs, and
inconveniences, which may arise in the mean while to the publickaffairs, that a
Council of State be constituted to take care of and intend the peace and
safety, and present management of the affairs of the Commonwealth; which being
settled acoordingly, the same is hereby declared and published, to the end all
persons way take notice hereof, and in their several places and stations
demean themselves peaceably, giving obedience to the Laws of the Nation as
heretofore: and in the exercise and administration whereof, as endeavors shall
be used, that no oppression or wrong be done to the people; so a strict account
will be required of all such, as shall do any thing to endanger the public
peace and quiet upon any pretense whatsoever.

O. CROMWELL.
April. 30. 1653.

These domestic Revolutions did in some measure heighten the spirits of the
Dutch, for they thought some eminent distractions and commotions would
certainly ensue thereupon, June, 2. The English Fleet being at Anchor, without
the South-head of the Gober, discover about 100 sail, of Dutch men of War,
lying two Leagues to Lee-ward; the English presently made sail after them,
after a sharp dispute they take of the Dutch 11. men of war, two water-hoyes 6.
Captains, 1500 prisoners, and sunck 6. men of War more; had not the night
prevented the rest of the Dutch-Fleet would in all probabillity have been cut
off in this engagement. General Dean, one of our Admiralls was slain; In the
mean time Cromwell and his Confederates consult on fit persons on whom the
Legislative power of the Nation should be committed, to which end the grand
Tyrant issues out warrants under his own hand to a certain number of persons
chosen by himself, whom he thought would serve his interest to appear at the
Counsel Chamber at White Hall, July. 4. 1653. Where being accordingly met
Cromwell being attended with several Officers of the Army, makes them a short
speech, and delivers unto them a writing under his hand and Seal, impowering
them to be the supreme Legislative Authority of the three Nations: from thence
they repair to the Parliament house, and choose for their Speaker Mr Rouse,
they begin to debate what they shall call themselves; at last they conclude to
call themselves the Parliament, having sat about four months their
consultations are chiefly for the taking away of Tithes, at last it was moved
by some of them that their further sitting would not prove for the peace of the
Nation, therefore they attend the General and according to command resigned
their power into his hands again, who presently after, assumes to himself the
Title of Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
takes unto himself a Council of twenty one persons, by whose assistance all
things are carried on, during the intervals of Parliament.

Things being thus translated in England, his Royal Majesty not having any
further means left him for the regaining of his dominions, is constrained to
take up his Residence in the kingdom of France, where notwithstanding his low
condition he lived with great honor and respect, with the King Queen and
Nobles of France. During his abode here in this Court a match was propounded to
him, viZ. the Duke of Orleances daughter, as likewise to his illustrious
Brother the noble Duke of York, the Duke of Longevills daughter. But the
troublesome estate of the kingdom of France, and his Royal Majesty's ill
posture of affairs in his own kingdoms, soon put a period to this transaction.
Whilst these things were in agitation happened a difference betwixt the the
Prince of Conde and Cardinal MaZarine, most of the Princes of the blood side
with the first: the King of France, who now was newly come to age, to sway the
Scepter, with the latter; the cause of the quarrel was, Cardinal MaZarine his
inordinate power, and other grand miscarriages of state, the people also
generally murmr against him, the Princes and Parliament of Paris and
Bourdeaux are against him, as also the Duke of Louraine, then in service of the
Spaniard, things arrived at such a height that nothing but a Civil war was
likely to ensue, to compose and end these differances his sacred Majesty of
England uses his utmost endeavors, telling them from his own experience, the
miseries of a civil War; but all endeavors proved in effectual, for the
French King, persisted in his resolutions not to give way to the banishment of
the Cardinal, hereupon, the Duke of Lorraine was sent for with his Army to come
and join with the Princes, the Duke having been tampered with by the contrary
party and having advantageous terms desisted, hereupon a^ general report was
spread, that his Majesty of England had drawn over the Duke to the Kings party,
because they were often together, this coming to the peoples ears, so incensed
them not only against the Duke for his perfidiousness; But also against his
Majesty and the Queen his mother, the fury of the people increased so much that
the King was forced for his own preservation to retire from the Louver to St
Jermans, the Queen his mother received many affronts, as she passedin her Coach
from the Louver to the Nunnery at Chaliot, where she kept her Refidence; his
Majesty now treats with Lorraine for the recovery of his kingdom of Ireland,
out of the hand of the English Republic, to this end several Articles are
agreed unto by the Lord Taffe agent for the King, and the Duke; amongst other
things it was concluded that the Duke should be vested with the power and title
of Protector Royal of Ireland. But the Duke having not strength enough for
this great enterprise, this business takes no effect: his Majesty having
stayed at Saint Jermans till the heat of the popular fury was over, returned
again to the Louvre. During, his abode there, his ilustrious Brother the Duke
of Gloucester, who for a long time had bin under the custody of the English
Juncto, and at length dismissed and sent into Holland to his sister, was from
thence attended into France by Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir Richard
Grenvile, and he was honorably received at Paris by the French King,
Queen Mother, and the rest of the Grandee. during his Majesty's abode here,
arrived Mrs. Jane Lane, who had so miraculously preserved the King after the
fight at Worcester, he being exceedingly glad to hear this news, immediately
sends some persons of quality, with Coaches to conduct her to Paris, where
being come they rejoice in each others presence: let us now a little cast our
eyes into England, where Cromwell and the Council at White Hall, having usurped
the Regal authority carry all by force before them, about the latter end of
February, several persons of quality are carried to the Tower, for being Loyal
to his Majesty, but because nothing of moment could be proved against them they
are set at liberty. Cromwell being desirous to strengthen himself, in the
Tyrannical Reigning over his Majesty's subjects bethinks himself of making
peace with foreign States and Princes, to that end presently patches up a very
disadvantageous peace with the Dutch. presently after, concludes a peace also
with Christina Queen of Sweden a a little before the resignation of her Crown
to her Cousen Carolus Gustavus. In May following, several persons are charged
with high Treason for endeavoring to take away the Protectors life, seize upon
the Tower and proclaim his Majesty King of Great Britain, a High Court of
Justice is erected, Col. Gerard, Peter Vowel Schoolmaster and Somerset Fox are
condemned to die, the last is reprieved for his ample confessions; Col. Gerrard
was beheaded at Tower hill, and Vowel hanged at Charing Cross on the same day,
Don Pantalaon Sa, Brother to the Portugal Ambassador was beheaded, for
engaging in a quarrel on the New Exchange where one Mr. Greneway was slain. His
Sacred Majesty having now remained in the Court of France about two or three
years, sometimes being lifted up high with hopes, of regaining his three
kingdoms, other times being cast down with fears sollicitates, the States of
Holland again, to own his Royal interest, but they having made a peace with
Oliver only complement him with a letter full of civility: and now that which
troubled his Majesty most was this, the French Court, (notwithstanding all
means used to the contrary by the King of England, his mother and other
friends) prepare to send over an Ambassador into England; hereupon his sacred
yet still suffering Majesty leaves that kingdom, having taken his farewell of
the King and other great ones from whom he received many Complements and
Apologies, being accompanied with his brother the Duke of York, his Couzens
Prince Rubert and Prince Edward Palatine to Chatilion, a house belonging to the
Prince of Conde where they stayed a while to confider how to dispose of
themselves to the best advantage his Majesty with Prince Rupert resolves for
Germany, having before sent the Lord Wilmot, before Ambassador to the Emperor
to negotiate in his behalf: Prince Edward took his journey to Burbone, the Duke
of York remaining in France till after the peace with England is concluded
being Lieutenant General of the French Army: the young Duke of Glooester after
his Brother was gone into Germany, by reason of the Queen his Mother, and some
others of the Catholic Religion, was placed in the College of the Jesuits
there, to have been bred up in the Romish Religion; Intelligence thereof being
soon brought to his Majesty: he being not a little displeased, soon takes order
for his remove, which was exactly performed. Oliver, according to one Article
in his Government, called a Parliament to meet at Westminster, Sept. 3. 1654.
William Lenthal master of the Roll, being chosen Speaker; at their first
sitting they begin to question the lawfulness of the power, by which they were
called, this highly Offended Oliver Protector, and made him resolve to put a
Period to their sitting; so when they had sat about 5 mouths, he dissolved
them, soon after the dissolution of the Parliament, the Court was allarmed with
news of a great rising in Shropshire, Montgomryshire, Wiltshire,
Nottinghamshire, Northumberland and Yorkshire in the behalf of his Royal
Majesty: Sir Henry Littleton, Sir John Packington, and Major Wildman are
secured, and sent Prisoners to the Tower. Sunday 11. March a Party about 200.
enter Salisbury, seize upon Horses, take away Commissions from the Judges as
they were going there circuit and march toward Cornwall, they are met with by
Captain Vnton Crook, and after a sharp dispute totally routed, their chief
Captains were taken, viz. Penruddock, Jones, and Grove, Sir Joseph Wagstaffe,
made a shift to escape shortly after, Penruddock and Grove were beheaded at
Exon, and Jones was repreived: several other risings in other parts of this
Kingdom, but were all suppressed; and now Cromwell prepares a very great Fleet,
but for what end none knew but some principal Commanders: In the mean time the
King of Spain sends over as Extraordinary Ambassador the Marquis of Leda, who
was here conplemented by our new Court, but finding which way things went,
after a short stay returns to his own Country; presently after his departure
this great Fleet steer there course toward Hispaniola, one of the fairest
Islands belonging to the American Dominions of the King of Spain; at l^st the
English land in the Island of Hispanola without any opposition, and seeing no
enemy near them, think themselves sole Masters of the Indies. They having
marched a many miles through the woods, are ready to perish with faintness, and
for want of water; and now the Spanish Negros fall upon them, and miserably
kill them, with little resistance drive them out of the Island; the remainder of
those that escaped this Buchery possess themselves of Jamaica; and now, G.
Blake with a little better success, being come before Tunis demands reparation
for the losses sustained from Turkish Pirates, but being answered in scorn by
the Dye of Tunis, fired 9. Ships, and came off with little loss, but much glory
to himself; notwithstanding the former ill successes of the Royal party, are
sent to the Tower upon suspicion of Treason; The Lord Willonby of Parham, and
the Lord Newport. The Illustrious Duke of Gloucester having staid for some times
with his sister the Princess Royal ^^ at Hague, was now resolved to go to his
Brother, Our most gracious King, then at Cullen. being come thither with his
Sister, they stay till after the Fair at Franckfort, to which place they made a
progress of State and pleasure, being attended with the Marquess of Ormond,
Lord Goring, Lord Newburrough, and Lady Stanhop, etc. As they passed through
every Princes Country, they were complemented by their Chief Officers of state,
and saluted by all the great Guns from all their Towers and Castles, in an
especial manner. The Prince Elector of Ments sent his grand Marshall, to
invite them to his Court, whereupon the Lord Newburrough, was sent back to
desire to excuse them at present, promising to wait upon them at his return:
being arrived at Franckfort and hearing that Queen Christiana of Swedn was
coming that was in her journey to Italy; his sacred Majesty sent one of his
Lords to her, signifying his desire to wait upon her at what place her Majesty
should be pleased to Nominate: the place appointed for this Interview was
Collingsteen a Village near Frankfort, where his Royal Majesty was received by
her with much respect: he had Private conference with her about half an hour,
then the Duke of Gloucester, and then the Lords that attended his Majesty Lord
Jermyn and other English Lords: Takes his Journey to Flaunders, where at that
time our dread Sovereign did reside, at the Kind invitation of Don John of
Austria then Governor of the Low Countries: let us now leave our King a
little, and look a while into his dominions, where Cromwell notwithstanding his
ill success in the last Parliament through his necessities, is compelled to
call another to meet at Westminster 17 September, where the Navy, Commanded by
General Mountague lying to intercept the Spanish plate, coming from the West
Indies, obtained a great victory over the Spaniard near Cadize, six hundred
thousand pieces of eight taken besides many ships fired, and many other rich
prizes taken. This Parliament being met on the day appointed, petition and
advise Cromwell to take upon him the name and Title of King, which his tender
conscience could not swallow because he was afraid of some of his aspiring
Officers; and now a desperate attempt against the life of Oliver is found out,
and one Miles Sindercomb is apprehended and presently after tried and condemned
to be hanged drawn sty. As they came from Frankfort the Elector of Mentz.
renewed his civilities, provided all manner of Accommodations for them as they
passed through his Territories, meeting them himself a great part of the way;
he brought them to one of his Palaces, where he entertained them after a
sumptuous and splendid manner, for two or three days, after which they returned
to Collen, four Burgo Masters being appointed to wait on them, and welcome them
hom^. About the beginning of November. 1656. A peace is concluded by Cromwell,
with the French, the principal condition of this Treaty was the exclusion of
our Royal Sovereign, with all his relations and adherents out of the King of
France his Dominions. The thrice Noble, Heroic and truly Valiant Duke of
York, notwithstanding his great Command in the King of France his Army, which
was Lieutenant General, is now advertized to depart the Kingdom, by a
prefixed time; which act the French may perhaps hereafter have cause enough to
rue which now being come, he takes his leave of the King and Court of France,
being attended by the and quartered, but he on the day appointed for his
execution, saves them that labor by making away himself, by snuffing up some
poisonous powder into his head; whereupon it was ordered that he should be
dragged naked at a Horses heels, from the Tower to the scaffold on Tower hill,
and there buried having an Iron stake thrust into his belly, etc.

In April 1657. several fifth Monarchy-men are apprehended, for having a design
to subvert this grand Tyrant and his Government. Major General Harrinson,
Lawson, and others are apprehended, but nothing could positively be proved
against them; Now, according to conditions of agreement betwixt England and
France, the French King desires Auxiliary forces from England to help him in
his Wars against the Spaniard in Flanders, which was readily granted by
Cromwell, 6000. Foot are accordingly sent over under the command of Col.
Reynolds, who are no sooner landed, but suddenly they take the strong Fort of
Mardike. After Cromwell had given his final answer, that he could not accept of
the Title of King, he was by the Parliament instated Lord Protector in a most
solemn manner, June 26. Cromwell having now, as he thought, settled his Throne,
bethinks himself of advancing his nearest friends and relations, to that end,
he sends for his eldest Son Richard out of the Country, to enure him to a Court
life, and that he might have some insight into State affairs, designing him for
succession in the Protectorship, which the University of Oxford foreseeing
send their Proctors, to elect him their Chancellor, in which honor he was
solemnly installed at Whitehall.

His Second Son Henry he created Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, his two youngest
Daughters he matched, the eldest to Mr. Robert Rich, Grandchild to the then
Earl of Warwick; The younger to the Lord Faulconbridge, the Nuptials of them
both was celebrated with much Splendour at Whitehal and Hampton Court; scarce
was the mirth of these solemnities over, but the Court is allarmed with the
death of Genesis Blake, Vice Admiral Badiley, and Lieutenant General Brain:
presently after Col. Reynolds and his Company were cast away by Goodwin Sands
coming from Flanders. The Parliament (so called) having adjourned themselves
from the 6 th. of June until the 20 th of January following; and now those
other Members were admitted, who formerly were excluded. There is also another
House of Parliament, so called, chosen by Cromwell, consisting most part of
Officers of the Army, with some of the old Nobility, this latter being as it
were a House of Peers. But this other House would not down with the House of
Commons; whereupon in a great rage perceiving his right, as he supposed, to be
infringed; notwithstanding all diswasions to the contrary, he leaving his
Council hasts to the Parliament House, swearing by the Living God he would
dissolve them, which accordingly was done; about the latter end of the year
dyed his Son in Law Mr. Robert Rich, and not long after his Grandfather the
Earl of Warwick.

And now about the 12 th. of March a terrible plot is discovered, the City of
London was to be fired, and the Tower and Mows fiered, and all the Soldiers
about the City sacrifized to the fury of the Royal interest; and therefore he
presently sends for the Lord Major, Aldermen, and common Council of the City of
London, to warn them of the approaching danger, tells them how the Marquess of
Ormond had lately been in London for 3. weeks together, promoting the affairs
of his Master, that our most dread Sovereign lay ready with 8000. men,
quartered on the Sea Coasts of Flanders, and 22. hired Ships to transport them,
thereupon he recommended unto their care the settling of the Militia, upon the
many persons were apprehended, an high Court of Justice, erected Dr. Hewet, Sir
Henry Slingsby, and Mr. Mordant were brought to trial; Sir Henry, and the
Doctor were both condemned to loose their heads on Tower Hill, and 6. others of
meaner sort were adjudged to be hanged, drawn and quartered, Whereof but three
suffered.
great endeavors were used, the Ministers of London Petition for the Doctors
life, and many great persons, for the Knight, but all avail nothing, About the
month of June 1658. arrived an ominous Whale in the River of Thames, which was
taken at Greenwich, and found to be 58. foot in length, and every way
proportionable.

In Flanders successes came in with a full Garri^^: presently after the taking
of Mardike Fort, Dunkirk was straightly besieged by the joint Forces: of the
English and French, and after a sharp battle the Marquis of Leda Governor of
Dunkirk being now more streitly then ever environed both by Land and Seas,
resolved upon a desperate sally, in which he was mortally wounded and shortly
after dyed, the Governors death wrought so upon the besieged, that on the 25
th. day of June Dunkirk was surrendered into the hands of the French, and
afterward consigned to the English.

August 6. Dyed Mrs. Elizabeth Claypoole, a Daughter to Oliver Cromwell; not
long after her, dyed the Earl of Mulgrave one of the privy Counselors to his
Highness, so called, And now comes death it self to act his part on this our
noble Tyrant, Cromwell himself must also dye, who by force and fraud had from a
mean beginning raised himself to the arbitrary Government of these 3. Kingdoms.

And that which is very remarkable on the same day on which he had gained two
such signal victories against his Majesty's forces viz. at Dunbar and
Worcester, viz. September 3. the night that ushered in the day of his death
there arose such a horrible tempest, the like has hardly been seen in our age,
Trees both of a large and smaller size, are torn out of the earth by the roots.
Having as he thought certainly secured the government of these three Kingdoms
to himself being at the point of death, he nominates for his successor his
eldest son Richard, who the next day after his Fathers death, was in the
presence of old Olivers privy Council, and the chief Officers of the Army
Proclaimed Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, and had addresses
unto him from most parts of the 3. Nations, professing their zeal and affection
to his government, which how little they availed him time has since
sufficiently showed us: And now after the Advancement of Richard to the supreme
power and dignity of these Nations, Principal care is taken for the enterment
of his Fathers Corpse, with all the solemnity and state accustomed at Kings and
Princes Funerals, and to this end search is made into old Records to see what
was expended at the Funeral of King James of happy memory, that the same, nay
much more cost might be bestowed on this; his Corpse being now enbalmed and
wrapped in Lead, was conveyed from Whitehal to Somerset House, there tolye in
regal pomp and State, a Spectacle for all Comers: and now his Funeral pomp
being ended, great preparations there are for the sending out of naval supplies
to the King of Sweden: But now want of moneys and other necessities of State,
enforce Richard and his Council to summon a Parliament, which accordingly meet
Jan. 27. This Parliament consisted as the other in his Fathers time did, of two
Houses, the Commons, and the other House, which now was called the Upper-house,
and now the great thing under debate was the Recognition of the Government, and
now the Protectorians and the Commonwealths-men, for so the House was divided,
spend there time in large Speeches, till on a sudden; Behold, A Remarkable and
an unexpected change, which was occasioned through some ambitious Spirits of
some in the Army, and particularly Major General Lambert, who thought to make
himself Lord Protector of the 3 Nations, as his Master Cromwell had done before
him, joins with his silly kindred Fleetwood, Disborow and others, and partly
out of fear enforce Richard to dissolve the Parliament then sitting.

And so suffered himself to be divested of that power and authority, which he
was invested in, returning to the condition of a private Person, was now honest
Dick again. And now all men were in a maze wondering into what hands the chief
power would next be devolved, the generality of the people did now again
according to their bounden duty, not only desire but endeavor, that his Sacred
Majesty our most dread Sovereign might be introduced into his own Kingdoms;
full well knowing there could be no settlement without his Royal person. But
now the Members of the old Parliament and the Counsel of Officers of the Army
meet, and it was agreed that those Members of the old Parliament who sat in
1653. and were interrupted by their late aspiring General from sitting should
be invited to their freedom and right of sitting, and the exercise of their
trust by a Declaration presented from the Army to the old Speaker William
Lenthal, and several of the Members at the Rolls in Chancerylane; This Juncto
being thus Re-called from the grave of Ignominy and reproach, for they were the
very scorn of the people, Being the Men that Murdered our Royal Sovereign,
and basely enslaved the people for so many years: on the 7. of May they began
to set again, and first they appoint a Committee to attend Richard Cromwell, to
know his mind concerning his acquiescence in the present Government, they
receive from him a writing to this effect, that he could freely acquiesce in
the present Government, that he held himself obliged as he expected from it, so
to demean himself peaceably under it; Not long after they send for his Brother
Henry, who had ruled in Ireland under the title of Lord Lieutenant, who came
over and submitted to their good pleasure. And now, the cunning Rump the better
that they might secure themselfs take into their own hands, the absolute
command of the whole Army, cons^stituting the Speaker General in the name of
the Parliament; appointing the several Officers to receive now Comissions from
them: and now the foundations of government being thus overturned there
appeared a general discontent throughout the whole Kingdom, in the end a
Secret combination was laid for a general rising in all Counties.

Sir George Booth in Cheshire, and Middleton in Shropshlre raised a
considerable Army in the defense of King and Parliament; Other Counties failing
to come into their assistance, Sir George Booth and his party are totally
routed by Lambert, himself taken in a disguised ^abit and was sent Prisoner to
the Tower of London.

This success revived his ancient credit with the Army, and now he begins to
plot their destruction, whose lately had taken him into favor, and that he
might the better bring about his own ambitious designs. 13 October, 1659. he
forced them to a dissolution, (...) keeping their Speaker, and the rest of
their Members from the House.

Thus was those once flourishing Kingdoms ^urried into changes of Government
and A^archi^^^^ confusions by mean persons who only studied to advance their
own base ends and interests. Fleetwood and Lambert and the rest of the Officers
of the Army have now the sole authority of the Nations, and because they have
the longest Sword make their will their Law, but a little to satisfy the people
that they might think themselves not under the power of the sword, these
Officers chose a certain number of choice persons fit for their own turn, to
whom they give full authority over the people and Christen them a Committee of
Safety. This Government is the scorn and derision of the whole Nation, and now
though the Rump had hung its tail* betwixt it is legs; for about 3. months. In
December it began to wag it and while the safety of the Committee of Safety was
marched into the North, under its Father Lambert, the churlish Rump stole into
the House again by night, seven times a Devil worse then before, where now they
ride triumphant, make wh^^ Laws they list, send their J^^^^ary (...) coats into
the City, take away the Citizens money pretending it was gathered for the King,
they fill the prisons about London with those persons that are for a full and a
free Parliament* But yet the eyes of all the good are fixed upon our renowned
General Monck, who is ordered to march up to London with what force he thinks
fit, in the way he was courted with addresses from the Gentry in every County.
Being come to Land. he was received with much joy, and now instead of being
their Moses to deliver them from their Egyptian bondage, he was suspected to be
worse then Pharaoh himself. On Thursday Feb. 9. 1659. by Commandment from the
Rump, he enters the City with his whole Army, imprisons many of the Common
Counsel, Diggs up their posts, breaks down the Gates of the City and none
dares open their mouth. This being done Saturday 11 of February 1659. a day
never to be forgotten; The Noble General enters the City with his Army
refusing to obey the Rumps Command, and shortly after admitts the Secluded
Members of the House of Commons which were kept out by the Army, 1648 Those
Gentlemen take their places, provide for the safety of the Nation, and at last
disolve themselves: Issue out Writs for a free and full Parliament to meet at
Westminster April 25. 1660, But to return to his Majesty in Flanders of whose
Itineracy life I have given you some small account already. May the first, the
Parliament consisting of Lords and Commons in their Coachs assisted with diverse
Noblemen, Gentlemen Citizens, Soldiers, etc. Proclaimed his Sacred Majesty
King of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith at Westminister
and London in great pomp and solemnity: this being done they send Commissioners
to his Royal Majesty then at Breda, to acquaint his Majesty what his Parliament
in E^g, had done entreating his Majesty to make what have conveniently he can
to his Parliament, the City of London also send their Commissioners to wait on
his Majesty: The Ministers also of London send their Deputies to congratulate
him; his Majesty conferred the honor of Knight hood, on the Citizens with the
Lord Gerrards Sword. The States General during his Majesty's abode with them,
entertained him with as great expressions of joy as it he had been theirs, not
Englands Sovereign, they had several times audience of his Majesty, who
delivered themselves in French* and his Majesty answered them in the same
language. The States of Holland supped bare with his Majesty, where they supped
his Majesty sat at the upper end of the Table, the Queen of Bohemia on the
right hand, the Princess Royal on the left, the Duke of York at the right hand
of the side of the Table, the Duke of Gloucester at the left hand, and next him
the Prince of Orange; one of the Courses was served up all in Gold, which was
afterward presented to his Majesty, valued at 60000. l. they also gave him a
Bed which cost 7000 l. and Table linen to the value of 1000. and 600000.
Guldens; the Illustrious Duke of York, as high Admiral of England, gives order
to the Fleet for his Majesty's Reception and Transportation of his retinue; His
Sacred Majesty, the Queen of Bohemia, the Princess Royal, the most Illustrious
Duke of York, and Duke of Gloucester, and Prince of Orange went aboard, General
Montague in the good ship, formerly called the Naseby, but now christened by
his Majesty the Royal Charles; Where after Re-past the Queen of Bohemia, the
Princess Royal, and the Prince of Orange, having taken leave of his Majesty,
they set sail for England; the Duke of York in the Land. the Duke of Gloucester
in the James; Not long after they arrived at Dover, where he was received with
great demonstrations of joy, the General so soon as ever he saw his Majesty
fell on his knees, but his Majesty taking him up and kissing him and embracing
him, all parties were well satisfied; His Majesty put on the George on his
Excellency the Lord General Monck: the Duke of York and Gloucester put on his
Garter, he also made him one of the Lords of his honorable Privy Council, and
Master of his Horse. On Tuesday May 29. 1660. being the same day of the week on
which his Royal Father was murdered, and the same day of the month on which he
was born, being just 30. years age; the same day, it also pleased God to bring
him in peace to the enjoyment of his Crown and Dignities.

Never was any Prince received with more Triumphs, All the streets being richly
hanged with Tapestry, and a lane made by the Militia Forces to London Bridge;
from London Bridge to Temple Bar by the Trained bands on the one side, and the
several Companies in their Liveryes, and the streamers of each Company on the
other side in their Railes, from Temple Bar to Westminster by the Militia
forces and Regiments of the Army. Thus was his Majesty conducted to his Royal
Palace at Whitehal, the solemnity of the day was concluded with infinite of
Bonfires, among the rest a very costly one was made in Westminster, where the
Effiges of old Oliver Cromwell, that grand Traitor was set upon a high post with
the Arms of the Commonwealth, which having been exposed a while to public
view, with Torches lighted that every one might the better take notice of them,
were at last burnt together; And thus having traced his most Sacred Majesty,
even from his lowest condition through all his sufferings persecutions; We
shall now leave him, invested with his Royal Crown and Dignity, and pray long
may his Majesty live a support to his friends, a Terror to his Enemies, an
Honor to his Nation, an Example to Kings of Piety, Justice, Prudence and
Power, that this Prophetical saying may be verifyed in his Majesty, King
Charles the II. shall be greater then ever was the greatest of that Name.

God save the King. FINIS.

