MIRACLES Revived, In the Discovery of the POPISH PLOT, By the late Reverend
DR. of SALAMANCA.
IT is a Vulgar Error, that Miracles are ceased in the Reformed Churches. To
confute which Paradox, we shall here produce some (among many) such
Demonstrative Arguments and Instances, taken from the acknowledged Miraculous
Discovery of the Popish Plot, made by that Famous Minister of the Gospel, and
Learned Dr. of Salamanca T -- O --, as none but Papists, and Popishly affected,
can have the confidence to deny them.

I. The Doctor (out of pure Zeal to Discover Popish Intrigues,) professed himself
a Papist; Renounced the Protestant Religion; Adored, and Received the
Consecrated Host; took Dreadful Oaths, even upon the Sacrament, to Practice,
and Pursue, Most Hellish and Bloody Designs for diverse Years together;
Stafford's Trial.
Yet all this while remained (as he says) a Real, Sincere, and constant
Protestant. If this be not a Miracle the Devil's in it

II. The Doctor (good Man) to save His Majesty's Life, Oais's Narrative.
had wheedled the Jesuits out of all their Secrets; He knew the very Time when
Groves and Pickering laid daily wait to Shoot the KING; He hourly expected the
Horrid Effects of Sir George Wakeman's Poison; He was privy to the designed
Assassination of the KING at Windsor; He was certain, the Russians were
actually upon the Place; He saw the Money sent them for Expedition, And every
Moment waited to hear the Fatal Blow was given; Yet (see the wonderful
Strangness of the Thing,) Neither the Dr. warned the KING of his Eminent
Danger, Nor did the KING all this while (God be Thanked) suffer any the least
Harm. This is Miracle upon Miracle.

III. The Dr. assures us, There were huge Armies of English Papists, Ibidem.
(besides Wild Irish and Spanish Pilgrims,) raised for Immediate Service; Yet
('it is strange) not One Man of them ever appeared: These Swarms of Papists were
to be Armed with Swords, Guns, Black-Bills, Fireballs, etc. Yet none of these
Magazines could ever be found. Oats saw, and Delivered, not a few Patents,
Bulls, and Briefs; He read whole Bushels of Letters and Pacquets, all
containing Damnable Treason; Nay, He could punctually Recite upon his
Fingers-ends the Express Words of almost every Letter; Yet (still more
strange,) neither He, nor any One for him, could ever produce One single
Patent, One Letter, One scrip of Paper, whereby to testify the Truth of the
rest. Here is a whole Heap of Miracless!

IV. The Dr. immediately before His Discovery, Stafford's Trial.
(though he had both the Purses and Lives of the Conspirators at his Command,)
Yet at the same Time was ready to Starve, and Begged at the Papists Doors for
Bread. This is as Strange as if it were a Miracle!

V. Coleman's Trial. Wakeman's Trial.
The Dr. before the King and Council swore He never knew, nor had seen either
Mr. Coleman, or Sir George Wakeman, until he saw them there present at the
Gouncil-Board: The like Ignorance of Mr. Corker, or his Concerns, He attested
at the Taking of Pickering in the Savoy; Yet at their Several Trials, He knew
them all, and had been their Intimate Aequaintance and Bosom Counselor. This
surely is no small Miracle.

VI. Five Jesuits Trial.
The Dr. was Personally in London, and at St. Omers the self-same Time; He saw,
and spoke with Mr. Ireland in London, that very Moment Ireland was in
Staffordshire. Nay, if This be not sufficient; He was really Present, Disputed,
and took Degrees at Salamanca; Yet never was seen or heard there. These are
Swingeing Miracles!

VII. Stafford's Trial.
The Dr. Swore before the House of Lords, He had Declared all he knew against
any Person of what Quality soever in England; Yet afterward He accused one of
the Best and Highest Persons in England of the Blackest Crimes Hell and Malice
could ever Invent. The Qu.
This, if it be not a Miracle, is at least a Monstrous Prodigy!

VIII. Coleman's Trial.
The Dr. once Deposed, Mr. Bury was a very Honest Harmless Man; Yet afteswards
when the said Bury gave Evidence against Him, He swore he was a Notorious
Priest and Jesuit. Castlemains Trial.
This is a Miracle the wrong side outward.

IX. Colleges last Trial
The Dr. formerly swore Absolute Impossibilites against the Papists in behalf
of the King; Now he swears Moral Improbabilities in behalf of Dissenters
against the King. This is a Presbyterian Miracle!

X. The Dr. is a Preacher of the Gospel, yet no Christian; A Priest, yet not
Baptized. This is little less than a Miracle!

XI. The Dr. swore, that Mr. Elliot (a Minister of the Chapter of England) having
been a Circumciz'd Slave, had poisoned his Patron; Yet, (O Wonder!) the same
Patron is now alive again, and ready to Attest the direct Contrary. Now we
hope none will deny, but that the raising of the Dead, is a Grand Miracle!

XII. Before the Company of Weavers.
The Dr. Preached a Sermon, wherein he affirmed, The Crucifixion of Christ was
not available to Salvation, etc. This indeed is not a Miracle, But it is a
piece of the Newest and most Refined True-Protestant-Reformation, ever yet came
to Light since the Primitive Times of Blasphemy and Atheism, And may justly
give a Luster and Credit to all the other Miracles here Attested.

If it be Objected against these solid Proofs; That, for a Profligated Wretch
of a lost Conscience and Desperate Fortune, allured by Gain, and encouraged by
Indempnities, to Swear palpable Contradictions and Nonsense, is no Great
Miracle! It is answered; The less the Miracle is in so Swearing, the greater
still the Miracle is in being Believed; Especially, when Sodomy, Buggery,
Felony; Nay, and Perjury too proved upon him by his own Supporters, Colledge's
Trial.
D --, T -- and S --, shrewdly diminish the Credit of His Evidence. This is a
Miracle with a Witness.

Thus I have in short (omitting Hundreds of Arguments more of the like Nature)
clearly Demonstrated; Not only that our Renowned Dr. and Swearing-Master has
wrought Grand Miracles; But also that the Magnitude of the Miracles, and
Holiness of the Saint, bear equal Proportion.

Ex Ungue cognosce Leonem.
LONDON, Printed for A. Banks, 1682.


