

A TREATISE OF DIRECTION, HOW To travel safely, and profitably into Foreign
Countries.

Written by Thomas Neale of Warncford, in the County of Southampton, Esquire.

Oh youth! a greater order does arise
Of daily Chances: let it not suffice
To see the adjoining France: but bravely know
The farthest ^ster, and the winds that blow
From Northern Boreas: see fair Egypts strand,
And that hot Eastern Nabathean land
That views the rising Sun: and that which calls
It self from thise red beams, where Phoebus falls.
That at the last thou happily mai'st come
Wiser then great Ulisses to thy home.
Petronius. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson. 1643.

To his dearly beloved Brother, Mr. William Neale at Tours in France, or
elsewhere these.
IF all men in a manner (most dear Brother) applying themselves unto any action
of consequence, may seem to need, a Counselor and director: much more
certainly may he want this aid, which wandereth through uncertain passages,
and walks through the unknown ways of an unstable conversation. And since
(as it seems to me) that man has good, and propitious luck, which in his
doubtful extremities may have the opportunity to fly unto wholesome and grave
counsels: there can nothing be more happily assigned unto an ingenuous, and
well educated nature, then some path or learned direction, which may be rather
signed with the lively pourtraicture of eloquence, then with lime or
chalke-stone. This noble faculty, I must confess, I cannot boast, because it
is both unseemly for a teacher of naked truth, to use the adulterate
flourishes. of Rhetorique, and also, because it is so meanly apparent in me,
that it will presently decay, if it should be brought before, the judicious
lights of these times: only my chief aim is in this Treatise, to show and
breath forth the ingenuous candor of my mind; and my brotherly affection
toward you; if those rules, which in the following subject be proposed, may
by you be received with the like kind inclination. There are some (I persuade
my self) of a light and brainsick condition, which (being also not few in
number) desire to borrow no directions from the storehouse of learned
Philosophy: and so much contemn the rules of contemplation, and the
demonstrations which are deduced from our solitary thoughts, that they suppose
these Canons, but mere ridiculous, and crasie fancies, and the vain blasts of
swelling Air. But how much you contemn the sottish opinion of these men, and
dislike of this most pernicious tenet against all virtuous proceedings I am
very well acquainted: having in your childish years, heard your labotious
Essays, most elegantly for that age employed, in the praises and commendations
of contemplative men; for there is no man without all question, which desires
(with Ennius) to live the life of a reasonable creature, but does cordially
admire learning, and desires to salute those sweet flowers of Science, from
whose fragrant beds, sundry ohoyce compositions of elocution does arise,
whereby ordinary things, may be understood with delight, and obscure things
may be made easy by industry. So general and learned a mistress is Theory,
joined with the discreet practice of things, that from this storehouse for all
uses, will not be wanting matter and workmanship, to supply the richness of
our wits, for intention, judgment, or the final ends of our enterprises.
Those things therefore (dearly ^steemed brother) which I deduce from this
Magazine, and in the subsequent Tract, do propose unto you; I entreat you not
to undervalew, until the second consideration, the third reading over, and the
fourefold more acurate knowledge (then yet your years are capable of) of
humane subtleties and affairs, may convict men in these present directions, an
importunate affecter of trifling observations, or a bringer forth of such
productions, which are obscure, and erroneous from that round Cylind^r of
virtues peregrination. Neither can I conceive, that you spend your precious
time amiss, when you cast your eyes, and your most serious faculties upon
learned discourses, as though that these were but employments for idle times,
and hindrances to affairs of consequence; thinking it a childish practice,
(as many do,) to meditate, or write out any learned Contemplation. Believe me,
those follies which they that affect this laziness, commit, are mere
frivolous ravings, and oftentimes, not valuable in the right scale of reason,
to turn down the weight of a cracked nut-shell. Avoid them; for rightly does
Homer instruct you, in his first book of the learned Travailour; under the
person of Telemachus;

It fits thee not (now age more wisdom brings)
Still, for to follow those same childish things.
Dated at Warneford April 3. 1638.
Farewell.
To the Reader.
MAny there are (Courteous Reader,) which have and do daily observe, to their
due commendation, in the voyages they undertake, things worthy the eternal
register of fame: and some have not been wanting in all ages which in the
words of that learned man (Gaspar Waserus) non tantum transcurrendo, corpora
hominum aspiciunt, sed etiam animos, atquererum momenta, non margines, aut
super fines introspiciunt: But few or none, which have prescribed the exact and
profitable limits, which ought to direct this laudable purpose. And therefore I
have observed it to be a custom (perhaps, where it is well sorted, not
unprofitable) among those which send forth their sons, pupils, or kinsemen to
travel, to elect some discreet, and well experienced Companion, which may more
safely waft them to their own homes back again, through many tempests, that
continually use to assault those which Iourny from their homes. But these do
not always fulfill the intentions of the Directors, or rather imployers;
because frequently most men belie or overweene their own sufficiency: and
(which is worse) usually overshadow, by their cunning demeanor, at or before
their election, their owne^ vices.

I have therefore thought it, in my opinion, always a profitable work; if any
(which bath ability for directions of this quality) studious, and sober man,
would, collect, to necessary and pertinent heads, such monitions cautions, and
observations, which might be easily found out: whereby the hot spirits of some
novices may be wholesomely restrained and faithfully instructed. For these
dumb counselors, are commonly most trusty, and carry with them in their
prudent directions, collected from both reading and experience more solid
profit: then those which either readily spend their Judgments without
meditation, or at leastwise have no other but transitory and superficial
knowledge. Finding therefore none that has in our vulgar language (to my
remembrance) undertaken this profitable essay; I have adventured to make
public a small treatise of direction how to travel profitably, and safely
into foreign Countries; which in another idiome I had some 4 years since
addressed, to a near and dear travellor of my acquaintance. The original
shall hereafter appear, (although not so fully furnished) if this impolished
translation, with the not altogether unnecessary additions may pass without
the censure of the critical, and with the allowance of the Courteous reader. I
well know the presses groan with the weight of pamphlets and (since this most
happy invention) innumerable books of all sorts lie moulding in most private
studies, and libraries, fearing the worms, and desiring their readers. Nay
many judicious volumes of former, and modern times do now cum blattis et
tincis rixari; whilst many more idle vanities or raging follyes do busymens
minds upon worse imploiments. Sed (in the phrase of Baudius) quae est ista
profusio temporis in hac vitae brevitate, tantaque copia rerum scitu
dignissimarum, tempus tanquam rem vacuam aut noxiam super vacuis impendere? nec
supervacuis tantum sed noxiis, vtquae dulcedine quadam sui, praeclarissima
quaeque ingenia alliciant ad se, and avocent a melioribus? expertus loquor, nec
quisquam tibi mihi ve verba dederit, ut in plurimorum nugis, magnum aliquod aut
secretum bonum inesse suspicemur. I have therefore provided a remedy in this
little treatise to mitigate this disease, for my self and others (if they will
as many do,) have any confidence of an unknown physician. Here also the
patient may trust without danger; and knowing once the quality of the potion,
take as little as it pleases him self. For the needless (which some perhaps,
male volent esteemers of other men's endeavors, may object) subject of this
book; I will answer with a learned Philologer: Stultum est, certe serum nimis
jam demum incipere misereri chartarum, quae tam diu, tam misere, sine omni
gratia perierunt, and pereunt quotidie. Besides, Scribimus indocti doctique And
there is not (if we believe Pliny) any book out of which the laborious, and
candid reader, may not collect some profit. How ever I have made it public
for to serve my own turn; who have now one, I may not repent to leave this
unto, as a legacy, or direction. But I would be willing to benefit more, and
amongst the rest my courteous, and benevolent reader otherwise.

Optarem ut placeam, sin minus ut taceam

From my house. At Warneford.

T. N.
3. Feb. 1642.
A Treatise of direction; how to travail profitably, and safely into foreign
Countries.
NOw therefore, that we may methodically sign those precepts, which in the
epistle we have generally premised, it will not be impertinent to bring before
the reader, their logical distribution: and first that we may profitably bend
our directions, let us behold the end, unto which, your resolution and my
speech ought to be referred. The end therefore of discreet Travail, is
Wisdom: which undertaken with a fortunate preparation, is circumscribed with
two bounds, to wit, men travail for experience sake, and the hardening of the
bodies faculties; or, for to better the gifts of the mind. The first cause of
experience, and bettering the inward parts, carried Plato into Egypt,
Pythagoras into those regions of Italy, which were then called, the greater
Graecia, and ushered Apollonius (that I may use the words of Hierom) unto the
scorched deserts of India, and the secret conclave of the Sun. The latter
moved those great warriors (if we allow not the desire, of renown to be the
only cause) Alexander and Julius to take far Iourneyes, that they might not
only in words, but in verity prove themselves as well hardy, as valiant.

Therefore that great Macedonian monarch, when he observed a Common Soldier
frozen almost to death by passing through those mountainous Counties;
descending from his throne, or chair of state, placed the half dead soldier
therein, that after those delicacies of ambition, which he bought by the
endeavors of the common soldier, he might obtain the fame of a
compassionate and hardy man. So often Julius Caesar, that true, and legitimate
son of Mars, as well in his descent, as actions, was wont to take, not only the
same diet, and lodging with the meanest of his soldiers: but some times upon
especial occasion, he was used to prevent the marches, and with incredible
celerity to pass one hundred miles within the compass of one day. Rightly did
these famous chief^aines understand that true, and ancient sentence of the poet
Timocles in Atbenaeus: 1. 6.

Each noble soul most labors takes, for why?
His honors issue from his Industry.
Heated with this Imagination, did Alexander after the laborious siege of the
City Oxidrace, leapt in a most ardent sweat, into the river Cephysus: that by
enduring at the same time the heat of the south, and the cold of the north, he
might show the strong composition of his body, and the Invincible tolerance of
his mind. But much more was the wonderful tolerance of the Philosophers, as
though there had among them been this only strife, which should be able to
endure most. For Zeno the master or beginner of the stoic sect, when he might
have lived safe in his own Country, traveled out of desire of increasing his
knowledge, and showing his constancy, into Sicilie, to the City of Phalaris
that most inhumane Tyrant, named Agrigentum, being so confident of his Town
abilities in enduring, says Valerius l. 3. that by his precepts, the barbarous
ferity of the people, and cruel savage in humanity of the Tyrant himself
might be mollified. A Philosopher also of the same name being entertained by
Nearchus likewise a most fierce Tyrant, and after some conspiracy against him
being taken and also freed from the tortures of the rack upon hope of some
farther Confession, approaching near unto that monster of men, he so strongely
fastened with his teeth upon the ear of the Tyrant, that he bit his ear from
his head; neither left his hold until his bowels were plucked forth. Strange
are the examples of Anaxarchus, Theodorus, Caelanus the Indian, and of other
Gymnosophists, which we read of their tollerance in this, and other authors: al
which to add unto this Topique will be both tedious, and unnecessary. And
certainly this is most plainly Confessed, by all that read the examples of
histories, that men which have been Inclined to travail have nothing so much
desired, as glory, and credit, amongst those foreign nations where they have
been entertained, which some have endeavored to obtain by the vigor of the
mind, and the faculties of an understanding, shining with the sparks of
virtues and learning: others have labored to get by the vastness, strength,
patience, and agility of their bodies. But this ostentation of bodily strength
is more sordid, then the other, which is most ingeniously decyphered by the
witty Poet Martial.

Hoc ego tuque sumus: sed quod sum non potes esse.
Tu, quod es e populo, quilibet esse potest.
We both have humane shape: but what I am
Do what thou will, thou can scarce ever be.
But such a one as thou, each Cobbler can
Or any worm of the Vulgarity.
Homer also, a most exquisite moral Philosopher and Poet, being about to
design the perfect lineaments of a discreet Travellour, does not assign him
the strength of Ajax, or the cholerique fury of Diomed, but under the person of
Ulysses frames him, a subtle observer of men's manners and rites politic; for
this was he,

Which often and with good discretion saw
Each Cities manners, and each nations Law.
And many troubles harbored in his mind
How he again his native home might find.
Or as Horace paraphraseth:

Which Conqueror of Troy, had many seen
Of Cities, and in many places been:
Which by providing for his sottish Crew,
Himself into full many Troubles drew.
And yet by strict observance of what is past
Through many waves, saw his own home at last.
As it were exemplarily treading out the paths of the most grave Philosophers,
and Travaling to learn experience, and teach prudence. Not as many
braine-sicke Travellours do in these times; which live from day to day, as the
proverb is; and being overheated by a furious brain, do skip inforraigne
Countries, without method or discretion, from one place to another: or inflamed
with an incessant desire of dancing up and down, practice nothing else, but to
advance their unruly and headlong passions. These a consideration of their
universal emptiness both in brain and purse (any wise and prudent man would
suppose) if they had but one Dram of discretion, would send back, although
with loss into their Countries. Infinite numbers of which summer Birds, that
are only like swallows or Cuckowes, good for the sack and smoke in the
chimnies, do so overheate themselves with hot exotique wines and fruits,
perpetually gowstering on the French or Italian delicates, that scarce one of
10 returns home alive. How many at the assault of the Groine and Lisbone,
when Don Antonio the base would have recovered Portugal, were sent unto their
latest homes in a foreign soil by heedlesse devouring of outlandish food;
here numbers dyed (as one speaks) and distempers were Conquerours over the
English Victors. The same fortune run many of our young lusty merchants and
mariners In Iava, at Bantam; at the Moluccaes, Amboina, Banda, the gulf of
Bengala, Coromandel, Pegu, Tenussery, Mocasser, Achen, Sumatra, Zeilan, and
finally in all those hot Countries of China and Iapon; which do overthrow your
health with the hot fruits of those Countries, and by excessive drinking of a
strong wine, Called Arecca, Common throughout all the east, and with the
contagious women, and almost as Contagious heat of the Country. And many (if
not to many) are those, which wearied with the delights of their own Country,
see Italy, Spain, France, upon as hard conditions: which besides the
Inconvenience of French affronts, and Rodomantodo duels, spanish Inquisitions,
and Italian suspicions (with Naples buttons sometimes to boot) run them into
many irrecoverable hazards. Pity it is (says a discreet Travellour) that the
parents, tutours; guardians, and friends will permit, much less egg on rash
inconsiderate hot headed spirits, and vain glorious brainsick youths; whose
only studies at home has been their cup, pipe and some butterfly Vanities,
from the fryingpan into the fire; from Domestical into foreign madness; as
though the change of Air for a feav'rish body and an ill temperd mind, were to
be preferred near the seaside, when as Horace rightly says,

Those which beyond the sea do run
Ill taught, the climate only change
But not their minds, now quite undone
Since they were suffered thus to rage.
For if the most Crafty Ulysses himself could scarce after Innumerable hazards,
and loss of his companions, see the smoke fume out his own palace in Ithaca,
and was known by none of his friends, except by one old mastiffe (which it
seemed lived longer then curres do now a days) what shall we think of their
unhappy courses, which having neither wit, age, nor experience; ruin all their
patrimony at home, and cannot spare, when they most abound? Certainly such
brainsick skippers (as Lipsius speaks) are like to return more fools then
they went forth. For such endeavor not to make better their minds faculties;
but only desire to jette up and down, that they may know the length of the
ways, and the names of the cities. There ought therefore to be limits, and
bounds set before these travelers, or rather Skippers, that may opportunely
keep them in the path way of discretion.

The first limit therefore ought to be, the Consideration of our purpose; and
to what end (as the Poet speaks, we are ordained, what the order of things
is, what Course of life will befit us; what may be the vocation of our necessity
and Inclination.

Also whether it be convenient for our natural addictions, the health of our
bodies, the profit of our affairs, and the manner of our Conversation to
travel. Then it is necessary to observe into what kind of regions, and sorts
of men we are to pass: as also what things are necessary for such a
resolution: and in all these circumstances we must take great care least we be
deceaved. That which follows is that we must have a regard of welsetling those
things we leave behind us, and not (as some do) ought we to think, that our
estates will follow us from one land unto another. There must be some certain
end (as Persius says) unto which we must direct our actions, and a certain
mark or scope to be aimed at, must always be before us. The longest day has
a night following, which Comes although slowly, yet at length it arriveth by
degrees. The long Journey too has an end, and breaths into a fainting period
it being the general aim of all discreet Travellours, there to die, where they
have been borne, to end their lives in their native soil although, as the
Ancient Poet has it.

To heaven still, we find an equal way
Whither at home, or else abroad we stay.
Yet (as Tully speaks) our Country has in it a certain enticing sweetness,
and delight, that young men oftentimes do affect the very beams of those
houses in which they were borne. Wherefore let every discreet Travellour, build
or settle some mansion in his own Country, if he be able; that he may be the
more gratefully received at his return: otherwise he is rather an exile then a
Travellour, neither travelleth such an one that he may come home more
sufficient, and better instructed: but if he repasse by chance, that he may
appear more desperate, and unhappy. Or oftentimes it happens, that he which
contemns, and Slighteth his Country, is slighted also by his Country.
Therefore let each Travellour settle his affairs, as well, as he may, before
his departure. For in his own Country and family each wise man does use first
to begin Uniformity.

These things being warily observed, it is necessary to purge the mind from the
dreggs of ill humors, and violent passions: and first of those innate
bitternesses, which with their fharpenesse infect each thing we taste: next
those impolished crudities, which may disgust foreign nations. For every
several clymate has amongst the ruder sort of Inhabitants some humors, and
whimsies predominant; which carry with them a distaste being Judged by the
palate of a stranger. so the French are accounted unconstant and rash; the
Spaniards proud, and vaineglorious; the Italian suspicious and revengefull; the
Germans, blockish and heavy; the Sicylians, Luxurious and effeminate; the
Polonian, barbarous and insolent; the Russe, Cruel, and yet parasiticall; the
Hungarian, furious and distasteful. Generally also the Europeans are dreadlesse
and rash, the Asians slothful and effeminate; the African subtle and
merciless; the American savage and heathenish. Our extravagant humors
therefore, when we Travel are to be polished with the rasor of a mild and well
qualified temper, that a man may Converse with foreigners, without shame to
his Countrymen, or offense to strangers. For nothing, in my opinion is more
dangerous, and mad then for a Travellour in strange regions to commit those
things, which being not fitted to the civility and custom of the places, he
converseth in, may call into question the genius of his Country, and the
Ability of his own discretion; so that if any sudden affront or mischance
happen, he may seem to bear it deservedly, whilst his own ill carriage may
be made the occasion of his unhappy success.

It is therefore a very necessary and considerable work for all discreet
Travellours to clear themselves of the burden of unnecessary passions before
they depart from home. For it is a very difficult matter to polish ones
education in that place, where all the faculties of nature are so put out of
order, that scarcely our best endeavors can free our selves from many hazards,
and inconveniences. For aptly does agree to many, which neglect this rule, that
saying of the Poet Horace:

They change of totimes the clime
not manners, which do pass
Their Country shoares -- Yea often (as Seneca has it) passions, the
fraileties and Infirmities of humane nature do most frequently follow those
wanderers, which depart from their Country out of a vain weariness or
Curiosity: whilst those sincere abilities which they possessed at home are
infected with Exotique contagions. Neither are those passions eased or cured by
time, which are rather increased by practicing. Trifles. And in another place
the same learned and judicious Philosopher: Thou art about to change thy
Country: but observe, if by avoiding that, thou can avoid thy self; and not
rather contrariwise; thou bear not about thee, the aggravation of thy
mischievous passions.

As those which are sick of a fever unquietly toss, and tumble themselves
about, vainly hoping for ease: so many times do those, which being sick and
diseased in their minds change climates, desiring to remedy their ungoverned
affections. For this is the way rather to uncover, then to take away the
disease: to confess and betray this inward hear, and not to heal it.
Elegantly says the Roman wise man: It is the property of a sick man to endure
nothing long, but rather to use changes as remedies. Hence are those wandering
peregrinations undertaken, and many shoares passed over, and sometimes by land,
other times by sea, over-wearied inconstancy contemning her pleasant abode, is
employed. Such therefore do rather fly away from, then avoid troubles, as
that heart in Virgill.

Whom amongst the Cressian Forests with a dart
The huntesman wounds: he feeling once the smart
Flies swist away, and to the woods is gone,
The Cretan woods, and now forgets his home.
But yet this flight is but to little purpose, because as the same Poet adds.

Unto his side does stick
The barbed dart, which first his ribbs did prick.
Therefore before a discreet travellour does undertake any Journey or
Peregrination, he ought to reduce his passions to to the rule of Tranquillity;
that so he may walk in the paths of reason, and felicity. Let his Course also
look generally upon that which is virtuous: For that which in it self is
honest, is profitable for all men: as the observation of customs, habits,
rites, governments of those men and commonwealths which we see; which ought not
to be negligently forgotten, or supinely observed. And therefore most wisely
did those Ancients, and amongst our later travellours, some few of the most
judicious, which did commit to their brief note-books the adventures of each
day: and the notable Acts of each week to their diaries, Kalendars and
Ephemerides; from the concise magazine of which small library, they might (in
Macrobius his sense) as from a storehouse, drawn out plenty of provision, to
put of the famine or barrenness of oblivion, or their confused memorials. For
the Table book, and this brief kind of writing, is the index and life of
memory; and may be made the Ingenions enlargement, of those things, which new
matter may consu^mate, and finish. Upon this grass let each laborious ox
ruminate, that at length, he may be be able to tread out the pure and solid
Corn of observation. And least the form of this kind of observation may halt,
in a Judicious Travellour ought to instruct his mind with the arts (amongst
which painting and limming are of best account) and liberal sciences, that
with their aid and direction, their notes may be reduced to a methodicall
order and form. Not after the manner of some ignorant Triflers, which while
they want matter, and vdnerstanding, gather together heaps of vanities; or
being blinded with faction and prejudice only sort but such things, which are
pleasing to their passions, and the Current of the times; utterly neglecting,
and refusing those things, which may either rectify the error, or amend their
judgment, but how to support these jnjudicious wanderers, the general
Topiques which follow may not unfitly be observed.

Now therefore will I endeavor to sign out limits, which may regularly direct
those, which purpose to touch upon foreign shoares. It shall be therefore
necessary for those which enter a strange Country, to observe these two things;
with whom to remain, and in what place. For some, whilst they pass not to
the chiefest and most noted places of the Country they now are in, but to some
sordid and meant Towns, rather seek a lurking for corner their ignorance,
then a place for instruction. A stranger therefore must labor and endeavor,
(if he may without any great inconvenience) to seek the chief seat and head
of the Kingdom, wherein he resideth; neither that, in any violent have, but by
degrees: that the Juice of his understanding may draw unto it the manners of
the Inferior regions, and in a manner naturalize them, that so more safely and
easily, he may arrive at the sum of his wishes. Aptly does Tacitus teach us
this necessity in the sixth book of his Annals Chap. 8. instancing of Phraates
the Parthian, which being placed in the room of Artabanus by the Emperor
Tiberius, whilst over suddenly he leaves his Roman Customs, and follows
the guise of the Parthians, he being not able to brook so sudden a change,
falls sick and dies. In the same manner one Tho Randolph in Queen Elizabeth's
time being Ambassador to Ivan Vasilonoch Emperor of Moscovia, reports
himself to have narrowly avoided death or extreme sickness, which he had
gotten, by changing his English habit overquickly into a Russian apparel. For
the sudden change of any habituated Custom, is so dangerous, that sometimes
ordinary things disused bring on the necessity of death. Wherefore by degrees,
the forces of custom are to be mollifyed or hardened according to the nature
and customs of the place, to which we intend to Travel, that when we come to
the mature places of observation; we may show no infections of bitterness and
spleen. This preparation being orderly practiced, we ought to proceed warily
to the chiefest places of the Kingdom. I call not those places the chiefest,
where the Court does usually reside, (which sometimes chooses the most
pleasant, not famous places) but those Cities, which are most ancient,
populous, noble, best served with merchandises, and if thou have any smacke of
learning, where there is some Academy; as in France, Paris, and Monpellier; in
Italy, Rome Bonona, and Padua: in Spain Toledo and Salamanca; in Germany
Strausburg, and Basil: from the happy concurrence of which famous places, not
only all sorts of exquisite learning but the very genius of urbanity, and
civility; and the sum of all profitable Conversation is to be enjoyed. In which
places commerces of all sorts are used, the Treasure of all humane knowledge is
laid up, and all other conveniences to advance a Travailour to the height of
civil knowledge are to be found out. Here also are not only books Containing
all sciences, (which may perhaps not over please, the unstable heads of some
jetting passengers) but the most humane and lively Volumes of famous men; whose
discourses, exercises, and polite conversations (if they be seriously admitted
into a man's mind) are the best epitomes of those regions. In such places, as
in the Cyerhan groves, and Parnassean hills, a Travellour resolving to stay; he
ought so to frame and settle himself, that his mind be not precipitate, and
unconstant, and so may loose, by to nimble and frequent motion, its due and
observable considerations: and least by to nimble departing out of the right
path of Judgment, it may not show the sudden Capacity of an Ingenious,
understanding, but the heady rashness and too apprehensive weariness ofa
stable happiness.

To this observation, succeeds, that a Travellour having Conversation, with
learned men, should first rather endeavor to learn, then be ready to speak,
and to understand then to teach. First it is a great and especial hinderance
of wisdom to speak much; and to desire the opinion of a ready orator,
without knowledge or sufficiency. For pride and a bolder Carriage then usual,
are vices most contrary to the humility of Instruction; which vices striving to
send forth the sounds of an arrogant expression, often show a self love and
ignorant vanity in the speaker. We must therefore labor to observe with a
gentle, and quiet behavior, being qualified rather, with the desire of
Instruction, then, wearied with the distaste of information. Neither (as many
do) let us think our selves in the gallery, before we are entered into the
parlour. For many (as Seneca well advises,) had arrived unto the perfection of
learning; if they had not supposed themselves perfect to soon. This evil is
to be avoided, because it is most common, and yet not so common as dangerous.
For now a days nothing is so usual, as for some proud, swelling, empty,
unskilful gul gallant to fall into the extremity of arrogant babbling; and
being intoxicated with the heat of vain glory, and self love, to boil out
trifles, and ridiculous language. And although this vice be to be abhorred
every where, as a mischief which is a very great enemy, unto all quiet and
sober communication; yet especially it is to be shunned by a Travellour into
foreign Countries, unto whom all things ought to seem strange, and new;
unless he desire to appear imprudent, or at at leastwise improvident. And
therefore Lipsius speaks aptly: Almost every man of the meanest sort can
babble, wander, discourse foppishly, and ramble without fear or wit from one
place to another: but few can learn and search with quietness and discretion;
which is the true end of Traveling. Refer therefore more to thy Instruction,
and sufficiency real, then to the vain glorious ostentation of babbling, and
to that infectious itch of immethodicall prating. Neither unfitly only does the
over-nimble discourser in foreign Countries let slip his words, but sometimes
dangerously. For it is a very hard thing for a man that talks much, sometimes
not to fail: although he knows the matter of which he discourses: but it is
imposible for a man which knows not the manners and customs of the men and
place before whom and where he is, to deliver his mind, not to err and
sometimes most grossly to be deceaved. Therefore let every wise Travellour,
with as much care as he may, sacrifice unto the two shrines, to wit, of memory
and silence: to memory, that he may hold fast all things, which are good and
profitable (for he shall according to the phrase of Martial, see some few good
things, many indifferent, and very many ill examples:) and that also he may
refuse the things, which are not Convenient for a well nurtured education to
follow: like those strong and profitable scaines or nets, which reserve the
great and large fishes, but let the worthless small fry drop back again into
the sea. Let him also sacrifice to silence, if not equally, yet in a plentiful
measure, because he which according to the Poet, is like water in a sieve, is
to full of holes to reserve with judgment any matter of important consequence.
But thou art ready to reply; or rather peremptorily question me. Do thou
prohibit a Travellour to use thebenefit of his Tonuge, which is most acceptable
to most men, and often serves better then a carvoch to pass away the dull
hours. I answer, that my purpose is not to stop their mouths, which with
discretion can bridle their discourse: but only thus much I admonish thee, that
thou be not a perpetual utterer of thy own concernements. Take liberty (in
gods name, faith a wise man;) of speaking, not only on the way, but in the
Inn, if thou find fit company: yea in any convenient place, neither only
before supper, but at, and after it. But let thy speech tend to some one of
these ends; which seek and enquire of the manners, laws, site, and condition
of each city; I add, which discourse of the Princes, wars Events, and
whatsoever is rare and unusual. But always think more wisdom to be placed
in few then many words, so the questions be apposite and pithy. Seek and
enquire therefore rather like a scholar, then like a Teacher. Discourse of
other men's actions, resound not thy own knowledge or vain glorious praises.

For that Travellour, which can abstain from any gloss of his own
commendations, comes near the rundell of perfection, and is both happy, and
Judicious. To the discreet modesty of which elocution, two observations do
occur: the first is always to endeavor (if thou have not given thy name unto
the muses and their instructions, whereby to increase, or at least wise lay the
foundation of the neighboring languages) to get the acquaintance of honest and
learned men. From these many helps may be easily obtained. For by their means
thou shall be able to view and understand, all the ancient and modern
monuments, worthy the sight in the citys thou passest, thou shall have the
entrance into the most famous libraries, schools, and Colleges, and see, not
only the outward furniture, but the inmost riches, of those happy receptacles:
besides by the company of these, thou shall avoid all those circumforaneous
and light headed ramblers, which insinuate themselves, and their companies into
the society of unbridled young Travellours, and often, by the corrupting of the
manners, lead them into all manner of hazard. For most True is that sentence of
a learned moralist: All those which indulge Luxurious Courses, do decline a
follower of Learning, and ingenuitie with a kind of detestation. And this great
Commodity, shall they also, obtain, by this happy conversation: thatthey shall
(if they will) rectify, what before has been in their manners amiste. For
learning often does profit more, by destroying that which before was corrupt,
then by implanting after the emendation of our natures, that which is sincere;
it being always a greater labor to clear, a woody and marish Country and to
prepare, it then to sow it. If this be so, how much imports it a wary and
experienced judgment (but most of all a raw and green one,) to desire the
company of learned and honest men; by whose conversation; a man's mind is
oftener wholesomely instructed, then vainly delighted? Notwithstanding all
these conveniences, most people of this latter age, do strictly desire such
company, and name those, most commonly, good fellows, and boon associates,
which please them with ridiculous passages, and whet their Luxuririous fancies,
by flattering their effeminate Inclinations: and abhor those assoure, and
distastefull, which with their grave and serious admonitions open a way to
virtue, and shut the passadges of vice: when contrariwise every discreet man,
chooses, a friend, as one would do a medicine for his health, the more sharp,
the more sound. And besides; Not only there is no benefit gotten, by
consorting with foolish and deboist Company, but rather an infinite heap of
mischiefs; whilst from their frivolous, and infectious discourse, the hearers
draw mudde, rather then water; and take pains to quench their thirst, not in a
river, but a Poole. For rightly said that wise man Seneca, We sooner accustom
our selves to learn the ill qualities of those, which are indifferently good,
then their virtues. So Alexander the great (as Quintilian reports,) drew some
vicious Imitations, from his master Leonidas, which being a valiant and
martial Emperor, he could not shake off. Marcus Tullius also records of
some fantastical Rhetoricians, which being not able to express, the several
graces, and exellencies of their tutours, endeavored only to follow, and
imitate, such frivolous gestures, which were most unproper for either of them.
So easily do most men fall downwards, and so prompt and ready a thing it is,
to decline from the rough way of rough and laborious progress of virtue, into
the obvious path of vice and slothfullnesse. True therefore is that saying of
Nilus, The first passages of virtue, and Ingenious proceedings seem hard unto
the disciple, because the nature of man from it is very Infancy, is conversant
in all license and idleness; but to those which armed with noble resolution,
have p^ssed unto the midst of this steep ascent; the way seems altogether
light and easy. For our ill manners being better qualifyed, with the mixture of
good customs, at the length are quite abolished with the memory of those
pleasures, which abhor from reason. Of the force and unhappy prevalency of
this slothful custom, another learned moralist named Diadochus has these
words. Great is the force of Custom, as well in society as in all other
things. For out of use proceeds a habit, from a habit arises a natural
necessity. Which to change ismost hard, nay sometimes impossible. It behooves
him therefore which desires to travail with profit, and safety, neither much
to desire company, nor (yet) to mix with confused troops; or yet to ramble to
every meeting of strange and unknown persons. For the going abroad upon small
occasions, consumes most precious time; and the conversing with every trivial
companion, either draws foolish and dangerous tautology; or enticeth a man
from those disciplines and exercises, which before he addicted himself unto
without hinderance. Let therefore a wise man abstain from the ordinary and
confused company of men, and let him endeavor to consort himself with those,
from whom he may receave profitable information. For it does often happen, that
those which are strangers, and do without much wariness deliver their minds
and opinions, are often ensnared by some certain crafty Promoters or
Informers, which often Oh how true is this.
take away not only such trifles as ones purse, money and raiment: but also
when they have done that and much more, these men being conscious of their own
unworthiness and obnoxious to the torments of an unquiet conscience, they
entice the secure prater into some velitation or strife of language, which
being by them craftily exaggerated, at length grows into or produces a capital
crime. And so often perishes with his unprofitable, and rolling eloquence,
that unhappy travellour, whose aim and vainglory, is to be known and
honored by his rolling tongue. Let therefore every man, which pretends to
enjoy the least dram of discretion, judiciously and advisedly consider what,
and before whom he intends to speak: neither let him weigh only his
conscience, the plain meaning and sense of those things which he is about to
declare; but the consequence of those things he purposes to discourse on, and
the fidelity of the hearers before whom those flying words are to be let slipp.
For there are many, especially in foreign Nations (amongst whom much is
consecrated to guile, and little to honesty) which are of so heady and forward
a malice, that they study, endeavor, and labor nothing more, then to entice
men into the snares of hasty language, from the dangerous implications of
which, a sudden ruin may like some quick flashes of lightning, arise.
Therefore let every wary Travellour; set a watch upon his lips, (which Homer
calls septum Dentium) sive (...) (...), although he may seem able to
discourse, subtly, eloquently, and politely, yea and perhaps, without offense
of the hearers. For amongst many the very nimblenesse, and affable curiosity of
the Wit, stirs up malice; and those which think to excel others, and to
gain a general admiration from their hearers, or rather spectators, are not
seldom rent, into many disgraces, by the biting and venomous teeth of snarling
envy.

Notwithstanding a mean ought to be imposed upon this suspicion, only before
the unknown rabble let this caution be exactly observed. But if thou have
(perhaps) gotten a bosom friend, a man whom thou have observed to be discreet,
and cordial; and such an one, whom thou have tied unto thy affairs, with the
eternal bands of affection; open thy mind to this man; but discreetly and
warily: proceeding after the manner of Scipio the African, with his friend
Servilius, as Ennius reports.

About to speak, he cal's his friend, with whom
Often lovingly and freely at his home
He had discoursed, (when often the day grew late,)
Of things were done, where that the Senate sat.
To whom most freely he might talk his mind
And of all business a sure closet find.
With whom he pleasure great had taken, and Joy;
Whose noble soul no sentence bad can sway.
A man that mild is, learned, faithful, just,
Of nature sweet, that never brake his trust.
Of tongue facile and fluent, and content
With that which is his own, and fairly spent.
Discreet, and speaking in good season, all
That he attempts to utter; which can call
To mind old and new actions, and can find
For secrets, a close harbor in his mind.
If thou have the good fortune to obtain, so true a picture of friendship, as
this description does afford, thou may not fear to trust those secrets unto
his safe custody; which may discreetly be permitted for a faithful man to
know. Yet ought good caution to be used, least that our Judgment be deceaved,
and lest under the cover of friendship, may be hidden, the enticing and
dangerous practices of a malicious enemy. Poisons are often given (says
Hierom) covered with honey, and those vices often deceave, which are adorned
outwardly with the shape of virtues, Ovid speaks rightly.

A safe and common way it is, for to deceave,
Under pretense of love which true love does bereave.
And to the same purpose Lucretius:

For as the Narses which to children give
Troubled with worms those vermin to derive
The bitter Century root, do touch the cup
About the brims with a delitious suppe:
That so the silly knowledge of the child
May drink the bitter potion, made thus mild.
Even thus also do these Quacksalvers of vicious and corrupt manners,
endeavor to set of with fair outward appearances, those polluted actions,
they endeavor to infect others withal. For the most impudent forehead cannot
choose but blush to commend any vice in its own native vileness, and abhor
to invite men to these rocks of the Sirens, without the outward Tinctures of
custom and luxury. Wherefore with great caution and most diligent observation,
let that friend (what soever he may appear) with whom thou meanest to
participate thy counsels, be heeded: because true friendship is rightly
conglutinated, and joined amongst none, but those which be equals; and
although one may be unequal before this knot, yet does it allwaies after this
reciprocal affection, equalize them into the same degree of fortune, and
correspondence: rightly therefore speaks that eloquent Roman Lawyer. Minutius
faelix: Friendship does always either find or make men equals. And St.
Hierom let a particular man glister with golden robes, and from his large
chestes, let his shining plate be produced. Charity cannot be exceeded; love
and affection are not to be bought with money: Friendship which once can end,
has never been true or sincere. Thence also has proceeded that ancient
proverb of the Greeks; That all things amongst friends are common: because
the parity and equality of their minds does so communicate all outward goods of
fortune, that the greatness of the one can never be a hinderance unto the
meanness of the other. But this parity of minds, seems rather to proceed,
from the source of their common inclination to virtue, and not from the
contrary apparent quality. Which consent is so rare, and in a manner so
impossible to find, that we may easily conjecture the hardness of it from this
one demonstration. For who almost amongst the general and modern sort of
people, does not desire to creep into his neighbors secrets with the intent
to destroy him, with a subtle and crafty intention, being rather armed for
ruin, then prepared to require the mutual aid, and help of a friend? Many
fair glozes and shows may be ready (perhaps) amongst the company of our
equals, many plausible, and enticing pretenses; Oh how either of favor with
true! superior magistrates, by interposing some efficacious petition, or by
directing our familiar affairs, in a seeming smooth Course; which subtleties
are wonderfully affected, by those which rather desire to abandon, then to
seek cordially for true friendship: Whereby they may persuade raw young men,
that they are most honest and right hearted good natures, and perhaps by these
sleights, they may purchase the opinion of wise men, being the more able by
these jugglings to set upon the secure innocent, now over confident of their
fidelities: when at the same moment in their hearts reigns all sort of guile,
envy, malice, hatred, emulation and heart-burnings, which like the Trojans out
of the fatal horse of Epeus, do with a number of most strange and sudden
calumniations, rush out upon their seeure enemy, and drive him into perpetual
ruin and despair. What fear, amazement, grief, and horror falls then
upon those, which giving credit, unto these men's Syrenian enchantments, thought
all their secrets, and open follies to be buried in oblivion. What tears, what
mourning?

When the image of that sad night did appear
Which was the last time of our being beer.
Therefore especially beware, unto whom and what thou speak, and whom thou
choosest to be thy bosom friend. Yea playing any game with thy own brother by
Hesiods direction.

-- A Witness choose
Least thou his love, or else thy money loose.
Consider therefore maturely before thou plightest the troth of mutual
affection with any man, unto whom thou do trust thy self. For acutely of
this Cautele speaks Theogonis in his learned moral directions to his friend.

About thy friendship my mind troubled is,
Whither in love or hatred I may miss.
These passages so obnoxious to dangers (perhaps) the too secure reader will
hardly believe; saying it is the property of a mind vexing it self before
necessity does require, to wait and expect it is own dangers; often using that
sentence of the ancient Poet.

He that death in health does fear,
Loses all his quiet here.
Judging it also to be an easier condition not to live at all, then to be
cooped up with so many Circumstances and considerations. And as those, which
are tortured by unskilful and slow Physicians, would rather perish by the head
strong obedience, unto their own inflamed appetites, and irregular disgestion,
then live according to those precepts, which are the means of health. So these
improvident men would rather permit all their affairs to mere chance, and the
uncertain current of the times, then to regulate themselves, in choosing the
demonstrations of experience. To these men puffed up with the opinion of their
own sufficiency (that I may pass over the sluggish heaviness of others) we
write not; nor greedily desire those men's tastes; whose stomachs being already
filled with crude humors, do not only contemn (as the Poet speaks)
ordinary viands, but soon disgust the purest elixar of philosophy. To these I
say, I propose not the hard fates of sundry armies, regions, cities, Islands,
which have suddenly perished, with to much confidence and presumption
ossecurity. But before these men's faces I exhibit the idea of their
conversations, selected out of choice and true Histories; which have brought
upon themselves sudden deaths, and most unfortunate ruins, by over: much
trust unto those which have deceaved their professions, and carried two faces
under one hood. Let therefore any supine or negligent frequenter of every
public society they meet, look upon the conspiracy of Vibulenus against
Blaesus mentioned in the first book of Cornelius Tacitus his Annals: and
afterward let him observe, the fained and guilefull friendship of Caepio
Crispinus, toward his Praetor of Bythinia, Granius Marcellus: who having
received from him, both increase of many honors, and diverse other benefits,
because he could Not to his own desires increase his fortunes, accused his
friend unto that most cruel Emperor. Tiberius, that he spoke ill against and
inveighed at the wicked and dissolute life of the Emperor. This man's ill
example (faith Cor. farther) did Romanus Hispo, and many others follow; which
enquiring into many men's lives and actions, did continually search about for
some occasion, whereby to feed the cruel desires of their Tyrannical Prince.
Hence (says my author) many poor rascals following this promoter, became
rich, which by these base and unworthy practices from the most mean places of
birth and fortune, lifting up their heads, were upon a sudden grown to be
most powerful and fortunate. Turn to the 7. chap. of the second book of
Annals, and there thou fhalt find Libo Drusus accused of treason by his most
intimate and familiar friend Firmus Cato. Drusus (it is the historians report)
by his ill and deboist example, this Cato, enticed and lead on to all
lasciviousness; and afterward drew him into debt; and engaged his land in
morgages and usury: And most faithfully for a Time did he deal with this his
friend in their common affairs; until he had gotten firm arguments and
witnesses to make good what he perfidiously intended. These being once ready he
opens his accusation unto Fla. Vescularius, and thus under the appearance of
Friendship, through most ignoble treachery, he brought his friend into the most
hard extremity, he possibly could devise. But the desperate youth suspecting
and beginning to vent this persidious accusation, declined into that height of
grief and passion, that he ran himself through the body with his own rapier.
But this modern example related by Samuel Bruno in his Portugal voyage; is a
most exact testimony of the infidelity of many which make fair shows and
profess, at the beginning of their acquaintance, much secrecy. There is a law
(says Bruno) in Spain, that it is lawful for no man whatsoever (except those
merchants which bring corn or other necessary provision into the Country) to
carry thence any coin stamped in the Kings mint: He which transgresses this
law without redemption is sold, and bound to the oar as a gally-slave; (and)
his goods and ship confiscated. It fortuned at my being at Lisbone there rode
in the Haven 4. ships; two of Roterdam, one of Enchuisen, and one also of
Ackerslought, in these there was hidden besides many gemmes of the oriental
Indies, great store of coined money. Three of the ships as soon as they might,
hoised sail and departed without discovery. But the fourth, (being one of the
Roterdam, ships) stayed unfortunately behind. For the master or chief merchant
of that ship, by name Cornelius Hoppo, a man well thought on, and of good
estiestimation amongst his Country men, had entertained a young fellow for his
scribe or secretary, which at the first appearance seemed to be very towardly,
and discreet: but was indeed a very malicious, and insolent natured fellow.
This scribe a little before their intention of departure, entreated his master
to lend him 500 Rials of 8. which (because he refused to give an account how he
meaned to dispend them,) being denied, he most maliciously and treacherously
forthwith repaired to the magistrate, accusing his master, and other of his
Countrymen for carrying away coined silver against the Law. Upon this
accusation; forthwith four Spanish galleys filled with armed soldiers, are
directed to search the ship, which forthwith they did, found the moneys, and
took away the other merchandise. But yet this base promooter had no share of
the prize (according to the law, which assigns a third part to the accuser)
so that in this part, the proverb was verifyed. The treason is often well
liked, when the traitor is not regarded. This ship was after sold, by the
governor unto some merchants of Germany. Thus far Bruno. Not unlike is that
practice of Hen. Greens mentioned in Abacuck Pricket his voyage recorded in Mr.
Pur. Pilgrims; who was kindly entertained (as ascribe) by Hen. Hudsen; to serve
in his last Northwest discovery, and at length betrayed Hudson his son, and
many more to the merciless element of the sea, or the more merciless Torment
of hunger. The history is worth a reading and over-large to be in this place
inserted. To these (besides what ordinary experience may afford) I could add
infinite store of examples out of T. Livius, C. Tacitus; Val. Maxumus; Amm.
Marcellinus, and of public calamities out of the Stratagems polemicall of Iul.
Frontinus; but that already I have stayed to long upon this evident
observation, which must rather be the fruit of experience then of History:
b^ing rather contented to sign the very limits of the right passage of
profitable travel, then to be troublesome all the way with overmuch chat;
knowing in Lucretius his similitude,

That the rare seldom tone of the pure swan
Is better then all clamor that ere came
From the loquacieus Cranes --
Only thus much let me add by way of corollary, unto the former observation,
that there are no Snares or Oh how true!
dangers more full of ruin, then those which proceed, and draw their
beginnings, from the Inventions, and practices of our friends, servants,
clients, sons, nay (which is scarce credible amongst many,) from the secret
plots and machinations of those which desire to appear our most loving, and
complacent wives. For rightly said Cicero, when he assured his brother; that
those evils are the most dangerous, which proceed from Domestique Authors.
Truly speaks also the satyricall Poet, in this rather wholesomely bitter,
then scurrilously satyricall.

Oh Corydon Corydon! think thou there may be
A secret in a rich man's house that's free?
For if the servants hold their peace and speak
Nothing at all, yet will his Cattle break
Into a wild relation: dogs, nay posts
Will before day declare to the next hosts
What he but thought at midnight: and will hear
What the head Cook, and Clarke said over their beer.
For (think thou these do fear t'invent a crime
Against their master? if at any time
They may by Rumors those tough blows once save
Or else revenge them, which their master gave
Nay rather then they will secret keep, what they
But Chance for to suspect, they will slip away
And hunt the Corners of the streets, to hear
Or tell, what he does in his wine or beer.
Ask these therefore what from me thou would know;
They hold their peace: nay rather they will show
A secret, then to drink in private up
Of stolen wine, or the best Ale a cup.
We rightly ought to lead our lives for these
And many causes; but least that we leese
Our reputation, is the special cause
That should well teach us, rather then the laws.
And in the sixth concerning the humorous condition of the other part of a
family, namely a wife; not unfitly the Satyr has discoursed. For

There hardly is a woman to be - found
That will not on each small occasion sound
Louder then many clockes -- And the ancient Poet Hesiod gives them this right
character.

Then a good woman nothing better is
For to be had; or to complete our bliss.
Again then an expensive wife there is not
A fire more surious, or a flame more hot.
A fire that roasteth men, without a brand:
A flame that soon consumes goods and land.
Generally is this corollary comprised by Petrarch in his Epistle unto Andreas
the Bishop of Bononia. There is nothing, quoth he, amongst all the difficulties
of our life more hard to be kept in order, then fidelity. Therefore thou shall
perceave those which live with thee, seldom merry, often sorrowful, never
equal in their addictions, but always various. I fear that saying of Seneca
to Lucilius: Nothing sooner does vanish, and grow distastefull, then affection.
I fear: that verse or exclamation of Vergil the prince of the latin poets.

O harmefull love! no wight can tell;
What thou men too, do often compel!
Wherefore if to a man purposing to remain in his own Country, such dangers,
snares, and entrapments are created by his own people; nothing is more to be
avoided by a Travellour then too much openesse especially if he have no friend,
but such as Bias the Philosopher did use to choose, whom he again might upon
occasion hate: and if he suspecteth danger amongst some unknown people as
amongst wild and dangerous beasts These observations although he observe, yet
let him avoid to express them in his countenance, gesture, or regard; either
yet let him suffer them to appear in that sparing discourse, he does sometimes
use: especially let him decline to show any diffidence or distrust of those,
with whom he more familiarly converseth at Table, or at leastwise any distaste
of their manners. For nothing is more inhumane, indiscreet or more undecent
then to browbeat those which (be they strangers, or otherwise) sit near us at
Table, or discourse with us familiarly. For by this means a Travellour
outwardly designeth himself to be possessed with pusillanimity, and unworthy
fear, and by his to humble submission armeth against his throat, and
reputation the sword and weapon of every cutthroat: let him rather color all
exception with the various coverture of affability, and civil courtesy; That
nothing may appear in him obscure, blew, or truculent, but that he may seem
to all festive, yet adorned with a certain becoming gravity; that in his
countenance may be discerned the vigor of a moderate, and well qualified
spirit, mixed with a nimble and heroique influence. Suetonius relates of
Augustus caesar, that he had eyes of so majestique a quality, that he seemed to
dart from them, the very rays of Majeftie. The same is storied of Theodosius
1. by AEmilius Probus, in the dedication of that little (compend) commentary
concerning the the lives of the most famous Generals, by some ascribed unto
Cor: Nepos; where he speaks unto his book in this manner.

Fear not (my little book) his yellow hair
Encircled with a sparkling Crown. But dare
For to salute his bright majestic eyes
Which carry splendor, like the Serene skies.
Titus also Vespasian from his Comitie mixed with his well tempered aspect, was
called the very delight of the nations. So also also in his Panegyrique Pliny
reports of Trajan, page: 5, that he had an incredible dignity in his
countenance; of whom Sex. Aurelius Victor reports, that he so carried himself
in the administration of the Imperial affairs that the most admirable wits of
the best writers can scarce express the dignity of his actions; so far is it
from the truth that Pliny did flatter this Prince, it now being the sum of
all good subjects wishes to desire, their sovereigns may enjoy the peaceable
times of Augustus, and the virtues of Trajan. Claudian also speaking of the
right noble and valiant general Stilico has these words.

Then (in thy youth) most gravely did thou go
And yet most lively gestures did thou show.
Thy following happy actions were for spoke
By those fair beams, thy eyelids from them broke:
The severe Parthian nobles were amazed,
At those full numerous aspects thou have raisd:
And Persian Caunes when they beheld a guest
Like thee, have sighed, drinking at a Feast.
The same has these verses in the commendation of man: Theodorust

Thy eyes a temper keep, whom neither rage
Does over sharpen, or confound thy age;
Neither does sudden tempests in thy face,
The genuine favor of thy cheeks disgrace.
And of Honorius,

Thee the fair Enipeus and thee wood
Dodone once beholding, smiling stood:
And those hard oaks, which to Chaonians yield
Their food, now seeing thee danced round the field.
On the other side, contrariwise Theocritus describes the unhospitall youth:

He had no luster in his looks, no flame
Of lively vigor ever warmd the same.
But he observed all men, as does the wild
Beasts of the field, or as a threatened child.
All which sentences gathered to a head, show us that this caution of mixing
comity with vigor in our countenances, is both necessary, and becoming; for
the forehead is (as it were) the Index of the mind, and often from the
countenance may be conjectured that which is fixed in the soul. In this most
worthy part are deposed (those) the most exact errors and perfections of
nature, which frequently are the obscure significations of our ma^ners. The
truth of which sentence may be more fully gathered out of those books of
Physyologie written by B. Porta: in the which, strange and rare conjectures
(from the quality of the countenance) of our humane nature are comprised.
Acutely and philosophically writes C. Plinius in the 11. book of his Not:
History. Only man (says he) has a face, other creatures only have a mouth or
beak. Other creatures have indeed a forehead, but only the forehead of a man
shows mirth, or sorrow, anger or mercy. In the upper part of this are placed
the brows, which only are moveable amongst men. These especically show pride
and disdain. In other places pride has his conceptacle, or place of birth;
but in these his abode. It is begotten in the heart; but it ascends hither,
and here hangs; and is placed.

Mix therefore these signs in thy daily conversation which are able amongst
foreign, nay amongst barbarous nations to obtain thee friendship and
access, and avoid those rusticke, manners, which Tranio objecteth to his
fellow slave in the ancient comedy. Mostell.

G: quam confidenter loquitur? fue! T. At te Jupiter -- diique omnes perdant!
oboluisti allium Germana inluvies, Rusticus, Hircus, Hara suis, Canis, Capra
Commista! The words are to rank for a translation. The avoidance of such
unmannerly evacuations are best learned by experience; for they are as
loathsome to any Ingenious man, as odious in their own natures and qualities.

This especial caution being heedfully observed, it shall not be amiss to
add this part to the former, which being neglected, often brings
incomparable dangers, upon the unwary travellour. Therefore a travellour must
be admonished with especial heed, that whilst he resideth amongst unknown men
in a foreign Country, he make not to bold, or be to inquisitive into their
secret affairs.

And this caution is for three especial reasons, to be adhibited. First least
by mingling some thing of our affairs, we may make our selves suspected to our
own Country: and so we may return either unwellcome, or our return be
forbidden. Thus was Reginald Poole, and R. Allen both English Cardinals
outlawed and proscribed, for dealing in foreign affairs and seeking the
ruin of their Country. Secondly least by over curiously enquiring of the
holies, or secret political affairs of other nations, we may by chance let
fall some words, which may draw on an Inconvenience upon us, or may be ill
taken by wise men. Most A strange History.
strange is that relation, which S. Bruno a switzer and Chyrurgion to the
fortress of Nassaw in the East Indies has committed to memory in his second
African Iournall; which is not altogether unfitting to be applied to this
Topicall caution. Being not far from the Promontory of Capo Monte amongst the
AEthiopians or Negroes dwelling there abouts, he had heard his Cap. Thomas
Peetersou a Flushinger say, that the devil of late had made in the adjoining
woods a most horrible noise, Imperiously requiring sacrifices to be performed
unto him.

Whereupon I enquired, where those sacrifices should be made; who told me hard
by, in the adjoining grove: but that none would be admitted to the celebration
of these infernal holies (but the King whose name was Thaba Flamor his nobles
and counselors.) At the day appointed I my self, quoth Bruno, heard a most
inarticulate and hollow terrible noise: and saw how those women and children
(which for the meanness of their condition could not be admitted to the
sacrifice,) ran away to their houses and caves with extreme fear. After this I
saw diverse and many sorts and dishes of meat to be carried into the wood, as
rice, venizon, hens, wine and a drink called Mellicratos of an excellent
taste. Being desirous to know whether this extraordinary cheer was conveyed,
I presently found a Companion of mine which had been in those places before:
but as soon as the Ethiopians saw us come near they howled out, extremely
threatening us, that if we did ofter to stir one foot forward, without mercy
their gods, (or rather devils) Suangi, and Cricry would tear us in pieces. We
notwithstanding their menaces and threats came nearer, which the devil
perceaving and being unwilling to be troubled with the presence of any
Christians, did so violently urge his black colored infernal servants, that
they most grieviously beat S. Bruno and his companion, that they left them for
dead in the place, yet notwithstanding they at last got home to the ships: and
a while after resorted to Thaba t lamour the King, with their Captain for
satisfaction, telling that swarthy Monarch, that no merchants would hence
forwards trade in his country, if the nation without due satisfaction should
offer such cruel wrongs. The king having heard them out, told them that
whatsoever had been done, was effected by the command of Cry cry alone; and
that we could not with any reason complain of injury. For since their
national rites and holies did not pertain to us; we rather ought to abstain
from the curious search thereof; because we came not thither for any devotion
or good will, but rather to enquire of their ceremonies and deride them. Upon
the hearing of this speech, the Captain was (contentedly) pacyfiyed, as
supposing the contents to be not altogether unreasonable. The devil had
persuaded this miserable King, that he should fly from place to place after his
death, and be his inseparable companion; which he took for a great favor.
Ric. Johnson in his voyage to the Samoyeds Country, beyond the river Obb, also
informs us, of their strange iugglings, miraculous incantetions, and
devilish sacrifices of dear and certain fowls, which they were most
unwilling to let him see; telling him that the being present at their clamorous
sacrifices, would be dangerous. And (if my memory fail me not) as I remember I
have read of a voyage into the North of Greenland, where the English found some
of the savage Inhabitants sacrificing at a fire, which they would not go into,
neither come near the smoke; but would have had the English have come near,
which they shunned fearing danger, until at last the fire was put out. Also
most strange are those sacrifices, of the sun; which Fer. Magaglianes
mentions, he saw performed by some old Beldames at the Island of Mathan, not
far from Zubut, which is about 50 leagues from Cattaghan. Neither come
behind, for monstrous and cruel Impiety, those ancient sacrifices of the
Peruvians and Mexicans in the West-India's, who consumed many thousands of men
yearly to their Vitziliputzli, and thought to prohibit the entrance of the
Spaniards by these inhumane butcheries.

Also we must advise our travellour, not to be over-inquisitive into the
secrets of other Countries, especially, of Religion; and commerce; because
often such have been taken for spies, as appears in the history of John
Newbery and his Companions at Ormus and Goa recorded by Io. Huighen Van
Lins^hoten of Harleim; and of Antony March; who (although his privileges
seemed to allow thereof) travailing into the Samoyeds Country and having
dispended in furs 1000 rables or marks Sterling, was not only delivered of
his warm and precious burden, but threatened and fined; and his Russe servant
Bodan, whipped upon the Pudkey and imprisoned. This is also the reason that all
those Eastern nations of Russia, Cathaia, Tartaria China suffer few forraigners
to go back for their Countries, being once admitted; least they should inform
of their manner and quality of government. But especially the Chinois or as
they name themselves the Tamegnies, are herein most scrupulous. Thirdly we must
avoid to much nicety in observation, lest that by mingling confused notions
together, we loose our times of studying; and so often a Travellour begins
to think himself a Doctor; before he rightly be accounted a Disciple. but
especially the first consideration of fidelity toward ones proper Country is
to be regarded. For unto this one thing, as to the sole end and Termination,
ought all our political intentions and actions to be reduced; to wit, that we
may profit and benefit our Country. Neither can there be almost any deed so
ungrateful or heinous which does exceed the treachery intended against a man's
Country. Because this, as a public parent does require a higher measure of
duty, then either respect of father or mother; children, wife, or Kinsemen: by
how much more public happinesses, and permanencies does prevail with all
good minds, more then private affairs. Miserable (therefore) and most
execrable therefore is that impiety, and ingratitude which in foreign or
Transmarine regions does endeavor to disturb the peace and commodities of a
man's proper Country, wherein it pleased God to give him being and education For
this vice of prodition shows the will, and not the necessity (which here has
no place at all.) And certainly in this kind there are no clearer examples of
unnatural and ignoble perfidy then in that history which the L. Bishop G.
Carleton has entitled a thankful remembrance of Gods mercy; which contains
the homebred and foreign treasons of the English and others intended against
the sacred persons of Queen Elizabeth, and K. James. Yet may not forthwith
this odious title of a conspirator or Boutefeaux be imposed upon every one;
which in foreign parts moves himself something more then ordinary in
appearance against the modern proceedings of his Country. For (as it seems
to me) these three causes, may excuse an active man moving against the affairs
exterior of his own nation, without admittance of the former odious title.
The first exception is, if that a man travel into transmarine regions, to
this. end and purpose that he may by his sufficient insinuations into foreign
affairs profit the same: and that he may restore it into a better state by
exotique physic, being now mortally ill and sick by the many distempers of
ill government. The truth of which canon may be approved by the examples, and
practices of diverse famous, and worthy men: As of Themistocles, which fled
rather then traveled into Persia and insinuated himself into the favor of
the King by professing himself an enemy to his own nation: and by this means
as also by repressing or moderating the powers of Tissaphernes, did more good
to his friends at Athens; then when he compelled Xerxes to fly through the
Hellespont in a single pinnace. So Cyrus the Persian monarch received into his
power, the city of Babylon betrayed unto him by his Subject Araspis, which fled
thither for prostituting the wife of Abradates: or rather as others report, so
Darius the son of Hystaspis triumphed over the before mentioned city, by the
help of his faithful servant Zopyrus, as Trogus in the end of his first book
informs Us. In this manner did Tarquinius sextus yield up unto his father the
City of Gabium, having gotten credit from his enemies by betraying some
counsels of the Romans; and by mutilating or wounding himself; reporting it to
be the cruel deed of his tyrannical father. So Hanniball flying from the
destruction of his Country, unto Antiochus the Indian monarch, under pretense
of Counsel, did more good to his afflicted Countrymen at Carthage, then to
either Rome or Zusa. So Alcibiades although banished by his Citizens, and
flying to Lacedemon, opened certain passages of state against his Country, yet
by acquaintance with the wife of Agis their titular King, and by signifying
their preparations, did expel a depending mis^ry from his Athenians. So
Phocyon, Aristides, Demosthenes, Tullius, Seneca, and many others ancient and
modern, although some were banished and some traveled voluntarily out of
their Country, yet either with their persons, or counsels they were never
wanting to their friends.

The second defense against this unhappy attribute may arise from this
subsequent original. For it seems not unjust that noble men debarred of
their titles should enter again or rather return into their Countries, to
claim those honors which are due unto them. Wherefore in my opinion Coriohm,
and Tarquinius are not so much to be reprehended: (neither yet Edward the
fourth of England, because in armor accompanied with warlike troops he
returned into his Country from Burgundy,) because they came but to challenge
their ancient titles; and promised amendment of their former offenses. The
same, (perhaps) is to be thought, of Henry surnamed Bullingbrooke which being
condemned unto banishment, by Richard of Bordeaux King of England, under
pretense of suing his livery for the Dukedom of Lancaster, (he being banished
Earl of Hereford) returned again before his time into England and landed,
under this pretense, with armed foreign troops at Ravenspurg in the North.
Wherefore those men are not to be thought, in my opinion, traitors to their
Country; which return to seek that which by the Law of nations, and nature,
of right belongs to them; neither when they are mingled with the affairs of
other commonwealths, (perchance) not belonging unto them, but rather
contrariwise sometimes dangerous, if so be, by these courses, they may in
future bee^ profitable to their Country, or in some measure, without manifest
disadvantage unto their Country, profit themselves. The truth of which
affection appears in the allowed voyages of many travellours, which passed
and repassed with good leave unto the East Indias. But it is especially to be
observed by us; that whilst we seek our own profit, we invade not, the rights
of other men. For if we offer at this unjustice, forthwith will, without doubt,
arise amongst us ruin, sedition, and the destruction of our commonwealth;
(although sometimes perhaps the author be but a mean private man; and often
that mischief follows, which Aristophanes remembers in the Comedy of the
Acarnanians.

When they come once to late, themselves they thrust
From one place to another, then needs must,
Whilst each will have the chiefest part, the rest
Must quarrel: and all peace they must detest.
The third defense against this vice of over much activity, or rather bound,
which keeps it within the order of fidelity; yet permits a travellour to
mingle Counsels, and friendly to discourse with the enemies of his Country; so
that he avoid the vice of impious treachery, and does endeavor to do his
Country or Countrymen good. And this course without any offense to their
citizens, took Themistocles, Thrasibulus, Zopyrus, Harmodius and Aristogiton,
Chariton and Menalippus; Neanthes, Cycizenus and Nicomachus. Yet
notwithstanding some of these by the unruly multitude had before bin banished
unjustly from their Country and grieveously mulcted against all equity. Thus by
the Athenians, Phocyon, Aristides, and Themistocles, yea and that famous
Historian Thucidides, although derived from the blood of Kings, without any of
their proper deserts, were exiled by ostracismes. Of which kind of punishing or
rather unjust condemnation of just men, Aristoteles thus has it l. 3. c. 9. of
his Politiques. These men (meaning the confused rabble) in this action had no
regard to the good of their city; but by ostracismes and tumults, under
pretenses of consultation with the public enemies, they punished their best
Patriots. So also amongst the Romans F. Camidlus, after he had expulsed the
Gallograecians or rather the Senones from the city, was sent into Exile,
because as Val. says, being Tribune^ (...) was accused to have taken 1500
pounds out of the treasury; when that money (as it was well known) being
pillaged by the Gauls, had perished in the Combat. Much better therefore and
more nobler did the Ephori of the Lacedaemonians deal with their general
Pausanias, whom (although he was certainly by his own friend Arginnius
Accused to have dealt about the change of his Countries government with the
King of Persia) they would not sudainely apprehend, until his own
confessions, drawn on by the youth, made his treachery apparent. The history
is worth the consideration; and written in a most choice and elegant latin
style by Cornelius Nepos,, in his book of the lives of (the) most excellent
generals. Valerius Maximus also may supply the like examples in his chapter
offidelity.

Let therefore be always conversant, before the eyes of a travellour, piety
toward god; and residing in his most inward affections, a faithful, constant,
and perpetual love toward his country. For if it be necessary for every
Christian man always to think of God; and to remember his benefits with a
grateful commemoration; as also to direct our humble petitions, and prayers
for the enjoyment of those blessings which every day we receave from omnipotent
and sacred Majesty of heaven: much more the more fervently (if herein by any,
any mean is to be held) ought a travellour to addict himself unto this holy
duty; which continually undergoeth not only the difficulties and dangers common
to other men, but also undertaketh sometimes a combat with dangers themselves.
And to this religious fear of god, let the love of our country succed in the
next place. For rightly said he, which told us; that fidelity yielded to a
friend is a great ornament, (and) trust performed and duty to our parents is a
greater, but to our Country stability yielded is the greatest of all. Neither
shall we find any men of fame and honor celebrated in history, which did not
flourish with an immaculate love of their Country. The truth of this axiom may
appear in the renowned relations of Codrus, Themistocles, Timoleon, and
amongst ours, of the Horatii, Fabii, Camilli, Curtii, Bruti, Ciceroues, which
to their eternal honor are commended (nay almost deifyed) in fames never dying
register, for their inviolate fidelity to their Country in its most sudden and
heavy dangers; which they like noble and truly renowned patriots bought out
with their own lives. For allwaies amongst generous spirits have public
affairs been preferred before private, although sometimes those private have
not a little concerned the public also. Most Heroique (if the political
affairs of this life be only balanced, is that speech of Otho the first to
his most faithful soldiers, after the foil he received by the Vitellianists
at Bebriacum. To hazard (quoth he) this virtue and valor of yours to
needless dangers, I account it to dear a price of my life. The more hope you
do show, ifI listed to live, the more commendation will be of my death, as
being voluntary, and not by constraint. Fortune and I have had good experience
the one of the other: and nothing the less for that my time has been short.
I tell you it is harder to moderate a man's self in felicity, which he looks
not long to enjoy. The civil war first grew on Vitellius party; and thence
grew the first occasion to contend with arms for the Empire; but to contend no
oftener but once, I, for my part, am purposed to give the example. And hereby
let posterity judge and esteem of Otho.

Through my benefit Vitellius shall enjoy his brother, his wife, and his
children: I seek no revenge; I have no need of such comforts. Others have
kept longer the Empire, but let it be said, that none has ever so valiantly
left it. Shall I suffer so much Roman blood again to be spilt; and the
Commonwealth deprived of so worthy armies? let this mind accompany me my to
grave, and so surely it shall, that you for your parts would have dyed for my
sake: but tarry you, and live, and let not me be any longer a hinderance to
your obtaining of pardon, nor you to my determination and purpose. To speak
more of dying, or to use many words of that argument, I take to proceed of a
cowardly courage. This take for a principal part of my resolutenesse, that I
complain not of any. For to blame Gods or men is their property, which gladly
would live. This was he which exceeded Cato himself. For Cato dyed rather out
of difdaine and a sullen humor; because he would not behold after his victory,
a pretended tyrant, his enemy, but this noble Emperor rather then he would
engage his countrymen in a bloody quarrel, chose to end his days on the point
of a rapier. Not unlike was that Christian, and truly worthy resolution of
Capt. Nicholas Downton in his 7. East India voyage where (after the retort of
the Portugal Bravado) he concludes his Journey, and combat, with this
admirable resolution. After all these insultations (quoth he) I was glad to
see the Viceroy give over the hopes of his fortunes, by further following of
us, which course I like very well, since he is so patient; for there is nothing
under his foot which can make amends for the loss of the worst man's finger I
have. Besides, I wish no occasion to fight for that, which I have already paid
for, I am already possessed on: and I am so far from the humor to fight for
honor, unless for the honor of my King and Country, that I would rather save
the life or lives of one of my poorest Pur: pilg: Pur. I. l. 4. c. II. p. 514.
people, then kill a thousand enemies. Great and noble also was the care of
Charles the fifth King of Spain, and Emperor of Germany at that unhappy siege
of Algier wherein he himself in person was present, when many of his galleys
and ships of burden being lost by a horrible Tempest, he commanded a great
multitude of excellent coursers to be cast overboord; reputing it (as says my
author) Knols Tur. Histo. 724. Vit. Solim:
an unmercifull part, to prefer the safeguard of those horses, although they
were of great worth, before the life of the basest common soldier or horse-boy
in his camp. And therefore (in my poor opinion) not without Cause Sir Arthur
Gorges in his martial and marine observations of the Portugal voyage taxes
Sir Richard Greenvile, Viceadmirall unto the Lord Thomas Howard in a voyage
unto the Azores or Flemming Islands, who being chased by a great armada of huge
Spanish Galleons, followed not the directions and judicious courses of his
Admiral; but suffered himself to be enclosed, and his sails becalmed by
those massy ships, and at length to be taken; his ship being sunk, called
the Revenge, and near two hundred slain outright. But more ridiculous (as
also more vainly cruel) was the practice of Mathias de Alburkerke an East
-India Captain, who being by the King of Portugal appointed Governor of
Goa, and fearing at his return to be dismissed of his office, caused his ship
to stay out eighteen months at sea, in which voyage for one man's pride and
vanity 250 men perished. This was he which grew (after he received his
Commission) to that height of vanity that he caused fortune to be pictured in
his Cabine, himself with a threatening countenance standing by her, and holding
up a staff with this impreza: Quaero quae vincas, i. e. I will have thee to
overcome. The juditious Travailour, from these examples may perceave that noble
natures prefer the public affairs of their Country before private
negotiations: and therefore in my judgment that saying of 10. Basilius or Ivan
Vasilinich recorded in his answer to the excuse of Mr. Anth. Ienkenson, is well
worth the noting. Ienkenson had been commanded by the Emperor, at his first
return into England, to impart and negotiate some affairs concerning the
estate of both Kingdoms, England and Russia, to the ever glorious Princess,
Queen Elizabeth. He seeming to have neglected this command the Emperor took
him up, with this Apothegme. We have since thy last departure given audience
unto one Thomas Randolph, but all his talk was with us about merchants
affairs. We know that merchants matters are to be heard: for they are the stay
of our Princely Treasures: but first Princes affairs are to be established,
and then merchants. Many more ludicious sentences of this nature may be read
with Mr. Ienkensons Polite oration in the 1. To. of Mr. Hacluits voyages p.
405. Let therefore a Travellour so much honor, and entirely respect the
benefit of his Country, that unto this, the love and duty he owes unto his
parents, the next under God, may be subjected. To this tie among good men even
the love of brothers has given place. Thus Timophanes affecting tyranny, not
without praise, lies stabbed dead by the just hand of his own brother Timoleon
an act, without the aid: of this truth, blotted with the odious attribute of
parricide.

Thus that noble freer of his country I. Brutus, for the safety of his most
Libertatem quam majores peperere digne studeat fovere posteritas. Sicl.
dear mother commanded his own aspiring sons to be whipped to death, after
the, ancient custom of the Romans. And why should we be ambitious to heap up
example^? since Curtius to stop an infectious plague amongst his Countrymen,
leaped into the ground alive since Genucius Cipus went into a voluntary
banishment with his family, because the south-sayers, had declared his son
should be a king, because he was borne, with some small extuberancies in his
forehead: since Decius, the Army of the Roman breaking order confusedly vowed
himself a sacrifice; since Scipio compelled the relics Brutus Potius quam
patr^i amoris vim ex animo ei^ceret; liberos proprios seri feriri elegit.
of that bloody battle of Canna to swear their service unto their Country as
long as any of them should remain alive; since Codrus the King of the
Athenians, by a stratageme drew on his own death, that he might fulfill, the
Oracle, and save his army. I could heap innumerable examples; unless it were
imprinted in every man's mind, that has any dram of honesty; or virtue; even by
the laws of nature; That all men's affections unto their Country, are to be
preferred before all other bonds, and obligations whatsoever. Wherefore
Horatium Coclitem contra omnes hostium copias tennit in ponte solu^ sine ulla
spe salutis patria salus. Vt Cl^lia virgo, ita omnes suo casu aut confirmare
patria salutem aut morari periculum debent bist T. C. h^^apo 534.
he that in foreign and strange nations does invent or endeavor any snares
or deceipts against his country, or Countrymen; does not only show himself to
be a most ungrateful, and wicked man; but one which is banished by his own
Confession and judgment. Neither commonly does any foreign nation; regard
those which presume to betray their own Country. A most excellently just, but
more terrible execution have we of this truth (that I may pass over to many
examples) performed by the magnificent Emperor Solomon upon a perfidious
traitor of this Kind. Nicholas Keretschen a German, held Giula a city in
Hungaria against Parthaw Bassa, general of the Otthoman forces there. After
many encounters and assaults, the Bassa still had the worst until he left of
his Iron, and began to batter with golden engines. These no sooner set on work
by Georgius Bebicus Kinseman to the Governor; but they made an impression, and
forthwith like a deep wellfilled mine presently blew up the Governors faith.

Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
Aurisacra fames?
Men's breasts and minds gold can derive
And corrupt most men now alive.
Shortly therefore after this comprimise he delivers the city, covenanting
besides his reward, that the soldiers should with bag, and baggage safely
depart; all which, says mine author, Knols; was frankely granted, who were not
gone past a mile out of the Town; but they were set upon by the Turks, and all
slain except some few, which crept into the reeds growing in the marish fast
by and so escaped. The traitor himself expecting his reward, was carried in
bonds to Constantinople; where afterward upon complaint made, how hardly he
had used certain Turks, whom he had sometimes taken prisoners, he was by the
command of Selimus who succeeded Solomon, (not of Solomon himself as others
say) thrust into a hogshead struck full of nails with the point inward, with
this inscription upon it. Hear receave the reward of thy avarice, and treason.
Giula thou soldest for gold: if thou be not faithful to Maximilian thy Lord,
neither will thou be to me. And so the hogshead closed fast upp; he was rolled
up and down, until he therein miserably dyed. Nay the very Barbarians and
Salvages do hate this most unworthy perfidiousnesse. For

Nome^ amicitiae barbara corda movet.
The name of true fidelity
Does touch the heart of cruelty.
Not long since there lived a salvage Weroance or petty Prince in Virginia, a
continent of the Nor. America; named Powhatan. To this Barbarian two Duchmen
belonging to the english plantation, under the government, at that time, of
Cap. John Smith, a worthy and valiant gentleman, the first commander, and
discoverer, fled away: pretending hard usage, and discovering the secrets of
the fortification. These base unworthy traitors two Gentlemen, one Mr. Wiffin;
and Ieffrey Abbot were sent to dispatch: which when Wiffin would have done, he
was resisted by his companion. Therefore they returned back without due
punishment of these fugitives. Which Powhatan perceiving (although they had
promised him to do great matters for him, with the next governor the Lo. La
Ware, then upon the sea;) he commanded his men to beat out their Brains
telling them, as you would have betrayed Capt. Smith to me so will you me to
this Lord. Thus can the divine Justice amongst the very barbarous, find due
chastifement for infidelity. Raro antecedentem scelestum Deseruit peds poena
cla^do.


To this consideration of fidelity, a discreet travellour ought to adjoine the
next of Temperance: which like the very soul of the soul, consists of 3
parts. For there is a temperance of our aliment or diet: a temperance of
sensual pleasures; which is properly called continence; and lastly a
temperance in our speech which is called, a discreet taciturnity.

The first part of which virtue is most exactly to be observed by a travellor
into foreign regions. For what can be more dangerous then for a stranger to
devour strange, and unknown meats: perhaps although delitious yet in their
own natures poisonous. Such are the most beautiful apples growing near
Ierico (of which W. Lithgow) that are in color and taste most beautiful and
gustfull; and yet in operation most venomous: as also are those apples which
were found in Guiana by Capt. Vnton Fisher, a little of whose juice causes
sleep unto death. Such are those dangerous Druggs of Petum amongst the
Brasilians, Opium amongst the Turks, Areca and Betelee amongst the Malapars,
Cassany roots amongst the Americans in general, which are most dangerous to
forraigners, and have caused the death of many thousand stout men, which have
rather trusted the delight of the palate, then the direction of temperance: nay
the very lovely sweet Durgoens (being the glory and delight of the East Indias)
is found to be most dangerous, if taken in to great quantity, rusting a knife,
and eating Iron like aqua fortis: and are there no less obnoxious then Melones
over greedily eaten in Spain or Italy; or grapes over violently devoured in
France. Many are the inconveniences which such seeming idainties produce; being
indeed as the Greeks rightly name them, (...), sowre-sweet to the Improvident
belly god Amongst such viands use the Italian proverb related by Cornarus;
that which is left, profits more then that which is eaten. Let temperance
therefore be thy preparative, and sometime evacuation by Phlebotomy in hot; by
bathe stoves in cold countries. but especially avoid Voracity and a greedy
desire to be devouring; because such customs do disgrace, not only thy own
manners; but call into question also the Customs of thy Nation. Besides, this
vice brings upon thee all sort of diseases, since there is nothing so
miserable expensive as a glutton, which eats that he may surfeit; and
surfetteth that he may eat. The proof of this saying is most evident, from
the deadly and infectious events of the voyage to Puerto rico; and Portugal;
as also the first voyage, to Guinea and Benin where many thousands of lusty men
suddenly perished for want of this golden virtue of temperance. Also there is
nothing more exactly observed in a forraigner then the outward gesture of his
clothing, feeding, and gesture, from which signs strangers make a Judgment of
his education. But of this most exquisite and rare virtue especially amongst
young men; we have spoken somewhat before, that may be (if well disgested) a
sop for Cerberus.

2. Of the temperance of language also in the former caution enough has been
spoken.

3 Wherefore now some brief direction concerning sensual recreations and
pleasures shall in order be added. Of these amongst forraigners great care must
be taken. For if this Violence, or rather furious rage of the most unbridled
passion, which tempts mankind, be exceeding dangerous, covered with the best
stratagems of this wicked art, (in which P. Ovidius and Io. Bocatius have to
their own disgrace, if not ruin, approved themselves masters) to those which
remain fixed in the same place of habitation: what shall we conceive of the
great inconveniences, it brings forth, when we lie open to all foreign
snares and temptations? besides, (which would be marked) Crimes creep, nay
suddenly rush and upon those which are secure: and to easily do strange
vices overcome those which are already worryed with domestique and homebred
passions. The force also of custom does tickle an Intemperate man; whilst he
thinks it a part of great wisdom to collect those things, and to practice
them, which although (perhaps) rare, yet certainly are most vicious.

And can there be a greater misery then for a man which in his own country was
accounted to be well and honestly educated, being intoxicated with the study of
novelties; to become in another climate, the very fosse, and sink of all those
vices, which either vanity has invented, or luxury found out? Against these
most pernicious foments of vice, there is no better antidote, then temperance;
which also does most prevalently resist, when the vice of incontinency does but
begin; and is of most power when as yet, (in Ciceroes phrase) the Ram of the
enemy has not shaken the wall: for as the Satyrist has it:

In vain then for terse hellebore we cry,
When that we are compelled almost to die
With heavy swellings, he that will have ease,
Must at the first prevent or cure disease.
For as a City which is well fortified is not subject to sudden Invasions;
neither does a Castle well munited with Ordinance and Bulwarks much fear
Panique terrors: so a mind enabled with the munition of fortitude most easily
resists the enticements of vices; neither is suddenly conquered with the
machinations of impiety.

For, an enemy which is armed with the darts of fortitude, does not presently
yield, besides it is the nature of Vice to creep on by degrees, neither to
fight at their first appearances, but rather to seek ambuscadoes, working
their feats rather by the help of deceit, then prowess. It is the saying of
the Poet.

None on a sudden grows most vicious. Vice
Comes on by stealth, and slilie does entice.
So mischiefs often try by fair means, rather then by open force to assail
those, they would subject; and rather seek opportunity to deceive, then a just
war. And like as heretofore many ancient Chieftaines did use to terrify, by
some strange stratagems and sudden devices, their enemies; thinking it more
safe to fright, them with panique fears then with Arms: So vice, whilst it
artificially does frame a combat, it places Intemperance perdue, as it were in
the field, or sends this Monster as a spy into the little Isle of man; which by
ill customs and enticements, may draw him into Voracitie, Gluttony and
Incontinencie: which sprigs of Vices, like the dark paths of errors, deceive
and draw many men into most dangerous precipices; otherwise the most dissolute
persons would abhor to act those things, which are undecent; if they were not
newly varnished with some aduleerate commixtions. Let Temperance therefore be
as a watchtower or lantern unto a Travellour; by whose bright rays, not
clouded with the dark fumes of luxury, he may rightly steer his reason in this
Sea of Adversities, and so may preserve his discretion untainted from any
immodest word or deed.

The second general observation is referred to inquisition or enquiry, to wit,
the enquiry of the Commonwealth, in which thou art conversant after the common
romances and conceits of the vulgar. Then such inquisition (except it be very
moderate and discreet) there is nothing more vain, unprofitable or empty. For
certainly it is a most vain and frivolous thing to enquire about every slight
rumor, which is set abroach by the common people, and to discourse of other
men's affairs, as of our own; Since such men rather amongst the learned,
deserve the opinion of vain curiosity, then learned Science. This vice is by
Caesar in his Commentaries and Nico Flisclinus in his Julius Redivivus, Act. 2.
Scen. 4. attributed to the barbarous Celtes or Gauls.

These men (quoth my Author) have a very barbarous and rude custom; for
as soon as they see foreign Merchants, they compass them round in the
streets, and enquire most nicely of the state of those Forraigners from whence
they come. The Merchants being compelled by their importunities to answer
unknown or unfitting questions, many times invent such tales as may please them
best, and seem most credible; Which they hearing, forthwith they set upon
their consultations, and according to these relations dispose of their
affairs; then the which there cannot be devised a more rash and inconsiderate
folly. There are no people more miserable therefore then such men, which suffer
their ears to be perpetually filled with such news; (which suppose they are
strained upon the rack, if one day be spent quietly and studiously.) Hence it
is that such men, for the most part are perpetually subject to exorbitant
passions, unquiet motions, and sudden fears; for being filled with choler and
melancholy, through the overmuch agilitie of their apprehensions, and the
uncertainty of their resolutions, they continually have those galleries of
reason, their heads stusted with the undigested and crude rumors, which they
so much affect and hunt after. Of these Lucretius:

Some men inconstant in each City, fear
The houses, lest in pieces they should tear
Their limbs with falling: others least the ground
Should gaping open and enclose thent round
These panique terrors tell some that the earth
Will now dissolve, and have another birth,
And opening her ^estie jaws, will fall
Into a Chaos and thus ruin all.
Let this be therefore a caution to be observed by a Travellour, not to take
news upon trust, concerning strange Commonwealths: because hardly such an
inquisitor can obtain any remarkable knowledges, and yet is most subject to be
ensnared by promoters. Rather let choice and silent narrations (although fewer
in number, and perchance not seeming to every companion so plausible, be his
aim,) such are the observations of Antiquities, AEdifices, Libraries; the
exscriptions of the places of battles, and the changes of the governments of
cities. In this path let moderation be also his guide: that if he happen to
strike upon some difficult passages, he may retract his footsteps, before he be
to farregone.

The third observation is more general; to wit, that a travellour ought with
his vigorous and festive carriage, to conjoine magnificence according to his
ability. For a poor, and ill accoutred travellor is the most ignoble creature
in the Nil habit infaelix pauper tas durius in se, quam quod rediculos homines
facit.
world. All men in a manner, (such are these later times) are esteemed from
their outward comportment; but especially travellours. To this magnificencie,
let there be added a manly reservation, for some men attributing all their best
gestures to a kind of easiness or (rather parasitisme) and dedicacating,
whatsoever they can get from others or exhaust from their own, to vain
ostentation, do fail in the especial parts of splendour, same and reputation.
From this precipice we must beware, least that we yield to much to exterior
pomp, and little or nothing to discreet mediocrity. For when once our familiar
affairs, and the opinion of our credits are subjected to wast; it is scarce
credible, how soon these buildings of our estates and fortunes decay. And
therefore most wittily does the Comaedian Plautus induce the young Cavalero
Philolaches in the first Act. 2. Scene of his Com: Mostellaria, comparing
himself unto a Carpenter, and his estate unto a new building which unless it
be perpetually repaired, and often new furbished;

Venit imber, lavit parietes, perpluunt
Tigna, putrefacit aer operam fabri:
Nequior jam factus est usus oedium.
A tempest comes, the walls are washed, and all
The strongest rafters soon begin to fall,
Corrupted with the foggie air; and straight
The house decaying falls by its own weight.
And no wonder is this sudden mutation (quoth Lucretius:) because.

The houses in the streets do often shake,
And moved by rattling Carres do trembling quake.
Let magnificence therefore be moderately mixed with this manly discretion:
lest that we overmuch contract the goods we have by the divine providence
allotted unto us: or (without the just care of a discreet steward) suffer them
over-nimbly and fluidly to slip from us.

The fourth observation of a Travellour should be the study of the best things.
For many there are which seek foreign Countries to no other end indeed, but
to satisfy their sensual pleasures. But Trismegistus, Apollonius, Mercurius,
and Pythagoras, the ancient quaternio of travellours and wise men, to this end
only did leave the sweet air of their Countries, that they might return
enriched, with the general magazine of knowledge.

Neither traveled these Worthies that they might only behold the outward
shapes, countenances, and appearances of men; but that they might understand
their Manners, customs, languages, learning; and that they might be capable of
those grounds and foundations, which may prove Canons and Theoremes of future
Sciences. Let therefore a travellour hear of nofamous Politician, or learned
Scholar, but let him endeavor (if he may) to be his Visitant, and rather let
him study to see such a miracle of science; then the lofty buildings of the
most aspiring Cities; that he may understand from this Oracle of the Muses
those things, which may both delight and instruct him. Thus many learned
judicious travellours (even from the rising of the Patron of the Muses) came to
Rome or Padua, to visit T Livius, the most exquisite builder of all profane
Histories. Thus as yet is Cor. Tacitus honored in most modern languages: and
amongst the stars of this latter age Erasmus, Vives, Polidorus, Muretus,
Lipsius, Gruterus, etc. were in their houses, schools, studies, visited with
no small (I had almost said) adoration. Let also a travellour pass by no
Library of worth, (but if that opportunity may permit) without searching and
observing it, committing to memory those things there which he finds rare,
and not regarding those slight vanities, which the Market or Tavernes may
afford. These judicious speculations also being referred to this one and only
end, that at his return he may excel in the Knowledge of the best things.

To this let there be added, a constant resolution. In all business whatsoever
we undertake the chief ornament and advancement is constancy: especially in
those things, which take force from our resolutions. In this purpose of travel
(if we may beleve Judicious Lipsius) there is need of a twofold caution, that
our intent be well founded; and then that it be constant. For a mind that is
mutable, gathers not the juice of erudition. Because it imploieth the times of
discipline to please extravagant passions. Discreet frugality is an excellent
remedy against these. But frugality it self is a most vain and idle name, yea
often the cover of wretchedness and penury, unless judicious moderation may be
the director of our expenses. Then indeed our manner of living truly shines,
and strengthened with the glory of reason, grows famous. Avoid also the
distraction of business, which often hinders the intents of a travellour.

For a judicious man undertaketh not his peregrination, to be pragmaticall
after the manner of lawyers, but when his leisure serves him, that he may
observe by action; because he often, which is to busy in the practique part,
can hardly learn any thing, whilst he does spend his time in superficial
follies, or needless business, and so both loses science, and experience.
Then which, what is more ridiculous? For the age of man being distinguished,
and separated into proper seasons, has unto them opposed several faculties.
And youth (for in our childish years some men prohibit us to travel) seems
to be the middle center of Practice and Theorie. Let therefore time be so
allotted, and distributed unto thy business, that thou may not be enforced
to neglect the due seasons of meditation. At all, and in all ages it is most
convenient to meditate; Neither is there any degree in the world that may not
be adorned, and advanced by learning.

To this part add the moderation of thy gesture and behavior; for as speech
is the Index of the mind: so is gesture a declaration of thy natural
inclinations. So Ambrose is reported to have refused the service of two Deacons
in the Church, being offended with the levitie of their behavior; besides,
nothing is so mutable as gesture, or more obnoxious to censure in Foreign
parts; whose opinions, who often lightly does contemn, is without doubt to be
accounted of a Dissolute inclination.

The Epilogue.
THese are the observations, and Cautions, (most D. Brother) which especially
are to be observed by those, which purpose to travel into Transmarine Regions;
as for many other directions if they be not referred, to the forenamed Canons
or Topique places; I have always thought them, the subjects of Common use and
experience.

FINIS.

