A PETITION Presented unto His MAJESTY At His Court at BRISTOLL on the 7 day
of August. 1643.

By Sir Baynham Throkmorton Baronet, High Sheriff of the County of Gloucester,
on the behalf of the Clothiers of the same County.

With His Majesty's Answer thereunto.

OXFORD, Printed in the Year 1643.

To the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of the Clothiers of Your Majesty's County of Gloucester.
Showing unto your most Excellent Majesty, that they being commanded by Prince
RUPERT His Highness to keep their poor people at work for the space of one
month, are most ready and willing to obey the same, to the utmost of their
power: But so it is, may it please your Majesty, that some of us have lost our
whole estates, and many of us have the residue that is left now in the hands of
merchants within the City of London, without which we cannot keep our
work-folkes in work as is Commanded, and as we desire, our credit being lost
with our goods; and our cloth being made, we have no way of safety to keep it,
noe means to vent it; whereby we are in a most distressed Condition: All
which, in all humility we present to Your Majesty's most gracious
Consideration; with this protestation, that whilst we live, we will continue
Your Majesty's loyal, faithful, and obedient Subjects, and will be ever ready
to express the same with our lives and fortunes.

We therefore most humbly beseech Your MAjESTY, that You would be graciously
pleased to take us into Your favor, and our distressed estate into Your
Princely Consideration, and to protect our persons, goods that we have left,
and cloth which we shall make, and to give us Your Majesty's gracious VVarrant
to fetch our money from London, and to afford us some way whereby we may have
sale for our cloth hereafter, whereby we shall be enabled to assist Your
Majesty, maintain our families, and many thousands of poor people which
depend upon us; And we, as in duty; and by our allegiance we are bound, shall
always heartily pray for Your Majesty's long and happy Reign over us.

His Majesty's Answer.
HIs Majesty having taken this Petition into Consideration, and having a deep
sense of the importance of the trade of those parts, and how many of His poor
Subjects are concerned therein, has commanded me to signify that His Majesty
has given express orders to all his Officers and Soldiers (which orders he
intends to fortify by a Proclamation to the same effect) That they offer no
manner of violence to the persons or estates of any of the Petitioners. That he
will require a strict account from any that shall presume to disobey those His
Commands. That He has commanded His Secretaries of State to give License to
such of His Subjects to repair to London to fetch their money from thence as
shall be made appear unto them to be so well affected to His service as that
they may be trusted to repair thither. That He has given order to the
Commissioners of His Treasury to consider the best way and means they may to
enable the Petitioners to sell off their cloth, and to treat with the Merchants
of the City of Bristol and of such other Ports as are, or shall be in due
obedience to His MAjETSY, to take off such proportion of Cloth from the
Petitioners at reasonable rates, as the Petitioners shall be able to make.

FALKLAND.
This is a true Copy of the Petition, and His Majesty's Answer, attested by
me John Driver Under-Sheriffe, Com: Gloucester.



FINIS.

