THE KING's Evidence JUSTIFIED: OR Doctor OATES's VINDICATION of Himself, And
the Reality of the PLOT, AGAINST A Traitorous Libel, CALLED The Compendium;
Contrived by the JESUITS, To the Dishonor of the King and Kingdom.

(...). Theog. (...). v. 613. Quanto perditior quisque est, tanto acrius urget.
Horace. Sat 1, 2, 15 London, Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in
Ludgate Street. 1679.

TO ALL Our Worthy Patriots, And all other Impartial Readers, OF WHAT Rank or
Condition soever.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WEre it not, but that the Inveterate Rage, and partial Obstinacy of those that
labor to defend the silly Poppetry of the Roman Catholic Religion, if I may
so term it, has been so apparent for many Ages, It might be matter of
Amazement, how it could possibly happen, that after so many Legal Trials, and
those also published by the Chief Judges of the Nation, to show the World how
guilty the Papists have been, any Subject of the King of England should dare to
be so hardy, as to Print his mutinous Reflections upon the Concernments of his
Sovereign and arrogantly jostle the Votes of the Parliament of the Nation in
both their Houses. But there are great men in the same Danger; and Policy with
Reward, goes beyond Strength. The most Unfortunate Mr. Reading took the wrong
course, to tamper clandestinly with a single Witness. Here Is one aims at the
full breast of Truth: He shall have all the Hundred Pounds a Year to himself,
and the Land in Gloucestershire to boot. For assuredly, this Compendium is but
an Engine contrived by Men of leisure, to batter down those Testimonies which
they themselves are conscious to be most fairly levelled at their Crimes. This
is called Preparation in the Interim, and agrees with Policy and
Self-preservation. For truly, if the Gentleman has given himself all this
trouble out of pure Zeal, it argues him to have little Religion; since no bad
Subject can be a good Christian. He might have allowed his Prince so much
Discretion, as to be able to judge of Crimes committed against himself; or
otherwise have been more respectful to his Royal Dignity, then in the
Metropolis of his Dominions, publicly to tax him with shedding Innocent Blood?
and from thence to insinuate an arrogant kind of Admonition to his Sovereign,
to be more Cautious and Wary for the future. Which being the absolute and only
Construction to be made of all his Toil, I would fain ask the Rational world
this Question, what would have been the unhappy Fate of a Compendium of this
nature, written by the Protestants in their own justification, under the
jurisdiction of the Inquisition?

But setting aside all his Marginal Industery, which has cost him the Expense
of a Rhodomando; and his gaudy mixtures of Roman and Italick: he must not think
to vapor here in England with his false Assertions, that the Dispute is still
on foot, unless it be among Fools and those of his own Party; or that the
Champions for his Friends still keep their Ground, unless it be within the
Lists of Rome or St. Omers. And let him wonder till Doomsday, the Epitomiser
will find the want of Consideration very erroniously thrown upon the Good
People. For, when his beloved Friends put themselves upon their Country; their
Country then, who were the people, as able, as the Epitomizers Worship, to
judge of an Evidence, were persons of that Integrity, that they would not have
found them Guilty, unless they had well Examined matters at their Trials: And
there was then as much spoken at the Bar, as was afterward made public to the
World. But he thinks it is time to stop the Current of the Peoples Examination
of things, which has occasioned the trussing up of so many of his dear Brethren
in several parts of the Nation, besides what are still in deserved Captivity;
some of which are discovered to be as Infamous for their Debauchery, as their
open Hostility against the Laws of the Land. I would fain know of the Mr.
Epitomiser, whether he thought the King and Council, were not in the same fault
with the ignorant people, when His Majesty was pleased to Issue forth his
Warrants to the Judges of Assize for the Execution of those that lay Condemned
in the Country Jayles?

The last Paragraph of his Dedication looks like one of Poor Robins
Advertisements, made only for the advantage of the Printer, who, as his
prudence foresaw, would be no great gainer by this exact Compendium of his; and
therefore he strains hard, to give it the best Encomium he can at the
beginning, for pithiness and briefness, to launch it into the world; alleging
it to be five times better then the late History of the Plot, because it is five
times shorter. Nay, he is so conceited of his Exactness, that he expects that
all the Executed Criminals, should Rise again and admire it. Else what he means
by the Persons concerned, will be a great doubt among the Critics. For the
Kings Evidence who are Alive, are no way Concerned, but only to let him know,
that such puny Extravagancies, must not pass uncorrected. And so to the matter
it self.

Concerning Mr. Coleman.
THe Epitomizer begins his Laborious Abbreviation with that of Colemans Trial;
where he comes with the Sheirs of his Consideration, and falls a pruning, as if
he were at work by the Great. Were it possible for his Libel to succeed, you
should see he would fall a snipping again, till he had brought it within the
compass of a Nut-shell, to be worn about the Ivory Necks of Ladies, in honor
of the within-mention'd Martyrs. Now, for the better and more plausible
carrying on his Design, he Challenges and Defies any man to show him where he
has lessened the force either of the Charge or Answer. But such is the Nature
of these be-jesuited Bygots, that they can as well leave their Leasing, as the
Catt, turned to a Woman in the Fable, could leave her Mousing. What is it to
the World, whether he cite true, if he do not quote all? Or, if he leave out
the most Material Points that make against him? It may be he states the Charge
right, but he leaves out the Principal Answer made to the Defense. Now whither
this be not True, let the first Proof of the Epitomizer's Honesty determine.

He Sums up Mr. Oates's Evidence in these Words: That in November 1678. Coleman
did write Letters by him to St. Omers, in which he called the King Tyrant; and
said, Page 17, and 18.
That the Match with the Prince of Orange would prove the Tyrants and Traitors
Ruin. That a Letter under Colemans hand, was also then enclosed to La Chaise,
thanking him for the Ten Thousand Pound which he promised should be employed to
no other Use but to cut off the King. That this Letter was written by the
Provincial Strange's direction, because he Page 19.
had hurt his hand, and Mico his Secretary was ill. That the Answer was carried
to Paris, where La Chaise asked him how the Dutchess's Secretary did? That the
Answer written by La Chaise was sent to Coleman, after it had been first
perused by the Society, in Mr. Oates's presence; who, by a Patent from them,
was of the Consult, and had Power to open Letters. That in April, 78. there was
a Consult of the Jesuits, at the white-Horse-Tavern in the Strand, to send Carry
to Rome. That afterward they Adjourned into several Clubs, Page 28.
and pitched upon Grove and Pickering, to Kill the KING; the one being to have
1500 l. and the other 30000 Masses. That this Resolve was Communicated to
Coleman in Mr. Oates's presence, at Wild-House. That the Persons that came over
with Oats, were F. Warren, Sir Thomas Preston, Page 21.
Francis Williams, Sir J. Warner, etc. That in August, there was a Consult of
the Jesuits, and Benedictines, at the Savoy. Page 29.


Here the Epitomizer makes a slight Cavil, pretending that Mr. Oats in all the
rest of the Trials, fixed this Consult upon the 21st. of August; as if the
Twenty-first Day, were not part of the same Month.

Then he goes on with his Summary: That at the same time, Letters came from
Talbot, Bishop of Dublin, that Four Jesuits were to Kill the Duke of Ormond;
and if they mist, Dr. Fogarthy was to Poison him: To which purpose, Coleman was
very forward to have him Dispatched away. That 40000. Black Bills were provided
to be sent into Ireland. That Coleman told Fenwick, He had found a way to send
200000 l. thither, Page 23.
to carry on the Rebellion. That the Four other Ruffians, procured by Dr.
Fogarthy, were sent in August, to Kill the KING at Windsor. That the next Day
after, Harcourt made a Provision of 80 l. to be sent them; and that Coleman
gave the Messenger a Guinney, to expedite his Journey. That Coleman saw the
Instructions, which Ashby brought from White, then at St. Omers, about 10000 l.
for Sir George Wakeman, to Poison the KING, in case the Assassinates failed.
That Coleman thought it too little; Page 22.
and took a Copy of the Instructions, to send them to the several Conspirators
in the Country, to encourage their Contributions. That he acknowledged the
Receipt of his Patent for Secretary of State; which was sealed with the Jesuits
Seal, and signed by their General.

This was the Substance of the Charge, as the Epitomizer has summed it up: And
one would think, it was as home and close an Accusation, as could be laid upon
any Man's Shoulders. Neither were the Proofs of it less Positive: The Time, so
far as the Law required; the Places, and several other Circumstances absolutely
sworn to: The Sense of the Words, if not the Words themselves, severely
affirmed: And the whole Relation was rational, plain, and probable. For, what
Impossibility was there, but that Mr. Oats might act, do, hear, and see those
Things, according to his Depositions? But they that were the Masters of
Evasion, were not so easily put out of Countenance. Now therefore, see how the
Salmon Flounces in the Net: For the Prisoner's Defense is thus Ironically and
partially abbreviated; plainly showing, which way the Bias of the Epitomizer's
Affection runs. That now forsooth, Oats pretends to be extremely
well-acquainted with him, and a World of Intimacy, even at Consults and
Meetings about the KING'S Death; whereas before the Council, he told His
Majesty, He did not know him. That Oats was then so far from laying any
Positive Treason to his Charge, (for as for the Payment of the 5000 l. to Sir
George Wakeman, 'twas a Hearsay, as not seen by Oats) that the Board, after
they had heard his Defense, did instead of sending him to Newgate, Commit him
only to a Messenger, till his Papers were Examined. And whereas Oats Accused
him at that time, of ordering (about the 21st. of August) 80 l. for the
Windsor-Ruffians, and giving the Messenger a Guinney; He was then in
Warkwick-shire, having left London on the 15th. of August, never returning till
the 31st. late at Night.

This is the sum of Coleman's Pigmy Defense, against an Impeachment so vast and
Giant-like. So that the Epitomizer finding the Defense to be so weak and
invalid, Epitomizes Mr. Oates's Reply with a Vengeance. Only upon the first
Part, where the Prisoner wonders, how Mr. Oats should pretend so much Intimacy
with him, and yet tell the King he never knew him, there the Epitomizer is like
the Doctor, that went to curtal Zabarel, but made the Book bigger then it was
before.

Oats, says He, replied, That he said at the Council, he could not Swear he
had seen him before, For his Eyes were bad by Candlelight, and Candlelight
alters the sight much: But when he heard him speak, he could have sworn it was
he; Yet he did not say so, because he was not asked. Here the Epitomizer
plainly falsifies. For Mr. Oats made no such Reply. Indeed the Prisoner taxed
him, that he should say before the King, he had never seen him before. Page 30.
But the Clerk of the Council, though Mr. Coleman was very glad to see him
there, spoke not a word of this matter; neither did the Prisoner put him in
mind so to do, though he were examined in his behalf, and that the point was so
conducing to his safety. Mr. Oats therefore speaks the Truth, and tells ye, he
said, he would not swear that he had seen him before in his life, Ibid.
because his sight was bad by Candlelight; but when he heard him speak, he
could have sworn, Ibid.
'twas he; but it was not his business then. And this Sr. Thomas Doleman himself
explains to have been Mr. Oates's meaning, who being asked, Page 34.
whether Mr. Oats should say he had never seen him, returned no more then
this, for the Witnesses Answer, That he did not know him as he stood there:
which plainly related to the weakness of an imperfect sight, and not to the act
of seeing a man at such or such a time. But all this the Epitomizer wisely left
out; for his Compendium is an Epitome; and no Epitome can be an Epitome, unless
it be an Epitome.

With as little reason was the Point of Familiarity urged: For there is a great
difference between the Knowledge of a man, and Familiarity with the same
Person. A man may know a man by sight, and yet not be familiar with him.
Neither did Mr. Oats pretend to any familiarity with Coleman: He only tells
ye, That he went to visit a Friend at Mr. Colemans House, Page 17.
That Mr. Coleman sent a Letter by him upon his Friends Recommendation, That
Coleman came where he was, Page 24. -- 27.
to Wild-House and at Fenwicks Chamber; and all this might be, where there was
no such Intimacy or Familiarity as Coleman pretended the Secrecy required: For
it was ground sufficient for Coleman to trust Mr. Oats, when he saw him in
such places, and in such Company, and under the Character of a friend. And
therefore, what Sir Thomas Doleman attested in Court, That Mr. Oats should
there say, That he knew not Coleman well, and, That he had no acquaintance with
him, might very well be true, without the least prejudice to his Evidence, and
is no Argument, that he knew Coleman no better, after his speaking then before,
as the Epitomiser in the vanity of his Imagination fondly inferrs.

The next Objection is, That Mr. Oats did not lay any positive Treason to his
Charge at the Council Board, etc.

To this the Man of Brevity, sums up Mr. Oates's Reply. That he designed then
to lay no more to his Charge; That he was so Weak and Tired, through his late
Fatigue and Watchings, that upon his Salvation, he could scarce stand upon his
Legs, (to which his want of his Memory, as not having Consulted his Papers,
should have been added) was the best answer he gave the Court, why he omitted
the most weighty Matters, as also the acount of the whole in relation to the
Kings Murder at Windsor. Nor could Sir Robert Southwel witness any thing new
to Oates's advantage more, then that he said in Council, That if Mr. Colemans
Papers were searched, there would be matter found in them, that he believed,
would cost him his Neck.

Now let the People examine the Truth and Honesty of the Compendium. For the
Narrative tells ye in a fair Character, how Sir Robert Southwell attested,
That Colemans Papers being found in a Deal Box, several of them sounded so
strangely to the Lords, that they were amazed, and presently sent Coleman to
Newgate: And being asked, Page 36.
Whether Mr. Oats did give a round Charge to Coleman or no? His answer was,
that Mr. Oats did say of Mr. Coleman, that he had Corresponded very wickedly,
and basely with the French Kings Confessor: and did declare further, that the
fifteen Thousand Pound was accepted for the murder of the King, and that five
Thousand Pound was actually paid by Mr. Coleman to Sir George Wakeman, upon
which the Chief Justice made this Reflection, that it plainly appeared by the
Testimony of Sir Robert Southwell, that Mr. Oats had charged Coleman Home, and
that it was a full answer to Coleman's Objection. What a strange honor had the
Compendium for Brevitie, to leave out all this! But by this you may see, that
the longest Cloak a Jesuit can wear, cannot hide the Devils Cloven Foot. While
the Father of Lies strives to trample Truth under his feet, his Diabolical
Hoofs, will appear in spite of his teeth. Nay, the very kicking and wincing of
his Offspring Falsehood against her Capital Enemies, will uncover the Nakedness
of her Sire, and expose her Deformity.

Thus has the Grand master of Conciseness overturned two rotten Inferrences
raised upon his own false Abbreviation, That Mr. Oats 's Evidence against
Coleman was a late Fiction; and that it was impossible through Lassitude, not
to tell the King of Colemans Design, had he known of it. It being the very
judgment of the Chief Justice upon the Evidence, That Coleman was not charged
at his Trial with matters newly started, but with the Conspiracy it self, as
had been done before at the Council.

Well then, this Gentleman may be a master at Compendium's because he comes so
short of himself; but he can never be a Matchiavillian to impose, in his first
experiment, upon the people whom he undertakes to undeceive. What says the
Poet?

(...)
(...). -- Theog. (...).
A Lie looks Ill at the beginning, but the End will have a Shameful Revenge.
As to the last Charge of Mr. Oats of Colemans being at the Consult with the
Benedictines upon the 21st of August, the Prisoner replied; That he was in
Warwickshire from the 20th. to the last day of the said month. and so the
Evidence could not be true in that particular. But because he had no one
Witness to prove what he alleged, the Court did not think it convenient to
take his own word; and so that Excuse proved a mere Chrysome or Abortive Birth.
Neither does the Master of the Abridgements himself endeavor to defend this
misfortune of his Martyr, not thinking it safe, for Brevitie's sake, to be
dabbling in the Support of too many untruths at one time, least all men without
my help should see his falsehood and horrid Abuse of the Kings Cause and
Evidence.

As for Mr. Bedlow's Charge, the Abbreviator does his Office like a Workman;
for, because 'twas but short, He takes all in.

He also says, that Coleman made little answer to him, besides protesting,
that he never saw him before: (which Mr. Oats says is false, for he was often
in his Company, but indeed, by the name of Ambrose) which was as good as
nothing: but indeed, it was a piece of Policy becoming a Secretary of State.
For he asked him but one civil question, whither He had ever seen him in his
life? Page 40.
and the Witness gave him such a Satirical rebuke, that the Man of Intreague
(as the Narrative-Trimmer calls him) immediately pulled in his Horns, and never
durst give him one push more.

But the Abbreviator observing this easy Conquest of his Friend, for brevities
sake, resolves to give his Catholic Zeal a Little Rope, and to etch out his
Abbreviation, least it should be too short, with a Politic Remark or two of
his own. For, quoth he, with a Papistical stretch, there was never any of Mr.
Colemans Family had ever seen him, which had been morally impossible, had he
received and brought Letters as he pretended.

How he came by this Intelligence, Heaven knows, for it is more then his
Original gives him Authority to say. But grant it true, he knows Mr. Coleman
was a man of Intreagues, Plotters always walk in Masquarade; he was too
politic to suffer the Instruments of so grand a design to appear at his House
twice with the same Face, nor indeed with their own faces twice together at any
time; And I am apt to believe, that Mr. Coleman's Asseveration might in some
measure be true, That he never saw Mr. Oats or Mr. Bedlow in that Habit or by
those Names, for the Jesuits we know go by many Names (as false men use to do);
or to use his own words, that he never saw That Face, of either, that is to
say, the Faces of either, as then they appeared fashionably adorned, and with
the natural and Genuine Air of their Countenances. By which, with a Jesuitical
Equivocation, he might serve his Papistical Conscience.

But this is not all, he is resolved to put his Confidence upon the
Tenter-hookes, and to undertake, not only for Mr. Colemans Family, but for the
whole Auditory at the Trial; too few of whom, he says, could comprehend, how
Mr. Bedlow should know that the Letter which he brought from Paris, and yet
understood not, was about carrying on the Plot. Truly this might have been a
Miracle indeed, could Monsieur Compendium have proved, that Mr Bedlow had at
the same time lost his hearing. But what a shameful Impudence is this, for a
man to belly a whole Auditory; I mean all that were not a sleep? For they could
not choose but hear Mr. Bedlow declare, that he received the said Letter, at a
Consultation of two French Abbots, and several English Monks; among whom, there
was no other Discourse, but of the English Plot, and Destroying the King. But
why should Harcourt call Mr. Bedlow over the way, for no other Reason, but to
hear Mr. Colemans Treasonable Expressions in the Height of his Zeal? Why
perhaps, because he was unwilling his Friend should stand in the Wet or the
Sun, -- or for some other Considerations him thereunto moving. Would any but a
Narrative-Snipper have us put such an Impertinent question as this to men of
Reason? As if they, who believe they can trust one another, care what they hear
one another say. Besides, it is well known that Coleman, as much a man of
Intrigue as he was (which is one of Compendium's excuses of the probability,
that the finding of his Letters might hang him) was two much wrapped up in the
Admiration of himself, to be either profound or wary. But there is yet another
Riddle behind, (For there was never such a Sphynx in Nature, as our Compendium
Writer) How Mr. Bedlow could carry La Chaise a Letter from Mr. Coleman, Dated
April 75; and yet Mr. Coleman's First Letter to him, was his Long Letter, Dated
September 29. 1675? This is a Question, it is true: But why Mr. Compendium
should ask it, is another Question. For it plainly shows, that the
Narrative-Clipper was careless of that Examination, which he so earnestly
reoommends to the People. Page 37.
For Mr. Bedlow does not say, he carried any Letter from Mr. Coleman to La
Chaise, Dated April 75. But he says, That in April 75. he carried over a large
Packet of Letters to Monsieur La Chaise from Mr. Coleman, wherein Mr. Secretary
is not Charged to have had any particular Letter of his own, but only to have
been the Hander and Conveyer of the Accounts of the Plot given to La Chaise by
other men; upon which the Confessor, well knowing how deeply Mr. Coleman was
Engaged, thought fit to give Mr. Coleman his Sentiments in a particular Letter
directed to himself. And so the Correspondence began in September following.
And thus the Riddle is resolved without the Help of an Oedipus.

Now let men of Reason but consider, the lamentable, miserable, pitiful,
sorry, inconsiderable, and weak shifts of Confidence and Fallacy, that these
people are put to, to uphold the shallow Defenses of their Villainous
Disloyalty; as if they thought to deal with the Protestants like Babies,
because their own Religion, is a Religion only of Trinkets and Baubles.

But now the Epitomizer is at a wicked Loss: the ghastly Apparition of Colemans
Letters has scared him almost out of his Senses. Those Letters are upon him as
the Philistines were upon Sampson, so that he knows not which way to turn
himself. True it is, he makes use of the Jawbone of an Ass, but not to the same
purpose as Sampson did. For, instead of smiting, he falls to expounding, and
extenuating. Instead of an Abbreviator, he turns Commentator; but with so
little Success, that there is not one word of Sense in what he urges.

First, he acknowledges, that Coleman acknowledged them very full of
Extravagant Expressions, because there was no way to avoid it. But that he
hoped they were not Treasonable. Suppose a Fellow breaks open and rifles a
house, Let the People Examine, whether it be a sufficient plea, for the
Malefacter to say, he hoped it was no Felony. He Prosecutes the Mighty-work of
Converting Three Kingdoms, and Subduing the Pestilent Heresy of
Protestantisme; Implores, and Sollicits Foreign Power and Assistance to effect
all this, and hopes it is no Treason: Violates the Tundamental Laws of the
Land, and hopes it was no Treason. But these, says the Animadverter, were only
Rhetorical Flowers to wheedle in La Chaise. A very probable Story. Men
pretending to Sense, should be ashamed to own in Print such childish
simplicities so scandalous to reason. The Commentator confesses, that the Court
of France had smelt him out, for all his pretenses, and knew him to be a Person
of no Interest, a mere Epistle-monger; so that, says he, Mr. Coleman could not
Dream to wheedle such a cunning Fox as La Chaise by any other means, then by
presenting him with a Rhetorical Nose-gay. But what was to have been the effect
of this Wheedle? To advance the King of Englands Interest -- By whose
Commission was this Wheedle to have been managed? By no body's -- only it was
Mr. Colemans Generosity to his Prince, to give himself the trouble. Briefly
then, Mr. Coleman was to advance the King of Englands Interest, and the
business was to have been brought about thus -- Mr. Coleman was to tickle La
Chaise's Nostrils with his Rhetorical Flowers, and then La Chaise was to have
persuaded the King of France to have sent Mr. Coleman 200000 l. to go on with
the Design.

In good Sooth, the King of France had been sweetly gul'd, to have given Mr.
Coleman 200000 l. for a Rhetorical Posie for his Confessor. No, no, -- Mr.
Colemans meaning no doubt, was just as the Court, persons that understood the
meaning of English words, expounded it; down right self-seeking Treason; and if
he and his Confederates had not hung together, better then the sense of them
that defend their Crimes, we had been but in a bad Condition ere now.

But the main business is behind. Says Mr. Coleman, says the Commentator,
There are some Expressions that explain, that he had No Plot or design to Kill
the King. As how? For the Reader, says the Interpreter, may find Mr. Coleman
telling La Chaise, That the Laborers were few, and the Harvest Great. Whence
the Expositor draws this immediate Conclusion, that it was an Argument, that
there were but a few concerned with Mr. Coleman. Dear Interpreter, thou art
fallen into the pit which thou prepared'st for another. The Argument for thy
Client is against him. For here is a plain confession, that Mr. Coleman was
concerned, though but a few were concerned with him. That is, not enough to kill
and take possession. Indeed, the Crop of England is a great Crop, and Mr.
Coleman I believe did want Laborers to reap the Harvest of his incessant
industry. Which made him so earnestly petition the French King to send him men
and money to advance the interest of the King of England. And thus we have done
with this mighty Champion so far as concerns Mr. Coleman; And give me leave to
tell the world, that if all the rest of the right writing Papists have no more
Salt in their brains then this Zealous Epitomizer, I would abhor the Catholic
Religion only for his sake.

Concerning Ireland, Grove, and Pickering.
IT is impossible that there should be any Truth in a Religion, when there is
no Truth in the professors of it. The Abbreviator desies all men that can Tax
him of being unjust to either party, and yet in his foreshortning of Irelands
Case, he has so Knavishly concealed, for brevities sake, the Material points of
his Charge from the Examination of the people, that we must be forced to pick
it out of the Narrative.

The Charge then maintained by Mr. Oats against Ireland, was, Nar. P. 16.
That he was at the Consult at the White-Horse Tavern: That one of the
Colloquies was at his Chamber. That he was present at the drawing up of the
resolve of the Assassination of the King, and signed it: and that he had laid a
Plot with others to move the disaffected Scots to Rebellion. Page 22.
All this the Abbreviator for his friends sake, leaves out. For it was not fit
to Communicate the Height of Irelands Crimes to the Examination of the people.
And therefore, only beginning at the Fagg end of the book, Page 60.
he falsely repeats his being said to be a Caballing (no such thing said) at
Fenwick's Chamber about a fortnight in August; and that on the First of
September, Mr. Oats had of him Twenty Shillings, which was only spoken to
prove his being in Town at that time, and not by way of Accusation.

The Charge against Grove maintained by Mr. Oats, was, that Grove and
Pickering were ordered to make an Attempt upon the Kings Person. That the first
was to have had One Thousand 500 Pound, and the latter Thirty Thousand Masses.
That they accepted of the Terms, took the Sacrament, and an Oath of Secrecy
upon it. That the fact was to be done with scru'd Pistols, shorter then some
Carbines. That they had Silver Bullets, Page 19 Page 23 Ibid
which Grove would have to be Champt, that the wound might prove incurable.
That he saw the Bullets in May and June; and this was an unanswerable and
remarkable passage, and therefore to be left out by the Compendium. That
Pickering having lost a fair Opportunity, by reason his flint was loose, was
forced to undergo a Penance, and had Twenty or Thirty Strokes of Discipline.
That Grove and one Smith had gone about to gather Peter-pende to carry on the
design, and that he saw the Book where these things were entered. And that
Grove told him, that he had a hand in the Firing of Southwark, and that he had
received, 400 l. for his Pains. Thus far Mr. Oats.

Mr. Bedlow being called, confirmed the Truth of the Entry book, and that Lang
horn was Register. That Ireland was at Harcourts Chamber toward the latter end
of August, where it was concluded, that the Ruffians missing to Kill the King
at Windsor, Pickering and Grove should go on, Page 41
and that Conyers should be joined with them to Assassinate the King in his
morning Walks at New Market: And that Ireland, Grove and Pickering were
present, and heard the whole discourse. That at the same Time there was a
discourse about Killing the Earl of Shaftsbury, the Duke of Buckingham, the
Earl of Ossory, the Lord of Ormond.

But the Charge says the Abbreviator, was solemnly denied by them all. What is
that to the purpose? As if a Roman Catholic vallued the denial of a
perpetrated Crime, for the Propagation of the Popes interest, any more then a
Common strumpet does to pick a pocket, or a Jesuit to forswear himself at the
Gallows.

Mezeray, in the Life of Henry the Fourth, tells us, that all the Torments of
that Rack could not force Barrier to any Confession, till his confessor took
him to Task, and opened his heart with the same Key, with which the Jesuits had
locked it up before. Should such Traitors make Confession of such Crimes as
these, when there is a Crown of Martyrdom to be obtained, Papists would turn
Atheists, and the Scarlet Pomp of Rome return to its Pristine Poverty and
Nakedness. No wonder then the dying Slaves are so industriously cajoll'd to
persist in their obstinacy, and that the Living adhearents strive with all the
art Immaginable to cast a veil over the shame of their Mother the Church of
Rome, never more likely to run the risk of Ruin, then by such permitted and
cantingly justified Acts of Impiety as these.

But the Epitomizer goes on. Pickering, says he, as to his particular,
protested, that He never shot off a Pistol in his Life. Though Mr. Dudgale, has
often gone a Fowling with him, when they were young Lads together, and has
affirmed, and is ready to be deposed, that he was as good a Marks-Man, as ever
he was acquainted with; which proves Pickering, and this Compendium-writer, a
pair of horrid deceivers.
But who knows what now resolution and Courage the Sanctification of his Arm
and the Exorcismes of the Jesuits, in such cases as these, by way of
preparation, might inspire him with of a sudden. Oh! But it seemed improbable
to the Spectators by his very mine and looks. This is now the second time that
this little pretender to Omnisciency, has undertaken to know the hearts of
whole Auditories and Assemblies: but if he use it too often, it will prove the
Mortality of his Confidence. Fronti nulla fides is too true a Proverb, that
every Millener has it in his Mouth. And it is as probable as many stories that
the Epitomizer tells, that he might be pitched upon for that very reason,
because he was so little to be suspected, having such a poor presence; but I
will boldly say, this was a poor excuse in our Epitomizer, and that here he was
at a hard pinch to excuse a Traitor by his puny looks; then says the
Narrative-Culler, Ireland affirmed, that he was constantly out of London from
the third of August, till above a week in September: This he labored to make
good against three Witnesses for the King, who positively swore they saw him
here in Town at that time, by several Testimonies of his own; pretending, to
move the Spectators Compassion, that he had not been permitted to send for any
more; though the Chief Justice declared, that his Sister had leave to go to
whom he thought fit in his behalf. But notwithstanding this public lie, and
that his Witnesses swore with prepared Consciences, and his own impious
Imprecations, his own Kinsman Mr. Jenison has since so fully cleared the
point, and let in the bright Sun upon their dark Concealments, that the
Epitomizer had better have shortened his Abbreviation, and left out his lift of
so many persons of quality, then have exposed them thus by their Names to the
public shame of owning and asserting False-Hoods. It Is a wonder that none of
those persons of quality, who could not want Money, especially the Ladies who
were out of danger, were not so kind, knowing where the pinch lay, as to take a
short journey to see London, and save a friend; nay more then a friend, a
Ghostly Father, one of the Patriarchs and Conscience -- Cabinets of the Romish
Church. But 'twas all one; they sent a pitiful Coachman to damn himself; which
was the same thing as if they had come themselves. But how did this Prostitutor
of his Soul, dare to call Mr. Oats Knight of the Post, who himself was then
resolved to forswear himself, before the Tribunal of Heaven? Now what have the
Papists got by such a Holy piece of perjury? They have only showed us, how far
the Impulse of Bigotisme, and the Confidence of Papal Remission will carry a
deluded Conscience; they have only displayed the iniquity of their Tenants by
the Iniquity of Irelands Exit, and how miserably poor Staffordshire is pestered
with the poisonous and Pestilential Heresies and Lewd Opinions of the Romish
Church.

Concerning Hill, Green, and Berry.
IT mainly concerns the Abbreviator to manage this business of the Murder of
Sir Edmundberry Godfrey wisely; for if he cannot rubb it off from the Papists,
it will stick as a Cursed stain and pollution upon the pretended innocence of
their Religion, as long as Popery endures. Now therefore let us see how he
behaves himself.

Mr. Oats, says he, swore, that after the Plot was known, Page 12.
several Popish Lords, some of whom are now in the Tower, had threatened Sir
Edmundberry Godfrey, and asked him what he had to do with it? and he said
often, that he went in fear of his life by the Popish Party, he having been
often dogged by them: but here the Epitomizer leaves out the most material
point; He forgets to tell the people the Occasion of the Gentleman's fears,
which was, because he had taken Mr. Oates's Depositions, and had dived too deep
into the discovery of the Plot. For Alas, before, Sir Edmund-Berry might have
walked the Town at all hours of the Night; there was no body watched him, nor
dogged him before. But no sooner had the Papists received the Alaram of the
Discovery, and that Sir Edmund-berry had been so Audacious as to perform the
Duty of his Office, and take the Depositions, but he could not stir a foot
without a a diligent Observer and Spy at his Heels; which double diligence and
care of his person, never ceased till they had Acted their intended Tragedy.

These were Circumstances too weighty to be repeated in an Epitome, especially,
it being the policy of the Narrative-trimmer; to lead the Examination of the
People astray as much as lies in his Power. Having made these willful mistakes,
he comes to Mr. Prance his part, who, as he says, Swore; That at the Plough
Alehouse, Girald and Kelley, Page 42.
two Priests, about a fortnight before the Murder, did entice him to it,
saying, That Sir Edmund Godfrey was a busy man, and would do much mischief. The
Epitomizer should have added, and farther told Mr. Prance, that it was no sin
to Kill, but a Deed of Charity to the Church to do it. But such mincings as
these must be expected, in Popish Compendiums, which are the most exact
Compendiums in the World, always leaving out what gravels them. He goes on, and
says, That Green, Girald, and Hill, Dogged Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey to a House
at Saint Clements. That Green came at Seven a Clock at Night to tell Prance of
it, Kelley and Green remaining upon the Watch. But neither Green, nor any of
the rest told him whereabouts in Saint Clements Sir Edmund was. That about
Eight or Nine a Clock, Sir Edmund came Homewards. That Hill ran before to give
the Conspirators notice of it, at Sommerset-House; and then going to the Gate,
He told Sir Edmund, that two Men were Quarrelling within, and desired him,
being a Justice of the Peace, to pacify them; that he consented to it, but when
he came to the bottom of the Rails, Green threw a twisted Handkerchief about
his Neck, and cast him behind the Rails, and then Throned him, and punched him
with his Knee on the Breast. But the Abbreviator omits, that Girald would have
thrust his Sword through him, but that the rest would not permit him, for fear
it should discover them by the Blood. Page 17. Ibid.
That about a Quarter of an Hour after, Prance came from his Station at the
Watergate, and laying his Hand upon the Body, found he was not quite Dead, but
that his Legs Shook, and that then Green wrung his Neck quite round: The
Snipper leaves out, that Green boasted of this particular Act, which his
Compendium should have Recorded; had it been for nothing else, but for the
Barbarism and Cruelty of a Popish Chapel Officer. But This he would not have
the World know, for Holy Church-sake.

Here the Compendium-botcher advises the Reader to take notice, that Prance
having related the matter of Fact in this manner, Mr. Attorney asked him on a
sudden, whether he saw Green wringing his Neck? No answered he, forgetting
what he said before, but Green afterward told him so: which words surprised
not a few of the Popish Party. Why this it is to leave out the most material
Point of an Evidence. For though to the first question Mr. Praunce answered,
No; yet to that which was impli'd, how he came to know it, he makes answer,
That not only all the rest, but Green himself told him so, and boasted of his
Butchery. And then indeed not a few might well be surprised to hear a Popish
Zealot so imprudently boasting of such an irreligious and inhuman Act. Ibid.
Reader, take notice of this; and what a Cheat this faithless Abbreviator would
have put upon your understanding: and what prime Camester this concise Devil
must be, that puts his Brains and Conscience so far upon the stretch, to
defend so horrid and never to be paralleled murder, unless among the popish
Massacres in Ireland, when they ripped up Women with Child, and the like.
Reader, take notice also of a farther Omission of this Defier of all men for
Truth. For he speaks not a word of the Punches that Green, like a merciful
Executioner, gave with his knees upon the half breathless body, for quickness
of dispatch, which was in like manner confessed and boasted of by Green, and all
the Rest. These were Circumstances, Reader, with which he was loath to astonish
your Examination, and might be therefore well enough left out in a delusive
Epitome, to serve their Church, and cheat the world.

After his foolish, or rather knavish Remark, he goes on, That Sir Edmund being
thus killed, they carried the Corpse to a Chamber of Hills at Doct. Godwins.
Observe by the way another escape of this wicked Epitomizer, which is that Mr.
Praunce swore, that when he came down, as is aforesaid, he found Hill, Green,
Girald, and Kelley, all four about the Murdered Magistrate, newly turned out
of his Commission after the Popish way; and that Berry came to them presently
after. Well! after he had Lain in Hills's Chamber till Monday Night, they
brought him to a Room in the lower part of Somerset House, and then Hill showed
him the Body by a Dark-Lanthorn, Girald, Kelley, and the rest being by. That on
Tuesday Night the Body was brought back to Sir John Arundels Lodgings, and upon
Wednesday Night, they removed it back to the place where it first lay. (By the
same token, that Prance coming as they were removing it, they were frighted and
ran away, but hearing Mr. Prances Voice, they returned again.) A remarkable
Circumstance left out, for Brevities sake, by the Epitomizer. That about Twelve
a Clock the same Night they carried it away in a Sedan to So-ho, and then upon
a Horse before Hill, to the place where it was found. That Girald, and one
Vernat spoke to him of a great reward, and that there was a good one to be sent
by the Lord Bellasis. That in the beginning of November, Vernat, Lawson,
Girald, Himself and one Dethick, met together at Bow, Page 21.
where reading all the Writing of the Murder, they were very merry, by the
same token that Mr. Prance being jealous of being overheard, caught the Drawer
Listening, and threarn'd to kick him down Stairs.

Bedlow, says the Abbreviator, swore, that La Fair, Prichard, Welsh, Keins,
and other Priests, did treat with him about the Murder of a Gentleman in
October Last. That they sent him to Insinuate himself into the acquaintance of
Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, not telling him their Design. That on Saturday, the
day before Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey was Murdered, La Fair met Bedlow by
accident in Lincolns-Inn-feilds, and also at the Pals-Graves-Head-Tavern, where
he told Bedlow, that a Material Man was to be put out of the Way, who had all
Oates's and Tongue's Informations, which, if not taken from him, would discover
their Design to that Degree that they must stay till another Age to Effect it.
That La Fair told him, he should have 4000 l. for a reward; That no worse, a
man then my Lord Bellasis was engaged for it, and that Mr. Coleman had order to
pay it. That he then parted with La Fair, but came not according to his
Engagement to Somerset House: That on Monday night La Fair met him again in
Fleet Street, and charged him with breach of promise. To which it was answered,
That he knew not but that the person to be murdered might be his Friend.
Whereupon La Fair appointed him to meet him at Eight of the Clock at
Somerset House, and he should know more. That coming there, La Fair told him,
that the man was Killed; and that if he would help to carry off the body, he
should have half the reward; and then, at Mr. Bedlows request, he showed him
the body by a Lanthorn; but that he did not see either Hill, Green or Berry
then in the Room. But that he had such a Remembrance of Faces, that he could
tell all he saw there, though the light were small.

Here the Abbreviator recommends to the Reader a learned Observation, That Mr.
Bedlow had deposed before the Lords, as their Journals Testify, that he saw
Prance, and that Welsh, Le Fair, Atkins, and my Lord Bellasis's man were with
him, being quite different Actors from those mentioned by Prance. From whence
it is supposed, that Mr. Bedlow naming these, and Mr. Prance naming others to
have done the Fact, Neither of them spoke truth.

What strange conclusions does this Nicodemus labor to impose upon the
Observation of the People. Observe then, Reader, Mr. Bedlow no way contradicts
the Lords Journals. For he swears in the Narrative, Page 33.
that he did see Mr. Prance there, which was the occasion of his knowing him
again in the Lobby; and that La Fair led him by the hand, into the Room where
were many more. But neither before the Lords, nor at the Trial did he undertake
to distinguish the persons that did the Fact. This is then a conclusion more
justly to be drawn from the Epitomizer's unfortunate Observation, that there
were too distinct parties, that had it in their Pates, to put Sir Edmund-Bury
Godfrey out of the Way. Le Faire's Party, and Kelly and Giralds Party. But it
happened that the last were two yare for the first; and had dispatched their
business while Le Fair went Hawking about with his great Rewards for a
Chapman. Now when the business was done, both Parties joined, and fed their
Curiosities with the beautiful Object of a Murdered Heretic, which is the
true Sense of Mr. Bedlow's Deposition, though the Epitomiser would so fain have
screwed it the wrong way.

But this is not all, Then quoth he, He tells us, meaning Mr. Bedlow, That the
Corpse had a Cravat about the Neck like that about his own, but so straight,
that he could not get his finger between. Which Reader, says the false
Epitomiser, was no very proper Instrument to strangle a strong man, so
cleverly, and without Noise. I know not what Experience in straggling or hanging
this Defender of the Massacre may have; But that Reader who will not believe,
that four strong men to one, may be able to strangle (by surprise) one strong
man, cleverly, and without Noise; and that a long Cravat is not a proper
Instrument for the business, I wish him no other harm, but that he may never be
so unfortunate, as to have the Conclusion tried upon himself.

He proceeds, that Mr. Bedlow knew him presently, though to beguile him, they
told him, he belonged to a Person of Quality. That the Jesuits then with him,
were not those, that had formerly employed him, to insinuate himself into Sir
Edmund-Bury's Acquaintance; and yet Reader, his Worship informed us, as you see
but just before, that his Introducer, La Fair, was one of them that so
employed him. This the Observator takes to be a Smiter, and worships Mr.
Bedlow, for putting such a Slur as this upon himself. Poor Creatures! They are
very thankful for the least seeming Kindness, that might help 'em out at such a
dead Lift as this. As if it had never happened in this World, that a Man might
introduce his Friend into a Room, and go out again. La Fair had glutted his
Eyes with the Show already, and might be drawn aside in Consultation with some
other Person. And it is most probable, that they who stood about the Body, next
to Mr. Bedlow, were such to whom the Fact was most a Novelty; and consequently,
less acquainted with Mr. Bedlow's Concerns. Now, Reader, where there is no
Opposition to Reason, it is a mere Cavil to fix a Contradiction; Especially,
where the Crime merits rather Aggravation upon the Malefactors, then to be
palliated with idle Excuses. I would advise the Observator, to take the Murder
upon himself, to surrender himself, and be Hanged; and so convince the World of
Mr. Bedlow's Error, and prove all the Witnesses Liars. The Pope, perhaps, might
Canonize him for such a Heroic Act.

He goes on: Mr. Bedlow, quoth he, farther said, That he advised them to throw
the Body into the River; which they not thinking safe, answered, That they
would put it upon himself, and make it his own Act. That upon his saying, It
was too early, Eleven or Twelve a Clock being better for their purpose, Le
Fair Conjured him by the Sacrament he had taken on Thursday, not to fall that
night; for, that after the Discovery of the Plot, the Sacrament was Administered
to him thrice a week. That he hasted away, and having so great a Charge upon
him as the Sacrament, he grew Disturbed, and went to Bristol, where God put it
into his mind to discover all; and so he wrote to the Secretary.

The premises, says he, were endeavored to be proved by four Collatteral
Testimonies. First, by Mr. Robinson of the Common Pleas, who attested, that Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey said to him, That he believed he should be the first Martyr.
Secondly, by one Curtis, a poor Chare-woman belonging to Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, Page 28. -- 39.
(though the Narrative says she was his maid, and entrusted with the Keys of
his Household Concerns) who Swore, that she saw Hill with her Master about nine
or ten a Clock in the morning, on the Saturday he was murdered, which the
Epitomiser left out for brevitie's sake, That she saw him in the same Clothes
that he had on at the Bar; and that she saw Green with her master a fortnight
before. Now, why may not a poor Chare-womans Eyes be as good as a Lady's? Or,
why may not she swear as true as a Jesuite's Miss. Thirdly, by Hills denying
before the Council, that ever he saw Gyrald, when as the Boy proved in Court,
that they frequently met there. He might have added, the master too, who swore
the same. Lastly, by Berry's sending away the Prince, while the Intregue was on
foot, upon pretense, that he had Orders to tell all persons of Quality, that
the Queen was private, and that they were not to come in. Page 50.
And then being ask't at his Examination by the Lords, Whether he had ever had
such Orders before? he then said, No; which Contradicted his Answer at the Bar;
where he affirmed, he had had several of the same Nature: One of which must be
a Lie.

The Epitomizer having thus displayed his Treacherous Endeavors, to deceive the
Consideration of the People, by slubbering over the Charge, and farcing it with
the petty Dictates of his Papistical Malice, being come to the Prisoner's
Defense, takes upon him to be their Champion, and makes open War, not only
against the Witnesses, but against the Judge himself.

To this Charge, says he, the Prisoners answered with all imaginable
Protestations, That they were Innocent. And well they might: For they did not
believe, they had Committed an ill thing. Men that were taught by their Ghostly
Fathers, and convinced, that Murder was no Sin, but an Act of Charity to the
Church of Rome, might well protest their Innocence of the Crime. For those
False Doctrines were so strongly rivited in their Breasts, that if Denyals and
Protestations could have saved them, they should have been as Cheap, as the
Prostitutions of Harlots amongst the Papists in their Stews; and nothing but
the gaping Earth, or some immediate Judgment from Heaven, should be an Evidence
of their Guilt, sufficient to demonstrate it to the World. Had the Romish
Religion been chary of her Appeals to God, and maintained the Chastity of
Protestations, as she ought to have done, such Protestations might have been
prevailing Arguments of the Protester's Innocence: But the Experience of many
Ages tells us, that they have been her Common Pawns for Belief; And that she
has now been trusted so long, and failed so often, that she is become an
absolute Bankrupt; not to be trusted any farther, for a Pennyworth of
Imprecations. And therefore, to tell us of the Protestations made by these
Malefactors of their Innocence, is a Gullery, which the Epitomizer must not
think to impose upon the Consideration of any rational People.

But he proceeds, and says, That Sir Robert Southwel's Testimony did not
advantage them a little, meaning the Prisoners, in the Opinion of many. That Is
a false Insinuation: For he, being summoned as a Witness for the King, to
acquaint the Court with several Particulars about Praunce's Examination before
the Court, was ask't, Whether his present Description and Account of Places,
were suitable to what he then said in Court? Sir Robert replied, Yes; but that
he said then more, then he said before at the Council. In the next place, the
Attorney General demanding, whether Praunce did hesitate, when he showed the
Lords the several Places, in relation to the Murder? He answered, That he went
positively and directly to all the Places: Till the Lords ask't him, into what
Room the Body was removed; but that then, after going into several Rooms, he
was in a great Distraction: Yet because in that Confusion, he said, Thus far I
am Certain, I am Right; the Chief Justice would have it, that his Doubtfulness
gave Credit to his Testimony; since a Knight of the Post never sticks at any
thing.

What Advantage this was to the Prisoners, the Epitomizer should have more
amply informed us; for this Formal Story signifies nothing. For Sir Robert
Southwel attests, that Mr. Praunce was punctual, direct, and positive, as to
all the Places where the Murder was Committed, and where the Corpse was first
conveyed. If they removed him afterward in his Absence, to a blind Hole, and
showed him this blind Hole by a blind Light, and he cautious of mistaking,
became more Considerative and wary then before; Shall this be any Argument of
the Malefactor's Innocence? And therefore, Page 47.
the Conclusion of the Lord Chief Justice was Logically true; That his
Doubtfulness did assert and give credit to the Testimony of the Witness, and
confirm it to any Honest Man in England; in regard, it argued, that the
Witness did not go prepared to swear right or wrong. Which, because 'twas
Reason, the Epitomizer looks upon it with a kind of Frantic Admiration. But,
says he, the Prisoners struck at the Root: For Hill desired, that Praunce's
Testimony might not stand good against him, (This was the wisest thing that
ever he did in his Life, could he have obtained his Suit:) For he urged, that
Praunce had denied all, not only before the King, as Mr. Chevins attested; but
before the Council, as Captain Richardson acknowledged.

But this needs no farther answer, then what the Lord Chief Justice himself
gave; that His denial, which was not upon Oath, could not be believed, because
his discovery upon Oath was so particular; and that the bare denial of what he
had Sworn, could not amount to perjury. Mr. Attorney General also declared,
that while he was a Papist, and not sure of his Pardon, Page 25.
he lay under Suspicions, Disturbances, and Fears, which prevailed with him to
deny what he had Sworn. But he was no sooner returned to the Prison, but being
convinced and troubled, that he had done amiss, he begged of Captain
Richardson, to go back to the King, and acquaint him, that all that he had
Sworn to, was True; and that what he had then said, was False. But this, says
he, gave several of the Auditory but small Satisfaction, meaning the Papists
that were there, considering, that a Jailer, whose interest it was to farther
the Plot, might easily, if the thing were true, obtain such a promise. Besides,
not a few knew how he had been used, and what Groans were heard where he lay
for many days together, as Mrs. Hill urged.

Here you may behold Mounsieur Compendium laboring for Life. This Denial of
Mr. Prance, must either be made to serve their turn, or else be Annihilated.
But it can no way serve their turn, because it was not upon Oath, and therefore
it must be Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey'd. And it must Die with Three Stabs, The
small Satisfaction of the Auditory, that were of the Popish Party; The Jaylors
Interest; And the Torturing of Mr. Prance. It seems, he was Eves-dropper in
Ordinary to the Auditory; or else the Captain of his own Gang, that crowded in
to breath disatisfaction upon every slight Occasion. For as to his knowledge of
the rest, which were Protestants, he must bring very good Witness of their
Disatisfaction, before any Credit will be given to his Presumption. And to give
the Epitomizer a proof of his Mistake, and that this is a Tale of his own
making, let him but observe that there never was any Trial of the Plotters,
since the first Discovery, but that the People were always Disatisfied, even to
tumult, when any of them were either Reprieved or Acquitted. As for the
Captain's Interest, I confess, I do not understand it. But I will appeal to the
Examination of the People, whether the Lords of the Council would give Ear to a
Flim-flam story of Capt. Richardson's, or join with him in an invention of
Prance's denial, to promote his Interest. For whatever Tale the Captain could
promote for his own Interest, was most certainly to come to the Test of Persons
not to be Imposed upon by the Keeper of Newgate.

But then they say, He was Tortured to make him deny. And who I pray brings
this Intelligence? Why, even Mr. Hill's own Dear Wife. Who by her behavior in
Court, showed her self to be a Clamorous Woman, that either knew not, or cared
not what she said. But he himself, who had most reason to know, swears nothing
but Civility from the beginning to the End. Neither does it sound like a thing
probable, that people should be racked in their own Chambers in Newgate.

But Prance's own Reason, says the Observer, seemed yet odder. For, he said,
It was because of his Trade, as fearing to lose his Employment with the Queen,
and the Catholics, which was the most of his Livelihood; and because he had
not his Pardon. But why this Reason was odder then the rest, the Learned
Commentator does not determine; and so we leave it to the Consideration of the
People, who with half an Eye, may see the Shallowness of these petty Quirks and
Shifts.

The Prisoner's Plea being thus overruled, and Mr. Praunce's Testimony
adjudg'd Good; Hill calls for his Master's Neice, and Mrs. Broad-street, who
looked to the House, as also, his Master's Maid, in his behalf. The Sum of
whose Testimony was this; That he was a Trusty Servant: That he never kept ill
Hours, but always came in by Eight of the Clock: That he could not go out
afterward, because the Doors were locked up; and that they were constantly up
till Eleven at Night: That he was at Home on Saturday-Night, when Sir Edmund
Godfrey was Killed; and on Wednesday-Night, when carried away. That their House
and Stairs were so little (...) it was impossible, that any thing could be
brought in or out, but they must know it. That the Room where the Body was said
to be laid, was not only over against the Dining Room, but in a Room that had
the Key in it always; and that every Day they went often into it for something
or other: and that the Foot-boys staid there, when any Body visited the Young
Lady: And that there was but one Key to the Door of the Lodgings. Nay, the
Servant-Maid, whom Judge wild commended to more care then the other two swore,
that she dall'd in every Day at the Door of the Chamber, and was the last up.

In this Testimony, the Observator seems to Triumph, as if he had got a Mighty
Victory. But he omits to observe, how fatally the Young Lady tripp't in her
Story, when she affirmed, Page 55
that the Family had never been out of their Lodging, since they came to Town;
and being ask't, when they were out of Town? she answered, in October; in which
Month the Tragedy was acted. Upon which, two of the Judges told her, Ibid.
That now she had spoiled all; and that she had undone the Man, instead of
saving him. Whereupon she would have Recanted, like Mr. Praunce in his Terrors,
and cried, Why, my Lord, I only mistock the Month. By which it was apparent,
that either her Devotion had stupify'd her Consideration, or that she appeared
in Court, only to say what would serve the Turn.

As for Mrs. Broad street's Evidence, It was delivered with more Confidence,
then became her Sex. For, after she had denied, that there was more then one
Key to the Lodgings, she confessed before the Duke of Monmouth, Page 57.
that there were Six or Seven. And in the Question about Hill's leaving the
Doctor's Lodgings, she had so hampered her self, by saying and unsaying, by
saying one thing, and setting her Hand to another, that never was poor Fly so
wrapped up in Cobweb-Lawn, as she in the Confusions of her own Story. Nay, she
had like to have brought her self into the Nooze it self: Page 56.
For, upon her stout and stiff Averment, that the Key was always and
constantly in Hill's Door, one of the Judges told her, That he would not judge
her; but that 'twas very suspicious, that if she were in the House at the same
time as she said she was, and used to go into the Room every day, but that she
must either hear the Body brought in, or see it. And another of the Judges told
her, 'Twas well, she was not Indicted. So that, Mrs. Inadvertency, and Mrs.
Confidence, were both dismissed with the public Rebuke of the Court. So that,
the Observator's Query, Why the Judges insisted no farther upon the Point of
the several Keys, was not because they thought it impossible, there should be
so many Keys to one Door; but because they took it for granted from the sable
Consequence of Hill's being abroad; and not believing one word that either the
Young Lady, or Madam Governante said.

Other Witnesses were called by Hill, as one Gray; who, as he said, kept him
Company from the 8th. of October, 'till the 22th. till Eight or Nine a Clock at
Night, but knew not what he did afterward; and so did him no service. Others
he brought to prove he was Innocent, because he did not run for it. Which
looked like a Comical Scene, in the midst of a Tragedy; Page 66.
according to Shakespeaks way. As for Green, his Witnesses failing so palpably
as they did, the Observator leaves him in the Suds; which was the fittest place
for him to be in.

After this, says the Observator, Berry calls his Maid; who witnessed, That
upon the 16th. of October, at Night, her Master came Home from Bowls, in the
Dusk of the Evening; and that he was not out an Hour, all the Night after: That
he lay within her Chamber; and went to Bed about Twelve a Clock. All which
might very well be; and yet her Master might slip out, and she never the wiser.
But that, says the Commentator, which surpised the People most, was the
Testimony of the Three Sentinels, who Watched that Night from Seven, till Four
in the Morning, at the Great-Gate of Somerset House; through which, the Body
was affirmed to be carried in the Sedan: For they attested not only, That there
came in no Sedan, besides that which stood there every Night; but that none
ever went out, during their respective Watches: It being impossible, for the
Gate to be opened, or for any to pass by, without their Knowledge: Nor did they
Drink one Drop while they Watched, or stir a Pikes Length from the Gate.

Let him not make such a hideous Noise with his Three Sentinels; for there is
but One, that we are to take Notice of, or that could be thought to speak to
the purpose. Now, this Sentinel did see the Sedan brought in, because he was
Awake; but he did not see it go out, nor hear the Door opened, because he was
Asleep; It being the Property of SLEEP, to Close the Eyes, and Stop the Ears
both at once Which the Court, had they examined the Sentinel to that point,
would have most certainly found to have been the reason of his deafness, and
blindness at that time of the Night. For most assuredly, Let all the
Epitomizers, Papists and Sentinels in England, say what they will, the Sedan
was carried out that way that it came in that Night. So that, notwithstanding
the Drowsy Testimony of Mounsieur Trollop, the people were so far from being
Supriz'd with it, as the Epitomizer Fabulously Poetrizes, that the Malefactors
were no sooner brought in Guilty, but the whole Assembly gave a great shout of
applause, to see such Criminals as they, so fairly convicted, so near the
punishment of so detestable a Crime.

With these Omissions, and these Reflections, has our Parti Perpale,
Narrative-pairer, Half Observator, half Abbreviator, labored to the utmost of
his Power, to Palliate one of the most Barbarous Murders that have been
Committed for many Ages. I expected from the Epitomizer, when he came to
Annihilate this Murder, that he should have huff't and ding'd, and fumed and
foamed, and cursed and swore, and bann'd, and sunk, and damm'd Himself; that
there was never any such Person in the World, as Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey; That
there was never any such Man Born, or ever should be Born, as long as the World
endures. Or else that he would have contrived some fine Story, Garnished out
with some of Mr. Coleman's Rhetorical Flowers, and have told us of a certain
great Person, at Court, that either out of Malice or Revenge, or else for
Favor or Affection, or for some other probable Reason, had politickly caused
Sir Edmund to be put out of the Way; and then thrown it upon the poor Innocent
Papists, on purpose, that he might persuade the King, to a General Persecution
of them, their Wives and Children, and beg their Estates.

But to come sneaking and peaking, and Crouching and Cringing to the
Consideration of the people, with his, How can it be so's, and how is is it
probable's, that is so much below the High-soaring pride of St. Omers and
Salamanca, that I rather conjecture him to be of some Sorry Mendicant order,
whom his Party will be so far from relieving, that they will rather give him a
Saint Andrews Cross Discipline, for attempting so far beyond his Ability. Where
are all old Irelands Protestations, Imprecations, and bold Summonings of God to
witness the Impostures of the Heretics? Here Is a murder Cravatted with a
wannion! -- They that could strangle a Justice of the Peace so Cleverly, could
they not suffocate a Murder more Artificially, and hide it with the Common
dexterity of deluded Virgins? For now, by this silly Justification, it appears
far fowler then ever. It will be impossible for a Jesuit to put on a white
Surplice; for it will turn Crimson, as soon as it comes upon their shoulders.
Since then all the Wash ball-Protestations of suffering Malefactors cannot
cleanse away this unfortunate stain, let it lie on -- And so it will, as long
as History can utter to the World the story of this Age. Certainly, Villainy and
Impudence were never so unluckily coupl'd together since the Creation. As if
they had thought, that the whole ruin of their designs, had depended upon Sir
Edmund Berry Godfreys Life; or that they had absolutely believed, they had had
the wish of Caligula, All the Necks of English Protestants in the Twisted
Handkercheif, that strangled him. But so Heaven ordered it, that this poor
Gentleman should fall by their bloody Hands, to awak'n the drowsy Nation, that
scarcely would believe before, those Impious designs of Popery, that
threatened its Eternal ruin. Yet as God permitted the Murder out of his secret
providence, so was he graciously pleased, Miraculously to discover it by their
own Instruments, as Guilty as themselves, till penitence and discovery had
wiped away their Offenses, and Sealed their pardon. Nay, as if they themselves
had been sick to confirm the justice of their Friends Condemnation, by a
speech formally penned, and stolen into Hills Pocket, they have plainly
acknowledged themselves, to be accomplices in the Murder. For to what end
should they be so much concerned to make speeches for the Malefactors, but that
they thought to purge themselves by their dying words. On the other side, how
silly and palpable a Cheat it was, to put such studied and flory'd expressions
into the hands of an illeterate person, that knew not how to manage'em. His own
homespun Language would have done better, and have been sooner believed, then
such flowers of Rhetoric out of his Mouth. It was plain then, that it was not
his own, as not being his hand writing, by the Confession of his Wife; and
therefore being written by some body else, whether any overaw'd, and truly
obedient Roman Catholic, well instructed in the Arts of denyals, and mental
resenvation, and soundly threatened by his Priest, do think himself obliged to
speak the Truth, when he only superficially repeats the Conn'd Expressions of
another man, I leave to the Consideration of the people. He that speaks not his
words, at the Gallows, promptly, fluently, and without an unaffected and
uncounterfeited Earnestness, can never speak from the bottom of his heart: and
he that does not speak from the bottom of his heart, can never be believed;
especially when he comes to discharge his Soul from the burden of a Crime.

What is then all this Florid Language for? For nothing but to show the
Contradictions of the Fool that made it. For here are Charity and Revenge, in a
diametrical Opposition; while he makes the miserable Artor upon the Hang-mans
Stage, to forgive his Enemies, yet Cite'em before the Tri^^nal of Heaven, for
doing Injustice, almost in the same Breath; He withdraws his Recognizance, and
yet designs a prosecution at the same Instant. So that by this double dealing
with God and Man: by that palpable Equivocation, of saying he forgives, yet
hopes, that God will not, he so shamefully imposed upon a dying Malefactor, it
appears most apparently, that the Person Executed, was Guilty of the thing laid
to his Charge, and consequently, the rest. Otherwise there was no need of
putting their Friend upon such a counterfeit, and obvious denial of a Crime,
whereof he had been really Innocent: And it was only a mere shallow Contrivance
of Persons equally Guilty, as being privy to the Fact, to repair the
Contaminated Credit of the Romish-Church. For they cannot choose but know, what
all the World knows, that Innocence never seeks, nor has any need of these
ridiculous shifts, to clear her Reputation.

Concerning White, Harcourt, Fenwick, Gawen, and Turner.
NOW then, since the Epitomizer has been so unsuccessfull in his endeavors, to
wrest out of our hands the Truth of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Murder, even by
those very Persons that were accused and justly executed for it, he can have
little hopes to be believed in any thing more that he says. However that vanity
overrules him still, and he runs on with his fallacies, misconstructions, and
salse conclusions as briskly as ever. Nay, he is so full of his little fetches,
and dazzling reflections upon the Trials of these men, as if he were striving to
make amends for his former negligence and disability in the weighty concerns of
Hill, Green, and Berry.

In the first place, the Reader must observe, that the Epitomizer, has most
corruptly and fallaciously, contrary to his defiance, lessened and curtall'd
Mr. Oats's Charge against all these men; though it is true he repeats enough to
convince any rational Person of their Treasons; or else he must have left out
the whole. But that is not all; when a man makes a promise, he ought to be as
good as his word. For he leaves out that Foul mouthed expression of
Whitebreads, which Discovered the bottom of his Rebellious Heart, That he hoped
to see the Black F s -- Head at White Hall laid fast enough, and that if his
Brother should appear to follow his Footsteps, his Passport should be made
too. That he wrote Letters out of England to St. Omers, wherein, he hoped that
it would not be long e're the blow would be given, and that by the word Blow,
they had Instructions to understand the Murder of the King: which being all
omitted, the sum of Mr. Oates's Charge Epitomized by the Compendium, is only
this. That he Summond a Consult which began upon the Fourth of April 78. where
they pitched upon Carry to go to Rome, and resolved, the Paper being afterward
Signed by some at Irelands, by others at Whites, by others at Fenwicks Chamber,
that the King should be killed. That White did about the beginning or middle of
July, send from St. Omers Instructions by Mr. Ashby, concerning Ten thousand
pounds to be given to Sir George Wakeman to Poison the King, and a Commission
for Sir John Gage (but he leaves out, that the Commission was Signed and Sealed
by Whitebread.) That in July or August, he saw Gawen at Irelands Chamber, and
that though he had seen Letters from the said Gawen, giving an account, p. 14.
the Epitomizer should have said, of the Affairs of Shrop-shire and
Staffordshire, yet he never saw him Write, till he drew a Bill upon Sir
William Andrews in Irelands Chamber, where he Discoursed of the same things as
he had given an account of in his Letters, which last circumstance should have
been repeated by the Epitomizer, as well as the former, because insisted upon
by the Court. As for Fenwick and Harcourt, he affirmed, they were with Blundel
and others, on the 21st of August at Wild-House, where lay before them Eighty
pounds for the Windsor-Ruffians, and that Coleman coming in, gave the Messenger
a Guinney, p. 15.
(left out by the Abreviator, that from Wild-House they drew off to Harcourts
Chamber, where Harcourt paid the Money to the Messenger in Fenwicks presence)
That about a day after as near as he could remember, there was a Consult held
by the Benedictines, where Harcourt and Fenwick were present, and there they
understood of the Conspiracy against the Life of the Duke of Ormond by Letters
from Archbishop Talbet, who desired also Commissions and Money for raising
Forces. p. 16.
Omitted by the Epitomizer that Fenwick did bring Commissions with him to the
said Consult, and sent them to Chester by a special Messenger, and several
Letters by the Post, and that the next day Fenwick gave him Money, and
admonished him to procure Masses to be said for the prosperous success of the
design: that Ireland being returned, Mr. Oats went to him, but was beaten and
reviled, for that the Jesuits suspected he had betrayed them, they having
understood, that one in such Clothes as Oates's, had been with the King; yet
that White said he would be Friends with him, if he would give an account of
the Party and Minister that went to His Majesty. Then declaring he had no more
to say against the Prisoners at the Bar; excepting only that Whitebread offered
5000 l. more to the sum of 10000 l. which Sir George Wakeman refused, and
greatly rejoiced that the Money was accepted, he ended with this, that he did
not remember that Gawen was at the Consult, though he remembers he then saw his
Subscription; but he said positively that Turner was there, Page 17.
(and Signed the Resolve, should have been added.)

This was the Sum of Mr. Oates's account, the omissions being added, which had
a very great Encomium from the Court, to be as exact an account as could be
given by any man in England.

But for all that, now methinks I see the Abreviator pulling off his Mittens,
resolving to handle Mr. Oats after a strange Manner. This Malleus Haereticorum
makes him beat and torment his own Brains most unmercifully. But he has
hitherto so immoveably stood the violence of their most furious blasts, that
there is no fear of such an Epitomizing Whiffler as this.

The Charge being finished, says the Observator, it soon became very dubious,
as to Gawen and Turner, because Oats knew them not at their Apprehension, Page
14.
and his own words in Court make it good. For first he confessed, that when he
met Gawen, after his Apprehension in the Lobby, he did not well know him, being
under an illfavor'd Perriwig, and knowing him to have a good head of Hair, he
did not understand the Mystery of it, and so spared his Evidence and informing
the Council against him. Well! Mr. Epitomizer, and what of all this? It may be
he might not know him in that filthy Perriwig, Page 14.
for it seems it was a filthy disguize. But it is plain, he was acquainted with
his Person, for he knew him to have a good Head of Hair. Nay, he knew more; he
knew that Father Gawen, who had not altered his Name, though he had Proteus'd
his Person, was the certain Man that gave an account by Letters, how Affairs
went in Shrop-shire, Page 15.
wherein he wrote that there was at least Two or Three thousand pound there,
ready for carrying on the Design, and that upon a particular Search, he saw his
Hand to the Resolve.

Now for Turner, who had Masqueraded himself after the same manner, in another
kind of a nasty Perriwig, and looked like one of the Furies with Snaky Locks, he
smartly told him, he valued not Names, but that He was the Man. And when he
cried, Did you see me at the Consult? Mr. Oats replied, I saw the Man that
speaks to me. Now what was the answer to all this? Why, Turner would fain have
Catechized Mr. Oats out of his sense of Seeing. And Gawen cried, upon my
Salvation I am Innocent as the Child unborn, Page 15.
upon my Salvation I was not in London. So that the Court, seeing Mr. Oats
firm to his Oath, It Is very true he was not in London, but he was in the
Liberty of Westminster.
which he valued, and the other prostituting his Salvation, for which he cared
not a straw, while Turner only prosecuted his Quirks and his Questions, was so
far from being dubious of the business, that they declared that their Defense
was nothing but captiousness. Page 22.
And therefore Mr. Epitomizer might have spared this unseasonable piece of
falsehood. But he knew the English of Veritas Odium parit, and was afraid of
being under the lash of the Proverb.

But the Observator, for he is like Gawen himself, sometimes one thing,
sometimes another, proceeds and says, that Gawen produced Sir J. Winfords
Niece, and her Maid, where he sojourned, who attested they were very confident
of his being with them (besides other Months) all June and July, because they
did not remember his absence, yet they would not positively say that 'twas
impossible for him to be away some days, since they had no particular
circumstances in readiness. But they and the rest of his Witnesses made it
appear that he was in Wolver-Hampton, from the Third to the End of July. For
then to their knowledge he was in the Spiritual Exercise. Which, says the
Observator included the time of Oates's Accusation. For by his saying Gawen was
in London either in July or August, and then absolutely agreeing it was in
July, it in a manner follows, that the time in Dispute, was in the latter end
of the said Month. Besides that he himself said, that he believed it was in the
latter part of it. But when Oats came to be pressed with it, he flew back,
taking the utmost extent of his Plea that he could.

What a deal of Man-Midwifery is here, to bring forth a Shapeless Conception,
that has neither head nor tail? He himself confesses that the Witnesses could
not say, it was impossible for Gawen to be absent some days, but only they
believed so, because they did not carry him Clean Linen. So that their
Testimony was not so much to prove he was not absent, as to prove they did not
carry him Clean Linen. And indeed the Virgins Evidence depended wholly upon
Clean Linen. A most Obsequious piece of Roman Catholic Diligence, to be so
careful to provide Clean Linen for a Stallion Priest. For such a one he was
known to be, a Priest after the Order of Martial, who Converted by the Music
of the Epigrammatist's Poppysmata. So that 'twas no Wonder the Women were so
handy at his Linen. Now, what was the Effect of this Clean Linen Discourse?
Truly a very remarkable one: for it moved the People to a loud Laughter, Page
64.
and when the Lord Chief Justice had made his smart Reflections upon it, they
gave two shouts that made the Court Ring. But Mr. Oats more soberly made it
out, that Gawen taking a Chamber to go into the Exercise, might pretend that,
and come to London the mean while, and the Witnesses not know it. Which the
Lady had no way to avoid, but by affirming, that a Susanna might carry Clean
Linen to a Jesuitical Chamber of Exercise, and be admitted. Now why Mr. Oats
should be concerned at such a ridiculous piece of Female Putanism, wrapped up in
Clean Linen, as this, I leave to the Consideration of the People. For as for
his taking the utmost extent and compass of time, it was no more then was
Lawful, and what the Court allowed him, without the least tittle of prejudice
to his Oath.

Now for Turner, says the Observator, he informed the Court, that Oats not
only did not know him at White Hall, but called him there by another Name.
There Is no such thing, he only said he went by another Name. Upon which the
Court observed, that when they had but one Name a piece, Mr. Oats hit it
right, but when they had so may Names, they were too hard for him. But let his
Name be what it would, he told Turner, that he was that man, and that he had
positively seen the Person that then spoke to him at the Consult, and that was
sufficient. And therefore the Epitomizer should have considered, before he made
these slight Observations, that Cavils are no Defenses. And I dare be bold to
say, that there was not one of these daring Justifiers of their Villainy, that
ever brought the least demonstrative Proof against Mr. Oats, but only such as
was uncertain, and continually trapt, or else confronted and overthrown by
Testimonies of far greater value. Which the People, the more they consider, the
more they will find to be true.

But, says the Observator, Mr. Turner farther urged, that though Oats deposed
then, that he saw him at a Colloquy in Fenwick's Chamber, yet by his former
Evidence it was at Wild-House. To which, adds he, Oats had nothing to reply,
but that because the Chiefest part of the Consult sat at Wild-House, it was
called the Consult of Wild-House. That is to say, he had nothing to reply, but
what he justified at White Hall, that he saw him at the Consult of Wild-House
at Fenwick's Chamber. Did Mr. Oats say he saw him positively at Wild-House,
and no where else? That was the point which Mr. Turner should have proved. The
rest was nothing but captious rifraff, not worth a straw, when the substantial
matter was proved, Page 22.
as was observed by the Lord Chief Justice himself.

Now the Reader is to understand, that all this stir and Turmoil is to prove
Mr. Oats Perjured; which makes me admire, that the Jesuits, who account
themselves the topping Order of the Catholic Religion, and conceit themselves
to have engrossed all the Learning in the World into their Societies, should so
grossly mistake themselves, as to err in the very Foundation of their Design. I
cannot therefore apprehend 'em to be such Bugbears as they pretend to be, but
that it is only the fond opinion of our deluded Gentry, that causes them to
throw their Children into the Bosom of their Education. Rather I take them to
be like our Splitters of Causes, who only study the Snaps and Quirks of False
Practice, but know nothing of the Fundamentals and Body of the Law: And that as
these study only the Knavish part of the Law, so they study only the Knavish
part of Divinity, that is to say, how to cheat and amuse by virtue of their
Profession. Now then to go about to prove a man Perjured, before they had
asserted what Perjury was, was an attempt so unbecoming men that presumed to
Learning, that to use their own expression, they deserved to be Hanged for
Fools as well as Knaves, for going so preposterously to work. Perjurus, then,
is one, qui male jurat contra animi sui sententiam. And there is a great
difference between pejerare, and falsum jurare. For, Qui pejerat, is sciens and
ex animi sententia falsum jurat. Qui autem falsum jurat, non decipiendi animo
hoc facit, sed quia rem ita se habere putat. To the same purpose, says Cicero,
Non falsum jurare perjurare est, sed quod ex animi tui sententia, s^cut verbis
concipitur more nostro, id non facere, perjurium est. Now Mr. Oats Swore that
there was a Plot, and that such and such were Actors in it, as knowing it to be
really true; ex animi sui sententia, but as to circumstances, he only Swore, as
believing them to be so, ita rem se habere. Their business was to have
Dis-prov'd the Plot it self, or that they were no way engaged to it; but there
was not one of them that did Defend himself against the Treason laid to their
Charge, only by Denials and Protestations which signified nothing; nay they
could not so much as Disprove Mr. Oats in Circumstances, the Witnesses which
they brought, of their own tutoring, either baffling themselves, or else being,
as I said before, overthrown by positive Oaths against them; so that it was
impossible to impute animum decipiendi to Mr. Oats, in Circumstances, when the
Fact it self was so plain, and they themselves could by no legal justifications
clear themselves from the guilt that hung so ponderously upon their Shoulders;
and was indeed in good measure proved by Letters of their own. Against which
the Judgment and Learning of the Court overruled all their Pedantick
constructions, and shifting Expositions, as being such as could never be got
off for their folly.

Nevertheless, they gave Mr. Oats Two violent Assaults, and thought they had
been both sparring Blows, for could they but have throtled His Evidence, then
they verily believed their work had been done. To the first Onset they Mustered
up a Brigade of Stafford shire Papists, to prove that Ireland was not in
London, from the Third of August, to the Fourteenth of September. But after the
Ladies had Testified for him with a great deal of Zeal, and the Gentlemen with
a great deal of Rashness, not only a Maid that had been a Servant to one of the
Conspirators, as has been already observed, came in, and confirmed Mr. Oates's
Evidence; but when both were again shaken by the solemn Imprecations of Ireland
at his Execution, Mr. Jenison his near Relation, and when he Conversed with him
of his own Religion, comes and appears in the World, and to the shame of Lords,
Knights, Ladies, Gentlewomen, and Innkeepers, levels the whole Battery mounted
against Mr. Oates's Reputation, and quite raises the Siege laid to his
Testimony. It Is like he may hear of it, but he is of Age, and no doubt will
answer for himself.

To the next Onset, they brought a Rabble of St. Omers Striplings, who
proffered to Swear in Verba Magistrorum, if it would have been permitted, that
Mr. Oats continued all February, April, May, and June, at St. Omers, and never
stirred all that time out of the College, so that he could not be here at the
White Horse Tavern Consult. However they brought their Scaling Ladders, fell on
very briskly, and thought to have carried the day: But alas, those Youngsters
were so far from giving Mr. Oats that Deadly Blow, which the Epitomizer so
foolishly cracked of, that they were so vigorously repulsed by a band of stout
Evidence for the King, who positively contradicted them upon their Oaths, and
punctually confirmed Mr. Oats in all he had said, that they were forced to a
shameful retreat, leaving all their Evidence behind them dead upon the place.
Fenwick asked the Reason why so many Innocent Children brought up in a good
Virtuous Education, that is to say, in that Seminary of Mischief and Iniquity
at St. Omers, should not be believed against a Protestant Knight, a Protestant
Minister, and a Protestant Schoolmaster, and Four more of the same Religion?

To which Mr. Jenison gives him a ready Answer. For if so many Staffordshire
Persons of Quality were so easily deluded, to stain their Honor and their
Reputation, to save the Lives of Five Canting Jesuits, Traitors to their King
and Country, it is no wonder that Sixteen Boys under the Lash of St. Omers
Discipline, should be drawn in by fear or fair promises, to swear for them that
could have given them plenary Absolution for a trick of Youth, had their
sucking Evidence succeeded.

To this, says the Abbreviator, the Jesuits gave a smart rejoinder, proving by
the Contradictions that must follow, that all Mr. Oates's Evidence was a
Perjury or a Grand mistake. But the Epitomizer did not consider, that all they
said was built upon a wrong Foundation; that they could not be contradictions,
because they were not cleverly proved, as he perfidiously would make the People
believe; but only falsely asserted: Nor did he observe, that while they were so
studiously Perjuring others, they were endeavoring at the same time to Perjure
their own Witnesses, and Damn the Souls of Young Men and Maids, Old Men and
Babes, and all others obtainable, that came out of their blind and misguided
Devotion, to lend them their Assistance.

Now Readers, you that are the People of England, for it is to you that the
Epitomizer makes his so frequent Appeals, weigh and Examine what has been
already said, and tell your selves where those Innocent Men as the Child unborn
did invalidate Mr. Oates's Testimony in the least. Examine with your selves
whether they had any other way to justify themselves, than by the
Subordination of their own Votaries. And that this may appear to be true,
challenge this great Champion of their foul Treasons, to Endite Mr. Oats, Let
him advise with his Council, and Assign his Perjures. More then this, I will
undertake that Mr. Oats shall appear and go to Trial with him by consent in
any Court of England. Lastly, Examine with your selves, whether, if either the
Staffordshire Persons of Quality, or the Striplings of St. Omers had been
permitted to Swear, they might not have run a fair Risgo of our National
Justice. To whom I will only apply the Story of Joab and Abner, that those old
Cinq and Quaters having a mind to have a little sport before they died, sent
for the Young Men from St. Omers to Play before 'em, for their last Recreation.

Concerning Mr. Langhorn.
THe Epitomizer comes now to the Trial of Langhorn, who was a person, from
whom, as from a man grounded in the Laws of the Land, strange things were
expected; it was thought by his Party, that all the Paper in London, would not
have sufficed for Panegyricks upon his Parts, and the Chronicles of his
behavior. The opinion of his Intellectuals can so high, that he would wipe his
backside with a protestant Commission of Oyer and Terminer, though all the
four Inn's a Courts were upon the Bench. But for my part when I heard how
simply he had driven his own Bargain for registring consults, and conveyance of
Jesuits Lands, I did very shrewdly suspect him. Nay I found he was conscious of
his own weakness, to suffer himself to be decoyd into such a Villainous Plot
upon the hopes of an Advocate Generals place out of his rode, who might have
moved in his own Sphere and have Stalked in his Collar of SS's, for asking. But
alas, when he came to the proof, never did man pretending to Law and Reason
make a sillier defense, for he made not the least use of either; as if they had
both forsaken him in his necessity, and had begged his excuse for appearing in
his bad cause. As for his Plea, that he had been a close Prisoner so long, and
could not foresee what the Evidence would testify, it was extremely frivolous.
For there is no man taxed of a crime, but knows the Substanee of what will be
evidenced against him, as well as the witnesses can tell him, upon the
examination of his own conscience. A perfect and clear innocence will show it
self in spite of fate: and he must be a weak Judge who cannot discern the
malice or interest of an Accuser, which are the chiefest vermin with which the
wicked hunt that ermin virtue. Neither did Mr. Oats bear upon the Innocence of
any one of the parties Condemned. For then he would have accused them hand over
head without distinction. But he charges one with one thing, another with
another, as he knew they acted in their several Spears of Treason and
mischief. Some were for consulting and signing Orders, some for execution, some
for regestring, and some for managing Foreign Intelligence. Which acts, as
they were all necessary, for the carrying on such a thorough paced Plot as this
was (and that there was a Plot is plain by the Murder of Sir Edmunbury
Godfrey, to which these very men that suffered were privy, as contrived by
their own Gang) who can be so silly as to think Mr. Oats has done himself
wrong, or believe them to be Innocent, unless they could themselves have
brought out the Parties that were really guilty; and that had been the only way
to have invalidated Mr. Oates's Testimony. It had been impossible for Mr. Oats
to have borne up his head in the public face of the World; to have stood the
strict Examinations of a great Monarch, his Council and his Parliament; which
implies all the Wisdom, Judgment, and Policy of a Nation, had not his discovery
been substantially true: which could not so have been, had he been deceived in
the persons of the Actors. Unless there be any of the people so brutish as to
believe, that the King and the whole Flower of the Nobility and Gentry of the
Nation, were in a Conspiracy with Mr. Oats, against a Company of Tatter de
mallion Jesuits and their deluded Associates, who might have been buried among
the forgotten Crowd, had they not like the firer of the Ephesian Temple made
themselves Famous by their Infamy. But for the satisfaction of the people, the
Abbreviator must have his Face washed a little, and so be sent away to School
with his Bottle and his Basket to learn more manners against his next
Compendium.

Oats, says he, charges Langhorn that in a Letter to the Fathers, wherein he
ordered Five pounds to his Son, who had been in Rebellion, and was reconciled
to him again, by the Intercession of the said Fathers, he expressed his great
care of the Catholic design, and told them among other things that the
Parliamentt Flagging, they had a fair opportunity to give the blow, which
says, the Observator, seemed very odd to many, that in an ordinary Letter of
Domestic Concerns, he should treat of such high and secret matters.

This looks like the Canvassing of some Catholic Coffee-house. Neither is it
material what descants People might make upon Mr. Langhorn's discretion; rather
let it seem odd to all Men of Reason, That the Observator should think to
invalidate Mr. Oats's Evidence, by quoting those Proofs, against which the
Prisoner himself made no Defense. As odd as it was, the thing was true, because
it was never disproved; nor so much as any Reply made to it by the Party
accused. Mr. Langhorne, perhaps, had a mind to conceal such an odd piece of
Indiscretion, and the Epitomizer has here brought it upon the Stage to be
publicly wondered at.

He goes on, and tells us, how Oats deposed, That he saw Commissions in
Langhorne's Study upon his Desk; when Langhorne appeals to all the Company that
frequented his Chamber, whether any of them ever saw a Desk in his Study? What
a Potgun of an Objection is this? The stress of the Oath does not bear upon the
word Desk, but upon the sight of the Commissions. No question the Advocate
General had a place in his Study to write upon; now because a Man gives to this
or that place, or thing, the general Appellation of a Desk, there must be a
solemn Appeal to All and some, Whether Mr. Langhorne ever had a Desk in his
Chamber? Well, if it were such a dishonor for Mr. Langhorne to have a Desk in
his Chamber, we will allow, That there was no such thing there as a Desk,
according to the Logical definition of a Desk. For as long as the Commissions
were seen in his Study, to which Mr. Langhorne said little or nothing; it is no
matter whether they were seen upon a Desk, or any thing else, which in a
Lawyers Study might appear like a Desk. Here Is a Catch indeed for a Lawyer to
make such a noise withal! He should have appealed to the Crowd of his Clients,
whether they had ever seen any such thing as a Study or a Chamber of his in the
Temple? But to put the stretch of such a proof as this ought to have been, upon
the dubious Explication of a Nomenclator, was to say any thing rather than
nothing, and to play at Push-pin for his life. As if Mr. Langhorne could have
found out no better way to clear himself from having discourse with a Man in
his Study, and of having Traiterous Commissions in it, had he been Innocent,
but by a solemn renouncing all acquaintance and familiarity with Desks, against
which, it seems, he had such an antipathy, that he never had one in his Chamber
in his life.

But now, says the Observator, Mr. Langhorne (who was subtler then any of the
Beasts of the Field) began to be nice about Mr. Oats's coming to St. Omers,
etc. Whereupon the Court answered, That all the Defenses of the Papists lay
upon Catches about time, a thing no Body could be positive in; which, says he,
heartened Oats not a little. For he being presently asked by Langhorne, When
he returned in April into England? answered about the middle of the month, and
stayed under twenty days; a Latitude which he would fain have granted him, by
reason of his ill success in the former Trial, though the Court never then
pretended (as you saw) to extend it to above eight or ten: And because he
feared Mr. Langhorne, he desired the Court to ask the Questions, adding, That
he knew the Court would be so kind, as to ask him Questions that were
reasonable.

Here the Epitomizer is at his old Trick of Delusion, and imposing upon the
People: For there was no such occasion that Mr. Oats should be hearten'd by
the Court; it was Mr. Langhorne, Page 15.
who wanted the Epitomizer's Julep; who was so far from making any rational
Defense, that at that very instant that the Epitomizer crows upon the Dunghill
of Langhorne's impertinent Catechism; the other had nothing to waste his breath
and time about, but only in fishing, and angling, and pumping for an answer
that had been given to his Question twenty times before in other Trials. But
the Epitomizer is offended with Mr. Oats, for taking more Latitude as to his
stay in England then before, which was by him done, by reason of his ill
suceess in the last Trial. Who but a mere Epitomizer would have been so short
in his Animadversions upon Mr. Oates's ill success, he should have stood with a
new-fashion'd Tube upon the Monument for a week together, and have bellowed it
over all the Roads of England; He should have published it in Gath, and in the
Streets of Ascalon, that the Papists might have triumphed upon the ill success
of Mr. Oats. This Epitomizer therefore should have looked before he leaped. He
could not choose but know that if Mr. Oats had had that ill success, he talks
of, there had been no need of a Compendium, and he must have studied some other
way to erect a lasting Monument to his Folly, than by snarling, and besmearing
the Wisdom and Justice of a Nation, with the insinuating Reflections of a
Traiterous Libel.

The Author does not consider that the aim of his Compendium, is only to deseat
that Evidence, and undermine that Person, whose ill success has been so fatal
to their damnable Projects. But if the Epitomizer calls it ill success, to have
his Credit justified, his Innocence cleared, and to baffle all the dexterity of
so many imbittered Collegiates of St. Omers, the great Swash-bucklers and
Termagaunts of Popery, I value it not, so neither he, nor any other, upon the
same account, may have any better. However this ill success made him so afraid
of that raw-head and bloody bones Mr. Langhorne, that he was forced to desire
the Court to ask him questions.

Had he said, that Mr. Langhorne was afraid from his very heart of Mr. Oats, I
dare truly say he might very probably have been believed; but why Mr. Oats
should be afraid of Mr. Langhorne, Page 14, 15.
he had as little reason to affirm, and it may be less, than he had to hang
himself. It Is true, Mr. Langhorne did ask Mr. Oats a long Caralogue of
ridiculous Questions, that one would have believed he had thought himself
rather at the Sport of Questions and Commands, than defending his Life. 'Twas
expected when he would have asked him, What Is a Clock? Or what the Sheriffs had
to Dinner? There was never a Question, as the People may see, that would have
scared a Mouse; so that when he had done, the Court rebuked him for his
Impertinency: Page 15.
his Defense being rather an abuse of the Judges Patience, then a rational
Discourse.

But after this, says our quaint Observer, Langhorne demanded whether he came
with Hildesly from Dover in a Coach, or on Horseback? To which Oats, after
much Hesitation, answered, That the Question was so sudden, that he could not
be positive. Upon which follows this Remark, That that same strange uncertainty
amazed many, but more smibed at it; considering that in ^^th he had reason for
what he said, as not knowing the Question was casual, but that Langhorne might
have Witnesses to prove now Hildesly made that Journey.

Now whence proceeded all this Mirth and Amazement? It was because Mr. Oats
had sworn upon a Trial at the King's Bench, that he came with Mr. Hildesly by
Coach. To which Mr. Oats replies, That he did not say so, Page 16.^
but that be came ower in the Pacquet-Boat with Mr. Hildesly, and that then
Hildesly left the Company, and went another way. By which you may see what
Company our Observer keeps, Men very prone to Amazement, and very subject to
smile. Earthen Ware, all of the same tincture with himself; Questions suddenly
started upon the memory of Man, may be cautiously answered, without being
smiled or wondered at. He that knew what Mr. Oats had sworn before, should
have faced him with his Contradicting Evidence; He should have proved upon Mr.
Oates's former Affirmation at the Trial, that, contrary to what he affirmed, he
did come with Hildesly on Horseback, and left it to his Jury. Else the Question
was propounded to no purpose; to start the Hare, and tie up his Dog. Truly such
wondering, smiling perdues as these, might have spent their time better, than
to lie in wait for such miserable Catches, and drowning-mens Bulrushes. It is
impossible to think that all these men should lay all the load and weight of
their Defenses, upon the weaker circumstances of Time and Place; could they
have any other way avoided the substance of the Charge. Mr. Oats comes and
proves the Crime by circumstances of another and higher nature, consequentially
depending upon the Fact, and against slight and single circumstance, brings
Fact and circumstance both together. To this, men bred up in all the delusive
Arts of pious Fraud, men professing the Doctrines of Perjury and Equivocation,
men acknowledging their Gang and Correspondence, their private Meetings and
Consultations, their lurking up and down in their Boroughs of Iniquity,
contrary to the known Laws of a Nation, and so bringing themselves within the
most probable verge of suspicion, think to avoid a Home-charge of Treason
brought by one of their own Members (for they sent for sixteen Witnesses to
prove he was of their Tribe) only by cavilling upon the difference of a week,
or a fortnight, or ten days. Such things as these do but discover the Vermin
in the Snare, and carry such a Face of guilty Fallacy, that while men observe
their doublings and shifts, rather to disintangle, than justify themselves,
they lose the Reputation of their Defense. And it is not to be questioned, but
that this Observer or Epitomizer, which you please, has, by this vain Attempt,
rather injured, than advantaged his Cause; while Inundations of new and fresh
disclosure, does but serve to testify his snarling Envy against the daily
Discoveries of Providence.

But then, says the Observer, he would not tell Mr. Langhorne positively,
whether he lay at Groves's the first Night of his coming to London, or no;
though he had directly sworn in Ireland's Trial, that he was commanded to lie
close at that House; so that if he had such Instructions, Ireland's Trial, Page
36.
it was impossible not to remember, whether he had broke them or no, and more
especially at his first Arrival about so dangerous and great an Affair. Here is
now a false Reflection from a false Repetition, according to the custom of
Popery. For Mr. Oats does not swear he was commanded to keep close at Groves
's House; but that he had directions to keep close, and therefore lay some
Nights at Groves's House. Thus the Question was idle, and the Inference as
silly. For why it should be such an impossibility for a man to forget whether
he broke a Command which was never enjoined him, is such an illiterate sort of
a Riddle, that none but the Epitomizer would have ventured to own such false
Conclusions, from false Ifs and Ands, that may betray Weakness, but never
assert Innocence: But now I would fain ask the Abbreviator one Question, with
what Face he, who takes upon him to pry so severely into the pretended Failings
of the Kings Evidence, and if he can but find the least appearance of a Fault,
pursues it with a full cry, should dare to justify that grand Error, if not
foul piece of Knavery in Langhorne, to bring in the Woman of the White-Horse
Tavern, to make her self the Laughter and Contempt of a Public Court of
Judicature, Page 46.
only to do him an unprofitable piece of service. The Woman's Carriage and
Preamble to her Story, showed she came, if a Papist, with a prepared Zeal; if a
Protestant, with a kind Devotion: And the Reflection of the Court was too
severe for Mr. Langhorne's Reputation; that a Woman's being so peremptory in
what standers by knew to be false, made the Contradiction in one thing, Page 47.
to give a suspicion that all Mr. Langhorne's Witnesses might be as false in
all the rest. Nor had Langhorne any thing to say for himself, but that he hoped
the Court, nor the Jury, would reflect upon him for it. Thus they will give an
Ell to their own Testimonies, but will not allow an Inch to the King's. His
Witnesses must be all Saints with the memories of Angels, to swear to a
Barley-corn of place, and a minute of time, or else be forsworn: Theirs may
swear Up-hill and Down-hill, be caught in speaking Falsehood, be shamed and
disgraced for so doing, and they that produce 'em, shall have the confidence to
hope, that neither Court nor Jury will think the worse of 'em for it. So then,
this is rather to be wondered at by many, and smiled at too, then any of the
Epitomizers little Parables; that Mr. Langhorne should venture his own Life,
and the Credit of all his Witnesses, in such a Female Bottom as this, as if no
Body had ever known the White-Horse Tavern in the Strand. Had he drank less
Water, and more Wine, it is probable he might either have had no occasion for
the Woman of the White-Horse, or have known the Tavern better. The Court told
him positively, the Woman had been very unfortunate in her Testimony; and the
People of England, are to believe the Judges of England, before ever a
Compendium Scribler in the world. Let us wonder then at nothing, but that Oaths
and Testimonies, which are the chiefest Bonds and Ties of Humane Society, and
the Soul of Justice, so inviolable among the ancient Heathen and modern Turks,
should be of so little value in a Religion which accounts it self the most
ancient and most perfect at this time professed under the Canopy of Heaven.

He is so fond, as to bring his Squabs of St. Omers again upon the Stage; but
in regard they were no more believed then they were the day before, let what
has been already said of them in the former Trial suffice, against a company of
Boys bred up at St. Omers, sent hither of an Errand to to serve the Catholic
Cause, and positive in nothing but what concerned the advantage of the
Prisoner, which is the short History of the Springalls of St. Omers. Certainly
St. Omers was a very foul Nest, a most filthy Den of contagious Jesuitism, that
there were not so many as two that could with safety be sent for, men of Age
and Reputation, but they must send for their Gigg and Town top Testimonies, to
disprove an Evidence for the King, in a Treason of the highest Nature that has
been acted for many Ages. But there are those misfortunes that befall Treason
and Murder, which all the Policy of Jesuitism, nor all the Finess of Rome can
prevent. And that is not the least of the misfortunes that befell these
Traitors and Murderers; that after their not being able to make any rational
Defense for themselves, after they had suffered for their Crimes, they should
be tried over again by the faint and carping Observations of a Compendium, that
instead of vailing, has only farther discovered their shame.

Concerning Sir George Wakeman's Trial, Corker, etc.
BUT now enter the Famous Trial of Sir George Wakeman, and enter Monsieur
Compendium with a Battoon in his hand, like one of the Marshals of a City
Company, strutting and laying about him in every Page, as if he had got a
Commission from Paolo d'Oliva, to show no mercy: so then the Reader is to
observe the effects of more Joy, and more Brandy. Here it was, says he, that
the King's Council admonished the Prisoners, That it would behoove them to take
Notes, ( as if, Reader, Hector himself, with all his gods, were at hand.) I
promised the Reader a flash of Exultation from him, and here he has it. But who
these Hectors gods were, I do not well understand; surely he must be beholding
to some old Ballad for this piece of Learning. For Hector's dear Sister,
Cassandra, speaks not a word of any such company that ever he kept in his life.
Homer says too, that the gods divided themselves, and that some took part with
the Trojans, and some with the Greeks. But these could be none of the
Compendium Hector and his gods, for Homer's Hector and gods were most
shamefully beaten. But what terrible Toryrories this Hector and his gods should
be, unless they should be the four Windsor Ruffians, I leave to the
consideration of the People. And so much for Hector and his gods.

Now this frightful Advice being given to the Prisoners, Oats, says he, was
called, who began the first Onset with the most stupendous circumstance that
ever was heard of, viz. That Ashby arriving here ill from St. Omers, Page 25.
Sir George wrote him a Letter of Instructions how to order himself before he
went, and when he was at the Bath; which were, to take a Pint of Milk every
morning and night, and an hundred strokes of the Pump. In which Letter, Sir
George wrote, that the Queen would assist him to poison the King. Then Oats
proceeded, saying, That he knew this to be Sir Georges hand, by another Letter
a day or two after, which could not but be his, for Sir George had it before
him in a writing posture; that he saw him lay by the Pen, and found the Ink not
yet dry, nor was there any body else to write, Mr. Ashby being lame of both
hands. I know not how the Abbreviator would have Epitomized his Charge, had he
been to have brought it. But if this be not a Charge substantial enough, and
propt by sufficient circumstances, I appeal to the consideration of the People,
unless the Epitomizer have any new definition for Treason. Now what was Sir
Georges Defense? First he brings an Apothecary to testify, that there was a
Letter sent to the Bath to Thimbleby, alias Ashby, with Physical Instructions,
without any name, neither was it Sir Georges hand, and was, it seems, dictated
to his Man. But alas this was not the Letter which Mr. Oats meant. And it was
the Chief Justices Opinion then, though with some more than ordinary
Observations of Ifs, and Ands, and Cautions to the Jury, that Chapman did not
answer Mr. Oates's Testimony; and that if Mr. Oats did swear true, Sir George
did write another Letter. Sir Georges Reply, was to make that improbable, in
regard it was ridiculous to prescribe milk. To which Mr. Oats made Answer,
That the directions for milk were to be observed before the use of the waters.
And Sir Robert Atkins came closer, affirming, That it was but a piece of Paper,
and that it was not to be offered in Evidence. Mr. Oats positively stood to
his Charge, and swore that was not the Letter that he saw. Which Sir George to
avoid, desired the Court to take notice, that it was not probable he should
write two Letters for the same directions: A kindness that the Chief Justice
was very willing to gratify him in, and presently recommended his directions
to the Jury accordingly. Though at the same time Judge Pemberton observed, that
one of the Letters might be written to serve a turn. After this, Sir George
called two Witnesses more, to prove the writing of the dictated Letter, which
the Court were apt to believe was true as they said; but that was not the
Letter in controversy, neither had Sir George any defense against it, but only
the bare denial of writing it. So that the Compendium Scribler's Story about
the Apothecary, and the Mard, and the Man, is all but twittle twattle, like an
Apothecary, to no purpose in the earth. And therefore let this vain Vindicator
of Blood and Treason moyle his heart out, the People are to know, that there
never was a charge so fairly made and proved by one Oath, nor ever a worse
Defense made by the Prisoner.

The next Charge is, That Mr. Oats heard Ashby talk to him of the Commission
he had received to be Physician to the Army; Nay, swore he saw the Commission
in Sir Georges hand. To which I do not ^^nd, that Sir George made any defense
at all. Which was the reason perhaps, that the Chief Justice left it out, till
he was put in mind of it by Sir Robert (...)*

As for Mr. Oates's Charge upon the Queen, the Observator (...) Reader, that he
may easily imagine how ridiculous this stuff seemed to (...) That a Lady
eminent in Virtue, should not only make such a Declaration in a Public Consult,
but also in the hearing of such a pitiful Wretch as Oats, who could help
neither Her, nor any Body else in any Part of the Plot, more then the first
Kennel Raker he meets with.

I know not how ridiculous this stuff might seem to this Emmet of a Scribler,
neither is it material; but certainly never did the People so openly exclaim
against the Carriage of any Trial, as they did at this. Which Exclamation or
rather Indignation of the People would never have been so general, had they
thought what the Witness said to have been such ridiculous stuff, as this
Varnisher of Conspiracy strives to inclucate. And therefore for his
Billingsgate Argument of pitiful Wretch, and Kennel-Raker, for upon those two
Pillars lies the stress of his Induction, let him take notice that none but
such a Compendium Scribler would use the language, or none but Fools and Knaves
believe his Syllogism in Barbara.

The next thing charged, is the proffer of 10000 l. for poisoning of the King,
which was not accepted, as being too little; but that upon the addition of 5000
l. more, the Bargain was made, and five thousand of the ten, paid in part, and
received. For proof of this Mr. Oats deposes, That he saw the Entry Book,
wherein was first, Memorandum, such a day 15000 l. was proposed to Sir George
Wakeman, and accepted. And then underneath was written a Receipt in these
words, Received then in part of this 15000 l. by order of Edward Coleman, 5000
l. of Father Harcourt. George Wakeman.

Now, Reader, says the Epitomizer, He that can swallow such a Register, or
such unnecessary and unheard of Entries and Memorandums, let him never for the
future think any thing either Romantic or Sottish.

Now, Reader, what can be more unquestionable, but that such Memorandums and
Registers were kept? For they that had the disposal of such Sums of money, must
certainly, had their design succeeded, have given an Account of their
Stewardship. It was a Sottish thing to undertake such a Plot, but when they had
once undertaken it, there was nothing that looked either like Romantic or
Sottish, to preserve the memory of their Transactions. Nay, had they reaped the
Fruits of their Labors, they would have gloried in what the Compendium calls
Romantic and Sottish, to have seen their Monumental hands affixed to Resolves
and Memorandums, as Testimonies to Posterity, of their daily Merit and
Diligence. Neither could so great a Design be carried on for so many Years,
without such Entries and Registers; it being impossible, in case of Mortality,
for succeeding Counsels to act methodically, as the Nature of so high a Concern
required without 'em; only because the Jesuits were more prudent to conceal
their Important Register, the thing it self must be a Romance. He may as well
tell us there was no Plot, which he that believes from the silly Insinuations
of his Compendium, must make an absolute Renunciation of the Protestant
Religion.

But what says Sir George to all this? He makes no Exception to the Register.
The stress of Sir George's Objection lay in this, That the Charge of the King's
Evidence was not so ample before the Lords of the Council, as at the Bar of
Oyer and Terminer.

To which the Answer of Mr. Oats was very fair and probable, and the Reasons
of that Omission were altogether as credibly balanced in his behall, as the
Averment against him; the truth of which, I think, has been made appear,
something to the uneasy inconvenience of the Gentleman. He was sworn to be in
as weak and feeble a condition as ever any man was seen in, being tired by
public and eminent Service; and therefore there was no such reason to
aggravate, contrary to former custom, such a worshipful Objection to such an
egregious height, as if it had been done on purpose, to throw shame and
disgrace upon desert, and make way for unseasonable Compassion.

Now then to confirm Mr. Oates's Testimony, and that if he had been remiss
before, it was only the Failure of his faint and feeble condition of Body, Mr.
Bedloe swore, that upon the delivery of a Bill of 2000 l. by Harcourt, and
promise of the rest in due time; and upon farther discourse, Harcourt told Sir
George, That the Business must be well followed and observed, because so much
depended upon it. For if we should miss to Kill Him at Windsor, and you miss
your way, which we hope you will not, we will do it at Newmarket.

Here the Chief Justice made a Hesitation, saying, He said quite another thing
then he said before; till the Lord North, Mr. Recorder, and Sir Robert Sawyer
unanimously answered, No, he said the same before. Whereupon demanding, What
was Sir George's Answer? He replied, that Sir George's Answer was, If I find
you ready, I will be ready in all things; And that this was all a continued
Discourse: Which put Sir George into such a consternation, that he said
privately to his Fellow Prisoners, There is my Business done. If there could be
any thing plainer then this, let the Consideration of the People judge. For why
Coleman should be hanged for the payment of 5000 l. upon the Account of
Treason, and Sir George be Acquitted for receiving the same 5000 l. for the
same Treason, is a Riddle worth expounding.

But to return to the Epitome, As for Corker, says the Abbreviator, Oats
charged him to have seen a Patent in his hand to be Bishop of London. (He
should have added, that Mr. Oats also heard him say, That he hoped it would
not be long, Page 34.
ere he should be in the Exercise of his Function, which made all the People
laugh.) That Corker, being President of the Benedictine Monks, did consent to
the Raising of Six thousand Pound, to be contributed by them toward the Design.
That he heard Corker dislike the choice of Pickering, to Kill the King, because
he attended upon the Altar; and might miss an opportunity while he was at Mass.
That Marshall knew of Pickering's design, and made the same Objection against
him; and that he saw him at the Consult in August.

Here the Observator is offended, that Mr. Oats would not be positive, when
Marshall asked him, What day it was he was at the Consult? Yet Corker could say
for himself, That no mortal Man could tell where he was, or what he did and
said every day and hour of his whole life. So that Mr. Oats must be Immortal,
or else must be no Witness for the King. But what they urged against him, made
the more for him; For the less positive he was, the more he was to be believed,
in regard that such a Testimony could not be taxed of Malice or Rashness.

As for Corker, and Marshall themselves, the first made a Pedantic, or rather
School Boy-like Declamation, to prove in the first place the Impossibility of
the Plot, because so many Persons of Quality were engaged in it: But he might
have remembered, that it was not the Rabble, but the Chiefest and most Noble
among the Senators of Rome, that were engaged in the Conspiracy of Catiline;
and the chiefest Nobility of France in the Guisian League, against their
Sovereign Henry III. Bie-and-bie, because he would have two strings to his
Bow, he argues the same Improbability of the Plot, because it was known to so
few. So that first he wondered why such a design should be communicated to so
many, and then he admired so few should know it. A Harangue so little to the
purpose, and so full of impertinent Extravagancy, as if his Brains has been as
invisible as his pretended Witnesses. Seeing then the Court would swallow none
of these gilded Pills, he flew at the Evidence, and accused them to be, or else
have been men of scandalous Lives.

Clodius accusat Moechos. For grant them to be, or have been men of scandalous
Lives, they could never be more scandalous then He, who at that time stood
Impeached of Forethought Murder and Treason, and whose Acquittal has rather
confirmed the guilt of his Crimes, then justified his Innocence. But as these
were things barely said, without any proof in the world, the Kings Evidence
must and will live, to the Reproach of a rash misprision Jury.

Marshall told a Story of a mark in his head behind, talking as if he had a
knock in his Cradle; which vanishing, upon the Testimony of Sir William Waller,
he made a great stir of what Witnesses he could have had, had he had time; but
that Point was cleared, that he had both leave and time sufficient, by Captain
Richardson. These Cards failing, they both fell upon Mr. Oats, for not
Apprehending them sooner, Arguing from thence, That if Mr. Oats had known they
had been in the Plot, he would have apprehended them sooner. But this was all
but Supposition; so that as long as they were apprehended, it was well enough.
He was then in a hurry, about apprehending the more considerable Instruments.
He was not to burden his memory too much, having so many to charge; and
therefore took his time, and was not bound to tell them when they should be
apprehended. And though Marshall popping accidentally into a House where a
Search was making, affirmed, He might have gone away, if he would; it was
sworn, That he would have gone away, if he could: But that Sir William Wasler
had given Order, that any Body might be let in, but that no Body should be let
out.

Then they called one Nell Rigby, a confident Slut, to testify that Mr. Oats
came a begging to Pickering for Charity, and that Pickering bid her shut the
door against him. A very likely Tale of a Draggle-tail, that Mr. Oats should
come a begging to Pickering for Charity, when Whitebread at the same time owed
him Fourscore pound, by Bill under his hand, not yet paid. However Marshall
made his conclusion, That it was an improbable thing, that they should trust
him with such a Plot, and suffer him to want; and more then that, send him with
such a flea in his car, when he might easily supply himself by a discovery.

But this is a wrong Conclusion, as these People make use of many, upon a wrong
ground. For it is absolutely denied, that Mr. Oats was in that necessity: So
that it is plain Mr. Oats came to crave Pickering's Charity for some other
Person. But the surly and penurious Pickering, not liking those charitable
demands, (And that he was a surly, cruel, ill-natured Fellow, is manifest, from
his being pitched upon to murder the King) bid the Maid shut the door, and not
let him come again. Of which Ruffianly piece of Incivility, Mr. Oats was wiser
then to take notice, or give them occasion to think he was so weak, as by an
unseasonable discovery, to revenge himself upon an insignificant Butcherly Monk.

And besides, they had such a slight opinion of his weak parts, or rather such
a confidence in the greatness of their own, that they scorned all discoveries;
and perhaps they might have had reason enough to have thought so, had they not
by that silly and impolitic Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, rather poured
oil then water upon the Fire, and sed that into a blazing Flame, which else
they might have easily quenched, and pust away the Smoke.

At last Corker called for two Gillian a Croydens, that lay in Perdue in or
about the Court, ready prepared to prove, that Stapleton, and not Corker, had
been for many Years President of the Benedictine Monks. To which purpose being
demanded by the Chief Justice, a general Question, Who was President of the
Benedictine Monks? They answered as generally, Mr. Stapleton; which was taken
for granted, without further Inquiry: though Corker gave him a fair hint, by
saying, He was at Paris with Stapleton, and therefore could not officiate in
his stead. Upon this Doctor Oats was called again, but never examined: why it
was not done, he must be a Solomon that gives the Reason, unless it were for
fear he should clear the Point.

After all, when nothing but Despair hovered before their Eyes, Marshall began,
as the Epitomizer says, a Harangue so pathetical, weighty, and moving; but as
the Court said, so fawning, so invective, so fallacious, so affrontive to the
Court, so far from Self-defence, which was the Text he was to follow, that he
was commanded to leave Sermonizing to no purpose, as abounding in his
Rhetorical Flowers, that had nothing but the ill scent of the French Marigold.

At length the Lord Chief Justice told them plainly, That their Defense had
been very mean, and that their Cause looked much better, before they had spoken
a word for themselves. Which the Jury ought to have taken more notice of, than
of Marshall's gingling expressions. But certainly some gentle Constellation
reigned that day, more tenderhearted than the weeping Pleiades; Or else Mercy
and Compassion themselves had some particular pique against Truth, and were
resolved to put an Affront upon her. Or else Lassa Crudelitas began to grow
penitent, and cry Peccavi for her former Severity, which (and for which, we may
thank a wise Jury) will certainly be the construction of them that shall
hereafter go to play the Causinus's with our Story: Which, however, the
Consideration of the People may prevent, by giving a more just and solid
Verdict.

THE ADDRESS TO ALL Persons of Reason, and Lovers OF THE Protestant Religion,
Of what Rank soever they be.
HAving thus (my Lords and Gentlemen) given you this exact and short Account of
the several Absurdities, Falsities, False Abbreviations, False Conclusions,
Impertinent and Senseless Inferences, and Fawning Insinuations, with which the
Writer of a certain Insamous and Rebellious Libel, has made all the Reflections
his Rancour and Malice could invent upon the late Judicial Proceedings, as
being the Vehicles which he thought most proper to convey his intended Poison
into the veins of the Nation: I know not whether you are more surpised, for
surpised I am sure you must be, at the Irreligion of an Infidel, defending
Acts of Impiety; or the Confidence of a Subject, contending against the Justice
of his Sovereign. For let his Pretenses be what they will, his design is this,
and only this, to annihilate the Plot, and by that means to full the Vigilance
of the Kingdom asleep, that they may the more securely make up the late Breach,
and begin again with their work.

To effect this, Mr. Oats, poor Mr. Oats, must be the Issachar of all their
Scandals and Reproaches; He must be pressed to Death, (not for standing Mute in
Court, I Am sure) the pitiful Wretch, as the Abbreviator calls him, so contemned
and despised by the Benedictine Rabbis, and Flaunty Taunty Jesuits, must be
trod upon, and dye the death of a Worm; and all, because he outwitted their
Cunning. The most convincing Argument of his Integrity, that such Goliahs, as
they, fell by his Imbecility.

Nay further, my Lords and Gentlemen, you have some reason to give this
Compendium Scribler your humble thanks, for having such mean and Hender
thoughts of you too, to be so sure of your being surpised at the Incoherenees
and Impossibilities of a Charge, which the Lords and Commons of England, and
consequently many of your selves, voted to be substantial and true; and at the
weight of Defenses, adjudg'd to be so weak and unscholar-like by all the select
Judges of the Nation.

But when you consider how it has been the practice of the Papists, either
absolutely to deny, or extenuate their perpetrated Crimes. So Cicarela in the
Life of Sixtus V. labors to extenuate the Murder of Henry III. saying. That
Jacob Clement committed the Fact, merely by the impulse of his own Zeal, and
that there was no Subornation of others that enraged him to the Act. When the
Jesuits themselves were they that fetched him, a poor Criminal Dominican, out
of the Cloister where he lay Condemned for several Rogueries; and never left,
till they had Charmed him to complete the number of his Villainies, by the
Murder of his Prince: As may be seen more at large, in Hospinian's History of
the Jesuits.

And Mezecay, the great Historian himself confesses, that the Ruffian
acknowledged to the Count of Brienne, then in the Bastile, that he had
instructions and directions from others, and a counterfeit Letter of Credence
in the name of the President Harlay, to facilitate his Access.

When you consider that it has been all along the longing desire of the
Triple-Crown'd Squire to regain England; And how zealous Pope Sixtus was, to
promote the Spamsh Invasion; And how he ammated Ferdinand, to the Fatal
Destruction of his Expensive Armada; And how probable it is, that those
vehement Thirstings and Yawnings after the Fertile Glebes of these Fortunate
Islands, still remain with the working Wits at Rome, one effect whereof,
besides several others, was their cursed Gunpowder-Treason.

I say, when you consider these things, and how improbable it is that Men of
their Principles, should leave off their old Customs; I am apt to suppose, that
you will not so easily jump with the Compendium-monger in his Opinion. That Mr.
Oates's Discovery is so monstrous, or of such disagreeing parts, as to show it
self so vain and chimerical, as this Plotthing were at last reduced to
proportion, as he most Jesuitically insinuates, it was done by the efforts and
skill of better Artists. Rather he ought to be called to an Account, whom he
means by better Artists. For the Lords of the Council, the Lords assembled in
Parliament, and the whole House of Commons, had the Examination of all things.
The Attorney and Solicitor General, and all the King's Council, had also their
Inspections into the Proofs; so then these must be the better Artists which he
means, that assisted Mr. Oats in the management of his Defects. It lies heavy
upon the Two Committees of Secrecy, and nothing but a Jesuits weighty Defense
can help 'em out. They were very ill Artists (though our Observator be so
courteous as to grant 'em better then Mr. Oats) that all their private Debates
and Consultations, should be only to produce a Plot for Mr. Oates's sake, that
should so easily be rendered Defective and Fabulous, by a Compendium-mongers
untainted Witnesses. Not so untainted neither, as he dreams, nor so much
Masters of Reputation, either by Law or Gospel, in regard they have been all so
notoriously and palpably disproved; And that it has been so fairly made out,
that they only came to lend their Friends a stretch of Equivocation, if it
would have served their turn. Neither do I believe this Plot-Plaisterer to be a
Man of that Grandeur, to authorize him to revile any Man with the term of
Profligated Wretch, unless it be, because he may be Excommunicated by Don Paolo
d'Oliva; nor to be so good a Physiognomist, as to judge by any Man's Temper or
Poverty, of his Inclinations; And therefore he might have spared his
Bear-Garden Arguments, when he wrote to Lords and Gentlemen.

Now if the Observator believe, that the weight of his Defenses lies in Ifs and
Ands, and How can it be possible? Then we leave it to the consideration of the
People, upon what has been already said; but if he think that the Ponderosity
lies in their Vows, Denials, and Protestations, he only builds in the Air, and
must have Dr. Wilkinson's Engine, to keep it from falling. For it is certain
that the Pope does assume to himself an absolute power to excommunicate Kings.
Sixtus V. Excommunicated two himself, Henry de Navarre, Henry Valois of France.
Now let us see what the Substance and Penalties of this Excommunication are.

The Pope ordered the King to be Excommunicated, which was, says Cicarela, in
the Life of the same Pope; That he should be struck with the Thunder of
Anathema; That he should incur all Ecclesiastical Censures, which are contained
in the Sacred Canons, in the general and particular Constitutions, and the Bull
of the Lords Supper. And the same Censure shall be good against all that assist
the same King, either with Counsel, or any way else.

And by his Excommunication thundered out against Henry de Navarre, and Henry
de Bourbon, Prince of Conde, he declared them Heretics, and incapable of
succeeding to the Crown of France. He also absolved their Subjects from all
Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity sworn to those Princes.

Now if CHARLES II. King of England, be Excommunicated at Rome, as there is no
question to be made, but He is; for any Papist to profess himself a Subject to
CHARLES II. King of England, being Excommunicated, is not only to disobey the
Pope, but to contemn and render invalid the Thunder of Anathema, the
Ecclesiastical Censure, the general and particular Constitutions, and the Bull
of the Lords Supper, and consequently to renounce his Religion. And therefore
all their Denials, Protestations and Imprecations signified nothing, because
they had relation to no Body; For according to the tenor of their
Excommunication, an Excommunicated King is no Body, a mere Statue of a King:
And therefore for them to profess themselves Jesuits and Priests, and pray for
the King, was Nonsense; and they died both like Fools and Knaves together, in
regard it was impossible for the King to be any thing to them that were true
Subjects to the Pope.

Now that the King stands Eternally Excommunicated at Rome, as an Heretic, is
not only plain from the Expressions of Coleman, but is manifest, from this,
That no Man of true Religion or Piety, I may add Morality, would dare to invade
the Dominions of a Sovereign Prince, call himself His Subject, and violate His
Laws, if he thought either His Laws to be Laws, or Him to be a King.

And the same Argument holds against the Observator's untainted Witnesses, who
might easily say any thing, when they were taught, and believed that what they
said, was neither in a Court of Judicature, nor before them that were
Magistrates. For the Magistrates of a deposed King can be no Magistrates,
according to the true Papistical Doctrine. And indeed it was the Devils
Masterpiece, when he had invented a Pope, to entail those two Powers of
Excommunication and Absolution to his Chair; which are the Foundation of all
breach of Oaths, all Protestations, Vows and Imprecations; of all Infidelity,
and Christian Irregularity.

As for Langhorne's averring, That he did not believe the Pope had any
Authority to Excommunicate, and consequently to Depose the King; in so doing,
he denied the Doctrine of the chiefest Fathers of his Profession, Petrus
Ribadeneira, Becanas of Mentz, Jacobus Simmancha Bishop of Bad^^^os, Bellarmine
himself, Hosius the Cardinal, and Molanus, who all unanimously teach the same
Doctrine, That the Pope has Authority to Depose and Excommunicate Heretic
Kings and Princes, and to Absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance and
Obedience to them. So that he must either have some strange Reserve to himself,
for that he did not speak, but only deliver his equivocating Conceptions in
writing, or else he could be no Papist, but must dye the Lord knows what, a
double Traitor to the Pope, and to his Prince; No Man can serve two Masters:
And therefore he did but imitate St. Peter in a wrong sense, as if he thought
to have got the name of an Apostle, by denying his Master Antichrist thrice,
before the Cock crow'd once. And thus we behold the Policy of Papists, who,
when they deal with others, always propose to them the Pretense and
Protestations of Religion, and the Arguments of their Christian Piety, while
under the pretext of these, they hide their Self-policy, to use it in time and
place convenient; which no Body can for the present discover, nor know the
depth of the Intrigue, but themselves.

But now, as if he were the Supreme Chiestain of the Spanish Inquisition, he
undertakes, like another Guido Vaux, with his dark Lanthorn, to pry into Mr.
Oates's Life and Conversation, and to blow up his Repute with a Gunpowder-Plot
of Recrimination. But all this while, who is this Bull of Basin, that bellows
out all these Reproaches against the Evidence for the King and Kingdom? Common
Fame (my Lords and Gentlemen) speaks him a Prisoner, and one that has so long
continued. So then for one Beggar, for if he be not so, he must be a Knave, to
reproach another renders him, if Poverty be the Crime, the more Contemptible.
But let him be a Croesus, he is a Papist by his own acknowledgment, and
consequently a Party; a Party that by the malice and embitterment of his
kicking and wincing Expressions, shows himself to be in the number of the
Galled Horses, that have been so severely rubbed by a clear and undoubted
Testimony. He is the Professor of a Religion which is a scandal to all Europe;
a Religion Marforio'd and Pasquin'd by the frequent Satyrs of those that behold
the daily Fooleries of its most exalted Aarons and High Priests; a Religion
that maintains that inveterate Hatred and inbred Antipathy to Protestantism,
contrary to the character of all Christian Piety, that it has no thought of
Reconciliation, or Humane Charity for it; which to make out gradually, we shall
thus begin, and make use of none but those of their own Profession.

Hear in the first place Cornelius Agrippa thundering out those dismal Sarcasms
against the Ecclesiastical Magistracy of his own Religion, cap. 61. de van.
scion. But the ancient Constitutions of the Fathers falling from their Majesty,
and later Pontifical Privileges prevailing through damnable Custom, such Popes
and Apostles ascend the Chair of Christ, as formerly there sat Scribes and
Pharisees in the Chair of Moses, who only say, and do nothing, imposing heavy
burdens upon the shoulders of the People. They are Hypocrites, doing all their
works, making shows of their Religion in Scenes. They shut the gate of Heaven,
and will neither enter themselves, nor let others go in. The Pope of Rome
himself is a most heavy and intolerable to all, whose Pomp and Pride never any
Tyrant equaled, They boast that the state of Religion and the Church consists
in them alone, throwing the Religious Functions upon others, and in the mean
time busied in making Laws for their own support, receiving the Profits of the
Church, themselves both lazy and flagitious.

Then he gives you a Catalogue of those Reverend Fathers of the Devil, Boniface
VIII. of whom Platina says, That he was so ambitious of the Pontificate, ut nil
Ambitione and Fraud praetermiserit, quod ad eam rem consequendam pertinere
arbitraretur, he omitted nothing that Ambition or Fraud could prompt him to, to
attain his ends.

After him Paulus, Sixtus, Alexander, Julius, the most famous disturbers of the
Christian world.

Eugenius IV. who caused Vadislaus, King of Poland, to break his Faith with the
Turk, to the loss of his own life, and the irreparable damage of Christendom.

Alexander VI. that poisoned Zizim, the Turks Brother, to the public detriment
of Europe. To whom we may add again, Alexander VI. sporting and dallying in
public with his Curtesan Vannoccia, and filling all Rome with his Bastards, and
giving himself up to the Devil, to enrich his impious Son Caesar Borgia.

Innocent X. committing Incest with his Sister-in-law Donna Olympia, and
resigning St. Peter's Chair to a Harlot.

And lastly, the present Odeschalchi, not a little Famous for his impotent
Amors with the Princess of Rossana.

But to return to Agricola, when he comes to pour out the Vial of his just
indignation upon the Rabble rout of Priests and Friars: In this See, says he,
with the vaster Leviathans and Behemoth, swims the lesser Fry of Money mumpers,
Clapperdogeons, Beggars with great Beards, girt about with Ropes and Halters,
Wallet-bearers with wooden Shoes, or sometimes barefoot, sometimes in black,
sometimes in gray, then in white, Benedictines, Beruardines, Augustines,
Franciscans, etc. Men whose Lives are generally most infamous for their
Covetousness, Lust, Pride, Gluttony, Ambition, and all manner of Iniquity:
Which is a very fair Character from so great a Man of his own Religion, and the
Ecclesiastical Government of Rome.

Let us now come to the Nipotism and Putanism of the Romish Jerusalem, the Holy
City. In the first of which, the Author of the same Profession, complains, That
all Christendom is scandalized; that they who make so great a Profession of a
Religion, should so little believe it. Nay, the People of Rome themselves have
a Proverb among them, That the Emperors first taught Tyranny, and the Popes
practice it. And a German Prelate lately living, was wont to say, That the
Popes Kindred acquire this world by their Uncles Indulgence, and that their
Uncles lose the other world by their Nephews Vices.

And Caesar Borgia made such a good use of the Popes Authority, that whenever
he was upon any mischievous design, he would say, That he very well knew that
what he went about was just, because his Father had the Holy Ghost.

It is not unknown, says another, to every Scullion in Rome. how odious the
Nipotism is to Heaven, Earth, Nobles, Plebeians, all Ranks and Qualities of Men.

The Author of the Whoredom of Rome, having assembled all the kind Ladies and
Curtesans of the City to elect a new Pope: Some are for this Cardinal, and
others for another; some they choose, and some they reject. Those that they vote
for, are such, whose kindness to women they have experimented. Those that they
reject, are the Devils of Gomorrah, that have little or no affection for the
Female Sex. A most blessed Vicar of Christ, to expose St. Peter's Chair,
himself, and all the great Nimrods of his Church and Society, to the merited
Reproaches of every Satirical Pen.

But this is not all; the Author of La Doppia impiccata, printed at Orbitello,
under the Nose of the Inquisition, brings Madam Pecunia, and arraigns her at
the Bar of Wisdom, for several and weighty Crimes; where being asked, How she
behaved her self among her Neighbors? She confesses, how she feduc'd the Holy
Jesuit Columbera. For he, good Man, being desirous to get a little money by
his labors, was wont to steal out of the window of his Cell by the help of a
Rope, and in his venerable Habit, to go with his Breviary and his Lanthorn in
his hand, having undertaken to debauch a young Virgin, between whose breasts,
it was not long before he gained the honor for his Patron, Father ( ypriano, to
preach with all his amorous Eloquence. So that of an Apostolic Missionary, he
suddealy became the bravest Doctor in the Pulpit of the Flesh, that ever
discoursed of the Beatifical Vision of snowy Bosoms, and the contemplation of
that heaven, where he had so often lay'n in the swooning Raptures of his Lust.
After that, he makes a bloody Complaint against the poor Lady, for fastening so
many infamous Sodomies among the Prelates and Cardinals of Rome, that they have
made a very Pentapolis of the Holy See: wherein such is the value of that
infernal Merchandise, that the excrement of a Page is at twelve Crowns an Ounce.

Being asked, What Frauds she had committed? She answered, she had caused the
Abbot Dini to counterfeit an Order of the Chamber of the Magazines in Venice,
to let go two Galeots sent by the Duke of Modena to that Republic, and all for
2000 Duckers; and has also caused the most Illustrious Mascambruno, to alter
the sense of the Canon in the Apostolical Briefs, to satiate the Vatican Harpie
with double Crowns.

Being asked, What occasion of Offenses she had given, in reference to
scandalous Actions? Alas! they were without number, she said. Particularly she
had been the Occasion, that Innocent X. would not give Audience to the Portugal
Ambassador, about the Affairs and Interest of Religion in that Kingdom, till he
had given Donna Olympia such a number of Duckers.

And that Father Caravita the Jesuit, being in possession of the Oratory of
the Bacchettoni, had so often adjusted his Pardons to the quantity of the Sum
agreed; while he caused the poor Husbands to be contented with the Horns that
were planted upon their heads, and made them believe, to that purpose, with his
Cabalistic Eloquence, that it was a meritorious thing to wear Brow. Antlers for
the love of God. The Purse of Pompeo Giustiniani, one of the wry-necks of the
same Society, knew his tricks well enough; who, after he had with great expense
enjoyed a Mercers wife, was by him condemned to give six Silver Candlesticks to
the Oratory.

'Twas she that had been the Occasion of the scandalous. Amors between
Cardinal Azzolino, and his Cardinaless the Queen of Sweden.

'Twas she that persuaded the Bolognan Abbess to betray into the hands of
Cardinal Antenio one of her choicest and most beautiful Virgins.

'Twas she that caused Donna Olympia to send for the Thaes, that her Nephew
Cadinal Maldachino, had been with the night before, and made her restore the
200 Duckers, which he had given her for his pleasure; and so disappointed the
poor Slur of a hundred Gewgaws.

'Twas she that caused Monsignior T^pp^, Arch Bishop of Beneventum, to assist
with his Pontificial habits at the digging up a certain Treasure, to conjure
away the Devil, as if he had designed in his Miter and Rocket to sing Mass with
the Inhabitants of Hell.

Being asked whether she had ever been guilty of abusing the Male sex? she
answered, she was a woman, but referred her self to the Schools of the Jesuits,
the most learned Lyceum's, where that Art was taught; those tilting places,
where they run at the Ring with so much bravery and fortitude; the Masters of
those Chairs delighting in most difficult Attempts, as having now forsaken the
poverty of Religion, and applying themselves to more expensive luxuries,
becoming Grandeur, and the Management of Secular Affairs. There would be no end
of the Discoveries of the Enormity of this Religion, were that, the sole
business of these sheets. However, this may suffice to show out of the mouths
of the Papists themselves, that Rome is only a Den of Thieves and Robbers, that
their Monasteries are but Sties of Ignorance and uncleanness, and their
Nunneries mere Hollands Leagures: Thus much then for their Ecclesiastical
Government; now for their Doctrine.

First, They teach, that all Pacts, Constitutions, Agreements of Emperors,
Kings and Princes, not confirmed by the Pope, are void, and of no Effect.

Simancha, Bishop of Badoxos teaches, That there is no Faith to be observed
with Heretics, though after Oath given. And in another place, That there can
be no Peace or Commerce with them, and therefore no Faith can be observed
toward them, though confirmed by Oath.

Conradus Brunus confirms this, averring. That there can be no Peace between
a Catholic and a Heretic; and that it is a wicked and blasphemous Condition
of a Treaty, that allows to Heretics the Exercise of their Religion.

Martin Becanus teaches. That Liberty of Religion granted to a Lutheran or
Calvinist, s altogether unlawful, and repugnant to the Law of God, and only to
be permitted no longer than needs must, to avoid a greater Mischief.

3. They teach, That it is the duty of the Roman Catholics to destroy and root
out the Protestants by fire, poison, sword, gunpowder, or any other way most
opportune and convenient.

To confirm this, says Cardinal Baronius, The Office of St. Peter is twofold;
to feed and kill; feed my sheep; kill and eat: by which Text Saint Peter is
commanded to kill and slay as well as keep and feed. It remains them, Holy
Father, that you draw the sword of St. Peter against the wicked Heretics, as
being constituted by God over King, and Kingdoms.

4. That Kings and Princes may be poisoned, or otherwise taken away by their
Subjects, being Roman Catholics, if their Divines do once account them
excommunicate.

5. That Heretical Magistrates and Princes are to be accounted excommunicate,
if not de facto, yet de Jure, and consequently may be lawfully assassinated by
their Subjects.

This is the Doctrine of Mariana, Petrus de Onna, Simmancha, Creswell, Tresham:
And Urban the second decreed, that they should not be accounted Murderers,
that killed any of the Enemies of the Roman Catholic Church.

As for the Doctrine of Equivocation, so publicly taught, and so frequently
practiced by them, there has been occasion to speak so much already through the
Nation, that it will be needless to repeat any more. I will only add, that all
those protestations and pawnings of their salvation were only Bugbears, with
which they thought to scare and amuse the ears of the Protestants, till they
had stifled all farther Discovery. But now they find, they were so far from
being innocent of the Murder of Sir Edmund -- Godfrey, that they rather chose
to murder themselves, than confess the foulness of their Crimes. Thus then it
appears that in the Popish Religion there is neither Honesty nor Credit; a
Religion broached and maintained only by the worldly Policy of a company of
Lordanes, to rob and defraud all mankind; a Religion that borrows it is Devotion
from the Silver-Smith, and whose brightest Luminaries are the Wax-Chandlers
Tapers. And shall the Professor of such a Religion as this, my Lords and
Gentlemen, persuade the Professors of the noble, candid and magnanimous
Religion of the Church of England, upon which never any of these Imputations
could be thrown by the worst of her Enemies, that he is a person fit to charm
ye out of your senses with his Ifs and his Ands; his How can this be possibles?
and How can ye imagins? when there is not the least improbabilitie in the
deepest of his Objections? Will ye not rather number him with those that so
vainly vindicated the Powder Plot, the Massacre of Paris and Guisian League,
and the murder of two Kings of France, by his wretched attempt to evade the
murder of your follow subject, and the foul Treason acted against your Prince?
Or can you have better thoughts of him, but that he is one that strives, as
they did, to Ruffianize the Crimes of his Associates, that he may hinder the
progress of your Prosecution? Does he tell ye who committed those Crimes? No --
but he fells ye, he hopes ye will find them out at length -- and would throw
the charge upon sticklers against Government, and King-haters; as if any had
proved themselves more busy in those things then his own gang. We know there
are sticklers, and perhaps those that are no great friends to the King: But
it is the humor of our English Malcontents, unless of those that are refined
with St. Omers Education, rather openly to ruffle with their Prince, then to
contrive secret Assassinations and Treasons. Shall he come with an old quashed
Endictment from a Pie-powder Court (for such a one I may call it in respect of
those High Courts where Mr. Oats appeared in reference to the late
proceedings) to vilify the Kings Evidence, so fairly venturing Life and
Reputation for the preservation of his King and Country? What a noise does the
Fool make with the Women of Hastings? Truly the women of Hastings were the most
unkind women that ever I heard of. The Minister of the Parish would have
prevented a Jesuitical Innovation upon their bearing-places, and they would
needs whip him form. Certainly those women were very popishly affected, or else
they would never have had the lash so ready at their fingers ends. And the
Magistrates of Hastings were vehemently to be suspected, that they did not
either find the man guilty, or else send the women to the scourgingpost, for
mutinying so furiously against the Assertor of their lawful privileges. To see
the difference of Opinions! Had he been a Cardinal that had been accused, I
warrant ye, the men of Hastings would have found him guilty, and the Compendium
monger would have made no more words on it. Now what an Act has this
Compendium-scribler done, to justify an illegal uproar of mis intelligenc'd
Baggages, to vilify an Evidence, that had he had a grain of Allegiance, should
have been more sacred to him? Now, the truth is, the Endictment was true, but a
pack of knaves and fools, leaning for favor and affection, and some products
thereof, did very scandalously take the Criminals part against their Minister.
And that this is true, you have the Attorney General's word for it, who having
taken cognizance of the matter, declared in open Court, that there was nothing
in it. All which the Observator most ingeniously leaves our, according to the
double Usance of Popery. But to show how little Mr. Oats is afraid of this
Bevis of Southhampton for the Church of Rome, he fairly appeals to Hastings,
Bobbing, or any other place, where he has officiated in the Countries of Kent,
or Sussex, to tax him with the least misdemeanour misbecoming his function,
during his abode among them, to which when the Observator makes his rejoinder,
he shall have another sort of answer.

In the next place, he tells ye a strange tale of Sir Denny Ashburnham, what he
said in prejudice of Mr. Oats. Truly it was a strange story indeed. It was a
speech might have become a plain Country Judice in the Wild of Sussex, but -
at a London Commission of Oyer and Terminer -- to talk as if he had been at a
Christening -- I wonder he did not bring his Widwife along with him to help him
out with such a piece of Gossipry. Well! You long to know what it was: It was
this; I knew Mr. Oats from his Cradle, and when he was a Child, Ireland's
Trial, Page 65.
he was not a person of that Credit, that we could depend upon what he said.
You see what a testimony Sugar-plums and Naples-bisket will produce. Did this
become a person that was such an early Judge of Credit, and consequently should
have had more wit, to bring his Fimtlam stories of the squabbles of Childhood
to invalidate the full grown Evidence of the King in a Concern or so high a
nature? And to aggravare the folly he had committed, by declaring, that had the
Discovery been only upon Mr. Oates's single testimony, he should have had some
little doubt of it upon the knowledge of him in his youth. Well, Mr.
Observator, Mitch ke ditch ye with Sir Denny Ashburnhams 's
Gingerbread-testimony. For there is many an unhappy child makes a good man; so
that Sir Denny Ashburnham's kindness to the Prisoners, was a little too much
antedated. He should have told the Court what he knew Mr. Oats to be when he
was a man, and not have done like a Moorfield's Trithemius, to conjure up the
peccadillo's of his childhood, to have appeared against him at such an
unseasonable time. However, these are the two grand accusations against Mr.
Oats, that must send him to Avernus for perjury. Poor man of Observation, they
were the best he could get, or else, we find his virulency to be such, that he
would not have spared him an Inch. An unfortunate Copy of an Endictment from
Hastings! which had the Observator penurioufly preserved for the lighting his
Pipe, would have done him much more good, as not having brought the least
tittle of advantage to his Cause.

For my Lords and Gentlemen, I suppose you cannot but believe the King's
Attorney had much more judgment then this Student de Collegio Ambubajarum and
Balatronum, and understood far better then he, the Nature of Indictment. But it
is not his bawling and scolding, and railing, that must do the great work he
has undertaken; nay, though he had all his Croneys, the Women of Hastings to
help him, he would never succeed. For it is sufficiently known, that the
Prisoners at the Bar had all the fair play in the world; they had both time and
liberty to call their Witnesses; and when they made their Objections, their
Witnesses were heard with all the patience imaginable.

Their St. Omers Youngsters were heard, and re-heard, to their own, and the
shame of them that sent 'em.

Their Staffordshire Testimony not only confronted and baffled, but detected
after wards to be a mere Jesuitical Subornation. Yet these contrivances of
their Friends at liberty, they thought would have proved as Infallible as their
Master the Pope.

Now after all this apparent Evidence for the King, and no Disproofs against
them, but only these two pieces of Forgery, and some few Surmises and
Suppositions, that signin'd nothing either in Law or Reason, for one single
person to upbraid the Justice of the whole Nation, as if the Judges had not
already answered all the obsolete Observations and Descants which the
Compendium makes, as if they were not able to judge whether Men be perjured or
no; or as if you your selves, who have many of you had the full Examination of
these matters, were to be rebuked, and re advised to reform your judgments, by
a scurrilous Rapsody of Slander and Untruth.

As for Sir Denny Ashburnham, though he made a Childish Observation upon Mr.
Oates's Childhood, yet he declared, That he found so many circumstances
confirming Mr. Oats 's Testimony, (as idle as he thought it) that he was
convinced of the reality of the thing it self. Which the Epitomizer did well to
leave out, because he was one of his own Witnesses. By which you may see what a
Worshipful Knight he was, to come into Court to put a slur upon the King's
Evidence, when in his Conscience he thought he spoke Truth. And by this you may
find, what fair Play the Observator shows you, to make use of pieces of
Testimony, merely so far as they make for his own turn.

After this, he brings two diminutive Dwarfs to second his two Goliahs,
pretending, That Mr. Oats had accused old Parker, the Father, of speaking
scandalous words against the Lords of the Council, notwithstanding which he was
disinist.

In answer whereto, let him know. That Mr. Cates still appeals to the same
Order, and is ready to make good his Charge. Mr. Observator, advise your Client
to sleep in a whole skin.

from whence he infers, That it was no wonder that such a Witness should swear
that Mr. Preston was a Priest, and his Confessor; when as the poor Gentleman
has not only a Wife, but has lived with her for many years. A most profound
Argument indeed. And why may not he be allowed to marry, as well as Cardinal
Maldachini be allowed to be dressed in Women's Apparel in a Common Bawdy House?
Or Tresham the Jesuit to have either a Doxy, or a Wife; such an one, as upon
his Deathbed compelled him to damn himself, by taking it upon his salvation,
much like Ireland, That he had never seen Garnett in sixteen years; when it was
afterward discovered, that he had been frequently in his company. But to show
ye, my Lords and Gentlemen, what a silly Calumny he infers, from Mr. Preston's
being married, you are to observe that Marriage has been practiced by their
very Popes. Some of our Popes have been married, says Aeneas Sylvius de Gestis
Council. Basil. And Aquinas allows the Marriage of Priests in these words: Vsus
Conjugalis interdicitur Sacerdotibus tantum jure humano, and proinde
dispensabile est. And Cajetanus avers the same: Non jure divino, sed humano
duntaxat prohibitum esse Conjugium Sacerdotibus, and proinde in hoc dispensari
posse. Marriage is not forbid to the Priests by divine, but only humane Law,
and therefore is to be dispensed with.

Now why might not Mr. Preston marry, the better to conceal himself, and yet be
Mr. Oates's Confessor, but presently Mr. Oats must be perjured for swearing
it? Are these the great Perjuries the Observator has hunted out? Courage Mr.
Oats -- I dare be bold to secure ye thus far -- Well -- What now? -- He was
the Son of a Weaver, and therefore not fit company for Jesuits -- Very good --
What if he had been the Son of a Carpenter? What then? Sixtus Quintus was a Boy
that kept Hogs -- And what then? But the world knows better.

These are precious Arguments, my Beloved, to prove that Mr. Oats knew nothing
of the Plot. If he were so mean a person, they fitted his Capacity to a hair,
for they sent him up and down from Dan to Beersheba with Letters. But if he had
the wit to open these Letters, certainly he could not be so dull as not to
understand the Contents. It will be their best way next time to choose a person
of more wit, and less discretion.

Oh -- but he does not understand Latin -- that is no Epitome, but an Untruth at
large. -- But suppose he did not; a Man must not be perjured, because he does
not understand Latin -- He understood English enough to bring them to their
cold Beds. --

But he never was at Salamanca, and consequently never did his Exercises. --
That Is but the Observator's saying -- in opposition to which, Mr. Oats avers
that he was at Salamanca, and that he did do his Exercises -- Ergo Bellarmine.
--

He offers, that Mr. Oats may send one, and the Papists another, to know the
truth of it. -- Let him ce'n go himself and save charges. Upon these
Goodly-good morrows he frames a hundred Riddle-me-Riddles, Suppositions and
Surmises, and demands present Answer to a long Bed-roll of Questions, with so
much confidence, as if he were Pedagogue-Poser-General of the Nation, and that
all the Lords and Gentlemen of the Land were his School boys, and bound to
answer him.

He would fain know what probability there was, That men of such polite Parts
as they, should trust such a poor, abject, contemptible person as Mr. Oats, a
person whom they had expelled their College for his ill Qualities, with a
design of such a high Concernment?

As to the first, there was no Improbability at all. For alas, they were no
such high-flown, high-soaring wits, as he dreams 'em to be; but they were a
company of pitiful, shabby, illiterate Dunces, that had not so much Scholarship
as their Founder Loyala, and he as mere a Clodpate as ever por'd in Grammar.
All which was evident from their Behavior at the Bar, and their filly Comments
upon their own Letters. Neither had their Declamations any thing of the truth
of Eloquence in 'em, but savor'd only of Themes, and Boys Exercises, which has
been in part already observed.

Then to his being Expelled for his ill Qualities, there they betrayed their
Folly most shamefully. For when it was expedient he should be Expelled, then he
was Expelled; when it was convenient he should be at St. Omers, then he was at
St. Omers, because he could not come away: Nay, they brought sixteen Witnesses
to prove that he kept close at St. Omers, and never stirred out for so many
months; and all this, after his Expulsion; which showed them to be mere
Whifflers, and no true Masters of Defense. So that this is the scope of the
Author's design, to prove Mr. Oats perjured, because they could not prove
themselves innocent.

Now for the Probitie of the Men (for he makes a sad complaint, That 13
Christian Men of great Probitie, should have such hard usage) let us take a
Catalogue of 'em.

Hill, Green, and Berry, an Ale-house-keeper, a Cushion-man of a Chapel, and a
Serving man, whose Conversation was not worth taking notice of.

Pickering, a pitiful, ignorant, lying Priest.

Ireland, a Smell-smock, that lay with his own Sister.

Gawen, called in question at St. Omers it self, and that was a wonder, for
Buggery.

Fenwick, a Parsons Son, disowned by his Father, and by him Expelled, for his
Debauchery, from his House, and in a fair way to be Hanged, till he took
Sanctuary at St. Omers, as Bankrupts do at Jamaica.

Whitebread, the Provinicial; a Fisher in all Professions for Preferment. First
a Jew, then a Presbyterian, then a Quaker, to whose Meetings he used to go in a
Carters habit; one that had more shapes to disguise himself, then a Player, as
is attested by a Letter written to the Lord Mayor of London: And at last a Jew
again, that is, a wandering Jesuit.

Turner, a silly ignorant Fellow, that prayed Nonsense at the Gallows, desiring
God to forgive him, and he would never offend him again, when he was next
minute to be Hanged.

Grove, a Rascal not worth naming.

Coleman, a conceited ambitious Fopp.

Staley, a proud debauched Goldsmith.

Langhorne, a Priest-ridden Bigott, but the best of 'em all.

Ay marry Sir, these are persons qualified indeed for a Plot. I confess, I
should have wondered that Men of Probitie should have intrigu'd themselves in
such a bloody design. But why such Christians, and Men of Probitie as these,
passing Mr. Oats neither in Birth, Learning, Parts or Honesty, (for they lay
no other Crimes to his charge, but only Poverty and Perjury, very slovenly
urged upon him) should be so abstentions, as not to trust Mr. Oats, a
stirring, active man, and a new Convert, the Abbreviator must give a better
Account then he does. But his and their Innocence may perhaps hang together in
time, for Fame reports him at this time Indicted of High Treason; so that it is
not his Innocence that makes him resolute and constant, as he tells my Lords
and Gentlemen, but a kind of Newgate-sturdiness, that makes him bold and
confident.

But now let me ask all Rational Men one Question, What should move Mr. Oats,
to embrue his hands, so heathenishly, so barbarously, without any compassion,
without any remorse of conscience, in so many streams of Innocent blod, without
any cause, without any offense given him, but the petty Expulsion from a
College?

The Compendium-Framer will say, The Hopes of Gain and Preferment. That Is
something indeed. But how could Mr. Oats hope either for Gain or Preferment,
by plunging himself into the discovery of a Chimera, from whence he could
expect nothing but Ruin and Misery in this world? For I omit the punishments
of the other world, which it may be well answered, The wicked do not value,

How poorly does this Compendium Mechanic think of the King, the Council, and
the Parliament, that they should be so deluded and cajoll'd by the mean and
contemptible parts of such a pitiful Wretch as Mr. Oats? Is it to be imagined
that so much Mercy, so much Piety, so much Wisdom, should prostitute the Lives
of so many Innocent persons, to the ambitious Perjuries of Mr. Oats? Would the
King have permitted such a daring Titan, to scale the Heaven of Majesty it
self, and not have immediately thundered him down into the lowest Abyss of his
Disfavor? It Is not for a Worm of a Subject to the counterfeit image of St.
Peter, to tell the King of England, who is the real Vicegerent of God, what
Perjury is; nor to flourish his pitiful Flag of Defiance against the Royal
Standard of His determined Justice. When the King of England desires to know
what Perjury is, perhaps he may be persuaded to address Himself to this
Mushrome of a Compendium-Framer. In the mean time his Diminutiveship would do
well to find out some other Employment, than to contend with his Sovereign, by
rebelliously appealing from Him to His Subjects.

As for his repeated Justification of the Murderers of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey,
I let it pass, in regard it is but merely Repetition, and there has been
sufficient Answer given already to all his Flashes and Evasions. Only take
notice by the way, how infamously industrious this Compendium-Scribler has been
to assail no less then twice, in one Libel, the Public Justice done upon those
more then prodigious Assassinates.

Concerning Dispensations, he talks as if he had a dispensation for what he
wrote. For such an Affront was never offered to the Popes Authority, at once to
deprive him of the chiefest Hours of his Papal Prerogative, and so ample a
part of his Revenue. But he says Lying is a sottish and senseless Crime -- so is
Incest -- But the Pope frequently dispenses with the latter Sin, why may he not
as well dispense with the former? Certainly if the Author of the Compendium had
not had a plenary dispensation for Lying, he would never have told so many
Untruths as he has done. Oh! but it is a great Evidence, that there are no
dispensations for Lying, because so many lost Preferments and Employments for
not taking the Test. A very silly Argument. For it would be a very sottish and
senseless thing indeed to lie and equivocate, where there was no occasion; where
there was no hazard of Life, no danger of endamaging the Cause of Popery; no
Fear of bringing an irreparable Scandal upon the Profession of the Roman
Catholic Religion, there Constancy to their Mother the Church, carried a kind
of Face of virtuous Piety and Christian Patience; but when the Honor of the
Pope, the Reputation of the Church, the Dignity of the Catholic Religion, lay
all at stake, upon the single Confession of a barbarous Murder, and a
detestable Plot, there the Case is altered, there must be grains of allowance;
upon such an Occasion Lying is no Lying, but a Pious and Sem-like covering the
shame of our Father the Pope, and our Mother the Church, and their Daughter the
Romish Religion. It Is true, some that needed neither Employment nor Preferment,
refused the Test; but with others, and those the far greater number, it went
down as pleasantly as Cream of Almonds. For which if they had no Dispensation,
they cheated the Pope, and were Persons of no Religion. But why do I insist
upon a Point, that he who disputes against, disputes against matter of Fact,
and the practice of Popery for many and many Ages.

As for that Renowned Prelate my Lord Bishop of Lincoln, I shall not presume to
intrude upon his concerns, unwilling to incur the Censure of the World, as if
able to add the Least mite to the perfections of his most accomplished Learning.

And thus (my Lords and Gentlemen,) you see how laborious, and sedulous this
William with a wisp has been, to lead your judgments astray, and seduce the
Belief of the people. Now then most certain it is, that there was, if not still
on foot, a most hainons and detestable blot against the Life of our most
Gracious Sovereign, the Government and Established Religion of the Nation. That
this Plot was carried on by the Papists, is as certain; let them endeavor to
shift it of how they can; which is evident by Coleman's own Letters, wherein we
find no Correspondence with Independants, or Presbyterians, or Quakers, but
with Monsieur Ferryer, and Monsieur La Chaise, with Salamanca, and St. Omers,
and with the Jesuits, Benedictines, and several other Papists in England. He
does not crave aid and assistance of money and men from the different Opinions
of the Protestant Religion; but from the King of France, from the Benedictines,
and the Contributions of the English Roman Catholics. Neither was his design
against Episcopacy, or Monarchy, but to subvert that Pestilent Heresy that had
so long reigned in the Northern parts of the World; that is to say, all
dissenters in general from the Catholic Religion: by which, I say, it is
evident, that the Papists were the Parties only concerned. As certain it is,
that upon the discovery of Mr. Oats, this Plot was first examined and dived
into; and that soon after Sir Edmund bury Godfrey was basely and treacherously
murdered. As certain it is, that so soon as Mr. Oats had broke the Ice,
several others came in, and confirmed his evidence, persons that he had never
seen or Conversed with before. And to be short, as certain it is, that upon
their Evidence, after the mature examinations of King, Council and Parliament,
several of these Popish Traitors have been convicted and executed.

Now after all this, comes this Glowworm, with his nocturnal reflections in the
tale of a Compendium, and to defend the Murderers, he cries, How can this be,
and how can that be? And against Mr. Oats he tears his throat, and baules out
Perjury, Perjury, as if he were practicing to cry Turnips and Carrots in a
Winter morning.

Now, my Lords and Gentlemen, I will put the whole only upon this single Issue
whether you do believe that our Sovereign, (who if ever he did himself Injury,
it was always with a regard to the right hand of mercy, never to the left hand
of Rigor,) can be ever thought to be much a deviatour from his own innate
principles, as to harbor and protect in his own Royal Palace a perjured
person; whose perjuries, if they may be so called, have not spared those
Grandeurs, which perhaps both you and I thought unapproachable.

Upon this single Issue, as I said before, and upon this single Contemplation,
(ruminate while you please) I lay the stress of all that I have now to say,
which is only this in few words.

That since you have not the least color of reason in the world to question or
misdoubt the truth of this Plot, and murder so impudently endeavored to be
rendered fabulous end Chimerical by this Traitor of a Scribler. That you will
consider the inveterate and irreconcilable Antipathy of the Papists to the
prevailing Grandeur of the Protestant Religion.

That you will consider how much it concerns 'em at this time to lay about 'em
with all the Thunder and Lightning imaginable, to dispel, if they can, that
dismal cloud of Murder and Treason that threatens the very dissolution of
Papacy, already the scandal of Christianity, and the contempt of Turcism.

That you would consider how it has been the continual practice of their
Church, by the indirect means of Lying and Scandal, to conceal their
perpetrated Villainies, or fix 'em upon the Innocent; and that it has been their
continual Custom and Maxim, to endeavor the propagation of their Faith, by
Destruction and Massacre: which both France and Ireland with Tears can
testify, and the Ruinous War of Germany by them fomented and carried on; as if
there were no way to recover their decaying Heresy, but by laying Blood to the
root of it.

Then upon these Considerations make this farther Progress: Let 'em not think
their Liberties so involved in yours. That they cannot fall, but you must
precipitate: Let 'em not think to amuse ye, that Protestants cannot be safe,
because the Papists are deservedly prosecuted for their Crimes. They had
Privileges sufficient, Immunities enough, all Indulgence imaginable: but they
have forfeited all by Conspiracy, and Murder of the Subjects of that Fountain
from whence all their mercy flowed. They would have deprived you of your Lives
and Liberties, your Wives, Children, and Estates; and now they cry, The
Protestants cannot be safe, because some few of the Traitors have been
meritoriously Hanged, and more like to be. They plot and contrive, and being
detected, cry out, Perjury, the Land groans under the Sin of Perjury. But let
'em know they are not done with yet; and let this Traitor of an Epitomizer be
assured, there is that Evidence in Bank, that will in time still the noise of
his nefarious yawling.

Since then, my Lords and Gentlemen, the Providence of Heaven has been so
miraculoufly pleased to discover these dark Intrigues of Popery, that would
have been the utter ruin of King and Country, of Religion, Life and Fortune,
Uphold and Maintain that Testimony to which you owe your Preservation: and let
it not suffer under the Scandal and Reproach of those that suffer justly by it.
For the sake of all that is good and holy, prosecute the present Discovery;
which being born up by an untainted and daily increasing Evidence, has not only
destroyed the hopes of our Enemies, but shaken the very Basis and Foundation of
the Catholic Religion.

And now the God of Peace preserve the King of Salem, from whom, as He has
been hitherto indefatigably watchful for our Tranquillity, we have no reason but
still to hope the future enjoyment of Prosperity and Plenty, of our Laws,
Religion and Liberties, so long as so Good and Gracious a Sovereign remains
well guarded against the Treasons of Popery, by the Obedience and Unanimity of
his Protestant Subjects.

FINIS.

