ENGLISH ATLAS, Tome the First.



AFRICA: BEING AN ACCURATE DESCRIPTION OF THE REGIONS OF Egypt, Barbary,
Lybia, and Billedulgerid, The LAND of Negroes, Guinee, Aethiopia, and the
Abyssines, With all the Adjacent Islands, either in the Mediterranean,
Atlantic, Southern, or Oriental Sea, belonging thereunto.

With the several Denominations of their Coasts, Harbors, Creeks, Rivers,
Lakes, Cities, Towns, Castles, and Villages.

THEIR Customs, Modes, and Manners, Languages, Religions, and Inexhaustible
Treasure; With their Governments and Policy, variety of Trade and Barter, And
also of their Wonderful Plants, Beasts, Birds, and Serpents.

Collected and Translated from most Authentic Authors, And Augmented with
later Observations;

Illustrated with Notes, and Adorned with peculiar Maps, and proper Sculptures,
By JOHN OGILBY Esquire Master of His Majesty's REVELS in the Kingdom of IRELAND.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Johnson for the Author, and are to be had at his House
in White Friars, M.DC.LXX.

CHARLES R.

CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all Our loving Subjects, of what Degree, Condition, or Quality soever,
within Our Kingdoms and Dominions, Greeting.
Whereas, upon the Humble Request of Our Trusty and Well-beloved Servant John
Ogilby Esquire We were graciously pleased, by Our Warrant of the 25th of May, in
the Seventeenth Year of Our Reign, to grant him the Sole Privilege and
Immunity of Printing in Fair Volumns, adorned with Sculptures, Virgil
Translated, Homers Iliads, Aesop Paraphrased, and Our Entertainment in Passing
through Our City of London, and Coronation, together with Homers Odysses, and
his forementioned Aesop, with his Additions and Annotations, in Folio; with a
Prohibition, That none should Print or Re-print the same in any Volumns,
without the Consent and Approbation of him the said John Ogilby, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, within the Term of Fifteen Years next
ensuing the Date of Our said Warrant: And whereas by one other Warrant, of the
20th of March, in the Nineteenth Year of Our Reign, We were in like manner
graciously pleased to grant him the said John Ogilby the sole Privilege of
Printing Homers Works in the Original, adorned with Sculptures; a Second
Collection of Aesops Fables, Paraphrased, and adorned with Sculptures; The
Embassy of the Netherland East-India-Company to the Emperor of China, with
Sculptures; and an Octavo Virgil in English, without Sculptures, heretofore by
him Printed; with like Prohibition, That none should Print or Re-print the same
in any Volumns, without the Consent and Approbation of him the said John
Ogilby, his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, within the Term of Fifteen Years
next ensuing the Date of Our said Warrant: And whereas the said John Ogilby
has humbly besought Us to grant him further License and Authority, to have the
sole Privilege of Printing a Description of the whole World, viz. Africa,
America, Asia, and Europe, in several Volumns, adorned with Sculptures: We
taking it into Our Princely Consideration, and for his farther Encouragement,
have thought fit to grant, and we do hereby give and grant him the sole
Privilege of Printing the said Books last-mentioned: And We do by these
Presents straightly charge, prohibit, and forbid all our Loving Subjects to Print
or Re-print the said Books, in any Volumns, or any of them; or to Copy or
Counterfeit any the Sculptures or Ingravements therein, within the Term of
Fifteen Years next ensuing the Date of these Presents, without the Consent and
Approbation of the said John Ogilby, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns; as they and every of them so offending, will answer the contrary at
their utmost Peril: Whereof the Wardens and Company of Stationers of Our City
of London, are to take particular notice, that due Obedience be given to this
Our Royal Command.

Given under Our Signet and Sign-Manual at Our Court at White Hall, the first
day of November, 1669. in the One and twentieth Year of Our Reign. By His
Majesty's Command. J. TREVOR.

To the High and Mighty MONARCH, CHARLES II. Of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc.
SIR,
SInce it pleased Divine Providence, by Your Majesty's sole Conduct and
Direction, to Compose all Foreign Differences, settling at last Your weary
People, Harrased with Fire and Pestilence, under a Necessary and Honorable
Peace.

The Effects of which, soon Chearing up Your Loyal Subjects, they, laying Arms
aside, straight betook themselves to the several Improvements of Arts and
Sciences, each striving to outvie the other, in what seemed most Conducible to
the Restoration of the former Wealth, Splendour, and Reputation of these Your
Majesty's Kingdoms, Renowned and Famous through the World.

But amongst these Busy Preparations, no Work appears more Perspicuous than
that Stupendous Miracle! the Raising from a Confused Heap of Ruins (sooner
than some believed they could remove the Rubbish) Your Imperial City, already
looking down, though Private Houses, upon former Public Structures, hereafter
to be the Business of Foreign Nations to See and Wonder at.

I also, Dread Sovereign, feeling a Spring of Youthful Vigor, warming my Veins
with fresh Hopes of better Times, have undertaken, according to my Mean
Abilities, no small Business, a Work of Time, requiring some Years to Publish,
being, May it please Your Majesty, a New Model of the Universe, an English
Atlas, or the setting forth, in our Native Dress, and Modern Language, an
Accurate Description of all the Kingdoms and Dominions in the Four Regions
thereof.

Since such, and so great an Offspring cannot be Born in a day, nor see the
light of Publication at once, being several and distinct Volumns, this my first
Issue, Most Gracious Sir, being Africa Complete, in the Name of the Rest yet
Vnfinish'd, I humbly Dedicate and Tender to Your most Serene Majesty, as an
Earnest and Representative of the whole Work.

In which, Dread Sir, You may behold amidst a Gallaxy of Southern
Constellations, or the numerous Flourishing Cities and Seats of that famous
Region, Your own Bright Star, none of the smallest Magnitude, Your Metropolis,
Your Royal City Tangier, which Seated on the Skirts of the Atlantic, keeps the
Keys both of the Ocean and Inland Sea, whose unparalleled Situation,
Temperature of Air, and Fertility of Soil, may well make the Story True, if
Romance, that an ancient Emperor resolved to fix there his Imperial Seat, to be
his Terrestrial Paradise, Invironing with Walls of Brass, a Gold and Silver
City.

Thus Prostrating at Your Sacred Feet, that which if Your Majesty be pleased to
receive with a Smile, Your Subjects through Your British Monarchy, not only
Ambitious in obeying Your Commands, but ready to follow, in what they may, Your
Royal Example, will give the Work also a Civil Reception.

Whilst I, Dread Sovereign, to clear all difficulties, am busy exploding Old
Tales, Fictions, and Hear-says of the Ancients, Collecting and Translating
better and more Modern Authority, especially Eyewitnesses, our late Sea
Voyagers, that I might not weary Your Sacred Ears with any thing, if possible,
but undoubted Truth, May Your Majesty, though Your Claim be Just, and Your
Sword able to Entitle You Emperor of the Universe, Your Thundering Soverdigns
already Commanding the Sea, and Royal Standards by Land, fixed in Possession in
the four Regions thereof, rather by Your Example at Home, and Mediation abroad,
Reconcile those Ruffling Princes that delight in War, settling them in Leagues
of Amity; for which so great a Blessing, may they, You being the best of Gods
Vicegerents on Earth, Crown also the King of Peace, a second Augustus, whose
Piety and Prudence has once more shut up the Temple of Janus, binding in
Perdurable Fetters, Bloody and All-destroying War for ever.

Your Sacred Majesty's Most humble, Most obedient Servant, and loyal Subject,
JOHN OGILBY.

THE PREFACE.
ENtering upon so great a Work, being no small Concern in my Territory of
Business, I suppose it proper, never Apologizing heretofore, by way of Preface,
to give you a brief Review of all my former Endeavors, so leading you on to
this present Occasion.

Many years are past with various Revolutions, since in the first Fluctuations
of the late Grand Rebellion, I being left at leisure from former Employments
belonging to the quiet of Peace wherein I was bred, in stead of Arms, to which
in parties most began to buckle, I betook my self to something of Literature,
in which, till then, altogether a Stranger; And drawing toward the Evening of
my Age, I made a little Progress, bending my self to softer Studies, adapted to
my Abilities and Inclinations, Poesy: And first Rallying my new raised Forces,
a small and inconsiderable parcel of Latin, I undertook no less a Conquest,
than the Reducing into our Native Language; the Great Master and Grand Improver
of that Tongue, Virgil, the Prince of Roman Poets; and though I fell much short
in this my vain Enterprise, yet such, and so happy proved the Version, and so
fairly accepted, that of me, till then obscure, Fame began to prattle, and soon
after I, forsooth, stood forth a new Author, and so much cheered up with fresh
Encouragements, that from a Mean Octavo, a Royal Folio Flourished, Adorned with
Sculpture, and Illustrated with Annotations, Triumphing with the affixt
Emblazons, Names, and Titles of a hundred Patrons, all bold Assertors in
Vindication of the Work, which (what e're my Deserts) being Published with that
Magnificence and Splendour, appeared a new, and taking Beauty, the fairest that
till then the English Press ever boasted.

Yet this first Endeavor raised my Reputation no farther, than to be accounted
a Good Translator, a Faithful Interpreter, one that had dabled well in another
Helicon; but I, greedy of more, having tasted the sweetness of a little Fame,
would not thus sit down, but ambitious to try my own Wing, endeavored to Sore a
little higher. The most Ancient and Wisest of the Grecian Sages, who first led
us through a Vocal Forest, where Beasts also spoke, and Birds sat Chanting in
every Tree, Notes for Men to follow: Aesop the Prince of Mythologists became my
Quarry, on his plain Song I Descanted, on his short and pithy Sayings,
Paraphrased, raising my voice to such a height, that I took my degree amongst
the Minor Poets.

My next Expedition with Sails a Trip, and swollen with the Breath of a general
Applause, was to discover Greece, that there, I might from Homers own hand, the
King of Pernassus, receive plentifully at the Fountainhead staining Draughts
of the brisker Hypocreen; in which I had a double Design, not only to bring
over so Ancient and Famous an Author, but to enable my self the better to carry
on an Epick Poem of my own Composure; whose Iliads with much Cost and Labor at
last finishing, being Dedicated to His Sacred Majesty, and Crowned with His
Gracious Acceptance, I maintained my Post, loosing no ground of former
Reputation.

Soon after, being ordered by the Commission of Triumphs, to Banquet His
Majesty at the Cities cost with a Poetic Entertainment, Marching with His
Train of Nobles through His Imperial Chamber to His Corronation at Westminster,
the Argument being great, seeming almost impossible to set forth the Dear
Affections, and unexpressible Joys of all His Loyal Subjects, especially of His
Metropolis London, at His so Happy Restoration; and that the Glory of so
Bright a Day, the most Splendid that e're this Nation saw, should not close
with the Setting-Sun, but appear a shining Trophy to Posterity; I, at my own
proper Cost and Pains, brought it to light once more, in a Royal Folio,
containing the whole Solemnity, the Triumphal Arches and Cavalcade, delineated
in Sculpture, the Speeches and Impresses Illustrated from Antiquity, and
Dedicated to His Majesty; of which, some, and but a few, escaping the late
Conflagration, remained.

But whilst I busied my self thus, neither sparing Cost nor Pains, to dress and
set forth my own Volumns with all the Splendour and Ostentation that could be, I
thought it also Religious, and the part of a good Christian, to do something
for Gods sake, to adorn in like manner, with Ornamental Accomplishments, the
Holy Bible, which by my own sole Conduct, proper Cost and Charges, at last
appeared the largest and fairest Edition that was ever yet set forth in any
Vulgar Tongue.

Next in order to the completing of Homer, I fell upon his Odisses, which
Dedicated to his Grace the Duke of Ormond, then His Majesty's Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland, to whom, in that Kingdom, in the late miserable Distractions, I was
a Servant, he kindly accepting thereof.

Then, being restless, though weary of tedious Versions, and such long Journeys
in Translating Greek and Latin Poets, Works asking no less than a Man's whole
life to accomplish, I, the better to feed my Fancy with variety of Objects, a
second time betook my self to Aesop, where I found such Success, that soon I
seemed to tread Air, and walk alone, becoming also a Mythologist; not only
Paraphrasing, but a Designer of my own Fables, and at last screwed my self up
to a greater height, finishing two Heroic Poems, viz. The Ephesian Matron, and
The Roman Slave, which Volumn, a most Worthy and Illustrious Person, the Earl
of Ossery, vouchsafed to Patronize; and although a Second Part, met with a Fate
not common, to be esteemed equal with the former.

Thus elevated by the Success of these my last heightened Essays, I thought it
time to go on (having fitted Materials, both Historick and Poetic) with my
long intended Edifice, my own great Fabric, an Epick Poem, already divided
into twelve Books, some almost finished, called CAROLIES, from our Miracle of
Hero's, Charles the First, being the best Pattern of true Prudence, Valor, and
Christian Piety; of whom, though too late, and too unworthy to be affixed to
his Hearse, out of the abundance of my Zeal and Loyalty to so matchless a
Worthy; I hope there may be indulgence for the placing these Lines, which may
remain to Posterity, in the Portal of this Great Work.

Mirror of Princes! Charles, the Royal Martyr,
Who for Religion, and His Subjects Charter,
Spent the best Blood Injustice Sword e're died,
Since the rude Soldier Pierced our Saviors side;
Whose Sufferance, Patience, reached to such a height,
For Angels only with Sunbeams to write:
No mortal Hand, less my unworthy Pen,
Fit to Display the best of Kings and Men.
This Work thus settled, and so well resolved upon to be the Pride,
Divertisement, Business, and sole Comfort of my Age, that day annually so fatal
to the Royal Party, swallowed in that devouring Deluge of Fire, with most part
of the City, that, and my whole Estate.

Thus fallen into a low condition, groaning under a double burden of Sickness
and Poverty, and almost quite despairing, the Work that might have Boy'd me up
once more, thus irrecoverably lost; and reminding, that many of my Friends, and
Worthy Patrons were more favorable to my Endeavors, when under a Cloud, than
after Shining in full Luster; and that since his Majesty's Restoration, the
minds of those restored to former Fortunes, or raised to several Advancements,
were more abroad, and not at leisure to look on such private Divertisements at
home; so that those later Volumns, which in course were Printed to perfect the
former, remained a Drug, until the insatiate Flames, at once, and in one bad
Market, cleared me of my Store, and House also.

Besides grave Poesy, in which Homer and Virgil's Heroes spoke Honor, and the
greatness of their Souls; comprizing in few Lines, by Example, more Rules of
good Life, than Philosophers in many Volumns; loosing place and former Luster,
Rough Satyr, Rude Travestee, and Rhyme Doggerel, gotten above, assisted with
such, that confidently avouch, that we in this more Refined Age, speak better
things ex tempore, than what has been Recorded by the whole Rabble of
Antiquity; looking down upon Moral Virtues, as stale Saws, and stiff
Formalities, only fit for Schoolboys Theams, and that our Brisker Youth, and
more Sublime Wits, should be ashamed to peruse, much more to follow.

Thus a new Gaggle drowning the old Quire of Melodious Swans, I resolved to
desist; and shutting up the Fountain of the Muses, left Clambering steep
Pernassus, and fell into the beaten way, and more frequented Paths of Prose: My
first undertaking being, An Embassy from New Batavia, to the Emperor of China,
which Published in my last Lottery, proved so acceptable, that I resolved to
carry on in the same way hereafter, the whole Business of my Pen.

When, as in my former Acquisitions, I flew first at the highest and best
Poetic Authors; so now as much ambitious, I pitched upon the like
Accomplishment in Prose, and no less serves my turn, than the Reducement of the
whole World, viz. A New and Accurate Description of the Four Regions thereof,
the first of which being AFRICA; wherein, having made some Progress, still
Collecting more Materials toward the Completing of so great a Work, a Volumn
lately Published beyond Sea in Low Dutch, came to my hands, full of new
Discoveries, being my chief and only Business to enquire after, set forth by
Dr O. Dapper, a Discreet and Painful Author, whose large Addition, added to my
own Endeavors, has much Accelerated the Work; which thus being finished,
adorned with more variety of Sculpture, Maps of Cities and Countries, and a
much larger Declaration than any yet extant, Presents it self to your
favorable View and Acceptance; and will, I hope, (such is the Intrinsical
Worth and Beauty thereof) invite a general Encouragement from all parts, that I
may more cheerfully and speedily go on with the Remainder; which if the Effects
follow, I doubt not, but a short time will produce the Happy Conclusion, by

From my House in White Friars, April 28. 1670. Your most humble Servant, John
Ogilby.

A CATALOGUE OF THE NAMES OF THE General Authors, both Ancient and Modern,
besides Later Voyagers, Consulted to the carrying on of this First Volumn; who
led us by the Hand through those Vast, and till of late Untracted REGIONS of
AFRICA.
OLiver van Noord, Jacob van Neck, Stephen Vanderhagen, Cornelius Matelieff,
Peter Williams, George Spilbergen, Peter Both, The Governors Peter Vander
Brock, and many more; as Samuel Blomert, one long Resident there, his
Observations being faithfully Collected by the Learned Isaac Vossius.

THe Particular Authors for the several Provinces, beginning with Egypt, are,
Johannes de Leo, or Africanus, Louis Marmol, Sanutus, Francois Alvarez, Peter
Belonius, Vilamont, Radziviel, Johannes Alpinus, Santen Seguesse, Caesar,
Lambert, Matthias Vossius, Peter de la Valle, Balthazar Tellez; these being
Portuguese, Italian, Latin, and French Writers; besides the Descriptions of
other both Ancient and Modern Geographers; as, Strabo, Dionysius, Perigetes,
Pomponius Mela, Ptolomy, Cluverius, etc.

THose that give us an Account of Barbary, are the afore-mentioned Leo and
Marmol, Diego de Haedo, Johannes Gramaye, Braeves, Cel. Curio, Diego de Torres,
and others. In like manner, there is taken out of the first Part of Leo,
Marmol, and Sanutus, all that lies in Numidia, Biledulgerid, and Libia, or
Zaahra, and the inmost part of Negro-land.

AS concerning the several Places lying along the Seacoast of the Negroes
Country, viz. between Cape de Verd and the Kingdom of Lovango, being a Coast
of about 900 Leagues, we find all the forementioned Geographers to be defective
in it: But most of what has been found hitherto, we have from the Hollanders,
in their several Voyages to Guinee, Collected by Peter de Marcez, who even to
these Times gives us so large a Description, that it descends to the meanest
Village; and withal, a large Account of their Religion, Modes, Manners, and
Merchandise.

Samuel Blomert also, remaining long in those Parts, being very inquisitive,
has rendered a more large and exact Account concerning Guin^^, than the former.

NExt, in reference to those Coasts near the Cape of Good Hope, there has been
almost nothing said by former Writers, but only what has been Collected out
of the several Journals of the Hollanders, in their Voyages to the East Indies,
which are very large and Authentic.

THe Territories and Coasts of the Nether-Ethiopia are lately as well Surveyed
and Delineated; first, by that Eminent Author Johan de Barros; next, Pigafet,
Sanutus, Jarrick, Moquet, Od. Barbosa, Urreta, Maffeus, Peter Davty, and some
others.

FOr the Description of the Abyssines, or Upper-Ethiopia, of which we were till
of late in a manner altogether ignorant, let us thank Nicholas Godignus,
Francois Alvarez, Jarrick, Dam. Goez, and especially Father Balthazar Tellez,
who has far exceeded all the former, having in an excellent Composure, in the
Portuguese Language, given us a large and accurate Description thereof.

ANd as concerning the Islands belonging to Africa, most of the forementioned
Authors, with some few others, have set their Hands to; except the Salt-Isles,
or those of Cape de Verd, and that of St. Thomas, which boast their Description
chiefly from Blomert.

ALso Madagascar, or St. Laureuce, Stephen de Flaccourt has for the most part
engrossed and appropriated to himself; he being long resident there, employed
by the French East India Company: Besides, a Frenchman that suffered Shipwreck
on that Coast, has done well; but not so hit the Truth as the former.

FOr the Island of Malta we are beholden to Bosio, Megisaer, Hieronymo,
Alexandrinus de Naberat, besides one, a great Observer, that long Inhabited
there.

AN ACCURATE DESCRIPTION OF AFRICA.
The Induction.
THE Terraqueous Globe, (whereof Africa shares no narrow Limits) seems but an
Imaginary Point, to the vast Expansions of the Universe, though in it self of a
Great Magnitude; for its Girdle, or Equinoctial Circle, contains in length
21600 English Miles, or rather such as 60 make Concerning this, see Mr.
Norwoods Experiment, or Sea-mans Practice. As likewise Mr. Oughtred's Treatise
of Navigation, at the end of his Circles of Proportion.
a Degree. And the Diameter or Axis of the Earth, according to the same
measure, amounts to 6875 Miles. The Semidiameter 3438. But the Superficies of
this Mighty Ball, if by a General Survey set forth in square Miles, reckons up
148510584 of the like Miles, which is the product of the Circumference,
multiplied by the Diameter, (not omitting its Fractional part.)

The Earth is divided into three Parts, or rather Islands, remoted from each
other by Circum-ambient Sea, though their Largeness nominates them Continents.
The first contains Europe, Asia, and Africa; the second America; and the third
Isle, Magellanica.

The first, being the then only known World, The Old World.
Antiquity confers on the three Sorts of Noah; to Sem, Who, some say, though
the eldest, shared the least part, being contented with his Patrimonial
Improvements, whilst his younger brothers roamed through, settling their
several Plantations in the un-inhabited world.
Asia; to Ham, Africa; and gave Japhet, Europe; yet later Ceographers make of
this only two parts, casting Africa into Europe, supposing the Gades, or
Hercules Pillars.
Mountains Calpe and Abyle, (now the Jaws of Gibraltar) were opened by an
Earthquake, receiving then also an Inundation from the Atlantic, which now
makes the Mediterranean Sea, being before all continued Land.

Others divide by the Mid-land Sea from the Straights of Gibraltar, unto
Tanais, placing Europe on the North, and spreading Asia on the other side, over
the utmost Extent of Africa: Some double this again, making four Divisions of
this our first Part of the World, (viz.) Europe, Asia, Africa, and Egypt;
Others later have once more reduced them to three, joining Egypt to Asia, (yet
very improperly) making the Nile bound Asia and Africa, so that Egypt striding
the River, extends her Limits into both. But the most modern Geographers, make
the Arabian Gulf the Mere betwixt Asia and Africa, casting Egypt into the last.

Concerning the several Divisions of this our old World, much has been said
both by Greek and Latin Writers, not pertinent in this place to be taken
notice of.

The second Island of the Globe, The New World.
called America, from Americus Vesputius a Florentine, who by a lucky hit, Or
the gingle of his Name Americk with Africa, though signifying no more in
English than Harry Wasp.
obtained the Denomination of this New World, from the first Discoverer
Christopher Columbus a Genoese, employed by Ferdinand and Isabel, King and
Queen of Castile and Arragon, in the Year 1492. The Southern Parts Peru, that
vast Empire, was after penetrated by Pizarro, Anno 1525.

Magellanica, The Unknown World.
the Unknown World, or third Island, was so called from her first Discoverer
Ferdinand Magellanus, being found by him in 1520.

Sir Francis Drake our Famous Navigator, forty five years after made a farther
Inspection, and in 1557. Sir Thomas Candish; next Oliver van Noord, a
Hollander; but the latest and last who made a far deeper incision than all the
rest, was Ferdinando de Quier, a Spaniard.

Thus much in brief concerning the Division and Dimension of the Universal
Globe, which we are hereafter to treat of; henceforth we shall only speak of
Africa, the chosen Argument of this our First Volume, of which ere we
particularize, thus in general.

Africa in general.
AFRICA, Names of Africa.
so called from the Grecians, according to Festus, and the most Eminent
Geographers, signifies wanting, or devoid of Cold; though by some the whole was
taken for Lybia, which is now but a single Province; Also they called it
Olympia, Oceania, Coryphe, Hesperia, Ortygia, Ammonis, Aethiopia, Cyrene,
Ofiusa, Cefenia, and Eria, but the Romans called it only Lybia and Africa.
Lybia from Lybia Daughter of Epaphus son of Jupiter; and Africa from Afer the
son of Hercules. The Moors, if you consult Thebets Geography, call it
Alkebulan, and the Indians, Bezecath; the Arabians, who formerly overran the
major part, knew their Conquests by the Name of Ifriquia, derived from the word
Faruch, which signifies Separation, because it is visibly more separated, not
only from theirs, but from all other Countries, than any other part of the
whole World; for the Mid-land Sea parts it from Europe; the Arabian Gulf, from
Asia; and the Atlantic Ocean, from our later Discoveries; Some Arabians (as
Marmoll tells us) call it Ifiriquia, The West Indies.
in honor of Melek Ifiriqui, an ancient King of Arabia Felix, who driven from
his own, planted here a New Kingdom, which after grew great and populous: The
Turks as some write, call it The West Country as to the Arabians, who
penetrated that way.
Magribon, from Magrip, though this Name properly belongs only to the Western
Sea.

The most received and best known is Africa, which some derive from Aphar an
Hebrew word, signifying Dust, and analogizing well with that dry and sandy
Soil: Festus an old Grammarian, as was said before, will have Africa from a
compounded Word, with the Greek Letter a, which has a privative or furtive
quality, and the Word (...), signifying Cold, which conjunctively Africa in
general, stands divided into seven Regions, besides Islands. Egypt, Fol. 39.
Upper. Lower. Middle.
Barbary, 146. and therein Fez. Morocco. Tunis. Tremesen. Dara, and Barka, the
only Commonwealth in Africa.
Biledulgerid, 283. contains, Three Realms, and Four Kingdoms.
The Desert Sarra. 305. Negro-Land. 315. Nineteen Kingdoms.
Ethiopia Nether. 489. Four Realms.
and Ethiopia Upper. 632. Nineteen Kingdoms.
The Islands. 659.

AFRICAE ACCURATA TABULA ex officina IACOBUM MEURSIUM.
makes void, or deprived of Cold, well suiting with the sultry disposition of
that Air; Bochartus who reduced all Language to the old Phenician, will have
Africa to be from Feruc, a Corn-Ear, which changed into Feric, comes at last to
Afric, that is, a Corn-Countrey, which well may be, especially those parts
which the Romans knew, then so abounding with Grain, whose Harvests supported
That World Rome! when most populous, and in her greatest height and glory; with
which Plenty their Poets prided to swell their Verses.

As Claudian: Tot mihi pro meritis Libyam Nilumque dedere,
Ut dominam plebem bellatoremque Senatum
Classibus aestivis alerent, geminoque vicissim
Littore diversi complerent horrea venti.
Stabat certa salus: Memphis si forte negasset,
Pensabam Pharium Getulis messibus annum.
Frugiferas certare rates, lateque videbam
Punica Niliacis concurrere carbasa velis.
They gave me Libya, De Laud. Still. Lib. 2.
and the Egyptian Shore
For my deserts, that they might with their Store
The People, and the Warlike Senate feed,
And with contrary Winds supply their need.
Famine farewell: if Memphis should deny,
Getulian Harvests will our Wants supply.
Freighted with Corn, I saw the Punick Fleet,
And Ships from Nilus in our Harbors meet.


And Prudentius: Respice number Libyci desistat ruris arator
Frumentis onerare rates, and ad Ostia Tibris
Mittere triticeos in pastum plebis acervos.
See if the Libyan Swain neglects to load In Symmach.

Our Ships with Corn, and to the Ostian Road
Sends Wheaten Mountains for the Peoples Food.


And Horace: Illum, si proprio condidit horreo
Quicquid de Libycis veritur areis,
Gaudentem patrios findere sarculo
Agros Attalicis conditionibus,
Nunquam dimoveas, ut trabe Cypria
Myrtoum pavidus nauta secet mare.
Persuasions him shall never charm, Hor. Ode 1.

Grown proud of his Paternal Farm,
Where Lybick Harvests thwack his Grange,
Not for King Attalus Wealth to change
His plenteous state, to furrow Brine,
And cross rough Seas in brittle Pine.


But next to those who derive the Name from the Hebrew word Epher, or Aphar,
Festus seems to have hit the Etymology of the word Africa.

JUdea, and the Judean Deserts, Arabia Petrea, and Sues, with the Red Sea, Its
Borders.
and the Arabian Gulf, bound Africa Eastward; the South Side stretching to
Cape Bon Speranza and part of the West, the Ethiopick Ocean borders; the
remainder the Atlantic; on the North-side Gibraltar, and the Mid-land Sea; so
that Africa lies divided from all the World by Sea, except Asia, where it
sticks by a narrow Isthmus, or Neck of Land of about sixty miles, so seeming
the greatest Island of the World, formed like a huge Pyramid, whose straight
Basis takes up all from the Mouth of Nile to Gibraltar, verging with the
Mediterranean Sea; one of its two sides running Eastward through the Red Sea,
the other Westward washed by the Atlantic, conjoyning both their Points,
making its Apex or Spire the Grand Southern Cape: whose largest Extent from
Gibraltar to Bon Speranza, contains 3600 miles; its utmost breadth from Cape de
Verde, to the Point of Guardafuy, at the Mouth of the Arabian Gulf, 3150.

THe Ancients never had any clear Prospect of Africa, The Ignorance of
Antiquity.
more than what vergeth the Mid-land Sea; the rest obscure; only guessing or
hearsay: but of all beyond the head Springs of Nile, and the Mountains of the
Moon, they were utterly ignorant (being within these last two hundred years
discovered to us) because much of those vast Tracts of Africa lying under the
Torrid Zone, they concluded not habitable, being parcht up with the Suns
excessive heat, therefore they never thought of further Penetrations, but
blockt themselves up with a possessed prejudice, and their own ignorance: Yet for
all this, some old Writers admit most parts to be habitable, but with such
monstrous Nations, that they deserve not to be accounted Humane, as From Pomp.
Mela, and the like Authors, our fictionary Traveller Sir John Mandevil, raised
his so bold Stories.
Pomponius Mela says, The Gymfasants are a naked People, who know no use of
weapons either for private or military Defense, nor how to avoid a well-aim'd
Javelin, utterly waving all Commerce with strangers. The Dogs-heads.
Cynocephali, who have heads and claws like Dogs, barking like them. The
Foot-shadowers.
Sciapodes, who are wondrous swift, hopping on one Leg, and lying down on their
Backs, make their single Foot an Umbrel, so shading their Bodies from the heat
of the Sun. The Headless Blemmyers whose Eyes and Mouth are the only Face, and
that delineated upon their Breasts; with other like Fictions.

All which later Voyages have made void, Africa habitable, and why.
manifesting the contrary; for the Inland Regions are found for the most part
habitable, and the Suns heat by shorter days and coolness of an equal night,
assisted with moistening Dews, and fresh Breezes, is much moderated; And though
Africa has many Deserts, yet the greatest part, especially under and on each
side the Equator, supposed to be most insupportable, abounds with Springs,
Brooks, and Shade-casting Trees; Besides under the Equinox, the Seasons of the
Year differ from other Climates, for our remoter Suns bring Cold and Wet; our
nearer, Heat and Drowth; but there the contrary: which many admire, yet never
dive into the Occult Cause, but straight flying to Providence, say, so it must
be: otherwise who could inhabit there? which though we should not altogether
reject, yet God working by secondary means, we may, modestly enquire by what?
which may probably be thus.

THe Sun darting fiery Beams daily perpendicular into the Sea, raises
abundance of Vapor, which suddenly ascends the Airs colder Region, and there
thinly crusting, becomes Snow, which sinking from thence dissolves into a misty
Cloud, or Dewy Rain, then increasing its velocity according to the Laws of
descending Bodies, and also quitting that station, gathers into bigger drops,
which if in abundance, (as often happens) falls with the greater violence, no
more a Shower, but like Buckets-full, or Cataracts, whose irruption and sudden
dis-embogue, agitating the medium, raises mighty and cooling Winds, which
together supplies the parched Earth, and refrigerates the sultry Air.

BUt yet this blessing extends not to the Inland Countries, nor has the
Atlantic Ocean any such influence upon the Western Coasts, unless (which is
very rare) the Wind comes from Sea, because the condensed Air, the farther it
penetrates, the more it rarifies, attenuated by the invading heat of the Soil,
that before it scarce contributes a Dew to stiffen the upper Sands, in a thin
Cloud, re-ascending, vanishes.

But yet the Inland and utmost Western Shores need not much complain, being
for the most part Hilly, for there the Mountains are glutted with assiduous
showers, for those huge congested Heaps, being the highest in the world,
withstanding the Airs constant motion, still agitated from East to West, or
according to Copernicus, lagging from the Earths diurnal Course, which moves
swiftest under the Equator, condenseth by Reverberation the subtiler Air into
its first Original, Water, which in the tumultuous commotions of eddying
Winds, either finding, or forcing their passage, through unequal Glens and
Declivings of the biased Mountains, they drive a constant trade, still brewing
all sorts of stirring weather, as Wind, Rain, Hail, and Snow, which often
covers their Skie-kissing Tops.

But these jarrings of the Elements there, produce happy effects below, vast
Champaignes, which else would be all Deserts by natural Drowth, flourish in
perpetual Green, fanned always with cooling Gales, and kept moist with
Mountain-floods, which converted into Springs, Brooks, and Rivulets, water in
their Meandring Courses, barren Plains like a Garden; so that as in a Paradise
you every where find shady and branching Trees, bearing allsorts of Fruit, like
Alcinous Orchard, still blossoming, green, and ripe. Of which Equinoctial
Elysium, Homer thus seems to allude: (...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...), etc.
Close to the Gates, well hedged on either side, Odyss. Li

A stately Orchard was, four Acres wide:
There pregnant Trees up to the Heavens shoot,
Laden with Pears, and store of blushing Fruit:
Olives, and Figs, green, budding, ripe appear,
Cherished with Western Breezes all the year:
Peach succeeds Peach, Pears, Apples, bloomed and big,
Grape after Grape, and Fig succeeds Fig:
Whilst here Vines ripen, there ripe Clusters load
The yielding Branches, ready to be trod.


Thus Africa, which else would be a miserable and unfrequented Desolation, is
fruitful and populous, having alternately two Winters and Summers every year;
Drowth making one, Moisture the other: but the tops and heads of these
Mountains, according to their various Positions, differ from this general Rule,
making some exceptions, settling their several Seasons otherwise; Of which I
will instance some few.

ON the Coast of Malabar, Winter rules from April to September; The Nature of
the Air.
Summer commenceth with the beginning of October, shutting up with the end of
March: On the Coromandell Shores, just the contrary, yet both situated alike
under the Torrid Zone, in which Season happen great Floods, both from the
Ocean, and sudden Falls from the Mount Gatis, not far distant. The like is
found also at Cape Rosalgate, and Guardafuy, the utmost Eastern Point of Africa.

BUt to make a deeper and more exact Disquisition, is, that all Arabia toward
the East of Africa, lies enclosed with Mountains, whose Rocky Battlements
appear above the Clouds, their swollen Ridges extending themselves in a long
continued Wall, reach from the bottom of the Arabian Gulf, to the Islands of
Curiamurie; these towery Hills of so prodigious height, not only put to a
stand all Winds and Rain, but turn them in their hurrying Eddyes, so
dispersing every way, as well as in the two out-stretching Capes of Mosamde and
Rosalgate, though they lie much lower than the rest of the Sea Coast: On these
Rocky Ascents, appearing to Sea-ward rough and rugged, the poor Arabians, in a
very sad condition make their residence.

These people have Winter with those of Coromandell; for their remoter Suns
brings them Cold and Wet: but those who dwell on the other side of the
Mountains toward the Coast of Frankincense, have the same seasons with those
of Malabar; so these Mountains work the like effect on the Arabians, as Gatis
on the Indians, their Winter falling in June, July, and September, both in the
Land of Frankincense, Arabia Felix, and the whole Coasts of the Curiamurian
Isles, unto the Lake Babalmandab.

Near the Arabian Gulf in Ethiopia, you will meet there also the like
alterations, and the same seasons of the year as at Guardafuy, and the Kingdom
of Adell, and all along the Ethiopick Coasts, to the Mouth of Babalmandab, as
we have, or those of Coromandell, finding in December and January their hardest
weather.

Then they which live betwixt twenty and thirty miles off the Coast, have their
Colds more mild, and their Rains so temperate and harmless, they seem rather a
comfort than a disturbance, Nature conferring on them such refreshing Coolness:
but if you venture farther up into the Country, then the Scene changing, you
are tormented with excessive Heat, for at the same instant while Winter smiles
on the Shore, it rages farther up, and their gentle Rains below so unequal to
their deluging Showers above, that then there is no traveling any way, all
Passages being obstructed with Floods, so sudden and violent, that many perish
there with extreme Cold, merely from the raw Defluxes of chilling waters; such
alterations the Mountain Dabyri Bizan causes.

The Portugees and Hollander have also discovered many more such places in
Congo and Angola, where their Winter and violent Rains commence in the Vernal
Equinox, and continue March, April, and May; their milder showers in the
Autumnal, September and October; so that in some places they have two Seasons,
their former and later Rain; for those steep Mountains (whence Zaire, Coansa,
Bengo, and other great Rivers descend) obstruct the course of the Air, and the
Land-windes, being hot and dry, but the South-west wind coming from Sea,
brings Rain: hence it is manifest that Africa under the Torrid Zone, is for the
most part Habitable.

AMongst the Ancients, Ancient Discoveries of it.
Hanno a Carthaginian, set forth by that State, discovered long since much of
the Coasts of Africa, but pierced not far the Inland Country, nor did his
Voyage give any great light that they might after steer by, though translated
from the Punick Language into Greek, and published by Sigismund Gelenius at
Bazill in 1533. and in the Reign of Necho King of Egypt, some Phenicians from
the Red Sea sailed by the Coast of Africa to Gibraltar, from thence returning
the same way they came; Of which Herodotus wrote nine Books of History,
according to the number of the Muses, entituling them in order by one of their
Names.
Herodotus in his Fourth Book.
Melpomene, says, The Phenicians sailing from the Red Sea, came into the
Southern Ocean, and after three years reaching Hercules Pillars, returned
through the Mediterranean, reporting wonders! how that they had the Sun at Noon
on their Starboard, or North-side, to which I give little Credit, and others
may believe as they please. Nor did Sataspes Voyage in the Reign of Xerxes King
of Persia, in the year of the world 3435. give us any better Hints; of which
thus Herodotus in the same Book:

Sataspes, Teaspes son, ravishing a Virgin, and Condemned to be Crucified, by
the Mediation of his Mother, Darius Sister, was to suffer no more than to
undertake a Voyage round Africa, which he but slightly performed; for passing
Gibraltar, he sailed to the utmost Point called Siloe Perhaps Bon Speranza, or
Cape de Verd.
, from thence sailing on Southward; but being weary, returning the same way he
came, made a strange Relation to Xerxes, how he had seen remote Countries,
where he found few People in Tyrian Purple, but such as when they drew near
Land, forsook their Abodes, and fled up into the Mountains, and that they only
drove some of their Cattle thence, doing them no further Damage; Adding also,
that he had sailed round Africa, had it not been impossible: To which the King
giving small credit, and for that Sataspes had not performed his Undertakings,
remitted him to his former Sentence of Crucifying.

AS little availed that Expedition of the A People inhabiting Tunis.
Nasamones to this Discovery, who (as Herodotus relates in his Second Book.
Euterpe) chose by lot five young men of good Fortunes and Qualifications, to
explore the African Deserts, never yet penetrated, to inform themselves of
their Vastness, and what might be beyond; These setting forth with fit
Provision, came first where only wild Beasts inhabited; thence traveling
westward through barren Lands, after many days, they saw a Plain planted with
Trees, to which drawing near they tasted their Fruit, whilst a Dwarf-like
People came to them about half their stature, neither by speech understanding
the other, they led them by the hand over a vast Common, to their City, where
all the Inhabitants were Blacks, and of the same size; by this City ran toward
the East a great River, abounding with Crocodiles, which Etearchus King of the
Ammonians, to whom the Nasamones related this, supposed to be the Nile. This is
all we have of Antiquity, and from one single Author, who writ 420 years before
the Incarnation, which sufficiently sets forth the Ignorance of the Ancients
concerning Africa.

BUt what they knew not, and thought almost impossible to be known, is common;
for the secrets of the Deep, and remotest Shores are now beaten and tracted
with continual Voyages, as well known Roads are, since Vasques de Gamma a
Portugees Anno 1497. first opened the Discovery, and finished, to the no small
Honor of the Nation, his intended Design; for that People having got ground
upon the Spaniard, widening the breadth of their commodious Seacoasts, first
fell on the Moors in Africa, taking several of their best Cities near the
Atlantic; Henry Duke of Viseo, youngest Son of Henry the I. encouraged by this
good Success, resolved to make this his Business, and sparing no Cost, invited
from Spain and Italy expert persons for his purpose, skilful in Navigation and
Mathematical Sciences, by whose help and diligence in 1420. he found Madera, in
28. the Isle These Names were all given by the Portugees, at their first
Discovery of the places.
Porto Sancto; in 40. Cape de Verd, and in 52. the Coasts of Guinee. After this
Prince laid open thus a new Way for Discoveries, having gotten the honor to be
the first that made the Portugees Seamen, being of a great Age, he dyed in
1463. after whose death those Seas lay fallow twenty years; which King John the
Second afresh furrowed then up again, and first discovered Angola and Congo,
St. Georges Isle, conducted by Diego Cou in 1486. next year resolving to try
further, hoping to sail round Africa, and so find a new Way to the
East Indies, and assisted by Bartholomew Diar, passing Cape Verd first found
the Princes Isle, thence steering Southward reached the Great Southern Cape,
from thence either daunted by cross Winds, rough Seas, or mutinous Mariners,
they returned, leaving the honor of this Great Enterprise to the forementioned
Vasques de Gamma; for which, employed by Emmanuel King of Portugal, after the
Discovery of St. John's Isle, and St. Hellens, he attempted the same Cape which
Diar durst not, then first calling it Cabo de Bona Esperanza, there being first
encouraged, with hopes of finding the much desired way to the East Indies.

Thence doubling this Great Point, they steered northward, Africa on their The
Left hand, or northside.
Larboard, reaching the Coasts of Quiloa, Mozambique, Mombara, and Melinde,
contracting an Amity with the Melindian King, by whose assistance he found the
Port Caliculo in the East Indies, from thence returning with unexpressible Joy,
and eternal Honor, to Lisbon, in 1500.

The next year after Alvares Capralde, with twelve Ships and fifteen hundred
men, prosecuted the Design, but suffering Shipwreck on the Coast of Brazil,
desisted; but the following year the former Vasques, and his brother Stephen,
reassumed the Undertaking with greater zeal and vigor: afterward by Ferdinand
Almeida, and Alfonso de Albukerque, and so from time to time by several of that
Nation, and last of all by the English and Hollanders. By this means the
Moderns were exactly informed of the particulars of Africa, when the Ancients
knew no more than the Limits of the Roman Empire, and some parts belonging to
Egypt, hearing strange Stories of Beasts and Monsters; whence arose this Adage:
Africa semper aliquid apportat novi.
Strange Monsters Africa always breeds.


THe Romans divided this Region into six Provinces, The Roman Division.
first the Sub-Consulship, in which were Carthage and Tunis, called properly
and especially by them Africa: Next the Consulship of Numidia, wherein was
Cyrte, now Constantine, Bysacena being a part of that proper Africa which
contained Adrumetum; last the Tripolitan Consulship, Tripoly being the Head
City; and two Mauritania's, one Imperial, containing Algier and Telesin; the
other Mauritania Tingitana, the Realms of Morocko and Fez; and Egypt which they
also possessed; and these Inhabitants made no further discovery than what was
known before, so pinching up Africa, that all was comprehended within Barbary,
excepting Egypt and some fragments of Numidia; yet Pliny, though a Roman,
mentions many other Nations, as the Murri subdued by Suetonius Paulinus; and
Garamantes, by Balbas; the Romans also possessed Cyrenaica, which they joined
to Creta.

Mela bounds Africa with the Nile, and so also Dionysius scarce mentioning
farther than Mauritania, Numidia, and Cyrenaica, placing Egypt in Asia; Strabo
so shrinks Africa, that he pities their ignorance that made it a third part of
the World, saying that Africa joined to Europe, would not both quadrary with
Asia; but Ptolomy, knowing further, did better, swelling it to twelve
Provinces, as the two Mauritania's, Numidia, Cyrenaica, Marmorica, the inward
and proper Lybia, upper and lower Egypt, Ethiopia under Egypt, inward or south
Ethiopia; For by his Maps may be plainly seen that what lies five or six
degrees beyond the Equator, he knew nothing of, saying expressly that 64 degrees
under the Southern Elevation, were all Terrae Incognitae; so the Ancients did
not what they should in its Description, Marmol. p. 1. l. 2. cap. 2. and 3.
but what they could; they contracting its Limits much more than Ptolomy,
taking Egypt and all betwixt the Nile from Africa, conferring it on Asia.

Leo Africanus their most Eminent Author, and curious Searcher of his Native
Country, in 1526. boasted that he had been through all, yet makes no more than
four Provinces, as Barbary, Numidia, or Biledulgerid, Lybia, and Negro-land,
giving Nile for its bounds, not the Arabian Gulf, with the Streights of Sues,
to the Mid-land Sea, so bestowing a great part of Egypt upon Asia Eastward; and
as Marmol says, not once mentioning upper Ethiopia, or Abyssine, nor the
nether, nor many other places discovered by the Portugues since; besides all
that is now called New Africa, extending from the sixteenth degree of Northern
Latitude, to the Great Southern Cape, discovered by Vasques de Gamma.

THe most apt and usual Division of Africa, Africa as now divided.
with the unanimous consent of late Geographers, is, as we shall here in a
short Survey present ye. The Main Land, not reckoning the Isles, they divide
into Provinces.
seven Parts, Egypt, Barbary, Biledulgerid, the Desert Sarra, Negro-land,
Inner, or Upper Ethiopia, or Prester John, and the Outward, or Nether Ethiopia.

Egypt is divided into the Upper, Middle, or Lower; Barbary makes six
Divisions, as the Kingdoms of Fez, Marocco, Tunis, Tremesa, and Dara, and Barka
only not Monarchical.

Biledulgerid contains three Realms, Targa, Bardoa, and Gaoga; The Land of
Locusts;
and four Wildernesses, Lempta, Hair, Zuenziga, and Zanbaga; the Desert Sarra
makes no Division.

Negro-land boasts nineteen Kingdoms, Gualate, Hoden, Genocha, Zenega, Tombuti,
Melli, Bittonnin, Guinee, Temian, Dauma, Cano, Cassena, Bennin, Zanfara,
Guangara, Borno, Nubia, Biafra, and Medra.

Upper Ethiopia makes also nineteen, Dafela, Barnagasso, Dangali, Dobas, Which
seven Regions contain in all fifty Kingdoms and but one Re-publick.
Trigemahon, Ambiaucantiva, Vangue, Bagamadiri, Beleguance, Angote, Balli,
Fatigar, Olabi, Baru, Gemen, Fungi, Tirut, Esabella, and Malemba.

Nether Ethiopia contains Congo, Monomotapa, Zanciber, and Ajan.

The Isles belonging to Africa in the Straights, are Malta opposing Tripoli,
Islands belonging to Africa, in number twenty four.
in the Ocean, Porto Sancto, the Maderas, Canaries, the Isles of Cape de Verd,
or the Salt-Islands, the Isles of Ferdinando Poo, the Princes Island, St.
Thomas, St. Matthews, Ascension, Anbon, St. Helens, the Isle of Martin Var,
Tristan de Cunha, the Island Dos Pikos, St. Marie de Augosta, and the Trinity;
all which lie west from the Main Land: Northward from the Cape of Good Hope,
and toward the East of Africa, are the Isles of Elizabeth and Cornelius,
Madagascar, or St. Laurence, St. Mary's, Comore, and Mauritius, and Socotara in
the Mouth of the Arabian Gulf, near the utmost Point of Guardafuy, and other
less Islands.

THe Hills of most remark, are the Great and Lesser Atlas, Hills.
the Mountains of the Sun, the Saltpeter Hill, Sierre Lyone, Amara, Mount
Table, and Os Picos Fragosos.

The Great Atlas, called by the Natives Aydvacall, (as Marmol tells us) and as
Aug: Curio, Anchisa, and by Olivarius, Majuste runs through Africa, as Taurus
through Asia; or the Alps, Europe; beginning in Marmarica, and from thence
extended to the west, divides Barbary from Biledulgerid, and though it has
many gaps, and often discontinues, yet holds he on from Jubell Meyes, to the
utmost Mountains of Cehel, and the Coast of Masra, about twenty miles from
Alexandria; westward the Atlantic Ocean stops his course, near the City
Messa, changing his name Aydvacall, which often happens both to him and the
lesser Atlas, taking new Denominations from the several places they pass by; No
Mountain in all Africa is more celebrated by the ancient Poets than this,
amongst many take these from their Prince Virgil, 4 Aen.

-- Jamque volans, apicem and latera ardua cernit
Atlantis duri, Coelum qui vertice fulsit;
Atlantis cinctum assidue cui nubibus atris
Piniferum caput and vento pulsatus and imbri:
Nix humeros infusa tegit: tum flumina mento
Praecipitant senis and glacie, riget horrida barba.
And now the craggy top, and lofty side
Of Atlas, which supporteth Heaven, he spied:
A Shash of sable Clouds the Temples binds
Of Pine-crown'd Atlas, beat with Rain and Winds;
Snow clothes his Shoulders, his starched Beard is froze,
And from the old Man's Chin a River flows.
All Writers affirm his wondrous height, that he seems to reach the sky: That
side which views the Ocean to which he gave his Name, is rugged, bald, and dry;
that toward the Land, seems hairy with Bushes, and shady with leavy Trees, and
watered with Springs, so being made fertile, in producing all sorts of Fruit:
that by day his Inhabitants not see well, and that by night the Mountain seems
to shine and send forth flames, and (as some say) is full of Satyrs, and
abounds with Echoes, resounding like Flutes, Trumpets, and Tabors.

The Lesser Atlas, called Lant, coasts with the Mid-land Sea, there known by
the Name of Errif, extended from Gibraltar, unto Bona; the Spaniards call both
Atlas'es, Montes Claros, or the Shining Mountains, because their eminency
renders them perspicuous far off, or that their Spires shine above the Clouds;
Thus Diego de Torres: But the Moors (says Strabo) call them Dyris.

On the Cape where the Atlantic shoots into the Mediterranean Sea, opposite to
Europe, appears the Mountain Abyle, now by the Spaniard called Sierra Ximiera,
or Sierra de las Monas, that is, Ape-hill; against this shows Calpe in Spain:
these are the Herculean Pillars so much celebrated with a ne plus ultra, by
ancient Writers.

The Crystal Mountain, according to Pigafet in his Congo, shoots to the Sky
his spiry and un-inhabitable Towers: on the Eastern skirts of that Province,
there are found rich Mines of Crystal.

Near which is the Mountain of the Sun, so called from its wondrous height, and
being barren of all Vegetables.

On the same side Eastward, appears the Saltpeter Hill, so named from the
abundance fetched from thence: This Mountain divides the River Sarbeles, whose
sides are so watered by its parted Streams.

Amara (that gives the vast Kingdom of Amara denomination) consists of most
high and inaccessible Hills, which stand as Outworks to a strong Fort in the
middle, where the Kings Sons have Education, kept with double Guards till their
Fathers decease, then the next Heir taken from thence enjoys the Crown.

The Mountains of the Moon, which lie betwixt the Tropic of Capricorn and the
Great Southern Cape, are the highest in Africa, or Europe, now called by the
Inhabitants Betsh, they are Ledges of barren Rocks, always clothed with Snow
and continued Ice, extending to the Coasts of Ceva in Goyame. Eminent Writers
would prove (though false) that the Head of the Nile springs amongst these; And
Ptolomy has left on Record, that his Overflowings are fed with the dissolution
of these Mountains Snow.

At the Cape of Good Hope appears the Table-Mount, so called from the flatness
of its Crown, like a Diamond so squared, not far from the Shore on the
Southside of a pleasant River, from whence by a Cliff they scale the top, no
way else any accession, being very steep and wondrous high, seen from the From
the Sea.
Offin nine or ten leagues: three or four hours before a Storm it seems to
frown and grow sullen, then veyling with more thick and opacous Clouds.

Westward from this is Mount Lions, either supposed their Palace, (being a
Receptacle of those Royal Beasts) or that the Hill resembles a Lion couchant.
Near Mount Table are those the Spaniards call Os Picos Fragosos, and the
Italians Pici Fragosi, signifying sharp, or rough, such being their aspiring
tops continually covered with Snow, all ranging in order one by another, at
whose foot runs a great and swift River, which comes down from the Country. On
the Border of Guinee appears another Mount Lions, Sierra Leona in Spanish; in
Portugues Sierra Lioa; there are several other Mountains in Africa of wonderful
height and wealthy in Mines: but we pass them over till we speak of them at
large in their due place, and Descriptions of their several Countries.

THis Region abounds also with many great Lakes, Lakes.
the chiefest is that they call the Zaire, or Zembre, which Linschot takes to
be the Old Triton, out of whose bosom issues two famous Rivers that water the
Kingdom of Congo, the Coanze and Lalande: Some affirm that from the Nile,
Zambere, or Couama have here their original; of which more at large hereafter.

NOr are here great Rivers wanting, as the Nile, the Niger, Rivers.
called by the Spaniards and Italians Rio Grande, or the Great River, also
Sanaga, or Sanega, the Gambre, Zaire, Couama, and Holy Ghost River; all which
by their flyings out, and overflowings, make more fertile their neighboring
Margines: what concerns the Nile (best known to us in Europe) we will discourse
at large, when we make our entry into Egypt, and of all his Benefits accrewing
to that Country, and so of the rest in their order.

AS for the Soil, it is very rich, producing all sorts of Vegetables, Animals,
The Soil.
and Minerals; what ever of these Europe or Asia boasts, Africa has, besides
no small production of its own, which the other have not, unless brought over
by Merchants and Travelers, with us presented for strange Monsters in Shows,
at Fairs, Markets, and the like. Such as are in common with us I shall not
mention, but those Creatures most of them peculiar to that Country, but all
strangers to Europe, will require an exact Inquisition, and here a room to be
set forth in, because of their rarity.

AFrica abounds with Camels, especially in the Wilderness of Lybia, Beasts.
Biledulgerid, and Barbary, they have them also in Asia; Camel.
the Bactrians and Arabians use them for Burdens, nor travel they in Egypt
without them: the Beast is cloven-footed, having a fleshy bunch on his back,
only peculiar to its Species, and another lesser bunch on the bending of his
Knees, which seems Supporters to the whole Body; his Tail is like an Asses, but
has four knots like a Cows; his Pizzle which sticks out behind, is so sinewy,
that they make of them the strongest Cross-bowe strings. Each Leg has only
one Knee-joynt or bending, though they seem more, because of the trussness of
his Hips, and short Buttocks; his Dung is like that of an Ox, his Gall lies not
separated as in other Beasts, but keeps in certain veins: Nature, as Aristotle
and Pliny write, has bestowed on him two Maws, because he eats Thistles and
Thorns, for the Uval of his Mouth, and the inward Skin of his Maw, are very
rough.

Modern Writers, as Purchase, Peter de Avicen, and others, Three sort of Camels.
say there are three sorts of Camels, the first (as Marmol tells us) the
Arabians call Elhegen, which is so large and strong, that he will carry a
thousand weight; the Africans geld them, so making them more hardy, ordering
only one Male to ten Females. The second sort called by the Arabians Bocheti,
or Bechet, is lesser, and has two bunches, each carrying Burdens, or a Man;
these are only in Asia. Of their Burden.
The third they call Raguahill, or Elmahari, are the Dromedaries, which are
small, Of the Dromedary.
lean, and tender, fit only to carry men; but in swiftness they so far excel,
that in one day they will travel a hundred miles, posting seven or eight days
through Deserts with little, or almost no food: All the Arabian Nobles of
Biledulgerid, Of his Swiftness.
and the Africans of Lybia, ride on them usually, and when the King of Tombut
would impart weighty Affairs to the Biledulgerid Merchants, he posts one away
upon a Dromedary to Darha, or Segelmess, in seven or eight days, which are each
from Tombut about seven hundred and fifty miles.

When they load a Camel, or unload, he sinks down on his Belly, and when he
feels that he has a sufficient Burden, he rises, nor will take more upon him
than he is able to carry: The African Camel far excels the Asiatick, for they
travel forty or fifty days without Provender, Of his enduring Hunger and Thirst.
contented only with a little Grass, and browsing on the Leaves of Trees:
Solinus says, they endure thirst four days, but swill when they come to it,
not only satisfying their arrears, but barrelling up store for the future;
puddle-water best suits their palate, for finding what is clear, they will stir
up the bottom with their feet, so delighting as it were in the Must, or drink
with a flying Lee. Late Authors say, they will endure thirst fourteen or
fifteen days, and it is certain in the Deserts of Hara and Biledulgerid, they
never drink if they can find Grass to feed.

They copulate backward (says Pliny,) Their Generating.
but Aristotle tells us that the Female stoops under the Males embraces, as
other Juments, and that in their Amors they spend whole days in dark Recesses
and private Retirements, concealed amongst Bushes and the like, none daring
come near to disturb them in their commutual Love-fits. They go (as Suidas
says) ten months, producing on the eleventh, and after the twelfth month
prepare for the like encounters. Pliny will have twelve months e're they are
delivered, and that being three years old they generate, bringing forth always
in the Spring, and so soon as delivered couple again: But Aristotle puts twelve
months to their pregnancy, and that they never bring forth more than one Foal.

They by natural instinct hate the Horse, Their Enmity.
Lion, and Gnat, which Cyrus King of Persia well observing, drew up his Camels
against Croesus Horse, who cannot endure their smell. Elian writes how
offensive Lions are to them; the Arabs anoint them over with the fat of Fish, so
to keep off their Enemy the Gnat: Authors differ much about their age; Their
Age.
Aristotle says they live above fifty years; Solinus a hundred, unless the
disagreeing temperature of the Air out of their Native Country cut them sooner
off; They are docile and vindicative, and extremely fond of their young; They
swell if beaten, and conceal how much they take it ill, Revengeful.
and study revenge till they find an opportunity. The Camel Colt learns to
Dance, Learn to Dance.
as says Africanus, to a Tabor beaten behind the door, where he is put up in
a room with a hot Stove, which not well enduring, he lifts up lightly one foot
after another, which quick and tripping motion, when ever he hears the like
Music, reminding his old lesson, he puts in practice, so seeming to dance:
They are driven with great trouble, yet not with stripes, but only a Song, so
that they seem delighted with vocal Harmony. Camels flesh amongst the Arabians
and Sineses is esteemed as a Dainty, but prohibited to the Jews. The Arabs
count their Wealth by their stock of Camels; for when they Audit their Princes
Estate, they reckon not by Pounds and Ducats, but adjust his Revenues by
thousands of Camels, for they live in full pleasure, freedom, and safety,
because they can remove with all they have into the Deserts, where no Army nor
Invasion can reach them.

THe Elephant called by the Arabs Elfill, Elephant.
is common both to Asia and Africa, but especially to the last; Amongst the
Woods behind Syrtes and the Deserts of Salee, in Upper Ethiopia, Guinee, on
the banks of Niger, and in the Wilderness of Atlas, and other parts of Africa
they abound, of which there are also of diverse kinds; as the Lybian, the
Indian, Marsh, Mountain, and Wood Elephants; the Marsh has blew and spungy
teeth, hard to be drawn out, and difcult to be wrought and bored through, being
knotty and full of little knobs. The Mountain are stern and ill-condition'd,
their teeth smaller, yet more white, and of a better shape; the Field-Elephant
is the best, well natured, most docile, having the largest, whitest teeth, and
easiest to be cut of all the other, and may by bending be shaped into any form,
according to Juvenal: Dentibus ex illis quo, mittit porta Syenes
Et Mauri celeres. --
From whiter Teeth, Sat. 2.
which the Syene sends
And the swift Moors. --
So it appears the Wealth of Africa did as much consist in Elephants Teeth as
Corn, by this Crown or Wreath described by Claudian: -- Mediis apparet in astris
Africa rescissae vestes and spicea passim
Serta jacent, lacero crinales vertice dentes
Et fractum pendebat Ebur. --
Amidst the Stars next Africa appears De Bello Gildon.

Her Garments torn, her Wreath of Wheaten Ears
Scattered about, Teeth brayded on her Crown,
And broken Ivory hung. --


The Wood-Elephants in the Kingdom of Senega, especially near the River Gamba,
feed together in a Heard like wild Swine in some parts of Europe. Of which
thus Petronius: Quaeritur in silvis Mauri fera; and ultimus Ammon
Afrorum excutitur, ne desit bellua dente
Ad mortes pretiosa suas --
The Lybian Sands we seek, and the utmost South
To find a Monster out, whose precious Tooth
Proves its own bane --


The Lybian or Mauritanian are lesser than the Indian, and (as Polybius writes)
can not endure the Voice or Cry of the Indian Elephant; The Indian, though the
largest of all, differ in size much amongst themselves; They showed one at
Constantinople, that was eleven Foot betwixt his Eyes; and the utmost of his
Trunk, from his Eye eight Foot in length: many are nine Foot high, some above
eleven; Aloysius Camustus saw one whose flesh weighed more than five of our
Stall-fed Oxen; They are all black, except the Ethiopian, yet the Relaters of
the East-Indian Voyages say, that the King of Narsinga had a white Elephant.

Their Skin is rough and hard, but more on the back than the belly; they have
four teeth that are Chawers, besides their Tusks which stick out of their
Mandible, and are crooked, but the Females are straight; some of these Tusks
are of an incredible bigness: Vertomanus saw two at the Isle of Sumatra that
weighed three hundred thirty six pound. Polybius says, that in the borders of
Ethiopia they are used for Jaums of Gates and Door-posts, and in Beasts-stalls
for stakes.

For a Nose or a Snout, they have a long, small, hanging part, called a Trunk,
reaching the ground and open, being sinewy and bending every way, it serves him
for a Hand, with which he gathers both his Food and Potation, conveying so to
his Mouth; through this he also breathes and smells: Aristotle says, they have
Joints in their hinder Feet below, but others write variously concerning the
flexure of their Knees; some say they have Joints in their Legs; others the
contrary, and that if fallen they cannot rise: Pliny says (which experience
allows) that they have short Joints in their hinder Legs, bending inwards like
a Man's; their Feet are round like Horses Hooffs, but larger. Vertomanus
compares them to a round Table, their broad soal being eighteen inches over;
their Toes (being five) look as if all one piece, being black and squadded, an
unlick'd piece, so little cloven that they scarce make any separation. This
creature has two Teats, not on her Breasts but backwards, and more concealed;
His Pizzle little, comparing his huge Bulk, and like a Stallions; his Stones
appear not, but abscond about his Reins, which apts him more for Generation.

Their sustenance is Water-Herbs, browsing on Trees, This grows upon a small
Tree with great leaves, and is of the bigness of a Cucumer, and by the
Mahumetan Doctors is affirmed to be the forbidden Fruit, because so exceedingly
pleasant.
Musae fruit, and Indian Fig Tree Roots; sometimes they swallow Earth and
Stones; but such food proves obnoxious to them (as Pliny judges) unless well
chaw'd; when tamed, they feed most on Barley, and drink untroubled Water,
delighting in Liquors made of Rice, other Fruits, and European Wine: One at
Antwerp guzzel'd down seven of our Wine Gallons at once, and took such large
potations often, yet are they not impatient of thirst, but will suffer eight
days well, and not languish under Drowth; Their ingenuity is wonderful, as
appears by that Elephant which Emanuel King of Portugal presented Pope Leo,
who seeing him at a Window, made formal Congees to his Holiness with bended
knees; Metellus says, that in the Isle of Zeilan they understand the Language
of the Natives. Pliny reports that an Elephant he knew, could write Greek, and
often set down in that Character this signification, (...), etc. I my self writ
this, and offered up to the Celtick spoil. Elian tells us that they used to eat
handsomely, and sit mannerly like men, not tearing or devouring their Victuals:
when they drank, they took their Cup, delivering it to the next, draining the
Goblet, moderately sprinkling the remainder as in a Joke upon the beholders;
when they would pass any water that is scarce fordable, the tallest of them
enters first, the rest passing by him, as it were a Bridge, to whom they cast
Branches of Trees to help out at last.

Some affirm that they are Religious, adoring the most Eminent Lights, the Sun
and Moon; and also hospitable, directing wandering Passengers when out of their
way; observe Murderers and other Criminals, and will detect such Guilty
Offenders; how they will toss a Pike, and Fence one with another, playing out
their several Weapons, and Dance after a Warlike manner. Augerius Busbeek
writes in his Turkish Letters, how he saw a young Elephant that Danced to a
Song, and played at Stool-Ball, striking and retorting with his Trunk, as we
with our hands; one at Rome would tie and untye hard knots by Moonlight, so
cunningly complicated, that none else could unloose them, and patiently receive
correction from his Master when he failed, and was out.

The female excels the Male in strength and hardiness; yet Aristotle makes the
Female more timorous.

Oppianus tells that they will beat down with their Teeth, Beech, Olive, and
Palm Trees; and whole Houses, as Aristotle relates.

Vertomannus Stories that an Elephant threw down a Tree, whose body four men
could not Fathom, and that three Elephans drew a great Vessel on shore.

Aristotle says they fight desperately, charging with their Teeth, and
worsted, fly the menacing voice of the Conqueror; an innate abhorring they
have to Lions, Serpents, Tigers, Rams, Swine and the Rhinoceros, and also to
some Colors, and Fire.

Authors vary concerning their Copulation: Pliny will have the Male fit at Five
years, the Female at Ten; but Aristotle allows Twenty years to both, of Twelve
to the Female, if forwards; if slow, fifteen; they conjoyn usually in the
water, which is easier for both, for the water supports the Male, and lightens
so great a burden, and fetches him after the Encounter more nimbly off; they
deal in love-affairs very private, and but once in three years; choosing every
Triennial a new Mistress, which work concluded they grow wild and almost stark
mad, throwing down their Stalls and Stables; their time of production is also
uncertain, some say they go Eighteen Months, others Three Years; a few stretch
it to Ten, and these reduce it to Eight years; in Travel their pangs are great,
squatting down on their hinder Legs, bringing but one at a birth, though others
say, four; their young see and go as soon as born, Sucking with his Mouth, not
his Trunk, Eight years.

They are taken several ways both in Africa and India: The Ethiopians knowing
the Elephants Night-reposes, where he always withdraws to sleep, catch him in
a strong Palisado made of Timber, in a close Covert, a Trap-Door left open
lying on the ground, which when the Elephant is in, they sculking in a Tree,
draw up and shut with Ropes: when they have him sure in the Trap, they descend
and shoot him to Death with Arrows; but if he chance to escape, rending their
Gins, he spares none, killing all he meets.

Others Saw a great Tree half in sunder, making a pit on the side, then
covering it, which the Elephant suspecting nothing, being weary, retires to his
old resting place, to which, he leaning, his weight oversets the half-cut
Trunk, which failing, he falls into the covered Hole, and finds himself their
Prisoner.

In Zenega near Cape de Verd, the Inhabitants, sixty in a Company, draw forth,
each Armed with six small, and one great Arrow, so finding his haunt, they stay
till he resorts thither, which, by the loud rusling noise he makes, bursting
through opposing Branches, and overthrowing whole Trees, keeping his march,
they know, then they follow him shooting continually, till their so many
infixed Shafts, may bring him to his end, which the Blacks observe by the loss
of Blood, and the stronger resistance of his confining Palisado against his
feebler charge.

The African Lion called by the Arabians Aced, Lion.
is the most courageous and cruel of all other, devouring not only Beasts, but
Men: yea a Mauritanian Lion sometimes dares attaque a The Empire of these
Deserts I obtained,
And under me Kings, Petty Lions reigned;
On Expeditions, Armies I could raise,
Nor plotted we for spoil, clandestine ways,
Lying whole Nights in silent Ambuscades,
But took the Field by day in bold Brigades;
And like a falling Deluge swept up all,
Emptying at once both Pasture, Coat, and Stall:
Nay more, on Skirts of Cities we durst prey,
Ships Boarding at Low water in the Bay.
Aesopic. Audroclem. Sect. 11. Gesner. Paraph.
Troop of 200. Horsemen, and though mortally wounded, will fight it out to the
last gasp, defending his young ones. Those which are bred upon cold Mountains
are less stout and dangerous, for the hotter their habitation, the more fierce
and cruel they are; such are those to be seen between Tremesen and the Kingdom
of Fez, or in the Wilderness of Anguep, or Angad, and about Tremesen: Also
between Bone and Tunis are found the cruellest and strongest Lions of all
Africa.

The Lions forehead, (according to Aristotle) is of a middle size and
foursquare; his Eyes not strutting out, nor yet hollow, his Nose rather thick
than thin, his upper and under Jaws meet, yet open very wide when gaping, his
Lips or closing of his Mouth thin, his Neck great and rough, moderately thick,
his Breast strenuous, Belly slender, Legs strong and sinewy, Hair of a dark
yellow, not falling in hard but looser curles, his Feet before have five claws,
his hinder but four, the Majesty and Grandeur of his shaggy Mayn, differences
him very much from the Lioness, who more signally may be known by the
exuberances of her two Teats, according to the number of her young ones. Galen
says, that the Lions temples are very strong, that he may bite the harder, his
Tongue rough, strangely red, as if fire, and speckled, having but one bone in
his Neck, as Aristotle holds: but Scaliger maintains, that it consists of many
Joints: his Complexion extremely hot and dry, caused by the sharp boiling of
his heart. Gesner writes that his foreparts are hot, but his hinder cold and
defective; he feeds sometimes on As Mountain Lions, whom their Mother bred
In shady Coverts, by their fury led,
Kill folded Sheep, and Cattle in the Stall,
Till by revengeful Shepherds Steel they fall, etc.
Hom. Iliad. 5.
Cattle, especially on Camels, and where straightened for Victuals, foraging he
adventures to fall upon men: Polybius says he saw many of them standing there,
that had suffered Crucifixion to terrify others from the like cruelty and
humane slaughter.

Writers differ concerning their preying on the dead, Vide Gesner.
which Elian affirms, saying, that they feed on them and bury the overplus,
lest other Beasts should prey after them; They drink little (if Aristotle and
Elian say true) enduring thirst three days, especially in Summer, but in Winter
they drink often.

The Lion loves the Dolphin, but is an enemy to Swine, Wolves, Wild Asses and
Bulls: Eccles. 13.
from a Woman that dares show her Nakedness, and boldly discover her
intimacies, strangely abashed at her immodesty and quite out of countenance, he
flies, says Leo Africanus: The Greeks of old make him afraid at the Crowing of
a Cock, but Camerarius affirms, that a Lion in the Duke of Bavaria's Court,
leaped up to the adjoining houses a wonderful height seizing the Pullen roosted
in the roofs. Some Writers say, the Lion Lowes like an Ox, which perhaps the
Whelps may when they get a prey; a few imagine that they grunt and whine like a
Boar; others, and they the most, that they roar, which is most likely; if we
will take fancy for truth. Hear the Lion himself Describing his own Language.
Thus formidable grown, being wondrous strong,
I roared Leontick, lost the Egyptian Tongue;
Though Beasts and Birds use several Dialects, Apollonius they report to have
understood the Languages of Beasts and Birds.

That less than humane voices have defects,
Uttering soul-dictates, both more clear and brief,
Hatred and Love, Fear, Hope, their Joy and Grief;
Yet Leo Lingua who not understands?
Words Edicts are, each Syllable commands;
The Lions Fiat 's quicker than his nods,
Like Angels Tongues, or Language of the Gods.
Aesopic. Androcleus Sect. 11. His true valor appears, when in most danger, for
then, though he neither fears Weapons nor Enemies, contending long in his own
defense, yet finding himself overpowred, he makes an honorable retreat,
loosing his posts with like courage they were maintained, often boldly charging
on the least seeming advantage; so recovering the Champaigne; observed well by
Virgil in the Ninth Book of his Aeneis on his retreat of Turnus, -- ceu saevum
turba Leonem
Cum telis premit infensis, ac territus ille
Asper, acerba tuens, retro dedit and neque terga
Ira dare aut virtus patitur, nec tendere contra:
Ille quidem, hoc cupiens, potis est per tela virosque
Haud aliter retro dubious vestigia Turnus
Improperata refert and men's exaestuat ira.
As when a Troop a Lion has beset
With cruel Spears, he makes a brave retreat,
Although forbid by Valor and by Rage;
Nor can, though willing, against such Power engage.
So unresolved, bold Turnus did retire
Step after step, his Bosom swollen with ire.
When he pursues his prey, he leaps, but in retiring he walks only: he knows
whom he receives a wound from, and will single him out from all his Enemies,
that spent their shafts in vain, and take his life only in satisfaction, if
possible; That these fierce Beasts may be tame, appears by Onomarchus King of
Castane, who entertained and treated them, as his Guests. In the Temple of
Adonis in Elemea, they dressed and combed such as tamely resorted thither, in
civil manner. Hanno an Eminent Syracusian, was the first that took a Lion, and
after presented him tame and tractable. And Mark Anthony after the Pharsalian
Victory, first brought tame Lions drawing a Chariot into Rome, which was
admirable in those days. In like manner Virgil brings in the Mother of the
Gods. Virg. Au. 10.
Alma Parens Idaea Deum, cui Dindyma cordi
Turrigeraeque urbes, bijugique ad fraena leones:
Tu mihi nunc pugnae princeps, tu rite propinques
Augurium, etc.
Oh blessed Idaean Mother of the Gods,
Who in Towr'd Cities dwel'st and high aboads,
Whose Chariot Lions draw, our Cause befreind, etc.
That they are good natured and grateful, appears by the Story of Mentor a
Syracusian, but especially by -- From a large Boscage
Androcleus comes to meet the Lions rage;
His Breast, his Shoulders, brawny Arms and Thighs,
Waste slender, Manly Face, and sparkling Eyes;
In Matrons stirring Pity, kindled flame,
And all, his great Accuser much did blame.
The Lion then, on purpose fasting kept,
Forth to his Prey, eager with hunger leap't;
A Feast prepared, then ready to attack,
His face beholding, suddenly starts back,
When he, his dearest friend perusing, knew;
Then in an humble posture, near he drew,
Kissing his Feet, his Hands, and well-known Face,
Then they each other hugged in dear Embrace;
He knows the Lion, though so curled and kemb'd,
And he Androcleus guiltlesly condemned;
To see the Monster that should him assail,
Fawn like a Spaniel, wag his bushy Tail;
And him that stood an offering to be slain,
Then clap his back, stroakking his shaggy Main;
The Admiring House made with applauses ring,
And Purses him of Gold and Silver fling,
A hundred thousand hands speak loud applause,
Glad the Defendant escaped the Lions jaws.
Aesopic. Androcleus, Sect. 30.
Androcleus, or the Roman Slave, which though among the Aesopicks, has a true
ground and sufficient Authority. The Romans used them with a great bravery in
their Triumphs. Quintus Scaevola in his Pontifice showed a Battle of many
Lions. Lucius Sylla in his Pretorship set forth 100 Lions with Mains: And after
him Pompey the Great 600. whereof 350. had Mains. Lastly, Caesar the Dictator
triumphed with 400.

They procreate backwards, and at all seasons of the year, but chiefly in the
Spring: then are bloody wars commenced among them, eight or ten Corrivals
following one Lioness: in sum, when the Males are debilitated with the
excessive heat, the Lioness is gal-lanted by the Pard, whom impregnating, she
produces a Leopard; but if she join with the Panther, she brings forth a more
biformed race; but if with the Hyena, thence is gotten the Crocuta. Sometime
urged by the necessitating Stimula's of Lust, they are forced to engender with
Dogs. Their young ones are brought forth seeing, which is only peculiar to them
of all Quadrupeds with crooked Claws: The sixth Month produces them, though
ill shaped and imperfect, not as Elian will, tearing the Matrix of the Dam, but
as Aristotle says, for want of Nutriment: Pliny declares that they bring forth
six young ones at the most, and sometimes but one only. Philostratus relates
that one was slain which had eight in her Womb.

IN several parts of Africa are an excellent breed of Horses, termed by us
Barbs, strong of Hoof, and extremely fleet: But the swiftest and most hardy
either in Africa or Asia, are the Arabian Horse, so called because first broke
by the Arabs from running Wild in the Woods, and brought thither by them, for
till Xeque Ismael first took them up, they wandered in Troops, since when the
Arabs have stocked with them all Asia; The most assured proof of their
celerity, is, when they can overtake the Lant or Ostrich in their Flight; if
so, that Steed they value at a 1000. Ducats, or else Barter for 100. Camels:
few of these Horses are in Barbary, but some are bred up in Arabia, and
abundance in Lybia, not enured to Tillage, or Wars, but Hunting. They feed
them daily twice with Camels Milk to keep them lusty and quick, but not too
foggy: When the rank Grass flourishes, they turn them into the Fields, but
then they Ride them not: The Lybian Horse, has a Body long, Ribs and Sides
thick, and a broad Breast strutting forth: The Mare, as Lib. 12. c. 44.
Elian writes, becomes lustful, and with Foal by This must be understood of the
wind, of which Sylvius Polyhistor. c. 57. says, it is only peculiar to the
Mares of Spain, as Salmasius notes upon Solinus, but common with Creatures of
another species, as Pliny instances in Partridges: and Columella in Sheep.
Whistling; of which thus Virgil in his Georgicks: Vere magis, (quia vere calor
redit ossibus) illae
Ore omnes versae in Zephyrum stant rupibus altis,
Exceptantque leves auras: and saepe sine ullis
Conjugiis vento gravidae, mirabile dictu,
Saxa per, and scopulos and depressas convalles
Diffugiunt, etc.
-- When heat of Blood returns,
Then all to Courting Zephire turn their Face,
And placed on Rocks, Lascivious Gales embrace.
And often they Pregnant prove without a Mate,
Big with the Winds, and (wondrous to relate)
Then over Hills and Dales, etc.
If we may believe Vertomanus, the Mares in Arabia will run at full speed a
Night and Day without resting, and will Travel without stop a hundred hours.
Wild Horses.
The Wild Horses amongst the more Savage Arabs, who live in the Deserts, are
scarce, they eating them as delicate Venison, being wondrous sweet, when young:
They catch them with Trammel'd Ropes laid under the Sand, Noosing their Feet;
whatever means else is used for that purpose, proves vain, and frustrates the
Hunters expectation.

THe Rhinoceros, Rhinoceros.
so called in Greek, that is Nosehorn, having one near the Tip of his Nose,
has a Skin speckled in tufts, with a mixture of Black and Gray, his Back
looking as if saddled, his Sides and Ribs swell out Dosserwise, dented down to
the Belly with folding panes; his Back is so hard, that a Partizan will scarce
pierce it, nor has it Scales (as with us reported) only the deep furrows on
his thick Hide resembling such: On the tip of his Nose, being like a Boars
Snout, only sharper at the end, there appears a Horn many times different in
color, being one while Black, another while of a lighter Color: The bigness
of this Beast varies, according to his Age: A midling Rhinoceros may compare
with a midling Elephant, only the shortness of his Legs, Aristotle.
makes him much more despicable: In Aristotle's time about 664. years before
the Building of Rome, neither the Greeks nor the Romans knew this Creature; Nor
is it yet agreed upon by Writers who first showed it, though Dio says, Dio.
Pliny. Lib. 8. cap. 8. Solinus.
it first appeared in Augustus his Triumphs: for Pliny relates, that it was
before shown in Pompey's Plays, which Solinus affirms, saying, the Rhinoceros
was never seen before Pompey's time: He feeds on bristly Leaves, and sharp
Herbs, Bontzius.
having a very rough Tongue; insomuch, that Bontzius writes, that having cast
down a Man and Horse to the ground, as if nothing, (which he never does, unless
greatly provoked) he kills him afterward with licking, for the roughness of
his Tongue, will immediately denude the Bones of their Fleshy coverings: He is
at great enmity with the Elephant, against whom preparing to Fight, he whets
his Horn upon a Stone, aiming to strike him in the Belly, his tendrest part,
that so rending it open, he may bleed to Death; but if he miss that
opportunity, the Elephant assuredly kills him with his Trunk and Teeth.

THe Musk-Goat is not only found in China and Persia, Musk-Goat.
but as most Eminent Writers affirm, in Africa and Egypt: There is difference
among Authors about its Description; yet all agree that it is a kind of Goat.
We find in Martinus his Chinese Atlas, that in the Country of Xensi Musk grows
in the Navel of a certain Beast not much unlike a Heart without Horns, whose
Flesh the Chinese eat: When this Beast is high in lust, his Navil swells like
a Tumor, or Bile full of Matter, and taken thence, resembles a thin hairy Purse
stuffed with this costly Odor.

The Civet-Cat, Civet-Cat.
called in Spanish Genetta, by the modern Greeks, Zapetia, and perhaps unknown
to the Ancients, has rough Hair, and is from the Head to the Tail, a Cubit
long, about the size of, and colored like a Wolf; near the Cods it has a
Purse, from whence they gather Civet: She eats eagerly raw Flesh and Mice, as
also sweet things, Rice and Eggs. The Excrement (which flows out of the
Purse-net near the Fundament, being full of small holes) has at first a strong
Scent, but put together and set in the Air, becomes most odoriferous; some
suppose this to be the Sperm, which they take daily out of the Purse with a
Silver, Copper, or Horn Spoon, about the quantity of one Dram: of which he will
yield the more being angered or irritated with a limber Twig or Wand, when you
are to gather it.

The Leopard, has a long Forehead, round Ears, Leopard.
very long and small Neck, little Ribs, a long Back, Thighs and Buttocks
fleshy, and flat about the Belly and Hips, which are speckled, his whole Body
wants shape and symmetry. On the Belly are four Teats; its Fore-feet have five,
the hinder Feet four Claws: his Eyes are more fiery than other Creatures in
the dark, but dimmer in the open light; his Skin, according to Oppianus, is of
a dark Yellow, dappled with Black upon White; It Is said he is marked in his
Forehead with a Half Moon, his Tongue is very Red, Teeth and Claws sharp, and
his Heart great, considering his bigness; he has strong Legs, yet by reason of
his great heat, is but lean: many of them are bred in Asia and Africa, in the
Country of Comeri and Bengale.

He Courts often the Lioness her self, sometimes driving a lower Trade with
homely Bitches, and the She-Wolf. Isidore fabulously relates, that the young
ones anticipate their Birth, tearing their Mothers Wombs: So much he hates man,
that he assassinates his picture, though a mere Paper Sketch, yet flies from a
Dead Man's head; though some say, he fears only a humane Visage, which Gesner
confirms: He bears a great enmity to the Cock, Serpent, and Leeks. Pliny says
that a Panther will not venture on any that is anointed with Cocks-blood: and
who wears a Panthers Skin need fear no Serpents; such his Antipathy to the
Hyena, that their Skins hanged opposite, his will shed the hair, if you dare
believe Pliny.

THe Camelopardelis, so called, as springing from the Camel and Pard,
Camelopard.
in size resembles the Camel; in his Marks or Spots, the Leopard, and is called
Nabuna by the Moors, says Pliny, by the Moderns now Saffarat; the Greeks and
Latins call it Gyraffa; Bellonius in his Observations describes this Beast
very exactly, thus: I saw a couple of them in Grand Cayro, each having two
little horns in the Forehead about six inches long, between which appeared a
bunch like a third horn, about two inches high: from the Dock to the crown of
the Head, was 18 foot; his Legs were much of a length before and behind, but
the upper Joint or Shoulder Bone, much longer than the Thigh: his Back slop'd
like the ridge of a house, his whole Body is of a Deer-colour trick't up with
many, great and square spots; Cloven-footed like an Ox, with his upper Lip
over-hanging the under; his Tail little, thin, and tufted at the end; his Mane
like a Horses, and seeming to limp in his going, first on the right, then on
the left Leg: When he eats Grass, drinks Water, or takes other Food off from
the earth, he stretches out his Fore-feet, otherwise he can take up nothing:
his Tongue, as Josephat Barbarus writes, is two foot in length, of a sad Azure,
long and round like an Eel, wherewith he gathers branches, leaves and herbs up
into his mouth with an admirable celerity. Purchase adds, that a horse and man
may pass under his Belly. Strabo says, he is found among the Troglodites, and
Ethiopes. Caesar first showed him at Rome, though it is probable they formerly
abounded in Judea, being a food prohibited to the Jews.

Here also are a kind of Wild Bulls, called by the Natives, Gualiox, Wild Bulls.
but by the Spaniards Vacas bravas, that is, Mad, or Hectoring Bulls: They are
swift as a Heart, but lesser than our Beeves, armed with horns black and sharp,
but his Flesh is sweet, and his Hide fit for Tanning, making good Leather: In
Barbary they run together in herds, more than 100. sometimes 200. especially in
the Countries of Duquele and Tremisen, the Deserts of Numidia, and elsewhere.

WIld Asses also are found in the Wildernesses of Numidia and Lybia, Wild Asses.
of a light gray, and for swiftness equalling the Barb.

In the high Eastern part of Prester John's Country, Goats.
on the Banks of Nile, are Male-Goats as big as a weaned Calf, their thick hair
trailing on the ground: They have excellent Skins called Xarequies, which are
dressed, hair and all, with the Root of a Tree, Cows.
styled Alhanne: There also are great naked Cows, which the Egyptians call
Demnie, with Tails trailing on the ground, and raising the dust like our Madams
Gowns; and their Necks stripped with diverse colors.

In these parts are two sorts of Sheep, Sheep.
Woolly, and Hairy; The first differ from ours, only in their Horns and Tails,
the last so round and thick, that the Sheep themselves are but subservient to
their own Train, some thereof weigh 15, others 20 l. which happens chiefly in
their fatting. Leo Africanus says, Of their wondrous Tails.
he saw one weighing 80 l. Others report to have seen some of 150 l. weight:
however, true it is, that the people are constrained to bind them upon little
Carriages, that they may go with less impediment: All the fat that covers the
Kidneys of other Sheep, is contributed upon their Tails; Store of them are
found in the Kingdom of Tunis, and in Egypt, and of late in the East and West
of Africa, and in the adjacent Islands.

The tame Cows in Africa are so small, Kine.
that they seem to be but two year old Heifers, yet the Inhabitants of the
Mountain Galate, as Leo writes, use them for Tillage, being very strong and
laborious.

Adimnaim is another tame Creature, Adimnaim.
much like a Sheep, but great as a midling Ass, having long and pendulous Ears;
the Lybians use them as Sheep, and their Milk (whereof they give much) serves
both for Meat and Drink; their Wool is short, but good; the Males are without,
but the Females have horns: they are mild and tractable, having strength enough
to carry a Man a days Journey; they breed chiefly in the Lybian Deserts, and
some few in Numidia.

The Arabian Dabuch, Dabuch.
which the Africans call Jesef, is of the bigness of a Woolf, and resembling
him in all parts but his Legs and Feet, wherein he is like a man: He hurts no
other Beasts, but devours the Dead, digging them out of the Graves, which is no
strange thing, the Moors usually burying in the open fields; when the Hunters
know his recess, they make their approaches Singing and Playing on Musical
Instruments, ravished with the pleasure thereof, he is drawn forth to listen,
where they in the mean while snare and kill him. Leo Africanus says, they are
found in the Woods of Mauritania, Pegus, Congo, China, and diverse other parts,
especially in Egypt, where they breed very much.

The Dub being in the Wilds of Lybia, Dub.
of the length of a man's Arm, and the breadth of four fingers, has a strange
antipathy to Water, so that if any be put into its mouth, he immediately dies:
They lay Eggs like a Turtle, and are harmless; their Flesh roasted, tastes, as
they say, like the hinder part of a Medow-Frog; he is very swift, and so
strong, that if his head be in a hole, and his tail out, no strength can draw
him thence, except you loosen his hold by widening the passage; it has a kind
of trembling Convulsive motion three days after it is slain, if but exposed to
the Fire.

The Guarall is like the Dub, but bigger, Guarall.
having poison both in his Head and Tail, which is the cause that the Arabians
throw them away when they Cook the rest.

In Africa, especially in Biledulgerid and Lybia is a Beast, like a little
Bull, Lant.
or small Cow, called the Lant; It seems to be that Bubalus of old, which
Aristotle says, is a timorous Creature, having neither Hair or Wool: which Leo
thus describes; The Lant, or Dant, resembles an Ox, but smaller Legged, and his
Horns less, with white Hair and black Hooves, and so swift, that no Beast
unless the Barb, can once overtake; yet easier to be caught in Summer than in
Winter, because the Parching heat of the Sand softens and loosens his Hooves.
But Scaliger says: The Dant, Lant, and Elant, (which is all one and the same,
though different in name) is white hair'd, faced like a Cow, but less in body,
yet much swifter and nimbler; so that they excel all Wild Beasts both in
agility and speed: Their Skin so strong and tough, that Steel will not
penetrate: the best time to catch them is the Summer, for then their Hooves
become loose and tender by the heat of the Sand: Bellonius makes another sort,
being (says he) a full grown Beast, smaller than a Deer, but bigger than a
wild Goat, and so well proportioned in shape, that it is pleasure to behold;
his yellow hair so sleek and shining, as if Curried and Dressed; his Belly
stripped or dappled with more brisk and various Colors than his Back, which is
dusky; Cloven-footed, with strong stubbed Legs, a thick short Neck, black and
very crooked Horns, Ears like a Cow, Thighs full and plump, his Tail as a
Camelopard, hanging down to his heels, full of bristly and rough hair, Lowing
very like, but not so loud as an Ox. This they find in the Arabian Deserts, and
between the Mountains of India and Catay, and diverse parts of Asia.

SOme Writers say, that in Africa, in the Mountains of Beth, Unicorn.
in Upper-Ethiopia, breeds the Unicorn: Garcias ab horto tells, that he saw one
between the Cape of Good Hope, and Cape de Currentes, though Modern Authors do
not without cause deny, and hold it a Fiction, and that there can be no such
Creature as the Ancients describe. Strabo out of Onesicritus says, it is like
a Horse; but Philes, that his Tail being ringl'd, resembles a Wild Boar, and
that he opens his Mouth like a Lion: According to Pliny, he has a Hearts head,
Feet like an Elephant, Tail of a Boar, and the rest representing a Horse, with
a Horn in his Forehead two Cubits long: Isidorus makes him the same with the
Rhinoceros, affirming his Horn so strong and mighty, that he either breaks or
penetrates quite through what e're he strikes: Marcus Paulus Venetus tells us,
that the Great Cham of Tartary uses them, and that in the Region of Lambri,
they are smaller than an Elephant, having a flat head like a wild Swine, an
angular Tongue, wherewith they take in what food they can get, and the rest of
their Shape agrees with the Rhinoceros. One Lewis de Barthema of Bononia writes
thus of it: Near the Temple at Mecha, are Stables wherein they keep two living
Unicorns; the one having a Horn near four handfuls in length. But the other
being of the growth of a Colt of two years and a half old, had a Horn on his
Forehead near seven foot long, the Body being of a sad Color, with a Head like
a Heart, short Neck, little Hair, and thinly Main'd, spindle shanks like a Deer,
Feet with Hooves a little cloven; being by nature Wild, and loving solitude:
That which we call in Europe the Unicorns Horn, and preserve as a costly and
rare Cordial, belongs to a Monster or Seafish taken in the North-Seas, upon
the Coasts of Island, Greenland, and other adjacent Isles: which we thus
describe.

It is a full and well-grown Fish, near eighteen foot long, and twelve broad;
Sea-Unicorn.
headed like a Perch or Carp; the Horn shoots out of the upper Jaw above his
Mouth, opens very wide, not right in the middle, but a little more toward the
left side; its Skin is russet, under which lies very much fat, whereof are made
great quantities of a nauseous and ill scented Oil, which for that cause has
little esteem. The Backbone consists of many strong Joints, ending in a forked
tail, armed on both sides with strong prickles: The Horn is straight, hard,
white, and so neatly adorned with deep wreathings, as if it were smoothly
polished, and Artificially turned Ivory; in length sometimes nine, ten, twelve
foot, or more; whose virtues are not inferior to those ascribed to the
Land-Unicorn, as well in driving out the Measles and Small Pox, as in asswaging
Malignant Fevers, and tough Distempers of Agues.

In Nubia and the Kingdom of the Abyssines, Zorafes, or Giraffes.
is a Beast called Zorafes, or Giraffes, as big as a two-years old Heifer,
having a Neck like the Glave of a Javelin, or Half-Pike, and a head resembling
a Gazell, with Legs short behind and long before, hair'd and brindled like an
Ox, the Ears like a Heart, and Breast smooth and shining; which the Africans say
is generated of two Species; he wanders solitarily through the Woods, flying
from men, and not to be taken, but young.

HAving treated thus far of Beasts; We shall now briefly present you with some
Plants and Vegetables, referring their full discourse to the places where
naturally produced.

Though Africa be in some places very fertile, yet a great part of the Country
lies waste and unmanured, full of Barren Sands, or abounding with Serpents, in
such manner, that the Peasant dare not Till the ground, unless Booted; but the
manured parts afford a rich crop to the industrious Husbandman, yiedling
oftentimes an hundred fold increase.

The chief Grain of Africa, is Wheat, Rye, Barley, Rice and Maiz, and besides
the Trees growing there, that are in common with Europe, are diverse others not
found amongst us, such are the Cassia, Egyptian Fig Tree (the Inhabitants term
it Guimeiz) the Date, Cotton, Coco, and Balsam-tree, Sugarcanes, and the like
Productions, with which they drive a great Trade with us in Europe.

Among others in the Wildernesses of Lybia, Ettalche, a Tree.
Biledulgerid, and Negro-land, grows the Tree called Ettalch, guarded round
with Prickles, having leaves like the Juniper shrub: from under the Bark issues
a Gum, whose body and smell resembles Mastich, which the Merchants often cheat
with, by adulterating, so selling it for Mastich.

Of the Tree Argan or Erguen, Argan.
an Oil is made by the Inhabitants; whereof more at large in the Description of
Hea a Province of Marocco.

In the Country of Lyme, Aud-Altassavijt.
is found the Aud-Altassavijt, which is tough like Hemp, and will not break
with hachelling, but yields at every blow a pleasing sound.

Other parts of Africa afford no small number of Herbs and Plants; all which we
shall set forth in their due place, especially in the Description of Egypt.

There is also the Root by the Inhabitants called Terfez, Terfez. A Root.
but Kamha by the Physicians, resembling an Earth or Ar-Nut, but bigger and
very sweet, gathered by the Arabians in the Deserts of Biledulgerid, pleasing
their palates like confected Fruits. Another Root yiedling a very sweet and
pleasing scent, is found on the Western parts on the Seashore, which the
Merchants of Barbary carry to sell among the Negroes, who use it as a Perfume,
only by sprinkling it about the house: An African A Mudde is three Bushels
English, or thereabouts.
Mudde, which in Mauritania, is sold for half a Ducket, which the Merchants
vend again among the Negroes for eighty or a hundred Ducats, and sometimes
dearer.

There is another Root called Addad, not unknown to the African Women, Addad.
whose acid Leaves and Root are of so poisonous a faculty, that a little of
their water distilled, gives a quick dispatch by sudden death to their
Husbands, or any other that they are weary of.

On the West Side of Mount Atlas, is the Root Surnag; Surnag.
having a special virtue to incite Venus. The Inhabitants report, that it will
devirginat Maids, couching to Urine on the Leaves, and after will much
dis-affect them with Tympanied infirmities. There is also Euphorbium, whereof
more at large in Barbary.

HEre are two sorts of Pitch, the one natural, or Stone Pitch; Pitch.
The other Artificial, and thus made: They erect a great Oven with a hole at
the bottom, in which they put the Branches of Pine or Juniper chop't in pieces,
then the Ovens mouth close stopped, a fire is made underneath, by the heat
whereof, the Pitch is extracted out of the wood, running through the bottom of
the Oven into a hole underneath it in the Earth, whence they take it out, and
put it into Bladders, or Leathern Bags.

All the Salt in the most part of Africa, as Leo says, is dig'd out of
Salt Pits, Salt.
being white, red, and gray: Barbary it is true, has plenty of Salt;
Biledulgerid is reasonably well stored: but in Negro-land, and the innermost
Parts of Ethiopia, a pound of Salt is sold for half a Ducket: They use no
Salt-cellar, nor set it on the Table, but each having a piece in his hand, lick
it at every Morsel. In a Lake in Barbary, near the City of Fez, all the Summer
is found a well-concocted and coagulated Salt; but such as border on the Sea,
make Snow-white Salt of Seawater.

Atlas on that side, where Biledulgerid borders on the Kingdom of Fez, Antimony.
produces great quantity of Antimony, and sundry other have veins of Sulphur;
Mines of Gold and Silver.
but above all, the rich Mines of Gold and Silver, those especially in
Negro-land, Guinee, and Ethiopia, deserve admiration.

MArmol relates from Aben-Gezar, Marmol. Los Hechizos.
that certain Stones are found in the Land of Lyme, called by the Spaniards,
Los Hechizos, and by the Arabians Hajar Acht, which have diverse signatures,
representing several parts of a Man, as a Hand and Foot, Face, Head and Breast,
many like the Heart, but some the whole complete Figure of a Man, in just
proportions. The most perfect of these Stones, they assuredly believe, to have
an occult and wonderful faculty, irritated by the help of Spells and Sorcery, to
introduce and bring the Bearer thereof into the favor of Princes.

In the steep Mountains Alard and Quen, between Nubia and Zinchamque, The Stone
Beth.
a Stone is found called Beth, which, as they say, will make those Speechless
that long gaze upon it.

AFrica also brings forth Eagles, differing in size, color, and properties,
Eagles.
whose greatest, the Arabs call Neser, and bigger than a Crane, having a very
short Beak, Neck and Legs, yet mounts exceeding high, till for want of
Feathers, he betakes himself to his Nest, where the Eaglets feed him.

Diverse parts of this Country, Parrots.
especially Guinee and Ethiopia, yield Parrots of several sorts and colors.
Whereof more at large, when we come to those parts.

The Mountains of the upper Ethiopia, Griffons. Marmol.
specially that of Beth, as Marmol says, show Griffons, which the Arabians
enstile Ifrit.

Great store of strange Creatures, Hippo-potamus, and other Amphibious
creatures.
some Amphibii, as the Hippo-potamus or Seahorse, the Sea-Cow, the Crocodile,
Tortoises, Ambare, and others of the same nature using both Water and Land, are
found in the Lybian wilds, and Seacoasts of Africa.

Serpents, Serpents, etc.
Venomous Creatures, Reptiles, and strange Insects, are produced in the
Wilderness of Biledulgerid, Negro-land, and upper Ethiopia.

HItherto we have lightly touched several things; as first, that Africa is for
the most part habitable, from the mildness of the weather and the seasons
conducing thereunto; next the greatness of the Mountains, richness of their
Mines, enumerated their Provinces and Kingdoms, the variety of Creatures,
Plants, Grain, and Herbage: now we will say something of the people themselves,
their Statures, Complexions, Manners and Religions.

Some divide the Africans into Black and White, but a curious eye may easily
observe a great difference in the colors of those people, Complexions of the
People.
as not being under the same climate: Blacks and White.
Such as in habit in and about Guinee, and the Negroes Land, between the
Equinoctial and Tropic, are Black; who live in Prester John's Country, Brown
and Olivaster.
are Brown and Olivaster, but the Natives of the Cape of Good Hope (which of
all Africa, is the most Southward) are the Blackest. Experience therefore
clears the vanity of that conceit, that according as people live nearer or
farther from the Equator, so they are Blacker or Whiter; whence it would
follow, those who have the Sun directly over them, must needs be the Blackest;
and the farthest therefrom, the whitest: whereas Nature in this case has
frustrated the fancy of the Learned, by a visible contrary, giving diversity of
colors to the Inhabitants of the same degree: for the Patagons a great people
near the Streights of Magellan, are totally white, whereas at the Cape of Good
Hope under the same Latitude, they are very Black; of the causes whereof are
See Brown's Vulgar Errors. l. 6. cap. 10, 11, 12. of the Blackness of Negroes.
various opinions, but which carries the greatest probability of truth, we will
not here discuss.

Nor is there a greater distinction of Complexions, Stature.
than difference in the bulk of their Bodies; Gygantick.
the Natives of the Kingdom of Neguz, being Giant-like; those of Mosambique,
Dwarf-like, and Middle.
Dwarfish; and those of Barbary, of a middle Stature. As to their several
characters and dispositions, we shall touch them in the Description of each
particular Country.

For Valor and Courage, Un-warlike.
they are much inferior to the Europeans; neither understanding to handle Arms,
nor willing or forward to learn: A great number of them not long since, by
their effeminacy were conquered by a few Portugues: One strong Fort, with a
small Garrison, keeps a whole Country in awe, and a See Salust. de bell.
Jugurthiu^, contestatio inter Jugurth. and Marium; that Jugurth and Marium were
well matched, or equal Captains, but their Soldiers would endure no degree of
Comparison.
Regiment of English or Hollanders, are able to rout whole Armies: And the
Turks make continual war upon the King of the Abyssines, wresting from him
diverse places of great concernment, which Prester John
he never durst attempt to recover. It Is true, in some places, the people are
very wild, savage, and dangerous to deal with, but their ignorance and
unskilfulness in Arms, makes their fierceness little avail for defense of so
great a Country. Among all these Provinces, Barbary Warlike.
Barbary is the most Warlike; having a long time by the Christians been
exercised in Martial affairs, making manful resistance against all invading
attempters, with the assistance of her home-born Turks and Arabs: yet they are
kept in awe by the Christian Forts on the Seacoast, receiving from them no
small damage, without hopes ever to recover what they knew not how to keep.

There are in Africa diverse sorts of people, generally divided into Arabians,
Several people.
and Aborigenes, sub-divided again into Whites and Blacks; of which two kinds
so dispersed over Africa, it will be worth our pains to set down their places
of abode, manners, and strengths.

The White Africans are by Johannes Leo, divided into five Tribes, viz. White
Africans, their division.
Zanhagians, Musmudans, Zenetans, Haoranians and Gumeranians; which are again
subdivided into six hundred Families, as their Historian Ibnu Rachu, Marmol.
by Marmol named Ibni Alraquiq, has Registered: The same Marmol, calls the
first two Zinhagians and Mukamudans, in the other three agreeing with Leo, who
says, That the Musmudans dwell East and by South from Mount Atlas, inhabiting
all the Plains, and commanding the four Provinces of Hea, Sus, Guzule, and
Marocco. The Gumeranians possess the Mountains of Mauritania, toward the
Mid-land Sea, and the Strands of Errif, beginning from the Streights of
Gibraltar, and extending East-wards to the borders of the Kingdom of Tremisen:
These two people live apart, whereas the other three live mixed one among
another, but may as easily be distinguished by the Air of their faces, and Mien
of their bodies, as the Natives from Strangers, being at continual hostility
among themselves.

The Zenetans and Haoranians inhabit the fields of Temesne, but the Zinhagians
in the Lybian Wildernesses, (whereby it appears that in former times they all
had their dwellings in the Plains) each favoring his own party, and employing
themselves in works necessary for humane subsistence. The Governors are
Pastors, or Keepers of Cattle; but the Citizens apply themselves to Trading,
the Mechanics also follow Husbandry. Some Writers imagine that the Kings of
Tombuto, Melli, and Agadez, are sprung from these Zinhagians.

The first Planters of the Eastern Deserts of Africa, are now termed African
Bereberes, descended from the Sabeans of Arabia Faelix, who came thither with
their King Melek Ifiriqui, mentioned before: But those of Tingitana, Numidia
and Lybia, are called Bereberes Xilohes: when these people fell at variance,
the Conqueror remaining Master of the Field and Cattle, forced the Vanquished
to secure themselves in the Mountains, or more populous Cities, who intermixing
with the other Africans, came at last, as they, to dwell in Houses, and to be
equally subject with them: Therefore those which live in Abraham journeyed with
his Family and Cattle, as these, and lived in Tents. Genesis
Tents, as the Arabians, are counted more noble, because more mighty, and
richer in Cattle; yet both preserve their Pedigree and Descent, having their
habitation in the strongest places of Barbary, Numidia and Lybia.

The Mukamudens hold four Provinces of Marocco in common with the Zenetans,
with them residing in the Fields of Temesne, the utmost westerly part thereof.
These are now a mean people, called Xavies: But others of them inhabiting part
of the Great Atlas, bordering on this Kingdom, and Tremisen, are very valiant,
maintaining continual Wars with the Turk: Another sort of them dwell in the
Countries of Constantine and Tunis; some in the Fields, like the Arabs, and a
few dispersed in Houses and Towns.

The Haoranians are mixed with the Zenetans: The Zinhagians reside behind the
Mountains of Barka unto Nefuca, and Gueneris: The Gumeranians possess the
Lesser Atlas, where it extends toward the Midland-Sea, and along the bounds of
Ceute, to the utmost part of Mauritania Tingitana, bordering on the Imperial
Mauritania.

THere are another people scattered over Barbary and Numidia, Effeminate people
scattered in Barbary.
for the most part Herdsmen: some so effeminate that they Spin and Weave, yet
live very poorly in Mountainous Holes and Caves, Tributary to the Arabians.
Others are Warlike, and laborious, enjoying liberty, and not acknowledging any
Superior. They claim as their chief Seat, the Provinces of Temesne and Fez: But
those who inhabit that part of the Kingdom of Tunis adjacent to the
Date-Countrey, are the most mighty and stout, having dared to engage in a War
with the King of Tunis, Anno 1509. and gave Battle unto Mules Nacer Son of
Mahomet, King thereof, endeavoring to subject them; who at this day bear Rule
over the Kingdoms of Cauco and Labez.

The Zenegans, or Zanagans, the Guanesers, Tergers, Lempters, and Berdoans, all
very poor and despicable, living without Order or Laws in Tents, and rove about
with their Horses, like the Arabs through the Lybian Wildernesses.

Some of the Arabians in Africa are more Savage, wandering over the Mountains,
and through the Woods. Others dwell in Cities, and are called Hadares, that is,
Courtiers; being indeed Merchants for the most part; the rest apply themselves
to Study, or follow Princes Courts, and are counted less noble, because they
mix their blood with others. Those which inhabit Fez, are entitled Garbes,
that is, West-countrey-men; such as dwell Eastward, Xarquies, that is, Diego de
Torres.
Easterlings; which made Diego de Torres divide the Country into Xarquia and
Garbia: The Lybian Arabs are Savages, but stout and warlike, Trading with
Merchandise upon Camels to the Negroes Country, and keeping many Barbary
Horses, oft-times recreating themselves with hunting of Wild Asses, Ostriches,
and other Beasts: The Numidians are great friends of the Muses, The Numidians
are Poets.
and highly pleased with Poetry, Poets naturally, being much addicted
thereunto, having so rich fancy, that on all occasions they set forth their
Passions and Love-fits in a smooth and elegant style: They are also jealous,
especially in bestowing their favors, lest they discover their wealth and
abilities: The Men go apparelled as the Numidians, but the Women differ.

Those between Mount Atlas and the Mid-land Sea, are much wealthier than these
of Numidia, both in sumptuousness of Apparel, richness of Tents, and abundance
of Horse, which are handsomer, and more full and brawny than the former, but
want much of their speed. Tillage and Cattle are their chief livelihood, the
later of which are so numerous, that they are often compelled to remove and
seek new Pastures: They are Savage like those of the Wilderness; some living as
Subjects to the King of Fez, but others in Marocco and Ducale, formerly free
from Tolls and Taxes, till the King of Portugal began to conquer Asafi, Aza and
Azamor, when after a civil War, and the miseries of its common Attendant,
Famine; they freely submitted to the Portugueses.

They of the Wilderness about Telesin and Tunis, are rich and stately; their
Rulers drawing great Sums of Money yearly from the Neighbor Kings, which is
equally distributed among the people, who pride themselves in comely habits,
being ingenious in making Tents, and Breaking or Riding Horses: In Summer they
come to the very borders of Tunis, to gather Contributions; and in Harvest
furnish themselves from other men's labors, with all Necessaries, as Victuals,
Clothing, and Arms, wherewith fully supplied, they return to their old Winter
Quarters; but the Spring they spend in Hunting: Their Tents abound with greater
plenty of Cloth, Copper, Iron, and other Metals, than the richest Warehouses
of some Cities; and no marvel, for under the pretext of courtesy and civility,
Good Poets rewards
they steal all they can lay hold on: They are also ingenious Poets, and the
best of them, get not only praise, but according to their excellency, have rich
rewards, and high honors from their Governors.

The Women, according to the custom of the Country, The Women.
wear black Gowns with wide Sleeves, covered sometimes with a mantle of the same
color, or blew, fastened about their Necks with Silver Clasps: their Ears,
Fingers, Legs and Ancles, are adorned with Silver Rings: If any man, except
their Kindred and intimate Acquaintance, meet them abroad, they cover their
Faces with Vizard Masks, and pass by in silence: In all their Journeyings
(which are frequent) the Women ride on Tin Saddles fastened to the Camels backs,
big enough only for one; yea, and going to war, their Wives accompany them, the
more to encourage them to fight for them and their Children.

The Maids Paint their Faces, Breasts, Arms and Hands; but the more noble Women
content themselves with their own natural Colors and Complexions; only
sometimes out of Hens Dung and Saffron, they mix a Color, wherewith they make a
little round Beauty-spot in the Center of their Cheeks, a Triangle between
their Brows, and an Olive-leaf, or long Oval, upon their knees: Their Poets and
Amors so highly commend the painting of the Eyebrows, that it is not used
above two or three days together; in which time none but her Husband and
Children may see her, because they account this painting a great incitation to
Venus, as thereby supposing themselves much more beautiful and handsome.

LEo writes that the Arabians of Barka between Barbary and Egypt, Lib. 6. Hist.
Afr.
live very miserably and poorly, which happens by reason of their want of Corn;
Want of Corn in Barka.
for there is not in all that Country a place fit for Tillage, or that
produces ought save Dates, and those too but in a few Villages: wherefore
though sometimes they Barter Camels and Cattle for Corn, yet cannot they
purchase sufficient for so many people; whereupon the Parents are constrained
to leave their Children to the Scicilian Merchants for a pawn or security of
payment: And if according to the agreement, they break their day, the Sellers
keep their Children for Slaves, whom if the fathers will redeem, they must
render treble of the former debt: This misery makes them such barbarous and
inhumane Robbers and Murderers, that no Merchants dare approach their Coasts,
but rather choose to travel some hundreds of Miles about.

PEter Dan in his Journey to Barbary, in the year 1633. Lib. 2. Hist. Barb.
has very exactly described the manners and life of these Arabians. Arabian
Manners.
They utterly (says he) abhor labor, glorying in a supine carelessness, and
esteem no other people so happy, though themselves be the most despicable and
wretched in the whole world; so priding in their poverty, that they will scarce
change their Hutts and Rags for the Palaces and Robes of the greatest Monarchs;
They have no secure or settled place of abode, but rove up and down: where they
stay for any short time, they pitch their Tents, or rather Huts, close
together, but divided into several quarters: and this great Troop, or Company,
they call Dovar; each single Tent they style Barraque: Here they lie upon the
ground intermixed with their Cattle; the Barraques seem like Pavilions,
underprop'd with two great Poles, the Door made of branches of Trees, and a
place in the middle like a void Court.

The Men wear about their heads a kind of Shash, The Men.
hanging down part before, and part behind: They use no Linen nor other
Clothing for their Bodies, save only a remnant of four or five yards of Cloth,
wherein they wrap themselves, casting it over the Shoulder and under the Arms,
barefooted, and bare-leg'd.

The Women wear a piece of Cloth hanging from the Breasts down to the Knees,
The Women.
the rest naked: They tie up their Hair, adorning it with Fishesteeth, and some
small pieces of Coral, or Glass, over which they lightly cast a fine
Hair-cloth, or Lawn, to appear the fairer. They pounce their Foreheads, Cheeks,
Thumbs, and Calves of their Legs, making various marks with the point of a
needle, wherein they strew a black Powder to make them the more visible, and
continuing; and in stead of more costly Jewels, Wear wooden Rings.

Their Kitchen-Furniture consists in one or two earthen Pots: their daily food
is Rice, Their Household Stuff.
Cakes, and Cuscous, with a little Drink and Milk: they drink fair water, wash
their right hands, but never any part else; using neither Cups or Napkins, but
squat crosse-leg'd on the ground on a Mat made of Date-leaves: Each Household
carries with it a Like a Mustard-Mill.
Mill to Grind Corn, made of two stones laid one upon another, which they turn
about with a stick: Every day they bake Bread in great flat Loaves under the
Embers, and eat it hot. They are strangers to riot and luxurious feeding, never
tasting of two several Dishes at one Meal; which admirable temperance may be
the cause of their so constant health, Salust. They dye of no Disease, but the
Plague, Scrpents, Sword, or Age.
and freedom from the Gout, Stone, and all other like Distempers, usually
living eighty years, and upwards.

They greatly delight when they come into Cities, to be presented with Oil and
Vinegar in a Dish, and warm Bread, which broken in small pieces, they dip
therein and eat.

Each wandering Company chooses a Captain, Their Habitations.
his Barraque or Tent stands in the midst of the Dovar, where he takes care of
all things conducing to their preservation. Their Arms are a Half-pike or
Javelin, they call it Agay, or Azagay; and use it with such dexterity and
strength, that they can certainly hit a man, and wound him dangerously at a
very great distance: They use besides a broad Dagger, which they wear in a
sheath on their right Arm near the Elbow, for the more ready service: They are
so skilful and active Horsemen, Their Horsemanship.
that whatever they let fall, they can take up again, their Horses running in
careere at full speed.

Upon any Visit, Their Visits.
if they be equals, they salute one another upon the Cheek at first meeting,
but if a Commander, or Marabou, visit them, they kiss their hands with great
respect and reverence: After salutes, they civily enquire of the health and
welfare, not only of their Wives, Children, and Relations; but also Horses,
Cattle, and Hens; nay more, strangely inquisitive how their Dogs and Cats do,
as a more concerned Domestic; for their Dogs are highly esteemed, not as their
Play-fellows, nor Ladies Foisting-hounds; but as faithful Warders, and a Watch
against the incursions of the subtle Fox, preventing all Assaults and Plots
upon his Masters Poultry, and also giving notice of a more dreadful Enemy the
Lion, by their loud and continual barking. But the great estimation they set on
their Cats, is not only that they preserve Victuals from the plundering Rat
and Mouse, where ever seizing of them, but their persons from the deadly tooth
of the Viper, which there abounds.

THeir Marriages are thus celebrated: Their Marriages.
The Wooer furnished by his father with a certain number of Oxen and Cows,
wherein their wealth consists; drives them to his intended Father-in-laws
residence, who immediately acquaints his Daughter that such a man must be her
Husband: Whereupon putting on a White Garment, she waits till he comes to visit
her in the Tent, where the only Complement is to tell her how much he loved
her, by declaring how dear she cost him, whereto a customary reply is made,
that a discreet and virtuous Wife cannot truly be valued at any price: After
this first interview, she remains for a while It is a custom in Spain, as
formerly in Greece, that both Wives and Virgins should have their faces
covered, whence Libanius mentioning the Destruction of Troy. (...). The head of
the Woman was without a veil; for the destruction of her Country had taken
away the consideration of modesly, for it was the fashion for Curtizans to walk
openfac'd, as may be seen in Callimachus Hymn on Venus, and in the Comedy of
Xenarchus; whence the Athenians made this Caveat: That whoever was taken with
any Woman, Wife, or Virgin unveyl'd, should not be counted an Adulterer.
veyl'd in her Fathers Tent, and there visited by all the Maids of the Dovar;
which done, she mounts on Horseback, attended by the same Visitants, with great
shouting and joy, till arrived at her Bridegrooms Tent, where expected by many
Women, with his Mother and Friends: At the Bridegrooms approach, they offer him
drink, wherein is sopt a piece of the Tent wood, with loud acclamation, wishing
happiness to the new Married Couple: and that the great God would so bless
their Marriage, that their Cattle might increase, and Milk flow to the top of
the Pavilion: When they alight, they give the Bride a sharpened Wand, which she
sticks into the ground, to intimate that as that cannot come out of the earth
unless forced, so a woman must not forsake her Husband, unless by Divorce, or
driven away: These Ceremonies performed, they set her to keep the Herds and
Flocks, signifying that from thenceforth she must lay her hands to work, and
take care about Houshold-affairs: After her Marriage, she wears a Mask for a
Month, not stirring abroad.

When one dies, the Wife or next Neighbor goes out of the Tent, After the
Irish manner and wont, with a loud cry, or ou-la-loo.
howling in a strange manner with a loud cry, or Ou-la-loo; by which Summons
the Women start out from their Tents, and joining their sad notes, make a
hideous and doleful harmony: others mean while repeating as it were in a Song,
his Eulogies, chanting forth his Praises and Virtues, till at last they bring
him to the Grave, according to the custom of the Mahumetans.

They are so much addicted to Robbery and Theft, that their very name Arab,
signifies a Theif: for where the Prophet Jeremy says, Like a Thief in the
Wilderness; St. Jerome says, like an Arab in the Wilderness.

THe Xilohes and Bereberes, as Marmol says, Marmol. Their Languages and manner
of Writing.
at this day write and speak all one Tongue, which is called Quellem Abimalick;
that is, the speech of Abimalick, who was accounted the Inventer of the Arabic
letters: But besides this, they use also the African speech, very much
different from the other, and mixed with many Arabian words: Africanus says, the
five white People of Africa use this Speech, which he calls Aquel Marik, that
is, a noble Speech; This last is divided into three several Dialects; the
Tamazegtans using one; the Xilhans another, and the Zenetans a third; each
varying from other only in some words, and holding affinity with the Arabic.

The Gumerians and Haoranians, who live on the lesser Atlas, and all the
Inhabitants of the Cities on the Coast of Barbary between the greater Atlas and
the Midland-Sea, use the Morisk Tongue: But in the City of Marocco and all its
Provinces, the Numidians, Getulians, and Western part of Africa, speak the
ancient African, known by the two old names of Xilha and Tamazegt. Others
residing Eastward, bordering Tunis, and extending beyond Tripoly to the Deserts
of Barka, speak a broken Arabic; Such as live in Dovars, or in houses, mingle
the Zenetan Tongue with corrupt Arabic: so that few people in Africa speak
pure and true Arabic, Sealig. ad Cansabon. lib. 1. Epist. 72.
but use generally in their writings the Abimalik Tongue: some have observed,
that in the Cities on the Coasts of Barbary the Citizens speak Arabic, but
base and corrupt. The Peasants use the African Tongue: But the common Edicts,
Commands, Laws, and Contracts, yea and their very Proverbs, are written in
pure Arabic.

The Azengians and other Mahumetans mingle their speech with Arabic and
Barbary words: The mixture of the African Speeches or Dialects.
the speech of Gelofe, Geneba, Tombuto, Meli, Gago, and Galata, they call
Zungay: that of Guber, Cano, Queseve, Perzegreg, and Guangray, Guber; which the
people of Borno and Gouga imitate; whereas in the Kingdom of Nubia, they have a
Dialect different from all the former; these Countries lie upon the River
Niger: In the more Southern, the Languages are as various and differing, the
principal are Zinch, and Habex, which last the Abyssines use: In some of these
parts the people are so sullen and brutishly inclined, that they will neither
speak, be sociable, nor appear to any; and in case one of them be taken, he
will rather starve to death, than open his mouth and speak.

Eminent Arabian Historiographers affirm, that when the Government of Barbary
(the choicest part of Africa) became subject to the Mahumetans, the African and
Roman Letters were the same, and were used commonly in Writing: so that all
their The Arrian Heretics that fled out of Italy from the Goths, and settled
here.
Arrian Histories are Translated out of Latin, and abridged with the Names of
Princes and Commanders, according to the Reigns of the Persian, Assyrian,
Chaldean, Israelitish, and Roman Kings. But the Schismatical Caliphs who
conquered Africa, raging with malice, destroyed all those Books of Histories
and Sciences, permitting no other to be read, than those of their own Sect. And
the beforementioned Writer Ibnu Alraquiq sets forth, that the Romans after
their Conquest, destroyed all the ancient Records and African Books, The Romans
utterly obliterated all Punick Records, Books and Histories.
introducing in place thereof their own name, which in small time so prevailed
with a shining luster, that their honor and glory alone remained, and the
African Letters so totally blotted out, that without any glimmering thereof,
they now write all in Arabic.

JOhn Leo says, Africans skilled in Astronomy, etc.
that the Africans are well skilled in Astronomy, and other Sciences, and that
they have some skill in Architecture and Husbandry: which knowledge they first
learned out of Latine-writers, as appears not only in that they order their
Months by Ides and Calends, as the Latins; but that they have likewise a
great Book in three Volumes, Entitled, The Treasury of Husbandry, which in the
time of Mansor Lord of Granado, was translated out of Latin into Arabic,
wherein are contained the rules of Tillage and Husbandry, the alteration of the
Seasons, manner of Sowing, with many the like singularities: Insomuch that in
former times these parts produced diverse ingenious and great Wits, Has
produced many famous and Learned men.
such as the Comedian Terence, and some Fathers and Doctors of the Christian
Church: And others whose valor was not inferior to the greatest, who by an
incredible courage maintained their liberty against the most magnanimous of the
Romans; although the present Inhabitants by a sad change, are so degenerated
from that glory of their Ancestors, that they are esteemed the absurdest and
most despicable Clowns in the Universe.

The African and Arabian Mahumetans reckon by the Moon, allowing to the year
but three hundred fifty four days, every year shorter by eleven days than our
European Account, giving six months thirty days, and to the other six twenty
nine.

AS Africa is thus blessed with the extraordinary production of Cattle and Corn,
Mines of Gold and Silver.
so the infertility of the Deserts is in many places recompensed by rich Mines
of Gold and Silver. Guinee, Sofale, Gago, Nubia, and diverse other contain such
Mines of Gold; as, Angola, Monomotapa, and other Kingdoms produce excellent
Silver, not without some Gold; the Kingdom of Neguz is rich in many sorts of
Merchandise; the Coasts of Barbary inhabited by the Turks, yields Corral, which
they dive for, growing upon Rocks under water; and Tombuto affords the finest
Gold, and other precious Rarities; so that Africa is not to be esteemed the
least or meanest part of the World.

If the Valor of the Inhabitants did but equal their number, Their Valor.
the united Forces of the rest of the World could little prejudice them; so
numerous are the Armies alone of the King of Marocco and Fez; besides those of
the Arabians, the bands of the Turks in the Kingdoms of Tunis, Algiers,
Tripoly, and Egypt, the usual Army of the King of Neguz, and the incredible
numbers of the King of Angola, seeming sufficient to make Africa invincible, if
they were hardy and courageous, and trained up to the use of Arms. It remains
then that we touch thereupon, and their manner of making war.

The Arabians of Marocco and Fez use Lances or Sagayes, Shields, Their manner
of War-fare.
Brestplates and Helmets: Their Swords generally they have from Europe, and are
much esteemed by them for the hardness of their Steel and excellent temper.
They are, according to their manner of Riding, most expert Horsemen, casting
their Javelins (whereof some carry six or seven) very swiftly one after
another, and aiming exactly at great distance; All manner of Firearms, whether
for Horse, or Foot, or Field-Carriages, Cannon, great or small, wanting
experience hitherto, they are not skilful in: They ride with tucked up
Stirrops, that their heels almost kiss the Skirts of their Saddles, and in
Fight cast off suddenly their loose upper Garment, or Mandilion, to ease their
Horses, and make themselves free and loose for the Battle.

Those that inhabit Westward, near Tremesen, and the Wildernesses of Barka,
carry sharp, long-pointed iron Javelins, which they cast here and there,
forwards, backwards, and on every side at their Enemies, that like the ancient
Parthians, they do greater execution in flight, than charging in Battle; yea,
some of them are so hardy, that one of them so mounted will engage their single
person sometimes against a dozen of their opposers: They use no Shields, nor
other defensive Arms; some few have Bows; fewer Gunnes, which they only carry
to terrify the Wild Arabs, who fly from the report, as Wilde-fowl, not only
fearing, but abominating so base and treacherous an Engine that surprises at
such distance, and kills before warning, the sound not being heard till
execution.

All their Wars hitherto have been managed on Horseback, yet lately those of
Tremesen have some Musketeers, but they use neither Ranks nor Files, but fall
on in disordered Plumps, so many crowded together, and thronged up in a narrow
circle: And if assaulted, dissipate immediately, endeavoring to break through
the Ranks, or else making huge gaps, force their passage to escape by flight,
or in so doing break through the imbodied Enemy.

SOme parts of Africa are governed by Emperors and Kings, The Government of
Africa.
others by Viceroys, and elsewhere by Xeques, that is, Commanders, only those
of Bravas have molded themselves into the form of a Republic, while another
sort live without Governors and Laws, like Vagrant Rogues, roving about and
robbing their Neighbors.

Barbary, (which was chiefly known to the Ancients) was at first subject to
several Princes, and after the destruction of Carthage, and other African
Kings, fell under the command of the Romans, who planted these fruitful parts
with their Colonies, and governed them a long time by Sub-Consuls, till the
Vandals under the conduct of their King Genseric, with an Army of twenty four
thousand men, in Anno 427. became Masters thereof. In possession of which they
continued one hundred and eight years: But Carthage in the year 553. was
re-conquered by Bellizarius, the Emperor Justinian's General, and their King
Gelemer taken Prisoner: by which Victorious proceedings, Africa was a Province
of the Greek Empire, who sent thither Annual Governors.

The Greeks maintained their Conquests till the year 663. when the Arabians
invaded the Country, and subdued part thereof in the Reign of Ottoman the
first King of the Turks, under the command of their General, Occuba Ben
Nasick, with an Army of twenty four thousand men; with which, having worsted
the Greeks in diverse Battles, he built the City Cairaven, since corrupted to
Carvan or Cairvan, thirty Miles Eastward of Tunis. Most of the Arabians, (say
the African Historians) returned home laden with rich Booties, but they which
remained in Barbary built more Towns, mixing themselves with the Africans of
Zinhagia, Barvata, and Zenega, commonly called Berberes, and by continual
conversation speaking Lingua Franca.
Italian or corrupt Latin, forgot the Arabic, their Native Tongue.

ANd here we may observe, Chronology of Barbary.
that when Barbary was under the Arabians, (and the family of Iris, who built
the City of Fez, ruled over both the Mauritania's, and the Abdarhamans at
Cordova) one family of the Zenetans, called Mequinecers obtained the
Government: After that the Magaroanians of Biledulgerid drove out the
Abdarhamans, and won many places from them, and also the Maquenetians out of
Barbary; but themselves were soon expelled by other Africans of Zinhagia (by
some called Lumptunas, by others Almoravidians and Morabitines) who were the
first that embraced the Mahumetan Sect, in the Reign of Hexin, son of
Abdulmalik: yet did it not prevail to quiet their possession long, for a
Mahumetun named Mehedi, made War upon them, under the favor of the African
Hargia's (a branch of the people of Mukamuda) and his Successors became in time
Lords of all Africa by the name of Movaledines, from the Doctrine of Mohavedin,
that is, The Law of the Writers: Against these the Benenerins arose and
expelled them, but were shortly themselves subdued by another people, called
Beni-Oataz, who last of all were bereft of the Government by the Xeriffes, or
Cheriffs: All these together with the Kings of Tunis and Tremisen, and all the
Kings of Africa who have reigned since the fall of the Arabians, are issued out
from these five people.

THe Africans were in former times great Idolaters, Religion of the old
Africans.
worshipping the Sun and Fire, as the Persians, erecting stately Temples to the
honor of both, and therein preserving a never-dying flame, as the Vestals did
at Rome, by constant Vigils. In this blind Superstition they remained to the
year 349. when they embraced Christianity, though some soon after fell into the
Manichaean Heresy. The Numidians, Getulians and Lybians worshipped the Planets:
Their old Religion.
The lower Ethiopians, some adored the Sun, others the Moon, others the Stars,
Water, Fire, and many things besides. Nay, so did superstitious folly lead
some, that they worshipped whatever living Creature met them at their first
going abroad. They of Upper Ethiopia by a natural instinct, honored Guigim,
that is, the Or God Almighty.
Lord of Heaven: Afterward, as themselves report, they became Jewish
Proselites by means of the Queen The same with Sheba, in our Vulgar Translation.
Saba, or Maqueda, who having heard of Solomon's great Wisdom, traveled
thither, and received from him Moses Law, with the Books of the Prophets: But
in the year 1067, Yahaia the Son of Abubequer coming into Negroland and Lower
Ethiopia, some of the Mahumetan Priests insinuated into the minds of the simple
people, notions of their false Doctrine, (which suddenly rooted and spread like
an infectious Disease, not only into Egypt, but over the Mid-land Sea into
Spain) thence coming off Victorious.

BUt the Africans having embraced Christianity, Africans when first Christians.
as we said before in the year 349. continued therein, by reason that in those
parts which now make the kingdoms of Tunis and Tripoli, at that time diverse
Christian Princes (most of them Arrians) flying from the rage of the Goths
(who harras'd Italy) took up their residence about Carthage, with whom, the
Arabians (invading Barbary) waged War a long time, until after various
Successes, and tired out, some went for Spain, and others for Italy. As an
apparent Testimony, how well Christian Religion had thriven and improved here,
it is Gramay. lib. 2. c. 2.
recorded, that in Carthage seven Ecclesiastical Councels have been held; in
one of which, viz. that Anno 1411. there assembled two hundred eighty six
Orthodox Prelates, besides a hundred and twenty more summoned, that were
absent; Nor was this all, it having produced many excellent and famous Fathers,
such were Tertullian, Cyprian, Fulgentius, Pope Gelasius the first, Arnogeus,
with diverse others; but above all, the incomparable St. Augustine.

They of Upper Ethiopia yet remain Christians, though tainted with many Jewish
Superstitions, by the residence of some few Jews among them: but the Nether
Ethiopians continue all in their Idolatry, only here and there some few, since
the Voyages of the Portugues into those parts, have received the Gospel.

At this day Africa is possessed by five sorts of Religions, viz. Christians,
Five sorts of Christians. Africa by whom possessed at this time.
Jews, Caffers, Idolaters, and Mahumetans. The Christians in Africa are partly
Strangers, and partly Natives, whereof some Slaves to the Turks and Barbarians;
others are free people: Of these again, some are Orthodox (as to Fundamentals)
such are they under the Government of the King of Spain, the Venetians,
English, Netherlanders, and Genoese, etc. Others Heterodox, Superstitious and
Schismatical, as in Prester John's Country, and some part of Negro-land;
Others live here and there scattered, as the Armenians, Maronists, Georgians,
Thomists, and Grecians: the first acknowledge the Patriarch of Alexandria; the
last the Patriarch of Constantinople; and the rest have their own peculiar
Prelates.

Here likewise on the Seacoast several sorts of people at certain seasons of
the year, assemble to Negotiate and Trade with the English, Hollanders, French,
Trade and Commerce.
Danes, etc. who make constant and frequent Voyages over the whole Coast of
Barbary along the Mediterranean Sea, unto the Streights of Gibraltar, and from
thence to Cape de Verd, and the Cape of Good Hope: the two first of whom have
raised Forts and Fortresses in diverse places on the Coast of Guinee, to secure
and confirm their Trade.

Many Jews also are scattered over this Region; Judaism spread through Africa.
some Natives, boasting themselves of Abraham's seed, inhabiting both sides the
River Niger: Others are Asian Strangers, who fled thither either from the
desolation of Jerusalem by Vespasian; or from Judea wasted and depopulated by
the Romans, Persians, Saracens, and Christians: Or else such as came out of
Europe, whence they were banished, viz. Out of some parts of Italy in the year
1342. Out of Spain in the year 1462. Out of the Low Countries in 1350. Out of
France in 1403. Out of England in 1422. These all differ in habit, and are
divided into several Tribes, having no Dominion, though both wealthy and
numerous, but despised of all Nations, and so abominated by the Turks, that
they are not admitted to be Mahumetans, unless first Baptized: And then no
otherwise made use of, than to receive their Customs, and gather in their
Taxes.

The Caffers, or Libertines, who hold many Atheistical Tenets, live together
promiscuously without Ceremonies, like our Familists Or Hectoring Debauchees,
that make their summum bonum, a distolute life; hating business, and all manner
of ingenuity.
or Adamites, following their sensuality and unbridled lust, inhabiting from
Mosambique to the Cape of Good Hope.

The Idolaters are numerous in Negro-land, Upper and Lower Ethiopia, and
toward the great Ocean, except, as we hinted before, some few, who by the
industry of the Portugueses and Spamards, have been converted and baptized in
several places.

The Mahumetans possess at this present a great part of Africa; arriving there
from Asia and Arabia; of whom, we will a little enlarge.

Some of them are Non-conformists, living uncontrouled and without Laws, nor
acknowledging any Principality, having their Meeting-places in the Wildernesses
of Lybia, Barka, and Biledulgerid: Those of Marocco, Fez, and some Ethiopian
people, have their Kings; whereas the Inhabitants of Algiers, Tunis, Tripoli
and Egypt, are governed by Deputies and Lieutenants, that is, Turkish Bassa's.

MAhomet was born, When Mahumetism began, and Mahomet born.
as most Authors hold, in the Reign of the Emperor Mauritius, Anno Christi 592.
(though some would have it eleven years sooner, others sixteen years later) at
a mean Village in Arabia called Itrapea: his Father an Ishmaelite, Abdellas;
his Mother, a Jewess, by name Cadiges; different you see both in Nation and
Religion: They say he was twenty three years in brooding of his Monstrous
Issue, the Alcoran, dying in the Emperor Constantius his time in 655. at the
Age of sixty three years, though some stick not to say he poisoned himself in
the thirty fourth year of his age.

The chiefest cause how this accursed Doctrine has so prosper'd, Why
Mahumetism so spreading.
and from all others drawn Proselites to it, may be, for that it is a subtle
compound of several Religions, tolerating pleasures, and not obliging its
followers by reason, but faith: so wheedling both the Jew, Gentile, and
Christian; first the Jews it draws in by the acknowledging of only one God,
affirming Adam to be the first man, and Abraham and Moses to be Prophets,
commanding Circumcision, Offerings, and the Feast of the Passover, also
forbidding Swines flesh, and abolishing of Images. The Gentiles are not
diffident to own it, because they observe them adore toward the Sun rising,
admit Polygamy, and some of their Superstitions. Christians are inveigled by
the great respect they give our Savior, the Virgin Mary, and some of the
Apostles, that they fast, acknowledge God the Father, and have great veneration
for the Holy Ghost, and many other the like Tenets. These indeed are causes,
but the main concern is fear, or the terror of falling into slavery, under the
insupportable NOVA AEGYPTI TABULA.
cruelty of the Turks, for avoiding which, and not furiously possessed with the
spirit of contradiction, no small numbers have forsaken their settled principles
of Religion, and espoused theirs. They have also another winning way by
bestowing great gifts and favors on those who renounce their own Religion to
embrace the Mahumetane, carrying them along the Streets in state, and with
extraordinary Ceremonies, richly rewarded, and made free from Customs and Taxes.

THe Mahumetans have diverse Sects, Diverse Sects of Mahumetans.
the first follow the Alcoran in the literal sense: of this Sect are many
Marabouts among the Arabians. The second follow Elhesibnu Abilhazen, born in
the City of Bafra, and the Father of it, eighty years after Mahomet's Decease;
he left no book behind him, but taught his Disciples certain Rules and
Commands, which Mahomet never prescribed, which after was carried down to
Posterity by Tradition: They are numerous in Egypt and Cyrene, where they
usually spend their time in Poesy, Dancing, glad Acclamations, singing
Love-Songs, and the like: The third Sect, had for Founder, one Elhari Ibnu
Esed, born at Bagadat a hundred years after the former: he left his Disciples
some Books, but the whole Fraternity was shortly after condemned by the Mufti
and whole Divan of their Doctors; yet after eighty years it revived again,
under another famous Teacher, whose fortune no better than the former, he and
his followers were condemned to death; but upon better defense of their
Doctrine they were released, and since that continued a hundred years, until
Maliksach, of the Turkish race, descending from the greater Asia, banished all
of this opinion; whereupon some fled to Cairo, and the rest sheltred in Arabia:
Under this cloud they continued near twenty years, to the Reign of Kaselsah,
Nephew of Maliksach, when Nidan Elmule one of his Council, and a man of a
daring Spirit, much enclining to this Doctrine, so restored it with the help of
one Elgazulli (who wrote diverse learned Expositions thereon) that he reconciled
the Doctors aforesaid to them of this Sect, on condition that the Doctors
should be styled The Preservers of Mahomet's Law, and these his Disciples, The
Correctors of it. This Agreement lasted till the ruin of Bagadat by the
Tartars; since which they have dispersed themselves almost over all Asia and
Africa, accounting all other Mahumetans, Heretics, while themselves by the
vulgar are reputed Saints, though guilty of all manner of impieties: They Elect
one High Priest, whom they name Eloth.

There are many other Mahumetan Sects, as the Cabalists, Sanaquites, etc.
Seventy two Sects of Mahumetans.
amounting in all to seventy two. By some all these are reduced to two: viz.
that of Lashari, spreading over all Africa, Egypt, Syria, Arabia, and Turkey:
And that of Imamie embraced over all Persia, and in the City of Corazan.

These two Sects differ in many points, for the Arabian Lashari maintain, that
God is Author of good and evil: But the Persian Imamie say, he is only Author
of good: The Persians hold God only to be Eternal; but the Turks say, the Law
is so also: The Persians believe, the Souls in bliss see not God but in his
works; whereas the Turks affirm, he shall be visible in his That is,
corporally, herein agreeing with the old Heretics the Authropomorphites, who
ascribed humane figure unto God, after which they conceived he created man in
his own likeness.
Essence. The Persians allow, when Mahomet received the Alcoran, his Soul was
carried by the Angel Gabriel into Gods presence: But the Turks, that his Soul
and Body were both so carried. The Persians pray but thrice a day: The Arabians
five times, besides many other differences about the interpretation of the
Alcoran, as may be read in Camerarius, Bovius, and others; which for brevity we
omit.

What Mahomet contrived designing his Foundation for this (as they call it) his
Law, appears in the Alcoran, wherein speaking of Christ, the Virgin Mary, the
Gospel, and himself, he says; That God, Jesus, and Mary, wrought Miracles
before men. And in another place; The Word of God, Christ Jesus, the Son of
Mary, was sent by the Creator of the World, to be the face of all people in
this, and the Ages to come. Elsewhere he confesses, That Christ is the power of
God, the Word, Wisdom, Soul, Breath, and Heart of God, born by a Divine
inspiration of the Virgin Mary, that he raised the Dead to life, made the Blind
to see, the Lame to go, and wrought many other miracles. That he was more
excellent than all the Prophets, and that the Jews had no more Prophets after
him. He prefers Jesus before all men and Prophets, and Mary above all Women;
but averreth withal, that the The Heresy of the Anthropomorphites.
Traitor Judas was Crucified in stead of Christ, being changed into his
likeness, and apprehended in his likeness in the Garden. Speaking of himself in
the Alcoran, he uses these words, That he did no miracle, nor should; that he
was ignorant of most things; that he was a mere man, though sent and inspired
by God, and could not forgive sins. He forbad people to worship him; confessing
that the truth of some things extant in his Books may be doubted. He
acknowledges the power of the Gospel, in that he calls in a Light, a Guide, and
Perfection; And much diminished the Authority of his Alcoran, in saying, Every
one that worshippeth the true God, and lives honestly and uprightly, be he
Jew, Christian, or Saracen, shall obtain mercy and salvation. His Disciples
believe the Creation of the World, that Adam was made of earth, all the Hebrew
Histories, and Christ's Doctrine in part; They acknowledge a Resurrection of the
Dead, the last Judgment, Rewards, and eternal Punishment in Hell; and that
Christ shall sit next to God in judgment, which are points so seemingly
consonant to the truth, that weak Christians mistaking those general notions,
think it no great error to submit to it; but all those fair shows and formal
species are quickly overthrown and dash't to pieces by Mahomet's assuming too
much to himself, where he says that Christ had profit by him in these words; I
declare unto you from the Messenger of God who shall come after me, whose name
is Mahomet, that is written from eternity, in the sight of Gods Throne, on his
right hand: It Is true, he commends Moses highly, and owns Christ greater than
Moses, but himself the greatest of all. He further adds, that the Christians
have corrupted the Gospel, and the Jews the Law of Moses; But yet both together
makes up the same, and as much truth as is in his Alcoran. That he was sent and
directed by God, to settle his Law by force of Arms, but Christ in the power of
Miracles.

At eight years of age, Circumcision.
the time of their Circumcision, the Children ride to the Mosque with a Turbant
on their heads, and a Torch carried on a Spear before them. After the
Circumcision, the Child by the Priests direction says aloud, La Illah Illella
Muhemet re sul Allah, that is, God is one God, and Mahomet his Prophet; and so
after some Prayers and Offerings, returns.

The Mahumetan Law contains eight Commandments; The first commands to
acknowledge one only God, and but one Prophet. The second contains the Duty of
Children to their Parents. The third, the love of Neighbors one toward
another. The fourth, the times of their Sala, or Prayer in the Mosque. The
fifth, their annual Fasts, by all to be observed thirty days. The sixth, the
love and alms to the Poor. The seventh, of Matrimony. And the eighth, against
Murder.

A Paradise of all pleasures is promi'sd to the observers of these commands;
but for the Offenders a Hell with seven gates is prepared, wherein they shall
eat and drink liquid Fire, be laden with Chains, and punished with hot seething
Water.

The grounds or rise of Mahomet's promised sensual Paradise, first appears in
Homer, which he makes no more but a shady place of quiet retirement; concerning
which, Ulysses congratulating Achilles, seeming to him as great a Prince there,
as when alive, and the primest Hero in the Grecian Camp, he much contrary to
his expectation thus answers: Thou of the Dead a weak discourse do make, Hom.
Od. 11.

Trather would a Rustic be, and serve
A Swain for hire, ready almost to sterve,
And living, be amongst all misfortunes hurled,
Than Dead, be Emperor of this shady world.
(...):
(...)
(...),
(...).


But Virgil raises his Elysium to a higher pitch, giving them pleasant slowry
walks, and shadows of Fruit Trees for delight, passing their time in Singing,
Dancing, Wrestling, and such like Entertainments. For which take a part of
himself thus described.

His demum exactis, Virg. Aen. lib. 6.
perfecto munere divae
Devenere locos laetos, sedesque beatas:
Largior hic campos ether and lumine vestit
Purpureo, solemque suum, sua sidera norunt.
Pars in Gramineis exercent membra palaestris:
Contendunt ludo, and fulva luctantur arena:
Pars pedibus plaudunt choreis, and carmina dicunt.
Necnon Treicius longa cum vest sacerdos
Obloquitur numeris septem discrimina vocum:
Jamque eadem digitis, jam pectine pulsat eburno.
This done, they came to Seats of Joy and Rest,
Groves, happy Mansions of the ever blessed,
Which larger Skies cloth with a Purple gray,
New Stars attending their own God of Day:
Some in green Meads, their time in wrestling spend,
And gallantly on Golden Sands contend:
Some graceful footing with a Song present:
In a long Robe the Thracian Poet went
On seven sweet strings, descanting sacred Lays,
His hand now strikes, his Ivory quill now plays, etc.
But Tibullus drove it up almost to this our Mahomet's height, Tibul. El. lib.
2.3.
of which he thus says* Sed me, quod facilis tenero sum semper amori
Ipsa Venus campos ducet in Elysios:
Hic choreae, cantusque vigent: passimque vagantes
Dulce sonant tenui gutture carmen aves:
Fert casiam non culta seges: totosque per agros
Floret odoratis terra benigna rosis:
Ad juvenum series teneris immista puellis
Ludit: and assidue praelia miscet amor.
Venus her self shall by the hand convey
Me, her Gall-ant, to seats of lasting joy,
Where Revels never cease; where Birds their throats
Extending ravish with delicious Notes:
Cassia unplanted grows: the fertile ground
With beds of Aromatike Roses crowned:
There Youth and Virgins drawn, Love-battels fight,
And never fainting, keep up full delight.


These amorous encounters being the top of his Paradise, Mahomet by the help of
Sergius an Apostate Monk, imping the Poets fancies, introduced as the greatest
of all allurements, setting forth Beauties most admired by the Asiaticks with
full and black Eyes, who shall alone regard their particular Lovers, not such
as have lived in this world, but created of purpose, which daily shall have
their lost Virginities restored, ever young and Feasting with all variety of
Delicacies.

They have three sorts of Marabouts or Saints; The first affirming; that a man
by good works and fasting, and abstinence from Meat, may attain the nature of
an Angel; the heart by these Duties, say they, being so cleansed from all
infection of evil, that although it would, it can sin no more, and that to
attain happiness, they must ascend by the steps of fifty Sciences. They live
very strictly at first, and torment themselves with fasting, keeping a long
Lent; after which the Scene changing, their abstinence and mourning turns to
all Feast and Merriment, and their whole life is a continual Parallel to those
Bacchanalian Revels mentioned by Virgil.
Carneval, which they spend in Maskings, and Serenaids, and all manner of
dissolute and intoxicated pleasures; whereof four Books are written by
Eseb-ravardi Schravarden Sein, a Learned man born in the City of Corasan. Ibnul
Farid, another Author, has described their whole Religion in a Poetic style;
upon which one Elfargari made an Exposition, collecting the Rules of the Sect,
and discovering the steps to attain happiness. These Verses are made in so
sweet and elegant a style, that they will sing no other at their public Feasts
and Merrymeetings; Some of their Tenets are as follow, viz. That the Heavens,
Planets, and fixed Stars, are holy; that no Law or Religion is erroneous, every
one being at liberty, to pray to what his mind is most inclined to; That all
knowledge of God was infused into the first man, whom they name Elchot; and
that man elected by God, is made like him in knowledge. After this Elchot's
death, forty men called Elanted, that is, the Heads or Chief, choose another
out of their own number, and when any of these forty happened to dye, then they
choose another out of the number of seven hundred sixty five. These Vagabond
Sectaries are by certain rules of their order to go always unknown, in poor
and despicable raiment, so that whoever sees them, would judge them to be
Madmen, and void of all honesty and humanity, rather than Marabouts or Saints;
for they run naked and wild all over Africa, and force Women publicly (as
beasts) without modesty or shame. Leo says, that many of them are in Tunis,
but more in Egypt at Alcair, where I (says he) upon the Marketplace Bain
Elkasraim, saw a Matron-like Woman coming out of a Bath, Ravished by one of
these Fanatics, in the presence of many people, who thereupon ran in great
numbers to touch her Garment, as a Holy thing; and the Woman's Husband with
silence, manifested his thankfulness toward the Ravisher, by a great Feast,
and liberal Gifts.

The second sort called Cabalists, fast very severely, eat not the flesh of any
living creature, but have a peculiar Diet and Clothing. They have Set-Prayers
for every hour of the day and night, according to the diversity of the Days and
Months; and wear small square Tablets Engraven with Characters and Figures.
They feign daily to converse and discourse with Angels, who, as they say, teach
them the knowledge of all things. Their chiefest Teacher was one Boni, who set
them Rules, and invented those Prayers and Tablets. Their Rule is divided into
eight parts, the first whereof is called Elumha Ennonaritae, that is, the
Demonstration of Light, containing their Prayers and Fast-dayes. The second,
Semsul Meharif, the Sun of Sciences, wherein are the aforesaid square Tablets,
with their use and advantages. The third, Lesme Elchufne, and in it a Table of
the Ninety nine Virtues, which, as they conceive, are comprehended in the name
of God; each other part of the eight having a particular name, and matter
whereof it treats.

The third sort termed Sunachites, reside in the Wildernesses like Hermits,
living only upon Herbage, and Leaves. They have a little smatch of Idolatry
and Gentilism, using no Circumcision till the thirtieth year; yet they Baptize
in the Name of the living God; so that they have a smack both of Christianity,
Judaism, and Gentilism.

Thus far of Africa in general; we will now descend to particulars, beginning
first with Egypt, having obtained the pre-eminence and place, both from Ancient
and Modern Writers; and also being so often mentioned in Sacred Scripture.

Egypt is divided into Erriff, containing the Cities and Towns of Plintina, or
the Arabian Tower, Monestor. Busiris, now Bosiri, Heliopolis, or Rameses.
Alexandria, the Island Pharos. Bocchir, or Canopus, Casar, and Athacon.
Rosetta, now Rassit, Natumbes, Fuoa, or Foa. Gezerat, Eldekab, or the Golden
Island. Mechella, Derota, Michellat, Cays, besides many Villages.
Elheatrye, or Beheyra, comprehends The Cape Brule. Damiata. Tenez, or Tenex,
and the Lake Stagnone. Arris, or Ostracine. Pharamide. Seru and Rascaellis.
Masura, or Masur, Demanora. Fustatio, or Fustat, Meny Cambri. Caracania,
Bulbaite, Abessus, and Souta, besides many other Villages, and inconsiderables
Places, not worth the naming.
Sahyd Grand-Cair, or Memphis, and therein Bulach. Charaffa, Old Cair, and
Grand-Cair. Mattaria, or El-Mattharia. The Ruins of Heliopolis. The famous
Pyramids. The Island Michias. Niffralhetick, Geza, Nukullaca. The Lake Mani.
The City Changa. Suez, Bethsames, Mukaisira, Benesuait. Munia, Fyum, Manfloth,
or Menf-loth. Azuth, formerly Bubastis, Ichrim, Anthinoe. Barnaball, Thebes,
Munsia, or Munza, with a Cloister of St. George. El-chiam, now waste. Barbana,
Cana, Cessir, a Port-Town by the Red Sea. Conza and Asna, Assuan, Suaquen,
Thura. Sachila, Phogono, Narmita, Nitriota, Elmena. Libetezait, Saguan, Dakat,
Pharaoh's-Angle. The Seven-Wells. Menviae and Cosera, Veneria and Ansena.
Cynopolis, or Monphalus. Heracleopolis, besides 24000 Villages. The Nyle-River.



EGYPT.
EGYPT (as we said before) Ancient Geographers, who parted Asia and Africa with
the Nile, established amongst the Asiatick Territories; but the Modern, who
since disterminated these two Quarters of the World with the Arabian Gulf,
have totally reduced and carried over into Africa, as no small Region thereof.

EGypt, according to Diodorus, Strabo, and others, had that Appellation from
their first King, Egyptus the Son of Belus the Assyrian Monarch, who secluding
his Brother Danaus, settled the Government of that Realm upon himself, and then
Reigned sixty eight years, the Country before called Nilea, Aeria, and
Osserina, though others assert this Denomination sprung from Nilus, whose
ancient name was Egyptus.

And as this Country has confounded Chronologers with the strange
Vicissitudes and main Alterations of its Government, The Ancient names.
so has it puzel'd them with the numerous variety of its Denominations;
Berosus calls it Oceania, from A Sea-god, or rather some Antike Prince.
Oceanus; Xenophon, Ogygia, from An Egyptian King.
Ogyges; Herodotus names it from the Nile Potamitis, that is, River-land;
Lucian in Greek, Melambolos, from the darkness of the Soil; several Writers,
and the bordering Moors, style this Region Ethiopia, or the Land of Chus; Homer
will have it to be Hefestia from Hefestes, or Vulcan; The Modern names.
the Modern Turks call it El-Kebit, or Cover'd-land: the Arabian, Mesra; the
Caldeans, Mesrai; the Assyrians, Misri; the Moors, Gabara and Mesra; the Romans
from Augustus Caesar, Augustanica; but the ancient Inhabitants call it after
Ham, the Son of Noah, Hamia; Lastly, the Jews style this Country Mizraim, from
Mizraim the Son of Ham, being there the first Plantet.

The later Assyrians call the Egyptians, Egoptes; and the Mahumetans call the
Christians there, El-hibit and Elcupti, sometimes leaving out the Article El,
contracting to Cupti, or Ecupti; but the Moors call them plain Giptu or Gibitu.

Herodotus makes Egypt a Present from the Nile, Egypt covered with water.
(being all Sea formerly) so conjecturing from the various shells found on
Summits and more rising grounds; from the brackishness of the water, in Pits,
Ponds, and Trenches; from the dusky soil, much differing from the Neighboring
Territories; but more especially from the Nile Pillar, whereon formerly flowing
eight Degrees, prognosticated fertility, when in his time, rising to Heretofore
sixteen Cubits was the most it attained to, as is to be seen in that Image of
Nilus, having sixteen Children playing about it, brought from thence and
Dedicated by Vespasian in the Temple of Peace, but since that at Cairo it has
usually risen 23. particularly in 1610. Mr. Ge^. Sandys.
sixteen, gave but a doubtful conjecture of a plentiful Harvest.

Such and the like instances, not improbable, intimate that the greatest part
of Egypt (especially where descending from the Mountains about Gran Caire, it
stretches down toward the Sea, lying annually under the overflowing of the
Nile) raised its depressed Morass from the sediments of these pudly
inundations, the River leaving in his retreat the fertile plunder brought from
the High Lands upon the Low Countries, which mud and marling slime filling up
stagnated ponds and plashes, when dried into a swarf, improved the soil for
manuring and better confirmed for Plantation. It is to be supposed that much of
it was then covered with water.
Most Writers with Aristotle concur in this assertion; and Homer also seems to
hint the same, mentioning only Thebes of this most rich and populous Country.

The Boundaries of Egypt according to the variety of Writers, The Boundaries.
are diversely set forth: Scaliger, with some few, placing part of Arabia with
the Gulf on the East; the Ethiopian Wilds and Mountains to the South; the
Deserts of Lybia, Westward; and the Mid-land Sea, North. Others prescribe
different limits: But Ptolomy, though he would seem not to meddle much in this
matter; yet when more nearly considered we may find him in some manner agreeing
with the former, bounding it Westward with Marmarica and the inner Lybia; to
the East, with the Red Sea, and part of Judea; Southerly, with Ethiopia; and on
the North with the Mid-land Sea; by which Description he has rectifyed the
mistakes of sundry ancient Geographers, who accounted Egypt (as we have said) a
part distinct from the other three, the then known Regions of the World.

The Africans themselves, who should know their own Country best, bound Egypt
on the South with Nubia, on the North with the Mediterranean (now the Sea of
Damasco) the Arabian Gulf washing the East, and Alvahat fronting the West. But
Maginus a very able Geographer, gives it for borders, the Deserts of Arabia,
East; the Lybian Mountains and Deserts of Barka and Nubia, West; Ethiopia or
the Abyssines Country, the Wastes of Bugie and Cataracts of Nile, South; And
the Mid-land Sea North. And herewith in effect agrees Marmol: By all which it
may appear, that Egypt is encompassed with sandy Deserts, but where it touches
the Mid-land Sea; Easterly toward the Red Sea, lies the Country of The regal
Metropolis was also called Thebes, destroyed by Cambyses, eighty furlongs long,
and built all upon Vaults -- Qua centum portarum sunt: ducenti autem per
unamquamque Viri egrediantur cum equis and curribus -- Vbi multa in domibus;
opes reconditae jacent. Hom. 11.9. -- Nor Thebes so much renowned,
Whose Courts with unexhausted wealth abound,
Where through a hundred Gates with Marble Arch,
To battle twenty thousand Chariots march.

Thebes, whose Wilderness being of three or four days journey in former ages,
becoming a retreat for diverse Recluse Orders of Christians, contained many
Towns, which were far better furnished with Monasteries and Cloisters, than
Houses.

THe Deserts of Barka Westward, are a tract of ground of fifteen days journey,
where stood the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, to whom Alexander the Great,
affecting the honor to be styled his Son, gave a Solemn visit. Beyond the Red
Sea to the South from Caire, is a great Wilderness extending even to Judea, and
supposed to be the same wherein the Israelites made their wandering
peregrination of forty years: The ground here is not surfac'd with yellow Sand
(as that of Sahid in Egypt, where the stupendous Pyramids, and the Mummies so
famed among us, are to be seen) but with a kind of soil, whose germinating
faculty or moisture being utterly exhausted with perpetual and excessive heats,
leaves no products, unless here and there an inconsiderable shrub.

Another sandy Desert and more dangerous, Mummies found.
stretches it self between Caire and the well-known Village Delbogui, twenty
eight days journeys, and destitute of all accommodation, where many casual
Mummies are found, supposed to be Travelers perishing there under accumulated
drifts of Sand, raised by sudden Tempests; but now to avoid such eminent
hazards, all that journey those ways, are conveyed in close Wooden Boxes, which
neither air nor light transpierceth, otherwise than through small crannies.

THe divisions of Egypt are as various, Egypt, how divided.
as the opinions of Authors are differing; Jaques Albert reckons thirteen
Provincial Jurisdictions, by the Inabitants called Kasssiffs, or Meltoscemines;
six of which, viz. the Kasssiffs of Girgio or Sahid, Manfelout, Benesuef, Fiam,
Gize, Bouhera or Baera, lie toward the West from the Nile, the other seven, as
Garbia, Menoufia, Mansoura, Kallioubith, Minio, Cherkeffi and Kattia, wholly to
the Eastward.

The Kassiffe of Girgio or Sahid, Kassiffes, thirteen.
the first of the Western Provinces is a vast tract, sub-divided into twelve or
fourteen lesser Governments, called there Kassifillix, whereof every one has
its particular Regent or Lieutenant: About a hundred years since this was
accounted as a distinct Kingdom; for the Government whereof, a Bassa with the
title of Viceroy, was usually sent thither from the Grand Seigneur at
Constantinople, but of late brought under the Bassa of Cairo, who sends thither
a Sanjacke, as his Deputy.

The Kassiffe of Manfelout, joins to that of Girgio, having under subjection
two hundred and seventeen Villages.

The Kessiffe of Benesuef is adjacent to Manfelout, in the way to Cairo,
exacting obedience from three hundred and sixty Villages.

The Kassiffe of Fium, lies next to Benesuef, Westwards of Cairo, and commands
three hundred (or according to Zanton Zeguessi, three hundred sixty) Villages,
all whose Territories yield abundance of Line or Flax, with great variety of
pleasant Fruits, especially Grapes.

The Kassiffe of Gize, Neighboring to that of Fium, lies close by Cairo,
toward the West divided only by the River, which, in regard of its low
situation, is generally at the overflowing of the Nile, covered twenty foot
deep, but this is recompensed with exceeding fertility, both of Flax and Grain,
and a convenient stock of very good Cattle.

The Kassiffe of Bouhera or Baera next, stretching from the Nile to the Cape
Bon Andrea, a large Dominion ruling three hundred and sixty Villages, whose
greater part lying high, looses the advantages of the inundating River, so
becoming less fruitful; wherefore those High-landers are watchful of all
opportunities of Plowing and Sowing, when any rain happens; however they have
store of excellent Sheep-walks, abounding with numerous flocks. Among the
inferior governments, subservient to this Kassiffe, Tarrana, wherein lies the
Wilderness of Makairo, boasts of about sixty three Hermits Cells.

To the East of the Nile, on the Island of Damiata, the Kassiffe of Garbia
appears all Champaigne, Mantled and Checkered with variety of Herbage. The
greater part of the Land is well manured and planted with Sugarcanes, Rice,
Corn, and Flax, having three great Cities, viz. Maala (called from its
extention Medina) Demanoour, and Sabin.

The Kassiffe of Menoufia lies on the same Island, divided between this and
that of Garbia, and although this Jurisdiction has not so many Towns and
Villages, yet the extent of its Territories, stands in equal competition.

The Kassiffe of Mansoura on the Eastern bank of Nile, as Cairo, contains a
hundred and ninety Villages, produces great store of Sugar, and is very
fertile in the growth of Flax, and all kind of Grain.

The Kassiffe of Kallioubieh on the same bank of the River bordering upon
Mansoura, gives Law to a hundred ninety six Villages.

The Kassiffe of Minio on the same side of the Nile opposite to Girgio, and
Manfelout, has a vast extent, but scatteringly inhabited, showing only a
hundred and four Villages, occasioned from the rising of the Land being
incapable to receive the Niles Annual Tribute, unless it rise above two and
twenty foot; which happens so rarely, that the greater part lies uncultur'd,
and indeed the fertilest yields no greater reward to the Husbandman, than the
pitiful returns of Fennel and Cummin.

The Kassiffe of Cherkeffi lies on the same shore, but over against Benesuef,
having only forty two Villages, scarcity of Corn, some small quantities of
Fennel and Cummin; Sugar and Rice denied them from the infertility of the soil.

The Kassiffe of Kattia last, and indeed controverted, whether a Kassiffe or
not, for the Divan (or Council) of Grand Cair will not allow it to be numbered
with the rest, because it contains but three Forts or Castles of Defense, and
is so unfruitful and sandy, that excepting a few Dates, nothing is found.

But Zanto Zeguessi, Here but ten allowed.
allows only ten of these Kassiffes, viz. Saet, Baera, Garbia, Menufia,
Mansura, Giza, Fium, Ebenesuef, Manfelat, and Minio, to each of which
(excepting Saet) he allots three hundred and sixty Villages: To these principal
ten, he subjoyns diverse lesser ones, viz. Galiup, Mesela, Fazackur, Eloua,
Kattia, Terrana, Ensy, Aceut, and Brin.

BEsides the former, Egypt divided in two parts.
some only will divide as the Nile cuts it, into two, almost even parts of
East and West Egypt, to which others have added the Nether-Egypt, called also
Delta D, from the form of the Greek letter, which the Nile by branching into a
right and left arm makes; and the upper Egypt, which is that tract of Land from
the South-angle of Delta to the Cataracts. But another sort of Writers make an
Upper, Middle, and Lower; whose first part takes in Thebes; the second,
Heptapolis, (the seven Towns) and the third Delta. This Justinian sub-divided
into the first and second; and Ptolomy into the greater, the lesser, and the
third Triangle. Haythen makes it have five Provinces; Five Provinces.
named; 1. Sahyf, 2. Demesor, 3. Alexandria, 4. Resint, and 5. Damiette, or
Damiata. Strabo says that of old it was divided into thirty seven parts, by the
Greeks termed Monoi: Ptolomy enlarges to forty, and Herodotus reduces it to
twenty eight; Thirty seven parts.
but thirty seven seems the most convenient, as agreeing with that On the
Senthside of the City of Alexandria near the Lake Mareotis wherein the
Sepulchers of King Maeris, and his Wife, were Pyramidally built with a Colossus
of Stone on each side: and adjoining thereto was the Labyrinth so sam'd, in the
midst whereof were thirty seven Palaces, belonging to the thirty seven
Jurisdictions of Egypt (whereof ten in Thebais, ten in Delta, and seventeen in
the middle Region) unto which resorted the several Presidents to celebrate the
Festivals of their Gods, (who had therein their particular Temples; Moreover
fifteen Chapels containing each a Nemesis) and also to advise of matters of
importance concerning the general welfare. The passages thereunto, were through
Caves of a miraculous length, full of dark and winding paths, and Rooms
within one another, having many doors to confound the memory and distract the
intention, leading into inexplicable error; now mounting aloft, and again
re^descending, not seldom turning about, Walls insolded within one another in
the form of intricate Mazes, not possible to thread or ever to get out without a
Conductor. The building more under the earth than above, being all of Massy
Stone, and lay^d with that Art, that neither Cement nor Wood was employed
through the Universal Fabric. The end at length attained to, a pair of Stairs
of ninety sleps conducted into a stately Portico, supported with Pillars of
Theban Stone: the entrance into a spacious Hall (a place for their general
Conventions) all of Pollish'd Marble, adorned with the Statues of their Gods
and Heroes, with others of monstrous resemblances. The Chambers were so
disposed, that upon their opening, the Doors did give reports no less terrible
than thunder; The first entrance was of white Marble within, throughout adorned
with Marble Columns and diversity of Figures: Dedalus was said to have imitated
this in that which he built at Crete, yet expressing hereof scarce the
hundredth part. Who so mounted the top, should see as it were a large plain of
Stone, and withal, those thirty seven Palaces, environed with solid Pillars
and Walls consisting of Stone of a mighty proportion: At the end of this
Labyrinth there stood a square Pyramid of a mavelous breadth, and answerable
altitude; the Sepulcher of King Ismandes that built it. See Herodotus.

There were four very eminent Labyrinths, one in Egypt, another in Lemnos, a
third in Italy, and a fourth in Crete, built after the ananner of the Egyptian,
to whose former Description take this addition: It was all of square polished
Stone, every side three hundred foot broad, fifty foot high upon a square base;
It had five Pyramids, one at each Corner, and one in the Middle of a hundred
and fifty foot, with such a top as has a Brazen Orb upon it, and one covering
laid over them all, from which hung down Bells in Chams, which stirred by the
winds, made a sound afar off, upon which Orbs there were four other Pyramids a
hundrod scot high, and other things: this is delivered from Varro by Pliny,
lib. 36. cap. 13.


Mysterious Temple or Labyrinth of theirs, which had so many Rooms, and
withdrawing Apartments in it: But later Writers say, that since the Mahumetans
conquered Egypt, they made but three divisions; the first, called in Arabic
Nahar Alleriffe, or Erriffe, extending from Grand Cair to Rosetta: The second,
Sahaid or Assahaid, signifying firm land, and reaches from Cair to the borders
of Bugiha: The third, Bechria, (or according to Marmol, Beheira-Allards, that
is, Or Zealand.
Sea-land) stretching along that arm of the Nile that extends to Damiata and
Tenez.

The first of these is very fertile and luxuriant in the production of Rice and
all sorts of delicious Fruits: The second yields plenty of Corn, prickle
Fruits, store of Cattle, Fowl, and Flax. And the third abounds with Sugarcanes,
Cotton, and other such Commodities.

The whole thus divided into three; each three is sub-divided into ten; as
follows, in Delta or Nether Egypt, were Rakotites, Phtenuti, Phtemphuti,
Mendefites, Omisis, Saities, Attribis, Tavites, Tarbethites, Busirites; which
order and names were first constituted by Sesostris, (of whom it is recorded,
that he would by cutting the Isthmus between the Mid-land and Red Sea, have
joined them, had he not been diverted from the attempt by their Priests
asseverations, That all Egypt would of necessity be drowned by the irruption of
the Red Sea, which lay higher than that Country did) though afterward Ptolomy
and others his Successors, made great alterations therein.

Middle Egypt, held Memphites, Heliopolites, Bubastites, Heracleopolites,
Crocodilopolites, Oxyringites, Kynopolites, Hermopolites, Antinopolites, and
Latinopolites.

And Upper Egypt, Thebetes, Apollopolites, Panopolites, Koptites, Tentyrites,
Lycopolites, Aphroditopolites, Latopolites, Abydene, and Anteopolites.

The reason of this division may be twofold, the first in regard of their
diversities of Gods, and various Ceremonies in their Services, which Sesostris
their Prince observing, to prevent tumultuous Seditions, allotted the Country
into Rather thirty seven, for the reason in the Description of the Labyrinth.
thirty shares, according to the number of their Gods and Goddesses, and by
this means made Egypt as it were one Universal Temple, wherein were as many
Numens, as Plato has divided the whole earth between.

The second cause was the Litigiousness of the people, concerning their bounds
or limits, occasioned (as Strabo observes) by the Nile's yearly inundations,
whereby boundaries were not only obscured, but even all Landmarks and
distinctions of propriety utterly washed away; which necessitated an infinite
trouble in Annual Surveys; this was settled by the aforementioned division,
each particular Governor apportioning to himself even by inches the Compass of
what was committed to his charge.

This division of Sesostris totally differed from that made afterward by
Ptolomy, and by his Successors established (after the decay of that State by
the Persians, under the conduct of their King Cambises) which was into forty
Dynasties: But this, with the remains of all the rest, were at last by the
Mahumetans, who trampled all down, utterly subverted, yielding to the Laws and
Establishments of the insulting Conqueror.

THe Extent of Egypt is from the 21 degree of Northern Latitude, Extent of
Egypt.
to the 31 degree of the same; and therefore some have judged it to contain in
length fifteen days journey, and in breadth but three.

Others strangely over-reckon, and will have it four thousand Italian Miles,
though Maginus. Marmol.
Maginus will allow but five hundred and sixty common ones, which Marmol
shortens much, reducing it to a hundred and fifty French leagues, therein
somewhat agreeing with Cluverius, who from the Pelusian mouth of Nile, to the
Town of Catabathmus, count no more than a hundred and fifty Miles.

In breadth, as Marmol reckons, it has but twenty six Spanish Miles, an
inconsiderable tract of Land between the shore of Nile, and the two great
Desert Mountains, from whence the River with wonderful swiftness issues, and
thence descending to Asne, and so to Alcayro, having scarcely run a course of
twenty Miles beyond it, divides it self into two Arms, which afterward
reunite, till having run sixty Miles beyond Alcayro, it branches again into
two streams, the one called the Canopean, passes to Rosetta, and the other to
Damiata, where by a new division, causing a great Lake, through a narrow
Straight, it falls into the Mid-land Sea, near the place where of old Tenesse
was situated.

These two Armsdraw or delineate the sides; and the Seashore, the basis of a
Triangle, giving the name of Delta D to that most Northerly part of the
Country, called also Nether-Egypt, but by the Natives themselves (as Guilliam
de Tyr, maintains) Mahetek. To this part Strabo assigns about three thousand
Stadiums, which make three hundred seventy five Italian Miles; but this is
lessened by Maginus, to three hundred, whereas on the other hand Villamont will
have its Circumference to be seven hundred Miles, setting down a great Lake at
the Coast of Garbia, Eastward from the River, for one part of its Limits; and
another Channel of the Nile called Katoz, that goes to Alexandria for a second.
And this might cause Ptolomy to style it Great, and sub-divide it into the
lesser and third Delta.

The Ancients (as Kircher observes) named this part Fium, which in the old
Egyptian Tongue, signified the Sea: not from its resembling the Sea in the time
of its being over-flow'd; but because it is generally believed that heretofore
the whole surface of that part was totally covered by the Sea, until by a long
Series of time, the Slime and Mud of the Nile came to settle, and at length
with great labor, became firm Land. The same Kircher in his Itinerary from a
certain Rabbi, affirms, that from the Patriarch Joseph's time, many Hebrew
Monuments, and old great Buildings were found there; and that after many days
toil and labor, by him directed, the same was made fit to be, and was
actually inhabited, according to which example, succeeding Princes continually
drayning the Marshy parts, made the whole Country useful; which thereupon
became so populous and wonderfully fertile in all things, that it was named,
The Gift of the Immortal Gods, as Diodorus relates. And the Poets tell us of a
great Serpent bred hereabouts, which did much mischief to the people, till
slain by Or Apello, Ovid. Met.
Hercules Egyptius, and the memory of his Atcheivement preserved, by naming the
City (from the Serpent) Python.

This proof of Delta's lying under water heretofore, makes us rightly to
interpret Herodotus, Strabo, and others, who maintained all Egypt to have been
in the same condition; whereas they must be understood by a Synechdoche, to
have taken a part for the whole, for that Egypt in general was not drowned with
the Sea, will appear from hence, that it was very Mountainous, and upon a
continual ascent upwards to the Nile, even as far as the Cataracts thereof, and
Ethiopia.

And now the Series of our Discourse, having brought us to the Nile, we will
with as much brevity and exactness as possible describe the same, by
discovering his first rise and heads, with his several branches and sources,
and setting down the Genuine causes of his annual Fluxes, from the crediblest
of our Modern Authors.

This River famous for his greatness and faecundity, According to some the name
of Nilus is derived from N^^^ Ow^, id est, drawing new slime, which may make
the Earth fertile. See Virg. Georg. 2.
has by antiquity, many several names attributed to him. The Hebrews call him
Nahar-Mitzraim, that is, the River of Egypt; the Inhabitants Nuchal, (which
agrees with Pomponius Mela, who give the same to the Head-spring of Nile) and
is but little different from the Hebrew Nahal or Nachal. It Is also by the Jews
named Shickor or Sihor, signifying black, from the color of the sediment; for
the same reason called by the Greeks Melas, black. And the Ancients represented
his Figure in black stone, though all other Rivers were denoted by white
Statues: Some would fancy this to be Gihon mentioned in Holy Writ; but with how
little probability, may easily be conjectured, if we consider that Gihon was
one of the four great Rivers that watered the Terrestrial Paradise, and
consequently in Asia, whereas this is in Africa. Homer, Diodorus, Xenophon, and
others, give him the common appellation of the Country, that is, Egyptus; and
Plutarch names him Osyris and Syris; Apollonius, Triton; Pliny, Astraton;
Diodorus, Aquila; (because of his swiftness it seems) Cedrenus, Chrysorrhoe;
(Golden stream) and Dyonisius, Syene. In the Reign of King Orus there, eight
hundred years before the building of Rome, the same was by his Subjects, known
by the title of Noym or Number. Upon the Coasts of Lybia toward Syene, (from the
name of a Princes Child there drowned) it was first called Nilus, which also
the Africans do; The Abyssines style it Abanha (Father of Rivers;) The Negroes
or Moors, Takkui; and from them the Abyssines, Nil Takui, and the two branches
thereof Tagazi and Abanhi. Lastly, by the report of Sanutius, the people of the
Kingdom of Goyame call it Gihon.

This famous River thus severally known by variety of Names, by yearly
inundations, does so fertllize and fatten the earth, that it provides for and
furnishes the Inhabitants even with an exuberance of Plenty; which proceeds
from three remarkable Prerogatives, wherewith Nature has endowed him beyond
all other Rivers: The first is, that he sends forth no foggy vapors, which
makes the Air very healthful and serene, being continually free either from
Rain, Clouds, Mists, or Fogs: Secondly, he runs with so even and undisturbed a
stream, that there never accrews any danger from his Waves or Billows to any
Boats, Barks or Passengers sailing thereon, but a satisfactory pleasure from
his continual calm: Lastly, his faecundating virtue, which is so great, that it
causes not only an infinite increase in all sorts of Cattle that water there;
and breeds a prolifick faculty in Men and Women, but produces of all things
growing from the earth a Harvest plentiful even to admiration. And this
fertility without dispute was the cause why Egypt of old exceeded all other
Nations almost, for multitude of people, and yet to this day, after so many
direful depopulations, may compare with those that boast the greatest number of
Inhabitants: As a testimony whereof, Diodorus records, that there were once in
it eighteen thousand strong Cities; many of which, as it seems, were either by
Time or War laid waste and desolate, because we find in the Reign of Ptolomy
Lagus, only three thousand Registered, no more then remaining: which by Suidas
his account, was in the Empire of Caesar Augustus, when Diodorus lived.

The same Author reports, that in Elder times, the number of its Inhabitants
were seventeen hundred thousand; and that in his own time, they were no less in
general esteem, than thirteen hundred thousand; which wonderful increase might
be effected by the constant drinking the water of this River, whose virtue had
the power as some believed, to make the Egyptian Women bring forth so often,
not only two or three, but sometimes six or seven, nay eight Children at a
Birth. And this may a little abate the wonder how the Children of Israel in so
short a time as two hundred years ( Broughton.
which was all the space they sojourned in Egypt) multiplied from but seventy
souls, to above six hundred thousand men on foot, besides Women and Children;
nor may those stupendous Monuments of Grandeur, which even to this day bear
the name of Wonders, seem so strange to have been erected by the Ancient Kings
of this Country, as a Remonstrance of their glorious Greatness and
Magnificence, if we lay into the other Scale the infinite number of people that
were under their Commands; all whose hands at the Princes Fiat being employed,
made things otherwise seeming impossible to become facile; according to that of
the Poet, Multorum manibus grande levatur opus.

From these unusual Excellencies, and rare Qualifications of this River, the
Gymnosophists of Egypt made it one of their chief Numens, which they worshipped
with particular Solemnities, under the name of the Goddess Isis, to whose care
and kindness, they ascribed their continual freedom from the terror and danger
of Earthquakes; and that they were never infested with any Pestilential
Contagion, but always enjoyed a Serene wholesomeness of Air, not subject to
any impetuous storms or alterations of weather, either from the Clouds or
Winds: This was the cause of those many honorable Epithetes bestowed on it by
Antiquity; among which, one was the flowing of Osiris, or rather as Abenefius
an Arabic Writer has it, Osiris Arm; because it did as it were reach forth to
Mankind so great a Plenty of Provisions: For observing that Egypt enclosed with
Mountains, did resemble an Arm, and that the several partitions at the end,
seemed Fingers, he appointed to the Nile the place of the Mediana or
Liver-vein; This like that in the body, sending forth its quickening moisture,
by whose motion and circulation, it fertilitates the whole even to such an
height of abundance, as makes Wonder stand amazed, to see Nature turn Prodigal.
This agrees well with the Ancient Poets, who gave to this River many notable
attributes: Homer the Prince of them, says it fell from Heaven out of Jupiter's
Bosom; from whence happily sprung the belief, not only of the old Egyptians,
but the later Greeks, that Heaven was its Springhead: This made some term him,
The Gift of Jupiter; others, The Tears of the Gods; The Veins of Paradise; The
Seed of the Gods; The Pond of Proteus; The Husband of the Goddess Isis, and a
number of other titles of remark not unknown to the remotest Nations: So that
the more ignorant Moors and Negroes, frequently entitle it Ankaata Mazat
Schamatarri, that is, The Fountain of Heavenly Water: The Arabian Poets
Hunfarid and Eldeburge, style it Giatellartim, The life of the Earth: Isai.
cap. 23. ver. 3.
And the Prophet Isaiah, cap. 23. ver. 3. speaks of it in these words, By great
Waters the Seed of Sihor, the Harvest of the River, is her Revenue: upon which
words, the Hebrew Rabbi Eliezer thus Comments; Sihor (which is Nile) says he,
in one Month, by one only overflowing, does more than all other Rivers are
able to bring to pass within a Year: Which fertility, the Greeks represented by
the Word (...), Neilos; their name of Nile, which Cabalistically resolved into
Arithmetical figures, makes the complete number of the days of the year, thus,
N with them standing for sixty, E for five, I for ten, L for thirty, O for
seventy, and S for two hundred; which brought into one Sum together, make just
three hundred sixty five, according to the Diary number of the year.

Thus we see the various opinions of sundry Authors and Nations, in reference
to the name of Nile; we shall surely find as great diversity of judgments as to
the place from whence this famous River takes his first rise; there being
hardly any thing mentioned on Record, whose beginning is so abstruse, or has
frustrated more the undertakings of the Learned.

Of his Head, Lucan in his Tenth Book thus: Te vident primi, quatuor tamen hi
quoque Seres
Ethiopumque seris alieno gurgite campos:
Et te terrarum nescit, cui debeat orbis:
Arcanum natura caput non prodidit ulli:
Nec licuit populis parvum te, Nile, videre,
Amovitque sinus, and gentes maluit ortus
Mirari, quam nosse tuos. --
Seres, first sce thee, and ask wondering whence
Through foreign Channels thy strange waves commence,
The world, to whom they owe for, thee not knows:
Nature thy obscure Head not any shows:
None see thee shallow, and from banks retired;
Thy Fountains rather are to be admired,
Than known to us --


And in this quest we will cursorily give some reasons why this River is most
full of water, even to an overflux, when most others, whether in cold or more
temperate Climes are empty, and likewise on the contrary; for the better and
more clear effecting thereof, without any wandering interloping: Athanasius
Kircher, and the Learned Vossius are worthy to be heard in their proper sense,
being such as with the greatest perspicacity, have waded through those depths,
wherein others of great and eminent parts have sunk and been gravelled.

Kircher then from a MS. of one Peter Pais, Kircher.
(who in company of the Abyssine Emperor, in the year 1618. March 21. most
accurately searched for satisfaction of the very Point in debate) gives us this
Relation.

The Nile rises in the Country of Sahala, being a part of the Province Agaos,
P. Pais.
bordering on Goyam: whose Source or Springhead, first appears in two Founts,
seeming perfectly round, on the top of a Morass or Boggy Plain, upon a Hill
sur-rounded with a shady and pleasant Grove; the Diameter of each, though no
more than eighteen inches; yet is in depth unfathomable, supposed bottomless;
the water keeps within those narrow banks, till breaking forth at the foot of
the Hill, it soon spreads into a River, whose Channel replenished by the
concourse of diverse others, swells into a Lake thirty Leagues long, and
fourteen broad; whence breaking forth afresh, after several Windings and
Meanders, it returns almost to the first Head, and there falling down by great
precipices among unapproachable Rocks, shoots into ^^e midst of Ethiopia.

The Cataracts of Nile ibid. Luc. l. 10.

-- Sed cum lapsus abrupta viarum
Excepere tuos and praecipites Cataractae
Ac nusquam vetitis ullus obsistere cautes
Indignaris aquis; spuma nunc astra lacessis:
Cuncta tremunt undis and multo murmr montis
Spumeus invictis albescit fluctibus amnis.
When Rocks in ruins fallen, withstand thy force,
Stopping in thy precipitated course,
Mad thus to be opposed, thy waves more fierce
Roar, and with dashing Foam the Stars asperse;
Thy thundering Voice all parts with terror fills,
Whilst conquering Waves silvers the lofty Hills.
Then passing several Countries and vast Kingdoms, he visits and enriches
Egypt, and at last disembogues into the Mid-land Sea. The access to these two
Wells is very difficult on all parts, but toward the North, by which whoever
desires to view those eyes of the Nile, must ascend.

This is Kircher's sense of Peter Pais Relation, to whose diligence he renders
infinite commendations, averring that all the Learned are hereby alone freed
from all the doubts, wherein they were so long entangled, adding withal his own
conjecture, that the shaking Plain was once a large open Pool, which by length
of time contracted a film or crust of earth, made more substantial and firm by
the growing and spreading of Grass, and other dust and slime, by the removal
whereof (which he supposes no hard matter) the principal grand source would
quickly be seen.

But Isaac Vossius excellently well confutes this discovery of P. Pais; Volsius.
so applauded by Kircher; For (says he) those pits on the shaking plain, as
all others, are undoubtedly replenished by Rain, without which the whole Globe
of the earth would become barren and unfit for habitation. No River having any
peculiar fountain, from which alone it rises, but for its rise or fall is
beholding, either to excess, or want of Rain: In vain therefore do any seek for
a settled Head, since each Brook and drop of Rain that falls upon the sides of
Hills or Valleys, inclining downwards to the Channels, are as so many
contributing mites to the increase of a River.

But whether it spring from the one or other, as we see opinions differ, so we
are more assured of its overflowing, whereof the Egyptian Priests assigned
three causes; One was the great plenty of water, wherewith Egypt naturally
abounded, which they endeavored to prove, because the Nile contrary to all
other Rivers) overflowed his banks in the midst of Summer,

According to that of Lucan, l. 10.

Inde etiam leges aliarum nescit aquarum;
Nec tumet Hybernus, quum long Sole remoto
Officiis caret unda suis, dare jussus iniquo
Temperiem caelo mediis aestatibus erit
Sub torrente plaga, ne terra dissipet ignis
Nilus adest mundus, contraque accensa Leonis
Ora tumet --
His Waves at Laws of other Rivers scoff,
Nor swells in Winter, Phoebus farthest off,
That custom scorning, but when scorching beams
Inflame the Air, he tempers the extremes
Under the Line, and when the Lion raves,
Swells more his torrent with impetuous waves
Drawn up against his rage --
A second, the Ocean, from whence they supposed that superabundance of water
came at that season: The third, was rain, because as Democritus writes, at that
time in the Southern parts, great quantities of rain pours down; the
Trade-winds driving the clouds that way. Anaxagoras a great Naturalist, holds
the melting of the snow in the Ethiopian Mountains as a cause, agreeing therein
with Euripides.

Aquam pulchram deserens
Fluminis Nili, quae extera defluit
Nigrorum hominum, and tunc tumefacit undas
Quum Aethiopicae nives liquuntur.
Then leaving pleasant streams of Nile
Issuing from the Negro soil;
Who annually his Banks o'reflows
At Thaws of Ethiopian Snows.
But Ephorus a Scholar of Isocrates, says, it proceeds from an abundance of
moisture all the Winter retained in Subterranean Caverns, which at the approach
of the Summer solstice break forth and evaporate like Sweat by an insensible
transpiration to such a quantity, as produces the rising of the River.

Contrary to which, Lucan l. 10. says thus: Vana fides veterum: Nilo quod
crescat in arva
Aethiopum prodesse nives, non Arctos in illis
Montibus aut Boreas, testes ubi Sole perusti
Ipse color populi calidisque vaporibus Austri:
Add, quod omne caput fluvii quodcunque soluta
Praecipitat glacies, ingresso Vere vanescit
Prima tabe nivis --
Slight ancient Saws, that Nile his banks o'reflows
From melting swollen of Ethiopian Snows,
No Boreas hoars those hills, their people tan'd
With sweltring Southern Winds and scalding Sand;
No streams in brimmers from their Fountains post,
Till Spring dissolves the hoards of Winter frost.


Kircher in his Enquiries upon this subject, first makes the natural site and
disposition of the Ethiopian Mountains a prime, and the condition of the
Channel, a second cause; but after coming more home to the point, he gives two
more probable. One, when their mouths are so obstructed, they cannot discharge
their Water; Another, when the Channels receive more than they are wont or can
contain. This later happens either through molten Snow, or the falling of
excessive Rain. Thales one of the seven Grecian Sages, asserts the former
opinion; Anaxagoras, and most other Philosophers, the second; and in truth the
belief that the increase of Rivers proceeds from violent Rains, has obtained
the greatest credit, being manifest not only in Countries lying under the
North Pole, but even in Mountainous parts, under the Line, such as t^^ Hills of
Andes in America, and the Mountains of the Moon in Africa. These great Rains
come not from the Clouds, driven thither by annual Winds, but from those
exhaled in Ethiopia it self, which are so much the greater as the Sunbeams
there in a perpendicular line, have the greater vigor to attract, for which
reason at the Suns coming out of Gemini, the matter causing Nile to overflow is
only preparing; but when the Sun enters Cancer, then the Nile and other Rivers
pass over their Banks; among whom the great African River Niger, then passing
between mighty Mountains in West-Ethiopia, discharges himself into the Ocean.

With this of Kircher, agrees Odoardo Lopez, saying, Odoardo Lopez.
there Rains fall from the beginning of March till August, not by drops, as
with us in Europe, but pouring down as it were by whole Payls or Buckets full,
with such impetuousness, that they cause all streams to swell above their Banks.

The reasons of the overflowing of Nile being thus shown, Kircher starts up two
new Difficulties, viz. Why the mentioned Rains fall, the Sun passing the
Northern Signs, and not at any other time? The second, Why the Rains which fall
in the Moors Country do not cause the same overflowing? Or why Egypt only in
the overflowing of Nile should so much participate of it, as to seem no Land,
but all Main Sea?

As to the first, it is to be observed, Why the Rain falls in the Moors
Country, when the Sun is in the North.
that a constant effect cannot be produced without a certain and constant
cause; Now the Position of the Sun, and natural Situation of the Ethiopian
Mountains, are the chiefest and greatest cause of these Rains, and the
overflowing of Nile and some other Rivers; for wise and provident Nature has
made these Mountains (especially those between the Equinoctial and the Winter
Tropic in 22 degrees of Southern Latitude, and which encompass the Southerly
Ethiopia on the East, South and West) to be as hollow, or concav'd
Burning-glasses, which lying to the Sun in his Northern Latitude, fitly gathers
and so concenters his Beams, that they reverberate such a fiery heat, as makes
extraordinary Exhalations, by which, abundance of thick Clouds are consequently
engendered, which crowded and thrust together by the Trade-windes, at that time
always Northerly, and beaten toward the capacious Receptions of the aforesaid
Mountain Convexities, are dissipated thence at length by the fervent cold
descending from the tops of the Hills, and so are dissolved and come pouring
down in hideous Showers, or rather in Streams, Floods, or Rivers of Rain, from
whence it appears that Nature has set them as Receptacles of Vapors and
Clouds: for how much the situation of Mountains, not only in Ethiopia, but
also in other parts of the World, conduce to the breeding of Winds and Rain,
is not strange to any who have made search into Natural Causes.

To the second, it is answered, Why the Nile overflow^ only in Egypt, and not
in the Moors Country.
That the Channels of Nile are the cause of its overflowings. For as the
Channels of Rivers running between the sides of Mountains are deeper, so they
can swallow the greater quantity of waters, because the Mountains hinder their
overflowing and running away: On the other side, where the Channels are
shallow, and go through flat places and wide extended Grounds, with Banks low,
the more overflowing they are subject to: The great Mountains therefore pouring
down waters between their narrow Openings and Precipices into the Nile, makes
it flow far and near over its shallow Channels, not able to contain that
abundance; And for this reason all the flat Grounds in the Moors Country are
subject to the like Nilian overflowings: As therefore the natural Situation
and Position of the Mountains which are so conjoined, as we before said, and
the Plains surrounded by them serving for a Laboratory as it were, The
shallowness of the banks in Egypt, a cause of the overflowing of Nile.
to make Rain in, is an infallible cause of Showers at set-times: So also must
the Natural Position and Constitution of the Channel of Nile be held for a
certain cause of his overflowing.

Now the reason why these Rains fall when the Sun is in the Northerly Signs,
Why it rains when the Sun is in the Northern Signs.
must be attributed to Annual Winds, called by the Portuguese General, or
Trade-Windes, which at the Suns entrance into Capricorn, come blustering out of
the North, and turn the Clouds to Rain; but when the Sun passes Libra, the
Anniversary Winds coming from the Ocean, and Countries full of Snow in
Magellanica, being very cold, the Vapors not exhaling is the Cause, there is
there at that time constantly bright and clear Weather.

We will conclude the whole from the aforesaid Isaac Vossius, Lib. de Nili, and
ali^rum Fluminum origin.
who says thus: The opinion of Ancient and Modern Writers, is, That the Nile
first rises either out the Mountains of the Moon, or out of the great Sea
Zaire; both which lie beyond the Equinoctial to the Southwards, and in that
part of Africa which lies under the Tropic of Capricorn: But Isaac Vossius of
the Original of Nile, and other Rivers.
he from the Portuguese Journal-books, says, That the Spring-heads of Nile lie
Northward of the Equinoctial between nine and ten degrees. For the better
clearing this Point, something must be said of the Seasons of the Year, and the
various Alterations of the Weather in several Climates.

With those that inhabit beyond the Line and the Tropic of Cancer, What
Weather, and how the Season alters in 23 degrees of North Latitude.
to the three and twentieth degree and thirty minutes of North Latitude, Winter
continues as long as the Sun passes through the Northern Constellations, coming
on leisurely and by degrees: for when the Sun enters Taurus or Gemini, the
Winds begin to rise, and some stormy short Showers to fall: when it comes into
Cancer begin the lasting Rains, and continue to the end of September, but their
greatest violence is while the Sun is in Leo; in which time the Rivers under
the Torrid Zone swell up very high, and the tops of the Hills are covered with
Snow: When the Sun passes Scorpio, Sagittary and Capricorn, they have clear and
moderate Weather, but their greatest heat is at the Suns being in Aquarius; for
then are most of the Channels of the Rivers dry, and a great part of Africa
choked up with Drowth: On the other side, with such as live between the Line
and the Tropic of Capricorn, to the three and twentieth degree and a half
South Latitude, Winter begins at our Autumn, as we said before, from which time
till the Vernal Equinox, they have lasting Rains and great Cold: Thence
commences their Spring, which continues to the Suns entrance into Cancer, and
thence to the Autumnal Equinox makes their Summer, so that the Seasons of the
Year hold the same time, though not the same method, both with them and us: And
all that travel those parts never find any other Seasons; only the Hills
sometimes cause an alteration and stop in this Law of Nature: Hence it may be
supposed where every River has its Springhead; for such as lie Northward of
the Line, overflow in July or August, whereas those to the Southward swell
principally in January and February: The consequence of all is only this, That
what River stretches it self from one Tropic to another (if any such one there
were to be found in the world) it must overflow twice in a year; but the Nile
only swells immediately after the Suns being in Cancer, and never in the
Winter, so that it must be concluded, that his Spring-heads arise from those
parts lying under the Artick Signs.

The beginning of the Niles increase happens, When the Nile begins to overflow
in Egypt, and when in Ethiopia.
according to the opinion of most Writers, on our seventeenth day of June, the
Sun passing into Cancer. Prosper Alpinus would seem to assign the very hour of
the day (wherein this increase was first enquired after) but that cannot be,
because it happens sometimes a day or two sooner or later: But in Ethiopia it
begins to swell sooner, because the first Rain falls there in the beginning of
June: but forwarder toward Egypt the Nile increases but slowly as long as the
Waters are low, but in June and afterward, when thickand lasting Rain falls in
Abyssinie, then his Current is mightily increased as well in swiftness, as
depth: Now when the increase is at the height, viz. when the Nile rises to
eighteen, twenty, and more cubits, then is his Current extreme swift, though
not so well discernable in a broad Channel, as when the Waters are shut up in a
narrow; an Experiment of which may be gathered out of Francis Alvarez; Francis
Alvarez. The great swiftness of the Nile.
who speaking of a certain Arm of the Nile that flows out of the Country of
Dobas, into the River of Takaze, says, When we lay here under the shadow of
Willows to repose our selves and bait, on a dry and clear day, we heard a great
Thunder, whose noise seemed to come afar off, so that we said it thundered as it
used to do in India: We being then about to pack up our baggage, as we did,
supposing no danger, had no sooner taken down and were folding up the Tent,
wherein we eat our Dinner, but one of our Company began to cry aloud to us,
which startling made us look about, when at the same instant we saw coming with
a head a great Mountain of Waters, rolling toward us with a horrible noise,
and in the twinkling of an eye swallowed up some part of our ungather'd
Carriage, and without doubt had swept away the Tent also, if standing, so that
we were necessitated with speed to save our selves from that so sudden
surprizal, by climbing up the Willows: This Water poured down with such an
impetuous force, as carried with it great stones rolling, and such an amazing
fragor, that the Earth shook, and the Sky ecchoed, but this as soon gone, as
come. After this we betook our selves to some poor Cottages we saw scattered in
the Country, but were driven away with stones by the Inhabitants, so that we
were forced to sup, and stay all night under the Canopy of Heaven: Next day we
went forward and perceived by the way Rain and Thunder, as we had the day
before, but were not troubled therewith.

Prosper Alpinus says, The Inhabitants to foreknow the greatness of the Rivers
approaching increase, preserve a dry Clod, which at the time of the first
swelling grows heavier: How true soever this may be, yet it is no certain nor
satisfying Prognostication, for if this or other tokens beforehand could
verify the completion of their hopes, then would they not concern themselves,
nor be so sollicitous and diligent to mark each days increase, and to publish
it by Common Cryers.

THere is a great Contest between Ancient and Modern Writers, Difference about
the time of its continuance.
varying about the Time and Continuance of the increase and decrease of the
Nile: The general belief is, that it rises forty days, and falls as many:
Herodotus, Herodotus. Diod. Sicul. Ammian. Marcell.
Diodorus Siculus, Ammianus Marcellinus, and many others, say it increases
ninety or a hundred days: Aristides, longer, almost for four months time;
Aristides.
which differences may easily be reconciled; for the Ancients called the whole
time of his Inundation, The Increase; whereas the Moderns say, that time only
is the Increase, which is between the least and greatest depth of Water; and
the other wherein the Water returns into his own Channel, The Decrease.

The Nile then flows by degrees from the later end of June: How long the Nile
increases in Egypt.
At the first very little, scarce rising up two or three fingers in twenty four
hours, nor much more any day after while the Sun remains in Cancer; but when
the Sun passes into Leo, it rises first half a foot; afterward half a foot and
a palm, immediately a foot, and lastly a whole cubit almost every day, so
continuing till the full height: Thus the Grounds lying near the River are
first moistened, afterward those afar off, and at last all Egypt over; Then
the Earth which a little before was dry Land, becomes Navigable; and the River
(whose Channel in many places was scarce broader than a Furlong, enlarges to
Above thirty English miles.
three hundred Furlongs; nor would it stay there, if the Hills on both sides
did not curb and hinder it.

The Nile in this expansion at his height (which ordinarily happens, the Sun in
the middle of Leo, though sometimes when in the fifth or sixth degree of Libra)
does not presently decrease, but continues many times at the same depth twenty
days and more, till the Sun enters Virgo, then by degrees lessening and running
away; before which time all the Dikes, Ditches, and Damms are opened to receive
and detain the water: Then may it easily be perceived how the Waters retire
gradatim, first from the Grounds of Upper Egypt, that border upon Ethiopia;
afterward from the High-grounds of Lower Egppt; which naturally comes to pass,
for the Water glides through the High-grounds, not running off indeed, but kept
up in Ditches, that the Mud which improves the Land may be ready to be spread
so much the nearer: At length after the Autumnal Equinox, the Water returns
into its natural Channel; and that which was thus long by Dikes kept up in the
Upper-grounds, let out by Sluices, first in Upper, and after in Lower Egypt:
And although sometimes there is a difference in the rising of the Nile,
according to the little or much rain falling in Ethiopia, yet the whole
Country is cleared, and the Water returned to its Channel before our eight and
twentieth of September, whereupon immediately the Grounds are ploughed with
small Coulters, and made fit for Sowing, and the Countreyman (when the Sun
enters Scorpio, The Nile almost always either increasing, or decreasing.
puts his Seed into the Earth; however, though in its own Channel, the River
ceases not lessening till the end of May the next year.

It remains now that from this Overflowing of the Nile, The Current of Nile
sometimes swift, and sometimes flow.
we show the swiftness or slowness of his Current, and how it varies at several
times; for the making which appear, you are to know that in Ethiopia it flows
up at least twenty days, and sometimes a whole month ere it begins to rise in
Egypt, at the beginning scarce running a league in an hour, whereas when the
Water is come to the highest, it passes so swiftly forward, that if the Channel
of the Nile be above four hundred and fifty leagues and more in length, as by
reason of its windings and reaches, some running almost point blank backwards,
it may well be, upon an equal calculation it will appear that it may run three
leagues in one hour: we must confess it is not so swift in Egypt, because the
Channel is like a Sea, about ten leagues broad, which causes it necessarily to
flow slower, whereas it is circumscribed and confined in narrow limits in
Ethiopia, and so consequently goes there more swift.

But now to return to our quest of the Head Sources or Fountains of this famous
River; The Head-Springs of Nile where, as supposed. Vossius.
Vossius gives us this account, Although the Head-springs of other Rivers are
not only in places far distant from their mouths, It receives all its water
out of Ethiopia.
in regard, where Rain falls, Brooks and small Channels are usually found,
which by their confluence make the great ones full; it is clear otherwise with
the Nile, being only indebted to Egypt for a passage, not receiving any
addition of Waters there: for all Egypt (except where bordering on the Sea) is
altogether void of Rain, but comes out of that part of Ethiopia that now is
called Abyssine, so that with reason there must we look for the Head-veins of
Nile.

Among the many Heads ascribed thereto, the farthest and most Southerly making
the rivers Maleg and Anguet, which join in the Country of Damut, and make the
West Channel, retaining the name Maleg, till after a course of fourscore
leagues, it falls into the middle Channel, accounted the chief, beginning in
the Hilly Country of Sakala, The Sea Bar-Dambea.
wherein also lies the large Sea Dambea, eighty and eight leagues long, and
about two hundred over, called Bar-Dambea by the Inhabitants, first falling in
the Country of Bagameder, thence gliding forward through the Regions of
Amaharam, Olekam, Gauz, Bizamo, and Gongos, and increased by the addition of
other Rivers, turns toward the North, visiting the Fields of Fasculo, at last
intermingling with the River Malegt, where it borders upon Nubia.

The third Channel is the rich River Takaze, rising from three Springs on the
borders of the Kingdom of Angola, whence after a Western course between Daganam
and Haogam, it winds toward the North, by the Kingdom of Tygre, and dividing
the Region of Sire, turns Eastward. Afterward falling into the River Mareb or
Marabo, which begins near Baroa, they jointly water the Country of Dengiri,
called by the Moors (who enjoy it) Ballai, and unites at last with the Nile by
the City Jalak. There are the three Rivers, which principally make up the Nile,
and enrich his Bosom with such plentiful Streams. Thus far have we traced the
opinions of Kircher and Vossius: Now we proceed to declare what the Cataracts
thereof be, diverse having written strange things thereof.

But first as to the name, It is called by Pliny and other Latin Authors, and
by the people also who live thereabouts, Catadupae, and by the present
Inhabitants, Katadhi, which in their Tongue signifies A Rushing Noise: This
happens at the Hill Gianadel, where his even Current is broken by the sharp
rocks, through or over which it makes passage: The place of this Fall,
according to the Ancients, contains Above six miles.
fifty Furlongs, filled up with huge and inaccessible rocks, over which the
Nile making his way, falls with such an impetuous force, and prodigious noise,
that as the Ancients write, the people who dwell thereabouts were all deaf by
reason thereof: But Experience now adays has taught us, that this Noise has
no such effect, whilst the River keeps his usual stream, but when he begins to
rise, the Noise increases, but yet is never so great that people should loose
their hearing by it; Though it is true, the Waters rush downwards two hundred
foot, roaring like the Breaches of the Sea in a Tempest; from hence then
sliding in a gentle Current over the Plains of Egypt to Cairo, where the Haven
of Bulach toward Villamont, carries in breadth two mile, then leaving Cairo
behind him, he parts into two, and after into more Branches: The Inhabitants
for distinction sake, have called the Tract of Land Eastward, Garbiah; and the
places Southward near the Angle or Point of Damiata, Chargnia.

These Branches or Arms, make the several Mouths of Nile, which the Ancients
have especially noted to be seven; But Ptolomy sets down nine, which two are
missing: and Pliny increases them to eleven, whereof four are wanting: The
names of the supposed seven remaining are these, The Heraclean, called also
Canopean, and Naucratian; The Bolbitian; Sebennitian; Pathmetian, by Strabo
named Fatnian, and by In his Euterpe.
Herodotus, Bucolian: The Mendesian, Tanitian, and Pelusian: The two wanted,
are Dialcos and Pineptimi: But if we take the What ever was, or is their
number, ancient or modern Maps vary among themselves; for whereas Ptolomy has
set forth nine, Hondius in his Map of Africa makes but eight, and in that of
Europe, ten. Ortelius in the Map of the Turkish Empire sets down eight, in
that of Egypt, eleven: And Maginus in his Map of that Country, has observed
the same number: And if we enquire farther, we shall find the same diversity and
discord in diverse others. Thus we may perceive that this Account has been
always different concerning these Ostiaries of Nile.
Nilus as he is at present, we shall find nine Mouths great and small; the
chiefest and most remarkable being the Canopean, now styled Rosetta from its
neighborhood: The Pelusian, by some taken for the Ostiary, were Damiata, but
seems rather the Tanitian, from its near adjacency to Tenez: The Bolbitian,
known by very few: The Sebennitian, now bears the Name of Sturioni: The
Pathmetian retains the old Name: The Mendetian and Damiatian, by some are
supposed the same, though others call it Migri: The Tanitian, at this day known
to some by the name of Kalixen, and to others of Tenez or Tanez: Pineptimi is
taken for that which in the Maps in named Brule: Lastly, Diolcos that is
wanting, Sanutius styles Damanora.

Modern Geographers much abate this number, Peter de la Valle his Journal.
Maginus. Guil. Tyrius. Bellonius.
attesting there are but three or four, to wit, The Rosettian and Damiatian;
and two other little Rivulets running between these, but poor in waters.

We come now to the Description of the Country, wherein for Methods sake we
will begin with the Cities.

EGypt (as we declared before) is at present by the Turks divided into three
Parts: Description of the Westerly parts of Egypt.
We will take our view from the Westerly, called Erriff, extending to the Point
of the Sea by Barca, a Country belonging to Barbary, and reaching from thence
to Rosetta, containing all the places between the two Arms of Nilus from
Alexandria, and Rosetta to Cairo.

First, To the West of Barca, lies a City by the Ancients called A ^ort or
Castle of the Arabians.
Plinthina, and now by the Italians, The Arabian Tower, near adjoining to which
is the Sea Monester. Busiris, or Bosiri.
Next to the old City Busiris, now termed Bosiri, on the Coast of the Mid-land
Sea, about twenty miles westward of Alexandria, heretofore by the Christians
subdued and totally destroyed: This Busiris, whence the Busirian Precinct
formerly takes its name, is called in the Bible by Ezekiel, Cap. 30. In our
English Translation it is rendered Pathros.
Phatures: Some will have this City so called from the feigned Syntagm.
Chorograph. Aegypti.
Busiris, who sacrificed all his Guests to Jupiter, and was the most cruel
Tyrant of all Egypt: Others draw its Denomination from There is in this
Country a Pillar with this Inscription, Mihi Pater est Saturnus Deorum junior,
sum vero Osyris Rex qui totum peragravi orbem usque ad Indiorum fines: ad cos
quoque sum profectus qui septentrioni subjacent usque ad Istri fontes and alias
parts usque ad Oceanum, Dr. Brown, etc. Nowaccording to the best
Determinations, Osyris was Mizraim, and Saturnus, Egyptus, the same with Cham,
after whose name Egypt is not only called in Scripture the Land of Ham, but
testified by Plutarch, who in his Treatise De Osyride says, Egypt was called
Chamia, a Chamo Noe filio.
Osyris the Egyptian Jupiter, or Hercules; and the Arabians from Busir the son
of Cham. Kircher says, it is so named from the Egyptian Idol Apis, signifying
in their Tongue An Ox; into which shape, as Diodorus reports, he was
transformed; and then the Name in the Old Egyptian Language must be Busosirin,
that is, The Kings Ox. The Grecians confound this City with Thebes, although
they be distant the whole length of Egypt. From the Name Busiris, it may be
supposed the Inhabitants worshipped an Ox; Osiris, as they hold, first showing
himself in such a similitude: But the truth is, he was a man, as they say
(though much controverted) and a great Enricher of that Nation upon this their
idolizing of an Ox, and situation of the City so near to Memphis or Cairo, as
also to Called also Ez. 30.17. Aven.
Heliopolis, which was Rameses, the constant place of residence to the
Israelites, whence might perhaps the worship of the Golden Calf in the
Wilderness take its original.

Not far from Bosiri lies Alexandria, Alexandria.
so called from Alexander the Great, who built it about three hundred years
before the Birth of Christ, chiefly employing therein the famous Architect
Dinocrates.

Some say it was anciently called Noy; Its several Names.
The Hebrews knew it by the Name of No-Ammon: The Romans, of Pharos, Sebastia,
Augusta, Julia, Claudia, Domitiana, and Alexandria: The Egyptians formerly
styled it Racotis, and say it was built by one Dalucka an Egyptian Queen, after
the drowning of Pharaoh in the Red Sea: The European Christians call it to this
day Alexandria, but the Turks Scanderoon, which is the same with Alexandria.

We find in Greek and Latin Historiographers, Several Cities bearing the Name
of Alexandria.
eighteen Cities of that Name, whereof this the most famous is chief: Another
claiming the same Founder lies in Asia: A third in Scythia, by the River
Tanais: There is one built, as is said, by Pope Alexander, or rather by the
Millanois and Cremonois in Lumbardy, by the River Tanaro. Another new
Alexandria built by Alexander the Great, at the foot of the Mountain Caucasus:
A sixth in the East Indies; A seventh De Stadt ALEXANDRIE of SCANDERIK. The
City AS EXANDRIA or SCANDERIX.
in Troas; In Thrace an eighth, called indeed Alexandria, but erected seventeen
years before Alexander's Birth: A ninth in Aria, a Country of Persia: A tenth
in the Island of Cyprus: An eleventh in Caria: and several other more in diverse
places which we spare to reckon, all of them through length of time, or raging
War, has destroyed, leaving them heaps of Rubbish; so that at this day there
is scarce any Tracks or Remains of other than this Alexandria in Egypt, and
that in the Dukedom of Millain.

The City lies on the edge of the Mid-land Sea, on a Sandy ground, Its
Situation.
near the Canobian Mountains of the Nile, Lee Africanus mistaken.
though Leo Africanus places it forty Miles to the Westward of Nile, in regard
near Cairo it begins to divide it self in two Arms, and so in strictness
loses its name, as he supposes, and about seven or eight hundred paces from
the Haven, which is very spacious for Ships, but dangerous because of the two
great Promontories of Rocks standing on either side in the entrance, called by
the French Diamant and Girofele, but generally known by the names of the Tower
Port, and the Chained Port: The former very dangerous, the later more secure
than convenient.

The City appears in the form of an The form of the City like a Market-Cross.
oblong Cross, and divided into the old and new Town, which being three Miles
in length, incloseth two or three sandy Hills; but Villamont makes the City
apiece, and says that it is encompassed with two old Walls of a large
circuit.

The Walls after so many terrible shocks, What manner of Walls it has.
in part remain standing which Alexander himself raised, strengthened with very
many Turrets, and beautified with ranks of stately Pillars: The inserted
Draught representing the ancient state of the City to the life, only mentions
one hundred and eighteen; each of which is four Stories high, and built more
for ornament than strength; yet some of them still spacious enough to receive
some hundreds of Soldiers to quarter in.

In the Walls of the old City, were four principal Gates, The Gates of the City.
all fortified with strong Iron Bars: One on the East side, called Cairo-gate:
The second to the West, leading toward the Wilderness of Barca: The third
named the Popes Gate on the South Side, leads out to the great Sea of
Elbucharia or Bouchaira, The Sea Elbucharia.
formerly Mareotis, and about half a Mile from the City, shadowed round with
Palm Trees; in this Sea, which is of a large extent, lie several small Islands
to which the Inhabitants for fear of the Enemy, sometimes fly for shelter: some
name this Sea (abounding with various kinds of Fish, yielding a great yearly
Revenue) Antaca, from another City near it: The fourth is the Seagate, opening
to the Seaside.

The new City appears somewhat pleasanter, The New City.
having on its left side the Old Haven, now Porto Vecchio, and for its defense
has one Castle belonging to the old Town, which though not of so good use,
because of the cumbersome passage into it, yet affords a convenient Rode and
Haven for the Turks Galleys, and other small Vessels: And if it were not for
the Neighboring Sea, it would without doubt be quite void of Inhabitants,
because of the bad Air: And as it is, the Buildings are mean and few, inhabited
by Jews, Turks, Moors, Copties, and Greeks, who reside there only for
Merchandise, little else inviting them thither.

This City has been several times besieged, and as often ruined, The City
often Ruined and Rebuilt.
but never so fatally as in the year 1624. when the Pirates of Barbary, who in
great Multitudes ranged over the Mid-land Sea, seizing and enslaving all
persons without difference of Nations, Sex, or Religions, laid it almost
utterly waste, falling on like Wolves, whose implacable rage was never
satisfied till 'twas laid in ashes, so that nothing could be seen but Walls
decayed, and Streets buried under the rubbish of their demolished Buildings;
since which time, 'twas begun to be Rebuilt, but so tediously, that in the
year after its Destruction, there were only four small Huts erected; however
not long after, they proceeded with such vigor and diligence, Turks encourage
its Building.
that many new Fabrics were raised, and by the Turks encouragement at length
became a stately City: And indeed the Turks endeavor to raise this place to the
former luster, by continual additions of new Edifices, but they take so little
notice of the old, that they let them fall down for want of repair, which makes
several Houses, Churches, and other Buildings there, seem half destroyed by
their heaps of rubbish, testifying their ancient greatness and glory, Agathias
opinion refuted.
contrary to the opinion of Agathias, who says, that in his time, the Buildings
of Alexandria were neither firm nor large.

The Houses are not ridged with Gable ends, Houses.
but flat, like those of the East-Countrey, for several conveniences,
especially the pleasure of walking; for the Inhabitants after Meals, take great
delight to expatiate there, or take repose both Winter and Summer: They all
seem to be founded on great Arches, and Marble Pillars, with Vaults and Sluices
underneath to receive the Nile water when it overflows, which Floodgates are
so many and great, that the whole City seems to stand on Arches and Pillars:
for a branch of the River, from between Cairo and Rosetta, runs thither through
certain Drains, or Common-Sewers, under the City Walls to fill the Brooks: This
water when the muddy slime is sunk to the bottom, becomes clear, and is used by
many Eminent Citizens and Gentlemen upon all occasions: But that which is muddy
and dirty, the common people use and are content with, because in all the City
there is no public Spring or Well to repair to.

There are three small Hills, Three Hills.
resembling that named Testacio at Rome, and where many Earthen Vessels, Urnes,
Pots and old Medals are found: Heretofore near the old Palace of Alexander,
were two Two Obelisks.

Both these were erected by the Egyptian King Sothis, about 1058. years after
the Flood. Dr. Brown.


Obelisks, each an hundred foot high, and eight broad, of one entire Stone of
Thebane Marble, intermixed and speckled with Veins of two other Colors: One of
these remains yet entire, but sunk deep into the earth, yet seems to exceed
that of St. Peter's at Rome; but the other is quite ruined.

Upon a small Hillock about two hundred paces from the City, surrounded with
Palm Trees, and from whence is a prospect both of the Buchairan Lake, and
Mid-land Sea, Perhaps from its being hemmed in with Palms.
stands Pompey's Pillar, by the Arabians called Hemadussenar, that is, The
Trees-Pillar; though hewn out of one entire rough Stone, (the same with that
of the Pyramids) and of so exceeding height and thickness, that to this day no
Artificer could ever be found that would undertake to remove it thence to any
other place: The height and bigness of Pompey's Pillar.
It is a hundred and five and twenty foot high, the Pedestal fifteen foot in
compass, remaining yet firm and whole: why it is so called, we can with no
certainty affirm, unless it were erected for a Remembrance of the Magnificence
of It is said to have been reared by Caesar, as a Memorial of his Pompeyan
victory Mr. Sandy's in his Travels.
Caesar or Pompey: It is Fabled, that a certain Egyptian King set it there to
defend the City against Naval incursions, having placed a Magical Burning-glass
on the top, that being uncovered, had power to set fire on all Ships sailing by.

In the Suburbs is a place where it is reported St. Athanasius hid himself to
escape the Arrian persecution. Here also between three Columns of Porphiry, is
shown the place, where it is said St. Catharine was Beheaded, to whose Memory
the Christians formerly erected a Church, now by the Turks converted to a
Mosque. In the adjoining Street is a Cross, on the spot, where they say the
Evangelist St. Mark suffered Martyrdom; to whose honor, St. Mark's Church, the
Patriarchal See.
a Church was built, formerly the Patriarchall See, but now held by the
Egyptian Christians: within it lay the Body of St. Mark, St. John Baptist's
Stone.
whence the Venetians secretly removed it to Venice: There they say, also is
the Stone upon which, at Herod's command, St. John Baptist's Head was chop't
off: near which, no Turk or Infidel can sit, but with great pain and torment:
Besides these Christian Churches, the Mahumetans have several stately Mosques.

Somewhat distant from the City (where now situated) are great heaps of
rubbish, through whose very disorder appear marks of Antike Grandeur:
Cleopatra's Building.
Many secret doors and passages may yet be seen, whence not without some show
of truth, they are concluded to have been the Palace of Cleopatra: And Strabo
says, that the Royal House of Alexander, with the City prospect on the left
hand, stood in the entrance of the great Haven.

Formerly Alexandria was the most populous and stately City, The Excellency of
Alexandria heretofore.
not only of Egypt, but of all Africa, so priding it self in Magnificent
Buildings, as well Private as Public, that no City, but Rome only, could
compare with it. Christianity even in the Primitive times, did here flourish in
such a glorious manner, that the ancient Fathers of the Church, called it
Paradise.

When the Emperor Augustus after his Victory over Mark Anthony, Angustus spared
this City, and why.
entered into it, he commanded not to spoil it for the memory sake of Alexander
the Founder, whose relics he viewed with a serious countenance: then in
respect to the beauty of the City; and lastly, for love of the Philosopher
Arrius chief Reader in the University there, and in high favor with the
Emperor: for this indeed was in those days the Pernassus of the Muses: Serapeum
and Iseum two Universities or Colleges rather.
here were the Schools of Arts and Sciences; the beautiful Colleges Serapeum
and Iseum, so called from the Goddesses Serapis and Isis; wherein all the
youth, who for their Learning aimed either at the Priesthood, or other
City-employments, were educated: The Serapeum far exceeded the other in Beauty,
having an exquisitely curious Portico more than a Mile in length, whereto
adjoined a Court of Justice, and a Grove: In this the followers of Aristotle's
Doctrines had a peculiar School, whereof the Alexandrians, as Eusebius and
Nicephorus write, would needs impose the charge on Bishop Anatolius for his
extraordinary knowledge in all Arts; Lastly, St. Mark the Evangelist was here
the first Divinity-Professor, whose Successor erected a School for Theology,
wherein for the advancement of Christian Religion, several of the most Learned
men, were appointed Readers, who Scholastically handled the main and
fundamental Points only: Among whom the famous Panthenus, who flourished about
the year of Christ one hundred eighty one, and other most excellent Pastors of
the Church were of great remark: Here also St. Jerome, St. Basil, St. Gregory,
and others were brought up: and Philo Judaeus became eminent; for in this
Academy, the Jews had a flourishing and populous Synagogue.

But what has much enhansed the glory thereof, The Library of Alexandria, so
famous among ancient Writers described.
was that most wonderful Library of Ptolomy Philadephus Son of Ptolomeus Lagus,
the second of that Name, of the Line of the Egyptian Kings; first established
and afterward from time to time by the following Kings augmented and enriched:
This Philadelphus was a Lover of Art and Learning, which moved him to advance
this most celebrated Library, wherein he placed the Books of Aristotle and his
own, and not only so, but with great labor and charge made a collection of
all manner of Books from all places, as well of Humane Learning, Arts,
Sciences, Histories, and the like; as Divine, such as the Pentateuch, and other
parts of the Old Testament, which he procured out of Judea: The other he
obtained out of Greece, Lib. 1. c. 1.
from Athens, the Island of Rhodes, and other places, according to the
Testimony of Athenaeus. The Copy or Duplicate of his Letter to Eleazar the
High Priest is to be read in Epiphanius, Eusebius. Epiphanius. Josephus.
Eusebius, and Josephus, and other of their Historians.

When this Prince worthy of eternal honor, had obtained these Books, written in
Languages unknown to the Egyptians, he burst out into these words: O hidden
Treasures and sealed Fountains, what exceeding benefit is couched in both!
After some consideration, he wrote back to Eleazar with diligence to select six
honest and ancient men of every Tribe, skilled and experienced in the Greek
Tongue, and to send them over to Alexandria, that they might Translate those
Books for more common use; In the answering this design, Eleazar was very
careful, and sent over the aforesaid number, whom Ptolomy embraced with great
care and civility, and in the Island of Pharos caused to be erected several
convenient Mansions, wherein every one by himself was to Translate the Holy
Law, which was so performed, Josephus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius,
Nicephorus, Augustine.
that according to the testimony of Josephus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius,
Nicephorus, Augustine, and other Learned Writers; they not only used the same
sense, but the very same words; certainly not without the special grace and
assistance of the Holy Spirit. And this is that Translation which bears the
name of the Septuagint, Septuagint Bible.
to this day. Of this Library was Phalerius Demetrius, Phalerius Demetrius made
Library Keeper.
an Athenian exile, famous for his Writings, made Overseer, and promoted also
to greater Offices; Furthermore this King sent to the Chaldeans, Egyptians, and
Romans for Books, and in like manner commanded to be Translated into Greek.

Seneca says, The number of the Books.
the number of the Books in it were four hundred thousand, whereas indeed they
were more, Agellius, Ammianus, Diodorus, Josephus.
amounting as Agellius, Ammianus, and Diodorus allege, to seven hundred
thousand: Josephus reports, that Demetrius the Library Keeper, being once asked
by the King, how many thousand Books there were? made answer, Above two hundred
thousand, but that shortly he hoped, the number would be five hundred thousand;
whereby it appears how infinitely the number increased in short time, which
ceased not with Philadelphus, but afterward from time to time were still
multiplied by succeeding Kings: yet this precious and invaluable Treasure of
Books (which were all Manuscripts (for then the Art of Printing was far off
from being Invented) was totally Burnt in the Civil Wars of Pompey and Caesar,
They are all burnt, and by what means.
taking Fire at first from Caesar's Fleet fired by the Enemy in the Haven: a
dire and irreparable mischance! at which Caesar, though it came not by his
fault alone, was so much ashamed, that afterward in his third Book of the
Civil Wars he neither makes mention of it himself, Plutarch, Dio, Livy, Seneca.
nor the Roman Consul Hirtius; But Plutarch, Dio, Livy, and Seneca, have not
omitted it; of which the last thus writes: Let another commend this burning
Stratagem, Ammianus.
like Livy, who said, that it was a work becoming the most Excellent, Wise, and
Provident Kings. And Ammianus pathetically: Among all the Buildings, the
Serapeum bad the pre-eminence, wherein was that invaluable Library, containing
all ancient Records of Memorable Transactions in seven hundred thousand Books,
by the diligence of the Ptolomies, Kings of Egypt, gathered together, but in
the Wars of Alexandria, and Destruction of the City, burnt by that most
Pernicious destroyer Caesar being the most eminent for Arms and Acts, accounted
this his greatest misfortune, that he so great a Lover of Books, should be the
cause of such an irrepairable destruction. Agellius.
Julius Caesar. All the Books, says Agellius, were burnt in the forementioned
Wars of Alexandria, when the City was destroyed, not wilfully, nor of set
purpose, but perhaps by the multitude of helpers to save it: He excuses not
only Julius Caesar, but also the Roman Soldiers, and lays the fault upon the
unruly crew of assistants: But Dio and Plutarch speak clean otherwise, Dio and
Plutarch.
as may be read more at large in their Writings. Thus had this never to be
paralleled Library its end, in the hundred eighty and third Not much above
forty years before the Incarnation.
Olympiade, after it had continued an hundred and twenty four years.

Another Library was after re-erected by Cleopatra in the Serapeum; It is again
rebuilt by Cleopatra.
which by the help of Mark Anthony, who obtained the Attalian and Pergamenian
Libraries, was greatly adorned and enriched, and in being to the time of
Primitive Christianity, and was there preserved so long as the Serapeum, which
was a Building of great Entertainment and wonderful Art, continued, And at last
with the Serapeum utterly subverted.
which at length the Christians in the Reign of the Emperor Theodosius the
Great, as a Harbor of Infidelity, threw to the ground.

Over against Alexandria stands the renowned Island Pharos, The Island Pharos.
by the Inhabitants called Magraf, or Magragh, and by the Arabians Magar
Alexandri, that is, Pharos of Alexandria; and by Ortelius, Pharion, from the
Lanthorn Tower which stands upon the Island, and now called Garophalo: In the
time of Homer, Alexandria and this Island were severed by a Part of the Sea
about a days sailing from the Land, whereof himself thus speaks, Od. lib. 4.

Pharos an Isle amidst the swelling Deep,
Against Egypt lies, from whence a nimble Ship
May sail 'twixt Sun and Sun with Sayls a trip.
(...) Hom. Od. 1ib. 4.

(...),
(...), etc.
But now it is part of the Main Land, the reason whereof is, because the river
Nile by his evomition of Soil and Mud, has constantly gained upon the Sea: To
this place of Homer, Lucan alludes in his tenth Book thus: Tunc claustrum
Pelagi cepit Pharon: Insula quondam
In medio stetit illa mari, sub tempore vatis
Proteos, at nunc est Pelleis proxima muris.
Then he took Pharos circled with the Main,
Where Fate foretelling Proteus once did reign,
But now to Alexandria joined --


Pinetus and others will have nothing lie between this City and Island but a
Bridge; but Villamont who has searched more narrowly, says, Piuetus.
it is now united to the Continent, and the Walls of the City in such manner,
Villamont.
that the Island makes two Points, one Eastward, another West, It Is united to
the Main Land.
which almost meet in two other Points, running from the Main Land into the
Open Sea, But makes two Haven.
leaving two Passages into the Havens; one of which is called Porto Vecchio,
that is, The Old Haven, and has no Defense, as it is said, but the Castle of
the old City, by the Italians named Castle Vecchio: But the other Haven has
two opposite Forts, yet not so far distant, but that they can answer and defend
each other, Two Castles.
nor can any Ship go in and out between them without leave. The greater Fort is
much the stronger, having high Walls fenced with Towers, besides a quadrangular
Work of Defense: And in it beneath is a Watch, or Cour du Gu^^d for Security,
and above are Lights that give direction for Ships coming in to find the
Channel. This great Castle on the right hand the Italians call Pharzion, and
that on the left Castelletto, or The Little Castle: Both of them are subject to
great inconveniences by the want of fresh water, which they are compelled to
fetch from the City every day on Camels backs.

On a steep Hill in this Island, King Philadelphus caused to be set up an
exceeding high Lanthorn-Tower, directing Seamen in their steerage by night,
being accounted one of the Seven Wonders, whose Master Builder Sostratus, that
ingeniously-ambitious Architect, who caused these words to be cut in a Marble
Stone, SOSTRATUS GNIDIUS DIXIPHANIS FILIUS DIIS SERVATORIBUS, PRO NAVIGANTIBUS,
that is, Sostratus of Gnidus Son of Dixiphanes, to the Gods Protectors for the
Safety of Mariners: This Inscription he covered with Playster-work, wherein he
set the Name and Title of the King, which imagining (as it happened) a short
time would make to crumble and fall off, then his own written in the Marble,
would obtain a perpetual Remembrance.

The Soil hereabout, The nature of the Soil in, and about Alexandria,
as we said already, is sandy, bearing neither Bush nor Vine, and so barren,
that it is unfit to be sown: all the Corn that serves the City comes about
forty miles off down the Artificial Channels of Nile: There are some small
Orchards, but they only produce Fruits so unwholesom, that they commonly bring
such as eat them into dangerous Fevers, and other malignant Distempers. They
have abundance of Capers and Tamarisk-Plants, and Hamala, which is a Root they
make Wine of, like the Herb Anthillis, by the Arabians named Killu or Kalli,
Kalli, a Plant.
and is of three sorts; the two first are found in Europe, but the third is
peculiar to Egypt, having few Leaves, and very like Field-cypress, but longer:
The Stalk is single, and somewhat crooked, out of which two or three small
Branches shoot forth, and grow upright, each of which has a Blade furnished
with five bending Leaves, or more, as appears ABOVE ENGRAVEN. Venice Glasses
made with the ashes thereof, and other ingredients.
Out of these three sorts, first dried in the Sun and then burnt, Ashes are
made, from thence transported to Venice, wherewith and a mixture of Soap and
other Ingredients, they make those most clear and chrystaline Glasses, The
Physical use of the Leaves and Juice.
so well known through Europe for their rarity: It is also said that the Leaves
beaten and taken in a convenient Vehicle, cleanse Phlegm and a dust Choler; The
same virtue is attributed to the strained Juice of them.

Thus much we have thought fit to say of Alexandria, the Seat of the Ancient
Egyptian Kings, and Birthplace of Ptolomy the Prince of Geographers and
Astronomers; from whence it must be concluded, that all the state and
ostentation of this City by Historians mentioned, is to be understood of the
time before its first destruction, A great Staple of rich Merchandise still,
and therefore there are Consuls at Alexandria or Scanderoon, at this day.
however notwithstanding the several desolations thereof, yet always has it
driven on Trade and Merchandise by the continual coming in of Ships from
several Countries; insomuch that diverse European Princes have their Consuls
there, for the Management of Affairs, and Deciding Controversies that may arise
between their inhabitants and their Subjects, to this day.

NExt Alexandria in the East, lies the wasted City Bocchir, by others
Bicchieri, Bocchir, or Canopus
and formerly called This City was so called from Canobus, Menelaus his Pilot,
there buried by his Master, who on these Coasts had suffered Shipwreck. Zacit.
Annal. 2.
Canopus, perhaps from the Egyptian Idol Canopus, which in this Precinct of
Land was called Phtenuti, and there anciently worshipped; Of this place thus
speaks that Prince of Latin Poets, Virgil, Georg. Lib. 4.

Nam quia Pellaei gens fortunata Canopi
Accolit effuso, stagnantem flumine Nilum
Et circum pictis vehitur sua rura Phaselis.
Where happy people plant Canopus Soil,
And dwell near spreading Streams of flowing Nile,
And through their Country painted Vessels glide, etc.
Through the World noted for luxurious Practices, and varied forms of
Effeminacy, whereof the Satyrist thus: -- Luxuria quantum ipse notavi
Barbara famoso non cedit turba Canopo.
Canopean Banquets now seem poor and small, Juven. Sat. 25.

Rome, beggars boasts at Feasts more prodigal.


For within Canopus stood the Temple of Serapis, to whose Festivals resorted
all sorts of people from Alexandria, men and women mixed in painted Barges,
chanting down the Nile Love-Songs, behaving themselves with all sorts of
looseness, beyond the bounds of Modesty; concerning which Statius brings in
Pampinius thus excusing himself: Non ego mercatus Pharia de puppe loquaces
Delicias, doctumve sui convitia Nili
Infantem, linguaque simul salibusque protervum
Dilexi --
I bought no Songs, nor pleased with boys so vile, Lib 5.

That imitate all Vices of the Nile,
Chanting with shameless gestures on the Decks.


Amongst whom, says Seneca, who so avoided vice, yet could not escape infamy,
the very place administering suspicion, and therefore worthily buried in its own
Desolations.

After that is to be seen the Tower and Cape of Bocchir, lying in a dangerous
place, where many Ships sailing from Syria, are bilg'd in the night, falling
short of the Haven of Alexandria; adjoining as it were hereto, two Castles
appear called The Castles of Bocchir; here also is the Sea Bocchir, and below
it the Towns Casar and Athacon.

The next place considerable is the City and Fort of Rosetta, Rosetta.
eight miles from the Mid-land Sea, and thirty from Alexandria, lying upon one
of the Ostiaries of Nile, where the Merchandise brought from Cairo arrive:
Strabo.
Strabo named it Schedia, as some say; though others will have it to be the
Metelis of Ptolomy: The Arabians and Turks now call it Rhaschit or Rasit; the
Egyptians, Rassit. Guilland. Bellon. Description of the City.
The City is small but populous, and as Belon and Jo: Baumgarten say, without
walls, but has nevertheless excellent Buildings, richly gilt and curiously
painted: At the side of the Nile, there are stately Palaces and a
Marketplace, where dwell none but Artificers of all sorts, and Merchants:
there is an exquisite Temple, one of whose Doors looks toward the Market-sted,
another to the Nile, whither they descend upon very neat steps; beneath the
Temple is the Haven, from whence by reason of small Channels the Citizens from
Boats can land their Merchandise or Goods at their Door, being no small
advantage: Without the City in the Suburbs are store of Asses and Mules ready
at livery to be hired by such as travel to Alexandria, or elsewhere.

About this City, but chiefly toward Cario, there grows in the Ditches a
Plant called The Egyptian Plomp or Lotus, Lotus, a Plant.
in such an abundance, that the Leaves, resembling those of the Water Lillies,
cover the whole Channel; The Egyptians call the Flower with its Stalk Arais el
Nil: the Leaf with the Stalk, Bush-nyl, and the Root Biarum. This Plant has
the property of growing exactly as high as the Water in the Ditches, and opens
his Flowers not underneath the Water, but above it: it is certainly true, that
it turns about with the Sun, though the Ancients disputed it.

This Plant for its near resemblance to a Water-lilly, Prosper Alpinus was
deceived in taking it for the very same, though afterward in his Book of
Foreign Plants, he retracted his opinion: Every Leaf has a single Stalk
growing out of the Root, which is thick, long, and round, in shape resembling a
small Pear, the biggest sometimes as large as a Hens Egg: On the outside black,
and full of Fibers, within yellowish and very pelpy, and hard, and sharp in
taste on the tongue: The Flowers are large like white Water Lillies, as we
said; whereof every one grows on the top of a green and round Stalk, smelling
like a Pink: After the Flowers follow round green Cods, containing in distinct
bags a sort of Seed, not unlike that of a Cabbage: After the Earth has drunk
up the Water of Nile, and is dried up, immediately the Leaves, Flowers, and
Fruit, wither and dye.

The Flowers of this Lotus were in former times, The use of the Lotus as well
heretofore, as now.
as Heliodorus writes, wreathed in the Triumphant Garlands of Conquerors: Now
adays the Juice of the Flowers and knobby Cods, mixed with Sugar, by the
Arabians called, Sharbet Nufar, is used against all inward heats: Thus made,
they mingle Sugar and Water, which hanged over the fire, they suffer to boil
till it come to the consistence of a Syrup, then taken off and cooled, the pure
Juice of the Lotus is put into it: The Egyptians in the Summer eat the raw
Stalks with the Heads, being very sweet, moistening, and cooling very much.

A little further up in the Country, there is the small City Natumbes,
Natumbes.
half a days journey from Rosetta, and lying on the opposite shore. Next is the
old City Fuoa or Foa, formerly called Nicy, seated on the Banks of Nile, Fuoa.
five and forty Miles Westward of Rosetta, very populous, but the Streets
within are narrow, having great Suburbs, famous for Beautiful Women, Ladies of
Pleasure residing there, assuming to themselves so much more than the usual
freedom allowed to modest Women; they Entertain, and are Entertained publicly
by their Gal-lants, at Night returning home to their always indulgent and kind
Husbands, without the least rebuke, or once questioning Where have thou been?
About a Mile from Fuoa, lies the Island now named Gezirat Eddeheb, The Golden
Island.
but formerly Nathos, or The Golden Island: Here are many Villages, Mechella.
and stately Palaces, but not to be seen at a distance, by reason of the shadow
of surrounding Trees: Here also is the rich, but ill fenced City Mechella, or
Maquella.

A little forward on the River, stands the un-walled City Derota, Derota and
Michellat Cays.
as also Michellat Cays, on a high Hill. In Derota was heretofore a stately
Church, and the Citizens flourished in wealth and abundance; The Country so
abounding with Sugar, that they pay yearly to the Sultan for the freedom of
making and refining it, a hundred thousand Gold Saraffies or Turkish Crowns:
But within the last Century of years, this place is much decayed, and the
Citizens impoverished.

ELbeahrye or Beheyra, the second part of Egypt, The second part of Egypt and
its extent.
extends from the Mid-land Sea to the Easterly Arm of Nilus, running to
Damiata, and beginning from the Borders of Rosetta, and ending at Faramide,
wherefore the Egyptians call it Sealand, and the Italians, Maremma.

In this Quarter of Egypt, is, first on the East of Beheyra, the Cape or Point
of Brule, in former times known by the name of Pineptimi, and by Ptolomy taken
for one of the Nilian Mouths; it is enclosed in the form of a Haven, and
receives the water, shooting out of the Eastern Arm of the Nile.

Not far from thence lies Damiata, or Damiette, by Nicetas in his Journals of
Emanuel, taken for Tamiathim; but by the Ancients for Pelusium, and by
Stephanus for Tamiates: Guilandinus will have it be Tanis, spoken of in the
Holy Scripture; but Auchard distinguishes Tanis and Damiata, making Tanis the
same with Tenex or Tenez, which has given the name to the Tanitian Mouth.
Others will not only have Pelusium, as we said, but also the ancient
Heliopolis to be the now Damiata; which error and mistake is very great, since
Pelusium, according to general consent, is seated near the Mid-land Sea,
whereas Heliopolis lies up within the Land, many Miles from the Sea.

Damiata lies in a bottom, Damiata.
about two Miles from the Mediterranean on the shore of Nile, which runs
through and waters it on both sides, on whose Banks there stands a Fort upon
one side, but on the other are only Houses, for having no Walls, the lowness
of its situation, makes it strong and tenable enough, by reason thereof it
becomes also most delightful and fertile; the Enclosures and Gardens abounding
with Trees of Cassia, Limons, Vines, Musae, and all manner of other delicious
Fruits, which here according to their several kinds, are more delighted with
the soil than all the rest of Egypt; for by the Trenches here (which is so no
where else) after the retreat of the Nile, the waters are let in to moisten the
thirsty Lands, in the time of Drowth. In these Trenches grows a Weed that moves
to and fro upon the water, resembling that we call Ducks-Meat, or Ducks-Madder,
without Stalk or Root, shooting downward, only many small strings and threads:
The Leaves are of a pale green, like those of Dogs-tongue, but shorter,
broader, thicker, whiter, more bristly and stinging. This Plant is the true
Stratiotes, Milfoyl, or Souldiers-Herb of the Ancients, having Leaves like
Houseleek, Water House-leek.
and is therefore called by the Egyptians, Hay-alem-Emovi, that is, Water
House-leek: The juice or powder good to stop Blood.
It has no smell, and in taste is choaky and dry: The Egyptians use the Leaves
for the same Diseases, The juice or powder good to stop Blood.
for which we take Mallows: The Bedori, or Countrey-women, use the Juice or
Powder of the dry Leaves, daily a quarter of an Ounce, The Leaves cure wounds.
against all immoderate Fluxes of Blood: The Countrymen cure all Wounds with
the Leaves, The Leaves cure wounds.
which they apply stamped or crushed in a strange manner.

Next in the East stands Tenez, Tenez.
or Tenex, by Burchard called Taphnis, and taken for Tanis in Holy Scripture,
The Lake Stagnone.
being in the Land of Goshen: Adjacent thereto is the Lake by Mariners (as
Pinetus reports) called Stagnone or Barathra; by the Inhabitants, Bayrene; and
by Montegarze in his Travels, Marera; This Lake is very dangerous, because of
the Sands, whereof some appear above, and others treacherously sculking
underneath.

The next in course is Arrise, Arrise.
formerly Ostracine, and in many old Maps Ostraca, and Ostraci: then comes
Pharamide, by some styled Pharamica, and formerly Rhinocura, and by Strabo
placed on the Coast of Egypt and Syria; Burchard thinks it is Pharma, which he
says is large and well built, but in a manner deserted by the Inhabitants,
overpowr'd by the increase of Serpents.

From thence passing Southward by the point of Nile toward Cairo, Seru.
Rascaillis.
there are two ancient places called Seru and Rascaillis, near Neighbors. There
is here Masura or Masur, Masur.
formerly Miscormus, near a branch of Nile, called by the Inhabitants
Batsequer. Here Lewis the Ninth, King of France, was taken Prisoner in the
Battle which he fought against the Sultan of Egypt. After Masura follows
Demanora, and many other places, of which the most worthy of note, is Fustatio
or Fostat, Fustat.
that is, A Pavilion. It is a small place lying on the Nile, and called by the
Inhabitants Misreatichi, that is, The Old City, which name by good right it
challenges in respect of Cairo, whose Founder was an Arabian Commander, named
Hanier, sent thither by the Califfe his Master; on the side of Chargni, Mevy
Cambri.
lies Mevy Cambri, betwixt Damiata and Grand Caire, after which may be reckoned
Caracania, Bulgaite, Abessus, and Souba.

Having passed the forementioned places, we now come to enter the third part of
Egypt, called Sahyd, otherwise according to Sanutius, Thebes, from Thebes, once
the Court and Seat of the Egyptian Kings, who afterward removed to Memphis,
and from thence to Alexandria, and afterward to Cairo. This Province extends
it self from the borders of Buchieri to Cairo, and so to Assue.

Grand Caire is the Metropolis, not only of Sahyd, but of all Egypt, and is by
many supposed the ancient Memphis; some distinguish it into the Old and New;
understanding by the Old, the Egyptian Babylon, and by the New, the present
Cairo, but this determination is not without some scruple; for that first the
ruinous heaps of the ancient Cairo, seem too old to belong to this place; and
secondly, the Egyptian Babylon, by the testimony of Strabo, and other Ancients,
lies upon the edge of Delta, to the left hand by the Eastern shore of Nile,
almost opposite to Memphis, which Herodotus and others, placed on the West; The
City CAJRVS. De Stadt CAIRUS.
besides the near lying of the Pyramides, which belonged to Memphis, and the
nearness of the edge of Delta, where Babylon stood, according to Strabo,
clearly evince that the Egyptian Babylon could not lie otherwise than over
against New Cairo, on the East side of Nile, in that place where are seen the
ruined heaps of Old Cairo. Others on the contrary place Memphis on the East of
Nile, and will have that old City to have stood, where at this day, Cairo
stands, but we will not undertake the controversy, but leave it to be disputed.

Cairo then, taken for Memphis, The various names of Cairo.
which was reputed the most ancient of all Cities, is called by the Egyptians
or Coptists, Monphta; by the Armenians, Messor; by the Chaldeans, Cabra; by the
Hebrews one while Moph, otherwhile Noph or Migdal, that is, Wrath: then again
Maphez, but commonly Mizraim (which last name also the later Hebrews, as we
have said, have given to the whole Country.) The Turks call it Mitzir or
Missir, and Alcaire: Marmol.
Marmol and others say, that Cairo is derived from the Arabian word Elcahira,
which signifies a Society or Cloister: some will have it from the Arabian and
Persian, Mercere, or rather from the word Mesre; adding moreover that an
Egyptian King named Mohez, on the highest place of Mercere, made a Bulwark, and
built a Castle to strengthen it against all incursions of Enemies, and called
it by his Daughters name Caireth: This place at length grew so great, that the
first name Mercere was utterly forgotten, and the name Caireth received, and
now known to us in Europe by no other name than that of Grand Cairo. Leo
Africanus, Leo. Afr Marmol, and others.
Marmol, and others consent in one opinion, that this City is not ancient,
being founded by Gehoar-El-Quitib, the Subject of a nameless Caliph, from all
which it may be concluded that the old Memphis is either quite ruined, or had
another situation.

Memphis is an Egyptian word, and has its derivation from Monphta, The Original
of the word Memphis.
as we said, which in the Egyptian Tongue signifies, The Water of God, and by
the Grecians changed into Memphis: For what cause, or how the City got this
denomination, Opinions are various; one, not improbable may be this. Kircher.
Chorogr. Egypt. p. 27.
When the Sons of Cham began to send Colonies into these parts, some say they
pitched their first Tents upon the Memphian Hills, the Lower parts generally,
as aforementioned, lying under water as a Lake, but afterward as the Ground
became more dry, the City was Built by Mizraim the Son of Cham upon the Shore
of Nilus, calling it by his own name, Mizraim: afterward the Country and City
by the fruitful overflowings of the River, becoming more fertile, they conceive
it was called Monphta, that is, The Water of God, and by variation of Dialect,
corrupted to Memphis. Herodotus affirms in his second Book, Herodot. Enterpe.
that Memphis was Built by the first Egyptian King Menes, who is held to be the
same with Mizraim.

This Memphis, now Cairo, was divided into four parts, viz. Bulach, Charaffa,
Old Cairo, and Grand Cairo; the two first were generally accounted among the
Suburbs of Grand Cairo, but are now, (as also Old Cairo) so ill furnished with
Houses, that they seem rather Villages than Cities. It contains in its
circuit, Beauvau.
the mentioned places, with their Suburbs, according to Beauvau, is thirty
Leagues, though others extend the Limits further.

Bulach, by some supposed Babylon, a Port belonging to Cairo on the East,
Bulach.
having formerly four thousand houses: There dwell now Artificers and
Tradesmen, especially such as deal in Corn, Oil, and Sugar: The stately
Churches and Palaces fronting the Nile, yield a pleasant and delightful
prospect, although its beauty is much diminished and impaired by the several
Wars, in which it had no mean share of Suffering.

Between Bulach and Grand Caire, Lesbrechi.
lies a great place by the Inhabitants named Lesbrechi, frequently drowned
with the Nile, which a little below Bulach, divides into many branches, whereof
one runs to Alexandria, another to Damiata, and others to several other
places: From Bulach to Grand Caire, the Land is all flat, and the way very
pleasant, being much frequented with Travelers; but the most beautiful part,
is a place called Usbechia in the Suburbs, near the City gate; this Usbechia is
a round piece of Land, encompassed about with Houses, which yield a prospect
infinitely pleasant, not only when the Fields are decked with Flowers, but
also, when by the recess of Nile, it seems like a drayn'd Pond, full of various
sorts of living Fishes.

Charaffa, Charaffa.
otherwise Caraffar or Massar, another part of the Suburbs, lies two Miles from
Cairo, it contained formerly two thousand Houses, which extended seven Miles in
circuit; but long since, this place where formerly the Sultans kept their
Court, has lain waste: Here were many Monuments built with high and stately
Arches, and within adorned with several carved Images, which the superstitious
people worshipped, as Consecrated Relics of Saints, covering the Floors with
Tapestry: Here also is a Custom-house, whence the Wares which come from Sahid
pay their Duties, and there at this day, Joseph's seven Granaries for Corn, so
supposed, are showed to Strangers.

Old Cairo stands conveniently toward the East, Old Cairo.
but un-walled, although Drusius bestows upon it a Wall of four and twenty
Miles: At this day, as Belloon says, there are scarce Houses enough to make a
small Village, which is inhabited by Greek Christians and Armenians. Pet. de la
Vall.
This Old Cairo, Peter de la Valla supposes to be the ancient Egyptian Babylon,
now lying full of ruinous heaps; the Houses few, and standing every where at
distance one from another, wherein now some few Christians inhabit; here were
according to the same de la Valla, several Churches, whereof one dedicated to
St. Barbara, with some Relics of her and other Saints; St. Barbara's and St.
Georges Churches.
another of St. George, built upon a Hill, so as it may be viewed both from the
Old and New Cairo, and the Country round about with great delight: Another was
heretofore probably the Church of the Coptists, built upon the ruins of a
small House, wherein they say the Virgin Mary dwelt a long time, while she was
in Egypt. The Relics of this Holy House are yet to be seen under the great
Altar of this Church in a deep dark place, with some small Pillars, whereupon
the Altar rests: and some remainders of pieces of Timber: Besides these Suburbs
lying without Grand Caire, there are three other Suburbs, as Beb-zuaila, or
Beb-zuila, Gemethailon, and Beb-elloch.

The Suburb Beb-zuaila, The Suburb Beb-zuaila.
otherwise Missuletiffe or Miffruletich, lies at the going out of the Gate,
bearing the same name, containing about two thousand Houses: and from West to
South about a mile and a half, and toward the North about a mile to the Suburb
Beb-elloch. Here are many Mosques and fair Halls for Guilds, especially one
built by Sultan Hesen; as also a Castle of the Soldans, at this day the Court
of the Turkish Bassa's, lying at the foot of the Fountain Mochattan, surrounded
with strong and great Walls: The Palaces being many and large, are paved with
various-colour'd Marble, and the Rooms rarely Painted and richly Gilt. The
Windows curiously made with Painted glass of several colors, and the Doors of
excellent Wood, carved and wrought with all sorts of Artificial work, and
gilded. Here formerly resided the Soldans Wives, Children, Attendants, Waiters,
and Lifeguard; And in times of Feasting they showed here their Magnificence,
at the State-Receipts and Entertainments given to Ambassadors, when brought to
Audience, or otherwise admitted to more private Courtly invitations.

The great Suburb Gemethailon, The Suburb Gemethailon.
reaching Westward to some decayed places of Old Caire was founded before the
erecting of Cairo it self, by one Tailon, a Subject to the Califfe or Governor
of Bagdet, a Commander in Egypt, who left the old City, and came to dwell in
this Suburb, where he built a Stately Palace, and a Magnificent Mosque: Here
also dwell Tradesmen and Artificers, who for the most part are Moors of Barbary.

The Suburb Beb-ellock, which is none of the least, Beb-ellock Suburb.
stands about a mile from Grand Caire, having in it near three thousand Houses,
inhabited severally by Artificers of all sorts: In a void and spacious part
whereof is a great Palace, with a Court of Justice, founded by a Mammalucke,
named Jasbach, then one of the Sultans Counselors, from whom it took the name
Jasbachia. The common people hereof, after the Mahumetan Public The Turks
Divine Service.
Sahala is ended, give themselves up to all lasciviousness and Debaucheries,
and seeing of vain Sights, and idle Shows, for out of the City, Stage Players,
Juglers, and Morrice-Dancers present themselves, showing many Camels, Asses,
and Dogs in a ridiculous manner Dancing to make sport: Fencing Masters also and
Singers, who by their Gestures and Songs, seem to act to the life, Egypt
Conquered by the Arabians.

Grand Caire, lies very near the middle of Egypt, The situation of Grand
Caire.
about two thousand paces to the Eastward of Nile, between the ruins of Old
Caire, and the Circassiers-street upon a plain below the foot of the Hill
Elmucattant or Moncatun, where is a strong Castle, giving to the City the
repute of a most remarkable Fortification. In this City are, and reside persons
of almost all Nations, How inhabited.
coming thither to Trade and Merchandise: But the principal inhabitants are
Moors, Turks, Jews, Coptists, Grecians and Armenians: At this day it is the
prime of all the Egyptian Cities, exceeding in bigness, Rome, Constantinople,
Villamont. Its compass.
and most others by us accounted the greatest, being in circuit according to
Villamont, two and twenty Leagues, so that a Horseman in full speed, can scarce
ride about it in ten hours, but Grand Caire, Old Caire, and the Suburbs, are
three Dutch Miles long; but Villamont says, Old and New Caire, together with
Bulach and Chatafat, are thirty Leagues long, and twenty broad.

The City is Walled round, except on the side next Nile: The form of it.
Villamont. Belloon.
Villamont says the form of it is Oval; but Belloon Triangular, of which the
Castle lying upon a Hill makes one Angle, whence the Walls are the second, and
thence going to to the North shapes the third, wherein is a Fort and Castle:
And whereas both the City and Suburbs are close built, with a great number of
Sumptuous and Stately Edifices, which hinder the sight of the Walls, therefore
such as have but superficially viewed it, have taken occasion to say that Cairo
is without Walls, whereas in truth it is encompassed with strong Walls and
Gates, The Gates.
of which, the last are all plated over and strengthened with Iron; below the
chief Gate on the East side, is that called Beb-Nansre or Beb-Nansare, the Gate
of Victory: Then Beb-zuaila leading toward Nile, and Old Caire: Next
Beb-el-futuch or Beb-el-fetoch, the Gate of Triumph, beyond which lies the Lake
Esbici.

The Houses by some accounted thirty thousand, The Houses.
but with those in the Suburbs, about Cairo, in Bulach, and adjoining, are
little less than three hundred thousand: Each of them is on the top flat, as
most of the Houses in Egypt; the Doors are narrow and low, so that none can go
in or out, unless they stoop, and this is the custom not only here in Egypt,
but in all Turkish Countries, that they might avoid quartering of Horse in time
of Wars: The Locks of their Doors are of Wood, but as curiously wrought with
variety of wards, and fit for use, as ours in Europe: within, the Houses are
trimmed and embelished with Carved work, and Painting, and inlay'd with Ebony.
A wood growing by the Lake Mareotis, whereof Lucan in his Tenth Book thus: --
Hebenus Mareotica vastos
Non Operit Posts --
-- Nor the huge Pillars made
Of Mareotic Ebony. --


And in the Island Meroes, as Lucan in the same Book.

-- Nigris Meroen faecunda colonis
Laeta comis Hebeni --
-- Meroes Black people proud
Of Ebon Tresses. --
a Tree being cut down, almost equallizing Stone in hardness.

Most of the Houses stand upon open Vaults, either of ordinary Stone or Bricks,
baked in the Sun, and laid in Clay Mortar, only some few by the water side,
are raised about the height of a man with Hewn Stones to withstand the
overflowing of Nile: A great many are built only of Reeds, others both built
and covered with them.

Beauvais reckons here six thousand and eight hundred remarkable Mosques, The
Mosques, and their number.
besides the ordinary ones, which together amount to the number of four and
twenty thousand; but Villamont lessens the number to eleven hundred: of all
which the Mosque Bemasar having thirty curious Pillars, surmounts all the rest
in Beauty.

There are also several Hospitals and Almes-houses, one of which has the
yearly Revennue of an hundred thousand Sultanies or Turkish Crowns, where all
manner of Wounded Soldiers and Sick people are received, and with great care
attended by Skilful Surgeons and expert Physicians, for the recovery of
their healths.

Within the City is a great piece of Land, containing about ten Acres, so
fruitful that it is yearly sown, and never lies fallow: There also is the
Besestan or Marketplace, where all sorts of fine Wares and Merchandise are
sold: Some Writers say the Citizens reckon about eighteen thousand Streets, The
number of Streets.
which others increase to six and twenty thousand, all which have several
names, and in the Evening for preventing Tumults and Uproars, are locked up by
their own attending Porters; they are very long, but narrow: The Houses are
small, but stand so close in some places, that there is scarce room to go
between them, much less any convenient passages, and in the Evening are shut up
with the same care and diligence as the City gates.

Without the City runs a long Street, Circassiers Street.
taking name from the Circassiers or Mamaluckes, who formerly therein used to
exercise the Riding of Horses, and to present other Shows: This opens into a
plain enclosed with Walls within, which is a stately walk adorned with Flower
Pots and open Spaces, whereby whatever's done in the Street or Plain, may be
seen: The Windows in stead of Iron Grates, have Stones with several holes made
in them, for the convenience of Women, who then, may peep through and see all
that passes or is done in the Street, without being seen.

Moreover, Another Street with Mosques.
there is another long and broad Street, wherein are convenient and handsome
Mosques, though small: Adjoining to every of which, stands a Garden, on one
side appearing stately Monuments made after the Turkish manner, which they say,
the Circassiers built for their own private Devotion, and there each set forth
his Burying-place for himself and Family: This Street is one of the most
Stately Remarks in Cairo, being very broad, and above a thousand paces long,
and all the Palaces and Mosques adorned with high Towers; but lying so far
distant from the City, it is not inhabited, but as it were utterly waste.

Over this City, a Castle or Fort raises his head standing upon a Rock, The
Castle.
to which the ascent is by a great and wide pair of Stairs: The form of it is
circular, but so capacious, that it seems almost a City of it self, encompassed
with slight old-fashioned Walls, with Turrets and Battlements betwixt: The
Dwellings within afford a most pleasing Retirement, because from every quarter
may be seen all within and without the City, and from the top, as from the
height of the Pyramid, the Eye may sport it self over the low and level Plain:
And the Stately Chambers, Banqueting and Withdrawing Rooms, yet to be seen,
plainly evidence the Pomp and Grandeur of the Soldans and Mamaluckes: For so
long as their Kingdom flourished, this was a most beautiful place, the Califfe
or Sultan having therein his Throne of Massy Gold, himself seldom or never
seen, except a little while to some Ambassadors; round the Wall runs a Marble
ledge a foot broad: The Gates and Windows enchac'd with Mother of Pearl, Ebony,
Crystal, and Coral, and all the rest very Artificial painted, and richly gilt.

FRom Cairo also set forth the Turkish Pilgrims, The Pilgrimage to Mecha.
which annually travel in Caravans to Mecha, to visit Mahomet's Sepulcher. This
is the Head City of Arabia Felix lying by the Red Sea: Eight days Journey from
which is Medina, where is Mahomet's Tomb; to which out of Egypt once a year in
November, go sometimes twelve or fifteen, nay, sometimes forty thousand
Pilgrims to offer according to their ability, Sacrifice and Burnt-Offerings to
their Prophet. Over the whole Caravan, one Superior Commander is appointed,
called Hamirag, who leads them under the conduct and safeguard of three
hundred Soldiers, furnished with Bows and Muskets to Mecha and Medina, and
without much delay and hindrance brings them back to Cairo (except sometimes
assaulted, hurt, plundered, and slain by the Arabians in the Wilderness.) The
number of Camels attending this great Company, are accounted by some sixty, and
by others ninety thousand. The Grand Seignior, alone, bestows upon this
Pilgrimage without accounting particular expenses of the people, six hundred
thousand Ducats, a fourth part of the whole Revenue of Egypt; for many poor
people and Beggars go thither on foot without any Money or Provision, for whom
the Grand Seignior causes many Camels to be furnished, to be ready in case of
sickness, faintness, or weariness.

Each person must provide himself of all Necessaries, even to Water, The order
of setting forth.
because in the whole way there is scarce any to be found: Before the Caravan
sets forth, all the Pilgrims and Wagons are to be viewed and searched, which
in good order passing quite through Cairo from the Castle where the Bashaw
dwells, draw forth out of the City-gates into an open Field, where they wait
one for another, and sometimes above eight days are spent before they are all
gotten together.

Before the Caravan, march the Troops of Horse, or Cavalcade, followed by the
chief Bakers, Cooks, Smiths, Sutlers, and other Artificers, each having a Camel
laden with Necessaries needful for their Journey. Then follow the Horses of the
Hamiragh, or Superior Commander, some of which carry Vessels of water, others
several necessary things to be used on the way: After these Horses, two Camels,
who are to draw Wagons or Chariots, accompanied with a great number of other
Camels, some with Burdens, and some without, in time of need to carry the poor
and those that are Sick, as we mentioned before; after that a great number of
other Camels belonging to persons of Quality, and many Musquettiers and
Pilgrims on foot, following the Janissaries that are bravely set out with
Muskets, and with Plumes in their Turbants; then the Commander of the
Carravan, and other Voluntier Votaries: Last of all, a small Pavilion of Silk
stitched with Gold, is carried upon a Camel, by which he so becomes
infranchis'd, and for ever after freed from bearing burdens, and honored with a
stately Caparison thrown over him at the Tomb of Mahomet, from thence attended
with many other Camels in great number, all in a rich and curious manner
Equipped and Harnessed.

In this Order these Votary Travelers set on together, under the conduct of
the Hamiragh, toward Mecha, and from thence back to the Grave at Medina, which
they perform in threescore days time: Beyond Mecha, which is under the Turks
obedience, an Arabian Prince rules by the name of Seriffe, which all assume
that derive themselves from Mahomet's Stock, and by Records and Writings can
show their Relation by Consanguinity. This Prince commands ten thousand Horse,
and twenty thousand Foot Soldiers, wherewith suddenly upon report of the
Pilgrims approach to his Borders, he goes out to the Mountains, and there stays
till the Pilgrims return, which is twenty days after; which flying of this
Seriffe, is for fear of the Turks, by this means preventing any snare that may
entrap him, or otherwise.

The Grand Seignior has from this Seriffe, Presents sent from the Seriffe to
the Grand Seignior.
several Presents every year sent to himself, as a Golden Panser is a
Brigandine or Coat of Mayl.
Panser; and to his Children and Brethren, a hundred and fifty thousand
Ducats; In return whereof, the Grand Seignior bestows upon him four hundred
pieces of very fine Silk Cloths, and three or four pound of Balsam; the
Governor of Cairo, and the Commander or Hamiragh of the Pilgrims, each of them
half a pound: There are also two other Hamiraghs, with many Pilgrims; one from
Damascus, and the other from Arabia Felix, to whom he gives some Balsam, but
very little: From Mecha all these Pilgrims Travel to the Mountain Arafat, The
Place where the Pilgrims Sacrifice.
at the foot of which lies a place by them called Maura, where they Sacrifice,
in remembrance of the Sacrifice of Abraham made there, Supposed to be where he
Offered his Son Isaac.
as they believe.

THe Soil, especially about Cairo, produces great variety of Plants; and the
Gardens and Orchards are full of many fruitful Trees of all sorts.

In the Fields about Cairo, Bammia.
grows the Plant Bammia: It shoots forth four or five Stalks aloft, resembling
Cassia in Leaves and Flowers, though somewhat differing in bigness and
hardness: The Flower has five Leaves of a pale yellow color; the Fruit is
five, and sometimes ten cornered, and not much unlike wild Cucumers: The Fruit,
Leaf, and Seed, of what use in Diet and Physic.
The common people, when it is green, boil it Seed and all, with some Flesh in
Broth, and eat it; the Seed is dressed like Pease and Beans with us: the
Leaves are very cooling, and used in Physic against several Diseases.

Another Plant like the former, Mosch.
is Mosch, whose Seed the vulgar call Abel-Mosch, because it smells like the
Eastern Musk; from the likeness of which BAMMIA. MOSCH
smell it has the name of Mosch, the Seed answering the best Musk in color,
taste, and smell, as we have said: The Arabians herewith so well can
counterfeit the Eastern Musk, that expert Merchants very hardly discover the
cheat; but a small time makes it plain, for the lovely smell of the Seed in the
counterfeit soon fades and vanishes.

This Plant shoots forth upon strait, round, and hairy Stalks, where from one
and the same joint grow two Leaves, one small, the other great, having long
Stalks beset with whitish hairs: The Leaves in shape resemble Lousyweed, and
different from those of Bammia only in bigness: The Flowers are almost like
the Bammian, and shoot forth between the Body and Stalk of the Leaves,
succeeded by round blackish Cods, which include a small, black, bitterish Seed,
smelling as strong as Musk.

The whole Plant is hot almost in the first degree, having a slimy Moisture;
The use of it.
the Leaves boiled in water, and applied in form of a Plaster or Pultiss to a
Wound or Sore, though it makes the party faint and weak, yet has good
Operation: Of the Seed which is more hot and drying, are made Purging Pills for
Women to suppress the rising of the Mother; But put upon the fire, and the
vapor taken up into the Body, draws down the Menstrua.

About Cairo, and in many other places of Egypt, grows the Tamarinde Tree,
Tamarinde.
which in brief, (although the East Indies and Arabia, is the proper Country
thereof) for its manifold uses in Egypt, we will here describe. The Egyptians
call it Derelsides; the Arabians inhabiting Egypt, Tamer-hendi; that is, the
Indian Plant, because it is brought over from the East Indies to Arabia Felix,
or from Ethiopia, or the Moors Country.

This Tree is as big as the Damesin Tree, full of Branches, The form of it.
and has leaves like the Myrtle, the blossoms are white, resembling Orange
Flowers, out of the middle of which shoot forth four white thin strings, whence
proceed thick Husks, first green, but when ripe, of an ash color, where are
rugged thick Seeds, with a black tartish pelp: The Leaves always follow the
Sun, The Leaves turn after the Sun.
and therefore are called Heliatropes, or Sun-followers; for when the Sun sets,
they up of themselves, and at its rising open again: This turning of the Leaves
is observed in many Egyptian Plants, So do the Acatia, Abrus, Absus, and Sesbus.
viz. The Acatia, Abrus, Absus, Sesbus, and this Tamarinde.

These Leaves, which fall not off in Winter, are somewhat sharp, and not
unpleasant to the taste, used to kill the Worms in Children: Moreover the same
infused a Week in Spring water, Their use.
makes a Purge; the Arabians conserve the small and green, as also the large
and ripe Husks, and their Pelp in Sugar, which Travelers take with them when
they journey through the African Wildernesses, and therewith, when they are by
the heat of the Sun inflamed and thirsty, it admirably cools, comforts, and
quenches their Drowth; (a special Blessing!) nay, sometimes they cure burning
Fevers: The Liquor wherein these Leaves have been steeped a Week, sweetened
with Sugar and drank, is good against Malignant and putrid Agues: Lastly, they
use them in all Inflammations of the Liver and Reins, and also to cure the
Gonorrhaea.

In these parts about Cairo, Calaf.
especially in moist places, grows a little shrubby Tree, like a Willow, the
Egyptians call it Caleb or Calaf; The Leaves are of a fingers length, and two
fingers broad at full growth: The Flowers grow in form of a little ball,
between the Body and Stalks of the Leaves; they are white, of a pleasant smell,
grow plentifully, the Flowers commonly equallizing the Leaves on the Tree.

From the Blossoms they extract a water called Macahalaf, The use of it.
accounted very powerful against all Putrefaction and Poison, and also a great
Cordial; whence happily the Plant gained its name, Joan. Vesting. in lib.
Alphin: de Plant. Egypt.
Caleb or Calub, in the Arabian tongue, signifying a Heart; The water of it is
also specially commended against all Malignant or Quartan Agues, and is given
to young Children, with some Grains of the Bezoar Stone, to drive out the
Small Pox and the Measles.

About seven thousand paces from Cairo, El-Mattharia.
lies a Hamlet or Village called Mattarea, and El Mattharia, by some thought
to be the ancient Hermopolis, but untruly, yet by consent of most Writers is
esteemed to have been the Residence of the Virgin Mary and Joseph, The place
whither the Virgin Mary fled with Christ from Herod's persecution.
with our Savior, when they fled thither from the persecution of Herod: There
is still to be seen a Wall with a little Window, where the Christian Priests
celebrate Mass upon a small Wooden Altar, and on the right side of the same
Wall, the Turks have erected a Mosque: There also springs a Fountain, wherein,
they say, the Virgin washed our Saviors Swadling-cloths; the water whereof is
yet in great esteem, having as they say, a special power for the Curing of
Agues: Close by this Village is a Tree known to the Ancients by the name of
Sycamore, Sycamore Tree, or Pharaoh's Fig.
and by the present Christians of Egypt is called Tin El Pharaon, Pharaohs Fig;
but by the Natives, Giamez. The Body of this Tree is low and broad, parting it
self into two or three spreading Branches, from which again spring others
strong and large, close one by another, (...) in Greek signifies a Fig. and
(...) a Mulberry.
which in Summer afford Travelers a pleasant cool shade, to keep off the
scorching Sunbeams: The whole Tree in its Stock, Branches, Fruit, Milk,
roughness of Leaves, and Color, resembles our Figtree, but in form and bigness
of Leaves, which never fall off all Winter, like the Mulberry: It is, as many
aver, so fertile, that it is never without Fruit, it growing on the Stock and
thick Branches, and never on the uppermost, as Dioscorides has mis-reported.
The Fruit of it called Figs.
This Fruit they call Figs, growing out of a Milk that issues from slits in the
Bark, without which it would be barren, for each slit sends forth a small
Branch, bearing sometimes three, five, seven, or more Figs, hollow within, and
full of a yellowish small dust, which commonly turns to little Worms: These
Figs eaten are very hurtful to the Stomach, making it faint, weak, and subject
to vomit; but they are good to cool and moisten such as walk in the heat of the
Sun, being moderately taken; they have a purging quality, and cure all heat and
hard Swellings, if applied by way of Plaster, or Pultiss.

The Learned Ulpian speaking of the Miscarriages of strangers, says, Vlpian. It
is not to be plucked up by the Roots.
It is commanded that none should presume to pluck up a Sycamore by the Roots,
because growing upon the Trenches at the foot of Nile, they bind the Earth
fast together with their Roots. It grows not of the Seed, for the Fruit has no
Seed in it, but is propagated by Slips set in the Earth, suddenly springing up
and growing in a little while to great largeness, and continues very long.

That which now grows in Mattharea, A Sycamore in Matarea.
the Inhabitants believe and held to be the very same, in whose Concave
formerly the Virgin Mary, Mary the Virgin, and Jesus hide themselves therein.
flying from Jerusalem to avoid Herod's Persecution, hid her self, and her
Child, our Savior, for some days, and ever since it is held in great esteem,
especially the Hollow of that Tree wherein Christ lay concealed, which the
Turks themselves say proceeded from the Spirit of the great God; whereupon they
also show great Devotion at this Place and Tree, accounting Christ, next
Mahomet, for a great Prophet. Others affirm, that this Tree by a Miracle was
split in two parts, between which the Virgin Mary, with her Child JESUS, and
Joseph, put themselves to dis-appoint the Persecuting Pursuers, whereinto they
were no sooner entered, but it immediately by like Miracle closed again, till
the Herodian Child-slaughterers passed by, and then suddenly re-open'd to
deliver its charge, so as at this day is to be seen: They report also, The
Illegitimates cannot walk under it.
that none unlawfully begotten can walk along under this Tree; It is
encompassed with a low Ditch, on whose edge a bank of Earth is cast up for the
ease of the Beholders: the top-branches are still green and lovely, though the
Body toward the Root is miserably spoiled; it having been observed that who
ever comes out of zeal to visit or kiss this Tree, commonly cuts off a piece of
the Trunk, to keep it in remembrance.

These kinds of Trees grow in several other places of Egypt in great plenty:
some of that largeness, that three men can scarce fathom them about. They are
found also in the Island of Cyros, Tripoli, and at this day in several Gardens
of Europe, being brought hither out of Egypt, though our Sycamore never bears
Fruit, but only puts forth flourishing Branches and Leaves.

It was this kind of Tree upon which Zacheus climbed to see Christ, By St.
Luke it is called Sycomoraea.
by St. Luke in his nineteenth Chapter and fourth Verse, called in Greek (...),
that is, Sycomoraea: and the same which our Translation renders a Fig Tree,
which seeing fruitless he cursed, that it should never bear Fruit more,
whereupon it presently withered.

Close by El-Mattharia in a Marshy and moist place, caused by the long lying of
the water of Nile upon it, grows a Plant called Beid-El-Ossar, Beid-El-Ossar.
but by Arabian Physicians Ossar and El-Usar: It has been brought and planted
in Europe in several Gardens, where it grows very great and blossometh,
Vesting. in Lib. P. Alpin. de Plant Egypt.
but never bears Fruit. The Roots grow in great clusters, out of which sprout
Stocks up to the height of a man. The Leaves stand in couples, being thick,
firm, broad at the Stalk, and oval at the end; As well from the young Leaves as
the ripe, The form of it.
which are of a pale, light Green, and also from the Stalks and Branches
broken, there drops an exceeding sharp and bitter Milk, which in those
Countries growing hard, from its whiteness is called Manna, or Saccar El-Usar:
The Saffron colored and purple Blossoms grow in bunches at the tops of the
Branches, and hang by tufts on long Stalks bowing toward the Earth, and
yielding Bees a pleasant food: The Fruit when ripe is large, resembling the
Cods of a Camel, The reason of the Name Ossar.
whence it might possibly take the Name Beid-El-Ossar; Ossar in the Arabian
Tongue signifying the Cod of a Beast.

In the Seed is Wool as soft as Silk, which is used in stead of Tinder, being
apt to take fire from the least spark: The outermost Skin is overgrown with a
thin hairy Wool, called by the Arabians Escera, and Scerara.

The stamped Leaves unboyled, The use of it.
or else boiled in water, and applied in form of a Plaster, cure Diseases
coming of Cold; of the Wool are made Beds and Quilts: Alpin. de Plant Egypt.
The Milk, which many keep in Vessels, fetches off the Hair from the Hides of
Beasts, lying awhile steeped therein: Dried, it makes a violent Purge, causing
a deadly Bloody Flux; but it is an excellent Remedy for the curing all Freckles
and Spots in the Skin, the parts affected being anointed therewith.

In some Gardens or Orchards of the same El-Mattharia, The Balsam-tree grows in
Arabia.
grow several Balsam-trees, trees, Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Pliny, Justine,
Strabo.
though their proper Country is only Arabia the Happy, as Theophrastus,
Dioscorides, Pliny, Justine, Strabo, and other ancient Writers, have asserted.
The Balsam-trees are strangers in Egypt, only preserved in those Gardens,
never growing wild, but brought from Mecha in Arabia beyond the Red Sea, by
the Turkish Pilgrims visiting Mahomets Tomb there: They continue not long, but
fade or wither by the alteration of the Soil, or negligent looking after, in
whose room others of the same, brought over the same way, are planted anew:
These Trees, say those Pilgrims, grow in vast numbers close by Mecha and
Medina, upon the Mountains and flat Grounds; as also in sandy and barren
places, though indeed such as grow in barren Land produce little or no Balsam,
but much Seed, which is sold into Europe, and the Inhabitants to make them the
more fruitful, remove them into fatter Soyls.

That Arabia is the native Place, and proper Country of Balsam-trees, is not
only testified by the said Pilgrims, but many ancient Writers, especially
Josephus, Josephus lib. 8. Hist. Jud.
in his Eighth Book of the Jewish History, who says, That the Queen of Saba
brought out of Arabia to Judea, a Balsam-tree, and presented it as a Gift to
Solomon, whence afterward others were produced. But Homer celebrates Egypt for
a Country abounding with all sorts of Medicinal Plants and Herbs; among which,
take this his wondrous Cordial: Joves Daughter Hellen, Hom. Od. 4 Lib.
then her self bethought,
Straight sending for a Cordial to compound,
Would Rage and Grief both in Oblivion drowned;
Who ere drinks this commixt with Wine, though dead
He saw his Parents, not one Tear would shed
In a whole day; nor him his Brother more,
Or Son would trouble, weltring in their gore.
On her this Medicine to appease all woe,
Did Polydamna, Thonus Wife, bestow,
Rich Egypts Product: many Simples there
Make wondrous Compounds, some that deadly are;
The Natives great Physicians prove, and all
From Apollo.
Paeon boast their high Original.
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).


And not only heretofore, but to this time, in those Parts such Trees
propagate, and their Balsam in great quantities carried into many Eastern
Countries, Sykomorus. Kal^t. Tamarind-boom. Balz^m-boom.
where by the report of the Arabians, it is in esteem and very dear; the profit
whereof the Arabians finding so extraordinary, they all began with great
earnestness to remove the young Trees from the sandy and mountainous Places,
and transplant them in Gardens upon fat grounds, by which means there are a
multitude of Balsam-gardens: It being also further provided by Authority of the
Law, that none but the Magistrates should sow, or set this Plant; neither may
any man without license pluck off the Balsam Blossoms, Branches, or Fruit.

The Balsam-tree shoots very high with few Leaves, which as Dioscorides says,
The Form of a Balsamtree.
are of a green color, whitish, and do not fall off in winter: The Wood is
gummy, cleaving to the fingers, smelling well, and light, outwardly of a
reddish color; the Branches are long, straight, rough, and full of Leaves
without order, and some like the Leaves of a Mastick-tree. The Blossoms are
small, growing in form of a Coronet, five on every Stalk, of a pleasing Scent,
though fading in a little time: After the Blossoms follow yellow sweet-scented
Seeds, enclosed in a reddish-black bladder, wherein is a moisture like Honey;
It is bitterish, and a little sharp upon the tongue, and of the same shape and
bigness with the fruit of the Turpentine-tree, in the middle thick, and at the
ends pointed.

Opo-balsamum in the summer drops from the slit of the insected Barks of these
Trees; as soon as it comes into the Air it becomes whitish, afterward green,
Opa-balsamum, what it is,
then of a Gold Color, lastly paler: The strained Balsam is at first clear,
but becomes instantly thick and cloudy, and when old, grows like Turpentine;
when it first drops it is of so strong a smell, as causes in many the
Headache, and in some causes a sudden bleeding at the Nose; but this sharp and
strong savor at length changes into a pleasant scent, which in old Balsam is
so weak that you can hardly discover any smell at all.

Observe here, All Balsams comes not out of the Bark, or Rind.
That all the Balsam brought over from Cairo in Flaskets and Leathern-bottles,
though it be very odoriferous, yet it is no pure Liquor or Gum issuing from the
bark of the Tree, as aforesaid, but is drawn out of the Wood and green Branches
by boiling, which yet is not all retained pure, but frequently adulterate with
Cyprus Turpentine. They press another sort of Balsam out of the Seed, which is
many times sold for right, though not so strongscented and bitter in taste.

There is no Medicine in more esteem, Its use.
or greater use with the Egyptians than this; for they apply it almost against
all Diseases proceeding from Cold, Moisture, or Poison, curing with it all
Wounds that are not deep, and accompanied with fractured Bones or cut Sinews,
in a short time.

It heals also all venomous bitings of Serpents and Scorpions, A Universal or
Catholic Medicine.
either taken inwardly, or spread upon the Wound; It is an extraordinary
Preservative against the Plague, taking half a quarter of an Ounce inwardly. It
drives away all inveterate Agues and Fevers that proceed from Putrefaction,
cleanses all unconcocted and cold Humors and inward Obstructions, if daily a
quarter of an ounce be taken inwardly: Very operative in opening Oppilations
and concocting indigested and superfluous Humors: It restores lost Sight, and
Hearing, if it be dropped warm into either of the offended parts: It is a very
powerful Medicine against all Cramps derived from Cold and Moisture, against
the Vertigo or diziness of the Head, the Falling Sickness, Lameness, Palsy,
shaking of the Limbs, Cough, stoppings of the Chest, Consumption of the Lungs,
a weak Stomach, difficulty of Breathing, Fits of the Mother, stopping of the
Courses, the Whites, stopping of the Urine and the Colic; the Stone in the
Bladder and Reins it powerfully breaks and dissipates.

Those Women that will anoint themselves go first into a warm Stove, This
Balsam a Fucus for women.
and when with this thoroughly heated, they dab and spread this Unguent on her
naked Breast and Face many times, continuing an hour or longer in the Stove,
till the Skin has drunk it in and is become dry: then she comes forth and does
her accustomed business, her Breast and Face remaining so befucus'd at least
three days without washing or cleansing; the third day after she goes into the
same Stove again, and anoints her Face and Breasts in the same manner many times
over and thick; Thus sometimes, they anoint themselves ten times or oftener in a
day, staying so long between each anointing till the Skin is become so dry,
that the following Balsam may the better take place: This some of them continue
at least thirty days, in all which time they never wash or wipe the Skin, as we
said, then at length they wash it after being anointed with Oil of
Bitter-Almonds mixed with Water extracted from Field-bean-flowers, and so
cleanse themselves many days successively.

The Seeds and green Branches also are used against all Distempers that the
Balsam it self is: The same Virtue is ascribed to the Wood, but the Balsam
works most strongly, termed by the Greeks Opo-Balsamum; The Seeds or
Carpo-Balsamum, more gently; and the Wood or Xylobalsamum, the weakest of all.
The Arabians also use Balsam, both the Fruit and Branches in many Medicines,
and against many Diseases.

NEar El Mattharaea, An Obelisk or Pyramid, near Mattarea.
where the ruins of Heliopolis are yet to be seen, stands in a great Lake a
straight Obelisk or Pyramid, with several Hierogliphicks upon all its sides; to
which none can come on foot, but when the Water that from the overflowing of
the River Nile falls into this Lake, is dried up by the heat of the Sun.

Who was the Erector of this Pyramid is a difficult task to find out, Who
erected them.
though we may guess it to be one of the eight built, according to the relation
of Pliny, in Heliopolis: Pliny.
Afterward (says he) other Kings erected Obelisks or Pyramids, in the City of
the Sun, viz. So this four, each eight and forty Cubits high: and Rameses,
under whose Government Troy was subdued, four also, each forty Cubits high.
This Testimony of Pliny plainly evidences that this Obelisk is one of the four
of the height of eight and forty Cubits.

On each side are one and the same Characters which have a peculiar and
mystical Exposition; they are carved but coursely and with a rough hand, which
makes some suppose they were not erected by Sothis, because all his were more
curiously Adorned: Artefius an Arabian Writer mentions two yet standing in
Heliopolis, engraven with the Celestial Scheme.

Two hundred and fifty paces from El Mattarea, Ruins of Heliopolis
the Ruins of Heliopolis are to be seen: It is called The City of the Sun,
from a Mirror or Looking-glass, which here in the Temple was consecrated to the
Sun, and set with such Art, that all day long it reflected the Sunbeams
direct, so as they enlightened the whole Church: Of the aforesaid Pyramid in
this City, Titus Livius.
Titus Livius has written; And the King of Poland's Architect, or Surveyor of
his Buildings, who saw the Pyramids, and took their Sketches, after drawing
them very exactly, gives this account thereof to Athanasius Kircher: Two miles
from Mattaraea, a Place famous for the Balsam-tree, the Marks and Ruins of a
very great City may be seen, on the Marketplace whereof stands a Pyramid with
Hieroglyphics, the Arabians call it Ain Schemps, that is, the Suns Eye. It
lies Eastward of Nile, as they say anciently Heliopolis did. This agrees
pyramids The inside of the first and fairest Pyramid.
EGIPTISCHE PIR-AMIDEN
with Abulfeda an Arabian Geographer, whose words are to this effect: Ain
Schemps or Heliopolis, known by the name of The Eye of the Sun, is in The time
he wrote in, which he calls ours, was about the year 724. which was the only
time Africa made great expeditions, and overran Spain and several parts of
Europe.
our times waste and void of Inhabitants; they say it was the City and Court of
Pharaoh, wherein are yet many Excellent and Memorable Antiquities; amongst
other, a foursquare Column called Pharaoh 's Monument thirty Cubits long.

About four miles from Grand Caire within Land, The Pyramids.
are those famous Structures of Stone, the Pyramids built apiece of great
Marble Stones, broad below, very high, in manner of a pointed Diamond, becoming
smaller and smaller, till it runs almost to a point at the top. There is no
curiosity of workmanship in them, aiming only at firmness, not so much to make
them pleasant to the eye, as to preserve them from decay, and that they might
endure even to a perpetuity, wherein they have answered expectation, these
Structures, having outstood Ages already, and without doubt may yet continue
many Ages more, for such is the firmness of the Materials, and the Stony
ground, upon which they stand together with their Spiring, that they are
preserved not only from all injury of weather, but made free from Earthquakes.

The three first and greatest very handsomely described by Prince Radzovil, and
Peter Belloon, are seen in the way to Cairo, together with many other, standing
about twelve thousand paces from Nilus, on the West side in the middle of a
barren and sandy Plain. Mr. Greaves from Pliny says, these three are very
conspicuous to those that Sail upon the Nile; they are seated on Africa side
upon a rocky and barren Hill, from the Nile less than four, from Memphis six
Miles.

THe first and greatest Pyramid, according to Belloon, has on every side at
the ground from one corner to the other, three hundred and fifty paces: If we
imagine the square sides of the Basis, four equilateral Triangles mutually
propending, till they all meet on high, as it were in a point; then we shall
have a true notion of the just Dimensions and Figure of this Pyramid; the
Perimeter of each Triangle comprehending 2079 feet, and the Perimeter of the
Basis 2772. whereby the whole Area of the Basis (to proportion it to our
measures contains 480249. square feet, which make 693. by the English Standard;
eleven English Acres of ground, according to the Measure taken by Mr. Mr.
Greave's Pyramidographia, 68.70.
Greave's with a Radius of ten feet, most accurately divided: In the
Circumference twelve hundred paces; in height six hundred foot. The altitude of
this Pyramid is something defective of the Latitude, though in Strabo's
computation lib. 17. it exceeds; but Diodorus lib. 1. rightly acknowledges it
less: which if we measure by its perpendicular, is 499. feet; but if we take it
as the Pyramid ascends inclining, then is it equal in respect of the Lines,
subtending the several Angles to the Latitude of the Basis, that is to 693.
feet, with reference to which great altitude, Statius, l. 5. Sylv. 3. calls
them -- audacia saxa
Pyramidum --


From the Basis up to the top, two hundred and fifty steps, according to
Bellonius. lib. 2. Observe. c. 4. others more, some less: But that which by
experience and diligent calculation, Mr. Greave's, 61.77.
I, and two others found, is this, that the number of degrees from the bottom
to the top, is 207. though one of them in descending reckoned 208. each Step
being somewhat more indeed than two handfuls broad, and little less than four
hands high: though the Steps cannot well be told, because they are so broken in
several places. All the Stones of this stupendous Fabric are of one bigness,
viz. three foot long, and two foot broad and thick. The North side is much more
worn out by Time, than the rest, because the North Wind, which in other places
is dry, is moist in Egypt, by reason of the Night-dews, insomuch that it is
hollowed or eaten in, whereas the other parts to the East, South, and West, are
plain: The Spire or Top, which seems to end in a point, is plain and square,
each side containing two and twenty foot, so that fifty men may stand upon it
with ease: Pliny indeed makes it twenty five; Plin. l. 36. c. 1^.
but Diodorus Siculus, Lib. 1. makes it but nine feet; by Greaves ibid. 72.
my measure it is thirteen feet, and 280. of 1000. parts of the English foot:
The sides toward the Base, spread so far out, that the Bellonius. Obser. lib.
2. cap. 42. and diverse others.
ablest and strongest Bowman standing on the top, cannot shoot an Arrow into
the Sand beyond the foot of it, as has been often tried. From hence is a most
excellent and delightful prospect of the Sea and whole Country, far and wide,
yielding great satisfaction to the beholders.

In the midst of it is an Arched Entrance, The form of it within.
consisting of eight great thick Stones cut with singular curiosity, and close
cemented together to the admiration of all beholders; From this Entrance
proceeds a foursquare Passage like a Well to the midst of the Pyramid, where
the Corpse for which it was erected, was put: A steep way.
This way goes down sloping so steep, that it is scarce passable, which the
Egyptian Kings did to preserve their Burying-places from violence, and that the
Dead might remain undisturbed: The Door where these bodies lay, was very neatly
closed up with great Stone like the rest, in such manner that none could see or
find it without breaking up the Pyramid.

This way is not to be passed without Torch-light, there being no Windows or
Loop-holes to let in the light, descending almost two hundred paces, cut out
between four even ranges of Stones, each five and twenty or thirty handfuls
broad, whereof one row makes the Vault; the other the floor, and the two
remaining, the sides of the Walk.

At the end of this way, A Chamber at the end of it.
which is so low, that whoever goes in, must stoop, is a small Chamber, wherein
the weary Visitors commonly rest and ease themselves; for the continual
stooping and difficulty of breathing in this close place, causes no small
faintness: Nor is there any fresh Air, other than what they find there; nor
light, than that of the Torches they carry; so that the narrowness and the
heat, which is no less there than in a Stove, causes a faint sweat on all that
enter.

Out of this Chamber runs up another way, Another steep way.
by a very steep ascent, wherein is a Vault, after the manner of
Italian-Vaulted Stairs, arched over. It Is square, and made of great and smooth
Stones, the upper sticking out a little beyond the lower, till by degrees they
almost meet, leaving only a small passage: This way they climb up by Stones,
that stick out in several places, upon which laying their Hands, and setting
their Feet in gaps made on purpose, each distant six hands breadth from the
other, the Visitants with incredible labor and pains creep up.

At the end of this steep way is another Chamber with a lofty Roof, Another
Chamber with a Burying-place. Piramidographia Mr. Greaves, page 94.
and a Burying-place therein, standing across the midst: This Room according
to Mr. Greaves, is seventeen feet and 190 parts of 1000 of a foot.
somewhat more broad; and thirty four feet and 380 of 1000 parts of a foot.
three inches long, covered with seven very great and large Marble Stones,
which with the corners and sides, lying one against another, make a flat Roof:
The Grave lies open without any Tombstone, as if it had been broken up, or
rather never had been covered, because the Inhabitants say, the Kings who built
this Pyramid, were not Interred there: There is in that Chamber, a very great
Tomb, cut out of one entire Marble Stone, hollow within; such Beloon calls
Theban Stones, so hard and firm, that they cannot be broken by any force; but
being struck upon with a Hammer or another Stone, it sounds as loud as a great
Bell; Some that have seen these Stones, say they are hollow within, four
fingers thick, twelve hand-bredths long, five broad, and five and a half deep.

The second Pyramid is much less, having no steps on the outside, The second
Pyramid.
so that men cannot climb upon it. At a distance these lesser Pyramids,
standing on the advantage of an higher ground, seem greater; but the contrary
is experienced as you approach nearer: This, as the first, is square with a
pointed Spire so sharp, that one man cannot stand upon it: The North side has
suffered much by the unkindness of the weather.

The third is much less than the two first, The third Pyramid.
upon which appear no signs of decay: It is a third part bigger than that
standing upon the Hill Testaceo at Rome, by the way from Ostia: The whole
Structure stands yet so handsome and undefaced, and free from cracks or flaws,
as if it were new made.

Not far from the greatest Pyramid appears a Head of a wonderful form and
greatness: Ancient and Modern Writers called it Sphynx; Herodotus, The Sphynx.
Andro-Sphynx; because it had the Face of a Man, and the Body of a Lion, as
Antiquity used to set forth this Monster: Many have endevour'd to undermine
this Statue, but without success; because the Sand round about rising, the
Sphynx is sunk into it, almost up to the Shoulders: It is of one entire firm
Stone, and the form of the Face, Nose, Eyes, Mouth, Forehead, Chin and other
parts so well done, Plin. lib. 35. c. 12.
that it may be conceived to be wrought with great Art and Skill. Pliny writes
of it thus: Near the Pyramids stands a Sphynx, heretofore a rural Deity to the
Inhabitants, who suppose King Amasis was Buried therein. Which happily might
occasion and give authority to the forming its Body into the shape of a Lion;
because as Gesner relates, Gesner.
the said King Amasis was transformed into a Lion; Of which Transformation of
his, Aesopic. Androcleus. Sect. 10.
hear himself speaking thus: Then first I called to mind, what her so scared
My dreadful Shape, rough Main, and horrid Beard.
So went I to slip off my Lions case,
Began to untye, unbutton, and unlace:
Striving to shift, the more my self I hurt;
The Shape stuck close, like Deianira 's Shirt;
I found then, I no property was in,
No Monsters Fur, but my own Monstrous Skin.
My self I did next in the Mirror view,
And from my own reflecting shadow flew;
Though I had seen all sorts of Lions store,
Never such a Prodigy I saw before:
I called for help, my Voice grown strangely loud,
Like Thunder rung, broke from a Prisoning Cloud;
Like Mouthing Tempests, or a Water-breach,
Or Battles joined, ten thousand men in each.


This Sphynx, the supposed Sepulcher of King Amasis, is of one entire natural
Stone, smooth and polished, the Head taking up in Circumference a hundred and
two foot; the length of the Body an hundred and three and forty, and in depth
from the Neck to the Crown, sixty and two.

Writers concerning this Structure, feign wonderful things; as first, that it
gave Responses to Inquirers like an Oracle; though many say, the Priests
feigned and delivered them in manner following: They made a way under the Earth
to the Belly and Head of it, by which going into the Image, they spoke at
settimes out of the Head, whatsoever they would, giving answer to such as came
to ask Council in difficult matters: The inward hollowness or cavities were
made with such subtilty, that the Voice therein finding no other passage than
the large gaping of the Mouth, first rumbling, at last with great force burst
forth, whereby the credulous Heathens, who stood before it silent and amazed,
took it for no less than the voice of a Deity, and by that extraordinarily led
on to the adoration of it.

Sphynx was represented in a twofold manner by the Egyptians, Sphyux
tepresented in a twofold manner.
to wit, either in the shape of a Couchant Lion upon a Throne, or in the form
abovementioned: By the first was signified Momphta an Egyptian Deity, ruling
over the Waters, and the Tutelar Guardian for the overflowing of Nile: And by
the second, the increasing of Nile it self; they made these shapes, not that
they did believe such manner of living Creatures were ever in being; but to
signify how much harder than we can express are the several Dictates of the
mind: Sphynx then so formed, What it s^gnifyeth.
signifies Nilus watering and fertilizing Egypt, while the Sun passed through
Leo and Virgo; which the Egyptians, being very Learned and naturally addicted
to Hieroglyphics, observing, were easily induced under that biformed shape,
which they called Sphynx, to represent their meaning, and in course of time
they became adored Idols, signifying Nilus.

There were according to Pliny, Many in Egypt.
many of these Sphynxes in Egypt, standing in the most famous places; those
especially, which were watered by the River, as in Heliopolis and Sais, and the
Wilderness of Memphis or Cairo, where that by us described the greatest of all
remains yet to be seen. Aben Vaschia an Arabian speaking of these Sphynxes,
says thus: For the signification of the fruitful nature of Nilus, they set that
Structure representing a Lion, because that overflowing, that fructifies their
whole Country, they receive from the bounty of the Constellation, the Lion
every year: And from them it is also by a pretty mistake, looking at them only
as Ornaments introduced here in Europe, to make or adorn the Pipes, Spouts,
Conduits, and Pumps, with Lions heads.

The Sphynxes were set by the Ancients before their Temple Gates, to signify
their teaching Divine matters consisted in Wisdom, which lay hid under
Aenigmaes, or Mysterious Parables.

Distant from these Pyramids about a thousand paces, Pyramids called Mummies.
lie others called Mummies, because situate in a Sandy Country where the
Mummies are found; the greatest of all lying in this place, Spires high into
the Air, and much more beautiful than any of the rest there, though almost of
the same form; the outer part by length of time is much defaced, so that the
steps thereof being broken, it is almost impossible to climb up to the top.

The Entrance of this Pyramid lies open from the upper part downward, but the
way within is so ruinous and choked up with Stones, that it is scarce passable
without creeping, which to the Visitors, because of the falling down of other
loose Stones, often proves dangerous.

Below there appears a very spacious and high Chamber, appointed as they say,
for a Burying-place, in which is a little Door opening into another as large
Chamber, built after the same manner: Neither of these have any Interred Corpse,
either perhaps because none were there Buried, or else the Burying-places are
totally defaced: Out of these two Chambers, wherein a decayed Gate lies, goes
a rising way, not to be ascended without a Ladder, and herein, the people say,
is a Burying-place.

Of several that traveled into Egypt to see the Pyramids, and have described
them, Prince Radzovil merits the chief place, having written thereof in his
Book of Travels, exactly to this effect.

An hour before break of day we went out of our Lodgings, Prince Radzovil.
and walking continually along by Gardens, we came into the Old Cairo.
City, distant from the New half a mile, two hours after Sunrising we crossed
the Nile, where having gone about two Furlongs, we came to the Pyramids;
whereof, because much has been written by others, I will in brief set down
what I my self have seen.

Most Writers affirm, that the City Memphis mentioned in Holy Scripture,
Memphis here thought to be situate.
was formerly seated in this place, whereof all the remaining Tokens are but
some ruinous Heaps to the south, covered over with dry and barren Sand: there
may be seen still undefaced Pyramids, whereof two greater, and a third less,
erected, as they say, by that famous Lady of Pleasure Rhodope, which is
singularly fair, but not above sixty or seventy cubits high; these three are
very handsome and undecayed, accounted among the Worlds Wonders, even by the
Romans, as Martial the Epigrammatist observes: Barbara Pyramidum sileant
miracula Memphis.
Thy wondrous Pyramids Memphis boast no more.



The two least are of an incredible bigness, yet exceeded by the third, which
is said to have in height, breadth, and length, three hundred Cubits; It has
within artificial and broad Steps, by which you may, as also by Steps without,
climb to the top; There are likewise places fit for Visitants to retire and
ease themselves in, two whereof more large were the Burying-places of the
Kings; in the lower of which there stands yet extant a very great Sepulcher.

Also by what Kings, how great Cost, in what way, or by what strange Art, and
whether by the Israelites during their bondage in Egypt, (which is the opinion
of With how little reason it may be imagined, that the Israelites should build
these Pyramids, may appear, in that they are built of stone, whereas their
employment was all in Brick-work.
some Writers) these Structures were erected, or by others who dig'd the
Trenches and Passages wherein Nilus runs (for it appears that all these works
were not by Nature, but made by Art) I leave to Historiographers to determine:
We may rather wonder why they were erected upon a rising Rock consisting of one
sort of Natural Stones, whereas they, for as much as is discernable, are inade
up of many kinds: Neither is it easy to apprehend, or conceive from whence,
or by what means so great a quantity of immense Stones, each more than a Cubit
and a half, and two Cubits broad, could be conveyed thither, Nilus lying
distant little less than four miles: The first and greatest Pyramid.
The greatest of them is built of quadrangular stones, rising Instar Montis,
like a Mountain, by singular Art: and although it appear in a square form all
along to the very top, yet these apiece stones are set in so uniform an
order, that the whole Structure seems to represent the form of a Picked Hill:
The going up, by reason of the thickness and bigness of the stones, is
difficult and toylsom, yet feisible; for though I my self used a competent
endeavor, I could not in an hour and half ascend to the top, which is flat, and
ten Cubits on each side.

The second Pyramid is a little less than the first, The second Pyramid.
and about two Bows shot from it, without any entrance into it: On the
outside you may climb half way up, the stones being so fitted on purpose, as
in the former, but a little leveller and smaller: Near the middle way they lie
so even, that it is impossible to climb any higher; and this smoothness which
seems to be done on purpose, reaches to the height of several cubits, which if
it could be passed, from thence to the top, being one third part of the
Pyramid, the stones lying carelessly and uneven, you might as well be able to
climb up to the top of it, as of the aforementioned Pyramid.

The third lying next Cairo, was erected, as we said, by Rhodope, The third
Fyramid.
made wholly of sloping stones, so that there is no climbing up: Three Bows
shot from it on the one side toward the City stands a Head, supposed of that
Concubine, with a long Neck and large Arms, seven Cubits high, and cut out of
one entire Stone. Some imagine that out of the first great Pyramid which we
entered, by a hollow Passage under ground through a firm Quar, which we saw
arched over with stone, a small and secret Entrance came into this Head, and
from thence (so is the common fame) by the mouth of that Head Oracles delivered.

In the Pyramids were Tutelar or Guardian Images, Guardian Idols called Serapes.
by the Egyptians called Serapes, and by them placed there for the protection
of the Corpse, and to carry the Souls to their Heavenly mansions: They were
graven from the bottom to the top with various Hieroglyphics; Among others
were found two such Images of a Man and a Woman, both adorned with Caps and
Ear-lappets, made of black Thebane Stones, thick above, and small beneath: They
stood upon a broad Pedestal in the Country of Sahid, not far from the Red Sea
in a Pyramid, wherein Age on one side had made an Inlet, through which some
Turks climbing had taken them out, each of which weighed almost Eight hundred
Pounds: The Turks opinion'd that formerly the Kings of this Country worshipped
these Images, and had commanded the like to their Subjects, who after their
death here buried their Princes together with their Idols: They were both
heretofore graven with Egyptian Letters, which according to the Exposition of
those who understand that kind of Learning, signify several Deities (of which
the highest called Jynx) stands clothed in the uppermost place) whose sole
power preserves the Bodies from all Accidents, and brings them to their, they
suppose, Celestial Abodes.

Amongst the most notable Remarks in and about Cairo, Famous Sepulchers under
ground.
or within four miles, the Marble Sepulchers under ground, by which the City
Memphis, and many places round about it stood, and yet stand upon Arches and
Vaults, breeds most admiration, far exceeding in greatness and curiosity the
Monuments of the Romans.

The Learned Egyptians of old, Egyptians held the Pythager^au Metempsychosis.
which held the Pythagorean Metempsychosis, or Transmigration of the Soul from
one Body to another, took care not only for their dead Corpse, with great
Preparation of several Spices to preserve them from corruption, but endeavored
also by laying it in a convenient place to keep it quiet; therefore with
wondrous pains and curiosity they neither disposed them in places over which
the Nile flowed, nor in the open Fields, but either in long-continuing
Pyramids, or Stone Caves under ground, which with great labor were cut out of
entire Rocks: These Caves served in stead of Churchyards, parted into several
Vaults, or arched Apartments, like great Dining-Rooms, with so many turnings
out of one into another, that they seem to be a perfect Labyrinth.

There were, as the Egyptians themselves report, so many of these, that they
extended many Miles off, even as far as the Oracles of Ammon and Serapis; this
was no small advantage to the Priests, Convenience of the Priests in the
Subterranean Vaults.
for that they could by these avenues without hindrance from the heat of the
Sun, or stiffling of the Sands, meet and converse together: From hence it would
seem that the whole Sandy Desert should be hollow, or vaulted underneath, which
none ought to think strange, if he observe the many other stupendous Works of
this Country, and shall mark considerately what is written by Antiquity of the
vast Extent, and exceeding Populousness of Memphis. Moreover, some Arabian
Writers in their Books stick not to aver, that Memphis and Heliopolis by hidden
Passages under ground, were united together, being diverse miles distant.

Most of the Inhabitants of the Village Saccara, lying nearest to these
underground Sepulchers, maintain themselves by breaking them up, and digging
out the Mummied Bodies; for since from ploughing the Land by reason of its
barrenness they can scarce feed themselves, How they find out the Subterranean
Sepulchers.
therefore they hire such as are willing with Money, either to search Caves
under ground within their Jurisdiction found already, or cause to be sought and
dug up new, and not yet discovered ones, in the dry and barren Sands, where,
as is supposed, are many never yet found, so covered some depth under the
Sands, that no stranger, no nor the inhabitants themselves, can know whether
any such things lie underneath, or not: When they are discovered, the trouble
is not all over, the greater difficulties follow; for the Searchers do first
make a small Well about two foot broad, and sixteen or eighteen foot deep, into
which with a Rope, a servant from above is let easily down, with a Torch in his
hand; true it is, in some few of them they climb up and down without Ropes, by
setting their feet in certain gaps of the Wall: At the bottom of this Well they
come to a apiece Passage of the same wideness with the Well-mouth, but of
several lengths, for in some places it is ten, in some fifteen, in some less,
in some more feet long, but so low that they stoop to go in it.

At the end of this they come to a apiece Vaulted Repository, A
Description of the Egyptian Vaults for Burial.
four and twenty foot long on either side, and at the end of each stand Tables,
cut out of the same Rock, about five foot long, two and a half broad, and one
foot high, opposite to each other, whereupon they set their Dead in Chests or
Coffins of Wood or Stone: In some Caves in the Wall above the Chests or Coffins
of the Dead, are certain Hieroglyphick Characters; and there stand, besides the
mentioned Eminent Coffins, more and other flat ones upon the Floor round about
those, which seem to be Childrens; Oftentimes there lie five and twenty such
Caves near one another, as in the PRINT above, wherein these Caves are
represented to the life; All of them come out at one Passage or Descent, and
because there is no light, nor any other Entrance than the first, within it is
utterly dark, so that without Torches and a Leader, it is dangerous to venture
into them.

The Ground-plat of this FOREGOING PRINT, is the fashion of the Cave, together
with the Tables, whereon the Bodies shut in the Coffins are set, which here are
to the number of nine, all of equal bigness; one of which is marked with the
letter D. Each Cave has on the four sides of it Marble Tables so big that the
Coffin may conveniently stand thereon; these Tables, together with the four
Walls of every Cave, stand in the Draught or Platform, with the numbers
1.2.3.4. as the letter X shows the Ground, or Floor of the Walls: All this
appears cleerer in the Draught where S and T are two Vaulted Caves: Between the
four Walls of the Vaulted Cave S, four Tables are to be seen, on which are four
Chests, as A. O. P. K. denotes every of which has enclosed Mummies. Commonly
there are at the Head, Images set representing Children in Swadling-Clothes,
with Figures of the Tutelar Gods, and at the Foot sits a Hawk; for they believe
that the Body by their presence shall be freed from all violence. The second
Cave T contains the like number of Tables, marked with the letters LMNB.
whereupon the Embalmed Corpse, with their Tutelar Gods by them are set: The
letters Q and R show the Ground or Floor of the other two Caves, and the
letters G and H the place of the Tables. The letter G. denotes the Entrance
into several other Caves, the number of which is so great, that they reach
several miles, as they say: On each Wall of some Caves are seen Hieroglyphical
Figures of the Guardian-Gods, which appear directly over against them, as the
letters E F, and Y Z show.

Now wherefore these Hieroglyphics are Graven over against them, and not at
the end, is by a hidden Mystery signified, that the inclination and kindness of
those Gods was the same which themselves had to the Corpse: for the Egyptians
believed that such kind of Figures had a great power and operation in them, and
therefore they are set by them as Guardians to the Body: Thus we have given a
Description of the Stone Caves underground, wherein the Egyptians Buried their
Embalmed Bodies, now called Mummies.

As to the Mummies themselves, Mummies, what they are, and the manner of their
Hieroglyphical Signatures.
two things are to be considered, first the Chests or Coffins, wherein the
Bodies are laid, and afterward the Body it self, only called Mummy. The Body
or Mummy it self, void of all Hieroglyphics, is Embalmed with Spices and
Bitumen: But the Chests or Coffins wherein the Mummies lie, and the
Winding-sheets wherein they are wrapped up, be richly gilt, streaked with several
Colors, and curiously depicted with Hieroglyphics.

Every Corpse lies in a smooth or costly Chest or Coffin according to the state
and ability of the person, when living, made either of Stone or Sycomore wood,
which is not subject to Worm-eating. This Coffin is gilt all over, and always
has carved on it either the likeness of some Deity, to whose Protection it was
committed, or the shape of those who lay Buried therein; the Hieroglyphick
Figures expressed thereon were several, and sometimes these: that is, the Image
of the Deity or Person as we said before: The Figures of an Altar, an Owl, a
Semicircle, a Paper-Pedegree of the Family with an Inscription, a Pitcher with
one Ear, a Water-pot, two Pillars divided into four halfs, a Snare, a
Balsam-Vessel or Urn, a Goose, an Egyptian Ship, a Branch of the Plant Papyrus,
with several other Characters, which have all some peculiar signification,
aiming at the preservation of the Body.

The Chest or Coffin wherein the Female lay, represented the shape of a Woman,
and had upon the Head a Cap with Ear-lappets hanging to it, and very mummies
curiously wrought with Seams and Edgings, as it were Embroidery: On the Breast
were several Edges and Seams in Trayle or Network, between which stood the
Image of a Woman with outstretched Arms, a Wreath or Chaplet on the Head, one
long Feather in each hand, and a three-folded or doubled wing of a Fowl: The
Body of the Image was so cut or hewn, that all along from the upper part to
the lower, it was smaller and smaller, covered with several Veils like a Net,
very artificially and curiously expressed: In the three upper Network rows,
stood the Images of the tutelar Gods to avert evil, on each side three with
Cords in their hands, A. Kir^her.
without which no adorning of Mummies are prepared; under these Hieroglyphics,
lie hid deep Mysteries, says Father Kircher, who, as he avers, had such a one
to show: His words are to this effect.

The whole Image represents the Goddess Isis, together with the tutelar Gods:
The seven trailing Streams upon the Breast, signify the seven Planets: By the
Bodies covered with a Cloak or Garment like a Net, is imported that Nature by
hidden and hazardous adventures, makes Life a Snare, and full of entangling
puzzle and continual struggle: The Image of a Woman with outstretched Arms
signifies the Egyptian * Jynx: Jynx is the eternal Divine Image according to
which all was Created by God; say they.
The long Feathers in both Hands, import the swiftness or suddenness of their
Operations; the Wreath or Chaplet upon its Head, shows that it is the greatest
of all Deities; to the tuition of the six Lares or Tutelar Gods, viz. Horus,
Anubis, Nephte, Cynocephalus, Osyris and Arveris, is the Body committed. The
Cords in their Hands import that they stop and bind up the powers of
contention and strife. Horus upon the mentioned Chest or Coffin, was in the
shape of a Child; Anubis, of a Dog; Nephte (which with the Egyptians is Venus,
with the Hebrews Astaroth) of a Woman upon her knees; Cynocephalus of an Ape;
and Osyris of a Hawk: These in the opinion of the Egyptians carry all Souls to
the Heavenly abodes, and therefore not without reason represented on most of
the Mummies.

Within the Coffins also in the Winding-sheets or Wrappers, Images within the
Coffins.
are Earthen Images, some as big as a Finger; others as a Foot; put there to
defend the Bodies against evil Spirits, in several shapes of Men and Women, and
other Creatures: On their Head they have commonly a Cap with Ear-lappets, on
the Breast many fine Winding-Clothes: they hold the Hands across, with a Hawk
in the left; they are all clothed almost in one fashion, as the Mummies
themselves; that is, bound up in Swadling-clothes after the manner of an Infant.

Round about them both before and behind, above and beneath the same Characters
are written, which are also upon the Grave-clothes of the Mummies, and are to
this purpose: The Spirit of this Body, Blessed by the Life of the favorable
and gracious Deity, shall by the Worship of the Tribe or Family of Horus the
Governor of Years or Time, fly to Heaven.

In these Coffins lie the Mummies Embalmed with Spices and Bitumen, How the
Coverings of the Dead are adornd.
stretched out at length, and bound up with several Wrappers of fine Linen or
Silk, with in-imitable Art, and great care and circumspection. These Wrappers
are spread over with a mixture of Wax, Pitch, and a Chalky Salve, partly to
preserve the Bodies from corruption, and partly that they may the easier and
firmlyer write thereon the Hieroglyphics: Upon these Clothes commonly is
portrayed; first the Pictures of those wound up therein with colors that will
never fade or decay, holding in their Hands things sacred to the Service and
Worship of the Gods, together with the Fruits usually offered up to them: Upon
the uppermost Covering, are Ribbons and Fillets, seeming to be set with small
round Glass Beads of many colors, with Girdles powdered over with a Stuff
resembling precious Stones, stitched on with a Needle: Between the
forementioned Ribbons, are Hieroglyphics of Celestial and Terrestrial
Creatures, viz. In one place the Figure of the Sun and Moon; in another of the
Bird Ibis, with Serpents in his Bill: There are also Lions, whereby the
fruitful Nile is expressed, and other more such like; lastly, appears the Mummy
it self, the Feet wrapped like an Infants in Swadling-clothes.

The Bodies of Kings and other Great Persons were sometimes laid in Pots or
Urns, Urns for the Dead wherein Kings were laid.
whereon was the Image of Canopus their God of Nile; over which, that of a
Hawk, whereby they imported the Deity of the Sun, to whose Protection the Corpse
therein was committed; then were characterized thereupon several lesser Figures
in Columns; as, a Goose, a Serpent, a Scepter, a Water-Tankerd and two Forks, a
Hawks head, two long Feathers with a Water-pot under, two Oyled Pictures, a
Semicircle, the Bird Ibis, a Crooked Billet, another Image of Ibis portrayed
in a Garden: The Exposition of the Figures.
Every of these Figures have a peculiar Explanation, all together amounting to
this sense or purpose: O Chenosyris the Guardian make the Dead happy, by a
Heavenly influence with a Divine dew of the Spirit: The Wisdom of the Sun
quicken it with his own Heavenly dew; Hermanubis bring it with his Ruling
influence, into the Garden of Osyris.

In another rank sometimes stands aloft upon a Serpent with a half circle, and
an outstretched Arm, an Image reversed, and looking backwards toward an Altar;
a Wreathed Cord with three Blossoms of the Plant Lotus, a hooded Fowl upon two
Scepters, one Scepter, two Semi-circles, an Eye, a Fowl with extended Wings, a
crooked stump with a Man's Foot; of which, Father Kircher gives this
Explanation: The Tutelar God moved by Offerings and due and acceptable
Solemnities, grant life to this Corpse, and bring this Body into the Heavenly
Constellations; Whence it appears, that the Hieroglyphics were set upon these
Urns, for no other ends, but that the Deity moved and drawn thereby, should
first protect the Body against all Infirmities, and afterward bring it to the
Heavenly habitations with all good success and satisfaction.

Some Coffins or Urns are inscribed with Dogs-heads; Rolls of Paper found in
the Mummies.
Others have representations of the Anatomies or Dissections of Bodies to be
Embalmed, with the Balsam pots about them. In these Chests sometimes are found
Labels of Paper rolled up one in another, written with abundance of these
Characters: for this Sacred Learning in the opinion of the Egyptians, did not
only signify hidden things, but had also a great power and virtue in them to
procure the Protection of the Gods, to whomsoever they were thus affixed: In
these Rolls the chiefest Portraitures of the Gods, which are also sculp'd upon
the Pyramids, and in the very same order as they use to be carried about in
Solemn Festivals, called Comasien, after the manner of Procession; for they
placed a great Mystery in the graceful and sumptuous order of the Gods
marching decently one after another: For this very cause were these Images set
by the Corpse to protect them from all adverse and evil Spirits, and to lead the
Souls to Bliss. These Rollers therefore describe only the Funeral Pomp or
Solemnity of Burials, The Funeral Pomp of the Egyptians.
which they carry forth most sumptuously, those especially of Kings, Priests,
and other persons of great Quality, bearing several Images of most of the Gods
upon Sacred Supporters, thereby to procure their grace and favor to the
deceased Party.



The Portraiture of two such Funeral Solemnities, What Figures stood upon it.
according to the Draughts found in the Mummies are to be seen in Kircher's
Book of the Mummies, where you may find according to this Method.

Isis of Memphis with Strings, and a Scarf upon her head, and outstretched
Arms and Hands, signifying the Spirit of the Deceased. The Goddess Nemphte and
the God Anubis with Arrows and Darts in their Hands: Two other Images of Anubis
and Nephte upon their knees, adorned also with Darts and Sycles: The two first
which go upright, seem to be Priests of Anubis and Nephte, whose Images they
followed to reconcile those Gods: A Serpent with his Breast and Head raised up:
An Image with a man's Face, but the Body of a Serpent, representing the Spirit
of the World: A Tripos or Trevet, joined by three Angles: Two Dogs sitting as
Warders of their Sacred Dominions: Two bundles of offensive Weapons with a
Caduceus and Ball therein, out of which creeps a Serpent: A Bar between
Perches, whereupon stood two Falcons, covered with a consecrated Cloth: A Biere
with the Funeral Bed of Memphti the Tutelar God of Nilus, and Anubis under it:
The Veil of Horus: The Scepter of Monphti: Water-pots, and an Egyptian Bani or
Ship with other Images belonging to the adornment of their several Mummies: At
length the Corpse or the Mummy Embalmed and wound up with many folds, and
dressed with various remarkable Characters. After that a humane Figure, with
erected Arms, and a Tail pendant, which they use to carry about at Anniversary
Obsequies or Annual Celebrations of Funerals: Several other Images also headed
like a Hawk, and Bodied like a Serpent, at last seven Oxen with a covering cast
over their Backs, signifying the seven days and a Which we may suppose to be
six hours.
quarter, that concern the Birth of the Goddess Isis: during which time, none
according to the received opinion are hurt by the Crocodiles, and that there is
a cessation of punishment from any of their offended Deities. After all this
followed several other Images.

This is the representation of an Egyptian Funeral Solemnity, (for in such
Order they march) which as a hidden matter full of Mysteries, the Egyptians
describe upon the mentioned Rolls of Paper, firmly believing that the Corpse
will thereby remain freed from the vengeance of those Deities.

Some with much mistake, have judged that the life and praise of the Deceased
is Hieroglyphically described hereby, but the former Descriptions have
sufficiently declared the contrary.

The ancient Romans have wholly and altogether followed the Egpptians in their
Funeral Solemnities, Gutherus.
as Gutherus in his Book of The Jurisdiction of Spirits, sets forth: in like
manner also have all the usual Ceremonies which the old Romans observed toward
their Corpse, had their original from them.

Many Mummies have under their Tongue a small Plate of Gold of the value of two
Ducats; Gold Plates in the Mummies.
for covetousness of which, the Arabians and others which dwell in Egypt, break
up most of the Mummies which they find undefaced.

Among several which have treated of the Mummies, Athanasius Kircher in his
Book of the Egyptian Hieroglyphics; Johannes Nardius in his Exposition of
Lucretius; and Peter de la Valla, deserve singular esteem: The two first for
the exact description of the Mummies, and the last for not only describing,
but also for his diligent searching of them, among which he found two most
remarkable; one of a Man, and the other a Woman, which he exactly describes in
this manner.

Upon a piece of a great gilded Winding Sheet that lay flat upon the Mummy, The
Description of the Mummy of a young Man.
was the shape of a young Man in a long Veil of fine Linen, as the ancient
Egyptians used to be clothed, artificially represented, and all over from head
to foot delineated with Hieroglyphics: The Head was covered with a Wreath of
Gold and Precious Stones, under which black-colour'd Hair appeared; in like
manner the Beard was black and curled, but small: On his Neck he had a Gold
Chain, with a piece of Coin like a Single-penny on his Breast, such as the
Governors of Provinces in Egypt wore formerly, whereupon the Bird Ibis, with
several observable Marks were pourtrayed, which seems to import that this young
Man had been of quality in his time: He held in his right Hand a Golden Cup
with red Liquor, for a token of presenting the Drink Offering, and in his left
Hand a Fruit not unlike a Malacatoon, with a Gold Ring on the fore and little
finger: He had on his naked Feet black Sandals laced on: On the Girdle was a
Fillet whereupon was written (...), that is, Happy, or Happiness, perhaps the
proper name of the young Man, or else set there as a Prayer for his eternal joy.

The Woman that lay in the same Cave, The Pourtraiture of a Woman.
was without doubt the Wife or Sister of the young Man, and more sumptuously
drawn upon her Herse-cloth; Besides several other Hieroglyphics, there stood
upon gilded Plates two Fowls and two Lions, back to back, and upon another
Garment lay an Ox or Cow, perhaps the Image of Apis or Isis, that Idol by the
Egyptians being represented in that shape. Upon another Plate hanging to the
last link on the Breast, the Sun was pencil'd: In the Ears were Gems with
Garters on her Arms and Legs, and many Rings on her Fingers: In her right Hand
she held a Golden Water-pot, and on the forefinger of the left Hand a Ring,
with other Trimmings and Ornaments: She had, as the young Man, black curled
Hair, which covered her Face; dark and thick Eyebrows, with black Eyes wide
open: These Effigies or Resemblances were drawn with a rough hand, like
Pictures in unsettled and barbarous times.

In the Cave wherein the two forementioned Mummies were found, there were
other Corpse which lay all without order, buried in the Sands, and preserved
only by its dryness. Besides the former two, there was another which lay in a
Wooden Coffin with a Virgin carved upon it, and laid forth almost like the
former, with a gilt Herse-cloth and other Ornaments. In the broken Body of this
Virgin, was found nothing else but a great many Rollers and Bitumen wound up
therein, for the Bones and Flesh were in a manner dried and consumed, so that
it seemed to be only a shell of Wood. The Materials of the Mummy were so hard,
that a Hammer could scarce make any impression upon it: A little forwarder
other Corpse were to be seen in great number, wound up in single Clothes, and
preserved in common Bitumen, without gilt Coverings, Pourtraitures, or any
other Ornaments; whence may be concluded, that the adorned Bodies were Persons
of rank and quality, either of Priests or Great Ministers of State, which only
had hope to come to the future Dominion, as Herodotus, Diodorus, and other
ancient Historiographers mention.

MUmmy is a Persian word, Mummy, a Persian name.
and signifies a dry and unperishable dead Body being Embalmed after a
peculiar manner: Many are of opinion, (though not so) that the Bodies which are
so called, were not prepared by Art, but by mere chance brought to the estate
of being unperishable by this following means.

In Africa, on the east side of Nile lies a great and sandy Desert, called
from its extent, The Sandy-Sea, which by impetuous Winds is so often agitated,
that Travelers and Beasts with their Burdens are overwhelmed alive, and there
utterly lost, which after by the power of the hot Sun and parching Sand are so
dried, that they become fixed and for ever undissolvable.

True it is, some such Bodies are found there, Mummies are not Bodies dried by
the Sun in the Sea of Sand.
and sometimes sold for Mummies, but they deserve not that Name, because a
Mummy is only such a Body as by a peculiar Art is incorporated and embalmed
with Bitumen, and other odoriferous Spices, such as at this day in great
numbers are found under the City Memphis, and the Caves about it.

Herodotus says in his * second Book, Herodot. Euterpe.
that Bodies of Rich or Great Meh were washed over with Phenician Wine, and the
Belly stuffed with Myrrh, Cassia, and other Aromaticks, and then laid in Salt:
but those of the common sort, was done with Juice or Gum of Cedar-wood: I shall
briefly set down the words of this ancient Writer, wherein he shows the whole
Egyptian way of Embalming, for the better explaining of what is already said,
and shall be said hereafter.

After mourning for the Dead, they bring the Body to be embalmed, Herodotus.
for which several persons are appointed excellently skilled in that Art, who
when it is brought into the house, show wooden Images of other dead persons
painted in natural colors: First, the neatest, afterward courser, and then a
third the coursest of all, asking according to which they will have the Corpse
done: After a bargain struck, having the Corpse there, the Pollinctors embalm
the Body with great diligence in this manner: First, with a crooked Iron they
drill the Brains out of the Head through the Nostrils, upon which they strew
Medicinal Ingredients; After that with a sharp Stone had out of the Moors
Country, they open the Belly and take out all the Bowels, which being cleansed
and washed with Phenician Wine, are mixed with pounded Spices: Then they fill
the Cavity of the Belly with beaten Myrrh, Cynamon, Incense, and other the like
Aromaticks, and so stitch it up again; this done, they lay it seventy days in
Salt, and no longer; After which the Corpse are washed, and wound up in silk
Blankets cut in slits, and spread over (like our Sear-clothes) with a Gum which
the Egyptians use in stead of Lime: When the Friends have received the Corpse
thus Embalmed, they frame a Wooden case just fitted, wherein they lay the
Corpse, and put it into the Burial-Cave next the Wall: Thus sumptuously they
prepare and order their Dead.

There is another kind of Embalming used by those of the middle sort, The
second sort of Embalming.
being of no great cost, viz. They fill a Syringe with Gum of Cedar-wood, and
inject it through the Fundament into the Belly, without removing the Bowels,
then let the Corpse lie so many days as aforesaid, in Salt: On the last day they
squeeze out the injection by the same way, which has such an Operation, that
it brings with it what is not fit for Preservation, and the Salt consumes the
flesh; so that nothing but the Skin and Bones of the Dead remain, which
finished, the the Corpse is delivered up to the Friends, without any more cost
or trouble.

The third way used to the poorer sort is only this: The third sort of
Embalming.
they cleanse and wash the Belly first, and then lay the Corpse seventy days in
Salt, and so finish the Obits.

Ladies of Quality are not so soon exposed to the Operation of Embalming, nor
such as were famous for Beauty, because the Embalmers should not abuse their
yet untainted Bodies: for they say, one of these Embalmers.
Pollinctors used that unnatural Villainy; and upon complaint of his
fellow-Artists was surprised in the very Act, and suffered condign punishment.

Haly an Arabian Physician is of opinion, Haly.
that Bodies by means of Bitumen and The Gum of the Balsam-Tree, before
mentioned. Joh. Nardius.
Opobalsamum, Myrrh, and such like Drugs, is brought to the state of
perdurableness. Johannes Nardius, who caused many of the Mummies to be broken
in pieces to try them, maintains strongly, that the Corpse of the Egyptians were
Embalmed with no other Material, then Asfalt is a certain Rofin or Pitch, found
in some Lakes, especially that of Asphaltites in Jewry, now Mare Mortuum, or
the Dead Sea, at certain times cast on the Shore; but now is somewhat rare.
Asfalt, of which all pieces of Mummy smell strongly.

In what manner the Bodies by Asfalt alone, should become uncorruptible, is
much questioned: Some attribute it to the great quantity of Salt mixed
therewith, but that cannot be; for Bodies laid in Salt, resist corruption a
while, Salt makes not the Corpse unperishable.
yet in length of time they consume to dust.

This Baronius in his History of the Church affirms, Proved by Baronius.
from a Body found in the Salt Mountains of City of Salt.
Saltz-burgh, seeming to have a white Skin, whole and clear, Eyes as if alive,
Hair unhurt, and the rest of the Body as stiff as a stake, but when it had lain
three days in the open Air, it so consumed, that in few days it turned all to
Water.

It rests then, that we say somewhat of the Manner, Art, and Means, by which
Bodies Embalmed with Asfalt become so dry and hard, and how the Asfalt or
Bitumen incorporates, which though at first sight it may seem difficult to
apprehend, yet we shall in some measure make out as follows.

ASfalt has a glutinous Body, In what manner are Bodies Embalmed with Asfalt.
being condensed by cold, and relaxing by warmth, especially Fire; but commixt
with Naphta grows fluent, when both these Gums are thus dissolved together,
they put the Corpse therein, in which if they let it lie so long till it be
thoroughly soaked, then taking it out, and the superfluous moisture by heat
drawn out of it; the work is finished: The probability of this is evidenced by
the adequate infusing this Liquor through all parts of the Body, insomuch as
the Hair of the Head, Eyes and Eyebrows in some Mummies, The Virtue of Asfalt
very Astringent.
are fast conglutinated together: And the penetrating power of the Asfalt,
which transpierceth the very Bones, and shrinks up by consolidation so
wonderfully the whole Mass, that the Bodies of those so Embalmed, being of full
Stature, are so lessened by a close contraction, that they seem rather the
Corpse of Children, and those of Children to have been Abortives.

It is observable, that all the Bodies of the Egyptians, At what time it was
the Egyptians Embalmed their Corpse, and delineaed then with hidden Letters and
Learning.
which are thus Embalmed, sumptuously adorned, and Hieroglyphically
Characterized, are found either in the Stone Vaults underground, or in
Pyramids, and were Buried therein before the Expedition of Cambyses into Egypt,
in the year of the World, Three thousand four hundred and thirty; as appears by
this, Observe that according to this account the Mummies in the Pyramids and
Vauits, are above 2000 years old.
that the same Cambyses after his Conquest, introducing his own Persian
Manners, Rites, and Customs, Banished or put to Death without mercy, the whole
Priesthood of the Nation, whereby this way of interting utterly failing, was
quite laid aside; as appears from Herodotus: These Priests, says he,
Herodotus.
only understood those Mysteries, which might not be taught or communicated to
the People in common, so that in effect the whole Science dyed with them.

IN the Caves under Memphis, Continual burning Lamps or Candles found
underground.
are frequently yet found a great multitude of burning Lamps made of boiled
Chalk, in the shape of a Dog, a Man, a Bull, a Hawk, a Serpent, and other
Beasts, wherein some with three, others with four, eight or twelve Wieks, by
the report of the Arabians.

Many have imagined from such burning Lights found, that the Ancients knew this
great Mystery of so feeding fire, that it should never go out or extinguish of
it self; which they strive to demonstrate by examples, The examples of such
burning Lights.
especially two: The first, was a Taper belonging to Pallas, which in the time
of Henry the Third Emperor of Germany, in the year One thousand four hundred,
and one, by a Country Swain was found, not far from Rome by the River Tiber,
together with the Body, supposed to have burnt two thousand years and upwards,
yet could not be put out or extinguished by the Wind, nor by casting of Water,
or any other moisture upon it; but as soon as by accident, the Vessel got a
leak or crack at the bottom by removing, the flame instantly went out, by the
running forth of its nutrimental Liquor; That this was the Body of Pallas the
Son of Evander the Arcadian, killed by Turnus; Volateranus holds, (whose Story
is at large in Virgil's Aen. Book the Tenth) upon whom he gives us this
Inscription.

Filius Evandri Pallas, quem lancea Turni
Militis occidit, mole sua jacet hic.
Pallas, Evander 's Son, by Turnus Spear,
Bravely in Battle slain, lies Buried here.
The other is said to be found in the time of Pope Paul the Third, in the
Appian way to Rome, in the Sepulcher of Tulliola, Cicero's Daughter, with this
short Inscription.

TuLLioLAE FILIAE MEAE.
To Tulliola my Daughter.
They say this Light had continued above fifteen hundred years; the flame of
this was not so perfect, as that of the other, nor so bright; perhaps the
admission of Air caused that dimness.

By what Art a Light can be made to endure so long without recruit, Several
Opinions of these long-burning Candles.
has been much debated; but yet remains undecided: Some deny the possibility,
that there are no such things in Nature, alleging that whatsoever alters or
consumes in vapor, cannot be permanent, but this oily nutriment vanishes and
so consumes, therefore the food of fire failing, the flame not durable
extinguisheth: Such as take the opposite part, deny that all the nourishment of
kindled fire must needs evaporate in a Damp, alleging that there are things
that can oppose fire, by fire: Such are the A Stone, if set on fire, cannot be
quenched.
Asbeston, Amiant, We may suppose it to be Nitre.
glistering stuff like Silver in the Sand, certain Grains of Aurum Potabile,
and the mentioned Lights, which by these means have burnt so long; yet it is a
wonder that the Defenders of these perpetually-burning Tapers, could never
find out these Asbeston Wicks, wherewith the forementioned Lamps were made.

It is true indeed, that nothing in the world is so possible to make a
perpetual burning Light, as the Asbeston and Amiant, which will be very
evident, if we look well into the nature of them: As to the Wick of the Amiant,
little can be said of its durableness; but Father Linum Asbestinum is a sort of
Linen spun out of the Veins, as some suppose of the Carystian or
Cyprian-Stone. Though Salmasius with more probability contends the true
Asbestinum to be the linum vivum of linum Indicum, in the folds of which, they
enclosed the Dead Body, committing it to the fire, till it were consumed to
ashes: while in the same flames this Linen shroud, as if it had only been
washed, became more white and refined by the fire. Salmas. Exercitat. Plinian.
Kircher tells us, that himself had in his Lamp a Wiek of Kircher de Lucernis
Aegyptiorum.
Asbeston, burning two years without any loss or alteration. All the difficulty
to make a perpetual lighted Lamp, consists in extracting Oil out of the
Abestion, which who can do, may easily perfect the rest: Several Chemists have
in vain attempted and spent much fruitless time and labor about it; for the
Oil either affords no fire, more resembling water than Oil, or else it is so
thick, that it is altogether incapable of affording flame; whereby it appears,
that the mystery of extracting such an Oil, far surpasses humane Skill and
Industry. And if any should yet say, that the two forementioned examples, and
(as several Authentic Writers affirm) that the manner of making such Lights,
was known to the Ancients, and consequently by our sublimer Wits, or Virtuosie
might now be again recovered; it may be answered that the abovementioned Lamps
were not perpetual, but only long-continuing Lights, which might naturally be
thus effected. The Enclosed Air by continuance of time being incrassated by the
fatness of the Bodies long pent up, may easily, as a new Coal draws Air by an
Antiperistasis get a flame: So in the Winter, Water in Cisterns, by the
circum-ambient Air, becomes warm: Such Ig^is fatuus.
flames many times appear glimmering in Churchyards, and fat marshy grounds:
The like is also asserted by the Workers in Mines, that they seldom open a new
Vein, but there burst out such flames, seeming of themselves consistent.

Notwithstanding all these disputes, The Egyptians had perpetually enduring
Lamps.
that the Egyptians have had perpetual burning Lights in their Sepulchral Caves
underground, which indeed were not made of Asbeston, but supplied from another
Fountain, appears by several Arabian, and other expert Writers, who were Eye
witnesses. Their words are to this purpose.

The Egyptian Sages, who were of a sublime spirit, and singularly experienced
in the course of Natural-causes, Salmuth in his Comment upon Pa^cirollus de
rebus perditis, affirms that one Podocaterus a Cyprian, showed at Venice some
incombushble Cloth, and his Materials were from Cyprus where indeed Dioscorides
places them: the same is ocularly confirmed by Vives upon Austi^, and Maiolus
in his Colloquies. And thus in our days do men practice to make long lasting
Snasts for Lamps out of Alumen Plum^sum, and by the same read in Pausanias,
that there always burnt a Lamp before Miuerva's Image.

Schianga an Arabian Historian.


did place by the Corpse of the Dead in token of their acknowledgment of the
Immortality of the Soul, several Lamps or Tapors, which they, so far as was
possible, sought with a discontinued durance to animate in this manner. There
are many places in Egypt, that afford plenty of Bitumen and Petrole, or
Stone-oyl; which the Learned among them, who were great Naturallists
discovering, laid from these Wells secret Channels or Pipes to the Sepulchers,
where they set in a convenient place, a Lamp with a Wiek of Asbeston, which
moistened and fed thereby continually, and the Wiek of it self unconsumable, it
must of necessity follow that the light also endured perpetually. Here comes to
mind that which Schianga an Arabian, in his History of Egyptian Remarks
asserted, being in English thus: There was in Egypt a field with Ditches full
of Pitch and Bitumen, from which their Learned men, all Naturallists, laid
certain Pipes to the Caves under ground, wherein they placed a Lamp joined to
the Pipes, which Lamp had a Wiek incombustible, like the Salamanders Wool is
not desumed from any A^imal; but a Mineral substance Metapliorically so called
from the received opinion of its incom^u^ibleness.
Salamanders Wool, by which means they burned; being once kindled, perpetually,
because of the continual influx of Bitumen.

The intent of the Egyptians setting these Lights near the Sepulchers, seems to
signify, that as the nature of fire is like the Operations of the Gods, so
also the Numens appointed for the protection of the Corpse thereby, as by a
visible similitude of their own likeness, for the continual glorifying of the
Soul, are drawn thither as, they believe.

Perhaps some will wonder, Why the Egyptians so carefully Bury their Corpse.
and ask for what cause the Egyptians have with such diligence taken care to
preserve their Corpse from perishing, and to adorn them with such exquisite
Ornature: To resolve which Quaere, it is to be observed first, that the
Egyptians firmly believed that the first state of the world after the course of
six and thirty thousand; or as others of forty thousand years, must return to
its pristine state and condition again: Secondly, that according to that
Position, the Government of the Seven Superior Tutelar Guardians of Egypt at
every seven thousand years end, return to the first again; so continuing for
the space of Annus Platonicus, or Maginus.
nine and forty thousand years, viz. when the Sabbath, or Rest of all things
shall come: That the change of these Rulers, caused the alteration of the
condttion of the Body: That the Soul, which after the course of seven thousand
years, transmigrating from one Body to another, should return to its own Body
left in the Grave, but clean from all corruption, and protected by the presence
of the Gods; yet still advanced, till having traveled through all the Heavenly
Residencies, at length it is brought to the Great Protoplastus, that is, Deus;
for although the Heathens did multiply to themselves such innumerable orders of
Deities; yet they ended in one only God, as Virg. Aen. lib. 1. O Socii (neque
enim ignari sumus ante malorum)
O Passi graviora: dabit Deus his quoque finem.
Dear Friends, for we have many dangers past.
And Greater, God these too will end at last.

Examplar or Idea of it self, and so live eternally and unchangably happy.

The Egyptians then believing this, and being wonderously diligent to lead an
honest and virtuous life, seem to insinuate by their Embalming of their Corpse,
and to desire, that those Souls after this their departure, may find their
next transmigrated habitations worthy of their deserts, till they be fully
united with God; for it is certain that the Egyptians from the beginning of all
Memorials have so constantly maintained the Souls Immortality, The Egyptians
have always strongly maintained the Immortality of the Soul.
that not only themselves believed it as delivered to them from Antiquity; but
have taught and inculcated this Doctrine also to their other Neighboring
Idolaters, though learned: Among others, Pythagoras, who first brought this
Opinion among the Greeks. Thus far of the Pyramids and Burying-places of the
Ancient Egyptians: We shall now return to describe the other Cities lying in
Sahid, and begin first with the Island Michias.

IN the midst of Nile, not far from Cairo, Island Michias.
over against the Old City Miffrulhetich, lies the Island Michias, or
El-Michias, that is, Measure-Isle, or Mark-Island, because within it was set
the Mark whereby they took the measure of the Rivers overflowing, and the
height and lowness of his waters, and thereby made a judgment of the
consequent fruitfulness, indifference or infertility of the following Year:
This Island contains about fifteen hundred Families, having at one end a fair
Palace, erected by a Sultan, and a large Mosque or Temple; at the other end
stands a round Building alone, with a apiece Well or Cistern, eighteen
Cubits deep, into which the Nile-water at the time of the overflowing is
conveyed: in the middle of the Well stands an upright Pillar, divided by marks
into so many Cubits as the Well is deep, where attend certain Officers by
command of the Council, who give notice of the increase, which some Children
with yellow Bands about their Heads, to that purpose appointed, make known by
an Outcry through all the streets of the City and Suburbs, admonishing the
people to fear God; and are by them in return presented with Gifts: During the
rising of Nilus in Cairo, and most other Cities, there is so great a Noise and
Joy made with Drums and Trumpets all along the City, that it seems to be in a
Tumult and Uproar.

Opposite to Miffrulhetich lies Geza, Geza.
joining to Michias, that severs it from Cairo: it shows many stately Palaces
erected by the Mamaluckes, and other curious and pleasant Buildings, together
with a sumptuous Temple, by the Nile; Many Handy-crafts men and other Traders
come daily from Cairo hither to work and trade, returning at night to their own
homes: Those that would visit the Pyramids, can go no nearer way than through
this City, which on one side is surrounded with a sandy Desert reaching quite
to them.

Not far from Grand Caire stands Muhallaca a little old Town, near which the
great Lake Maeris, The Lake Meris.
which Diodorus placed ten Stadia or Furlongs from Cairo: Antiquity gave it in
compass two hundred and fifty, or four hundred and fifty miles, whereas at this
day it is but eight leagues.

At the increase of Nile, Sanatus.
this Lake is in some places fifty fathom deep, receiving great store of water,
which the Inhabitants make good use of. It has two Rivulets; one, by which it
receives water from Nile, and the other where it runs out of the Lake, and
moistens the thirsty grounds in Summer time: They say King Maeris, from whom
this Lake took his Name, caused it to be dug with Spades, and in the midst
of it erected a Sepulcher for himself and his Queen, wherein two fair Pyramids,
each forty paces high were set, with the tops out of the water, upon either of
which he placed a Marble Statue. The Revenue of the Fish of this Lake, which
amounted daily to a Talent of Silver, the King allowed to his Royal Consort to
buy her Pins. This agrees with what Herodotus writes in his second Book, in
these words:

The Lake Maeris is in compass a thousand six hundred Stadia or Furlongs,
Herodot. Euterpe.
and sixty paces, which compass is as much as all Egypt is in length on the
Seacoast; It reaches far to the North and South, and is in depth fifty paces.
That it was dug and made by men's hands appears, in that about the middle
there stand two Pyramids that rise fifty paces above the water, and as much
under it, so that each Pyramid is an hundred paces high: Upon either of them is
a Stone-Image sitting upon a Throne: The water of this Lake comes not from a
Spring, being sometimes very dry, but is supplied by Trenches out of the Nile;
six months it is furnished from them, A Talent is 250 l. sterling.
and other six months makes returns into it, which later six months the
Revenue of Fish amounts every day to a * Talent of Silver, but in the former
only to twelve Minae, or Pounds; Adding, that the Inhabitants asserted this
Lake went under the Earth Westward, as far as the Sandy Syrtes in Lybia, where
it anew breaks forth near the Mountain which hangs over Memphis.

About six leagues from Cairo, Changa.
at the Entrance of the Wilderness which runs toward Mount Sinai, lies the
City Changa, heretofore very great, and beautified with stately Houses and
Temples, but so much spoiled and wasted by Wars, that it has lost its ancient
splendour: Here is a double Thorow-fare, the one toward Syria, the other to
Arabia; but no water other than what from the overflowing of the Nile is
preserved in Sluices and Ditches.

Hence toward the East stands Suez, Suez.
by Ptolomy called The City of Brightness, upon the utmost Border of the
Arabian Gulf, about three days Journey from Cairo, Livy, Sanutus, Bellonius.
as Livy, Sanutus, and others affirm, though Bellonius places it much nearer:
This is one of the most commodious Havens on the North-side of the Red Sea, and
the Moors bring hither out of India, all manner of Spices, Gems, Pearls, Amber,
Musk, and other costly Merchandise, which are carried by Land to Cairo, and so
to Alexandria, whither the Venetians, English, Dutch, and other Nations come to
traffic: Diverse place this City with Ptolomy, in Egypt; Ptolomy. Maginus
Geograph.
but others as Maginus in his Geography, in Trogloditis, a part of Arabia: but
it seems rather to belong to Egypt, because it is now under the Command of the
Turkish Bassa of Cairo: It is environed with a sandy and barren Desert, which
reaches some miles distance, utterly desolate and void of all things. It is
supported by the Revenues arising from Commodities of other Countries brought
thither: all the water they use is conveyed thither two miles off upon Camels,
and is nevertheless so brackish, that it breeds many Diseases: On an adjacent
Hill stands an inconsiderable Castle with old ruinous Walls.

More to the Inland South from Nile, lies Bethsames, Bethsames.
by some held to be the old Heliopolis. More Southward, Muhaisira.
close to the Nile stands the decayed City Muhaisira, and on the other side
Southwards also lies Benesuait or Benesuahid. Benesuahid.


A hundred and eighty miles from Grand Caire upon a rising ground, is the City
Munia, built in the time of the Mahumetans, by one Chalib, Munia.
belonging to the Califfe of Bagdet: This City had formerly many neat Churches
and other handsome Structures, insomuch that there yet appear diverse Ruins of
the ancient Egyptian Building. Not far from Munia, lies Fyum, formerly called
Abydus, Fyum.
and by some Abutick. Here it is said, that Joseph the son of Jacob was first
buried, whose Bones Moses afterward when the Children of Israel departed out
of Egypt, carried with then into Canaan. Close by Fy^m yet stands the great and
old City Manfloth or Menf-loth, erected by the Egyptians, destroyed by the
Romans, and afterward rebuilt anew, and inhabited-by the Mahumetans, though
infinitely short of its pristine luster; however some great and high Columns
with stately Church-Portals, whereon are Verses written in the Egyptian Tongue
are yet extant. Here also are the Ruins of a great Building, seeming formerly
to have been a Temple, from whose Foundations Gold, Silver, and other Coin has
been taken up; upon one side of which was stamped the Effigies of the ancient
Egyptian Kings, and on the reverse, diverse Hieroglyphics.

Azuth, formerly Bubastes, about two hundred and fifty miles from Cairo, Azuth.
was heretofore esteemed a very beautiful City, but at this day, for the most
part, lies waste, and buried under Heaps of Ruin. Here inhabit a hundred
Christian Families, and three or four Churches remain undefac'd. Without the
City stands a Monastery, wherein reside above a hundred Monks, that live only
upon Herbs, Bread, and Olives, not touching either Flesh or Fish. The Cloister
has great Revenues, giving entertainment to all strangers, who are there
supplied with all Necessaries for three days.

Three hundred miles from Cairo, on the shore of Nilus, stands Ichium, Ichium.
erected by Mizraim the son of Chus, and consequently one of the oldest Cities
in Egypt: Which the Mahumetans when they first began to rule there, so wasted
and destroyed, that there is not one stone left upon another; for they carried
the Pillars and Stones to the west side of Nilus, and used them to the building
of the illcontriv'd Town Munsta or Munsia, whose narrow un-pav'd Streets by the
vicinity of a sandy Soil, in Summer are very offensive, though the Country
adjacent has fruitful Valleys for bearing Corn, and pasturing Cattle.

Anthius, by Marmol called Anthinoe, or Anthedon, was a fair City, Anthinoe.
built by the Romans, on the Western Banks of Nilus, wherein yet may be read
several Inscriptions upon Marble Pillars; Joining as it were to this, lies
also the City Barnabal.

Thebes, formerly a glorious City, but now almost lost in its own Ruins, lies
West of Nilus about five days journey from Cairo. Strabo calls it Diospolis,
that is, Kircher Choregraph. Egypt.
Jupiters City, because Jupiter was worshipped there; By Homer and Stephanus, in
his Book of Cities, Hecatompylos, Hundred Gates; for Thebes in former times is
said to have had so many Gates. By Diodorus, Busiris; by the Moors, Sirim; by
the Arabians one while Asna, another Asiuth and Asuan. Strabo gives the best
and most accurate description of all other. We will give you his own words.

Some, Strabo.
says he, reputed this City as the Metropolis of Egypt: it is true, there still
appear remaining Marks of its Greatness; being in length about eighty Furlongs.
Cambyses the Persian much defaced it and spoiled the Temples. Now it is rather
a heap of conjoined Villages than a City, one part of it lying in Arabia; one
of its two Colossus's cut out of an entire Stone, remaining still whole and
sound, but the uppermost part of the other, is said to be broken off by an
Earthquake. They also report that sometimes a sound issues from the Pedestal.
When I was there with Elius Gallus, and diverse Friends and some Soldiers, I
heard about the tenth hour, the like sound, but whether it was made by one of
the Company, I cannot say; because all, for the uncertainty of the Matter, had
more occasion to believe so, than that such a hollow murmur should come out of
such a firm body. A little further, beyond Memnonium, from the sounding like
Memnous Tomb.
Memnonium, are about forty Sepulchers of Kings in Caves under ground, after
the manner of such as we formerly described, which are worthy the seeing. Near
this Colossus are some Pyramids with Inscriptions, which set forth the Riches
and Potency of those Kings.

These words of Strabo not only speak the Greatness, but also the
Sumptuousness of Thebes, and agree with the present Asuan, which is a Name
given by the Arabians, by adding A to Suan or Soan; for the Copticks called
that Soan, which the Greeks entitled Thebes.

In this City have been also many Pyramids or Obelisks; according to the same
Strabo, as also Diodorus and Herodotus say here were many Pyramids, some few of
which still remain, the rest by the fury of the Persians miserably defaced and
destroyed.

The deep Mysteries which the Egyptians couched under their Pyramids and
Hieroglyphics sculped thereon, being a matter worth the knowledge, induce us
in this place to give a more exact account of them than heretofore.

OBelisks therefore are four square Stone-Columns, Several Names of Obelisks.
running up in height, taporing to a point, and on every side inscribed
Characters. The Greeks style such (...), Kircher. Obilise. Pamphil.
that is, Acute Points. The Italians, from the form, broad beneath and running
up in shape of a Needle or Spire, Aguglia; the Arabians, Messalets Pharaonis,
that is, Pharaohs Needles, because, they say, they were the invention of
Pharaoh the first King of Egypt; When Spires were erected in Egypt.

Manuphtar.


but the Egyptian Priests name them The Fingers of the Sun, to signify the
Mysteries hidden under it: But the first that introduced the practice of
erecting Spires or Obelisks in Egypt, was Manuphtar Lord of Memphis, in the
Year of the World 2604. So this.


Then his son Sothis succeeding, finished the Work begun by his Father, and
erected at Heliopolis twelve Obelisks, 1175 years before the Incarnation.
in the Year of the Creation, 2893.

Momphencure son of Sesostris erected a plain Obelisk in the Year 2947.
Momphencure signifies the Governor of Memphis.
The like did Simarres or Simannes, in the time of King David, Anno Mundi,
2986. or thereabout.

King Marres or Afhres, Marres.
by others called Vaphres, built a plain Obelisk in the Year of the Creation
3022. which the Emperor Claudius carried out of Egypt, and set up at Rome for
the Mausoleum.

King Psammitichus, Psammitichus.
by Pliny called Sennesertus, erected a great Obelisk, inscribed with Sacred
and Sublime Figures at Heliopolis, Eight hundred and seven years before the
Incarnation.

King Nectabanus, by others called Necho, Nectabanus.
seven hundred and forty years before Christ, erected a great Obelisk at
Memphis, which afterward Ptolomeus Philadelphus removed to Alexandria, and
placed in the Temple of Arsinoe. Most of all these Obelisks at several times by
the Roman Emperors were brought out of Egypt to Rome. Lastly, the Persian King
Cambyses, after the Conquest of Egypt, which happened in the Year of the World
3528. destroyed all that remained, 522 before Christ.
as well those that stood upright, as those that were fallen down, and either
slew or banished all the Egyptian Priests, as we mentioned before.

These were not the Works of Kings only, but of Priests and Ministers of
State; and Custom at length prevailed so far, that scarce a place could be seen
without them; At which none ought to wonder, if he consider the Egyptians
worshipped the Sun, to whose honor they erected such Spires.

The bigness of the Obelisks were several, some no higher than ten or twelve
foot; while others did climb to the height of twenty, thirty, seventy, an
hundred, or a hundred and forty foot.

Upon every side the ancient Egyptian Priests carved Figures and Images almost
in the same manner, Hieroglyphick Figures carved upon the Needles or Spires.
as those delineated upon the Covering-Clothes and Winding-sheets of the
Mummies, and sometimes the very same.

There were also plain ones erected by the Kings that conquered Egypt, Neeldes
or Spires without Figures.
for the Egyptian Priests would not reveal the Mystery of their Charactering to
any strangers.

As this Hieroglyphical manner of writing was very mysterious, Of what stone
the Needles or Spires are made.
so the Stone they chose for that purpose was most excellent, which the Greeks
called A Fire-stone.
Pyroboilon; the Latins, Theban Stone; and by the Italians, Granito Rosso: It
is a kind of Marble, sprinkled and speckled as it were with Drops of several
colors, and as durable and hard as Porphiry. The Quarry out of which these
were cut, lies close by the ancient City Thebes, among the Hills extending to
Negro-land, and the Cataracts of Nilus to the South. And though Egypt abound in
Quarries of other sorts of Marble, yet the Egyptian Priests chose this for the
erecting of Obelisks, no other Stone being used to that purpose; for although
they had the like Veins of Marble in the Island Ilia, and other places in Italy
and Sweden, yet it could no way compare in hardness and variety of Grains and
Specks, with that of Egypt. Now why the Egyptians made the Obelisks of those
streaked Marbles, this may be the reason.

They that erected Obelisks in honor of the Sun, Why they do so.
whose beams their spiring tops seemed to represent, would not take every kind
of stone, but such only as did most analogize with that glorious Body, which
in their opinion this Marble does: By nature it consisted of a fourfold
Existence, viz. First, a glistering Red, among which here and there are found
some mixed, other clear Christal-colour'd Spots; then Violet-colour, after that
Blew and Ash Color, with some streaks or dashes of Black between; which the
Egyptians seeing, they chose it, as most fit to represent their hidden
Mysteries; so that by the aforesaid Mixture of the Colors, without doubt they
intend to signify the four Elements, and particularly by the Red, Fire; by the
Christaline, Air; by the Blew; Water; and lastly by the Black, the Earth.
Hereby appears with how great judgment the Egyptians chose fit Materials for
their Mysteries, and that for the better representing their deep Notions, they
have used nothing but what might make them more conspicuous. And if any find
older Obelisks of another sort, certainly they were not true Egyptick; but
either erected by Strangers, in imitation of the true; or in the late times,
when by the Destruction and Banishment of the Priests by Cambyses, the Sacred
Egyptian Letters were utterly lost. Such was the Obelisk raised by the
Phenicians to the Honor of the Sun; which being depressed, low, flat, and
leaning, very much differed from the right: Such a one also Herodian says, the
Emperor Heliogabalus brought from Syria to Rome.

ALL the great Obelisks, In what manner the Obelisks were brought out of the
Stone Quarties to the place appointed. Plin. lib. 36. c. 9.
were brought from their Quarries to their appointed place in this manner:
First, there was a great Trench Dug, beginning under the already hewn
Obelisk, and running into the Nile, where two great Ships deep laden with
Stones, exceeding the weight of the intended Freight, were Sunk; and then towed
quite underneath it, the two ends of the Obelisks hanging on the opposite Banks
of the Ditch. The Ships there settled, and the Stone Ballast being cast out; the
Vessels finding themselves eased, Buoying up, received their Lading, the
hanging Obelisk, which they brought through the same cut into the Nilus, and so
to the appointed place where it was to be erected.

THere are yet to be seen at Thebes, Egyptian, Greek, and Latin Inscriptions,
and without the Gates, old Ruins and Columns, all the remaining tokens of its
ancient Glory. The City according to Diodorus, in circuit had an hundred and
forty Stadia or Furlongs, That is, five miles.
eight and twenty Stadia accounted for a Mile. As to the number of an hundred
Gates, that account seems to some, as Diodorus reports, to intend only the
gross number of the Avenues and Passages; though others, as Mela, confirm it;
adding, that Thebes was so exceeding populous, that it could draw out of That
is a Million of men.
every Gate ten thousand Armed men. And that the Greek word Hecatompilos, which
signifies an hundred Gates, (according to which Thebes was called by Homer) is
not to be understood literally; but is rather to be explained to relate to an
hundred Palaces, in which so many Princes had their residence. Plin. lib. 36.
c. 14.
Pliny, will have the whole City stand upon Arches so made on purpose, that the
Egyptian Kings might draw their Armies this way, under the Houses of the City
without being discovered.

Round about this decayed and desolate City, are Deserts, wherein formerly very
many Hermits dwelt. Two days Journey from Cairo lies a Wilderness, wherein it
is said, is the Cave wherein St. Paul remaining, was visited by St. Anthony.

Six miles from the City Munsia or Munza, lies a Cloister of Georgian
Christians, heretofore very famous, and inhabited by above two hundred Monks,
who having much Goods, and a great yearly Revenue, imparted the same to all
needy Strangers; sending the overplus to the Patriarch to Cairo, who
distributed it among poor Pilgrims in his Diocese; But two hundred and sixty
years since, all these Monasticks dying by a Pestilence, the Bashaw of Munsia,
walled in the Cloister, and made it into Houses for Artificers and Tradesmen,
to dwell in.

Chiam or El Chiam, Chiam.
now a heap of Rubbish; but heretofore the Seat of the Jacobite Christians;
Livy and Sanutus, seem to be of Opinion, that this is Ptolomy's old Diospolis,
because both of them lay in the same Latitude.

More toward the South from Cairo, Barbanda.
lies another City upon the Banks of Nile, called Barbanda, destroyed by the
Romans, whose ruinous heaps were for the most part, brought to Asna: among
which sometime they find Gold and Silver Coin, and pieces of Smaragdus or
Emeralds.

Against Barbanda, lies Cana, erected by the Egyptians near the Nile, Cana.
and Walled. The Inhabitants use no Trades, but rely all upon Husbandry and
Tillage: by which means, this place which is divided from the Red Sea by a vast
sandy and dry Desert, is very rich in Corn, which the Inhabitants of Medina,
where the Tomb of Mahomet is, and also of Mecha Transport in great abundance
for Asia. Opposite to Cana, on the Red Sea, lies Cossir a Haven, whither they
usually Travel from Cana over the forementioned Sandy Desert: There are many
Granaries for the reception of Corn brought thither from Cana. It is probable
that Livius Sanutus says, that this Haven is that of the Old City Berenice,
because they lie in the very same elevation; yet some will have it to be
Miosormus.

There is also Conza, formerly Metacompsus, not far from the City Asna, Conza.
on the Southermost borders of Egypt, some of the Ancients placed Elephantis or
Elephantina; of which at this day, the name only remains.

The last City to the South of Egypt, lying on the Nilus, is Asna, formerly
called Siena; but got the name Asna from the Arabians, for the word Siena being
the same with the Arabian Zey^^a, which signifies Foul, Sanutus lib. 9.
they thought the City too fair to bear that Name, and therefore changed Siena
into Asna, that is, Fair; the City indeed being very beautiful; the Romans
wasted most part of it, but it has since been much more stately rebuilt by the
Mahumetans.

The Inhabitants drive a subtle Trade in the Kingdom of Nubia, partly in
Vessels sailing up the Nile, and partly by Land through the Desert; by which
way of Transportation, they are become considerable in Cattle, Corn, and Money.

In the City, which is of a large extent, and by the Moors, according to
Marmol, called Gavera, there yet appear many fair Edifices, and particularly a
very curious Sepulcher, with Egyptian and Latin Inscriptions.

There is also a deep Well, into whose bottom the Sun shines at Noon, A deep
Well.
while he passes too and again through the Northern signs. To this place or a
little further, the Nile is Navigable; but beyond no Vessel can pass; opposed
and stopped by the Cataracts, and therefore they Land their Goods below, and
carry them over Land, then again shipping when they are past the precipice, and
come into smooth water.

Eastward from Asna is the ancient and great City Asuan or Assuan, The City
Assuan.
by some taken to be Conza or Metacompsus, and borders upon the Desert Buche:
through which they Travel by the City Suaquen, to the Red Sea, Neighboring with
the Moors; and by Marmol placed in Egypt. Beyond this they pass not up the
Nile, Sanutus.
because of the forementioned precipices. It is very hot there in Summer, and
the Inhabitants are Tawny of color; not caused so much by the great heat, as
by their commixture with the People of Nubia and the Moors. In several places
about this City are many ancient Buildings and Towers, there called Barba;
which makes some imagine that here stood Thebes, In circuit five mile, in
length three miles.
out of whose Ruins Asuan was built; Strabo gives it eighty Stadia or Furlongs
in length, of which City of Asuan, Albufeda the Arabian, thus writes: Asuan is
a City of the upper Theban Country, lying by the side of the Eastern Desert:
wherein stands the famous Needle or Spire, the greatest Monument of Antiquity,
partly for its huge Carved Stones, and partly for the variety of curious
Imagery upon it. And that many Obelisks and Pyramids have been there,
Herodotus, Diodorus, and others testify. Herodotus. Diodorus.
Beyond this the utmost border of the Turkish Dominions in Egypt, there are no
Seats or Habitations worth the mentioning, only some few Huts or Cottages,
where Tawny people of Buchia dwell, that speak a Tongue scraped together out of
the Egyptian, Arabian, and Moorish Languages.

Several other small Cities, Sanutus.
and inconsiderable places by length of time decayed, are by Sanutus and other
Geographers, with few words touched upon; such are these: Thura in the East,
lying close by Cairo; Sachila and Pharsono lying beneath the Lake Maeris;
Narnita and Nitriota above it; Elmena, Libelezait, Saguan, Dakat, all poor and
thin peopled places; of which the first is to the inland, in the midway
between the Red Sea and Nile; but the other lie close by the Sea side.

King Pharaoh's Angle, Pharaoh's Angle,
or Point, from whence Moses with his people, in a wonderful manner, passed
through the Red Sea; Corondal, Aziruth, and Aphaca, places on the Red Sea,
lying not far one from another, with few or no Inhabitants.

The seven Wells, Seven Wells.
called by the Italians, Zette Pozzi, is a place in a dry Tract of Land, where
at this day appear some tokens of the Old Wells or Fountains of Water, that
gave name to the place. Menuia and Cosera lie in the Island Heracleopolites,
Sanutus.
but thinly inhabited. The like also are Veneria and Ansena, two Neighboring
places.

Besides the Island Michias, The two Islands of Heracleopolites, and
Cynopolites.
lying by Cairo, and the Island Elephantina, there are Heracleopolites, and
Cynopolites, or the Isle of Dogs, both lying in the Nile, placed by Sanutus in
Egypt.

The Metropolis of the later is Cynopolis, Cynopolis.
or Dog-town; because the Inhabitants for the most part worshipped a Dog; but
at this day it is called Monphalus.

The Island Heracleopolites, Heracleopolis.
so called from Heracleopolis, that is, Hercules City, because Hercules was
worshipped in it, is fifty miles in circuit, and fruitful in Olives and other
Fruit Trees. Here was the Icneumon, the mortal Enemy of Crocodiles and Serpents
worshipped.

Besides all these Cities, The Number of Villages in Egypt.
there are many Villages in Egypt; for above Delta both Southward and Northward
of Cairo, Sanut.
there are four thousand, and in Delta twenty thousand, whose Grounds and
Meadows are once a year watered by the Nile.

As to the Soil, The Soil of Egypt is dry and thirsty in it self.
it is Sandy, very Barren, and so dry and seared, that unless it lie under
water many days, as at the overflux of Nile, it will never become fertile.
Therefore the Egyptians often drown their Gardens and Orchards, so by long
soaking to make them fruitful; whereby their Pot Herbs and Salletting are very
waterish, and more insipid or flashy, than in Europe. But although the Soil be
of it self thus steril; It is made fat by Nilus.
yet the fruitful Nilus with his fat Mud, makes it fertile, and fit for
Tillage; and in some places so luxuriant, that they often mix the fatness of
the Soil with Sand, to temper and allay it.

This only overflowing of the Nile, made Egypt to be esteemed not only the
Granary of Rome, but of the whole then known world; for it fed all the Roman
Provinces with Corn, a third part of the year, exposing besides abundance into
remoter Countries. Pliny reports, that the ground there was so exceedingly
fruitful, that one only Seed planted in the Earth, would bring forth a hundred
fold. But this wonderful fertility was attended with this inconvenience, that
the rich Product was not lasting; and from this very same cause, they
dispatched them away to their Neighbor Nations of the Arabian Desert,
Palestine, Syria, Constantinople, and Europe; especially Sugar, Cassia,
Senaleaves, several Gums, and other Inland Commodities.

Kassia Colekasia Datura


The Delta's boast theirs the richest Ground of all Egypt, Delta is fruitful.
for the rest beyond Catro to the Moors Country, is but barren, except two or
three Leagues in breadth on each side the River Nile; the rest of the places
beyond, are dry and sandy Deserts. The Country of Errif produces excellent
Rice, and other Fruits; Errif
though toward Alexandria, some places are covered with Sand, and the Gardens
there all produce very unsound Fruit. The Lands of Becheira, Becheira.
lying round about the River, are extraordinarily rich; but the places between
the Eastern Channel, toward Damiata and Syria are Mountainous, and without
water, overwhelmed with Sand. Suez and Bocchir, and the Land about the Lake
Mareotis, by Alexandria, have nothing but great sandy Deserts. Sanutus says,
Sanutus.
the ground about Alexandretta is unfruitful; Bellonius.
whereas Peter Bellonius in that place saw growing Rice, Wheat, Barley, and
other Fruits. About Rosetta, grows a kind of Red Rice in great abundance, and
the like about Damiata.

EGypt is also singularly rich in the production of variety of wholesome Plants,
Egypt is rich in Plants.
Herbs, Trees, and other Vegetables; some common in Europe, but many utterly
unknown, transported from thence; such are, The Datura, Colocasia, Sebesten,
Cassia Fistula, Elhanna, Lablab, Melochia, Sesban, Sophera, Absus, Sempsen,
Berd, Chate, Abdellavi, Batechia El Mavi, Negel El Jalib, Tamaris-Tree,
Dedal-Tree, Mauz or Muza, Carob, Sant, and many other; of some of which we have
spoken already.

Among other, their grows in Egypt a kind of Nightshade named Datura,
Datura. Alpinus de Plant. crotic.
or Tatura, by the common people, and by Dodoneus in his Book of Plants, is
called Strammonie, as the Fruit is by Avicenna held to be the Nut-Methel. This
Plant Datura, shoots into the ground with a long, thick and brushy Root, of a
very unpleasing savor. The Stalk being slender, broad, and round, grows to the
height of four or five Cubits, divided into several Branches, on which hang
dark brown-coloured Leaves, deeply indented on each side. The Blossom is very
sweet-scented and pleasant to the eye, beneath small, above broad, and white
without and within; followed by roundish Fruit, enclosed in a prickly Shell
full of yellowish Seeds.

The Seeds eaten, will cast one for a time into a kind of blockish inebriation.
The use of it.
It is commonly used among the Egyptian High-way-men, made up with bread, which
dose so prepared, they have a subtle way to administer, by insinuating
themselves into the Company of Merchants, following the Caravan, and under
pretense of safe conduct, taking together their repast, they convey these
Loaves instead of Bread, of which eating, they grow strait besotted, while they
take the Plunder of their Gold, Silver, and other rich Commodities.

The Curtezans of the Country use the like Trade, What the Whores in Egypt
perform therewith.
giving such as they intend to rifle, a quarter of an Ounce of this Bread with
Wine or other Drink. The same power is also ascribed to the Blossom.

No Plant is more known among the Egyptians, nor more used, than Colocasia;
Colocasia. Alpinus de Plantis Egypt.
by the Arabians in Egypt, called Culcas. These greatly provoke Venus, whether
eaten raw or boiled; whole Fields are overgrown with these Plants; though
none, whether Stranger or Inhabitant, which seems a wonder, It Blossoms not in
Egypt.
have ever seen it bear either Blossoms, Fruits or Stalks. Prosper Alpinus had
a round Root (for there are of two sorts, a round, and a long) sent him out of
Alexandretta; But in Italy it does, and the reason thereof.
that Blossomed in his Garden at Venice in April, in form and bigness
resembling the Blossom of the Aron or Calves-foot, though with Stalks and all
it is no longer than the Palm of ones Hand. Now why this Root in Egypt its own
proper Country, should bring forth neither Blossoms nor Stalks, and in Italy
usually does it, proceeds only from the fatness of the Soil in Egypt, which
makes them increase only in Leaves and Roots, whereas in Italy, being a
Foreign and leaner Soil, the Roots and Foliage are small, and the upper part
drawing the nourishing moisture, is the cause it sometimes brings forth Stalks
and Blossom.

Two sorts of Sebesten-Trees are found here, Sebesten.
a wild one like the Damsin-Tree, and a Garden one, which has thicker and
broader Leaves than the wild. The Blossom is small and white, succeeded by a
Fruit, not unlike the small Damsin, with threesquare Kernels. The Fruits of the
wild Sebesten-Tree are smaller, and later ripe, than the Garden, which are
bigger and better. The Decoction is very prevalent against the Cough, Ruptures,
Pluretick Stitches in the Side, Hoarseness, Agues, and all Distempers of the
Breast and Lungs. The Juice of the Fruit hanging the whole year upon the Tree,
and ripe in Harvest, makes excellent Birdlime; the same stamped and washed, and
wrought into the form of a Plaster or Cataplasm, the Egyptians use against all
hard Swellings.

The Tree by Physicians called Cassia Fistula; The Pipe Cassia-Tree.
by the Arabians in Egypt, Sagiar El Selichet, and by the Turks Chai'ar Xambar,
that is, Black Cassia, flourishes in great plenty, in low and marshy places,
lying near the Sea; the Stock, Branches, Leaves, and Shell, which are smooth,
of a pale ashy color, resemble the Nut-tree, but more Leavy. The Buds or
Blossoms are very like the Primrose smelling well, especially early in the
Morning; so that the Egyptians delight to walk under their shade. Every Blossom
has in the midst of it many small Strings, which at length become great, and
turn thick Trunks or hollow Pipes, which ripen all the year long, and at all
times continue hanging on the Tree.

The Egyptians gather these Pipes at Cairo, only in Summer time, when many
other green ones appear out of the Blossom, which at length, as the first, grow
dusky. That which grows in and about Damiata, has thick Shells, but little
Pelp or Juice within; but those of Cairo and Alexandria, are thinner Husked and
more full, which are accounted the best, being of two sorts, that is, Reddish,
which they call Abis, and are the best; the other are Black. Prosper Alpinus
opinions, that the Pipes which open with shaking, are the best; but that is not
so, because they are dry and withered; such as by a hard Winter and Stormy
Winds, are shaken or fall from the Tree, are unfit for use. Wherefore some good
Husbands to prevent that, do with a string tie fast together many Pipes of the
same Branch.

The Pelpy Juice of the Pipes, The use of Cassija.
the Egyptians use as we do, that is, stamped and given in Potion, mixed with
Wine or other Liquor, being hot and moist in the first degree, makes a gentle
Purge, driving Phlegm and Choler out of the Stomach and Bowels, cleansing and
allaying the heat of the Blood. The Juice mixed with fine Sugar, and taken
inwardly, is esteemed a certain Cure of all Diseases of the Reins and Bladder:
For it quenches or allays the inordinate heat of the Kidneys, and an excellent
Vehicle for carrying off the slimy dregs out of those Vessels through the
Bladder; so that the Egyptians by the frequent use thereof are absolutely freed
from the Stone. It is also useful against pains in the Limbs arising from heat,
especially against the Gout, applied by way of Plaster.

The Blossoms Candied with Sugar, are a powerful Remedy against the Heat of the
Kidneys, and cleanse and free the Uretories from vicious and slimy foulness.
The green Pipes first decocted in water, and then dried in the shade, and laid
in Sugar or Honey, are used commonly by Women and Children against the same
Distempers, taking the weight of half an Ounce at a time.

The Plant by the Arabians in Egypt, called Elhanne, Elhanna.
and by the Physicians Alcanna, grows with many Branches like a little Shrub.
The Leaves resemble those of the Olive, being shortish, but something broad, of
a fresh and flourishing green. The Blossoms grow as those of the Elder-tree,
and used by the Women, as a comfortable refreshment in their Baths. A decoction
of the Leaves, prevents the falling off of Hair, and drives away Vermin; the
Egyptian Women with the Juice of the Leaves and Branches, paint their Nails, in
the manner of a Semicircle, which remains long without wearing off. Of the
stamped powder of the Leaves, which they call Archenda, mixed with water, is
made a Gold color, wherewith they stain their Hands and Feet, which yellow
tincture they hold for a great Beauty.

Lablab a Tree with many Branches, climbing and spreading like a Vine; Lablab.
but in Leaves, Blossoms and Form resembling the Roman Bean. Twice a year, that
is in Lent and Harvest, it bears long and broad Cods or Shells, which contain
in them Black and Brown reddish Beans, streaked as the Roman. This continues
many times without sensible decay a hundred years, carrying both Winter and
Summer green Leaves. The Egyptians use the Beans for food, which are no less
pleasant than the European. The Women drink the Decoction of it for their
Months, and it is good against the stopping of the Urine and the Cough.

Melochia is an Herb growing a Cubit high, with thin and limber Twigs. Melochia.
The Leaves are like those of a Beet, but smaller, long, and sharp-pointed. The
Blossoms are little, and colored like Saffron, the Seeds little and black, in
a Husk like a Horn. The Seed is used to prevent Swooning-fits, and ripens all
hard Swellings; though this be common, yet is nothing more acceptable to the
Palate, for they boil it either alone in water, or in Pottage as we dress
Beets, at Feasts they both garnish and season their Dishes with it, which is
very pleasing; yet notwithstanding this repute, it agrees not over-well with
many, for it yields but slender nutriment and a flimy juice, breeding in such
as eat much of it great stoppings and Costiveness in their Bowels. The taste
also is something flashy and flat unless quickened with Juice of Lemons. The
Decoction of the Leaves is very good against the Cough, and half an ounce of
the Seed makes a sufficient Purge.

Sesban, is a Sprout with a prickly Stock, Sesban.
shooting up to the height of a Myrtle Tree; the Blossoms are yellow, the Husks
or Cods long, and like those of Fenugreek; so also is the Seed, and has an
attractive power like the Fenugreek Seed. The Egyptians commonly make Hedges or
Fences between their Grounds with this Bush.

Sophera, is a Plant two Cubits high, and leaved like the Myrtle; Sophera.
it bears scentless yellow Blossoms with few Seeds, which are said to be
poisonous.

Absus is an Herb with Leaves like the common Clover or Three-leav'd Grass,
Absus.
the Blossom white or straw-colour'd, the Seed black, and the Stalk prickly.

The Plant known to the Egyptians by the Name Sempsen, Sempsen.
but by the Greeks and Latins called Sesamus, grows upright a foot and half
high, the lower Leaves are more indented or nicked than the higher, and are
very like those of Nightshade. The Blossoms are small and white, followed by
small Cods, holding a Seed like Line-seed, out of which Oil is pressed, which
the Arabians call Zeid Taib, that is, Good Oil, because it is so wholesome a
Food, that it is sold dearer than the Oyl-Olive.

The Leaves, The use of it.
Seed, and Oil moderately hot and moist in the second degree, of an extenuating
quality, are by the Egyptians used against many Diseases. The Country people
heretofore fed thereon, and grew fat with it, but now the Oil is chiefly used
to take away Freckles and Spots in the Skin, and to anoint Sores.

The Plant Berd or Papyrus, Berd or Papyrus.
grows upon the Nile, having a reedy or stringy Root, with many straight
Stalks, six, seven, or more Cubits high above water, at the end of which is a
multitude of long and very small Threeds, seeming as a Blossom. The Leaves are
Triangular, soft below, at the Stalk broad, and at the end sharp, in form of a
Cross-barr'd Dagger; Surgeons there use the Juice of the Leaves, to cleanse and
enlarge the Orifices of Sores, and with the Ashes of the tops of the Stalks,
close and heal up the Wounds.

The Roots in former times served in stead of Writing-Tablets, The use of them.
the Juice of the Stalks wrought into thin Leaves, the Ancients wrote upon, as
we now adays do upon our Paper made of old Linen, and probably from this
Plant took the name Papyrus. There is a signature of a Sprig or Stalk of this
Plant Carved upon several Obelisks, whereby they signified the great abundance
of all things, because this Plant served them formerly in stead of all
necessary Commodities; for before the Planting of Corn was known in Egypt, the
people lived on this Plant, making thereof Clothes, Boats, all manner of
Housholdstuffe, Garlands for the Gods, and Shoes for the Priests. But at this
day by the carelessness of the Inhabitants, and the importing of our European
Paper thither, it is by them esteemed of no worth at all.

There grows also a kind of Cucumers in several places in Egypt, Chate.
named Chate, differing only from ours in Europe in greatness, clearness, and
softness of the Leaves, which are smaller, whiter, softer, and rounder; they
have a very pleasant taste, and are light and easy of digestion. The
Inhabitants account them very wholesome, either eaten boiled or raw, and
Physicians use them against burning Fevers, and several other like Distempers.

There grow also several kinds of Melons; Abdellavi.
one called Abdellavi, much differing from ours: another kind Chajar, of an
unpleasant and watery taste; but the Seed is held to be more cooling, Batechia
El Mavi.
than of the rest: A third sort, called Batechia El Mavi, bigger than ours,
yellow of Skin, and has within nothing but Seeds and sweet water, which they
drink in great abundance, against Thirst, and to allay the heat of the Stomach,
Liver, and Kidneys, and also to abate the Tertian Ague. The more noble Turks,
Arabians, and Egyptians, who live delicately, drink this water only with
Sugar, and mixed with Rose Water, Musk and Amber, in Summer time for their daily
Drink; yet not without damage to the Stomach and Liver, because of the
overgreat Cooling, if it be too much used.

The Egyptians keep this Fruit the whole year good, in Cellars, which as a
rarity they set upon the Table for Strangers to eat.

Here also grows a kind of limber Grass, Nejem El Jalib.
creeping in the Earth with white, tartish and sweet Roots, as our Couch-grass.
On the ends of the Stalks stand four Ears, with small Seeds in them, over
against one another; from whence the Egyptians took occasion to name it Nejem
El Jalib, that is, Cross-grass. The Seed is held for a special Remedy to
dissolve the Stone in the Kidneys, and Bladder. The decoction of the Root, is
with good success given inwardly against the Measles and Small Pox, and does
bring down the stopped Terms.

There grows also a Tree called Atle, Tamaris-Tree, or Atle.
very like the Tamaris-Tree, which Dioscorides names Mirica and Tamerix, and is
found in several places of Italy and Germany, though no where in Egypt.

The Egyptian Atle, shoots up to the bigness of a great Olive Tree, and in the
Country of Sahid, grows as big as a great Oak. The Leaves are like those of
the Tamaris, but longer, smaller, and full of green Hairs. The Fruit, is hard,
woody, or sticky, without Kernels, and seems to be the same with Nut-Galls.

The Wood of it they use for Fuel for want of other; The use of it.
and also make thereof a kind of Charcoals, which all Egypt and Arabia burn.

The Leaves open Obstructions of the Milt or Spleen; so do Cups, Cans, and
Pots, made of the Wood.

In several places of Egypt, and especially about Alexandria, The Dadel-Tree,
unknown to us.
are great Woods of Dadel-Trees, which the Arabians from the name of the Fruit
call Dachel.

The Dadel-Tree (of which there are Male and Female) has every other year
abundance of Fruit, but the Female affords no Fruit, unless her Branches be
plash'd with those of her Mate. Many to make the Female fruitful, Alpinut.
strew the Matter that lies in the Bag or Receptacle, out of which the Blossom
and Fruit comes, upon her Branches: And probably if the Egyptians did not so,
they would bring bring forth no Fruit, or if they did, they would never come to
any perfection. But Veslingus seems to reject this, Observat. in Alpin.
ascribing the great fruitfulness of it to the Soil, being Sandy and Nitrous:
For he affirms that he has seen the Earth in the Dadel-Tree Wood oftentimes,
thick covered with a white Down or Callow, like Cellar Walls where we find our
Saltpetre, which by the sultry South winds from Negro-land and the Barren
Arabia, is in great abundance driven up hither, and falling on the tops of the
Dadel-Trees, not only makes them flourish, but also pregnant.

The Roots are so small, thin and short, that it is a wonder how it supports it
self, being so great, especially when so often charged by strong and assiduous
gusts; for contrary to other Trees, this tapers downwards, and the slenderest
part of the Stock is nearest the Foot, which has made some suppose that the
Plant, though large, receives no nourishment from the Earth by the Root, but
from the Air.

There is no Tree more profitable, or turns to a greater account than this: for
of the Stock or Body they make Beams and Rafters for Floorings of Houses, and
of the Boughs and Branches they make diverse sorts of Wooden Ware, which they
call Cuffaz. Of the Leaves, Sayls and Mantles; and of the Bark they make Tow
and Cordage for Ships. The Fruit affords not only a most delicious Food, but
good Physic. The Arabians as we said, call this Tree Dachel; a Bough of it
with Dadels on, they call Samarrhich; the Bag or Cod, Dux; a young unripe
Dadel, Tella; a greater, Nin; one half ripe, Ramich; perfectly through ripe,
Bellan; a dried one, Tamar; a rotten one, Rotob; and the Leaves, Zaaf. In the
Stock where the Branches shoot out, lies a white Bag full of Pelp or Juice;
which many, when a Tree either falls or is cut down, pull out, and eat raw, as
a provocative to Venus; it not differing much in taste from our Artichoaks.

There also you may see in some Orchards a Tree, Cotton-Tree.
by the Arabians in Egypt called Gottne'l Ssegiar, whereon the Cotton grows.
It rises ten Cubits high; the Wood hard; the Leaves have five deep indentings;
the Fruit is a Nut as big as an Apple, covered with a green Skin, full of Milk,
white Wool or Cotton, which by the opening of the Fruit as it ripens, endeavors
to thrust it self out; within which, is one only dark brown hidden Seed.

There is Lasting but a year.
an Anniversary Plant that also bears Cotton, and differs from the
afore-mentioned in slenderness of Stock, and form of Branches and Leaves; this
grows not in Egypt, but plentifully in Candy, Cyprus, Apulia, and Syria, which
from thence the Egyptians transport, for they use not their own Cotton, being
but scarce, but the other in all cases, and particularly in stead of Lint for
Wounds, as also to stench Bleeding. The Juice or Extract of the Seed is very
Sovereign in all Agues and Burning Fevers, and good to expel what ever
corrodes and gripes the Stomach and Bowels.

There is also another Tree, Carneb, or St. Johus Bread.
bearing Fruit Semi-circled like a Hunters Horn, called here Saint John's Bread;
by the Arabians, Carob or Carneb, that is, The Mother Horn, with whom the Fruit
only is in use, out of which they draw an exceeding sweet Honey, wherewith in
stead of Sugar they preserve the Cassia Fistula, Tamarine Ginger, and other
Fruits green. Moreover, that Honey is very much used by them in Clisters, by
reason of its solubility.

The Sant, Sants or Acatia.
the true Acatia of the Ancients, grows in Egypt in a Tract of Land far from
Sea, by Mount Sinai. The Body of the Tree has a Bark black, rough, and
prickly. The Leaves are small and slender, closing at the setting, and opening
again with the rising Sun. The Fruit lies in a flattish Cod or Husk, like those
of a Lilly, of a Thumb breadth, and sometimes a span long. From the green Cods
stamped in a Stone-Mortar, Juice of Acatia.
they extract a Juice, by decocting made thick and hard; The use of it.
of which the Tanners in Cairo use a great quantity to make a gloss upon their
wrought Hides: It has also an astringent quality to stop the sharp Defluxions
causing sore Eyes, and to dissipate the like hot Goutish Distillations falling
in the Joints.

This Egyptian Plant sends forth also from the Body a Gum, Gum-Arabick.
by the Apothecaries called Gum-Arabick, though others think that their Gum
proceeds not only from this, but is a Compound-product of many other; because
in Egypt and Arabia no sorts of Summer Trees are to be found, but this Sant
only.

The Mauz, Mauz, or Muza.
or Muza, by which name also the Fruit is known, grows in several places of
Egypt, and especially about Damiata; but in much greater abundance in Guinee
and Ethiopia, where we shall speak more fully of it.

Egypt produces also several sorts of fair and beautiful Flowers, Why the
flowers in Egypt lose their smell.
as Hyacinthus, Daffadil, and the like, brought over from Constantinople by the
Turkish Bashaw's, but keep not long any esteem, because here their fragrancy is
presently lost.

In Egypt are no Poplars, Belon.
but Myrtles in abundance. Here is also a sort of Rue called Hermale, wherewith
the Arabians, Turks, and Egyptians perfume themselves every morning, with
persuasion that the scent thereof drives away evil Spirits.

Here also grow very great Pomegranats, Villamont.
out of which they press a very pleasant Wine; as also Pomecitrons, Oranges,
Lemons, Figs, with other sorts of Fruits which grow not in these Countries, but
they have no Eglantine, Wallnuts, or Hasel-nuts, Flax.
nor several other European Fruits.

Some places produce a Lint that makes Russet Flax, Pier. Hierogl. lib. 53.
especially about Rosetta, where the In habitants plant such abundance, that
they serve with it several foreign Countries.

Among all the rich Commodities of this Country, In Egypt is no Wine produced.
there is no Wine but what Merchants import from other places: the flatness of
the Region hindering the Planting and Dressing of Vineyards; Radzovil.
yet Prince Radzovil in his Book of Travels, writes that he saw a Vineyard as
he went to El Mattharea. Secondly the Mahumetans, to whom by the Alcoran
drinking of Wine is forbidden, root up such Vine-stocks as are at any time by
the Christians planted, out of obedience, as they pretend; But is brought
thither from other places.
however notwithstanding their zeal, many of the Turks strong Wine, and suffer
Wine of Candia, Cyprus, and Mount Libanus, and of the Island Zant and
Cephalonia, to be imported, so that they have no want thereof, though none
grows there.

As to Gardens and Husbandry, there are few of the one, How Tilage is done in
Egypt.
and little of the other here, but abundance of Wheat and other Grain, being
sowed upon the bare Mud which Nilus at his Overflux left upon the Land, without
other labor of Ploughing or Tilling, than the running it over with a wooden
Harrow, the better to drive and settle the Seed therein.

This shall suffice to have spoken concerning Plants or Vegetables, we shall
now proceed to enumerate Quadrupedes, Fowls, and Fish, wherein it hardly gives
place to any other Region in the world.

FOur-footed Beasts, by reason of the great plenty of Grass, Meadows, and
Pastures, excellent Trees and shady Groves, bred up and nursed by the Nile, are
here for the most part very large, as Bees, Oxen, Camels, Horses, Asses,
Bellon. lib. 2. cap. 25.
Goats, and Sheep; which last are fat and fleshy, with a Dew-lap like Oxen, and
long spreading Tayls, that hang upon the ground. The Mutton, Veal, Beef, and
Lamb, is singularly sweet and delicious, but somewhat moist and watery.

The Goats very numerous about Alexandria, Goats with long Ears.
have Ears hanging down to the ground, and at the end four or five fingers
broad, curling upwards.

There is another kind of these that are wild, Wild Goats.
by the present Natives called Gazelles, but known to the ancient Greeks by the
name of Orygis, commonly running in great Herds in the Fields and Woods, which
the Inhabitants shoot or kill with Guns. Their Hair and Tayls, Eyes and
Eyebrows, resemble Camels; fore-footed like a Hare, shorter before than
behind. They have a black Horn, and bleat like tame Goats, but are Beardless;
very nimble in climbing, but unweildy to descend; on plain ground very swift.
The Horns of the Male exceed those of the Female, standing very straight, only
at the end a little crooked. Pliny says they have but one Horn, and which is
more remarkable, if true, when the Dog Star arises, they look steadfastly upon
it, performing some gestures, as it were, of Adoration to it.

Here also are a kind of Apes, the Baboon, called in Greek Cynocephalus,
Cynocephalus. The Drill, or Baboon. Arist. lib, 2. cap. 7. Hist. Animal.
that is, Dogs-head, for the likeness of that part to a Dog: They are much
larger, stronger, and wilder than the other, with Teeth sharp and set close
together: This Beast, according to the testimony of Horus, had a very
extraordinary property, which was to urine every hour. For these and other
rarities observed by the Egyptian Priests in this Creature, it was of frequent
use among the Hieroglyphics, to denote and signify several Mysteries.

Chameleon is a Greek word, and signifies A Little Lion: Chameleon.
Bellonius says they frequent about Cairo, and many other places in the Hedges
and Bushes: it bears some little resemblance of the Crocodile, from which
different in Color, Head, Their shape.
Tongue, Eyes and Feet: It creeps not, but walks upon all four, the Head long
and sharp like a Hog; the Neck very short; and Eyes, which having no Eyelid,
can turn about on every side.

This is a sluggish and dull Animal, holding the Head carelessly, and the Mouth
always gaping, lolling out the Tongue, and so catching Flies, Grasshoppers,
Caterpillars, Palmer-worms, and such like; in stead of Teeth having one entire
Jaw Bone, indented like a Saw, but useless, swallowing whole what ever Food it
takes, wanting both Spleen and Bladder, dunging, or rather muting like a Hawk.
The Back has a hard and rough Skin, beset with some few prickles: the two fore
Feet, Bellonius says, have three Claws inwards, and two outward; but the
hinder Feet three outward, and two inwards, with hooked Nails or Talons.

It has a strange and ridiculous manner of gate or movement, Its gate is
ridiculous.
for stretching both feet on each side at once together, and so alternately,
the other makes such a shuffling gradation, one Shoulder jetting foremost, the
other out-stepping that, with a continual untoward hank and loose, that it
makes Spectators laugh, as if it were a match, which side should come first to
the Goal. But he is so nimble in running up Trees, that he seems rather to
fly; wherein he makes great use of his Tail to lay hold on the Boughs,
especially in coming down; whence we may gather, that the Camelion more
frequents trees, than the ground.

Nor give the motions of the Eyes less cause of Comical admiration, It stirs
the Eyes wonderfully.
for he does not as other Creatures, who turn both Eyes at once after the same
object: But sometime like our squinters, not only look two opposite ways at
once, but more, seeing right forward with one Eye, and looking up with the
other aloft; another while to the ground with one, and sideling with the other;
but which is yet stranger, it will draw one Eye to its Back, and make a survey
behind, while the other takes a prospect forwards.

They make at their Meals also Merriment, It Eats devouring, or swallowing
whole.
neither pecking as Fowl, nor chawing like Cattle, nor sucking like Lampreys
and leeches; but with an odd and sudden flutter of the Tongue, shot out near a
hands breadth, ingurges the caught prey in a trice.

This member being nothing else but a hollow Pipe, The fashion of the Tongue.
fleshy and spongy, wherein are some Sinews easier to shut together than a Gin
or Trap, because those Nerves proceeding from the Os Hyoides, and running
through the Cavity, draws the same after expansion back again, with its prey
sticking to a glutinous stuff, wherewith it is covered: This refutes the
opinions of the Ancients, who believed the Camelion lived by the Air, whereas
in truth, it lives by such received nourishment as we have declared.

It appropriates to it self another peculiar quality in the Opinion of some old
Writers, who deliver that the Camelion changes color according to the several
objects presented: First in the Eyes, then in the Tail, after that in the whole
Body. Cameleons vary not color with their objects.
And this alteration of colors, many Authors conjecture, and among others, the
Roman Panarolus affirms to proceed from the Systole and Diastole of the Heart,
which according to sensibility of heat or cold, beats quicker or slower, the
quicker striking a redness, whereas the slow reduces him to his own natural
Ash Color; for it retains that hew even after Death, though a little paler.

The Ichneumon of old called by the Greeks (...), Ichneumon.
a Hog, from rooting in the Earth; but now by Bellonius named The Egyptian, and
by Elianus, The Indian Rat, though some will have it, The Egyptian Otter: it
much resembles a Cat, but longer, and of a rougher hair, colored between bay
and dun, round Ears, black Legs, and a long stern taporing from the Hanch to
the end. Near the Fundament appears another wide passage hairy all over, which
has given Writers occasion to suppose that this Beast was a Hermaphroditick.

The Ichneumon, bred only in Egypt, and chiefly about Alexandria, becomes tame
as Cats and Dogs; Vitruvius asserts, they are also found on one side of Mount
Atlas, and at the Head-Springs of Nile. They feed on Mice, Snakes, Snails,
Cameleons, Frogs, and small Fowl, especially Hens. Some fancies that it has a
peculiar appetite to the Liver of a Crocodile, and therefore creeps into its
Belly sleeping; but in truth not so much to eat the Liver, as from a natural
antipathy; for it also breaks their Eggs wherever found, to the no small
advantage of the people, who greatly rejoice at their destruction. It cannot
endure the wind: for whenever they rise it sculks under shelter. This
creature though multiparous, having always many young ones, hunts eagerly Mice
and Snakes, as a Poulcat or Weesel, therefore they are kept tame, and preserve
themselves against cold by playing and motion: It thrusts her Head between her
hinder Legs, so converting into a round bundle, like a Hedgehog or Porcupine.

At the approach of any Beast, it bunches the Back, and bristles up the Hair as
in defiance, daring to set upon Mastiff Dogs, nay upon Horses or Camels, and
will leave a Cat breathless at three strokes; he seizes his prey couching like
a Bull-Dog upon the ground, and at length rising upon the hinder legs falls
upon it with a leap. When he draws to Battle against the Asps, he rolls first
in the Mud, then dryes himself in the Sun, or else dips over head in water, and
then tumbles to gather up the dust, which she uses as defensive Arms against
the Enemy.

The Scincos, which Dioscorides supposed to be the Land-Crocodile, Scincos.
and Bellonius the small Crocodile, in outward appearance one and the same,
having four feet, and as big, says Bellonius, as the Salamander, with a round
knotty Tail. Renodeus appropriates to it many small and yellow knobs, a long
Head, and a round Tail, somewhat crooked at the end, with a blew list or streak
from the point of the stern to the crown of his Head. They feed upon sweet
smelling Flowers, and bury their Eggs, whose flesh they use Physically, as
Cantharides to heighten Venus.

The Bird Ibis, has long Legs and a crooked Beak, being of two sorts, viz. The
Bird Ibis.
the white found all over Egypt; and the black only to be had at Damiata, and
no where else. The white ones have a head like a Sea-pie, and a pointed and
hooked red Beak, about a Thumbs breadth. It represents the form of a man's
Heart, when hiding the Head and Neck in the Feathers under its Breast. Plutarch
says, it weighs but half an Ounce when first hatched. Gaudentius Merula, gives
it a Heart too big, if compared with the Body. Elianus avers, that his Guts are
ninety and six Cubits long, which are shrunk together, so long as the Moon is
near the Change unseen. This Bird with which all the ways to Alexandria are
filled, is so peculiar to Egypt, that it will starve it self to death if
transported thence. Yet some say, the like is found about Licha, in the utmost
parts of Africa.

They eat Serpents, Grasshoppers, and such like: A West-winde drives them out of
the Lybian Deserts into these parts, where they are very numerous and much
nourished, because of their enmity to Serpents. And for this reason, they say,
Josephus.
that when Moses drew into the Field against the Moors, through places beset
with Serpents, he took these Birds along with him, shut up in Paper Cages. For
fear of the Cats, they make their Nests upon high Palm Trees. Some hold, but
with what reason is yet controverted, that a Basilisk or Cockatrice is bred out
of the Eye of this Bird Ibis: But most certain, says Elian, that the Feathers
and Eggs stupifying, take away all motion from the Crocodile; it makes it self
clean when preparing to sleep. This Creature first taught the use of Clisters
and Syringes; for with the crooked Bill, as with a Syringe, it injects
Salt Water into his own Bowels, to open its vent when obstructed: and from
thence, says the same Elian, Plutarch and Pliny, the Egyptians took that
Chyrurgical Practice. Another observable thing, and peculiar to this Bird is,
that it will drink no foul or unwholesom water: wherefore the Egyptian Priests
made Holy Water of such as the Ibis had drunk.

Bellonius says, A Sacred Hawk.
here is a Sacred Hawk, because formerly worshipped by all the people, large as
a great Raven, headed like a Kite, but of the usual color of Hawks. It Is a
Bird of Prey, abounding not only here, but in Syria, though very seldom, and
sometimes also in Caramia. It had so much repute, as to give the name Baieth to
one of the Provinces of the Country, as the Crocodile did to Crocodilopites;
the Dog, to Cynopolites, and the like.

The Priests comprehended great Mysteries under this Bird, It signifies great
Mysteries among the Egyptians.
and their Figure was carved upon almost all their Spires or Obelisks, where
always uppermost was the Deity of the Sun, acknowledged to be full of Spirit,
Light, and Life; For this, says Horus, the Egyptians called them Baieth, and
Thaustus; Bai signifying the Life; and Eth, an Heart: because as the Heart is
the Fountain of Life, so the Sun is the Heart, or Soul of the World; for this
reason the Egyptian Priests did conceit that the Hawk, The Egyptian Hawk, or
rather the Eagle, drinks no water.
because of the similitude of Nature which it has with the Soul, drinks no
water, but blood, whereby they imagine the Soul to be nourished. In their
Hieroglyphical Writings a Hawk represented God, partly because above all other
Fowl it seems to be the Image of the Sun, being observed out of a peculiar and
hidden power of Nature, to look with very fixed Eyes upon its Beams, and for
that cause they sometime pourtray the Sun in the form of a Hawk. Those who had
willingly or unwillingly killed a Hawk, or the Bird Ibis, Herodot.
were without hope of pardon condemned to die: Nay, so high was their
Veneration of it, that they ceremoniously buried a dead Hawk, and brought it to
the City Bulis.

It has been observed, The Egyptians have taken several Letters from the forms
of Beasts.
that the ancient Egyptians took several of their Letters from the forms of the
Legs, Head, and Beak of the Bird Ibis, and this sacred Hawk; as also from the
Ox, and the Dog, both by them reputed religious. These four Beasts were of the
highest esteem, not only for their use in Hieroglyphical Writing, but also
because in their High-times of Solemnity, called Comasien, they usually carried
them in Procession, according to the Testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus.

Herodotus writes, That in former times about Thebes, small bodied Serpents
with two horns on the crown of their Heads, and very harmless, were found;
which being dead, they buried in the Temple of Jupiter, because they believed
them dedicated to him. The same Herodotus reports, but from hearsay, That near
the City Brutus, close by Arabia, were Serpents with wings, which flew thence
in the beginning of Lent into Egypt; but the Bird Ibis met and fell upon them
in their flight, and by their deaths anticipated any prejudice from their
arrival: for which benefit the Ibis was held in great adoration.

As the Land is ennobled by producing great store of Plants, Beasts and Fowls,
so the Nile hides in its bosom a vaste abundance of Fishes; of which the
Crocodile, and Hippopotamus or Seahorse, which are Amphibii, be the most noted
and chief. And though the Crocodile keeps in several Rivers of Asia and
America, as in the River Ganges about Bengala, and in the Niger in Africa, yet
Nilus feeds the greatest, as though a more peculiar of that than any other
Rivers.

The Crocodile Herodotus tells us, Crocodile.
the ancient Egyptians about Elephantina call Champsa, and in the Dominion of
Syena, according to Strabo, Suchus; but the Ionians or Greeks, (...), that is,
Crocodiles. The Indians name it Cayman; the Arabians and Jews, says Megistus,
Corbi, and in Kirchers Egyptian Lexicon, it stands expressed by the name of
Picharuki.

This wonderful Creature has very great Eyes with little balls or apples, Its
Form.
whose Backbone consists of sixty Joints; his Feet furnished with sharp nails,
and splaying outward, and the Tail proportionable to the Body, lessening by
degrees to the end. This Serpent, as we may call it, runs swiftly, but can
neither deviate to the right or left, or turn about easily, but with a stiff
formality goes directly forward by reason of the inflexible Joints of the
Backbone, by which means it is often avoided. They say, it can live four whole
Months without food, but when hungry will cry or weep like a man. Some dare
affirm, though untruly, that it lives of Mud or Slime; for it eats dead fish,
and humane flesh: Peter Martyr relates in his Babylonish Embassy, Peter Martyr.
that one of them was taken that had three young Children in his Mouth. When
they engender, the Male turns the Females Belly upward, The Breeding of them.
otherwise for the shortness of their Feet they cannot well couple: After that
Coition, the Female lays sixty Eggs, each as big as a Goose Egg, upon which
they sit to hatch sixty days. Some conceit that they bury their Eggs in the
Sand, and hatch their young ones by the heat of the Sun, but that is not so:
however there is no Creature that from so small a beginning, comes to such an
extraordinary bigness, some being found to exceed thirty Foot in Length.

They bear enmity to the Ichneumon, Buffel, Tiger, Hawk, Hog-fish, Dolphin, It
bears Enmity against other Beasts.
Scorpions and Men, but hold friendship with Hogs, and the Trochilus; which is
a small Fowl, with a sharp point or pin on the Head, Trochilus.
that when the Crocodile is glutted with Fish, and sleeping with his Mouth
open, comes, (searching his own Food) and by picking cleanses his Mouth,
Teeth, and Gullet. Lee. Afric.
Others suppose this little Bird picketh out the Worms breeding between the
Teeth, who ingratefully would eat it up for requital, but that the sharp Pin on
the Birds Head pricking his Jaws, makes him open them, by which means the Bird
escapes.



Several Eastern People eat them as good Food, The Flesh of it is eaten.
which was customary also here; only forbidden to Apollonopolitans: whether it
was, because the Daughter of King Psammitichus, as you may read in Herodotus,
was devoured by a Crocodile, or out of hatred to the Heaven-invading Typhon,
who as they say was Metamorphosed into one, is not yet determined; however in
Arsinoe, which Strabo calls, At Arsinoe it was counted sacred.
The City of Crocodiles, it was counted Sacred, and fed with Bread, Flesh, and
Wine: The Original of which Veneration without doubt proceeded from fear, for
that the Crocodiles, which in great abundance in the Lake Moeris lay close by
the City, continually waiting to make a Prey both of Men and Beasts, by that
means glutted, should not be greedy after Prey: but neither Fear or Reverence
of that could prevail with the People of the Neighbor City Heraclea, to hinder
them from giving Worship to the Ichneumon, its most mortal Enemy.

The Hippopotamus, Hippopotamus, or the Seahorse.
or Seahorse, not so called from any Similitude it bears with a Horse, but
from the bigness, (the Word (...) in Greek sometimes seeming to bear the
Signification of Great as well as Horse) haunts the Proteus the Son of Oceanus
and Tethys is feigned to be the Keeper of Sea-Calves or Horses.
Nyle, says Pliny, though indeed found also in the River Niger, and many other
Places. Barboza.
Barboza averres he saw many of them in Gophale, leaping out of the Sea to the
Land, and returning again: And others have seen the like in the great Sea near
Petzore. Aristotle, Elian, and others have done something toward its
Description: But Fabius Columna in his Observations of Amphibious Creatures,
has exactly showed this in a Salted Skeleton, brought from Damiata into Italy
by Nicolaus Zerenghi, The Form of it.
Master-Surgeon of Narn. It has no likeness of a Horse, the Body resembling an
Ox, and the Legs a Bear: From Head to Tail thirteen Foot long, and four and a
half broad; The Belly was rather flat than round; The Compass of his Legs was a
Yard, and his Foot twelve Inches in breadth; Each Claw had three Divisions: The
Head two Foot and a half broad, three Foot long, and seven Foot about: The
whole of a very large Size: The Mouth is fleshy, shrivel'd, and very wide; The
Eyes an Inch broad, and twice as long; The Ears little, and but three Fingers
long: It was fat, had Claws divided into three, with a Tail like a Hog: The
Nostrils large: The lips like a Lions, beset with a bristly Beard, though the
rest of the Body were without Hair. In the nether Jaw were six Teeth, of which
the two outermost were half a Foot long, two Fingers broad, and on either Side
seven thick, and short Grinders. In the upper Jaw, which he moved like the
Crocodile, were the like; all of them as hard as Flints, and from thence for an
Experiment, by striking the back of a Knife upon it, flew sparks of Fire, so
that it is probable, that this Beast with gnashing his Teeth one against
another, might seem to breath Fire; which special property the Ancients
ascribed to it, but thus mistaken. He will leap ashore, and running into the
Plowed Lands, satiate himself with Corn; then immediately returning into the
River, either for fear of Hunters or Plowmen way-laying him. When superfluous
fatness troubles Him, he rubs himself so long upon the stump of a Reed, till he
has opened a Vein; which having bled enough he closes, plaistring it over
with Mud.

It is as dangerous and malicious to Man as the Crocodile, Its Flesh is Eaten.
yet the Moors eat their Flesh, which Clusius says, A chief Man of the Hague
in Guinee, about the Promontory of Lopez Consalves, has seen; where in the
City of Ulibetto, many of their Heads were kept, out of which his People took
with them Teeth of a strange bigness. The Egyptians, as Columna reports, bind
the Teeth to any Part troubled with the Cramp, or carry about them a Ring made
thereof. With these the Blacks imagine they preserve themselves from many
Diseases.

The four Sea-Horses which Peter van de Brock in his Journey to Angola,
Sea-Horses.
saw on Land in Lowango, were like great Buffles, slick Skinned, with Heads like
Wildehorses, short Ears, wide Nostrils, two crooked Tushes, like Wilde-Boars,
short Legs, and Feet like Clover-grass-leaves, and neighing like our Horses.
They stood still till the People came near them, then they went away
Pedetentim, foot by foot, till returned to the Sea, where throwing themselves
in, they sometimes rose above Water, but dived again as soon as they discerned
the approaching People; so that by all their Endeavor they were not able to
shoot one of them.

THe Old Egyptians were so great Idolaters, The Egyptians worshipped Beasts.
Heredot.
that the meanest of Creatures, Herbs or Plants, had among them Divine
Adoration; for when a Cat was dead in any House, the whole Family shaved off
the hair of the Eyebrows; but the hair of the whole Body and Head when a Dog
dies. The Cats first salted they lay in large Burying-places in the City
Bubastis; Hawks in the City Butum; and Bears and Wolves, which they accounted
Sacred, in the place where they were found lying. Nor did they only Interr when
dead, but set them at their Tables when living, feeding them with the daintiest
Morsels, and did also adore them in times past, as Esopic. Androclent. Sect. 16.
Amasis thus complains.

Soon as my usual Dishes up were served,
They for themselves, their Wives and Children carved;
And like a Dog gave me their Plates to lick,
Throwing their Offall and gnawn bones to pick;
Delicious Wines, my whole allowance quaff'd,
And at my savoury lapping Water laughed;
In wild Moriscoes heightened thus they Dance,
Shins, over Stools and Tables take their chance;
When a fat Priest had almost broke my Chine,
Throwing athwart me his foul Concubine;
This Ipass'd over, but I began to stare,
When Owl-fac'd Malkin Feasted in my Chair;
They truly honored her, in state there sat,
Fed with my Dainties a ridiculous Cat;
But the fat Priest who her did most adore
In public, was in private her Amor.
The Lycopolitans did forbear all manner of Cattle, because worshipping the
Wolf, they would not bereave him of his due food: The Oxyrinchites adored a
Fish, Oxyrinches, which takes his Name from Swiftness, may be the Dolphin, the
swittest of all ^ishes.
the Cynopolitans a Dog; between whom Plutarch relates, that in his time a
bloody War arose, because the Cynopolitans had eaten the Fish which the
Oxyrinchitans had in Divine Honor; and on the other side, the Oxyrinchitans in
revenge had taken and killed a Dog, to which the Cynopolitans did offer
Sacrifice. In his Oration against Julian.
Athanasius says, that all the Contention and Wars among the Egyptians, took
their Original from such mean and slight beginnings. The Inhabitants of Thebes
honored an Ox or Calf; whence the worshipping of the Calf, by the Children of
Israel in the Wilderness, perhaps took Original; those of Crocodilopolis a
Crocodile; the Latonopolitans, the Latonos; they of Mendes, a Goat or Pan,
called Mendes in the Egyptian Tongue.

Thus every City, Province or Territory had a several Deity; nay, they
descended lower, even to the adoration of things more abject, as Garlic,
Onions, and other Kitchen Garden-stuff; whereof thus Juvenal in his 15th. Satyr.

Quis nescit, Volusi Bythinice, qualia demens
Egyptus portenta colat? Crocodilon adorat
Pars haec; illa pavet saturam Serpentibus Ibin.
Effigies sacri nitet aurea Circopytheci!
Dimidio Magicae resonant ubi Memnone, chordae
Atque vetus Thebae centum jacet obruta portis.
Illic caeruleos, hic piscem fluminis: illic
Oppida tota canem, venerantur; nemo Dianam.
Porrum and caepe nefas violare ac frangere morsu.
O sanctas gentes! quibus haec nascuntur in hortis
Numina! lanatis animalibus abstinet omnis
Mensa: nefas illic faetum jugulare capellae:
Carnibus humanis nesci licet --
Who not, Volutius, knows, what Monsters vile
Mad Egypt worships? these the Crocodile;
Those Ibis glutted with Serpentine gore,
Others a grave Baboon in gold adore,
Where Magic groans from Memnons Tomb arise,
And hundred-gated Thebes in ruin lies:
Some Sea, some River Fish, whole Cities there
Pray to a Dog, but none Diana fear;
Garlic and Onions none must burt or eat,
O holy Nation who in Gardens set,
Peculiar Gods, from Sheep all must abstain
To kill a tender Kid, or Goat, profane;
Yet eating man's flesh all these Sects maintain.
Now why the Egyptians, Why the Egyptians worshipped Beasts.
with such Zeal and Solemnity worshipped Beasts, seems to proceed from their
opinion of the Transmigration of Souls; for they believed, that the Souls of
good men went into sacred Beasts, as Hawks, Oxen, Dogs, Ibises, especially the
Lion, as the prime of all bestial Transmigration; Androc. Sect. 8. Aesopic.
of which hear Amasis.

I not in Bestial Sovereignty rejoice,
Though all the Forest trembles at my Voice;
My high Condition wretched seems and base,
Husk'd in a shaggy Main and Hairy Face;
I rather would, armed with my Lench and Aul,
A Cobbler be, Inthroned beneath a Stall;
Drive some such subtle Trade to purchase Bread,
Than be over Beasts the universal Head;
Though amongst the numerous Animals that be,
Next Man, the Lion takes the first degree.
But the Souls of the wicked they supposed to go into more vile and despicable
Creatures, as the dull Hippotames, Horses, Asses, and the like. And that both
Gods and Kings walked up and down under such disguises, to punish Vices, and
encourage Virtue, wherever found.

EGypt also hid within its Bowels great Quarries of all sorts of Marble, as
appears by the sumptuous Burying-places under Ground, Spiers, Needles, and
other stately Works, erected in ancient Times, with such variety of Stone as we
have already mentioned.

THe Air, especially about Cairo, and further toward the South, The Air in
Egypt. Hot.
because so near the Line, is when the Sun casts his Beams perpendicularly from
Cancer, very Hot; during which time of violent Heat, all the people dwell in
places under ground; and in Cairo, in the midst of every House, are Wells
containing water, which not only cools their Mansions, but refreshes
themselves. They contrive also in their Houses very great Pipes or Funnels,
which stand right up into the Air, from the midst of the House, with a broad
Mouth like a Bell, standing open to the North, wherein the cool Air entering, is
sent down to the lowermost retiring Rooms under Ground. For shade also in the
Streets, every Dwelling has a broad Penthouse: And for refreshment of their
scorched Bodies they use bathing, for the commodiousness whereof they have
curious Bannia's of sweet and clear Water from the River Nile, without mixing
any Herbs or Medicinal Ingredients. The Hot Air is cooled by Nilus, and the
Anniversary Winds.


The Heat also is somewhat moderated by the overflowing of Nilus at that Time,
and the continual blowing of cool Northerly Winds; otherwise the Heat there is
so vehement, that neither Man nor Beast could be able to live. In Winter, the
Air is Hot and Dry, sometimes a little cool, but generally very Hot, and most
obnoxious to the Head of all parts of the Body. The Air of the Nights is cold,
which after Sunrising becomes a little Warm; at Noon very Hot, but at Night
again Cold: so that its inequality breeds many Diseases.

THe Year may also very well, though in a different way from us, The Seasons of
the Year are with the Egyptians fourfold.
be divided into four Seasons, The first is Spring, March or April.
in which the Weather is temperate. They have also every Year two Summers, but
contingent, divided into an unhealthy and intemperate, and a healthy and
temperate. The first Summer.
The first being the unhealthful, continues to the middle of June, and the
rising of the Nile.

The second Summer begins from the Nile's rising, The second Summer.
and continues till September, and the Decrease. The Harvest consists of two
other Months; Harvest.
but the Brumall Season begins on December, and continues to March or
April. Winter.
Thus is the Year divided, the Reason whereof we will a little search after.
First, Then they placed the Spring, as before is said, because at that Time the
Air is of a moderate and mild Temper, and the Trees begin to bud and grow, The
first Summer causes many Diseases.
and the Ground to bring forth. The Spring ended, the first Summer begins, very
hurtful both to Man and Beast; during the whole time of whose continuance, very
hot and tedious Winds blow, called by them Campsien, from Campsi a Commander,
who was overwhelmed under a great heap of Sand by these Winds, and smothered
with his whole Army in the Deserts of Africa: Such is the violence of these
impetuous Gusts, sometimes, that it so raises the Sand, that for three, five,
seven, or nine Days, the Air is darkn'd, and the Sun cannot be seen for those
Atomy Clouds. At this time rage many mortal Sicknesses, but chiefly Soreness of
the Eyes, for the hot South-winds, as we said, How this comes to pass.
so drive up the scortching Sand, that they seem to bring with them shining
Flames, the which driven through the Air, hurts and prejudiceth the Body, and
in the Eyes breeds prickings and inflammations. And that time many mortal
Fevers and Phrensies rage, which dispatch men in few Hours. In fine, all
Bodies are thereby so Distempered, that they abhor Food, continually burning
with unquenchable Thirst, against which the Water of Nile is the only Remedy.
Strangers all this Season retire to places under Ground, where they remain till
other cool North-winds arise from the Midland-Sea, which afford a present
Comfort to their inflamed and afflicted Bodies, wonderfully cooling the Air.

After this follows the second Summer, not so Hot, because the Northerly
Winds daily renew fresh and cooling Breezes, and the Nile overflows his Banks:
What Alterations of Air happen, are not sudden, but come leisurely, and
therefore it is a healthful and wholesome Time.

Now the Husbandmen live at Ease, because the Ground, while covered with the
Nile, cannot be either Plowed or Tilled, passing the Time in Shows, Sports, and
other signs of Joy, with Feastings and Mirth. Then comes Seedtime and Harvest
at the Decrease of the Nile, in which are Wheat and other Fruits sown, which
becomes soon Ripe, and are suddenly Reaped. This Season is temperate and free
from Sicknesses: The following Winter-Moneths the Air is colder, and
consequently more wholesome.

It Rains seldom in the Inland Parts, It Rains seldom in Egypt.
and about Cairo, and what is, is rather a Dew or misling than a Shower. At
Alexandria and Damiata, and upon all Places lying near the Sea, are many times
great Rains, but seldom or never is there any Ice, Snow, or Hail seen, because
the Air is not cold enough for it. This as to the Temperature of the Air.

NOw concerning the Temper and Constitution of the People, Several kinds of
Egyptians.
you may observe three sorts of Inhabitants in Egypt, viz. Citizens, dwelling
in Cairo and other Cities; wandering Arabians, that live in Tents; and lastly,
Ploughmen or Husbandmen, which dwell up the Country. Most of the Citizens are
Sanguine, but the Bodies of the Ploughmen and Arabians are hot and dry, so are
many Townsmen; but the continual drinking the Nile Water, often use of cooling
Food or Diet, and the immoderate use of Venus, mightily lessen and alter the
Heat and Drought. Besides, their continual use of Baths of sweet Water, so
cools them, that many of those dry tan'd Complexions become Sanguine,
especially Women and Eunuchs. They have cold Stomachs, and full of Phlegm,
proceeding from the constant using of cooling Diet, as also by the overgreat
Heat of the Air, whereby the natural Heat extracted or exhaled, the Stomach is
left Raw and Cold.

The Egyptians are general very Gross and Corpulent, The form of their Bodies.
especially the People of Cairo; most of the Men there being so Fat, that they
have much Greater, Thicker and Larger Breasts than Women; but the Arabians are
Meagre and Slender, so are the Husbandmen, and not only so, but also hairy,
sweaty, and almost scorched and burnt by the Sun. They do all follow Venus
immoderately; they are by Nature very Wakeful, and little inclining to Sleep,
of a cheerful Spirit, yet delighting in an Idle and Lazy Life; only the
Arabians and Farmers take Pains, or else they must Starve.

THis Country is very subject to several and dangerous Diseases, Egypt is much
subject to Land-Sicknesses.
partly because of the intemperate Air, partly by the immoderate use of Women,
and partly because the Poor there which are numerous, are necessitated to use
foul unwholesom Food, and muddy and corrupt Water. The chief Diseases
afflicting them, are Blear Eyes, Scabs, Leprosy, and Mortal Phrensies, Small
Pox, pain in the Limbs and Joints, Ruptures, Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder,
Consumption, Obstructions or Stoppings, Weaknesses of the Liver, Spleen, and
Stomach, Tertian Agues, Consuming Quartanes, and all manner of Maladies of the
Head. It is true, other people are subject to the like; but not so continually,
nor grievously, and therefore properly may be called The Plagues of Egypt.

In Alexandria, in Harvest-time many malignant and mortal Agues reign, by
drinking the tainted and foul Water, which the Townsmen from year to year keep
in their Wells under their houses. In Winter they are troubled with sore Eyes,
but the Inhabitants of Cairo much more; among whom it reigns so Epidemically,
that scarce half of them escape the Distemper. There also rages that most
terrible Egyptian Disease, by the Arabians called Them El Muia, which in few
hours suddenly possesses the Brain like an Apoplexy, and bereaving them of
sense and understanding, in few minutes irremediably kills them. Every year
once are the Egyptians surprised with this Sickness, of which multitudes dye.

At the same time Children are much afflicted with a malignant kind of Pox bred
by the venomous Damps raised from the corrupt Water of Caleg, Malignant
Childrens Fox in Alexandria.
which is a Branch, or rather a Trench cut from the Nile into Alexandria. Every
year, Whence they arise.
when the Nile is risen eight or ten Cubits, it falls into this Trench, and
runs from thence through the whole City; and at the recess of Nile, this Water
then in the Caleg, remaining without current, or motion, at length corrupts,
and first becomes green, then black, and in the end sends forth a very noisome
Stench; which corrupting, sends forth venomous Vapors whereby the Air is
polluted, and that Infection bred; and therefore all the Children which dwell
thereabout for that cause are carried thence to other places.

Many other Diseases are in Egypt, which are bred by the eating Ox and Camels
Flesh, and rotten Salt Fish, taken in Pools, and Lakes, and moldy stinking
Cheese, by them called Gibnehalon: whereby is ingendered much thick Blood,
Choler adust, Grossness, and soft and crude Humors. The Cause of the Dropsy.
The Dropsy here is very frequent, and such as have it, have Legs, which by
the abundance of hardness and gross Swelling are blown and puffed up, like the
Legs of Elephants; though indeed they feel no Pain, but are only unwieldy to
walk. One main Cause of these Distempers proceeds from the too frequent Use of
Colocasie, Beets, Bammia, and Melochia, Herbs breeding thick and tough Phlegm.

Many of the better Sort also have a Weakness in their Joints and Limbs, Why
the Egyptians have weak Joints and feeble Limbs.
like Childrens Rickets, relaxed either by immoderate Venery, or the too
frequent Use of Sweat-Baths: Alpin. Medicin. Egypt.
But the meaner Sort get it by wearing the same Clothes in Winter and Summer,
and going barefoot and bare-legg'd. And are troubled with the Stone.
The Stone is no stranger among them, being bred from the Sediment of the Water
of Nilus, which as all Water causing Urine, comes to the Kidneys: but the more
Earthy Part remaining like Dregs behind by the extraordinary Heat of the Body,
becomes dry, and in a little Series of time is turned into Stones.

There are also many of a Melancholy Temper, Sad spirited People in Egypt.
which are generally accounted Holy Men: For the vulgar persuade themselves,
that they live without Sin, leading their Lives in great Sanctity; the better
to mind Sacred Mysteries, retiring from the World into desert and barren
Places: The Mahumetans look upon them as Santons, because they seem to contemn
Riches, and slight the vain Pleasures of the World. They live single, giving
Hospitable Entertainment to all Strangers of what Religion soever: They reprove
Vice very sharply, affirming the World to be nothing but a Vale of Misery and
Trouble: In a sad and morose Reservation they denounce great Punishments to Man
for Sin, and so macerate and mortify their Bodies by a vowed Abstemiousness
and Labor, that they are little better than the dried Mummies.

The Pestilence is very frequent in these Parts, Egypt is much afflicted with
the Pestilence.
and prevails against them the more, because they seek no Remedy for it, falsely
conceiting, that God has certainly appointed and ordained every ones Death
aforehand, and the manner of his Dying; so that he that must die in the Wars,
cannot die of the Pestilence, and those only can die of the Pestilence, that
are aforehand destined of God for it. For this cause, as we said, no Egyptian
will go about to avoid the Place, nor shun converse with the Infected: and the
Clothes and other Housholdstuff of such as dye of that Distemper, are instantly
sold in the open Market by Outcry, which none are afraid to buy: by which mad
obstinacy in this their foolish Persuasion, the Plague in Cairo, in the space
of six or seven Months, sometimes sweeps away above five hundred thousand
People.

This dreadful Malady commonly begins in their first Summer, When it commonly
begins in Egypt.
continuing till the cool Northern Winds arise, and then it begins to abate.

That which begins in the first Months, is the worst of all, especially if it
come over out of Barbary: for then it sometimes almost depopulates whole
Cities, leaving them destitute of Inhabitants: But if it comes later, it is so
much the milder, and cease the sooner. But although it rage never so
fiercely, At the Suns entrance into Cancer, the Pestilence ceases in Egypt.
yet at the Suns entrance into Cancer, it wholly cease: which by them is
accounted no small Blessing: for from thence forward, as if never any such
infectious Disease had been, the City and all things in it are from a depth of
miserable despair reduced into a secure, safe, and healthful condition: Neither
while the Contagion lasted, did any other Diseases appear among the People. Now
the reason of this so sudden Cessation seems to be caused by the even and
constant temper of the Air, How this comes to pass.
by the blowing of the Anniversary Northwinds, which then begin to rise and
oppose the moist Nature of the South-winds, called as we said, Campsien; which
cooling as well the Air as Men's Bodies, taking away the Cause, (the infectious
Heat) the Effect cease.

Very seldom or never does the Plague begin here from Putrefaction of the Air,
Seldom does the Pestilence in Egypt arise from the Putrefaction of the Air.
unless the Nile overflowing the Country too high, leaves his Water a long
while upon the Ground, whereby the whole Land becomes as a corrupt and standing
Lake, that by the Southerly Winds, and Summer Heat, are ripened and made fit to
send up infectious Vapors.

There being then no Natural Cause to breed this Contagion within Egypt, The
Pestilence is always brought over from other Places into Egypt.
it follows that it is brought thither from other Neighboring and Bordering
Places; and especially out of Greece, Syria, and Barbary. That which is brought
thither out of Greece and Syria, and falls upon Caire, is very mild, kills
few, and holds but a short time. But when it comes from Barbary thither, it is
most pernicious, and of longest continuance: Such was that in the Year Fifteen
hundred and eighty, that raged so furiously, that in a short time it clearly
swept away above five hundred thousand men.

By the continual rising of the Dust, Why the Baths are in great use among the
Egyptians.
and extraordinary Sweating, the Bodies of the People become foul, nasty, and
verminious; and therefore Baths are of very great use to cleanse and keep them
sweet and free from breeding Cattle: But the Women, with most frequency and
care use Bathing, as intending, or at least imagining, that such Lotions make
them more pleasing to their Husbands, and to have a gracious and pleasant Scent
in their Nostrils, when they come together to recreate themselves.

They take little care of their Hair, Alpin. de m^de. Egypt.
ordering it slightly, according to the manner of the Country in a Silken
Caul; but are very curious elsewhere, using the Razor where necessary.
Afterward they anoint themselves with several rich Perfumes, such as Musk,
Amber, Civet, and the like, which there are bought in great abundance for a
small matter, as aforesaid.

This frequent Bathing and Anointing they use not only for Ornament, Fat Women
are pleasing to the Egyptians.
Cleanliness, and Coolness; but especially to make them, if lean, to become
plump and fat: because such Women be highly esteemed of in those Parts; by
which means some grow Bona-Roba's, and others out of all measure with
fathomless Wastes, like foul Sows: chiefly the Jews, whose Women are more
liable to that undecent Extreme.

All in general when they are Bathing, the sooner to facilitate their Design,
What they do to be fat.
take nourishing cool Broaths, and Cordial Jellies, on purpose made of
Pinguefying Ingredients; to wit, Bammia, Melochia, and Colocasia.

The poorer sort in the Bannias drink the Settling of the Oil of Sesamus Seed,
which they call Thaine or the decoction of China Roots, or the Oil pressed out
of the Indian Nuts, or the Fruit of the Turpentine-Tree, Sweet Almonds,
Hasle-nuts, and Pistaches: eating besides much food, and Flesh of fatted Fowls,
with the Broth boiled to a Jelly, and mixed therewith.

Nor do these Lotions and Unctions suffice, The chasing of the Body.
unless attended with a threefold Frication; The first is done with the naked
palm of the hand, anointed with the Oil of Sesamus; the second with a rough
linen cloth; and the third with a course cloth of Goats-hair.

After which they are rubbed all over with Soap, which they wash off in a Bath
of warm sweet-Water. And lastly, they lay upon their Feet a mixture of the
Powder of Archanda mixed with ordinary water, and is very serviceable for moist
and stinking Feet, drying them speedily by its great astringency.

At Cairo and Alexandria great multitudes of Houses are appointed for the use
of Baths, which have many Caves, Cellars, or Chambers, The Superfluity of Baths
at Cairo.
wherein people sweat, are chafed and washed, containing at all times hot,
warm, and cold Baths; but usually moderately warm, because principally in use
among them.

The Egyptians keep a slender and sparing Table; eating little, but often: The
Egyptians feed sparingly, but often.
They are not pleased with Variety, but content themselves with one Dish of
Meat at a meal: And if Flesh, eat sparingly of it, as having no great appetite
thereto; but when they do, they choose Mutton simply cooked, without either
addition or Sauce to it: But of late some Merchants have begun to learn to eat
Chickens.

They chiefly delight in moist Food; Their Food,
and therefore commonly use Rice boiled in preserved Juices of Linse, Erwetes,
white Cives, Melochia, Beets, Melda, Coal, Bammia, Cucumers or Chate, the
Roots of Colocasia, Melons, Dates, Musae Fruit, Figs, Apricocks, Peaches,
Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Granates. The poor people eat Beef, and Camels flesh;
and some Fish, as Pikes or Pickerels, and many other: and among the rest the
flesh of the Crocodile.

In places near the Sea, Fish may be had in great abundance, which they eat
without distinction; for the most part salted, and sometime half rotten. Milk,
and all that come of it, or are made with it, is with them in very great use.

And as they are best pleased in simple Diet, of one kind of Food, They eat
not many sorts of Food.
so a little of it contents them; For many make their Dinner and Supper, only
of Melons or Wheaten Bread; some of such simple Broth as we mentioned before;
and others chew upon a green Sugar-Cane, or only with Figs, or Grapes or
Cucumers, or some such trifling Diet.

All their Pot Herbs and Fruits are moister than the European, and therefore
more unsavory. The Fishes are unwholesom.
In like manner the Fishes, taken in the Nile, are fat enough and pleasant in
Taste, but accounted unwholesom, because that River has no stony or gravelly,
but a sedimented bottom, and the Water unsettled with a flying Lee, which must
of necessity make the Fishes that breed in it unwholesom.

The common Drink of the Country is the Nile, Their Drink.
which is very sweet, but the Christians and Jews drink Wine also, as also some
Turks, and especially the Soldiers, that often at Cairo take the Creature in
such abundance, that they return home laid athwart on Asses Backs; in those mad
and inebriating Frolicks, no more minding their Prophets Wine-forbidding Laws.
The best Wine, for in Egypt there grows none, is brought from the Island of
Candy, Rhodes and Cyprus; the Wine of Italy, Corcyre and Zacynthe, turning
sour presently.

This Water of Nilus, The Water of Nilus very wholesome to drink.
which by the length of his Current, and the Heat of the Sun, must needs be
sufficiently concocted and made thin, is very wholesome; for as to the dregs or
muddy part thereof, the Egyptians have a way to make it clear, which they do in
this manner: As soon as the Water is brought home in Leathern Flasks or
Bottles, they put it in long-neck'd great earthen Jugs or Jarres, with broad
round Bellies, anointing the edge a little with stamped sweet Almonds, then
taking a handful of the same, they thrust their Arm into the Water up to their
Elbow, with all their strength stirring the Water about; then leaving the
Almonds in it, the Water will be clear in the space of three Hours. Lastly,
pouring out the clear Water into other small Vessels, they use it either for
their Drink or Food. Others let this Water stand only and setle, till it become
clear of it self.

The Virtues of this Water are very many and great, The Virtue of the Water of
Nilus.
for in some it fetches out an inward Infirmity by insensible transpiration;
others it causes to Urine freely, some to go to Seige, to none is it hurtful,
though drunk Day and Night, even to excess. Moreover, it is to hot Bodies as a
cooling Julep, to allay the heat and burning of the Bowels.

There also our New Drink called Coffee has no small Estimation, Coffee-Drink.
gotten by long Experience of the Benefits which they suppose they receive by
it, using upon the matter little or no other Physic or Doctors, they eating
much Fruits, and drinking only the Nile, which is it self their grand
Physician: The infusion of the Powder of this Berry, in that so excellent Water
decocted, and taken Hot, composeth not only the Crudities arising from bad
Digestion, but suppressing all Fumes, so setleth in quiet both Head and
Stomach; which may be well asserted by those that use it moderately here, who
after they have taken their Dose, two or three Cups in the Morning, find
themselves more apt to Business or Study. It certain and suddenly cures
Inebriation, and in many allays the fits of the Gout. Namral History.
Sir Francis Bacon, who took it long before in use with us, says, It comforts
the Heart and Brain by Condensation of the Spirits. The Arabians call it Caova,
and the Tree whereon it grows, Bon; where it grows in such abundance, that from
thence the whole Eastern, and now part of our Western World is furnished; yet
with them so valued, as not to be purchased by any Barter (as they say) but
Gold and Silver.

The Turks and Moors have also a very wholesome Drink called Sorbet, A Turkish
Drink called Sorbet.
made of Sugar and Lemmon, and drank by them with great Delight. They use also
another kind of Drink, made of Plumbs, Corants and Water, set together in the
Sun.



MEn in Egypt live longer than in other Places, for they say, The Egyptians
live long.
it is usual to find People above an hundred Years old, the Reason of which
Longevity, Physicians much differ about; yet in General they assigned as one
chief Cause, their spare Life in Eating and Drinking, whereas on the contrary,
Alpinus de Medicina Egypt
all Europeans which drink abundance of Wine, and eat much Flesh, By what means
this is so.
are for the most part short Lived; for as the moderate use of Flesh generates
good Blood, and quickens the natural Heat, so the immoderate use incrassates
the natural moisture, making it become tough and viscous, so stopping the
activity of Circulation, with the Load of gross repletions, just as the Flame
in a Lamp, by the exuberancy of the Oil extinguisheth; therefore the Egyptians
living Sparingly, and not Distempering themselves with high Fare, their Blood
being thus attenuated, spins out a longer thread of Life to them, than our
guzling and debaucht Nations.

THe Habits of the Men are neat, but not gorgeous; Men's Habits.
for in the Summer time they wear Vests of the finest and lightest Cotton, but
in the Winter, of their own Country Cloth, quilted with Cotton. Their Vests
are shaped narrow above, and wide below, with small Sleeves close at the Hand;
over which Princes, Officers of State, and other Great Men, wear a rich Tunick
of Satin, Damask, and other costly European-stuff, every one according to his
State and Dignity.

They wear great Turbans, made of long striped Camelet, Tulhandes or Turbants.
wound or folded up round together. The Color of which denotes of what
Religion they are; The Color of the Turbant, denote the Religion.
for the Jews wear one Yellow, the Christians Red or Blew, and the Mahumetans
only a White one; but those that boast themselves, lineally descended from
their Great Prophet, wear Green Turbans. Their Hose or Stockings, are short,
like the Buskins of the Ancients, but in a manner all strangers to Shoes, for
what they use on their Feet, are rather Slippers or Sandals, having no
Upper-leather behind, and the Soals according to the Turkish Fashion, shod with
Iron.

Ladies and Persons of Honor, The Habit of Women.
are there for the most part clothed in White, with Masks of the same Color.
The Countrey-Women, have in stead of a Mask, a Cotton Cloth before their Face,
Black or some other Color, at the Chin, pointed with two holes only, that they
may see their Way, and where they tread: But in many Places, their Vizors
follow the Turkish Mode, being a very thin Cloth, made of Horse-Hair, before
their Faces; or else among the better Sort, a fine Linen or Tiffany. They go
mounted on Choppines, which have no Upper-leather, but only to fasten them over
to the foot.

Their Head-attires are various, according to the diverse Customs of the
Country, the Turkish keeping their own Fashion of being close covered, but the
Egyptians wear a costly Silk Cap, half a Foot high, and running to a Point,
like one of our Women's high-crown'd Hats without a Brim; on the forepart of
which they fix a Branch or Sprig, neatly composed of several Gems with various
Lustres, and a Frontlet of Oriental Pearls, with Chains of Gold about their
Neck, The Egyptian Women wear Smocks and Peticoats laced at the bottom, like
the Gallants of our Time.
and Golden Bracelets on their Wrists, and Garters all of Gold: Next their Skin
they wear a fine Silk Smock, bordered with curious Needle Work, and over this a
Coat or Gown of a different Length, made of changeable colored Silk, trimmed
with Gold, Silver, and Silk Knots, and the Skirt richly embroidered.

No People are more dextrous in Swimming, as compelled thereto by necescesity;
for at the overflowing of Nilus, they swim from place to place to dispatch
their Affairs, and to that end are very lightly Clad, only with a Coat and
Shirt, intending to Travel, which they tie upon their Heads in form of a
Turbant, when they swim cross any deep Rivers; but if their Transnatation
extend to a farther Distance, they have bundles of Flaggs or Bull-rushes, which
as either necessity or convenience requires, they use to Buoy themselves upon,
both for their Ease and Safety. When they ride in Cavalcade through Cities in
State, or through the Country for private Business, their Horses are unshod,
covered after the Moorish Fashion, with Foot-clothes or Caparisons, usually
made of Tapistry, wrought after the manner of the Moors; but the Women masked
upon Mules. Mean People and Strangers use Asses, which always stand upon the
parting of cross Ways ready to Hire.

THe Houses of the plain Country, Their Houses.
because of the overflowing of Nilus, are built upon rising Places, with thick
clay Walls, and flat Roofs, as is usual in most Eastern Countries. And in
regard Wood and Stone are very scarce, they are little and low, without
advantages of many Rooms, because most People Eat, Drink and Sleep under the
Date-Tree for coolness, not fearing either Winter or Summer-Rains, because the
Country is free from them. The whole Country is subject to one Inconvenience,
which is want of Fuel; for in the great scarcity thereof, they are forced upon
all necessary occasions to burn the dung of Cattle.

POlygamy is common among the Nobler Sort, Their Marriage.
who shut up their many Wives together in a Seraglio, but separate from one
another in distinct Apartments. The Moors and meaner Sort, to show their
Affection when they go a Wooing, sear their Flesh with red hot Irons, and flash
their Arms, without any sense of Smart or Danger. And if by that means they can
obtain the bare reward of a single Kiss from their Mistress Hand, they take it
as if they had gained the top of Felicity, or whatsoever Lovesick Amors
desire.

THe Parents dispose their Daughters in Marriage at ten, or at most at twelve
year old. When they conduct the Bride to the Bridegrooms House, she has
carried before her whatever her Friends or Parents gave her: for the Bridegroom
bestows on her Money, Garments, and other Necessaries; Jewels, Housholdstuff,
and Slaves of both Sexes.

THe Turks in Egypt are either of the Civil or Martial List, Their Employment.
living voluptuously, having little or no business but at starts: but the
Native Egyptians follow Pasturage and Husbandry. The Arabians live by downright
Robbery; the Moors, Negroes, and Jews manage Trading and Merchandise; so do
most of the Inhabitants of Cairo.

There are another sort of People here called Beduines, The manner of the
Beduines.
wandering about in great Companies, of two or three hundred, with their Luggage
upon Carts, and driving their Cattle like the Tartars, from place to place for
fresh Pasturage: and where they find good Grass, they spread their Tents of
course Goats-hair Cloth, and thence migrate up and down still for fresh Pasture.

The Men are most of them Smiths, and Weavers; they go meanly apparelled,
without any Clothes, but a blue or gray Shirt, with broad Sleaves hanging down
to the ground, and a piece of Cloth, called by them Baracan, which sometimes
they cast over their shoulders as a Mantle; when they pitch, they sometimes
make that their Tent to sleep under in the night, and in the day to skreen off
the heat of the Sun.

The Women go for the most part clothed like the Egyptian, having maskt their
Faces with holes. They stick in their Hair many Silver and Copper Plates, and
black Earrings and Jewels of an unusual bigness; and the like on their Arms.
The Daughters, as they become marriagable, manifest it by scratching themselves
upon the Chin and Lip, which they dawb over with Ink and Ox-gall mingled; that
give such a fixed tincture as will never wear out.

THe Potency and Wealth of Egypt has ever been famous; The abundant Riches of
Egypt.
insomuch that in Ancient Times, Authors have said there were above twenty
thousand Walled Cities, and is at present, China excepted, held one of the
richest Spots of earth in the World. Cairo only for its share contains fix
hundred thousand Jews; from whence the number of the rest of the Inhabitants
may be guessed: as also from the great destruction, in the Year Fifteen hundred
and eighty one, when died of the Pestilence in seven Months, above five
hundred thousand. In the time of Asan Bassa, there were numbered seven millions,
or seventy hundred thousand persons.

TWo Languages and two sorts of Writing were used here, Two sorts of Tongues
among the Egyptians.
one Common, understood by all in ordinary Conversation; the other Peculiar,
only used by the Priests, Prophets, and Religious Votaries, whose ambition led
them to hopes of the Crown and Government of the Kingdom: This they named The
Sacred; but the Coptick or Vulgar, The Profane Tongue: Which last was also
called, Pharaohs Speech; because it was usual in the time of the Ancient
Egyptian Kings, which were called by that one General Name of Pharaoh. I shall
in brief set down the difference and propriety of them both.

Whence the Name Coptos or Copta took its Original, Writers disagree. The
Tongue Copta, why so named.
Athanasius Kircher seems among all to have come nearest, deriving it from
Coptos, formerly the most famous City in Egypt, and the Chief of the Country
of Thebes; though at this day the Ruins thereof are but mean: or else from the
Coptists, the Inhabitants of that City, by whom alone this Tongue was kept in
being.

Here we may take notice of a great mistake among most eminent Writers, The
difference between Coptos and Cophtos.
who without distinction confound Coptos and Cophtos; whereas they differ much
in their signification. Coptos is an antique word, and found in old Authors;
but Cophtos is a Name invented by the Mahumetans, who call the Egyptian
Christians by way of derision Cophtites; as if they would say, Circumcised.
Some suppose they are called Cophtites, Della Valla.
because they followed heretofore the Erroneous and Heretical Opinions of
Eutiches and Dioscorus, condemned in the Council of Ephesus, which did before
Baptism use to receive Circumcision; (for (...) is only a Greek Name, and
signifies Circumcised) whence they were nick-nam'd Christians of the Girdle,
meaning upwards; because from the Girdlested downwards, being Circumcised, they
were rather Jews.

The present Cophtick Tongue, The Coptick is the old Egyptian Tongue.
is not only like the Ancient Egyptian, in the time of the Pharao's, but
altogether one and the same, as appears by some words still in use; and among
the rest the Names of the Months, whereby the Old Egyptians and the Modern
Coptists name them without any remarkable difference. The like you may observe
in the Planets.

Mars was with the Ancient Egyptians Moloch, which the Holy Scripture so often
mentions; Remphan in our English Translations.
Saturn, Refan, the very word used in the Acts of the Apostles; Venus is called
Zahara: and many Plants and Herbs, mentioned by Apuleius in his Book of the
Virtues of Herbs, may be found very little different from the present Egyptian
Names. Now since no Tongue comes nearer to the old Egyptian, than the Coptick,
we may rationally conclude, that the Coptick is the true and ancient Egyptian,
not so pure and undefiled indeed, as it was in the time of the Patriarchs; but
by process of time, the manifest mixture of People and Languages, and other
alterations of the State disguised and corrupted.

The Coptick in it self is an Original, Its distinction from the Greek Tongue.
not a Derivative Language, though some strongly argue, that it is but a Greek
Dialect, differing as the Caldee from the Hebrew. It is true, that in Coptick
Dictionaries, brought from Egypt by Peter Della Valla, many words sound like
the Greek; but it is to be observed withal, that this Tongue had not that
mixture at the beginning, but it fell in in the time of Alexander the Great,
and the Ptolomys, by the mutual Converse of Greeks and Egyptians together, for
three hundred years. And by the same means also Latin, Arabic, Hebrew, and
Samaritane Words are blended with it; but this is not sufficient to root out
its Original Purity.

Diodorus Siculus sets down so great an Agreement between the Hebrew and
Egyptian Tongue, From the Hebrew.
that he seems to maintain those People might very easily have understood one
another; but this contradicts that Psalm, which speaking of Joseph, has these
words: When he passed into Egypt, he heard a Language which he knew not.
Besides, If there were so great an Agreement, it must have arisen either by
Trading or Converse; of both which the Hebrews, as the Scripture witnesses,
were utterly debarred.

Gesner, And from other Eastern Tongues.
Volateranus, Eusebius, Ambrose, and Theseus seem to assert, That the Egyptian
Tongue has some relation to the Abyssine, Caldee, Arabic, Syriack, and other
Oriental Languages, moved by a similitude of Sound: and for that like the
Hebrews, Arabians, and Caldeans, they use Letters instead of Arithmetical
Characters.

But this Opinion stands upon a loose Foundation; for there are great
Differences between this and the other Eastern Tongues, as well in manner of
Pronunciation, as in Words: As for example; The Hebrews call Father and Son;
Ab-U-Ben; The Caldeys, Abba-Ubra; The Syrians, Abo Vabro; The Arabians, Ellab
Vallabu; The Abyssines, Vb Wawalda; The Armenians, Hor eu Ordi; The Samaritans,
Ab-U-ben; The Egyptian Copticks, Fiot Nemsiri: Hereby appears the great
Agreement of the Eastern Tongues among themselves; but not in the least with
the Coptick: for what likeness have the words Fiot Nemsiri, with Ab Uben, Abo
Vabro, Ab Uben, Ab Wawolda, etc.? Accordingly Theseus concludes, That the
Analogy of several Speeches in one or two words, makes no more to prove them
the same, than that Stone and Timber are Identicals, because both grow in the
Earth.

The Coptick has this peculiar Property; That all the Words thereof used by a
Stranger, receive alteration in the first Syllable, and not in the termination
or ultimate, usual in other Languages: Neither at this day are any Books
remaining of it, only a few words have been preserved by Greek and other
Writers of most Antiquity.

Authors disagree about their Characters; The Letters of the Ancient Egyptians.
however we have reason to conclude, that they were taken from the form and
postures of the whole Bodies of Beasts, by them accounted Sacred; when they
intended to signify whatever in it self is great. The minute or lesser matters
were expressed by their several parts or members.

As they endeavored in their holy Language to perform all their matters by
Mysteries, so they did also in the vulgar Coptick, as will plainly appear by
their Alphabet, consisting of two and twenty Letters: wherein few but signifies
some deep Mystery. The second Letter in its Figure, represents the form of a
Capital ^ Gamma, and signifies A Carpenters A Square is a Carpenters Rule, by
which they measure their square Lines: it is made of Iron.
Square; but mystically intends the rule or method of square and honest
dealings, which God the Great Fabricator of the World has set down and fixed as
a Law in our Nature, that a Quadrary Proportion should rule all Actions which
we call just and virtuous. In like manner, under all the other Letters,
according to their specifical differences, lay hid other peculiar and deep
Mysteries. Besides this, they had another manner of Writing: so that it seems
the other were only used as Sacred Hieroglyphics, to set forth great Secrets:
As a Testimony whereof several Mummies have been found, upon whose gilded and
gummed Winding-Clothes many Coptick Letters were inscribed, being no small
evidence to prove the Antiquity: because the Mummies were Interred long before
the Invasion of Cambyses, who destroyed or banished the Priests, by which it
was lost, as we have often mentioned.

But neither could its Antiquity or Sacred Use preserve it from being abolisht,
as at this day it almost is: The Arabic having generally prevailed, The
Coptick Tongue is not spoken any more.
only some Christians have retained still a small Remainder, in Celebrating
their Liturgy, and having a few of their Religious Books written in it; as
among the rest, the Books of the Old and New Testament, translated out of the
Hebrew into that Language above fourteen hundred Years since; when the now
ruined Thebes was the famous Patroness of Religion, as Nicephorus reports:
Nicephorus.
There is also a Coptick Dictionary, of about six thousand Words, with the
Arabic by it, preserved and kept in Egypt: and another, which that Worthy
Searcher into Antiquities, Peter della Valla, brought with him thence, in the
Year Sixteen hundred twenty and four, which in the same order, with Latin
Interpretations, was twenty Years after published in Print at Rome, by the
Learned Father Athanasius Kircher, who had also before that Published an
Introduction to the Coptick Tongue, wherein he treats largely of its Antiquity,
Original and Difference from other Tongues, together with the Knowledge of the
Letters, and the Means both of Restoring and Reforming it.

The Sacred Egyptian Tongue, The Consecrated or Sacred Egyptian Tongue.
consists of comprehensive Representations, by Philo Judaeus called Figures of
Living Creatures, and by the Greeks, Hieroglyphics, that only denote by
Mystical Figures holy Matters. These were found out with great Sagacity, and
consist no way in the Apprehension of Letters, Words or Sentences; As a
Basilisk, with the Tail twined about its Body, signifies the Course of Time; a
Serpent, with the Tail in its Mouth, the World; a Branch of Palm, the Moon,
because a Palm, at the beginning of every New Moon, The Palm shoots forth a
fresh Branch every Moon.
sends forth a new Branch, so that in a Year it shoots forth thirteen new
Branches, as they observe.

These Hieroglyphics contain a complete Sense, in what manner soever it be
expressed, whether Beneath or Above, or on the Right or Left Side; for upon the
Obelisks or Spires they stand perpendicular; upon Flats for Painting, they
stand as we write, Level; but upon Rounds of Metal or Marble Statues or what
other Representations, they march strait up or down, athwart or promiscuous
without Order. Also observe, that the Sages did not grave upon Stone their
Histories, as many now suppose, or the Famous Acts of their Kings and Princes,
or the Liberal Arts, or any other such like Argument, but only what was Holy,
and which had respect either to the Properties of the Divine Nature, or to the
Orders of Angels and Spirits, or to the Tuition of Corpse interred.

These were written not only upon Stones, but also upon Winding-Sheets, and
Funeral-Cloaths of Mummies, made either of Paper, Wood, or burnt Brick, or the
like Matter, as is declared in the Description of the Mummies. But generally
the whole Body of this Learning was cut upon Stone, and set up in several
Places in Egypt, as upon Temple-doors, Obelisks, or Images of the Gods, that
they might remain Remarks to all Posterity. They make Mercurius Trismegistus.
Hermes the first Inventer of these consecrated Figures, whom the Arabians
called Adris; He was a Priest, and the greatest Wiseman in all Egypt, and
flourished in the time of Abraham, under the Government of the first Egyptian
King Mizraim.

This Hieroglyphical Learning was so highly Esteemed by the Egpptians ever
since its first Beginning, Was in high Esteem.
that the Priests, who only understood it, might teach it to none but those of
their own Order. Moses himself, according to the Scriptures, was endued with
all the Wisdom and Learning of the Egyptians, which according to the Exposition
of Philo Judaeus, chiefly consisted in this Divine Philosophy, When it was
destroyed.
which since the Conquest of Egypt by Cambyses, is so wholly lost, that there
is scarce any Remainders to be found.

A At present the Native Egyptians speak Arabic or the Morisk Language, so do
the Coptists, only their Church Service or Liturgies are celebrated in the
Coptick, with an Arabic Explanation. The Jews at Cairo for the most part speak
a mixed Language, a mere Gally-maufry hasht together of all usual Tongues, now
called Lingua Franca.

THe Number of Soldiers in Pay, The Soldiery.
which the Grand Signieur maintains to keep under the Country, they variously
Report; formerly they were no more than twelve Thousand, but at this day, as
well Horse as Foot, 15100. ten Thousand seven hundred Horsemen, Jaques Albert.
which they call Mottaferagas, Chiauses, Arabgis, Geoumelli, and Tuffegis, and
four Thousand four hundred Footmen, that is, Janissaries, Topigi and Azapi,
besides the San-jaks and Cherkes, which last watch the Banks of Nilus, to
prevent the Arabians from cutting off or stopping the Water at the time of the
overflowing; besides these, there are to garrison Castles and Forts, two
Thousand two hundred, as also trained Soldiers raised in the several Cassiffes,
at the pleasure of the Divan of Cairo, and maintained at their own Charge.

OUr Purchase says, Egypt is guarded by an hundred Thousand Soldiers, called
Timariotts, who are bound to serve the Turk in all Places where he pleases to
use them. Villamont accounts twenty Thousand Spahies and Breves, and five and
twenty or thirty Thousand Janissaries and Natives, all bravely appointed in
Habit and Arms. The Baron of Beauvan reckons five Thousand Spahies, who do
nothing but Ride through Cairo, two Thousand Mottafaragaes or Mattaferagaes,
two Thousand Chiaous or Chiaus, fifteen Thousand Janissaries, all Foot-Soldiers.
Prince Radzovill relates, That there lie in Cairo usually six Thousand Horse,
and as many Foot, to prevent the Robberies of the Arabians, and that the
Cavalry consists partly of Turks, partly of Mammelucks and Circassians, but all
the Infantry wholly of Janissaries.

THe Mottaferagaes are at this day three Thousand three hundred, Jaques Albert.
having no other Commander but the Bashaw, who is of their own choosing; the
Chiaus three Thousand five hundred, commanded in chief by the Aga, but
secondarily by one chosen out of themselves, whom they call Chiaussi Tihaiassi.
The Seraquegies, Gioumelli and Tuffegies, are each of them twelve Hundred,
under their proper Leaders, which they call Boullouk; the Seraquegies bear
Yellow Colors, the Geoumelli Red, and the Tuffegies Green and White. If at any
time a Boullouk offend, he receives both Trial and Punishment of the Aga.

The Janissaries are above three Thousand, with a peculiar Aga, who only may
punish them, but no otherwise than in secret. They guard the uppermost side of
the Castle of Cairo. The Arabgies and Topigies, each five or six Hundred, all
Cannoneers, under the Aga of the Janissaries, though they have also a distinct
Commander, their Post is the Gate of the Castle of Cairo, on the side of the
Way from Romeilla.

Out of this Soldiery, by the Command of the Divan, residing at Cairo, a
certain number is drawn, according as the danger of any Place requires; but for
Defense of the Country, against the Incursion of the Arabs, two Thousand two
hundred twenty and three, are always in readiness, as a flying Army to assist
the Soldiers quartered in and maintained by the Country, and always lying in
the Field under rich and curious Tents.

The Cassiff of Sahid or Girgio, The Soldiery of every Province.
has by the Command of the Divan of Grand Caire, an Hundred Mottaferagaes, an
Hundred Chiauses, an Hundred Janissaries, and two Hundred Spahies at the public
Charge, keeping as many in Pay upon their own Account. These continually scout
Abroad, laying hold of all opportunities to fight with and cut off the
Arabians, that lurk in the Mountains for Spoil.

Manfelut maintains six and twenty Soldiers, Mottaferaga's and Spahies, and as
many Natives in Arms, which as the other lie always in the Field. Benesuef has
a Hundred and forty; Fium a Hundred Spahies, and fifty Janissaries; Gize has a
Hundred Spahies, all which constantly keep the Field, to free the Country from
the Plundring Arabians.

Baera has two Hundred Mottaferagaes and Spahies. Along the Channel that runs
from the Nile to Alexandria, the Provincial Governor keeps some Soldiers, to
hinder the Arabians letting out of the Water. In Gaobia are fifty Soldiers, to
preserve the small Channel, called Tessos, from being cut off by that Wild
Nation.

Into Menousia the Divan sends a Hundred Spahies, and the like into Mansoura,
whose Provincial Governor is bound to keep the like number, at his own Cost and
Charges. In Callioubieh a Hundred; in Minio seventy five, together with thirty
of the Provincials providing; in Cherkeffi five and forty, all at the Cost of
the Country: Besides all which, Alexandria, Rosetta, Damiata and Suhez, each
receive sixty Soldiers.

EGypt, besides these Military Guards, has several Castles and Fortifications,
Castles and Forts.
partly on the Seacoast, and partly more Inland.

There are four Castles in Alexandria, one Great, called Pharaillon, and
another smaller, standing close by it, at the Mouth of the New Haven, and the
two other lie on the other Side of the Old Bridge; one Great, called Rouch, and
the other smaller, a Member as it were of the first. Next these four stands
another, called Boukier.

In Rosetta are two, one at Broules, the other on the Sea-Point toward
Damiata. There are two or three also in the Dominion of Cattia, by the Side of
Gaza. And in the Way toward Mecha, two small days Journey from Cairo, stands
the Castle Aseroust, through which the Caravans pass, also a small Church of
the Greeks. The next is that of Lacaba, Magazines.
in the Road to Mecha, and further, about half Way, between Cairo and Mecha,
the Castle of Hazalem. Over and above these Castles, there are three Arsenals
or Magazines, for Arms and Ammunition; one at Cairo, another at Alexandria, and
a third in Suhez. All these Fortresses are Garrisoned with sufficient numbers
of Soldiers; for in the two Pharaillons, the great and small lie three Hundred:
Yet Caesar Lambert averrs, that there is sometimes no more than one poor Moor,
to kindle the Fire to be a Guide to Ships entering the Haven in dark Nights; for
notwithstanding the Divans Order, the Guard of Janissaries has been long
neglected, as almost all things which concern the Grand Signieur in that
Country are, out of too much Security.

In Rouch-Castle are five and twenty Men; in that of Boukier, two Hundred and
twenty; in the two at Rosetta, five Hundred; in Broules, six and twenty; in the
two at Damiata, three Hundred; in each Castle of Cattia and Caniones, a Hundred
and sixty; in Aseroust, five and thirty; in Labaca, forty; and forty in
Hazalem. All the Cavallery receive above their Monethly-Pay, Maintenance and
Forage, of Corn and Grass, but not the Foot. The Pay of the Beis, Cherkesbeyes
and Mottaferagaes only amount to ninety Sisi or Beurses a Month, which they
constantly receive every three Months, out of the Revenue of the Province. The
Garrisons in the Castles are Paid out of the Revenue of the Customs; of which
the Farmer brings an account to the Divan of Cairo. One Piaster is 120. Aspers,
and 12 s. 6 d. sterling.


The Pay of the Soldiers in the Castles of Alexandria, Rosetta and Boukier, is
accounted Yearly to be twelve thousand six Hundred Piasters; those of Broules,
two Hundred; those of the Castles of Damiata, five Thousand five hundred; of
the two Magazine-Houses in Cairo and Alexandria, Yearly, four Hundred and fifty
Piasters. Della valla.
A Seriffi is six shillings English.
Some raise the whole Charge of Egypt, to six Hundred thousand Gold Seriffi, a
fourth Part of the Revenue of Egypt. The least Pay of a Soldier is six Medins a
day (a Medin is thirty Piasters) though some receive fifty or sixty Medins a
Day. Over and above this, such as lie to guard Provinces, have further
Encouragement and Allowances taken Nolens volens from the poor Housekeepers,
besides Provision for them and their Horses.

THe Yearly Revenue of Egypt, The Revenue. Jacq. ^lb.
which the Provinces and Customs of the Spicery bring in at Alexandria,
Rosetta, Bekir, Damiata, Brules and Bouluk, some advance to Nine hundred and
sixty three Zizi, or Bags, each of which contains Seven hundred fifty and a
half Piasters, Two Medins make an Asper.
or Five and Twenty thousand silver Medins, and some about Seven hundred French
Crowns, together with Three hundred twenty and nine thousand Ardebes of Corn,
An Ardebe 260. or 300. French Pounds.
every Ardebe accounted Two hundred and sixty, or Three hundred French Pounds.
All which Treasure is divided into three Parts, one to the Grand Signieur,
another to the Divan, and the third to the Bashaw of Egypt, his Tihaia and
Agas: Thus the Bashaw has Three hundred and ninety two Bags; the Tihaia and
his Aga's Eighty seven, the Divan Fourteen hundred and forty, and two Chests of
Twenty thousand Seriffs, together with above a 100000 Quarters, Two hundred and
seventy four thousand Ardebes of Corn.

Others raise the Revenue to Four and twenty hundred thousand Serifs, Della
vella.
each worth little more than a Venetian Sequin or Ducat, and divide it thus;
the Bashaw Yearly must send upon forfeiture of his Life, Six hundred thousand
to Constantinople, together with Three hundred and fifty Seriffs, the Revenue
of Jemen in Arabia Felix; another Six hundred thousand is bestowed on the
Caravan to Mecha; the like sum paid to Soldiers, and the Overplus comes to the
Bashaw.

There are that Compute the Yearly Revenue no higher than Sixty thousand
Seriffs, besides the Provision of Sugar, Spice, Drugs, Indian Cloths, Incense
or Perfumes, Rice and all manner of Provision of Grain for his Seraglio, and
many other Gifts or Presents, and such like, amounting to as much more. One of
the San-jaks living at Cairo, conveys the Revenue or Chasma to Constantinople,
with a Guard of Five hundred Soldiers, each of which have three Men to attend
Him, which raises their number to above Two thousand. At their return every
Troop has a Medin for the Advance of his Pay, and the Foot-Soldiers half a
Medin or Asper.

Every Provincial is bound to pay the Revenue or Farm of Customs he receives of
every Village in his Province, to the Bashaw of Cairo, Jacques Albert Estats de
Egypt.
to whom he also renders a certain Rent Yearly, as also to his Tihaia and
Aga's; that is, those of Sahid or Girgio, give yearly forty Bags of Money; and
to the Tihaia and other Aga's of the Bashaw, twelve, and fifty thousand Ardebes
of Corn, all which he must bring to Old Cairo. He pays also to the Grand
Signieur, besides the Corn, Four hundred and twenty four Bags of ready Silver
to be distributed among the Soldiery, and a hundred and five Officers of the
Divan. When the time of his Government is drawing to an end, he must sow all
the Land of his Dominion overflown by the Nile, which he delivers up to the
Divan. If by chance the Provincial of a Place continues his Office no longer
than one Year, it impoverishes him; but if he continue four or five years, he
will be a gainer, and acquire a plentiful Fortune.

The Provincial Governor of the Cassif of Manfelout, pays to the Bashaw twenty
or thirty Bags, to the Tihaia of the Bashaw, and to the Aga's five other; he
gives to the Divan a hundred thousand Ardebes of Corn, and five Bags Yearly.

The Subordinate Province of Ebrin yields nothing but Date-Trees, Senna-Leaves,
and Ebony, so that they pay no Rent to the Divan, nor above two or three Bags
to the Bashaw.

Benesuef gives as a yearly Present to the Bashaw thirty Bags, twelve to the
Tihaia, and to the Aga five; and to the Divan sixty and six, together with four
and twenty thousand Ardebes of Corn yearly.

Fium affords to the Bashaw five and twenty Bags, to the Tihaia and Agaes five:
and for Rent to the Divan in ready money two hundred Bags a year.

The Provincial of Baera pays to the Bashaw thirty Bags, to the Tihaia, and the
Agaes six, and to the whole Divan an hundred twenty and four.

When a new Bashaw, comes into Egypt, this Provincial is bound to find Horses
and Camels for him and his Retinue, and to bear all their charges to Cairo.

Out of Garbia the Bashaw has forty Bags, the Agaes nine, and the Divan four
hundred and ninety.

The Provincial of Menoufia pays to the Bashaw twenty five Bags, to the Tihaia
and Agaes four, and to the Divan ninety six.

The Cassiff of Mansura pays to the Bashaw twenty five, to the Tihaia, and to
the Agaes four, and to the Divan two hundred ninety six.

The Cassiff of Callioubieh pays to the Bashaw five and twenty Bags, to the
Tihaia, and to the Agaes four, and to the Divan two hundred and ninety six.

The Cassif of Minio pays to the Bashaw twelve Bags, to the Tihaia and Agaes
four; and to the Divan ten thousand Ardebes of Corn.

The Cassif of Cherkeffi pays to the Bashaw five Bags, to the Tihaia and Agaes
one and a half, and to the Divan a thousand Ardebes of Corn, and twenty five
Bags of Money.

The Cassif of Cattia pays to the Bashaw four Bags, and two to the Officers:
All the Revenue of these Countries are raised from the Tolls or Customs of the
Caravans, passing through it to Jerusalem and Palestine.

All these Presents are raised out of the Villages, farmed yearly to honest and
faithful Chiaues, Mottaferagaes or Spahies, who are bound to give Rent
according to the List of the Villages, which lies ready in the Divan at Cairo;
wherein are set down all the Villages, and what every of them must give yearly;
as well in Corn as in Money: And yet these Farmers let out scarce the half of
the Villages, but keep the best part of them to be tilled for their Families.

There are several kinds of Tolls or Customs, The Toll or Custom, or Douan of
Delborar.
called by them Douanes. The first is the Custom of Delborar, that is, the Farm
of Spices and Drugs; and in general, of all Merchandise, which come from Mecha,
Mocal, and India, of which the Farmer takes the Tenth in Silver, according to
the usual Valuation, which is Fifteen in the hundred, and more: He gives for it
to the Bashaw 45 Bags, to the Tihaia 15, and to the Grand Seignior 120. to whom
obliged likewise to find all Spice, and Drugs, Clothes, and Ambergreese for
his Women's Seraglio.

The second Douan, The Custom or Douan of Alexandria.
is that of Alexandria, comprising Rosetta and Bekir: for which the Farmer of
the Customs gives to the Bashaw thirty Bags, ten to the Aga's, and to the Divan
an hundred and twenty; besides twelve thousand Piasters, for the maintenance of
the Garrison-Souldiers of Alexandria, Bekir, and Rosetta; three hundred
Quintals of Oil of Olives for Mecha, and twelve or fifteen thousand Piasters,
for Silk Clothes, and Cloth once a year to the Bashaw, and his People at their
Ramadan, or Easter. For the raising of this, all Wares that come out of
Christendom pay one and twenty in the Hundred; and those that come out of the
Grand Seigniors Countries, ten in the Hundred. The Wood brought from the
Black-Sea gives twenty in the Hundred: This Customer is like our Clerk of the
Market, overseeing Weights and Measures, for which he has a Salary of twelve
or fifteen Bags yearly.

The third Douan, is that of Damiata, The Douan of Damiata.
for which the Farmer pays yearly to the Divan, two Chests of Gold, worth
twenty thousand Seriffs; to the Bashaw, fifteen, and to the Tihaia four Bags,
and to the Soldiers of both the Castles lying at the mouth of the Nile, being
an hundred and twenty four, to each six Medins a Month. The Revenue hereof
arises from Imported Commodities and Merchandise from Turkey, as Corn, Oil,
Soap, and Almonds; or other Commodities brought from Gaza, Zeida, and Damas,
which all pay ten in the Hundred. Many Saiques also from Turkey and Cyprus come
laden with Rice, Beans, Pease, or Rent-Corn, and Flax, Sugar, and Canes.

The fourth is that of Brule, whose Revenue grows from Dadle or Dates, Douan of
Brule.
and other Fruits; but chiefly from the Fish that caught in great abundance,
are salted and sent to Candia, and other places. The Customer pays to the
Bashaw two Bags and a half, one to the Tihaia, and to the Divan four: The
Metassoup, that is, he who sets the Price upon all Victuals, inhances upon the
poor Inhabitants, to raise for the Bashaw thirteen Bags.

The fifth, called Caddare, is that of Boulak; Douan Caddare.
for which the Farmer gives the Bashaw fifteen Bags, the Tihaia and Agaes five,
and the Divan sixty four. His Income proceeds from the Custom of Flax, of which
yearly there is spun and weaved two hundred thousand Quintals at Boulak,
besides an hundred thousand sent to Damiata. Of Corn, which is brought to Old
Caire, of which the Farmer takes six Bags, and six other of the Green-water
Melons, and the like; which in all amounts to twenty and four thousand Bags:
The remainder is upon Tobacco and other Merchandise coming from Turkey, of which
some afford ten in the Hundred, some less. He also receives of every Camel
laden with Merchandise, going to India and Mecha, four Piasters, as a certain
Sum of the Caravan, which come from Damas, Gaza, and other places.

The Jews and Christians living in the Grand Seigniors Countries, Pole Money of
Jews and Christians.
at sixteen years of Age, pay every one Head by Head a certain Price, yearly
amounting to eight and forty Bags. There are in Cairo above eight hundred
Camels appointed to draw water; all which pay a certain Tax imposed on them at
the Bashaw's pleasure. So do the poor people which carry water upon their backs
in Goat Skins through the whole City, each of whom, being thirty thousand in
number, give to the Bashaw for his License what he lays upon them.

Trading and Merchandise is not in such flourishing state as formerly,
Merchandising.
because of the danger of the ways which the Grand Siegnior has endeavored by
all means to secure; but without any success; so that at present Cairo that was
wont to furnish Christendom, is now from thence supplied with Cassia, Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, Pepper, Ginger, Purcellaen, and other Spicery.

The Merchandise there had at present, is Rice, Sugar, Flax, Tamarinds, and
Linen. From the Borders of Hymen comes still much Frankincense; and from the
Skirts of Ethiopia or Negro-Land, Turkish and Arabian Gums, Feathers, and some
Drugs.

They have in Cairo, Bazars, Marketplaces, or Bazars
the chiefest of which are the Rows of the Mercers and Druggists. There are
also stately Houses, which they call Ochelles, where they sell Blackamores,
wherein are divisions to keep Whites to sell; where Men will yield from twenty
to sixty Pieces of Eight, and Women especially Whites, five hundred Piasters;
yea, a thousand, according to their Beauty: yet no Christian may bring a Slave
to Land on pain of his life.

In the Market of Cairo are also great Sacks of Jett brought to be sold in
pieces two handfuls thick, being in great esteem among the Arabians, Syrians,
and Egyptians; because they make of them Beads, which they tell over
Religiously: and sometimes deck their Hair with them.

The Powder of Alcanna is in such repute, that whole Ship-Ladings are sent to
Constantinople; and is of so general use in all the Eastern Countries
subordinate to the Turk, that the Revenue amounts yearly to eighteen thousand
Sultanies, or Ducats.

In Mala, being under the Cassiffe of Garbia, every two days is held a Market
of Cattle, and all sorts of Commodities, called Chec Ahmet Elbodoin. In Hayman
or Hiemen are found some Precious Stones, as the Cornalines, or Cornelians, the
Sardis, or Sardonicks.

THe Ancient Egyptians observed only a Lunar Year: But seeing this manner of
Reckoning did not agree with their Affairs, but was discommodious, they brought
it, according to Censorinus, from one to three Months, and after that to four.
But here we must observe, all the Egyptians did not compute their Year
according to the Course of the Moon: for a great part observed the Solar Year,
but yet not the same that is now in use, for it contained no more than three
hundred and sixty Days, which they divided into twelve Months, giving each
Month thirty Days.

This Computation was a long while used, then at length growing skilfuller by
experience in the Course of the Heavens, and the Suns Annual Motion; they added
to the said three hundred and sixty, five more, which they called Nisi: which
year afterward was generally received for the true Civil Year, and according to
Horapolla called Gods Year: Plutarch.
For the Egyptians called the Sun God, and therefore it is not strange, that
the Sun's Year by them should be called The Year of God.

Gods Year, fourteen hundred and sixty one Days. Then at length among the
Egyptians the Civil Year was brought to the Solar or Sun's Year, Zodiac; and
the fourth Year, with the lengthening of one Day, by the putting together of
the four-times six hours, made it a Leap-year: Now that the making a Leap-year
in this manner was in use among the old Egyptians, among others Diodorus
Siculus gives us to understand in these words, Diodorus Siculus.
where he says; That the days among the Egyptians were not reckoned by the
Moon, but according to the course of the Sun; so that they gave every Month
thirty days, and to the twelfth Month they added five days with a quarter of a
day, that in this manner they might have a perfect course or circuit of the
Year. And this among the Egyptians was so ancient, that they had it long before
Alexander the Great's coming thither; not learning it from, but rather teaching
it to the Romans, as Eudoxus, Plato's Disciple, testifies: who having by
Services and by great Study dived into this knowledge, taught it the Grecians
in his own Country, as Strabo affirms.

As the Year so settled was generally called Gods; Gods year.
so was also every year of the four called by the name of one of the chiefest
of their Gods: The first they called Sothis, or Thoth, that is, Dog; from the
Dog Star, for that they began their year at the rising of that Star; The second
bore the name of Isis, or Serapis; The third of Osiris, and the fourth of
Horus, which the Egyptians also called Kemin. Wherefore, when they would
represent the four years, they made the Figure of Hermes or Mercury, with a
Dogs Face, standing upon a Crocodile with a Bowl in his hand. At his right side
Jupiter Ammon, at the left Serapis with a Figure of Nilus upon his head, and an
Image of a Star, representing according to Manilius, Isis.

The Coptists and Abyssines keep the same reckoning, only changing the names
of the Heathenish Gods, into those of the Four Evangelists; calling the first
year Matthew, the second year Mark, the third Luke, and the fourth John.

Besides this forementioned Civil and large year, for Civil affairs, there was
by the Priests and Astronomers another current year in use, which they termed
The Mystical Year, and consisted of three hundred sixty and five days, bare: By
which means, in four years they lost one full day; and in forty years ten:
Wherefore the time of their Festivals, instituted for the Honor of their Gods,
every year came so many days earlier: For Geminus affirms, That the Feast of
the Goddess Isis, which in the time of Eudoxus fell in the Winter Solstice, in
his time came a whole month sooner. This moveable Course of the Festivals was
done by the Contrivance of the Priests, that they might not Celebrate them
always upon one and the same time of the year; resolving that they should run
through all the Seasons: For the Gods, according to their opinion, in fourteen
hundred and sixty years make Progress over all Countries and Places of the
World, and pass through all the Degrees of the Zodiac, and the days of the
Month in process of time, that no place of the World, nor part of year should
be debarred of their necessary presence. Thus far of the Computation of the
Year among the Old Egyptians.

The Modern Christian Copticks observe a threefold Account; The Modern Account
of the Year among the Copticks.
The first from the Creation of the World, and with them observed by most of
the Eastern People; and in Arabic called Abraham's Epoch.

The second accounts from the beginning of the Grecian Monarchy.

The third from Nabonassar, King of the Caldees: But this used by the
Astronomers only, was little known.

There is a fourth Account used by the Abyssines, and that is the Emperor
Dioclesian's, introduced by him in the nineteenth year of his Reign, being the
year of Christ, Three hundred and two: It begins the twenty eighth of August,
Old, or the Eighth of September, New Style, in the first Month Thoth. They
call it in the Arabic, from the City Captos, Tarich Elkupti, that is, The
Coptick Calendar; and by the Copticks, The holy Martyrs Calendar, or, The Year
of Grace; and by the Abyssines in that Country Language, Amath Mahareth, that
is, The Year of Grace and Mercy; because of the great Persecution which the
Christians at that time suffered under the same Dioclesian; when about Coptos
only were Martyred an hundred and forty four thousand. The reason of
introducing which Account, we will in short set down.

When Dioclesian reigned, seized with a raging Fury, he not only insulted with
strange arrogance over the Christians, casting them to wild Beasts, and
exercising against them all other kinds of savage Cruelty; but endeavored by
all means to extirpate their Name, and to that purpose he put in practice, and
commanded to destroy and burn up all their Religious Books, supposing when that
was done, they would easily be brought to the practice of their Heathen Rites,
and accordingly upon the twenty fifth day of March, being then Easter Day, the
said Dioclesian and his Colleque Maximian, commanded and published Edicts to
that end, that all the Churches of the Christians, in Egypt especially, and
about Thebes, should be thrown to the Ground, and the Books of their Religion
destroyed. And in the second place, the ancient manner of the Years used by the
Egyptians, he made to be fitted to the Roman Style, and that Account he named
from himself, Dioclesian; in which last he so far prevailed, that it took place
even among the Christians, so long as Heathenism continued, and until the time
of the Abbot Dionysius.

The Names of the Twelve Months, into which the Year was divided by the
Copticks, are Thoth September Paopi October Athor. November Choiak December
Tobi January Mechir February Famenoth March Farmy April Paskoes May Paoni June
Epip July Messori August

The Month Thoth, the first of their Year, begins on the nine and twentieth
of August; Paopi the eight and twentieth of September; Athor upon the same day
of the following Month October; Choiak upon the twenty seventh of November;
Tobi upon the same day of December; Mechir the Six and twentieth of January;
Famenoth upon the six and twentieth of February; Farmy the twenty seventh of
March; Paskoes the twenty sixth of April; Paoni upon the same day of the
following Month of May; Epip the twenty fifth of June; Messori upon the same
day of the following Month of July; all which Account is set down according to
the Old Style, which with ten Days added to every such day of the Month,
easily may be agreeable with the New Style.

In the common Years they add to the last Month Messori or July, five days,
which the Greeks call Epagomenes, that is, additional; but the Copticks, Nisi;
and in the Leap-year six, which they intercalate between the eight and nine and
twentieth of our August, according to the Old Style, or according to the New,
between the sevententh and eighteenth of September.

The Egyptian Months, By the Arabians called By the Syrians called Thoth
Muharam Illul Paopi Safar Thisrin 1. Athor Rabi 1. Thisrin 2. Choiak Rabi 2.
Kanum Tobi Giamadi 1. Kanon Mechir Giamadi 2. Scebat Famenoth Rageb Adar Farmy
Scaban Nisan Paskoes Rhamadan Ijur. Paoni Scevel Haziram Epip Dulkaida Thamuz
Messori Dalhagieb Ab

EGypt at the beginning had Native Kings, The Ancient Egyptian Dynasties.
who governed their Subjects with a free and unlimited Authority, and according
to the Prescription of their Priests, lead a Moral and Virtuous Life; and till
the Government of Psammenitus, son of Amasis, who Ruled in the Year of the
World, Three thousand four hundred and five and forty, were all called by one
general Surname or Title of Paraoh: Wherefore in Jeremiah in his six and
thirtieth Chapter, we read Pharaoh Jer. 46.2.
Necho, and Pharaoh 44.30. Pharaoh-Hophra.
Kofra, as much as to say, King Necho, King Kophra; Pharaoh being barely a name
of Dignity, as with us the name of Emperor or King is. In which Year, for he
reigned but six Months, Cambyses the son of Darius, with a strong Army invaded
and conquered Egypt, and took Psammenitus captive, putting to death, banishing,
and destroying all before him, and reducing the Country to a Province; in
which Subjection of the Persians it remained above a hundred and fifty Years,
till the Reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus: In whose time the Egyptians set up one
Inarus, son of Psammitichus, before King of Lybia, who in the beginning
Governed happily, till Artaxerxes with a great Fleet and Army came upon them
out of Phaenicia, unawares, and soon reduced them again to his Obedience; from
which time it was subject to the Persian Kings, until the Reign of Darius
Nothus, when they were expelled by Amirteus, born in the City Sais, or a
Sebanite.

Six years reigned Amirteus, succeeded for about Ninety one years, Mendesian
Princes, so called from Mendes, which also was Horus, one of their Gods, from
whom they descended, or from the City Mendes.
by four Mendesian Princes, Neferitis, Achoris, Psammites, and Neferitis the
Second; after that by three Sebennites, viz. Nectabanos, Techos or Meos, and
Nectabanos the Second; which last, Artaxerxes Ochus bereaved of his Kingdom,
and drove to Ethiopia, and so Egypt fell again to the Persians, to whom it
continued subject till the destruction of Darius Codomannus, by Alexander the
Great, who brought it to the Grecian or Macedonian Kings, that reigned five
years over it. Anno Mundi 3600.
After Alexander's Death, this Country fell to Ptolomeus, surnamed Lagus,
whence all the Kings, his Successors, in that Kingdom, were called Ptolomeys,
subjoyning thereto some other Name, as Philadelphus, Epiphanes, and the like.
This Dynasty held the Scepter Two hundred ninety and eight years.

At first, after the Death of Alexander the Great, his Brother Arideus, after
much debate was chosen King, who over the conquered Territories made the
chiefest Captains, Lieutenants and Governors: In which Distribution of great
Offices, Egypt, as we said, fell to the share of Ptolomy (which in Greek
signifies Warlike or Courageous); but his Companion Perdicas picking a Quarrel,
quickly routed him, and was himself as soon vanquished by Antigonus, who was so
puffed up with his Victory, that nothing but Sovereignty would content him,
whereupon he took the Title of King, which Ptolomy now recruited, Egypt was a
Kingdom under the Ptolomeys.
imitating and not willing to be inferior to his Companion, assumed the Royal
Dignity and Title, joining to Egypt, Syria and Arabia, rifling Jerusalem; from
whence he brought away many Jews captive, whom at first he grievously
persecuted.

The Ptolomeys in Egypt which bore the Title of King, were Ten in Number, and
these that follow.
Ptolomy the Son of Lagus Reigned 40 Years. Ptolomy Philadelphus Reigned 28
Years. Ptolomy Evergetes Reigned 26 Years. Ptolomy Ceraunus Philopator Reigned
17 Years. Ptolomy Epiphanes Reigned 35 Years. Ptolomy Philometor Reigned 24
Years. Ptolomy Evergetes Reigned 29 Years. Ptolomy Phiscon, otherwise Soter,
that is Protector Reigned 17 Years. Ptolomy Alexander Reigned 18 Years. Ptolomy
Auletes. Reigned 30 Years. Cleopatra Reigned 24 Years.
The Reign and Race of the Ptolomeys over Egypt, ended with Cleopatra, the
Daughter of Ptolomy Auletes, courted at first by Julius Caesar, then by Mark
Anthony, through whose favors She kept her Sovereignty: but Augustus at the
Battle of Actium ruining Anthony's Fortunes, with the death of Cleopatra who
poisoned her self, made it a Roman Province, and it continued under that Empire
till the Reign of Heraclius, who held his Royal Court and Seat of Empire at
Constantinople.

After the dividing of the Roman Empire into East and West, Egypt fell to the
Greek or Western share; but the remisness of their Government, and Extortion of
their Officers, made the Egyptians submit themselves to the Arabian Califs,
about the year Seven hundred and four, to whom they stood faithful till
conquered by the Mahumetans.

The first Arabian Calif was called Omar, who to that end sent a strong Army,
under the Conduct of his Lieutenant Ambre, son of Albas, to Cairo, over which
at that time, in the Greek Emperors Name, presided as his Deputy or Viceroy,
Makaubare, who compounded with Ambre upon these Terms: That every Inhabitant
should pay a Gold Esku; That the Arabians should be entertained three days in
all places where they pass through; and that the Citizens should pay to the
Calif a yearly Revenue of twenty hundred thousand Eskues. The year following
Ambre won Alexandria, and so brought all Egypt under the Command of the Arabian
Califs, and thereupon took upon him, in the Califs Name, the Dominion of Egypt,
as his Governor: From thence it was ordered by Deputies, until the year Eight
hundred fifty and one, when Calif Mutamid dividing his whole Empire, gave his
Brother among many other Countries, Egypt, who held it fifty years and upward.
Then in the year Nine hundred and four, Calif Muktatos made it Provincial; but
the Calif Abubekre adding to it whatever the Syrians had possessed, Muhamed
Abuhur succeeded him with the Title of King, and after him Casur.

In the year Eleven hundred thirty and five, Ali Abulmansar after his Fathers
Death came to the Throne, and Reigned to the year Eleven hundred sixty and
three, at which time Syracon or Xarracon, called by others Asereddin
Schirachoch, an Armenian, General or first Vizier of the King of Damas, who had
sent him with an Army to the assistance of the dispossessed Souldan Sanat,
against the new Souldan Dargon; by his lucky Conquest and victorious Arms,
taking captive the Calif of Egypt, made himself Master there, with the Title of
Sultan or Souldan. After whose death his Brother Joseph Nazir Saladin took
Possession, and by the overthrow of the former Calif Etzar, so settled the
Government, that it continued in that Name and Race till the year One thousand
two hundred and forty two, when the Mamalucks, the offspring of a People on
the Banks of the Euxine Sea, vulgarly called The Circassians, and by
Melechsala, The seventh Calif, of Shirachochs Race made his Guard, knowing
their own strength, and finding a fit opportunity by the Murder of their Lord,
made themselves Lords of the Country, appointing for their Prince one
Tarquimenis, born in Turcomania; in whose Race the Possession continued from
1255. (for Elmutan the Son of Melechsala held War with them till then) until
the year 1517.

The last Souldan of Egypt was called Tomumbey, the second of that Name, The
last Sultan of Egypt.
which by the Warlike Mamalucks, for his Virtue and Honesty, was elected
Sultan, who having Wars with the Turkish Emperor Selim, and defeated by him in
Battle, fled to Cairo, where taken captive, betrayed and delivered up by a
Moorish Prince, he was miserably in the said year, Fifteen hundred and
seventeen, Murdered, and his Body tied to the Tail of a Camel and dragged
through Cairo. This, with the Victory the year before gained against Souldan
Campson Gauri, so ruined the power of the Mamalucks, that ever since, Egypt
together with other Countries and Kingdoms, by their Courage and Conduct, kept
in Subjection above Three hundred years, as before is mentioned, fell under the
Command of the Turkish Empire, to which with Cayar-Bey, and Gazelle, most of
the Mamalucks joined themselves, though indeed Gazelle, Souldan of Apamee and
Aman, the most Noblest of the Mamalucks, held War a long time; but finding his
Power too weak, at length he submitted with his Forces, and was received into
Favor by Selim, and made Governor over Syria, which Office he performed till
the death of Selim, with great Care and Fidelity; but after his death Gazelle
began to strengthen himself with Soldiers, and endeavored to draw to his Party
Cayar-Bey, though in vain, for he perfidiously put to death the Messengers; yet
Gazelle did not leave his Enterprise unattempted, but with a great Army drew
into the Field, though without any remarkable success.

Mamaluck signifies in the Syriack, A mercenary Soldier; they were always kept
in the Pay of the Souldan or Sultan, being chiefly Horse, and the most of them
Christians, or children of Christians; for Arabians, Saracens, Moors, Turks nor
Jews, may not be received into their Society.

The greatest part of them were of Circassia, on the Banks of the Euxine Sea,
as we said, where the Turks call them also Cercas or Zercas, and we
Circassiers. These, says Jovius, were taken in their Infancy by the Valaques,
Tartars, Precopitans, Podolians, and the Inhabitants of Roxolania, and sold to
the Merchants, who chose out the strongest and stoutest, which they brought
over the Midland-Sea to the Souldan, who at Cairo caused them to be brought up
in the Exercise of Arms as soon as they came to Age, and learned to draw a
strong Bow, and shoot at a Mark with extraordinary Aim and Steddiness; the
whole Science of Defense, and the exercise of their Arms for Battle, Riding and
well managing of Horses; they received Pay of the Souldan, and were immediately
listed into the Number of his Lifeguard. Thus these Mamalucks being in no
likelihood to attain any Honor, Office or Maintenance, but by their Valor and
Courage, so enured themselves to Martial Discipline, that of despicable
Bondmen and purchased Slaves, many of them became great Captains and mighty
Princes.

This Government of the Mamaluck Souldans was Elective, for no Son might by
right Succeed his Father, but went away content with the Heirship of his
personal Estate. In the Election, every Mamaluck had a voice, and as soon as a
Souldan was chosen, required of him a Serif or Ducat of Gold.

Since the subduing of Egypt by Selim, Government. Caesar Lambert. Jacques
Albert.
his Successors, the Grand Signieurs, manage the Government by a Bashaw,
otherwise called Beglerbei, and chief of the Sanjacks, in the same manner as
Alzier, Tunis, Tripolis, and other Countries, subject to the Turks.

The Great Turk sends commonly every Three years a new Bashaw from
Constantinople, although for these fifty or sixty Years none of them has
continued in his Office for a whole Year; nay, sometimes in Three Months there
have been two new Bashaws. If a Bashaw offend the Commons, especially the
Leaders among them, he is instantly as they say there, Manzoul; that is,
without Authority, and secluded apart, sometime within, sometime without the
Castle; and in his Place, the Kai Macam, that is, the antientest of the
Sanjacks is substituted, who often performs the Place better than himself. That
this is most certain, we have a fresh Example that happened but in the year
Sixteen hundred and thirty.

Mahomet Bashaw, Nephew to the Grand Vizier, Kampson Bashaw, General of the
Army for the Grand Signieur in Persia, after his coming and Reception in Cairo,
stayed there about five Months, obliging all the Great Ones of the Country to
him, and putting to death five or six very Rich but intolerable Oppressors and
Squeezers of the poor People. At length in the year Sixteen hundred and thirty,
Gaetai Bey, one of the richest Men in Egypt, very ambitious, and who had cast
an eye upon the Kingdom, came at eight of the Clock in the Morning to visit the
Bashaw, who received him with more than ordinary Kindness, and showing him
greater Honor than expected. After much Discourse held on both Sides, and the
Conclusion of the Beys Business, which continued about two Hours, he invited
him to taste a dish of Sorbet and Coffee; which done, and he about to depart,
the Bashaw accompanied him three or four steps over against Door of his Chamber
on that side of the Room where he gave audience; and then told him, That he had
a Letter from the Grand Signieur, which contained a Command to send him his
Head, upon the penalty of his own, and without more words, Bey having no time
to escape, was immediately taken and brought through the Gallery of the Room,
by the side of the Place, where usually Water is to wash himself; there was he
beheaded, and the head instantly thrown through the Window of the Room upon the
open Place, as also the Trunk or Corpse through the Gallery of the Chiaus in the
same Place.

The Bashaw, a man of solid Judgment, and full of Courage, of the Age of five
and thirty Years, withdrew himself without any tumult; but as soon as it was
Published, he was surrounded with five or six Thousand Janissaries, whom he
satisfied with Reasons. On the Morrow, the Great Men all assembled together,
with the Janissaries in the Castle, and other Commanders, demanded of the Bashaw
the Order of the Grand Signieur, which he said, he would not deliver to any but
his Master, neither would he show it. They threatened to take his Head in
Compensation for the other; to which with a settled Resolution he neither
answered nor resisted. However, he was conveyed out of the Castle, and kept
under Guard till the Grand Signieur should signify his Pleasure, either to
discharge, or have him sent to him.

The Dominion of the Bashaw is limited and bounded by Law; for without the
Kadilescher or President of the Council, and the Great ones of the Country, he
cannot conclude any thing of great Concernment; however he takes Cognizance of
most things which happen to his Employment.

The Bashaw in Cairo has the like Officers under him, as are in other Turkish
Places; that is, a Tihaia, Cadilesker, Sanjaks, Defterdar, Sarraks, Chiaus,
Soubachi; all which together Constitute the Divan or Council.

The Tihaia is the second Person next the Bashaw, and the Cadilesker as much as
President of the Council, or Divan.

The Sanjaks, of which the Bashaw is Head, are eighteen in number; they take
Pay every Monday, and their highest Pay is five and twenty thousand Medins a
Month; besides five and twenty Ardebes of Corn, and the like Weight of Barley.

The Soubachi is as much as a High Sheriff of a County.

The Divan or Council assemble at the Castle of Cairo, or in the Rooms of an
old Structure joining close to the Castle, thrice a Week, on Mondays, Tuesdays,
and Thursdays; on Mondays usually Matters of State, and that which concerns
Justice are debated; and on Tuesdays touching the Revenues.

The Bashaw comes into the Divan at Noon, accompanied with the Defterdar, and
four Sanjaks, which they call Nubba; after the dispatch of business proper for
the time, and calling over their Names, they leave the Bashaw and the Defterdar
alone with the Secretaries of the Divan, which sit at the foot of the Bashaw:
In this Divan also sit the Rosmanegi, Mocategis, Calfas, Mocabelgies, and the
Sarraf Bassy, who commonly is a Jew, accompanied also with several other
Sarrafs, Receivers of the Treasures as well in Cairo, as in the plain Country
in the Cassifillis and Meltescens, or Meltecemino that be Provinces.

The President of the Chiaus, who is the Bashaw's Interpreter, is in the Divan
Catteby, as well as the Secretary, usual with four Chiauses, and as many
Mottaferagaes, and a like number of Janissaries which stay below.

On Thursdays the inferior Divan assembles, where the Cadilesker sits in
person, to hear the Complaints of the People, violently oppressed or fleeced by
the Cassifs, or Governors. But at this day these Courts are seldom kept, yet
the people dare not complain.

Concerning the peculiar Businesses of the Janissaries, they have their own
particular Aga or President, as also Spahies and a Chiaus; from which last all
the Chief Officers proceed, and are Judges in all Differences which arise among
them: from whom however there is an Appeal to the Divan of the Bashaw, which
yet is seldom done. Business of small moment, that reach not Corporal
Punishment, are decided by the Cadizen of State; but Corporal Punishments are
inflicted by the Sanjak, or Superior Authority.

All the Differences among Christians in Cairo, or between Christians, Turks,
Moors, and Jews, are determined by the Consuls of their own Nation, there
resident.

The Sanjaks of Cairo superintend several high and mighty Affairs both within
and without the Country; that is, one conducts the Caravan from Cairo to
Mecha; another guards the Grand Seigniors Revenue to Constantinople; a third
attends the Muster-Master General in the Affairs of the Soldiery, and to
perfect his Rolls against Persia, Syria, and Mecha. When they have finished
their Expeditions, they are discharged for three years following.

Four other Sanjaks usually keep Guard in Grand Caire Month by Month, upon
the four great ways of the City: The first is Alladelne, or the Gate, out of
which they go to Suhez, the Red Sea, and Palestine: The second, that over
against Old Caire: The third leading to the Sepulchers of the Garrison; and the
fourth to the second Bridge of Cally.

Besides the Chief Bashaw, there is over every Cassif or Dominion, a particular
Governor or Lieutenant, called Sabbessadeh, appointed by the Bashaw, of whom
he rents or farms the Province.

Every Governor has his own peculiar Council or Divan in his Province, to
which are belonging one Chiaus, one Droguerman or Interpreter, one Aga of the
Janissaries, and four Boullouks, besides Mottaferagaes, Sphahies, Tuffegies,
Sarakgies, and Arabgies.

There is also The Enrollment-Office, or, The Divan Catteby, where all the
Orders of the Great Divan are entered.

THe Religion of the Ancient Egyptians consisted in the worshipping of Idols,
The Ancient Religion or Worship.
Beasts and other Creatures, under the several Names of Osiris and Isis,
Serapis, Apis, Hammon, Canopus, Horus, Harpocrates, Mithres, Typhon Osiris's
Brother, and others beside.

Osiris, according to the Testimony of Diodorus, was the Son of Saturn, after
whose Decease married to Isis. They say he governed Egypt with such Wisdom and
Moderation, that he infinitely gained the affections of all: For besides the
wholesome Laws he made, he instructed them in Husbandry, Mechanick-Trades,
Planting of Vines and Olive Trees; and was the first among them, that by the
help of Mercury taught them Letters.

These happy Inventions thus perfected, Osiris thirsting after greater Glory,
raised a great Army, and commending to Isis the Care of all, to whom he joined
as an Assistant for Council, Mercury, a most Ingenious and Politic Statesman;
Hercules Egyptian.
and Commissioned Hercules, a man of extraordinary Strength and Power to
overlook the more Active and Military Part. When he had ordered all thus
wisely, he associated to him his Brother Apollo, and his two Sons, Anuber and
Macedo; thus marching into the Field, accompanied also with Pan, Maro, and
Triptolemus, the first Planters of Vineyards, and Sowers of Corn, he passed
through Arabia, and the Indies, atchieving many great Victories, and teaching
Civility to all those barbarous conquered Nations: At last touching upon
Europe, much improved by his Travels and Warlike Expeditions, he returned into
Egypt; where for these great Acts he was Deifi'd by the People, and Worshipped
as the Sun, and his Royal Consort Isis as the Moon: because as their idolatrous
and dull Fancies imagined Osiris ascended into the Sun, and Isis into the Moon,
to preside and govern the two great Luminaries, and so consequently the Earth.

The same Diodorus relates, That when Typhon saw his Brother Osiris while alive
thus highly reverenced, his heart was so embittered against him, that he
privately murdered him by the help of the Tytanois distributing to every one
of his Relations a part of his Body, and usurped the Kingdom. But Isis with the
assistance of her Sons Horus and Anubis, soon revenged her Husbands Death, by
the destruction of Typhon, and all his Rebellious Accomplices.

Isis after this in memory of her murdered Lord, with Herbs and Wax wrought or
kneaded with Aromatic Spices together, framed a most Exquisite Effigies of
him; commanding the Priests to show it every one, with order that they should
in secret honor him as a God, and Consecrate to him what Creature they liked
best: And the more to promote this Service, she settled on them a Yearly
Revenue; which prevailing on their covetous minds, they instantly put all in
practice, in manner following.

The Priests at the appointed time Went into the Archives of the Temple, where
stood (but known only to them) this Image of Osiris, before which in mournful
postures, amidst their contrite and most doleful lamentations; they first
shaved their Heads, then beating their Breasts, and ripping up the Scars and
new-heal'd Orifices of their former Wounds received in private as a preparation
for this general Service. Some days in this manner being past, they pretend by
a most wonderful, and divine Instinct, to have found the Body of Osiris;
whereupon they run out from Sorrow to the extremity of Exhilaration; Tears and
Lamentations turn to Songs, Dances, and all sorts of Revels: Which Solemnities
finding applause with the ignorant Vulgar, after the first Sanction were
continually after Celebrated at the Festival set apart for the finding of
Osiris's Body.

There was another Feast, called in Greek, Phallophoria, The Feast Phallophoria.
kept in Commemoration of the finding his Genitals; for Typhon had, as we said,
distributed the rest; which Diodorus says was publicly presented in Ivory or
Gold, half a yard in length, carried about with Wind-Musick, and in dancing
before it presented all wanton and obscene posture. Isis also had a Holiday,
wherein they did nothing but bemoan Osiris Death. At all these Feasts, the
Priests wore a long white Linen Surplice, they wore upon their Head the Image
of Anubis, headed like a Dog, in their Right Hand a Branch of Sea-Wormwood, or
Pine; in the Left, a Tree that had power (as they gave out) to drive away Evil
Spirits. Osiris, according to Plutarch, draws the Etymology from the Greek Word
Hosieros, or Hosiros, that is, Very Holy; or of two Egyptian Words, Os and
Iris; the first signifying Great or Immense; and the last an Eye; as much as to
say, as Great Eye. Kircher will have it, that Osiris in the Ancient Egyptian
Tongue signifies Holy Lord, and a Ubiquitary Fire. If then Osiris genuinely
denotes a Shining Light, or an Immense Eye, it must needs be meant of the Sun;
because Philosophers held the Sun to be a Fire. And we not scruple to
denominate it Great Eye, viewing still at once the half of our Orb.

Isis, Osyris's Wife was also taken for the Moon; both these were said,
according to Diodorus, to compass the World, and to feed and multiply all
things, by a continual Circulation. These are peculiarly operative in all
Propagations; the one being Fiery and full of Spirit, the other Moist and Cold;
the Air which is the Nurse, participating of both.

The Powers and Perfections of Osiris, or the Sun, are expressed by so many
Names, that Plutarch not without good cause calls it Myrionumos; that is,
Thousand Names. Homer names Osiris and Isis, for the same cause, Father and
Mother of all the Gods: And indeed from hence have sprung an infinite number;
some confounding Osiris with Bacchus or Dionysius, Mercury, Pan, Neptune,
Jupiter, Janus, Saturn, and Coelum; others make him one and the same with
Hercules, Apollo, Pluto, Horus; some, as Hesychius, will have him the same with
Nilus, Apis, Serapis, Hammon, and Oceanus. See here a Pedigree of all the Gods
proceeding from one Stock or Root.

Writers infinitely differ about this Isis: The Greeks make her the Daughter of
Inachus, whence the handsome Fiction of the Transformation of Isis by Juno into
a Cow, springs; but this Isis, or rather Io, was not the Wife of Osiris, but
the Assyrian Isis. Some derive her from Ethiopia: Xenophon, Diodorus, Eusebius,
and others, make Osiris and Isis Children of Saturn, which some again
contradict.

Isis was among the Egyptians held in such great Honor, that it was a Capital
Crime to say, She was a Man; therefore in all Temples where the Images of
Osiris and Isis were set, stood also one of Horus or Harpocrates, Osiris's Son,
with his finger upon his Lips, importing silence. She was held by general
consent of most Ancient Writers, to be the Moon; and therefore by Plutarch in
Greek is called Pandeches, that is, Receiver General; and Keratophorus, or
Cornuted, Servius says, Isis signifies the Spirit of Nilus: The moving of the
Trees, which she was feigned to carry in her right Hand, signified the flowing
up of Nilus; and the Merlin in her left Hand, the flowing to the Banks: From
whence, we may not without Reason infer, That in the Egyptian Tongue it
signifies the Earth. By Apuleius in his Eleventh Book of his Metamorphosis, she
is styled, The generating Nature of all things, Lady of all principal Matters,
Bringer forth of Ages, the Supreme of the Deities, Queen of Spirits, the first
Exemplar of Gods and Goddesses. Adding, that the Athenians called her the
Cecropian Minerva; the Cyprians, the Paphian Venus; the Cret^ans, the
Dictimnian Diana; the Sicylians, the Stigian Proserpina; the Eleusinians, the
ancient Ceres, others Juno, some Bellona, Hecate, Rhramussia; only the
Egyptians called her by her right Name, Isis. So many and several Names had
Isis, for no other Cause, but to signify the different operations which she
affected in the World. Diodorus affirms, that Isis found out many Medicinal
Remedies for the expelling of Diseases: Diodorus.
For Horus, her Son, killed by the Tytanois, and found in the Water, she not
only restored to Life, but made him also Immortal, as they say; by which means
she gained greater Honor and Reverence among the Egyptians, than Osiris
himself. The Egyptians have in memory of them several Inscriptions to be seen,
engraven upon Pillars in Writings of Eternity, some whereof we may read in
Diodorus particularly, one of Isis.

IIsis, Queen of Egypt, taught by Mercury, am the Wife of Osiris, I am the
Mother of Horus; That which I have Established by Laws, shall none be able to
Dissolve. I am the first Inventor of Fruits, I am in the Constellation of the
Devouring Dog; the City Bubastis was Erected to my Honor. O Egypt, Egypt,
Rejoice that thou have Fostered Me.

Memorials of Osiris.

MY Father is Saturn, the Youngest of all the Gods; I am King Osiris, who have
traveled through the whole World, even to the uninhabited Borders and Bounds
of India, and other Parts of the Kingdoms of the Earth, to the utmost Ocean. I
am the Eldest Son of Saturn, a Branch of a Noble and Excellent Father. There is
no Place in the World which I have not Visited, teaching every where those
rarities which I have found out.

They say at last, That Isis, besides the Inventing the sowing of Wheat,
Barley, and other Grain, instituted Laws also; wherefore she was called by the
Ancients, Plutarch.
The Lawgiver, which confirms the words of the former produced Inscription.
She was also by the Greeks called Tithenes, that is, Nurse; and Pandeches, that
is, as we said already, Receiver General, and held to be the same with
Proserpine and Ceres, and so the Mother of the Gods, because she bears the
Titles attributed to all.

We have heretofore spoken of the Egyptians ridiculous Superstition and
Idolatry, we will now add something of their Apis, and so come to their present
Persuasion.

The Egyptians worshipped with great Zeal and Devotion, Apis or Epaphus.
a Calf or Ox, which they called Apis, and the Greeks, Epaphus; for every Ox
was not fit for it, but it must be Black all over the Body, having a square
White Spot or Star on the Forehead, the shape of an Eagle upon the Back, a
Py'd Tail, and upon the Tongue a Horse-flye or Hornet.

When such an Ox died, the People fell into sorrow upon it, and sumptuously
Buried it, never ceasing their grief till the Priests found out another like
the former; in which Quest proving successful, the Priests brought the Calf
first into the City Nilus, where they fed it Forty days, afterward in a Ship,
under a Golden Pavilion, to Memphis, where they placed it in the Temple of
Vulcan. The cause hereof, says Diodorus, was because they believed the soul of
Osiris first of all transmigrated into it.

Nor did this Apian Worship terminate it self in Egypt, but also spread into
the East Indies, where even to this day, in the Kingdom of the Great Mogol, in
Bengala, Sumatra, upon the Maldiver Islands, and other Countries lying on the
Seacoast, are to be seen such Apises or Oxen; nay, they are come to such a
height of Sottishness, that they believe none that die shall be saved, unless
at their Departure they lay their Hand upon the Tail of any Ox or Cow.

AS to the present Religion in Egypt, it is Mahumetan: The present Worship in
Egypt.
And Bellonius in his Observations, says, The Egyptians and Arabs do keep their
Law much more stricter than the Turks; and although that have prevailed most,
yet in Cairo it self, are many Christians, of several Nations and Sects, viz.
English, Dutch, French, Italians, Copticks, Nestorians, Maronites, Georgians,
Jacobites, Armenians, Syrians, and others, amounting to the Number of 100000.
All which, though in some Points differing among themselves, yet in many of
their Church-Ceremonies they agree with the Roman, though in others they have
remarkable Differences: They inhabit several Cities, Villages, Hamlets and
Cloisters beside Cairo, as at Alexandria, Sai, Tmui, Asna, Festadada, Coptus,
Asman, Asioch, Elesmunin, Monphaluth, Cause, and in the Cloisters of St.
Macharius, St. Peter, St. Hermes, and St. Pachomius, adjacent to the Red Sea.

All these Christians, and the Abyssines themselves, are under one Patriarch,
who keeps his Residence in Alexandria, and in the Arabic is called Papa, or
Abuma Patriarch, that is, Our Father Patriarch.

In former times, under the Persecution of the Emperor Dioclesian, the Copticks
did lead an Honest and Sincere Life, adhering to the Church of Rome, but
afterward rent from it, by the embracing the destructive Heresies of Dioscorus
and Eutiches; and at present own no other Head of the Church than the
Alexandrian Patriarch.

The Jacobites hold, that in Christ, by the Hypostatical Union, Kircher suppl.
Copt. c. 2.
is one only Personal Nature, consisting of two Natures not Personal, without
Mixture growing together. They make Saints of Dioscorus, Severus, Petrus,
Macharius, all Heretics, and condemn Pope Leo. They hold also, that
themselves, together with the Armenians and Abyssines, are the Universal or
Catholic Church, and exclude all others, and withal, that before the General
Judgment, no man goes into Paradise or into Hell.

Those that follow the Heresy of Dioscorus, from Arrius and Origin, Kircher.
deny Christ's Humanity, affirming his Body coequal with the Deity; others deny
that he received a Soul, and from these words of St. John, And the Word became
Flesh; that he took Flesh of the Virgin Mary, and that merely the Word became
Flesh.

Those lastly, that follow Nestorius, a Constantinopolitan Bishop, Kircher.
distinguish two Substances or Beings in Christ, giving him two Persons, and by
Consequence two Sons of God, and two Christ's; one which is God, and the other
generated of his Mother Mary. They say that the Virgin Mary is not to be called
Gods Mother, but Christ's Mother.

In their Divine Service, the Copticks use the Liturgies of St. Peter, Mark,
Basil, Gregory, Cyril, translated into the Coptick, they also Celebrate it in
Arabic, which there every one understands; but the Epistles and Gospels are
read twice, once in the Coptick, and once in the Arabic; In the same manner as
in a Solemn Service at Rome, they are read both in Greek and Latin. At the
time of the Service, they all leaning against the Pillars, thereby to show,
that they are Travelers or Pilgrims, and expect the blessed coming of the
Glory of the Great God. They sing aloud altogether their Liturgies, in a Tone
called in Arabic, Hink; sometimes raising their Notes to the Alts, then using
deep Cadences, so well ordered, that no unpleasing Discord jarr from their
Harmony.

Now although most of the Alexandrian Patriarchs or Pastors, together with
their Flocks have formerly thus departed from the Church of Rome, yet all the
Countries of Egypt, and the whole Abyssine Church, have, and still do
acknowledge the Romish Doctrine to be the right, and the Pope to be Christ's
Vicar; as appears by several Letters from Gabriel the Patriarch of Alexandria,
sent by two Messengers to Pope Clement the Eighth, in the Year Fifteen hundred
ninety and three; wherein he calls himself GABRIEL, The humble Minister by
Gods Grace, of St. Mark, in the City of Alexandria, and in all other, bordering
Southerly on the Seacoast, and among the Abyssines. In one of these his
Messages he made Confession of his Belief before the Pope, in these words: I
believe and confess that the holy Apostolic Seat, and the Roman Pope, is the
supreme Head in the whole Church, and the Successor of the blessed Apostle St.
Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Christ's Vicar, and Father and Teacher of all
Christians: I confess that Power is given to him from our Lord Christ, through
St. Peter, to keep and govern the Universal Church, as also that none can be
Saved out of that Universal Church.

This was the Confession, which they stand to at this day. The Pope is by these
Patriarchs, in their Letters to Him, commonly thus Entitled:

To the Greatly Esteemed Pope, Father of the Priesthood, Successor in the
Universal, Apostolic, truly Believing Church, Father and Prince of Princes,
Christ's Vicegerent on Earth, Sitting upon the Seat of St. Peter, Prince of the
Apostles, Lord Urban the Eighth.

After the Death of one Patriarch, another is chosen out of the number of
Monks, residing in the Cloisters.

And here observe, That ever since the Beginning of Christianity, there were
three Patriarchs, by the Apostle Peter, Erected in the most Famous Cities of
the Roman Empire; The Roman, the Alexandrian, and the Antiochian; whereto
afterward was added the Constantinopolitan, by the Councils of Constantinople
and Chalcedon: And lastly, the Jerusalemitan, by the same Council of Chalcedon.

The Sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, held in the Year after the Birth of
Christ, Three hundred twenty and five, annexed to the Patriarch of Alexandria,
Egypt, Lybia, or Pentapolis, Arcadia and Augustanica; to which afterward were
added Upper and lower Egypt, both Thebes, and other, so that at last Egypt
contained ten Arch-Bishopricks: For so many Metropolitans it pleased the
Emperor Theodosius and Valentinius to call together out of this Patriarchat, in
a Letter to Dioscorus. And indeed so far has this of Alexandria extended it
self of late, that now it includes the utmost Bounds of the Abyssines.

There are in Egypt likewise many Calogers, that is, shaved Monks, which follow
the Greek Religion, and possess many Churches and Cloisters. All which live
poorly, sleep upon the Ground, and drink no Wine, but merely so much as is
necessary for the Mass.

The Years of their Government. The beginning of their Government after the
Birth of Christ. THe Archbishop or 45 Evangelist S. Mark 19 64 Anianus. 22
Miliut, alias Abilius 13 87 Cerdi 11 110 Ephrim, otherwise the First 12 112
Justus 11 124 Eumenius 11 133 Marcianus 6 144 Claudianus 15 150 Agripini 17 165
Demetrius, an Opposer of Origin 44 190 Hieroclas, Follower of Origin 12 234
Dionysius, a Scholar of Origens 18 248 Maximus. 19 266 Theonas, a Pillar of the
Church 15 285 Peter the first Martyr. 10 300 Here began the Account of the
Martyrs under Dioclesian Archillas and Achillas 1 310 Alexander 15 311
Athanasius, great Dr. of the Church 42 326 Peter 12 368 Timothy 5 380
Theophilus 27 385 Cyril the Great 33 412 Dioscorus, under whom began the first
Rent from the Alexandrian Church 7 445 Timothy, a Scholar of Eutiches 25 452
Peter, alias, the Heretic Gnapheus 9 477 Athanasius, a false Heretical Bishop
20 486 John, of which there were three, viz. 10 506 Mela Tabida Machiota
Dioscorus the young 516 Timothy Theodatius, an Arch-Heretick Peter, alias,
Mogus, a false Bishop Dimanus Anastatius 622 Andronicus 639 Benjamin 645
Agathus 19 664 John; this built the Church of St. Mark in Alexandria 8 672
Isack 3 675 Simon the Syrian Alexander 20 Cosmas 13 718 Theodorus 11 703 Choel
23 763 Mena 9 772 John 13 791 Mark 10 817 Jacob; this is said to have raised
the Dead to Life 10 890 Simeon 1 822 Joseph 18 845 Chael 1 864 Cosmas 7 866
Sanodius, otherwise Sanitius 875 Chael, otherwise Michael 25 885 Gabriel 11 923
Macarius 12 931 Theophanius, killed 4 967 Mena 11 972 Abraham, died poisoned by
his Amanuensis, or Secretary 3 976 Philotheus 24 919 Zacharias 28 1015 Senodius
25 1043 Serius Christus 30 1068 Cyrillus 14 1098 Michael 8 1112 Maccearius,
altered the Church Ceremonies 26 1246 Gabriel John Mark; here the Years of
Government are wanting. John Benjamin Peter Mark John Gabriel Matthew Gabriel
John Matthew Gabriel Michael John Gabriel John Gabriel; this sent a Messenger to
Pope Urban the Eight 1593 Mark John Matthew 1635

BARBARY.
THis Country was not unknown to the Ancient Romans, by the Name it bears at
present of Barbary, since their Writings signify they had settled therein
several Colonies. The Original of the Name Barbary.


The Arabians, according to the Testimony of Ibnu Alraquiq, have given to this
Country, by Marmol called Berbery, the name of Ber, that is, Desert or
Wilderness: from whence the Inhabitants themselves were afterward styled
Bereberes. But others will have it so named by the Romans; who having subdued
some parts of Africa, this part lying opposite to them, they called Barbary,
because they found the Inhabitants altogether Beastial and Barbarous: Nor is it
at all improbable, Herodotus.
considering that among us it is usual to call such as lead a wild and
ungoverned life, and not civilized by Education, Barbarians; so of old, the
Grecians called all people (...), barbarous, that agreed not with them in
Manners and Customs. But Jan de Leu says, the White Africans were called by
the Arabs, Barbarians, from the word Barbara, in the Arabic Tongue signifying
Murmuring; because their Language in this Region did seem to them a kind of
confused murmur or noise, The Bounds of it.
like that of Beasts.

Barbary lies enclosed between Mount Atlas, the Atlantic and Midland Seas,
the Desert of Lybia, and Egypt: For it begins at the Mountain Aidvacal, the
first Point of the Great Mount Atlas, containing the City Mess, and the
Territory of Sus, and reaches from thence Westward, along the Seacoast of the
Great Ocean; on the North, by the Straits of Gibraltar, and the Mediterranean,
to the Borders of Alexandria; Eastward by the Wilderness of Barcha, near Egypt:
and on the South, The Contents of it.
passing from thence to the Mountain of the Great Atlas.

The Length, taken from the Great Atlantic Ocean, to the Borders of Egypt, is
by some accounted six hundred Dutch Miles, and the Breadth from Mount Atlas to
the Midland-Sea, about eighty two Dutch Miles, which Breadth is not every where
alike in it self, but according to the Cantles and Indentings of the Seacoast,
and the going out and in of the Borders on the Land-side, which are very
unequal. Other Contents of it.


Marmol makes Barbary much bigger, accounting from the City Mess, lying on the
Western part of Barbary to Tripolis, under which the Kingdom of Morocco, Fez,
Tremesin, and Tunis lie above twelve hundred; and that part of the Seacoast
extending to the Sandy Desert of Lybia, broader than an hundred and eighty
Spanish Miles. To which Length we must yet add, from Tripolis to the Borders
of Barca, a Country no less than two hundred Miles long.

In the Division of Barbary, The Division of it.
among the most noted Geographers, there is some difference. Philippus
Cluverius, who seems to follow Golnitz, divides it into Six Parts; that is,
into Barca, Tunis, Tremisen, Fez, Morocco, and Dara, which first sets down for
a Republic, and the five other for Kingdoms. In this lies the (...)

Barbary is divided i^^o 5 parts. 141. 1. Morocco, containing Morocco proper,
and therein Rivers. Tenzift, Ecifelmel, Niftis, Agmet, Afisnuall, Teccubin,
Hued la Abid, Habid, Umarabea, or Ommirabih, Darna, Sie-siva, Tesethne, Rio dos
Savens, Teculeth, and Imiffen. Fifteen in all. Cities, or Towns. Morocco,
Agmet, Elgiun^uhe, Emigiagen, Tazarat or Tezrat, Tenez, Gamaagidid, Tenulet,
Imizimiz, Tamdegost, and Animney. Mountains. Nefuse, Derenders, Aden, Atron,
Semmede, Xauxave, Sicsive, Gedmeve, and the Hantete.
Hea Towns. Tedoest, Agobel, Alguel, Teknleth, Halequis, Texeuit, Lusngaguen,
Tesegdelt, Tegetze, Eitdevet, Kyleyhat Elmuhaidin, Tefethne, Gazale, Tafalle,
Zebedech, Magodor, Goz, and Engueleguingil. Mountains. Ayduacal, or Atlas,
Demensere, Mount Giubel el Hand, and Tenzift.
Sus Towns. Mess, Tecent, Gared, Tarudant, Faraixa, Tedsi, Tagoast, Aguar,
Gantguessen, Aguilou, Algazib, and Samotinate. Mountains. Henquise, Laalem,
Guzala, and Ilde. Rivers Only one, named as the Province, Sus.
Guzula Towns Has no walled Cities, few good Towns, but many Villages.
Mountains None rising there, and scarce any en passant. Rivers None rising
there, and scarce any en passant.
Ducala Towns The principal City, Azamor; Elmedine, the next; Magazan a place
of great Strength; Tit, or Tut, now waste; Saffi, a walled City; Conte,
Maramor, Cernu, Aguz, Telmez, Umez, Miatbir, Sudeyt, Tamarrox, Terga,
Benekafiz, Guilez, Terrer, Cea, and Bulaaguan. Mountains Benimequez, and Jakel;
Hadra, or Mount Verd. Rivers Ommirabih.
Haskora Towns Elmadine, ^lendin, Tagodast or Isadagas, Elgiumuha. Mountains
Teuendez, Tenhite, wherein 50 fortified Castles, and Guigim. Rivers Tenzift,
and Elgua del Habid.
Tedle Towns Tefze the chief, Fixtele, Cithiteb, Aitiat. Mountains Segeme,
Magran, and Deeds.

2. Fex Fez, a Province Towns Salee, Rabat, Fez the Metropolis, Tefensare,
Maamore, Mequinez, Tefelfelt, Gemaa el Hamem, Hamis, Metagan, Beniz Bail,
Makarmede, Habad, Zavy, and Haluan. Mountains Zalagh, Zathon, Tagat, and
Gereygure. Rivers Burr^greg, Subu, Fez, Bath, Likus, Homar, Guir, Gomer,
Cherzer, Melulo, Melnean, and Mutuye.
Temesne Towns Coxor, Escossor, Anfa a Roman Building, Almansora, Sala or
Sella, Rotima, Rabat, Newhayle, Adendum. Tegeget. Hain el Chetu, Maderauvan,
Thagia, and Zarfa. Mountains None remarkable.
Asgar. Towns Larach, Elg^umha, and Casar el Cabir.
Ehabat Towns Tangier, ^aximus, Arzille. Cosar, Ezzachir or Alcazer, Ceuta, the
Vionones, Ezagen, Beni-tuid, Mergo, Tansor, Agle, Narangia, Homam, and Tituan.
Mountains Ralione, Benefenficare, Beni-Aroz, Chebib, Angera, Quadres, and
Beniguedarfeth.
Erif Towns Comere-Terga, Yelles, Bedis, Penon de la Velez, Gebba, Mezemme,
Tegasse, Seusaon, and Guazaval. Mountains Beni-Garir, Beni-Mansor, Beni-Chelid,
Beni-Zarval, Seusacen, Beni-Gebara, Beni-Yerson, Beni-Gualed, Beni-Guazual,
Guarga, Beni-Achmed, and Beni-Guarrued.
Garet Towns Tarforagello, Fetis, ^arfoquirato, Melille, Casasa, Tezzote, and
Meggio. Mountain^ Alkude, Eguebdenon, Beni-Sahia, Azgungan, Beneteusin, and
Guardan.
Cus, or Chaus Towns Teurert, Hadagia, Garsis, Dubdu, Meza, Sophroy, Mezdega,
Benihublud, Ham-Lisnam, Mehedia, Tezerghe, Umengiueaybe, and Gerceluin.
Mountains Matgara, Cauata, Megeze, Baronis, Beniguertenage, Beniriftere, and
Siligo.

3 Tunis Tunis properly Rivers Guadelbarbar, Magrida, Megerada, and Caps, or
Capes, Mountains Zogoan, Gueslet, Benitefren, Nefuse. Towns Tunis, the
Metropolis of the whole.
Goletta Towns Goletta, the chief; Marsa, or Marca; Nebel, of old Napolis of
Barbary, Cammort, Arriane, and Arradez, once a Roman Colony.
Carthage Towns Carthage.
Byserta Towns The City Biserta; Choros, or Clypea, or Kalybby, Porto Farine.
Mountains None; but one fertile Plain, called Matter.
Urbs and Beggy Towns Urbs, Beggie, Nayne, Sammin, and Kasba. Rivers One, but
without Name.
Susa Towns Susa, the chief City, Hammameth, or rather Mahometa; Heraclia,
Monaster. Islands Cumiliers, Querguene, and Gamelere.
Mahady Towns Mahadia, or Africa.
Kayravan Towns Kayravan, Tobute, and Astachus, or Arfachus.
Tabarca and Galita Two small Islands
Tripoli Towns Old and New Tripoli, Capez, Machres, Elhamma, and Zoara. Rivers
and Lakes Kasarnaker, Rasalmabes, and Mabro. The Lake Tritonis, famous in
Antiquity.
Zerbi Towns Meninx, Thoar, or Guerra, and Sibele; but scarce worth naming.
Ezzab Towns Ras, Axara, Tessuta, Rasamisar, Lepida, of old Eoa, and Ruscelli.
Mountains Garian, Beniguarid
Mecellata Towns Lard, Chedicke, and Eufrata, Sibaca, and the Philenian Altar.
Cyrenaika Towns Cyrene, Berenice, Apollonia, Ptolemais, and Arsinoe; Alcude,
Sabbia, Drepanum, Camara, Carkora. Teionis, and Ardbry.
Taurka No Towns; but the People live scattered in Huts.

4. Tremesen, or Algier Algier proper, and Tremesen Towns Algier, Tremezen,
Hubet. Tefezara, and Tezeta. Rivers Zis, Hued-Habra, Tesne, Mina, Xiles,
Celefe, Ceffay, Hued el Harran, Hued el Hamis, Hued-Icer, Hued el Quibar,
Sufgemar, Marsock, and Yadoch. Mountains Beninezeten, Matagara, Beniguernid,
Tarara, Agbal, and Magarava.
Angad Towns Guagida, Tenzegzet, and Isli.
Desert Mountains Benizeneten.
Beniaraxad Towns Beni-Arax, Calaa, Elmohaskar, and Batha.
Miliane Towns Miliana, or Manliana, Mezune, and Tequident.
Kouko Towns Kouko, Tamagus, a good Haven.
Labez, a gr. mount. Towns Tesli and Boni.
Tenez Towns Tenez, and Medua. Mountains Beni-Abukaid, Abusaid, and Guenezeris.
Tubeca Towns Thabuna.
Humanbar Towns Humanbar, Haren, Tebekrit, and Ned-Roma. Haresgol, a particular
City of it self.
Horan Towns Oran
Sargel Towns Sargel, and Brexer; and the Mountain Darapula, and Bresch.
Bugy Towns Bugy, Micile, or Mesele, Stefe, and Nekans, one of the pleasantest
Cities in Barbary. The Village Gigery.
Constantine Towns Constantine, Chollo, Sukaycada, and Estote, with many
Mountains.
Bona Towns Bona, Mele, and Tabarca. The Isle of France.

5. Barca, or Marmarica Towns Raxattincase, Trabucho, Augele, Laco, Mosolomar,
Soudon Haven, Raxa, and Barca the Metropolis.



BARBARIA BILEDULGERID o: Libye et PARS NICRITARUM TEREA


THe Customs of these People are according to their Names, Every man marries
many Wives.
Barbarous: For every man takes as many Wives as he pleases, keeping besides
Concubines and Slaves in great number. They esteem the Children of one Woman no
more than the other; all after the Fathers Decease jointly participating of the
Inheritance.

In their Marrying they use no other Solemnity, than a bare Testimony and
Assurance, which the Bridegroom makes before the Cadi or Judge; whereby he
acknowledges to take such a As we had in the late Troubles, Marriages before a
Justice.
Woman or Maid for his Bride: but this is of so little validity, that he may
put her away when he will: Neither has the Woman a less Privilege, having
liberty at her pleasure to renegue her Husband, only with this difference: If
the Wife go from her Husband, yet the Father is bound to pay him the
Marrige-Portion promised: But if the Man puts away his Wife, he can demand
nothing, except he have testimony against her for Adultery. The Women and Maids
keep themselves so veiled, that they are not, nor must be seen by such as would
make Love to Marry them.

In like manner the Men are so Jealous of their Wives, that they dare not go
open-fac'd to their Parents.

They have many pernicious Customs, Evil Customs.
being greatly addicted to Sorcery and Witchcraft: Whoever at any time falls
sick, makes an address to a Wiseman or Wise-woman, as we term them, who
oftentimes cure them by Charms taken out of the Alcoran, or Amulets, or else
Specific Medicines, for they have neither Physician, Apothecaries, or other
Druggists, but only some inexpert Chyrurgeons.

The greatest Zealots amongst them, when sick, go where one of their Marabouts,
or Saints lie buried; to whose Sepulcher they bring a great many things to eat,
fondly fancied to a belief, that if by chance a Beast eat thereof, it gets the
Disease, and the sick person will recover.

When their women are in Labor, Great Superstition of the Barbarians when they
bring forth.
they send to School to fetch five little children, whereof four are employed
to hold the corners of a Cloth, in each whereof they tie a Hens Egg: wherewith
these Children presently run along the Streets, and sing certain Prayers, one
answering the other. In the mean while the Turks and Moors come out of their
Houses with Bottles or Cruises full of Water, which they throw into the midst
of the Cloth; by which means they believe the Woman who is in Labor is luckily
delivered.

To this idle Fancy they add another no less ridiculous, to cure the Pain in
the Head; by taking a Lamb or young Kid, which they hunt and beat about the
Field so long, till it fall down, whereby they persuade themselves, that the
pain will pass out of the man's head into the beasts.

To countervail these bad and foolish, Two commendable Customs.
they have some commendable Customs: Pierre Dan. descript. Barbar.
One is, That how angry soever they are, they never swear by the Name of God;
nor have in their Language, whether Arabic, Turkish, or Morisk, any particular
words wherewith they can curse or blaspheme. It Is true, the Renagadoes Swear
desperately in their own Tongues; but because they do it in contradiction of
the Turks, they are presently most severely punished for it: The second is,
That how great a contest soever they have one against another, they seldom come
to Hand-blows, but never kill.

The Inhabitants of the City of Barbary are very ingenious, The Condition of
the Inhabitants in Cities.
and singularly zealous in their Religion; but no people more jealous: for they
had rather lose their lives, than have a blemish on their Reputation; which
especially they look upon, as best preserved by their Wives Chastity. They
covet Riches above measure, but are very modest in speech. The Inferiors
behave themselves toward their Superiors with great humility and submission:
But Children show wonderful Reverence and Obedience toward their Parents.

The Country People dwell in Tents or Booths upon the Hills and Fields, The
manner of the Country People.
generally dealing in Cattle; they are not fierce of Nature, yet very
courageous; they live but poorly, yet are great pains-takers, and liberal.

Whereas the Townsmen on the other side, are quarrelsome, vindicative,
inhospitable, covetous, setting their whole thoughts upon scraping together
Money and Goods. They are continual Traders, but so suspicious, that they will
not trust any Foreigner: They are great boasters, but dull of wit, giving easy
belief to common reports, and doubtful hear-says, yet so cunning and false in
their dealing, that they will deceive the most vigilant.

Some of the better Sort have great inclination to Arts and Sciences, They are
inclined to Skill and Knowledge.
delighting chiefly in Histories, and the Exposition of their Law. Heretofore
extraordinarily addicted to Southsaying, Magic, and Astrology; all which about
five hundred years since were absolutely forbidden by their Princes.

They Ride well after their manner, and know with a singular dexterity to mount
and dismount: The chiefest Weapons of such as dwell up in the Country, are
long Lances or Javelins, in the throwing of which they are wonderful ready:
but all that coast upon the Sea, use Guns, Powder, and Shot.

The whole Country is very healthful, The Age of the People in Barbary.
so that the people by the ordinary course of Nature, seldom dye before sixty
five, or seventy years of Age: In the Mountains peradventure some be found
reaching a hundred years, remaining to the last very strong and active; but
chiefly upon the Seacoasts where the Air is constantly refresht and agitated,
by the frequency of cool Breezes, which have the same efficacy, working upon
their Constitutions, so that they are seldom sickly.

Barbary has a great abundance of Merchandise, Barbary affords much
Merchandise,
which are transported by Foreigners to the enriching of the Inhabitants; such
are untann'd or raw Hides, Linen, and Cotton-Cloth, Raisins, Dates, Figs, and
the like; of which we will speak more particularly in its proper place.

Evident Signs of the great Wealth of this Kingdom in former times may be drawn
hence, that the Kings of Fez, as they say, Signs of the Ancient Power of
Barbary.
formerly spent four hundred and eighty thousand Crowns in the building a
College, Leo Africa. Peter Aviley Barbary.
and seven thousand in erecting a Castle, and little less in founding a City,
besides his continual standing Pay to his Militia. No less are the Riches
thereof at this day, Signs of the present Power
as appears by the great Revenue of the Kings of Morocco and Fez, the Bashaws
and other great Lords of Tripolis, Algiers, and Tunis, and the infinite Trade
and Merchandise, which the English, Venetians, Genoas, Hollanders, French,
Hamburgers, and other people, drive there, without taking notice of the rich
Spoils the Pirates of Barbary carry in from all parts, especially Spain and
Italy, with too much connivance of their Governors, though seemingly against
their Command.

Another signal proof of its exceeding Wealthiness, are the great number of
Mosques, and the yearly Revenues belonging to them. For in Algiers only there
are a hundred, and in Tunis three hundred, as many also in Fez, and in Morocco
seven hundred, among which the chief have two hundred Ducats Annual Rent. Add
thereto, that the Plunder of Fez, when those of Algiers became Masters of it,
was valued at two hundred and sixty Millions; and the Spoil of Tunis, under the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, which he gave to the Soldiers for a Reward, as much,
when the three chiefest Field-Officers gave each of them for their Heads,
Thirty Millions of coined Ducats. Moreover, the Jews, who have their chiefest
Refuge there, as in the Center of the World, bring no small advantage by the
liberty of their Usury.

The Dominion of Barbary is various as the Country, The Government of Barbary.
some are absolute unlimited Kings, as those of Morocco and Fez. Others
acknowledge a Superior Lord, as the Kings of Algiers, Tunis and Tripolis, who
are no other than Bashaws or Viceroys, or under the obedience of the Great
Turk, who at his Pleasure may alter the Bashaw: Another sort, though
Tributaries, yet Rule with absolute Sovereignty, as the Kings of Konkue and
Labez, as also the Xeques of the Arabians; in the whole Country there is but
one Commonwealth, and that too may rather be termed an Anarchy than a
Republic.

In every City where the Grand Signieur has a Bashaw Resident, In every City
is a Cady.
a Cady is sent to administer Justice, who with unlimited power Judges and
Determines all Civil and Criminal Causes. Every one there pleads his own Case
without Proctor, Advocate, or Council, which course is observed through all
Barbary, except at Salle, where the Moors who are Masters there, plead with
Proctors and Advocates after the Spanish way.

The People here are, Many sorts of People in Barbary of several Religions.
as elsewhere, of different Religions, as Mahumetans, Christians, Jews, and the
Country People, who are never congregated or make any shows of Devotion.

In their Mosques they have no Images, The Mosques or Temples of the Mahumetans.
but in stead of them, Six hundred Lamps sometimes in a Row; about it stands a
great Cloister or Hermitage, wherein the Iman or Marabou, that is, the Priest
dwells. Their Prayers are called Sala, How they pray in them.
and the People repeat the same words the Priest, says before them, and in all
Gestures imitate him, in several lifting up of their Hands and Heads to Heaven.
At their entrance into the Mosques, they put off their Shoes, kiss the Earth,
and wash their Mouths, Noses, Ears, the soals of their Feet, and Secret Parts,
whereby they believe that the Pollutions of the Soul are purified and clens'd.
And during their abode there, they neither dare to Spit or Cough, nor so much
as speak one to another, but upon great Necessity; They sit down there upon the
Floor one by another, upon Matts of Date or Palm Trees. The Women are not
permitted to come thither, lest by their sight the Men should fall into unclean
Thoughts; but they commonly perform their Devotions at Home.

They go to their Sala five Times a Day, They perform their Prayers five times
a Day.
that is, at Daybreak, which they call Caban; at Noon, called Dohor; in the
Afternoon at four, called Lazar; at six or seven, which they call Magarepe, and
at two in the Night, Latumar; but few resort at all these Times, but the most
Zealous, none being compelled to it. They have neither Bells, Clocks or Dials.
And when they call the People to their Devotions, How People are called to
Prayers.
certain Officers to that purpose only appointed, go up to the Battlements of
an high Steeple, and upon a Wooden Pole set up a small Flag; but this is used
no where but in Barbary. When this is done, then the Marabou turns himself to
the South, because Mecha lies that way; then stopping his Fingers in his Ears,
he cries out these words with a loud Voice, Lahilla Lah, Mahometh ressoul
Allah; that is, God is God, and Mahomet is his Prophet. Then he turns him to
other Parts, saying the same words. By this setting up of the Flag, and
Outcries, the People know what hour of the Night it is. When the Marabou of
the greatest Mosque has called, then all the other follow, which they act with
Ridiculous and wild Gestures.

The Friday is their Sabbath, called by them Dimanche, Friday is their
Sabbathday.
in which most of them go to the Mosque, especially in the Afternoon; during
their Service none Work, and all the Shop-Windows are shut, but after the Sala
is ended, they are opened again, and every one applies himself to his Business.

They use Coral-Beads, of an equal size, and in number a Hundred; Their Praying.
upon which many times they say, Sta-fer Lah, which is, God Bless me. The Feast
Ramadan.


Every Year they keep a Feast, which they call Ramadan, which continues a whole
Month; during which they abstain, from Morning to the close of the Evening,
from Eating and Drinking; but then the Marabou going to the Steeple, gives them
by his accustomed Cryings, leave to Eat. This their Fasting, is so highly
esteemed, that they dare not so much as drink Tobacco, supposing that to be a
Breach: Nay, the very Corsaires or Pirates observe the Ramadan at Sea; and
though the Renagadoes do not so strictly bind themselves to it, yet they for
neglect of it, are, if known, punished with an hundred or two strokes on the
bottoms of their Feet.

After this Fast, and long Lent so well kept, they celebrate their Passover,
Their Passover, Easter or Bayran.
called by them Bayran, which continues three Days, wherein they distribute
Alms plentifully, and frequent their Mosques with great Fervency and Zeal.

The Priests in Barbary are of two Sorts, Santons and Marabouts, The Clergy or
Sacred in Barbary are of two sorts.
whereof the chiefest is called Moufti, who has his Residence in Cities, and
hears and determines all Ecclesiastical Causes. The Marabouts are in great
number about the Mosques, as well in Cities and Suburbs, as in the open Fields,
where they live as Recluses or Hermits, in Cells, to which these Barbarians
bear so great an Esteem and Reverence, that they fly to them as to
Sanctuaries, how great a Crime soever they have committed.

Among these Devotees, there are some, who lead a strange and unusual Life,
Their Gestures.
for sometime Melancholy so working on their Imagination, that no less than if
Distracted, they rove through the Cities barefoot and bare-leg'd, in a ragged
Coat and a Staff, with which they tap or gently strike, here one, there
another, which favor whoever receives, accounts himself happy, persuaded
thereby their Sins are remitted. Besides also, these Recluses study Magic and
such forbidden Arts, undertaking to cure all Diseases, and to work Love, by
several Incantations, and the power of Numbers: Of the great opinion the
Ancients had of Charms and Numbers, hear Virgil.

Carmina vel coelo possunt deducere Lunam:
Carminibus Circe socios mutavit Ulyssis:
Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis.
Terna tibi haec primum triplici diversa color
Licia circumdo, terque haec altaria circum
Effigiem duco, numero Deus impare gaudet.
Necte tribus nodis ternos Amarylli colores.
Necte Amarylli modo, and Veneris, dic, vincula necto.
Vanquished with Charms, from Heaven the Moon descends,
Circe with Charms transformed Ulysses Friends,
Charms in the Field will burst a poisonous Snake --
Three Lists, and each of Colors three, I bound,
And with thy Picture thrice the Altars round,
Three several Colors Amarillis fetch
And quickly tie in treble Knots: dispatch,
Then say these Knots I knit for Venus sake.
In the City of Algier, and in other Cities in Barbary, are several small
Mosques, where many of these Marabouts lie buried, whom they honor as Saints or
Sacred, or set before their Sepulchers burning Lamps, going thither on
Pilgrimage, or when they are sick, send Presents to obtain Remedy.

Those that are afflicted with the Falling Sickness are held in great Esteem,
The Falling Sickness in Esteem among them.
because Mahomet was troubled with this Disease, and shamelesly made them
believe, That then God by his Angel Gabriel revealed to him the most secret
Mysteries of his Religion.

The highest Festival is the Nativity of their great Prophet, A Festival upon
the Birth of Mahomet.
which they celebrate with all Solemnity, the fifth of September, in manner
following: All the Schoolmasters assemble after Dinner with their Scholars in
the chiefest Mosque, out of which they go in Order, every one with a Torch in
his Hand, and sing along the Streets the Eulogy and famous Acts and Praise of
their Prophet. Two of these Masters carry upon their shoulders a great
Pyramide, covered over with Flower-Works, and a Cross on the top of it,
followed by vocal and instrumental Music, after the Turkish manner; all the
Corner-Houses in Cross-ways are hanged with Tapistry and burning Lamps. They
set also in every House, about Midnight, a lighted Torch upon the Table,
because Mahomet was born at that Hour. During the eight Days of this Feast,
every one may walk the Streets by Night, which at other times they dare not, on
pain of corporal Punishment.

The Cooks of the Divan, to the number of Two hundred, each carrying a Napkin
or Towel upon his shoulders, and a burning Torch in his Hand, from the seventh
to the eleventh Hour, go two and two along the Streets, till placing themselves
before the doors of the chiefest Counselors, they chant a solemn and appointed
Hymn, in Praise of their Prophet, with many Instruments of Music.

THe last Solemnity concerns their Burials or Funerals, Their Solemnity for the
Dead.
which they perform in this manner: When any Dies, the next Friend hireth Women
to lament, who flocking about the Corpse, with strange and unusual howling make
a noise, and scratch themselves till the blood follow their Nails. This done,
How they bury their Dead.
the Body is enclosed in a Coffin, covered with a Green Cloth, upon which a
Turban is set, as we use a Garland, and so with the Head forward, is carried to
and laid in the Grave, but attended all the way thither with howling
Valedictions. At the entrance of the Burial-place some Marabouts sing without
intermission these words, Lahilla Lah, Mahometh ressoul allah, that is, God is
God, and Mahomet is his Prophet. At last it is placed in the Grave in a sitting
Posture, with a Stone under the Head, in stead of a Pillow, and the Face
toward the South.

Their Burying-places are very Large, and lie round about the Cities, for they
Interr none in their Mosques, but in the plain Field, where every one according
to his Estate buys a spot of Ground, which they Wall in, and plant with
Flowers. The Women every Friday visit these Monuments, carrying thither Meat
and Fruits, which they leave for the Poor, and for the Fowls, after they have
tasted of them, believing it to be a work of Charity, and a furtherance to the
bliss of departed Souls. They pray there for their Husbands and other Deceased
Friends, and comfort them sometimes with these or the like words; That they
should have Patience in waiting for the Resurrection of their Bodies. And this
shall suffice to have spoken of the Mahumetans there.

The Jews in Barbary differ in nothing from the Jews in Asia and Europe, Great
number of Jews Barbary.
being so numerous, that only in the Cities of Morocco, Algier and Tunis, and a
part of the Kingdom of Fez, there are a Hundred thousand Families.

The Christians are few, and not Masters of many places in Barbary; those that
be, are under the Command of the King of Spain, as Arache, Oran, Mamaure, and
Tangier, now in the possession of the King of England. Gramay says, that in
Morocco, Fez; also in Lybia are some Remainders of Ancient Christians, who
Celebrate the Liturgy of the Mozarabes or Moxarabes, Translated out of the
Latin into the Greek Tongue, and about an Hundred and seventy Greek Families,
who give peculiar Honor to St. Stephen.

There are besides these many other of several Nations, who taken at Sea by the
Pirates, are brought to Land and sold for Slaves, whence they cannot be
redeemed without great Ransoms, except by chance any make an Escape, which is
seldom; or rowing in the Galleys be retaken by the Christians. These generally
lead a miserable Life, undergoing the extremity of Servitude; only some one by
good Fortune, that lights upon a mild Patron, is more gently handled.

In Algier the Slavery is most bitter; but in the Kindoms of Tripolis, Tunis
and Fez, more tolerable.

Some Slaves meet with Patrons dwelling up in the Country, The labor of the
Slaves in Barlary.
which carry them thither to bear all sorts of Burdens to Market, of which if
they render not a good account, they are sure to be well beaten. Others go
Naked, as in Billedulgerid, tending Cattle, or like Horses drawing the Plough
without any other reward for their toil, than harsh Language and merciless
Blows, being hardly afforded a little Water and Meal for Food. Others are
thrust into the Galleys to row, where their best fare is Water and hard Biscuit,
and the reward of their Pains, drubs with a Bulls pizzle; nor is their
treatment better when they come ashore, being locked to a heavy Chain, and at
night thrust into Dungeons, by them called Masmora, where they lie upon the
bare ground.

Such as chance to have City Patrons, The labor of the Slaves in the Cities.
their chiefest labor is to carry Water from place to place, bear away the
dust of their Houses, convey their Merchandises to Warehouses, work in the
Mill like Horses, knead their Dough, bake their Bread, and do all other
drudgery, yet for all receive neither good word or deed, or freedom from their
Fetters.

Many of these wretched Creatures, Why many Christian Slaves make desection.
partly out of desperation and impatience of their misery, partly out of a
desire of liberty, and hopes to attain the honor of a Janizary, renounce their
Religion and turn Turks: Nay, there are many rich Women, who often give half
their Goods to their Slaves, when they embrace Mahumetanism; and some even of
the best Quality among them being Widows, are so zealous, that they marry their
Slaves, out of design only to draw them to be Mahumetans, it being among the
Turks accounted a most meritorious work to make Proselytes to their Prophet.
The several Punishments for Malefactors in use by them are these.

Those that can be proved after Circumcision to revolt, Their Punishments.
are stripped quite naked, then anointed with Tallow, and with a Chain about his
Body, brought to the place of Execution, where they are burnt.

They who are convicted of any Conspiracy or Treason, have a sharp Spit thrust
up the Fundament, others bound Hand and Foot, and cast from a high Wall or
Tower, upon an Iron Hook, whereon sometimes they stick fast by the Belly,
sometimes by the Head or other parts of the Body, sometimes only by the Skin,
and hanging many days, they so languishing in great torture, die; or else tied
with a Rope about the Middle, and with four Nails fastened to a Cross against
the City Wall, they are flead alive, or brayed to pieces in a Mortar.

There is another inhumane Torture in use, which for the barbarousness we will
describe: Upon a Gallows are two Hooks, the one fastened to a short, the
depiction of torture method other to a long Chain; the Malefactor so soon as he
comes thither, climbs up the Ladder with the Executioner, who thrusting the
Hook through his left Hand, hangs him by it on the shortest Chain; then to that
on the longer, he fastens him by the soal of his right Foot, where by
insufferable Torments, he often remains hanging three, four, or more days
before he dies.

Those that have committed any crime at Sea, Sea-Justice.
are tied to the Mast or Steerage, and shot to death with Arrows, or else his
hands and Feet cut off, and set before the Mouth of a Cannon, Usual Punishments.
and so shot all to pieces. To drag them in pieces with four Ships, to which
they are tied, and then cast the Quarters into the Sea, is a usual Punishment;
so it is to cut off limb by limb, or joint by joint; but to tie them up in a
Sack, Light Punishments.
and draw them, is held a gentle and mild Sentence. It Is capital to lift up
the Hand against a Janizary, or to commit Adultery with a Mahumetan Woman. But
this later is connived at, because they believe that all sins by washing in the
Bath, or by once plunging into the Sea, are washed away.

Their Lodging is very mean, Their Household Stuff.
being only a Mattress in stead of a Bed, which they lay upon a floor of
Boards. They sleep in their Drawers or Calsoons; they have neither Chairs,
Stools or Tables, but hang their Clothes upon Pins in the Wall. Those of
Quality sit at Meals, and all other times upon pieces of Tapistry, cross-legg'd
on the Ground; but poor People have a great Matt, made of the leaves of a Date
or Palm Tree.

The Men wear next their Skin a large Linen Frock and Drawers, The Habit of
the Men.
and over that a loose Coat of Cloth or Silk, buttoned before with great Gold
or Silver Buttons, and hangs down almost to the knee. Their Sleeves reach but
to their Elbows; so that turning up their Shirt upon them, their Arms are for
the most part half way bare or naked; and instead of Stockins, the great men of
the Court, and other People of quality, sometime wear small Turky-Leather
Buskins.

They shave their Hair all off, except a little Lock, which they let grow upon
the Crown of their Heads, because forsooth Mahomet shall pull them up to
Paradise; as the Angel brought Abaccuck to Daniel into the Lions Den: Some cut
off the whole Beard, reserving only two large Mustacheo's; but such as are
stricken into years, wear their Beards long grown, but cut round.

They wear Turbants made of red Wool, wound up in a piece of Cotton five or
six Else long.

Their Slippers are piked at the Toe, of yellow or red Leather, shod under the
Heel with Iron, having no Lappets; which they slip off at the door of any house
whereto they enter, as a great point of Civility.

They wear at their Girdles three very fine Knives, that is, two great, and one
small, in a silver Scabbard a foot long, adorned with Turkoyses, and Smarag'd
or Emeral'd Stones, so rich sometime, that they stand them in above a hundred
Escues.

When they make water, they stoop down to the ground; How they make water.
for it is held a shameless thing to urine standing, as the Christians do: And
the reason may be, because if the least drop of their water fall upon them,
they are polluted, and must forthwith wash themselves.

The Women are Habited almost like the Men, The Habit of the Women.
only having a fine Linen Cloth on their Heads in stead of a Turbant: Their
Semaires come but to half their Thighs, the rest naked. Rich Women wear
commonly five or six Pendants in each Ear, with Bracelets of Jewels on their
Arms, and Silk Garments. They paint the ends of their Fingers blue, with an
Herb called by them Gueva, perhaps our common Woad. When they go along the City
in the Streets, they cast over all a Cotton Cloak, which hangs down to their
Feet, and tie a string of Pearls upon their Foreheads, and a fine Kerchiff
before their Eyes, so that they cannot be known as they go up and down the
Streets. All their occasions lie within the house, where they have a several
apartment by themselves, wherein none but Women may visit each other, the
Master of the House himself being at such times excluded, to prevent all
occasions of jealousy.

They are curious in the beautifying themselves according to the Fashion of
their Country, painting their Eyebrows and Eyelids, and coloring their Hair
black with burned Antimony.

The usual Food of the Country is commonly Rice, Their Food.
Cuscous, Mutton, Veal, some Beef, and Fowl. When ever they slaughter any
Beast, they say over each, I kill thee in the Name of God; then turning
themselves to the South, they cut the Throat quite through, like the Jews, that
it may bleed the more; else they count it unclean, and dare not eat of it.

Their Drink at Meals is either clear Water, or Sorbet, for Wine is forbidden
them by the Alcoran: And in the mornings when Tradesmen and Merchants meet
about business, they go to the Public Coffee-Houses, which Liquor they drink,
having a great opinion of it, smoking abundance of Tobacco, spending much of
their time there. In stead of Table-Cloths, they use red Turky-Leather Carpets,
and wipe their fingers on their Handkerchiffs in stead of Napkins: Only at
Solemn Festivals, the great ones wipe upon a blue Cloth fixed to the Carpet.

Their Cups and Dishes are of Tin or Earth; Their Cups or Vessels.
for none may use Silver; only the Sultans, they are all of Massy-Gold. Liquid
things they eat with wooden Spoons a Foot long.

Gaming is unlawful among them, so that they neither play at Dice, Cards,
Balls, Bowls, nor any other Sport usual with us. Sometime they will play a Game
at Chess, but not for money.

Bathes are much used, Great use of Baths.
besides their frequent Washings enjoined before Devotion; so that every place
almost is filled with Bannia's.

Every City has also many Free-Schools, or Mesquites, for the instructing of
Youth to Read, Write, and cast Accounts, but no further. The principal Book
they learn, is the Alcoran, which when a Scholar can read well, his
School-fellows lead him in his best Habit along the Streets, and set forth his
Commendation through the City; for beyond this none learn.

Thus having showed you the Manners and Customs of the People, we shall now in
short give an account of the nature of the Soil, and what Beasts and Plants it
produces.

THere are in Barbary very many Springs and Rivers, The Rivers.
the chiefest of which take their Rise in, and Fall down from the greater
Atlas, though some others claim distinct Originals; all which disembogue either
into the Great Atlantic or Midland-Sea. The Waters springing from Atlas,
relish of that Earth whence they arise, and are for the most part thick and
sedimenty, especially on the Borders of Mauritania.

The whole Coast of Barbary lying on the Ocean, The Situation of it.
Atlas, and the utmost Southerly Parts of the Territory of Sus, as far as the
Streights of Gibraltar, is very fruitful in the Production of Wheat and Barley,
full of Meadow-Ground, and luxurious in Herbage to feed up Cattle.

The other on the Midland-Sea, How the Soil of Barbary is at the Mediterranean
Sea
from the Streights, to the Eastern Borders of Tripolis, is uneven, craggy, and
full of Mountains, which in some places extend twenty or thirty Miles; between
which and the Great Atlas, are not only pleasant, but luxuriant Valleys
intervein'd with Brooks and Rivulets descending from those great Hills, and
shaded on each side with delightful Groves, reaching as far as Cairavan.

But that part called Errif, near the Little Atlas, is subject to Cold more
than Heat, so that it produces little Wheat, but great plenty of Barley; a very
good Commodity in those parts.

The Great Atlas is in some places unhabitable, because of the excessive Cold;
particularly over against Tremesin, where in the Winter are such fierce and
driving Snows, that neither Man nor Beast can tarry there long without hazard
of life, the Snow overwhelming the whole face of the Ground to that height,
that the tallest Trees are not discernable: But at the return of Summer, when
the Snows dissolve, first the Trees appear, and after that a pleasant Verdure
clothes the Ground, inviting thither the Herdsmen to depasture their Cattle.

The Fruits growing in this Country are very delicious; the Raisins, Figs,
Cherries, Plumbs, Peaches, Quinces, and Apricocks, having a more brisk and
quick Gust; and the Pomegranates, Oranges, Citrons, are more pleasing and
sweet, than the same in other Countries. Their Olive Trees in Morocco, Fez, and
Algier, are very thick, bushy, and high, but in Tunis neither bigger nor better
than in Europe. Here grows also abundance of Sugarcanes, and Cotton Trees.

Among others, here grows upon the Coast of the Midland-Sea, a shrubby Plant,
called in Arabic, Achaovan Abiat; that is to say, White St. John's Wort, or
White Mugwort. It has many branches, two or three Cubits high, bearing an
Ash-colored Wool, with broad and deep indented Leaves, black on the inside,
and on the outside white; but in thickness and growth, like the Leaves of our
Mugwort; the Blossoms are yellow, like Grunsill, and vanish at last dispersed
into a Powder: This Plant is cherished here most for Ornament of several
Gardens, and by a modern Herbalist is called Cineraria, that is, Ash-plant, and
Jacobea Marina, that is, Sea-Saint-James-wort, because it grows upon the
Seashore, and agrees with the common Jacobea, or Saint-James-wort.

The Decoction of it taken is good against the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder,
and all inward oppilations.

Here are numerous Herds both of great and small Cattle, and in the Woody and
more Mountainous Parts, incredible numbers of Wild Goats, Lions and Tigers,
and other Savage Monsters; as also Fowl, and Venomous Serpents.

Barbary has in some parts Gold, Mines of Metal.
Silver, and other Mines; whereof we will be more particular, when we come to
the distinct Territories.

Having thus briefly run over Barbary in general, we will now descend to every
Kingdom and Territory, together with the most remarkable Singularities in each
of them; beginning first with MOROCCO.

MOROCCO.
THe Kingdom of Morocco, Cluverius.
together with that of Fez, contains the whole Country known to the Ancients
by the Name of Mauritania Tingitana, so called from its chief City Tangier;
whose Inhabitants were called by the Greeks, Maurusij; by the Latins, Mauri,
that is, Moors, according to their Color, which was either Olivaster, or black.

It is bounded on the West and by North by the Great Sea, Its Borders.
and the Bay De las Yegucas, or Jumens, extending along the Seacoast, from the
City Mess, where the River Sus falls into the Ocean; Azamor at the Mouth of
the River Umarabie, or Ommirabih, from whence the Great Atlas makes its
Southern Border; and Mount Deeds divides it from the Kingdom of Fez on the
North.

DIego de Torres, The Length.
according to the common Account of the Natives, who reckon Distances of Places
by Days Journeys, says it is in Length seven Days Journey: And the Spaniards
have reduced every Days Journey to ten Spanish Miles, which Length he takes
from the said River Ommirabih, to the Cape or Point Ager, that parts Morocco
from Tarudant, which Torres shuts out of Morocco, although it be a Member of
Sus, one of its Provinces.

In Breadth from Mazagan to Dara, The Breadth. That is 180 Miles English.
it has sixty Miles; and on the Seacoast from East to West, accounting from
the River Azamor to the Cape Arguer, That is 150 Miles English.
is Fifty; in which Tract lie many Places and Havens of note, as Azamor,
Mazagan, and Safy.

The Kingdom of Morocco contains in it seven Provinces, viz. Morocco, Hea, Sus,
Guzula, Ducala, Escure or Hascora, and Tedles.

MAny good Rivers either have their Spring-Heads, The River Sus.
or pass through this County. The first of which toward the West, is called
Sus, or Sous by the Inhabitants; but by Geographers, supposed to be the River
Una mentioned by Ptolomy: Now it gives Name to this Region, the last and most
Southerly of the whole; it rises in the Great Atlas, or rather that part of it
named Mount Ilda, adjoining to Demenser; from thence running directly down to
the South, it waters the Low-Grounds of Sus, opposite to Tagavost, where
altering the course, it passes to the West through the three small Cities of
Mess, and at length at Guertessen finishes its course into the Sea.

Tenzift, or Tensist, the second River of note, derives its Head from another
part of Atlas, by the City Animmey, in the Province of Morocco, properly so
called, running North all along, till passing through a Quarter of Ducala, it
falls into the Great Atlantic: Some hold this to be the Phuth of Ptolomy,
whose mouth Marmol says, was styled Asama, and whose Waters were increased by
the Rivers Eciffelmel, or Sifelmel, Niffis, or Hued Nefusa, and Agmet.

FEZZAE ET MAROCCHI REGNA AFRICAE CELEBERRIMA.


Eciffelmel, says Marmol, springs from Mount Sicsiva; Eciffelmel.
but Sanut and others from the great Hill Hantete, above Morocco, whence it
glides through a Level, till it falls into the Tenzift aforementioned.

Niftis or Hued Nefusa, springs from the same Hantete, Niftis.
soon mixing its Water with that of Tenzift.

Agmet, whose Waters are always clear, Agmer.
takes it beginning source from a Lake in Mount Agmet, close by a City of the
same Name, whence flowing to Morocco, it sinks under Ground, but afterward
re-appears, following its course till united with Tenzift.

Asifnual springs out of the Sicsiva, one of the Arms of Great Atlas, Asifnual.
above Delgumuha, whence it streams with great force, and makes a Boundary
between the Territory of Hea and its Neighbor, falling at last into the River
Tenzift.

The other Rivers, both called Teccuhin, which signifies Windows, Teccuhin.
shoot forth out of the Mountain Gugidime, a part of the Great Atlas, out of
two Fountains, lying about a Mile one from the other, then passing a flat
Country, crosses through the Territory of Hascora, then ending in the River
Niger, called by the Inhabitants Hued la Abid.

Heud la Abid, the Niger, takes its Original a Mile from the City Bzo, Hued la
Abid.
in Mount Animmey, where the Dominion of Hascora borders with Tedle; it runs
through a deep Vale between barren Mountains, Northward, still receiving Brooks
and Rivulets as an augmentation of his streams.

There is also the small River Habid, rising according to Sanutus, Habid.
out of the Mountain Tevesson, conterminates the Region of Hascora, and that of
Ducala, at length also mingling with the Tenzift.

The Great River called by Marmol, Umarabea, by others Ommirabih, Vmarabea.
and by Sanut, Ommirabili, derives his source from Mount Magran, where Tedle
borders on the Kingdom of Fez, then gliding through the Plain of Adaksuni, and
afterward shut up as it were in a narrow Valley, where a fair Bridge was
erected over it by Abul Hascen, the Fourth King of the Marin Family. From
thence Southward, overspreads the Levels between Dukala and Temesne, till at
length, by Azamor, after it has received the Waters of the River Hued la Abid
and Derna, it pours it self into the Ocean. This River, neither Spring nor
Winter, can be forded, therefore the neighboring Inhabitants ferry over both
Passengers and Merchandise upon a Float, made of Goat Skins, blown up like a
Bladder, with Hurdles fastened to them, upon which they take in their Fare and
other Lading. This River abounds so much with Shads, that not only the
Inhabitants of Azamor and Marocko are served, but also Andalusia and Portugal
are supplied with them as a foreign Dainty.

Darna runs out of Mount Magran, by the Cities Efza and Tefza, from Tedle,
Darna.
between the Mountains full North, till it meets with Ommirabilis streams.

The Brook Sicsiva, called by some Sessua, and Sefsava, Sicsiva.
runs betwixt the Mountains of Nefise and Semede, and through the City
Elgumuha, then mingling with the Asifnaal.

Tefethne takes its beginning out of the Mountain Gabelelhadi, Tefethne.
passing through the Plains of Hea, watering Heusugaghen, Tesedgest and
Kuleihata; then branching into several Arms, glides into the Ocean over against
Cape Magador.

The River of Sanut, called in Spanish, Rio dos Savens, and in Portugues, Rio
dos Savens.
De los Savalos, in English, Shad-Brook; it shoots out of the Mountain
Gabelelhadi, so descending through the Campaign of Hea, to Amama, then
delivering up his fresh Water to the briny Ocean.

Tekuleth, Tekuleth.
supposed to be the River, by Ptolomy called Diur, whose Margents are crowned
with the Famous City Tekuleth, and not far thence loses it self and name,
between Goz and Amama, in the Atlantic.

Lastly, And the Fifteenth River which waters this Kingdom of Morocco is
Imiffen, Imiffen.
proceeding out of the Mountain Sicsiva, then gliding Southward, dispatches a
short Progress, falling into the Ocean at Cape Non.

The Air of this Country, The Air of it.
is commonly much warmer than that of Europe; but the Air on the Mountains is
commonly cold, especially on the highest, which are covered with Snow, and so
probably are more unfruitful.

The Plains of Morocco and Fez, The fruitfulness of Morocco.
thus watered with abundance of Rivers and Brooks, are exceeding fruitful.

This Kingdom abounds with all things necessary for humane sustenance,
particularly good Oil d'Olive, and other useful Oils.

The variety of their Vines are numerous, of whose grapes they eat many fresh
gathered; many they dry, and some they press, which yield both pleasant, brisk,
and full-bodied Wines.

Here also is exceeding plenty of Dates, Figs, Peaches, Nuts, Pine-Apples,
Sugar, Flax, Hemp, Woad and Honey.

Mines of Gold, Gold Mines.
Silver, and Copper are frequent, so also are great Stone-Quarries, but none of
them all are at any time opened or sunk without special Order of the Xerif.

Upon the Plains and Mountains feed large Oxen, Beasts.
Horses, Mules, wild Goats, Roe-Deer, Asses, Sheep; also frequented by Lions,
wild Swine, Wolves, and many other Beasts of prey, as shall appear in the
Description of the particular Territories.

There is no place in Barbary so well stored with Camels as Morocco, Camels.
of which the Inhabitants make great use in carrying Burdens and Merchandise
out of the in most places to the Seacoast, Leo Afric.
A sign of Apprehension in Camels
to their no small advantage. These Creatures seem to have a notable
apprehension, for when between Ethiopia and Barbary they are forced to go a
days Journey more than the common Stages, Leo Afric.
their Masters cannot drive them forward with blows, but are necessitated to
sing and whistle before them; which supererogated Reward seems to them a
sufficient bounty to draw and entice them to the performance of their
over-service. Experience confirms that the African Camels far exceed the Asian
in strength, being able to travel fifty days with their Burdens on, Camels
traveling fifty days together never unloaden.
without any Fodder or Meat, Nature in them supporting it self by a Consumption
as it were of the parts; for first the flesh of their Bunches fall away and
consume, afterward their Bellies, and lastly, of their Hipps and Buttocks;
whereby they become so feeble, that they can scarce bear a hundred weight.
Concerning their Form, Nature and other Properties, we have mentioned at large
in our general Description of Africa.

Here likewise also in Ducala and Tremisen, Guabox, or Wild Oxen.
breed a kind of wild Oxen, by the Inhabitants called Guahox, and by the
Spaniards, Vacas Bravas, that is, Mad Bulls; they run as swift as a Heart, and
are smaller than an Ox, with a dark brown Tail, black and sharp Horns, the
Flesh sweet, with a Skin fit to tan for Shooleather. They generally range
through the Woods in great Herds.

In the Rivers are found great pieces of Amber, abounding also with Shads,
Pikes, Eels, and other variety of Fish.



THe People of Morocco are well set, and strong of Body, The Constitution of
the Moroccaians.
as most of the Inhabitants of Barbary are, of a subtle and piercing spirit,
abounding with Choler Adust, which commonly denotes acuteness of wit.

Some of them follow Merchandising, others Husbandry, a third sort Wars, Diego
Torres, c. 88.
a fourth Arts and Sciences, but all in general have a peculiar Inclination to
Judiciary Astrology, as may be supposed from the opportunities of their Serene
and long Nights.

Their Women constantly keep within doors, using Spinning, working Tapistry, or
doing other things, and have black and white Slaves of both Sexes, to serve
them on all occasions.

For want of Knives they break their Bread in pieces with their Hands, and eat
their Meat on Matts spread on the Ground, as we said before.

They have variety of Dishes, as Beef, Mutton, Fowl and Venison; Their Food.
but their most usual is Couscous, made of Meal, Rice, and other Ingredients,
mixed with water, and made up in Balls, then put into an Earthen Vessel full of
little holes, set upon the Hearth, the heat whereof Bakes it enough. This they
eat in great pieces, being very pleasant in Taste, and of a wonderful
pinguefying Nature. Feasting is here very frequent, especially in the Houses of
Great Persons, where for one Entertainment, sometimes twenty, or five and
twenty Sheep, all of a large size than ours, are dressed.

Their Drink commonly is a Liquor made of Raisins, Their Drink.
steeped in Sugar and Water, or else Like our Metheglin.
compounded of Water and Honey. But the Inhabitants in and about Mount Atlas,
drink commonly boiled Wine, whereas others will drink nothing but Goats and
Camels Milk.

The Citizens of Morocco, and other great Towns, wear Shirts, The Habit of the
Men.
long Breeches and Coats reaching to the Knees, of Red or other Color, with
Caps of Linen or Silk, and on their Feet a kind of Slippers or single-soal'd
Shoes, which they call Reyas.

The Women pride themselves in much Linen, The Habit of the Women
their wide Smocks being several Else in the hem, with large Linen Drawers or
Calsoons, which come down to the Calf of the Leg. In Summer they have Bonnets
of Silk, in Winter of Linen; in stead of a Mantle they cast over them long
pieces of Cloth, called by the Inhabitants Likares, trimmed with Embroidery or
Fringes, which they clasp together with a Buckle, either of Gold or Silver,
Brass or Iron, according as the Wearers ability will extend; which it seems was
ancient there by Virgils Description of Dido. Virgil.


In their Ears they wear Jewels, rich Neck-laces and Bracelets of Pearl, which
they call Gagales.

SEveral Languages are here spoken, viz. the Morisk, Arabic and Gemmick
Tongues. The Morisk is the ancient African, or rather a mixture of several
Tongues, with a dash of Arabic, for they speak it not pure, because of their
converse with Foreign People, whereby are introduced many strange words; the
Gemmick is half Spanish and half Portugues.

There is another Speech called Tamacete, used by the People which dwell
between Morocco and Tarudant, Northerly of Mount Atlas, and boast themselves to
come of a Christian Parentage.

Every Mahumentan may by the Alcoran lawfully have four Wives, The
Marriage-condition.
from any of which he may divorce at his pleasure, and take other. When any man
intends to Wed, they have a Caziz, Notary and Witnesses; the Notary makes a
sealed Agreement of all that the Man promises to give his intended Bride for a
Marriage-Portion, which they call Codaka, which he must give, if at any time he
part from her.

If a Woman will part from her Husband, she loses her Marriage-Goods.

Besides their Wives, they may keep as many Concubines as they are able to
maintain, out of which the King may choose one to bestow upon his Favorites.
They count it no Crime to obstuprate their Slaves, White or Black. The King
has commonly four Wives, besides a multitude of Concubines, with whom he
companies according to the dictates of his wandering Fancy.

On the day of Marriage, The Solemnity of Marriage.
they set the Bride on a Mule, sumptuously adorned and set forth, begirt with a
round Canopy in form of a Tower, covered with Tapistry, after the Turkish
Manner, so carrying her in State through the whole City, followed by many
Muletts laden with the Goods, given her by her intended Husband, and attended
with Men and Women in great Multitudes. After this Calvalcade, they go to
Feasting, which done, they remove to a spacious and open Place, where all the
Kindred and Friends assemble; and such as are skilled in Horsmanship, for the
space of two hours exercise themselves with Lances before the Bride.

But Diego de Torres says, Cap. 76.
the Woman is carried upon a well-furnish'd Camel, in a small Castle or Tower,
called by them Gayola, and curiously adorned and covered with thin and single
Taffaty, that she may easily see through it, with a great Train of Followers;
so is she first brought to her Fathers House, and from thence to her Husband,
where is great Feasting and Mirth.

If the Husband find she was devirginated before, Maquet, lib. 3.
he immediately sends her away, with all he gave her, but if he be satisfied of
her Chastity, her praises are sung through the City, and the tokens of his
satisfaction publicly shown, which also be carried through the City, in token
of her being a Maid; this was customary among the Jews.

Into their Churchyards the Women go every Friday and Holy Days to bewail
their dead, with Blew Mourning Garments on, in stead of Black, Mourning for the
Dead.
as is the fashion in this Country.

The Revenue of this Kingdom yearly brought into the Kings Chamber or Exchequer
is very great, and raised thus: Diego de Torret.
Botero Relat. univers. p. 2. lib. 2.
Every Male or Female of twelve Years, or according to Botero, of five Years
old, pays four fifths of a Ducat; Hearth-Money.
and the like of every Hearth, which by them is called Garama: For every Bushel
of Beans, the King receives the second; for every Beast, the tenth; but for
every sack of Wheat, half a Real. Besides these, there are other Customs paid
upon exported Goods, which sometimes they raise high, pretending thereby to
ease their Subjects. However, the Christian Merchants, for all Commodities,
either imported or exported, pay great Tolls, besides a large Sum of Money for
License to Trade freely there.

Lastly, The King has full power over all the Goods of his Subjects, What
makes the Kings mighty and rich.
of whom none can claim what he possesses for his own; for when the Alkayde,
that is, the Governor of the Country, and other Officers that take Salary,
die, the King seizes all they left, giving to his Son, if fit for the Wars, his
Fathers Employments; but if they be little, he maintains them till they can
handle a Weapon; and the Daughters, till they are married. Another Device the
King uses to possess himself of the Peoples Wealth: When he has intelligence
of any rich Person, he sends for him, and under color of Favor, confers on
him some Office that receives a Salary from the Crown, in which continuing to
his Death, makes the King a Title to his Estate; which is the cause that every
one, as well at Morocco as Fez, to prevent this inconvenience, endeavor to
conceal their Wealth, and keep as far from Court, and the Kings knowledge, as
possible.

The King also takes one Beast in twenty, and two when the Number rises to a
hundred. His Collectors also gather the tenth of all Fruits growing in the
Mountains, which the People pay as a Rent for their Land.

THe English, Hollanders and French drive here a notable Trade, The Merchandise
of several People in this Kingdom.
carrying thither several Commodities, as Cloth, etc. bringing thence again
Turky-Leather, Wood, Sugar, Oil, Gold, Wax, and other Merchandise, having their
Consuls resident in the Cities of Sale, Zaffi, and other Places.

THe Inhabitants of Morocco in some things differ among themselves as to
Religion; most of them follow the Doctrine of the Xerif Hamet, The strictness
of the Moroccoians, in observing Mahomets Doctrine.
who at first was a Monk, but left his Cloister in the Year Fifteen hundred and
fourteen, and began to set abroach the Enthusiasm of one Elfurkan, declaring
that the Doctrine of Ali Omar, and other Expounders of the Alcoran, were only
humane Traditions, and that men were to observe the pure and single writings of
Elfurkan, who was a faithful Expositor of the same. And as the Turks prohibit
any to come into their Mosques, that is not of their Religion, upon pain of
Death; So this new Prophet admitted all Nations, as well Christians as Jews, to
hear his Preaching. For this difference in Religion, the Turks and Moroccoians
bear a peculiar hatred one against another; the Moroccoians treating the
Turkish Slaves as cruelly as the Christian.

They observe all Solemn Feasts with the Turks and other Mahumetans, Festivals.
especially the Feast of the Passover; The Passover of the Moroccoians.
for the King rides sumptuously the Day of the Passover, attended with the
Bashaw and other great Lords, both Horse and Foot, and men sounding Trumpets,
playing upon Flutes, and beating Drums, and Kettle-Drums: When he is come to an
appointed place without the City, two Rams are brought to him, Homer. Il. 3.
lib.
which after several Ceremonies he sticks in the Throat; and if they die
quickly, that is held by them for a good Presage; but if they linger any while,
they believe the following Year many Sicknesses and Troubles will ensue.

The King of Morocco bears the Title of Emperor of Africa, The King of
Morroco's Title.
and also Emperor of Morocco, King of Fez, Sus and Gago, Lord of Dara and
Guinee, great Xerif of Mahomet.

He has, as we said, so absolute a Dominion, that all the People are his
Slaves, not daring without leave go out of the Kingdom, upon pain of Corporal
Punishment.

In this Kingdom many wild Arabs frequent, Arabians in Morocco.
by some called Larbussen, which live by the Wars and Plunder, being general
Enemies to all, and all Foes to them; yet when the time of their Harvest is
come, they make a Cessation of Arms; for it is not a Peace, because as soon as
the Corn is threshed, and laid up in their Pits, made in the middle of the
Fields for that purpose, and covered over with Planks and Earth, they-fall to
their old Trade of robbing and spoiling again; whatever Corn is hoarded in
those Pits, none see or meddle with, unless when they fetch some for private
use, to Sow, or to Sell.

They dig also deep Pits to find Water, to which they come with their Camels
from Places far distant, leading them home laden therewith in Leathern
Borachio's. These Arabians in regard of their so much using the Wars, are
Commanders over the Almahallen, that is, little Armies to conduct the Caphiles
or Caravans, by order of the King.

MOROCCO.
THE Province of Morocco, The Territory of Morocco, and Borders of it. Grammay
Afric. 9. Marmol. p. 1. lib. 3.
taking Name from the Metropolis, is almost all Champaign, beginning on the
West at the Mountain Nefise, and stretching Eastward to the Mount Hannimey, and
so running Northward to the Tenzift, where it meets with that of Eciffelmel; so
that on the North, Ducala conterminates it; on the West, Hea and a part of Sus;
on the South, another part of Sus, Darha and Gezula; and the East, the
Territory of Eskure or Haskora.

Morocco, Morocco the Head City.
the Principal City of the whole Kingdom, called by the Inhabitants Marroc, and
by the Spaniards, Marruecos, is by the unanimous consent of most Geographers,
held to be the Boccanum Hemerum of Ptolomy. Be it one or other, such as make
narrow inquiry into Antiquity, say, That it was first built by Joseph Aben
Texijien, and his Son Ali, out of the Ruins of Boccanum, or rather in the same
place where Ptolomy had set that.

It is situate between the Rivers Neftis and Agmet, in thirty Degrees and
thirty Minutes, Northern Latitude, encompassed with a Plain, sprinkled with
little Hills, among which on the North-side Atlas thrusts his Basis within six
Miles of the City.

It contains a Hundred thousand Houses, and Four and twenty Gates, at Het
KONINKLYK HOE meteen ge^elte der Stadt MAROKKO.
present surrounded with a strong and very high Stone-Wall, fortified with
Turrets for defense, a Rampart within, and deep Trenches without.

The Citizens number, says Gramay, five and thirty Streets, besides a
multitude of Lanes, and other narrow Passages; but adds withal, that one
third part is destitute of Inhabitants, by reason of many Ruins, between which
it is planted with Groves of Dates, Vineyards, and other Trees.

Here were in former times many Stately Temples, Guilds, Baths, It was formerly
very rich in Buildings.
and Inns; but the Civil War in the Country has laid waste and levelled most
of them with the Earth. Memorable Monuments remaining, are two Temples of a
wonderful Greatness: One built by Ali, the other by Abdul Mumen; neighbor to
which, King Almansor erected a third, encompassed with a Wall of fifty Cubits
high, and beautified with Columns or Pillars, which he brought out of Spain:
Under it he made a Cistern of like bigness with the Temple, to receive all
water from the Roofs.

The Royal Palace, called by the Inhabitants Alkakave, or Michouart, may
compare with an ordinary City, surrounded with strong and high Walls. In the
middle of a Basse Court stands a stately Mesquiet with a Tower, on whose Top,
in stead of a Fane, stand four golden Apples together, as they say, Four Golden
Apples of the top of the Tower.
weighing seven hundred Pound, and given to the King of Morocco by the King of
Gago, with his Daughter in Marriage. And to confirm this Opinion, they
allege, that the King of Morocco in right of that Marriage still remains
Inheritor of that Kingdom, and fetches from thence much Gold.

But Marmol tells us, That when King Mansor had builded this stately Temple,
out of a desire to leave behind him some Memorial of his Wealth, bestowed a
great part of the Jewels he had in Marriage with the Queen, for the making
those Apples. The Inhabitants firmly believe they were so signatur'd by such
Configurations of the Heavens, that they were as Telesman's, never to be
removed: which Magic seems to be as ancient as the Building of Troy, and whose
Palladium we may suppose to be such; whereof hear Virgil. Aen. l. 2.

Omnis spes Danaum and coepti fiducia belli
Palladis auxiliis semper stetit, impius ex quo
Tydides, sed enim scelerumque inventor Ulysses,
Fatale aggressi sacrato avellere templo
Palladium, caesis summae custodibus arcis,
Corripuere sacram effigiem, manibusque cruentis
Virgineas ausi divae contingere vittas.
Ex illo fluere, ac retro sublapsa referri
Spes Danaum, fractae vires, aversa deae men's.
Our chiefest hopes and confidence were laid,
Since first the War began, in Pallas Aid,
Till impious Diomed with Ulysses went,
(The best that ever mischief did invent)
And boldly from her sacred Fane conveyed
Fatal That was the Effigies of the Goddess, and Telesmon made of Pelopts bones
by Arius the Philosopher, and presented to Trous to preserve his City where
founded; and therefore Diomede and Ulysses stole it from thence, that they
might conquer the City, though Synon feigns thus.
Palladium, and dire Slaughter made;
These the blessed Image pulling down, distained
With bloody hands, and Virgin Wreaths profaned,
The Grecian hopes from that time backward went,
Our Strength decayed, the Goddess discontent.
Cidrenus says, this Image of Pallas was consecrated by Diabolical Rites, out
of a vain presumption, that the Town was impregnable while that remained in it:
This is confirmed by Joannes Antiochenus, who says such Images were
Telesmatically made under a good Horoscope, and enabled by Art to preserve
Cities, wherein they are kept or set up in a victorious and impregnable
condition. And the Architect employed to place those Apples, not only used the
like Arts, but had by Magic set several Spirits for the constant keeping of
them.

Many Kings have endeavored to take them down, but still some mishap has
followed to prevent them. The King of Morocco himself, Anno 1500. boasted he
would take and bestow them upon the Portugals, as a Reward for their Service in
the Defense of his State; but the Commons withstood it: alleging they were
the greatest Ornament of Morocco, and next to the Kingdom they were fit to be
preserved.

In this Palace are thirty Chambers, and a Hall, on all sides within and
without furnished richly with all sorts of Imagery, and appointed for places of
Contemplation and Study. In the midst of the whole stands a very goodly
Fountain, canopi'd and turrited with white Marble, artificially Carved and
Polished.

ABout half an hours Journey from the City, The Garden, or Montserat.
lies a very stately and pleasant Orchard or Garden of the Kings, called
Montserat, planted with above fifteen thousand common Trees, the like number of
Oranges and Dates, and about thirty six thousand Olive Trees; besides many
other sorts of Plants, Flowers, and wholesome Herbs. A Rivulet comes out of
the Mountain, and runs quite through it; watering not only the Plants, but
feeding many sorts of Fish. In the midst of this lies a apiece place,
wherein stands a Leopard of white Marble, speckel'd with black Spots to the
life, at every corner, and round about encompast with Marble Pillars, upon each
of which is a Lion, spouting clear water out of his mouth.

To this Garden adjoyns a Park, A Park of Beasts.
wherein are enclosed a great number of Wild Beasts, as Elephants, Lions,
Deer, and the like.

In the first Court of the Palace, Moquet says, appear three very stately
Buildings, after the Morish Fashion, and adorned with Fountains: The second
Court has Piazzaed Walks, supported with white Marble Columns; so artificially
built, that the best Architect may admire their Workmanship. And on the ground
stand many Marble Vessels with clear water, where the Moors wash themselves
before they go to their Sala.

Next this are the Habitations of the Jews, The Jews Dewlling Place.
like a second City, girt with strong Walls, but having one only Gate guarded
by the Moors. Many Agents or Ambassadors from several Princes and States of
Europe use to be here resident.

The ordinary Houses are low, Their Houses.
small and slight, raised up only of Loam and Chalk; but the Houses of great
Persons are magnificent, built with Stone, and flat at the top to walk upon for
coolness.

Most of the Mosques or Churches, Churches.
which there are very numerous, are entire Marble, and covered with Lead.

The River Tenzift runs through the City, whose Water the Citizens use on all
occasions, and serves also to drive Mills for grinding Corn.

THis Province abounds with Flax, The Fruitfulness of the Soil about Morocco.
Hemp, Wheat, and all sorts of Grain, which it vents abroad into other parts in
great quantities; nor yields it a less store of Dates, Figs, Raisins, Apples,
Pears, Olives, Nuts, and the like Fruits, besides Cattle, which afford plenty
of Milk, Butter, and Cheese. But the tops of the Mountains lie many times
covered with Snow, being for the most part barren and cold, and at best
producing nothing but Barley.

Eight Leagues from Morocco, Agmet.
upon the top of a Mountain, stands Agmet, in former times rich and populous,
containing about six thousand Families, but at present decayed, and affording
Wolves, Foxes, and other wild Beasts and Fowl, a burrow and resting place.

Elgiumuhe or Elgiemahe, by the River Xeuxaue or Sochaiu, Elgiumuhe.
about two Miles from Mount Atlas, formerly a place well inhabited, but now
lies almost waste and desolate.

Emigiagen or Umegiagen, a City and Fort, eight miles Southerly of Elgiemake,
Emigiagen.
surrounded with a stony Rock in stead of a Wall.

Tazarat, or Tesrat, or Terrasast, lies upon the Banks of Eciffelmel, Tazarat.
five miles Westerly of Morocco, and seven from Mount Atlas.

Teneze at the foot of Atlas, called Guidimyve, or Gedmeve, Teneze
three miles from the River Eciffelmel.

Gemaagidid called by some Delgumuhe, Gemaagidit.
a fair City lying upon the high Mountain Sicsive, five and twenty mile from
Morocco, contains about a thousand or twelve hundred Houses.

The City Temelet, called by some Temelle, and Mehedie, Temelet.
lying on a Mountain.

Imizimiz, or Imismizi, on the hanging of the Hill Guidimive, Imizimiz.
has below it a Road which runs cross Mount Atlas, and is called Bureix, which
signifies Feathers, because the Flakes of Snow oftentimes fly over this City
like Down.

Tamdegost, or Tumeglast, about five mile from Atlas. Tamdegost.


Animmey, a small City on the side of a Plain, Animmey.
about three miles from Morocco, Eastward.

HEre also are diverse great Hills, such are Nefuse, or Nefise, Derenders, Hills
of Morocco Nefuse.
Aden, and Atron, lying in the West, and dividing it from Hea. Very barbarous
people inhabit it, who live hardly.

The Semmede, begins at the foot of Nefuse, Semmede,
and spreads Eastward seven miles in Length.

The Xauxave to the Southward of Semmede, Xauxave.
gives name to a River rising there.

The Mountain Sicsive is very high, Sicsive.
and the Hill Temelet boasts of a stately City called Temelet.

The Guidimive, or Gedmeve, begins at the Westerly Foot of Semmede, Guidimive.
extending East about eight miles.

The Hantete is so high, Hantete.
that at a distance it shows continually covered with the Clouds; touching to
the West on Guidimive, and reaching Eastward about six miles to Animmey, which
also lifts it self up to a great height, extending from hence Eastward to the
River Tecouhin.

THe Constitution and Nature of the Inhabitants we will now give you a touch
of, as in the several places wherein they are seated, The Constitution of the
Inhabitants.
and begin with them of Morocco; who are well featured, and very white: The Men
delight much in Hunting and Hawking, and therefore keep excellent Horses;
which, according to their Custom, they manage with good judgment. They take
great pleasure in keeping all sorts of Fowl, which are brought to them from
Mount Atlas.

They of Elgiumuhe are diligent in Husbandry, but often plundered by the Arabs.
Those of Delgumube are extraordinary neat in their Habit, proud, bold-spirited,
but very jealous. The Mountaineers are ill natured, rough, and deceitful,
coveting from Strangers what ever they have. They go meanly Habited, live as
beasts, and feed on Barley with a little Oil of Olives. Some few of them have
Converse with Jews, from whom they learn some Mechanic Arts, wearing only
under their Feet artificial Soals, to defend them from sharp Stones and Thorns.
And their best Habit is merely a Cloth about their Loins, to keep off the
violent beatings of the Snow.

All the aforementioned Cities and Towns, Strength and Riches of Morocco.
are by natural Situation exceeding strong, and the inhabitants Powerful and
Rich; so that if they were reduced under one Head, by such a Union, his
Discretion and good Conduct might effect great matters.

HEA.
THe Jurisdiction of Hea, Borders of the Territory of Hea.
the most Westerly Part of the Moroccian Kingdom, joins to the Great Atlas,
which the Inhabitants call Aivakall, conterminated on the West and North with
the great Ocean; on the South with Atlas, and part of Sus; and on the East with
the River Eciffelmel, which divides it from Morocco.

The famousest Places lying in this Territory, are

Tedoest, Tedoest.
heretofore the chief City of Hea, was in the Year Fifteen hundred and fourteen
totally ruined, but is now rebuilt in part by the Jews, who have erected there
five hundred Houses:

Agobel, Agobel.
a strong City on a Hill, and surrounded with a Wall, contains about three
hundred and thirty Houses.

Alguel, Alguel.
situate also on a Hill, has tolerable Walls, and the advantage of two small
Rivers running through it.

Tekuleth, Tekuleth.
a fair City on the side of a Hill, eighteen Miles Westward of Tedoest, close
by the Fort Aguz, at the mouth of the River Tekulet, which Ptolomy called Diure.

Hadequis, Hadequis.
lying on a Plain three Spanish Miles from Tekuleth, before its Destruction by
the Portugueze, in the Year Fifteen hundred and eleven, had Walls of Stone,
strengthened with Towers: The Houses were of the like Materials, amounting to
twenty thousand; but now is thinly inhabited by a few Jewish Merchants.

So also the next City Texevit, Texevit.
though walled and watered by a pretty large River, falling from the
neighboring Hills, between which it stands.

Lusugaguen, Leusugaguen.
or Ilusugaguen, a strong City, built on a high Hill in manner of a Fort, three
Mile from Hadis, Southward.

But amongst these Mountain-Cities, Tesegdelt is imputed the chiefest, four
Miles from Texevit, having a Wall of sharp Rocks, it contains about a
thousand Houses, and is moistened with a handsome River.

Tegteze, Tegteze.
or Tagtesse, stands on a high Hill, five Miles from Tesegdelt, the ascent to
it going round the Hill as it were by winding stairs.

Eitdevet, Eitdevet.
five Miles from Tegteze, toward the South, an ancient City, containing about
Seven hundred Houses.

Kuleyhat Elmuhaidin, Kuleyhat Elmuhaidin.
that is, a Foundation for Scholars, seven Miles from Eitdevet, was first built
in the Year Fifteen hundred and twenty, by an Apostate Mahumetan, named Homar
Seyef, who broached diverse new Opinions as to matters of Religion, drawing
after him many Followers who did much mischief; but at length after this
Province of Hea had been miserably harrased and wasted, he was slain by his
Wife, for his Incestuous living with his Daughterin-law; and all his Followers,
when his notorious Dissimulation and odious Debaucheries were discovered,
driven out of the Country, only his Nephew betook himself to a Fort, which he
defended a whole Year, though strictly besieged; but in the end surrendered on
Articles, but carried with him his malice, which he wreaked on them in a
perpetual enmity.

Tefethne, or Teftane, by Gramay called Bente; but Tamusige by Ortelius,
Tefethue.
a strong City on the Coast of the Atlantic, at the foot of Mount Atlas, has
a Haven four Spanish Miles in length. A little toward the West lies another,
Gazole, Tafalle, Zebedech.
which Marmol supposes to be the same that Ptolomy calls Hercules-Road. Then to
the Southward Gazole, Tafalle and Zebedech, all places of small Importance,
which at last bring us to the Cape of Ozem, Northward, The Cape of Ozem.
Magador.
not far from which appears the Island Magador or Mongador, about five Miles
from the main Land. Here is a strong Castle, wherein the Kings of Morocco
always keep a good Garrison for defense of his Gold and Silver Mines in the
neighboring Mountains.

Goz or Gozen, a safe Haven, by some taken to be the Surige of Ptolomy. Goz.
Kurio descript. Regus Morocco. Engueleguingil.


Engueleguingil, or according to Sanutus, Ichillinghighil, is a small City,
lying two Miles Southward of Eitdevet. Those are all the remarkable Towns. We
will take a short view of the Mountains, and so proceed.

THe first that lies in our way is Aidvacal, or rather Atlas, Mountains of Hea.
Aidvacal.
beginning at the Ocean, and reaching along the Shore, making a Boundary
between Hea and Sus, being about three days Journey in breadth. Here are many
populous Villages.

Demensere, or Tensare, begins where Aidvacal ends, Demensere.
and reaches into the East about seven Miles, to Nefise in the Province of
Morocco; it is very populous, but has no City nor enclosed Town, but diverse
small ones, and many Villages.

Mount Giubel el Hand, or Gebel el Hadith, that is, Iron-Hill, Giubel el Hand.
which Ortelius guesses to be the Fokre of Ptolomy, begins toward the North,
near the Ocean, and reaches Southward; Tenzift running between Hea, Morocco and
Ducala, but comes not near Atlas.

This Country has in it many small Rivers, great Woods, The Nature of the
Territory of Hea.
and pleasant Valleys, yet the Inhabitants have little Corn, which proceeds
either from their sloth, or unskilfulness in Husbandry; as appears, for that in
several places are abundance of Fig Trees, Peaches and Nuts. Here is also great
quantity of Honey, which in part they sell; but such is their stupidity, that
they throw away the Wax.

ASses, Goats, Oxen, Sheep, Deer, Hares and Apes, run here in great abundance;
so are the Horses, but of a strange shape, different from ours, and so swift,
that they will run over the Mountains without Shoes, catching hold like a Cat.

THe usual Food of this Province, is Barley-Meal unsifted, Nature and Customs
of the Inhabitants.
which they Bake with the Bran, in an Earthen Pan, and eat for Bread, together
with Elhasid, that is, Barley-Flower, in Winter boiled in Water, and Oil put
into it, but in Summer, boiled in Milk, and sauced with Butter. Other-while
they eat boiled Flesh, sometimes diverse sorts of Meat together, which they call
Couscous.

THe most People wear only a piece of Woollen, Apparel of the People of Hea.
by them called Elchise, made like a Sheet, and tied about the Body; so, round
about the Head, with a piece of the same died Black, with the Bark of a
Nut-tree. But the Elder, and such as are in any esteem for Learning, wear round
double Bonnets.

Their Matts which they sit on, Furniture for their Houses.
are made of Hair, platted through with Reeds; so also are their Beds, and
covered with Hair-cloths, from five to ten Yards long, serving both for
Blankets, Sheets and Coverlid. In Winter they put up their Hair under a Cap,
but let it hang down about their ears in the Summer.

They Plow their ground with Horses and Asses intermixed, and contrary to most
in these parts, their Women go with their Faces bare.

SUS.
THE Territory of Sus or Sous, Its Borders.
formerly a Kingdom, took name from the River Sus, which bounds on the West as
far as the Great Bay of That is, of great Cattle.
Juments, or de la Yeguas; Northward it reaches to Mount Atlas, where touching
on the Side of Hea; on the South lies the sandy Desert of Biledulgerid; on the
East bordering upon Guzula.

In this Territory on the Seashore lie three small Cities, all known by one
common name, Mess, being indeed rather one City divided into three parts, each
separated and surrounded with a Wall. This was heretofore called Temest, being
seated on the shore of the great Ocean, at the foot of Atlas, or Aidvacal, as
they call it.

The River Sus running through the Mess, A strange Temple.
at a place called Guertesen, falls into the Sea, on whose shore a Temple
appears, whose sparrs, rafters and beams are said to be the bones of the Whale
which swallowed the Prophet Jonas, who was thrown up again in this place. The
learned among them stick not to affirm, That this our Minor Prophet shall
appear in this Temple, being so declared by their great Prophet Mahomet; for
which Reason they all highly reverence and preserve it with extraordinary care.

Hereabout are many large Whales often begrounded, which the common People
fancy happens by an occult quality of that Temple, which kills all those
Monsters coming that way and endeavoring to swim by it.

Teceut, Teceut.
an ancient City, a Mile from Mess, Triangular, and contains four thousand
Families. In the middle of it stands a fair Temple, through which runs an Arm
of the River Sus.

The Country hereabout is full of Hamlets and Villages, but more Southerly is
not inhabited, but overrun by the wild and wandering Arabs.

One Mile from Teceut lies Gared, Gared.
founded by the Cerif Abdala, about the Year Fifteen hundred, on a Plain by a
great Spring called Ayn Cequie. Here is a sort of excellent Moroquines.
Kids-Leather, which in such great quantities is transported into Europe, that
the Custom of it yearly to this City, produces Thirty thousand Ducats.

The Principal City of all is Tarudant, by the Moors called Tourant, Tarudant.
twelve Miles East from Teceut, and two Miles South from Atlas, in a pleasant
Valley, eighteen or twenty Miles long. This City watered by the River Agur, was
formerly the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, and the Royal Seat and Chamber of
the Kings of Sus.

Half a Mile from Tarudant stands Faraixa, built by Mahomet Cherif, Taraixa.
before he was King of Morocco.

Tedsi, twelve Miles Eastward of Tarudant, twenty from the Ocean, Tedsi.
and seven to the South of great Atlas, was in former times very rich,
containing above four thousand Families, but is now by their Civil Wars almost
ruined.

Togoast, the greatest City of this Territory, twenty Miles from the Atlantic,
Togoast.
eighteen from Atlas, and three from the Sus, contained in former times six
thousand Houses, which at present are reduced to a far smaller Number.
Volateranus says, this was the Birthplace of the ancient and famous Doctor St.
Augustine.

On the Westerly shore of the River Sus, lies Cape Aguar, Cape of Aguar.
taken by Ptolomy for the Cape Usagium. This place in former times belonged to
the Portugues, who erected there a very strong Castle, by them called Santa
Cruce, and by the Moors Darumnie, that is, Christian-House. Afterward the
Portugals founded a strong City in the same Place, which they possessed a long
time, but at last were driven out of it by the Cherif, in the Year Fifteen
hundred thirty and six.

On a cutting Skirt of Atlas, by the great Ocean, Gantguessen.
at the Mouth of the River Sus, stands Gantguessen, a very strong place; and
more Southerly on the Seacoast; these places, Aguilon, Alganzib, Samotinat,
with the Capes of Guilon, and Non or Nun, in twenty seven Degrees Northern
Latitude.

THe Mountains of Sus are Henquise, The Mountains.
reaching from West to East twelve Miles in length, Ilalem or Laalem, Guzula
beginning at the end of Henquise, and stretching Eastward to Guzula, South to
the Plains of Sus; Ilde the Western, boundary between Guzula and Sus.

All the Inhabitants of Mess maintain themselves by Husbandry, The Nature of
the ground of the Territory Sus.
encouraged thereto, for that in April and September the River Sus rises and
overflows its Banks, which causes a plentiful Harvest, whereas if it fail in
one of the aforementioned Months, then generally follows a Scarcity, or dear
Year. On the shore by Mess, is found very good Amber in great plenty. All
about the City of Teceut, the Grounds abound with Wheat, Barley, and many other
sorts of Grain, as also Sugarcanes, besides Dates, Figs and Peaches.

Mount Henquise is cold, and continually covered with Snow.

Mount Laalem abounds with Horses, and holds in her bosom a rich Vein of Silver.

From Tarudant is brought Ostridge Feathers and Amber, and so transported into
Europe.

The People of Tedsi live orderly, and behave themselves with great Trust and
Civility. The like do the Inhabitants of Tagoast, whose Women for the most part
are white and Handsome; nevertheless there are Blacks and Tauny-Moors among them.

They of Mess are Husbandmen, but those of Teceut ill natured, proud and
pervicacious. Those of Henquise and Ilalem are Valiant and Generous, but
maintain old Feuds about their Silver Mines.

Lastly, The Mahumetans themselves living in this Territory, show great Honor
to the Body of St. Augustine, which they report lies Buried near the City of
Tagoast.

DUCALA.
THE Territory of Ducala has for Borders, Limits of the Territory of Ducala.
on the East the River Umarabea, or Omni^abih, and the Country of Temesne; on
the East the Tenzift, and Cape of Cantin, with part of Hea; on the North the
great Ocean; and on the South the Province of Morocco, and the River Habid.

The greatest length from West to East is Thirty; Its Bigness.
and the breadth, according to Marmol, Twenty four Miles. The Cities and Places
of Note in it are, First, Azamor, Azamor.
a City lying at the Mouth of the River Umarabea, three Miles from Mazagan. In
the Year Fifteen hundred and thirteen, Emmanuel King of Portugal, to revenge
himself of the Injury which Zeyam the Governor of this City had done him, Was
won by the Pertuguese.
in disappointing of his Marriage, sent a Fleet of two hundred Ships, with
great Forces, who coming to this City, begirt it with a strong Siege, and
compelled the Inhabitants to surrender. The Portuguese who entered, Ruined and
Plundered it, and not so contented, proceeded further, and took and wasted
diverse other Places.

The Town before this War, contained above Five thousand Houses, and is still
large and populous, being subject to the Moors, who keep a strong Garrison in
it. The greatest Trade of the Citizens consists in Fishing, which from April
till September they use in the River Ommirabih, to their great advantage,
raising thereby yearly six or seven thousand Ducats.

Elmedine or Almedine, Elmedine.
a Place of great Antiquity, formerly the chief City of the whole Jurisdiction,
distant about ten Miles from Safi, between it and Azamor, on a pleasant and
fruitful Plain.

The next in Order is the strong Citadel Mazagan, Mazagan.
by some called Mazzakan, by Marmol, Mazagran; but by the Moors, Boreyja, about
two Miles from Amazor, on the Banks of the River Ommirabih, not far from the
Sea. It formerly contained five thousand Houses, whereas at the present it is
scarce half a Mile in Compass, and lies scatteringly in four Parts, each
whereof has a peculiar Governor, but all subject to one Cherif, and among
themselves very unanimous.

The Inhabitants flourished heretofore in Wealth and Prosperity, but at this
day is a place of no Trade, M^quet, lib. 3.
but only serves for a Garrison, having lofty Walls or Rampars, so overtopping
the houses, that whoever stands without, sees nothing but the Fortifications,
which so much surmount the Dwellings.

Upon these Works are planted many great Cannons, for whose Defense five
hundred Foot, two hundred Horse, and five hundred Pioneers, are always ready,
bestowing the intervals of their leisurable times, either in new making or
repairing their Works.

The circumjacent Places are very fruitful, Nature of the Soyli
part of which the Soldiery look after, that it may be sown for their Advantage
and Provision, yet is all their care too little to prevent the Moors, who in
the Night come and make themselves sharers of the greatest part.

Tit or Tut, four Spanish Miles from Mazagan, lies now desolate, having never
recovered the Destruction thrown upon it by the Portugues, about the Year
Fifteen hundred and thirty.

Then comes in order Cape Cantin, Cape Cannaveral, on the North; Cape of Cantin.
not far from whence lies the City Saffi, or Azaffi; by Marmol, Assi; and by
the Portugals, Safin, who conquered it under the conduct of their King
Emmanuel, in the Year Fifteen hundred and seven, but since it is reduced to the
subjection of the King of Morocco, who has strongly Walled and Garrisoned it.
Here resides a French Consul to order the Merchants Affairs.

Conte is an Inland City, seven Miles Eastward of Safi, Conte.
and not far from Cabo de Spart, or Sparts Cape, so called from the Plant
Spart, signifying Rushes, which not only the Natives, but the Portugals use in
stead of Hemp to make Cordage.

Five Miles East of Safi lies Maramor, having old Walls, Maramor.
and about four hundred Buildings; a member whereof is Cernu, three Miles from
Safi, Cernu.
formerly Ruined, but now full of People.

Aguz, now thinly inhabited, and Telmez, and Umez, Aguz.
two inconsiderable Places, possessed by Hoc Afri, an ancient People of Barbary.

Next is the Fort, by the Inhabitants called Miathir, that is, Aundred Pits,
Miathir.
and by the Geographers in Italian, Cento possi, from the great number of Pits
thereabouts, wherein the Inhabitants lay up their Corn to preserve it. It is
situate on a high Cliff, and her Houses for the most part of Marble.

Sudeyt, a poor and meanly Walled Town, by the River Umarabea, Sudeyt.
Tamarrox. Terga.
close by is Tamarrox, containing about four hundred Buildings. Terga, supposed
to be the Jagath of Ptolomy, ten Miles from Azamor, now almost totally buried
in its own Ruins.

Benekafiz, five Miles from Azamor, and two from Mount Verd, or Green-Hill.
Benekafiz.
Guilez, Terrer and Cea, in former times famous Cities, but now void of
Inhabitants, except a few wild Arabs. In the last place comes Bulaaguan, of no
other Note, but that it stands by the River Ommirabih, between Fez and Morocco.

Mountains here, are Benimeguez or Benimagar, four Miles from Azafi, Mountains
of D^quel.
which Marmol guesses to be Ptolomy's Mountain of the Sun. Jakel-Hadva, or
Mount Verd, beginning on the East side of the River Ommirabih, and reaching
West to the Hill of Haskora, becomes a Boundary between Ducala and a part of
Tedle. Upon it live many Hermites, scattered under the reception of several
Mahumetan Altars, and ruinous African Buildings.

This Territory of Ducala is full of People, but they are Dull-witted,
Illnatured, Cowards and Clownish.

HASKORA, or ESKURE.
THis Province has on the North Ducala, on the East the River Tenzift; Limits
of the Territory of Haskora.
to the West that of Elgua del Habid, which separates it from Tedle. The
chiefest Places of it are Elmadine, or Abnedine, on the side of Mount Atlas,
Eastward, Elmadine.
about thirty Miles from Morocco.

Alendin, or Elmedin, a mile to the East of the former in a Valley, Alendin.
encompassed with four great Mountains, and consisting of about a thousand
Houses.

Tagodast, or Isadagas seated, says Marmol, among great Mountains, yet is very
pleasant, by reason of the Confluence of Rivulets and Brooks, which descending
pass through it.

Elgiumuha standing also on a Hill four miles from Tagodast, Elgiumuha.
and Bzo or Bizu, eleven miles.

FAmous Mountains here are Tenuevez or Tevendez, Mountains of Haskore.
about five and thirty Spanish Miles from Dara Southward.

Tenhite beginning at the edge of Tevendoz, reaches on the East to Dedez,
running along South by the Wilderness of Dara; this Hill contains fifty
Castles, all fortified with Stone Walls, and subject to the Governor of Dara.

Guigim or Gogideme inhabited only on the North, neighbored by two other
Hills, commendable for nothing but a convenient River, that takes Rise there,
and afterward waters a pleasant adjoining Vale.

OLives, The Fruitfulness of Hask^re.
Grapes, Nuts, Figs, and other Fruits grow here naturally, but the Apricocks
are as large as a great Portugal, or as we call it, a China Orange.

Gagodast produces Wheat, Barley, pure Oil, and especially Honey of two sorts,
the one white, like our Virgin, and the other clear and yellow, like our common
Honey. They have also store of Goats.

Tevendez bears only Barley and Woad, yet abounding with Sheep and Goats,
though its Ground lies continually covered with Snow.

Tensite yields store of Dates, and Gogidem wild Beasts of several kinds,
especially the Lant; of which we have spoken at large in our general
Description.

THe People are much more reserved, Cuse^n of the Inhabitants.
than those of Ducala, affecting a stiff formality; their only Business
Merchandise, which is no small Encouragement to Strangers to come thither to
Traffic.

There is a natural Antipathy between the Inhabitants of Elmadine and their
Neighbors, so that they always go armed, though about their ordinary occasion
into the Fields. They are very kind and hospitable to Foreigners, entertaining
them with a great deal of respect in places purposely appointed.

They eat several sorts of Flesh like us in Europe, as Mutton, Veal, Kid, and
Venison.

The Women are handsome, and take great pleasure in the Company and Converse of
Strangers, adorning themselves with Neck-laces, and curious Armelets of Pearls
and precious Stones.

Most of the Men in this Territory are Tanners, with great Art and Curiosity
dressing Kid-Skins, which the French Merchants call Maroquins; and are
transported in great abundance to most Countries of Europe.

TEDLE:
THe Territory of Tedle has on the East the Kingdom of Morocco, Limits of the
Territory of Tedle
on the West the River Quadelhabid, and on the North, the Conflux of the same
River with that of Ommirabih; and on the South Mount Atlas: So that it is in
effect Triangular. For those Rivers springing from Atlas, make one Angle, Atlas
a second, and Morocco the third.

Tefze the Chief City, erected by the Arabians on the edge of Atlas, stands
encircled in a Wall of Marble curiously cut, which Work in Arabic they call
Tefza, the Wall so giving name to the City, being large and well peopled,
having many Temples, and adjoining to it the pleasant Plains of Fixtele;
wherein is a Village of the same name a mile from Tefze on a Hillock,
containing about seven hundred Houses.

Cithiteb, on a very high Mountain, three Miles Easterly from Tefza. Ehithiat,
or Aitiat, four Miles from Cithiteb, having about four hundred Houses; but no
Walls other than the Mountain and steep Cliffs.

THe Mountains are Segeme, or Seggheme, lies in the South, Mountains of Tedle.
joining to Teseven; Magran a little more to the West, reaching from the last
mentioned Segeme, to Deeds; one Point of whose Basis Westward rises at Magran,
and so running to Adesan on the South, makes a Bulwark or Wall to the Plains of
Tolge.

THis Country is full of Mountains, The Condition of this Territory.
whose tops are covered with Snow the greatest part of the year; yet the Plains
yield all sorts of Corn in great abundance, Vines, Pistachio's or Nut-Trees,
Figs, and other Fruit Trees in vaste numbers. Neither are Cattle wanting here,
though much infested, and often devoured by the wild Beasts harboring in the
adjacent Mountains, such as Lions, Tigers, and Wolves. And the pleasure of the
Valleys is also much abated by the almost infinite numbers of Mesketo's, (a
kind of Wasp) that by their too frequent stinging make their lives a trouble
to them.

THe People of Tebre go well habited, but those of Deeds almost naked; Custom
of the Inhabitants.
they pilfer and steal naturally, and are as deceitful, and delight in
broaching of quarrels; so that who ever comes among them, had need have more
Eyes and Hands than single Pairs: therefore not only Strangers, but their
Neighbors refuse to trade or deal with them in any kind; so that they spend
their whole time in laziness and thievish inventions, without any desire to
improve themselves by learning Arts, or using Commerce: As an evidence of
which; Whosoever by chance travels through their Country without Convoy, they
make no scruple to rob of all; and though they have the safe Conduct and
Protection of their Governors, they extort from them above one fourth of
whatever they carry with them, besides what is otherwise useful to them.

Mahumetanism overspreads the whole, The Religion of Tedle.
yet admits a few Jews to reside in several places among them for the benefit
of Trade, and fewer Christians. But all the Mountaineers know nothing of
Religion, nor trouble themselves with Churches or Priests, but make their Gods
the wild Dictates of their brutish Inclinations. Yet this nothing is also so
catching, that some neighboring Christians wheedled by those specious form of
Libertinism, renouncing their Savior, embrace their Atheistical Tenets.

GUZULA, or GEZULE
THis Province seems to Marmol to have been a part of the Ancient Getulia,
Guzula is a part of Getulia.
whereof the Name retains yet some small remembrance; and that which makes this
Conjecture yet more probable, is, that the Ancient Getulians were placed near
Libia, beneath Mount Atlas toward the South, where at this day Guzula lies.

It has in the West the Mountain Ilde, Its Borders.
on the South Atlas, by which also parted from Morocco, and on the East the
Dominion of Hea. Here are no walled Cities, and but few good Towns, but many
Villages; among which some contain a thousand Houses.

THe Inhabitants are brutish and sordid, The Condition and Custom of the
Inhabitants.
commonly wearing Woollen Jackets without Sleeves, hanging down to their Knees,
and Hats made of Date-leaves. They have Mines of Copper and Iron that bring in
great profit, but no Silver; and are exceedingly stockt with Cattle. Iron and
Copper they exchange with Foreign Merchants, and barter it for Cloth, Spices,
Horses, and other things which they have occasion for. But that which above all
brings greatest advantage to this place, is a Fair or Market kept there once a
year for two months time, during which they entertain and feast all Strangers
repairing thither. And that they may the more peaceably reside among them, they
make a general Cessation of Arms among themselves, each party unanimously
choosing a Captain with a hundred men, for the Guard and good ordering of the
Fair; which Captains continually go the Rounds into every Quarter; and if they
find any offending, according to their Crimes, so do they immediately inflict
a suitable Punishment: As for example; Thieves they execute immediately, by
running through every Limb with their Lances, leaving their dead Bodies to be
devoured by Dogs. This Fair is kept on a Plain, where for the Merchants are
erected in Rows like Streets, Tents and Booths, plastered with Reeds and
limber Twigs, wherein every Trade is placed in distinct order; so that each
has his particular Station: Only the Grasiers that sell Cattle stand in the
open Fields. This Fair begins on Mahomets Birthday, being the Twelfth of the
Month of Rabih, or Rabik.

THeir wearing Arms are Simiters, Their Arms.
and short and broad Daggers, with very sharp points; which they hang on both
sides.

They say this Country can bring sixty two thousand men into the Field, so
that they need not stand in fear of the Arabs.

They live in Freedom, and are their own Masters, without acknowledging any
King or Lord, though they do properly belong to the King of Morocco. They
formerly paid to the Portuguese twelve thousand Ducats yearly as a Tribute, but
it continued not long.

Some think that they wave Law and Religion as well as Kings; but keeping their
Fair on Mahomets Birthday, leaves it questionable, that they may be of some
Belief.

FEZ.
THe Kingdom of Fez, The Territory of Fez
the most Easterly Part of the Ancient Mauritania Tingitana, now by the Moors
called El-garbe, bounded on the West with the Kingdom of Morocco, and the River
Meline; on the North, by the Midland-Sea; on the South with part of the Great
Mount Atlas.

In this Kingdom, as before in Morocco, are seven Territories, viz. Fez it
self, giving the Denomination to the whole, but the most Westerly Part is
Temesen, or Temesne, the others are Asgar, Elhabat, Erif, Garet, and Cuz or
Chaus, or Sau.

The Rivers which run through, or rising there, water this Kingdom, The Rivers.
and after fall either into the Ocean or Midland-Sea, are the Burregreg or
Burregrag, Subu, Fez, Bath, Likus, Homar, Guir, Gomer, Cherzer, Melulo,
Melukan, and Muluye.

The River Burregreg or Burregrag, formerly called Sala, takes the Original in
the greater Atlas, from whence passing through many Woods and Valleys, at last
discharges it self into the Sea, between the Cities of the old and new Salle.

The River Subu, by Ptolomy called Suber, one of the greatest in Barbary, Subu.
springs from Mount Ciligo, or Selego, a Branch of Atlas, in the Dominion of
Cuz, or Chaus, from whence it descends with so strong and swift a Current, that
a Stone of a hundred weight cast into it, is presently thrown out again. Not
far from its Head is a stately Bridge made over it: After a long Course and
various Meandrings, it runs for two miles along by Fez, enriching that City and
Country, as also Asgar, with its Waters; So running on, till it falls into the
Sea by Morocco.

Many lesser Streams and Brooks, and particularly Guarga, Sador, Yuavan, and
Halvan, as also the River Fez, contribute their Streams to the augmentation of
this River.

The River Fez runs through the City Fez; the Neighbors give it an Arabic
Name, signifying The Pearly River, known to Pliny by the title Fut, as to
Ptolomy by that of Phuth or Thuth.

The Bath rises out of Atlas, and gliding through Asgar, receives Incremental
Helps of Gurgivora and Bunzar, joining at last with Subu.

Lucus, heretofore called Licos, derives from Mount Gomere, running from the
West through the Plains of Habat and Asgar; so looking at Naravigia and Basra,
about two miles from the Sea, makes the Island Gezire; then washing the Walls
of Alkasar Elquikie, it pours into the Ocean by L'aracch a City of Asgar,
making there an excellent Haven.

The Homar, Homar.
so called from a City of the same Name by which it flows, begins in the
Mountain of Habat, and runs into the Ocean by Taximuxi.

The Guir, Guir.
by Ptolomy called Dyos, a small Rivulet, comes out of the Mountain of Temesne,
and loses it self in the Ocean near Almansor.

The Gomer, Gomer.
springing a Mount of that Name, falls into the Midland-Sea, by a place called
also Gomer.

The River Cherzar descends out of Errif, Cherzar.
and enters the Sea a little way distant from Cherzar.

Nokar, Nokar.
by Ptolomy called Mokath, and by Peter Daviyte, Milukar, takes its Rise out of
Mount Elchaus, so running toward the North, and dividing Errif from Gared,
falls into the Mediterranean.

Melulo, Melulo.
a great River descended from Atlas, between Sezar and Dubudu, from whence
visiting the barren Deserts of Tesreft and Tafrata, empties it self into the
Mulukan, taking Head from Atlas six or seven miles from Garcylain, a City of
Chaus; so watering the Deserts here, as also Angued and Garet, falls into the
Mediterranean by the City Cacasa, having first received the Waters of Melulo,
and some others.

Lastly, Muluye.
The Muluye from Atlas, runs from West to East, till disemboguing into the
Midland-Sea by the City Ona, it makes a handsome Haven, by Ptolomy called Malva.

FEZ.
THe Province of Fez has for Boundaries in the West, The Territory of Fez
Burrogreg or Burragrag, as it comes from Temesen, and stretches Eastward to
the River Imnavan, on the North Subu, and part of the Sea between Salle and
Mamorbe; on the South the Mountains of Atlas. Its Length from East to West
about seventeen Miles.

The most Ancient City of this Country is Sale; Sale.
by Ptolomy, Sala; and by some Geographers, Sella; on the Northerly Shore of
the Sea, where the River Buragrag, Beregreg, Sala, or Kumer, flow into it
Southerly, and toward the South opposite to Rabat or Rabald, which also is
styled Salle: so making the Old and New Sale. Nor do the Cities only differ in
Name, but the Inhabitants also; those of Old Salle being called Slousi, those
of New or Rabald, Rabbati; being for the most part Andaluzians, formerly driven
with the Moors out of Spain.

Both these Cities are strongly Walled and Fortified: The Old in a Quadrangular
Form with four Gates; one of which toward the North, is called Sidimusa
Ducala, from a Saint, whose Sepulcher stands about an half hours Journey from
thence; and on the same side a less Gate by a Redoubt: On the Land-side toward
the East are two Gates, one opening to the Burying-place of the Jews, and the
way leading to Mikanez; the other a Percullis'd Gate, like a square Watchtower.

Old Sale is on all sides, except that of the Percullis'd Gate, fortified with
a strong Breast-work, and Palisado intermingled with strong Forts, viz. One of
SALEE
Stone leading to the Point, in the entrance of the River on the Sand, and
Planted with seven or eight Pieces of Cannon: Another also of Stone on the same
side, at the North Point: The third on the Land-side, at the North-East Point:
And the fourth, as it were adjoining to the Portcullis'd Gate. Between the
aforementioned Gate and the Castle, upon the Point of the River, stands a
Block-House, just opposite to such another at New Sale.

The Arabians keep a daily Market in the Old City, bringing thither Butter,
Wheat, Barley, Oil, Cows, Sheep, and other necessary Provisions. In this Market
under the Ground lies the Masmora or Common Prison for the Slaves, receiving
all its Light, with diverse inconveniences, from Iron Grates lying even with the
earth. This was heretofore a large place of Receipt, as appears by the Ruins
of the Walls and Buildings; but at present both in Buildings and Beauty falls
short of New Sale.

Rabad or Rabald, now New Sale, almost also Apiece, New Sale.
stands in a Valley between two high Precipices; those on the Land-side much
higher, and uneasier to ascend, than those on the Seashore.

A double Wall guards the Land-side, the one old, the other new, between which
they reserve a proportion of Land, half as big as the Town, wherein they Sow
yearly several Grains: The outer or new Wall defending the Entrance between the
aforementioned great Hills, boasts an extraordinary Thickness, and the Height
of thirty Foot, or thereabouts; but toward the Sea lies in a manner open.

Three Gates on the Land-side give entrance into it; one on the East, The Gates.
and two on the South, viz. The Gate of Morocco, and the Gate of Temsina.

Close by the River upon a rising Ground, stands Asan, Tower Asan.
a Apiece Tower so called; adjacent to which is a Church built without a
Roof, above and without are Arches about fourteen hundred Foot long, and three
hundred broad, with a square Steeple of Stone two hundred Foot in Compass; the
Ascent to whose Top is so easy and broad, that sometimes attempting, they
scale the Top with Wagons and Horses.

The South Point of the Steeple being toward the Church, stands with a gaping
Rent received by a dreadful Thunderbolt.

Through the Church runs a Brook about thirty Foot deep, and a hundred broad,
made in a Channel or Trough of Stone, guessed to be intended as a Bathing-place
for the Moors.

Here also a strong Castle, called Alkassave, Castle Alkassave.
seems proudly to swell into the bigness of a little City, encompassed with
thick Walls, and a deep dry Trench. Formerly it enclosed two hundred Houses,
which at present are most of them fallen or falling; only one Tower remains,
whose Top is adorned with Mahumetan's Crescents. This Castle was heretofore as
a Seraglio for the King of Morocco's Concubines, to the number of eight
hundred, under the Guard of Eunuchs; but now the Residence and Seat of the
Governors.

Without the City lie several Sconces and Redoubts, made of Loam, and cast up
when the Castle was Besieged, in the Year Sixteen hundred and sixty.

Within these Cities are several Mosques, with enclosed Yards round about, and
without diverse Mesquites.

The Houses, especially in Old Sale, are very small and slightly built, Their
Houses.
though here and there some are richly set out with Carved Work, and Marble
Pillars: Generally they are but one Story high, without any Windows to the
Street, or other opening than the Door; all their Light descends from a Loover
in the midst, about which the Chambers are placed; the whole Edifice
flat-rooft, for convenience of Walking Morning and Evening, for the benefit of
the cool refreshing Air.

The Haven is very spacious, The Haven.
but shallow, having at low Tide not above a Foot, or a Foot and a half Water,
though at full Sea eleven or twelve. Before the Haven lies a Bar, passable at
High Water with laden Barks and Ships, either out or in, whereas when the Tide
is out, they must remain at the Rivers mouth, and unload their Goods into small
Boats; out of which Landed, they carry them through the Gate Sidimusa Ducala,
upon Asses and Camels into the City. This shallowness of the Haven compels the
Corsaires or Pirates of this Place to use light Vessels that draw little Water,
which proves better for the Chase, and more advantageous in their Pyracies, and
also in escaping Ships of greater Burden, whereas they of Algiers, Tunis and
Tripolis, from the convenience of their Haven, put to Sea in greater Vessels.

The Revenue consists in Tributes and Customs of Exported and Imported
Merchandise, The Revenue.
all which pays ten in the Hundred.

The Country People under its Jurisdiction pay the tenth of all their
Land-Fruits for a Tribute. And the Pirates, by their Robberies against the
Christians, bring no small Advantage.

These Cities are now Governed by an Alcaide, The Government.
who with his chosen Council manage all Affairs, either Martial or Civil. In
the Election of a new Governor or Deputy, they proceed with no regularity, the
Commons or Plebeians sometimes setting up one from among themselves, or if it
were possible, below themselves, as they did some few Years since, when without
the consent of the King or Nobles, running together upon the Governors death,
without any the least appearance of Reason, they set up in this mad fit an
Ass-driver, and by their own Authority empowered him; but he soon after his
Advancement using the same severity, rough handling and menaces to his new
Subjects, as toward his old Slave the Ass; they no longer pleased with his so
rigorous Government, kicked him out of the Saddle, and left him to conduct by
those stern Rules his old Servant. Other great Alterations often happen in the
choosing of Governors, insomuch that sometimes it has been known, that there
have been three new Governors in a Month, so often turned out, either out of
the Peoples hatred to them, or for their own Misgovernment; and yet their whole
Jurisdiction reaches no farther than over a few little Cities, and some
wandering Advars, that is, Arabs.

This City has from the first Foundation, been subject to Commotions and
Alterations, but more especially since the coming of the Andaluzian Moors, that
were driven out of Spain, as will presently appear.

During the continuance of the Moors in Spain, which was from the Year Seven
hundred and twelve, (for then they made their Conquests) for Six or seven
hundred Years they kept possession; all which time the Kings of Spain made it
their Masterpiece to drive them out, especially Ferdinando the Fifteenth; for
he taking into serious Consideration the great mischief by them done to the
Christians, and the continual Wars wherewith they infested them, in the Year
Fourteen hundred ninety two, set fiercely upon them, who seeing themselves in a
straight, and even brought under the power and obedience of Ferdinando, seemed
to embrace Christianity, though scarce in outward appearance they were such;
however, it gained them a breathing while, and gave them opportunities of
endeavor, at least to distract that State; so that in the Year Sixteen hundred
and ten, Philip the Third, King of Spain, by an Edict published the Sixteenth
of January, banished them out of his Kingdom, The Andaluzian Moors driven out of
Spain.
and for fear of incurring the penalties thereof, above a Million of Men, Women
and Children of all Sexes, departed within the time limited, the greatest part
of whom taking Ship, passed into Barbary.

But others spread themselves into the East about Constantinople, some came
into France with the consent of the King, who allotted them a place to dwell
in; conditionally, they observed the Roman Catholic Religion, wherein by
performance of their Articles they so fixed themselves, that at this Day some
Families of them are to be found in Provence and Languedoc.

Such of them as pitched at Salee, were admitted with freedom by the King of
Fez and Morocco, believing they might be useful to instruct his People in many
Trades and Handicrafts. Here a while they lived Peaceably, yielding equal
Obedience with the other Subjects; but they soon started aside, and with the
Money, which in great quantities they brought from Spain, bought Arms and some
Ships, wherewith they applied themselves to Roving and Pyracy at Sea,
pretending at first to take from none but the Spaniards, in revenge of their
inflicted Banishment, though indeed and in truth their malice raged upon all
the Christians. It Is true, at the beginning they played fast and loose, under
pretense of Trading and Merchandise, setting up Spanish Flags and Colors in
their Masts and Sterns, and acting all in the name of Spaniards, The
Andaluzjans beginning to take from the Christians.
as they were by Birth and Language, by which they did great Robberies; but at
last this Trick growing stale, they pulled their Vizards off, and declared
themselves openly Pirates and Enemies to all Christians. Whatsoever Prizes they
took, they paid to the King of Morocco, as a Tribute, seven or ten in the
Hundred, as well of Prisoners as of Merchandise. Thus for a time they continued
their Subjection to the King of Morocco, but still waiting an opportunity to
throw off the yoke; and indeed they wanted not a specious pretense, for under
the color of furnishing their Ships, they got into their hands the best Arms
in Salee, of which possessed and instigated by the natural Ambition of the
Country they were bred in, they brought to pass those Designs they had been so
long secretly contriving: For first they made themselves Masters of the
Alkassave, They rise up against the King of Morocco.
or Castle of Salee, and by that means of the City; which done, they disarmed
the Moors, banished the Natives, and expelled all the King of Morocco's
Officers; and for their Assistance they invited to them other exiled
Andaluzians, by whose help they took up Arms and declared themselves no more to
be Governed by Kings.

As soon as the King heard of this Insurrection, The Agreement of the King of
Fez.
he immediately sent an Army thither to block up the City, which by the Charm
or Magic of a Rebel Santon or Marabou, called Layassen, an inveterate Enemy to
the King, so routed and afflicted the Royal Army, that the King was
necessitated to break up the Siege; yet before he marched off, he made with the
Rebels these Articles following.

That they did acknowledge Him for their Chief, and as a Token of their
Submission, should every Year, as a Tribute, present some Slaves.

That the King should appoint them Officers to do Justice, and hear and decide
Causes among them.

That the City and the Castle should remain in their Custody.

Thus rested Affairs for a while, but the King at last got possession of the
Fort, and settled a Garrison in it; which the Andaluzian Moors for some time
murmured at, but at length, in the Year Sixteen hundred and sixty, they began
again to take up Arms against those of the Castle, New Insurrections of the
Andaluzians.
beleagured before by about two thousand Soldiers of Santa Crux, and other
Places, under the Command of one Hamed Aginnivi, which at last so far
prevailed, that on the tenth of February the Citizens of both the Cities joined
Forces with him to beleaguer and straighten the Castle, though with little hope
of suddenly obtaining it; whereupon in the City they cast up several Works and
Fortifications of Loam, from whence, with Muskets, for want of great Guns, they
daily alarmed those of the Castle; the like did they of Old Salee with their
great Guns. On the other side, the Besieged were not wanting to defend
themselves, both with great and small Shot, which they plied with such effect,
that they killed many as well in the Works as the Streets; whereupon
considering with themselves, and finding their own strength too weak for their
Designs, They send a Chief Officer to Gailand.
they sent to Abdulkada Gailand, Lord of Arzile, Tituan and Alkazer, a chief
Officer, to crave his Assistance, whereto he presently consented, dispatching
thither Abdelkador Ceron, to look to New Salce; and Hadzi Fenis, with Hadzi
Ibrahim Manino, to take charge of the Old City. Ceron had not long continued in
his new Government, before he was treacherously surprised in his House, his
Neck broke, and his Body cut to pieces; whose Death, as it begot no small
terror in the hearts of the Citizens, so it heightened the hopes of those in
the Castle. Nor did this rebellious Faction contain it self within the Walls,
but as other infections, spread into the Country adjoining; where not only
Towns, but every Family were divided into Parties, by which Contrast and
Separation among themselves, minding solely their mad Disputes, the Ground lay
neglected, Tillage and Husbandry thrown by, whereby so great a Famine followed,
that in the Year Sixteen hundred and sixty, many thousands perished for want of
sustenance.

In like manner, The secret Conveyance of Provision by the Citizens to them in
the Castle.
those in the Castle were distressed for want of Provisions, notwithstanding
some Citizens sent them underhand Supplies almost daily, partly out of a sense
of their Duty to the King, and partly out of a desire of their own gain, though
upon Discovery many of them were severely punished for it. Besides, the English
were great Supporters of the loyalty of those in the Castle, by sending in to
them Provision of all kinds from their Ships, which then lay in the River; as
on the contrary, the French and Hollanders animated the Rebels.

In the end, The Agreement.
after the Wars had thus continued a while, Sid Tagar, Gailand's Brother, came
with about Three hundred Horse from Arzile to Salee, to make a Peace with those
of the Castle, which upon the fifteenth and sixteenth day of April, in the Year
Sixteen hundred sixty four, was concluded, to the great rejoicing of the
Inhabitants, upon Condition that of all the Contributions or Tenth-Moneys,
which the Goods imported produced, one third Part should go to the Castle,
another to New Salee, and the last third Part to Old Salee.

On the third of May, Gailand was owned by those of the Castle for their Lord,
and as a token of their Joy, these Volleys of Cannon-shot made Proclamation
thereof; and the next day his Brother Sid Tagar drew away with his Soldiers to
Arzile.

But the fifth of October came Gailand himself in Person, accompanied with
three or four hundred Horse from Arzile, and pitched by the River; about eight
in the Morning he was invited by the Governor Sid Hamed Aginnivy, into the
Castle, which the next day was delivered up, The Castle delivered up to Gayland.
beyond expectation of all that were concerned; which done, the sixteenth
Gayland withdrew again to Arzile, having the beforementioned Aginnivy and Sid
Hamed el Xhymir Governors of it for him.

The tenth of December, Sid Hamed Aginnivy took his Colleague Governor and put
him in Hold, charging him to have concealed a hundred weight of Silver from Sid
Abdala, the former Lord of the Castle, and fined him a thousand Pesoes or
Pieces of Eight.

The twenty ninth of March, in the Year Sixteen hundred sixty five, another of
Gayland's Brothers, Sid Sybi came thither, and took away with him all the
principal Persons of Salee, whom on the second of the same month he carried to
Arzile, thrusting into the City a Garrison of Two thousand Horse and Foot.
During the time of his stay, he was very friendly received by Sid Hamed;
however, he cashiered the old Soldiers of Santa Crux, and other Places, who had
so long guarded the Castle; and not only so, but took from some of them what
they had, and Imprisoned others. These tyrannies produced new Commotions; for
on the one and thirtieth in the Morning, the Andaluzians and their Accomplices
chose Sid Abdulkadar Merino Commander in Chief, sending the former Prisoner to
the Castle. In like manner Xache Brahim Manino, Lieutenant of Old Salee, they
displaced, and put into his stead Xache Fenis.

The first of April, Sid Tybi with his own Hand, led Sid Hamed Aginnivy out at
the Gate of the Castle, under the Custody of Abulkadar, but after a little stay
he was discharged and set at liberty, with a Reward of Two hundred Ducats: The
same Day most of the Women also were sent out of the Castle to Old Salee; but
Aginnivy not contented with this, as he thought too slight a reward, the third
day after took his Journey toward Arzile, to make his Complaint to Gayland.
But the two and twentieth, tidings came to Salee, that upon Friday before their
Passover, he died suddenly, not without great suspicion of Poison.

The two and twentieth of August, the Governors of the City took Merino and
Xache Fenis, with one Abulkadar Roxo, to Arzile, and returned to Salee the
fourth of September.

The sixteenth of June, in the Year Sixteen hundred sixty and six, Gailand,
Lord of Alkazir, drew into the Field against Muly Resis, King of Tafilet,
Brother to the King of Fez; but three Days after came back again to Alkazir:
About two Days after he drew into the Field again, was met by the King of
Tafilet, routed and put to Flight, with the loss of many, and revolt of more
Soldiers, to the Kings side; Gailand himself wounded with a Semiter, escaping
to Alkazir, but not daring to trust himself there, within an hour fled to
Arzile. The King without any opposition took in Alkazir, whereupon Tituan and
Old and New Salee fell to him; so that now the City and Castle was once more
reduced under the Power of the King of Fez. Once before the Portugues took it,
but were not able to hold it long ere it returned to the right Owner.

In the Year Sixteen hundred fifty nine, in July, three Ambassadors came from
Salee to the States of the United Provinces, to renew a League, begun Anno One
thousand six hundred fifty one, and Confirmed in April, One thousand six
hundred fifty seven; and further to treat of Matters relating to the Benefit of
both Parties, and after many Conferences they agreed on certain Articles; which
not relating to the purpose, and being too long for our way of carrying on this
Design, we need not mention. After about two Months stay, viz. on the two and
twentieth of October, they took their leaves and departed. We have here for
Rarities sake, given you in two Sculps; the foregoing showing the Habits of the
Ambassadors, and the ensuing that of their Servants that were in their Retinue;
by which Glimps you have as it were a View of the Country in that Part. And
now since we are upon the several Revolutions of Sale, we will give you an
Account of one particular Passage, relating as much to the Honor of the
English Nation, as any one Occurrent within the last Century.

When Sydan, the third Son of Hamet, after the Death of his Father and
Brothers, had possessed himself of the Kingdom of Fez, though afterward stripped
both of that and Morocco for a time, by the several opposite Factions in those
Kingdoms, commanded by Hamet Ben Abdela, a Religious, but hypocritical
Heremite, who hoping to get all for himself, was opposed by Sid Hean, that took
part with Sydan; by which assistance the Tumults at last were pacified in some
measure; yet nevertheless a rabble of Pirates invested themselves in this chief
Port of Fez, inabling themselves thereby to do him infinite mischief, both by
Sea and Land, and not to him only, but all others whose business of Trade drew
them into those infested Seas. Many fruitless Attempts he made upon them, so
that considering his own weakness at Sea for want of Shipping, he sent an
Ambassador unto King Charles the First of England, to desire his Assistance;
Nor did that Pious Prince need much Importuning to put his hand to so good a
Work, for he soon dispatched thither the requested Aids, by whose Assistance
Sydan became Master of the Town, unroosted and punished the Pirates, and sent
Three hundred Christian-Slaves freed for a Present to his Majesty. Nor staid he
there, but raising his thoughts to a higher Pitch of General Good, he sent
another Ambassador with a Letter to His Majesty, to give him the like
Assistance against Algiers, who Roved with as much Cruelty through the
Mediterrane, as the Salee-Men before had done over the Atlantic. The which
Letter savouring of more than Mahumetan Piety, and much conducing to the King
of Great Britains Honor, we will Insert for Satisfaction.

THE King of Moroccos Letter TO KING CHARLES The FIRST, of ENGLAND.


WHEN these our Letters shall be so happy as to come to Your Majesty's Sight, I
wish the Spirit of the Righteous God may so direct your Mind, that you may
joyfully embrace the Message I send. The Regal Power allotted to Us, makes Us
common Servants to our Creator, then of those People whom we Govern: So that
observing the Duties We owe to God, We deliver Blessings to the World; in
providing for the public good of Our Estates, We magnify the Honor of God
like the Celestial Bodies, which though they have much Veneration, yet serve
only to the Benefit of the World. It is the excellency of Our Office to be
Instruments whereby Happiness is delivered unto the Nations. Pardon me, Sir!
This is not to Instruct, (for I know I speak to one of a more clear and quick
sight than my self) but I speak this because God has pleased to grant Me a
happy Victory over some part of those Rebellious Pirates, that so long have
molested the peaceable Trade of Europe, and has presented further occasion to
root out the Generation of those, who have been so pernicious to the good of
Our Nations: I mean since it has pleased God to be so cuspicious to Our
beginnings in the Conquest of Sale, that We might join and proceed in hope of
like Success in the War of Tunis, Algiers, and other Places (Dens and
Receptacles for the inhumane Villainies of those who abhor Rule and Government.)
Herein whilst We interrupt the corruption of Malignant spirits of the World, We
shall glorify the great God, and perform a Duty that will shine as glorious as
the Sun and Moon, which all the Earth may see and reverence; a Work that shall
ascend as sweet as the Perfume of the most precious Odours, in the Nostrils of
the Lord; a Work grateful and happy to Men; a Work whose Memory shall be
reverenced so long as there shall be any remaining amongst Men that love and
honor the Piety and Virtue of Noble Minds. This Action I here willingly
present to You, whose Piety and Virtues equal the Greatness of Your Power; that
We who are Vicegerents to the Great and Mighty God, may hand in hand triumph in
the Glory which the Action presents unto us. Now because the Islands which You
Govern have been ever Famous for the unconquered Strength of their Shipping, I
have sent this my trusty Servant and Ambassador, to know whether in Your
Princely Wisdom You shall think fit to assist Me with such Forces by Sea as
shall be answerable to those I provide by Land, which if You please to grant, I
doubt not but The Lord of Hosts will protect and assist those that Fight in so
glorious a Cause. Nor ought You to think this strange, that I, who so much
reverence the Peace and Accord of Nations, should exhort to a War. Your Great
Prophet CHRIST JESUS was the Lion of the Tribe of JUDAH, as well as the Lord
and Giver of Peace, which may signify unto You, That he which is a Lover and
Maintainer of Peace, must always appear with the Terror of his Sword, and
wading through Seas of Blood, must arrive to Tranquillity. This made JAMES Your
Father of glorious Memory, so happily Renowned among all Nations: It was the
Noble Fame of Your Princely Virtues, which resounds to the utmost corners of
the Earth, that persuaded me to invite You to partake of that Blessing wherein
I boast my self most Happy. I wish God may heap the Riches of his Blessings on
You, increase Your Happiness with Your Days, and hereafter perpetuate the
Greatness of Your Name in all Ages.

But now to return to the Course of our History.

Two large Miles from Salee, Tefensare.
there lies another ancient City, called Tefensare, or according to Sanutus,
Fansare, and by Marmol supposed to be Ptolomy's Banasse.

In the same Place, Mahmore.
at the Mouth of the River Subu, stood formerly the City Maamore, or Mahmore,
destroyed in the Moorish Civil Wars; Emmanuel King of Portugal sailing into
that Country, pleased with the situation, erected a Fort there, Anno Fifteen
hundred and fifteen, which e're made well defensive, the King of Fez his
Brother came with an Army of Fifteen thousand strong, with which defeating the
Portugues, he utterly raised King Emmanuels new erected Work. But the King of
Spain, in the Year Sixteen hundred and fourteen, set forth a Fleet to scour the
Seas, and also chase away the Pirates that sculking sheltered in those Parts,
and in the same Spot raised a new Fortress, which with the assistance of the
Citadel Larache, kept all the neighboring Coast and Country in awe, and also
improved the Haven for safer riding of Shipping.

Mequinez, Mequinez.
and by some called Mecknesse and Mechnase, and by the English, Mikernez,
seventy Spanish Miles from Salee, twenty from Mahmore, twelve from Fez, and six
from the Great Atlas, close by a River; it is an old City, by Ptolomy, as
Marmol says, Leo Afric.
called Silde, formerly furnished with Six thousand Houses, and very strong
Walls, fair Churches, Three Colleges, twelve great Bannia's, large and
spacious Streets, and a commodious Stream.

Tifelfelt, Tefelfelt.
or Tefelfelt, a small City ( Ptolomy's Tamusige) in a Valley, four Miles
distant from Mahmore, and three from the Ocean, now nothing but Ruins, and a
Receptacle for wild Arabs, and the like Robbers.

Gemaa el Hamem, Gemaa el Hamem.
or Gemei Elchmen, or Elchmel, is an old City, on a Plain, four Miles from
Mequinez, Southward, East from Fez, and three from Mount Atlas, but much harmed
by the late Wars; insomuch, that the Churches and Houses stand all bare, the
Roofs lying on the Floors, which confusion makes it rather a Den of Thieves
than a City, being nothing else but lurking holes for those inhumane Purchasers.

Hamis Metagare, or Kamis Metgare, Hamis Metagare.
close by the way that goes from Morocco to Fez, between the City Gemaa el
Hamem and Fez, four Miles from either of them, lay formerly waste and
uninhabited; but afterward by the Moors banished out of Granada, Peopled and
brought to its pristine State and Condition.

Beni Becil, or Beni Basil, another City, lately wasted by the Wars, Beni Becil.
but now Repaired, situate between Fez and Mequinez, on the Banks of the small
River called Heud Nigh, which with the Fountain Ain Zork, half a Mile above the
aforesaid City, takes it Original out of the same Place.

Makarmede, by Marmol taken to be the Erpis of Ptolomy, Makarmede.
lies six Miles from Fez, Eastward, and is wasted by the same Civil Wars.

Habad, or Rabat, by some called Hubbed, is a Castle, Habad.
environed with strong Walls, built by Mahumetan Priests, opposite to Sale, so
standing, that from thence they have a large Prospect of all the adjacent
Country. The Opinion is, that this Town or Citadel formerly was large and very
Potent, but now in a low and miserable condition, Inhabited by Moors and wild
Arabs, that only live from hand to mouth, by Forage and Plunder, having no
Commerce, pretending Vassalage to the Kings of Morocco.

Zavie, or Zaquie, held to be Ptolomy's Volusse, built by Joseph the Second,
Zavie.
a King of the Marine Family, lies four Miles from Fez, almost wholly Ruined,
the chief remaining part being now converted into an Hospital.

Halvan, or according to some, Chanban, a Walled Village, Halvan.
lying two Miles Eastward from Fez, at the River Sebu, or Subu, having without
the Walls a Hot Bath, with very fair Inns.

But the most Eminent City of all is Fez, called by the Mahumetans, The City
Fez.
Western-Court, and by some held to be Silde, by others the Volubilis of
Ptolomy. This City was first founded, Anno Eight hundred and one, by one Idris,
the natural Son of Idris, by his Handmaid, he being a dispossessed Arabian
Patriarch. The Original of the Name Fez, is by some brought from the Arabian
word Fez, signifying Gold, because at the first breaking of the Ground, to lay
the Foundation, there was Golden Oar found; but others will have it from the
River Fez, which Waters the City.

It stands remoted from the Sea a hundred Miles, The Form of it.
with rough and almost inaccessible ways to it. The Form is a Quadrangular
Oblong, hedged in on every side with Suburbs, all encompast with high and
stately Walls, wrought artificially with Brick and Freestone, fortified round
about with Towers, but few Redoubts, according to the Modern, but only
Flanker'd at the Gates, which are in all eighty six; some of them Water-Gates,
a Stream running through them: So near surrounded with Hills, that there
remains no more Level, but what the City stands upon. It is divided into twelve
Wards or Precincts, containing sixty two spacious Markets, set with Artificers
and Tradesmens Shops round about, above two hundred Eminent Streets, together
with a great number of cross and by-Lanes, all which are adorned on both sides
with large and stately Edifices, besides seven hundred Mosques, a great number
of Colleges, Hospitals, Mills, and common Bannia's. This as to the general, we
shall now make a more particular Inquisition.

The River Fez, which Paulus Jovius calls Rhasalme, passes through the City in
two Branches; one runs Southward toward New Fez, and the other West; each of
these again subdividing into many other clear running Channels through the
Streets, serving not only each private House, but Churches, Inns, Hospitals,
and all other public Places, to their great Conveniences.

Round about the Mosques are a hundred and fifty Common-Houses of Easement,
built Apiece, and divided into Single-Stool-Rooms, each furished with a
Cock and a Marble Cistern, which scowreth and keeps all neat and clean, as if
these Places were intended for some sweeter Employment.

Here also are two hundred and fifty Bridges, Like London Bridge before the
Fire.
many of which are built on both sides, that they are not only Thorow-fares,
but of all Trades there.

There are eighty six public Springs or Wells, which afford the Citizens
abundance of Water, besides six hundred other in Palaces, Hospitals, and great
Buildings.

The Houses are artificially built of Bricks, The Houses.
and Stones; their Fronts Carved out with all sorts of Imagery; the Rooms and
Galleries, of Brick and Tile, and portrayed with Flowers and variety of
Colors; and for the greater luster, they shine with a rare Varnish.

The Cielings and Beams of the Rooms are commonly Gilt, Carved, and Painted
with delightful Colors; the Roofs are flat, and artificially laid with
Pavements, which in Summer are cool Reposes.

Here their Houses are two or three Stories high with Galleries; the middle of
the House lying always open, with Rooms on each side, having high and broad
Doors, furnished to the whole Length with a great Press or Chest of Drawers, in
which they lay up their Habits, or what ever else they have a great esteem for.

The Galleries rest upon Pilasters made either of Brick or Marble, painted and
varnished over after the manner of a Piazza or Terrast-Walk.

Many Houses have Stone Cisterns, ten or twelve Cubits long, six or seven
broad, and six or seven Foot deep, handsomely painted and varnished over, under
which stands a Marble Trough, receiving the redundant Water of the Cistern.
They are kept pure and clean, though never kept covered, but in Summer when
Men, Women, and Children bathe in it.

The Houses have also commonly peculiar Turrets, something elevated from the
rest, in which when they go abroad they secure their Wives; who to pass the
time with more content, from thence have a full Survey of the whole City.

Of the seven hundred Mosques there, The Churches.
above half a hundred are very spacious, and of great Reception, and stately
built on Marble Pillars, mingled with Stone Fountains on the Tops. They are
built after the manner of our Churches in Europe, vaulted with Wooden Arches;
but the Floors are covered with matted Rush, so close and neatly joined
together, that the Seams can hardly be seen, nor any dust come through: And the
Walls also in the same manner matted above six foot high.

The most Eminent Mosque in this City, The chief Church.
is called Karuven, which Gramay says is half a Mile in Compass, with thirty
Porticoes, every one of an extraordinary Height and Breadth, with a Roof of an
hundred and fifty Cubits long, and eighty Cubits broad. The Tower or Steeple of
it, whence they daily cry aloud, and set up certain Flags to give notice to
call the people to the Sala, or their Divine Service, is exceeding high, and
being built not Square, but Quadrangular Oblongo, stands supported in Breadth
with twenty, and in Length with thirty Marble Pillars; under which are always
above four hundred Vessels of Water to wash in before Prayers: Round about
stand several Cloisters, each of forty Cubits in Length, and thirty in Breadth,
wherein all sorts of Church Utensils, as Oil, Lamps, and Mats, are kept. There
are in that Church above nine hundred Arches with Marble Pillars, at each of
which hangs a lighted Lamp.

About a Mile from hence lies New-Fez, a glorious Structure, New-Fez.
built by one Jacob, son of the First Abdullach, of the Marine Family, in a
rich and delightful Plain; one Arm of the River on the Northside runs into the
City, and the other makes its Entry on the Southside, taking a view of the
Castle, and the College of King Abuhinam, who named it, The White City; but
the common People, New-Fez: Founded at the first only to be the nearer to the
King of Telesin, who at the beginning of his Reign had been his great Enemy.

He divided it into three parts; the first allotted to be the Kings Palace, It
was divided into three Parts.
and a Residence for the Children and Brothers of the King; wherein were
contained many Gardens, stately Mosques, and Chambers for Accounts and Receipts
of the Revenue: Round about were Mansions for Artificers; in the midst
Dwellings for Receivers, Treasurers, Laborers, Notaries, Accomptants, and
Secretaries. Near the Treasury-Chamber was the Goldsmiths Row, and other
Conveniences for the Assay-Master, and Master of the Mint.

The second Part he set out for a Palace for his Courtiers, Officers, and chief
Men, contained within a Line of Fifteen hundred Paces, from East to West, and
adjoining to a Market, set round about with Shops of Merchants and Artificers.
The third Part was at first the Quarters of the Kings Lifeguard, but now is
for the most part Inhabited by Jews and Goldsmiths.

This New City has no fewer Mosques, Baths, and Colleges, than the Old. Here
is an ingenious Water-Work, the Invention of a Spaniard, having many great
Wheels, each of which turn but once round in four and twenty Hours, and convey
Water out of the River into Cisterns, from whence again through Leaden-Pipes,
the Palaces, Gardens, Mosques, Baths and Colleges are all plentifully served.

This City was brought to full Perfection in an Hundred and forty Years, being
environed with strong Walls, and accommodated with Conveniences and Ornaments
fit for a City, except the forementioned Water-Work, which it had not of
diverse Years after, being only contented with Water brought thither from a
Spring, ten Miles distant through Pipes, by the contrivance of a Genoese.

THe Mountains of this Province are, Zalagh, Zarhon, Tagat, and Gereygure.
Zalagh somewhat more than half a Mile distant from Fez Northward, The Mountains
of Fez.
begins on the East Side of the River Subu, and extending four Miles
Westward on which is situate Lampte a fair Town, supposed by Marmol to be the
Bobrise of Ptolomy.

Zarhou, called by the Inhabitants, Zarahanum, appearing first in the Plains of
Eceis or Aseis, three Miles from Fez, and stretching eight Miles Westward. It
is properly under the Jurisdiction of Mequinez, and contains forty Hamlets or
Villages; lying among the Green Olive Trees, wherewith it is every where
abundantly shadowed.

Titulit standing on the top of it, was formerly the Chief City of this
Territory, two Miles in Compass; but by King Joseph, of the Race of the
Almoraviden, utterly destroyed, and has ever since remained waste, only that
fifteen or twenty Alsakues or Priests reside there, in so many Houses standing
about the Mosque. Some report, there yet remains a City, commonly called,
Elkazar-Pharon, that is, Pharaoh's Palace; but by Geographers, Kazar Zarahanum,
being three Miles from Titulit, with a small River on each side, and shadowed
round about with Groves of Olive. This City was ruined the same time with
Titulit, there being at present no other Remainder of it, but a Marketplace
called Larbaa el Haibar, frequented every Wednesday by the People of Fez and
Mequinez. But Dar el Hamare, which Marmol thinks is The Epitiane of Ptolomy,
stands here yet without any injury, and well Peopled, though the Inhabitants
are mightily terrified with Lions, coming thither frequently to seek Prey.

At the Foot of this Mountain, near the way from Mequinez to Fez, appear the
Ruins of Gemae, formerly called Gotiane, destroyed by King Abu-saiid, of the
Benimerin Race.

Tagat or Togat, two Miles West from Fez, and extending from West to East two
Miles, as far as the River Bu Nacer.

Guerygure is very populous, close to Atlas, three Miles from Fez, between the
Plains of Eceis and Adhasen: Here rises the Head of the River Aguber, that
after a short Western Course joins with the Stream Beber.

IN this Province also, six Miles from Fez, lie the Plains of Eceis or Aseis,
full of Villages and Inhabitants, and Beniguarten Vale, containing about two
hundred Residences of the Arabs.

This Jurisdiction produces great abundance of Grain, The Quality of the Soil
of the Territory of Fez.
Cotton, and Flax, even to admiration; as also variety of Fruits, especially
Figs, Almonds, Olives, and large Grapes; Horses, Camels, Oxen, Sheep, Goats,
Deer, and Hares breed here in great numbers: But this Plenty of all Necessaries
is attended with a great Inconvenience; for the Air of the Country ten Miles
in Length, and five in Breadth, Westward from Old Fez, is infectious and
unhealthful, causing in the Inhabitants a pale yellow Color, and casting them
into malignant and other mortal Diseases.

The whole Country is full of Gardens, wherein grows Flax, Melons, Citrons,
Beets, Herbs, and all sorts of such Plants in such vaste quantities, that it is
said, that the Gardeners in Summer bring five thousand Wagons with Fruit and
Herbs to Market, and little less in Winter. The Soil is so rich, that they
plough it not, but only sprinkle it in May with Watering-pots; with which small
cost and pains it produces infinite variety of Fruits, very delightful in
taste, only the Peaches are waterish, and not very well relishing.

Besides this Fertility of the Land, the Rivers are wonderously stored with
Fish of diverse kinds, especially that by the Spaniards called Sabalos.

The Land about Salee produces multitudes of Box-Trees, and other Wood,
whereof the Inhabitants make Combs. Much Cotton also, but little Grain, by
reason of the Sandiness of the Soil.

The Country about Mahmore is on one side shadowed with stately Oaks; but the
other affords excellent Pasture for Cattle, abundance of Oranges, but Dates
beyond imagination. There are also very large Oxen, and besides Goats, Hens,
Partridges, Pigeons, and other tame and useful Creatures.



The Woods breed the strongest and fiercest Lions in all Africa, to the great
annoyance of the People: Nor do they want good Honey and Sugarcanes, in the
use whereof they were ignorant, till the Moors banished out of Spain taught them
how to extract it.

The Moors Country produces many excellent Fruits, especially great Quinces,
Granates, White and Damask Plumbs, large Figs, Grapes, which they eat fresh
gathered, Peaches, and abundance of Olives and Flax.

Upon Mount Zalagh grow Vines, yielding singular sweet and delicious Raisins.

Mount Zarhonne is covered with Olive Trees, that afar off it seems to be a
Wood.

Tefelfelt stands among Woods, wherein many fierce Lions frequent. In the
Plains of Aseis or Adhasen, the Lions are so timorous, that a man, nay a very
woman, will either by chiding or blows make them fly.

The Diet of the Inhabitants of Fez, Their Food.
agrees with that of all other Mahumetan People of Barbary, making three Meals
a day: For Breakfast, they eat a little Fruit and Bread, with thin Pap made of
Meal; but in Winter, Sops made in the Broth of Salt Flesh, such as we in
England usually call Brewis. At Dinner, they have in Summer Flesh with Sallets
of Lettice or Cabbadge, Cheese, Olives, and Melon-Broth. At Supper, nothing but
Bread with Melons, or Raisins, or Milk; but in the Winter, boiled Flesh with
Couscous, but seldom Roast-meat. This is the ordinary Fare of common Citizens;
but Persons of State or Quality have many additional Delicacies. The Tables are
low, without Table-Clothes or Knives, pulling their Meat in pieces with their
Fingers. They put Flesh and Pottage in the same Dish, out of which every one
may take what he pleases. They never drink till they have done eating, and then
conclude their Meal with it.

The Men of Fez that have any Estate, wear a Habit in the Winter, The Habit of
the Men of Fez.
made of Foreign Cloth; over that a Cassock or Tunick with short Sleeves; and
over all another large Cloak, clasped before upon the Breast; and on their
Heads they put Caps like Night-coifs. The poorer sort wear a loose Jacket, with
a Mantle over it, and slight Quoives on their Heads.

The Women also go fashionably clad, The Habit of the Women.
wearing in Summer a Shift only; but in Winter a Coat with wide Sleeves: When
they go abroad, they put on long Drawers that reach to their Knees, then throw
over their Heads a Cloth that covers them all over, and a Mask. The better sort
wear Gold Earrings with precious Stones and Jewels; but the meaner content
themselves with Silver ones without Jewels. On their Arms and Legs they wear
Chains also, and a peculiar sort of Slippers fastened on with Silk Bands.

The Arabs living thereabouts, The Habit of the Arabians.
commonly wear a Garment which they call Baraguan, wrapped about their body, and
a red Bonnet. All the rest go naked, only one Clout girt about their Waste,
and hanging down almost to the Knees.

THe Government of Fez is Monarchical, Their Government.
heretofore called Cheriffs; but now Kings, who are very potent. But neither
they nor any other Mahumetan Kings use either Scepter, Crown, or Throne, but
only a low Seat covered over with Cloth of Gold, and a Cushion set with Pearls
and precious Stones.

When the King perceives, The choosing of their Kings.
or feels, that his Death approaches, he calls all his Lords and Noblemen
about him, and ties them by Oath to choose his Son or Brother, or some one he
has a favor to for his Successor; which they all take, but little regard it
after the Kings Decease, choosing another, not to fulfill his will, but their
own pleasure.

In Fez, People of several Countries in Fez.
People of all Countries reside; as English, French, Hollanders, Tartars,
Persians, and Eastern Greeks, each of them having a Consul there to manage the
business of Merchandise: But the common Inhabitants are Moors, the Offspring of
those formerly banished out of Spain, as we declared before.

THe Nobility here are threefold, The Nobility of Fez threefold.
each distinguished from other by peculiar Marks. The first are noble in Blood,
as descended from Honorable Ancestors; others become Noble by Offices and
Employment; the third are so esteemed for their great Wealth and Riches: but
all enjoy the same and equal Privileges. They are very proud and disdainful
both in their Speech and Behavior toward Strangers, but according to their
Obligations without any reluctance, attend the King in his Wars. In this one
City, they say there are above three thousand Noble Families.

THe Jews are numerous not only in Fez, Their Religion.
but spread through the whole Kingdom, where it is supposed they amount to
eight hundred thousand. Among them are many Goldsmiths, for the Moors must not
meddle in that Trade, being prohibited by the Alcoran. These have also a
Consul, by whom the Stamps for Money are kept, which they only License to be
Coined in the New City.

The Inhabitants are either Mahumetans, The Inhabitants of Fez are of three
sorts.
Jews, or Christians: But the Mahumetans being far the greater number, have the
chief Command in all things, though there be as many Sects of them in Fez
alone, as in all the Turkish Empire: there being some principal Teachers or
Heads of every Faction seated here, which as Marabouts or Saints, give Rules to
their Followers.

TEMESNE, or TEMECENE.
THis Jurisdiction, the most Westerly part of the Kingdom of Fez, The Borders
of the Territory of Temesus.
has for bound on the East, the River Buragrag; on the West, the River
Ommirabih; on the North, the Great Ocean; and on the South, Atlas. The length,
from East to West, is accounted Seventeen Miles, and the breadth Thirty.

This was formerly so flourishing a Country, that it contained Forty, or, Joan
Leo.
as Gramay says, a Hundred and twenty great Cities, Three hundred good Towns,
and exceeding many Villages, some whereof as good as Walled Cities; most of
which are so totally ruined in their Civil Wars, that scarce any remainders of
them can be found.

The most eminent Places now in being, toward the Sea, are Cape Cocor, The Cape
of Cocor.
a few Miles Northward of the River Ommirabih, Escossor, Cabo del Camelo, that
is, Camels Cape, and the City Anasfe, or Anfa, built by the Romans on the Coast
of the Atlantike, Twenty Miles North from Atlas, Eighteen Westward from Azamor,
and about Nineteen from Rabat: here is a strong Fort, built by the Arabians,
who keep in i^ a great Garrison.

This City triumphed formerly in stately Mosques, magnificent Palaces, Shops
and Warehouses of rich Merchandise: of all which at present nothing remains but
decayed heaps of Rubbish. This desolation was thrown upon it by the Portuguese
in so fatal an hour, that it has never been repaired.

Almansora, or Mansora, was built by Almansor, King of Morocco, Almansora.
by the River Guir, in a delightful Plain, Two small Miles from the Ocean, and
about Twenty from Rabat, now thinly inhabited by the Arabians.

Sala, or Sella, a Place distinct from the beforementioned Salee, Sala.
built by the Romans on the River Buragrag, Two little Miles from the
Atlantike, and One from Rabat. King Mansor erected here a stately Mosque and
Princely Palace, with a Marble Portico and Chapel adjoining, artificially
beautified with all manner of Carved Work, wherein he had ordered his Body to
be laid after his Death: which accordingly was performed, and a Marble Stone,
whereon was Engraven an Epitaph, laid at his Head, and another at his Feet, and
ever since all his Successors have been there Interred.

On the same Shore you may see Rotima, the Cape of Sale, or Sala, Rotima.
and some small Islands, the greatest of which is supposed to be the Pena of
the Ancients.

Rabat, a great City, thought to be the Oppium of Ptolomy, and Key of Barbary,
situate upon a great Rock, to the East of the River Buragrag, which there
falls into the Ocean, has for its defense a strong Castle, and for Ornament
many Mosques, Palaces, Shops, and Bathes; without on the South Side stands a
high Tower, discernable far off at Sea, and consequently a good Mark for
Sailers. Half a Mile from hence lies the ruinous City Menkale.

INland Places are, Nuchaile, a small demolished City: Adendum, Nuchaile.
Adendum.
formerly called Ekath, Four Miles from Mount Atlas, and Seven from Nuchaile:
Tegeget, or Tegegilt, near the River Ommirabib, in the Way from Tedle to Fez:
Tegeget.
Hain el Chelu, a small, but populous City upon a Plain: Maderauvan, Hain el
Chelu. Mader-Anvan.
or Madaravan, formerly Dorath, seated on the River Buragraph, Six Miles from
Atlas:

Thagia, Thagia.
or Dagia, is a small City, forty Miles from Fez: heretofore a Place of great
note, for the Sepulchers of diverse Holy Men, who miraculously restrained, or
drove away the Lions: for which kindness the Inhabitants of Fez, and other
Places, go Thirty yearly in Pilgrimage, with much seeming Devotion.

Zarfa, Zarfa.
a mere heap of Ruins, yet affording shelter to some Country people.

THe Soil of this Province is every where Flat, The Quality of this Territory.
and Fertile, by reason of the River wherewith it is Watered, yielding great
store of Corn, especially in the Plains of Anfe: which, as also Mansora, Rabat,
and Zarfa abound with Fruits, especially Oar, by the Inhabitants called Rabih,
in Shape like a Cherry, but having the Taste of A pleasant Pectoral Fruit.
Jujubes: they bear also excellent Melons, which growing ripe in April before
those of Fez, and carried thither, find a quick Market: and so their Grapes.
But Thagia, by reason of the coldness of the Air, is so Barren, that it affords
neither Corn nor Fruits, yet sends forth great store of Honey, which yields to
the Inhabitants a profitable Return. Goats are here very numerous; so also very
fierce Lions, and Leopards, whose daily ranging strikes great terror into the
people. The Pastures of Tegeget feed all sorts of Cattle. Adendum and Mader
Auran, from their own Veins, furnish them with Iron.

THe Citizens of Anfe go neatly Clad, The Manners and Constitutions of the
Inhabitants.
and drive a great Trade with the English and Portuguese: but that that proved
most to their prejudice, were their Pyracies, especially those committed upon
the people of Cadiz, which not only took away the kindness of Commerce, but
turned their Trading Friends to Enemies. Those of Thagia were Dull, Clownish,
and Ill-natured.

Temesne was formerly so mighty and populous, The Power of the Inhabitants of
Temesne.
that it sent into the Field again Joseph-Aben-Tefzin, the first Builder of
Morocco, an Army of Fifty thousand Men, to drive him out of the Country; but
upon the approach of the King's Forces, such a Panick fear consternated their
minds, that they fled, not making the least resistance, to Fez, King Joseph
pursuing them at their heels into their Country, which he laid waste, burning
and destroying all before him. The King of Fez also fearing the Conqueror, not
only refused to give protection to those that were by flight come thither, but
fell upon them with equal fury, making the like slaughter: which violent
prosecution raging against them so fiercely for ten whole Months, the Country
was in a manner utterly depopulated, and Temesne a harbor for wild beasts.
After a Hundred and fifty years, King Mansor finding it then unpeopled, gave it
to some Arabians, who inhabited there near Fifty years; but them, together with
Marcer, were expelled by the Kings of the Family of Lunfun. And since that, the
People of Zanete and Haore, by the Marin Princes were Seated here, viz. about
the Year Fifteen hundred, and therein have so well thriven, that the King of
Fez is jealous of them, having a watchful Eye over their Actions, yet holding a
Peace with them, and unwilling to stir up any animosities, as knowing they are
able to bring into the Field Threescore thousand Men, and have under their
Command Two hundred Forts and Castles.

La RACHE.


AZGAR.
AZgar Borders Nothward, on the Great Ocean; to the West, The Borders of Azgar.
on the River Buragrag; East, on the Mountains Gemere, Zarhon, and Zela; South,
on the River Bunasar. The length about Eighteen Miles, and the breadth Three.

Seacoast Towns are these, Larache, Elgiumha, Casar el Cabir.

Larache, by Ptolomy called Lixa; and by Pliny, Lixas; and by the Moors,
Larache.
as Sanutus and Marmol say, Elharis, lies about six Miles and a half from
Arzille, in the height of thirty four Degrees and thirty Minutes, North
Latitude, at the Mouth of the River Lecus, or Lix.

This City, which Gramay and others conceit to have been the Gardens of
Hesperides, and Sanutus, the Royal Court and Residence of Antaeus, and the
Place where Hercules Wrastled with him, has long been, and still is, one of
the most convenient Forts the Kings of Fez enjoy, and the surest Opposer both
of the Spanish and Portugal Forces, when with greatest fury they pursue the
Moors in these Parts. But in the Year Sixteen hundred and Ten, which was the
good fortune of the Spaniards, that one Muey Xek, Governor of it, surrendered
it into the hands of the Marquess of St. Germain, General of the King's Army.

A Great Morass spreads it self about it, The Quality of the Place.
abounding both with Fish and Fowl: and in the adjacent Woods are some Lions.
The Country about Larache being Barren and Waste, yields nothing but
Cotton-Trees, and Coal-Mines, both affording sufficient Profit, especially the
last, carrying them to Tangier and Arzille.

The Haven, much frequented by Spanish and Italian Merchants, is but a wild
Road, granting but small security to such as know not the safest Ridings.

The City prides it self in diverse stately Erections of Stone, encompassed with
a strong Wall, and defended by three large Castles. It has three Castles.
One of which since the Conquest of the City by the Spaniards, is called by the
name of S. Mary; the second, lying at the Mouth of the River, St. Anthony; and
the third also dedicated to another Saint.

The Moors, before the Spaniards possessed it, maintained there a Garrison; and
the Spaniards at this time do the same. The Fort St. Mary has a broad Graff
and Bulwark, to be entered at three Iron-Gates, being maintained with sixty
Brass and Iron Pieces of Ordnance. In St. Anthony's Fort are planted thirty
Pieces of Brass Cannon, well supplied with all sorts of Ammunition. The
Spaniards have made up the Works about both the City and Castles, esteeming it
a place of very great Consequence for shelter and preservation of his Fleet,
having much improved the Haven. Near to this lies the Mountainous People and
Arabians. In this very Territory appears also, on the Seacoast, the City
Moximar.

Elgiumha, according to Marmol, Gemaa el Carvax, a small City in a Plain,
thirty Miles from Fez, at this day wholly Waste. Kasar el Kabir, or Alkazar el
Quibir, which signifies a large Border, stands on the River Lakkus, ten Miles
from Arzylle, containing near fifteen hundred Houses, with many Mosques. There
were here several Cities of note, all which lie buried in their own Ruins by
the cruelty of the Wars.

THe Air of this Province is so pleasant and healthy, The Condition and
Constution of Azgar.
that the Kings of Fez, in the Spring, take their Progress thither; not only
for their Refreshment, but for their Game, the Place yielding Field-Sports,
Hunting and Hawking. From hence also Fez is furnished with Cattle and Horses.
The Soil about the City Elgiumha and Kasar Elkabir, yields great store of
Grain. Larache, altogether barren, abounds only with Cotton and Fish; two
Miles in Circuit. The City Kasar Elkabir, boasts only of curious Gardens and
Orchards, Planted with all variety of delicate Fruits: but wants Springs, so
that the Citizens have no Water but what Dreyns from the Roofs of the Houses,
which in Barbary seems strange.

THe Inhabitants of this Territory commonly go neatly Clad; The Customs of the
Inhabitants.
but those of Kasar Elkabir wear only Cotton-Garments in general: they are a
Mild and Quiet People, rather Simple than Ingenious.

HABAT, or EL HABAT.
HAbat, The Borders of Habat.
or El Habat, begins Southward, at the River Guarga, or Erguila, and runs
Northward to the Midland Sea; bounded on the East with the Mountains of Gomere,
called Errif, on the West with the Marshes of Agar, being Twenty Miles long,
and Seventeen broad.

Towns on the Shore of the Atlantic Ocean are, Taximus. Arzylle.
Taximus: then Arzille, formerly called Zilia, and by the Inhabitants Azella,
built by the Romans toward the West; about Fourten Miles from the Mouth of the
Straits, and Forty Miles from Fez.

This City was for some time subject to the Prince of Septa, Its several
Overthrows.
or Ceuta, a Tributary to the Romans; but afterward subdued by the Goths which
were driven out by the Mahometans, who possessed it Two hundred and twenty
years, when the English took it by Storm, and utterly wasted it by Fire and
Sword, so that Thirty years after it lay desolate; but at length Repaired and
Peopled by the Mahumetan Patriarch of Cordua. It was vanquished by the
Portugals.
But Alphonsus King of Portugal, who for his eminent Achievements in these
Parts, as a second Scipio, gat the Surname of Africanus, on a sudden surprised
it, and took Prisoners, not only all the Soldiery, but also the King himself,
with his Sister, about Seven years of Age, whom he brought Captive to Portugal,
where they remained Seven years, and then redeemed for a great sum of Money.

This young Prince, after his Fathers death coming to the Crown, sought all
opportunities of revenge, The King of Fez, overcomes Arzylle.
beginning first to vent his choler on this City; which he assaulted in the
Year Fifteen hundred and eight, with an Army of a Hundred thousand Men, and won
it, setting at liberty all the Moors that were found in the City: however, the
Portugals kept the Castle; which the young King so straightly besieged, that he
forced them to a Parley; wherein it was agreed to surrender, unless they had
relief in two days: within which time Don Pedro of Navarre appearing before the
Town with a strong and well-manned ARZYLLA, of ARGILLE.
The CITY of TANGER
Fleet, so plied the Enemy with Shot from his Great Guns, that he not only
compelled him to leave the Siege, but also to quit the City, and draw off with
his whole Army. Left again.
This success of Don Pedro so encouraged his Countrymen, that they erected new
Forts, and so strengthened the Place by Sea and Land, as the Moors never after
durst attempt it. But after many years, whether out of design to retrench their
Expenses, or out of fear of the Xeriffs coming upon them, whereof they had
intelligence, they quitted it, together with some other Places, which the
Mahumetans soon possessed and kept, until Muley Mahomet re-engaged it to Don
Sebastian, King of Portugal, as a Pledge for the keeping of his Word; but that
noble Prince miscarrying in that unfortunate War, the Xeriffe soon retook it,
and in the Mahumetans hands it continues to this day.

The Cape of Spartelli, by the Spaniards called Cabo Esparta, The Cape of
Spartelli.
and by some taken for the Cottes of Pliny, lies between Arzille and Tangier,
shooting far into the Sea, and the very Point guarded with a Rock.

On the Shore of the Great Ocean, near the Straits of Gibraltar, Tangier.
in the height of three and twenty Degrees, and forty Minutes, North Latitude,
stands the ancient City Tangier, formerly Tingis; by the Portugals Tanjar, and
by the Barbarians, according to Strabo, Tinga; in the time of the Romans, the
Metropolis of Mauritania Tingitana; Its Building.
and by them builded after the Conquest of Spain, although the African
Historiographers falsely attribute it to one Sedded, Son of Had, who, they say,
was Emperor of the whole World. Their Story is this: That the Emperor having
resolved to build a City, of no less beauty then an Earthly Paradise, he first
encompassed it with Brazen-Walls, and then covered the Roofs of the Houses with
Gold and Silver; which, say they, was not impossible for him to do, in regard
all the Cities in the World contributed to its building. But to leave their
fancies, and return to the truth the History: It stood, while the Romans Lorded
over Spain, subjected to the Prince of Ceuta, as we said before, and continued
very populous till the time of Alphonsus the Fifth, King of Portugal, who in
the year Fourteen hundred sixty three, making his third Expedition into Africa
with thirty thousand Men, easily became Master of the Place, the Inhabitants
terrified at his Power, leaving it, and with their chief Movables flying to
Fez. His Father, King Edward, in the year Fourteen hundred thirty and three,
had worn out his time fruitlesly in the African Wars, and beleaguering of this
City: for he was compelled to break up the Siege, and leave his Brother
Ferdinand as a Pledge in the hands of Aben Sala, the Emperor of Barbary, till
Septa should be re-delivered. But the State of Portugal esteeming it
dishonorable, easily to surrender a place of such consequence, took no notice
of Ferdinand, who continued there seven years in a miserable Captivity. During
this time they got also Tangier, which with great expense and trouble having
kept diverse years, at length finding the charge of defense to exceed the
profit, they absolutely assigned over their interest to our gracious Sovereign
CHARLES the Second, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, in part of
the Marriage-Portion with Donna Catharina, Daughter of the most Illustrious
Family of Portugal now our Sovereign Lady, and His Majesty's Royal Consort; who
in her Right duly possessed thereof, has not only much improved the
Fortifications, but also erected a stupendous Mold, a strong and safe Harbor
for Shipping, from whence he may take cognizance, or speak with any that pass
the Straits of Gibraltar, (by which it stands) either into the Mediterrane or
Atlantic Ocean: and the Garrison of English now there fear not at all what the
power of the Moors can or dare do by Land.

THe Country round about yields little Corn: The Condition of the Country.
but there are many Gardens, which produce Citrons, Lemons, and other Fruits in
abundance. The Mountains adjoining to the City are replete with fertile
Vineyards: but more toward the Inland the whole is covered with Sand.

At the Mouth of the Straits stands Kosar Ezzakir, Kosar Ezzachir.
known vulgarly by the name of Alcacar, or Alcaser. The Founder was Mansor,
King of Morocco, who built it as a fit convenience from whence to Embarque for
an easy passage to Granada. The Passage thence to Granada.
Alphonsus the First, King of Portugal, in the Year Fourteen hundred forty and
eight, took it with a triumphal Victory. But in the Year Fourteen hundred and
forty nine, the King of Morocco twice Attaqued it strongly, but was by the
Valor of the Portuguese bravely Repulsed.

In the same Straits stands Ceuta; so called both by the Spaniards and
Portugals; by Melle, Septa; and by Ortelius, taken for the Lexiliss of Ptolomy;
distant not above three Miles from the Coast of Granada, The Straits three
Miles over at the narrowest.
from which separated by that Strait, so narrow, that Men and Beasts may be
seen and distinguished from the one or the other Shore. It has had many
Masters, as the Romans, into whose place came the Goths, whom the Mahumetans
dispossessed, as themselves at last were, in the Year Fourteen hundred and
fifty, by John King of Portugal.

This is a Place considerable, and reasonably well built, notwithstanding the
fatal miseries it three several times underwent both by Fire and Sword; first
under Habdul-Mumin, King of Morocco; the second under Mahometh of Granada; the
third under the Kings of Portugal, who, the severity of the War passed, to
encourage others to build, beautified it with a strong Castle and Palace.

A little distant from this lies an enclosed Ground, Vinnones.
called the Vinnones, that is, Vine-Hill, for the great abundance of Vines
there growing: and indeed that is all it can boast; for the other Grounds are
Barren, and which is the reason of the extreme dearness of all sorts of Grain
there.

THe Inland Places are these: Ezagen.
Ezagen, three Miles from the River Guarga, and twenty Miles from Fez, having
abundance of excellent Springs and Fountains. Beni-Teuds.
Beni Teude, or Bani Teud, supposed the Baba of Ptolomy, or Julia Campestris of
Pliny, in a pleasant Plain, on the same River, fifteen Miles from Fez,
containing heretofore Eight thousand Buildings; but now lies Waste.

So also Mergo, Mergo.
by Marmol called Amergo, by others Tokoloside, five Miles from Beni Teude; the
Ruins of its Walls still show some Latin Inscriptions, though much
obliterated.

Tansor, Tansor.
by Marmol called Tansert, and by the Arabians Tehart, and Triside, two Miles
from Amergo, between Fez and Mount Gomere.

Agle, Agle.
or Aguile, a Walled City close to the River Guarga, or Erguile, formerly
spoiled by the English, but at present recovered, and reasonably well peopled.

Narangia, Narangia.
three Miles from Ezagen, on the River Lukkus: At the Mouth of which, three
Miles from the Sea, and fifteen from Fez, appears the Island Gezire, by the
Spaniards called Gratiosa, and perhaps is the Cerna mentioned by Ptolomy.

Close by Narangia, The Ruins of Bezat.
but more into the Land, may be seen the Ruins of Bezat, by some called Lixa,
and by others Besara, or Besra. It stood in a Plain between two Mountains,
three and thirty Miles from Fez, and seven from Casar el Kabir, boasting of the
number of two and twenty thousand Buildings.

Homam, also heretofore a flourishing Pile of Buildings, Homam.
but now a ruinous Heap.

Tettigin or Tetuan, by the Inhabitants called Tetuain, about seven miles from
Ceute, and eleven from the Atlantic Ocean. The Name signifies, An Eye, gotten
from a crooked Countess, who ruled over this place. The banished Moors of
Granada did it much mischief; but it has recovered its pristine Beauty, having
within strong Walls, and a deep and broad Trench, eight hundred well built
Houses.

THis Dominion has eight eminent Mountains, viz. Rahone, The Mountaint of
Habat.
Benefensecare, Beni Aroz, Chebib, Angera, Quadres, Beniguedarfeth.

Rahone, or Arahone, rises close by Ezagen, extending in Length ten miles, and
in Breadth four. Beni Aroz, by Marmol styled Beni Maras, close to Kasar
Elkabir, seven miles long, and only three broad. Chebib or Beni Telit, eight
miles from Tangier, noted for six or seven small walled Villages there
standing. Beni Hassen a very high Mountain: Angera about eight miles South of
Little Kasar, is three miles long, and one mile broad. Quadres, otherwise Huat
Idris, and Vateres, borders on Beni Aroz, lying between Ceute and Tituan: And
lastly, Beniguedarfeth, adjoining to Teteuain.

THis Province is well watered, and exceeding fertile; The Condition of Habat.
especially from Ezaggen, to the River Guarga, being ten miles, wherein lie
nothing but Gardens: Then from Beniteude to the Mountain Gumere, containing
forty miles, as also round about Homam, are abundance of Cornfieldsd and
Pastures well stockt with Cattle. Rabone yields plenty of Grapes, out of which
they press both White and Red Wine. Homar and Angere afford Flax. Benefensecare
great quantity of excellent Honey. Tansor feeds great Cattle, sufficient to
supply their Neighbors: Lions also breed there; but so faint-hearted, that upon
the noise of Women or Children they fly: So that they have a Proverb in this
Country concerning Cowards; That they give their Tails to the Cows to eat.

THe People of Mergo have a high Conceit of themselves, The Manners or Customs
of the Inhabitants.
as being of a frank and generous Nature, but are indeed covetous, rude, and
ignorant; so are those of Tansor. Those of Bafra were formerly very courteous,
and simple or sincere, but with the Change of the State have so altered their
Manners, that now they are quite contrary. The Mountaineers are strong of Body,
very laborious and active, but unwillingly submit to any Command, being
strangers to all Laws and good Order.

ERRIF.
ERrif has on the East the River Nakor, The Borders of Errif.
on the West the Territory of Habat, on the North part of the Midland-Sea, and
on the South, the Mountains over against the River Guarga, in the Province of
Fez: Extending in Length from East to West fourteen, and in Breadth from North
to South eight miles.

The chief Places thereof lying on the Coast of the Mediterranean-Sea, Comere.
are: Comere, lying close by three little Islands; the first of which some hold
to be Penon, and the two other the Cliffs Tarfonelle and Nettegalle.

The City Terga, by Marmol called Targa, and built, as Sanutus says, by the
Goths, about twenty miles from the Straits of Gibraltar, contains near five
hundred Buildings.

Yelles, Yelles.
a little Sea-Town, two miles from Bedis, has a safe, though small Haven.

Bedis, Bedis.
by many called Bellis, as cohering with the Spanish Name Velez, is by the
Inhabitants named Deirath Bedis, and by the Learned thought to be the Akrath of
Ptolomy.

It stands between two high Mountains, containing six hundred Houses, an ill
fortified Castle, and a small Dock on the Shore, where commonly Galleys and
other small Vessels or Boats are built.

About a thousand Paces from thence, Penon de Velez.
upon a Rock, in the height of twenty four Degrees, and twenty Minutes,
Northern Latitude, stands Penon de la Velez, that is, The Rock of Velez,
severed from the firm Land by a small Channel, that affords a safe Harbor for
ten or twelve Galleys. It is a very strong place, guarded with several Forts;
the chiefest of which is built upon the height of the Rock, accessible by one
only cut way; some stand in the middle, and others at the foot: so that it
seems almost impregnable.

Gebba, Gebba.
a small decayed Town, eight French Miles from Velez.

Near Point Oleaster, Mezemme.
mentioned by Ptolomy, Marmol places Mezemme or Megeime; by some held to be the
Teniolonga of Ptolomy, seated on the side of a Hill on a great Plain, nine
French Miles long, and three broad, through which the River Nakor passing,
divides Errif and Garet: But now so waste, that the wild Arabs desert it.

Towns more to the Inland, are: Tegasse, a little Place, two miles from the
Mediterranean-Sea, called by Marmol, Tagaza, and thought to be the Thalude of
Ptolomy: Seusaon. Guazaval.
Then Seusaon, and Guazaval, remarkable for nothing but their inconsiderable
meanness.

THe Mountains here have few Habitations, The Mountains of Errif.
but poor Huts covered with Straw, or Barks of Trees: Such as they be, take as
follows: First,

Bentgarir or Beni Oriegan, close by Targa, three miles long, and two broad.
Beni Mansor, three miles long. Bucchuia or Botoia, in Length four, and in
Breadth three miles. Benichelid or Beni Quilib, in the Road between Bedis and
Fez. Beni Jus, four miles long, and three broad. Benizarval and Benirazin,
fronting the Mediterrane. Seusacen or Xexuen, reported to be the fairest
Mountain of Africa. The Beni Gebara, high and craggy. Beni Yerso, and Hagustan,
well inhabited. Benigualed and Beni Iedes, high, and almost unpassable. Alkas,
twelve miles from Fez. Beniguazeual, ten miles long, and five broad, showing
one City, and an hundred and twenty Villages. Guarga, Beni Achmed, or Beni
Hamet, four miles long, and the like in Breadth. Beni Egenefen, or Beni Zanten,
Beni Mesgilda, Beni Guamud, all bordering on Fez, from which divided by a River.

THis Province bears good, The Condition and Quality of the Territory.
tall, and straight Timber, but little Grain of any sort: Of Grapes, Figs,
Olives, Quinces, and Almonds, there is pretty plenty: but no Cattle besides
Goats, Asses, and Apes, with a sort of Beeves no bigger than yearling Calves.
The Water abounds every where, but in many places so muddy, that it is scarce
potable; by reason whereof the People fetch their water to drink from Pits and
Ponds without the City.

MOst of the Inhabitants of these Places have great Swellings under their
Chins, like the People in the Mountains of Savoy and Dauphine; The Customs of
the Inhabitants.
but the reason unknown, except it proceed from the drinking that Water:
however it much deforms them. They are blockish, stupid, and given to
Jealousy, and all other kinds of Beastiality. These are not so curious of
their Wives, but in other parts of the same Jurisdiction they are as careless:
it being customary, That when a Woman dislikes her Husband, she will go
presently to a Neighboring Mountain, leave her Children, and take another: And
this is the cause of continual Wars between them. And if by chance at any time
they make peace, the Man who has the others Wife, is bound to give all the
Expenses to the first Husband, during the time of their Cohabitation.

They fare very hardly, living of Barley or Oat-Bread, salt Sprats, and Eggs;
accounting Goats Milk, Bean-Broth, and boiled Mosch, a great Dainty.

GARET.
GAret the sixth Province of Fez, butting East, on the River Mulaye; West, The
Borders of Garet.
on the River Nakor; on the North, on the Midland-Sea; and South, on the River
Mullulo, and the Mountains close by Numidia, is divided into three Parts: The
first compriseth the Cities and Plains; the second, Its Partition.
the Mountains; and the third, the Wildernesses. The first containing the
Cities, is accounted sixteen miles in Length, and forty in Breadth.

On the Mediterrane stand the Cities Tarforagello, Fetis, and Tarfoquirato,
with the Mountain Alkudie; so called by the Arabians: but Marmol takes it to be
Abyle, Alkudie.
one of Hercules Pillars; at whose foot lies Cape Trident, or The Point of
three Forkes, by Castaldus called, Cabo de tres Forcas, and by Oliverius, Cabo
de tres Orcas, supposed to be the Metagonitis of Ptolomy, the Metagonium of
Strabo, and Sestiana of the Ancients. It shoots far into the Sea with a Point;
from which Eastward lie three small Islands in form of a Triangle, besides one
great one named Abusam, in the height of thirty Degrees, and twenty Minutes.

Melille, formerly Ryssadirum, or Ruisar, Melille.
by the Inhabitants called Deirath Milila, having a convenient Haven in the
Midland-Sea, was heretofore the Head-City of this Territory: In the time of the
Goths strongly walled, and so flourishing under the Mahumetans, that it
contained above two thousand Houses. But in the Year Fourteen hundred and
ninety seven, the Duke of Medina Sidonia won it, and at this day it is one of
the Spaniards Principal Strengths in Africa, excellently Fortified, and
commanded by a Castle well provided of all Habiliments necessary either for
Offense or Defense.

About six miles from Melilla, near Cape Trident, or Metagonites, lies Casasa,
Casasa.
by the Portuguese called, Cabo de Casasa; where formerly, because of the
Convenience and Safety of the Haven, the Venetians drove a great Trade of
Merchandise with the Inhabitants of Fez: But by the Diligence of Ferdinand,
King of Aragon and Castile, the Moors driven out, he annexed it to the Kingdom
of Spain.

Places further from the Sea, Tezzote.
are Tezzote, mounted on a Rock, ascendible only by Winding-Stairs: Meggeo.
And Meggeo, a small Town, two miles Southward of the Midland-Sea, and about
four to the West from Tezzote.

BEsides Alkudie, The Mountains of Garet.
and the Point of three Forks, here are several other Mountains, viz.
Equebdenon, or rather Mequeb Huan, a large one, boasting seventy two small
Villages before the Spaniards had Casafa; but since that, much thinner of
Inhabitants. Benisahia, reaching Eastward from Casafa, to the River Nokor, in
Length eight miles, and containing about an hundred and eighteen Villages:
Besides Azgangan, Beneteuzin, and Guardan, remarked only for their
Monuntainous Qualities.

THis Dominion, The Constitution of the Territories.
though it has many, yet wants some Necessaries for humane Sustenance;
particularly Water, many Places having no other than the Rainwater they can
catch: The whole Country, except the Hill Benesahid, being dry and barren,
like the Deserts of Numidia.

THe Deserts feed abundance of all sorts of Cattle, the chiefest Riches of the
Inhabitants.

So also the Mountains Echebdeaon, Benesahid, and Azgangan: But those Mountains
about Meggeo, enclose in their Bowels much Iron, which they barter or exchange
with the Merchants of Fez for Oil.

MOst of the Inhabitants are very generous, The Manners or Customs of the
Inhabitants.
mild, and affable, especially the Citizens of Meggeo, and the People of
Benesahid: And such is their Temperance, that they drink no Wine, although
their Neighbors of Erriff make great quantities.

CHAUS.
CHaus, The Borders of the Territory of Chaus.
by Marmol called Cuz, the seventh and last Province, but not the least of this
Kingdom, being in effect a third part of the whole; having on the East the
River Zha or Ezaha; to the West, that of Guraigura; in Length from East to West
near forty six miles, and in Breadth about forty. Its Bigness.
For it contains all the Parts of Atlas, over against the Moors Country; a
great part of the Plains of Numidia, and the Mountains bordering upon Lybia.

Teurert is placed among the chiefest Cities of this Jurisdiction, Teurert
situate on a Hill near the River Zab, fronting on the North the Desert of
Garet, to the South, looking on the Wastes of Adduhra, on the East, those of
Angah, bordering on Telensin, and in the West, on the Wilds of Tafrata,
adjoining to Tezza.

Hadagia, Hadagia.
a little Town erected at the Conflux of the Rivers Melule and Muluye, first
spoiled by the Arabians of the Desert Darda, and afterward during the Wars of
Teurert, utterly demolished. But the Turks have re-peopled and beautified it
so, that now it flourishes no less than at any time heretofore.

Garsis, formerly Galafa, erected upon a Rock near the River Muluie, Garsis.
five miles from Teurert, fortified with a Castle, and made a Storehouse for
Corn by the Marin Kings. The Wall and all the Houses built of Black Touch.

Dubdu, a very Ancient City, Dubdu.
in the height of twenty five Degrees North Latitude, upon a high Mountain,
principally inhabited by the People of Zenete.

Meza or Tezar, a strong Town two miles from Mount Atlas, twelve from Fez. Meza.
forty from the Great Ocean, and seven from the Midland-Sea, in former times
was accounted the Third of the whole Kingdom, having a far greater Mosque than
any in Fez, and five thousand Houses all meanly built, except the Palaces of
the Nobility, and Colleges, which carry more state. The Jurisdiction of this
City is very great, and comprises several Mountains, upon which several People
dwell.

Sophroy, a little City, at the foot of Mount Atlas, Sophroy.
four miles Southward of Fez, close by the Road leading to Numidia.

Mezdaga, another small place, three miles West from Sophroy, Mezdaga.
and four to the South from Fez, environed with a good Wall, but the Buildings
very slight, yet each house necessarily accommodated with a Fountain of Water.

Benihublud, of old called Beuta, distant from Fez three miles, Benihublud.
and watered with several Streams flowing from the adjacent Hills.

Hamlisnan, otherwise named, Ain el Ginum, that is, The Fountain of Idols;
Hamlisnan.
because in old time, the people meeting in the Temple, situate near a
standing-Pool, did commit all sorts of uncleanness.

Menhdia or Mehedia, seated upon Mount Arden, Menhdia.
about three miles from Hamlisnan; formerly in the Civil Wars of the Country
laid waste, but since Peopled anew, and repaired by the Arabians.

Tezerghe, a small City, built in form of a Castle by a Rivers side, Tezerghe.
at the foot of Mount Cun^igelgherben.

Umengiveaibe and Gerceluin, two old decayed Towns; Vmengiveaibe. Gercelum.
the first not far from Atlas, the later near the Mountain Zis; now of little
note, but heretofore strongly walled by the Kings of the Marin Family ruling in
these Parts.

WIthin this Tract of Land are two great Plains, the one called Sabblelmarga,
that is, The Field of Contention; being forty miles long, and ten broad, having
neither Houses or Towns, but a few small Huts, lying here and there
dispersedly: the other vulgarly named Azagari Commaren.

Mountains here be, Matgara or Matagara, two miles from Teza, Mountains.
difficult to be climbed up, by reason of the narrowness of the way: Cavata, no
better conditioned than the former, yet contains fifty Villages, with two fair
Springs that feed and supply two Rivers: Megeze, showing forty Villages:
Baronis, noted only for the Name: Beniguertenage, reasonably Peopled:
Guceblen, otherwise called Guibeleyn, thirteen miles in Length, and two in
Breadth, neighboring upon Dubdu and Banyasga: Benirifften, and Selelgo or
Ciligo, out of which runs a River with so strong a Fall downwards, that will
drive before it a stone of an hundred weight. The River Subu also takes his
Rise from hence, being the greatest in all Mauritania. There also appear the
Mountains Benyazga and Azgan; which last, in the East Butteth upon Selelgo;
West, on the City Sophroy; South, on the Mountains above the River Muluye; and
to the North, on the Plains of Fez: Mount Miabir, that is, Hundred-pit Hill,
upon whose top stand some old Buildings, near which there lies a deep Hole, or
Pit, that they can find no bottom of it by Fathoming. Cunaigelgherben, or
Condigetherben, not far from Miabir, but altogether without Inhabitants, partly
by reason of the vehement and sharp Cold, and partly for the multitudes of
Lions and Leopards there breeding, upon whose top rises a high Rock,
frequented with infinite Flights of Crows and Ravens; whence some imagine the
Mountain took Name: Kunai-gel-gherben properly signifying a multitude of
Ravens. The passage by it is dangerous, in regard oftentimes, out of the North,
so strong Drifts of Snow roll from thence, that Travelers have been buried
under them, without hopes or possibility of recovery. Yet the Neighboring
Arabs, called Beni Essen, usually frequent them, for the coolness of the Water,
and refreshment of the Shades. The Mountains Benimerasen, and Mazetraze,
Mezitalze, the last from West to East about ten miles in length, and four miles
in breadth, borders upon Temesne. Mount Zis, thirty four miles long, and
fourteen broad, Butting East, on Mazetraze; West, on Tedle and Mount Edis;
South, on part of Numidia, called Segelmesse; and North, on the Plain of
Edeksen and Guregra.

The Houses upon the Mountains are made of Clay or Loame, and covered with
Barks of Trees or Rushes; wherein they shelter their Cattle from the extremity
of Weather.

There is also in this Jurisdiction a strange Bridge over the River Subu, A
strange Bridge.
between the two high Mountains, Beni Jasga, and Selelgo; which the Inhabitants
for convenience of passage from one to the other, have built in this manner:
They have set two great Beams on either Shore of the River, to each whereof
hangs a Pully, through which run two great Cables, with a Basket fastened to
one of them, wherein ten Men may easily sit, and when any would go over, he
puts himself into the Basket tied to the uppermost Rope, and so drawing the
lowermost, conveys himself to the one or other side.

THe greatest part of this Country is Rough and Craggy, The Quality of this
Territory.
Dry and Barren, excepting one little Spot, replenished with Gardens, and
watered with smooth purling Rivulets

THe Lands, about Teze and Matgare, are extraordinary fertile, and the Air very
clear and wholesome. Garsis boasts of many well-planted Gardens, fruitful
Valleys, full of Vines, black and red Grapes, but not good to make Wine. Megese
and Beniguersenage, bear much Flax; and the latter, Wheat, Olives, Citrons and
Quinces. The Gardens of Benijesseten afford Grapes, Dates and Peaches: the last
of which the Inhabitants cut into four pieces, and dried in the Sun, is
accounted a great Dainty.

The Mountains in general are Woody, wherein harbor many wild Beasts, such as
Lions, Leopards, Apes, besides abundance of good Cattle, viz. Sheep, bearing a
very fine Fleece, which the Women make into Coverlets and Cloth, so fine, that
at Fez they give any Rates for it; Goats, profitable both for their Milk and
Skins; Horses, Asses, and Mules, not only profitable to the Inhabitants by
their Labor, but upon Sale, yielding very good Barter. The Mountains Zis and
Gerseline produce an incredible multitude of Serpents Tame, that they creep
into the Houses, and are as familiar as Catts and Dogs: they twine themselves
about what they eat, and eat what is given them, without hurting any body,
unless first disturbed or abused.

THe People of Megese and Zis are White, Strong-limmed, Swift of Foot, The
Quality of the Inhabitants.
and active Horsemen. They of Tezerghe, are homely; but the Women of Baronis
very white, handsome shaped, and well set. Those of Benijesseten are Clownish,
Ignorant, and void of all Education, living as Beasts; whereas on the contrary,
the Inhabitants of Mazattase, Benijasga, and Gueblen, are lovers of Learning,
of civil Deportment, and Courteous.

NOr are their Conditions more various than their Habits: The Habit of the
Inhabitants.
for the Mazetasians go neatly Clad; the Baronians wear much Silver; they of
Benijesseten Iron Rings and Pendants; labor in the Woods, or tend Cattle; for
the most part going Barefoot, or at best wearing Shoes made of Bulrushes.
Those of Zis wear only a Woollen Shirt girt about their Loins with a Towel,
without any Covering upon their Heads, Winter or Summer.

ALGIER.
THe Kingdom of Algier, so called from the Head City of the same Name, The
Kingdom of Algier.
includes at this day, according to Peter Davity, Reyame de Alger. p. 166.
the ancient Cesarian or Imperial Mauritania; yet excludes Dara, bestowing
Introd. Geogr. lib. 4. cap. 109.
it on Numidia or Biledulgerid, whereas Cluverius Treats of it under Barbary,
as wholly included in Mauritania Caesariensis, without any relation to
Biledulgerid.

This Kingdom, together with Bugie, Constantine, Its Borders.
and other adjacent Territories, heretofore a Member of Tremecen, or Telensin,
but now it self incorporated into this, has for Borders in the West,
Mauritania Tingitana; Easterly, part of Fez: from which divided by the Rivers
Zis and Muluy; on the South, the Deserts of Numidia and Biledulgerid; on the
East, Tunis; and on the North, the Surges of the Midland-Sea.

It runs along by the Coasts of the Mediterrane, Its Extent.
from the Mouth of the River Muluye, to that of Susgemar, being in length, from
West to East, above an hundred and-fifty Spanish miles, though in other places
not above twenty. Peter Dan, in his History of Barbary, augments it to an
hundred sixty and two French miles, that is in the East, by Tabarka, to the
Kingdom of Tunis; and the West, by Oran, to the Kingdom of Fez.

Marmol divides the whole into four Provinces, viz. Tremecen or Telensin,
Tenez, The Partition.
Algier, and Bugie. Gramay in his Description of Africa, says, The Turks divide
it into ten lying toward the Sea, and into ten toward the Inland; and each of
which has a City, called Alzier, Bugia, Gigeri, Constantine, Bona, Sargel,
Horan, Humanbar, Haresgol, Tebesse, Beniarax or Beniaraxid, Miliane, Angad,
Tenez, and Tremecen or Telensin, formerly a Kingdom of it self, besides the
Kingdom of Kouco, Labez, Tikarte, and Huerguela; which two last now belong to
Numidia.

THe chiefest Rivers watering the whole Country, The Rivers of Algier.
are Zis, Hued Habra, Tesne, Mina, Xilef, Celef, Ceffaye, Hued el Harran, Hued
el Hamiz, Hued Icer, Hued el Quibir, Sufgemar, Marsoch, and Yadoch, all which
rise out of the Great Atlas, and finish their course in the Midland-Sea.

The Ziz, The River Ziz.
a large Stream, deriving his Head, as we mentioned before, from Atlas, flows
through the Desert of Angued, and at last, joining with Hued Habra, falls into
the Mediterrane: the Waters hereof are very clear, and well replenished with
Fish.

Hued Habra, Hued Habra.
arises in Tremecen, and uniting with Zis in the Plains of Cira, changes its
Name to Cirat, so passing the desolate City Arzeo, empties her Waters into the
Mediterrane.

Tesne, Tesne.
by Ptolomy called Siga, and by the Natives Harelgol, a little Brook,
descending from Atlas, takes a Northern course through the Desert of Angued,
and so giving a Visit to Tenzegzet, falls into the Sea five miles Westward of
Oran.

Mina, Mina.
a midling River, called by Ptolomy, Chylemath, runs from Atlas Northward,
falling into the Sea near Arzeo.

Zilef, Zilef.
formerly called Cartena, a great River, springs out of Guanecexis, and passing
through the Plains of Tremezen, intermingles his Waters with the Sea near
Mostagan. Both the sides of it are inhabited by Rich and Warlike Arabians,
called Fledsueid, which can bring into the Field above Two thousand Horse, and
Three thousand Foot.

Celeph, Celeph.
supposed to be the Chinalaph of Ptolomy, whose Banks are shadowed with
pleasant Groves adjoining, waters the Metiasian Valleys; at length disemboguing
into the Sea, three miles from Algier.

Ceffaye, Ceffaye, or Soffaye.
or Soffaye, the Save of Ptolomy, enters the Mediterrane close by Metafuz,
Eastward of Algier.

Hued el Harran, Huid el Harrax. Hued el Hamiz.
and Hued el Hamiz, Winter Rivers, but Summer Brooks, mix with the Sea between
Algier and Ceffaye.

Hued Icer, Hued Icer.
thought to be Ptolomy's Serbere, springs from Atlas, and after a long Northern
passage, Marries the Sea Eastward of Metafuz, near the Village of Beni Abdala.

Hued el Quibir, Hued el Quibir.
by the Spaniards and Portuguese named Zinganor, and taken for the Mazabath of
Ptolomy, shoots from the beforementioned Mount, and falls into the Sea near the
City Bugie.

Sufgemar, Sufgemar.
the Ampsago of Ptolomy, rising in Mount Auras, having watered several dry and
thirsty Plains, gives a Visit to Constantine; afterward, augmented by
contributary Water of Marzoch, empties it self into the Midland-Sea.

Yadoch, Yadock.
or Ladoch, proceeding from Atlas, Eastward of the City Bona, unites with the
Mediterrane.

THe Constitution of the Air in this Climate is so temperate, The Air or
Climate.
that the greatest Heats does not parch the Leaves of the Trees, nor do they
fall off with the Cold. In February they commonly Blossom, and in April the
Fruits have a visible greatness; so that in the beginning of May they have ripe
Cherries and Plumbs, and toward the end, Apples and Pears; in June Grapes fit
to be gathered; but in August, all later Fruits, viz. Figs, Peaches, Nutts, and
Olives, attain a perfect maturity.

THe Land here is for the most part barren, dry, and rugged, The kind of Land.
full of great Deserts; only the Plains Northward, between Tremecen and the
Midland-Sea, produce good Pasturage and Feeding for Cattle, and great
quantities of Fruit, and some Corn.

THe Deserts breed Lions, Ostriches, Hedg-hogs, Wild-Swine, Hearts, The Beasts.
Camelions, Leopards and Apes; besides great quantities of Wild-Fowl.

THe Cities here are but small, and thinly peopled; yet conveniently seated,
and inhabited chiefly by Merchants: who live in very noble Equipage, by
Trafficking into Guinee, Biledulgerid, and several parts of Negroe-Land.

The People of this Region come from several Nations, The several sorts of
People in Algier.
and therefore each differing from other, both in Religion and Customs. The
first are Native Turks, which out of Poverty remove hither out of the Levant,
or the East, for Profit and Gain, where they become Soldiers of Fortune. The
next are High-Land Moors, called Kabaylees, and Asaguen, constantly following
the Turks Colors both in War and Peace. Then Jews and Moriscoes, Exiles of
Andaluzia, Granado, Aragon and Catalonia. Besides Slaves of all Countries
dispersed every where, especially in the City of Algier. Without the Cities
dwell none but Moors and Arabians, commonly called Larbusses; Arabians and
Larbusses.
who usually make their Residence by the Rivers sides in Hutts or Tents, two or
three hundred together, which they call Douar, and one single Tent Baraque, as
we mentioned at large in our General Description. Other Arabs range through the
Deserts in great numbers, not fearing the King of Algier, by whose Armies if at
any time overpowered, they fly to the Wilderness of Biledulgerid, whereinto
they cannot be pursued; so that the most of them at all times live in freedom.
Therefore Algier it self did give them a general Pension to live peaceably: but
now most of them pay Tribute to Algier, fetched from them yearly by the
Janissaries.

In Tremecen is another sort of Warlike People, named Galans of Meliava, and
divided into five Tribes, viz. Uled Abdala, Uled Muca, Uled Cacix, Uled
Suleyman, and Uled Hamar, who command and enslave the Brebers, both of Algier,
Tenez, Brebers.
and Bugie.

TREMECEN, or TELENSIN.
THe Jurisdiction of Tremecen, or Telensin, formerly a distinct Government,
Trenecen was formerly a particular Kingdom.
but now incorporated to Algier, of which we shall first treat (though somewhat
improperly, in regard it is not the chief Province, but) because of its
Neighborhood to Fez, Marmol, p. l. 5. Gramay. l. 7. Sanut. l. 5.
and for the more orderly viewing the Goasts of Barbary. It derives the
Denomination from the principal City, named by the Affricans Telimicen, but by
the Europaeans corrupted into Telensin, comprising formerly the Cities of
Tremezen, Teuzegzet, Zezil, Guagida, Ned Roma, Teberrit, Ona, Haresgol, Hubet,
Tefezara, Tezela, Agobel, Barha Marka Elquibir, Oran, Canastel, Arzeo,
Mazagras, Mostagan, and Beni-arax, together with the Desert Angued, or Angad,
and the Mountains Beninezeten, Matagara, Beniguernid, Tarara, Agbal, and
Magarava; but now circumscribed in narrower Limits. The Cities yet left, are
Tremecen, Hubet, Tefezre, and Tezele, with the Mountain Beniguernid.

Tremecen, Tremecen.
or Telemicen, the supposed Timisi of Ptolomy, by some called Telesin, or
Tremisen, and by Marmol Tlemisan, five small miles from the Midland-Sea. Abu
Texifien, who Ruled about the Year Fifteen hundred and twenty, raised the Walls
of Hewn Stone, forty Cubits high, and strengthened with many Cittadels, or
Redoubts; where-through the Citizens pass five Gates with Draw-Bridges: the
whole overlooked by one great Castle, erected according to the Modern
Architecture, with many Chambers, Dining-Rooms, and Apartments, besides Gardens
and Lodgings for the Janissaries. Within the City are five Colleges, built
Quadrangular after the Italian manner, yet scarce eight Mosques remaining of an
hundred and fifty; whereof the City formerly boasted, each having a Tower,
built after the Dorick method, and beautified with Marble Pillars; four great
and eminent Baths, all that are left of fifty; two Inns for Strangers,
Venetians and Genoueses, and four eminent ones for the Moors, the best remains
of six and thirty, in former time set apart for entertainment of Travelers,
and relief of the Sick. Most of the Streets spacious and large, wherein are ten
fair Marketplaces, where the Merchants have Warehouses, and whither the
Neighboring Country with Commodities come twice a Week.

The Houses there are much more stately and larger, Their Houses.
than in the City of Algier, having Gardens Planted with Flowers, and all sorts
of Fruit Trees. In the Year Fifteen hundred and twenty, they reckoned six
thousand Houses; and in sixty two, Five and twenty thousand; but at this day
the number, by the Tyranny of the Turks, is very much abated, the Merchants in
general removed to Fez. The Jews had there ten great Synagogues, which yet were
not capable of their multitudes; but since the Year Fifteen hundred and
seventeen, their number and strength is wonderfully decreased.

Hubet is a Walled Town, Hubet.
a small half mile Southward of Tremecen, said to be built by the Romans; and
called Minara, by Ptolomy placed in thirty two Degrees and ten Minutes, North
Latitude; famous only among the Moors for the stately Sepulcher of Sidi Bu
Median a Morabout, in the great Meskiet, and an adjoining College and Hospital.

Tefzare, Tefzare.
or Tefesre, Situate upon a Plain, four miles Eastward of Tremecen, surrounded
with strong and high Walls, and taken for the Astacilis of Ptolomy.

Tezele, Tezele.
formerly Ariane, destroyed by King Abuhascen, and never since either rebuilt
or inhabited.

Beniguernid, The Mountain Benigueuid.
an Arm or Limme of the Great Atlas, and full of Villages and People.

THis Country, The Quality of the Country.
by means of the great plenty of Water, both in Rivers and Wells, yields
abundance of Grain, all sorts of Cherries, delicious Figs, by the Inhabitants
dried in the Sun to preserve as a Winter-Dainty, Peaches, Melons, Nutts,
Almonds, and many other kinds of Fruit.

The Plain of Tezele alone produces Wheat enough to feed all Tolensin.
Beniguernid abounds with Wood, and Tefzare rich in Mines of Iron.

The Inhabitants divide themselves into four Ranks, The Employments of the
Inhabitants.
viz. 1. Handicraftsmen, or Artificers; 2. Merchants; 3. Literati, or the
Learned; and 4. Soldiers. The Merchants with great industry export and import
Commodities from diverse Countries far remote from them. The Artificers are very
ready and skilful in their several Trades. The Soldiers venturous and daring,
made up partly of Turks, and partly of Moors. The Learned are sub-divided into
Scholars, Lawyers, Notaries, and Doctors; some of whom read Lectures in
Physic, others in Philosophy, and a third sort make it their business to
expound the Alcoran.

They of Telesin and Hubet, are affable and civil, Their Dispositions.
many of them being Diers and Cloth-workers: Those of Tefezare of a dull
apprehension, and rugged nature; but in Tefezne, Smiths, and such as work in
Iron, making a profitable Living.

The Ancient Kings of Telesin lived in great Majesty, never showing themselves
in Public, nor giving Audience, but by his Counselor; who also managed
afterward all Business.

These People were a long while Tributary to the King of Spain, but from him
wrested by the Turks, who sent thither an Alcaid to rule; but the Turks now
have little to do there, being subjected to Algier, and governed by an Alcaid
sent from thence.

ANGAD.
AGad, or Angad Heben, called by some Angued, The Borders.
signifying A Waterless and Woodless Desert, extending in Length, from West to
East, seven miles, and in Breadth about twelve.

The River Muluye cuts through this Wilderness in the midst, on whose Shores
reside three sorts of People distinguished into Tribes by the Names of Uled
Talha, Uled Arrax, and Uled Mangor.

THe Cities in it, are Guagida, Tenzegzet, and Izli.

Guagida, an old Town in the Hill-Countrey, Guagida.
thought to be the Lanigare of Ptolomy, stands upon a pleasant Plain, nine
miles from the Mediterrane, toward the South, and almost so sar West of
Telensin, abutting on both sides on the Desert of Angad, replenished at the
present with three thousand Families.

Tenzegzet, a strong City, Tenzegzet.
seated upon a Rock in the way from Fez to Telesin, at whose foot flows the
River Tesma, repaired, new fortified, and garrisoned by the Turks, being their
principal Magazine for these Parts.

Izli, Zezil, Gutlui, or Giglua, taken for Ptolomy's Giva, together with its
Castle, Izli or Zezil.
stands upon a Plain by Angad Wastes, not far from Telesin.

Here are but few Mountains; the Chief of which is Benizeneten, The Mountain
Benizeneten.
inhabited by the Breberian Zenetes, about thirty miles Westward of Telensin;
extending in Length toward the East seven miles, and in Breadth toward the
South five.

The Air is unwholesome, the Ground rough and woody, only here and there a
sprinkling of Barley; and indeed the Soil in this small Tract differs very
much: for Guagida and Tenzegzet abound in Corn, Figs, and Raisins, mightily;
whereas Isli is so dry and barren, that it affords little advantage,
notwithstanding all the care the Inhabitants use, which frequently overflow it
for improvements sake.

The Deserts of Angad are furnished with Deer, Hearts, Porcupines, Ostriches,
and Lions; whose rapacious fury is exceeded by Thieves, there lurking up and
down, and taking all opportunities to rob and spoil Merchants, traveling from
Fez to Telensin.

THe Inhabitants of Izli show great Courtesy toward Strangers Traveling that
way; but those of Guagida are of a contrary temper.

The Benizenetens live hardly upon Carraben or Saint John's Bread; Their Food.
those of Angad eat Dates, Milk, and the flesh of Goats and Cammels; their
Habits mean, their Language the old African Tongue, and their Religion
Mahumetane.

They have a peculiar Governor resident at Guagida, Their Government.
yet must address to Telesin, either to exhibit their Complaints, or for
redress of their Grievances.

BENI-ARAXID, or BENI-ARAZID.
BEni-araxid, or rather Beni-arazid, or Beni-razid, an Inland Territory, is
about eleven mile long, and five miles broad; all the Southern part even and
plain, but toward the North rises up every where in Hills.

The chiefest of the Cities and Villages, Beni-arax.
is Beni-arax, enriched with more than two thousand Houses, yet unwall'd.

The second is Calaa, Calaa.
formerly called Atoa, walled, and built Castle-wise.

The third, Elmohaskar.
Elmohaskar, having a Fort near it, begun by Almansor, Lieutenant of Mahometh
Benzeyen, and finished by the Turks, who have appointed it the Residence for
the King of Algiers Lieutenant.

Lastly, Batha.
Batha, by Ptolomy named Bunobora, erected upon a pleasant place, two small
miles from Horan, by the River Huet Mina; formerly very populous, but in their
Civil Wars wholly destroyed: But a Marabout or Priest named Cena, in the Year
Fifteen hundred and twenty, pitching his Residence near it, and by the Alms
bestowed on him, gaining great Wealth, (for he had five hundred Horses, ten
thousand Goats, two thousand Oxen and Cows, and five thousand Ducats) he
bestowed the same in rebuilding this place which he made a Seat for five
hundred Scholars, which were every day at certain hours bound to repeat aloud
some Names of God: this Foundation competently endowed, continues to this time;
and his Scholars do spread themselves and their Tenets all over Africa. The
Arabians call it from this second Founder, Cena.

THis Country is very fertile, yielding abundance of Grain, Prunes, Figs, and
Honey; besides vaste Herds both of small and great Cattle.

THe Inhabitants are of two sorts; one resident in the Hills, that Till the
Ground, Plant Vineyards, and labor about other necessary things; others live
idly in Tents, ranging the Fields, and tending Cattle.

From Elmohaskar, the Governor frequently marches out with some selected Troops
of Horse, and Pieces of Cannon, to keep these People in awe, and fetch in the
Tribute.

MILIANE.
MIliane or Meliane, abuts on Beni-razid in the West, and Algier in the East.
Miliana, formerly called Magnana or Manliana; The Head City Miliana.
for both these Names are found in Ptolomy, is a great City, built by the
Romans upon an high Mountain, about three small miles from Sargel to the
Inland, and nine miles Westward of Algier; environed on one side with towering
Rocks, on the rest with high Walls; the Houses built very curiously, each
almost accommodated with a fresh Spring.

Other Cities belonging to this Province, are Mezune and Teguident: Mezune.
The former built by the Romans, between Mestagan and Tenez, about twelve miles
from the Mediterrane: The Walls high and strong, but the Housing mean and
slight. The chief Ornament of the Place is the Fort near the Palace, and the
Great Church; both which seem to be Roman Structures.

The later is the Ancient Cesaria of Ptolomy, and lies so far to the Inland,
Tessare.
that it touches upon Biledulgerid, formerly held in Compass two small miles,
as still some of the Ruins do declare; but in the Year Nine hundred fifty
nine, destroyed by the Kalifs of Cairavan; but afterward by a great Marabout
restored and Peopled: So that at present it contains above thirteen hundred
Families.

The Inhabitants are most of them Weavers and Turners, who though Skilful in
their Trades, yet seldom arrive thereby to any more than one degree above the
meanest poverty.

KOUKO.
THe Kingdom of Kouko, by the Marsi^^n Merchants called Kouque, or Kouke; by
the Italians and Spaniards, Kuko, supposed to be the Cinnaba of Ptolomy, now
subject to the Turks, and paying Tribute to Algier. The Mountain Kouko


On the Borders of the Fields of Metiia, toward the South and East appear many
Mountains; among which is Mount Kuko, giving Name to the whole Kingdom.

Gramay says it is a very high and craggy Mountain, eleven or twelve Dutch
miles from Algier, nine Westward of Bugia, and three from Mount Labes: But
Peter Dan, in his History of Barbary averres, that Kouko is a place lying
thirty French miles from Algier, environed with almost inaccessible Mountains,
possessed by Arabians and Moors.

THe City of this Name contains more than sixteen hundred Houses; The City.
strong in Situation, as being surrounded with high and steep Rocks. Here the
King of Kouko has his chiefest Palaces.

And not far-distant, in former times was the Haven Tamagus, belonging to the
same King; but now in Possession of the Algerians.

This Country has many Springs and Gardens Planted with all sorts of Fruits,
The Haven of Tamagus.
especially Olives.

The plain Grounds yield plenty of Figs, Raisins, Honey, and Flax, of which is
made excellent Linen; Saltpeter is there dug. The Inhabitants are warlike,
necessitated thereto by their Neighboring Enemies; yet their Fields stockt with
Cattle, their Woods with Monkeys, and the whole Region with Horses fit for
Service in the Wars.

THe yearly Revenue of the King, The Revenue.
is reckoned to seven hundred thousand Crowns, which he raises by the Barter of
Native Commodities; nor can he easily be deprived thereof, the Mountain serving
as a Bulwark to keep out whom they are not willing to admit; there being but
only one way to ascend them, and that so narrow and uneasy, that a small
number with stones may keep back a strong Army.

THe Inhabitants are all Mahumetans, Their Religions.
here and there mingled with Christian Merchants: But such is their enmity to
Jews, that they will on no terms have any Converse with them.

GRamaye and Peter Davity, Government.
give the Title of King to the Lord of these Countries; but Ananie ascribes to
him only the Name of Xeque, though we may believe him mistaken; because within
this hundred years, or thereabout, one Benel Kadi, of the Stock of Celmi Beni
Tumi, King of Algier, by Aruch Barberossa murdered, relying upon the strength
of his People, called himself King of Kouko; for whose Death all the people
became deadly Enemies to the Turks: which continued till Hassen or Asan Bassa,
Son of Hayredin Barberoussa, inter-married the Daughter of this King; by which
means he gained the Assistance of his Armies against the King of Labez.

The King keeps no Court nor State, but only a Guard for Safeguard of his
Person: The continual Enmity of those of Algier against Kauke.
Nor makes Ostentation of his Strength; for his Country lying enclosed with
the Provinces of Algier, they have always had an evil eye upon him, endeavoring
utterly to extirpate the King, and bring the State under their absolute
Obedience. This being not unknown to him, makes him Side with the Spaniard, as
he did openly in the Year Fifteen hundred forty and two, when he sent the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, lying before Algier, two thousand Moors for his
assistance. Which upon the News of the miscarriage of his Fleet, he withdrew:
but this was so highly resented, that shortly after in revenge came Asan Bassa,
King of Algier, with an Army of three thousand Turks and Moors upon him, and he
durst not strike one stroke against him, but made a Peace, upon a promise of a
yearly Tribute, and gave his Son Sid-Amet Benalkadi for a Hostage. This begun a
tie of Friendship between Kouko and Algier; which yet were more strongly united
in a League, in the Year Fifteen hundred sixty one, by the Marriage of Asan
Bassa with Kouko's Daughter, whereby his People got liberty to buy Arms and
other Necessaries at Algier. But this brought no small suspicion into the
Janissaries, whose Aga having in October published a Prohibition upon pain of
Death, that no Arms should be sold to the Koukians, within two hours drew the
Janissaries out of the City, seized upon Asan Bassa, together with his Sisters
Son Ochali, the General of the Army, whom he sent bound in six Galleys to
Constantinople. This raised new fears in Couko, and increased their hatred to
Algier, so that in Sixteen hundred and nine, they sold the Haven of Tamagut to
the Spaniards: but before delivery the Algerians took it by force. Afterward
in Sixteen hundred and eighteen, after the death of Hamaert the Kings Brother,
who usurped the Kingdom, the old League of Friendship was renewed with Spain,
and Hostages given for performance: this made the hatred between them and
Algier break out afresh: but his death the year after quite altered the Case;
for his Nephew, Murderer and Successor, made Peace with Algier, and sent
thither Hostages, who in a short time there ended their lives.

Of this Enmity between the King of Kouko and Algier, the Spaniards made great
advantage, contriving thereby to get Algier into their hands, and according to
their Design, in the Year Sixteen hundred and three, thus attempted it: There
was a Franciscan Monck, named Matthias, well skilled in the Language of the
Country by his long Slavery there, when he was ready to return for Spain, he
held secret intelligence with the King of Kouko, between whom 'twas agreed,
that Matthias should furnish him with some Spanish Soldiers, for whose
reception and safeguard the Koukian was to deliver up a small Fort, lying in
the Entrance of the Mountain; and so with Joynt-Forces fall upon Algier. The
Enterprise thus concluded; a day was appointed to effect it; but the Council
and Soldiery of Algier having privately some intelligence thereof, at the very
hour sent a great number of Janissaries to the place; which at first approach
summoned, was by Abdala, Nephew to the King of Kouko, yielded, together with a
discovery of the whole design to the Bashaw of Algier, Solomon of Katagne, a
Venetian Renegado; who promised him for every Head of a Spaniard concerned in
the Plot, and by him either taken or killed, fifty Sultanies, and for the Head
of Matthias two hundred. A fruitless Enterprise of the Spaniards to take Algier.
At last four Spanish Galleys appeared under the Viceroy of Majorca, on the
appointed day, close by the Fort, with a good number of Soldiers, and the sum
of fifty thousand Escues, Abdala also, accompanied with a great many Moors, did
not fail to come to the Place; whereupon the Jesuit Matthias instantly, with
four and twenty of the chiefest of the Galleys, stepping out to Land, asked for
the Kings Son, which was promised him for a Hostage; Abdala answered, He was in
the Fort: this gave Matthias cause to suspect Treachery, whereupon he would
have retreated; but Abdala and his Soldiers opposing fell in upon them, and
knocked him, and all that came on Land with him, to the ground: Whereupon the
Viceroy of Majorca took up his Anchors, and withdrew, leaving all behind him
that were Landed.

LABES.
THe Kingdom of Labes, Gramay, Affr. 7. l. 25. c. Marmol, p. 1.5. l. 28. c.
which signifies a kind of Rush, in Spanish called Esparto, of which the Frails
or Baskets for Raisins are wrought, is by the Turks made a Province of, because
Tributary to Algier.

The whole County is Mountainous, or rather, it is one of the Mountains of the
Great Atlas, three Miles from Kouko, and ten or eleven from Bugie, unto which
it properly belongs, on the East part of which stands a strong Fort, called
Kalaa, the Residence of the Xeque, or King, as at Kuoko of Teleta, their
Sepulchers. At the foot of the Hill lies two Places, Tezli and Boni; where, by
command, a Fort was cast up to withstand the Turks.

The Inhabitants are Brebers and Azuagaes, both Warlike People, observing the
same Customs and Ceremonies with those of Kouko.

The King can bring into the Field an Army of Thirty thousand Foot and Horse;
yet at present pays a yearly Tribute to the Bashaw, or King of Algier, which
commonly consists of Four hundred Horses, and a thousand Goats, for which there
is returned to him, as a Gratuity in point of Honor, a Simiter, set with
Precious Stones.

TENEZ.
IF we would take a Journey out of these Countries, Gramay 7. l. Marm. p. 1.5.6.
lying high up into the South, back Northward, we come to the Territory and
City of Tenez, one of the Midland Divisions of the Kingdom of Algier. It had
formerly for Borders on the West, The Borders.
Telensin, or Tremizen; in the East, Algier; in the South, the Mountains of
Atlas; and in the North, the Midland-Sea: but now, with the renting off many
Pieces, is become much less. Marmol comprehends under it Brexar, Sargel,
Caesarea or Tiguident, Mesane, and Meliane; but at this day Sargel and Meliane
are two distinct Jurisdictions; Tiguident and Mesane belong to Meliane, and
Brexar or Bresch, subjected to Sargel.

The Head City is Tenez, The Head City.
built upon the Plain, half a Mile from the Mediterrane; by Marmol supposed to
be the ancient Laguntum of Ptolomy; and by Sanutus taken for Tipasa. It stands
in the Midway between Oran and Algier, Seventeen Miles Eastward of the first,
and as much Westward of the second; distant Three Miles from Mostagan, and
Thirty from Telensin. There is in the City a Fort, with a Palace, formerly the
Kings Court, and still the Residence of the Provincial Governor, sent thither
by the King or Bashaw of Algier: who also in this Jurisdiction possesses many
other Places; as, Medua, formerly called Mara, lying on the Borders of Getulia
and Biledulgerid, about Thirty Miles from Algier to the Inland, and Forty
Eastward of Telensin.

MOuntains here showing themselves, are Beni Abukaid, Abuzaid, The Mountains.
and Guenezeris, by some called Guanseris.

Abuzaid, or Zatima, lies close by Tenez, to which it belongs. Guenezeris very
high and craggy, from whose Entrails rises the River Selef.

THe Land hereabouts brings forth abundance of Wheat, The Condition of the Land.
breeds very good Cattle, and yields plenty of Honey. Medue abounds with
encircling Springs, and luxuriant Valleys, producing all sort of Fruits.
Abizaid feeds many Deer or Staggs, some Honey, but yields great quantities of
Barley. Guenezeris bears little besides Spart, or Rushes, and here and there
sprinkling a little Tutia, or Tutty.

THe Natives of Tenez are so homely, brutish, and ill-natured, The Customs of
the Inhabitants.
that the Neighboring Arabs seem to have some Nobleness and Generosity in them.

Those of Medue are so ignorant, that if a Stranger that has any knowledge
come among them, they not only freely entertain, and by all good offices
endeavor to keep him, but also will make him an Arbitrator and Umpire, for
settling and reconciling all their Differences: using in general a civil and
decent Habit.

From Tenez they Export and Barter Wheat, Barley, and the like, Their Trade.
for the Imported Commodities of other Countries, and after a good Market, send
them out again to Algier and other Places. The Abuzaidans come usually with Wax
and Hides to Tenez Markets, to Trade with Europaean Merchants.

TEBECA.
TEbeca, or Tebesia, took the Name of the Head City, Gram^y, 7.6. ^. 2. ^
Mar^^. p. 1.5.6.
anciently called Thabuna, and belonging to the Kingdom of Tunis, but now
separated and divided from them, together with Constantine, and connected to
this.

The Head City lies on the Borders of Biledulgerid, The Borders.
two and twenty miles Southward from the Mediterrane, begirt with a high and
strong Wall, of great Hewn Stones, supposed to be built by the Romans.

In and about these places, great Antiquities, Pillars, and Marble Remains of
Monuments, with Latin Inscriptions upon them, are found. In a Mountain close
by the City may be seen many great Gaves, which the People believe to have been
the Recesses of Giants. Many Authors of Eminency have written, that there is
scarcely in Europe a goodlier Place, either for magnificence, or curiosity of
Buildings, though it have undergone many sore Storms from the Arabs. At present
it is of that excellency, that they say Proverbially, it excells all the Cities
of Barbary in three things, viz. the fairness of the Walls, the Springs or
Fountains, and the Nutt-trees, wherewith surrounded on all sides, it seems to
stand in a Wood; yet the Air about it is very unhealthful, and the Ground Lean
and Barren.

HUMANBAR.
THe first Maritime Province of Algier is Humanbar, Borders.
lying on the Shore of the Midland-Sea, opposite to the City Almeria in
Granada; having for Neighbor on one side, The City Humanbar.
Fez; on the other, Haresgol and Horan.

The principal City Humanbar, by some called Hunaim; by Marmol, Ona; and by the
Moors, Deiratuneyn; which Ruscelig, in his Addition to Ptolomy, will have to be
Urbara; and Gramay the old Siga, mentioned by Ptolomy. It was by the Spaniards,
in the Year Fifteen hundred thirty and three, Sacked and Destroyed, so that it
never since had any Inhabitants, says Marmol; but Gramay tells us, it is now
re-peopled, and the chief place in this Dominion.

Haren has a small Haven, Haren.
strengthened with two Block-houses, and a strong Wall to the Seaside.

The Houses are built with various colored Brick, and plentifully served with
good Water.

Here are two other Cities, Tebekrit.
viz. Tebekrit, and Ned-Roma. Tebekrit, formerly called Thudaka, now famed for
little but its vicinity to the Mediterranean Sea.

Ned-Roma, Ned-Roma.
that is, New-Rome, situate upon a Plain, three miles from the same Sea, and
one and a half from Atlas, and the same which Ptolomy called Celama. The Walls,
Houses, Ruins, and huge Alabaster Columns with Latin Insciptions, testify it
to have been a Roman Structure; not far from whence are the two great Hills,
Tarasa and Galhasu, out of whose sides is dug Iron.

All the Land, as well Mountains as Plains, abound with Figs, Apples, Karrabes,
or St. Johns-Bread, Citrons, Granates, Peaches, Olives, Melons, Cotton and
Flax. And some few places yield Wheat, Barley, and other Grain.

HARESGOL.
HAresgol, another Maritime Territory, so called from the City of the same
Name, where the Governor keeps his Residence; by Marmols computation standing
Eastward of Humanbar, Westward of Horan, about four miles from Tremezen, at the
influx of the River Teffene, anciently called Siga, into the Mediterrane, on
the East side toward the Sea guarded by a Castle.

This City in the Year Fifteen hundred and seventy, by Don Pedro of Navarre was
Sacked and Plundered; but left by him, the Arabians re-entred, and possess it
to this day, under the Protection of the Turks, who maintain a Garrison in the
Fort.

THE MARQUISATE OF HORAN.
HOran, lying also by the Sea, Butts on the West upon Haresgol, Its Borders.
and to the East on Tenez and Sargel. The City of Oran, called by the
Inhabitants Guharan, and by some held to be the Quiza of Pliny, or Buisa, or
Visa of Ptolomy; which others contradicting, say it was that which he named
Icosium. It has been known to former Ages by many several Names, as Madura,
Ara, and Auran; whence some derive the present Oran. It is the Head City of
this small Tract, seated at the edge of the Midland-Sea, oppofite to Cartagena
in Spain, thirty five miles from Telensin. It stands partly on the hanging of a
Hill, partly in a Plain, having the Sea on one side, and on the other Trees,
Brooks and Fountains. The Streets are narrow, crooked, and without order; the
Houses also mean and scattering: yet surrounded with indifferent handsome and
high Walls, but the Haven very incommodious, especially as to some Winds.

In the most flourishing time the Inhabitants reckoned six thousand Houses,
besides Temples, Hospitals, Baths, and Inns. Most of the Citizens were Weavers,
others lived of their yearly Revenues, which they raised from their Sale of
Barley; the adjacent Country yielding little Rye or Wheat. Many Merchants
arrived hither from Catalonia, Genoa, Venice, and other Places, who drove a
great Trade with the Citizens, whose deportment toward them was very courteous
and friendly.

They held Wars a long time with the King of Telensin, who would have imposed
on them a Governor, which they would never admit, but among themselves chose a
Magistrate, whom they empowered to decide all differences arising, and was the
Judge in all criminal Causes, either as to Life or Death. By this means, and
their unity among themselves, they became at length so powerful, that at their
own Cost they maintained a Fleet, with which they Pillaged upon all the Coasts
of Spain, and became as it were a Prison of Captive Christians: This so
provoked the Spaniard, that he sent an Army thither, under the Command and
Conduct of the Cardinal of Spain, Francis Ximenes; which, with the help of the
Biscayners, in the Year Five hundred and nine, the Eighth day of May, with the
Loss only of thirty men, and the Redemption of twenty thousand Christian
Slaves, took it, and much defaced its former Luster; yet still there is a
stately Palace, the Residence of the Kings Lieutenant, a Council-House,
Exchange, great Church, and several rich Hospitals.

Here are two other little Cities, called by Gramay, Aghard, and Agbal; besides
Mazagran and Mastagan, both possessed by the Turks, together with the Mountain
Magarava.

Mazagran has a Haven, the same as Marmol thinks which Ptolomy named the Haven
of the Goths, and is environed with high Walls, and both strengthened and
beautified with a great Castle.

Mostagan, by Sanutus and others called Mestugam; by some taken for Cartena,
but by others for the Trada of Ptolomy, by the Sea side, nine miles Eastward of
Horan, and one small mile from Mazagran. It contains fifteen hundred Houses, a
fair Church, a convenient Haven, and on the South side a strong Castle.

Mount Magarava, extending Nine Miles in length upon the Seacoast, parts
Tremecen and Tenez one from another, takes its Name from the Magaravaes, a
People so called, that Inhabit there; at whose feet stand both the former Towns.

About Mostagan the Land is very Rich and Fruitful, but lies waste and
uninhabited, by the continual Thieveries of the Arabs: and Magarava breeds many
Cattle, and yields good store of Wheat.

The Mazagrans are untoward, Their Employment.
and ill-conditioned, being for the most part Shepherds; but the Magaravaes are
Warlike, and of a haughty Courage, not living in Houses, but like the wild
Arabians, removing from place to place with their Cattle: Their Language broken
Arabic, and their Lives spent without any certain order; only for convenience
sake, they pay to Algier an Annual Tribute of Twelve thousand Escues, or French
Crowns.

A Mile Westward of Horan, by the side of a little Bay, stands Marzalquibir,
thought to be the place which Ptolomy calls The Great Haven, and placed in
Mauritania Caesariensis; nor is the Opinion without great show of Reason, for
that Marzalquibir, Marzalquibir.
as Marmol says, signifies in the Moorish Tongue, A Great Haven: and indeed it
is of so vast an Extent, that many think the whole World cannot show a greater:
nor is the Magnitude all, for it is a secure and safe Port for Shipping against
all Winds and Storms.

This with all its advantages, in the Year Fifteen hundred and five, was by the
Marquess de Comarez, taken from the Moors, and annexed to Spain, under which it
long has, and still does continue.

SARGEL.
SArgel, another Tributary Jurisdiction of Algier, formerly a Member of Tenez,
so named from its chief City Sargel; which some suppose to be the ancient
Canuccis, and others Cartena, but generally in many Mapps Entitled Sargel.

The Romans erected it by the Mediterranean Sea, Nine Miles to the East of
Tenez, and surrounded it with an high Wall of Hewn Stone. The chiefest
Monuments are the remaining Ruins of a Magnificent Temple, built all of Marble
or Alabaster, a stupendous Work, and worthy the Roman Grandeur; brought to
that Ruin by Cayne, the Califf of Cairavan, when he took the City from the
Arabians, and destroyed it: from which time it lay desolate until the Year
Fourteen hundred and ninety two, when the Moors banished out of Granada
pitching there, began to People and Re-build it.

Within this Dominion also stands Brexar, which many call Bresch, or Brich, De
STADT ALGIER
and the Arabians Bersak, founded likewise by the Romans; five miles Eastward
of Tenez, encompassed with high Walls, a mile and half in Compass.

TWo miles Eastward of Sargel appears a Mountain, The Mountain of Karapula.
which the Turks call Carapula; the Moors, Giraflumar; and the Christians,
Battallo; so high, that from the top they can see a Ship twelve miles out at
Sea.

This Town has fruitful Valleys lying round it, and within it, Walls many
Vines, Olive, and Mulberry-Trees, planted chiefly for the feeding of Silkworms,
which they nourish and breed in great multitudes, making thereof no small
profit.

The Grounds near Brexar bear much Flax, Figs, and Barley; but the Inhabitants
are contentious and malicious.

They of Bresch are strong, well-set, and fresh-colour'd, marking both their
Thigh and Hand with a Cross; an old Custom observed amongst them since the time
of the Goths.

ALZIER.
THe Province of Alzier, the Principal of the whole Kingdom, The Borders.
lies bounded on the West with Tenez, Eastwards with Bugia, Southwards with the
Greater Atlas, touching upon Biledulgerid, and Northwards on the Midland-Sea.
The Plains thereof inhabited by powerful and rich Arabians, called Aben Texita;
and the Mountains by Breberians and Azuages.

The Cities lying within its Verge, are Algier, Metafuz, Teddelez or Teddel,
Col der Medujaren, Sasa, Medua, and lastly Kouko.

By whom and when this City was built, formerly the Head of Mauritania, The
City of Algler. When built.
and in the time of King Juba, his Royal Seat remains obscure; although some
have conceited it to be the Ancient Salde; Its Ancient Names.
Mercator with some reason guesses it to have been J^; and Ptolomy, Julia
Caesariensis: Whose History we will give with as much truth as Antiquity or
History will afford.

History records to this purpose; That after the Death of this King, his Son
having been taken and led in Triumph to Rome by Julius Caesar, did testify so
great a moderation in the disaster of his Captivity, that he won the hearts of
the Romans by the high Fame of his Worth and incomparable Virtues; which was
the cause why Augustus, succeeding Julius, restored to that young Prince the
Liberty which he had lost, and gave him the Dominions of his Father: So that by
way of acknowledgement of so great a Favor from Augustus, having wholly new
built this which was then called Jol, he ordered to be added to it the Word
Caesaria; upon which it has ever since been called Jol, or Julia Caesaria, as
may be seen by certain Medals of Claudius and Antoninus.

Now that Algier is the same City which the Ancients called Jol, appears
manifestly; inasmuch as the Descriptions which the old Geographers made
thereof, are not to be verisi'd in any other City of Barbary, save this alone.
Others have been pleased to affirm also, that it was at first called Mesgrana.
But this seems to me altogether improbable, in regard that neither Strabo nor
Ptolomy, nor the other Authors who have been curious in Geographical Enquiries,
do not speak any thing thereof, nor of any such People. However, of all the
Names that it may have had heretofore, that of Algier is only remaining at
this day; which happened in this fashion.

The Sarazens and Arabs coming to act their Robberies in Africa, landed there
in sundry places, like so many impetuous Torrents, and there committed
unspeakable outrages. Besides this, as if in imitation of the Goths, they had
taken pleasure wholly to ruin what ever published the Grandeur and
Magnificence of the Roman Empire, having observed that this Name of Julia
Caesaria was an apparent mark thereof; and yet not desiring to destroy this
City, they resolved to change its Name. They called it therefore Algezair,
which in the Arabic signifies An Island, because it is situated near unto a
small Island, where the Mole of its Port is at this day, the Sea washing its
Walls on the North-side. And this Name has ever since continued; but yet it
has been several ways corrupted; some calling it Algier, and others Argier, or
Argel.

ALthough its Soil be for the most part Mountainous, The Nature of the Soil.
yet is it notwithstanding good and fertile, as well in its Valleys, as all
along the Seacoasts. You there may see very fine Gardens, and Vineyards also
which the Moorisks have there Planted: Insomuch, that for eight or ten Leagues
round, there are counted above eighteen thousand Gardens, which are as it were
so many Farms, which are called in Lingua Franca, Maceries, in which are kept
great numbers of Slaves to Cultivate the Land, and keep their Cattle.

This Town, The Houses.
which has all its Houses whited with Chalk or Plaster within and without,
makes a very fine show to such as approach unto it by Sea: For it presents it
self unto the view insensible, as it were by certain steps, and grows higher
and higher, in manner of an Amphitheater; the reason of which is, because it
being upon the side of a little Hill, exposes all its Houses to the open view
with Terrass Roofs; from the top of which they have the pleasure to behold the
Sea, one House not hindering the Prospect of another. Now although it be of a
square Figure, yet it seems much less above than below; which happens
according to the Rules of Perspective, by reason of the defect of the Sight,
which determines in the Pyramidal Form.

Its Streets are for the most part so narrow, The Streets.
that two men can scarce go abreast in them; yet we must except those that are
adjacent to the Gates of the City. They make them thus narrow, that they may be
the more cool, for that the heat is there very violent. The Houses are but of
one Story, all built of Brick and Clay, but plastered and washed over with
Chalk; having on the outside neither beauty, nor order of Architecture, yet
they are for all that very handsome within. They are most commonly paved with
little Bricks of sundry colored Clay, laid in fashion of Mosaic Work. There
are four Galleries above and below, with a Court in the midst. The Chambers are
broader than they are long, and let in Light only at the Doors, which are very
large, and all of the full Height of the Room from Floor to Cieling. It Is
true, those that are adjoining to the Street, have some kind of Windows. They
have very few of them any Gardens, and are all very close, that being the Form
of Building in all the Cities of Barbary Pirates.

The most goodly House in Algier, is that of the Bashaw, or Viceroy, Public
Building.
which is almost in the midst of the City, and only remarkable for two small
Galleries, one over the other, supported by a double Row of Columns of Marble
and Porphyry, with some Enrichments of Mosaic Work. There are likewise two
Courts, the one more spacious than the other, encompassed with Galleries, where
the Divan sits every Saturday, (at the entrance of the Alcassaw) Sunday,
Monday, and Tuesday.

There are also nine other Houses of note, which they call Casseria's, or
Funduca's. The Janissaries, to whom they serve as Lodgings, have one Chamber
betwixt every eight of them: And though they be many in number, yet they are so
cleanly, that in all their Apartments one shall not see any thing that is
offensive. Indeed it is true, that there be several Slaves of the Divan
appointed to take care to keep them cleanly; besides the Turks have this
peculiar to them, of being very neat in their Houses. Besides those
above-named, there be six others of considerable bigness, which they call
Bagna's, which are the Prisons in which they keep up the Christian Slaves. He
that would make a near compute of all the Houses of Algier, shall find at
least Fifteen thousand, which are, as I said before, all very close, and
sometimes contain in one of them five or six Families.

Many have affirmed, Number of Houses and Inhabitants.
that this City contains an hundred thousand Inhabitants, accounting Natural
Turks, Moors, Janissaries, Slaves, and Jews. Of these last there may be about
nine or ten thousand, to whom it is permitted to have their Synagogues, and a
free Exercise of their Religion. And yet for all that, they are no better used
there, than in all the Parts of Christendom: For besides the Imposts charged
upon them, it is permitted to every one, yea and to the Christians themselves,
to offer them a thousand Affronts. They are distinguished from other men by a
Bonnet which they are obliged to wear, and which ought to be black, as also all
the rest of their Clothes.

The Circuit of the City is about, by the Walls, The Compast.
three thousand four hundred Paces; in which Enclosure there are sundry
Mosques, in which they make their Sala: the principal of which is that which
stands along by Yessall, near to the Sea, which they call The Great Mosque,
although it have not in it any thing remarkable more than the rest.

As to Inns, they have none amongst them; No Inns.
so that the Turks and the Moors which come thither, must of necessity lodge
with some one of their Acquaintance. But if there come thither any Free
Christians, or Merchants, they cannot take Lodgings in the Houses of Turks; but
in those of the Jews they may, who have their Quarters assigned them apart in
the City; and amongst whom there be always some which keep Chambers to that
purpose, unless that such Merchants, to be the more private, do choose rather to
take an House in the City; which is permitted them to do, in what Quarter they
like best.

But in stead of these Inns, But Taverns, and by whom they are kept.
there are a great number of Taverns and Tippling Houses, which are not lawful
to be kept by any save Christian Captives. In these are ordinarily sold Bread,
Wine, and Victuals of all kinds. Thither flock the Turks and Renegates of all
sorts, there to make their Debauches. And although the use of Wine be very
strictly forbidden them by their Law, yet they do not in the least scruple to
violate it; and there do very few Evenings pass, in which you shall not see
some one or more of them drunk; who carry themselves to such Christians as they
meet in that humor, with insolence, and often strike, and most commonly wound
them.



There are usually six Gates open, and others shut.

The first is that of Babason, which is toward the East: In its Suburbs, which
is very small, are wont to lodge the Merchant- Moors and Arabs, which bring
Provisions to the City. It was on this side that Charles the Fifth battered and
besieged it. There they put the Turks to death; and you at all times see one or
other that is there empal'd, or gauched, as they call it, and set upon the
Walls, as we shall show more at large by and by.

The second, which they call Porto-novo, is of the same side, by which one
passes to Castello del Imperador.

The third is the Gate of the Alcassaw, so called, for that it is near unto
that Palace, which is as it were the Arcenal and Magazine, wherein they keep
all their Ammunition of War.

The fourth is that called Babalowetta, which looks toward the West. Before
this Gate there is a place which these Barbarians have appointed for the
putting of Christians to death; many of which have, and still do there receive
the Crown of Martyrdom, choosing rather to suffer all imaginable Torments, than
to renounce the Profession of the true God, to embrace the Impieties of
Mahomet. And this is the only place of the City where they are put to death.
Without this Gate is the Turks Cemetery, or Burying-place, which is about a
League in Compass; at the end of which, inclining toward the Sea, is that of
the Jews, and fast by, that of the Christians, which the Sea does often wash
with its Waves.

The fifth is the Porta della Mole, so called, for that it looks directly upon
it. This Mole is a great Mass of Stones in the Form of an Half Moon; the
Breadth is about six or seven Paces, and its Length above three hundred. This
egregious Structure gives shape to the Port, where there are usually above an
hundred Vessels for Piracy, and others. It is so unsecure in Autumn and Winter,
by reason of an East and by North Wind, that in the Year One thousand six
hundred and nineteen, there were twenty five Vessels rackt in one day. This is
also called the Porta della Dogana, because that there the Customs are wont to
be paid.

The sixth and last Gate is toward the Seaside, directly opposite to the
Arsenal of the Shipping, and is called in la Lingua Franca, La Porta della
Piscaderia. Where it is to be noted, that in some of these Gates there be
always three or four Turks for a Guard, with great staffs in their hands, which
they do not seldom lay upon the shoulders of the poor Slaves, when they pass
that way, which they most commonly do in sport, but out of a malicious fancy.

There are reckoned at this day above an hundred Fountains in the City of
Algier, that have been erected within this twenty five years only; whereas
before they had none but Cisterns. A Morisco named Padron Moussa, of the Race
of those who were expelled Spain, in the Year One thousand six hundred and ten,
and One thousand six hundred and eleven, did make them by means of an
Aquaeduct, which was brought two Leagues from without the City. It Is easy to
believe, that this Work cost much Sweat and Toil to the poor Christian Slaves,
that wrought in the same without intermission during the most violent Heats, as
they daily do now in making the Mole of the Port.

The Walls of the City are reasonable good, part of Brick, The Walls.
and part of Stone, with square Towers, and certain Bastions, of which the best
are toward the Babason Gate, where there be deep Trenches; and toward the
Seaside, the Wall stands upon a Rock, against which the Waves beat.

I come next to the Fortresses of the City, which are a considerable number,
all built regularly according to the Art of Modern Fortifications.

THe first is on the East Side, flanked at the top of a Mountain, The
Fortresses.
from whence one may greatly incommode the Town, and batter it to pieces. It Is
called Castello del' Imperador, for that Charles the Fifth, having laid Siege
to Algier in the Year One thousand five hundred forty and one, of which we
shall speak hereafter, did there begin that Fort, which the Inhabitants
afterward finished. In the state wherein it is at this day, it serves the Town
for a Citadel, in which there is commonly a Garrison of an Hundred Men, with
sundry Pieces of Cannon.

The second is called Castel-novo, or The Seven-corner'd Castle; for that it
consists of six Angles. This Fortress is betwixt the Town and Castle del'
Imperador, toward the South, about five hundred Paces distant from the City.

The third is the Alcassaw, which is of a very great Extent within the City,
and makes a part of the Wall betwixt the East and South.

The fourth is on the West, three hundred Paces without Porta Babalowetta,
flanked upon the point of a little Rock toward the Sea.

The fifth is a good Bulwark, but small, close by the Porta della Mole, toward
the Great Cassaria. In it are observable five great Fieldpieces, which on the
side toward the Sea defend the Port; but above all, there is in this Fort a
very fine Canon of seven Cylinders or Bores, which serves to command the Entry
of the Gate.

The sixth is a little Island upon Piles in the midst of the Mole. The Haven
and Mold.
It is a Pentagon, or a Figure of Five Angles, in form of a Tower, in the top
of which are five great Guns for the Defense of the said Mole.



The seventh is a little Tower at the entrance of the said Port, toward the
Mouth of the Mole, wherein a Guard is kept, and in which for the use of the
Navigators, a great Lanthorn is sometimes placed a nights. It is kept by eight
Moors, who stand Sentinel along the Mole, and by a dozen more that lie at the
Entry thereof in a Boat.

There are planted upon this Mole Sixty six Pieces of Cannon, small and great;
and are kept there only for a remembrance of the Victory which they of Algier
obtained over those of Tunis, when in the Year One thousand six hundred twenty
seven, they defeated their Armado, at which they became Masters of these Guns.
Amongst them all, there be four small ones very excellent, two of which
belonged to Simon Dancer, a notorious Flemish Pyrate.

NOw although that this City have all the Fortresses which we have named, The
Guards.
yet it is for all that to be commanded on all sides, except on that toward
the Sea; for that there be sundry Hills and Mountains from whence it may be
beaten to dust. The Garrisons which are put into them, are only designed for
the Guard of the City. Besides this, the Meswar, or Executioner followed by
sundry Assistants, does constantly each night walk the Round, and the Patroul
through all the many Streets: And as for the lesser, they are for the most part
shut up so soon as night begins to approach. And if the Meswar meets any one
whose excuse seems not to him satisfactory, he presently seizes on him, and
carries him to Prison. The next day he gives an account thereof to the Divan,
or to the Cadie: And if the Prisoner be so unfortunate that he cannot appease
the Judge with reasons, or take off the Meswar with Money, this accident will
cost him sometimes two hundred Blows of a Cudgel; which there is no way to
avoid but by emptying of his Purse: for the truth is, that there, as well as in
other places, Gold and Silver are powerful Charms.

IN Algier, Tunis, and Sally, and the other Pyratick Towns of Barbary, The
Language.
three different kinds of Languages are spoken. The first is the Arabic, or
Morisk, which is that of the Country. The second is the Turkish, which has
nothing of resemblance with those of the Arabs or Moors. And the third is that
they call La Franca, which is commonly used to make ones self understood; which
is a kind of easy and pleasant Jargon, compounded of French, Italian, and
Spanish.

Each Nation that keeps an Ambassador at the Port of the Grand Seignior,
has a Consul at this City, by whom the Differences are determined that may
arise betwixt the People of his Nation. He likewise keeps his Chancellor with
the Kings Seal; and in this Chancery are those Acts and Businesses ratified
which those of that Nation do Transact among themselves. Which is done for
Paying Three per Cent. which the Consul has power to take upon all the
Merchandises of the People of his Nation that come thither to Trade. But then
he is to secure them at his own Charges, from all the Frauds and Exactions that
the Turks and Arabs may chance to offer them. And the same is practiced in all
the other Pyratick Towns.

WE shall now in order proceed to their Militia. The Militia.
And though at this day the Janissaries have the whole Command in Algier, yet
that manner of Government has not been always such: for at the time of
Ariadin, Barbarossa made himself Master of the City, and that his Brother
Cheridine succeeded him, they both Commanded absolutely: but that form of Rule
did change amongst the People of Algier after that the Grand Seignior began to
send them Bashaws, or Governors: whence it happens sometimes, that this
Militia flying into Revolts, have set up some, and driven out others; to which
the Grand Seignior has not thought fit to give a check, for fear of
exasperating them, and wholly diverting them from his Obedience. And this is
the reason why he, being well acquainted with the Disposition of that People,
and the troubles that they may procure unto himself, if he should use any
Violence against them, contents himself to send thither in his Name a Bashaw
that represents his Person, and who only takes care that nothing be transacted
to the disservice of his Highness.

Whereby you may see that this Bashaw, or Viceroy, has all the Honors of
State, reserving the Government. And thus the Militia has insensibly usurped
the Sovereign Authority in Algier: for how considerable soever the Bashaw is,
he can conclude upon nothing without the advice of the Commanders of that
Militia, nor so much as go to the Divan unless he be sent for.

Upon the whole one may affirm, This is that goodly Model of Government which
our English Janissaries, or Mussulmans introduced amongst us in the Winter of
Anno 1659.
that this is at this day a State that Apes a Sovereign, whereas the other
Bashaws and Beglerbegs, which Command in the Provinces of the Ottoman Empire
(excepting, besides this, those also of Tunis, and Tripoly of Barbary,
Pyratical Cities) are absolute over the Janissaries. But ever since that the
Militia of Algier is put in possession of the Sovereign Authority, nothing does
pass without the express Order of it, which in the Declarations and Edicts it
sends forth, does always speak in these Terms of high Pre-eminence: WE the
Great and Small, the Puissant and Invincible Militia of Algier, and of its
whole Realm, have Determined and Resolved.

But the better to understand what concerns this Militia, I do think fit to
speak of it first in particular, until we come to speak of its Divan and
Government.

When I consider this Militia, I fancy it to be like unto a Basilisk, which
Nature has crowned for the King of Serpents, but whose Looks are contagious
and mortal. Even so does this Monster carry Death in its Eyes, so dangerous is
it to all those whom it intends to hurt; and it is only its violence that has
put the Crown upon its Head.

It consists of Twenty two thousand Men; of which some are Natural Turks of the
Levant, and Sons of Turks, which they call Couloys, and the rest Renegadoes, or
Strangers, or Natives of the Place. There is a necessity of having always some
Natural Turks, to the end the Advantage may be equal betwixt them and the
Renegadoes, without either getting the Mastery of the other. Nevertheless the
Renegadoes cannot be Soldiers, or receive Pay in the Militia, unless they be
free and franck: that is, unless they have found out some means to Redeem
themselves, or their Masters have conferred on them the Privilege of Freedom:
which they sometimes do, when they have been well Served, or when they become
Renegadoes at their solicitation: for although a Christian Captive do take the
Turban, and turn Turk, yet do they not cease to be Slaves, unless he be freed
by one of those ways.

But if it chance that there remain but few Natural Turks in this Militia,
either for that they are dead, or for that they are returned into their Native
Country, in such Case the new Bashaws which come from Constantinople, bring
others along with them, or send for them into the Levant: insomuch, that in
such Case they take the first that come; and very often the poor Shepherds, or
such like, which they train up to handle Arms.

The Moors and Arabs can have no Office in this Militia, thereby to prevent the
suspicion that might arise, lest that being Natives of the Place, they should
conspire underhand together, to expel thence the Turks and Renegadoes, and
assume the Sovereign Authority into their own hands. Nor are the Morisks, who
were driven out of Spain, admitted to that Privilege. And if there be occasion
to Enroll a Man, which is most commonly done only in Algier, it is the Custom
to go and find out the Aga, who is the Chief of the Militia, or the Colonel, or
the General, as also the Clerk to the Divan, who do take the Names of those
that are listed, and instantly put them into Pay, which is Four Doubles a
Month, Their Pay.
each Double being worth Ten Sols of French Money. They have moreover each day
Four Ammunition-Loaves: but if they be Married, as they may be, they have no
Bread, but may dwell in the City with their Family.

This Pay is increased a Double by the Month, as often as those who receive it
are found to be in the Field gathering the Lismes or Tributes of the Moors, or
that a new Bashaw does come; and as often likewise as any Male-Child is born
unto the Grand Seignior. And thus the said Pay mounteth, until it come to Forty
Doubles the Month; but can never rise higher, according to the present
Establishment, for any Officer whatever. And this was Enacted some years since,
by reason there was not found Money enough to pay the whole Militia. From this
Militia are drawn forth all the Soldiers of the Garrisons which are dispersed
in the Frontier Towns of the Kingdom, which are changed every Six Months, and
are called the Pubes; of which the Brigades are composed, as has been said
above.

Now when the question is made about Arming a Pyrate-Ship, amongst the other
Soldiers, there are constantly some of this Militia, of which Three or four
thousand remain in Algier for a Guard to the City, and to serve upon the
occasions that may arise. As for their Quarter, it is ordinarily in Nine great
Houses, which they call Casseria's, where, or elsewhere they may follow any
Trade that they are skilled in. In which doubtless, that which does much
encourage them is, that the least among them may attain when time shall serve,
according to his order of reception, to be the chief Commander of this Militia;
for they successively rise from Degree to Degree, and from Office to Office,
until they come to the Quality of Aga: nor can any Favor, or other
Consideration change this method. And because it is impossible to understand
this, but by knowing the Degrees and Names of those Officers, it is requisite
that I here insert them, beginning at the lowest, and ascending to the highest.

From simple Soldiers and Janissaries, who are called Oldachy's, after a
certain time, as their turn comes, they are made Biquelars, otherwise Cooks to
the Divan, which is the first step to rise unto the great Offices following.
These Biquelars are those that in the Casseria's, Garrisons, Camps or Armies,
are to take care about providing Meat and Drink for the Officers, and principal
Commanders of this Militia.

From Biquelars and Caterers they come to be Odabachy's, that is Corporals of
Companies, or Commanders of Squadrons, of which the number of Soldiers is not
limited; for they consist sometimes of Ten, and sometimes of Twenty. These have
Six Doubles a Month for Pay, and expectation of having it augmented to them,
as we have said already; and they wear for a mark of Honor a great Trayle of
half a Foot broad, which hangs down their Backs above a Foot in length, with
two long Ostrich Feathers.

From the Charge of Odabachy's they rise to that of Boulouchbachy's, or
Captains, which one may know by a piece of Copper Gilt, which they wear upon
their Turban, in fashion of a Pyramid, and a very high Plume.

From Boulouchbachy's, or Captains, they come to be Ajabachy's, which are but
Twenty four, and are the chief of the Divan.

From the quality of Ajabachy's, they ascend to that of Aga, Commander, or
Colonel-General of all the Militia. They can continue but two Months at the
most in this Charge, and sometimes they change five or six of them in a day,
when they are not judged capable thereof by the Divan: insomuch that sometimes
there have been Three in a quarter of an hour. But let them be never so unfit
for it, yet nevertheless the have all the honor to have presided in the Divan,
although that sometimes they have not been Seated in the Chair of the Aga, nor
declared such: and in that case the Bashaw is obliged to give each of them a
Scarlet Vest.

After they have past the Dignity of Aga, they hold the Quality of Mansulaga's,
that is to say, they are such as our Veterans, called by the Romans, Emeriti
Milites; for they are after that no longer obliged to the Function of
Soldiers, and yet never cease as long as they live, to receive Pay, which is
about Forty Doubles, which amounts to Twenty Livres of French Money. But if the
Divan are to choose a General for the Fields, or for the Fleets, they commonly
take him from amongst these Mansulaga's, for that they are Men of Experience,
and well skilled in matters of War.

Now all that are of the Militia are so much esteemed amongst them, that they
do not make any account of a Man unless he be a Soldier; although that very
often the principal of those Officers be Tradesmen, as Shoemakers,
Black-Smiths, and the like. And there is not any one that dares to strike one
of those Soldiers, unless he be one himself, and unless he will have his Hand
cut off: nay its remarkable, that they are not Censurable by the Cady's, or
ordinary Judges, but only by the Aga, or his Chaia, that is, his Lieutenant.

The Musket and Simiter, are the Arms which they use to carry, when they go
unto the Wars, or to fetch in Contributions, or to play the Pirates, and not
otherwise. We are to add here, that of the number of these Oldachy's, or
simple Janissaries, the Aga selects Four, which they call Sotachy's, who serve
for a Guard to the Bashaw: and these have their Lodgings and their Table in his
Palace, and withal, these only are allowed to wear Simiters; and that they
may be distinguished from the rest, they have upon their Turbans a kind of
little Tower of Gilded Copper, and a very high Plume made of Herons Feathers.

That which is very observable in this Militia, is, that it being compounded of
a great many Men of different Nations, as namely Turks, Greeks, French,
Spaniards, Italians, Flemings, English, Germans, and others; yet their Policy
is for all that so good, that they all live in great Concord, and very rarely
Quarrel each other. But if amongst them any one chance to lay hand on his
Simiter, be it by Rencounter, or otherwise, with a design to strike, then all
that be present are obliged to make in unto him to hinder his doing any more,
and to carry him to the Divan to be punished.

I will add here one notable passage, An Instance of Barbarians that
reproacheth the uncharitableness of Christians.
to make it appear how much esteem these Barbarians have for all those in
general who receive Pay, and are Enrolled in this Militia. Some years since it
happened, that amongst sundry Lions which were Tamed, and went up and down the
Streets of Algier, there was one which entered into the Court where the Divan
was sitting; and there before the whole Assembly he threw himself at the Feet
of the Bashaw, and began to fawn upon him, moaning in a sorrowful Tone, as if
he did complain: The Bashaw instantly guessed, that this Lion suffered hunger,
and that having no particular Master, (for he was in common, and lay in the
Streets) no one had took care to give him Food: whereupon, by consent of the
Divan, he ordered, that for the time to come, that Lion should have the Pay of
a Janizary, to be employed for his sustenance: but the Lion chancing to die a
Month after, it was Decreed in full Divan, that he should be solemnly
Interred, and carried by four Janissaries, in memory of that that he had been of
their Militia, and received Pay as themselves.

THe next thing is their Civil Government, their method of managing affairs of
State, which is by the Bashaw and Divan; yet herein differ they from all other:
for the Divine Plato speaking of the felicity of States, has said with as much
reason as truth, that they would then be happy when the Philosophers should be
Kings, or Kings would Philosophate. But the State of Algier seems directly to
oppose that Doctrine; for that those who have the Government thereof have very
few of those Qualities which are required to Wisdom. And yet nevertheless, as
if Fortune had taken up her dwelling in that City, she makes it to grow and
prosper from day to day, both in Wealth and Power, if so be one may call that
Prosperity which subsists only by Vice, and which has no other Foundation
than Tyranny.

The Divan, Their Government.
to speak properly, is the Council of State, as well of the City, as of the
whole Kingdom. It is composed of all the Officers of the Militia, and sits four
times a Week; namely, on Saturday, which is the day of the Great Divan, Sunday,
Monday, and Tuesday. The first day in the Alcassaw, and the three others in the
great Court of the Bashaw's House. He himself, as great as he is, cannot be
present there, unless he be sent for in the Name of the Divan, by is Chiaus, or
Huishers, who go on purpose to his Lodgings to advertise him thereof; and at
the foot of the Stairs, where they stay, they salute him three times, as if
they spoke to one that was deaf. I shall next let you see the Order and Placing
of the Officers.

The Aga, who is Chief of the Council, and of all the Militia; he is seated in
the most honorable Place, as President, and proposes all that is to be put to
the Debate, and to be resolved on in full Assembly. And if the Bashaw be called
in, he singly reports his opinion as one of the rest, but can determine of
nothing by his Authority.

The Clerk or Secretary of the Divan, who writes all that is there concluded,
and keeps a Register thereof.

The twenty four Ajabachy's, who are Officers of the Militia, nearest
approaching to the Dignity of Aga. They are seated in the same Court along a
Gallery, in which each takes his place, according to the Seniority of his
Reception.

The Boulouchbachy's, who may dispute, and give their Votes, as the rest.

The Odabachy's, and sometimes also the Mansulaga's, who are Summoned when
great Affairs of State are under deliberation.

The Chiaus of the Divan; and these by the duty of their Charge, are present to
execute the Orders and Commands of Council, which for the most part consists of
about seven or eight hundred Persons. For the principal Officers of the Militia
have their places in it, and all of them that are in Town use to be present; so
that sometimes there will be in this Divan above fifteen hundred Persons;
especially when all the Officers are there, the Mansulaga's and the Odabachy's
are taken in. These later, and the Boulouchbachy's, who make the greatest
number of Counselors of State, and Officers, do stand in the midst of the
Courtyard, each according to his Rank. They continue there sometimes six or
seven hours, in the Sun, in the Rain, and in the Wind, each with his Hands
across upon one another, without being permitted to alter that posture of them,
save upon some necessity; nor to bring thither any Arms, not so much as a
Dagger, for fear of any tumult. Those who have any business there, be they
Christians, Turks, or Moors, may stand at the entrance of the Court, up and
down which certain Chiaus's pass to and again with Pots full of Water, to offer
those to drink that desire it.

All the Affairs of this Divan, are propounded and resolved in the Turkish
Tongue; so that there is a necessity that all the Officers do understand and
speak it; otherwise they cannot be admitted into the same. And this is
practiced amongst them, thereby to testify how much they value and esteem the
Turkish Empire. And for this cause it is, that they have always in the Divan an
Interpreter of Languages, of which they ordinarily make use to understand the
Christians and Moors, when they have any Complaint or Petition to present:
there being no Nation in that place, which has not his Truchment to explain
his thoughts. These Officers and Counselors of State being in this manner
assembled, the Aga propounds with an audible voice that which is then to be
debated, addressing himself first to the Bashaw, if he be present, and to the
twenty four Ajabachy's: Which being done, he puts the thing to the Vote of the
whole Divan, and requires their opinion and resolution in the Case; which is
taken in this manner.

After that the four Officers, which are called Bachouldala'es, have heard the
Proposal of the Aga, they make it to be understood to the whole Divan in a loud
voice, without stirring from their places. The word thus past unto the last of
the Officers, remounts from one to another, with a strange voice and
murmuration, when it happens that the thing does not please the assembly. And
that being done, the Aga gives his Determinations according as the Vote was
for or against the Proposal that he made. In the mean time, amongst this
confused variety of Opinions, they observe not for the greater part of the time
either Order or Law; but are constrained to conclude the Affair indifferently
either with Justice or Injustice, as it best pleases these goodly Counselors;
who being for the most part Mechanics, know not how either to write or read:
so that consequently in their ridiculous Advice they are guided only by the
motion of their Passion, and of their brutish Ignorance; wherein sometimes
they fall to hot Contests. As particularly upon the Twenty sixth of August, in
the Year One thousand six hundred thirty four, there happened to arise a great
Difference betwixt the Bashaw, and the Assembly. The noise thereof was such, or
to say better, the howlings were so great, that no man ever heard any thing so
frightful. In this Commotion they pusht one the other, with design to rush upon
the Bashaw; and seemed to argue with each other, who should be the first that
should lift up his arm to strike. For it is a Custom, that he that begins
the Tumult, in lifting up his hands which he holds across in the Assembly, is
sure, that, whether he have right on his side or no, he shall be seized on, and
put into a Sack, and thrown into the Sea. Which yet did not happen at that
time, for that in the end the Bashaw and the Aga found out a way to appease the
Tumult.

Where it is farther to be noted, that the Women who have Complaints to offer,
assemble sometimes to the number of an hundred of their Kinswomen and Friends,
who all veiled repair to the Gate of the Divan, and there cry, Charala, that is
to say, Justice of God, and are very readily heard.

IN the last place, we will briefly give an Account of the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, when he besieged this City; and of the great Loss he suffered therein.

This Prince in the Year One thousand five hundred forty one, Charles the Fifth
besieges Algier.
having Embarked upon the Sea an Army of Twenty two thousand Men aboard
Eighteen Galleys, and an hundred tall Ships, not counting the Barques and
Shallops, and other small Boats, in which he had engaged the principal of the
Spanish and Italian Nobility, with a good number of the Knights of Maltha; he
was to Land on the Coast of Barbary, at a Cape called Matifou. From this Place
unto the City of Algier a flat Shore or Strand extends it self for about four
Leagues, the which is exceeding favorable to Galleys. There he put ashore with
his Army, and in a few days caused a Fortress to be built, which unto this day
is called The Castle of the Emperor.

In the mean time the City of Algier took the Alarm, having in it at that time
but Eight hundred Turks, and Six thousand Moors, poor-spirited men, and
unexercised in Martial affairs; besides it was at that time Fortified only
with Walls, and had no Outworks: Insomuch that by reason of its weakness; and
the great Forces of the Emperor, it could not in appearance escape taking. In
fine, it was Attaqued with such Order, that the Army came up to the very Gates,
where the Chevalier de Sauignac, a Frenchman by Nation, made himself remarkable
above all the rest, by the miracles of his Valor. For having repulsed the
Turks, who having made a Sally at the Gate called Babason, and there desiring
to enter along with them, when he saw that they shut the Gate upon him, he ran
his Poniard into the same, and left it sticking deep therein. They next fell to
Battering the City by the Force of Cannon; which the Assailants so weakened,
that in that great extremity the Defendants lost their Courage, and resolved to
surrender.

But as they were thus intending, there was a Witch of the Town, His Fleet and
Army overthrown, and wracked by Witchcraft.
whom the History does not name, which went to seek out Assam Aga, that
Commanded within, and prayed him to make it good yet nine Days longer, with
assurance, that within that time he should infallibly see Algier delivered from
that Siege, and the whole Army of the Enemy dispersed, so that Christians
should be as cheap as Birds. In a word, the thing did happen in the manner as
foretold; for upon the Twenty first day of October in the same Year, there fell
a continual Rain upon the Land, and so furious a Storm at Sea, that one might
have seen Ships hoisted into the Clouds, and in one instant again precipitated
into the bottom of the Water: insomuch that that same dreadful Tempest was
followed with the loss of fifteen Galleys, and above an hundred other Vessels;
which was the cause why the Emperor, seeing his Army wasted by the bad
Weather, pursued by a Famine, occasioned by wrack of his Ships, in which was
the greatest part of his Victuals and Ammunition, he was constrained to raise
the Siege, and set Sail for Sicily, whither he Retreated with the miserable
Relics of his Fleet.

In the mean time that Witch being acknowledged the Deliverer of Algier, was
richly remunerated, and the Credit of her Charms authorized. So that ever since
Witchcraft has been very freely tolerated; of which the Chief of the Town, and
even those who are esteemed to be of greatest Sanctity among them, such as are
the Marabou's, a Religious Order of their Sect, do for the most part make
Profession of it, under a goodly Pretext of certain Revelations which they say
they have had from their Prophet Mahomet.

And hereupon those of Algier, But the Algeriant will not own it.
to palliate the shame and the reproaches that are thrown upon them for making
use of a Witch in the danger of this Siege, do say, that the loss of the Forces
of Charles V. was caused by a Prayer of one of their Marabou's, named Cidy
Utica, which was at that time in great Credit, not under the notion of a
Magitian, but for a person of a holy life. Afterward in remembrance of their
success, they have erected unto him a small Mosque without the Babason Gate,
where he is buried, and in which they keep sundry Lamps burning in honor of
him: nay they sometimes repair thither to make their Sala, for a testimony of
greater Veneration.

Here one thing very well merits our observation, Note.
that in the Year One thousand six hundred thirty seven, in the end of
November, as those of Algier took an exact survey of the Mole of their Port in
the time of a great Calm, fearing the strong Preparations of the French,
wherewith they had been menaced by the Sieur de Manly, they to their great
astonishment, perceived without, and somewhat above the Mole, a Galley at the
bottom of the Water, where it lay covered with Sand from Poop to Prow, with all
its Banks of Oars. Now in regard none living had seen or heard speak of such a
Galley, it did much astonish every one, and invited most people to go to see
it. To raise it entire there was no way, but all they could do was to get up
three very fair and perfect Canon, and by the Arms of Charles the Fifth upon
them, it was imagined to be a part of the Wreck of his Fleet an hundred years
before, as we but now mentioned.

About twelve Miles from Algier, Teddelez.
Teddelez, the most Easterly Sea-Town of this Country, by Ptolomy called
Addime, seven Miles from Alzier, fortified with strong Walls, that enclose
above a thousand Houses, together with a Castle, the Residence of the Governor.

Sasa, Sasa.
formerly called Tipassus, and by some Old Algier; because the other, as they
say, was built out of its Ruins: Heretofore it contained above three thousand
Houses, but now lies desolate.

Kol der Mudejar, Kol der Mudejar.
a Town new built by Asan Bassa, about the Year Fifteen hundred and fifty,
three Miles Eastward from the River Safran to the Inland.

The Inhabitants are either Tagarins, Morisks, or Granadins, driven out of
Castile and Andaluzia; and Targatans, expelled Valentia.

THe Soil is so fruitful, The Soil of the Country.
that sometimes there are two or three Harvests in a year, of Wheat, Barley,
and Oats; besides other Plants, which it affords the whole year in great
abundance. They have in some places Melons, very delicious in Taste; some of
which are ripe while others are green; so that all Seasons produce successively
ripe Melons: Besides Vines, whereon hang bunches of Grapes a Cubit long.

THe Deserts feed Lions, The Beasts.
Leopards, Tigers, Panthers, Porcupines, and Hedge-Hogs, whose flesh the Moors
eat, though Swines Flesh be forbidden; Hearts, Apes, Foxes, Camelions, and many
sorts of Fowls, viz. Ostriches, Eagles, Hens, Partridges, and the like: Oxen
also with straight Horns an Ell long, and Sheep with three, four, five, or six
Horns, and Tails thirty, forty, or fifty pound weight, besides Horses and
Camels.

Here are also two strange Beasts; the one called a Gapard, the other a
Ciculis: the former frequently made tame, as Gramay says, and used to hunt with
by reason of its swiftness; it has a Head like a Cat, but much bigger, a
spotted Tail like a Panther, the Feet behind longer and higher than those
before; one main cause of his great speed in running. The other neither a Dog
nor a Fox, but partaking of both; having one peculiar and rare property to cure
Lameness with his Breath, if the same be taken in the morning upon the hand,
and that applied to the part affected, chafing the same.

THe Native Inhabitants of Algier, The Constitution of the Inhabitants.
are whiter than the rest of the Country, strong-limbed, and well set; but
there are not many; for people of all colors reside there; some for the Wars,
as the Janissaries; some for Profit, as the Turks; some for Trade, as Merchants;
some upon force, as the Granadines and Andaluzians, driven out of Spain;
besides the Slaves of all Countries. Jews also and Moors, that serve the Turks
in the Wars, and come out of the Mountains of Kouko and Labez.

Without the City live none but Moors and Alarbes; not in Houses, but seatter'd
up and down in Huts and Tents in the open Fields.

The King and the Grandees of the Court, wear their Beards long; but others
shave close, cutting off withal the Hair of their Heads, excepting one Lock on
the Crown, by which they believe they shall be drawn up to Paradise. They Bathe
often, and Wash every Morning before they do any thing; then again before their
Sala, or Prayer; also before Dinner: at each Lotion the Water is poured into
the Palms of their Hand, which they suffer, or rather cause to run up to their
Elbows.

MOst of the Houses are built Apiece, two, three, four, Their Houses.
and five or six Stories high, Flat-rooft for convenience of Walking, receiving
both Air and Light from the Doors, and small Windows. In stead of Chimneys,
great Vessels filled with Earth stand at the Doors, whereon with Wood and Coals
they Dress their Meat.

The Palaces of the Kings and other Grandees, have great Quadrangles,
beautified with curious Columns; the Floors of the Rooms Boarded, spread over
with Tapestry, into which whoever goes, leaves his Shoes standing before the
Door.

THeir Household Stuff is little, being for the most part one Matt, Their
Household Stuff.
a Tapestry Quilt, and two Cloths spread at one side of the Room, some Earthen
or Wooden Pots and Dishes, long Spoons, and Wooden Cup-boards and Chests. In
stead of a Bedstead, Ledikani.
they lay two or three Sticks from one Wall to another, two or three Foot from
the Floor, over which they lay Planks, whereon they lay a Quilt; upon which
they lie, covered only with a Blanket.

Their usual Food is Rice, Couscou's, and boiled Meat, with some Fruit. They
drink Water; yet some of them, notwithstanding the Prohibition of their
Alcoran, drink Wine also.

THe Moors of this Province live some by Husbandry, Their Employment.
some by Handicrafts, others by Merchandising, but most by Robbing of Christian
Ships. The Janissaries employ themselves in Soldiery, but the Arabians live
Slovenly and Poorly, getting all they have by Cheating and Treachery. The
Granadins use all manner of Trades, wherein they are very skilful and
Arts-Masters. The Women do nothing but sit all day on Matts or Tapestry,
entertaining one another with Discourses, or else in Visits of their Friends,
going to the Bannia's, Recreating themselves in the Gardens without the City,
or at Feasts.

THe Habits here are several; for Christians and free People, as English, Their
Habits.
French, Netherlanders, and others go Clothed according to the Fashions of
their several Countries; but the Slaves wear commonly a Gray Suit, with a Coat
or Cap, like a Sea-mans.

The Common People wear in the Winter over their Shirts, a Linen or Woollen
pair of Drawers, a white Woollen Coat, with a white Cap fastened behind, called
Galela; others have a Garment on hanging down to their Knees, which they throw
over their Shoulders, and under their Arms, like a Cloak, called Golela,
commonly Died Black. In the Summer they have two large Frocks, or Coats on,
which they call Adorta: upon their Head is a Turban of slight Linen, or
Cotton-Cloth.



The Apparel of the Women differs little from that of the Men, only they are
much statelier and thinner; their Shifts come down to their Ankles, their Hair
braided and tied up with Necklaces of Gold, Bracelets of the same, rich
Pendants and Jewels in their Ears, and square Caps on their Heads. When they go
abroad, they have a Vail or Mantle of fine Linen hanging over their Heads, and
clasped on their Breasts, so that nothing can be seen but their eyes; but in
the House they wear a Silk Frock over their Linen Shift.

THe Ancient Inhabitants of Algier used the Punick Tongue, Their Language.
and when subject to the Roman Emperors, the Latin, as may be observed from
diverse Inscriptions yet to be seen. But when the Arabs overran the Country,
they brought in use the Arabic, in which all public Writings and Letters are
still written more frequently than in the Turkish. The Morisk also is much
used; but the common and vulgar Speech, as well here as in the Levant and other
Eastern Countries, as well by Mahumetans as Christians, is Lingua Franca; being
a Medley composed out of the French, Italian, and Spanish Tongues.

HEre is a Custom deviating a little from the Alcoran, Their Marriage.
the restraining Men to four Wives, whiles this gives liberty for as many as
one pleases; but the Algerines are obliged by their Custom, and keep within the
compass of four Wives; but their wanton lusts toward Concubines and Catamites
are unbridl'd, and without limitation: Others assume the liberty of seven,
among whom they divide the nights, and allow every one a several Chamber; but
this produces heart-burnings and jealousies which many times prove fatal to
either, or both.

The Bridegroom, as we have before related, sends Gifts to the Bride for
several days before the Wedding, making merry with his Friends. The Bride
receives all sitting upon the Ground, accompanied with other Women, especially
the Garments, which trimmed with Jewels, and fit for wearing, are orderly showed
to her. In the evening she is brought to the Bridegrooms House, covered all
over, with Drums beating, and other Turkish Music, where she is accommodated
according to her Quality.

When a Man lies upon his Deathbed, he is tended by Men, A Funeral Pomp.
as Women are by those of their own Sex: when Dead, the Corpse is washed with
warm Water and Soap, then wrapped up in white Linen, and a Turban laid upon it.
Thus prepared, it is set upon the Bier, and with the Alcaid's License, conveyed
to the Grave in the Fields without the City Gates, Clothed, and with the Head
forward, where it is Interred and covered with Earth. Some few days after, if
it were a rich Person, at his Head and Feet are Stones set up, with
Inscriptions and Epitaphs to the honor of the Deceased, and some select
Sentences out of the Alcoran laid upon him.

They make no show of Sorrow by their Clothing, Sorrow.
only the Women wear for some days over their Faces, a black Cloth, and the
Men for a Month never Shave themselves; both Men and Women visit the Grave for
the space of three Days, bestowing on the Poor, as a Benevolence, Bread and
Figs, and continually saying over the Tomb with hideous outcries, Celam Ala,
that is, Gods Light bless thee.

In the same manner almost are the Grandees, and the Commanders in the Wars
buried, but with greater Pomp and State; that is, the Corpse is laid into a
Coffin adorned with carved Work, and other costly Ornaments; and so carried to
the Burying-place, the Marabout going before, and his Family and Servants
bearing his Lance and Scimiter after him, followed by Horses and Camels in
great number; of which the PRINT affords a sight.

Most people in Algier walk on foot, few ride a Horseback except Alkadies,
Governors of Provinces, or other great Lords; others of meaner Quality using
Asses. The Women seldom or never go afoot, but are carried upon Asses covered
with a kind of Canopy, as we have declared before, and sitting in a
apiece Box drawn round with Curtains.



In such like broad Frames set upon Camels, many are carried in their Journeys
to Mecha, to visit Mahomet's Tomb, partly to shroud them from the heat of the
Sun, and to keep the Sand from flying into their Eyes as they go through the
Sandy Desert. Two Men may conveniently sit in these, but with their Legs
across; which is not troublesome, being the fashion of the Turks.

The general Coin and Money current here, The Coin.
both amongst the Turks, Moors, Jews, Dieg^ de Haedo Typograph. de Alg. eu
Gram. lib. 1.
and Christian Merchants, is Outlandish, being partly Turkish Gold, as
Sultanies of the value of a Ducat; Mortikals of Fez, a fifth part more in value
then a Ducat; partly Europaean, as Spanish Pistols; French Crowns, Italian
Zequiens, somewhat more then a Venetian Ducat; Ungarian Ducats, and Spanish
Ryals. But the Moors and Arabs up in the Country know no other than Escues, or
Spanish Pistols and Ryals: it is true, there is some Money Coined there, viz.
Pieces of Copper called Burba's, but thick, stamped with the Arms of the King
on both sides: formerly six of these Burba's made an Asper, but now six make
but half an Asper. An Asper, the best Silver Coin, is apiece, Printed with
Arabic Letters. Fourteen Aspers and a half make a Spanish Ryal, and Four and
twenty Doubles, that is worth about Nine Shillings English.

Their Gold, which has an allay of a little Copper, is for the most part Coined
at Tremecen, being round, and of three sorts, viz. Rubies, which make Twenty
five Aspers; Dians, or Zians, each worth a hundred Aspers; each of those have
for their Stamps the Name of the Reigning King, in Moorish Letters. The Jews
have the most Profit and Command of all this Money, being indeed the only
Exchangers; for which they pay an Annual Rent to the Bassa.

Diego Haedo estimates the Revenues of this Kingdom at Four hundred and fifty
thousand Ducats; The Revenues.
Harego, Four hundred thousand; and Peter Dan, Six hundred thousand yearly, all
which comes to the single benefit of the Bassa; for all which he never sends to
the Grand Seignior any more than some young Lads, and other Presents of small
value; but he gratifies the most eminent Officers at the Royal Port of
Constantinople every year with some thousands of Crowns. But this Revenue is as
uncertain as the Prizes they take from the Christians, of which the Bassaw
receives a seventh part; as also of the Customs of imported and exported
Merchandise. The most certain In-come is the Pole Money of the Jews, Moors, and
Arabians, who all pay either by the Head or Family: and is Collected in this
manner.

Every year the Algerines send into the Field three Bands or Flying-Troops of
Janissaries, each containing two or three hundred; How the Tribute of the Level
Country is brought in by the Arabians and M^^rs.
one of these marches to the West of Tremicen; the second Eastward, to the
Coast of Bona and Constantine; and the third South, to the Negroes Country and
Wilderness. This last has the greatest trouble, because for the most part they
continue out six or seven Months.

Every Troop is commanded by an Aga, who is as much as a Colonel; under whose
Command and Conduct they forceably Collect those Tributes among the Moors,
wild Arabs, Advares and Alarbs, who pay nothing but by Compulsion. For this
Oppression and Tyranny they are generally hated, and the people certainly
knowing the time of their coming, oftentimes break up their Tents, and drive
all their Cattle before them into the Mountains where the Convenience or
Strength of the Place gives them hope to have an opportunity of avoiding their
Cruelty. These Marches are contrived always to begin in Harvest; but if it
happen they can get neither Money nor Coin, they secure themselves by taking
their Cattle and Corn, and sometimes their Children. All the gathered Tributes
are brought to Algier, and a particular Account thereof given in the Divan.

Some perhaps at first hearing may wonder how one of these Troops, at most not
above three hundred strong, can so easily run down the whole Country; but his
own recollected thoughts will easily rectify him, when he shall consider, the
one are ignorant of Martial Discipline, and that breeds in them a want of
courage, neither know how to manage those few Arms they have; whereas the other
are completely armed, well disciplined, and daily exercised in the Wars.

The Register or Secretary of the Divan has the Command or Check of those
Troops, of whom he always has a List or Muster-Roll; by which knowing every
man's Quality and Service, he accordingly puts him upon Duty. And when they go
out to fetch Contribution, though they be all Foot-Souldiers, yet are they
allowed Horses as well as their Officers; only with this difference, the
Commanders have Slaves to look to their Horses, which the others may not.

When they draw out of Algier, they Rendezvous about the City, lying in Tents
till they meet together.

But when they march, they commonly have their Allowance of Bread, with a
little Oil, Vinegar, Rice, and Couscous. What other Provisions they will have,
they must buy with their own Money; but that they take no great care for, as
well enough knowing how to fetch Victuals abundantly from the Arabs and Moors.
The greatest gain those Companiess make, arises from the Ostridge Feathers
they bring from the Wildernesses in the South, which upon their return they
sell very dear.

As to the Corsairs or Pirates, the best account that can be given of them, is
from the great number of their Ships wherewith they put to Sea; which amount to
thirty five in all: A List of which, with the Names of the present Commanders
as they were in the Year 1668. and what each Ship carries in her Stern, with
the number of Guns, we have here inserted, as follows.

Guns. CAptain Tegue, Admiral: The Tiger 44 Usten Usiph: The Palm Tree, with
two Bucks 32 Caramis: A White Horse, with a Moon in his Back 30 Tabuc Raise: A
White Horse 32 Maned Segma: A Gilt-Lime-Tree 36 Ben All Raise: A Lime-Tree 32
Birham, Cololy: A Gilt Sun 40 Bischew; a Dutch Renedago: A Moor Gilt 38 Dochier
Hoggi: A Gilt Star 30 Alli Raise Trego: The Shepherds 36 Alli Raise Vento: The
Oak 32 Alli Raise, a Spanish Reneg. A Gilt Rose 34 Buffone Ray, a Dutch Reneg.
The Seven Stars 36 Raise Elleway: A Gilt Flower-pot 30 Mustapha Raise, an English
Reneg. A Green Serpent 28 Regient Raise: A Half Moon Gilt 32 Mustapha Raise, a
Dutch Reneg. An Antelope 30 Mustapha Baris: The Palm with two Lions 28 Regient
Raise, a Savoyard: A Half Moon 14 Montequera: A Moon with two Cypress-Trees 20
Mustapha Raise, a Genouese Reneg. with two Lions 26 Cornetto, a French Reneg. A
Dolphin Gilded. 16 Le Madam Wynkes, Reneg. A Lion with a Hand 32 Two Satees,
two Galleys 14 Six Ships on the Stocks from 26 to 40 Guns 236 Two Tartans ready
to be Launched.

This is the Number and Quality of their Strength at Sea, with which they do
infinite Robberies; besides the vaste numbers of Christians which they reduce
into a miserable Slavery. Gramay in his time reckoned their number to above
thirty thousand; but that we may well suppose to exceed: Nor is it an easy
matter to make a certain Calculation. But if they were much fewer than they
are, yet were it a Meritorious Work for any, or all Christian Princes and
States to unite to unroost that Den of Thieves, whose inhumane Cruelties merit
nothing but utter destruction: And although since the beforementioned Defeat
of Charles the Fifth, Emperor, no great Attempt has been made upon them, yet
lately in 1669. Charles the Second, of Great Britain, etc.
a Squadron of His Majesty's Ships, under the Command of Sir Thomas Allen, lay
before the Place, declaring War against them, and seized two Barques and a
Galliot with about seventy Turks, burning another in the Haven.

THese Advantages, and in truth all other their Wealth coming in by the
Soldiers, make them to be so highly esteemed, that it is Death to strike one
of them; nor are they liable to the Censures or Punishment of any Officer but
their own Aga. And notwithstanding they consist of all Nations, as English,
French, Spanish, Italian, Germans, Dutch, and others; yet are they so well
governed, and live in such unanimity, that very seldom a quarrel is heard of
among them.

As to other particular Singularities in this Kingdom, we will give a
particular Account thereof in its proper place.

THis Country in the time of Juba, that Sided with Pompey against Caesar, was
very potent, and a terror to its Neighbors. But this flourishing Greatness at
length decayed; the Dominion sometimes resting in Constantine, other whiles in
Bona, and lastly in Tremecen, from whence wrested by the Mahumetan Moors and
Arabians, and Barbary divided into several Kingdoms as at this day.

In the Year One thousand five hundred and ten, Ferdinaud King of Spain
besieges Algier.
Don Pedro of Navarre having subjected the Cities of Oran and Bugy to his
Master Ferdinand King of Spain, reduced Algier to such extremity, that finding
themselves not able to withstand him, they submitted to Selim Eutimi the Great
Prince of the Alarbes, who had always lived in the Campaignes about Algier,
under whose Protection they made it their whole work by perpetual Incursions to
infest the Coasts of Spain, Majorca, Minorca, and the other Islands, whereupon
Ferdinand sent a powerful Fleet to destroy Algier: The Citizens seeing such a
Naval Force ready to fall upon them, submitted to the King of Spain, obliging
themselves to pay an Annual Tribute: However the Spaniard built a Castle in the
City, wherein was always two hundred Soldiers, and great store of Ammunitions
and Provisions, whereby he kept both Pirates and Citizens in awe, which
continued as long as Ferdinand lived.

After Ferdinand's Death, with the Consent of their Prince Selim Eutimi, And
distresses it.
they sent to Aruch Barberossa, who was then at Hegir, a place on the side of
the Midland-Sea, distant from Algier, Eastward a hundred and eighty Italian
Miles, entreating him to make all the haste he could with his Turks and Galleys
to deliver them out of the hands of the Christians, who much incommoded them by
the Fort, promising to reward him nobly for his pains. Barbarossa immediately
comes thither, and in a short time secretly murdered Selim Eutimi in a Bath:
Which done, he caused his own Soldiers to Proclaim him King, then summoning
the wealthiest Citizens, he forced them to acknowledge him: Whereupon he Coined
Money, new Fortified and Garrisoned the City, made himself Master of Tenez, and
the Country round about, subjected Tremisen, by the Help and Treachery of the
Natives, who joined with him against their King, and became dreadful to all his
Neighbors.

But Divine Justice at length gave a check to these Successes by his Death; for
in the Year 1517. by the Marquess of Comares, who was marched out of Oran
against him in the behalf of the dispossessed King of Telensin, with ten
thousand Christian Soldiers at a Passage of the River Huexda, he together with
Fifteen hundred Turks were killed.

After his Death, his Brother Cheredin Barbarossa was chosen King by a general
Consent; who though a man of great Valor and Conduct, yet sent a Galley with
Letters to the Grand Seignior, desiring his Assistance and Protection against
the Christians: very readily did the Turk consent to his Request, sending
thither two thousand Native Turks: Thus fell this City and Kingdom to the Grand
Seignior, to whom it is yet subject, Governed by a Viceroy, who is entitled a
Bassa, to whom the Christians give the Style of Highness.

THeir Marabouts carry so high a reputation among them, that whatever they say
is looked upon as an Oracle, and their Commands obeyed even to the hazard of
life: They cut not the Hair of their Heads or Beards; their Habit a long Coat
to their Heels, over which a short Cloak reaching but to the middle of their
Back, as in the foregoing PRINT does more plainly appear.

Their Religion and Worship is the same with other Mahumetans, or at least very
little differing; each having an equal Reverence for the Alcorna, and using
both the same Times and Method of Devotion.

BUGIE.
BUgie, formerly a Kingdom, by the Moors called Bigeya, or Bugeya, The Borders.
from the chief City belonging to the Dominion lying toward the Sea, borders
on the West with Algier, on the East with Gigel or Gigery; before the Bounds
were altered by the Turks, this Country was the most Easterly Part (according
to Davity) of the Caesarian Mauritania, bordering then on the West (as we said)
with Algier, on the East with the City of Tenez, and Africa the Less; having
the Midland-Sea and the City Collo on the North; and on the South,
Biledulgerid, and Numidia.

This Country stretching almost Fifty Dutch Miles toward the South, over the
Mountains to the Wilderness of Numidia, contained formerly, according to
Marmol, Bugie their chief City, (from whence the whole Territory is so named)
with the Garrison and Village of Gogere, Micila, Migana, Tezteza, Lamora,
Nekauz, the Mountains of Benijubar, Auraz and Abez; but Gramay reckons thus,
Gigeri, Mesile, or Misile, Stefe, or Distefe, Nekaus, Kollo, and Sukayda. But
now Gigeri is a peculiar of it self, and Sukayda and Rollo are incorporated to
Constantine: So that at this day Bugie contains only Micili, Distefe, and
Nekaus, with the Mountains of Bugie.

The City Bugie, by the Arabians and Moors, says Marmol, called Bigeya, The
City Bugie.
or Bugeya, and held by some to be the ancient Metropolis Thabraka; by others
taken for Igilgilis, or Vrikerh; and by Ptolomy, for Salde; lies near the
Mediterrane on the side of a great Mountain, about seventeen miles East from
Algier, and the like Westward from Gigery.

The Romans, they say, first Founded this City, being invested with high,
strong, and ancient Walls; in Fifteen hundred and twenty well Peopled, boasting
of Eight thousand fair Houses. It has also a commodious large Bay, or Road,
anciently called The Numidian Sea. The Streets are handsome, and wellorder'd,
but being upon a continual ascent or descent, they are wearisom to those whose
occasions call them to walk much therein. Here are several Mosques, many
Colleges, and also Cloisters, public Inns and Houses of common Reception for
Strangers, built after their own manner. They have a fair and spacious
Marketplace, near which, on a rising Hill, stands a strong Fortress, environed
with thick and high Walls, curiously adorned within with several seeming
Characteral Mouldings, upon Plasters, and Carved in Wood, besides exquisite
Paintings, according to their manner, which, as they say, cost more than the
whole Fabric.

Eastward of this the River Hued-el-Quibir (that is the great River) falls
into the Sea.

Micile, or Mesile, lies within thirty miles of the Border of Numidia,
surrounded with the Mountain La Abez.

Stefe, or according to Gramay, Distefe, or rather Distese, or more rightly, as
Marmol calls it, Tezteze, supposed to be that which Ptolomy called Apfar, being
fifteen miles to the Inland, Southerly of Bugie, situated upon a delightful
Plain, near Mount La Abez, formerly destroyed by the Arabians, but soon after
re-inhabited by Three hundred Families.

Nekaus, Nekaus.
formerly called Vaga, one of the delightfullest Cities of Barbary, stands on a
River side seventeen miles from the Sea, and twelve from Testese on the Borders
of Numidia. It has strong Walls, and boasted formerly of stately Baths, Houses
of Entertainment, wherein Strangers and Foreigners were Lodged, and well
accommodated; besides many Palaces and Churches. Every House, though but a
Story high, had a Garden, Planted with Vines, Damask Roses, Myrrh, and Jasmine.

Bugie lies almost quite hemmed in with the Mountains of Zarara, but the most
remarkable they call Bene-quibar, being five miles from the City Bugie, six
miles long, and three miles broad. This Ridge of Mountains, taken together
reach along the Seacoast thirty miles, and are in some places six or seven
miles broad.

THe Land about Bugie is barren, and unfit for Tillage; yet it brings forth
excellent Garden-Fruit. Near the City Nekaus are large Plains abounding with
Corn, and on the River stand an incredible number of Hazel and Fig Trees,
accounted the best of that Country.

THe Mountains afford little Wheat, but abundance of Barley, besides Nuts and
Figs, Flax, and Hemp, whereof much (but course) Linen is made; Iron-Mines
also, and good Wood: The Inhabitants also keep a great number of Horses, Oxen,
and Goats.

THe Women of Nekaus are handsome body'd, The Constitutions and Customs of the
Inhabitants.
and fair, with black and shining Hair; which makes them take a pride to
frequent the Baths. The Inhabitants of Micile are Clownish, and exceeding
Rustical, sturdy and revengeful: so also the Mountaineers.

Some of them are kind in their Conversation, and very much inclined to
Pastime, and, more than any, use Musical Instruments. Those of Nekaus have a
good Mien, and comely Deportment, mild, sure Friends, and always neat in their
Apparel. And though every Mountain is possessed with a several Family, yet their
Customs and manner of life are all one.

Those of Bugie and Nekaus have their Colleges, where their Youth are
instructed in the Mahumetan Laws and Philosophical Studies; the Students
Clothes and Diet born at the Cities Charge. The Inhabitants of Micile are all
Artificers and Husbandmen.

The Inhabitants of the Mountains mark themselves, according to an Ancient
Custom, with a black Cross on their Cheeks, and on the Palms of their Hands;
which first they used when they were subdued by the Turks, who then required no
Tribute of the Christians: Whereupon many of them took up the Badge of
Christians, so escaping the Tax that was laid on other Persuasions; which
though now useless, they continue as a fashion, neither knowing the Cause nor
Original.

The Riches of the Inhabitants consists in their Cattle, Their Riches.
Corn, Plants, Linen, and Hempen Cloth. The Mountaineers use for their Coin
small Gads of Iron, of half a pound weight; yet they Coin also small Pieces of
Silver.

IN the Declension of the Roman Empire, the Goths expelled their Legions, Their
Government.
and made themselves Masters of Bugie, and there settled the Royal Seat of
their new Government, under their Prince, King Abni; These in the Year Seven
hundred sixty and two, were driven out by the Saracens; and about a hundred
years after that, Joseph, the first King of Morocco, gave the Kingdom and
Castle of Bugie, then subdued by him, to one Hucha-Urmeni, though a Saracen,
without paying or doing Homage. And though his Successor was disturbed by the
Arabians, yet afterward they held a fair Correspondence with Tunis.

But two hundred and sixty years since, the Sovereign Power falling, it became
Tributary to the King of Telensin, under which it continued till the Reign of
Abuferiz, King of Tunis, who subdued Bugie, giving it to one of his Sons called
Habdidi Haziz, with the Title of King; whose Race Governed by Succession, till
Don Pedro de Navarre, by Command of King Ferdinand, in the Year Fifteen hundred
and ten, with a strong Army Conquered it for the Spaniard, who slighted the old
Castle, and cast up two other new Forts on the Shore by the Haven.

This City and Forts Barbarossa supposing to stand in his way, as opposing the
Designs he had upon several parts of Barbary; and at the invitation of the
expelled King, came in the Year Fifteen hundred and twelve, with twelve Galleys
well manned, and an Assistance of three thousand Moors, drawn by their King from
the Mountains, and pitched before the City; yet after so fair a show of his
great Power, eight days continually battering the Castle, being discouraged by
a small Shot received in his left Arm, he faintly withdrew, and broke up the
Siege, returning to Tunis, and the King to the Mountain.

This much troubling Barbarossa, that he had so dishonourably forsaken such an
Enterprise, having recovered his Wound, in the Year Fifteen hundred and
fourteen he renewed the former Siege; in which plying the Castle so hot, and
shaking it with his great Cannon, it fell; but the Garrisoned Soldiers retired
into the City. Then instantly he applied himself to the Storming of the other
Castle, and without doubt would have carried it, though in the first Assault
there remained an hundred Turks, and as many Moors dead upon the Spot, had not
Martin de Reuteria, with five Ships, and a competent number of Soldiers, came
opportunely to their Assistance into the Haven: whereupon Barbarossa was once
more compelled to depart to Gigeri. Charles the Fifth Emperor, seeing of what
great consequence it was to keep this place for the more easy Conquest of
Algier, for the better Security thereof, built a Fort upon the Hill which
commanded the Castle.

At length those of Algier, after many fruitless Attempts, became Masters
thereof in the Year Fifteen hundred fifty and five, by the Conduct of the Bassa
Sala, who with three thousand Turks, and thirty thousand Moors, beleaguered in
two places both the Castles as well by Land as Water. First he gained the
Castle lying on the Sea, cutting off most of the Defendants, then slighting it,
and pursuing his Success, fell upon the other Fort with such fury, that the
Lieutenant Alonso de Peralta was forced to desert it, and seek Refuge in the
City; but considering the weakness of the Town, as not able to endure an
Attaque, surrendered the City, Shipping thence (according to Articles) for Spain
four hundred old Soldiers; for which Service he was rewarded, by cutting off
his Head: and ever since Bugie has been under the Government of Algier.

GIGERI, Or GIGEL.
THis Country bordering with the Sea, Marmol so calls, from a Village of that
Name. In the way between Algier and Bugie, being fifteen miles from the later,
consisting of about five hundred mean Houses, near which stands an old Castle
upon a Hill almost inaccessible.

This Territory reaches Southward to the Borders of the Numidian Desert,
containing Mount Haran, being about twenty miles from Bugie, and fifteen from
Constantine; and running Northward to the pleasant Valleys of Mesile, Stefe,
Nekaus, and Constantine.

THe Soil is generally barren, and fit only for Lime and Hemp, which there
grows in great abundance.

Mount Auraz has many Springs, which so water the Plains, that they are
Plains, that they are all Morass; but dried up in the Season of the Year by the
Heat of the Sun. All this high Land is inhabited by Arabs, a fierce and jealous
people, not permitting any Intercourse, or the least Commerce with the
Low-Landers, lest they should dispossess them of their Habitations.

The Village Gigeri is very rich, especially by the Trade they had in former
times with the French who used to put in there for Hides and Wax.

The Inhabitants Traffic in small Vessels laden with Nuts and Figs to Tunis,
giving to the Bashaw of Algier, the Tenth of all their Cargo's.

IN the Year Fifteen hundred and fourteen Barbarossa subdued this Territory,
The French are driven out of Gigeri.
and gave himself the Title of King of Gigeri. And by that means when Cheridin,
Barbarossa his Brother and Successor in his Conquest, submitted to the Grand
Seignior, this with the rest became subject to the Turks; who disturbed by the
French that had won something upon it, there were still Endeavors by the one to
keep what they had got, and by the others, to regain what they had lost: So the
French in November, 1664. designing to Fortify themselves, had an Assistance
sent to them under the French Admiral Duke de Beaufort; who arriving with a
Naval Army, sent a Spy to find out the Strength of the Moors; and to prevent
his Discovery, attired him in Turkish Habit, promising him for a Reward of his
Fidelity and care, fifteen Pistols, determining upon his return to fall upon
the Moors with eight hundred men; fifty of which he intended for an Ambuscade.

In this interim also the French Spy not being heard of, one pretending to have
fled from the Moors came, and upon audience promised to bring the French, if
they would Habit themselves like Turks, to surprise the Enemy: This Wheedle
took effect, so that in imagination, the French were already Masters of all,
and calling a Council of War, wherein consulting of affairs, it was resolved,
that the Places with them possessed, were Tenable by the Strength they The City
GEGERY DE STADT GIGERI^
had; upon which resolution of the Council, the French Admiral withdrew with
the greatest part of his Fleet, leaving behind only the Marquess of Martell
with four Ships. And now for a while they were full of Courage, intending to
disguise themselves according to their design, when the Moors, not unconcerned,
providing themselves with Cannon and other Necessaries for Battery, surprised
the Surprizers, giving the new French Fort so smart an Assault, that a Redoubt
was laid level, and many of the Defendants killed on the Spot. Hereupon
Mounsieur Fretee was sent out with some Troops to try if he could by any means
force the Moors from their Post; which well he might have accomplished, if
another Officer that should have assisted him with a Party of select Foot, had
not failed in timely Juncture: so that the Moors perceiving their small
numbers, soon put them them to flight; then renewing their Batteries, the great
Guns quickly made the green and unsettl'd Walls of the French Citadel to
shake; which struck such a Panick Fear through the whole Camp, that they could
not be staid by Blows or Commands, showing no respect to their Officers, but
ran away totally in a confused Rout. This showed the Vanity of the former
Resolution of the Defensiveness of the Place; notwithstanding which, and the
Report thereof given in Writing by the General of the Horse, and Engineer of
the Army, to the French King, both Soldiers and Commanders now judged the
place untenible: So that at length it was determined with general Consent, to
leave Gigeri, and embarque the Soldiers, and what portable Goods they could in
the four Ships left, as we said before, and by good fortune still remaining in
the Harbor. But this could not be put in execution with such speed; but that
assisted by the darkness of the night, before all were gotten on Board, the
Turks fell in upon the Rear, doing great execution; besides many sick and
wounded Soldiers that fell into their hands, the whole Rear-Guard of four
hundred men were cut off and taken; Six and thirty Pieces of Ordnance with the
French Arms upon them; many Horse and a great quantity of Provisions newly
received. Nor did this ill Fortune go unattended, for in passing over from
Gigeri to Toulon; not much above two Leagues distant from thence, a great Ship
called The Moon, being old and crazy, and as it seems overladen, also sunk, and
was utterly lost, with ten Troops of Horse in her. And this was the Event of
the French Expedition to Gigeri.

CONSTANTINE.
COnstantine, a Maritime Province, so called from its Metropolis, includes, Its
Borders.
according to Marmol, that space of Land, which the Ancients named Nero
Numidia; containing formerly Constantine, Mele, Tefas, Urbs, Ham Samit, and
Beldelhuneb, the Rivers Magier and Guadilbarbar dividing it from Tunis.

The Head City Constantine formerly, according to Strabo and Mela, The Head
City called Constantine.
did bear the Name of Cirta Numidia, and Cirta Julia, having for the Founder
Micipsa, King of Numidia; but Gramay thinks it a Roman Work, by the stateliness
and form of the Buildings. Marmol averrs, that this City was of old called
Kulkua, a Plantation of Numidia, and that the Moors still entitle it Kucuntina.

It lies on the South side of a very high Mountain, surrounded with steep
Cliffs, from among which the River Sugefmart flows, so that the Cliffs on
both sides serve in stead of a Rampart; on the other side, strengthened with
high Walls of black Stone, exquisitely hewn; through which are but two ways
into the City, the one on the East, the other on the West. It contains about
ten thousand Houses, many well Paved Streets, furnished with all kind of
Tradesmens Shops. On the North side stands a Castle; and without the City are
many old Buildings, and some Ruins, signs of its former Greatness: and about
half a mile distant from it a Triumphal-Arch, built after the Roman fashion.
From the City they go to the River by steps cut out in a Rock; within which is
a Vault, whose Roof, Columns, and Floor are all of the same Piece. Not far off
rises a Fountain of warm Water; a little Eastward of which, by a little Rill of
fresh Water, is a Structure of Marble, garnished with Carved Images; which the
Common People imagine to have been an Academy, and that the Master and Scholars
for their wickedness, were metamorphos'd into those Statues.

Sanutus places the City Chollo, Kollo.
formerly called Kullu, and now by some Alkol, by others Kol and Kollo, near
Constantine; being built by the Romans at the edge of the Mediterrane-Sea,
adjoining to a high Mountain, but open and without Walls: It has a Castle
founded upon a Rock, with a convenient Road for Ships, formerly much frequented
by Genouese, and French Merchants.

Sukaicada, Sukaicada.
about thirty miles from Constantine, has also a Haven full of Trading, and a
Street-way running from it a mile and a half in Length.

Five or six miles from Constantine, The Village Estore.
not far from the Cape of Gigeri, lies the Village Estore, famous for its
Antiquity; and a small, but convenient Haven.

THe Mountains are many, The Mountains of Constantine.
covering the whole Coast from the North to the West, and so to the East,
beginning at the Mountains of Bugie, and reaching alone the Mediterranean-Sea,
about thirty miles; from whence arise many Fountains and Rivers, that taking
their Course through the Plains, by their fertilizing Streams, greatly enrich
the Places through which they pass. Here also appear scattered up and down many
Ruins of Streets and Castles, built by the Romans.

THe Land about Constantine is bountiful to the Countreyman, rendering to his
labor a thirty-fold return; nor are the Mountains much behind, yielding good
Corn, besides plenty of Olives, Figs, and other Fruits; yet nevertheless
through the insolency of the Arabians, are but thinly inhabited.

In the beforementioned warm Bath there is abundance of Snails with shells,
which the silly Women cried out upon for Evil Spirits and Devils; attributing
to them the cause not only of all Diseases, but other evil Occurrents: As a
remedy of all mishaps coming by them, they use to kill a white Hen, and thrust
it with their feet into a Dish; so bringing it with a Wax-Candle to the Bath,
and leaving it; which is soon conveyed away, and eaten, (I hope you will not
think by the Snails.)

THe Inhabitants of the City Constantine are rich, proud, and clownish, but
withal courageous; those of Kollo friendly and courteous, great Traders, and
Lovers of Arts and Sciences. The Mountaineers are much Civiler here than in
Bugie, but ignorant in all parts of Literature: however they learn and use many
Handicraft Trades; and without doubt would much improve themselves, if they
would leave off those continual Wars they manage among themselves about their
Wives, which often run over from one Mountain to another to get change of Men.
By this means generally the Men are Soldiers, so that they can bring into the
Field forty thousand Men, of the which perhaps four thousand Horse. The
Citizens of Constantine, Kollo and Gigeri, yea, and the Alarbs, come to their
Weekly Markets; to whom without exception they equally sell what Fruits or
other Commodities they have.

THe whole Government is Commanded by a Provincial Lieutenant, Its Government.
Residing in Constantine. Heretofore they had Kings of their own, but in the
Year Fourteen hundred and twenty, becoming subject to Tunis, the Kings thereof
bestowed it as a Principality on their eldest Sons; but at last in the Year
Fifteen hundred and twenty, after Cheredine Barbarossa had taken Kollo, those
of Constantine, weary of the Trunsian yoke, voluntarily yielded themselves up
into the hands of Barbarossa; since which they have remained free from Tunis.

BONA.
PLiny and Ptolomy called this Country The Royal Hippon, Its Borders.
for distinction from Diarrython Hippon; but the Inhabitants in the Moorish
Tongue name it Bederna, now a Member of Algier, though heretofore computed
under Constantine: It lies encompassed with Mountains on the West and South;
and which reach about twenty miles, that is from Bona to Beg, and in breadth
eight miles.

THe City Bona, famous for having been the Episcopal See of St. Augustine, The
City Bona.
is said to be built by the Romans upon sharp and very high Cliffs on the
Mediterranean Sea, having both within and without many Wells and Springs.
Sanutus and John Leo say, that Bona lies at present waste and depopulate, and
another City called Beldelhuneb, or Beledel Ugneb, built out of its Ruins,
whereas yet Marmol, a Writer worthy of belief, averrs that the City, which the
Europeans call Bona, got the Name of Beledel Ugneb from the Moors; so making
them both one, as indeed they are.

The compass thereof is small, and the Streets very narrow; so that it has
kept nothing of the former Beauty, and ancient Glory, which it boasted of in
the time of the Ancient Father St. Augustine; having been several times
destroyed by the Moors and Saracens: particularly in Four hundred and Forty,
the very year wherein St. Augustine died.

A small Quarter of a Mile Southwards from the City, lies a remarkable Plain;
where yet are to be seen the Marks and Monuments of the Monastery and Cloister
which that Father caused there to be built; which by the Foundation may be
judged to have contained about an hundred Paces in Length, and thirty in
Breadth. Near the Ruins of this Structure is a very fair and large Fountain,
which the Moors of this place do to this day call Saint Augustines Well.

Eastward of Bona lies a handsome Citadel, built by the King of Tunis,
wherein the Governor keeps his Residence; it is strongly fortified, and well
provided with great Cannon, and other Ammunition, as well for fetching the
Revenue from the Alarbs, as to keep the Country in awe. The usual Garrison,
two hundred Janissaries.

Mele or Mile, Mele.
formerly Tenare, stands also near the Sea, yielding Obedience at present to
the Algerines, but before subject to Constantine, from which distant three
miles: The Walls are old and ruinous; the Houses sometime three thousand, now
very few, and those thinly inhabited: yet the great Conduit in the very heart
of the place, is no little advantage to such as dwell there.

Tabarka, Tabarka.
seated on the Seacoast, and famous only for the Coral-fishery close by it;
opposite thereto, lies an Island of the same Name, between which and the main
Land, is the distance of a mile and half.

THe Soil of this Territory well deserves the Attribute of Bona, The Soil of
the Country.
Good abounding with fresh Valleys, rich in Grain, and delightful in the shadow
of Jujuben-Trees; whose Fruit the Inhabitants gather in the Summer to eat in
the Winter. There grow also Figs, Apples, Pears, and very much other Fruit; but
above all, yielding great store of good Cattle; as Oxen, Calves, and Sheep,
called by the Arabians, Nedez; sufficient to give Supplies of Butter and Milk,
not only to the City Bona, but also to Tunis, and the Island Zerbes.

THe Mountains for the most part lie destitute of People, yet full of pleasant
Springs, having Water enough to give a Current to several Rivers, which
afterward take their course through the Plains, between the Hills and the
Midland Sea. The Coast hereabouts yields much Coral, both white, red, and
black; being a kind of Plant, or Shrub, growing in the Water between the Rocks.

THis City and Province were-Governed by Xeques and peculiar Lords of their
own, Its Government.
till the King of Tunis, having subdued them, built a strong Castle on the East
side of the City to keep it in awe; but afterward Aruch Barbarossa, in the
Year Fifteen hundred and twenty, coming with two and twenty Galleys and Ships
into the Haven, forced the Citizens to acknowledge him: by which means they
became Subjects to the Kings of Algier, and so have ever since continued,
excepting for a short space, that the Emperor Charles the Fifth, in the Year
Fifteen hundred thirty five, made himself Master of it.

THE FORT OF FRANCE.
SIx Miles to the East of Bona, between the Kingdoms of Algier and Tunis, Peter
Davity, Estat Ture on Affique.
and between the Black and Rosy Cape, you may see a Fort, Commanded by the
French, and called Bastion de France, that is, French-Fort. Formerly near this
Cape of Roses stood another Building, erected in the Year Fifteen hundred sixty
one, by two Merchants of Marseiles, with the Grand Seignior's consent, called a
Fort, but indeed was only a Flat-rooft Warehouse, for a residence of the
French, who come thither, and employ the Natives Diving for Coral, and under
that pretense Exported all sorts of Merchandise, as Grain, Hides, Wax, and
Horses, which they bought there with more liberty, and for less Price, than in
the Island Tabarka, because no Turks lay there to hinder them.

But many years since this Structure, whose Ruins yet appear, was beaten down
by the Algerines, oppressed with a great scarcity of Provisions, which the
Moors reported was occasioned by the French Exporting their Corn. Afterward in
the Year Sixteen hundred twenty eight, by order of Lewis the Thirteenth, French
King, Mounsieur d'Argen, Lieutenant of Narbone, and chief Engineer of France,
was sent thither to re-build the razed Fort, who took with him all Materials
necessary for the Work from Marseiles, and with great speed and diligence
erected this Bastion. But the Work was scarce begun when the Moors and Arabians
came down Armed in great numbers, and forced the Mounsieur to a Retreat, and at
present to Fortify himself in a Half Moon newly cast up, from whence with the
first opportunity he took Shipping. At length the same King employed one Samson
to re-attempt the same design, who brought it to some perfection, and was
Governor of it. Since which another was formed upon the Island Tabarka, in the
Year Sixteen hundred thirty and three.

This Bastion de France has two great Courts; the one to the North, where the
Storehouses for Corn and other Merchandise are, with many convenient
Ground-Rooms for the Officers and Chief Commanders. The other being more large
and spacious than the former, stands on a Sandy Beach, where the Ships usually
come to trade for Coral, as we mentioned before. To this adjoyns a fair and
great Vaulted Chapel, called St. Catharina, in which they Celebrate their
Mass, and Preach, having convenient Lodgings above for the Chaplains and
Priests. Before it there is a Churchyard, and a little on one side a
Garden-house, set apart, and used only for sick and wounded Soldiers. Between
these two Courts toward the South, stands a great Quadrangle built all of
Stone, which is the Fort or Strength, with a flat Roof; wherein stand mounted
two Mortar-Pieces, and three other Brass-Pieces, supplied with a sufficient
Garrison.

TUNIS
THe Kingdom of Tunis, The ancient Borders.
at this day subject to the Great Turk, comprised formerly the Countries of
Constantine, Bugie, Tunis, Tripolis in Barbary, and Essab, and by consequence
the greater part of Africa the Less, together with Carthage, Old Numidia, and
other Countries, extending above a hundred and twenty miles along the
Seacoast: But now the greatest part of Bugie, Constantine, and Essab are
wrested from it by Arms, and annexed to Algier.

The Kingdom of Tunis then, Its present Borders.
taken within these narrow Borders, begins at the River Guadelbarbar, formerly
called Tuska, dividing it on the West from Constantine, as on the East the
River of Caps or Capes, by the Lake of Melaetses, separates it from Tripolis,
and on the Southern Limit is the Modern Numidia. Peter Dan in his Description
of Barbary joins it on the West to Algier; to Barka, Bona, and Tripolis on the
East: So that by his account, the Southern Part of Tunis lies Westward of
Negro-Land, containing but few places of note.

THe Rivers which run through and water this Country, Its Rivers.
are chiefly four; Guadelbarbar, Magrida, Megerada, and Caps or Capes.

Guadelbarbar, Guadelbarbar.
which Sanutus and Marmol call Hued d' Ylbarbar, takes its Original out of a
Hill lying a quarter of a mile from the City Urbs or Jorbus, being serviceable
only to the Citizens in driving their Mills; for the Current runs in so many
crooked Meanders, that such as travel from Tunis to Bona, are necessitated with
great trouble (there being no Boats nor Bridges to help them) to wade over five
and twenty times. Lastly, it disembogues into the Sea, by the forsaken Haven
Tabarka, seven miles from Bugie.

Magrida, Magrida.
formerly called Catadt, seems to be a Branch of the former; flowing through
Choros, and then entering the Mediterrane, near to a place called Marsa.

Megerada, Megerada.
or rather Maggiordekka, formerly Bagradag, on whose Shore Pliny, Gellius, and
Strabo say, that when Attilius Zegulus was Consul for the Romans in these
parts, during the Punick Wars, was found a Serpent of a hundred and twenty Foot
long, killed by Attilius and his Army with Arrows. It rises according to
Sanutus, out of a Mountain, bordering on the Country of Seb, called by others
Ursala; whence giving a friendly Visit to the City Tebesse, it runs Northward,
till discharging its Water into the Mediterrane-Sea, about ten miles from
Tunis. This River swells up an unusual height, when any great Rains fall; so
that the Travelers sometimes are compelled to stay three days till that the
Water abates, that they may wade over; for there are neither Bridges nor Boats
for Ferry.

Kaps, The River Kapis.
or Kapis, or Kapes, supposed to be the Triton of the Ancients, arises, as
Sanutus and Marmol say, out of a Wilderness, lying on the South of the Mountain
Vascalat, whence it flows through certain Sandy Plains, till losing it self in
the Midland-Sea. The Water of this River is said to be so warm, that it cannot
be drunk, unless they let it stand and cool; and so medicinal in the T^UNIS
adjoining, that it has merited the name Lepros, because by drinking the Water
it cures the Leprosy.

MOuntains in this Kingdom, are Zogoan, Guislet, Benitefren, The Mountains.
and Nefuse, besides some others on the South. Zogoan lies six miles Southward
of Tunis: upon whose Side and Foot may be seen the Ruins of diverse Castles
built by the Romans, as appears by the Latin Inscriptions insculpt on Marble.
From hence also was the fresh Water brought through Arches and Conduits to
Carthage, some whereof are yet to be seen. Guislet, three miles from Kairavan,
shows also some ancient Remainders of Roman Edifices.

Gramay gives to this Kingdom six Seacoast Provinces, viz. Utica, The dividing
of the Kingdom of Tunis.
or Bizerta, Carthage or Gouletta, Sousa, Africa, Capis, and Tripolis; and
three to the Inland, to wit, Caravan, Beggie, and another partly lying in
Numidia, and partly in Lybia. But as Utica, Tripolis, and Capis being rent from
it, are become particular Dominions independent of it, we may justly enough
divide it into four shares by the Sea, and four to the Inland: those that
front the Sea are Carthage or Gouletta, Bizerta, Sousa, and Africa; and the
Inland, Kairavan, Urbs, Beggie; and the Country, half Numidia, and half Lybia.

The City Tunis.
THis City was known to the Greeks and Romans by the same Name, The several
Names.
as by its distance of three miles from Carthage, Titus Livius declares. Strabo
and Pliny call it Tynis, or Tunis; and Ptolomy, Themise: some will have it, but
without any reason, to be Tenissum, lying by the Numidian Sea, which in truth
stands thirty miles from it: Others stray as wide from the mark, making Tunis
and Carthage to be one and the same place. The Italians call it Tunisi and
Tunis; the English, French, and Dutch, Tunus, or Tunis; and the Arabians,
Turks, and Moors, Tunus.

IT lies upon an Inlet of the Lake Gouletta, The Situation.
three miles to the North of the ancient Carthage, and two miles from the
Mediterranean Sea, surrounded on the South with high Mountains: The form of it
is an Oblong-square, and in bigness, about a small mile in compass, though
Gramay enlarge it to three, and others to five Spanish mile, environed with a
Wall of forty Cubits high, strengthened with many Turrets; before the last
Assault made upon it by the Turks, there were many Bulwarks and Forts, but most
of them are since slighted.

THe principal Gates in the Arabic Tongue called Bab, are five, viz. The Gates.
Bab Vasouque, Bab Carthago, Bab Elbaar, Bab Asseire, and Bab Efmenar, besides
several other Posterns. Formerly they reckoned herein eighteen eminent Streets,
besides diverse Lanes, all very narrow, sixteen Markets, three hundred and
fifteen Mosques, and twelve Christian Churches; besides in the Suburbs eight
Jewish Synagogues, four and twenty Hermits Chapels, a hundred and fifty
Bathes, eighty six Schools, nine endowed Colleges, sixty four Hospitals, or
Inns for Travelers and Strangers, and above three thousand Shops, wherein in
were sold Woollen and Linen Cloth; of all which at present there are but few
remains.

THere are seven Prisons, The Prisons,
where they shut up Christian Slaves, called in French, Bagnes; or Bafios, viz.
the Bayne of Issouf Dey, the Bayne of Morat Bey, the Bayne of the Patron,
another of Solomon, a fifth of Sidi Mamet, the sixth of the Bassa of Tripolis,
and lastly that of Sigale.

Among all the Edifices of the City, The Palace.
the Palace is the most eminent, where the Bassa keeps his Court, beautified
with four stately Portico's, several Towers, a pleasant square Court, fair and
delightful Gardens, and magnificent Cloisters, Chambers and Halls; but above
all, the Treasury-Chamber is costly, wherein the King formerly kept the Book of
their Teacher Elmuachdin, or Elmohadian, of which they boasted as the only
Reconciler of all Differences rising about their Law.

There stands also a Castle on the West side of the City upon a Mount; as also
a great Mosque, called Ameth Benaros, built by King Zacharias, to the Honor of
one of their Santons, serving for a Refuge or Sanctuary for Offenders; and had
a Tower that was held the most famous in all Africa. There is also a Quarter
for the Janissaries, a Burse or Exchange for Merchants, and a Customhouse. The
other Buildings of most remark, are the Palaces of Aga Sidi la Fes, of Sidi
Mahometa Milanoys, of Sidi Jucip Raise, and many others.

THe Citizens Houses, The Houses.
Gramay and Sanutus say, amounted formerly to ten thousand; but much increased
by the Moors that were driven out of Spain, and settling here, have filled it
with all sorts of Artificers and Handicrafts; by which means it is full of
Trade, and will compare with many of our best Cities in Europe. The Houses were
heretofore built very artificially, with all sorts of Imagery, wrought both in
Stone and Plaster, and curiously painted; the Floor of the Chambers paved with
smooth and shining Stones; the Roofs flat; but most of them only one Story
high: This was its Ancient Beauty: But at present they are slightly built,
generally having two Doors or Gates, one to the Street, and another to the
backward places; between which they have a small Gallery, chiefly used as an
Apartment for Friends that come to visit them.

In the Year Fifteen hundred and twenty, Suburbs Gram 8. b. 1. H.
there were three Suburbs; one without the Gate Bedsuvaike, containing about
three hundred Houses; another without the Gate Bebelmanora, showing a thousand
Habitations of Tradesmen; and the third without the Gate of Beb-el Bachar, a
quarter of a mile from the Lake Golette, having three hundred low and small
Houses, wherein the Venetians, Genoueses, and other Christians reside, that
they may not intermingle with the Moors. But now there are only two, one on
the West toward Biserta, very fair and large; the other on the East toward
Sousa: Without the City are the Burying-Grounds of the Turks, wherein are many
Marble Monuments, and great variety of curious Flowers.

THis City has neither Wells, The Water.
Rivers, nor Springs of fresh Water, but only Cisterns, wherein they Catch the
Rainwater: It Is true, there is one Well, sometimes affording pleasant Water;
but with great diligence kept for the Viceroy and his Family.

But some years since Issouf Dey brought Water thither from a Fountain a mile
without the City, through a stone Channel, or arched Sewer, appointing for the
maintenance thereof two Escues yearly.

In the Suburbs there is a Well of Brackish-Water, which the Slaves bring to
the City and sell; making thereof good profit, the People accounting it much
wholesomer than the Rainwater in the Cisterns.

ANani says, The Soil on the West side, is reasonably Fertile, The Soil.
having some Rivers to water it: But on the East side, for want of Water, very
little worth. But Peter Dan avers, that on the South Side, where it lies
surrounded with Mountains, it has very Fruitful-Valleys, but in all the other
Parts very Dry and Sandy. Gramay and Sanutus report, that close by, the Ground
is so Dry, that it had need be continually watered. This want of Water,
together with the frequent Incursions of the Alarbes, makes the Corn at Tunis
very dear. The People in the Suburbs being necessitated to Wall in little Spots
of Ground, wherein to Sow Barley and Rye, to preserve it from their Pillage.

ORanges, Lemmons, Dates, and such like Fruit, grow here plentifully; The
Plants or Vegetables.
so also Olives for a mile round about the City, which afford Oil, not only
for the Natives but Foreigners; and their Wood they burn in stead of other
Fuel. Borbo produces Roses and other sweet smelling Flowers. The high Mountain
Zagoan, Barley and Honey. Genslet yields Apples, and St. Johns-Bread; but
Benitefren and Naifuse, only Barley, and but little of that.

THe whole Country, especially the Mountainous Parts, Beasts.
are full of Lions, wild Bulls and Cows, Ostriches, Apes, Camelions, Neat,
allow-Deer, Hares, Phesants; besides such abundance of Horses and Camels, that
they bear little or no price.

THe People of Tunis are Moors, Turks, Jews, The Inhabitants.
and Slaves of several Nations, taken by their Pirates in the Mediterrane, and
brought thither.

Here are also a sort of Men that Laze up and down the Streets bare-headed, and
barefooted, with Stones in their Hands, like Mad or Distracted Folks, whose
careless Madness has won such a reputation upon the folly of the Vulgar, that
they not only account them Saints, but allow them a settled Maintenance at the
Public Charge.

THeir Clothing is according to the best Fashion of their Country, Their
Clothing.
each in his several Degree; but all wear Turbans, made and covered with Linen
or other Stuff, after the Turkish manner. Women's Habits, especially of the
better sort, are very neat, and richly adorned with Jewels: when they go into
the Street they cover their Faces with a great Cloth, over which they cast
another, which they call Setfari: these multifarious Coverings, at a distance
make them appear of a much larger Size than ordinary: When they remain at home,
they spend the greatest part of their Time and Means in making Perfumes, and
other like Trifles, not minding Huswifery, or any other profitable Employments.

THeir Bread is for the most part made of Wheat, Their Food.
though the vulgar use Barley; which in stead of kneading with Hands they beat
with Battoons. The common Diet of Merchants, Artificers, and the like, is but a
course Food, called Besis, made of Barley-meal and Water, like Pap or Pudding;
to which they give a Haut-goust with Oyl-Olive, and Juice of Lemmons and
Oranges, which they buy in the Market appointed for the Sale thereof, and
nothing else. Besides this they eat also Flesh, especially that of Lambs: but
more than these another kind of Dish they have, in the eating whereof they take
great pleasure, the common known Name is Lasis; of which whoever eats two
Ounces, is so far from satisfying his Stomach therewith, that it rather
augments it to a kind of Caninus appetitus, or unsatisfied voraciousness,
attended with a continual Laughing, and other antic Gestures, till at length
they fall into the extravagancies of a lustful Passion.

IN this City are all manner of Handicrafts, Their Employment.
but chiefly Linnen-Weavers, whose skill in their Trade was such as made their
Cloth of great repute, both for strength and fineness.

The Mountaineers deal only in Cattle, living in Hutts, which they draw
together to the number of a hundred or two hundred, wherewith they continually
range about and change Places, as their Cattle want fresh Pasture.

Those Hutt-Villages stand in order, with ways and passages between, all
leading to a great Field in the midst where the Cattle feed. On the outsides
they stand so close, that they are like a Wall, passable only at two
Entrances, the one for the Cattle, and the other for the Men; and these in the
Nights so secured with Trees, Thorns, and the like, that they neither fear
Lions, nor other wild Beasts.

THe King or Bashaw of Tunis receives Annually two hundred thousand Ducats;
Their Reverue.
besides the Custom upon Olives and Linen; Exported Wheat, heretofore amounted
to forty thousand Ducats more. Others reckon that the Bashaw Letts the Lands
and Customs for five hundred thousand Escues, or French Crowns. The whole
Revenue seems to arise to more than two hundred thousand Ducats yearly.

Peter Dan says, Peter Dan.
that the Revenue of this Kingdom is but accidental and uncertain, accrewing
chiefly, not from any standing In-come, but only from the Fishery, which
yields a Rent yearly of thirty thousand Ryalls of Eight, and the Jews
Poll-money; all the rest raised out of the Prizes of the Ships taken by the
Corsaires of Tunis in the Mediterrane from the Christians, which yield Ten in
the Hundred; as also from the Tributes and Taxes, which with Flying Parties
they fetch from the Land of the Arabians and Moors.

THe Inhabitants are not Rich either in Banks or Stocks, Their Riches.
because of the Dearness of all things, especially Corn, which they fetch from
Urbs and Beggie.

THeir principal Merchandise is, Their Merchandise.
as we said before, Linen Cloth, which is there made in great quantities, and
carried all over Africa; so Oil, Olives, Sheep, Ostritches and Horses, from
which they raise great Gain.

THe Native Moorish Kings of the Countries first stamped here Gold Sultanies,
or Ducats, greater by a third part than our European Ducats, Their Coin.
and worth four and twenty Carraks. They have also a square silver Coin called
Nosara, as also Aspers and Duble's, and another called Borbas, of Copper, of
the like value with those of Algier.

THe Government heretofore was Monarchical, Their Government.
and long continued in the Line of Moorish Kings, which were not by Election,
but an Hereditary Succession of the eldest Son of the deceased Kings; or for
want of Sons, the next of Blood to the King, took the Dominion: But since their
Expulsion by the Turks, the State is wholly altered, being at present Commanded
by a Bashaw, or Viceroy, sent thither from Constantinople; who Ruled with
greater and more unlimited Authority than any other Bashaw of the Great Turk in
Africa: He is assisted with the Council, or Divan of the Janissaries, the Aga,
some chief Officers called Beniloukbassen, and four Counselors, who wear upon
their Heads a Hood with a Silver Horn.

PEter Dan says this Bashaw is changed every three year, Peter Dan.
and another sent into his Place; whose present Authority is much eclipsed, in
that he meddles with nothing but the Receipts of the Revenue: that those of
Tunis elect a chief Officer of their own, with the Title of Dey, to whose care
the Government of the City is committed during his life, unless, which
sometimes happens for miscarriages therein, displaced, and put to death. Other
inferior Officers for the better Administration of Justice, are an upper Cadle,
that is, a Marshal, or rather a Sheriff, who appoints under him many
Substitutes, who hear and determine all criminal Causes, and such as relate to
Life and Death, but not without apparent testimony. The occasions of these
alterations and new settlements have proceeded from several grounds, whereof we
will give you a short Narrative.

Not many years since, the Janissaries and other Soldiers in Pay, to the number
of six or seven thousand, partly Turks, and partly Renegado's, intermixed with
Moors, combined together to bereave the Bashaw of his Command, and leave him
nothing but the Honor and the Office to pay the Janissaries: in prosecution of
which Design they set up a Divan, or Council of State, like that of Algier,
which undertook the Management of all matters of War. This continued till the
Year fifteen hundred twenty four, when Kara Osman, a Native Turk and Janizary,
and formerly a Shoemaker by Trade, but very subtle and ambitious, so won the
hearts of the Janissaries by Artifices and Presents, that they declared him
their Chief, giving him the Title of Dey; so that thence-forward, neither the
Divan nor Bashaw himself durst conclude any thing but with the consent of the
Dey and his Participants.

With the like absolute Authority have all Successive Deys governed, although
the Grand Seignior has a Titular Bashaw there, who is only concerned in the
Revenue, as we mentioned before.

Neither at present do these Deyes undertake or conclude any matter of
Concernment, till first communicated to the Divan; The Divan or Council.
which is a select Council of Officers chosen out of the Janissaries, consisting
of an Aga, a Chya, or Lieutenant, twelve Odabaschi's, four and twenty
Bouloukbassen, two Secretaries, and six Chiauses. These determine all Matters
both Civil and Military, but not till they have first heard the Opinion of the
Dey, whose single Vote, though contrary to all their Judgments, is conclusive
and binding. Subservient to these superior Ministers of State are many Cadies,
who judge of lesser Causes, to the great ease both of the Dey and his Council.
After the Decease of one Dey, another is chosen by the Divan.

The Janissaries here transact all Affairs as those in Algier, being
distinguished neither by Commanders or Justice: Out of whom are yearly chosen
two Field-Commanders to gather in the Custom and Tributes of the Arabians; and
for the increase of their Strength, some few Moors, by the name of Zovaners,
are admitted into Pay.

ANd here we shall succinctly render an Account of the several Revolutions that
have happened in the Government of this Kingdom. After that the Arabians, by
the Name of Mahumetane Saracens, had brought a great part of Africa and all
Barbary, under their Command, and made Cairo in Egypt the Head-Seat of their
Empire, they sent hither Abelchit, an African by Birth, who being a man of an
ambitious and daring spirit, and having withal a Strength answerable thereto,
resolved to take upon him Sovereign Rule, and accordingly settled his Court at
Cairavan, about thirty miles from Old Carthage. Kaim, then Caliph of Egypt,
having intelligence of this Revolt, sent thither a strong Army, whose timely
Arrival smothered the Enterprise in the birth, though he had promised himself a
more happy Fortune; yet was he not discouraged or disabled, Tunis is a Kingdom.
but that he transmitted to Hibraim, one of his Sons, the perfecting his Design
in part; for he soon after laid the Foundation of a new Kingdom in Tunis, there
settling his Court, and making it the Metropolis of his Dominion.

This Kingdom Hibraim and his Successors held a long time, with much Felicity
and Honor, till Joseph King of Morocco made an Invasion upon it; whose
Successors tracing the steps of his begun Attempt, never ceased till they got
all: for Habdul Mumen having gained Mahadia from the Christians, in process of
time wore out the Race of Abelchit, and got the total Possession thereof,
governing it by Viceroys or Lieutenants, It comes under the Kings of Morocco.
without any notable molestation, during his own Reign, and his Son Joseph's,
and his Successors Jacob and Mansor.

But after the Death of Mahumeth Ennasir, Son of Mansor, and his Brother
Joseph, The Mutiny of the Arabians.
who was overthrown in Battle by the King of Telensin, the Abelchittin Arabians
took advantage to resettle themselves in the Command of Tunis, laying a close
Siege, and often storming it; so that the Lieutenant sent to the King of
Morocco for Assistance; protesting, that without timely help the City must of
necessity fall into their hands. Hereupon the King sent a Fleet of twenty Ships
for their Relief, under the Command of his approved General Abdulhedi, a Native
of Sevil; which so politickly played his Game, that instead of fighting his
Mutineers, he overcame them by Gifts and Rewards bestowed among them by his
Masters consent; They are stilled.
for which great and good piece of Service, the King made him Viceroy, and
after his Death continued the same Honor to his Son Abu Zacharias, a man of no
less prudence and Conduct than his Father; whose Son Abraham or Abu Ferez took
it upon him as by Right of Succession; and being very ambitious and proud,
would not acknowledge the King of Morocco for his Supreme Lord, Abu Ferez sets
himself up to be King of Tunis.
but made himself an absolute and independent Prince; and soon after, having
conquered Telensin, and put the Inhabitants to pay Tribute, he called himself
King and Lord of Tunis; or as others will have it, of all Africa: Which came to
pass in the Year 1210.

After him followed his Son Nutman, Nutman his Son comes in his place.
who was more unhappy than his Father, receiving many great damages and
affronts from the King of Fez. But Hakmen his Son, called by Gramay, Autmen,
and by others Hutmen, restored again tose decays, leaving for his Successor the
unfortunate Abu Bark; for he was scarce warm in his Royal Seat, ere he was
treacherously murdered by one of his near Kinsmen, named Yahaia, who boasted
himself the Son of Omar, third Kaliff of the Saracens in Asia. But Gramay
contradicts this Story, averring that Aben Ferez, before his death, divided his
State between his three Sons, giving to one, Bugie; to Hamar, Numidia; and to
this Hutmen, which he called Autmen, or Hakmen, Tunis; who barbarously put out
his brother Hamar's Eyes, and deprived him of his Dominion, which he annexed to
his own: however he held the Scepter forty years; which he left, as we said
before, Emmoi^n.
to his unfortunate Son Abu Bark, murdered by Yahaia, whose Nephew Abdul Mumen,
meeting in a Pitched Field, overcame and deposed him: holding the Throne many
years, yet at last basely slain: however his Son Zacharias the Second, took the
Sovereignty, but in a short time dyed of the Pestilence without any Issue. Then
succeeded Mahomet, and lastly Muly Assez. But Marmol says, that after the
death of Hutmen the First, the Benemerins, Kings of Fez, waged many Wars
against Hutmen's Successors, and that Abu Heman of Fez, having beaten Bulabez
of Tunis, made him fly to Constantine, but pursued thither was taken Prisoner,
and brought to Fez, but afterward set at liberty by Abu Celem, and made a
League with him; by which those Kingdoms afterward continued an Amity and
Correspondence, till Abu Bark, Son of Hutmen the Second, which was brought to
an untimely end by his Nephew Yahaia, as before is declared, who was succeeded
by Abdul Mumen, as he by Zacharias, who dyed in a short time Issueless; so that
the Tunissians chose for King Abukamen, Nephew of Zacharias, Abukamen King.
whose Tyranny caused many Rents and Divisions in his State, and hazarded
almost the whole: yet partly by Policy, partly by Force, he so brought it to
pass, that Muly Mahomet his Son enjoyed the Kingdom of Tunis after his death.
Muley Mahomet.
And his Son Muley Assez, or Assan, the last of this Stock after him, till
thereof by Barberossa bereaved: yet was he not so absolutely lost, but that
afterward by the assistance of the Emperor Charles the Fifth again restored.
The manner this: Muley Mahomet, Father of Muley Assez, had by several Wives
many Sons, among which this Muley Assez, though the youngest, was the most
entirely beloved, as being a most prudent and generous spirited person: the
eldest called Manon, he absolutely disinherited, and kept in Prison under
strong Guard, because of his unnatural disobedience, Muley Assez declared King.
(as having by Treachery endeavored to depose his Father) and declared his
Brother Muley Assez to be his Heir and Successor, to the great satisfaction of
most of his Subjects, who greatly affected Muley Assez for his Endowments; and
shortly after Muley Mahomet died much lamented. By this means Muley Assez
became sole Master of this State; to secure himself wherein, and taking into
consideration the former pretenses of his imprisoned Brother Manon, he caused
him privately to be put to death.

Araxar his other Brother being informed thereof, Araxar flies out of Tunis.
for fear of the like mischief, fled to Numidia, to Abdalor a mighty Xeque or
Prince of Bixkara, whose Daughter he there married, and got a promise of
Assistance for regaining the Crown, to which he thought he had the best
pretensions, as being elder than his Brother Muley.

The News of Araxars withdrawing so enraged Muley Assez, that he apprehended
all that were of the Royal Blood, The Rage of Muley Assez.
putting out all the Men's Eyes, and keeping the Women in a strict and close
Imprisonment.

This Savage Cruelty added wings to Araxar, Araxar intends to besiege Tunis.
who by this time had taken the Field with an Army raised and furnished by his
Father-in-law, and now marched forward with intent to besiege Tunis: Muley
Assez came out with a mighty Army against him, but was soon defeated and
necessitated in all haste to retreat to Tunis for Recruits; so that Araxar
fearing his own Strength not sufficient to subject the Country, A subtle
Invention of Barbaroussa to play the Knave with Araxar.
requested Assistance from the famous Pyrate Cheredin Barbarossa, who at that
time governed Algier in the Name of the Grand Seignior; which was promised, but
yet with this Caution, that it would be necessary (the more happily to bring
his Enterprise to pass) to make a Journey to Constantinople, wherein he (the
said Barbarossa) would accompany him, with assurance to procure from Sultan
Soliman great Favor and Assistance. Araxar deluded by these Flatteries, went
to Constantinople, and was there very friendly received in outward appearance;
but Barbarossa now minding nothing less than what he had said and written,
underhand told Soliman, that in regard Prince Araxar was young, he had now a
fit opportunity to annex the Crown of Tunis to his Empire. Mavelous pleasing
was this Advice to Soliman's ears, who instantly prepared a Fleet, which being
ready to set Sail, he puts Araxar under Guard; telling him, when Barbarossa had
subdued Tunis, and forced them to receive and acknowledge him for their lawful
Prince, he should be sent thither with an honorable Retinue, and put in
Possession. In the interim he sent Barbaroussa without him upon his intended
Design.

Upon the Approach of Barbarossa, Muley Assez, who knew himself too weak to
stand a Siege against such a Force; and believing Araxar to be in the Fleet,
added more Cruelty to his former; so that hated by his Subjects, he left the
City, and betook himself to his Uncle Dorat, a man of great Power among the
Arabians of Uled Aixa.

The Citizens thus forsaken by their Prince, The Turk becomes Master of Tunis.
submitted to Barbarossa, who forthwith proclaimed Sultan Soliman their Prince.
Muley Assez on the other side (to turn the Scales) sent to the Emperor Charles
the Fifth then in Spain, and required his Aid; which the Emperor willingly
hearkened to; and the rather, because it was confidently rumor'd, that
Barbarossa intended to harrase with a strong Fleet, not only the Coast of
Italy, as he had done the foregoing year, but also against the next Summer
would Ship over to Sicily an Army of Turks and Moors to invade the Kingdom of
Naples. Fired with this News, and also instigated by Muley Assez, he put to Sea
with a strong Fleet Manned with Spaniards and Germans, in the Year Fifteen
hundred thirty seven, on the Five and twentieth of June, being St. James's Day;
with which coming under Tunis, he took at the first Assault the Castle and
strong Fort Goletta, and not long after the City it self, and with it the whole
Kingdom: Barbarossa foreseeing this Storm, had withdrawn himself, and committed
the Defense of the City to Mustapha, a courageous Soldier, who yielded himself
up into the hands of the Emperor.

Thus the Emperor Re-instated Muley Assez in his Kingdom, Muley Asse^ is
Restored.
telling him, that for all his Cost he would only keep the Castle and Goletta
in his own possession, with a Garrison; and that he (Muley Assez) should send
yearly to him (the Emperor) and his Successors, two Faulcons, and two Numidian
Race-Horses. Other Articles were made between the said Princes, to this effect:
That if Muley Assez did make a failer of this Agreement, he should pay for a
Forfeiture for the first Default five thousand Crowns; for the second, twice as
much; and for the third, fall into Contempt, and height of Displeasure. That he
should always hold a strict Alliance with the Emperor, and be an Enemy to the
Turks, and a Friend to the Christians, to whom he was to afford liberty of
Religion. That he should pay every year a thousand or twelve hundred Spanish
Soldiers, which the Emperor would keep in the Fort of Goletta: And lastly,
That neither the Emperor nor his Successors should send any more Forces, nor
take into his hands any Places of the Kingdom of Tunis, belonging to the
aforementioned Muley Assez, Goletta only accepted. And this Agreement was
sworn to by both Princes with great Solemnity.

This Expedition thus happily performed, the Emperor upon his return, to keep
up in memory so great an Action, and to encourage the Valor of such as
followed him therein, instituted the Order of Knights of the Cross of Burgundy.

But Muley Assez did not long possess his Kingdom in Peace after his
Restoration; being compelled within eight years, once more to fly to Spain for
Assistance: In which time of his absence his Son Amudas usurped the Kingdom,
putting to death his Father's Favorites and Friends: but Muley Assez returning
with some few Troops of Italians, and the Garrison-Souldiers of Goletta, soon
routed the unnatural Rebel, taking him, with two other of his younger Sons,
Prisoners, whose Eyes he immediately put out. After a few years Abdimelech, or
Abdulmalech, another of Muley Assez Sons fell foul with his Father, forcing him
once more to fly to his old Benefactor, Charles the Emperor, who maintained him
the remainder of his life, which was not long.

But Abdimelech enjoyed his Usurpation only one Month before he died, and his
Son Mahomet his Successor, after four Months Reign was expelled by his Uncle
Amidas, who held the Dominion; till Uluzaly, or Aluck Haly, by some called
Ochiali, by order from the Grand Seignior, in the Year Fifteen hundred sixty
eight drove him from Tunis; whereupon he fled to Goletta to the Spaniards: At
whose Suit, in the Year Fifteen hundred and seventy, Tunis was again overcome
by Charles the Emperor.
Don Johan of Austria made himself Master of Tunis, and of the whole Kingdom;
giving Mahomet the Brother of Amidas, a Princely Allowance; but set over Tunis
as Lieutenant, in behalf of the Emperor, Gabriel Willon, a Milanois; and over
Goletta, Pedro Carrero, a Spaniard.

In these continual Conflicts, both the City and Castle were much weakened; but
Willon fortified them anew with strong Ramparts and Palizadoes.

But the Turkish Emperor, The Turks come against Tunis.
Morat or Amurath fearing this new Growth of the Spanish Kingdom, in the Year
Fifteen seventy four, sent a Fleet of a hundred and sixty Galleys, besides many
other Ships, Manned with forty thousand Turks and Moors; the Conduct of the
Admiral, Occhially for Sea; but the Land Army was committed to Sinan Bassa,
wherewith they besieged both Tunis and Goletta; whereupon Don John, who had the
Supreme Command of the Spanish Fleet, endeavored to relieve the Besieged, but
to very little purpose; for he had barely thirty Galleys, whereof five and
twenty were furnished in Spain with Warlike Provision and Soldiers; and the
Princes of Italy undertook for the Raising of the rest. With these, as we said,
he made an attempt,; but the Turk soon diverted both their Fury and Design, and
there shut them both up with a more close Siege than before: Then raising
Batteries by Land, from thence without intermission they tore the Castle with
their great Guns, so that the Walls fell; neither was the City or Goletta
better able to resist such impetuous Thunder; Tunis overcome by the Turks.
for all were taken and razed, and the whole Kingdom wrested out of the
Spaniards hands.

In the Overthrow of the City all the Christians were hewn to pieces, except
fourteen which were carried Captives to Constantinople. Moreover, the Conqueror
demolished the Walls of Tunis, and the Castle built by the Emperor Charles,
levelled with the Ground; erecting another of exceeding Strength to command the
Haven. From this time the Turks have always possessed Tunis in Peace, and the
Government thereof by Kings ended, who had swayed the Scepter there about three
hundred and seventy years.

THE DOMINION and FORT OF GOLETTA.
THe Dominion of Goletta, The Dominion of Goletta.
so called from the Fort lying on the Mouth of the Lake Goletta by Tunis,
contains these Cities, Marsa, Napolis in Barbary, Kammart, Arriane and
Carthago. It is looked upon as a Place of weighty Concernment, being the Key of
Tunis, and Neighbor to Carthage: Some hold it to be the Island Galatha, or
Galitha of Ptolomy, and the Gorilon of Pliny: but Sanutus and others make
Goletta and Galatha to be two distinct Places. The Name of Goletta comes
originally from the Italian word Gola, signifying a Throat, or according to
Olivarius upon Mela, from the Diminutive Goletta, that is, a Little Throat, or
as we term it, a Gullet, because this Fort is built upon the Neck or Throat of
a Lake of that Name, over which they pass in small Barques to Tunis; so that in
truth it is an Island.

The Mahumetans first built upon this Spot, thereby giving a beginning to this
Fort; which the Turks afterward having strengthened, the Emperor Charles the
Fifth after, Overcome by Charles the Emperor.
together with Tunis, took from them: but at length regained by the Turks in
the Year Fifteen hundred seventy four, as before has been more particularly
related: Since which time the Turks have, besides the old one, cast up two
other Forts, with two or three Redoubts between them, and are as the Keys of
their State in that Country. Gramay says, it contains a fair Haven, fit for
many Ships to harbor in, with Storehouses for Merchandise, a Custom-house,
two Mesquites, and Prisons for Christian Slaves; so that it seems much rather a
City than a Fort.

The first Fort appears surrounded with a double Wall, flanked with Sconces,
and three great Works one within another, encircling all to Command the Haven
and City: In the midst is a Well of fresh Water, feeding a Stream which runs
through the Fort. Little remains of the old Fort, saving a Corner of a Bulwark,
Planted with ten Pieces of Ordnance, where those of Tunis maintain forty
Janissaries.

Marsa, or Marca, signifying in Arabic, A small City, Marmol says, Marsa.
stands in the place where the Haven of the old City of Carthage was, or
according to Gramay, opposite to it, built after the destruction of Carthage,
by one Mehedi Kaliff of Cairavan. It is adorned with a Royal Palace, and some
pleasant Places, whether the Bashaws of Tunis in the Summer go to take their
pleasure, and keep their Court. They say at present it boasts eight hundred
Houses, with a Mesquite and a College, built by Muley Mahomet, Father of Muley
Assez King of Tunis.

Nebel, by the Moors called Nabis; by the Africans anciently, Napolis of
Barbary; Nebel.
is supposed to be that Colony which Ptolomy called Neapilis; and by Strabo,
Leptis; was built by the Romans at the Edge of the Midland-Sea, three miles
from Tunis: on the East formerly well Inhabited; but at this day Peopled only
with a few Families of Gardners, and such like inferior Persons.

Kammart, another small City close by the Ruins of Carthage, Kammart.
two miles Eastward of Tunis; was formerly called Walachie, as Aben Razid, an
African Writer affirms: who also reports the Romans to have Founded it, being
encompassed with high Walls, and very populous, yet most of the Inhabitants
Gardners, who bring their Fruit and Herbs to sell at Tunis.

Arriane, by Marmol called Abditane, a small City a mile North of Tunis,
Arriane.
built by the Arian Goths, from whom, and their Heresy, it took the Name,
Leo. 5. D.
which it has hitherto kept without any alteration.

Lastly Arradez, Arradez.
a very small Town in the way between Goletta and Tunis on the East. This was
formerly a Roman Colony; when the Arabian Mahumetans fell into these Parts,
they ruined it, but the Kings of Tunis re-edifi'd the Walls of the Castle, and
Planted it with Inhabitants.

CARTHAGE.
CArthage, formerly the most famous City, not only of Africa, but stood in
competition with Rome to be Mistress of the whole World, has had several
Names: The Greeks called it Charchedon sometimes, and sometimes Cadmia,
Oenussa, and Cacabie; The Emperor Commodus gave it the Names of Gettabert,
Commodia, Alexandria: Caius Gracchus, Junonia: Marmol, from the Africans,
Bersak and Almenara: The Italians, Rocco. But notwithstanding all this variety,
it still retains the old and best known Name of Carthage, supposed to have been
a Colony of the Phaenicians; who on the Conquest of their Country by the
Children of Israel, forced to seek new Habitations; and having store of Ships
to transplant themselves and Families, settled in these Maritime Parts of
Mauritania, and proper Africa. Many pregnant Testimonies hereof might be
produced, we shall only instance two. One from St. Augustine, who in his
Comment on St. Paul's Epistles to the Romans tells us, that Interrogati Rustici
nostri quid sint, respondent Punici Chanaani: When any of the Inhabitants of
this Country (whereof himself was one) was asked what they were, they answered
Chanaanites. The other from Procopius, (cited by Evagrius Scholasticus)
reciting, that on two Marble Pillars not far from Tangier, there was in the
Phaenician Language and Character engraved: Nos fugimus a facie Joshuah
Praedonis filii Nave; that is, We fly from the face of that Robber Joshuah the
Son of Nun: The Settlement of this People here might be a great inducement to
bring Dido hither, who feared as much danger from her Brother Pigmalion King of
Tire, whose Hands had been imbrued in the Blood of her Husband, as the others
did from the Sword of Joshuah.

Concerning Dido building of Carthage, and the cause of her flying thither,
hear in brief Venus giving an account of it to Aeneas.

Carthage thou see, built by Jupiter begat Epaphus, he Belus the elder, he
Agenor, he Phoenix, he Belas the younger, Father to Dido, Pygmalion and Anna.
Here Carthage therefore is called Agenor's Seat per An^onomasiam.
Agenor 's Race,
But Lybick 's Coasts, where Warlike Men are bred;
Dido reigns here, who from her Brother fled:
The Story's sad and long, but I Will in brief
Of many Passages select the chief.
The Poet softens rougher Names, making Sichaeus of Sicharbus; Eelus, Dido's
Father, Methres.
Sichaeus was her Lord, in Wealth beyond
All Tire, and she of him extremely fond;
Whose Father with blessed Omens gave a Maid:
But Tyri, Adverbium. Pygmalion, whilst yet a Child, was honored with a Crown
by the People, and reigned 47 years. He was the tenth from Hiram, who supplied
Solomon with Cedars toward the Building of the Temple. From which Hiram, to
the building of Carthage, Scaliger reckons 103 years, in Proleg. de Emend. Temp.
Tire her Brother King Pygmalion swaid,
Who far exceeds all those that are engaged
To murder Princes, and with Fury raged.
Mad, till her Husband's Gold he had enjoyed,
Sichaeus at the Altars he destroyed;
Long hides the Fact, and did her Love despise,
Yet cherished her vain Hope with flattering Lies.
To whom in Sleep, her Husband un-interr'd,
With a most Ghastly Countenance appeared,
Dire Altars, and his wounded Bosom shows,
And all her Brothers Treason did disclose:
Persuades her, straight that she her Country fly;
A Hoord of Gold, and Silver, to supply
Her Voyage, he discovers under ground,
Which made her way, and many Followers found.
Those who did hate, or fear the Tyrant, meet,
And suddenly they seized a ready Fleet,
Transporting thence greedy Pygmalion 's Coin;
A Woman Principal of this Design;
And found those parts where now huge Walls, and new
Towers of aspiring Carthage thou may view:
Called Dido, driven upon Libya, and ready to be turned away a gain by Iarbas,
cunningly entreated that she might buy of him (others say, that he would give
her) so much Ground as an Oxe's Hide would compass; which he granting, she cut
the Hide into so many small pieces, as enclosed twenty two Stadia.

Thus (says Cambden) Our Aunals record, that Hengist the Saxon, after he had
vanquish^d the Picts and Scots, and received very large Possessions in other
places, obtained also in Lincolnshire, of Vortiger, so much Ground as he could
compass round with an Ox Hide cut into small Thongs, whereon he founded and
built a Castle, afterward called Thong-Castle: Whence it is that one who has
written in Verse a Breviary of the British History, turned Virgil 's Verses in
this manner;

Acceptique solum, facti de nomine Thongum,
Taurino quantum poterat circundare tergo.
A Ground he took, which Thong he called, when first he did begin,
As much as he, a Bull Hide cut, could well incompass in.
As to the name Byrsa, Scaliger (in Festum) observes, that it is used, by
Metaphrasis, for Bysra; originally an Hebrew word, signifying a Tower, or
Fortified place: for Carthage was a Colony of Tyrians, who speak Hebrew. But
that this story is to be understood only of the Tower, not of the whole City,
which was afterward added to it as they grew greater, we have the Authority of
Appian, in this more probable than Livy, who would understand it of all, lib.
44.


Byrsa from the Bargain; so much Ground
Bought, as a Bull's Hide might encompass round.
Punica regna vides, Tyrios, and Agenoris urbem:
Sed fines Lybici genus intractabile bello.
Imperium Dido Tyria regit urbe profecta,
Germanum fugiens: longa est injuria, longae
Ambages, sed summa sequar fastigia rerum.
Huic conjux Sichaeus erat ditissimus agri
Phoenicum, and magno miserae dilectus amore:
Cui pater intactam dederat primisque jugarat
Omnibus: sed regna Tyri germanus habebat
Pygmalion: scelere ante alios immanior omnes.
Quos inter medius venit furor, ille Sichaeum
Impius ante aras, atque auri caecus amore,
Clam ferro incautum superat, securus amorum
Germanae: factumque diu caelavit, and aegram
Multa malus simulans, vana spe lusit amantem.
Ipsa sed in somnis inhumati venit imago
Conjugis, ora modis attollens pallida miris:
Crudeles aras, trajectaque pectora ferro
Nudavit: caecumque domus scelus omne retexit.
Tum celarare fugam patriaque excedere suadet.
Auxiliumque viae, veteres tellure recludit
Thesauros, ignotum argenti pondus, and auri.
His commota, fugam Dido, sociosque parabat:
Convenient, quibus aut odium crudele tyranni,
Aut metus acer erat: naves, quae forte paratae,
Corripiunt, onerantque auro: portantur avari
Pygmalionis opes pelago, dux femina facti.
Devenere locos, ubi nunc ingentia cernes
Moenia, surgentemque novae Carthaginis arcem:
Mercatique solum facti de nomine Byrsam,
Taurino quantum possent circumdare tergo.
The Descent of Dido (from whence the truth of her Story must be collected) was
this; Phoenix (who gave name to Phoenicia) was the Brother of Cadmus, and the
fifth from Jupiter: His Great Grandfather was Epaphus; his Grandfather, Belus
Priscus; (reputed a God, and honored with Temples called Bell by the Assyrians,
and Baal by the Hebrews) his Father, Agenor: Belus the Less, called also
Methres, was Son to Phoenix, and King of Phoenicia by Descent, and of Cyprus by
Conquest: he had Issue (besides other) Pygmalion and Dido, who well revenged of
her Brother for her Husbands death, fled unto the Confines of Lybia with all
Treasures, which were very great, accompanied with her Brother Barca, and her
Sister Anna, and Landing in the Bay, where after stood Carthage, obtained leave
to build a Fort, no bigger than she could compass about with an Ox Hide. This
was the beginning of Carthage, and hence it took the first Name Byrsa: The
first Foundation was about the Year of the World Three thousand and seventy;
about 144 years after the building of Solomon's Temple, Josephus lib. 1. cont.
App^
143 years before the building of Rome, and 290 before the destruction of Troy.
By which account it seems impossible, that Dido or Eliza ever saw Aeneas,
clearly contradicting Virgil in that his excellent Poem. From this concurrence
of time, and upon sight of her Picture, Ausonius has given us this Epigram:
Illa ego sum Dido, vultu quam conspicis hospes,
Assimilata modis, pulchraque mirificis
Talis eram: sed non Maro quam mihi finxit, erat men's:
Vita nec incestis laeta cupidinibus
Namque nec Aeneas vidit me Troius unquam
Nec Lybiam advenit classibus Iliacis,
Sed furias fugiens atque arma procacis Iarbae
Servavi, fateor, morte pudicitiam.
Pectore transfixo, castos quod protulit enses,
Non furor, aut laeso crudus amore dolor:
Sic cecidisse juvat; vixi sine vulnere famae:
Ulta virum, positismaenibus operii.
I am that Dido, Passenger, behold!
For my surpassing Beauty once extolled.
Such was I living, not as Maro feigned,
My Chaster Bosom with foul Lust distained.
I never Aeneas saw: nor ever heard
A Trojan Fleet to Lybick Confines steered.
But to escape Iarba's wanton Flame,
By Self-destruction I preserved my Fame.
Therefore with steel I pierced my tender Breast,
And not with grief of Love despised, oppressed.
Thus pleased I fell, like Gold my Honor tried,
Revenged my Lord, a City built, and died.


Hereunto consented Ausonius; who honoring the Statue of this abused Princess,
among other Verses written thereon, gives us these four.

Invida, cur in me stimulasti, Musa, Maronem
Fingeret ut nostrae damna pudicitiae?
Vos magis Historicis (Lectores) credit de me
Quam qui furta Deum concubitusque canunt.
Why stirr'dst thou, envious Muse, up Virgil 's vein,
That against my Honor be a Lie should fain?
Historians, rather than this Poet trust,
Who praised the Gods for Robberies and Lust.
But to return to Carthage: Ibnuraquique an African Historiographer will have
an Egyptian King to have laid the first Foundations 226 years before Rome: but
others later. Wherever it was first erected, sure we are, the Romans
destroyed it in the six hundredth year after the building of Rome, after it had
stood above seven hundred years. This so famous City stood in the bottom of a
safe and capacious Bay, strongly fortified on all sides both by Art and Nature,
surrounded by the Sea, except where joined to the Land by a narrow Isthmus,
forty five miles in compass by the outward Wall; within which were three Walls
more, and between each of them were several streets with Arched Vaults
underneath, thirty Foot deep, wherein they could keep three hundred Elephants,
with convenient Fodder for them, besides Stabling for four thousand Horse, with
Conveniences of Stowage for their Provender, and sufficient Quarters in those
Out-Streets for their Riders, and twenty thousand Foot besides, which never
came into the City to trouble it. On the South Side stood the Castle of Byrsa,
two miles and a half in Circuit; first built by Dido, as we said, and in that
the sumptuous Temples of Juno, Apollo, Esculapius, and Belus: On the West a
Mole, whose entrance was but seventy Foot, but within a stately Arsenall and
Room for their Ships and Galleys to ride in safety. Thus commodiously seated,
it conquered all the Seacoasts from the greater Sirtes to the Streights of
Gibraltar, and so to the River Iberus; wherein was contained three hundred
Cities. Not contented here, they cast an eye upon Sicily, whose defense the
Romans (emulous of the Punick Greatness) undertook; which was the first
Carthaginian War, and ended to their disadvantage, being forced to pay three
thousand two hundred Talents, amounting to two Millions of Crowns.

The second, begun by Hannibal the son of Amilcar, descended from Barka the
Brother of Dido, who after many Victories in Spain, and much experience gained,
conducted his Victorious Army through Gaul, and over the Alps into Italy,
defeated their Armies; and slew their Consuls, but not pursuing his Victory,
after the Battle of Cannae, and eighteen years Warring in the bowels of Italy,
was at last called home to defend Africa from Scipio, who had transferred the
War thither: The event was, that the Carthaginians, worsted in the Battle at
Nadagara, were compelled to submit to the will of the Conqueror. The second
Punick War thus ended, it might have been supposed the Romans needed not to
have been any farther jealous of Carthage; which, though subject to them,
because in few years very thriving, they had a spite to, as thinking
themselves unsafe while that City stood. Resolved therefore on the destruction
of it, they sent against it L. Martius, and M. Manlius their two Consuls, with
a powerful Army, to whom the Carthaginians willingly delivered up their Arms
and Shipping, contracting only for the preservation of it self, which was
promised: But when upon the delivery of their Pledges they were told, A City
consisted not in the Walls and Houses, but in the Laws and Government, and that
these, with the Corporation should remain, but the Town be removed ten miles
farther from the Sea: Enraged hereat, they resolved to abide the uttermost, but
their former condescensions had made them incapable of resistance: Therefore in
stead of Iron, which they wanted, they made Arms of Gold and Silver, pulled
down the Houses to furnish Timber for a Navy, and the Ladies cut off their Hair
to provide Ropes and Cordage; twenty five thousand Listed themselves to defend
the Walls, which with great courage and constancy was a long time performed.
But at length another Scipio, sent thither, at last took the Town, and for
seventeen days together consumed it with Fire: but it was again re-edifi'd and
peopled by Julius Caesar as a Colony, and so much augmented by Augustus, that
it was accounted a place of no small reputation.

IN the time of the Emperor Vespasian it was grown in great esteem, Its Fame.
and very populous: but in the Reign of Constantine the Great, it was called,
The Ornament of the World. But soon after, the Vandals, under their King
Genserick, in the Year after Christ's Nativity, Four hundred forty two, reduced
it to great misery; which yet once more it recovered, and remained a City of
good estimation, till suffering under the Gothish Devastations: but at length
finally destroyed by the Arabians, and made a heap of Ruins, as it still
continues.

The chief and greatest remaining Antiquity of this once so famous Place, is a
Watercourse, Vaulted over with high Arches, through which it runs into the
City, although many remainders of the old Fortifications may yet be seen, and
some ruined Structures.

The Village Marsa, which we mentioned before, is the only place that keeps up
the memory of Carthage, being built in part of its Ruins, and a poor piece of
the Skeleton of that once so glorious Body; so true is that of the ancient
Poet, Sic patet exemplis Oppida posse mori.

THe Valleys lying round about have a very sweet Air, The Condition of the
Country.
because continually cleared by fresh Breezes that come from the Sea, and are
full of Orchards, Planted with great variety of Fruit, of a pleasant taste, and
very large, especially Peaches, Pomegranates, Olives, Figs, Citrons, Lemmons
and Oranges, wherewith the Markets of Tunis are plentifully furnished; the rest
of the Ground also being exceeding Fertile, though circumscribed in narrow
Limits; for on the North lies the Mountain Thesea, and the Lake of Goletta;
and on the East and South, the Plain of Byserta; the rest between Carthage and
Tunis, for almost three miles, dry and barren Land.

THe Ground about Arriane, produces some Wheat and St. John's Bread, Plants or
Vegetables.
but about Naples nothing but Flax; and about Kammart many Sugarcanes.

SOme wild Beasts are found hereabouts, as also a sort of Gray Partridges,
Beasts.
and others, with black Feathers on their Breasts and Wings, the remaining part
Ash-colored, with the Bill and Feet much shorter than the Partridges here with
us. In the Lake of Goletta are Birds, by the Moors called Louze, and by the
Turks, Kalckavensi, having Legs two Foot and a half long, and all their
Feathers Milk white.

THE DOMINION and CITY OF BYSERTA, or BESERTA.
SOme take Byserta, now a small Village, for that Ituqua of Ptolomy, or Utica
of Caesar and Titus Livius, famous by the Death of Cato; who having in behalf
of the Pompeyan Faction, undertaken the Defense of this City, when he could no
longer hold it, chose rather to lay violent hands on himself, than fall into
the Power of Caesar. Marmol takes it for Porto Farnia, which he says, the
people of Barbary call Garelmetha; although some stick not to say that it has
been, and is known by the Name of Mazacharus, or Kallefort, as being a Member
of the French Garrisons in Africa.

However it is, the Moors give it the Name of Bensart or Benserth, that is, Son
of the Lake; for Ben signifies Son, and Serte, A Lake; from whence it is easily
corrupted to Byserta.

It stands on the Mediterranean-Sea, between Razamuza, by the Ancients called
The Point of Apollo, and The Mouth of the River Bagrada, ten French miles from
Tunis, where there is a great Lake much frequented by Fishermen; formerly
containing within the Walls six thousand Families, but now Garrisoned by the
Turks; who keep there two great Prisons for Slaves, besides Storehouses for
Merchandise, and two strong Fortifications or Sconces, for the Security of the
Haven.

Westward of the Lake lies a great Plain called Matter, Plains of Water.
belonging to Byserta, but bordering on Goletta: Not far distant is Choros,
formerly called Clypea, or rather, according to Davity, Kurobis; because Clypea
is the true Quippia, and the modern Kalibbie seated on the River Magride, about
two miles from Tunis; formerly in the Civil Wars of the Country laid waste,
but rebuilt and peopled by a sort of Alarbes called Benicheli, intermixed with
others; so that at present it shows the face of a well-inhabited Town.

The Haven of Farine is famous only by the fatal Wreck of St. The Haven of
Farine.
Lewis King of France, in his return back from the Holy Land, and two great
Rocks lying at its Mouth.

THis Country has abundance of fresh Water in all Quarters, The Constitution
of the Country.
which afford great variety of Fish; in the Lake are usually taken Dorads or
Dolphins of five or six pound weight; and from the end of October, to the
beginning of May, great quantities of a Fish called by the Natives Elft; by the
Spaniards, Jachas; and by the Moors of Barbary, Giarrafas. The great Plain of
Matter is a fat and marly Soil, which would yield a good Return to the painful
Husbandman, if he might reap the Profits free from the Incursions and
Thieveries of the Arabs.

Choros also is not backward in a Fertile Return according to the quality of
its Soil, which yields vast and lofty Groves of Olive Trees, for the great
benefit of the Inhabitants.

THe People go almost naked, Their Clothing.
wearing only a Barrakan, or short Apron, a half Turban, a Cloth about their
Necks, but barefooted and bare-legg'd.

THeir Food is a kind of Couscous made of Meal, Their Food.
Eggs, Salt, and Water, which they dry, and can keep a whole year. Their Bread
is a sort of Cakes called Obs, Baked on the Hearth; and their Drink made of
Raisins and Wine Lees boiled together. The poorer sort have no Beds, but sleep
upon Mattresses of Sedge, laid on the Ground. The more noble have in their
Chambers, long and narrow Divisions, higher than a Man, made fast to the Walls,
with very fine Wicker-work, which they climb up to by a Ladder when they go to
sleep.

THe Houses and Churches are whited once a year on the outsides, Their Houses.
but the in-sides are slovenly enough. In their Kitchins, if so we may call
them, Fire is a stranger, all their Victuals being dressed and boiled in a sort
of moveable Ovens.

They are much inclined to Sorcery, wearing Papers Written with small
Characters, Sticht in Leather, on their Necks, and on the Heads of their
Horses, when they draw into the Field to Fight, believing that they will free
them from all Diseases and Mishap.

URBS and BEGGIE.
URbs and Beggie, two several Territories, comprehend these Cities; Urbs,
Beggie, Hain-Sammin, and Kasba, with some great Plains.

The City Urbs, formerly Turridis, The City Vrbs.
founded by the Romans on a delightful Plain, eight and thirty miles on the
South of Tunis, shows yet many Remainders of Antiquity; as Marble Images;
Borders upon the Gates with Latin Inscriptions, and Walls of thick
Square-hew'd Stone, together with a Castle, betwixt which and two adjacent
Villages runs a River of fresh Water conveyed in a Trench of pure white Stone
to the City.

Beggie also built by the Romans, about six miles from the Mediterrane, Beggie.
and twenty to the Westward of Tunis, by a Highway leading from Constantine
thither, containing but few Habitations, yet has preserved her Walls firm and
undefaced. Hain Sammin built by the Kings of Tunis, Hain Sammin.
about seven miles from Beggie. Kasba or Kasbat, a Roman Structure seated in
the middle of a delightful Plain; whose Walls are made of great hewn Stone,
yet stand whole and undefaced; but void of Inhabitants, by reason of the
continual Invasive Rapines of the Arabs.

THe Soil both about Urbs and Beggie fruitful, The Conditino of the Kasba.
yields Corn in great abundance. The Arabs, notwithstanding the best defense
of the Inhabitants, are half sharers of it, without any recompense, so that
oftentimes a great part of the Country is never cultivated, they rather
choosing to run the risque of seeking Provision, than to sweat and toil, to
support the Villainies of such, who study nothing more than their mischief.
Little more can be said of Hain Sammin and Kasba, only their fertility is
accompanied with a most healthful serenity and sweetness of the Air, excellent
Springs of fresh Water, and abundance of well-grown Cattle.

THe Inhabitants of Urbs have little Civility, Their Manners.
being for the most part Laboring Hinds. Those of Beggie have a great insight
into Arts, Sciences, and Mathematick Trades, living decently: but they of Kasba
are lazy and voluptuous, choosing rather to die of Hunger, than to take pains to
Till their Ground.

SUSA, Or SOUSA.
THis Province contains the Cities of Sousa, Hamameth, or Mahometta,
Heraclia, and Monaster.

Sousa, Sousa.
or rather Susa, stands about five and twenty miles on the East of Tunis,
formerly a great City, but now inconsiderable, though the chief City of this
little Dominion; by some taken for the Adrumetum of Ptolomy, and by Marmol and
others, for the City Siagoll, which is the more probable. It was built by the
Romans near the Mildland-Sea, on a high Rock before the Cape of Bon, or Point
of Mercury, that shoots out toward the Island of Sicily. It may be divided
into an upper and a lower City, and has Walls of hewn Stone, neat Houses, and
many Mosques; but one excelling all the rest. This is the place against which
Prince Philibert of Savoy, in the Year Fifteen hundred and nineteen, had a
Design to get from the Turks; but they getting some intelligence thereof,
prevented him with a great Slaughter of his People, among which many Knights of
Malta, and forced him to a dishonorable Retreat. In the Haven thereof the
Pyrate Ships of Tunis generally lie, as being convenient for them.

Hammameth, Hammameth or Mahometa.
or rather Mahometa, a Modern City, built by the Turks near the Mediterranean,
by some taken for Ptolomy's Makadama, as if raised out of its Ruins.

Heraclia is a small City upon a Hill, Heraclia.
built by the Romans, and destroyed by the Arabians.

Monaster, Monaster.
or Monester, once a Roman Colony, but since got the Name from a Cloister of
Augustine Monks, built close by, but now included within the Walls, which are
high and strong, as the Houses are neat and commodious.

Neighboring hereunto are the Islands Cumiliers, The Islands of Kamiliers.
Querquene. Gamelere.
as also Querquene and Gamelere, distant two miles from the main Land. Sanutus
thinks, that in former Ages these were all that one Island which Ptolomy called
Cercine, being so near to the main Land, that they could go from the one to the
other over a Bridge. But Pliny contradicts this, Cercine.
averring Cercine to be thirteen miles in length, and three in breadth.

THe Soil of Susa is properly fit for nothing but Barley; The Soil.
yet they have Figs, Olives, Pears and Pomegranates: besides abundance of
excellent Grass, wherein they feed great Herds of Cattle.

THe Inhabitants of Susa are active and industrious, The Manners of the
Inhabitants.
behaving themselves toward strangers with great humanity, and inclining to
Merchandising: but such as love to be within the smoke of their own Chimneys
are either Weavers, Potters, or Herdsmen. Those of Hamameth are Fishermen,
Carriers, Cole-burners, Whitsters, living poorly upon Barley Bread, and Barley
Meal mingled with Oil; and as meanly Habited. But the Sussans are in a better
condition, driving a great Trade both into the Levant and Turkey.

The Governor with a strong Lifeguard of Janissaries, keeps his Seat in this
City, from which alone he receives Annually twelve thousand Ducats, besides the
Tribute of the rest of the Cities and Country.

THE PROVINCE and CITY OF AFRICA, Or MAHADIE.
THis City which the Europeans without distinction call Africa, The Name.
some think was the Aphrodisium of Ptolomy; but the Inhabitants, Marmol says,
call it Mahadia, or Mehedia; Leo Africanus, El Mahadia; and bestowing on it
strong Walls and Gates, with a commodious Haven.

IT stands situate on the Seacoast, or rather encompassed with the Sea, The
Situation.
except where joined to the Continent by a Neck of Land two hundred Paces in
length, and that fortified with a double Wall, and a great and deep Trench, and
many Defensive Towers: This Strait passed, the City grows broader, and receives
the Sea on both sides: afterward Eastward it becomes narrower, and at length
runs to a Point; so that the whole Place represents the shape of a Tongue. And
although on the Seacoast it is not defended with such strong Walls, as on the
Land side, yet is it secure enough from any Attempts to be made on it by Ships,
because of the many Shelves and Sands lying as Outworks before it.

The Gate of the City on the Land-side is exceedingly strong, being fortified
with Turrets and Pallisado's, but chiefly with several intricated and winding
Arched Passages, with Doors plated with Iron Plates: which past, they come to a
narrow Vault or Cave seventy Foot long, and so dark, that it is terrible to
Strangers, seeming rather a Murdering Den than an Entrance into a City.

The Haven is very capacious, and strongly Walled in, whereinto the Entrance or
Mouth is so narrow, that a Galley Rowing can scarce come in, but being once
within, there is room enough for fifty Galleys to ride with freedom and
convenience.

This City continued many years subject to the King of Tunis, from whom wrested
partly through Force, and partly through Treachery, by Assan Gerbin, a Relation
by Blood to Barbarossa: who was again Outed from the possession thereof by
Dorgut, or Dragut, a Turkish Corsaire, and Bassa of Tripoli, with the help of
some Citizens, in the Year fifteen hundred forty five; ever since which time it
has continued under the Jurisdiction of the Turk.

KAYRAOAN, or KAYRAVAN.
THis Province contains only the Cities of Kayravan, Tobute, and Astachus.

Kayraoan or Karure, The City Kayravan.
or Karoen, lies seven or eight miles from the Mediterrane, twenty from Tunis,
and eleven from Carthage. Its first Builder was Hukba or Okkuba, Ben Nasik, an
Arabian Commander sent out of Arabia Deserta by Hutman the third Mahumetan
Kaliff, into Barbary and Biledulgerid to pillage the Country; during which
time of his harrasing, he erected this only for a convenient Retreat for the
Army, and a Repository for his Booty; for the security whereof he environed it
with impregnable Walls: Within he erected a stately Mosque supported with
Marble Pillars, two of which were of an unvaluable worth, being of a red
Color, and glistering, intermixed with small white Spots like Porphiry: but
notwithstanding this Strength and Beauty, yet is it destitute of water, being
situate on a dry and sandy Plain.

Tobulte or Tabulta, Tobulte.
according to Bertius, and by some taken for Adrimentum, boasts it self a Roman
Foundation, standing on the edge of the Midland-Sea, three miles Eastward of
Monaster.

One Elugleb, being chief Magistrate there by the consent of the Inhabitants,
erected another goodly Pile of Buildings, which they named Recheda, adjoining
to it for a Palace for the Prince and his Retinue, both which in the Civil Wars
of Barbary were greatly defaced, and never since recovered their former Luster.

Arfachus, Arfachus.
otherwise Esfakos, or according to Marmol, Elfachus, thought by some to be
Rhuspe of Ptolomy, and by others Tafrute, built by the Moors at the
Mediterranean-Sea; heretofore handsomely Walled, and very Populous, but now can
show not above four hundred mean Houses.

THe Sandy-Plain about Kayravan bears neither Trees, The Constitution of the
Country.
Corn, nor Fruit; so that all Necessaries are fetched by them from other places.
They have no Wells, nor any Springs; only Rainwater, which with great
diligence they preserve: Nor is that of sufficiency; for that also after the
going out of June fails them; so that they are reduced to great extremity.

About Arfachus and Tobulte, there grows some Barley and Olives; but the
greatest part of the Land lies waste, because of the Arabians pillaging.

THe Inhabitants of Kayravan are generally Skinners and Tanners, The Nature of
the Inhabitants.
which send their Leather to Biledulgerid, and there barter and exchange it for
European Cloth.

KAyravan is eminent for the Residence of a Mahumetan Pope, Their Religion or
Worship.
or High Priest, of great esteem among them for his Sanctity and strict
Observance of the Alcoran. The Arabians ascribe to this place extraordinary
Veneration; for that their Kasiz or Priests, continually here exercise their
Priestly Functions; maintaining that the Dead there buried cannot be damned,
because they participate so constantly of the Prayers of the Kasiz and Pope:
and this Belief has so far prevailed, that many great persons coming thither
out of Reverence, pull off their Shoes when they enter into the City, as if it
were a Mosque, and build there Mesquites, which they endow with great Revenues;
believing by such meritorious Works they shall go directly to their Paradise.

THE ISLAND OF TABARKA AND GALITA.
ABout six Miles from the Cape of Maskarez, lies the Island Tabarka, Peter
Davity Estats du Turkin. Africa.
severed from the main Land by a Foordable Passage, a Musket Shot broad. Now
possessed by the French, who have built there a Fort, furnished with all
Necessaries of War, and a Garrison of Two hundred Soldiers, as a Convenience
for defense and support of the Trade which they drive there with great
advantage, Transporting thence Hides, Grain, Wax, and other Merchandise; yet
are obliged, or rather compelled, for that License to pay to the Bashaw of
Tunis, Four thousand Crowns, and to the Bashaw of Algier Two thousand; and yet
for all this there is a Band of Janissaries always thereabouts, to supervise
their Actions, and give a Check to them, if they suspect any incroachment. Here
the French get Coral, as we mentioned before.

Opposite to this, but two Miles distant, you may see the Island Galita, or
Galata.

TRIPOLIS.
TRipolis, a Member of the Turkish Empire, bears at this day the Title of a
Kingdom; not so much for the Largeness of its Extent, or that it had peculiar
Lords; as that having a Bashaw from Constantinople, it is named out of
ostentation to increase the swelling bulk of those Titles, which makes that
Empire seem so Gigantick: But be it one or other, now it is so reckoned, and
contains the Territories of Tripolis, Essab, Mezellata, Mesrata, The
Partition.
or Cyrenaica, and Barka, with some Islands; extending, The Borders.
according to Peter Dan's Account, Eastward along the Seacoast of the Island
Zerby or Gerby, to Egypt; and Southerly to the Negroes Country.

THis City and State has from the beginning had Lords of greatest eminency,
Tripoli under the Romans.
as first the Romans, to whom it did Homage and Fealty, when they were Masters
of Africa; but as their Strength and Glory declined, shrouded themselves under
the Protection of the Kings of Morocco, Fez, and Tunis, which have possessed it
by right of Birth: But when the Inhabitants saw themselves oppressed by the
Tyranny of Mukamur, Under the Moors.
Son of Hesen, King of Tunis, they threw this yoke off their Necks, first by a
general Revolt, then expelling the King's Lieutenant, and all other his
Officers, and at last electing from among themselves one whom they made their
Ruler or Magistrate, putting all the Revenue and Support of the State into his
hands. In the beginning this new Lord ruled with all gentleness, but afterward
degenerating into all kinds of Tyranny, his Brother in Law revenged the Cause
of the City by killing him. Freed from this Viper of their own breeding, they
empowered a Courtier of Prince Abubacer, who had been a Recluse or Hermit, who
held the Command a few months, till Ferdinand, Vanquished by Ferdinand.
King of Arragon and Castile, sent Don Pedro de Navarre thither with an Army,
who surprising the City, made all the Inhabitants Slaves, and brought them
away; together with their Governor and his Son, whom he sent first to Messina,
from thence to Palermo, where the Emperor Charles the Fifth set him at liberty,
dismissing him home to Tripoli, which the Christians, as we said, had
dismantled and made untenable in all parts, except the Castle, which they
fortified with a brave Wall, whereon they Planted diverse great Cannon.

The young Prince being come to Tripoli, re-peopled it, in the name and on the
behalf of the Emperor Charles; but in the Year Fifteen hundred thirty and
three, together with Tunis, Byserta, Susa, Monaster, and the Island of Zerby,
was re-gained by Barberossa; Re-gained by Barberossa.
who was scarcely warm in it before the Emperor Charles re-assaulted and took
it, By the Empetor Charles.
forthwith making a Present of it to the Knights of Malta; who possessed it
till the Year 1551. when under the Reign of Solomon the Magnificent, Sinan
Bashaw, came and Besieged Tripoli; to whom after a short time it was delivered
upon honorable Articles; It was brought under the Turks.
among which one was, That the Garrison should march out with Bag and Baggage,
and be provided of convenient Shipping to Malta by Sinan: but contrary to the
Conditions most of them were plundered of their Goods, two hundred of the
Moors, who had served the Malteses, were put to the Sword, and most of the
Knights of Malta sent to the Galleys, and the rest the Bashaw took and made
Slaves.

After this Victory Sinan appointed Morat Aga to be Viceroy, and ever since
the Grand Seignior sends from Constantinople every three years a Beglerbeg or
Bashaw thither to support his Conquests.

About the Year Fifteen hundred ninety eight, Sidi Haga, a Marabout, or Priest,
designing to make himself a Master of the City and Kingdom, with the assistance
of the meaner sort, began a notable Rebellion: upon the first intelligence
whereof Asan Bassa, Admiral at Sea, Sailed thither with sixty Galleys, and some
Soldiers from Tunis and Algier, on a sudden fell into the Marabout's Quarters,
whose own Men finding their error, in some measure to mitigate the fury against
themselves, set an end to their Mutiny, by presenting their Captains Head to
Sinan, who sent it to the Grand Seignior.

IN this condition Tripoli continued until about the Year Sixteen hundred, The
Government.
when the Authority of the Bashaw was diminished by the Soldiers and their
Commanders, in the same manner, as Kara Osman did at Tunis; De Stadt TRIPOLIS.
since which time Mahomet Bey a Grecian Renegado, of the ancient House of the
Justinians, has so laid his business, that having gotten the Banner of
Tripolis from the Grand Seignior, after he became Master of the Castle, would
not endure the Bashaw any longer, but began to rule with full Authority, yet
still pretending a Subjection to the Turk, and to preserve his Favor, as an
Acknowledgement and Homage, he frequently sends over many costly Presents, and
Slaves: But at length this Bey became so powerful, that nothing was done but by
his peculiar Command. For he took Soldiers at his pleasure, without the
knowledge of the Divan, or Militia, and placed them in the Castle, for the
security of his own Person, that he might not be trappan'd into his Ruin by
the Policies of the Great Turk: And in this posture of Government it remained,
and does still; only in Sixteen hundred sixty seven, the Moors made a
dangerous Insurrection, but it proved only to the loss of their own Heads.

THE TERRITORY OF TRIPOLI.
NEar the Lesser Africa and Asfatus, over against the Island Querquene, The
Borders of the Territory of Tripoli.
called by Ananie, Ceraunia, the River Capez takes its Course, anciently called
Triton. Westerly of which this Province takes its beginning, and ends at that
of Mezellata in the East; so that it has for Borders on the West, Tunis; and
on the North, the Mediterrane; on the South, Numidia, or Biledulgerid and
Lybia, with the Wilderness of Zara; and in the East, Mezellata, a large Tract
of Ground, but altogether waste and unfruitful.

The chiefest Places thereof are Old and New Tripoli, Kapes, Machres, Elhamma,
and Zoara.

Old Tripoli, by some taken for the Ancient City Naples in Barbary, Old Tripoli.
and the Great Leptis of Ptolomy. This was the Birthplace of the Emperor
Severus, first built by the Romans, afterward possessed by the Goths, and at
length destroyed by the Mahumetans, in the time of Hamor, their second Kalif;
and ever since, as Sanutus says, little inhabited.

New Tripoli, or Tripoli in Barbary, New Tripoli.
to distinguish it from a City of the same name in Syria, called by the Turks,
Terabulus; and by the Moors, Trebeliz, or Tarabilis, seated on the Seaside, is
not great, but full Peopled with Turks, Moors, The Situation.
and Jews; surrounded with high and defensible Stone-Walls, strengthened in
several places with Sconces and Bullwarks; yet having but two Gates, one on the
South Side, going out to the main Land; and one on the North, by the Haven:
adjoining to which Gates, are two Forts; that on the North securing the Haven,
which is very pleasant and beneficial, and of capacity enough to contain many
Ships. The Houses like those of Tunis, and the Streets very well paved, with
one large Prison or Masmora for Christian Slaves; whereof there are always some
here, though much fewer than at Tunis, or Algier; besides diverse Mosques, and
some Hospitals; but for the greatest part sorely decayed through the Cruelty of
the Wars.

Kaps, Kaps, or Kapis.
or Kapis, or Kafis, by Marmol called Kasce, and by the Moors, according to
Mercator Kabez, being the Takape of the Ancients, stands near the Midland-Sea,
environed with lofty Walls, and strengthened with a Castle.

Machres, Machres.
or Mahara, a Village, about thirteen miles from the Isle of Zerby, with a
Castle for the defense of Kaps Bay.

Elhamma, Elhamma.
a Roman Platform, three miles from Kapes, having Walls of Hewn Stone, and
Gates, whereon in Marble Tablets may yet be read Latin Inscriptions.

Zoara, Zoara.
or Zoarat, taken by the Ancients for the Haven Pisidon, is an ancient Town by
the Mediterrane, thirteen miles to the East of the Island Zerby.

There is one more little inhabited, Rasalmabes.
and of as little fame, only for the Name controverted by Authors, some making
it Gichtis, others Rasalmabes; and Simlerus, the Gita of Antoninus.

The Syrtes are two, a greater and a lesser: the lesser is an ill Neighbor to
the Gulf of Kaps, near Tripoli, being very dangerous, by reason of the Shelves,
Banks, and Quicksands lying round about: But the great Syrtes, in the Maps are
called The Shoals of Barbary; and in Spanish, Baxos de Carthage; which is the
same over against Ezzab.

Syrtes is properly a Greek word, The Syrtes.
signifying Shifting Sands, sometimes having much, and then little Water, and
sometimes almost none at all.

The greater of these Syrtes is in Nine and twenty Degrees North Latitude, and
Forty eight Degrees of Longitude; but the smaller in Two and thirty Degrees
Latitude, and in Three and forty Degrees Longitude.

The Lake Tritonis, The Lake Tritinis.
famous in Antiquity, and often mentioned by Historians, and Geographers, lies
in the very heart of Little Africa. Volateranus says, there are there of the
said Name, viz. this of Lybia, thought to be the Birthplace of Minerva;
another of Boetia, and a third in Thessalia. Ptolomy places here two, that is,
Tritonis, by Marmol called Kapis, and the other the Lake of Pallas. Diodorus
after all makes mention of another near the Atlantic Ocean.

THe Rivers of this Kingdom, The Rivers.
are Karsarnaker, Rasalmabes, and Magro, otherwise Cenifes, all which take
their originals from Mount Atlas, and discharge their Waters into the
Midland-Sea, near the places from which they take their Names.

THe Country is all Sandy, The Soil.
and so Barren, that no kind of Corn by the best Husbandman be produced there;
so that the Inhabitants would almost perish with Hunger, if Corn were not
Transported thither from other places to supply their defective Harvests.

THere is in this City no fresh Water, Their Scarcity of Water.
but that which runs from the tops of the Houses through Gutters. Not far from
Elhamma rises a great Spring to the Southward, whose Waters being exceeding
hot, are conveyed by Pipes into the Bathes there; which notwithstanding its so
distant Current, yet retains the Heat so powerfully, that few will adventure to
go into it; yet sometimes for pure necessity the Inhabitants are compelled to
drink thereof, though in regard of its Sulphurous Quality, it operates little
toward the quenching of their thirst. Lastly, not far from the City is a
Standing-Water, called The Lake of the Melatson, by reason of having a strange
power to Cure the Leprosy.

Sanutus places here the Lotus-Tree; which by some are called Mikakoliers, or
rather Alsiers: of which Fruit, being sweeter than Dates, the Inhabitants make
very pleasant Wine.

Lemmons, Oranges, and Dates grow here in great abundance, but no other Fruits,
except Halbhazis, which grows under Ground to the bigness of a Bean; it
tastes like an Almond; but is never chewed, only sucked.

THe Inhabitants of Tripolis live chiefly upon Weaving and Merchandising. Those
of Kapes, being poor, Their Employment.
are generally Husbandmen and Fishers, paying Tribute of all their Labors to
the Bashaw. Those of Elhamma are lazy, poor, and very Thieves. The Zoarers burn
Lime, which they carry to Tripolis: But all live hardly, their Food being so
scarce, that he is accounted a rich Man that can lay up two Tunns of Corn for
his own use.

THe Revenue, Tributes, and Customs, The Revenue and Trade.
which the Bassa receives yearly, amounts to a hundred and eighty thousand
Ducats; Gramay.
all which come from the Customs set upon Exported and Imported Commodities,
the Poll-Money, or Tribute of the Jews, and the Contributions fetched in by the
Flying Armies of Dragoons from the Moors and Arabians in the Country.

The Venetians used formerly to Trade hither with their Galleys, but have long
discontinued, going farther to Alexandria or Scandaroon, there being no City of
note between that and Tripolis.

The chiefest Trade now is in Blacks or Negro's, which formerly were sold in
Sicilia, but now in Turkey. But when we have said all, we must conclude, that
their Pyracies at Sea brings in their greatest Gain: for though it be the most
inconsiderable of all the Corsaire Towns, yet they do much mischief: which the
fitness of their Situation does exceedingly promote, though it is a place that
usually all Christian Ships, Laden with Merchandise to Alexandria, Siorte, or
Seide, Aleppo, and other Ports that way, must pass by.

THE ISLAND OF GERBES, OR, ZERBY.
THe Island of Gerbes, The Names.
Ptolomy called, Meninx, or Lotofagites; Antoninus, Gerba; Mercator, Zetha;
Thevet, Glaukon; the Spaniards, Gelves; the Arabians formerly, according to
Ananie, Gezira; and at present Algelbens, and the now Inhabitants, Gelbens.

Pliny says it lies two hundred Paces to the West Entrance of the little
Syrtes, and so close to the Shore of the Main Land, that it was formerly
annexed by a Bridge, which the Inhabitants upon the Report of an intended
Invasion, pulled down.

Leo Africanus, Bigness.
and Gramay give it four Miles in Compass; but Pliny inlarges its Length to
eight Miles, and its Breadth to six, situate in two and thirty Degrees
Northern Latitude.

Ptolomy places two Cities on this Island, Places.
Meninx and Gerra; but Pliny three, namely, Meninx on the side next Africa,
Thoar on the other side, and Sibele between; which (they say) was overthrown in
the Year Eleven hundred fifty nine, and the whole Island wasted by the King of
Sicily: But at the present there are no Cities, nor any thing else, but some
Huts, scattered here and there far from one another; only on the North side
there be some Villages under the Protection of the Fort, wherein lies a
Garrison of the Turks.

Thevet tells us, there sometime were here Zadaique, Zibida, Camusa, Agimur,
Borgi, Rochere, and Kantare; but little remains of them besides the Names.

THe Ground, The Soil.
though plain and even, yet is sandy and barren; so that the Inhabitants,
notwithstanding they use great care, with all their industry get only a small
pittance of Barley. But Dates, Figs, Olives, and Grapes grow here without
Cultivating.

The Island and the neighboring Shore, Lotus-Tree.
produces also the Lotus, whose Fruit grows to the bigness of a Bean, at first
yellow, but often changing Color before it be perfectly ripe. This Fruit is of
so sweet and pleasant a Taste, that the People from the eating thereof, are
called Lotofagi, that is, Lotus-Eaters: This Name the Greeks imposed, who for
its extraordinary Deliciousness feigned, that Foreigners after the eating of
it, forget their Native Country; which Homer taking notice of, recites, that
some of Ulysses Fellow-Travellers in their wandering falling in here, enticed by
the sweetness of this Fruit, Homer.
would not return again: His words are these.

(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
Tossed with cold Winds upon the raging Main;
The tenth the The Ancients agree not on the Seat of these Lotophagi.
Artemidor^ says, that they inhabited the Deserts of Africa, South of
Mauritania, from the Atlantic Ocean even to Cyrene. Others say that it is the
Island Meninx, which lies before the lesser Syrtis, which is here denoted:
because there is abundance of those Lotus-trees in that Island, which bear a
very pleasant fruit; and an Altar of Vlysses's still remaining.
Lotophagian Coasts we gain,
Who feed on Flowr's: we dined and watered there.
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
Two then, to make Discovery, I sent
Of our prime men, with them a Herald went;
Who found the Lotophagi planted there,
They pleasant Lotus for them did prepare,
Not meaning Harm: now they who Lotus eat
Never mind returning to their Native Seat.
These, whilst they shreek, acting distracted Pranks,
I forced aboard, and fastened to their Banks.
Then shipped I all the rest, lest they should eat
Sweet Lotus, and their Native Soil forget.
Most of the Inhabitants are Merchants, carrying Cloth to Alexandria, Leo, 6.
d. Sanut. 5. b.
and Raisins, not only thither, but Barter with them to several other places.
Their Language the Morisk or ancient African.

FOrmerly this Island had a particular Xeque, but now is wholly under the
Bashaw of Tripoli, who raises from hence a great Revenue. The Emperor Charles
the Fifth Conquered it at the same time with Tripoli, and put it under the
Jurisdiction of the Viceroy of Sicily, who kept it not long, being deprived
thereof by the Dukes d' Alva, and Medina Coeli.

EZZAB.
EZzab, or rather Azzab, contains the Countries of Mecellata, Mesrata,
Taurka, and the Mountains Garian and Beniguarid.

This Territory begins at the Westerly end of the Mountains Garian and
Beniguarid, and ends at the outermost Borders of the Territory of Mesrata on
the East.

Sanutus makes Ezzab to contain Ras Axara, Tessuta, Rasamisar, Lepida, formerly
Eoa; and Ruscelli, Commenting upon Ptolomy, believes it from the similitude of
the Name, Leptis, out of whose Ruins Tripoli rose.

GArian, a high and cold Mountain, three Miles in length, The Mountain Garian.
and as much in breadth, lies Northward of Great Atlas, about four Miles from
Tripoli; and notwithstanding the sharpness of its Air, is yet well inhabited,
containing, by common repute, a hundred and thirty Villages.

Beniguarid, eighteen miles from Tripoli, and a part of the Great Atlas, boasts
above an hundred and fifty inhabited Villes.

This Country affords little Corn, but abundance of Dates, Olives, and
Saffron, held to excel all in these Parts, both for Color and goodness, and
is Transported to Gran-Cayre; where it is sold dearer by a third part then
other Saffron.

The Inhabitants of Mount Garian are faint-hearted, and continually molested
and Cowed by the Arabs; but those of Beniguarid are so Warlike, that they not
only preserved their Liberty, but kept both the Kings of Tripoli and the
Arabians also in awe, in regard they were able to bring twenty thousand Men
into the Field, many of which were Musketeers, who were so well Exercised and
Disciplined, that more then once they have put the Turks to flight; yet at
present they own themselves Subjects to the Bashaw of Tripoli, Paying him the
same Tribute they did the King of Tripoli, who was supposed to draw from thence
yearly eighty thousand Ducats.

MECELLATA.
THis Territory being the great Syrtes, by the Arabians called Ceirat el
Quibir, lies about eight miles from Tripoli, by the Seacoast. Ptolomy names
its chief Town Makomaka, or rather Calummacula. There are still three other
populous Villages, called of old Aspis, Sakramasa, and Pyrgos Eufranta; and by
the Moderns, Lard, Cedick, and Eufrata. Not far thence, on the Seacoast,
stands Sibaka, by Ptolomy named Aporisburgh; then the Cape of Sorta, formerly
the Point of Hippie; Nain, taken for Ptolomy's Philenes, and by the Roman
Historiographers, the Altar of the Philenii, highly reverenced by the
Carthaginians, being the Sepulchers of the Philenii, two Brothers, who
sacrificed their lives for the safeguard of their Country.

The Country yields exceeding plenty of Dates, Olives, and Oil. They can bring
six thousand Men into the Field: are under a particular Lord, having with their
Neighbors the Arabs sometimes Peace, and sometimes War, as they are
necessitated. At this day they are Subjects to the Turks, though Gramay
maintains they acknowledge neither Turks nor Arabians, yet follow the Mahumetan
Platform in the way of their Worship.

MESRATA, Or CYRENAICA.
THis Province of Mesrata Marmol calls Cyrenaica, or Pentapolis; and the
Moderns, Korene; and the Moors, Ceyret.

Cyrenaica, once part of the Ancient Lybia, beginning by the unanimous Consent
of all Geographers, at the Philenian Altar beforementioned, and did extend, as
Mela and Strabo aver, to the Valley of Katabathmus in Egypt, and to Nylus; by
consequence comprehending Marmarica.

At this present Mesrata is distant about nineteen miles from Tripoli, Westward
of the Territory of Mesellata, and Eastward of Barka, containing five Cities;
from whence called Pentapolis, which carries as much in its signification:
Their Names be these; Cyrene, Berenice, by Mela called Hesperia, Apollonia,
Ptolemais, and Arsinoe, or Teuchire.

Cyrene, the Birthplace, as Strabo witnesses, of Callimachus, Eratosthenes,
Carneades, and Aristippus; all Ancient Philosophers, and Olivarus upon Mela,
denominates it Korene.

Berenice, as the same Olivarus reports, is now vulgarly styled Berrich;
Apollonia, Bonaudria; Ptolimais, Tolomete; Arsinoe and Teuchire, Trochata. But
Marmol retains the old Name Cyrene; and as to the rest, Berenice he names
Berbik; Arsinoe or Teuchira, Trokara; Ptolemais, Eptolometa; Apollonia, Bon
Andrea; which differ very little from Olivarus.

THe chiefest Places upon the Coast, beginning from the West, Strength.
are these; Alcudie, by Ptolomy called Autemalan, an old Fort; Cape Sabbia,
formerly Promontorium; Drepanum the Salt Pans, known to the Romans by the Name
Stationes Maritimae; Zanara, was the Haven Diarchea, or the Birds Island;
Camara, or Cambra, according to Mercator, formerly Hercules Tower; Carkora, a
Fort, heretofore Diachersis; Teionis or Teiones, once the Cape of Briois; and
lastly Ardbry, anciently the Coast of Briois. Further up the Coast of
Pentapolis, stands Berbick, or Bernich, or indeed Bernice and Hesperides;
because some have here placed the Gardens of Hesperides, so famed among the
Poets.

THe only River of note is Milet, by Ptolomy called Lathon or Lethon, which
some have imagined to be Lethe, the River of Oblivion.

Having past this River, we come to the Cities Trokara, Tolomata, and Zadra,
formerly called Ausigda; Longifana or Longifaria, in elder time the Temple of
Aptuch, the Fort of Aras Ausen, by the Italians called Cape Carane, and
Raxalsen, the Point of Fikos: Afterward Bon-Andrea or Apollonia, with its
Haven, heretofore Naustathmes; Forceli once Erythron; Favora anciently Chersis,
and Darna, or Dardania, of old the Point Zephyrium, to the East of Mesrata,
bordering upon Marmarica or Barka. Lastly, to the Inland, Cyrene, Arguide,
Quereda, and Napolis.

Cyrenaica formerly was very Rich, but now lies for the most part waste and
unhabited, because of the Arabians who continually oppress this Country with
Robbing and Spoiling.

THe Mesratines are Warlike and Rich, Riches.
Trading with the Christians for European Wares, which they transport to
Negro-Land, and exchange for Blacks to make Slaves, as also for Civet, Musk,
and other Commodities, which they afterward sell to the Turks for great gain.

THey can bring into the Field an Army of ten thousand Men, Places.
with which they make Wars continually against their troublesome Neighbors, the
Pilfering Arabs; nor could they be brought to pay Tribute to^ the King of
Tunis; however they are subjected at present to the Great Turk: yet, as Gramay
says, their Governors are of their own Country, only they own him their
Superior, rendering some small Acknowledgments.

TAURKA.
TAurka is a small Country, about thirteen miles in compass; yet abounds with
such plenty of Dates and Corn, as sufficiently serves their own occasions, with
some to spare for their Neighbors; although their Valleys by their Sandiness
are somewhat barren. The people are all Husbandmen, and live in Hutts made of
the Branches of Date-trees. They are at present subject to the Turk, against
whom, in the Year Fifteen hundred and sixty seven, they made an Insurrection:
but after a stout Battle maintained four Days, with great slaughter of the
Turks, overpowered by number, or rather wearied out than Conquered, the
Taurkians were necessitated to yield upon Conditions, viz. to lay down Arms and
Disband, and Pay three thousand Ducats as a Fine for their Delinquency.

BARKA, Or MARMARICA.
IT seems that this Name of Barka is of great Antiquity; for Ptolomy places
hereabouts a People called Barrceitors: which contradicts not their Residence
in Cyrene, because Strabo and Mela extend that Country to Katabathmus in
Egypt, and to the Nyle, and so by Consequence comprehended Ptolomy's Marmarika,
and our Modern Barka: So Strabo sets the Marmarides in Cyrenaica, whereas there
is no mention of Marmarika in that place. Marmol says it is now called Barka;
but the Arabians name it Sahart Barka, that is, A stormy Wilderness; or Cyrat
Barka, The passage of the Storm: and who ever intends to go by Land from
Barbary to Egypt, must go through it: It is a great Desert, beginning on the
Easterly Borders of Mesrata, and reaches from the Cape of Arraxaltin, or
Raxaltin, by Ptolomy denominated the great Chersonesus to the Point Glaukun, on
the Borders of Alexandria or Scanderoon; Bigness.
being in length above two hundred sixty eight miles from West to East, and in
breadth, from North to South from the Midland-Sea to Numidia, above thirty.

The most eminent Places are the Cape of Raxaltin, Places.
mentioned but just before; the Haven Trabucho, formerly of Batrachus. Farther
to the Inland lies first Augele; then Lako, formerly Antipirgus; Cape Lako,
or the Point Kalyonium; Mosolomar Port, but since the Haven Salone, although
before of Panorme: This brings you to the great Katabathmus, by Ruscelius named
Carto, a great Valley reaching to Egypt: Opposite to this, but more deep into
the Country, was the Oracle and Temple of Jupiter Hammon, four hundred
thousand Paces from Cyrene, say both Pliny and Solinus, in the midst of a Sandy
Desert, three miles in length. Gramay by mistake sets it in the Desert of
Lybia; and Leo Africanus in Numidia, between Jasliten and Teorreque; but
wherever it stood, they call it now in Arabic, Hesachbir, that is, A Heap of
Stone. Afterward follows the Haven formerly called Selin, now Soudan, having
but a narrow Entrance, but spacious and convenient within. Next appears
Laguixi, formerly Trifachi, of late time Raxa, taken for the Paresonium of
Ptolomy and Strabo; although Mercator rejects that opinion, and maintains
Paresonium to have been Alberton. Farther to the Inland stands the chief City
Barka, from whence the Country takes its Name.

All the whole Country is almost nothing but a barren Wilderness, Their Soil.
that has neither Water for refreshment or use, or Soil fit for Tillage, which
makes them live very poorly. A few Dates they have indeed, but of little
consequence to supply so great a Tract of Land: Some Sheep and Camels they are
Masters of, but make little Profit of them, the scarcity of Pasturage and
Fodder making them so Lean, that they are unfit for use or service. Nay, such
is the unhappy necessity of the People, that Parents often send their Children
over to Sicily, to become Servants, and undertake all sorts of Drudgery only
for their sustenance.

The Arabians that possess Barka are ill-favored, and crooked of Body and
Conditions, driven by want continually to Rob; so that no Carravan dare pass
along the Seacoast opposite to the Desert, but take their way sixty miles
about to the Inland.

When these Arabians go to steal in Biledulgerid, The Arabian's Robbery.
and ransack Pilgrims and Travelers, they give them hot Milk to drink, then
lift them up by their Legs with their Heads down, so that of necessity all must
break forth that is in their Body; which Excrements these Villainous Thieves
search, in hope therein to find some Ducats, supposing Travelers coming that
way, out of fear have swallowed their Money. But the places on the Seacoast
are better ordered, Their Government.
being subject to the Turks, and under the immediate Command of the Bashaw of
Tripoli, who usually sends to Barka, the principal City, a Kadiz to administer
Justice.

All the People are Mahumetans, excepting the wild Arabs in the Deserts, Their
Religion.
who live by Rapine and Villainy, without any sense of Religion, Honesty or
Goodness.

Biledulgerid, or Numidia 283. comprehends Sus, and Ydausquerit Sus, proper
Cities, or Towns Idrunadayf, Iduguneus, Argon, the three chief, besides
Idjauson, Merit, Deusdisdud, Deusenez, Indeuzell, Arrahala, Ayhakeli, and
Tizitit. Rivers Darha, Ziz, and Ghir.
Extuka Towns Targuez the Metropolis, with 40 Townships and Castles subject to
it.
Nun Towns Nun, the chief City, Idaguazinguel, Idanbaquil, Deurseumugt and
Hilela.
Tesset Towns Tesset, the head-City.
Ufran, or Ufaran Towns It has four Fortified, but not named. Rivers One, and
that but small.
Aka Towns None, only three Villages.

Dara Dara, containing Towns Banesbick, Quiteva, Sizeri, Tagumadert, Tenzeda,
Tragadell, Tenzulin, Tameguerut, Temerguit, Tabernast, and Assa. Rivers Dara.
Mountains Atlas, in part.

Tafilet Itata Towns Itata.
Tafilet prop. Towns Tafilet.

Sugulmesse Sugelmesse Towns Segelmesse, Teneghet, Tebubassan, Manuun, Mazalig,
Abuhinam and Kasayr, besides 350 Cities more, great and small, not named.
Rivers Ziz. Monutains Mezetazu, Telde.

Queneg Matgara Retil Tebelhelt Togda Forkala Tezerin Berrigumi Benibesseri
Guachde Fighie Terebit Tegorarin Messab Tekort Guargula Zeb Towns Zebbell,
Gastir, and Tamarakrost, besides 12 small Forts, and 26 Villages. Helet, and
some Forts on the River Fez. None named but Forts, Essuoihila, Humeledegi, and
Ummelhesen. Three very populous, and 12 Villages. Four, Villages 10. Three
small ones, and 4 Villages. Six small ones, and 15 Villages. Eight of
considerable strength, besides 15 Hamlets. Three Fortified places. Three fair
ones: The River Ghir. Three strong ones. Four: Villages eight. Three and fifty
Fortresses, and 100 Villages. Six Strongholds, besides Villages. Tekurt, the
Turaffilum of Ptolomy. Guargala. Zeb, Peskare, Nefta Teolocha, and Deusca.
Biledulgerid proper Biledulgerid Cities Teusar, Kafza, Nefzara.
Teoreque Three good Forts; 26 Villages.
Jasliten Towns Jasliten.
Gademez Towns Sixteen Walled, and ninety two Villages.
Fassen Towns Augele, besides 58 Walled Cities, and a hundred open Villages.




NUMIDIA, OR BILEDULGERID.
Ancient Numidia, by Ptolomy called New Numidia, Ancient Numidia.
and by the Grecians, according to Pliny, Metagonites, takes its beginning, as
the same Pliny, at the River Ampiaga, now named Sufegnia, and ends at the
River Tuska, now called Guadel Barbar; which Region some now comprise under the
Kingdom of Telensin or Tremecen. But some observe, that Ptolomy has not set
forth in particular the proper Bounds of Numidia, though they may well say,
that he has conterminated this Country with the Rivers Sufegmar and Jadogh,
by the Moderns called Ampsiaga, and Rubrikat near Bona; which Territory
contains part of Constantine, and a part of Bugie. But Maginus settles
Numidia otherwise, that is, between the River Magior, formerly known by Audus,
(where Ptolomy fixes his Numidian-Bay) and the River Megerada, or Magrada,
called Bagrada, near Carthage, under which also a part of the Kingdom of Tunis
may be comprised.

The Numidia which now we know, is that part of Africa, Modern Numidia.
which by some is placed between Lybia and the Mountain Atlas, Leo Africanus.
and likely takes in no little share of Ptolomy's ancient Description; for some
endeavor to make out, that its Borders extend farther, taking in most part of
Bugie, and the Kingdom of Tunis, and a good share of the Caesarian Mauritania,
in the Territory of Dara.

THe spacious Dominions of this vast Country Numidia, Name.
the Arabians call Biledulgerid, from the chief Province thereof, or according
to Anani, Guaten-Tamar, both signifying Date-land, so named from the abundance
of that Fruit, which that Country produces more than any other part of Africa.

NUmidia takes its beginning Eastwards at the City of Elokar, Borders.
five and twenty Spanish miles from Egypt, stretching Westward to Nun, whose
utmost Confines Border the Atlantic Ocean; its Northern Boundaries are the
Skirts of Mount Atlas; the South, the Deserts of Lybia.

THe most eminent Regions which this World of Ground contains, Territories.
are Tesset, Dara, Tafilet, Segelmesse, Zeb, and Biledulgerid: This last, as we
said, gives the Denomination to all Numidia. But there are other Countries
within this its spreading Circuit, especially Westward, as shall appear
hereafter.

BIledulgerid, Bigness.
or Numidia, reckons in length six hundred miles, in breadth where at widest,
three and fifty. The chief People which now Plant this large Country on the
West, are, according to Marmol, the Musamades, Hilels, Zaragans, and Quicimas,
and the meaner sort are called Gemis, signifying a Masseline of several Nations.

THe most eminent Rivers watering Biledulgerid, Rivers.
are Darha, Ziz, Ghir, to which some add the Sus, Leo Africanus,
rather belonging to the Kingdom of Morocco, as we have already set forth.

Darha, Darha
descending from Mount Atlas, on that side which Borders the Country of
Haskora, thence running Southwards through a Land of the same Name, loses it
self in many Rivulets, first making luxurious Vales amidst the Deserts.

The River Ziz, Ziz.
falls branching it self also from Atlas, then recollected into one Stream,
glides Southward, straightened with several Mountains, washing the Feet of Mount
Gersolim. Afterward visiting the Countries of Chenegh, Matgara, Reteb, and
Segel-Messe; thence losing it self in a Desert, appears again at Fort
Sugaihila. From thence carried on, making no stop till in the middle of a
barren Sand choked up, it becomes a Lake, by none frequented but a few Hunting
Arabs.

The River Ghir also derives from Atlas, Ghir.
which Sanutus puts under twenty two Degrees Northern Latitude, and five and
twenty Degrees and a half Longitude, which gliding Southward through Deserts,
comes at last to Benignumi, and from thence to a Sandy Wild, where obstructed,
it makes a Lake as the former.

Besides those aforementioned, Rio Blanko.
there are other less, or second rated Rivers, of which the first is the White
River, in Portuguese called Rio Blanko; which falling from a Hill, and running
through the chief Province Biledulgerid, commixeth its Streams from many Mouths
with the Great Ocean.

But Buzedor springs not from a Mountain, Buzedor.
but in Campaigne, and so also gliding through Biledulgerid, disembogues where
it leaves its Name, to the Town Buzidor into the same Sea.

The Dry River, Dry River.
so called from its Channel, being so often bankrupt in Summer, scarce then
having any Streams to carry Contribution to the Sea, the French call Seche;
being rather a Brook than a River, falling from the Highlands of Numidia not
far from the Sluices of Ifran, whence descending betwixt the Cape Bojador, and
the City Nun, ends in the Ocean.

The Lebech, Lebech.
also rising in a Hilly Country, in its Descent swollen with the Waters of
many other petty Streams, loses it self in its full greatness near Albena, in
the Atlantic Main.

Teseut, Teseut.
or Teseutin, the one in the Singular, signifying A Shore, the other in the
Dual, or Plural number, Shores, are two Rivers, which rise within a small mile
one from another in Mount Gegudeme; which gliding through pleasant Plains, and
the Territory of Askore, then both uniting their Streams with the River Lebick,
leave there their Denomination.

Hemissin boasts its Birth also from the Mountain in Biledulgerid, Hemissin.
falling into the Sea near a place which the Sailers call Ansulim.

The River Tarkala, Tarkala.
which takes its Name from the Country through which it glides, is but small,
and its Fountain not far distant; though some suppose it springs from the
Northern Hill; so hasting till stagnated, it becomes a Standing-Pool, which
often swelling, turns into Morass the adjacent Valleys.

But Togdaa falls more probably from the Northern Mountains, Togdaa.
and though little at first, yet waters the Country of its own Name, and
running Southward, from small grows great and sluggish; so ending its progress,
there settles in a Standing-Water.

The warm River, called by the Hollanders, The Heet Revier, being warm like a
Bath, descending from Atlas, first fertilizing the Plains of Biledulgerid,
accommodating also the City Teolach, and Nefta, acquiesceth at last in the
Deserts, there becoming also a Standing-Pond.

Techort, Techort.
another small River rushing from the Mountains bordering on Lybia, running by
the City Techort, ends amongst Sandy Wilds in large Plashes.

The Brook Teusart, descending from a Mountain, runs Southward, Teusart.
loses motion in the Desert, and so spreading it self becomes a shallow Fen.

THe Soil of Biledulgerid is hot and dry, The Numidian Soil.
being very much attemper'd with the moisture which these forementioned Rivers
contribute; most of them watering the Country quite through to the Desert of
Lybia: This Territory bears little Corn, but superabounds with Dates, and other
fruitful Trees, but in less quantities. They have there also the Lotus, and the
Plant Euforbium, with some other Rarities of that kind.

That part of Biledulgerid that borders Lybia, yields but a small Product,
being craggy and barren Mountains, whose Skirts are of as little value, bearing
nothing but inconsiderable Shrubs, Brambles, and Thorns; a dry Sterility ruling
over all for want of Water.

ALl Numidia is infected with various and deadly biting Serpents abroad, The
Beasts.
and within with Scorpions as dangerous, which especially rage in Summer,
killing many: They have store of Ostriches, Camels, and Goats, and some breeds
of Horses. Their Corn-Harvest falls in April, their Dates they gather in
September, and the middle of October; but if Rain happens in April or
September, they neither sow nor reap, but their stored up Dates, which are
always abundant, supplies the Effects of a bad Year; by which means, though
the Seasons prove intemperate, they know no Famine: yet though the Date grows
there so plentifully, that they never lack, yet they would rather have a good
Fruit-year than a Corn-year, because the Arabian Merchants and others bring
them in store of Grain, which they willingly barter for Dates. There grows
much of the Wood called Anil, so useful for Dying.

Besides ravening wild Beasts and venomous Serpents, they suffer also much by
the molestation of an East Wind, which raising such Tempests of Sand, and
beating on their Faces, gets into the Eyes of those that travel, making them
always blear'd and sore; otherwise the Air of it self is very healthy, and
oftentimes for an hundred years together they know no Pestilence, Small Pox,
nor any other such like Distempers.

THe Inhabitants of Numidia are generally long lived, The Constitution of the
Inhabitants.
only Scorbutic, in so high a manner, that their Teeth often drop out;
supposed to proceed from their constant eating of Dates; whose sweetness so
incrassates the Blood, making slower the Circulation, that this their Diet
seems to be the chief cause of that Distemper: They are also weak-sighted, and
much troubled with sore Eyes, which accidentally happens from the Sandy
Commotions carried on by the forementioned noxious Eastern Winds. They are by
Nature jealous, libidinous, and ignorant, not courting neither Knowledge or
Learning, nor minding how to live in a plentiful manner; but though they are
sedentary and slothful, yet they are deceitful, treacherous, and murdering
Robbers. But some few of this Region are not guilty of this their sordid
Condition, but are more generous, ingenious, very civil, and truly valiant.

THey eat much Camels Flesh, Their Food.
and the Ostrich they esteem as a Dainty; their Drink is Camels Milk, and the
Liquor in which the Flesh is boiled; not once so much as tasting clear Water.

Amongst their other Qualities, there are some that are so nastily sordid, that
not only they never wash their Feet, but look upon it as an abomination to
have clean Hands, or any part of their Bodies.

THey Arabs that dwell in Biledulgerid, The Numidian Arabs.
are for the most part deformed, and lean, their Complexion a deep Sallow, and
not much troubled with Hair on their Chins; they are subtle and cruel. They are
also long-lived and healthy, Frication (and not Sweating) all the Physic these
Arabs use.
which some ascribe to their Frications, and avoiding what ever causes Sweat;
which is the only Physical Application they use. All their Recreations are
pursuing the Ostrich, and several sorts of Hawking, which they much delight in.

The Grandees pride themselves in their attendance of Negroes; but the Common
People having no Servants, domineer over their Wives, exercising Supreme
Authority, putting them not only to Women's, but Men's Drudgeries; as dressing
and sadling their Horses, and whatsoever business else, either in House or
Field.

There are some of these Arabs that are Students at Fez, and such Proficients,
that they Commence Doctors, and Professors of the Mahumetan Laws and Religion;
others follow Traffic. But in most parts of Numidia, many of them are addicted
to Poetry; attaining to such a height, that they set forth in Heroic Verse
long Epick Poems, like Homer or Virgil, at large, with high Fancy celebrating
the valiant Acts of their former Princes and Conquerors; and also they are good
at Pastorals, and such business of the Field: But in Songs, Sonnets, Madrigals,
and the like, which express the various Passions of sad Amors and always dying
Lovers, they are most exquisite in beyond belief.

THese Arabs are of a mild and sweet disposition, Their Disposition.
generous and bountiful, Apparel.
if their Fortunes answer. They are Habited like the Numidians, only their
Women differ in their Dress. These, though Poets, live sparingly, and think
themselves highly Caressed with a few Dates and dried Figs.

THeir Habitations are Hutts and Tents, Their Houses.
sometimes two hundred together; which being like a Village pitched in a round
order, defends their Cattle like a Wall, which are always placed in the middle:
They have only two passages, which they stop up with Thorns, so to keep out
Lions, and other Beasts of Prey. They live together in Tribes, and remove to
better Pasturage, like the Tartars; and they reckon their Riches in their Stock
of Dates, and Store of Camels.

Yet these Countries are Inhabited partly by other Africans and their own
Numidians, and by Arabians, which drove out the ancient Inhabitants, and
settled themselves in the Deserts bordering Date-land: and on the other part
the Numidians made themselves Masters of the Wilds, that belonged to the Blacks
or Negro's.

These People are distinguished into three sorts; the first live without either
Law, Religion, or Order; the second are Non-conformists to all Orders but
keeping of their Herds and Cattle, which they drive from place to place, every
one having their own Beasts distinguished as their proper Goods. Having no more
Law then only Meum and Tuum, so they mark their Cattle that they never
wrangle; the third observe both Law and Religion, and are Tributary to the
Kings of Fez and Morocco, whose Dominion extends to the Country of Dara,
Tafaletta, and Ytata.

There are Turks also residing amongst them, of which more hereafter.

IN the declination and fall of the Roman Empire, Their Government.
this Region was Governed by Kings, but when overrun by the Invading Arabians,
Their Religion.
and falling asunder, it was snatched up and shared by many petty Princes. Their
Religion.
Most of these People are Mahumetans.

SUS, And the Country of YDAUSQUERIT.
THe chief Tracts of Lands in Numidia Westward, are those that Border on the
Ocean, extending from Barbary and the Cape of Aguer, to the Cape of Nun.

THis Country they called The wide-spreading Sus, bordering in the West, Sus.
with the Atlantick-Sea; in the South, with the Lybick Islands, taking in a
part of Nun; in the East, confined with the Territory of Dara; and in the
North, with the other Sus belonging to Barbary.

THe chiefest Inhabitants are all Extracted originally from the African
Breberians, and are divided into Tribes or Families, which they call Gemies, as
we said before, signifying a Maslin People. The first of these were the
Offspring of the Ydausquerits, called by a special Name Hilela, who possess
many Cities and Forts, as Ydiauzon, Merit, Deudysdud, Deuseniz, Yndeuzel,
Arrahala, Ydeunadayf, Argan, Deuquinsus, Aytiakoli, and Tizitit. Among which
the chiefest places are Ydeunadayf, lying about fifty miles from Taradan to
Zahara; on the South, Ydeuquinsus and Argon; which all make but one only
Gemie, or Family, named Quincina, and are Consociates with the Soldiery of the
House of Hilela.

THis Country affords great store of Grain, Wheat and Barley, and in some
places store of Oranges, Lemmons, and several sorts of such brisk, or
sharp-relishing Fruits, as are frequent in Spain and Portugal. It breeds also
plenty of Cattle, and such store of Horses, that they are reckoned up by
thousands.

Extuka.
EXtuka, Extuka.
a Territory of the wide-spreading Sus, in which are reckoned to be above forty
Cities and Castles, is inhabited by the African Breberians of Miceamunda.

The chiefest Place of which is Targuez, strengthened with a Fort, lying on a
rising Hill; the Residence for the Xeque or Lord.

Their Neighbors are the other Breberians, that are also Possessors of several
walled Cities and Castles; the chiefest of which are Ydaguazinguel, Ydanbaquil,
Deursumugt, and Hilela.

This Country is Mountainous, and only fit to produce Barley, and feed Goats;
of which there are plenty.

Nun.
NEar the Western Ocean are several Forts and Cities inhabited by the meaner
Breberians, Nun.
and called Ydeuzel; but their chief Country lying in the wide-spreading, is
Nun, according to the Name of its Head-City.

This spacious Tract of Land lying between Numidia or Biledulgerid, and Lybia
or Zahara, of which the greatest part belongs to Zahara: both which suffer
extremely, in being harrassed by the many Incursions of the spoiling and
pillaging Arabs, which skulk in the Deserts, wandering up and down with their
Tent-Villages.

Near the City Nun, Cape of Nun.
lies Cape Nun, or Non, so called by the Portuguese; because they say,
whenever any were returning home, they were asked if they would come thither
again; who answered still in the Negative Voice, Non.

This Country affords no Grain, except a little Barley, and a few bad Dates;
therefore the Inhabitants are constrained to fetch their Provisions from the
Kingdom of Gualata.

Tesset.
TEsset, a part of Numidia, a Country in the Wide-spreading Sus, Tesset.
is so called from a City near the Borders of Nun toward the Lybian Desert,
twenty nine Degrees and ten Minutes Northern Latitude.

This Country on one side for threescore miles lies desolate, without any
Inhabitants. The Town is well fortified with Brick-Walls, which become hard
only by baking in the Sun, and contains about four hundred Families; but in
the adjacent Fields, scattered about are at least twelve thousand.

THis Territory is full of Sandy Plains, except in one Spot near the City, in
which grow many Dates, Barley, and Tares, which the Inhabitants use for Food.
There are also a few Camels, Horses, and small Cattle.

THe Inhabitants are hard-favor'd, very brown, and much tanned; The
Constitution of the Inhabitants.
but the Women are of clearer Complexions. They drive a great Trade in
Negro-Land and Guzule, so that for the most part they reside out of their own
Country. They plow their Ground with a single Camel, and one Horse; which
manner of Tillage is used through all Numidia. They are a Rustic People, and
know nothing of Letters, only Women educate their Children; yet as soon as
they are of any Growth, they turn them to Plough, and so farewell all their
Female Scholarship. Some learn to read, others Spin and Card, and the rest
spend their time altogether in Idleness.

Most of the Inhabitants are of mean Estates; the Richest of them possess only
a few Cattle. They are under the Contribution of the Arabians, called Udaya, or
Uled Vodey, which reside in the Lybian Wilderness.

Ifran, or Ufaran.
THe Country of Ifran, or Ufaran, Ifran.
has in the most Southerly part of it the Wide-spreading Sus, four Fortified
Towns, distant from each other half a mile, near a small River, which in Summer
dries up.

This Province abounds with Dates, and has some Copper-Mines. The People are
Mahumetans, yet Civil, and commonly well Habited.

They Trade much with the Portuguese in the Haven Guarlguessen, The Trade of
the Inhabitants with the Portuguese.
where they Barter their Inland Wares for Cloth, Woollen and Linen, which
they carry to Tombut and Gualata. They keep Weekly Markets in all their Towns,
where Corn is always very dear.

They have amongst them a Judge, or Civil Magistrate, Their Government.
who hears and decides all Causes, inflicting no more punishment on the
greatest Criminals than Drubbings on their Feet.

Aka.
THe Land of Aka has three strong Villages, Aka.
lying one by another on the Desert of Numidia, in the Borders of Lybia; they
were formerly very populous, but afterward by the Civil Wars within the
Country were left desolate: yet in process of time by the Mahumetan Priests
composing dome stick Broils, and seeking Peace, they were re-peopled again, and
so restored to their former Condition.

This Country yields nothing but Dates, and their only business is to gather
them.

THE KINGDOM OF DARA.
THe Kingdom or Territory of Dara, The Territory of Dara.
or Darha, so called from the famous River Dara, which runs cross through the
Country, contains part of the ancient Caesarian, or Imperial Mauritania, or,
as Cluverius will have it, the whole Caesarian Mauritania, and is one of the
most excellent and noble Parts of Numidia.

ITs Northern Border is Mount Atlas; Borders.
the West, the Territory Gezule and Sus; the East, that of Sugulmesse in
Numidia; and the South, the Desert of Lybia, where the Zanaga's inhabit.

The extent in length, Length.
from Mount Atlas to Zanaga, is about six and fifty miles; but in its breadth
very narrow.

It has many strong Towns, Villages and Cities.
Forts and Castles, which stand in order pleasantly seated along the Banks of
the River; but most of them built of Datewood, which is weak and yielding.

Their most eminent City is Banisbick or Mukabah: Banisbick.
Not far from thence Quiteva, defended by a Fortification: The next Sizerie,
commanding and commanded by a Castle. Tagumadert.
Next Tagumadert, or Tigumedes, famous for the Birth of the first Xeriff,
Tenzeda.
that succeeded the Kings of Morocco and Fez. Tenzeda and Tragadel, the
greatest of these reckons four thousand Houses, and above four hundred Jewish
Families, Tenzulin.
and is well fortified with a strong Castle. Tenzulin also a great Town, six
miles from Taraglet, is strengthened on the North-West side with a Fort.
Tameguerut.
Tameguerut, with a Fort; and likewise Temerguit, another special City, on the
Confines of Gezule, well fortified, and peopled with above two thousand
Families, besides a Suburb of two hundred Houses.

Near Lybia is a good Fortress called Tabernast; and next that, Assa; The
Castle Tabernast.
both built there by the Xerifs: All these standing in order, now flourish on
the pleasant Banks of Dara.

There also you may see the Ruins of Tefut, which has been the Residence of
their Princes, now desolate.

THey have not much Land for Tillage, The Nature of the Soil.
yet it yields them a plentiful Harvest, if the Dara, which we may call their
Nile, overflows their Ground in April; which failing, they expect no Harvest:
and though a good and seasonable Year produces a rich Crop of Wheat and
Barley, yet it serves not the Inhabitants; but they are forced to be supplied
(by bartering their Dates) from Fez and other Countries. The Daran Country
also yields store of Indigo, the Banks of the River for many miles are shaded
with excellent Date-Trees; but as these excel, they have also a meaner sort,
which they give their Horses and Camels; and also with the Stones well pounded
or ground, they feed their Goats, which fattens them much and suddenly; and yet
makes them better replenish the Milk-Pale. Their Horses are few, and their
Camels many: The Country breeds peculiar Ostriches.

THe People are of a very dusky Complexion, Their Complexion.
and few Whites amongst them, which happen by their commixing so much with
Blacks; so that we may well call them Demi-Negroes.

The Women are comely, modest, and well-body'd, Their Women.
and inclining to be fat, which seems to them a Beauty; those of best Quality
are well attended by Negro-Slaves.

THeir common Dish which they account very wholesome, Their Food.
and they much use, is a mixture of grinded Dates and Barley; which made up and
boiled in a body like a Pudding or Dumpling, is to them very savory: Pure Bread
they seldom or never taste, but at Festivals and Weddings. They also eat Camels
Flesh and Horses when they grow unfit for Service; and the Ostrich serves them
for Pullin and Wilde-Fowl.

THey are Subjects to the King of Morocco, Their Government.
to whom they pay Annual Tribute; and are governed by several Lieutenants or
Provincial Magistrates, which the King according to his pleasure puts in and
removes: Some Places are governed by Commissaries.

THE KINGDOM OF TAFILET, AND TERRITORY OF ITATA.
THe Realm of Tafilet, Tafilet. Marm^l lib. 7. c. 28. Diego de T^rres. Hister.
de los. Xeriffs, c. 103.
so called from its Metropolis Tafilet, situated in a Sandy Soil near Zahara,
and the Daran Country, is well fortified with a strong Wall, and defended by a
Castle; and has above two thousand Families, extracted from the Africanian
Brebees, called Filelis: And from Zahara near the City a great River leads to,
and cuts through Mount Atlas.

The Territory of Ytata, part of Tafilet on the Borders of Lybia, is almost as
big as the Daran Country. The Inhabitants are a mixed People, called Garib; and
their Neighbors are Breberians, Sikutaners, and Etuaguits.

THis Country is Mountainous, The Nature of the Soil.
and yields not much Grain, but superabounds in Dates the best of all Numidia,
and has some good Pasturage for Cattle. There grows also a Plant, of which
Anil or Indigo is made. They have store of Cattle, Camels, and Horses for the
Race, which they highly esteem; who wanting Oats and Barley, are contented with
Dates. As for Ytata, the whole Country seems a Grove of Dates; of which only
they have great store, and scarcity of all other Fruits.

THe Tafiletters are not so well accommodated as their Neighbors, The
In^ab^tants.
their Country being rough and barren; yet they are subtle and ingenious.
Their Language.
Those of Ytata are a mixed people, and speak neither good Arabic nor Zenetish,
but a broken Dialect betwixt both.

Those of Tafilet drive a great Trade in Indigo, Their Trade.
and Hides, which in Arabic they call Xerques, that is, the Lant-Skin; which
Beast we have at large described in the General Africa; and in Linen woven
after the Morisk manner embroidered with Silk. Here you must observe, that most
of the Dates which are brought into Europe, are transported from Tafilet;
because the Kings of Morocco and Fez prohibit the Exportation of them from any
other part in their Dominions.

BOth these places are under the Xeriffs, the Kings of Morocco and Fez, Their
Government.
who commonly write themselves Lords of Dara and Tafilet, and cause those
Countries to be Governed by some of the Stock of Xeriffs, which they permit to
be called Kings of Tafilet.

This Country was formerly pillaged by the Arabians, called Uled Eelem, Uled
Abdulquerims and Zorgan, and was under a Xeriff, or Supreme Head, of the same
People. But afterward Hanen, Xeriff, or King of Morocco, made himself Master of
the chief City of Tafilet by the help of his great Guns, which was such, that
the Xeque, or Supreme Head, called Amar, of the Family of Uled Abdulqueris,
Governor of the Country, found himself necessitated to surrender: so likewise
those of Ytata are under the King of Fez and Morocco.

Sugulmesse.
THe Territory of Sugulmesse, or Segelmesse, so called from the chief City, The
Borders of the Territory of Sugulmesse.
which stands upon the River Ziz, and spreads it self from the narrowest part
of it, lying near to Gerseluin, extends Southwards to the Borders of the Lybian
Desert about twenty eight miles, running in length from the Darran Country, to
the Borders of Tesset.

Segelmesse, the chief City of the Country, situated on a Plain by the River
Sis, formerly strong, and well built; but the Air proving unhealthy, the
Inhabitants quitting it, dispersed themselves into small Towns and Hamlets, so
that it became desolate. But, as Gramay affirms, it recovered its former luster
in the Year Fifteen hundred forty eight.

In this Country on the Banks of Ziz, Grammay lib. 10. c. 11.
are three hundred and fifty Walled Towns and Cities great and small, and
Hamlets innumerable. Amongst these are three more eminent than the rest: the
first Tenegheut, near Segelmesse, containing a thousand Houses; next,
Tebuhasan; the third and last, is Mamun, or Mamua, which is both large and
populous. This Country being Mountainous, reaches from Mezetazu on the West
to Telde. It affords little Grain, but many Dates; and most places suffer
extremely with venomous and various Serpents, and the worst sort thereof,
Scorpions.

HEre the Summer Heatsare so excessive, that the Sunbeams draw up the Sand in
minute Atoms like moist and watery Exhalations, which agitated by the Winds,
beats so much in their Faces, that they are always troubled with inflamed and
ulcerated Eyes.

This Droughty Season also exhausting the Rivers, necessitates them to dig for
Water; which they are forced to drink, though the most of what they find proves
brackish.

The Air of Sugulmesse is pure and healthy, unless in Winter, then growing
danky and gross, being moister it affects them with cold Rheums, Catarrhs, and
sharp Defluxions, causing sore Eyes; which are easier to be Cured than those
which they get in Summer.

These People have amongst them, as they distinguish, five sorts of Wizards, or
rather Witches, such as are skilful in Black, or Magic Arts; the first they
call Malurman, these Exorcising, Charm the Reptilia, or creeping Animals; the
second called Mahazin, take upon them to Cure all humane Distempers, restoring
health to the sick Bodies; the third Makabelt, Cure only Cattle; the fourth
Zira; these boast of raising Storms and Tempests, mustering showers of Rain and
Hail, Clouding and Serening the Sky at pleasure; the fifth are the
Sadulacha's; these go highest, professing to drive out the evil Spirits from
those that are possessed, making no doubt to confine the Devil after excluded,
if you will believe them.

In Tebuhasan are many Foreigners, Their Trade.
and amongst them Jews, that Trade. Their Food is Corn and Dates. Their Food.


THis Country had formerly Kings of their own, Their Government.
but afterward by King Joseph of Morocco, of the Race or Stock of Luntune,
they were subdued and made Tributary to that King next to the Almohadie, and
after that to the Merins; but at length they Rebelling, slew their chief
Governor: in which Commotion the whole City was destroyed, and lay desolate
till Anno 1548. Then they gathering together rebuilt the City, and Planted
many other Towns and Villages; some of which are yet free, others under the
Arabs.

THE TERRITORY OF QUENEG, or QUENEN.
THe Territory of Queneg, L^^, p. 6.
near the River Fez, bordering on Mount Atlas, has a Highway reaching to Fez
and Sugulmesse; M^rmol, l. 7.
in which Road are three Towns of Receipt and Entertainment: The first, which
is called Zehbel, stands in the entrance of the Road, on such a high Rock, that
its Spire seems to salute the Clouds.

The other is called Gastrir or Gastir, Gastrir.
three miles from Zehbel, stands under the brow of a jutting Mountain, near a
Plain.

The third called Tammarakrost, Tammarakrost.
lies about five miles Southward from the second, in the same way: The rest
are twelve small Forts, and six and twenty inconsiderable Villages.

THis Country has also store of Dates, The Condition of the Soil.
but none of the best; the Soil is poor, except in some few Spots, which are
the Margents of the River, and the Skirts of the Mountain. They sow only
Barley and a few Tares; but so abounding in Goats, that they are their chief
Sustenance.

They have for their Houses or Habitations only a greater sort of Huts raised
very high, with a small entrance, and narrow steps to ascend on; some of these
People are under the Arabians, or the City Gherseluin, the rest Free-States.

Matgara, or Margara.
THe Territory of Matgara borders on the South on Queneg or Quenen, Matgara.
beyond the forementioned Highway. There are many handsome Forts on the River
Fez; the chiefest they call Helet, the Residence of the Governor, who has
inhaunced the Customs of the Merchandise yearly to thirty thousand Ducats.

Retell, or Arratama.
THe Dominion of Retell borders on Matgara, and reaches Southward along the
River Fez, thirty miles distance from the River-Countrey of Sugulmesse; on the
East confined with an inhabited Mountain, and in the West on a Sandy Plain,
which the Arabians make their Rendezvous, when they come out of the Desert.
There are many fortified Places or Sconces.

Retell has abundance of Dates, yet covetous and narrow-hearted Inhabitants,
who by the Arabians (under whom they submit) are handled like Slaves.

Essuoihila, Humeledegi, and Ummel-hesen.
NOt far from the Territory of Sugulmesse are three small Forts or Holds,
Essuoihila.
the one is called Essuoihila, or Zuaihilla, a small place, about three miles
from the Jurisdiction of Sugulmesse, to the South in a Desert; close by which
glides the River Ziz, from thence going on to the Lybian Wildernesses. The
second Fort Humeledegi, lies about five miles from Sugulmesse, Humeledegi.
also in the Desert. The third Ummel-hesen, is a place of small convenience,
Vmmel-hesen.
built by the Arabians upon a very barren Spot, just in the way which leads
from Dara to Sugulmesse. The Walls seem to be all of Touch, the Stones are so
black. But round about the first Castle are found neither Gardens nor Orchards,
nor any Ground that bears Fruit; and nothing in prospect but Sand and black
Stones. The Fields about Humeledegi produce in great abundance a Fruit, which
at first sight seem to be Peaches.

Tebelbelt.
THe Country of Tebelbelt, or Tabelbelt, Tebelbelt.
lies in the midst of a Desert about the Mountain Atlas, and five and twenty
from Sugulmesse to the South.

This Country has also three populous Towns, and twelve Villages. The chief
City lies in three and twenty Degrees and ten Minutes Longitude, and twenty
Degrees and thirty Minutes Northern Latitude.

There are many Dates, Their Food.
but they want Water, and have few Cattle; for the Inhabitants supply their
Tables with Ostriches, and store of Red-Deer.

They drive a poor Trade of Merchandise in Negro-Land, and pay Contribution to
the Arabians.

Todga.
THe small Territory of Todga takes its Denomination from the River Todga,
Todga.
which confines it about ten Miles Westward of Sugulmesse: It has four Towns,
and ten Villages.

This Country abounds in Dates, Peaches, Figs, and Grapes; likewise all sorts
of Grain: Most of the Inhabitants are Husbandmen and Tanners.

Farkala.
THe Country Farkala or Ferkala, Farkala.
a small River also conterminates about five and twenty miles from the Mountain
Atlas to the South, and five and twenty Miles from Sugulmesse. Here are three
small Towns, and four Villages.

This Country affords Dates and other Fruits; but little Grain, and that bad.
The Inhabitants are poor, and under subjection of the Arabians.

Tezerin.
TEzerin, Tezerin.
which signifies in the African Tongue, Cities, yet shows no more than six
small Towns, and fifteen Villages, and scarce seen two others, long since
demolished: This borders on a River fifteen Miles from Atlas, and eight from
Farkala.

There is great plenty of Dates.

Beni-gumi.
THe Country of Beni-gumi, (...).
skirted with the River Ghir, about thirty miles to the South from Sugulmesse,
contains eight strong Towns, and fifteen Villages.

This Country also yields many Dates, but has poor Inhabitants; who for Wages
undertake mean Service at Fez: With the Money they so earn, they buy Horses,
and put them off to the Merchants which travel to Negro-Land.

The Cities Mazalig and Abuhinam.
ON the Banks of the River Ghir, thirteen Miles from Sugulmesse, stand in a
wilderness two small Cities, called Mazaligh, and Abuhinam; Mazaligh in the
Longitude of three and twenty Degrees and ten Minutes, and in the Latitude of
thirty Degrees and twenty Minutes.

The Tract of Land thereabouts, produces no sort of Grain, and nothing but a
few Dates. The Inhabitants are under the Jurisdiction of the Arabians.

Kasayr.
THere is also a small City found, called Kasayr, Kasayr.
which Sanutus brings with the foregoing under Sugulmesse, and stands in a
Wild, five miles from Atlas.

Its Tract of Land has store of Mines of Lead and Tinn; by which Metal the
Inhabitants (carrying great store of it to sell at Fez) maintain themselves.

Beni-Besseri.
THe Country of Beni-Besseri lies at the Foot of Mount Atlas, Beni-Besseri.
and has three fortified Places, and some Villages.

They have store of all sorts of Fruits, except Dates; they have an Iron-Mine,
wherein the Inhabitants old and young do labor.

The Inhabitants are under the Lord of Dubu, and the Arabians.

Guachde.
THe Country of Guachde lies one and twenty Miles, Guachde.
or thereabouts, from Sugulmesse, in the West, and contains three fair Cities
near the River Ghir, and many Villages.

It abounds in Dates, but there is little Corn. The Inhabitants traffic in the
Negroes Country, and are Tributary to the Arabians.

Fighie.
THe Country of Fighie has three strong Villages or Towns, Fighie.
standing in the midst of a Desert, thirty miles Eastwards from Sugulmesse.

Dates grow here in exceeding plenty.

The People are Ingenious, The Disposition of the Inhabitants.
some Trading to Negro-Land, others Commencing at the Schools in Fez. The Women
make Woollen and Linen Cloth, as Gramay affirms, as fine as Silk or Lawn,
which they sell at Fez and Telensin, and other places of Barbary, at great
Rates.

Tesebit, or Tesevin.
TEbesit lies in a Desert, Tesebit.
sixty three Miles on the East from Sugulmesse, and twenty five from Atlas,
comprising four Towns and eight Villages, which lie upon the Borders of Lybia,
on the way which leads from Fez and Telensin to the Kingdom of Agadez.

Here grows nothing but Dates, and some Barley. The Men are most of them
Blacks, and the Women are well featured and comely, but brown. They are a poor
People.

Tegorarin.
TEgorarin, Tegorarin.
or Taguriri, a great and spacious Country, lies amidst the Numidian Deserts,
about thirty Miles from Tesebit to the East, containing three and fifty
Fortresses, and above an hundred Villages. The chiefest Seat lies in eight and
twenty Degrees Longitude, and in thirty Degrees Northern Latitude.

This Country also abounds exceedingly in the Production of Dates, The Soil is
barren.
and store of Corn-Ground, which they water as we do our Gardens, by reason of
the Drought; and though a barren Soil, yet are much improved by Husbandry and
Manuring; by which account, Strangers which come with store of Horses and
Camels pay nothing for their Lodging, but only their Dung which they leave
there; laying of it up with as great care, as if a treasure: Nay, they take it
very ill, if any of their Guests happen to ease themselves without doors.

By the scarcity of Cattle, Flesh is very dear there; for the Ground is so dry,
that scarce any Grass will grow upon it; yet they keep some Goats, only for
the Milk. But all these Wants are amply supplied with that which answers all
things, Gold, found by the Inhabitants of Tivar; though others say that they
are thus richly supplied from Negro-Land.

THeir usual Food is Milk and Camels Flesh, Their Food.
brought by the Arabians to their Markets with Salt-Suit, with which they dress
and relish their Dishes; It is brought thither out of Fez and Telensin.

THere dwelt amongst them formerly very rich Jews; Riches.
but the people being stirred up by the instigations of the Mahumetan Priests,
they were banished from thence, and most of them in their departure slain by
the Vulgar in a tumultuous Riot; which happened about the same time when they
were driven out of Spain and Sicily by King Ferdinand.

Meszab.
MEszab, a Country in the Numidian Desert, Messab.
about sixty miles Eastward from Tegorarin, and a like distance from the
Midland-Sea, in two and thirty Degrees Longitude, and eight and twenty Northern
Elevation, containing six strong Holds, and many Villages. The Inhabitants are
Rich; they drive a great and subtle Trade with the Blacks, and are Tributaries
to the Arabs.

THE KINGDOM OF TEKORT, OR TEKURT.
THe Kingdom of Tekort, or Tekurt, according to Gramay, The Kingdom of Tekort.
is that which they call Tikarte, accounted by the Turks for an Inland
Territory of the Kingdom of Algier, as also that of Guerguela for another,
because they both pay Tribute.

This Province derives its Name also as others from its Head City, which they
say lies fifty or sixty miles from Tegorarin, and ninety from Algier, in two
and thirty Degrees and fifty Minutes Longitude, and in seven and twenty and ten
Minutes Latitude.

This City, held by some to be Ptolomy's ancient Turafylum, The City Tekort.
was built by the Numidians near a Hill, at whose Foot runs a River, with a
Drawbridge over. The Town is well Fortified with Lome-Walls mixed with Stone,
except on that side where the Cliffy Rocks and steep Declivings of the Hill
make it inaccessible. Their Houses, which are above two thousand, are all of
Sun-baked Brick, except the Mosque, which is built more stately.

About this City are reckoned up forty Strongholds, and an hundred and fifty
Villages, some of them at least four days Journey off; so that this Site seems
to be the Center to the Circumference of what is under its Jurisdiction.

THis populous Territory wanting Corn is supplied sufficiently by the Arabians
from Constantine, The Condition of the Country.
which they Barter for Dates, that grow here in abundance.

THe People are very Civil, The Condition of the Inhabitants.
Affable, and exceeding Hospitable to all, rather bestowing their Daughters on
them than the Natives: Nay, they are so good-natured and generous, that they
many times present their new Acquaintance with costly Gifts at their departing,
though they never expect to see them any more, or receive a Return from them.
They are a mixed People; of which the chief live like Gentlemen on their
Estates, the others follow Trades, and are Artificers.

THE DOMINION OF GUARGALA, OR GUERGULA.
THe Country of Guargala, The Kingdom of Guargala.
by Gramay called Huergula; by Marmol, Guerquelen, and Guergula; and by the
Africans, Verquelen; lies in the Desert of Numidia, on the Borders of the
Kingdom of Agadez.

This also has denomination from its chief City, The chief City.
by some taken for the ancient Tamarka of Ptolomy: The Center of this Province
lies in thirty seven Degrees and a half Longitude, and in twenty five and
fifty Minutes Latitude.

This City has no other near, but surrounded with store of Villages, as Gramay
reckons a hundred and twenty.

THis Country, The Constitution of the Country.
like the others, abounds with Dates, but has scarcity of Flesh and Grain.
Most of the Inhabitants are black, not from the temper of the Climate, but
their intermixing with the Negro's that are their Slaves. They are also mild,
and of affable Conversation, always kind to Strangers, because most of their
Necessaries and Sustenance they are supplied with from them, as Corn,
Salted-Flesh, Fat, or Suet, Cloth, Linen, Arms, and Knives.

In the City Guargala are both Merchants and Artificers. Their Food.
They have their Bread, Camels Flesh, and Ostriches from other parts.

The Revenue of the Lord of this Country is accounted to amount to a hundred
and fifty thousand Ducats yearly. Revenue.


To this their Governor they give Supreme Honor like a King, Government.
yet he pays some Tribute to the Arabians, and also acknowledges the Bashaw of
Algier yearly with a Present of thirty Negro's.

THE TERRITORY OF ZEB.
THe Territory of Zeb, formerly called The Country of Zebe, The Territory of
Zeb.
lying by the Mountain Auran, according to Procopius, runs through the midst of
Numidian Wilds.

Its Eastern Borders are Biledulgerid, Borders.
opposite against the Kingdom of Tunis and Tripoli; on the West, Messile; on
the North, the Foot of the Mountain Bugie; on the South, a Desert, where a Way
runs along from Tekort to Guargala.

Here are five eminent Towns, viz. Zeb, Peskare, Nefta, Teolacha, and Deusca,
Lee Afrie, 6. Decl.
besides many Villages. The City Zeb, from whom the Country has its Name, is
in four and thirty Degrees Longitude, and in thirty Degrees and ten Minutes
Latitude: it is accounted very ancient, being, according to Africanus, erected
by the Romans, and also destroyed by them; but after in process of time it rose
to its former splendor, and now also well Peopled.

Nefta, or Neota, is a City, or rather a Country, Nefta.
containing three great Cities, especially where a Fort was built by the
Romans. Leo, p. 6.


All these three, as Gramay affirms, was destroyed in the Year Fifteen hundred
and fifteen; but since they have returned leisurely to their former Luster.

Teolacha is the antientest, surrounded with slight Walls, Teolacha.
by which glides a River of warm Water.

Deusen, another old City, built by the Romans on the Borders of Bugie, Deusen.
and the Desert of Numidia. Not far from this last City many Antique Tombs and
Monuments present themselves; in which several Antique Coyns and Medals;
Engraven with Emblems, and on the Reverse Characterized with various
Hieroglyphics, are found.

THis Soil is dry and sandy, the Air fiery hot, The Constitution of the
Country.
wanting the two special Ingredients, Water and Corn; most of their Ground
being unfit for Tillage: but their store of Dates supplies all.

Peskare is much pestered with Scorpions in the Summer, whose least bite is
immediate death: therefore in Summer the Citizens desert their Houses, and
dwell in the Country, not returning till October.

THe Inhabitants of this place, The Condition of the Inhabitants.
though poor, are Civil, but those of Nefta are Rough and Surly; but those of
Teolacha are a proud and high-minded People, looking down on all Strangers, as
too mean for their Conversations; but the Densans are Stout and Warlike. Borgia
feeds many Artificers, but more Husbandmen.

ONe part of this Territory stands under the Jurisdiction of the Arabians;
Their Government.
another under the Kings of Kouko and Labez; the third the Turk lays his claim
to. But Paskare, Anno Fifteen hundred sixty two, was rent from the King of
Tunis by the practices of one Tachea a Marabout; who making himself Master,
they could never be reduced to the former Government.

THE TERRITORY OF BILEDULGERID.
BIledulgerid, The Territory of Biledulgerid.
or Beledulgerid, which is a single Province, yet gives Denomination to all
Numidia, as we said before, signifying Date-Land, extends to the Realm of
Tunis; beginning at Teskare, so reaching to the Coasts belonging to the Isles
of Zerbes, bordering on the East at Cyrene; one Point shoots far from the
Mediterrane; for Tousar and Cafta, two stretchedout Arms of the Province,
reckon seventy five Miles from the Midland-Sea.

This Country has only three Cities: Teusar.
The first Teusar, anciently erected by the Romans, near a Desert, and watered
by a small River, replenished from the Southern Mountains, is divided in two
Divisions; one stands possessed by the Natives, and the other by the Arabians,
since the Mahumetans deserted it, having destroyed the place.

The second, Kafsa.
Kafsa, also a Colony of the Romans, stands in Longitude forty, and in Latitude
twenty seven Degrees, and ten Minutes, and has a strong Fort; with Walls of
Touch or Black-Stone, being five and twenty Cubits high, and five broad. There
are also stately Mosques, and spacious Streets paved with Black-Stone. The
middle of the City is adorned with several Fountains standing within a
Quadrangular Wall.

The City Nefzara, in Longitude forty two Degrees, and fifteen Minutes, and in
Latitude thirty Degrees, consisting of three enclosed or walled Villages, close
together, is very populous.

THe Air of this Province is generally hot, and that of Kafza is so bad, The
Air.
that the Inhabitants are always troubled with Agues and Fevers. The whole
Tract of Land of Tousart is befriended with a handsome River, and that of Kafza
only by a warm Stream, not potable, unless it stands an hour or two cooling.

This Country also dry, bares no Corn, but abounds in Dates. But the Kassan
Country has not only the best, but the greatest quantity of Dates, and also
Olives, of all the adjacent Territories. Neither want they store of Flax, and
are well provided with Potters Earth, of which they make very fine Earthen War.
This Country as far as Tripoli is under the Government of Tunis.

Teorregu.
TEorregu borders on Tripoli, nearest to the Deserts of Barka, having three
good Forts, and six and twenty Villages.

The Inhabitants distanced far from other well-peopl'd places, are very poor.

Jasliten, or Jassitin.
JAsliten, or Jassitin, is a small Canton near the Mediterrane-Sea, between
Kafza and Trioply; in Longitude two and forty Degrees, and fifty Minutes, and
in Latitude eight and twenty.

This Country has also store of Dates, and is under the Jurisdiction of
Tripoli.

Gademez.
GAdemez, a Country Southward from the Midland-Sea sixty miles, containing
sixteen walled Cities, and ninety two Villages; Zieglerus.
the chiefest Seat is Gademez, by Zieglerus taken for the Oasis of Ptolomy.

This Territory also rich in Dates, is slenderly accommodated with Grain and
Flesh. The Inhabitants deal much in Negro-Land. They were under the Kingdom of
Tunis, but now forsooth boast themselves a Free State.

Fassen, or Ferssen.
FAssen, a great Country, borders Agadez, and the Lybick Deserts: There is no
other inhabited place in those Wilds but only Augele; but the whole Country
contains eight and fifty Walled Towns, and a hundred open Villages; the chief
Seat being in Longitude forty four, and in the Latitude twenty six.

These want no Dates, though Corn and Flesh, (which other places supply) except
Camels, which there they make their usual Food.

They obey a Supreme Authority, who receives and pays all that belongs to the
Public.

Lybia, or Zaara. 305. Lybick Nun Towns Nun, the Metropolis, besides a Cape of
the same Name. Zenega Towns Zenega, Anterobe, Arquin, Port Cavallero. Rivers
Rio de Oro, or Golden-Stream. Mountains Mountain of the Sun, or Bojador.
Tagaza Towns Tegaza the chief, with many Salt Pits, and diverse Villages.
Zuenziga Towns Zuenziga, Gogden. Hayr, or Terga Towns Terga, Agadez. Lempta
Towns Iguidi. Berdoa Towns Three fortified, and six Villages Augele Towns Three
enclosed with Walls, besides many Villages. Syrte Towns One only, named Syrte,
and that in effect a heap of Ruins. Algequet Towns Three enclosed for defense,
besides many Villages.


LYBIA, OR ZAARA.
THe Ancient Grecians, as Herodotus, Diodorus, and others, Several meanings of
the Name Lybia.
called all Africa, Lybia; but afterward this general Name was contracted into
a narrower Circuit and Signification, Ptolem. Geogr. lib. 4.
and appropriated only to a small part of this vast Region, and this also
divided into the proper or Exterior, and Interior-Lybia, whereas some call
only the Exterior, Lybia.

The peculiar Lybia was properly that part of Africa, which reaches from
Alexandria to Cyrene, Procop. de. Edit. Just. lib. 6.
compassing the Country of Barka. This is that part of the Country which
Ptolomy expresses under that Name; whereas some, as Philippus, and also
Cluverius call this proper ancient Lybia, Exterior Lybia, taking in the Desert
of Delphocat and Gaoga, and place it on the West side of the Nyle, and spread
it to the Negro's Country.

LYbia Interior, or Inward Lybia, according to Ptolomy, has in the North, The
Borders of Inward Lybia.
the two Mauritania's, that is the Caesarian Mauritania and the Tingitana;
Tang^ian-Moors Country.
the East, a part of Marmarica, and Ethiopia below Egypt; in the South, Inward
Ethiopia; and in the West, the Atlantic Ocean. But the Modern Lybia, which
contains a part of Interior Lybia, agrees not with the Ancient Lybia Bounds,
but is by the late Geographers included within other Borders, as hereafter.

THe New Lybia has for North Confines, the Desert of Numidia, The Borders of
the Modern Lybia.
or Biledulgerid, with a part of their Nun; Eastward, Egypt, the City Elockat,
and the Kingdom of Gaoga, conterminate to the South Negro-Land; the West,
washed with the Atlantic Ocean; along whose Coast it reaches from that part
of Nun which belongs to Biledulgerid, or Numidia, to the River of Zenega, or
Niger, which divides the Whites and Blacks: A Partition between the Whites and
Black.
But to set forth the Bounds thereof more accurately, its Northern Confines
range all along with that Negro-Land that has the River Zenega, which passes
on by these Countries in the form of a long narrow Towel almost to the Nyle; it
is a Tract of sixty Spanish Miles.

THe original of the Name Lybia the Grecians derive from a Woman, The original
of the Name of Lybia.

Herodotus.

Aldrete.

Antigued. lib. 3. cap. 6.


a Native of that Country called Lybia; some from a greater Lady, Lybia, the
Daughter of Epaphus, Son of Jupiter; others would force the Name Lybia from the
Arabic word, Lebib, which signifies Excessive Heat. Now the Arabs call this
Land Zaahara, Zaara, or Sarn, that is, The Deserts.

THe migrating Arabs, The Arabian division of Lybia.
that so often in great companies shift their eaten up Stations for fresh
Pasturage, roving through this Lybia, divide it now into three parts, according
to the diversity of the Soil, and varieties of Places to which they progress;
for the Sandy bearing neither Shrub nor Grass, they call Tehel; the Stony, or
Gravel Country Zaara, and all that which is Morass, or Boggy, being always
green, Azgar.

And lately it has been divided into ten Cantons, Other Partitions into ten
Territories, or Deserts.
or Deserts, in which there are some populous places; the first, that which
belongs to the Lybick Nun, to the Desert of Zenega, or Zanaga, Tagaza,
Zuenziga, Hayr, or Terga, Lempta, Berdoa, Augele, Serte, and Alguechet, every
one so called from their Metropolis. Cluverius on the other side brings the
Deserts Lempta, Hayr, Zuenziga, Zanhaga, and the Kingdom of Targa and Berdoa,
under Biledulgerid, and extends Sarra all the length of the Kingdom of Gaoga,
quite to Gualata.

MOst of the People of Lybia have their Dwelling-places about the River Zenega,
Where the People of Lybia have their chiefest dwelling-places.
a branch of the River Niger, that they may the better drive their Trade, and
hold Commerce with the Negro's.

THis Lybia, The Air.
or Sarra, has so excellent and wholesome Air, that it not only excludes all
Diseases from the Inhabitants, but makes a Cure on all others that have long
despaired of their recoveries of health; so that from Barbary, and other
adjacent Countries, they thither repair, and suddenly shaking off their
weakness and Malady, they return sound and able.

THe Soil is very hot and dry, The Water.
and has great scarcity of Water, none to be found but here and there in Pits
or Wells, and them for the most part brackish; for in some places they travel
six or seven days, finding no Water; so that the Merchants Trading from Fez to
Tombut, or from Telensin to the Kingdom of Agadez, Bottle it up in Goat Skins,
and carry their provision of Liquor on Camels Backs. But though the Way be much
more troublesome, which goes from Fez to Gran-Cayre, through the Wilderness of
Lybia, they have the benefit of a great Lake in their passage, where the People
of Ceu and Gorhan dwell. Ieo. Eerst Decl.

Marmel. lib. 1. cap. 14. and lib. 8. cap. 1.


But in the other Road from Fez to Tombut, they find some Springs, covered over
with Camels Hides, out of which they draw their Water, as in little Buckets,
with the Shank-bones of the same Creature.

The Merchants adventure more by Land than ours at Sea, putting themselves often
in greater dangers, especially if they set forth in Summer; for then usually
arise in those Countries Southern Winds, which raise abundance of Sand, that
new congealed drifts cover those Pits so deep, that all Marks are lost whereby
they may recover them again, scarce guessing where they were, they often
fainting with thirst perish there, as may appear by many of their dead Bodies
found in the Way by following Travelers. To prevent which misery in this
necessitous exigent, no other means being left, they kill their Camels, and
squeeze the Water out of their Bowels and Maws; which when they set forth, they
Tun up in their Bellies in such a quantity as would suffice them ten or twelve
days: this they refresh themselves withal, and often save their lives till they
find some formerly known Pit: yet in many places Camels Milk may be had.

THis Country is scatteringly inhabited, and but thinly peopled. The Soil of
the Country.
In the Rainy Season, when wet Weather begins, which commonly happens in mid-
August, and continues to the end of November; but sometimes stretching out a
Month or two, nay, almost three Months longer, then the Country flourishes
with Grass and Herbage, and the Temperature makes Traveling very pleasant, and
well accommodated; for then there is neither scarcity of Water nor Milk: the
necessity of which at other times makes the whole Country a Map of misery. But
if those that observe their times to Travel set forth upon the advantage of the
expected Season, if then it happens, as sometimes it falls out, a general, or
second Drought, then not only Travelers are put to run the risque, but the
Inhabitants lose the Product of the whole year.

THere are some barren Mountains which bear nothing but inconsierable Shrubs,
Briers and Thorns. The Vegetables.
The most fertile Soil of all Lybia Manured, produces only Barley, and but a
few Dates, by which we may judge the sterility of that Country.

Their chief support are Camels, which there they have in abundance, whose
Flesh and Milk supplies sufficiently what their barren Earth, and droughty Air
denies them.

THey have also Adimmain Beasts, not unlike Sheep, The Animals. See p. 24
which we have before mentioned, and Ostriches. But the People have also added
to their other suffering, viz. sudden incursions of wild Beasts and deadly
biting Serpents, preying both on Men and Cattle: but most of all they are
miserably infested with Locusts; which in vast Armies clouding the Sky in
their speedy March from Arabia, and other Eastern parts, take up their Quarters
in those Deserts; which whatever they yield, though little, they utterly
destroy, enabling them for greater expeditions, and their second flights to the
Fare and Plunder of richer Countries, Barbary and Spain: But a worse mischief
when they are gone they leave behind them, viz. their Spawn, which produces a
more ravenous and greedy generation; who heavy and unweildy, not fit for
flight, sit down on the Trees and Plants, and eat, not only the Leaves, but
the Bark and Rinds, making all over a Famine, which the Arabs call Jarat: Yet
the Inhabitants of the Arabian Wilds are hard enough for them, though they
spoil theirs as other Countries, making them quit scores, by eating the Eaters,
which they esteem savoury, balances of the accounts of their losses.

HEre are five sorts of People, Sects, or Tribes, as Zanaga's, Guenazeries,
Several sorts of People in Lybia.
or Zerenziga's, Terga's, Lempta's and Bardoa's; some of which are called
Habexes, others Breberians, Natives of the Country, one part reaching in
Villages amongst Morass and Fenny Grounds, and the others flitting from place
to place for fresh Pasture for their Cattle, like the wandering Arabs.

MAny of the Inhabitants are Meagre, The Constitution of the Inhabitants.
Lean, and more or less Deformed; yet their so seemingly weak Constitution
gives them strength, and good health to the sixtieth year of their age. The
Women are something gross, but their Arms and Legs, their supporters, are
slender, like Sticks, or Tabletressles: they are rather Brown than Fair, their
Speech and Behavior Comely.

Both Sexes are naturally Libidinous, The Disposition of the Inhabitants.
delighting much in dalliance and wanton Amors, having no Laws or Customs
prohibiting such Venerian courses, nor ought elss, following the dictates of
their own Nature, and what they are most inclinable to. Betwixt those that
follow Cattle roving up and down, and those that live settled in Hamlets and
Villages, the disparity is great, the last being naturally Affable,
affectionate in Friendship, never failing those whom they profess kindness to,
extremely hospitable to all Strangers, still striving to endear them, also
valiant, and faithful to their trust; whereas those shifting Drovers relish
altogether of their own beastial Employment, worse than the Cattle which they
feed: for what Nature has denied them, viz. Science, they, though not
incapable, despise, abominating Knowledge or Literature. They are so far from
Honesty or Honor, that they will Hoot at, and scorn to keep Company with such
pitiful Fellows, that will scruple in the least at Cheating, Robbing, nay
Murdering, if need be, and for a small Gratuity, nay sometimes gratis, any of
their Kindred, Brother or Father: such is their sordid baseness, that they care
not on the other side, whoever vitiates, or prostitutes their Sisters,
Daughters, Mothers, or their own Wives: the word Cuckold, or Wittal, signifying
nothing. All their study, whole endeavor, and business, besides a little
Hunting, is only mischief, either to Rob or Cheat their Companions, and
driving their Cattle into the Wilderness where they may never be found: which
done, they makeit their May Game to laugh and jeer at one another. Thus they
spend the whole course of their lives, not staying above three days in a place.

THese, Their Food.
otherwise so vicious Churls, are sober, drinking little, and that Camels Milk,
which in the Mornings they take warm: in the Evening light Suppers, only a
little dried Flesh, Stewed in Milk and Butter; of which every one eats a
morsel: then, for their better digestion, they sup in the Palm of their Hand
some of the Broth, closing all with a second Dish of Camels Milk; which whilst
they may have, it abounding most in the Spring, they regard not Water. And also
the Camels themselves, whilst they find Grass, drink no Water.

NEither are they proud, Their Clothing.
most of them going stark naked; some accounting themselves very fine with a
Lappet before them, covering what modesty requires. Some strut about, thinking
themselves very gay with pieces of black Cloth Sasge-wise, foulded about their
Heads: But their Captains, or Grandees, look on themselves as Princes in a blew
Cotton Jump, or Jacket, with wide Sleeves; which they account good Truck from
the Negro Merchants.

The People of this Country, when they Travel, are mounted on Camels, sitting
on a Saddle betwixt the Bunch and Neck, and in stead of Spurs use a sharp Stick
like a Goad, with which when they grow slow, they prick in the shoulders, so
making them mend their pace. The Camels in stead of a Bit or Snaffle in their
Mouths, they manage with a Head-stall, and Reins thrust through two holes,
which are made in their Nostrils.

Their Beds are hard, being Matted-Bull-rush and Sea-sedges. Their Lodgings.
Their Tents are made of course Camel-hair-cloth, and some of course Wool
which they gather amongst the Dates. Betwixt these Lybians and the Numidians,
dwell a sort of poor Arabs, but stouter than the Lybick Arabs, who follow
Hunting, their Game being only Porcupines and Ostriches; yet have a good Breed
of Horses.

The Language they speak, is that of Barbary, rough like their Country. Their
Language.


Though these have no prescribed Laws, or ruling Customs, Their Government.
and all good manners banished from thence, yet they are all subject to the
Obedience of one Lord, sole Monarch, who by Arbitrary Power reigns, and rules
them as if one body at his pleasure.,

That small Religion which they have, is Mahumetane. Their Religion.


The Desert Zanhaga, or Zenega.
ZEnega, also called by Marmol and others, Zanhaga, or Zenega, The Desert of
Zenega. Leo Afric. 6. Decl.
is a Desert bordering the Atlantic Ocean, from the Country of Nun, one part
belonging to Lybia, the other to Numidia, (some places being inhabited) to the
River of Zenega, which separates the Whites and Blacks. The Limits between the
Whites and the Blacks.


THe Borders are in the North, the Countries of Nun and Dara; The Borders.
in the East, the Wilderness of Tegaza; in the South, the people Benays and
Jaloes, and the Kingdoms of Gualata, Geneva, Melley, and Tombut; and lastly in
the West, the Ocean.

On the Sea Coast, about three and thirty miles from Cape Nun, The Cape of
Bojador.
lies Cape Bojador, formerly called, The Mountain of the Sun; since, The Point
of the Canaries; but as Mercator sets forth, The Arsinarium Point of Ptolomy;
but others know it by the name of Cabo Verde, or Green-Head. What Bojador
fignifieth.


But this Name Bojador signifies no more in Portugal than a winding or doubling
Cape; for the crooking Shore bended like a Bow, in Sailing makes the Prospect
of the adjacent Coast suddenly vary by opening and shutting in the Points one
with another. The Portugals at first durst not adventure beyond this Cape; for
the Stream hurrying swiftly over the Shoals, being full of Whirlingeddies, the
Waves boiling like Liquor in a Cauldron, being very terrible to behold, stopped
there their Voyage, till one Gill Yanes also a Portugal, sent out by King
Henry, in the Year Fourteen hundred thirty three, went stoutly by it, undaunted
at such Chymera's, and then gave it the Name which it bears at this day.

About seventeen miles Southward of Cape Bojador lies a Space of Land on that
Coast, which the Portugals called Angra de los Ruvos, so named from the great
abundance of Fowls that haunt there. Eight miles farther is a Tract of Ground
named, Angra des Cavelleros, that is, The Country of Horses, Augres dos
Cavelleros,
or Steed-Land: Yet eight miles more Southward, they find a River, whose
Current sets to the Inland, but soon returning, ends its short progress in the
Sea; it is by the Portugals called Rio do Oro, The River of Gold.
that is, The Golden Stream; because the Inhabitants oftentimes redeemed some
of their Natives, taken Prisoners by the Portugals, The first Gold brought to
Portugal.
paying there their Ransoms in Gold, which was the first Africa Gold the
Portugals were masters of.

Eight miles more Southward, Angra de Gouzalo de Sintra.
is a piece of Land called Angra de Gonzalo de Sintra; next that, the Haven
Kavallero; and about seventeen miles farther, Cabo Blanko, or White-Head;
discovered first by Nunno Tristan, and Antonis Gonzales, Anno 1441, Sanutus.
lying in twenty Degrees and a half North Latitude. At this Cape begins the
Coast of Anterote, so called from a little Town there reaching to the River
Zenega.

Cabo Blanko makes a Bay, by some called The Gulf of Arguin, named from a
neighboring Isle: it is a wild and unsafe Road, not only lying open to the
Sea-winds, but full of blind Rocks and shifting Sands, and a sprinkling of
small Isles, like Warts upon the Sea.

Beyond this Southward, The Islands of Arguin.
opens another Bay, in which are the Isles of Arguin, and the Seven Cliffs,
which had once peculiar Names; but now called only Arguins, from a Fort built
on the chiefest of them, by Alphonso, first King of Portugal, Its Names.
Anno 1441. But these were their former Names, The White Island, that the
Portugals call Blanca, because of the white Sands; The Island of Skins, by the
In habitants called Adeger, lying about two miles from the main Land; Ilheo, or
Little Island, otherwise called, The Island de Las Garcas, or Crane Isle, not
far from the main Land; Nar and Tider two more, near the Coast; and lastly
Arguin, which now gives the denomination to all the rest, long since possessed
and fortified by the Portugals: Castle of Arguin.
whose Fort lies on a commanding Point, strong, built all of Stone, four
hundred and five and twenty Foot in circuit, defended on the Land-side with a
Wall, or Out-work, of eleven Foot thick, and four and twenty high: It has also
three Batetries, two toward the Land, and one to the Sea. This Fort has more
than ordinary accommodation, sixteen handsome Rooms of State and Address, with
their Apartments, a large Kitchen, good Cellars, and other Offices, and close
by accommodated with a Fountain of fresh Water. But in Sixteen hundred thirty
and three, on the nine and twentieth of January, only with three Ships of the
Netherland West India Company, though so defensive, the Portugals surprised
with a pannick fear, delivered it up to the Hollanders.

The Main Land Coasting this Bay, is dry and barren; but about five miles there
are some Shrub and Heathy Grounds, from whence those of Arguin fetch their
Fuel. Formerly there dwelt upon this Isle some Moors called Sebek-Moors, who
lived by Fishing, and some Trade, giving the fifth part of their Gain to the
Castle. Also the French Fishermen yearly in December, January, and February,
using large Nets, above fourscore Fathom long, Fish up and down this Bay for
Grampos's, which they cut up at Land, and dry in the Sun, making Train-Oyl of
them. And also hereabouts the Portugals drive a notable Trade with the wild
Arabs and the Whites, bartering their Woollen and Linen Cloth, Silver, course
Tapestry, but most of all Corn for Blacks, Gold, and Ostrich-Plumes. They bring
thither also Horses, which yielded them a dozen or fifteen Slaves.

Under the Desert of Zannaga is also contained The Wild of Azoat, The Desert of
Azoat.
so called because of the general dryness and infertility, reaching from the
Pool of Azoat to that of Azoan, near thirty miles distance from Tombut.

Here are to be seen two Stone Monuments with Inscriptions upon them,
signifying who were there Interred, and the cause of their lying there, which
was thus: One of them a wealthy Merchant, traveling through those Defarts,
overpowered by invincible Necessity, suffering strangely by Thirst, met by
chance with a poor Carrier, who had not yet spent all his Water, though under
the same calamity, with whom he contracted at no less Rate than ten thousand
Ducats, which he laid down upon the Spot for the Moiety thereof: but so it
happened that neither of them had any great purchase; for the Water being
divided was soon exhausted, and proved not sufficient to save either, so that
languishing with extreme drought, they both lost their lives, and were there
Interred.

The Desert of Zenega, inhabited by the People Zanaga's, is wondrous hot, and
has little or no Water but what is bitter and brackish; and those Pits or
Wells are at least twenty miles one from another; But the Wild of Zenega is
destitute of all Water, seldom or never raining there, having but one Pit in
all the way of thirty miles.

This Soil is all Sandy, and utterly unfruitful, being a vast Plain, so flat
and level, that the Traveller has no mark to find his way, or know where he
is, but is forced to steer his Coast by the Sun and Trade-Winds, which blow
always Easterly, and other little knowledges they gather by former Prints from
the Claws of Fowl, as Crows, Ravens, and such like, which always wait upon the
Caravans, as on great Armies, expecting Prey: for none ever travel through this
Desert but with great Company.

This Country produces a kind of Grain like Wheat, Plants or Vegetables.
which grows of its own accord without Sowing; But those near the Banks of the
River Zenega reap Barley, not wanting Dates; having also good store of Camels,
Goats, and other Cattle.

The Inhabitants of these Deserts are Breberians, Ludays, Duleyns, and
Zenega's, or Zanaga's, by Sanutus called Azaneghes, and some Arabs, Sanutus.
who live upon others sweat and labor, stealing their Cattle, which they
convey to Dara, and elsewhere, there bartering them for Dates. Sometimes the
Arabians of Beni-Anir pillage this Country, between Nun and the City Tagaost.

Tegaza.
THe Desert of Tegaza, so called from the chief Town Tegaza, The Desert of
Tegaza.
which has also this denomination from the great quantity of Salt which is
brought thither, and from thence conveyed through this Wild to other Countries.
This populous Dominion Borders Eastward on Zanaga's.

This Country, though well inhabited, is vexed in Summer with a dangerous
South Wind, whose scorching blast strikes many blind; and it has also great
scarcity of fresh Water.

Here are many Pits of pure white Salt, round about which the Salt-boylers, The
Salt Pits.
being Strangers, pitch their Huts and Tents, and their business being done,
return with the Caravan to Tombut, and there sell that Commodity, being there
very dear.

Those of Dara also send their Tivar Gold to Tombut, The Gold of Tioar.
dispersing it from thence to Taragbel and Morocco.

Zuenziga.
THe Desert of Zuenziga, Zuenziga.
beginning Westward on the Borders of Tegaza, reaches Eastward to the Wilds of
Haya; Northerly, confined with the Desert of Sugulmesse, Tebelbelt, and
Beni-horai; on the South, with the Wilderness of Ghor, lying near the Kingdom
of Huber, belonging to Negro-Land. The Desert of Gogden is comprised under that
of Zuenziga.

The Inhabitants of the Desert of Zuenziga are called Guaneziries, and
Zuenziga's. The Merchants which travel out of these Parts, and from Tremecen to
the City Tombut, and the Kingdom of Isa, must cross this Desert, and that of
Gogden.

This Zuenzigan Wild is much dryer, and worse to be traveled through than
Zanaga, very many being often choked for want of Water. And that of Gogden
has in nine days Journey no Water, except what falls from Heaven in sudden
showers, and only in one place, where Lading their Camels, every one supplies
his own private store. There grow also many Dates in the Desert of Zuenziga, on
these Borders of Numidia.

AMongst the Inhabitants of this Country there are also Arabs called Hemrum,
The Inhabitants.
who take Tribute of Sugulmesse for their Plough'd-Lands. These (as other
Arabs) rove up and down, changing Pasture as far as Yguid; they have store of
Cattle and Dates, and are so numerous, that they have brought under their
Contribution a great part of Biledulgerid.

They have other great Arabs Assisters, as the Garfa and Esbeh, which are
looked upon as Nobles descended from famous Ancestors, whom the Kings of
Barbary have often courted, desiring to make Alliance with them.

The Desert of Hayr, or Terga.
THe Desert of Hayr, The Desert of Hayr.
so called from a populous Town there, yet by some called Terga, from the
Tergans of Little Africa, has for its Western Borders, the Wilds of Zuenziga;
in the East, that of Yguid; in the North, Its Borders.
the Wilderness of Tuat, Teguirin, and Mezzeb, in Biledulgerid; on the South,
conterminates with the Deserts near the Kingdom of Agade in Negro-Land;
spreading it self in some places the breadth of sixty mile, that is, from
Biledulgerid to the Negroes Country. The Air of this Desert is so temperate,
that in many places there is abundance of Grass; and though other parts be very
sandy, yet nothing so bad to travel in, as that of Zanaga, or Zuinziga; because
it has store of Springs and deep Wells with sweet and fresh Water, but more
especially on the Verges of Zuenziga.

On its Southern Limits near Agadez, they find great store of Manna, which
early in the Morning the Inhabitants gather and carry to the Markets of that
City; which the Negroes mix with Water, making it their Food, being as they
suppose very much refreshing and wholesome: So that Strangers are not so often
sick in Agadez, though the Air be not so healthy as at Tombut; this Cordial not
being there so frequent.

THis Desert has also wild Arabs, called Uled Huscein; Arabians of Hayr.
which though they belong to the Numidian Country, fetch in Winter larger
Rovings, with their Cattle as far as the Desert, and sometimes to the Skirts of
Atlas; though they have few Laws, yet they are all under one Government; and
these great Arabians have a meaner sort of little Arabs under them, which live
in the condition of Subjects or Servants; some of which settle in Fenny Places,
and follow Tillage: But the general business of the forementioned, is to steal
and spirit away poor Negroes from thence, carrying them to Barbary and
Biledulgerid, there selling them for great Rates, as Slaves.

The Desert of Iguidi, or Lemta.
THe Desert Iguidi or Lemta, The Desert of Lemta.
taking its Name Iguidi from its chiefest Seat, and Lemta, from the Name of the
Inhabitants, The Borders.
borders in the West on the Wild of Hayr; Eastward on that of Berdoa; Northward
on the Desert of Tekort Guerguela, and Gademez in Biledulgerid; and to the
South, Verges with a Desert near Kano in Negro-Land. Between this and that of
Sugulmesse, lies the Country of the Morabitins or Morabites, which others
call Almoravides.

Here is dangerous traveling for Merchants which pass from Constantine to the
Negroes Country; the Inhabitants being rude, savage, and beastial, robbing all
theymeet, and taking all they lay their hands on. They have also an ancient
feud and hatred against those of Guergula, a Territory in Biledulgerid, which
they cruelly massacre, putting to death when and where they come within their
power.

In this Desert dwell also certain Arabians called Hemrum, Kayd, and Yahya,
mingled among the Lempta's.

The Desert of Berdoa.
THis Wild has on the West for Borders, the Wilderness Lempta; The Desert of
Berdoa. The Borders.
on the East, that of Augele; on the North, Fessa in Numidia, and Barka; and on
the South it conterminates with a Desert bordering on the Kingdom of Borno, a
hundred ninety eight miles from Nylus; it contains three fortified Towns, and
six Villages. It is very dry, Plates.
and dangerous for traveling, yet convenient for those of Gadamez or Numidia,
Allies to the Berdoaners. The inhabited places have good Water, and plenty of
Dates.

The Wilderness of Augele.
BY some taken for the Country Augiles, The Desert of Augele.
described by Mela, has for its Western Borders, the Wild of Berdoa; on the
North, the Desert of Barka and Marmarica, and spreads in the form of a Towel to
the Mediterranean-Sea, opposite against Syrtes; on the East, the Wilds of the
Levetans, which reach to the Nyle. It compriseth three enclosed Towns, and many
Villages, a hundred and twenty miles distant from Nylus. Their abundance of
Dates answers all, which supplies them with Corn and other Necessaries.

This Country is molested also with deadly biting Serpents.

The Desert of Serte and Alguechet.
THe Sertan Wild, The Desert of Serte and Alguechet.
divided from the five other more eminent, has for its Western Borders, the
Desert of Augele; on the South, the Kingdom of Gaogo; on the East, Egypt.

There are yet to be seen the Ruins of the City Serte. Also on the South of
Serte, four and twenty miles from Egypt, the Country of Alguechet, with three
enclosed Towns, and many Villages, and whole Groves of Dates.

The Inhabitants are black; and though stored with Dates; yet are poor and
Covetous, and Tributary to a Xeque, or King.

In this Dominion live eminent Arabians, called Uled Yahaia, Uled Said, and
Uled Sumeir, being able to raise an Army of thirty thousand Horse, and an
innumerable number of Foot: Yet they possess no fortified Towns, but live in
Tents, and are Masters of the Campaigne.

NIGRITARUM REGIO.


Negro-Land, 3.5. contains In the Inland Gualata Towns Three very large and
populous, besides the Metropolis Gualata. Rivers Zenega, or Niger. Mountains
None of any remark.
Guinee, or Genoua Neither Cities, Towns, nor Fortresses; but one single
village, the Seat of the King, and a University. Melli The Village Melli, with
some Deserts, and barren Mountains. Tombut Towns Tombut, Cabra, or Kambre.
Rivers Niger.
Guber Towns. Guber, besides a great Number of Villages and Hamlets. Agadez
Towns Agadez. Kano Towns Cano the head City, and some Mountains. Kassene
Nothing but slight Huts, in the manner of Villages. Zegzed Towns Zegzed a City,
with some excessive cold Mountains. Zanfara Some Villages, consisting of mean
Huts. Gangara Some Villages, consisting of mean Huts. Borno Towns Borno, the
principal, about which, many smaller Cities, Hamlets, and Villages. Gago Towns.
Gago, the Metropolis, standing by the River Zenega; the rest of the inhabited
Places, are Villages and Hamlets. Nubia Towns Tenepsus, Kondari, Dangala, Nubia
the Metropolis, Kusa, Ghatua, Dankala, Jalake, and Sala, besides Villages. Bito
Towns Only Bito. Temiam Towns Temikan alone. Dauma Each one poor Town. Madra
Each one poor Town. Gorhan Each one poor Town. Semen A Country little known,
and less conversed with. Upon the Seacoast about Cape-Verde Towns and
Villages. Refrisko, Camino, Punto, Porto Novo, Ivala. Rivers. De la Grace,
Barsala, Garnba, Rha, St. Domingo, Katcheo, Rio de les Iletas, Rio Grande,
Danalves, Nunno, Tristan, Tabito, Rio das Piedras, Pechel, Palmas, Pagone,
Kagranka, Kasses Karokane, Kaper, Tambefine, Tabarim, Rio de Serre-Lions, and
Bangue. Mountains Mesurado.
Guinee Rivers Rio das Palmas, and Rio Galhinas, Maguibba, Rio Nova, Mava,
Plizoge, and Monoch; Rio Junke, St. John's River, Sertos, St. Andrews River.
Towns and Villages Kings Village, Little Sestos, Zanwyn, Bofow, Little Setter,
Bobowa, Sabrebon, Krouw, Wappen, Drowya, Great Setter, Gojaven, Garway,
Greyway, Tabo, Pelicaro, Tahoe, Berby, Assin, Albin, Tabat, Atzyn, Takorary,
besides 50 others.
Zenega, or the Country of the Jaloffs Towns Bcere, Emdoen, Jandos, Emduto,
Endir, Sanqueng, Magar, Emboul, Embar, Bey-hoarte, Lambay, Sangay, Jamesil,
Borsalo, Tubakatum the Royal Seat of the Great Jalaffe, Geroep, Jawesil. Rivers
and Lakes Zenega, Gambea, Borsalo, Basseangamar, Rio des Ostros, or Oyster
River. The Lake Eutan.
Mountains Machamala, where are Crystal Rocks.
Gambea, Cassan, Cantor, and Borsalo Towns Barra, Nabare, Bintam, Tankerval,
Tendeba, Jayre, Jambay, Mansibaer, Barraconda, Tinda, Joliet, Munk-baer, Jair,
Silico, Little Cassan, and Jongo. Rivers Gambea.
Buramos Towns Jarim, St. Domingo, Katcheo. Guinala and Biguba Towns Guinala,
Biguba, Balola. Mandinga and Sousos Towns Sango, Sousos. Serte-lions, or
Bolmberre Rivers Rio Pechel, Rio Palmas, Rio das Piedras, Pogone, Cangrama,
Casses, Catocane, Capar, Tambasine, Tagarine, Bangue. Towns Serboracasa, Bagos,
Tomby (the Seat of the English) Os Alagoas, Baga.
Quoya Towns Jegwonga, Fachoo, Figgia, Cammagoerna, Jerboeffaia, Falyhammaya,
Flomy-Seggaya. Rivers Magwibba, Mavah, Plizoge, and Menoch.
Guaffe Towns Aguaki, or Little Commendo, Ampea, Cotabri, Aborbi, Terra Pekine,
Great Commendo. Fetu Towns and Forts Igwa, Takorari, Adia, and Anemabo: Castle
del Mina, or St. George. Sabou Towns Moure, Sabou; Fort Nassau. Fantyn, Akara,
and Labbede Towns Fantyn, Kormantin, Soko, Little Akara, Great Akara, Labbede,
Ningo, Temina, Sinko, Pissy. Adom Towns Mompa, Wassa, Wanguy, Abrambor,
Kuyforo, Bono, Atty, Akanien, Inta, and Ahim, Akam, Aqua, Sanquay, Aquumboe,
Abunce, Kuahoe, Tafoe, Abotra, Quaho, Cammana, Equea, Lataby, Akaradi, and
Insoko. Arder Towns Foularn, Little Arder, Jakkeyn, Joyo, Ba, Great Arder.
Benyn Towns Benyn, a City; Gotton, Koffo; and one only River, called Arbo.
Other in a manner unknown Territories are Isago, Jabo, Odobo, Istanna, Gabo,
Forkado, Amboyses Highland, Calabare, Krike, Moko, Bani, Korisko. Rivers Rio
Non, Rio Odo, Rio St. Nicholas, Rio de tres Jermans, Sambreiro, Calabare,
Camarones, Jamoce, Rio de Campo, Rio San Benito, Rio Danger, and Gabon.


NEGRO-LAND, Or the Country of BLACKS.
THis Country spreading from the North to the South, that is, from the Desert
of Lybia, to the Banks of the River Niger, is at this day, with a general Name,
called Negro-Land, or, The Country of the Blacks, or Negro's; which Marmol
places in Nether Ethiopia, withal adding, that the Arabians call it Beledla
Abid, and Beled Geneva; and the Africans of Barbary call it Geneva Sinch, and
Neuha.

All the Inhabitants of this Province were called by the Ancients, as Pliny,
and the Geographer Ptolomy, Ethiopian Nigrites; or according to the Orthography
of Dionysius, in his Book of the Situation of the Earth, calls them Negretes,
as some have called them in Greek, Melanes; which, Stephanus de Vrbibus.
as the former Name, signifies Blacks: perhaps derived from the color of the
Inhabitants, or nature of the Soil, and because of the Deserts which spread
from the Mountain Atlas, to the River de Niger, Callimackus Him. in lic.
or else because Niger casts up a black or duskish Sedement, some Rocks
appearing amidst in the River, which seem as if burnt. The most will have it,
that the People have gotten their Name from the River Niger, which moisteneth
their Country; however others have it, yet some of the former Reasons seem to
have great appearance of probability.

In this Country are placed also Ptolomy's Ethiopian Aganginers, the Africans
or Gamfasantins, Perosers, Matirers, Ptoemfaners, Nubians, Atlanticans,
Garamantins, and other ancient People besides.

THis Country has on the East for Borders, the Nyle; on the West, The Borders.
the Atlantic; on the North, the Desert of Lybia; on the South, partly the
Ethiopian Ocean, and partly the Abyssine, or Prester-John's Country, being the
old Borders of Congo; as also the Kingdom of Lovango, and other Countries lying
Southward toward the Equinoctial Line.

In this Country are many Kingdoms and Territories, partly to the Inland,
Inland places of the Negro's Country.
and partly to the South along the Seacoast, the Inland Kingdoms every one
having the Denomination from its Metropolitan, are ^ualata, Guinee, Melli,
Tombut, Gago, Guber, Agadez, Kano, Kasene, Zegzeg, Zanfara, Guangara, Burno,
Gaoga, Nubie, Bito, Temiam, Dauma, Medra, Gorhan, Semen, and the Desert of Seth
and Seu. The first fifteen being Kingdoms, lie for the most part on the Banks
of the River Niger, through which the Merchants of Gualata travel to Kairo and
Alkair: it is a long way, yet commodious, and without danger. The other, as
Bito, Temiam, Dauma, Medra, and Gorhan, lie far Eastward from the other.

The Dominions verging the Coast stretching from East to West, Country lying
at the Sea.
are the Kingdoms Zenega, or Country of the Jalafs, the Kingdom of the
Barceziins, the People Arriareos and Faluppos, the Kingdom of Kasanga's, or
Kasamanse, the People Burama's, the Bisego's or Bigiohos, Islands of the
Kingdom of Guivale, Biguba, Mandinga, Bena, Sousas, Serre-Lions, or Bolmberre,
the Islands de los Idols, Bravas, all Guinea, with its Territories, Coasts,
and Kingdoms belonging thereto, as the Territory of Balm, Cikon, and Quiligia,
the Kingdom of Quoia, the Green-Coast, The most noted.
Tooth-Coast, the Quaqua, or Fowl-Coast, five or six Bands-Coast, and the
Golden-Coast, with the Kingdoms belonging to it; the Kingdom of Arder, Ulkami,
Beniin, Isago, Jaboe, Odobo, Istanna, Gaboe, Biafar, Ouwerre, or Forkado, the
Territory of Calcarien, Krike, Moko, Bani; the Territory of the Ambissines, or
the High-Land of Amboises and Corisco. Every one of which shall here following
have their peculiar place, first beginning with the most Inland Countries, or
Center of all these vaste Dominions.

But the greatest Extent of Negro-Land from Cape de Verde, The Length.
or Green-Head, being the most Westerly Point lying at the Sea, to Tangale, a
City in Lybia, close by the Nyle, 3430 English miles. The Breadth.
reckons eight hundred fifty and five German miles, or seven and fifty Degrees
Longitude; and accounts for its greatest Breadth, being from the Kingdom of
Gualata to the Cape of Lopez Gonzalvez, three hundred and eighty miles and a
half, 1522 English miles.
or five and twenty Degrees and a half, that is, from the three and twentieth
Degree and thirty Minutes North Latitude, taken from the Kingdom of Gualata, to
the second Degree South Latitude, near the Cape of Lopez Gonzalvez.

Amongst all the Rivers, The River Niger.
which in great number cut through this Country, the River Niger is the most
eminent, which by the Arabians is now called Hued Nigar, Sanutus.
and by some is taken for the River Asana of Pliny, or Asanaga of Solinus; as
also some hold Niger and Gambea to be one and the same River; and others will
have it, that Niger is Rio Grande, or The Great River; both which opinions seem
to have appearance of Truth, because the chiefest Geographers of this Age hold
Gambea and Zenega to be two Branches of the Niger.

Yet some will have it, Original. Leo p. 1.
that the Niger takes its Original out of a Lake Eastward of the Desert Seu,
gliding from thence to the West, and in the Atlantic disburthens its self. But
the Arabian and African Geographers assert, that Niger is a Branch of the Nyle,
which running under ground, after a great distance shows his so long-lost
Streams again. And that the Niger proceeds from the same Head or Fountain, they
also affirm from these Evidences: First, that they both breed one and the same
sorts of Fish, especially the Hipopotamus, or Seahorse, and overflow the
Ground, enriching the Neighboring Countries near the same time and in the same
manner as the Nyle. The Ancients themselves, among whom Pliny, make Nylus and
Niger to be of one Nature or Quality; and add moreover, that it produces
Reeds, and the Papyrian or Paper-Plant, as Nylus does, which the Egyptians used
to write on, as we on our Paper.

The Modern Geographers make Niger to take its Original out of a Lake called
The Black Lake, bordering on the Kingdoms of Medra and Vanque; and make it also
serve for a Boundary between the Abyssine, or Prester-Johns Country, and
Negro-Land: Afterward it cuts through the Countries of Biafar and Nubia,
diving about eighteen miles under ground, and at last appears again, and makes
the great Lake of Borna, lying upon the Borders of four Kingdoms. From thence
it flows through these Realms, Guangara, Biafara, Kassena, Zegzeg, and Kano,
and makes another great Lake, called Sigisma, or Guarda, which in the South
moisteneth the Kingdoms of Mandinga, Guber, and Gago; and in the North, that of
Kano and Agadez: gliding out of this Lake, it runs to the West, then rushing
toward the North close by the Kingdom of Tombut, and in the South hard by
Melli, spreads it self into a third ample Lake, Niger parts into four Branches.
from thence branching into four Rivers, near which losing its own Name Niger,
receives four new Denominations: The first of which is called The River of
Saint-John, which in the Bay of Arguin falls in the Ocean, whose Mouth makes
the Haven Tofia. The second running direct West, which we have so often
mentioned, is Zenega: The third gliding by degrees also West, is called Gambea;
but the last Branch of Niger parts instantly into two other Branches, one of
which is called Sante Domingo, and the other, which takes its Course to the
South, in Portuguese, Rio Grande. Each of these Branches boast of whole
Kingdoms bordering their Banks, as Guihala and Biguba, according to the Name of
those Rivers: Rio Grande, or The Great River, distinguishes it self from the
other Rivers in eleven Degrees Latitude; and after having dispatched two
Branches more from its own, which are called Guinala and Biguba, between the
Islands of Bisegos, falls into the Sea.

Sante Domingo, otherwise called Jarim, The River Sante Domingo.
is held by some for the eminentest River of the whole Coast, because of the
abundance of Slaves sold near its Banks. It seems to be a Branch of Rio Grande,
which near the Bay called Esteirs Katerina, ends its Progress in the Sea. Many
of the other Rivers, gliding down from the Inland, water the Coast of
Negro-Land, and fall into the Ocean. But of these in their own particular
place, as of the other Rivers, being Arms of Niger, as Zenega and Gambea, shall
be treated of in the Kingdom Zenega, between which they are included.

All these forementioned Branches, and Sub-branches, swell and overflow in the
same manner, and near the same time with the Nyle, when the Sun in their Zenith
enters Cancer: all the benefit the Nyle brings to Egypt, the like accommodation
the Niger, with other Rivers, brings to Negro-Land. Niger, together with other
Rivers, beginning from the fifteenth of July, rises forty days, and retreating
as long, all which time till it draw within its circumscribed bounds, the
Low-Lands, Plains, and level Country becomes a Sea, all places covered with
Water, as in Egypt; where also, during that time, the Travelers are Rowed up
and down in Boats.

The equal overflowing of this River with the Nyle, Isaac Vostius de Nili and
aliorum fluminum.
is not occasioned by the vicinity of the Springs of those Rivers belonging to
the Nyle, as the received Opinion; but because their Head Fountains lie almost
the same distance from the Equinox, as we have declared at large.

Concerning the temper of the Air, condition of the Soil, Vegetives, Animals,
and the Constitution, Modes, and Manners of the Inhabitants, their Riches,
their Policies in Government, and several Religions of the Negro's Country in
general, shall here briefly be declared, and as to what belongs to the
materials of every Kingdom, shall also in particulars be handled: but observe,
that their Plants, Beasts, Men, and Languages, differ very much from
neighboring Countries under the Equator, though the temperature of the Air, and
all the mutations thereof, as Heat, Cold, Wind, and Rain, are not unlike, but
in a manner one and the same.

By the overflowing of Niger, Zenega, and Gambea, as also by the Rains,
Negro-Land is moistened and made exceeding fruitful in all manner of terrene
Products, especially Mill and Rice, both being the chiefest Bread-corn of the
Inhabitants.

The Country is in some parts plain, and others Hilly, but about the Banks of
the River Niger it is very level, and watered by several standing Pools, left
there by the retreating River; which are planted about with shady Groves,
Recesses for ravenous Beasts, and Elephants. This Dominion fosters not only
tame, but also wild Beasts in great numbers.

The Natives are very black; but the Features of their Faces, and their
excellent Teeth, being white as Ivory, make up together a handsome Air, and
taking comeliness of a new Beauty: they are well Limm'd, and much addicted to
Venus.

Their Languages are diverse, Their Language.
Gualata, Tombut, the Inland, Guinee, Melli, and Gago; there all these use
only one Tongue, called Sungai; but in the Kingdom of Kano, Kalsene, Zegzeg,
Guangura, and Guber, they have another called Guber; and another in the Kingdom
of Borno, which is like that of Gaoga. Likewise those of Nubia have a peculiar
Speech of their own, a Maslin of the Arabic, Chaldee, and some Coptick, or
Egyptian. Besides, along the Seacoast their Dialects differ every three or
four miles distance, but on the Coast of Guinee a particular Language: Of which
more hereafter.

As for their Governments, Their Government.
some of them know none, neither ever scarce heard of any, but live in a
confused Ataxy, swayed on all occasions like tumultuous Herds, and at other
times like tame Cattle feeding, and following their idle pleasures. But the
rest are all Monarchical, living under Laws, Order and Princes. Leo Eerst. Decl.
In the first place the King, or rather Emperor of Tombut, to whom they pay
Tribute, and acknowledge as their Supreme Ruler over these fifteen Kingdoms in
the Inland, as Gualata, Guinee, Melli, Tombut, Gago, Guber, Agadez, Kano,
Kasena, Zegzeg, Zanfara, Guangura, Burno, Gaogo, and Nubia; besides, the King
of Burno reigns over another Moiety, acknowledging no Superior; the rest of the
In-lands are subject to the Gaogo's: but in times past they were all absolute
Kings, doing Homage nor Fealty to no other. Also the whole Seacoast of
Negro-Land, from Cape de Verde to Lovango, stands divided into several
Monarchies.

The Religion of the Inland Negro's, Their Religion.
most of them anciently worshipped one God, called Guighime, that is, Lord of
Heaven: this Persuasion of theirs not being inculcated by any Priests, who
study Rites and Ceremonies, imposing a reverential awe on their Disciples and
Proselytes: but Instinct, and the mere dictates of Nature, which brings as soon
to the acknowledgment of a Deity, something not subordinate, but infinitely
supreme, governing all. After this they were instructed in the Mosaic Laws,
which they long and zealously observed, till some of them being converted to
the Christian Faith, wholly ecclipsed the Jewish; then Christianity flourishing
many years, till Mahumetanism at last over-spreading all Asia, and these parts
of Africa, they being still greedy of Novelty, fell into Apostasy, drinking in
the poison of this new and dire Infection, so that Christianity is in a manner
extirpated, some few Professors of the Gospel, after the Coptick, or Egyptian
manner, yet remaining in Gaoga. But those Southern People that inhabit the
Coast from Cape de Verde, to the Kingdom of Lovango, sticking to their first
Tenets, are still all Idolaters, as hereafter in particulars shall be declared.

THE KINGDOM OF GUALATA.
THe Kingdom of Gualata, whose Inhabitants are called Benay's, has received
its Denomination also from its Metropolitan, possessing three great and
populous Villages, and some delightful Gardens and Date-Fields, lying twenty
and five miles from the Atlantic, Observe these and the forementioned, are for
the most part Spanish Miles.
sixty Southward of Nun, and about thirty to the Northward of Tombut, Fenced in
on every side with the rising Banks of the River Zenega or Niger. Sanutus sets
down in this Dominion a place called Hoden, lying in the Inland six days
Journey from Cabo Blanko, in nineteen Degrees and a half Northern Latitude,
where the Arabians and Karavans, that come from Tombut, and other places of
Negro Land, traveling through the same to Barbary, stay and refresh themselves.

THis Country which produces nothing but Barley and Mill, The Plants or
Vegetables.
has also great scarcity of Flesh; yet the Tract of Land about Hoden abounds
with Dates and Barley, and has plenty of Camels, Beeves, and Goats; but their
Beeves are a smaller Breed than ours of Europe. This Country abounds in Lions
and Leopards terrible to the Inhabitants; and also Ostriches, whose Eggs they
account a Dainty.

BOth Sexes are very Black, they are Civil and Courteous to Strangers, The
Constitution and Manners of the Inhabitants.
like their Neighbors in the Lybick Deserts; the Inhabitants of the City
Gualata live very poorly, whereas those of Hoden live plentifully, having
Barley-bread, Dates, and Flesh; and supply their want of Wine, by drinking
Camels Milk, and other Beasts.

BOth Men and Women in Gualata have their Heads and Faces commonly covered with
a Cloth; Their Clothing.
and the Men of Hoden also wear short white Jackets; but the Women think it no
shame to go stark naked, covering their Heads only with a Caul of Hair died
red. Their Language.
Their Language is called Sungai.

These Arabs of Hoden also (like others) never continue long in a place, but
rove up and down with their Cattle through the adjacent Wilds.

THose of Lybia, Their Trade.
so long as the Country of Negro's stood under their Jurisdiction, had
formerly planted the Royal Residence of their Kings in Gualata, which brought
great Concourse of Barbary Merchants thither; but since the Country fell into
the hands of a powerful Prince, called Heli, the Merchants forsook this place,
and settled their Staples at Tombut and Gago. But the people of Hoden still
drive a Trade in Gualata, and resort also thither in great numbers with their
Camels laden with Copper, Silver, and other Commodities from Barbary and other
Countries, to Tombut and many places in Negro-Land; bringing no worse Returns
from thence than Gold.

The King of Gualata, Anno 1526. being in Battle overcome by the King of
Tombut, upon Articles paying him a yearly Tribute, was restored to his Throne.

THese People, Their Government.
though governed by Kings, are not under the Prescript of any Laws, nor have
Courts of Judicature in their chief Towns, there to summon and punish
Malefactors, but live in a rambling manner promiscuously, every one endeavoring
to be his own Judge and Arbitrator; their Will being their Law.

THe Gualatans only worship Fire; Their Religion.
but those of Hoden, extracted from the Arabs, are a sort of Mahumetans,
professed Enemies to Christianity.

THE KINGDOM OF GUINEE, OR GENOVA.
THis Kingdom, The Kingdom of Genova.
which many call Guinea, though not the same, differing from our present
Guinee, lies by the Sea which reaches along the Coast from Cape Serre Lions,
to Cape Lopez Gonzalves, by the African Merchants called Gheneva; Leo 7. Decl.
by the Arabians, according to Marmol, Geneua; and by the Natives, Geuni, or
Genii.

IT has for its Northern Borders, The Borders.
the Kingdom of Gualata, where the Wilderness runs ninety Miles long; on the
East, that of Tombut; and on the South Melle, and runs in a Point to the
Atlantic, at the place where Niger falls in the same Ocean; along whose Banks
another Angle runs above eighty French Leagues.

This whole Country, notwithstanding the vasteness of its Extent, boasts
neither Cities, Towns, nor Fortresses, but one single Village; yet that so
large, that not only the Kings keep their Courts and Royal Residence there,
but also there is a University, where Scholars Commence, and the Priests
receive their Orders and several Dignities; besides a settled Staple for the
Merchants of this Kingdom.

YEt this Place of so great Concourse has but mean Buildings, Their Houses.
only small Huts and Hovels of Loam, and thatched, ranged in a round order;
the Doors or Entries so low and narrow, that they are forced to creep in and
out; which we may suppose are no statelier built, because they expect annually
in July, August, and September, to be under water with the overflowing of the
Niger; then in prepared Vessels and Boats made for that purpose, in which the
King first loads the Furniture and Household Stuff of his low-rooff'd Palace;
then the Scholars and Priests their University-Goods; and next the Merchants
and Inhabitants their Movables; and last of all, the Water increasing)
themselves, as if they entered the Ark; and at the same time the Merchants of
Tombut come thither, and joining Fleets, traffic with them on the Water.

This Kingdom abounds in Rice, Barley, Cotton, Cattle, and Fish; but their
scarcity of Dates are supplied them from Gualata and Numidia.

THe Inhabitants (according to their manner) go handsomely clad in black and
blue Cotton, of which they also wear Head-Shashes; Their Clothing.
but their Priests and Doctors are habited only in white Cotton.

THese People make great advantage of their Cotton-Clothes, Their Trade.
which they barter with the Merchants of Barbary for Linen, Copper, Arms,
Dates, and other Commodities.

This Kingdom was formerly under the Luntiins, a people of Lybia, whose King
was afterward made Tributary to Soni-Ali, King of Tombut; his Successor Ischia
obtaining a Signal Victory on a great Battle against the King of Guinee, took
him Prisoner, and sent him to Gago, where in miserable Captivity he died close
Prisoner.

Thus the King of Tombut now grown Master of all Guinee, reduced it into a
Province, setting his Lieutenant over them, and then caused a great Market to
be proclaimed in the Metropolis of the whole Country.

THE KINGDOM OF MELLI.
THe Kingdom of Melli, The Kingdom of Melli.
likewise so named from their prime Village, the Residence of their King, has
for its Northern Confines Gheneoa, or Guinee; Southward, Deserts and barren
Mountains; in the East, the Jurisdiction of Gago; Westerly bounded with a
mighty Forest, which runs sixty miles along the Banks of Niger, to the Verges
of the Ocean.

The Village Melli is very large, The Village Melli.
and contains above six thousand Families, standing thirty days journey from
Tombut.

The Country abounds in Corn, Flesh, and Cotton; and has a King, but
Tributary to those of Tombut.

HEre they are all Mahumetans, Their Religion.
and have Mosques, in which wanting Colleges, they not only perform their
daily Devotions, but in the Temples instruct their people and Disciples in
their Laws and Doctrine. These were the first Apostates from Christianity to
Mahumetanism.

These People formerly were governed by a great Prince of Royal Extract,
descended from a Prince of Lybia, Uncle to the King of Morocco, the Renowned
Josephus. The Sovereignty continued in his Progeny, until Uzchea King of
Tombut, Anno 1520. made the then King of Melli Tributary, and so reduced all
these Countries under his Subjection.

THE MONARCHY OF TOMBUT, OR TONGUBUT.
THe Kingdom of Tombat has its Denomination from a City, founded, The Kingdom
of Tombat.
as they say, by King Mense Suleyman, Anno 1221. about three miles from an Arm
of Niger, lying a hundred and eighty miles from the Country of Dara, or
Sugulmesse.

THis City gloried formerly in great Fabrics, The City Tombat.
and sumptuous Buildings, but now condemned to simple Huts and Hovels, and
only boasting one stately Mosque, and a magnificent Palace for the King, built
by a famous Architect of Granada.

Three miles from Tombut, Kabra.
on the Banks of Niger stands another great Town, called Kabra or Kambre, being
a convenient Port for the Merchants to travel from thence to the Kingdom of
Melli in Guinea.

THis Country abounds with fresh-Water-Springs, Corn, Cattle, The Disposition
of the Country.
Milk, and Butter; but what savors all, Salt, is very scarce: for a Camels Load
goes often there at fourscore Ducats, being brought over Land from Tegaza,
about a hundred miles distant from Tombut.

They use small Horses, with which they ride up and down the City, and the
Merchants travel with them; but their best Horses they have from Barbary, whose
numbers when they arrive are Registered, which at any time is above twelve, the
King makes choice of the primest of them, paying the Price they would go at.

THe Inhabitants, especially those of the City Tombut, The Manners of the
Inhabitants.
are a People usually merry, and of a cheerful Disposition, and spending most
part of the Night in Singing, Dancing, and Revelling up and down through all
the Streets. They keep a great many Slaves both Men and Women; Students (which
are highly esteemed amongst them) are there frequent, and bred up at the Kings
proper Charge. Here are store of Arabic Books, and Manuscripts brought from
Barbary, and not to be purchased but at a great Value.

Here are also many Tradesmen and Artificers, especially Cotton-Weavers. Their
common Diet is a Dish made of Flesh, Fish, Butter, and Milk, hasht and stewed
together.

ALl the Women, Their Clothing.
except the Slavesses, go with their Heads and Faces covered. They have no
stamped Coin, but plain Pieces, yet bigger and lesser, all of pure Gold.

This King or Emperor of Tombut, ruling vaste Dominions that yield him
inexhaustible Treasure, which he piles up in Bars or Billets of pure Gold; some
of them weighing (if the report be true) Thirteen hundred pound Weight.

MAny Merchants of Fez, Their Trade.
Morocco, and Gran-Cayre, resort to Tombut for the Trade of Gold, which was
brought thither by the People of Mandinga in so great abundance, that
oftentimes the Merchants having disposed of all their Commodities which they
barter with them for that Metal, it becomes a Drug, and either left there till
the next Return, or else they carry it home again.

THis Country, Their Government.
according to Marmol, a Prince governs, styled Emperor of Melli, who dwelling
in a magnificent Palace, takes such state upon him, that no Ambassadors or
Envoys from Foreign Countries making their Addresses, are admitted to Audience
but in posture of humble Suppliants, kneeling with dejected Countenances,
throwing dust upon their heads.

In the City Kabra, the King has a Commissary, who Hears, Judges, and
Determines all Causes and Differences, either concerning the Crown, or other
private Arbitrations betwixt the Subjects.

THE KINGDOM OF GAOGA.
THe Kingdom of Gaoga, The Kingdom of Gagao.
or Goagao, as Marmol calls it, lying, by the unanimous consent of the
chiefest Geographers, in the same Elevation where Ptolomy places the Lake, or
Pool Chelidones, bordering Westward on the Kingdom of Borno; East, on Nubia;
and South, near the Nylean Desert, which conterminates the North with the Wild
of Seth. It passes by the South of Egypt, spreading from the West to the East
a hundred and twenty five miles in length, reckoning as much in breadth.

This Country abounds with Cattle and Goats; but the People are in a manner
savage, and ignorant of all Civility and Literature, nor under any form of
Government; especially the Mountaineers, or Highlanders, which go stark naked
in the Summer, only retaining so much modesty, that they wear a Lappet before
them, concealing their Privities. They dwell in Huts, or rather Arbors; their
whole defense against Sun, Wind, and Rain, are Boughs of Trees set up and
placed together.

Their chief Employment is only in Cattle, the whole Nation being only
Herdsmen; yet they are a kind of Christians after the Egyptian manner.

THE KINGDOM OF GUBER.
THe Kingdom of Guber enclosed between very high Mountains, The Kingdom of
Guber.
is about seventy five miles Eastward from Gago, with a barren Desert between
them, about ten miles distance from the Niger.

It compriseth a great number of Villages and Hamlets, the chiefest of which
(wherein formerly the King kept his Court) contains about six thousand Houses,
and has imparted its Name to the whole Kingdom.

This Country lies Annually under the overflowing of the Niger, which causes a
great Return by plentiful Harvests of Barley, Rice, and Mill: Their Goats and
Cattle (though numerous) are but small.

These Inhabitants are Reclaimed, being of a Civil Behavior, expert in
Handicrafts, weaving and making good Cotton-Cloth, sufficient Tanners, but
exquisite Shoemakers; their Ware supplying the Markets of Tombut and Gago,
whither they are sent in great parcels.

THE KINGDOM OF AGADEZ.
THe Kingdom of Agadez being more Easterly than that of Gualata, The Kingdom of
Agadez.
stretches its Limits to the North. The Metropolitan thereof also called
Agadez, stands upon the Confines of Lybia, the nearest place to the White
People (except Gualata) of all Negro-Land.

This Country abounds with much Meadow-Land, having store of Springs and
Grass; it also yields much Manna, which is not only their common and best
Food, but makes them a most excellent and cordial Drink; which together keeps
them in good condition, always strong and healthy: Yet they want no store of
Cattle nor Goats. The Agazons for the most part are Strangers, settling there
their Staples of Merchandise, trading to Foreign Countries: The Natives are
Artificers, or Soldiers; but the Southern People follow Pasturage, breeding
Cattle and Goats; their Receptacles are slight Arbours of implicated Boughs,
like the Arabs, or Mats, with which they rove up and down. Those of the Lybick
Deserts insult over the Kings of Agadez; and though they are Tributary to the
people of Tombut, where they might complain, yet they carry so high a hand over
them, that they supplant and plant the Royal Throne, deposing and establishing
whom they please, being commonly in such Removals, one of their Favorites or
nearest Relations.

THE KINGDOM OF KANO.
THe Kingdom of Kano, The Borders of the Kingdom of Kano.
a great Realm, is about a hundred twenty five miles Eastward from the River
Niger, and ninety from the Kingdom of Agadez.

The Head City also called Kano, stands in the middle of the Country, in
thirty and a half Longitude, and seventeen Degrees Northern Latitude, and
invested with a wooden and chalkey Wall; as also their Houses are made of the
same materials.

This Country in many places is full of Springs, especially in the Mountains
which are overgrown with many Orange and Lemmon-Trees, which bear Fruit of an
excellent Relish; it also abounds in Wheat, Rice, and Cotton-Trees, of which
they make Cloth: They have also many Beeves and Goats.

The Country Inhabitants follow both Grasing and Tillage. The City People are
Merchants and Artificers.

This King of Kano was formerly so powerful, that he made the Kings of Zegzeg
and Kassene Tributaries to him.

THE KINGDOM OF KASSENE.
THe Kingdom of Kassene to the Eastward of Kano, The Kingdom of Kassene.
possesses nothing but slight Huts in the manner of Villages, standing one by
another.

The Country is mountainous and barren, yet fruitful in Barley and Tares. The
Natives are Cole-Black, and have Camisie Noses, and thick Lips. The Air of
their Face much differing from their Neighbors; their Noses and Lips so broad
and thick, that they leave them scarce Cheeks or Chin.

The former Government was absolute under a Prince; but the last of the Line
being made away by Ischia King of Tombut, under pretense of assisting him,
joined it as a Province to his own Kingdom.

THE KINGDOM OF ZEGZEG.
THis Kingdom of Zegzeg borders in the East on the Kingdom of Kano, The Kingdom
of Zegzeg.
about thirty miles from Kassene. The Villages and Houses are of the same form
as in the Kingdom of Kassene.

The chiefest City being also Zegzeg, lies in six and thirty Degrees and forty
Minutes Longitude, and in fourteen Degrees and forty Minutes North Latitude.

The Country in some places Flat, and in others Mountainous, is subjected to
various Weather, the Valleys exceeding hot, and the Mountains excessive cold,
insomuch that they make great Fires in the middle of their Halls, spreading the
red hot Cinders under their Bedsteads, which being high from the Ground secures
them from the Fire, but warms them exceedingly. They are rich, and drive a
great Trade with other People. The Valleys are so well watered, that they are
made luxuriously fruitful, abounding in Corn, and all other Products of the
Soil.

This was also under a King, but trapann'd both of Life and Crown by Izchia,
King of Tombut, who annexed it to his Empire.

THE KINGDOM OF ZANFARA, Or GANFARA.
THe Kingdom of Zanfara, The Kingdom of Zanfara.
a fruitful Country, abounding in Corn, Rice, Barley, and Cotton, borders in
the East on Zegzeg.

The Inhabitants, The Inhabitants.
exceeding Black, and of large Stature, broad-Faced, Camosca-Noses, thick-Lipt,
are savage and of wild disposition: and also Subjects to the King of Tombut.

THE KINGDOM OF GUANGARA, or GANGARA.
THis Kingdom confines on the South with that of Zanfara, The Kingdom of
Guangara.
and has in the South-East some Countries stored with Gold. The inhabited
places are only Villages, built with Huts, except the chiefest, which in
greatness and fairness exceeds all the other, lies in four and forty Degrees
and a half Longitude, and in fourteen North Latitude.

The Natives are surly and clownish, dull of apprehension: they traffic much
abroad, the Slaves carrying their Packs or Fardels of Goods on their Shoulders,
and some on their Heads, in large dried Calf-skins, so carrying them to barter
to the Southern and Gold-Countreys; for the Ways are not passable, being so
ruffled with Woods, Briers and Thorns, that to all Beasts of burden they are
inaccessible.

The King, if occasion require, can raise seven thousand Foot, many of them
good Archers, and five hundred Horse: he governs by an Arbitrary Power, his
Will is his Law, his Subjects no better than Slaves; yet his greatest Revenue
he raises out of his yearly Customs of Exported and Imported Goods.

THE KINGDOM OF BORNO.
THe wide-spreading Kingdom of Borno, also called Burney, The Borders of the
Kingdom of Borno.
formerly a Dewlling Place, as appears by the Customs thereof, of the ancient
People of Atlas; or, as Cluverius will have it, Garamantes, has on the West
for Borders the Kingdom of Guangara, with a vast Desert, above a hundred and
twenty five miles Eastward, and lies near the Head-Fountain of Niger in the
Wild of Seu; in the South, of Seth; in the North, the Deserts which reach to
that side of Barka.

Urreta sets down for Borders in the East, Gaoga and Nubia; in the South,
Histor. de La. Ethiop. l. 1. c. 32,
the Kingdom of Kiofara and Ethiopia, or Abyssine; in the West, the Inward
Lybia, or Sarra; and in the North, Berdoa. It lies, according to Urreta, from
the sixteenth to the twentieth Degree Northern Elevation; and, as Marmol, above
eighty miles to the East.

There are many Cities, Hamlets and Villages, Leo, p. 7.
on that Plain where the King has his Residence with his Army: the chief City
is Borno, lying in eight and forty and a half Longitude, and in seventeen
Degrees and ten Minutes North Latittude.

THe Country is partly plain, and partly rough and Hilly, but fruitful; The
Condition of the Country.
the Highlands also producing Mill, Corn, Wheat, and Tares; and feed also many
Beeves and Goats.

THose of the Plains are civilized, understanding Order and Honesty; The
Constitution of the Inhabitants.
amongst whom reside Foreign Merchants, both Blacks and Whites; and there also
the King keeps his Court and Camp: but the Mountains are possessed with rough
Herdsmen, which go almost stark naked; they are hard to be distinguished from
their own Cattle, going in Beasts skins with Hair, in which they also sleep.
Their course of life seems void of all humanity, for their Women and Children
are not appropriated, but in common, none acknowledging either as his peculiar,
but pick where they please out of the Herd, according to the manner of the
ancient Garamantes; and like those of Mount Atlas, have no proper Names to be
distinguished by one from the other, but every one has his Nickname, or
Denomination derived from the shape of his person, whether deformed or comely;
for Tall, they sur-name Long; the Short, Kort; the Bunch-shoulder'd,
Crook-backs, etc.

This King of Borno is said to be very rich: for his Utensils both for Quirry,
Vessels of massy Gold.
Kitchen, and Table, are all of massy Gold.

These Natives are not superstitious, neither Quarrel nor Dispute about
Religion; for having none at all, Jews, Christians, and Mahumetans seeming to
them all one, stand alike in their esteem.

THE KINGDOM OF GAGO.
THe Kingdom of Gago, The Kingdom of Gago.
thus called from its Metropolitan, Gago, has in the East the Kingdom of
Guber, but is divided by a Desert.

The chief City Gago, The chief City Gago.
standing by the River Zenega, about a hundred miles from Tombut South-East, in
thirty five Longitude, and eight and a half Latitude, has for the most part
mean and ordinary Houses, yet some of them show well; as among others, the
Kings Palace, and Seraglio. The rest of the inhabited places consist in
Villages and Hamlets, in which the Countrymen, and People of meaner state,
have their abode.

The Country abounds in Corn, Rice, and Cattle; but they have no Grapes, nor
other Fruits, except Mellons, Cucumbers, and Citrons, which are much used,
having more than an ordinary relish.

This City, like others, is not without an inconvenience, being destitute of
fresh Water, which they are forced to fetch out of Pits forty or fifty miles
from the Town; yet this want is plentifully supplied by the abundance of Gold
that is in this Kingdom, which, according to Meguet, is fetched from thence by
the Moroccoans.

The Country people are not Bookish, taking no delight in Literature; for not
one in three days Journey is to be found, that scarce knows one Letter of the
Book: yet the Citizens are much civiller, and better taught than these Rusticks.

THe Barbary Merchants drive a successful Trade here in this City, Their Trade.
vending all sorts of European Wares, as Cloth, and the like; but that which
goes off best, and yields most profit, is Salt.

These Morocco Merchants traveling thither, go never less than two or three
hundred in company, and are six Months in their Journey; of which they spend
two, in desolate and sandy Deserts, directed in their course only by the Sun,
Moon, and Stars; which if not well observed, they are utterly lost, perishing
with Hunger, especially Thirst.

Those that suffer there casually, their Bodies decay not, being dried by the
parching heat of the Sand, but become a kind of Mummy, and sold in many places
of Europe for the right.

THis Country is Governed by a King, Their Government.
who pays Tribute to the King of Morocco, since Muley Hanef, in his Wars
against the Negro's, overpowering him with a great Army under the Command of
Juder Bassa, took by force the chief City Gago.

THE KINGDOM OF NUBIA.
THis Country Ptolomy calls Nubes, or Nubiers, and Strabo, Nubea, The Kingdom
of Nubea.
which Stephanus places as a Neighbor to the Nyle; which perhaps might cause
Ptolomy to denominate the people Arabic Egyptians; and Mela has placed other
Nubiers by the Bay of Aralites.

At this day all Geographers call it Nubie, after the Moors, who, as Marmol
says, gave it the Name Neuba, and some style it, Little Egypt.

It borders on the West on the Desert of Gaoga, extending to the Nile; The
Borders.
which takes a long Course through this Kingdom, dividing it in the middle: On
the East, bounded partly by some people of Bagamedri, called Belloes, and
partly by the Countries of Dafila and Kanfila, being Members of Barnagas, a
Territory in Abyssine; in the South, by the Desert of Gorhan; and on the North,
by Egypt.

The Length is by the Inhabitants accounted two That is 1800 English miles.
Months Journey, The Length.
and somewhat more.

Pliny says, the Chief City of Nubia was Tenupsus; Ancient chief City.
but the latter and more modern Writers give the Priority to Kondari; Leo
Africanus makes Dangala the Metropolis, which he says contains near ten
thousand Houses, but very meanly built; and that all the rest are poor Villages
and Hamlets scattered about the Nyle. The Natives of this Country, Nubian
Geographers.
who have left us some Descriptions thereof, affirm Nubia the Principal; and
the others pretending to any Eminency, Nubie, Kusa, Ghalva, Dankala, Jalak and
Sala.

Kusa lies under the Equinoctial six days Journey from the City Nubia. Kusa.
Ghalva seated on the Nile below Dankala, five days journey.

Jalak is ten days journey from Ghalva; hither Shipping comes up the Nile;
Ghalva.
but they that will go from hence into Egypt, must hard by unlade their Goods,
and carry them on Camels over Land, by reason of the Cataracts of Nile.

THis Country (like Egypt) in many places once a year participates of the
Benefits accrewing by the Overflux of that River, The Nature of the Soil.
whereby it becomes exceeding fertile, producing besides great store of Cattle
and Sugarcanes, which the unskilfulness of the Inhabitants make little
advantage of, because in the boiling, it becomes black and unpleasant in taste.

Here is found a very strong and deadly Poison, Mortal Poison.
of which one Grain is enough to kill ten persons in a Quarter of an hour;
which they sell for fifty Ducats an Ounce, and to Strangers only, whom upon
delivery they oblige by Oath not to use in their Country.

Marmol says, here is much fine Gold, Speckled-Wood, Civet, and Ivory,
especially the last, by reason of the great number of Elephants which breed in
all parts of it.

THe Townsmen for the most part deal as Merchants, Their Maintenance.
but the Country People live by Tillage, and such like Labors; however want
not courage or skill in Arms to defend themselves, and offend their Enemies:
their Complexion black as Pitch; their Language, as their Color, peculiar to
their Climate; but all their Public Devotions are performed in the old Coptick
Tongue.

THeir Government is Monarchical. Their Government and Religion.
Their Religion seems to relate to Christianity; for in above a hundred and
fifty Churches yet among them, is to be seen the Image of Christ, the Virgin
Mary, and many Saints and Martyrs Painted upon the Walls, but much decayed by
time and want of new Colorings: Some affirm them to be neither Christians,
Turks, Moors, nor Jews: but Hathen averrs they are yet Christians; which
Brokard confirms, reporting that they Baptize one the other, wherein they use
hot Irons, like the Abyssines, with burning a Cross on some part of their
Bodies: and as a proof of their once being such, the Patriarch of Alexandria
has Jurisdiction over them in all affairs Ecclesiastical, whom they yet own,
using, as we said before, in all their Church-Services, the Coptick Tongue.

BITO.
THis Kingdom has for Borders on the West, The Kingdom of Bito.
Guberion; on the North, Kano and Zegzeg; on the East, Temiam.

The chief City also called Bito, lies in eight Degrees and ten Minutes of
Northern Latitude.

The Inhabitants are governed by a Prince of their own.

TEMIAM.
THe Kingdom of Temiam lies neighbored in the West by the last mentioned Bito;
The Kingdom of Temiam.
in the North, by Guangara; the Eastern Limits are the Desert of Seth and Seu;
A. An^u, Trast. 3.
on the South washed by the great River Niger.

The chief City is Temikan, The Head City Temikan.
situate in eight Degrees and thirty Minutes of North Latitude, where the
Inhabitants are Cannibals, or Anthropophagi.

DAUMA.
THe Kingdom of Dauma lies surrounded on the East by Medra; The Kingdom of
Dauma.
on the North with the Desert of Seth; to the West has the Wilds of Seu; and
on the South the Jews Country, or the Kingdom of Semen.

The Inhabitants are very rich, and governed by a Prince of their own Country,
who is an absolute Sovereign, and when seen in public, carried up from the
ground, which he may not touch: Sanut. lib. 7.
and if by chance at any time he do, it is accounted ominous, and he is purged
with many Solemnities and Sacrifices.

MADRA.
MAdra also is a Kingdom conterminate in the East by Gorhan; The Kingdom of
Madra.
in the West with Dauma; on the South by the Jews Country; and on the North
with Borno.

The chiefest Town thereof lies in eleven Degrees and twenty Minutes of
Northern Latitude.

GORHAN.
GOrhan lies encompassed on the East with the Nile; The Kingdom of Gorhan.
on the West with Medra; has Goago on the North; and divided on the South by
several great Mountains from Jewen-Land.

The People are as brutish as wild Beasts, struggling with a thousand kinds
of miseries and calamities in the Desert; there being none that can understand
their Language: however they have a kind of Government, and that too absolutely
Monarchical.

The Country of the Jews, or Kingdom of SEMEN.
SAnutus calls this Country in Italian, Terre Giudei; the Abyssines, Xionuche;
but diverse Europeans a little altering the pronunciation, Semen, in stead of
Ximench or Ximen.

It lies enclosed with Mountains and Deserts, on the East extending themselves
to Nile; on the South to Congo, and the Equinoctial-Line; in the West to the
Kingdom of Benin; and on the North over against Davina and Medra; a Country
but little known, and less conversed with; and under the Domimon of the
Abyssines.

The Desert of SETH and SEU.
THe Desert of Seth borders in the North on Borno; in the East on that of
Medra; in the West on some Countries where Gold is found in great plenty; and
in the South on the Kingdom of Dauma.

The Desert of Seu has for Limits in the North, the aforementioned Golden
Countries; in the East, Dauma; in the South, vaste Mountains; in the West the
Kingdom of Benin: From this Desert some affirm the great River Niger takes its
beginning.

THus much we thought fit briefly to mention of the Inland Parts, we will now
lead you by the Seacoasts, beginning at Cape Verde, the farthermost Westerly
Point of Negro-Land, and so come to the Cape of Lopez Gonzalves, and Saint
Catharine.

The Coast of the Negro's Country.
THe furthermost Point of Negro-Land to the West, is Cape Verde, lying in
fourteen Degrees and one and twenty Minutes Northern Latitude: Three miles
Southerly off which lies a Village called Refrisko; one mile from that,
another named Kamino; two miles further to the South-East, Eudukura; and a mile
and a half beyond that, Punto, and then Porto d' Ale; to the Westward of which
is Punto d' Porto Ale, that is, The Point of the Haven of Ale.

On the same Shore (not far from Porto d' Ale) lies Cabo de Maste, Porto Novo,
or New Haven, and Punto Sereno, or Bright-Point; then Punto Lugar neighbors
with the Village Juala, on whose Southern side flow the Rivers De la Grace,
Barsala, and Garnba; on a Point of this last lies the Cape St. Mary; from hence
you pass to the Eastern River, and that of Rha or Kasamanka, and so to Cabo
Roxo, and the two greater and lesser Points.

Then appears the River Sante Domingo, called also Jarim, betwixt which and
Cape Saint Mary, live people known by the Names of Arriareos and Faluppos: Two
miles from the small rough Point, the River Katcheo falls into the Sea: Then
Rio de les Iletas, or, The River of the small Islands, and Rio Grande flowing
into the Sea over against the Island Bisegos, or Bigiohos.

More Southerly, the River Danaluy discharges his Waters into the Sea; the like
do Nunno, Tristan, and Tabito or Vergas near Cape Virgen, in the Kingdom of
Sere-Lions, or Bolmberre; so passing to Rio das Piedras, The River of Stone,
Pechel, Palmas, Pagone, Kagranka, Kasses, Karokane, Kaper and Tambasine,
Tagarim, or Metombo; and lastly, Rio de Sere-Lions, and Bangue; which last
disembogues his Stream on the South Side of Sere-Lions into the Sea, as Metombo
does on the North.

Upon the Coast of Sere-Lions diverse Islands appear, as the Bisegos, De los
Idolos, or Idol-Isle, Banannas or Bravas, and the Sombreras; between which last
mentioned, the Land makes a great Point, called Furna de Sant Anna, where four
Rivers intermingle with the Sea; from whence it is but a short passage to Cape
Tagrin or Ledo, the outermost Southerly Point of Serre-Lions.

Here begins Guinee, extending all along to the Cape of Lopez Gonzalvez, and
the River Benin; a large Maritime Country, and divided into the Grain-Coast,
Tooth-Coast, Quaqua-Coast, Bants-Coast, and Gold-Coast.

The first thing we meet with in Guinee worth taking notice of, are the Rivers
Rio das Palmas, and Ria Galhinas, running through the Countries of Bolm, Cilm,
and Quilliga, where begins the Kingdom of Quoia, wherein are the Rivers
Maguibba, or Rio Nova, Mava, Plizoge, and Monoch, in Portuguese called Rio
Aguado. In five Degrees and three and forty Minutes of Northern Latitude lies
Kaboc Monte; twelve miles Eastward whereof rises a high Mountain called Cape
Mesurado, adjoining to which is the River Saint Paulo; and ten miles from it
Rio Junk or Siunk, and Saint John's River, empty their Waters into the Sea; six
miles East from this River, stands the Village called Tabe-Kanee, Petit-Dispo,
and Diepe, by the Blacks named Tabo Dagroh.

Six miles from Little Diepe, the River Sestus falls into the Sea: And here
begins the Grain-Coast, being a Tract of forty miles in Length; on the Easterly
Part of which lies Little Sestus; and five miles farther Cabo Baixos, and then
Zanwiin, a small Village distant thence three miles; passing on toward the East
you come to Bofou or Bofoe, and so to Setter and Bottowa; Cape Swine appears
next in order, with a Village of the same name; and then at little distances
you come to Crow, Wappen or Wabbo, Drowyn, Great Setter, Gojaurn, Garway,
Greyway, or Grouway; and lastly, Cabo de Palmas, or Palm Cape.

Here at the Village of Grouway begins Tooth-Coast, so called from the
abundance of Elephants Teeth there to be had, beginning two miles Eastward of
Cape Palm, and ending at Cape de la Hou, making a Tract of fifty miles: within
which are not many inhabited Towns; for the first is four and twenty miles from
Cape Palm, and called Tabo; the next Petiero, a mile farther, and close by the
Sea; then Taho, five miles from thence; and at the like distance from that,
Berly, in four Degrees and a half of Latitude: close by which St. Andrews River
enters the Sea, where it makes a great imbowed Reach to the South-East toward
Red-Land, so called from its red Cliffs.

Beyond the Red Cliffs appears Cape'de la Hou, the utmost limit of Tooth-Coast;
from whence Quaqua-Coast commences, and extends to the Village Assine, the
first place of Gold-Coast a mile and a half upward, in a barren place, void of
all shelter or Trees, stands a little Township, called Koutrou, or Katrou; and
not far from thence Jakke La-Hou; within five miles of which, Jak in Jakko;
from whence you go directly to a place adjoining to the Sea, and commonly
entitled, The Pit, or Bottomless Lake.

About sixteen miles Eastward of La-Hou, lies a place called Kerbe La-Hou, in
the Bants-Coast; before which place the Sea is very deep; for, a Stonesthrow
from the Shore they have forty or fifty Fathom Water. Eight and twenty or
thirty miles from Cape La-Hou lies Assine, where the Guinee Gold-Coast begins,
being twelve miles Eastward of Kerbe La-Hou, and ends at the plentiful Golden
Village Akera, making in all a Tract of fifty miles.

The Kingdoms upon the Seacoast are Atzin, Little Inkassan, Anten, Guaffo,
Fetu, Sabou, Fantin, Aghwana, Akara, Labbede, and Ningo. In Atzin are three
Villages, one of which is called Akombene, but the chiefest is Atzin. Little
Inkassan contains no place worthy remark, save Cabo-Das-Tres-Puntas. Anten
reckons within it self these following Villages, Bothrom, Poyera, Pando,
Takorary, or Anten, Maque, Jaque, Sakonde, and Sama. Three miles from Takorary
Guaffo shows it self first, then Aitako, or Little Commendo, two miles Eastward
of Sama: afterward Ampea, Kotabry, Aborby, and Terra Pekine.

In Fetu, on the Shore, there lies a little Hamlet, which the Natives call
Igwa, but the Merchant corruptly, Cabo Cors, from its near neighborhood to Cabo
Curso.

On the Borders of this Kingdom of Fetu, stands the famous Castle of Saint
George, or Del Mine, built by the Portuguese; on whose West Side lies Dana, or
Dang, where the Salt River Bensa enters the Sea, as the Sweet River Utri does
half a mile more to the East.

In Sabou you first discover the Township of Moure, and by it the Castle of
Nassau, built by the Hollanders.

Fantin shows it self Cormantine Ville, two miles Eastward of Moure; then
Anemalo, and a Cannon-shot Westwards thereof, Adja.

In Agwana are these places of name, viz. Craggy Point, Soldiers Bay, The
Devils Mountain, New Biamba, Old Biamba, Great Berku, Jaka, the principal
Sea-Town, Corks-brood, and Little Berku; all which Places have strong Rocks
before their Havens.

In Akara, on the Seacoast, stand Soko, Orsaky, and Little Akara, being
fifteen miles Eastward of Cormantine, and the last place of the Gold-Coast.

Two miles Eastward of Akara, in the Kingdom of Lebbade, stands a Town of the
same Name.

Lastly, in Ningo are four chief Ports, viz. Ningo, four miles from Akara, and
two miles from Lebbede; Temina, a mile from Ningo; Sinko the like from Temina;
and Pissy, all naturally fortified with high Cliffs.

Seven miles East of Akara on the Shore, Sinko comes in view; from whence
Journeying on still to the East you arrive at a Village, where the River Rio
Volta runs into the Sea: between these lies Fishers Town; and not far distant
Cabo Montego, in a Low-land, with several small Woods about it. From thence
Eastward to the Village Popou the Country is very plain and even; four miles
below Popou begins the Kingdom of Ardez, and ends at the Town Aqua: within
which Tract are contained the Hamlets of Foulaen and Ardre: Southward of which
lies Oost, a Tract of Land eight miles long, boasting a handsome City called
Jackeyne: three days Journey from thence stands Jojo, another good Town; and a
quarter of a mile farther, a City named Ba.

Sixteen miles Eastward of Little Arder, Rio Lagas runs into the Ocean; and
eighteen miles farther the River Benin, with a broad and wide Mouth, loses it
self in the Sea.

Four and twenty miles beyond Rio Forcado, having visited the Eastern Borders
of the Kingdom of Ouwerre, falls into the Sea by Cape Formoso, in four Degrees
and eight Minutes North Latitude.

Fifteen miles from Cape Formoso runs the River Reael, or Calberine; between
which Cape and River seven others have their course into the Sea: the first is
called Riotton, half a mile Eastward of Formoso; the second, Rio Odi, in the
Latitude of four Degrees and ten Minutes; the third, fourth, and fifth, are
called Rio Saint Nicholas; the sixth, Rio de tres Irmaus; the seventh, Rio
Sambreiro: a mile beyond which is the little Territory of Bani.

Two miles from the Easterly Point of Calbarine the River Loitamba, so called
by the Inhabitants, but by Seamen Rio Sant Domingo, has its course; all about
which the Country is very plain, even, and full of Trees. This Coast extends
it self East South-East sixteen miles.

Rio del Rey, a very wide and great River, comes next in view, then Camerones
Pickereen, very narrow; both which have on each side plain Ground, but full of
Bushes.

Between these two last named Rivers lies the High-land of Amboises, by the
Spaniards called Alta Terra de Ambosi; on whose West Side lies several
Villages, and among others Bodi, or Bodiway, otherwise Tesge, and three small
Islands, called The Islands of Amboises.

In the next place come these following Rivers, viz. Monoka, Borba, or Boura,
Rio de Campo, Rio Sante Benito, and Rio Danger: five miles from thence is a
great Bay, or Haven; from which six miles Southward lies a prominent Point,
called St. John's Cape, Fronted with a Ledge of Rocks.

About three or four miles Southward of St. John's Cape lies the Island near the
Main Land, called Ilhas des Korisko, that is, The Island of Lightning.

Fifteen miles more Southerly, under the Equinoctial Line, runs the River
Gabon, or Gaba, as Linschot calls it: and not far off, Point Santa Clare; and
eight miles Southward the Cape of Lopes Gonzalvez, in six and forty Minutes of
South Latitude.

Lastly, the River Olibatta, with the Cape of St. Katharine, and Ferdinando Vaz.

Peter Davity, Rotiere, Jarrik, Samuel Bruno, Linschoten, and other
Geographers, Limit this Coast of Guinee in this manner:

From the River Zenega to Cape Verde, the East reaches with its Creeks about
four and twenty miles. Near to the Cape Verde, and the Kingdom of Jalofs, Rio
de Barbazin falls into the Sea; adjacent to which are the Barbasins, or
Berbisins Countries, and the Kingdoms of Ale and Brokallo; the last of which
lies by the River Gambea, fifteen miles from Cape Verde; about which Kadamust
and Sanutus place the small Kingdoms of Gambea and Mandinga; and Southward of
these appears Cape St. Mary; from whence to the River Sant Domingo, it is
reckoned seventeen miles. All which places are inhabited by two sorts of
People, called Arriareos and Faluppo's; through whose Country the River Kaza
Manca takes its course, till mingling with the Sea; having on its Northerly
Shore, the People Iahundas; on the Southerly, the Benhuns; and in the East, the
Boramo's. Before the Mouth of Rio Sante Domingo, lie the small inhabited
Islands called Byagosar and Bysegos.

Between these Islands flows Rio Grande, or The Great River: on the Northside
lies the Kingdom of Guinala, whence you go directly to the Haven of Bigubia,
or Santa Cruix, where the Portugals have a Fort: All the Territory is inhabited
by Negro's, called Beafers. Upon a separate Branch of Rio Grande by the Haven
of Bolola, live a People which the Portugals call Tangos-Maos, or Lancados.
From the Southerly Point of Rio Grande to the Cape Virgen, the Mallus, or
Malluces, Vagai, and Korolines inhabit: and here begins the Country of Serre
Lions, wherein is Cabo Ledo, and Rio Das Gamboas, with three Islands called De
Bravas, and the Cape of St. Anne, lying in seven Degrees North Latitude.

From Cabo Ledo to Cape St. Anne, is about ten miles; after which follows the
River Das Palms, and somewhat farther, Rio das Gallinas, Hen-River: From
Serre-Lions to this place, it is forty miles: From hence to Cape de Monte,
eighteen; and from that to Cape Mesurado, sixteen; and within two miles
thereof, Mata St. Mary, where the Grain-Coast does begin: From Mata St. Mary to
the River St. Paul, are six miles, where the Mountains of the same Name, very
high and craggy, stretch themselves six or seven miles along the Coast: From
Rio de St. Paulo, to Rio Junk, are six; and from that to Rio Cestos, two miles;
whereto neighbors the Kingdom of Bitonin, a Member and Subject to that of Melli.

Opposite to these appears the little Island of Palms, close by which are
Ilhas Blancos, the two white Isles; from which to Cabo Formoso is commonly
reckoned five miles.

Then going forward, you arrive at the Cape de Baixas, where Rio dos Genueveses
and St. Vincents Stream flow into the Sea; next which lies Rio dos Escalvos,
that is, The River of Slaves, close by St. Vincents Cape: Then Cabo dos Palmas,
in four Degrees of North Latitude, and twelve miles from the Cape of Clement.

Next we come to the Rivers of Maio, Sueryo de Costa, Rio Bobra or Cobra, and
Mancum; upon this last stands Fort Agem or Axiem, near Akombene Ville, at whose
side lies the Cape of tres Puntas, in North Latitude of four Degrees and a half.

The Ivory Coast reaches from Cabo de Palmas, to the Cape tres Puntas, where
the Gold Coast begins, comprehending many Kingdoms, and extending to Rio Volta;
wherein first appears Anten, a place rich in Merchandise: Next Jabbe Chama,
formerly a Castle of the Portugals; then the Village Agitaki, by others called
Little Commendo; and not far off the Castle of St. George de Mine, built by the
Portugals, as upon the Point of Cape de Curso, the Hollanders have erected
Nassau Fort, in honor of the worthy Family of Aurange, so famously
Instrumental in raising them from the meanest degree of Distress, to make them
capable of assuming the High and Mighty Titles they now use: Not far from
thence lies Moree, or Morre, the chiefest place of Trade in the whole Kingdom
of Sabou; then comes the great and famous Fort of Kormentine or Karmandin, with
the places and Kingdoms thereunto belonging; viz. First Biamba, then Berku,
next Akara or Akkra, the Principal Town of the Kingdom of that Name; having in
the North the Kingdom of Akanie, whose Inhabitants go to trade for Gold with
other Blacks far up into the Inland.

Rio Lagos comes next in order, beyond which to Landward lies the Kingdom of
Dauma; from Rio Lagos to that of Benin, is about twenty and five miles; and
thence to Cape Formoso as much: Afterward in five Degrees North Latitude, you
come to the Royal River, vulgarly, Rio Reeal, from whence to Rio dos Kamarones,
is thirty miles; near neighbor to which is placed the Territory of Ambosine,
whereon abuts the Kingdom of Capons, that reaches far into the South, and lies
one Degree and a half in South Latitude; then the Coast shoots from the East
to the South, to the River Angra: From which to the Stream of Gabon or Gaba,
lying at the Equinoctial Line, are nine miles.

From the River Gabon to the Cape of Lopez Gonzalvez, lying one Degree
Southward of the Equinoctial, is about five miles; and a little Southerly, Rio
de Pero Diaz, or Poeradia, wherein breed Sea-Horses and Crocodiles; and lastly,
Rio de Ferdinando Vaz. In short, the Coast of Guiny, as Peter Davity holds,
reaches to the Cape of St. Katharine, and from thence to two Degrees and a
half South Latitude, to the Borders of the Kingdom of Lovango. Thus having in
brief run over the Coast of Negro-Land, we shall hereafter describe at large
the Kingdoms, Countries, and Places lying more into the Land.

THE KINGDOM OF ZENEGA, OR COUNTRY OF JALOFS, Together with the Dominions
belonging to it, of CAYOR, BAOOL, IVALA, ALE, etc.
MArmol names this Country Gelofe, and the Inhabitants thereof, Gelofs; Lib.
9. Jarric. l. 5. c. 44. Marmol 9. Borders of the Kingdom of Zenega.
but others call it The Kingdom of Zenega: By which Name in the common Maps or
Charts it is set down.

This Kingdom reaching far into the Main-Land, and bordering to the North on
Guinee, lies between the two Arms of the River Niger; the one called Zenega,
the other Gambea; but by Ptolomy, Darade, and Stachiris.

It bordereth Eastward on the Country of Tuchusor, whose Inhabitants Jarrik
makes the Negro-Jalofs; to the West side on the Ocean, the North bounded by the
River Zenega, and the South by the Kingdom of Gambea, Ala, The Bigness. Jarric.
l. c. 44.
and Brokallo. The Length is from East to West Seventy six miles, and upon the
Seacoast forty.

Under the Name of Gelofs Marmol compriseth many People, What People by Marmol
are comprised under the Name of Gelofs.
the chiefest whereof, which dwell on the Shore of the River Zenega, are the
Barbasins, by Jarrik called Berbesins, Tukurons, Karagols, Baganosen, the
People of Mani-inga, Mossen, and others beside.

THe Kingdom of Zenega, The Subordinate Kingdoms under Zenega.
or Great Joalof, holds several other inferior States subjected, as Baool,
Cayor, Ivala, and Ale; although others repute them for several, and free
Kingdoms, because most of the Kings rule with absolute Power, and no less than
the Great Jalof himself, without acknowledging any above them; though in
ancient times they paid Tribute; And not only these, but also all the Places
from Cape de Verde to Kassan; the Great Jalof writing himself King over
thirteen or fourteen Kingdoms; among which also the Barbasins are numbered.

THe Country of the King of Baool, The Kingdom of Baool.
called Louchi Four by the Inhabitants, begins on the East Side of the Village
Kamino, lying from Porto d' Ale, about sixteen miles.

The King keeps his Court two days Journey from the Seacoast, in Lambaya, the
chiefest City of the Kingdom, taking to himself the Title of Tain.

THe King of Cayor, The Residence and Court of the King of Kayor.
who also commands Cape de Verde, and the Places round about, has his
Residence in like manner two days Journey within the Country.

THe Dominion of Ivala, The Kingdom of Ivala.
severed by the River De la Grace from that of Ala, contains not above twenty
miles; whose chief Governor, called Walla Silla, dwells also two days Journey
up into the Country, but is indeed of little Power.

THe Country of Cayor, The Extents of the Countries of Cayor and Barsalo.
together with the Region of Barsalo, border upon the North, with the Kingdom
of Ale and Ivala.

THe utmost Borders of these two Jurisdictions, The Borders of Cayer and
Borsalo.
are two Villages, the one called Yarap, belonging to Cayor, and the other
Banguisca to Borsalo, divided one from the other, by a woody and desolate
Wilderness of eight or ten miles.

THe Principalities of Ale and Brokallo, The Kingdom of Ale and Brokallo.
(which last is much the bigger, and bordereth on the River Gambea) are
inhabited by the Barbasins.

In Zenega, In Zenega there are no strong Cities.
and the other inferior Dominions belonging to it, there are neither fortified
Towns or walled Cities, but only slight Villages and Hamlets.

The Country that runs out between the Rivers Zenega and Gambea, Cape de Verde.
makes that eminent Point, called, for its delightful Verdure seen afar off at
Sea, Cape Verde; but the Inhabitants name it Besecher; and Ptolomy, Arsinarium;
which they place in the height of ten Degrees and forty Minutes North Latitude.
This Cape is very Hilly, on the North-side dry and sandy, shooting far into the
Sea, and containing many populous Villages and Hamlets upon the Seacoast.

ABout a Bow-shot from the Main Land, The Island Goree.
in fourteen Degrees and thirty five Minutes North Latitude, appears an Island,
to which the Hollanders have given the Name Goree.

Refrisco, a Hamlet about three miles from Cape Verde; Refrisco.
within half a mile of which lies a high Rocky Cliff, encompassed with
dangerous Shoals, and undiscernable Sands, which the famous Pyrate, Claes
Campaen, first adventuring to approach, gave it the Name of Campaens Cliff.
Kampaens-Cliff.


A mile Eastward from Refrisco stands Camino, between Cayor and Baool. Kamino.


Two miles to the South-East lies Endukura, Endukura. Gunihemeri-Punto.
and at like distance Gunihemeri; beyond that, close by Rio Picena, the Village
Punto, that is, a Corner Point, which leads directly to Porto d' Ale, eight
miles from Goree, and six or seven from Refrisco; close adjoining to which in
the way to Ivala, lies the Wood Tapa. The Wood Tapa.


On the Haven of Ale stands a high Rock, called The Whale, The Whale.
which Seamen Sailing out and in, seek to avoid by all means, by reason of the
danger in coming too near it.

On the same Shore, not far distant, Cape Mast shows it self, Kaho Maste.
so called from the breaking of Masts of Ships that Sail by; which is done by
the Wind furiously breaking forth from the two adjacent Mountains: to prevent
that mischief the Mariners always strike Sail beforehand.

The Seacoast from Frisko to Cabo Maste is clear and deep, The Seacoast from
Refricco to Cabo Maste, and further.
so that the Ships may go close by the Shore, but about Porto d' Ale the Coast
is very foul, scarcely having six or seven fathoms Water, so that no Vessels of
Burden can come within a League of the Haven.

Three miles from Porto d'Ale, Porto Novo, that is, New Haven; Porto Novo.
and a mile and a half farther up, Punto Sereno, and Punto Lugar; Punto Sereno.
seven miles forward stands Ivala, an open Town, inhabited by Portuguese and
Mulata's: a Tawny People, Ivala.
generated out of a white Father and a Negro-Woman: which both Trade here for
all Commodities of the neighbor Regions.

Four miles Eastward of Ivala lies Candima, Kandima.
and six miles farther within the Land, Geroep, where an Alkayor, entitled
Embap, resideth, with some Portugueses.

THis as to the Maritime Parts: The Inland Places.
We will now proceed to set down the Inland Places.

To travel from the Shore to the Inland, there are but two convenient and
passable ways; the one extends it self toward the North-West of Refrisco, and
the other full North.

Upon the Edge of the first way a mile from Refrisco, lies Beer, Beer.
a Town so called; and on the second at like distance, a mile also from
Refrisco, Emdoen.
Emdoen a Lordship, and the Dewlling Place of a Great Man, entitled
Amarbulebu, but a Vassal to the King of Ivala.

Two miles from thence, toward the North, stands Jandos, Jandos,
under the Subjection of the beforementioned Amarbulebu; where grow many
Palmito or Date-Trees.

A little more to the North may be seen the Lake Eutan, The Lake Eutan.
nearly neighbor'd by Emduto, where always one of the Antientest is elected as
a Magistrate over the rest, being a place of good Accommodation and Rest for
all persons traveling those Parts: Six miles further East lies a Hamlet,
where the Licherins, their Priests reside, whose Superior is called Alletrop.

Thence you pass to Endir, Endir.
where together with the Blacks, four or five Portugal Families dwell, and some
Mulata's, who maintain themselves by Merchandise.

Half a mile onwards lies Sangueng, Sangueng.
where stand two large Portugal Houses, each having an exceeding great and tall
Tree called Talbassero before the Door, whose interwoven Boughs, that afford a
pleasant shade, make a delightful Arbor, whereinto they frequently go, and eat
and sleep there.

North-East from thence appears Magar, Magar.
where the King of Cayor many times keeps his Residence; Emboul.
and seven miles farther Eastwards Emboul, where the Kings Palace is divided
from the City with Pallisado's, interweaved with Bands and Palmito-Boughs, and
on the inside Planted with many Vines.

Before the Court lies a great Plain, The Court of Rayer.
where they use to break and exercise Horses, set round with Trees. Into this
none may enter, but such as are appointed, because the King's chiefest Wives
therein have their particular Apartments: yet about it, at the distance of a
Musket Shot, many persons dwell in small Huts or Tents, making a reasonable
Livelihood by petty dealing with the Servants and Attendants of the Court.

Ten miles from the Palace they have Embar, Embar,
a Town set apart only for the Reception and Entertainment of all such as come
of the Blood Royal, and may have any hopes to the Succession of the Crown.

Three or four miles farther, Bey-hourte.
upon the Shore of the River Zenega, is a large Hamlet termed Bey-hourte, where
the King's Customers and Receivers reside, for the Collection of all his
Revenues of all sorts thither brought to them.

About three miles from hence Westwards, The Fort of the French.
the French have a Fort, which they maintain to support the Trade they drive
there: but they pay to the King Sixteen in the Hundred for Hides, whereas the
Portugals pay but Ten, and but a little for other Wares.

In this Tract we arrive at Baool, Lambay.
whose Metropolis is Lambay, where the King usually resides; about two miles
from whence toward the North-West, lies Sangay, Sangay.
where sometimes the King takes his Divertisements.

Four miles removed Eastward stands Jamesil; Jamesil.
and about five and fifty miles to the Inland the City Borsalo. Borsalo.
But the Royal City of the whole Kingdom of Zenega is Tubakatum, Turbakatum.
the Court and Chamber of the Great Jalof.

THese Countries are usually infested with sultery heats, The Air, or temper of
the Climate.
so that the depth of their Winter is warmer than May with us; yet have they
stormy and wet Weather, Travaden, or Stormy weather; or Rains.
which they call Travaden, that is, Tempestuous, accompanied with much Thunder
and Lightning: these begin on the Seacoast, for the most part in June, and
continue till September; though sometimes accidental Storms happen in October
and May, but without Rain. These sudden Gusts arise commonly out of the
South-East; but the stiffest and strongest out of the East-South-East, which
too often prove dangerous to the Seamen.

The most unhealthy time here is in October; for then the Air parches with
Heat: but when the Winds begin to blow, those Breezes temper and cool the Air,
and so continues till toward May.

SEveral Rivers water this Country, the Chief of which are those of Zenega and
Gambea, both after many meandring Courses discharged their full Streams into
the Atlantic Ocean.

Ortelius believes, that Zenega is the same which Ptolomy named Daras or
Darade: but Lewis Cadamost maintains it to be the Niger of the Ancients, and
makes it a bordering Limit to Negro-Land: But that Opinion seems altogether
impossible; because (like the Nyle) Niger overflows and fertilitates the
Countries it passes through; whereas Zenega leaves all lying about it very lean
and barren.

Zenega has as many Names as it runs through Countries; Several Names. Marmol
l. 8. c. 3.
for the Jaloffs call it Dengueh; the Turkornols, Maso; the Caragols name it
Colle; the people of Bagano, Zimbala; those of Tombut, Iza; but the Portugals
not knowing its proper Name, styled it Zenega, from the Name of a Prince, with
whom, upon their first coming into these Parts, they contracted a League of
Amity.

Johannes Barros derives this Stream from certain Lakes lying in the East, The
Head-Fountains.
by Ptolomy named Chelonides; the greatest whereof at present, is called Goaga,
and the other Nuba. The Course of it is very long and straight, almost in a
right line, till about seventeen miles above Cape de Verde, disemboguing into
the Ocean.

In Zenega, though not so full of Water as Gambea, many Islands appear; Islands
of Zenega.
the greatest part whereof are full of Serpents and Wild Beasts: Nor is it
much profitable otherwise to such as inhabit near, being not passable in many
places, by reason of huge Rocks causing great and unusual Cataracts, like those
of the Nyle; which some of the Inhabitants call Huaba; others, Burto, that is,
a Bow; because sometime the Water is carried up into the Air by the force of
the Wind, in the manner of a Bow.

Many other great Rivers run into this, A strange Virtue of two Rivers.
especially one coming out of the South, and seeming to have Red-Water: between
these two, they say, is such a strange Antipathy, that whoever drinks the Water
of one, and presently that of the other, finds himself necessitated to vomit;
yet neither of them produce this effect single, nor both together, after they
have mingled their Streams, and run in one Channel.

Several kinds of Fishes and other Creatures breed herein, as the Hippopotamus,
or Seahorse, Crocodiles, and Serpents with little Horns; yet notwithstanding
all these inconveniences, the Water has a Prolifick Quality, foecundating
Cattle that drink of it.

SIx miles Southward flows Borsalo, full of great dry Sholes or Sands; The
River Borsalo.
on both sides several Villages show themselves, Fountain-Springs.
supplied with fresh Water from a clear Spring that rises on the Easterly
Shore, A Tree four fatsiom thick.
by a Tree above four Fathom thick: For the River Water, by the flowing of the
Sea, is brackish near forty miles.

NOt far from Punto Sereno flows a small River, called Rio de la Grace, being
a Border to the Kingdom of Ale; before whose Mouth lies a Shelf, many times
overflowed by the Sea; from which (as soon as dry) fresh and sweet Water
continually springs.

Somewhat more Southerly runs Bassangamar, full of great Rocks. The River
Bassangamar.


The next is Rio des Ostro's, or Oyster-River, The River of Oysters.
deep enough for the coming in of Ships.

Between Borsalo and Gambea, the Country all along is plain, but full of high
Trees, yet wholly void of Inhabitants.

About three miles from Jandos Northwards, The Lake Eutan.
is the Lake Eutan, six miles long, and half a mile broad. In time of Rain it
abounds both with Water and Fish, but in a dry Season so empty that they can go
over dryshod. The bottom for the most part covered with Simbos, or pieces of
Horn and Glass, which in Angola they use for Money.

Not far distant from hence is a Well of ten Fathom deep, A Well of sweet Water.
sending forth so pleasant Water, as if it were dulcified with Sugar or Honey;
from whence all the People fetch their drink: the other Wells, through the
whole Country are unwholsom.

The Inhabitants say, A strange virtue in Water.
(and if true it is worth observation and enquiry) that there are streams of
Water, of which, if the Horses or Camels drink, they die, but all other Beasts
drink thereof without prejudice: of which the Natives can give no other reason,
but that they have found it so by experience.

THe whole Country is plain, The Condition of the Soil.
and without doubt fit to bring forth all things in abundance; but it lies
altogether uncultivated, for that Zenega and Gambea, by their over-flux in the
Winter lay it wholly under Water; but in the Summer the heat of the Sun, and
want of Moisture make therein parched Chops wide enough to bury a Horse. By
these means the products of the Soil are few, which may be attributed rather to
the sloth and ignorance of the Inhabitants, Vegetables, or Plants. Sanus.
than the barrenness of the Earth: It Is true, about Cape Verde there grow Beans
of an unusual bigness, besides Rice, Cardamoms, or Grains of Paradise, and
Barley, each Grain as big as a Pease. The little Harvest they have is in
September, when it rains there, and the Rivers swell over their Banks.

The most usual Grain is Mill, Mill, or Mais.
and Indian Mais, which they put into the Earth dry, and only cover it lightly
with Sand, without any other labor bestowed upon it; by which slight kind of
Culture it grows and flourishes exceedingly, whereas, without that mixture of
Sand, the Earth first by the overflowing of the Rivers, and the Rains made
soft, and afterward made over hard again by the violent heat of the Sun, is
made barren, and incapable of bearing.

They have no Wine but what is made of Palm, in high esteem among them: Some
few places yield Dates, and a sort of Oil that gives a yellow tincture to all
that it is put into, or mingled with.

Close by Porto d' Ale lies a Wood called Tapa, The Wood Tapa.
full of high Trees, which give pleasant and delightful shade, under which the
Portuguese have their abode, and shelter themselves from the scorching beams of
the Sun.

Tobacco grows there wild, Tobacco.
without Planting; whose green Leaves plucked off, the People suck or chew with
great delectation. And certainly, if these People could be brought to labor,
they might propagate, not only Tobacco, but all other Plants in abundance.

Tamerindes grow here also, Tamerindes.
and Anana's, but few Oranges and Lemmons; yet there is another Fruit called
Foles, The Fruit called Foles.
in bigness and color like an Orange, but differing in taste, being sour and
full of great Seeds.

There grows also a wild Fruit like Dates, but smaller, yet very sweet; out of
which Wine is pressed, Sebanken-Wine.
but inferior to that of the Palm.

Syby-Trees afford Wine also, but of great esteem, and Fruit like a Coco-Nut,
but much smaller.

Kakatons are a great soft round Fruit, Kakatons.
outwardly of a dark-green color, and tart Juice.

Naniples resembles a Pear-Plumb, yellow without, and soft, having a Juice,
Naniples.
whose pleasant sharpness, and cooling quality, makes it useful in several hot
Distempers, if mingled with Water.

Nompata's grow to the bigness of a Wallnut, upon high Trees, Nompata.
sweet in taste, and of a greenish color.

Tambakumba, somewhat bigger Fruit than the former, Tambakumba.
is hot and unpleasant of taste.

Cotton also is naturally produced more than what the Inhabitants know what to
do with, and would grow in great abundance, Cotton.
if managed with Art and Industry.

There grows also in great abundance small Trees, about three Foot high,
Arbre-Tint.
called Arbre-Tint, whose Leaves bruised, yield a blue Color, wherewith the
Natives Dye their Clothes; the manner thus:

Of the Leaves, which in the Morning when the Dew lies yet upon them, they
pull off, and immediately stamp in a Mortar, they make Cakes as big as ones
Fist, they being dried in the Sun diverse days, are often pulverised very fine,
and then put into Earthen Pots: upon these Pots they set others bigger, having
a little hole at the bottom filled with Ashes of the same Tree, mixed with
Water, which they let drop through the Vent into the lower Pot, upon the common
Color: this moistened stuff they set ten days in the Sun, then scum off the
uppermost, which is the best, and therewith color the finest, and with the
undermost the coursest Clothes. The Dregs remaining are thrown away.

THe Country is exceedingly stocked with Cattle, especially Kine, Cattle.
as appears by the Hides, wherein their chiefest Trade consists, which are
Transported into Europe: The Herdsmen are found to drive them from place to
place for change of Pasture, by reason of the dryness of the Ground.

The King of Baool, called Luchi Four, keeps above six thousand Oxen; the like
do the Nobility, and others, according to their ability. There are also Camels,
small Muletto's, Asses, Horses, Goats, and Sheep, with Hair like Dogs: And the
Woods feed many Stags, Hearts, and other Deer, with crooked Horns like
Rams-horns.

There is a strange Beast, in Body like a Hog, but Footed like a Badger, that
creeps in the Earth like a Mole, and feeds on Ants, or Pismires, neither
yielding them profit, nor doing any damage. Here are also Hares, Civet-Cats,
Dogs, and Apes.

The Wilderness that borders upon the Kingdoms of Cayor and Borsalo, breed many
wild Beasts, as Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Wolves, Elephants and Alakarons, being
Creatures like Crabs, with two Claws, and a Sting in their Tails, like
Scorpions, for fear of which the Inhabitants, when they travel through these
desolate ways, make great Fires in the night to secure their persons. Nor are
the wild Beasts all that trouble these Wastes, for there are Thieves farther
therein, altogether as savage and inhumane as those other Beasts of Prey.

The Fowls there far exceed in number the Beasts, such are Popinjay's, Parrots,
Paraqueeto's, some small, others very large, with Ash-colored Necks, and green
and yellow Bodies, Geese, Ducks, Herons, Partridges, with black and white
spots; and in Fenny places, Snipes, Wild-Ducks, and many other small Fowl,
common with us in Europe. Such as we know not, nor have yet seen, are the
Akkaviak, as big as a Turkey, with a red tuft of Feathers upon their Crown,
which they can raise like Bristles, and spread so, that they will hang over
their Eyes; Hearons white and black, and large as Eagles, but not regarded,
because they eat nothing but Mans-dung. Pelicans, with Necks so great and long
as a Man's Arm.

Nor is the Land more productive of Beasts, Fishes.
than the Water is of Fish, whereof there is great variety; especially of
Carps, Crabs, Pikes, Herrings, and other like; Salmon only differing in the
whiteness of their flesh.

In the River De la Grace, many Crocodiles breed, which frequently coming on
Land, lie basking in the Sun; but upon the sight or approach of men instantly
(as if afraid) return into the Covert of the Water.

When the People which dwell on the Seacoasts are straightened of Provision, by
the scarcity of Harvest, they supply themselves with Fish, going with their
Canoo's, (wherein three persons may sit) out to Sea, without regard of Wind or
Weather.

LOcusts abound here in such prodigious numbers, Insects.
flying over in June out of the North-East, that they cover the Sky, and darken
the Sun, devouring all the ripe Plants; so that many Inland People starve to
death; and others for the preservation of their lives, sell themselves to the
Portugals for Slaves, as it happened in the Year Sixteen hundred forty one.

Serpents breed here in too great abundance; Serpents.
among which the most poisonous are of a Grass-green Color; others frequent
the Dwellings of the People, being very harmless, and of great use in
destroying Rats and Mice: These the Negro's will not permit any to kill,
believing that their deceased Ancestors are metamorphosed into such; and that
it is fatal for any to hurt them. When any is bitten with one of the venomous
kind, he immediately makes address to a Charmer, who cures them by Enchantment.
But if the Witch be abroad, he leaves a piece of Wood at his Door; which upon
touching effects the desire of the party infected. Some will leap up at a man,
and twining round about his body, girt him to death; others suck the milk out
of the Cows Udders; and some are so prodigiously great, that they can swallow a
Buck whole, Horns and all.

Here breeds a sort of Creatures called Leguanes, which make good Food; as also
Efts or Lyzards, which nesting in the Walls, run over people when they sleep,
causing Boyls to rise in the places they touch.

Between Beyhourt, Salt in the River of Zenega.
and the French Fort, the whole ground in the bottom of the River Zenega, is
grown over with Salt, which they break up in great pieces with Irons, and dry
it on the Land: thus dried, it grows very white; and which is more, that if all
be taken up one day, the next will afford the like quantity; so that it is a
perpetual Storehouse of that necessary Commodity; nor are the quantities
small, but sufficient to serve the whole Country, whereinto it is carried upon
Camels. The Profit arising hereby, the King of Cayor has bestowed on his
Priests; who for a Last of it, which is a Camels Load, take a Cape de Verde
Garment, and a Tub full of Mill.

THe Inhabitants exceed in Blackness those that dwell on the Coast of Mina and
Angola; The kinds of the Inhabitants.
well set, and keep themselves very clean by frequent Lotions, and daily
Washings: but withal are sullen and stubborn.

The Men are of various dispositions, and the Women light and unconstant, of a
craving humor, affecting best where they find most advantage: when they speak
they thrust forward their Necks, and utter their words in a furious tone: In
brief, they are in general by nature very wanton, thievish, treacherous and
lying, esteeming it a credit ingeniously to betray; unconstant, beyond measure
jealous, and so voracious Gluttons, that they may be said to devour rather than
eat.

They have great propensity to, and skill in Sorcery, Their propersity to
Sorcery.
so that they can charm Serpents, as we hinted before, whose venomous blood
they take, and mingling with the Seed of a Tree, empoyson their Weapons with
it, whose effect is so mortal, that who-ever is wounded therewith dies in half
an hour. They believe farther, that they can bewitch any in such manner, as to
cause them to die of a languishing Disease.

The King of Ivala, called Walla Silla, as they report, in eight or ten days
can bring together, if need require, five thousand Men, whereof about six
hundred Horse: a great many, considering the whole Country does not contain
above fifty or sixty miles.

The Inhabitants of Camino are Warlike, and keep themselves Neuters between the
two Kings of Baool and Kayor, by that means corresponding with both, and
suffering by neither.

THeir Houses are small and round, running up to a Point like a Cap; Their
Houses.
within which are places raised about a Foot and a half from the Ground,
covered with a Matt, whereon they sleep, casting over them another Matt of
Bull-rushes in stead of a Coverlet.

NEither the King of Zenega, nor any other, have any Walled Cities, No Walled
Cities in Zenega.
Fortifications, or Palaces; the best Habitations being only round Structures
made of Sticks, fetched out of the Woods, about three Fathom above the Ground,
encompassed with a Fence of Reeds, and covered with Straw, having a low Door,
so that without stooping none can go in or out.

Their Household Stuff is only Arms, Axes to cut Wood, Their Household Stuff.
an Iron Spade to throw up the Earth withal in stead of Ploughs, and some
Earthen Pots: to which the Sea-Coasters add Nets, and other Necessaries
belonging to Fishing.

THeir greatest Employment, as to matter of getting a Livelihood, Their
Maintenance.
is Digging, keeping of Cattle, and Fishing: some few follow Merchandising,
while others busy themselves either at the Forge, making Horseshoes and Arms
for the War, or in Weaving: in both which (though their Masterpieces) yet are
they but mean Workmen.

In the Village Kandina all the Men are Fishers, and the Women Merchants.

They live quiet, but poorly, and trouble themselves neither with pride, They
earnestly mind tilling of the Ground.
nor over-working themselves, only in Seed-time they go diligently to order
the Ground, and sow Mill, whereof in three Months time they receive the Crop:
and if they prove negligent in that, it turns to their great shame and
disgrace; for the greatest Men in the Country accompany their Laborers in the
Field.

After the Mill is cut up and brought into the Barn, Mill cut up, how ordered
by the Women.
the Women by stamping it in a wooden Mortar, separate it from the Chaff, then
cleansing it in the Wind, they put it in Straw Baskets of about three Fathoms
wide, and seven (...)

Refrisco, one of the chiefest places for Trade, on the Seacoast, affords
Salt-Hides, but smaller and sleighter than Porto d' Ale.

Sanutus says, that the Inhabitants about Cape de Verde, Pasture so many
Cattle, that oftentimes whole Ships are fraighted with Hides from the Haven of
Ale, in exchange of other Commodities; and that besides they have Ambergreece,
Gum-Arabick, Leather, Gold, Silver, Ivory, Salt, Civet, and Wax.

In the Town of Geroep a Market is held every forty days, where Clothes,
Cotton, Tobacco, Slaves, Horses, Camels, and other Beasts, with all sort of
Provisions for Food, are bought.

The like is in Kamino, where is also a continual Mart for Hides and Clothes;
and commonly two Hides are given for a Bar of Iron: But Crystal Beads, and
Brandy-Wine are the most ready Traffic, especially with such as dwell more
toward the Inland.

In Jawesil is a weekly Fair of Hides, Cows, Goats, Hens, Mill, and all edible
Commodities. Of this Market, called Gambayar, a Nobleman has the supervising,
who appoints Deputy-Clerks of the Market under him at certain Rents.

The Trade driven by the Merchants of Europe in these Kingdoms, In what places
of Zenega, and when the Euroan Merchants Trade there.
is transacted most between the beginning of October and the last of May: In
the rest of the Months, the Blacks are busy in Tilling of their Grounds.

The Wares desired by the Blacks, Wares brought over from Europe to Zenega.
and carried over thither out of Europe, are these following, of which Brandy
and Iron are the chief: for they use great quantities of Iron to make Bows and
Arrows, Harping-Irons, Assagay's, Javelins, and other Utensils for their
Fishing Trade, Tillage, and Husbandry.

Bars of Iron, of which eight and twenty or thirty make a thousand Weight.
Slight Inland Brandy-Wine. Brass Basins, from seven to ten Inches deep, with
narrow Brims. Copper-Bars, each of a pound weight. Wool-Cards. Blue small
Buckles. Red, yellow, and Blue Clothes. White; Blue, Red, and Yellow combed
Wool. Red and Yellow Yarn. Grain of all sorts. The best or common Allom. Fine
red, and long Beads like Coral. But at this day in stead of Crystal, rather
Coral, or Beads are used.
Mountain Crystal. Sea-mens Knives. Fine and course Shirts for men wrought on
the Neck, Breasts, and Sleeves. Sleazy Linen, which is called Akros on the
Coast of Guinee. Fine Diaper. Fine Cotton. Thin and white Paper. White and blue
Canns. Irish Mantles. Spanish Leather-Shoes. Men's Hats or Caps. Slight
Scemiters or Cuttles. Brass Trumpets. Course red Caps. White and course
Sowing-Thread or Yarn. Glass Bottles overlaid with Tin, and all sorts of Nails.
All these Wares are commonly packt in little Chests, which are there bartered
for good advantage; the Commodities received in Exchange, we mentioned before.

THe Weapons and Arms of the Jalofs are Lances, Bows and Arrows made of
Iron-Plates; a kind of Turkish Scimiter, crook'd like a Bow; round and broad
Shields made of very hard Skins; Darts, which they shoot in long Bows made of
Canes.

Others carry a great Shield made of Oxe-Hides, with a Scimiter and great Knife
by their side, a long Assagay or Javelin, with two other short Darts, by them
called Sinchirin; which by the help of a loop fastened in the middle of it,
wherein they put one finger, they can throw very steady, and with great
swiftness and strength.

They have a sort of small Horses for service, which they know how to ride with
great dexterity. The Moors of Barbary sometimes carry their Horses thither, and
sell them to the Blacks; every Horse for ten, twelve, or thirteen Slaves, each
Slave accounted for nine and twenty Bars of Iron. These Horses, as soon as they
have them, they charm by a certain peculiar method of Incantation, believing by
that means they shall pass shot-free in the Wars.

Such Horsemen as follow the Wars, mount and dismount with such active agility
as is admirable; for they can in full speed stand upright on the Saddle, turn
this way and that way, stand upon their hands, bow their bodies, lie down on
their sides, and take up any thing from the earth.

Their Arms are Scimiters, long Javelins with long Iron-points, wherewith they
strike, holding it in their hands without casting.

The Wars are seldom undertaken out of ambition, or for honor, or managed with
design to subject others, but principally out of revenge, and that extends
only to the burning of some Towns: if at any time they come to a Battle, the
greatest fury thereof vents it self on the one side to take, on the other to
keep the Royal Drum, by them called Omlambe, and in no less esteem there with
them, then the Royal Standard of the Eagle with the old Romans.

The present King of Ivala, a free and loving Prince, courteous toward
Strangers, is constrained to be always in a posture of Defense against the King
of Baool, a Tyrant, and delighting in cruelty and oppression.

When the King of Ale intends to War upon his Neighbors, he calls a Council,
with whom he Treats in a Wood close by the Palace, in which they sit about a
round Hole three Foot deep, with their Heads hanging down. This Hole they cover
after the rising of the Council: for the King says, That the Hole will never
disclose his Secrets, letting them understand thereby, that none shall know
what their Determination is. By this means, and for fear of being punished as
Traitors and betrayers of their Country, their Enemies can never learn ought
of their Resolution till it be brought to effect; which without doubt is the
chiefest cause of their success.

Their Government is not Hereditary, from Father to Son, The Inheritance of the
Crown.
but three or four Grandees elect a King amongst them of the noblest Stock,
whom sometime presently after the Election they drive out of the Country again
upon the least distaste.

When the King dies, his eldest Brother takes upon him the Dominion; and after
his Decease, all his other Brothers successively; and when they are all dead at
last, the Children, according to their degree of age; or for want of Children,
the eldest Son of his Brother.

The Subjects show great honor and respect to their Kings, The Respect of the
Subjects to their Kings.
using many Ceremonies when they come into his Presence, saluting him first
afar off upon their Knees, bowing down to the Earth, and with both Hands cast
Sand upon their Heads and Shoulders, thus they creep forwards kneeling till
they come within two Paces of him, and then speak; having said what they
intended, the King answers in few words with great state.

When any Nobleman comes to the King, he puts off his Shirt, and lays it upon
his right Shoulder and Arm, appearing only in his close Coat, called by them
Joula, and so draws near to the King; who is always attended with a great Train
of Courtiers and other Servants, who, as a Guard to his Person, are Armed with
Assagay's, and other Weapons of Defense.

Every Town on the Coast of Cape Verde has an Algayere, or Alkaid, set there
by the King of Cayor, to receive the Custom of Foreign Ships, that is, three
Bars of Irons for each Vessel; but when they find any Merchants unexperienced
in their Modes, they extort as much as they can get; besides, every Ship pays
to the Alkaid for their Water ten Bars of Iron, or the like value in other
Merchandise, and sometimes a Cask of Brandy-Wine.

In the Year fourteen hundred fifty and five, The Kings of Cape de Verde are
called Burdomel.
a great Prince named Burdomel had Dominion over all the places about Cape
Verde, from whom, ever since, all the Kings of Cape Verde in general are called
Burdomel, as the Roman Emperors were styled Caesar, and the great Egyptian
Monarchs Pharaoh at first, and afterward Ptolomy. The proper Name of the
present King is Daur, but by the addition of that Royal Title which signifies
King, called Burdomel Daur.

This Name of Burdomel, The King, is taken by some for a Place about Cape
Verde, and accordingly so set down in the Maps of Africa.

HEre are no peculiar or Municipal Laws; The Law of the Country.
for indeed the Law or light of Nature is the only Rule they steer by: for
when a Man dies, and leaves behind him Wives, Children, Cattle, Slaves, and
Iron, wherein their chiefest Riches consists, the Brothers and Sisters of the
Deceased take all, without any consideration of the Children, whom they leave
to the wide World to help themselves as well as they can.

As to matters of distributive Justice, or punishments of Crimes, they are in a
manner strangers to both; the greatest extravagancies being bought off, and
pardoned by paying of Slaves, or some other Mulct to the King.

THeir Religion, Their Religion.
if so we may call it, is generally Paganism; for they greet the New Mood with
horrible roarings, and strange gestures of adoration: they offer their
Sacrifices in the Woods before great hollow Trees, wherein they have placed
Idols: and this they do rather out of custom then zeal, using neither form nor
method in their Devotions, nor any particular Assemblies, but every one
following the dictates of his own humor, makes a God in his own Fancy, which is
as often varied as their Lusts or Passions raises in them other motions: Some
of them seem to incline to Mahumetanism, and admit among them some Marabouts;
but so little have they prevailed upon them, that they know not what the Sala
means, nor do the Priests any other Service than write Arabic Characters on
small Papers, which sewed in little Leather Purses, are worn by the Blacks on
their Necks, Arms, Legs, Heads, and every part of their Bodies in great
numbers, firmly believing, that thereby, in time to come, they shall be freed
of all troubles and dangers, to the great gain of the Marabouts, who sell them
at no small Prices. And although they know there is a God, yet have they no
understanding to worship him: and use Circumcision the fifth or sixth Year; and
then, if they be asked the reason thereof, they can give no other account, but
that it is an ancient Custom received among them, but farther know not.

None of the Priests are permitted to Marry but in their own Families, nor may
teach any to Read or Write without the chief Marabout's License.

They hold the Christian Religion in great abomination, affirming, that God who
gives all things, and can do what he pleases, and causes Thunder, Lightning,
Rain and Wind, is Omnipotent, and needs neither praying to, nor to be set forth
in so mysterious a way as that of the Trinity: and thus Heathenism and Idolatry
generally possesses the whole Country.

THE KINGDOM OF GAMBEA, CASSAN, CANTOR, AND BORSALO.
Adjoining to Zenega on the North is Gambea, The Kingdom of Gambea.
a small Kingdom by the River of the same name. On the other side of the River
Gambea lies the Jurisdiction of Cassan, Great Cantor, and Borsalo, all
heretofore subject to the King of Mandimanza, but now have Princes as absolute
as himself, and acknowledging no Superior.

The King of Great Cantor keeps his Residence continually on the Southerly
Shore of the River Gambea, The King of Canter.
having many inferior Dominions under his Obedience.

The King of Borsalo commands on the North-side of the same River to
Tantakonde. The King of Borsalo.


Both these Princes have several populous Towns belonging to them, but, Several
Towns lying on Gambea.
as we said, all without Walls, and situate on both the Shores of Gambea,
which like the Nyle, overflowing it Banks, much enriches and fertilitates the
neighboring Soil.

The Seacoast hereabouts shooting from the South is very low, and in that
regard, unless in very clear weather, hard to be known; but more forward the
Land rises high, is full of Trees, and spreads North-East and South-West.

At the Mouth of this River stands the Town Barra; Barra.
so named, because every Ship that comes thither must give a Bar of Iron, which
they call Barra, to the King of Borsalo.

Above the South-Point stands a Town called Nabare, Nabare.
within a Wood.

Three miles higher on the same Point lies a Town called Bintam, inhabited by
the Portugals. Bintam.
On the South Side of the River, twenty miles from the Mouth, Tankerval.
Tendeba.
appears Tankerval; and not far thence a Town called Tendeba, twelve miles from
which last may be seen Jayre, Jayre.
in a narrow Creek.

Half a mile beyond the Creek, on the South Side, lies the River and Town
called Jambay, Jambay. Mansibaer. Barraconda.
with another named Mansibaer, on the North.

In the last place you come to Barraconda, above which the Sea flows not; so
that whoever will go higher, must Row against the Stream.

After a tedious and toilsom Journey of ten days you arrive at Tinda; Tinda.
above which stands Joliet; Joliet. Munkbaer.
and six days Journey from that a City called Munkbaer, to which, without great
hazards, there is no coming; from whence in nine days you come to the City
Jayr, and so to Silico, an Inland Town, yet a place of great Trade.

Five and fifty miles within the Land stands Borsalo; and eighty five miles,
Little Cassan; Small Cassan. Groat Cassan.
three miles above which the vast and great City Cassan shows it self, whose
side is washed by the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, and where the King keeps
his Court.

AMong other Rivers that water these Countries, The River Gambea.
one of the principal is Gambea, or Gambia, so called by the Portuguese; after
the example of the Blacks, who call all the Tracts of Land, reaching from the
Mouth of it to the Gold-Coast Gambu. Its Mouth is about three miles broad, has
five fathom Water, and lies in thirteen Degrees and nineteen Minutes North
Latitude, between the Zenega and Rio Grande.

It draws the original from the great River Niger, Its Original.
at the place where it makes a great Lake, and divides in four branches, which
are afterward named Zenega, Gambea, Sante Domingo, and the Great River; all
which after several long courses, having visited and refreshed these hot
Countries with their pleasant Streams, at last near Cape Verde, pour forth
their Waters into the Great Ocean; but especially Gambea, with so strong a
Current, and such abundance of Water, that sixteen miles in the Sea (as they
say) that Water may be taken up.

They may row up in this River against the Stream near a hundred miles; but
then are stopped with a strong Water-fall, which with an impetuous noise pours
down over the Rocks, and by that means becomes unpassable. The Channel is for
the most part very broad, especially from the Gold-Coast of Cantor or Reskate,
to its Mouth; and by the receiving of many other Streams becomes full of water;
and gliding also easier by reason of the breadth, to the great ease of all
Vessels that go up against the Stream.

By the Village Tinga, the River is fordable, but none dare venture to wade
through it, but the Blacks, for fear of the Crocodiles; however on both its
Shores are many Villages, and within its bosom diverse small Islands.

Twelve miles upwards of Tondebu, half a mile above the Creek Jayre on the left
hand, lies a little Island, betwixt the which and the main Land, the Stream is
no broader than a Musket Shot, shallow, and runs in many Meanders, but higher
on the left side is four or five fathom deep.

About two miles about Mansibaer, lies another Island, that so straightens the
passage, that without great trouble they cannot go through it.

Not far from Nabare, half way between the Mouth of the River and the Gold
place of Cantor or Reskate, lies Elephant-Island, so called, for the great
number of Elephants which breed there.

THe Air in this Country is continually hot, The Air.
though with some little variation from the beginning of June till the end of
September, in which time it rains every day at Noon; and at Night from the East
and South-East, continual Lightnings and Thunder.

But the greatest Rains falls from May till the beginning of August, which
causes the Rivers to swell and overflow their Banks, and that proves a very
unhealthful time; for the first Rains falling upon the naked people, cause
blotches and spots, and on the Clothes of the Whites, it breeds Worms, but
after a little time that inconvenience vanishes.

ALl along the Banks of Gambea, and about Cassan, Vegetables or Plants.
Tobacco grows plentifully, which the Portugals fetch with Sloops both green
and dried, without making up in Rolls; Cotton also, with Mill, Rice, Lemons,
Oranges, Apples, and Ananasses, but not in such abundance as some have written.

On the Seacoast are Trees above seventeen Paces in compass, and not twenty in
height; whereas further into the Country, they are tall and slender.

BEasts fit for labor and service breeding here, are Camels, The Beasts.
small Horses and Asses: But they have besides many Cows and Oxen, as appears
by their Hides yearly brought into Europe; as also Goats, Sheep, Deer red and
fallow, with diverse others, besides the Wild Beasts found in the Wildernesses,
viz. Lions, Tigers, Baboons, Otters, Elephants, and the like.

This plenty of Cattle makes Provision in those places so cheap, that about
Gambea you may buy a Beast of three or four hundred weight for a Bar of Iron,
although at Cape de Verde they pay four or five Bars for the like.

THe people heretofore were savage and cruel, but since they have in some sort
by the Converse of Christian Merchants, received some notions of Religion, they
are become tractable and courteous.

The Kings (as we said) keep a Majestic Port, according to their manner of
State, seldom appearing in public to their Subjects.

They are all great lovers of Brandy, and will drink thereof even to excess:
Their propensity to Brandy.
And if any Forreigner, Merchant, or other, desires Audience of the King, he
can by no means sooner effect it, than by presenting him with a Bottel of
Brandy.

The King of Great Cassan called Magro, who spoke the Portugal Tongue, The King
of Cassan a great Sorcerer.
yet could not be won to Christianity, was well skilled in Necromantick Arts,
whereof one Block in a Journal of his Travels gives a particular account: We
will only instance in one or two of his prestigious actions. He commonly wore
as many enchanted Chains without trouble, as would have over-loaden a strong
Man. One time, to show his Art, he caused a strong Wind to blow, but confined
it only to designed limits, so that the next adjoining places were not
sensible of any violent motion. Another time desiring to be resolved of some
questioned particular, after his Charms a smoke and flame arose out of the
Earth, by which he gathered the answer to his demand.

MOst of the Wealth of the Inhabitants consists in Slaves, Their Riches.
though some have Gold; for among them are few Artificers, and those that are,
only Weavers and Smiths, Artificers
who are ill provided of Tools for their Work, yet make shift therewith. The
Smiths make short Swords, and knowing how to harden the Iron, form the Heads of
their Assagay's or Lances, Darts or Arrows, and all sorts of Instruments with
which they Dig the Earth. Their Bellows are a thick Reed, or hollow piece of
Wood, in which is put a Stick wound about with Feathers, which by the moving of
the Stick makes the Wind. The Iron which they Forge is brought over out of
Europe thither in Bars, in Pieces of eight or ten Inches long, and are
exchanged with great gain in barter for their Inland Commodities. The Weavers
make Clothes of Cotton, which by the Merchants are carried to Serre-Lions,
Serbore, and the Gold-Coast, and there bartered for Ivory, red Wood, and Gold.
These Clothes, because made also about Cape Verde, are called Cape de Verde
Clothes; being of three sorts: the best and chiefest, called Panossakes, are
two Else and a half long, and an Ell and a half broad, whitened upon the
Ground, and with Lists commonly of eight Bands sewed together: the second
Bontans, two Else long, and an Ell and a half broad, very neatly Stripped,
having six Lifts sewed together: but the third sort, named Berfoel, are great
Clothes, made with blue Stripes: all which are commonly bought for Iron, that
is, one Panossakes for one Bar of Iron, three Bontans for two Bars, and two
great Barfoel Clothes for one Bar.

EVery one, Their Tillage.
be he Spiritual or Temporal, old or young, must Till his own Ground, if he
intends to eat, the King only, and some chief Nobles, and ancient decrepid
people excepted: for the doing whereof they use no Ploughs, but dig the Earth
with a kind of Mattocks in the time of their Rain, because then the Ground is
softened.

THeir Food is Mill, Their Food.
Shell-Fruit, Milk, and some Flesh. They Bake no Bread, but boil it as we in
these Countries do Puddings, which they eat hot. Their Drink is Palmito-Wine,
and for want of that, Water; but the Priests with their whole Families drink no
sort of strong Drink, but only Water.

THe Houses, Their Houses.
like those in Zenega, are only round Huts, with Walls of Reed, Lime, and
Earth, covered with Canes, and environed with a Pallisado, or Hedge of Canes.

THe Habit of this People, Clothes. Sanutu^.
as well Men as Women, is only a Shirt that reaches down to their Knees, with
long wide Sleeves, a pair of Cotton Breeches, and little white Hats, with a
Plume of Feathers in the middle. The Maidens cut and prick their Breasts,
Thumbs, Arms, and Necks, with Needles, in fashion of Embroidery, and burn in
these marks that they may not wear out; those works being esteemed a great
Ornament.

Their Arms are the same as we mentioned before in Zenega: Sanutus says, they
are very warlike and stout, which they have often manifested, when in their
little Almadyes they adventured to board some Portugal Carvils, without regard
either to their Canon or other Arms. For though these Blacks have no hopes of
Victory, and many of them are slain, yet they regard not their lives, nor ever
run away from the Fight.

They work also their Almadyes and Canoos with such dexterity, that they force
them forward with incredible nimbleness, and betake themselves upon the
approach of Ships which they think will damnifie them, to the mouth of some
small River.

The People of Europe drive a great Trade in this River of Gambea, Their
Merchandise.
transporting these Merchantable Commodities.

Iron Bars of one, two, or three foot long. Sleasie Linen. Fine Ticking. Fine
Shirts for men. Slight Gilded Rapiers. Salt. Hats or Caps. French Caps.
Mountain Crystal. Beads of several Sorts and Colors. Amber. Yellow Buckles.
Linen Sheets. Copper Kettles. Copper Basins. Cans. Combs. Paper. Tin and
Copper Bracelets. Enameled Bracelets. Rings. Pendants for the Ears. Iron
Kettles. Chopping-Knives. Ordinary Seamens Knives, Fish-hooks. Trumpets. Common
and gilded Looking-Glasses. Cloves, and such like.
The European Paper is much desired by the Marabouts or Priests.

In Exchange of these Commodities the Merchants receive Hides, Ivory, Gold, and
other Merchandises.

The King of Cassan gives liberty and freedom to the English, Portugals,
French, and Dutch, to come in his Country, and to traffic there.

The Inhabitants themselves in diverse places trade one amongst the other.

The people of Cape de Verde, Refrisko, Porto de Ale, and Ivala, come with
Sloops to this River Gambta, and buy Hides, Wax, Elephants Teeth, Rice, Gold,
Cotton-Clothes, Blacks, and Tobacco, which they barter and exchange, some to
Europe, some up higher into the Country, to their no small profit and gain.

In the Village Tinga are some Hides and Teeth; so also in Tankerval and
Tondeba, together with Rice and Cotton.

In the Village of Mansigaer in the middle of February, is held a Fair, A
Market or Fair in Mansigaer.
whereto resort many people out of diverse Countries, with Mats, Hens, Bucks,
Cows, Cotton, and Salt; yet does not this Commerce bring thither riches, or
many Inhabitants, being wholly possessed by a few poor Portugueses and
Mulatto's. The principal Merchandises to be had there, are Wax, Hides,
Elephants Teeth, and a little Gold brought thither out of the Inland Country.
Here also is kept every Monday in a plain Field, a petty Market, where every
one brings to sell what he is minded to dispose of. And in case they want
Money, they exchange all other things for Matts.

In Cassan are two yearly Fairs, whither come a great concourse of People to
buy and sell all sorts of Wares, nay Gold it self. The Portugals and Mulata's
that scatteringly inhabit by the River side, send their Slaves into the
Country with Iron and Beads, to buy Hides and Ivory, which they carry on their
Heads, and bring to the River.

The Moors of Barbary come in great numbers, with Camels to Trade at Yaye for
Gold, whereof that Country affords great store, and return home richly laden
with it.

The manner of dealing between these People and the beforementioned Arabians,
How the Trade is driven by the People of Taye.
in exchange of their Goods, is this: They of Barbary go to an appointed place,
where they lay their Wares in several heaps, distinct one from the other; which
done, they go away and return not for a whole day: in the mean times the
Natives come, and lay over against every heap as much Gold as they value the
Parcels at, then go away, leaving on the place both their own Gold and the
Merchants Goods; who upon his return finding that he has his value in Gold,
takes it away and leaves his Merchandise; but if he expects more, he divides
his heaps, and lets them so remain; which the People seeing, lay more Gold, or
if they think not fit to give more, they take that away which they laid there
first: thus in three times the Bargain is driven and ended. The reason why the
People will not be seen, is the loathsomness of their Bodies; for their lower
Parts, through the excessive scorching of the Sun, are always raw and sore, in
such manner, that if it were not for sprinkling them with Salt, they would rot;
and that is the cause why they so much desire Salt.

TInda yields great abundance of Hides, but the trouble, and almost
impossibility of coming up the River with great Vessels, very much hinder
Trade; besides Iron bears not so good a Rate there as in other places, because
the Inhabitants say, they have Ore thereabouts, of which they can make it: But
Salt is a most desirable Commodity, not only there, but indeed over all the
Country. At the first discovery of these Places they carried thither a bad and
blackish Salt, which went off well enough; but since the People have gained
skill and knowledge so to distinguish, that they will not deal for it, but
only for the whitest; in exchange whereof they give Slaves, Hides, Elephants
Teeth, Cotton, Cotton-Yarn, Cotton-Cloathes, and Gold.

In the City Joliet, lying beyond Tinda, there is, as the Blacks relate,
abundance of Gold; and the like at a Place called Munkbar: whither also the
Arabians and Moors of Barbary come, with Camels laden with Salt, and all sorts
of Merchandises, which they barter only for Gold. But the Inhabitants of the
City Sillico buy Salt of the Portuguese for Blacks.

THe Marabouts, Their Faith, Religion, and Worship.
or Priests, which for the most part reside in Silligo, dispense with the
seriousness of their Profession to Trade for Gold, not only to Borsalo, but
higher up the River; yet as a cloak to their covetousness, they live retired,
and separate themselves from the rest of the People: It Is true, they have a
kind of dark Notions concerning the Old Testament, and can darkly Discourse of
Adam and Eve, of the Deluge, of Moses, and many other like things, yet are in
all things absolute Mahumetans. They own God, whom they call Alla, and
according to the Alcaron, admit neither Idols nor Images; they use Circumcision
and their Friday Sabbaths, but not so strictly as to forbear their ordinary
business and employments. Besides themselves none can, or may learn to Write or
Read, and that ignorance nuzzles them up even to the neglect of all acts of
Devotion whatsoever.

These Santons, as other Mahumetans, make mention sometimes of Christ, whom
they call Nabe, and say he was a great Prophet, who wrought many Miracles, and
had a Mother named Mary; but particularly deny him to be the Son of God,
objecting that God is invisible, incomprehensible, and a Spirit, which cannot
Beget, neither needs a Son to be with him.

When any of them die, he is buried with all his Gold; and he is reputed the
happiest who is buried with the greatest quantity: so that notwithstanding all
their pretensions to zeal both living and dying, Gold is their only Deity.

THE KINGDOM Of the BARBESINS.
NExt to Zenega on the Seacoasts, lies the Barbesins, Barbesins.
or according to Sanutus, Berbesins, to whom Jarrik gives the two Kingdoms of
Ale and Brokallo.

The Head City and Court of the King, is called Jongo, Jongo.
whose Inhabitants have many Horses, and the neighboring Woods breed many
Elephants, but their Teeth want much of the bigness and beauty of those in
other places. Upon the utmost Border of the Country, stands the Town Embamma,
and at the distance of three miles, a Village called Bangasia.

The aforementioned Jarrik places on the Seacoast below Cape Verde, The
Barbesin-Islands.
three Islands, which from the neighboring people he calls the Barbesin-Islands
being altogether uninhabited, and producing only large Trees and unknown
Fowls, the bordering Sea breeding many great Fishes, one sort especially, by
the Spaniards called Dorades, frequently weighing five pounds.

THe Women of this place, says the same Jarrik, Their Customs, or Manners.
cut on their Skins diverse Shapes of Beasts, afterward anointing the gashes
with a certain Herb that makes the Marks never wear out. This manner of
Ornament they highly esteem.

Another sort of Trimming the elder people use, boaring holes in their
Under-lips, wherein to keep the Orifice open, they stick Thorns and round
pieces of Wood.

THE PEOPLE OF ARRIAREOS, AND FALUPPOS.
BEtween Cape Saint Mary and the River of Saint Domingo, Arriareos and Faluppos.
live two sorts of People, called Arriareos, and Faluppos.

The Country is low, but full of Cattle and Fowl of diverse sorts, which are
easily purchased at low Rates, and for mean Commodities; for you may buy a Cow
for a Copper Basin of three or four pound weight, or for an Ell and a half of
slight Linen, a Buck for less, and a Hen for three strings of little Beads;
of Palmeto Wine they sell willingly two Gallons for two or three strings of the
like Beads: Nor indeed do they set a high rate upon the best of their
Commodities.

THey are as the other people, The kind of the Inhabitants.
black of Color, but better shaped, and of a more pleasing aspect than those
of Angola; but so jealous and distrustful, that they will never come aboard
Merchant-ships, unless some go first on shore out of them; and being asked the
reason of this their wariness, they answer, that the Whites under pretense of
friendship, have many times seized them, and carried some of them out of their
Country against their wills, as Slaves.

BOth Men and Women go naked; Clothing.
below their Wastes, from their Navels to their Knees they cover with a Cloth;
but young men and boys wear a Girdle, whereto they fasten a Cloth, which drawn
before their Privy-Parts, they wind between their Legs.

They have (as the rest of their Neighbors) two, They have many Wives.
three, four, or more Wives, every one according to his ability and estate,
each valuing another wealth by the multiplicity of their Wives.

The Rivers, Countries, and Kingdoms lying near the Sea, from the River de Rha,
to the Kingdom of Serre-Lions.
IN this Description we shall begin from the River of Gambea, about thirteen
miles beyond which lies in twelve Degrees and seven and twenty Minutes on the
Sea Coast, the Mouth of the River De Rha, so named by the Natives, but by
Jarrik and other Geographers, called Cassamanka; the Banks whereof are Limits
to the Kingdom of Casamge.

The next place called by the Portuguese, Cabo Roxo, lying in twelve Degrees
and fifteen Minutes North Latitude; which by the falling a way off the Coast, a
small Wood shows it self very remarkable to Mariners at Sea: Five miles from
Cabo Roxo to the South-East, is a place by Seamen called, The Great Rough Bay;
adjacent to which stands the Town Besu; and two miles and a half farther, the
small rough Point.

Next in order follows Sante Domingo's River, otherwise Jarem, which seems to
be a Branch of the Niger. There are diverse other Points and Banks in the
Seacoast between Cabo Roxo and this River; as The Red Point, The North Bank,
The South Bank, or Sea-gull, The Point of Easter Even, and The Black Point.

In the Latitude of eleven Degrees and eight Minutes North Latitude, flows the
River Katcheo, a Branch of Sante Domingo, two miles East from the Rough Point;
at the entrance of it lies some dry Sand, although the whole Current glides
through a muddy ground to the Village Cassio.

By Katcheo it meets with another Branch, called Sargedogon, Eastward of
Gambea, but runs to Katcheo. The Blacks of Katcheo, when any Ships come out of
Europe thither, come with their Canoos to Traffic.

Beyond Domingo, the River of the three Islands, called in Spanish, Rio de las
Iletas, takes its course through the Country of the Papais, which Jarrik
names Buramos; To the South of which, opposite to Guinala and Besegui, lie
seventeen other Islands, entitled, The Bigiohos, or Bisegos.

Next the Buramos, or Papais, the Kingdoms of Guinala and Biguba, are embraced
between two Arms of Rio Grande, the one called Guinala, and the other Biguba,
from the Countries they conterminate, being in eleven Degrees North Latitude,
about four and forty miles from Cape Verde, between the Islands of Jagos, or
Byagos.

More Southerly appears the River Danalvy, passing through the Countries of the
Malucen, by the Inhabitants called Kokolis; then you come to Nunno Tristan, and
a mile and a half farther to Tabito, or Vegas, which loses both Name and
Current in the Sea, near the Territory of the same Name.

Having left Vegas, you arrive in the Country of Cape, watered by the two
great Rivers Kaluz and Karceres.

More to the Inland, on the River Gambea, the Kingdoms of Mandinga and Beni
are seated.

A little farther to the South lies the River Marine; and on the Seacoast the
Mountain and Kingdom of Serre-Lions.

Between the Bisegos and Serre-Lions, in the River Sorres, lie the Islands of
Tamara, or Veu Usvitay, commonly called by the Portuguese, De los Idolos; and
Southward of Serre-Lions, the Bannannes Islands.

Thus much as to the general Description; we will now proceed to each
particular, and therein for method sake, begin with the Kingdom of Kassamanse.

THE KINGDOM OF KASANGAS, OR KASSAMANSE.
THis Kingdom lies encompassed as it were by the River De Rha, The Kingdom of
Kassamanse.
on all sides but the East, where the Benhuers give it Limits. It is a large
Tract of Ground, and by the moistening of the aforementioned Rivers very
fertile, so that it produces not only great store and variety of Fruit, but
also pleasant Vales and luxuriant Meadows for the Pasturing of Cattle.

The Portugals have in this place by the River side a Fort called St. Philips,
of a convenient strength, well Manned, and Planted with several Pieces of
Ordnance, to withstand any sudden and treacherous On-slaught of the Natives.

THe King of Kassamanse pays Tribute to another called Jaxem, Their Dominion.
who himself has for Superior (as all the rest of the petty Princes
thereabouts) the King of Mandinga.

THe Trade formerly accustomed to be driven in Kassamanse, Their Trade.
the Portuguese have for convenience removed to Katcheo, often before mentioned.

THe Kassamansines are downright Pagans, Their Religion.
devoted to one Idol, among others, named China, signifying God, in whose
honor, on the Twenty ninth of September at midnight, they solemnize a high
Festival: at which time some of their Priests, or Soothsayers, which they call
Arakam, (as indeed they are all no better than Magicians and Witches) wears a
blue Scarf, wherein they depict a bundle of Rice Branches, intermixed with
Bones, in remembrance, perhaps, of such as have out of the height of their
blind zeal sacrificed themselves to this Idol; under whose form the Devil
beguiles them in several manners. This Priest begins a circular Procession,
which finished, they place it in a hollow Tree, offering before it many
Burnt-sacrifices, and other Oblations of Honey, and the like: At length ending
their Devotions, in stead of Prayers, with several extravagant and inarticulate
Ejaculations, they betake themselves to their particular Abodes.

THe Portugals here (as in Zenega) come with Ships laden with all sorts of
Ethiopian Wares, Their Trade.
which they barter with their Countrymen resident here to great profit for
Negro Slaves, which they transport to Carthagena in the West Indies, and there
sell dearer by ten Rials a piece, than any either of Benin or Angola; and not
without cause, for these are cleaner limbed, better shaped and featured, of a
notable capacity and understanding, but withal stubborn and suspicious: but
time and experience must discover those qualities, while in the interim their
outward Semblance advances the Market: nor are the numbers of them small, as
will easily appear, if we consider that the best Commodities brought hither,
are for the most part exchanged for such; being either purchased by War, or
else under the pretext of some imperious and arbitrary Laws by the Kings and
Great Men of the Country, first enslaved, and then sold. The like Trade is
driven at St. Jago, one of the Salt Islands, Cape Verde, Refrisko, Porto de
Ale, and Ivala.

The Wares chiefly desired, and bought up almost at any rate by the Blacks, are
Spanish and Brandy-Wines, Oil, Fruits, Iron, Stuffs for Clothes, fine Linen
Edgings, Bracelets, Damask, Laces, Nails, Yarn, Silk, and other small Wares;
but among all these Iron is the chief.

The People BURAMOS.
THe Buramos, or Papais, live about the River Santa Domingo, and from thence
spread to the Mouth of Rio Grande, far up into the South.

Their chiefest Town in the proper Idiom of the Country called Jarim, lies
five miles and a half from the Haven of Saint Domingo, Jarim.
where the Potentest King of this People resides and keeps his Court.

Katcheo, situate upon the River so named; Katcheo.
wherein live several Portuguese Families, and some Mulata's, who have many
Slaves: they dwelt heretofore intermixed with the Blacks, but of late have
betaken themselves to Forts, which they have erected and planted with Guns, to
secure themselves against Invasion.

THe Houses of the Natives are built of Clay, Their Houses.
with Roofs made of the Leaves of Trees.

In the abovementioned River lie some small Islands, possessed still by the
Buramos, very pleasant, fruitful, and full of Trees.

BOth Men and Women file their Teeth to make them sharp, The Nature of the
Inhabitants.
as if Nature had not given them edges fit for their ordained work.

The Women, Jarrik lib. c. 44.
because they would not accompany themselves to much talking or scolding, take
every morning betimes a little Water in their mouths, which they keep there
till all their Houshold-work is done, but then putting it out, give their
Tongues free liberty.

They have many Governors, but all subject to him of Jarim; only the
Islanders have a particular Prince: But as to matters of Religion, they all
continue in their old Paganism.

The Bisegos, or Bigiohos Islands.
BEyond the Buramos to the South, Bisego's Islands.
opposite to the Kingdom of Guinala and Bisegui, lie seventeen other Islands,
called De Bigiohos, or Bisegos. The chiefest and greatest of these is the Fair
Island; by the Portugals named Isla-Formosa; Isla formosa, or The fair Island.
by the Spaniards, Isla de Po, according to the Discoverer's Name, Ferdinando
de Po, in eleven Degrees and three and forty Minutes North Latitude, four miles
and a half due-South of Cabo Roxo.

These Islands are very fertile, The Fruitfulness of the Islands.
and full of Palm Trees, which yield Wine, Oil, and many other things; for the
most part plain, and so fit for the producing all sorts of Grain, that it
affords a sufficiency of Food to the Inhabitants without being manured. Here is
also great store of Rice, Iron, Wax, Ivory, and long Pepper, which the
Portugals call Pimienta de Cola, a Commodity much desired by, and vented to the
Turks: And many times upon the Seashore are found great quantities of
Ambergreece.

The Land is well stocked with good Cattle, Beasts.
and the Sea and Rivers plentifully stored with excellent Fish, whereof great
profit accrews to the Inhabitants; who as they cannot speak, so neither are
they willing to learn, any Language but their Mother Tongue, being of a large
stature, and inclinable to fatness.

Their Arms are the same with those of Besu and Katcheo, Arms.
but not so well wrought, nor so handsome, which they are well skilled in the
use of, being withal of great courage, and very hardy: Heretofore they so
pressed upon the Portuguese, The Valor of the Inhabitants.
and harrassed the Rivers where they had seated themselves with their light
Boats, that in the Year One thousand six hundred and seven, they forced them to
send for Aid into Spain; which arriving, they were brought to reason, and ever
since have held a friendly Correspondence.

The King of Biguba they reduced into so great straits, that he was forced to
fly in the Wilderness with all his Subjects.

The King of Guinala they have dispossessed of six Kingdoms, and maintain
continual Wars against their Neighbors on the Main Land, from whom they take
many Slaves, which they sell to the Portugals: Each of these Islands has a
particular Lord, which are all under the Jurisdiction of the King of The fair
Island, or Isla do Po.

THE KINGDOM OF GUINALA.
THis Kingdom inhabited by the Beafers, The Borders of the Kingdom of Guinala.
has its Name from the River Guinala, and borders on the South on the
beforementioned Islands, on the East on the Naluze^, a warlike people, but not
such troublesome Neighbors to the King of Guinala, as the Islanders, who (as we
said) have dispossessed him of six Kingdoms.

The chiefest place of this Country, is the Haven of Guinala; The Haven of
Guinala.
and the next the Cross Haven, which the Portuguese possess.

The Country by means of the clear and serene Air, is very healthful and
pleasant to live in.

The King always appears in great State, and when he goes abroad, The King's
State.
is attended with a strong and numerous Guard of Bowe-men.

He keeps also fifty great and fierce Dogs, which he arms, as it were, in
tanned Skins of Sea-Cows, that are so hard and strong, they can scarcely be
cut; each Dog in the day time has a Keeper, but in the night they are let
loose; for there is no other Watch in this City but these Dogs; and such is
their fierceness, no body dares stir in the Streets without the hazard of his
life; for they will fall upon every one without regard. This Dog-Watch was at
first set up against the Thieves, who in the nights used to break open the
Houses, and steal the Blacks to sell for Slaves. This King gives a Hat to his
Governors, which is an Ensign of Honor; of whom he has under him seven, which
are not only his Homagers, but his Slaves.

When the King dies, there comes into the Street twelve Men called Schiten,
When the King's Death is proclaimed, and by whom.
clothed in parti-colored long Coats made of Feathers, with as many Claromen,
or Pipers before them, which sound mournfully, yet shrill; there they proclaim
his Decease: whereupon every one with a white Cloth thrown over them comes out
of their Houses, and do nothing all that day, but walk about the Streets in a
mournful posture; his Friends, Relations, and Servants in the mean time
assemble to choose a Successor. The Funeral.
Afterward the Corpse is washed, and the Intrals burnt before their Idol, but
the Ashes preserved to be Interred with the Body; which lies as it were in
State for a Month: at the expiration whereof, prepared for Burial, the
Subjects bring out of all parts of the Kingdom, Balsom, Myrrh, Ambergreece,
Musk, and other Perfumes, to burn and smoke about the Corpse, which lastly is
carried to the Burying-place by six of the most eminent persons, clothed in
white Silk Coats, followed in the first place with Music playing mournful
Tunes, and after them with a great many people on foot; some of which cry
aloud, other sing Funeral Elegies: last of all the Princes of the Blood ride on
Horseback in white Habit. By the Grave are his Women and Servants which in his
Lifetime he most affected, together with his Favorites and Horses, which are
all put to death and buried with the Royal Corpse; which is done to this end,
that he may be served by them in the other World, as they believe and are
taught. This slaughter is performed in a terrible manner, viz. after the
cutting off their Fingers and Toes, they break their Bones by stamping all to
pieces, and when it is beat enough, they throw it out in the presence of all
the others that are to undergo the same fortune: for the avoiding which
cruelty, many Servants, after they have sufficiently provided for themselves,
either leave the King's Service in his Life, and fly away, or else they retire
and hide themselves in time, when they see he is without hope of recovery.

THe King's Jurisdiction extends over six Kingdoms, Their Power and Dominion.
besides those wrested from him, as we said before: and for the better and more
orderly management of State Affairs, has a Privy Council, consisting of many
Lords; of which one, who is the second person in the Kingdom, is President.

THey worship, Their Religion.
as the Cassanga's, abundnace of Idols, the chief of which they name China,
which is to say, God; although a long time since, by the Preaching of some
Portugal Jesuits, they are said to have embraced the Roman Religion.

The King himself, with a great number of Nobles, in the Year Sixteen hundred
and seven, desired of Emanuel Alvarez a Jesuit, to be Baptized, which he, upon
farther examination finding their unstedfastness, denied.

THE KINGDOM OF BIGUBA.
AT the Nether-Arm of Rio Grande, The Kingdom of Biguba.
above the River Guinala, lies the Kingdom of Biguba: The chiefest place
thereof is the Haven of Biguba, and a little higher the Haven of Balola,
inhabited by the Tangos-Maas; but the Village of the Haven Biguba, the
Portugals possess.

The Beafers lead the same manner of life as the People of Guinala. The
Tangos-Maas are extracted out of the Portugal Blood, but have united themselves
with the Blacks, and live now no less barbarously than they, as if they had
never heard of Christianity; in some places going all naked, and Carving their
Skins after the manner of the Country.

THey live under a Monarch, as those of Guinala, after whose death the most
powerful of the Family obtain the Crown, but not without great contest; so that
in the interim they are all in Arms, committing all kinds of extravagant
outrages, till by Conquest reduced under the obedience of him that lays the
strongest claim.

They are like the Beafers, Idolaters, although some are already by the Jesuits
brought to the Christian Faith.

THE KINGDOM OF MANDINGA.
ON both sides of the River Gambea live a sort of Blacks, The Kingdom of
Mandinga.
which have enlarged their Seat above a hundred and twenty miles up into the
Country, so that they command a Tract of Land that spreads it self in breadth
from nine to eleven Degrees North Latitude, which the Spaniards call
Mandimenca, after the Name of one of their Kings; by others Mandinga; by
Marmol, Mani-Inga; and by the French and Dutch, The Kingdom of Mandinga.

The chief City is Sango, some miles more Easterly than the Cape de Palmas.

The Country is watered with many Rivers, all which after long courses through
several places, at last contribute their streams to replenish and augment those
of the more famous River Gambea.

THe Inhabitants of Mandinga are reputed the best of all Guinee, The Valor of
the Inhabitants.
yet are barbarous of nature, deceitful and treacherous to Merchants and
Strangers; but among themselves and Neighbors thought expert Horsemen; so that
they go into diverse Kingdoms to serve as Troopers, not only being readily
entertained into Pay; but for their Skill in Martial Affairs, and tried Valor,
have the Van of their Armies admitted into the best Commands, and allowed large
Privileges, to oblige them to stay in their Service.

THe Arabian and other Merchants drive a great Trade here for Gold; Gold-Trade.
which they say this Country abounds with; besides other Commodities, which at
Tombut the chief City they are admitted freely to barter for.

THe King of Mandinga some years since was so puissant, The Power of the King.
that almost all the Kings and People of Upper-Guinee obeyed and paid him
Tribute; especially the Cassanga's, and the other Kingdoms lying at the River
Gambea.

Heretofore he held the Seat of his Empire in the Inland, and gave the lower
Countries lying on the West Sea, to one Chabos and Faim Braso; placing moreover
many other Viceroys under him, as of Bursalo, Jaloffo, and Bersetti, who
commanded the Kingdoms of Boloquo, Bintao, and Hondigu; but now these have
taken the Title of Kings, and regard this Mandimansa little or nothing; every
one governing his Country with full Power, without acknowledging him or any
other for their Superior.

The Mandingians were anciently altogether given up to the Delusions of the
Devil, worshipping Stocks and Stones, and keeping among them many Sorcerers,
South-sayers and Witches; nor have they yet detested those old and wicked
Customs; but of late years Mahumetanism has much prevailed among them, brought
first thither by the trading Moors and Turks, and since increased by the
Natives, who went to serve in Foreign Wars.

The chief Bexerin or High Priest has his Residence in the chief City of the
Kingdom, and deeply skilled in Necromantick Arts, wherein he has instructed
the King of Bena, who makes great advantage thereof in revenging himself of his
Enemies; whom he variously torments as his malice or necessity incites him.

BENA and SOUSOS.
THe Kingdom of Bena and Sousos, The Kingdom of Bena and Sousos.
deriving its Name from the Inhabitants of its principal Town, which is named
Sousos, stands situate about nine days Journey from the Way that leads to the
Kingom of Torra and Serre-Lions, but more Northerly of those, and Southerly
from Mandinga.

THis Country is very Hilly and Mountainous, The Nature of the Country.
all whose sides are plentifully furnished with shady Groves of green-leaved
Trees, and here and there scattered some Valleys, veined with clear and purling
Brooks.

From the color of the Earth in the Mountain, they conjecture that the Iron
Mines enclosed within their bowels, are of finer Ore than most in Europe.

Within the covert of the Woods lurk many Serpents, curiously spotted with so
many lively colors as are scarce to be found in any other Creatures: The King,
whom the Inhabitants style King of Serpents, keeps commonly one of them in his
Arms, which he strokes and fosters as it were a young Child, and so highly
esteemed, that none dare hurt or kill it.

WHen any one dies, The manner of their Funerals.
the nearest Relations of the Deceased, and next Neighbors have notice of it,
whereupon they immediately begin to make a howling noise, so hideous, as to
Strangers is terrible; afterward the Friends and Kindred go to accompany the
Funeral howling, and crying as they pass on, which is redoubled by the
frightful shreeks of such as go forth to meet and receive them. They bring with
them Cloth, Gold, and other things, for a Present, to the Grave, which they
divide into three equal parts, one for the King, the other for the nearest
Relations to whose care the Funeral is left, but the third part is buried with
the Corpse; for they believe, as we said before, that the Dead shall find in the
other World whatsoever is so laid up at their Interrment.

THe Kings and other great Lords are buried in the night very privately, and in
unknown places, The Funerals of the King and other Grandees.

Jarrik lib. 5. c. 48.


in the presence only of their nearest Kindred: Which privacy they use in all
probability to prevent the stealing away the Goods and other Wealth which in
great quantities they put into the Grave with them, especially what ever Gold
in their lives they had hoarded: And for the more certain concealment, they
stop the Rivers, and guard all ways round about, until they have so levelled
the place, that not the least mark appears discoverable.

This is used toward the greatest and most honorable; but frequently over the
Graves of persons of meaner repute, some small Huts are erected, sometimes made
of Cloth, other while of Boughs, whither their surviving Friends and
Acquaintance at set-times repair, to ask pardon for any offenses or injuries
done them while alive; and so continue as long as the Weather permits it to
stand.

THe Jurisdiction of this King reaches over seven Kingdoms, The Kings Authority.
and yet he is under Konche, the Emperor of all the Sousos.

THe Inhabitants (as all the rest) are Idolaters, Their Religion.
and use certain Letters or Characters written by the Brexerins to preserve
them from Diseases.

THE KINGDOM OF SERRE-LIONS, OR, BOLMBERRE.
THe Mountain looking into the Sea, and known to the English, French, The
Mountain and Kingdom of Serre-Lions.
and Dutch, by the Name of Serre-Lions; as also the whole Kingdom, first
obtained this Title from the Portugals and Spaniards, who called it Serra Lioa,
and at last Siera Liona, that is, The Mountain of the Lioness.

The cause of which Name is conjectured to be drawn from hence; Why it is so
called.
for that from the hollow of its Concave Rocks, whereon the Sea beats, when the
Winds bluster, and the stormy Billows rage, proceeds a terrible noise, like the
furious roarings of a robbed Lioness; adding moreover, that from the top of
this Hill (which lies continually covered with Clouds, which the violent heat
of the Sunbeams darting perpendicularly upon it twice in the year, cannot
disperse) there is continually heard a rattling of Thunder, with frequent
flashes of Lightning, whose resounding Echoes may be distinctly observed
twenty five miles off at Sea.

THe Inhabitants name this Country in their own Language Bolmberre, The
Bigness.
which signifies Low and good Land; and especially has respect to the low and
fruitful Tract of Serre-Lions, which takes beginning at Cape de Virgen, and
ends at Cape de Tagrin, or Ledo, lying in eight Degrees and thirty Minutes
North Latitude, and is easy to be known at Sea, because it is exceedingly
higher than the Country Northward, and runs far into the Sea.

The Mountain about the Point is high and doubled, spreading along the Sea,
South-East, and South and by East; but the Country Northerly of the Point is
low and flat.

THis Kingdom contains above thirty Rivers, which all empty themselves into
the Great Ocean; and most of them having broad streams, neighbored with
pleasant Valleys, and flowing between Groves of Orange Trees, and their Banks
on both sides edged with fair Towns and Villages, to the great delight of
Passengers.

The first River by Cape de Virgen is by the Portuguese called Rio das Piedras,
that is, The Stone-River, because of the many Stones therein. It is a very
great River, and divides the Country with several Arms, making many Islands,
styled Cagasian, or Cagakais, where the Portugals have built a strong Fort for
the convenience of their Trade.

In the next place the Maps of the Country have set Rio Pichel, Rio Palmas,
Rio Pogone, Rio de Cangranca, Rio Casses, Rio Carocane, Capar, and Tambasine;
which two last take their original from the Mountains of Machamala; upon which
may be seen a stately Work of Crystal, with several Pyramids of the same
Matter.

Lastly, The River Mitombo.
they describe the River Tagarin, otherwise Mitombo, but at present by the
English, Portugals, Dutch, and other-Traders, called Rio. de Serre-Lions. This
River taking its course Northward of the Point of Serre-Lions, is at the Mouth
twelve miles broad, but on the North-side half way choked up with diverse
Shelves of Sand, which divide it into three Channels; one runs along the
North-side, the other in the midst; but the great Channel Coasts by the South,
which is the deepest of all. The Portugals pass only in the two small Channels
with Boats; for in the third, or great Channel they dare not venture. Also
between the Island Tasso, lying in this River and the South, there be many
small Currents, passable with little Vessels, but not with great Ships.

Another called Bangue, glides on the South Side of Serre-Lions into the Sea,
as Mitombo on the North-side; so that the Mountain by these two Rivers lies
enclosed in manner of a hanging Island, and makes the prominent Point, called,
The Cape of Serre-Lions.
as we have often said, Cabo de Serre-Lions, but so narrow, that the Blacks
take their Canoos upon their Shoulders, and carry them over.

On both Shores of this River lie several Towns and Countries: those to the
North-side are called Bolm, which signifies Low; but they on the South, are in
their Language named Timna.

On the outermost Point to the Mouth stands the Town Serboracasa, and on
another Point, lying on a yellow sandy Bay, a mile and a half distant, they
have the first place where the Ships, which frequent this Coast, take in fresh
Waters.

The Country about Serboracasa is called Serbore, Serbora.
extending from the Sea to the Town Bagos. A mile Eastward of Serbore begins
another Dominion, Observe, the Miles on these Coasts are all Spanish or
Potugal, either former^^ mentioned, or hereafter following.
governed by one Semaura, an ill natured man, and for every small trifle picks
a quarrel with the King of Serbora.

Eight or ten Paces within the Shore is the second Watering-place, The second
Wateringplace.
where the Water drills easily down the side of a little rising Ground: About
two miles farther lies a flat Shore full of Trees, and between them a small
open place, through which a Brook descends from above, which at low Water runs
away over the Beach.

A Musket Shot distance thence into the Land, stands a Town, where Don Andreas
(Brother of the King of Bolm-berre) resides; here the River has a strong
Current, which two miles and a half upwards splits it self into three Branches;
one to the North-East, having red Sand, has Water enough to bear great Ships;
but the middlemost, by reason of the shallowness, Shelfs of Sand, and Cliffs,
may only be passed with Skiffs and small Boats. Three miles from the first
Watering-place appears Bagos, Bagos.
a Town seated under the shadow of a little Wood; and a mile and half Eastward
upon a prominent Point, you see Tomby, a pleasant Seat, Tomby.
where the English usually lie with their Ships at Anchor. After that, the
Island Tasso is seen a far off, seeming to be firm Land.

Thirty two miles up the River lies the Kingdom of Mitombo, The Kingdom of
Mitombo.
on whose South Side the Village Os Alagoas is situate; Os Alagoas.
whither the Blacks will let no White People (besides the Portugals) come; all
others they anticipate with Skiffs and Floats.

The Islands De los Idolos, Bravas, etc.
ALong the Coast of Serre-Lions lie several Islands; particularly twelve miles
and a half Southward of the Cape de Virgen, those of Tamara and Veu Usvitay,
commonly called Los Idolos, which West and by South from the Point appear as
joined to the Continent; but afterward show themselves as they are in truth,
Islands, which afford all sorts of fresh Provisions to the Seamen, and good
Tobacco.

The people are self-willed and mistrustful, and will not suffer any Dutchmen
to come into their Towns.

The most advantageous Commodities vented there, are Salt and Brandy; to for
which they have in Exchange Elephants-Teeth and Gold.

To the South end of Serre-Lions, near the Islands Banannes, appears to Ships
sailing by, a very high Mountain raising his Head into the Clouds, called
Machamala; whereof we shall have occasion to speak more largely in a short
space.

Near the South-end of Serre-Lions, half a mile in the Sea, lie the Islands
Bravas, being a high Land full of Trees, the biggest having a Spring of fresh
Water.

Five miles from hence lie on the South-East, against the Point, three other
little Islets called Sombreras.

Between the Sombreras and Bravas is the place where Jacob le Maire, in the
Year Sixteen hundred and fifteen, found four Rivers; among which the
Westermost, having large Banks, had depth and breadth enough for great Ships.
The next running in between the Trees, they might stand on either side of the
shore, and not be able to see Land on the other: thereabouts it was wild and
waste, without any signs of inhabiting; but they saw many wild Beasts, as
Elephants, Buffles, Boars, Civet-Cats, and such like. The third had a Bank that
hindered the coming in of Ships. Three or four miles upward lay a low Land full
of Lemon-Trees, whose Fruits, notwithstanding it was in the time of the Rain,
hung most of them ripe upon the Trees. The fourth was a small River within the
Point of the Island Sombreras, whose Water is deep and Salt; where the Seamen,
coming on Shore, found Crocodiles, Turtles, and Oisters on the Trees.

The afore-mentioned Bay here and there has Shole-water, Furna de Sante Anna.
about five, six, seven, or eight Fathom, and muddy Ground, which runs between
the Sombreras-Islands Easterly, and Furna de Sante Anna, whence come many
Rivers; amongst which the chiefest is Gambea.

Twelve miles upward of Gambea, being as far as it is Navigable with small
Vessels, lies a Place called Kancho, in the height of seven Degrees, being very
low Land; whereto adjoyn some Islands.

THis Country of Serre-Lions, according to the Description of Jarrick, many
take for the healthfullest place of all Guinee, and the Air much wholsomer than
that of Portugal, so that seldom any die by other infirmity than that of Old
Age. The same Air, as Jarrick adds, is much better for a man's health than in
many places of Europe, being neither too cold, nor too hot, by reason of the
cool Winds which blow there continually; which is worth observation,
considering the nearness of its situation to the Equinoctial: And truly, under
the favor of that Author, we may question his Assertion, seeing in the Summer,
viz. in June and July, it is there dark, and close rainy Weather, with South,
and South-West Winds; as also because the Rainwater in all the neighboring
parts of Serre-Lions, and along the Seacoast, is of so unwholsom a quality,
that wherever it falls on the bare Body, it causes Swellings and Blotches on
the Skin, and breeds a sort of strange Worms in the Clothes; besides, the
River-water in April is very offensive, and dangerous to drink, by reason the
Ground, through the Summer excessive heats, and the stench of poisonous Beasts,
which died through the extraordinary burning of the Sun, and rotting on the
Earth, seems to leave some of their venom on the superficies of the ground,
which is washed off by the Rain, and carried into the Water.

The Netherland East. India Ships put sometimes in here, to refresh themselves,
and to take in fresh Water, but to the great prejudice of the Seamen, if it
happen at the beginning of the Rain, and while the afore-mentioned poison is in
the Water: moreover their greedy eating of raw Fruit, there found in great
plenty, brings upon them many dangerous and mortal Sicknesses.

The Country is by some reputed very fruitful, The Fruitfulness of the
Country.
for it yields abundance of white Mill, Rice, and two or three sorts of
Cardamoms, or Grains of Paradise. About the River of Serre-Lions it yields
several sorts of Fruits, especially Lemons, a great refreshing to Seamen; many
wild Vines, bearing good Grapes, a few Oranges, and some Indian Figs, by the
Inhabitants called Banamas.

The Islands of Sombreras produce many Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Palmito-Trees
of several sorts, which afford the Inhabitants Wine, Palm-Oyl, and other
things; but above all, an excellent sort of Soap, made of the Oil and Ashes of
the Palmito-Trees, so much exceeding the European Soap, that it is prohibited
to be brought into Portugal, because it should not bring down the Price of
their own.

Here, and in the neighboring Islands, grow many Sugarcanes naturally; whence
might be raised great Profit from the convenience of the many adjacent Rivers,
where Mills might be set up to Grind them, without the charge of Slaves.

They have also great store of Cotton, red-coloured Wood, vulgarly called
Brasil, better than that which comes from Brasile, for it will give a tincture
in Dying seven several times: Besides, there is a sort of Wood named Angelin,
fit to build Ships with; and the Barque affords Materials to Caulk the Seams of
Vessels, and make Match for Guns.

The other Commodities are Wax, Ivory, and Long-Pepper, by the Portugals called
Pimenta del Kola, and Tail-Pepper, or Pimenta del Rab. Both these sorts are
taken to be much better than the East India Pepper; but the King of Spain has
prohibited the Importing it into his Country, that the Trade of East India
Pepper may not be spoiled, which brings them such great Profit: However, the
English, Hollanders, French, and other People that Trade in this Country,
bring it over, but the Portugals barter it on the Coast of Guinee, in exchange
for Gold, Slaves, Provision, and other things, according as the Places wherein
they Trade differ or vary.

In Mount Makamala (which we mentioned before) appears, Crystal Rocks.
from the Skirts of whose over-shooting Edges, which hang like Bases or
Penthouses, several Christalline Radii shoot in a Pyramidal Form, with the
Points pendent toward the ground within four or five foot, like Isicles from
the Eaves of a house, which when struck, yield a pleasant twang like the
strings of an Instrument, both to the delight and admiration of the beholders.

Among other Beasts found in this place, there are three sorts of Monkeys; Aper.
one called Baris; they are strong and active, and withal so sensible, that
being taken up young and tutored, they are serviceable on many occasions; for
they go commonly on their hinder-feet, and beat Mill in a Mortar, fetch Water
out of the River in small Cans on their heads, which if they chance to let
fall, they squeak and cry out as afraid; they also turn the Spits, and do
several Jugling-tricks, to the great pleasure and pastime of their Masters.

In the Village of Serborakasa the Ships are furnished with all sorts of
Provisions; for the Land yields abundance of Cattle and Fowl. The Rivers have
infinite variety of good Fish, and also the Seacoast, than which Europe can
boast none better.

THe People of Serre-Lions, and the Cape of Sagre or Tagrin, The Custom and
Habit of the Inhabitants.
are rather brown than black; they mark their Bodies in several places with hot
Irons, and in their Faces, Ears, and Noses having many holes, wherein they
place several Jewels, which they call Mazubas, and Gold Rings: They go always
naked, only upon their Pudenda they wear a Flap made of the Barks of Trees.

Two sorts of Negroes inhabit about Serre-Lions, that is, Capez, Inhabitants
are two sorts. Capez.
a People of more clear spirit and judgment than those of Guinee; Jaric. lib.
5. cap. 4.
for they easily learn what is taught them; but withal are effeminate and
luxurious: yet of late are much improved in Valor and Manhood, by the
continual Wars they are forced to wage with the Kumba's their Neighbors. The
other are these Kumba's, called also Manes, being Anthropophagi, and by
consequence of nature cruel and barbarous. These in the Year Fifteen hundred
and fifteen invaded the Capez for Pillage; but enticed by the great Fertility
of the place, determined to remain there, and dispossess the other: whereupon
they furiously persecuted the Capez, eating up whomsoever they took of them;
till at length (as if satiated with humane blood) they sold some to the
Portuguese for Slaves: This their savage Tyranny so consternated the rest, that
to escape that Barbarity, they almost totally deserted the Country; but since
by the Converse with Merchants, and something softened with the pleasure of the
Country, they have left those abominable Customs, and are become treatable,
eating Rice, Mill, Beans, Oxen, and Goats flesh.

In every City or Village stands a great House severed from the other, where
the young Maids have their abode; and for the space of a year are instructed by
a very honorable and well accomplished old man, sprung from a noble Stock. At
the end of the year they go forth all together, dressed up according to the best
mode of the Country, to a place, where having Music, they dance in the sight
of their Parents, and many young men, who from among them choose one they best
like to marry; but before they are permitted to carry their Brides away, they
purchase them of their Fathers, and also give a satisfactory recompense to
their old and grave Instructor.

Their Kings are buried without the Towns in a large place erected of purpose,
The Funerals of the dead.
and covered over with Straw; alleging, it is not fit that such should be
buried in the open air, who have in their life time born the public Office of
a Judge. Others are buried in their Houses, attired with Gold Bracelets,
Pendants in the Ears, and Nose-Jewels. Their Lamentations and Mourning are
performed in open places, according to the Rank and Quality of the Deceased.

The Wealth of the Inhabitants consists in Ambergreece, Riches.
Crystal, Pearls, Ivory, Wax, excellent Brasil-Wood, long Pepper, and
unrefin'd Gold.

The Wares which the Merchants receive chiefly in Exchange of their European
Commodities, are Elephants-Teeth, Gold, and Red-Wood, which last is generally
bought up by the English.

The Countries on the North-side of Serre-Lions, have a peculiar Language,
called The Bolmish Tongue, being hard to learn, and difficult to pronounce;
whereas that of the people of Timna, dwelling to the South, is easy.

The Capez and Kumba's are subject to their particular Princes, who sit in
public to administer Justice, and decide their Differences; and to that end
have near their Palaces several terrassed Walks, called Funko's, in every of
which is raised a Throne covered over with fine Mats, where the King sits; and
on each side placed long Forms for the Noblemen, called Solatequies, that is,
Counselors, with whose advice he determines the Causes.

The Method this; first appears the Party Complainant, with his Proctors and
Advocates, called by them Troens, attired with several sorts of Feathers,
having Bells at their heels, and Staves in their hands to lean on; when they
Plead, they put a Mask before their Faces, that they may not be afraid, but
speak freely before the King what they have to say: after the Cause is pleaded
on both sides, and the Counselors have given their opinion upon it, the King
pronounces the definitive Sentence, with present Execution against the party
cast.

When the King Creates one of these Councellers, How the King's Lords of his
Council are made.
he causes him to come into the Funko; where being set upon a wooden Stool
curiously wrought and carved, and appointed only for this Solemnity, he girts
him with a bloody Fillet of a Goats-skin about the Temples; afterward
Rice-meal is strowed over it, and presently a red Cap put upon his Head: And
that the people may take notice of this new-conferr'd Honor, he is carried
about in Triumph upon the shoulders of certain Officers to that purpose
appointed. These Ceremonies performed, the new-made Lord makes an
Entertainment, wherein they spend three days in all kind of Mirth and
divertising Pastimes, setting forth diverse Skirmishes, and other jocose
Exercises, according to the fashion of the Country: At last they kill an Ox,
and divide the flesh among the common people.

WHen the King dies, his youngest Son inherits the Dominion, The ancient manner
of choosing of a King.
or if there be no Male-Issue, then the Brother or nearest Relation succeeds.
But before they proclaim him, they fetch him out of his House, and carry him
bound to the Palace; where he receives an appointed number of strokes with a
Rod. Then unbound, and Habited in his Royal Robes, he is conducted very
ceremoniously to the Funko, (where the chiefest Nobles of the Kingdom have
assembled) and seated on the Throne; when one of the gravest Olatequi declares
in a large Speech the Right and Privilege of the new King; which ended,
delivers into the new King's hand the Insignia Regalia, that is, an Axe, with
which the Heads of Offenders are cut off, and thenceforth he remains an
absolute Sovereign peaceably, and receives all Services and Tributes. These
were the ancient Customs, while the Kingdom was free; but since (by the
Conquest of one Flansire, Grandfather of the present King of Quoia, or Cabo
Monte) it was subjected to Quoia. Bolmberre is Governed by a Viceroy.
Bolmberre is become a Province, and Governed by a Viceroy, who receives the
Dignity and Title of Dondagh, that is, King, from the Quoia's, as themselves
took it from the Folgia's: but they have thrown off that Yoke, and at this day
the Quoian King, as Supreme, not only gives Laws to Bolmberre, but also to the
Principalities of Boluma and Timna; having also left his old Title Flamboere,
and from the Portugals, by whom converted to Christianity, received the Name of
Don Philip.

The King has four Brothers, The Residence of the King and his Brothers.
who separately hold their Residence in distinct places in the South Countries;
the eldest five or six miles beyond the Town Bugos; the second, called Don
Andreas, at the second Watering-place beforementioned; the third, Don Jeronimo,
at the third Point of the South River; the fourth, Don Thomas, in a Town called
Thomby.

All that Tract of Land lying by the Sea, The Dominion of King Fatuma.
from the North-side of the River Serre-Lions, to Rio das Pedras, together with
the Isle De los Idolos, are under the Jurisdiction of Fatuma, a Potent Prince,
commanding far up into the In-lands, and holding as his Tributaries, the Kings
Temfila, Teemsertam, and Don Michaell, a converted Christian.

The People, before the coming of the Jesuit Barreira, Their Religion.
lay wholly drencht in Idolatry, but he converted many to the Christian Faith;
and in the Year Sixteen hundred and seven Baptized the King, his Children, and
many others, giving to the King at his Baptism the Name of Philip, as we said
before, to which the Portugals flatteringly added Don, and because he was King
of Serre-Lions, called him Don Philip the Lion: But they little practice the
good Instructions taught them, but still retain, with the generality of the
People, their old heathenish Customs, as shall be declared afterward in the
Description of the Kingdom of Quoia.

The English, Trade.
Hollanders, and other people that come into these Parts to traffic, carry out
of Europe several sorts of Commodities, which they barter and exchange with
great advantage; the principal are these.

Iron Bars. Linen. Basins. Earthen Cans. All sorts of speckled Glass-Buttons.
Counterfeit Pearls of several sorts. Copper Meddals. Bracelets and Armlets.
Pendants, and such like. Small Cutlasses. Seamens Knives. Fine Bands. Ordinary
Lace. Crystal. Ordinary Painted Indian Clothes. Spanish Wine. Oil of Olives.
Brandy Wine. All sorts of great Bands. Waste-bands wrought with Silk, which the
Women buy to wear about their middles.
On the Island in the River of Serre-Lions, The English Fort subdued by the
Netherlanders.
the English possessed a small Fort, erected for the more secure managing of
their Trade, which in the Year Sixteen hundred sixty and four, the tenth of
December, the Dutch under the Conduct of the Admiral De Rutter, with a Fleet,
without reason, surpised and took; wherein they found four or five hundred
Elephants-Teeth, a good number of Copper-Kettles, Iron Bars, and about sixty or
seventy Lasts of Salt; the later parcels, with some other inconsiderable
Merchandises, they left there; but the Teeth, and other Wares of consequence,
they brought over in the returning Ships.

GUINE.
WE are to observe, Several acceptations of the Name Guine.
that the English, Portuguese, and Dutch greatly differ in their Descriptions
of this Country, though in the general Name they seem to agree; for the
Portugals divide Guine into the Upper and Lower; comprising under the Name of
the Upper, the whole Tract of Land lying by the Sea, enclosed between the River
of Zenega, and the Borders of the Kingdom of Congo; and under the Lower, the
Kingdoms of Congo and Angola: whereas others bring Congo and Angola, together
with Monomotapa, Zanzibar, and Ajan, under the Exterior, as they include
Abyssine or Prester-Johns Country, wholly in the Interior Ethiopia.

But by the English and Netherlanders, Guine is circumscribed in much narrower
Limits, allowing it no more than from the Cape of Serre-Lions, to the Cape of
Lopez Gonsalvez, lying about one Degree and a half South Latitude: But some yet
restrain it more, shutting it up between, (which they include) the
beforementioned Cape of Serre-Lions, and the River of Benin.

GVINEA.


Some Geographers have attributed to Guine the Title of a peculiar Kingdom,
making it begin at the Gram-Coast and the River of Benin; but this cannot be,
considering the great numbers of several Kingdoms lying between them. Again,
others oppose that, making all along upon the Seacoast, in every eight miles a
particular Territory and People, to each of whom they set a peculiar King; but
he forsooth is no better than a Provincial.

The greatest part of Guine, which indeed lies all upon the Seacoast, Guine is
divided into several Coasts.
has several Names given to it, according to the various Commodities they most
abound with: Some divide it into six or seven Parts, others into five, but the
best and most known Partition is into the Guinee-Coast, Ivory-Coast,
Quaqua-Coast, and Gold-Coast.

The Grain-Coast, so called from Manigetta, or Grain of Paradise, Grain-Coast.
abundantly there to be had, takes beginning from Cabo de Baixos, and runs two
miles beyond the Palmito Gardine, or Cabo de Palmas; although some would have
it to commence at Serre-Lions.

Ivory-Coast, by others called Bad People, that is, Villainous, Vooth-Coast.
begins near the Town Gruwa, two miles Eastward of Palmito, and ends at Cape
de Lahoe, containing a Space of fifty miles. From whence to Cabo des tres
Puntas, or Cape Triangle, they reckon Quaqua-Coast, so called from the Cotton
Clothes, which are there Traded for; Quaqua-Coast.
but the vulgar acceptance of Quaqua takes original from the Call wherewith
the Inhabitants, when they come near with their Skiffs to the Merchants Ships,
as a token and sign of salutation and welcome, cry always Quaqua.

For the Gold-Coast we need not seek for the reason of the Name, Gold-Coast.
because it speaks it self; it is a large spot of Ground, extending in length
fifty miles from Cape Triangle to Acre, though some would stretch it to Rio
Volla, and others yet farther, even to Rio Jagos, and Rio de Benni.

Whence this Name Guine had the first original, all Geographers differ; The
original of the Name Guine.
but the greatest probability seems to bring it from the Portuguese, who being
the first Discoverers, and finding it to lie even with the before-described
Kingdom of Guine, or Geneva, near the River Niger, gave it the same
Denomination with its Neighbor.

In the Description of this Country we shall only set down some of the
chiefest, and which for the variety of Plants, Beasts, and Customs of the
Inhabitants, bear some remarkable difference from others; and particularly
begin with that of Bolm.

The TERRITORY of BOLM, CILM, and QUILLIGA.
THis Country, whose Inhabitants are called in their Mother Tongue, The
Country of Bolm.
Bolm-Monou, lies by the Seacoast, near the River Selbore, taking Name from
the Prince, being very low and watery, from whence denominated Bolm.

Fourteen or fifteen miles up the River, on the Left Hand, appears the Village
Baga, Baga.
where the Prince resides and keeps his Court

Ten or eleven miles to the South-East you come to the Province of Cilm, The
Country of Cilm.
whose Inhabitants are named Cilm Monou. Here are seated on the Banks of the
River diverse good Towns, with the City Quanamora, containing about five
thousand Families.

The River Selbore, or Rio des Palmas, the chief of this Region, lying in eight
Degrees North Latitude, toward the Mouth divides into two Branches, one
running to the Westward, the Inhabitants name Torro; the other passing to the
South, the Portugals call Rio de Sante Anna. Torro twice or thrice a year has
little Water, and by reason of several Islands can only be passed with Ketches
of eighteen or twenty Last, and other small Passage-Boats.

This River, with its Branches, produces many amphibious Creatures. In the
Mouth of it lies a great Island, so made by the two forenamed Arms, which
from their embraces thereof on each side, suddenly fall into the Sea.

The Island, with its Point, called Sante Anne, appearing very pleasant by
reason of its shady Groves, the Portugals in their Sea-Cards called Ferula, or
Farillons; but it is better known to People by the Title Massokoy, according to
the Name of the Prince, whom the King of Cabo Monte, or Quoia, has made his
Viceroy.

Before this Island lies a great Shelf, denominated Baxos de Sante Anne, and
round about it several dangerous Rocks.

THe Inhabitants are Blacks of the Town Quanamora, The kind of Inhabitants.
a wicked and faithless people; under pretense of Trade coming under the Ships,
will endeavor to sink them.

The Land has Nature for a kind Mother, The fruitfulness of the Country.
bearing without, or at least with very little Tillage, abundance of excellent
Rice and other Grain; besides Hens, Banames, Injames, Potatoes, Bakovers,
Ananasses, and such like; by reason of which Fertility many people flock
thither to inhabit, especially near the River.

The English have by this River in the Village Bago, Their Trade.
many Tents; wherein at certain Seasons they reside for their convenience of
dealing for Red-Wood, whereof they purchase and acquire very great parcels; and
for that very purpose have planted several Families in the circumjacent
Villages.

The Inhabitants of Farrillons and Massakoye, Their Customs.
are affable and courteous, behaving themselves in a very orderly manner,
beyond the ordinary Barbarism of the Blacks, and wear a Cotton Coat down to the
knees, by whose example their Neighbors do the like.

By St. Annes Rocks, Pearl-catching.
Pearls and Scollop-shells are taken; but the Sea is so overrun with
devouring Fishes, that few dare adventure the catching of them.

Their Religion, Their Religion.
if any, is downright Paganism, yet use they Circumcision like the Jews and
Turks; of which their Ignorance is not able to give any reason.

Having thus traveled through Bolm and Cilm, you go to Quilliga, lying by Rio
de Galinas, The Country Quilliga.
or Hen-River; thirty or two and thirty miles upward of which appears
Carradobo, The River of Hens.
whose Inhabitants are called Carradabo Monou, as those of the former Quilliga
Monou.

All this spreads East and by South, lying very low, but full of Trees, having
the benefits of several Rivers that water their Plains.

The first, lying twelve miles from Rio das Palmas, the Inhabitants call
Maqualbary; and the Portugals, Galinas, by reason of the great number of Hens
thereabouts bred; and takes its Original out of the Region of Hondo.

The people living on the Shore of this River speak a particular Language that
seems harsh and unpleasant; but when they go to Quoya, Their Language.
or Cabo Monte to traffic, they express their meanings significantly in
another Tongue that runs smooth and easy, either to be learnt or understood.

All these Countries have particular Lords, Government.
but own for their Superior the King of Quoia, whose Predecessors subdued them
by Arms, by the Assistance of the Folgia's, as hereafter we shall more fully
declare.

Fourteen miles from Rio de Galinas to the South-East, appears Cabo Monte, in
five Degrees and three and forty Minutes North Latitude.

THE KINGDOM OR COUNTRY OF QUOIA.
THis Kingdom situate by Cape de Monte, contains especially two Countries,
viz. Vey-berkoma, and Quoia-Berkoma.

Vey-berkoma, that is, the Country of Vey, Vey-Berkoma.
the Ancient Name of the Inhabitants, is that Tract which lies at Cape de
Monte, near the River Mavah; below which lies Dauwala, wherein the same River
Northward of the Cape, has its Exit into the Sea.

The Ancient Inhabitants (as we said) Vey, are by Wars reduced to a small
number, possessing only a parcel of ruined Villages or Towns; insomuch, that
their Name is almost forgotten.

Another People, named Puy-monou, Puy-Monou.
dwelt anciently before the Wars and Conquest of the Country by the Karou's in
the Island Boebelech, and along the Banks of the River Mavah. But few of this
Posterity are at present to be found; being for the most part by
Inter-marriages with the Karou's so united, as if but one in Name and Nature.

Quoia-Berkoma begins at the Seacoast of the New-River, or Rio Novo,
Quoia-Berkoma.
by the Inhabitants styled Magwibba, and extends to Rio Paulo, a Boundary
between this and the Territory of Gebbe, shooting out into the Land above
twenty miles.

This Kingdom boasts great numbers of Towns and Villages, most of them
pleasantly seated on the Banks of the River Magwibba.

The first appearing in five Degrees and three and forty Minutes-North
Latitude, Cape de Monte.
by the Inhabitants is called Wachkongo; and by the Portugals, Cabo Monte;
although the Country both on the West and East is low and overgrown with
Bushes.

This Point to Ships sailing out of the West shows its self in the shape of a
Helm; but coming near, it appears long with a gap in the middle. Westward of
this is the Road where the Ships Ride, that put in to trade upon this Coast.

Half a mile upwards from Magwibba on the left side, Jegwonga.
stands a Village called Jegwonga, where the King Flamboere settled his Royal
Mansion, when he first left Tomvy; but at present he resides on the Island
Massagh, in the Lake Plizoge, whither he retired to avoid the hazards of the
people of Dogo, that invaded his Territories.

On the other side of the River stands the fair Town Fachoo, Fachoo.
signifying, I watch the Dead; which Flamboere fortified, and retired to as a
place of security, upon intelligence that the Land of Folgia would make War
upon him, though afterward he found it but a rumor.

A mile and half farther up, Figgia.
on the same side, Figgia discovers its self, being formerly the Dwelling of
Figgi, one of King Flamboere's Brothers.

A mile beyond that, Cammagoereia.
on the same Shore, is seated Cammagoereia; and half a mile from thence, the
handsome Town Jerboeffaia, where the Prince of Quoia, who commands the Country
round about, keeps his Court; opposite to this last, King Flamboere about a
year since began to lay the Foundations of a new Town.

From thence going, along the Seashore lie dispersed some Salt-Towns, where
the Inhabitants boil Salt out of Seawater.

In the Vales of Tomvy, watered by the River Plizoge, stands a great Town or
Village, beset with Trees sprung up out of the Rubbish of its decayed Walls:
From thence to Cape de Monte lie some forsaken and wasted Villages: On a Branch
of the River Menoch or Aguado, is situate Faly-hammaia, and two miles farther,
another called Flomy-Seggaya.

The Region of Quoia has the benefit of four excellent Rivers; The Country of
Quoia is watered by four Rivers.
the first in the West, Magwibba, or Rio Novo; the second, Mavah; the third,
Plizoge; the fourth, Menoch, or Aguado.

The River Magwibba in Summer bears two miles and a half in breadth, The River
Magwibba.
but in Winter is broader and fuller of Water: It runs from the Sea up into the
Land, taking a North-Easterly Course up into the Country; in the Mouth of it
are so many Banks or Shelves, as great Bars, that make it dangerous to be
passed with small Boats, although the English, Portuguese, and French have, and
still venture over it in their little Skiffs.

As far as Davarouia, it may conveniently be passed with reasonable Vessels,
being very deep, and four hundred foot wide; but above that place, by the
interposition of diverse Rocks, which cause great Water-falls, there is no
passing.

The second called Mavah, The River Mavah.
or Maffah, on whose Shore formerly the Puy-monou dwelt, springs from a
Mountain four and twenty miles within the Country. The Channel is wide and
deep, making its Exit into the Sea in the broken Land of Dauwala, almost a mile
Northward of Wach-kongo, or Cape de Monte.

Between these two Rivers along the Seacoast, here and there, they say, stand
certain Towns, where the Inhabitants make Salt.

The third, Plizoge, meets with the Sea a mile Northward of Cabo de Monte. The
River Plizoge.
This is sometime in dry weather very empty of Water, but so continues not
long, being soon fully replenisht.

Three miles from this River appears a great Lake, a mile and a half broad,
wherein stands the Island Massagh, the Courtly Residence of the present King
Flamboere: on whose South Side flourish many stately Palmito-Trees.

The fourth, Menoch, or Rio Aq^ado, The River Menoch.
comes out of the Country above the Hondous, and six or seven miles Eastward
of Cape de Monte poures into the Sea. It is a deep and wide River, yet
unpassable, because of several Water-falls, Cliffs, and Shelves of Sand that
choke it. It has on both sides Red-wood Trees.

Having thus given you the Scituations of Towns and Rivers in this Kingdom, we
will now proceed to describe the Vegetables or Plants, Beasts, and then the
Customs or Manners of the People: but by the way, in regard Gala-Vy, Hondo,
Konde Quoias, Manou, and Folgia, lying round about, participate of the same
qualities with Karou, already mentioned, or at least with very small
difference, we will give you a cursory glimpse of these in particular, and then
carry on our intended method.

Gala-vy, a member of Quoia, shows the original source of Mavah, Gala-vy.
near a great Wood of eight or ten days Journey in length. It bears the Names
of Gala-vy from its Inhabitants, sprung at first from Galas, but being driven
out of their Country by the People of Hondo, sought new Habitations in those
places; whence they were neither called Vy, as those with whom they intermixed,
nor Galas, their old Name, but Gala-Vy, that is, half Galas, and half Vy.

On the Borders of Hondo and Manoe, beyond the forementioned great Wood, dwell
the right Galas, who are under the Jurisdiction of the Kingdom of Manoe, and
have a Prince entitled Gallafally.

The next is Hondo, inhabited by the Hondo-Monou, Hondo.
situate by the side of this Wilderness, more North-Easterly then Gala-vy, and
contains within it the peculiar Lordship of Dogo.

Neighboring to these dwell the Konde-Quoia's, or High-Quoia's, Konde-Quoias.
that differ in Speech from the Maritime Quoia's.

Afterward you arrive at the Kingdom of Folgia and Manou, or Manoe; Folgia and
Manou.
which last is a Potent State, holding in subjection most of the Country round
about; two small Rivers encompass it, viz. Rio Junk, and Arverado; the former
Folgia East and by North above Rio Junk, the dividing limit between them, which
with the other, in about five Degrees North Latitude, pour into the Sea.

Karou, whose Inhabitants took their Name from Karou-Monou, The Country Karou
is a peculiar Territory, now included in Folgia by Conquest, but heretofore
had a Prince of their own, and a Country large, and free from any slavish yoke.

At the Coast of Cape Saint Anne, and along to Cabo Monte, and Cabo das Palmas,
The Winter-Season.
the Rain begins with May and continues to October; during which time they have
great and terrible Thunder and Lightning, with furious North-Westerly Gusts of
Wind: however, this continual Showering so fills and pinguifies the
before-cleft and parched Earth, as adapts it for the bearing of Rice, and other
Fruits and Grains; for the whole face of the Ground is covered with Water, that
there can be no stirring for common converse, except in Boats.

During this time also the Sea sets hard all along the Shore toward the
North-East, so that Ships which between July and September happen to fall below
Cape de Monte, can very hardly, and not without great labor, get about to the
South. Besides, this Race makes mountainous Billows roll to the Shore, so that
it is in effect impossible to approach the same in Boats, without danger of
splitting.

There blows also upon this Coast a Land and Sea-Wind; the first begins after
midnight, and continues till high-Noon; the last rises after two, and holds
till Midnight. But these Seasons once over, from October to May, the Weather
proves pleasant and dry, till endammaged by the fiery heat of the scalding Air.

QUoia Berkoma, Plants.
with the adjacent Fields, are by the beforementioned Rains so impregnated,
that they produce all sorts of Grain and Plants in great abundance: Bond.
for first, there grows a great Tree called Bond, in height exceeding all
other Trees in the Wood, and scarce fathomable by six or seven Men, the Bark
full of great Thorns, the Wood soft, of which they make Canoos, Stools, Spoons,
and Dishes; the Roots lying generally four or five Foot above the Earth, they
cut out into Planks and Boards for Doors to their Houses, and many other uses;
with the Branches and young Sprouts Hedging the Towns, because being stuck into
the Ground, they grow and make a Quickset-Fence: the refuse of the Wood they
burn, and with the Ashes make a lixiviated Liquor, which boiled up with old Oil
of Palm, makes an excellent and very useful Soap.

The Tree Bassi grows high, Bassi.
and two or three fathom thick, having a Russet-Bark, which they use in Dying
to give a Russet-brown Tincture, as of the Trunk they make Boats, and such like
Utensils.

Kaey is also thick and high, Kaey.
of whose hard Wood, being not apt to rot, they also make Canoos; but the Barks
and Leaves, for their Medicinal Virtues, they use in Physic.

Billegoh, Billegoh.
a tall thick Tree, whose Wood exceeds that of most Trees in hardness, and of
notable use in Physic.

The Bossy has a dry Bark, Bossy.
and soft Wood like the Bond, yielding also a kind of Potashes, and bearing
yellow Fruit, good to eat, and tart in taste.

The Mill shoots very high, Mill.
the Wood soft, the Root like the Bond, growing above the Ground, the Blacks
use it in charming Potions.

The Borrouw grows but to an ordinary height and bigness, Borrouw.
but upon the Bark stick crooked Thorns like the Talons of a Fowl; these being
chopped, yield a yellowish white Juice, (the like do the thick Leaves beaten and
pressed) which taken inwardly is an effectual Purge, and so certainly good,
that it is commonly used when other Remedies will not work. The Wood is damp,
and unfit either for Service or Fuel.

Mammo a thick and high Tree, bears a Fruit white within, and of a tart taste,
Mammo.
much used in Physic; and buried under the earth, remains good a whole year.

Quony, a high and thick Tree with a rough Bark, which they use in Philters or
other charming Potions mixed with water; they make mortars of the wood, Quony.
because tough, and not easily split, wherein they stamp Rice. It bears a
venomous Excrescence, full of Juice, wherein the Blacks dip their Arrows, that
from thence contract a mortal Poison.

Hoquella rises to a great height, bearing Shell-Fruit a foot and a half long,
Hoquella.
enclosing flat Beans; the Bark and Leaves have a Physical Quality, and
therefore in much use: But the Ashes of the Shells burnt, make a most useful
Lie.

Domboch bears Fruit pleasant and frequently eaten. The Bark bruised, Domboch.
and the Juice mixed in a convenient Vehicle makes an Excellent Purgative
Medicine; but the wood they convert into Boats, Sugar-chests, and such like.

Kolach a Tree of ordinary size, bears Fruit like Plumbs, Kolach.
very agreeable to the Palate, whose Bark also is of use in Physic.

Bongia rising to a more than common size and bigness; Bongia.
of no use but in the Bark, and that only for Physic, and to give a yellow
tincture in Dying.

Duy in Growth like the former, produces round Apples, Duy.
a profitable and wholesome Food both to man and beast: The Bark steeped in
Wine and other Drinks, make them great Cordials.

The Bark of Niaukony tastes hot in the mouth like Pepper, Niaukony.
and has won the esteem of a more than common Remedy in many Diseases.

The Palmito-Trees grow here frequently, which young are called Quan,
Palmito-Tree.
have many branches with long thorns, and small long Leaves, which hatchel'd,
serves them in stead of Hemp, to make Nets and Ropes; grown up to the height
of a man, it bears a kind of Nuts which are as big as Olives, of which the
Palm-Oyl is made.

When it is shot up forty or fifty foot high, and proportionally large, the
branches fall off, so that it stands naked like a Maste, only with Branches
and Leaves at the top, the undermost by degrees still falling off, while
upwards new ones grow; thus full grown, it is called Tongoo; and when very old,
affords Wine, Oil, and Hemp in one year. This Wine which the Blacks call
Mignoll, they draw out by boaring a hole in the body of the Tree, where the
Leaves at first began to sprout, out of which the Wine distills into a Pot or
Pitcher hanging on a hook; in color it resembles Whey, and at the first
drawing is sweet and pleasant to the taste, like Wine; but the second day
begins to sower, and changes in short time into very good Vinegar. It
intoxicates the Brain, and makes those that drink too much thereof drunk, as
other Drinks do: Out of one Tree two Gallons of this Liquor may be drawn in a
day, without any damage to the Tree, or hinderance to the ripening of the
Fruit; which are, as we said, a kind of Nuts, somewhat bigger than Olives,
growing in a bunch; of which every Tree bears five or six, every one as much as
a man can carry; every single Nut having within it in a hard stone a sweet
Kernel.

When the Blacks gather this Fruit, they climb up with a Rope about their
middle very readily and nimbly, and cut the Nuts from the bunch, whereof they
make their Palm-Oyl in this manner; first they beat and stamp them, then boil
it a first and second time; at the last boiling the Oil swims at top, which
they scum off with Spoons, and put into Pots or Pitchers: They use this Oil as
Butter or Oyl-Olive, which they have not, and anoint their Bodies therewith
from head to foot, to make the Skin smooth and shining.

Bang bears a great resemblance with the Palmito, Bang.
and like it also yielding Wine, which they call Makensy; the Leaves are large,
and half a fathom long, of which they make a sort of Tow, which they work into
Mats, Nets, and all sorts of Ropes. The Branches being long and thick, and
bushy, like common Brushes or Beesoms, serve for many uses, viz. for covering
for their Houses, Shelters, and Fences for their Villages, and such like.

Dongah, Dongah.
a great Tree, growing by the Seacoast, bearing Shell-fruit like great
Wallnuts, and having round well tasted Kernels.

Red-wood Trees, Bondou.
called Bondou, grow here numerously, having soft and thin Leaves: the Wood
while it grows is yellow and soft, but after the cutting hard and red.

The Tree Jaaia grows abundantly in low and watery places, Jaaia.
and on the Banks of Rivers, wherein, as if delighted in spreading his Boughs,
the Oysters fix thereabouts, and grow.

There is another Tree, The Fruit Kola.
upon which grows a Fruit, by the Portugals called Kola; by the Blacks,
Toglouw; five or six enclosed in a Shell, having a bitter taste, but a rare
Medicine against the Dropsy; and used also in Enchantments and Witchcrafts.
The Portugals drive a great Trade with it, as having an high esteem thereof.

The whole Country abounds with Cotton-Trees, Cotton-Trees.
which they name Fondy. Kong, from which they gather Cotton, to be woven into
Cloth, and other things.

Here is also springing up in every place Lymo's, Lymo's, or Limonties.
or Limonties, whose fruit has the perfect similitude of a Lemon, but rounder
and smaller: Also Oranges, Banana's, Bakovens, and other Fruit.

They dig up here a Root which the Dutch call Ignames, Ignames.
or Injamos, so great, that some of them weigh nine or ten pounds: they are
white and mealy within, dry in taste; being boiled, are eaten in stead of Bread.

Batatases, Batatases.
another Root, like Potato's, or Jerusalem-Artichokes, but bigger than our
Turnips, having a sweet and dry taste.

A few Sugarcanes, some Tobacco, Ananasses, or Pine-Apples, may be had there,
but scarce of their own growth, for the Inhabitants say they have them from
Serre-Lions.

THeir chiefest Sallet and Potherb has the Name of Quelle Togge, Sallet-herbs.
having small Leaves, and short Stalks, which boiled with Flesh, has a good
taste.

The next Quantiach, shoots up high, with broad Leaves, which shred and boiled
with Flesh, make a pleasant Sallet. They have variety of Herbs, which, because
of their commonness, we shall not meddle with here.

They have besides Rice, Mill.
Mill, Many-Jonglo, and Maiz, which here they call Turkish Wheat, and little
regard it.

There is another sort of Mill called Jonglo, Mille-Jonglo.
with a smaller Seed and longer Ear than the former, most eaten in Lent, or
other times of appointed abstistence.

There is also Manigette, The Grain Manigette.
enough to serve their convenience, as also two sorts of Pepper, Benynith, and
Long-Pepper.

QUoia, Beasts.
or Cape de Monte, with the adjacent Parts, has many Elephants, which they
name Kanmah, and several sorts of Civet-Cats.

The River Magwibba breeds Water-Elephants, Water-Elephants.
called Korkamanou, being about the bigness of a large Horse, but much thicker
and rounder, and seem as it were blown up.

Fol: 3 5 2


Fol: 3 8 5


Mavah produces the like, together with Sea-Cats, Crocodiles, and the like
strange Creatures.

The Janaka has the proportions of a Horse, but shorter, The Beast Janaka.
and more Bowe-Legg'd, with a long Neck, Bay or Sorrel-colour'd, stripped with
white, but Headed more like an Ox, having a Bag in the Flanks, of great use
among their Soothsayers, which when they go about to make any Predictions, they
blow strongly, with Tickling on the inside, where the Augures and Soothsayers
witch into them, using antic postures and bellowings.

There are two other of a smaller sort, called Cillach Vondoh, Cillach.
as big as Stags with us in Europe, having little Horns a span long, a Skin of
the same color, with a Tumor, or rather swelling Orifice on both sides, where
the Wind coming out, makes them unable or unfit, either for running or leaping.

The Buffles that breed here in great herds, Buffles.
do immense damage in the Rice-Fields.

Another Creature, called by the Blacks, Woey; and by the Portugals, Woey.
Gazellus de Mutte, being as big as an ordinary Dog, small bone'd, and swift in
running, makes good sport to Men and Women that Hunt it, using many cunning
shifts to avoid the Nets.

The Tebbe is a brown-coloured Beast, of the bigness of a Sheep, Tebbe. Culmo.
and taken with Nets. So also the Culmo, but different in the redness of his
Furre.

There are two sorts of wild Boars; one reddish-hair'd, called Kouja; Two sorts
of Boars.
the other black-hair'd, named Kouja quinta: The former like ours, but the
later much bigger, and very mischievous, having monstrous Tusks, wherewith they
cut and tear, as if it were split with a hatchet.

Porcupines also are of two sorts, a bigger, and a less; Two sorts of
Porcupines, or Hedghogs.
the bigger by the Natives called Queenja, resembles a common Boar, but armed
with sharp and long Quills, which it can dart out suddenly with so great force,
that sometimes they kill Leopards with them: The less are about a foot high,
but not dangerous, in regard they do not discharge their Quills.

They have also Dontfoes or Camelions, living (as they suppose) by the Air,
Dontfoe.
and in nothing harmful, only they fancy it an ill Omen to see one, imagining
one of their nearest friends shall die.

There is another strange Beast called Quoggelo, Quoggelo.
much resembling a Crocodile, six or seven foot long, very slender, but with a
Tongue of extraordinary length: It is a Beast of Prey, and very strong, close
set with gaudy Quills over the whole body, wherewith it only offends men, and
defends it self against other Creatures; for when the Leopard attempts to seize
it, it converts into a round ball, setting up the points of his Quills, that no
hold can be fixed. Their food is generally Pismires, which with their tongues
they lick up at a great distance.

Both on the Seacoast and the up-land Country many Civet-Cats are found; of
whose Genus there is great difference among Authors: Civet-Cat.
Some will reduce them under the kind of Cats, according to their name; but
Johnston ranks it with the Hyena; we will briefly describe it, and so leave the
Reader to his own judgment: It more resembles a Wolf than a Cat; for it has a
long Head, with a small Nose, flat Mouth, and short Ears, their Teeth like
those of a Dogs; the body part white, part ash-colored, speckled with black
spots, the legs and feet of a middle size, with black hairs, having four Claws
forward, and one backward, with black short flat nails; the Tail long, bushy
and speckled, hanging to the ground.

From what part the Civet is gathered, In what part the Civet is gotten.
there have been many different opinions: The famous French Physician Riolanus
holds it to be the Dung, or Ordure; but Ruellius and Audreas Matthiolus more
truly aver, that it is taken out of the Privities, and that the Cods were the
Purse wherein it was bred; others maintain it to be the Sweat, or Sudor, about
those parts, caused by violent motion and beating: but all these opinions vary
from the truth; for the part wherein this odoriferous Perfume is found, is
distinct and peculiar, lying between the Privities and the Cods, and seems at
the first glimpse to be the Matrix: for it has a long opening, and felt with
the Hand, seems of the bigness of a small Egg, and grisly; which being opened
with the Finger, two passages appear like Nostrils; under which are some small
Cavities as big as Almonds, the place of the Civet, which is taken out thence
with a Spoon, or other fit Instrument.

But beyond all these is that monstrous Creature, Quoias-Morrou.
which the Inhabitants called Quoias-Morrou, or Worrou; and the Portugals,
Salvage, that is, A Satyr: It has a great Head, a heavy Body, fleshy Arms, and
strong, no Tail, and goes sometimes upright, and sometimes like an Ape on all
four. The Blacks report it to be of humane Extract; but by the alteration and
change of the Woods and the Wilderness, it is become half a Beast. They sustain
themselves in the Woods with Fruit and wild Honey, which they get out of the
Trees: and as they are not few, so when they meet, continually fight one with
the other. The Blacks relate strange things of them, and aver it for an
infallible truth, that it not only over-powers feeble Women, and unmarried
Maids, but also dares set upon Armed Men.

The Woods produce also other wild Beasts, Tigers and Leopards.
as Tigers and Leopards; the first they call Quelliqua, the latter Quelly.
These two bear great enmity to each other; though the Tiger is generally
master: wherefore the Leopard, when the Tiger pursues him, with his Tail will
wipe out his footsteps, that so by them he may not be traced. Some of the
Ancients, knowing the fierceness of the Tiger, attributed to him the command of
the Woods: but here, in regard he hurts no Man, but only Beasts, they make the
Leopard the King of the Woods, What Customs are used upon the taking of a
Leopard.
because he is more dangerous. For this ravening they are hunted and killed by
all that can, even for their own safety: yet when a Leopard is killed, they
bring him dead unto the King's Town, there to be cut up and eaten; but if the
Resiants there be not acquainted with it beforehand, they will not admit it
without great opposition; and therefore, with Weapons in their hands, every man
falls upon the bringers of the Leopard, who come also Armed to abide the
expected brunt: Thus meeting, they fight eagerly, till one side become absolute
Victors: which for the most part are the King's Men, to whom the Leopard is
left as a booty; which they commonly draw into the Town, and with extraordinary
mirth convey to the place where they use to exhibit their Sports: where being
flayed, his Skin and Teeth they present to the King: but the People assembled
eat the Flesh boiled as a great Dainty; spending the remainder of the day in
Revelling and Dancing, as at their most solemn Festivals. But the King forbears
to eat it, because it is, as we said, accounted the King of the Woods. But if
this esteemed Royal Beast be taken by any, that that have neither strength nor
confidence to make such a Bravado, they seek out among them some more than
usually bold Fellows, who for some inconsiderable hire will take upon them to
bring the Leopard cunningly into the King's Town. These, by the help of one or
two Comrades, drag the Leopard thither unseen, and lays it near the
Sporting-place; then withdrawing into the House of his acquaintance, waiting
till some find it; who upon the first sight with great eagerness cries out:
then assembling the People he tells them, There is yet another King brought in
without our knowledge. Upon this all the People run out of their Houses, and
the bringers discovering themselves, every one gives them the hand of
friendship, and according to their fashion, indigitate the Person to all their
Friends with these words, You are the Man to whom we may trust in need; we have
seen your works, and so proceed to flea and eat it, as before.

The King sells the Leopards Skin, if he be not minded to sit upon it, nor to
lay it upon the earth to tread on; but the Teeth (which are highly esteemed) he
bestows upon his Wives, who wear them in stead of Jewels both about their
Necks, and upon their Clothes.

Insects breed there innumerably, as Serpents called Tomb, Insects.
above two foot long, and as thick as an ordinary man's leg, with curious
speckled Skins; they have no innate antipathy to man, whom they never offend
till hurt or trod on; yet such is their venom, that whosoever they bite dies
irrecoverably within two or three hours.

The Serpent Minia attains such largeness, The Serpent Minia.
that it can kill and swallow a whole Deer without chewing or tearing to
pieces, and devours Boars and many other such like Beasts and Cattle: It lurks
for Prey in some bush, which coming within reach, it suddenly seizes, winding
two or three times about the body, and twists it self about the loins, till it
falls down and dies; of which thus glutted, he lies not able to stir, till his
gorged Paunch has digested his meal. The Pismires have such a natural enmity
to him, that if they find him thus infeebled with his over-feeding, they creep
into his body, and kill him. The flesh of this Creature the Blacks account good
Food.

NOr are Beasts, Insects, and Reptiles only found here, but Fowls also of
diverse kinds; particularly Qualontia, being of a large size, Eagle.
and very strong, remaining most in the Woods, and feeding upon the flesh of
Civet-Cats, and other Beasts, and roosting commonly in the high Tree called
Banda.

The Bastard-Eagle which they name Quolantia Clou, Bastard-Eagle.
keeps most at the Waterside, preying on Fish, which swimming near the surface
of the water, he takes in an instant.

The Buzzard or Kite called Simby, Kite.
feasts it self with the flesh of all other smaller Birds.

The Poi also a Bird of Prey, Poi.
and accordingly armed with crooked Talons, frequents the Seashore, and feeds
upon Crabs, which with great cunning and diligence it catches.

Blue Parrots with red Tails are numerous, roosting on the Palmeto-Trees,
Parrots.
and eating the Nuts.

The Comma has great variety of fine Feathers, green about the Neck, Comma.
red Wings, black Tails, crooked Bills, and Claws like a Parrot.

There is a Bird in bigness like a Thrush, with black feathers, Prognosticating
Birds called Clofyf.
by them called Clofyf, who (as they say) by the difference of his chattering,
prognosticates either good or bad luck; insomuch, that when any travel through
the Woods, if they hear this Bird cry about them, Kybo fie offygh, they take
that for an ill Omen, and will by no means go any farther that day. On the
contrary, if their Journey shall be prosperous, and this Bird cries in another
manner, which they expound, Forward, go on, in the Folgiaske Tongue, they no
longer despair, but proceed forward in their Journey so soon as possible. They
repute him an ominous and unlucky Bird, and say, that the Kigbofy has sung his
Song over all those that die an evil death. He keeps most in places where
Pismires frequent, which are his principal food.

There is another little Bird like a Lark, Fonton.
called Fonton, who having found in the Woods a Buffel or Elephant, or Honey in
a Tree, or a Tiger, or Snake, or any thing else whether good or bad,
immediately flies toward the people, fluttering about them, and making a noise
with his wings; whereupon they follow him, saying, Tonton kerre, Tonton kerre,
that is, We come. Then he flies forward chirroping, till come to the thing he
would show. But if they do not follow him, nor regard his noise, he never rests
flying backward and forward, till perceiving the unmindful Travelers approach
near what he would discover, he perches upon a tree; by which sudden settling,
they know they are not far from something he would show to them.

There are also Swallows, Swallows.
which they call Lele or Lele-atterecna, that is, Day-Swallows, to distinguish
them from Bats, which they call Lele-Sirena, that is, Night-Swallows. The
Blacks report that they have another sort of Swallows, which they style Tonga,
of the bigness of Pigeons, but without any resemblance of the other. Their
Flesh proves good meat, of which there is no scarcity; being so numerous, that
sometimes sitting upon trees in flocks, their great weight tears down whole
branches as big as a man's leg.

There is yet another Bird like a Wood-pecker, The Fowl which picks the Trees
hollow.
who with his Bill makes a concave hole in trees, and in that hollow breeds the
young; of which the Blacks relate this following story.

This Bird (they say) complained in ancient times to Kanou, that the people
stole away his Young where ever he made his Nest, desiring Kanou, that for the
future he would smother them when they committed such theft. Whereto Kanou
seemed by promise to consent; but enjoined, that in regard the huge trees would
hinder the fall of the Heavens, he first cut them down, and then by weight of
their fall upon the earth, he would certainly smother the people.

There are many Turtle-Doves, Turtle-Doves and Pigeons.
which they call Papoo, and three sorts of Partridges or Pheasants with
speckled feathers. The first called Bollend, has a tuft on his head; the
second, Kambyge, bald and without feathers; the third, Decedeu, has black
feathers mixed with small white specks, and a white neck.

Cufonfoo is a Bird as big as a Raven, Cufonfoo.
with black feathers, and a very long and broad Bill, making the Nest of earth
in the Trees; when the Hen sits, she pulls off all her feathers to lay the
young ones in, and remains sitting without any going off, being daily fed by
the Cock that flies abroad for food.

There are many Tigua or Cranes, Cranes.
which the Inhabitants of Cape de Verde call Aqua-piaffo.

Doco, Doco.
a very great Fowl, frequenting Moors and Marishy Grounds, as wholly living on
Fish.

Jowe, Jowe.
a small Bird, no bigger than a Linnet, drops her Eggs by the wayside.

All these, together with white and blew Herons, except the Jowe, Funtan, and
Kigbofy, are by them eaten.

Bees, in this Country called Kommokesse, are not kept as in Europe, Hiv'd and
Housed, but swarm as it were wild in the Woods, Nesting in hollow Trees, by
which half the Honey is not found.

The Bremsems, or Wasps, here called Quun-bokessy, come into the very Houses,
but yield no Honey; but if disturbed sting venomously, insomuch that the place
stung swells up with great pain.

Besides these they tell of a third, and smaller sort of Bees than the right
sort of Honey-Bees, but swarm, and Nest like them in Trees, making Honey
rancker or sharper of taste than the other; brown of color, and the Wax
blackish: the Inhabitants name them Cubolig-boli.

Mescito's are here in such abundance, and so plague the People, that it is
impossible almost to sleep, or take any rest for them.

In the time when it rains, which is about May, June, July, August, Crickets.
and September, some Crickets, called Gelleh, fall among them from the Clouds,
as the Blacks themselves report; which are bigger than other Crickets, and
afford them food.

Thus much we have thought fit to say concerning the Plants and Beasts, we will
now show you the Employment, Customs, and Nature of the Inhabitants, and what
else relates to them.

THe Quoia's have no Trade, The Quoia's are diligent in Tilling.
but maintain themselves with Sowing of Mill and Rice, and by the planting
other Herbs and Fruits; for the Country being large, and more than two thirds
untilled and woody, every one may manure what he thinks fit, and cut down as
much Wood as he pleases. After a Place has been once Sown, they let it lie
Fallow two or three years, till the Earth, which they suppose impoverished by
bearing, has recovered a new vigor by lying uncultured: yet notwithstanding
the beforementioned liberty for the encouragement of such as take pains, no
person may Sow in a Field which has been Ploughed by another.

In the middle of January, or in the beginning of February, The first Planting
of Rice.
they begin first to order the Fields intended for Rice, cutting down the Wood,
Bushes, and Weeds, laying all even and smooth. The Ground thus prepared, one
goes before with the Seed, which he sprinkles upon the Ground, while others
with crooked Iron-Rakes turn it under the Soil. This commonly sprouts on the
third day; but then must be carefully looked after, to keep it from Birds, which
flock thither in great numbers: but after it has taken firm Root they mind it
no farther, nor have more trouble till grown ripe, and fit for gathering. In
some places they are forced to Fence their Fields to keep out wild Beasts,
especially Buffles and Water-Elephants, which else would rob them of all the
fruits of their labors, and the hopes of the ensuing Harvest.

The second Rice-planting is begun in April, in the High-land, The second
Planting of Rice.
and at the time of the first Rains. Those that are good Husbands, and
diligent, may sow Rice three times in one Summer; the first in the Low-land;
the second in higher, and the third in the highest Land; every one a month
after the other; because they will not have all ripe at a time, not being able
then to get it in; for it must be cut off ear by ear, with great leisure.

The first Crop growing in low and moist places, is cut off in the beginning of
April; the second in the higher Land, in June and July; the third in September
or October.

Such as are wary, save commonly good quantities against the next Seedtime;
whereas more lazy and careless persons that eat up all their store, are
compelled to betake themselves to other places, as to Hondo, Gala, or Gebbe,
where they buy it for Basins, Kettles, Clothes, or other things.

The Women Manure and Dig the Fields, The Work of the Women.
and Sow the Rice, and the Men cut down the great Trees, and clear the Bushes,
and sometimes help the Women in the rest, to dispatch the sooner. But the
chiefest business wherein the Men employ themselves, is Fishing, Hunting, and
building of Houses: for those Sports of Hunting and Fishing are free; Hunting
is free.
yet all sorts of Hunting is used not by all: for the Hunting of Elephants and
Buffles is dangerous, and undertaken by such only as will venture their lives;
for few escape mischief or death at one time or other.

The King has for his proportion, The Revenue of the King.
of Elephants and Buffles, one out of two; of Boars, Hearts, and other wild
Beasts, a third part; but Water-Elephants, and Sea-Cows, belong wholly to the
King, who bestows upon the taker a Present of Rice and Mill; but yet less than
a tenth part. All people are bound to offer the best of the Fruits and Plants
to Belly their Idol for Junanen, that is, for the health of the Souls of their
deceased Friends and Parents.

THe Houses, Houses and Villages.
or rather Huts, are round; so likewise the Villages, and enclosed with Trees,
standing close together; and with their Boughs Plashed and interwoven, make a
good Defense, or Bulwark; the Gates are low, and so narrow, that but one man
can go through at a time; the whole Enclosure shadowed with Bangoela, that is,
Branches of Vine-Trees, or Tomboe, bound together so close, that they are
forced to make certain Holes therein to Shoot through, which they can open and
shut at pleasure. At every of the Gates there is a Hut, or moveable Turret,
fifteen or sixteen Foot high; which they can carry in time of need, and set in
any fit place, made as the Walls, wherein always some exquisite Archers keep
Guard, and are as Sentinels, both for discovery of the Enemies approach, and to
defend against their assaults.

In the middle of the Town lies an open Green to play in; cross ways leading to
the Gates, are Streets, between whose ends and the Tree-Wall, round about, is a
passage to go from place to place. The Towns thus fenced with Trees, they call
Sansiah; but other unfenced, Fonferah, that is, an open place: so that properly
we may term the former Cities, and the later Villages or Hamlets.

Into these Fortifications the Country people also without restraint repair in
time of need, to secure their lives, and what they have from depraedations, and
also by their Persons and Valor to defend their Abodes.

By virtue of an ancient Law made by the Tribe of the Karous, The Karous may
not eat Fish with Scales, nor Beef.
the Inhabitants are prohibited to eat Beef, or Fish with Scales, which they
observe very strictly; believing, that if they should break it, they should
either instantly die, receive some remarkable judgment, or else fall into
frenzy.

The people in general are very libidinous, The Lustfulness of the Inhabitants.
but their ability answers not their desire; however such their too frequent
actions, and dealing with variety of Women, draws upon them no small
inconveniences: Nor do the Women fall short of the men in their Unchastity,
wholly giving themselves up to Venerial Exercises; and as if continually
troubled with a Furor Uterinus, at all times chaw and eat such Herbs and Barks
of Trees, as are the greatest Incentives to heighten their desires to almost
hourly Congresses.

Both Men and Women are much inclined to drink Brandy; yet they will not give
Elephants Teeth in exchange for it, but only barter Provisions of Victuals.

They are courteous one among another, holding firmly together, They are gentle
and courteous.
helping each other upon all occasions. Whatever any wants, (wherewith his own
store or penury cannot furnish him) his friends and acquaintance supply freely.
They show great Friendship to one another in Gifts of Clothes, and sometimes of
Slaves; and in Housekeeping live as it were in common, every one participating
of the others Diet without grudging: None appears, or makes any address to the
King empty-handed; insomuch, that all Merchantstrangers, having any occasion to
speak to him, make their way by Presents; some few of the baser sort will steal
from Strangers, but yet be just among their own Countrymen; they neither
swear, curse, nor quarrel, but have a natural antipathy against those that
cause Bloodshed amongst their Neighbors.

There are found many among them which can work strange effects with Herbs,
Powders, Characters, and Figures; They understand Sorcery very much.
and some Diabolically mischievous, whom they enstile Savah-Monou, that is,
Poisoners and Bloud-suckers; because in the absence of any person they can
fetch out his blood, and bring him by that means into a Malady.

They have amongst them another sort of people called Senearts, that by
Incantations and Charms can mischief a Child, spoil Rice and Plants, and do
other prestigious Facts. This particular Art they call Pilly; but all the rest
Sovach-Monousin: all which though so much practiced, yet if any Complaint be
made against the users thereof, they are punished with great severity, and
sometimes with Death.

THe Word Sovach signifies an Evil Imagination, The signification of the word
Sovach.
Atra-biliary Sadness or Melancholy; or in a word, Malicious Envy. Now the
Blacks affirm, that Men or Women possessed with this mischievous humor, pining
and despairing, go into the Woods, where in solitary murmurings venting their
discontents, and inclinations to damnifie their Neighbors: macerated with those
perplexed thoughts, fitted now to receive any impressions, the Sovach appears,
and speaking to them, teaches them to do hurt or mischief, instructing them in
the method, and what Herbs they shall use. He that is thus spoken to by the
Sovach, for a time is totally bereaved of understanding, not being capable to
distinguish Men from Beasts; so that raving about, he kills the first he meets:
but upon the perpetrating such a crime, as if restored to his Senses, he seems
to become wise and circumspect, no longer retaining his unsociable madness, but
thence forward grown perfect in his Diabolical Knowledge, acts his designs
warily, yet not afraid to instruct others in the same black and abstruse Arts.

That sort of Conjuration called Pilly, vents its malice on all things, Sorcery
called Pilly.
beginning with Men, and descending to Plants, Grain, Clothes, Arms, Iron, and
what not?

There is yet another kind of Witchcraft, called, Sticking of Needles,
Needle-sticking.
which they use toward proud and imperious persons, to make them more affable
and fit to be treated with: the manner this. They stick through the Eye of a
Copper or Leaden Needle, a Splinter, which indiscernably they throw at the
person on whom they intend to practice; whose least touch carries with it so
dangerous and effective an operation, that hazards life, unless some speedy
remedy be found to prevent it.

Against this Sovach-Belly they prescribe some Antidotes, A Remedy against
Sovach-Belly.
or preservative Medicines, by whose use, if first taken, the Person is
secured, and the Sovach becomes powerless: But if the Sovach be first taken, no
Medicine can be found powerful enough to drive it out.

SOlitariness they repute the sole cause of this Evil; Solitariness held to be
the cause of this Evil.
and therefore none, how valiant and daring soever they be, will venture to go
alone into the Woods; and if any be observed to use it, he gains the name of a
dissolute and desperate person. People of quality go always accompanied, partly
for the cause aforesaid, partly that they might have aid and assistance at
hand, if any wild Beasts should attempt upon them; alleging moreover, that
company gives cause of Discourse, and that diverts the Fantasy from melancholy
thoughts, which generally bring the Sovach to converse with them.

BIgamy and Polygamy are accounted Virtues, Marriage.
every Man keeping as many Wives as he can maintain.

The Parents used formerly to procure Wives for their Sons; but finding the
Women they get were not regarded, now they let them choose for themselves,
according to their own pleasures. However, before the Marriage, the Bride,
according to custom, must be purchased with Presents and Slaves. Such whose
small Stocks cannot reach to that, get their Wives by obsequiousness and
service, that is, they build Houses, draw Wine, work in their Rice-Fields, and
do all other things wherein they may be useful; which sometimes endures three
or four years before they can attain their desire.

If any take a liking to a Woman brought by the Merchants from a foreign
Country, with a purpose to Marry her, he makes known his Suit by Presents
after their manner: And the like, as we said, if any man cast his affection
upon a Maid, who is not reserved for some other Person; but if she be set apart
by agreement or promise, they admit no hearing to any other: but the intended
Bridgroom invites the Maid in the Evening to come to his House, to eat and
drink; which, if she stands upon her honor, she takes no notice of three or
four times; but at last goes with her Friends, and after that the solemnity is
concluded, the Bride remains sometimes ten or twelve days before she ask for
her Bride-Presents, if they live both in one Village; but if the Maid come from
the Country, and her acquaintaince which have brought her thither, would go
away, then she asks for them before their departure. And these must always be
paid at three distinct times, viz. first she demands her Cola, or Togloe, which
signifies, Give me somewhat that is next to hand, whether Beads, or other
Ornaments; the second time she requires her Jasing, that is, some Goods which
the Whites bring thither, as Cloth, Garments, or the like; the third time she
asks her Lesing, that is, a Basin, Kettle, and Chest that she may keep her Cola
and Jasing in, and a Slave that may wait upon her, and look to her Goods: then,
when she has received all her Dowry, she goes with them to her Friends, and so
returns from whence she came.

If now this Woman grow with Child, and it happen upon her Delivery to be a
Boy, the Father, so soon as it can go, fetches it away; but if it be a Girl, it
remains with the Mother.

If the Man be pleased with the Woman that he has thus had knowledge of then
he sends by his people Presents to her Parents for their Good Will; who ask
their Daughter of her intentions: if she desires her Parents to receive them,
that makes up the Match; if not, they send them back again. After the Marriage
thus perfected in this manner, yet the Man must gratify the Parents, and Maids
Companions with some Gifts; which sometimes they retaliate: But to take many
Presents from the Woman's Parents, turns greatly to his prejudice: for if it
happen that the Wife had rather have another Man, or that the Husband will turn
her to her Parents, thenceforth all the Presents given to him are demanded
back, but whatever he has bestowed on her or them, they keep; for he must do
no injury to the Woman, nor to her Parents: But if the Wife will be reconciled,
she may; for it is at her choice, because the Parents may not force or compel
her. But if he have not accepted any of their Gifts, then such a Daughter, if
her Husband will, whether she like it or no, must continue with him, and yet
shall have no other esteem, than according to the Riches she brings him.

We have said before, that the Men may have as many Wives as they can maintain;
but the first Wife that the Man has Married is the chiefest, and called by the
other Makilmah, that is as much as to say, The Governess of the Women: but they
are all subjected under the authority of the Husband.

When any that is of Noble Extract will send his Daughter to her Husband, after
the Marriage-Presents are completed, he gives to accompany her in the way,
some of his Subjects and Slaves, with two Coats, or Shirts, a Quiver full of
Arrows, and a Simiter with a Belt, for a Present for her Husband, and three or
four Kanasters, or Bags with Rice, and other small trifles.

THe giving of Names to their Boys, The accustomed Solemnity at the naming of
their Children.
is done with a particular Ceremony, viz. when the Child is eight or ten days
old, on a set Day, early in the morning, the Person designed to give the Name,
with a great company carrying Bows and Arrows, comes leaping and shouting with
great hurliburly and noise; which others in the Town hearing, go out also with
Bows and Arrows, Assagays or Javelins, and Shields: the company thus
assembled, they lay about them, as if fighting with their Enemies. After half
an hours playing in that manner, the Name-giver taking the Child from the
Mother, lays it down upon a Shield in the midst of the Concourse, and puts a
little Bow, made for that purpose, into its hand; then he makes a Speech above
half an hour long over the Child, admonishing it to be as he is, and to follow
his example, to be diligent in Tillage and Husbandry, that he may get much
Rice, that he may give to every one to eat that ask it, and thereby to get a
praiseworthy Name; not to covet after another Man's Wife, nor to deceive, or
cheat, or be treacherous, whereby a Man, says he, shall come to scorn and
contempt. This solemnity being ended, he brings the Child to the Mother again:
afterward they must go a Hunting, while others provide Wine: after Noon they
return home with the Beast they have caught, of which, boiled with Rice, they
make a Feast; and so, with the Women make themselves merry, and frolic the
greatest part of the Night.

But the solemnity at naming a Daughter is not so great; for a Woman, with some
few attendants, fetch the Child out of the Mothers House, and lay it upon a
Mat, amongst the rest, putting a Stick in its Hand, admonishing it to be
diligent and industrious, to wash it self clean, for that cleanness is an
ornament to a Woman; to be chaste and modest, not to ru^ from one Man to
another, lest she cast away her own happiness; to be ready to make and cook
Dainties, that her Husband may take a good liking to her; and to associate
constantly with him at all times: so re-delivering it to the Mother, the
Ceremony concludes.

The Women keep from the Men as long as the Children cannot go, or commonly
till it attain the age of a year and a half; for they believe, unless the Child
Suck so long, it would be infected with some remarkable Infirmity.

THe Inhabitants are subject to many strange Sicknesses, Strange Sicknesses.
unknown to us in Europe, such as these following:

Ibatheba, Ibatheba.
a kind of Murrain, happening, though not often, among the Beasts; who, as they
say, are invisibly struck by splay-footed Dwarfs and Fairies, which they call
Thebano's, that produces a Botch, out of which there falls commonly a piece of
corrupt, or dead Flesh. This Distemper kills Elephants, Buffles, Hogs, Dogs,
and many other Beasts: sometimes also Men are infected, but it seldom proves
fatal to them.

The Bloody Flux begun in Serre-Lions, The Bloody Flux.
in the Year Sixteen hundred twenty and six, and spread it self through the
whole Country; raging with that violence and misery, that caused a direful
Mortality, and swept away such vaste multitudes, that for want of people, the
Rice-Tillage stood still above three years together; every one more dreading
the day of his Death, than making Provision for the sustaining of such an
uncertain Life.

The Meazels here do not seize upon Children only, The Meazels.
but general afflicts both old and young, as an Epidemical Disease, with such a
fatality that few escape: and therefore with them it is very much feared. The
Pain of the Head which the Physicians call (...), but themselves Honde-doengh,
is frequent among them: So also the Jydoeng, or Pain in the Teeth. Some
languish under a continual Haemorragy, or Bleeding, till they almost insensibly
expire; which they say is effected by the Sovach, or his Scholars: Some have
lost their Noses and Lips; and others go with sore Arms and Feet, as if totally
infected with the Morbus Gallicus, though it proves nothing but a natural
course of the Climate, for that it is not contagious to any that converse with
them.

Some through anguish of spirit run raving up and down, perfectly distracted;
others, as if possessed, do many strange Feats, contorting and writhing their
Bodies; Colga, or Idiots.
a third are mere Idiots, called Colga; not so born, but happening (as they
say) by finding the Nest of a Fowl called Jouwa, which not only deprives them
of Rationality, but incapacitates them to Virility. They are cured of this
Disease by Witchcraft; but with this Injunction, they must never taste of any
feathered or flying Fowl.

Some having attained the full Perfection of Age, are suddenly vexed with a
terrible Swelling in their Cods, The swelling of the Cods.
and a Shrinking of their Virile Part, without any possible means of Cure: Who
are most subject to this Disease.
Such as neighbor the Sea, and the places adjacent, are most subject to this
Malady; to wit, the Inhabitants of Bolm, Cilm, and Bolmberre; and among them,
such as sell and drink immoderately of the Palmito-Wine; and therefore it may
with reason enough be supposed, this Disease grows by the use of that Wine: but
whether so or no, we shall leave it to be determined by such, whose Curiosity
has better informed their Experience.

WHen any man dies according to the course of Nature, Eakotima, that is, the
departure or Funeral.
or by Mischance, presently all his Friends and Acquaintance meet, and
encompassing the Corpse, sing Elegies and Epicediums, wherein they set forth at
large the Praises and Actions of the Deceased in several Languages, every one
choosing that wherein he thinks himself best skilled and able with most
Excellency to express his fancy; for besides their own Quoian, they can all
speak the Timnian, Hondrian, Mendian, Folgian, Galaan, and Gebbian Tongues.

For they account it a great Honor to have such a Funeral-Elegy composed and
spoken in a high Strain and lofty Style: And if any that have no continual or
public Employment, happen at such a time to neglect to show his Love to his
deceased Friend or Relation, by such a Valedictory Gratulation, all his
surviving Kindred and Acquaintance will exclaim against him, as one that merits
not their kindness living, who will not join to lament for them dead.

After the Funeral-Orations are finished, the Corpse is washed, the Hair
pleated, and the Body set upright, supported with stays at the Back, and under
the Arms. If it be a Man, then they put a Bow and Arrow into his hand, and
array him with his best Garment, and his Friends bring Presents to the Funeral;
viz. one Needles; another a Kettle or Basin; the third a Garment; a fourth
Dishes, and Earthen and Tin Cups.

The Corpse thus set up and dressed, some of his nearest Kinsmen come and play
with Bows and Arrows before him; and that done, kneel down with their backs
turned to the Corpse, and draw the Bowe-string as far as they can, to signify,
that they would fight against his Enemy; and if he were slain in the Wars, or
killed by any malicious Person, they would with such force take vengeance.

And lastly, a Man or a Woman is left by the Corpse to keep it, and take care
to beat away the Flies, and Vermin which otherwise might annoy the body.

When the nearest Relations have finished their Ceremonies, and come from the
house, immediately some Women of her Acquaintance apply themselves to the Widow
to lament and condole with her; and falling down at her feet, use these words,
Bqun e, Bqun e, that is, Be comforted, or Cease your lamentation. After the
accomplishment of these sorrowful Complaints, the men carry the Corpse upon a
Biere to the Grave, commonly made near the Sepulchers of their Ancestors, in
some Tombouroi, or desolate Village, and there inhume it not above knee-deep;
casting into the Ground after him Mats, Kettles, Basins, Beads, or what other
Wealth he possessed himself with, or was presented after his death, and then fill
up the Hole with Earth, covering it over with a painted Mat fastened with Pins,
and an Iron; close by setting up a Pole, whereon (if it be a Man's Corpse) they
hang his Clothes and Arms in the manner of a Trophy; but if it were a Woman,
some Pewter Porringers or Dishes are made fast with a Pin to the Ground: And
with all convenient speed the Friends erect a Hut over the Grave, as a defense
from the Rain, and also for a Monument, that their Memories may not altogether
be forgotten.

The Kings Kindred are buried in an Island called Masach, lying in a Lake
belonging to the River Plizoge, where King Flans-Sire, Father of the present
Reigning King Flambore, in his life kept his Royal Seat, and now lies Entombed.

If any of the Friends have been absent, or in a Journey, upon his return he
comes to the House of the Deceased, though it be two or three months after;
and falling down at the feet of the nearest Kinsman to the Deceased, bewails
his loss. If he meets any of his Acquaintance of the near Friends to the
Deceased, he embraces him, and salutes him with these words, Clau e, Clau e,
that is, Lament, Lament; and then talk together of their Affairs.

When any Nobleman dies, one or two of his Slaves or Slavesses are put to death
at the Grave, to be his Attendants in the Elizian Fields; others wait at the
Grave, to whom the Friends of the Dead carry Presents of Bracelets, Beads,
Coral, Rice, Tobacco, the Fruit Kola, and a Hen boiled with Rice, which they
may dispose as they please.

Though this destroying and killing of Slaves and Slavesses was an old Custom
here, yet it is not much practiced of late; and those of the Slaves that can
run away, or defend themselves with weapons in their hands, are free: Therefore
when an Eminent Person is dying, all his Slaves get away where they cannot be
found, though the danger of their Lords Death is concealed as much as possible.
The Run-away-Slaves when they come again, are railed at and upbraided with
these or such like words: You will eat of your Lords Cost, but not die with
him; who excuse themselves, saying, Life is sweet, and no man would willingly
leave or have it taken away against his will.

The chiefest of the Friends at the beginning of the Mourning make a Vow of
Abstinence, swearing by a holy Token, which they call Bolly-Gowe, with lifting
up of hands, that they will keep it; for a common Person eight or ten days, and
for a Lord, a month, or longer; in which time they may not eat any Rice, nor
drink out of any whole Vessel or Cup, but only out of a Potsheard, or a little
hole made in the ground; neither do the Men sleep with their Wives, nor may
wear any Painted or Colored Clothes, but only Black or White, cut with
flashes, shaving their Hair, and sleep upon the bare ground.

When the time is expired, they come to the Bolly-Gowe, and discharge
themselves with up-lifted Hands from the aforesaid Promise and Vow, with
assurance that they have kept the same. Lastly, a Funeral-Banquet is prepared;
for which the Women boil Rice, and the Men go into the Woods a Hunting, and
bring home what they catch, which they boil and eat, and so the whole Ceremony
concludes.

Those that have fasted are gratified with Presents, every one according to his
quality; that is, common persons, one with a Basin, another with a little
Garment, or Salt-Basket, or a piece of Iron or Mat; but persons of account,
with a Staff; Iron, or other Goods, which with them are highly esteemed.

If the acquaintance of the Deceased have any suspicion that he died not a
natural Death, they neither wash the Dead, nor lament, till the doubt be
resolved; for they say, if any should mourn before, it would be impossible to
bring to light the guilty person, because the Spirit of Envy over-hearing it,
would not give any intimation of it.

The Enquiry is performed in thismanner: They take the Corpse, or in stead of
that, a piece of his Clothes, with pairings of his Nails, and some of his
Hair, sewing it up like a Pudding, mixed with scrapings of Bondu, or red
Dying-wood: this Roll they put into a Mortar, where they stamp it. Then two
eloquent Men are elected, who stand with two Iron Bills or Halberds before the
Staff-bearers, and clashing their Bills, ask the Dead what he died of; and
whether God took him away or no: if yea, then the Staff-bearers nod, as if they
were half asleep; but if not, they shiver and shake. In like manner they do
upon the other Question of Who did it? Where is he? and, In what manner was it
done? At length they receive answer, that he died a violent Death, being killed
by some Bolly; for Bolly is with them all manner of Medicinal Herbs, but the
Herb that is venomous or poisonous, is called Sovach. But if Bolly has killed
him, then the Names of most Physical Herbs are recited, till they have found
which of them was used; concluding however at last, that Sovach has killed
him. Then is asked whether he was killed by a Man or a Woman: and at last is
asked concerning the place of his dwelling, and person. The guilty person being
found, immediately they are chained to a great Block, and asked if he or she
will acknowledge the Fact. If they can be brought to no acknowledgment, then is
given to them Quony; or else, upon acknowledgment of the Fact, are cruelly put
to death.

This Quony is a Rind, or Bark of a Tree so called, which in the presence of
Friends, by the suspected person, is pulled off, that the Sap or Juice may be
used without any deceit. The outermost scurf of the Bark they pare off, and
beat in a Mortar with Water, which after the settling affords a very tart Juice;
of which they give to those that are taken, three or four Kalabasjes, or
Quarts, to drink in the Morning, and not at any other time. In the mean time
they conjure and persuade themselves, that if the Captive be guilty of the
Crime, he will die, or else not: At last, vomiting the Quony, he is held to be
quit; but if he cannot do that, though at first he brings up a little Froth, he
dies; and the Body is either burnt, or else cast into the River.

But if it happen that they cannot receive any answer, or but such as is
uncertain and Amphibological, resting thereon, though with much
dissatisfaction, they forthwith, without farther enquiry, interre the Corpse:
Yet nevertheless, they go to a Jakehmo, or Soothsayer; a vagrant sort of
People, who have no certain Dewlling Place, but rove up and down; and before
they answer any question, run about distractedly, one with a certain kind of
Pots, or Cups; another sounding a Horn; the rest with Tabers, or little Drums,
making a great noise and hurliburly, seeking, and calling for the Sovahmo; from
whom, when they have received any information concerning the guilty person,
then they proceed to the trial with the Quony, in the manner aforesaid.

IN Right of Inheritance, or possessing of Goods, this method is observed: The
Inheritance.
When the Man dies, and leaves behind him some Children that are under Age, the
elder Brother takes the possession of all the Slaves, Wives, Children, moveable
and not moveable Goods of his Father, except his own Mother. Thus taking upon
himself the government of the Family, after time of mourning finished, he draws
to the place of Exercises before the King, in presence of all his acquaintance,
with his Father's Bow in his hand, and his Quiver of Arrows at his back, one
end of the Bow he sets upon the Ground, holding the other end in his hand; in
that posture he declares openly, that resolving to be valiant, and to follow
his Father's course, he will now give a proof before all the Spectators. After
he has showed his skill and activity, he presents himself before the King in
the same posture as before, saying, He is resolved to bear the burden of his
Family, to give the Children under Age an Example, to Till the Ground, to
defend the Right of his Family, and what else befits him.

After the Decease of this Son, the next eldest Brother takes all. But if the
eldest Son live, and have Children, then his younger Brothers and their
Children have only so much of the Estate, as shall keep them till they come to
Manhood, and maintain the Slaves or Slavesses given him in his Father's
lifetime: for it is the custom in that Country, that people of ability bestow
upon their Children, as well Sons as Daughters, from their Infancy some Slaves.

But if the Father dies, leaving only Daughters, either his Father's Brother,
if living, or else his Father's Brother's Son, that the Name may not be
extinct, shall inherit.

But if there be no Male-issue of the Father's side, the King is Heir, and
takes as well Slaves as Goods and Women to him, allowing a sufficient
maintenance to some trusty Person for the bringing up of the Children.

THe Quoia's speak not only their own Timnian, Their Language.
Hondian, Mendian, and Folgian Languages, but also those of Gala and Gebbe.

The People of Gebbe and Folgia differ in Speech but little; however the
Folgian, being the smoothest and the noblest, is called Mendi-ko, The
Lordly-Tongue; partly (as we said) for its Elegancy and Smoothness, partly
because of the Dominion the Folgia's hold over the Quoia's, and Gebbe-Monou,
that is, the People of Gebbe; for Monou in that Idiom signifies People.

They of Konde-Quoia or High-Quoia, differ in Dialect from the Quoia's near the
Sea.

IN the Head of the Constellation Taurus, Signs of their Summer and
Winter-Seasons.
are five Stars near the Pleiades, which they call Manja-Ding, that is,
Lords-Childe, upon which they look to know whether it be Midnight, They have no
Hours.
or past Midnight; but know not how to divide Time into Hours, nor how to
reckon the Age of the Moon. Those that dwell in Daula look upon these five
Stars appearing in the Evening to the West, as a Sign of a Raining-time.

THe Authority and Greatness of Quoia, Their Strength and Power.
is at present supported more by Wisdom and Policy, than by Power; because the
subjected Countries of Cilm, Bolm, and Bolmberre, are accounted more powerful
than it. This the Parable of King Flamboers Brother, named Cia-Haddo, seemed to
hint to Flamboere's eldest Son, threatening Massakoey, Lord of Bolm, to take his
Country. There was (said he) in ancient time a Fowl, with a very fine red Head
and Neck, but beyond that, thin of Feathers, and a small Train; but for his
beautiful outside appearance, was by other Birds chosen King: This Bird
sensible of his own defects, kept in a Bottel; and when the Council of Fowls
was assembled, put the Head and Neck only out; till at length by course of
time, the great Sacrifice was to be made to the Idol Belli in the Wood, which
none but the King in Person might perform; at which time compelled to dissert
his Bottle, his poverty and wants were discovered to his great damage. Thus far
Cia-Haddo. And without doubt he discovered a great Prudence in that witty
Apothegm; for to prevent discovery, it is not permitted to the People lying
Northwards, to pass through the Easterly Countries; nor for those of the East,
to go with their Ambassadors or Merchants through the West Country: and this
(as we said) that they should not discover the Secrets, and Conveniences or
Inconveniences of the State; therefore they of Quoia keep them at distance, and
traffic for Eastern Wares at reasonable Rates, which they vent to the West, in
Exchange for such as are fit for Barter; and Exchange with European Merchants,
for such Commodities as yield ready Truck with those of the East.





In like manner also the People of the Upper Countries prohibit the Quoians to
travel through their Land; for it is a particular favor, that the King of
Quoia may take to Wife the Daughter of the King of Manou, and at his pleasure
pass through the Folgian Territories.

WE will next proceed to their Government; The Government.
and first begin with Quoia-Bercoma, at present Commanded by a King, with the
Title of Dondagh, his Name Flamboere the Fourth, Grandson of one Bokwalla,
formerly Prince of the Karou's, who by the assistance of the Folgians
conquering the Veyes after a tedious War, laid here the Foundations of a Potent
Monarchy to his Successors; invited thereto by the fertility of the Soil, and
an innate ambition and thirst of Sovereignty. This acquired Grandeur has been
supported with such Policy, that the Inhabitants at all public Meetings and
Solemnities to this day Sing, He descended from above.

This King, like his Ancestors, holds in subjection Folgia, The King of Quoia
holds subject the Folgia's.
the Region of Cape de Monte, and the adjacent places formerly belonging to the
people Vey and Puy; whereupon the Heir of the Crown, when the King dies,
requires Earth from the Ambassadors of Folgia in token of Acknowledgement, and
Installs the Lord of Bolmberre with the Title of Dondagh, by a particular
Ceremony; of which we shall give this brief Account.

The Heir is laid flat upon the ground, with his Face downward, and some Earth
thrown upon him: Lying thus, they ask what Name he desires to have; and what
he chooses, they impose together with the Title of Dondagh. Then they cause him
to rise, and put a Bow into his hand, and a Quiver of Arrows, to defend the
Country with; which performed, he distributes Slaves, Clothes, Kettles, Basins
and such like Presents to the King of Quoia.

The Power of the present Quoian-Prince is absolute and unlimited; so that he
is the only and sole Judge of all Causes: For although he admit his
Counselors sometimes to give their Opinions, yet they signify nothing, for he
follows his own single resolved Determinations.

This absolute Power makes him jealous of his Honor: For, he will not endure it
should be diminished by any. His highest Pomp consists in sitting upon a
Shield, whereby he gives to understand, that he is the Protection and Defense
of the Country, and the manager of all Wars, pacifying Civil Insurrections,
and other Weighty Matters belonging to him alone. His Title as we said is
Dondagh, which is as much as Monarch.

When any Nobleman proves disobedient and will not appear before him on
Summons, then he sends his Koredo, that is, his Shield, In what manner the King
deals with any man who keeps away from his duty.
as if he would say upbraidingly, if you be not obedient, be Lord your self,
and bear the burden of the Country. This peremptory Command by the Shield is
sent by two Drummers, who as soon as they come near the Offenders Habitation,
begin to beat their Drums, and so continue without ceasing, till they have
delivered the Shield; upon receipt whereof, without delay, he must speed away
to the Court, carrying the Shield with him, which he presents to the King,
begging forgiveness of his miscarriages; and so taking up Earth before the
King, humbles himself.

THose that make an Address to the King to obtain his Favor, An address to the
King to obtain his favor, now it is made.
make their way with Presents of Ribbons, Elephants-Teeth, or such things which
he must deliver at the house of the Kings chiefest Wife; who receiving the same
bears it to the King, with request, that the person may be admitted to his
Presence: If the King accept it, the person has leave to enter, otherwise, if
any complaints be brought against him, he sends it back, yet so, as the
Presenter dares not receive and carry it away, but continues his Suit by
Friends without intermission; by whose frequent and renewed mediations, the
King at last seeming a little pacified, remits his severity, takes the Present,
and calls for the Suppliant; who entering the Royal Presence, goes bowing all
along toward the King, who sits on the ground upon a Matt, leaning upon a
Stool: when he approaches within two steps, he bows himself to the Earth,
kneeling down upon one Knee with his right Elbow to the Earth, and names the
Kings Title, Dondagh: whereupon the King if pleased answers, Namady, that is, I
thank you, if not, sits silent. If it be a person of Quality, and his Subject,
the King perhaps causes a Matt to be spread on the ground, upon which sitting
at the distance of a Pace, he declares what he has to request. But if he be a
Foraigner that comes only to Salute the King, without any further Ceremony he
is conducted to him, receiving an immediate dispatch. If the person have any
Proposition, Petition or Complaint to make, upon notice thereof, a Jilly, or
Interpreter is called, who coming with his Bow in his hand, opens to the King
the whole matter, sentence by sentence; whereto according to the quality of the
Affair, he receives answer, with promise, if upon a Complaint, that as soon as
he has heard what the other party can say in his defense, he will forthwith
give Judgment according to Right.

If any man come to thank the King for doing Exemplary Justice in a difficult
Cause, How the King is thanked for doing good Justice.
after his Presents received, he devests himself of all his Clothes and
Ornaments, saving only a little Cloth to cover his Pudenda; so casts himself
backwards upon the ground, and instantly turning again, rises upon one knee,
takes up earth with his hand, and lays it upon his head; then leaning with one
elbow upon the earth, he says three times, Dondagh: whereupon the King answers
some times, Namady, that is to say, I thank you; and sometimes otherwise, as he
thinks fit.

The first Address usually is performed in his own House in the presence of his
chiefest Wife. But such as concern Justice, or the State of the Country, he
hears in the Council-House, in the presence of the Lords of the Council: This
Assembly they call Simannoe.

When some Eminent Person sent from a Neighbor King desires Audience, one of
the Kings Wives goes with a Present, and tells him who sent it: whereupon the
Person appears before the King, and takes earth.

When an Ambassador sent from another great Prince approaches the Borders, he
gives notice of his coming; whereupon he is ordered to remain in the next Town
till all be made ready, as is requisite in the Kings Town. There he is received
with great Festivals, which consists in Exercising with Bows and Arrows,
Assagays, Lances and Shields, as if they were fighting against Enemies, with
great Drummings and Songs of War; which the Ambassador having seen, and the
Sport ended, the King retires to the Council-House; where after a little stay,
enquiry is made if the King may be saluted; whereupon having permission, the
Ambassador enters, and kneeling upon his knee with his back to the King, and
his Bow in his hand bent to the utmost, allusively implying, that he will set
himself to the utmost against his Enemies. In the intervals of these Passages,
the Ambassadors Followers chant forth his Praises, as before the Kings Servants
sung Elogiums to his Honor. These Encomiums they always begin with these
words; Polo, Polo, Sammach: Then continuing, they say, Comme bolle machang,
that is, His handiwork is not to be equalled by another man: Doogo Doogo
Folmaa Hondo Mco, that is, Pursuer of. Doogo Folmaa and Hondo Moo; Sulle Tomba
Query Asch, that is, I will stick as close as Pitch to him that opposes me.

This Address the King receives in his Simannoe, or Council-House, being open
on all sides, with great attendance round about. After this Gratulatory
Salutation, the Ambassador desires leave to relate his Embassy, but is put off
till the next day; so retiring, he diverts himself till the appointed time in
Feasts and Sportive Recreations.

The Ambassador receives Answer by the Kings Direction from a Jilly, or
Interpreter; after which they show the Ambassador and his Retinue the place
where they are to remain; where the Kings Slaves bring them Water to wash, and
the Kings Women bring very neatly dressed, in Dishes set on their heads, Rice and
Flesh, much or little, according to the number of his Attendants. The
Entertainment ended, the King sends him for his Welcome, Wine, and other
Presents, either a Kettle, Basin, or such like.

If any European Merchant bring the King a Present, he is invited to eat with
him; but with no Black, how great of State soever, will he eat out of the same
Dish: but lets their Meat be carried by his Women to the place where they are.

When the King dies, the eldest Brother succeeds in his Throne, The In^eritance
of the Kingdom.
and enjoys his Rice-Fields, Slaves, and Women, except those which in his life
were given to the Children.

The Folgia's are under the Emperor of Manou, or Manoe, a mighty Prince; The
Folgia's are under the Manou's.
who receives of them yearly Tributes in Slaves, Salt, red Cloth, Kettles,
Basins, and such like: for which he bestows on them as a Gratuity, certain
Clothes called Quaqua-Cloathes, which the Folgian send to the Quoians, as they
again to the Bolmian, or Hondoian Lords.

The People of Gala-Monou also give Presents to this King of Monou yearly,
whose Name at present is Quawawoe, but his Predecessors was Mendino; but the
Folgia's, as an acknowledgment of their accustomed subjection to them of Monou,
call them Mendi-Manou, that is to say, Lord, the word properly so signifying.
For the same cause the Quoians have the like Title of Mendi-Monou both from the
Folgia's, Bolmasses, and Timnasses. And this Power of the Mendi-Monou is (as we
said already) more maintained by Wisdom than Force.

The Folgia's are esteemed Rich, and their Language Courtly and Eloquent; which
wins great respect, and by their Neighbors called Mendi-Co, The Lordly Tongue.

HOndo has many several Princes; the chiefest, appointed by the Quoians, The
Government of Hondo.
are Mossilago, Dedowach, Dangoerro, and Dandi, each lying far distant from the
other. From hence come yearly Merchants, bringing Slaves and Elephants-Teeth;
who apply themselves in the name of their Lords to King Flamboere, who returns
by them back again to their Lords, red Clothes, Copper Kettles, Basins,
Cypress, or Quaqua-Cloathes, and Salt which is not dried in Pans by the heat of
Sun; but boiled from the Seawater with great labor and toil.

THe Quoians, Their Religion.
as also those of Bolm, Timna, Cilm, Folgia, Hondo, Gala, and Manou, are all
Circumcised according to the Mahumetan manner, and acknowledge one God, the
Creator of Heaven, Earth, and Men; and jointly with these they worship no
visible earthly Creature; but they highly honor the Sun, Moon, and Stars. They
neither represent the Deity nor Spirits in the shape of Men or Beasts; only in
Bolma and Timna some Images, by them called Janaa, they set in the Ways, and by
their Houses, as remembrances of their deceased Ancestors and Friends.

They believe that the Almighty, Their great Superstition concerning the Souls
of the Deta^^ed.
whom they call Kanuo, will punish all their misdeeds, and encourage
well-doing; therefore they call upon him when they are oppressed, for his
presence and aid; and that he will take notice of their Cause, and do them
Justice; continually inculcating in all their speeches; That there shall a time
come, in which all evildoers shall receive their wages.

They believe that their Friends after their death become Spirits; which they
call Jannack, or Jannanen, and say, that they are omniscient to take cognizance
of all Causes which happen among them; and therefore they hold familiar
Colloquies with them, telling them all troubles and adversities under which
they labor.

Those that go into the Woods to Hunt, The Offers or Sacrifices to their
deceased Parents.
and take Elephants, or Buffles, or begin any other dangerous Enterprise, go
first and offer to the Spirit of their deceased Parents, either a Cow, or Wine,
or Rice, which they leave on the Grave.

The high times of Sacrificing are kept among them with great Joy, Dancing and
Singing. But besides those solemn times, the King calls upon the Souls of his
Father and Mother almost in every Matter of difficulty.

They believe the Spirits of their near acquaintance are protectors of their
Houses, and therefore in all Sorrow and Sickness they bring Wine and Food out
of their Houses into the Way, and there leave it for an Offering.

They say farther, that these Spirits have their habitation in the Woods:
whereupon all that are distressed, and look for help from God by them, go
thither, complaining and lamenting their affliction; but with awful reverence:
for how great soever any man is, yet he fears very much in the presence of God.
For this cause all acts of Devotion are performed in those solitary Recesses;
into which no Women or Children may be permitted to come.

In this Place twice; thrice, or oftener in the year, according to the
fruitfulness of the Season, and when Hunting is good, all sorts of
Meat Offerings are brought to feed the Spirits.

They say Circumcision has been received among them from hand to hand from all
antiquity, Circumcision.
and that God has commanded it.

They Circumcise Children at half a year old, though sometime, by the Mothers
tenderness, they are kept to the second or third year; but then the Cure proves
more difficult, because the Children going naked, the Air and Sun make the Cut
swell and fester; which they heal by washing with the Juice of green Herbs.

They have together with Circumcision another Custom, which they call
Belli-Paaro, whereby they say they become incorporated into the society of
Spirits, and therefore take part with them in eating the beforementioned
Offerings. But this is kept hidden from Women, and unskilful persons; to whom
they affirm, that the Jaananen, or Spirits themselves eat it: And if any dare
be so bold, as either out of covetousness or curiosity to peep into this
secret, if it happen to be known, they are by some sudden and undiscovered
means immediately made away.

The received Tokens of Belli-Paaro are seldom shown, viz. once in twenty, When
it is done.
or five and twenty years, and then they tell strange Stories of it, and how
they came to the high favor of receiving them: which are nothing else but some
rows of Cuts, from the Neck along both the Shoulder-blades. What they are.
Those that have them are accounted very understanding persons: and when they
grow old, in all Assemblies and Councils, relating to State Affairs, or Causes
Criminal, wherein Life is concerned, may be present, and give their opinion.

Of the manner of receiving these Marks, take this short account:

There is by the Kings order a place in the Wood appointed of about two or
three miles compass, They are received in the Wood.
whither are brought the Youths that have not been Marked, by main force and
against their wills, because they believe they shall be killed or changed; and
therefore they take a sorrowful farewell of their Friends and Parents, as if
they went indeed to their death.

When now they are lodged in the Wood, continually some Ancient persons which
have had the Tokens of Belli-Paaro very long, attend to teach and instruct them
what behavior they shall use; leading them a strange and uncouth Dance, and
causing them to learn some Verses which they call Belli-Dong, being Songs and
Encomiums of Belli, stuffed with obscene and scurrulous language.

Hither the women bring Rice, Bonano's, and all sort of Fruit, prepared for an
Offering, and give it up to the Soggonoe, that is, the Ancientest Marked, whom
the women hold for Saints, praying them by all means to hinder that their
Children in the change should not be burnt to ashes. Thither also goes the
King, and stays two or three days.

This living in the Wood continues four or five years; during which time there
are new comers daily brought thither.

None unmarked may come near this place, only women in manner before
mentioned, and they too must come and go singing with a loud noise; for if it
fall out that any pass by silently, they are taken away by the Spirits, without
ever being heard of more.

When they come out of this Wood, What they do when they come out of the Wood.
they are brought by the Belli-Soggonoe into Huts made for that purpose, where
they are permitted to eat and drink familiarly with the women, and afterward
are anew instructed in causes which concern the Wars, Justice, and Government.

At their first coming abroad, they behave themselves as if they then came
newly into the world, not knowing (or at least wise so pretending) where their
Parents dwell, and so totally changed, that they have forgot their Names; nor
indeed do they the meanest or most common act of Childhood, without being first
tutored therein by the Soggonoe.

At this their beginning appearance, How they are clothed when they come out of
the Wood.
they are habited with Plumes of Feathers, and Caps made of the Bark of Trees,
with long flappets hanging down before their Faces. After some days stay in the
Huts, in such array, with Bells about their Legs, and Beads mixed with Leopards
Teeth about their Necks, and their Hair plaited, they are brought openly to the
Sporting-place, where the women and other people of all sorts, of all Towns and
Villages lying round about, are gathered together to see them Dance the
Belli-Dance, the postures whereof they learned in the Wood.

Those whose dull apprehensions, The Belli-Dance.
or unactive bodies have not carried them forward to perform their parts in
this Dance, are contemned, as having spent their time in abhorred idleness.

After the end of the Dance, every one called by his new name, received in the
Holy Wood from the Soggenoe, is delivered to his Parents with these words,
These are your Parents or Tutors, learn hereafter to know one another again.

Lastly, The marked must swear by Belli-Paaro.
Every one of them must swear by Belli-Paaro, that is, by Divine Justice, That
he will do the Command imposed on him; that he will not withdraw out of this or
that Town, nor reproach any persons or places, or carry any thing away, or
hinder the passing of the Canoo's, or keep Oil, Nuts, and Houses: Then they put
a Stick in the Earth, with a bush of Rushes, resembling a Broom on the top, and
Charm it by these words, Hucquonono Hucquo, Hucquonono Hucquo, Hucquonono
Hucquo, which concern Belli only, and are not used otherwise in the Language.
Who ever offends against this Oath, receives punishment according to the
weightiness of the matter.

In case of breaking this Determination, The Punishment of such as transgress
this Adjuration.
the Falsifier is laid into a Basket with Thorns, and so rolled through the
Town, and back again, till that his skin and flesh is torn; besides they give
him Buasille, that is, Pepper mixed with water, which they put into his Mouth,
Eyes, Ears, and strew or sprinkle it over his whole Body.

But the Trial of Adultery by this kind of Oath, The Adjuration in case of
Adultery.
is made by the Magistrate after many Pre-admonitions, and inflicted only upon
the transgressing Woman, according to this Custom.

The complaining Husband, who will have his Wife tried by Belli, or be
delivered up to the Spirits, as they call them; brings her in the Evening into
the Sporting-place, before the Council assembled for that purpose; where after
the calling of the Jannanen into her company, she is blindfolded, that she may
see nothing, and admonished to forsake her evil life, and not go to any but her
own Husband; and presently a great noise and murmr is raised, as if Spirits
did appear, with some not intelligible (though articulate) Sounds, that are
interpreted aloud before the whole Congregation, with threatenings, that if ever
she commit such an offense again, she shall be punished according to her
deserts; and if she be ever thereafter detected of the like Crime, she shall,
together with her Paramour, be carried away by the Jannanen.

In like manner, some are adjur'd for breaking the Decrees made by the King, or
the Magistrate, for Bloodshed, and for taking away the Slave of another, and
selling him, and such like.

Now this taking away of Offenders by the Jannanen, How Offenders are carried
away by the Jannanen.
is made terrible by this means; In the Evening with a great rushing noise
comes into the Town, their Belli. Soggenoe having certain Rattle-clappers,
making a great noise, so that the common people wonder at the hurliburly; being
come to the Sportingplace, where the Offenders are set, they take with them as
many as are there, with such a fearful Clamor, that the Outcries of the
Offenders cannot be heard; so are they hurried to the Holy Wood, from whence
they never return. During the time of this Performance, no Woman or unmarked
person may look out of the house, upon pain of being fetched from thence in like
manner.

This Belli-Paaro is also common in Hondo, Where the Belli-Parro is in use.
Folgia, Gala, and Gebbe; also among the Bolmesses and Cilmesses.

And though it is apparent enough, How highly Belli is esteemed by them.
what it is to be killed by Belli, for that the Execution of Belli is but the
Kings Form of Justice; yet no man dares for fear of Death, take upon him to
interrupt it: For the Belli-Soggenoe hold this Ceremony to be so Sacred, and
have it in such high esteem, that the King himself (who is as it were the Head
of Belli) declares himself his Vassal, and to be subject to his Mysteries.
Indeed he takes care in the Council, Who are free from Belli.
that none be adjur'd by Belli, nor that the Jannanen take away any without his
knowledge or consent; only inflicting that Punishment upon his own Subjects,
though sometimes a few have dared to resist it, and fly into another Province
rather than submit.

And here we may observe, that none is given up to the Jannanen, Water to know
if any be guilty or not guilty.
but with good Consideration, and upon clear Evidence of Guilt; to prove which,
they have a Water of Cursing, boiled of Barks and Herbs, which by the Elders of
the Mystery is put upon the hand of the charged Party lukewarm; if he be
innocent, it will not hurt; but will corrode and burn the Skin off, if guilty.

Thus is Adultery, Thievery, and Lying tried.

The foresaid Water of Cursing, or rather of Divination, wherewith they extort
the Truth in all doubtful matters, as we have related, is thus prepared. The
Bollimo takes the thick Rind of the great Tree Nelle, and the Rind of Quony,
growing also upon a great Tree bearing Seed, used in the making of Poison for
their Arrows; and mixed with water, as we said, is given to them to drink who
are accused of Sovach. Thirdly, He takes some leaves of the Borrow-Tree, from
which beaten and pressed proceeds a white Juice, which with some mitigating
Ingredients makes an excellent Purge, but the strongest taken alone is mortal
Poison. Moreover, the Bollimo adds to the before-recited long Pepper, and a
piece of Mannoone about the bigness of a Bean. All these are put into a little
Pot or Horn, and filled up with the Urine of a young man that had never known a
woman. This done, they scrape in a little Bonda, that is, red Dying-weed.
Lastly, daubing the four sides of the Pot with Mannoone chawed in the mouth, it
is ready to be set on the fire, which must be made under the open Heaven in the
morning at Sunrise, or in the evening at Sunset, of green Wood. As soon as
the water begins to boil, the Bollimo takes a piece of Domboo, being a Tree
that bears fruit like a Medlar, and puts it under the Seething Pot; in the mean
time trying whether the Ingredients have boiled enough, and repeating secretly
the names of the suspected persons, or of other matters, How this Sorcery-water
is used.
to which the Witchcraft must be applied. When all is ready, the Bollimo takes
the arms or legs of the suspected persons, and washes them clean with fair
water. At length he puts his Divining-Staff, which is bruised and tufted at the
end, into the Pot, and drops or presses the water out of it upon the arm or
leg of the suspected person, muttering these words over it: Is he guilty of
this, or has he done this or that; if yea, then let it scald or burn him, till
the very skin come off. Now if the person remain unhurt they hold him innocent,
and proceed to the trial of another, till the guilty be discovered; and this is
done so long, till the name of the guilty, or the person be found out.

The Criminal thus found, is without any long procrastinating put to death. The
manner of which, according to the variety of Places is different; but the most
usual thus: The Executioner takes the Offender, and leads him with his Hands
tied behind, and his Eyes blind-folded, either into an open Field or a Wood;
whither being come, the Offender upon his Knees, his Head bowed down, he first
runs through the Body with an Assagay, or Simiter, and afterward chops off his
Head with an Axe: for they do not believe he is dead till his Head be cut off.
The Carcass cut into four quarters, after great lamentations, they leave in the
Field as a Prey to the Beasts and Fowl, but the Friends take away the Head as a
great Present, and boiling it in a Kettle, drink up the Broth, but hang the
Scull by their Fetisso, or Idol.

The like Trial is also made of other Offenses among the Blacks in Quoia; and
also in Gala, Hondo, Bolm, Cilm, and many other Places: so that every one had
need to be circumspect and careful to prevent suspicion, especially the Women,
who are for every trifling Caprichio of their Husbands, brought in question of
their Honesty.

Now if one of the King's Women lash out, The Punishment of chief Women for
Adultery.
or go abroad after other Men, and the King be enraged against it, then he
causes them to be so possessed, that if they touch any Masculine person, small
or great, they suddenly fall into a kind of Epileptick Fit; according to which
three Wives of the present King Flamboere suffered: one of which receiving her
Daughters Child, not knowing it was a Boy, fell into a Swoon, and might therein
have died, if the other Women had not run to the King, and beseeched him that
the Bollimo might release her from the Curse. But because this is an
extraordinary thing, no other but the King himself may put it in execution, and
that very seldom.

ANd as the Men have the Marks of Belli, The Marks of Nesogge;
so here the Women have a Mark of Obligation, which they call Nesogge; which
first took original from Goula, and done in manner following: They bring ten,
twelve, or more Maids of full Age, as also Women, into a peculiar place in the
Wood not far from the Town; where first Huts are made for them, then a Woman
comes out of Goula, whom they call Soghwilly, to be the chiefest in this Work
of the Garnoer, or Vala Sandyla, as they term it. This Soghwilly, or Priestess
gives the Assembly Hens to eat, with the Obligation to stay with her in that
place, which she names Sandy-Latee, that is, Hens of the Agreement. After that
she shaves off their Hair, and the next day brings them to a Brook in the Wood,
where the aforesaid Soghwilly, by Incision cut out the Mother, not without
great pain and terror; then washing and healing the Wound with green Herbs,
which sometimes requires ten or twelve days time.

They stay there afterward three or four Months, to learn Dances and Verses
of Zaudy; which are not only difficult to learn, but contain very little that
can be sung with honesty, by any that do but pretend to be chaste and modest.
During their abode together in recess they go as naked as they were born, their
Clothes being taken away at the first coming of the Soghwilly. When the time
draws near that they shall be brought from thence, they make a kind of Garments
of the Rind of Trees, Died red and yellow; and their Friends are permitted to
bring them Arm-Rings, Beads, Bells, to put about their Legs when they Dance,
and other things to adorn themselves at their coming forth. When they enter the
Town, or Village, where the People gather together as if it were some Holiday,
the Soghwilly leads to the Sporting-place, where one sits Drumming with two
Sticks on a round hollow piece of Wood. By the ill-tun'd Music of which (if so
we may call it) Instrument, the Simodiuno, or Sandi-Simodiuno, that is,
Children of Sandy, every one understands his time; and they all seek to exceed
one another in Dancing.

This Solemnity ended, they make these Women to swear by Noe-Soggo, that is, by
their Faithfulness: and thenceforth all people must give credit to their words.

They have no select Days set apart for their Ceremonies, They have no
Holy Days.
nor do they keep holy the seventh, but the first Day of the New Mood, when
they see it appear; for then they do no manner of work: neither do they any
work in Planting on that day when any one drinks Quony, nor when any one dies
in the same Town; for they believe if they should, that the Mill and Rice
would grow red, seeing, as they say, it is a day of Blood; but they may freely
go a Hunting.

Thus far we have thought fit to give an account of what concerns the Kingdom
of Quoia; now we shall, for the better connection and understanding of what
before is mentioned, and that which is yet to be related, give you the
Narrative in what manner the Karou's were dispossessed of their Country by the
Folgia's; and Vey, Puy, and Quoia-Berkoma subjected.

A Relation, in what manner the Karou's subdued by force of Arms, by the
assistance of the Folgians, the Countries of Vey, Puy, and Quoia-Berkoma.
THe Karou's, when they inhabited by Rio Junk and Aquado, The Contention and
Quarrel between the Karous and Folgians.
had for their Prince one Sogwalla; whose near Neighborhood to the Folgia's
bred many sharp Quarrels and Contentions between them concerning Limits and
Superiority, till at last from private Feuds they broke out into an open War,
wherein the Folgians generally went with the loss.

The Folgians reduced to extremity, The Folgians seek for Address by Sorcerers,
how to overcome the Karou's.
and no longer able to hold out by plain force, have recourse to one Jakehmo, a
Prognosticator, or Conjurer, for counsel how they might master the Karou's; who
returned this answer, That near a Hill, in the Karou's Country was a Pond, or
Standing-Water, which they worshipped, and accounted holy, being fondly
persuaded, that the first Karou's dropped out of Heaven into this Pond, making
daily Offerings there, and to the Fishes in it: they should therefore take
boiled Fishes with Scales, and throw therein; (for you must observe, that it is
unlawful for the Karou's to eat any Fish with Scales) which defiling their
consecrated Pool, would be a cause of Variance and Contention amongst
themselves, so that they should destroy one another; whereby weakened they might
easily be conquered: The Folgians followed his advice; whereupon the Karou's,
according to the Saying of the Sorcerer, became wonderfully enraged one against
another; and dividing into Factions, so weakened themselves by mutual
slaughters, that the Folgians thought it time to assault them: however, the
Karou's made resistance; but at last, through the impulse of Fate, they were
overcome, The Karou's overcome by the Folgians.
and their Governor Sogwalla slain; whose Son, named Flonikerry, with the
remaining Karou's, soon after submitted to the Command of the Folgians. But the
Folgians, who very well knew by long conversation, the ambition and
stubbornness of the Karou's, and had seen many proofs of their Valor, and that
their restless spirits would take all opportunities to regain their Liberty and
Honor, resolved not to inflict any great Services upon them as Slaves, but
live with them as Companions and Contrymen; They are civilly treated by the
Folgias.
by that means to draw and unite their hearts to them, and to win the
advantages of a continual Peace: As a farther motive and inducement to which,
Flansire, King of Folgia, took to Wife the Sister of Flonikerry, Flonikerry
remains General of the Karou's.
by Name Wawalla: by which Marriage Flonikerry, remaining Chief of the Karou's
in his deceased Father's Place, so wrought, that both People were incorporated
into a mutual Amity.

In this interim the Quabe-Monoaw, a People dwelling near Rio Cestes, had begun
a War with the Folgia's: for the management whereof, Flansire made his Brother
Flonikerry his General, and referred the Trust and Care of all to his
discretion, as well satisfied of his great Experience in the Wars: Whereupon he
drew to Rio Cestes with his Forces, and meeting with the Enemy, a fierce and
terrible Fight ensued, with great loss of Men on both sides, it being very
dubious a long time to whose side the Victory would incline: but at length the
Folgians good fortune prevailed; and assisted by the Conduct and Valor of
their General, made a total Conquest both of the People and Country. The War
thus luckily ended, Overcomes the People of Rio Cestes.
the General with his Army returned back to Folgia; where he was courteously
received by his Lord, and thanked for his faithful Service.

During this War, The Death of the King of Manou.
Mendino the King of Manou (to whom the Folgians paid an Annual Tribute) died,
whose Subjects and Favorites did strictly, according to their Custom, make
enquiry how he came to his end; but the narrowest of their Scrutinies not being
able to make any discovery, they were forced to acquiesce: Nevertheless they
took up an embittered hatred against Manimassah, Brother of the deceased
Mendino, The Kings Brother Manimassah drinks Quony.
that he was forced to drink the Quony; which seeing no other remedy, he did;
yet evacuated the same again without any hurt, as a remarkable sign of his
Innocence: Whereupon he demanded to be restored to his former Honor and
Credit; but in stead thereof, the Tryers told him: The King was in his life
time our common Father; should not we after his death endeavor to find out what
did befall him, or caused him to dye? that were a great shame for us; we have
examined and tried you, but it shall not remain so; we will examine the
business yet farther, and make the Soothsayers acquainted with it.

Manimassah mad at these inhumane usages, Retires Northward.
burst forth at last into these words: This shame is not to be suffered of my
Subjects in my own Country; I will go under the Conduct of the Spirits, my
deceased Friends, and seek a dewlling place. In this manner he left his Native
Country, and traveled a little Northward into Gala, inhabited by the
Gala-Monou's, a mean and simple People, without any Prince.

These in a short time (won by Manimassah's endearing Behavior) besought him
with an unanimous consent to be their Prince; Becomes Prince of the
Gala-Monou's.
to which he consented, with this Condition: That they should give him some of
their Plants and Venison for an acknowledgement of their Subjection; this they
yielded to, but such was their brutish Barbarism, that although they owned him
their Lord, they used him as their Companion; for being wholly unacquainted
with Civility, when any of them brought him Wine, Rice, or Flesh, they came to
him to require their Callibashes or Baskets; Was uncivilly dispossessed
which unmannerly clownish behavior Manimassah so resented, He withdraws again,
because of their Disobedience.
(though upon due consideration, their ignorance might have pleaded a
sufficient excuse) that he concluded to withdraw again to obtain help and
assistance (because he was not potent enough to bring the Gala's under his
Authority) from Flansire, Upon what he withdrew.
King of Folgia, whose Daughter he had married.

The King hearing the Request of his Brother-in-law, lent him many Soldiers
for his help under the Conduct of Flonikerry as General, Comes again with an
Army, and compels them to Obedience.
who unexpectedly fell into Gala, and subdued the People, settling Manimassah in
an absolute Dominion; who has ever since continued their Prince, and taught
them with sorrow to learn more respective qualities. This Affair performed, at
last Flonikerry returned to Folgia, and was there received and welcomed with
great Applause.

This Flonikerry had a Brothers Son named Fesiach, Fesiack gives opportunity
and occasion of overcoming of Vey-Berkoma.
who having been formerly at Cabo Monte, or Vey-Berkoma, and the places
adjacent, many times told his Uncle the Convenience and Situation of the
Country, and how easy a matter it would be to bring it under his Obedience:
These Discourses before the King had wrought in him an inclination to the
Proposal, which upon the account following came to effect.

Flonikerry had long before desired of the King, Flonikerry desires some
Countries to Farm of the King of Folgia.
that he and his people might have designed to them some places of the
Country, upon promise to pay Tribute: To answer this Request, several things
fell under consideration, at length Cabo Monte was proposed; whereupon there
was several long Debates between the King and his Nobility; but the King
remembering his Generals honest Performances for himself against those of Rio
Cestos, and in Gala for the Service of his Son-in-law, resolving to content him
in it, said, I shall do the desire of his heart; The King appoints to go
against the Country of Cape de Monte.
and gave him leave to go thither with the Karou's, sending a considerable
Force with him for his help, that he might not be repulsed.

The Commanders of the Army that went out of Folgia to the Cape de Monte with
Flonikerry, were these; Jelliva, Syala, Juba, Selboela, Mamnos, Syfre of the
Cape of Mesurado and Fesiach, Flonikerry's Brothers-Son.

As soon as the Field-Officers with their Soldiers came to Cape de Monte on
the South side about Tomby, they invaded the Vey-Monou; who being numerous, The
Karou's come with their Army near the Vey-Monou's.
and withal of a haughty courage, were not quickly mastered; but the continual
Onsets of the Karou's at length tired them out, for they shot poisoned Arrows,
whose wounds proved irremediably mortal; whereas the Vey's, They overcome them
by shooting of poisoned Arrows.
not being accustomed to such Fights, used only Darts, and Assagayes or
Lances, having no skill in preparing Poison; so that finding they could not any
longer defend themselves, they went with their Hoods upon their heads to Quolm,
a Fort of the Karou's, erected at the River Plizoge, a little Eastward of
Tomby, to ask favor, which Flonikerry naturally inclined to pity, easily
granted, bidding them go lie down with their Faces to the ground, according to
the manner of the Country in such case; then coming out, he trod upon them
with his Feet. He made an Agreement with them as follows: First, Their way of
making an Agreement.
some Hens were killed in the presence of them all, of whose blood the
conquered swallowed a little, as a token of Agreement. Afterward the dead Hens
were boiled, and the flesh eaten among them, only the legs were kept for a
perpetual remembrance; for if any man after that time transgressed or broke his
promise, to him were the legs shown; who upon sight thereof soon recanted, for
fear of the punishment that after would assuredly follow.

In the consideration of this success, Flonikerry overjoyed, let loose his
thoughts, The former successful Victory of Flonikerry made him insolent.
giving them free scope to range further; but first for assuring his new
conquered Dominion, he sought by all means to win the minds of the vanquished
to him, and to contract a firm League of friendship and correspodency with the
Karou's of his own Country. But wavering fortune that minds nothing less than
the continuance of friendship, will blemish his new gotten glory, with a dire
and unexpected mishap; for scarce were the minds of the Vey's or Karou's
united, but there came out of Gala, Miminique, Son of the aforesaid named
Manimassah, with a great Army of Gala's and others, to make War upon the
Karou's and Vey's, to whose design his Father was not unwitting, having
voluntarily forgotten the kindnesses received from Flonikerry's Arms, in the
Conquest of his now acquired Dominion. Wherefore Flonikerry upon the first
intelligence, drew together his Forces, to which joining the Veys, he formed a
considerable Army; wherewith marching toward the Enemy, they soon met and came
to a Battle, wherein the Gala's at first by their multitude put the Karou's to
a disorderly Retreat, which Flonikerry a valiant and undaunted person seeing,
and not used to shrink before his Enemies, dug with his hand a hole in the
ground, and put his knees in it, with a resolution, either to die there, or
remain Conqueror over his Enemies. And indeed he had his desire in the one, for
after a long and sharp Contest, at length as it were covered with Assagayes and
Arrows, he was slain on the spot. However, his men gathering fresh courage to
revenge their Princes death, Rallied and gave a fresh Charge upon their Enemies
with such fury, that they turned the fortune of the day, and became solely
masters of the Field.

But the death of Flonikerry, whose body they buried in the Fort Quillone, was
sometime kept secret, till they sent for his Brother Zyllymanque to take his
Charge, who immediately accepting the same, pursued the Victory, and drew near
to the Camp, where he soon brought under the Puymonow, giving their Spoil as a
Booty to his Soldiers.

After this Victory he marched with his Army to Quoia-Monou, lying along the
River Magwibba, or Rio Nova; but the people would not endure to run the risque
of War, but yielded themselves up to Subjection without blow. And in this
manner the Kanou's, by the aid of the Folgia's, became masters of the whole
Country, and gained the reputation of a mighty people.

Soon after he went to the River Maquelbary, or Rio Galinhas, where he subdued
the Quilliga-Monou after a little resistance; and with them he ended his Wars,
and retired with his Forces to Tomby, his old habitation; but was at length
poisoned, as was thought, leaving behind him several sons, which were but
little, and not capable to manage their Fathers Dominion.

However the eldest called Flansire was admitted Successor, during whose
Minority his Uncle Jemmah, his Fathers Sisters Son, as Guardian, took care of
the Government for some time; but Flansire growing in years took the Royal
Authority into his own hand, and to show that he inherited as well his Fathers
Valor as Countries, resolves to enlarge his Bounds yet farther; and to that end
went with his Forces over the River Maquelbary, or Galinhas, taking all the
adjacent places as far as Serre-Lyons, which he also by force of Arms brought
under his Subjection; and in all the chief places before his departure set
Garrisons, and appointed Governors over them, viz. over Serre-Lyons he made
Kandaqualle Commander in chief; over the Countries at the River de Palm he set
as his Deputy one Selboele, from whom the River took name: and to command the
people about Rio Galinhas, he appointed one Sytre. Having thus settled his new
Conquests, he returned into his own native Principality, where he spent a good
part of his life in peace and quietness, till inconstant Fortune, which seemed
to have served him too long, began to create him new troubles: For there came
news from Serre-Lyons, Serre-Lions is taken by Dego Falmah.
that Kandaqualle was driven out thence, and forced to fly with all his people
to the Islands Bananneo, not being able to withstand Dogo Falma, a native of
the Country of Dogo, a Territory in Hondo, who with a mighty force had invaded
him. Flansire startled at this news, and very well knowing that a matter of
such concern required expedition, sent to the Bolmian Lords, his Substitutes,
to gather their people together, and to meet him at an appointed Rendezvous:
but they had made a private confederacy with Gammina their Masters brother, by
whose instigation they neglected and slighted his Commands.

Flansire knowing nothing of this Combination between his Brother and his
Provincial Governors, Flansire draws toward Serre-Lions.
after he had committed the Lieutenantship of his Kingdom, and the care of his
Wives and Children to the Protection of his Brother, marched forth with his
eldest Son Flamboere, the present King of Quoia, not doubting but that his
Provincials durst not have a thought to leave him. First therefore he went by
Land to the River Galinhas, and from thence with Canoos over the Islands
Banannes, to take with him the People that were driven from Serre-Lions, as we
lately mentioned, and so passed directly to Serre-Lions; where Landing with his
Forces, He comes with his Forces to Land.
he began a sharp War with Dogo Falma.

This Dogo Falma had been heretofore a great Man in favor with the King of
Dogo, or Hondo, but had attempted, and lay with one of the King's Wives; Dogo
Falmab punished by the King of Hondo.
whereat the King was so enraged, that not contented the offense, according to
custom, should be bought off with Gifts or Slaves, he caused his Ears to be cut
off, and banished him his Presence: but length of time so wore out the King's
fury, that Dogo Falma was admitted again to the Court; where he had not long
been but he began to show his insolence, His Speech to the King upon his having
punishment
and at length accosted the King in these terms: Sir King, considering the
wickedness committed against you my Lord and Master, I am obliged to thank you
for your gracious Sentence by which I am punished, that every one that looks
upon me derides and scorns me; and the rather, because the punishment is
unusual, and the like offense customarily bought off with Goods and Slaves: Now
as you were pleased to punish me, so I desire the like offense in others may be
punished in the same manner. It may happen that some of the King's Servants or
Subjects may fall into the same Lapse: but if it be either denied, or not
performed, I shall complain against my Lord the King in the Ways and in the
Woods, to the Jannanen and Belli, that is, to all the Spirits and Demons.

The King having heard this audacious Speech, took council upon it; and,
notwithstanding his implicit menace, determined, that the punishment inflicted
on him should not follow upon all: But nevertheless to pacify him in some
measure, and take off his complaint, he made him General of an Army, He is made
General of Serre-Lions.
to recover Serre-Lyons out of the hands of Kandaqualla, who presided there for
Flamboere.

To repel this Invader, Flansire, as we said, was come to Serre-Lyons with an
Army, and made sharp War; at length by the help of some Whites, he fell upon
the Town Falmaha, and with axes cutting down the Tree-wall; at last they forced
an Entrance, and set the Houses on fire, The Town of Falmah is taken and burnt.
whose fury soon increased to an impossibility of being quenched. Whereupon
Dogo Falmah finding himself unable to resist, fled; whom King Flamboere with
the Karou's pursued, though to no purpose: however Flamboere won great
reputation at this time, for his valor, the people crying him up in these
terms, Dogo Falmah, Jondo Moo, that is, Pursuer of Dogo Falmah.

Thus Flansire reconquer'd Bolmberre, Gammanah stands up against Flansire.
and settled Kandaqualla again in his Lieutenantship, and then Retreated with
his Company, intending to return to his Wife and Children. But on the way he
received notice that his Brother Gammanah, whom he had given Commission to
manage the State and supervise his Family in his absence, had usurped his
Dominion, and killed all his Sons he could come at, and taken his Wives to
himself, and set up his Residence by Rio de Galinhas, as a convenient place to
intercept or impede his Brothers return: And as commonly, fluctus fluctum
sequitur, one trouble falls in the neck of another; so here, this Rebellion of
his Brother was attended with an Invasion of the Gebbe-Monou who dwell about
Cabo Mesurado, who fell into Dowala and Cape de Monte, The Gebbe-Monou's fall
upon Dowala.
where they burnt the Town, and lead away Prisoners all persons they could meet
with, intending to make them Slaves.

Flansire understanding these mischiefs, marched toward the River Maqualbary
with all speed; but complaining to the Kanon and Jananie's, that is, to God and
the Angels, of his distress in these words, To you only it is known, that my
Father left me rightful Heir in his Kingdom, which falls to me by the Laws of
the Land, seeing I was the Eldest Son, and that my Brother has rebelled
against me, and has set himself up to be Lord: be you Judges between him and
me in this intended Fight, and let it, if the Cause be unjust that he manages
against me, come upon his own head.

Thereupon he passed with all his Soldiers over the River, where the Armies
suddenly met, and his Brother, with great number of his men, slain, he got a
complete Victory; but still kept the Field, although no further opposition
appeared against him.

In this time, while the King remained encamped in the Field, to be the more
ready against any other appearing Rebels, his Son Flamboere went with a
Squadron of Soldiers into the Woods to hunt Civet-Cats; and by his Sports
trained far into them, they discovered some of the Rebels busy in burying the
dead body of the Usurper; but as they perceived Flamboere and his followers,
immediately they betook themselves to flight, imagining he had purposely come
with that Force to find them out, and left the Corpse behind them, with three
Shackell'd Slaves, intended to have been dispatched at his Grave according to
custom. By this means ascertained of Gammanah's death, when they least expected
it, they took and brought the three Slaves to Flansire, who having understood
out of their mouths all circums tances of what had happened, and how all
things stood in the Country, he sent them to their fellow-Rebels, to admonish
them to come to him to ask him pardon, and to assure them, that he would not
think of their misdeeds: Which goodness of the Kings, though presented by the
mouth of these Slaves, wrought the desired effect, for the Rebels immediately
submitted, and received their pardon.

This Rebellion thus quashed, Flansire subdues the People of Gebbe-Monou.
King Flansire, with all his Power marched to Cape Mesurado, to reduce the
Gebbe-Monou, which he did with great slaughter, and the Spoil of the Country,
and then retired with his Forces home again, taking his habitation in his old
City Tomby, till the Dogo Monou made a new Insurrection, to revenge the losses
of Dogo Falmah; at first he left the Town, and retired to Massagh, an Island
lying in a Lake of the River Plyzoge, whither the Dogo-Monou with Fleets
following to Attaque him, were in a manner totally subdued by Flansire's people.

The Coast from Cape de Mesurado, to the Grain-Coast.
ABout twelve miles Eastward from Cape de Monte, lies Cape de Mesurado, Cape
de Mesu^ado.
a high Mountain, at the North Point. A mile and a half, The River St. Paul.
or two mile Eastward of which the shallow River of St. Paul falls into the
Sea, passable only with Boats and Sloops. The Land about Cape de Monte and
this River, containing about ten miles and a half, is low, overgrown with
Bushes and Brambles; but the Cape a high Mountain, and runs with the South
Point steep down in the Sea, and seems to Seamen coming from the South an
Island, because the low Grounds on the other side cannot be seen.

The Country about the Cape de Mesurado, is called Gebbe, Gebbe.
and the People Gebbe-Monou, subjected and conquered, as in the manner newly
related.

Nine or ten miles from Cape Mesurado, lies Rio Junk, Rio Junk.
also in Portuguese called Rio del Punte, having a violent Stream; yet at the
deepest not above eight Foot Water: by which impediment made passable not
without great labor and difficulty. The Land hereabout overgrown with Bushes
and Brambles, yet standing higher, may be farther seen to the Sea. On the
South-end of Rio Junk, some little Groves appear upon a rising Ground; beyond
which to the Inland, three swelling Hills raise heads to a height discernable
far off at Sea.

Eight miles from Rio Junk, St. John's River empties its Streams into the Sea,
The River St. John.
being shaded with lofty Trees. The Coast reaches betwixt both, South-East
Easterly.

Eastward of this River, within the Country, a high Mountain shows it self in
the shape of a Bow, being high in the middle, and low at both ends.

Six miles from it lies a Village called Tabe Kanee; and a little forward to
the Sea, a Cliff; where the Land begins to grow low, and so continues to Rio
Sestos.

In the midway between Tabe Kanee and Sestos, stands a small Village called
Petit Dispo, with an adjoining Cliff like the former.

Three miles from Del Punte, you meet with the Brook Petit, or Little-water, by
the Blacks called Tabo Dagron, perhaps from the Name of the King who has the
Command there.

The Grain-Coast.
THe Grain-Coast, so called by the Europeans, The Grain-Coast.
from the abundance of Fruits and Grain there growing, (the chief of which,
named by Physicians and Apothecaries, Grain of Paradise) takes its beginning at
the River Sestos, and reaches two miles beyond Cape de Palm, being a Tract of
forty miles, though some make it begin at Cape de Monte, or Serre-Lions, and
end as before.

Diverse Geographers make this whole Coast one Kingdom, The Kingdom of Melli.
and name it Mellegette, or Melli, from the abundance of Grain of Paradise
there growing, which the Natives call Mellegette. And they not only give it
the Grain-Coast, but further include within it the Jurisdiction of Bitonen.

But Leo Africanus circumscribes it with other Limits; Other Borders of the
Kingdom of Melli.
for in the North he bounds it with Geneva, or Genni, below Gualata; on the
South, with certain Wildernesses and Mountains; in the East, Gago; and in the
West, diverse great Woods; adding further, that the chiefest City, named Melli,
lying thirty days Journey from Tombute, contains above six thousand Houses, and
gives Name to the whole: But we will not farther dispute this matter, but
proceed to set before you the Places and Rivers, lying upon, and within this
Coast.

Six miles from Petit Brook, The River Sestos.
and nine from Rio Junk, the River Sestos glides, with a smooth strong Current,
between high Cliffs on either side: Westward of which the Country appears
woody. Here the Grain-Coast takes its beginning.

Three miles up this Water stands the King's Village, where commonly the Ships
lie at an Anchor to Trade.

A mile and a half Eastward you come to Little Sestos, Little Sestos.
a Village, neighbor'd by a Cliff extending into the Sea, and having one Tree
upon it as a Landmark.

Five miles forward lies Cabo Baixos, Cabo Baixos.
that is, Dry Head, by reason of the Shelf lying before it in the Sea. It is a
round Hill, a mile and a half from the Main Land.

Eastward of Cabo Baixos you may see a white Rock, appearing far off coming by
Sea out of the South, like a Ship with a Sail. And farther into the Sea many
others, which threaten great danger to the ignorant Seaman; and the rather,
because most of them are covered with Water.

Three miles from hence the Village Zanwyn shows it self, Zanwyn.
with a River of the same Name; on whose Banks stands a great Wood, where are
many tall and lofty Trees.

A mile Easterly lies the Hamlet Bofow; and half a mile thence Little Setter:
distant from which three miles you may view the Village Bottowa, seated on the
rising of a high Land near the Seacoast, opposite to Cape Swine; and to the
Southward, a Village of the same Name, by a small Rivers side.

Four miles more Eastward you discover the little Town Sabrebon, or Souwerobo;
then to a place named Krow, which directs you presently to a prominent Cape
with three black Points. From Bottowa the Coast reaches South-East and by East
for five miles, with low and uniform Land, little known to Seamen, only
before Setter and Krow some high and bare Trees raise themselves into the Air
like Masts of Ships laid up.

Passing four or five miles from Krow you come to a Village called Wappen,
Wappen.
or Wabbo, in a Valley, with a Stream of fresh Water adjoining, and five or six
straight Trees on the East Side.

Before Wappen lies an Island, and by it the greatest Cliff in all this Coast,
besides many smaller; and farther on the right hand another Cliff, united on
the East with the Land; at whose Edge lies a Pond, whereinto the fresh Water
falls out of the Woods. Hither the Seamen bring their Casks commonly into the
Village; which the Blacks fill with Water, receiving for their pains
Cotton-Seed, or Beads. The like Pond is by Krow, behind the Cliffs: whither
also the Seamen commonly go with their Boats to fetch fresh Water; which the
Blacks bring them in Pots out of the Woods, and receive the like reward.

From Wappen you come next to Drowya, thence to Great Setter, Great Setter.
by the French called Paris; adjoining to which rises a large Pool of fresh
water. This Tract runs South-East and by South: About three miles from Great
Setter you may discover the Township of Gojaven; and two miles more forward
Garway, Goaven. Garway. Greyway.
close by Cape de Palm; and two miles to the East, another Village called
Greyway or Grouway. Here a small River passes, but full of Rocks and Sandy
Banks, yet passable enough with Boats along the Southern Shore, where some few
Houses are erected. From hence all Ships that arrive there, plentifully furnish
themselves both with fresh Water and Wood.

Next in order comes the high Point, Cabo das Palmas, or Cape Palm, Cape de
Palm.
in four Degrees, and fifteen Minutes North Latitude; on whose Westerly Corner
are three round Hills; and a little farther within Land, a round Grove of
Palm Trees, which may be seen far at Sea, from whence this Point took the Name
of Cabo das Palmas.

Near to this, in Sandy-Bay arriving Ships find a convenient Harbor: A mile
Easterly of which up into the Country, appears a long Mountain, looking like
double Land: From the first Point of Palm Cape, a ledge of Rocks shoot South
South-East, a mile into the Sea; and before them a great Shelf two miles long;
between them the Tide runs very strong to the East, having ten or eleven fathom
Water: Two miles more Eastward, Gruway.
the Village Gruway stands seated at the end of the Grain-Coast.

This whole Shore is very full of Rocks; for which reason, the Ships which Ride
there, are in no little danger.

In February, March, and April, here is fair and clear Weather, with cooling
Breezes, and gentle Westerly Winds.

In the middle of May there begin South and South-East Winds, The Air.
which bring with them not only stormy Gusts, as Hericanes, but also Thunder,
Lightning, and great Rains, that continue June, July, August, September,
October, November, December, and to the latter end of January: During part of
this time, the Sun being in the Zenith, or Vertical Point of the Heavens, sends
down its Beams perpendicular.

The Land here yields great plenty of Mill, Cotton, Rice, Grain of Paradise,
or Melegette.
good Palmeto-Wine, besides diverse sorts of Grain, especially that called of
Paradise, or Melegette.

The Plant that bears Melegette has thick Leaves, better than three inches
long, and three broad, with a thick rib in the middle, out of which shoot many
Veins, which have a Spicie-taste like those of the Seed.

The Fruit is but little of size, covered with a poisonous, tough,
Russet-colour'd, or rather Pale-brown Shell, and under that a Film filled with
many smooth and pointed small Seeds, white within, biting as Pepper and Ginger.

The unripe Grains are red, and pleasant in taste.

The greatest, smoothest, and Chess-nut-colour'd, are the best; and the
blackest the worst.

No kind of Beasts are here wanting, by which means there is all necessary
Provision to be had for Seamen.

The Blacks in these Parts are very envious to all Strangers, The kind of the
Inhabitants.
and steal from them what ever they can lay their hands on; so that it behooves
all Dealers to have a circumspect eye over their Goods: And in some places they
must be careful of themselves; for being Cannibals, they eat whomsoever they
can get into their power.

'T FORT TACARAY, often WITSEN.


and about half flood a fathom and a half deep, but within very dry and narrow,
that it gives little advantage either to the Natives or Seamen.

At the West Side of it rises a Rocky and steep Hill, full of Brambles and
Trees; but on the East Side a Sandy Bank, by which as it were split, it runs in
two small Vills, one to the North-west into the Country, and the other
North-east; but (as we said) both dry and not Navigable.

Near St. Andrew's River, the Seacoast bellies out to the South-east, as far
as the Red-Land.

Between the fourth and fifth Cliff, some high Trees grow in a Valley, whose
edge is remarked with two little Vills, the one named Tabattera, the other
Domera.

Having left behind you the Red Cliffs, you come to Cape La-Hou, Cape de Labou.
the utmost limit of this, and the beginning of Quaqua-Coast, which spreads it
self to Assine: the whole Land hereabouts low and poor, overgrown with
Brambles and Trees, yet a mile and a half Eastwards lies a Village called
Koutrou, Koutrou.
or Katrou.

Five miles from this Cape, stands the Village Jakke La-Hou, in a very barren
spot: five miles farther Jak in Jakko; and six miles beyond that, the
Bottomlesspit, so called from its unfathomable deepness; for the Seamen having
Sounded with their longest Lines and Plummet, could never reach the bottom.
This Hole is in the Sea, not above a Musket Shot from the Shore, so that the
Ships which come about this Pit, must come to an Anchor betimes to prevent
danger.

Three miles from this Pit on the Shore, runs a small River Eastward into the
Country.

From Cape de La-Hou to the aforesaid Pit, the Coast spreads Eastwardly with
double Land.

Sixteen miles Eastward, by La-Hou takes place, Corbi Labou.
before which the Sea runs very deep, for a stones cast from the Shore it has
forty and fifty Fathom water.

Eight and twenty or thirty miles from the Cape La-Hou, Assine.
is seated the Village Assine, where the Guinny-Gold-Coast begins, full of high
Woods, but the Land low; the houses (such as they are) stand on the Seashore,
so that they may easily be seen in the passing by.

Two miles from Assine stands a Hamlet called Abbener or Albine, Albine.
a little to the West of a apiece Wood.

Then follows in order Taboe; and two miles farther Cape Apolony, Taboe.
being a rising ground, and seeming to Sailers like three great Hills.

In Jernon, a little Village situate on the side of this Promontory, the
Netherlanders have a Storehouse.

All along this whole Coast grow many Palm Trees: nor is it destitute of other
Conveniences, yielding extraordinary variety both of Fruits and Plants.

The Inhabitants, as we mentioned before, are called Quaqua's, because when
they see any Trading-Ships approach, they declare their welcome by crying aloud
Quaqua.

These People by their Aspect seem the unseemliest of all the upper Coast; but
are indeed the modestest and honestest, and most courteous; for they esteem it
a great shame, either at meeting to Salute, or at parting to take leave with a
Kiss. When they come to the Ships to Trade, they put their Hands in the Water,
and let some drop into their Eyes; by which they testify, as by an Oath, their
uprightness, and hatred to all Cheatings, or Knavish actions.

Drunkenness they not only abstain from, They shun Drunkenness.
but abominate: for the avoiding which they will drink no Palmito-Wine, but a
smaller sort called De Bordon, or Tomb, and that also mixed with Water;
alleging, that from Drunkenness proceed many Quarrels, the two frequent
occasions of Murders, and other inconveniences; which are all prevented by
Sobriety and Temperance.

The chief Merchandise to be had here, Merchandise.
are Elephants-Teeth, of a larger size than usually elsewhere; but withal
dearer. Some Clothes also sold here; which the Europeans, and other Traders,
from the Name of the Coast, call Quaqua-Cloathes; being of two sorts, the one
bound with five Bands, or Strings; the other with six: from the number of the
bindings giving denominations to the Places they are sold in.

Cape Lahou yields many of these Clothes, which the Inhabitants barter for
Salt; which they, according to their own report send abroad by Slaves or
otherwise, who with it travel so far into the Country, till they come to white
People, that Ride on Mules and Asses, and use Lances for Arms; but they are not
altogether white, as the Europeans. By this Description we cannot but imagine,
these Mungrel Whites they mention, must without peradventure be Moors of
Barbary.

The Blacks of other Places exchange these Clothes for yellow Arm-Rings, and
sometimes, but seldom, for Beads. Heretofore some Gold was to be had; but now
that Trade is lost here, and carried to Akara.

The Government here is Monarchical, Government.
the present Regnant King called Sakkoo; of whom all the neighboring
Territories stand in great fear, because he is a Conjurer, firmly believing,
that if he pleased to put his Arts in practice, he could bewitch all his
Enemies to death.

In the beginning of December this Sakkoo sends a Canoo to Atzyn and Little
Kommany, and all places on the Gold-Coast, with Negro's; where they throw some
compounded Conjuring-stuff into the Sea, using some formal words in doing it;
which is done only to free it from Hericanes, or Whirlwinds, and tempestuous
Storms. So soon as this Canoo returns, the Merchants come with their Clothes
to the Gold-Coast, but in such order, that no more may come off till the first
come back, for the prevention of the hindrances of one another. The five Band
Villages have the priority in coming off, and after those of the six Band: this
continues till April, or the beginning of May: when the Sea begins to run high,
then the King's Canoo comes as before, using the same formality, and returning,
the Gold-Coast Trade ends for that Year.

The Quaqua-Blacks have a well-governed State according to their Mode: As for
example, those that are Fishers must all so remain, without daring to alter
their Employment: As likewise all Merchants are so preferred there, that no
other may deal in fair Laces, and Garments of Akori, but they; insomuch that
all others who have those Commodities, are necessitated to put them into the
Merchants hands.

The method of their Worship, Religion
if any, is Diabolical, sacrificing Men to their Idols, and thereto so
addicted, that they will not be won to alter it; yet courteous enough to
Strangers, from whom they endeavor to conceal those abhorred Oblations.

Gold-Coast.
THe Gold-Coast received its Name from the abundance of Gold there to be had:
It spreads to the length of fifty miles, from the Village Assine, Gold-Coast.
twelve miles Eastward of Korbi Lahou, to the Golden Village of Akara lying at
the Sea. And although some Gold may be had on the Grain-Coast, and Eastward of
Akara, yet that Tract is not reckoned under the Gold-Coast; because the
quantity is but small.

This although known by this single Name to the European Merchants, consists in
many rich Villages, Kingdoms, and Territories, yet but small in Circumference;
the particular Places we will only name here in brief, being these; viz.
Atzyn, Little Inkassan, Ygwira, Great Inkassan, Inkassan Iggina, Anten, Tabeu,
Atty, Adom, Mompa, Wassa, Wanqui, Guaffo, Sabou, Abramboe, Kuyfora, Akanien,
Dohoe, Junta, Ahim, or Great Akany, Akan, Fantyn, Aqua, Sanquay, Ayhwana,
Aquamboe, Abonce, Tafoe, Akara, Labbede, Ningo, Abora, Quanhoe, Bonoe,
Kammanah, Equea, Lataby, Akaradii, Insoka, Gaui, Aquambou, or Aquimena.

The Kingdoms lying at the Sea, are Azin, or Atchin, Little Inkassan, Ante,
Guaffo, Fetu, Sabou, Fantyn, Aghwana, Akara, Labbede, and Mingo; all which are
commonly visited by the English and Netherlanders chiefly, and sometimes by the
French; which several people have in diverse places particular Storehouses and
Forts for the keeping of their Wares, and for the Convenience of the Trade,
which they have built by the permission of the Inhabitants.

The chiefest Villages lying at the Sea, are Atzyn in the Kingdom of Atzyn, the
Village at Cabo tres-Puntas in Little Inkassan, Takorary, Botrow, Poyera,
Pando, Maque Jakquim, Sakonde, Sama in the Kingdom of Anten, Agitaki, or Little
Komendo, Terra Pequerime, or Pekine, Dana, or De Mine, Ampea, Kotabry, Aborby,
and two Salt-Villages; in that of Guaffo, Moure; Sabou, in the Dominion of
Sabou; Anemabo, Adja, Kormantin, in that of Fantyn; the Rough Point,
Soldiers-Bay, Devils Mountain, New Biamba, Great Berku, Inka, Koks-bred, Little
Berku, in that of Aywana; Akara in Great Akara; Labede in Labede.

The Territory of ATSYN, or ATCHIN.
THe Territory of Atsyn, or Atchyn, or Aksem, The Territory of Atsyn.
(as the Blacks call it) has on the East little Incassan, and on the North
Igwira, the Seacoast on the South with Cliffs of Stone.

Near the Sea, three Villages are erected, inhabited by Fishers; Achombene.
the one Achorbene, three miles from Cape de Tres-Puntas: The second Achombene,
near which the Portugals in the time of King Emanuel built a small Fort; but
afterward by agreement with the Blacks, they raised another greater Castle on
the main Land, named from the neighboring Village, The Castle of Asyn, The
Fort Atsyn.
or Atchin, at present possessed by the Netherlanders, who in the Year Sixteen
hundred forty two, the Ninth of January, before the Peace made between them,
and the Crown of Portugal, had dispossessed the Portugals of what strength they
had there.

Coming at Sea out of the West, this Castle in a clear Sun-shiny day, yields a
pleasant Prospect; but coming right against it, the sight is hindered by an
Island lying before it. Westward thereof runs a Rivulet, which though very poor
in Water, yet visits several Dominions, being supposed to take the original far
off in the Golden-Land of Igwira.

Half a mile from the aforementioned Fort, The River.
a River passes, by some thought to run through the Jurisdiction of Akana; but
of this no certainty, nor any likely to be, by reason of its many and strong
Water-falls. Those of the Mine used to go thither with Canoos, which they laded
thence with Shells for the burning of Lime; but since the like Shells have been
found in the Ditches of the Mine, that labor is left off.

The next River bears the name of the Province among Merchant-strangers; The
Atsyn River.
but the Inhabitants denominate it Manku, whose first sight invited the Traders
to search its Channel; but they soon had enough of it, for they met with so
many Shelves and absconded Rocks, besides high and precipitious falls, that it
was impossible to pass them: however it is not altogether waste, for the Natives
dig out from under the Cliff good store of Gold, and fetch it up from under the
Water, in Trays mixed with Earth, Stones, and other Rubbish.

The Territory of Little-Inkassan.
LIttle-Inkassan has on the West Atsin, The Territory of Inkassan.
on the North Igwira, on the East Ante, and in the South spreads with three
Points into the Sea; and therefore the Portugals have named it, Cabo das tres
Puntas. It lies in four degrees, and ten minutes South-Latitude, three miles
Westward of Atzin Castle, and fifteen miles Eastward of Albine.

The Principality of Anten.
ANten lying about seven miles from Cape de Tres Puntas, The Kingdom of Anten.
and ten from Atsin, has neighboring on the West Little-Inkassan; toward the
North-West, Igwira; on the North North-West, Mompa; in the North, Adom; in the
North-East, Tabu; and in the East Guaffo: the whole River full of Villages,
inhabited by Fishermen, as amongst others, Botrow, Pogera, Pando, Takorari, or
Anten, Maque, Jaque, Sakonde, Sama, whereof Takorari is the chief: behind which
lies a remarkable Promontory, with a convenient Road or Haven for Ships. At
Botrow the Netherlands have a considerable Fort.

The King of Anten keeps his Court about three or four miles up in the
Country, commanding all the Country, as well the Inland Villages, as those
that lie at the Sea. A mile Eastward of Anten, Rio St. George falls into the
Sea: close by whose Banks the Village Jabbe is seated.

Near Tekorari the Hollanders some years since built a Fort, from the
neighboring Village called The Fort of Tekorari, The Fort of Witsen, or
Tekorari.
but to themselves known by the Name of Witsen; originally belonging to the
Dutch West India Company; but before the great War between the Crown of England
and the States of Holland, by them remitted to the States General.

In the Year Sixteen hundred sixty and four, in the Month of April, Sublued by
Captain Holmes.
this Fort was attacqu'd by Captain Holms and one Joseph Cubits, in behalf of
the Royal African English Company, with two of the Kings Men of War, six
Frigates, and some other Ships, and by them with no great difficulty won; but
regained again the next Year on the fifteenth of January, Recovered by De
Ruyter.
by Admiral De Ruyter, being at that time only manned by four or five in
health, and about as many more sick Englishmen, and leaving in it seven
Iron-Guns, six or eight Pounders.

Immediately upon the retaking, the Guns being drawn off to the Ship, De Ruyter
caused it, as not to be maintained without many people, and great Charges, with
Twelve hundred pound of Powder, to be blown up into the Air and totally
dismantl'd.

The Negro's of the Mine in the mean time Plundered Takorari, The Negets of the
Mine are sent to assist De Ruyter.
and laid it waste by Fire and Sword, out of malice which they had against the
Blacks of Takorari; there came down thither about nine hundred in three hundred
Canoos, who having as it were by surprise won the Victory, exercised great
cruelty upon such Prisoners as they took, cutting off their heads, with which
they went Dancing and Leaping up and down, and at last carried them home, in
token of Victory.

These Negro's of the Mine were well Armed, according to their Country
fashion; some of them having Caps made like Helmets, adorned with Feathers and
Horns of Beasts, and Swords hanging before upon their Belly, whereon, instead
of Handles, they put Bones of Tigers, Lions, and other Beasts. Their Faces
generally Painted with Red and Yellow, so also on their Bodies, which made a
very strange and terrible sight.

Three miles lower stands a large Town, called Sama, containing about two
hundred Houses, under the Government of one Braffo; nevertheless both he and
his men own as their Superior Lord the King of Gavi, whom they serve in his
Wars in time of need, and pay him Tribute.

The Portugeuese had in this Village a Stone Bulwark, with a Storehouse, but
now decayed, and deserted by them; but by reason of the great convenience of
the River for fresh water, and the adjacent Grounds for Firewood, the
Netherlanders have Rebuilt and possess it, and have raised the middle
foursquare Battery fourteen Foot high, and a Storehouse, whither those of Adom
and Wassen come to Traffic with them.

Close under the Town runs a handsome River, whose Water is fresh and pleasant.
Two, three or four miles upwards, but higher up, is full of Cliffs and Rocks,
so that it is not passable, although for a while it was conceited otherwise,
till experience manifested the contrary; for several of the Traders there
hoping to have got some advantage by it in their Gold-trade, sent six persons
in a Ketch, with three weeks Provision to search, who turned back the
thirteenth day, relating that they had Rowed up eleven or twelve days, but were
not able to get any further, because of the forcible fall of the Water six or
seven Foot higher; and that above, they discovered so many Cliffs and Rocks,
that it was impossible to get through them.

Anten is a plentiful Country, producing great store of Fowl, The Condition of
the Country.
and Poultry of several sorts; besides great variety of Fruits and Vegetables,
especially Injame's, Ananasse's, and Palmitor's, from which so much Palm-wine
is extracted, that the Blacks come ten or twenty miles to fetch it thence in
Canoo's, and carry it up the whole Gold-Coast.

The people along the Shore maintain themselves by Fishing, Their Maintenance.
and in the Country by Handy-labor and Husbandry.

They have always held themselves in an indifferent neutrality toward all
people, Trade.
and formerly, were sought to sometimes by the English, sometimes by the Dutch
to Trade with them; but they finding the Gold they had, was brought to them
from Igwira and Mempa, in small quantities, signifying little, neither of them
prosecuted it any further.

The best Conveniences to be had among them, are Water, Wood, and Ballast for
Ships.

The Government is mixed, being constituted of a Braffo or Captain, and
Cabosero's, or Chiefs of the People.

The Jurisdiction of GUAFFO, or GREAT-COMMENDO.
GUaffo or Great-Commendo, The Kingdom of Guaffo.
or Commany, borders in the West on Anten and Tabeu, having a small River for a
Boundary, between both; in the North-West, on Adom; in the North, on Abramboe;
in the East, on Fetu; and in the South, on the Sea.

Formerly Commendo, Fetu, and Sabou, were united under one Prince, and the
Inhabitants then, as now by strangers, called Adossenie's; as those of Fantijn,
Fantenie's; but at present divided into three several Kingdoms.

On the Shore lie several Towns, as Aitako, or Agitaki, otherwise
Little-Commendo, but by the Portugal's called Aldea de Torres, being the head
Town on the Shore, situate on the Borders of Fetu, two miles and an half
Eastward of Sama; then Ampea, or Apene, Cotabry, Aborby, Terra Pekine; and half
a mile Eastward another Commendo.

Within the Country, stands a great City upon a Mountain, by the Inhabitants
styled Guaffo; and by the Europeans, Great-Commendo, for a distinction from
Little-Commendo beforementioned, lying near the Sea.

Most of those Towns have suffered terrible devastations by those of the Mine,
who use on a sudden to invade them by Water, burning and spoiling all before
them, being not able to cope with the Guaffin's at Land: but they of Abramboe
once made War against this Country by Land, got the Victory, and killed their
King.

All sorts of Fruit and Provision are daily brought to Market in abundance by
those of Guaffo, Guaffo.
and sold at a reasonable Price; so that several Ships in time of need may
furnish themselves very commodiously.

The Land about Little Commendo boasts exceeding Fertility, The Fruitfulness of
Commendo,
especially of Fruit, which is not to be had so cheap in any place thereabout;
so that it may with good reason be termed, The Great Fruit-Market.

The Inhabitants are very expert Fishermen, Their Employment.
but prove bad Soldiers; therefore in the former generally employ themselves,
having to that purpose exceeding many Canoos. They often go out to Sea with
seventy or eighty of these Boats early in the Morning, and come home again
about Noon laden; for which they have so good Vent, that several Hamlets
maintain themselves by Fishing, without any other Manufacture or Trade.

THE KINGDOM OF FETU.
THis Kingdom of Fetu bordereth in the West, on that of Guaffo; in the North,
on Atty; in the East, on the Dominion of Sabou; and in the South, on the Sea.

The Metropolis of Fetu toward the Sea, the Inhabitants call Igwa, The Capede
Kors.
but the Portugals, Cabo Curso; because of a Prominent Point, a mile and half
from Myna.

This is certainly the chiefest place of Trade next Mine and Moure, being much
frequented: Yet the Inhabitants maintain themselves by Fishing, furnishing from
their Stores and Labors all the Neighboring Countries.

Adjoining to this Town, the Netherlanders have a Fort, The Fort of Cape de
Kors.
strengthened with a convenient number of great Guns, and manned with a strong
Garrison of Slaves: But in the Year Sixteen hundred sixty four, together with
the Forts Takorari, Adia, and Anemabo, taken by Captain Holmes, for the Royal
African Company of English. But when Michael de Ruyter, with the Dutch Fleet,
in the Year Sixteen hundred sixty five, on the eighth of February, had forced
the English Fort Kormantyn, he spared neither Diligence nor Cost to regain Cabo
Kors, then in the English Possession; and the rather, because John Valkenburg
(the Dutch Commander in Chief there, judged it very dangerous, that any place
in that Country should be left in the hands of the English; averring, that if
during the Wars in Europe they were expelled thence, by consequence they might
easily be kept out; whereas by their holding of this Place, they had an
opportunity to settle their Jurisdiction in the Country again, and in spite
of their Power defend it against them: But seeing the Fetuses sided with the
English, threatening nothing but Fire and Sword, having also possessed
themselves of a place, where a hundred men might beat off a thousand, it was
judged not to be undertaken without the greatest danger in the world; and
therefore at present the Design laid aside.

The Castle of the Mine, or St. George.
THe Castle of the Mine, The Castle of the Mine. Gold-Mines lying near.
generally so called because of the adjacent Gold-Mines; but by the Portugals,
St. George; to whose Protection they dedicated the same: It stands upon the
Borders of Fetu, near the Seashore, in a small Nook or Creek of the Salt River
Benja, two miles from Little Commendo.

This Castle was judged an ancient Building, Its Antiquity.
from several marks of Antiquity about it; as first by a decayed Battery, which
the Dutch repaired some years ago, retaining the Name of The French Battery,
because it seems to have been built by the French; who, as the Inhabitants say,
before the coming of the Portugals, harbored there. The Dutch, when they won
it, found the Numerical Figures of the Year Thirteen hundred, but were not able
to make any thing of the two following Characters. In a small place within also
may be seen a Writing Carved in Stone between two old Pillars, but so impaired
and worn out by the Weather, that it is not legible: The next is the Magazine,
which seems first to have been built in the Year Fourteen hundred eighty four,
in the Reign of John the Second, King of Portugal, as appears by Figures of the
Year upon the Gate, standing yet so clear and plain, as if made but a few years
before. Its Form.
The Building consists of hard Stone in double rows, between which the
vacancies filled with Earth, situate for the most part upon a high Rock;
against which on one side the Sea beats, so that it is difficult to be
assaulted; on the other side enclosed with four strong Bulwarks, two on the
Seacoast, which are the strongest, and other two on the Land-side. The Walls
are but low toward the Sea, because the Flankers built about it are very high;
but to the Landward the Walls are lofty and strong for defense. It is in the
narrowest part fourteen Rods broad, and two and thirty Rods long, besides the
Outworks reaching from the River to the Banks of the Sea.

The Dutch took it from the Portuguese in the Year Sixteen hundred thirty
seven; at which time it had toward the Sea two Batteries, each strengthened
with six good Pieces of Ordnance, whereas toward the Land, opposite to the
Mountain St. Jago: where the greatest strength was required they had but one
Battery, with six Mortar-Pieces; and toward the North-East but two small Pieces
upon an old Barracado'd Gate.

Over against the Castle on the West, The Mountain St. Jago.
beyond the River, lies the Mountain St. Jago, so called from a little
Chapel, formerly erected there; upon which the Dutch made a Redoubt of Earth
immediately after the taking it, to hinder the approaching and coming up of an
Enemy to the Mountain. This new Sconce holds four and twenty Rods square, and
twelve Foot in height, encompassed with a Stone Wall.

Beyond Mount St. Jago lies another of the like height, from whence only St.
Jago can receive damage, the rest lying at greater distance, and much lower.

Over against St. Jago, in the place where, in the time of the Portugals, stood
two Lodges, is now raised a Battery, Planted with great Guns, the better to
defend the Fort against St. Jago's Hill.

On this Quarter the Castle was very weak while the Portugals held it, being
without Breast-works, and scarce Fenced with a Mud-Wall: only there stood a
Battery with six Mortar-Pieces, and two small Pieces upon an old Gate, as we
mentioned before: But on the Sea-quarter they made it strongest, and Planted
their chiefest and best Guns: for they were of opinion, that no Cannon could be
got up the Mountain St. Jago, and therefore took so little care thereof, that
they had suffered the Mountain to be overgrown with Bushes, supposing that the
Trees alone would be a sufficient hinderance to any Enemy; but they found
themselves greatly mistaken therein; though indeed otherwise this Fort, by the
strong Walls, and great height, has sufficient Defense.

In this Castle rises a fair Fountain of Water, Fountains of Water.
and in the French-Battery another; in both which may be kept Provision of
Water for two hundred men for six months. Besides those Fountains there is a
Trench over against the Town Mine, by the Inhabitants called Dana, cut out of
the Rocks, being enough to contain a thousand Pipes or more, whereinto all the
waste water falling from the two beforementioned places, and from the Soldiers
Courts of Guard, gathers together.

This Trench without doubt, cost the Portugals a very tedious and heavy labor.

By this water drawn from hence, the Inhabitants are furnished; as also the
King of Fetu with his Army, when in War, supplied, and now accommodates the
Dutch with mavelous plenty.

The conveniences for Merchandise, Provision of Food, necessary Ammunition for
Wars, and other Commodities, are in great abundance within this Fort; for that
the Ships coming out of the Country, readily unload, and go back again; there
being a Key for Landing or Shipping of all sorts of Commodities at a Watergate
made for that purpose.

The Dutch suffered great prejudice so long as the Portugal's possessed this
Fort, because they endeavored by all means to hinder their Trade with the
Blacks; whereupon they consulted, and designed to get it from them, yet always
were frustrated in their attempts, till the year Sixteen hundred thirty and
seven; at which time the Castle was in a mean condition, by reason of great
disagreement among the Portugal's: Then the General of Guinea and Angola being
acquainted by the Kaboseroe's or Chief people of the Mine, that the time was to
undertake somewhat about it. This Intelligence he communicated by Letter to the
Commissioners of the West India Company, who provided nine Ships well Manned,
Armed, and Victual'd, which in the Year Sixteen hundred thirty seven, the Five
and twentieth of July, under Colonel Hans Koin, went forth from Farnambuck to
the African Coast, and soon arrived there in safety; whereof he sent notice to
General Yperen, who resided in the Town Moure two miles lower, by Letter, to
this effect: That he was there, by Command of Grave Maurice, and the Council,
furnished with Soldiers to undertake the Enterprise. He desired therefore to
know where was a fit place to Land upon the Enemies Quarters, and to advise
with him in what manner the Enterprise might be prudently accomplished: That he
would endeavor to win the Blacks with all possible Persuasions, great
Promises, and Rewards, to assist the Company; and withal, would watch the
English, who lay upon the Road, and labor to prevent all other Impediments;
That they must keep all secret, that the Enterprise might not be disappointed:
and in the interim, he would be upon the Road before Albine, or Assine, to
expect an Answer.

While thus Koyn plied upon the Coast, the Negroes come with eighteen Canoo's
to his Fleet, and ask for Netherlandish Merchandise, to barter for
Elephants-Teeth: But when 'twas answered they had no Wares, the Blacks began
greatly to doubt; but the Dutch to assure them friendship, according to the
custom of the Country, let some drops of Seawater fall into their eyes,
wherewith for the present satisfied, they departed. At length the Fleet
appearing before Albine and Assine, the Blacks came again with their Canoo's to
Trade, but our men put them off with delays for three or four days; whereupon
the Blacks said, that these of Fetisson had understood by their Guardian God,
that seven bigger Ships were at hand, at whose coming their Wares would fall in
Price. Koin, who little regarded that, and had somewhat else in his mind, wrote
Letters again almost of the same Contents, whereto for answer he received
Orders to remove with his Fleet before Commendo, which was speedily performed;
and immediately inquiry made for the fittest place to Land; to this purpose
they sent out a Scout, who returning, brought intelligence that there was no
Landing between the Mine and Cape de Kors, but only a Musket Shot from the
Mine, where the Salt-River at low Water was not knee deep, that the Mountain of
St. Jago might be easily attempted with small Shot, and that the Line was unfit
to be long defended: That the fresh River which lay about half a mile from the
Mine had excellent Water, and that the way from Cape de Kors to the Mine, was
very fit to March on in good order with the Soldiers.

After much courting, at length, and opening to them their whole design, they
gat the Youths of Commendo with Gifts, and promises to furnish them with Water
and other Provision; whereupon on the Four and twentieth of August, they went
off to Cape de Kors, They land at Cape de Kors.
and there Landed with great Canoo's; and on the Twenty fifth day being
Tuesday, drew in good order to the Mine, being about eight hundred
Land-Souldiers, and Five hundred Mariners, drawn up in three Companies. Coming
about Noon to the fresh River, the Soldiers rested and refreshed themselves,
some Scouts were sent for discovery, who brought intelligence, that they
discerned about a thousand Blacks lie at the hanging of a Hill; who having
discovered, pursued them with a great cry; upon this were sent out four
Musquetteers, who venturing too far were lost, and their heads by the Blacks,
according to the manner of the Country cut off, and carried in triumph. But a
greater force falling in, soon put them to flight, and possessed the Hill
whence the other were driven.

On Wednesday the six and twentieth, those of Commendo drew our Mariners to the
Town of Mine, which they assaulted, and took all their Cattle.

The Commander in Chief bending his whole thoughts to take the Castle, caused
in this interval two Passages to be made, by cutting up the Bushes on the
Mountain St. Jago; the one leading toward the Shore, by which to bring the
Ammunition for the Soldiers; and the other upon the top of the Mountain near
the Fort. On Thursday were brought two Pieces of Ordnance with a Mortar-Piece
to Mount St. Jago, with which they made eight or ten Shot, besides as many
Grenades, but they fell short; whereas by the shooting of the Enemy from the
Castle, two Sentinels were killed. Then the Negroes of Commendo approached
toward the Town of Mine; but driven back by the Enemies great Shot, The Castle
Summoned.
quickly retreated: Hereupon the Commander sent a Drummer to summon the
besieged to surrender; to which the Governor returned, That it was not in his
power to consent, without conferring with the Commanders of the Army, and the
Citizens, and required three days time; but that was denied, granting only to
the next day; however nothing was then done; for the Governor of the Fort, the
day being spent, held the Gates shut, and would not admit the Drummer: Then the
Forces from Mount St. Jago making a fierce Attacque, though with little
Success; and battering with their Cannon, a Messenger came forth, requiring the
Letter sent before by the Drummer; but that was denied: Whereupon after a short
Consultation, Messengers were sent to treat of an Agreement; during which
Treaty, the Blacks of Commendo were required to lay down Arms, and to use no
force to the Husbandmen of the Mine.

The Articles offered by the Garrison, were refused; Articles of Agreement.
but those accepted that the Beleaguerers proposed; being to this effect: They
shall all with their Wives and Children, without reproach or abuse, go forth
safe with Life and Limb. Every one shall take their Apparel; but no Money
either Gold or Silver. The Victor shall retain all the Merchandise, and Slaves,
except twelve, which the owners may keep. All the Church-Ornaments and
Utensils, except of Gold and Silver, they shall take away with them. The
Portugals, Mulattoes, and all their Households provided with necessary
Sustenance, shall be carried to the Island St. Thome. The Governor of the Fort,
and Soldiers, shall forthwith depart out of the Fort, and leave all the
Ammunition for War, and the rest of the Merchandise to the Victor. The
Soldiers shall depart without Colors or Sword, and neither have lighted Match
nor Bullets. Thus was this renowned Castle won and lost in four days. The Booty.
The Booty of Ammunition and Arms found therein, were thirty Iron Pieces of
Ordnance, nine thousand weight of Spice, eight hundred great Iron Balls, ten
Fats of small Bullets, and three hundred Stone Bullets, six and thirty Spanish
Swords, besides Bows, Arrows, and other Utensils of War. As soon as the
Garrison was drawn out, and come over to the Island St. Thomas, the Dutch took
possession with an hundred and forty Men. A former attempt had been made
against this Castle, but succeeded unluckily; the manner this:

The Dutch Admiral with his Fleet, on the six and twentieth of August, The
fruitless attempt upon the Castle of Mine.
One thousand six hundred twenty five, came into Serre-Lions to refresh his
Men, being most of them sick of the Bloody Flux; where he found three other
Ships, who had lay'n there two Months, undergoing great Misery, Sickness, and
other Calamities. The People of both the Parties being refreshed and cured,
determined to win the Castle of Mine, being about fifteen Ships and Ketches,
with which they set forth the five and twentieth of September from Serre-Lions,
and were the ninth of October upon the Grain-Coast, between Rio St. Paulo, and
Rio Junk, in five Degrees and an half North Latitude, where they sent a Ketch
to the General for the Netherlands West India Company at Moure, to acquaint him
with their coming, and that they intended to come with their Fleet before
Kommony, and to Land there.

Being come on the twentieth of the same Month before Kommony, The coming to
Kommany.
they understood that the General was gone to Akra, the uttermost place of the
Gold-Coast, and not expected back again for three or four days. This delay the
Admiral and his Council of War thought would give too fair opportunity to the
Enemy, and therefore resolved to Land the Soldiers: but this resolution was
deferred by advice of those of the Fort of Nassau, till the coming of the
General, because of his great Interest with the Kings of Fetu, Sabou, and
Kommony, in whose Favor much did consist. But immediately after his arrival,
which was on the four and twentieth, it was concluded the next day to go on
with the Design. Four Ships therefore were ordered to lie close before the
Castle of the Mine, to amuse the Enemy by continual Shooting for three days,
They Land at Terra Pekine.
till the other Soldiers might in the mean time draw up without interruption.
The five and twentieth they Land in Terra Pekine about twelve hundred Soldiers
and Mariners, with an hundred and fifteen Blacks brought from Maure with the
General; who about Noon came within a mile of the Castle of Mine, and from
thence, after two hours rest, drew within shot of it; where they were saluted
presently with some great Guns, but without hurt: and so sat down before the
Castle behind a Hill, with resolution that night to Entrench and make their
Approaches. In the mean time, while the General went to the pitch of the Hill
to view the Castle, the Soldiers being tired with heat and thirst, ran from
their Arms, and gat themselves to rest, without suspicion of any Enemy; Were
fallen upon by the Enemy.
but as soon as the Commanders were come upon the top of the Mountain, they
were unawares fallen upon by about two hundred Blacks, who, like mad furious
Men, fell in and made great slaughter and destruction amongst them; which bred
such a terror and consternation amongst them, that they threw away their Arms,
and leaping into the Water were drowned. There remained slain, The number of
the slain.
together with those that were drowned, three hundred seventy three Soldiers,
sixty six Mariners, and most of the superior and inferior Officers; The General
wounded.
the General himself wounded, came to extreme distress, and carried out of the
Fight, the rest fled to Kommany; whither also the Ships steered their course:
and by this means was that Design utterly overthrown. But now we return to the
remainder of the precedent success.

Presently after the taking of this Castle, the Victors sent a Canoo with
Letters to the Portugal Governor of Atzin, thereby requiring him to surrender
that Place: But he well knowing they could not come up to him in that season of
the year, answered, That he would keep the Fort for the King, and expect our
Forces. Then by advice of the whole Council of War, the Redoubt upon St. Jago
was repaired, as also a Battery that was fallen, adjoining to the Works of the
Castle; from whence they may scowre the Shore of the River, and relieve the
Sea-Battery.

On the West Side of the Castle stands a pretty large Town, The Town Myna at
the Mine.
close built, by the Portugals called Del Mine; but by the Blacks, Dana, or
Dang; extending far in length, but lies so low, that at a Springtide the Sea
in some places runs through the Streets: And on the other side runs the
Salt-River Benja; which not only hinders the passage out of the Town, but
makes the adjacent Country very Moorish. This River formerly was ten or eleven
Foot deep at low Water, but now so shallow, that it is not passable for
Ketches, which draw four Foot Water.

This Town is naturally very strong, being (as we said) shut up between the
River and the Sea, so that the Enemy has no other approach, than at the end of
Kommany, where the Portugals, as a Security from the Blacks, had raised a
Stone-wall from the Sea to the River, and made a Battery.

About half a mile from St. The River Vtri.
Jago, flows the River Utri, but full of Cliffs, and altogether unpassable,
yet affords this Commodity, that not only the Blacks from the Town daily fetch
thence their Water, but also the Ships; there being within two miles no Springs
to be found.

The Country hereabout yields little Fruit; The constitution of the Country.
therefore most of their Food is Mill to make Bread of; Safoe or Wine of
Palms, Sugar, Ananae's, Injame's, Potatoe's, Wine of Bordean, are brought to
them from Fetu, Abrembe, Commendo, Akane, and exchanged in Barter for half
Gold, half Fish.

This Town with the neighboring Land, the Portugals boasted for the
pleasantness and most fertile place on the whole Coast, and as an effectual
proof thereof, would often bestow upon other Traders some gifts of Apples,
Coco-Nuts, and such like things, which they (though without reason) thought
grew there: but now the contrary is most evident, for Moure, Kormantine, and
other Towns in that Tract, in pleasantness, Plants, and Provisions, far exceed
it. It Is true however, this Town goes beyond the rest for number of
Inhabitants, being able in time of War to raise two thousand men fit for
service. They are a mixture of Black's and Mulattoe's, which last being
Portuguez Christians, amount to the number of two hundred, or thereabouts.

The whole maintain themselves with Fishing, Their Employment.
going out to Sea with four or five hundred Canoo's, and in every Canoo two or
three persons; they sell the Fish to them of Fetu, Abrembo, and Commendo for
Mill, Wine of Palm, Sugar, and the like; as is beforementioned.

The Jurisdiction of Mine was divided between the Kings of Guaffo and Fetu: but
this burden the Portugal's removed, so that it seems a kind of Corporation
under the subjection of the Castle, and has several superior Officers of their
own; and in that state and condition they are at this day.

The constitution of which Government they have thus modeled, The Government
of the Town the Mine.
every Quarter or Precinct, the whole Town being divided into three, is ruled
by a peculiar Braffo or Captain, and Kaboseroe's or Officers; but they all
assemble upon any emergency, in the house of the chiefest Captain, where they
first exhibit all complaints, and from thence remit them to the Commander in
Chief of the Castle for redress, from whose sentence there is yet an appeal to
the General, who concludes the whole matter, and all parties rest satisfied
with his Determination; and by this means they live quietly and peaceably.

But if any difference arise between them and the Commender's or Fetuan's, for
the more speedy decision thereof, the whole Commonalty taking the injury done
to a particular person as to themselves, immediately complain to the General,
with request, that the Rights and Privileges of the Members prejudiced may be
ratified, and to that end, that he would promise with power to obtain remedy.
In such occasions the Portugal's always readily interposed, and accompanied
them to War against the adverse party; whereby at length they came to be of
great repute for Valor among their Neighbors.

They are all (as has been said) expert Fishers, being not only their chief
employment, but of such esteem, that they are prized beyond all Artificers.

Of what they catch, they pay to the Castle the fifth Fish for Custom. Some few
get a living by Polishing of Coral which is brought thither.

Their Religion has some tincture of Christianity, The Religion and worship.
which they learnt from the Portuguese, with whom they Inter-marry'd; from
which mixture have proceeded several Mulattoe's there resident.

THE KINGDOM OF SABOU.
THis Dominion borders in the West on the Kingdom of Fetu; The Borders of the
Kingdom of Sabou.
in the North, on that of Atty; in the East, on Fantyn; and in the South, on
the Sea. On the Seacoast thereof lie three Towns; the middlemost is called
Moure, by others, The Dutch Churchyard, because many of them are there buried.

Another Town called by the name of the Kingdom, Sabou, where the King has his
Residence, a mile and half or two miles in to the Landward, and of a reasonable
bigness.

Moure, Moure.
standing in five degrees and ten minutes North Latitude, upon a rising ground,
near the Castle of Nassau, is a pretty large Town, almost as big as Myna, but
not so rich or populous by a fourth part, being not able to raise above two
hundred men; the largeness of the extent arising from the wide distances of the
Houses one from another.

This Town was the first, with whom the Hollanders at the beginning, when they
endeavored to Trade along this Coast, had friendship, and gave them License to
come a Shore: whereupon the Portugal's for spite, came one night and brake all
their Canoo's in pieces.

Formerly Moure, so long as the Portugal's held the Castle of Myna, was wont to
be the most Eminent place of Trade on the whole Gold-Coast; for the Dutch,
because of their Ships, came to Anchor there, and the Blacks came out of the
Country thither along the Shore to Trade. The Akanist's bring still much Gold
thither, and as long as they stay there, hire dwellings of the Moureans. The
Inhabitants maintain themselves chiefly by Fishing, which the people of Sabou
come to buy of them for Food; though of late some of them are become Factors
for other Blacks.

The People paying some Tribute are under the King of Sabou, yet are governed
by a peculiar Braffo or Captain, and Caboseroe's of their own.

Sabou, Sabou.
the Residence of the Kings, is a pretty large Town, and close built with
Houses.

The Country hereabouts is very Fruitful, yielding plentiful Provisions of
Victual, as Mill, Injames, Fruit, Hens, and the like, which are in this Town
of Moure, more easily and at a cheaper Rate to be had, than in any other places
of this Coast, because those of Sabou use more diligence in Laboring and
Sowing their Fields than their Neighbors.

The Castle CORMANTINE. Kastee^ van CORMANT^


The King of Sabou, whose Command reaches about five miles round, The Power of
the King of Sabou.
can bring into the Field Fifteen hundred Armed Men, and held good
correspondence with the Dutch, till upon complaint of the Mourean's too much
oppressed by him, they took up Arms against him in their behalf.

In the time of the late deceased King, either by the Black's of Atty, their
Neighbors, or the Akanist's, who hated him for his great falsehood, they were
continually molested: But because his Successor was reported to be a good and
upright Prince, the Akanist's and others ceased to molest them, and ever since
have continued an amicable Commerce.

They of Sabou account themselves courageous Soldiers, as they are indeed; The
Valor of the Inhabitants.
for where those of Atty Invaded him with many thousands, he stoutly opposed
them, and cut off some hundreds of their Heads.

Near the Town of Moure, a mile Eastward from Cape de Kors, The Fort Nassau.
appears Fort Nassau, built some years since by the command of the General
States, but now in the possession of the West India Company. It was never any
sure Defense against the Blacks; for the Round being made of slight Earth,
fell down every year; but now, since the taking of the Castle Mine, they have
cut off one Half Moon, and brought the Curtains in the four corners into one,
and covered the remaining Line of Earth with Clay in stead of Stone, and made
up with Corners, or Flankers of Clay, so that this Fort is defensible against
the assaults of the Blacks.

THE KINGDOM OF FANTYN.
FAntyn, a populous Country, borders Westward on Sabou; Northward, The Borders
of the Kingdom of Fantyn.
on the Dominion of Atty, Aqua, and Fonqua; Eastward, upon Aguana; and
Southward, on the Sea.

The chief Town of the Inland is Fantyn, the Regal Seat of the King, Fantyn
the Head-Town.
being four miles into the Country.

The chief Town upon the Shore is Kormantyn, Kormantyn the Head Town on the
Shore.
the principal place of Trade for the English, situate two miles Eastward of
Moure, upon a very high Mountain. It shows the fairest and most delightful
prospect upon the whole Coast, inhabited by as many people as Moure, and
appears coming by Sea out of the South, reddish: Near which the English have
a Castle fortified with four Bulwarks.

In the Year Sixteen hundred sixty and five, on the eighth of February, this
Kormantyn was surreptitiously attaqued by the Dutch; the manner thus:

The Holland Fleet coming to Anchor February the sixth, The fruitless Attempt
of the Castle Kormantyn.
between the Fort of Cape de Kors and Moure, Westward of Kormantyn, the next
day got four or five hundred Canoos with Negro's from the Castle De Mine; with
which well Manned they departed from the Fleet, intending to Land at Anemabo;
but were upon their approach near the Shore saluted by the Negro's of
Kormantyn, who lay hid behind the Cliffs and Bushes, with Muskets and great
Ordnance, playing from the Fort with such fury and violence, that they were
beaten back, and forced to retreat without doing any thing.

The Enterprise was afterward twice re-attempted, It was re-attempted by the
Netherlanders.
upon the hopes of having brought the Negro's to side with them; but neither
time brought along with it any better success: however, resolving not to quit
the Enterprise, they came to a more close agreement with the Blacks; who, as an
assurance to perform their Undertaking, delivered into their hands several
Hostages: the Design they laid to be put in execution with the first
opportunity. At last having pitched upon a time, at night came a Negro called
Antonio, with a Canoo, sent by the Fantyns, declaring, that the People about
Anemabo and Adja could not be ready at the appointed hour, but in the morning
they would not fail them with their promised help and assistance; adding
moreover, that early in the morning, at the new cast-up Fort of Adja, the
Princes Flag should be set up; at which sign the Dutch might go with their
whole Power, and Land. Affairs thus concluded, the chief Commanders of the
Fleet resolved the following morning to re-attempt the Onset; yet beforehand
sent a Letter to the English Commander in chief, thereby requiring the
surrender of the Fort without any opposition. Accordingly at eight of the Clock
in the morning the Princes Flag being raised upon the new-erected Fort of Adja,
They Land.
they Lanched through with much hazard near the same new Fort, and thence
marched in good order along the Shore with the Negro's, to the number of three
thousand, every one with a Linen Cloth about their Necks, to distinguish them
from the Enemies Negro's: they came about noon to Anemabo, and drew forth about
Musket Shot Westward of Kormantyn, They find great opposition.
to a Hill planted with three Pieces of Ordnance; where they found stout
opposition: but at length overpowered they fled, and then the Hollanders
entered the Town and set it on Fire; which by the flame and smoke made the
Garrison in the Castle suddenly amazed: The subduing of the Castle.
for as soon as they saw the Soldiers with Scaling-Ladders, Hand-Granado's, and
other Utensils of War under their Walls, they took down the red Flag from the
Tower, and immediately, as it were without a stroke, delivered it up.

Into this Castle were instantly some Soldiers out of the Garrison of the
Castle of Mine and Moure, put to guard and defend it.

To the subduing of this Fort, Braffo of Fantyn gives assistance for the
subduing it.
the Hollanders were not a little animated, by the promise of help and
assistance from the Braffo, and his Kabo Seros of Fantyn; which they purchased
of them, 24000 Gilders.
as we hinted before, for two and fifty Bars of Gold, amounting to about two
thousand five hundred pounds English Money.

Half a mile Westward off Kormantyn, The Town Anemebo.
and a mile and half Eastward from Mow, stands Anemabo, divided into two
sorts, whereof one half is inhabited by the Fishermen of the Mine, and the
other by the Fishermen of Fantyn; both which, for all that they take, pay to
the Braffo once a week a small Custom. The Road here is very commodious and
safe for Shipping.

At Canon-shot distance Westward of Anemabo, The Town Adja.
lies another Town called Adja, A Fort
where the Dutch had a small Fort taken by the English, in the Year Sixteen
hundred sixty four, and by them kept till the Attempt upon Kormantyn, Is
subdued by the English

The English blow up Adja.


where they blew it up with Gunpowder, not without using a subtle Stratagem:
for they had laid a heap of Earth at the Mnye, whereon when any came with hopes
of Plunder, they intended by Springing the Mine to have Blown them up likewise:
But little harm was done, however the English in the mean time left the place,
and Retreated to Kormantyn.

Between the Town Aja and Anemaby, lies a Town called Janasia, where the
English have a Fort.

The chiefest Places of Trade lying near the Sea, Places of Trade.
and frequented by the Whites, are Kormantyn and Ademabo.

The former having been the chief Place of the English upon this Coast for some
years, where they got the best sort of Goods, and enjoyed most Friendships: For
the support whereof, they built that Fort, Planted with two and forty Pieces of
Ordnance, and Fortified with four Bulwarks.

The principal Goods Traded for at Kormantyn and Moure, are, Merchandise.
Sleisie-Linnens, Copper, Iron, Searges, and old Linnen-Sheets; which bring
very advantageous returns: And these places are the more frequented, because of
the convenient going in and out to Sea.

The King keeps his Residence in the Town of Fantyn, The Command of the King.
and extends his Jurisdiction about ten or twelve Miles round, being able in
time of War, to bring eight or ten thousand men into the Field.

His Revenue consists in Tributes, brought to him by the Inhabitants, The
Revenue.
and in Customs of all Goods, which the Akarists come to buy there, especially
of Salt.

The Government is mixed, and made up of many Inferior Braffo's, Government.
yet all submit to one Supreme, the King of Fantyn, in which respect it is an
absolute Monarchy.

The TERRITORY of AGWANA, OR The COUNTRY of KONKOMO.
THis Territory, taking the latter name from its last deceased King, Borders of
the Kingdom of Agwana.
a Valiant Soldier, borders in the West, at the Kingdom of Fantyn, and
Sonquay; in the North, by the Kingdom of Aquumboe; and the Country of Abonce;
in the East, at Great-Akara; and in the South, spreads along the Seashore.

Agwana has diverse Villages and Mountains near the Sea, as the Rough-Point, a
Village of Fishermen, Souldiers-Bay, and, The Devils-Hill, New-Abrembee,
Old-Abrembee, Great-Berku, situate on a Mountain, four Miles from Akara,
Jako-Kox-broot, and Little-Berku, where Watered by a small River. All these
places have Stony Cliffs before their Havens.

From Cormantin the Coast reaches East and by South, The spreading of the
Coast.
to The Devils-Mountain, about six Miles; from thence to Berku, a Tract of five
Miles, East and by North; from Berku one Mile Westward to Akara, a Tract of
five Miles, East North-East. Beyond Kox-broot lies low Land, replenished with
small Trees, but the Country within is high and Mountainous.

In Berku breed many Hens, sufficient to eat among themselves, and to sell
cheap to strangers; and their Drink called Pitouw, is like our small Beer.

The Inhabitants have the repute of Stout and Warlike People, The Nature and
Maintenance of the Inhabitants.
but in Peaceable times maintain themselves by Husbandry and Fishing: Yet some
of them are good Artists, both in Iron and Gold; of the first, making good
Arms, and of the second, curious Gold-Chains, and other neat Pieces of
Workmanship.

In this Territory is but a small Trade for European Wares, There is little
Trade.
and therefore little frequented: the best dealing is for Slaves of Berku with
the Akerasche Merchants which come thither, who exchange them for Serges, viz.
a Piece of Serge for a Slave, or else two ounces of Gold.

THE KINGDOM OF AKARA.
THis Kingdom contains in Circuit, The Borders of the Kingdom of Akara.
ten or twelve miles, having on the West, Aguana, and the Country of Abonce;
on the North, the Dominion of Aboura and Bonoe; on the East, that of Labbeda
and Ningo; and on the South, the Sea.

Near whose Shore are three Villages, viz. Soko, Little Akara, fifteen miles
Eastward of Kormantyn, and Orsaky; Having gone four miles into the Country,
you come to Great Akara, where the King keeps his Residence.

Provision here is very scarce, especially Fruits and Bread-Corn; so that
whatever Whites put into this Place to Trade, must upon necessity provide
themselves well with all necessary Provision.

The King has (and not without cause) the repute of a Potent Prince, The Kings
Power.
being able in time of War to bring fifteen or sixteen thousand Men into the
Field. He has a more absolute Sovereignty over his Subjects than any of his
Neighbors, so that he is an unlimited Monarch: and for the more sure confirming
his Jurisdiction, keeps good Correspondency with all Whites, without showing
more favor to one than another.

The Little Akara has been many years the chiefest place of Trade upon the
Gold-Coast, next Moure and Kormantyn; Trade.
where Foreign Merchants carry Iron and Linen, which they exchange in Barter
for Gold, with much greater gain than on the other places of the Gold-Coast:
but the Linen must be finer than ordinary, otherwise the Blacks will not
meddle with it.

While Trading here was free to all, that is, till the Hollanders West. India
Company had engrossed it to themselves, the Haven of Akara produced a third
part of the Gold that was to be had on all the Gold-Coast; which was brought
thither to sell from the Countries of Abonce and Akamen.

All the Wares which the Inhabitants buy, they sell again at the Market of
Abonce, two hours Journey beyond Great Akara, which they hold three times a
Week, with great resort of People out of all the neighboring Territories.

The King of Akara suffers none out of Aquemhoe and Aquimera to come through
his Country and Trade with the Whites, but reserves that freedom to his own
Subjects only; who carry the Wares brought from the Europeans to Abonce, and
exchange them there with great profit. Neither would this King suffer the
Whites to set up a Storehouse on Shore for Trade, but forced to ride with
their Ships, Ketches, and Sloops before the Haven: yet some few years since he
sold to the Dutch a piece of Ground, whereon he has permitted them to build a
Storehouse.

Adjoining to this they have so far incroached, The Storehouse of Akara.
as to raise a little Fort of Stones sixty two Foot long, four and twenty
broad, and flat above, overlay'd with thick Planks, strongly mortis'd together,
and strengthened round about with high Breast-works, Port-holes, and defensive
Points for keeping off an Enemy.

At Great Akara the King has appointed a Captain over the Merchants, Overseer
of the Trade.
with full power to set a Tax or Price for Selling, to prevent all Quarrels,
Differences, and Controversies, which might otherwise arise, of whom the
Merchants stand in greater awe, than of the King himself; for he not only
punishes Offenders according to his pleasure, but in case that any Dissentions
happen, he stops up all the Ways, if they do not pay him according to his
Amercement.

THE KINGDOM OF LABBEDE.
LAbbede, a small Territory, has on the West, Great Akara; The Borders of the
Country Labbede.
on the North and the East, the Kingdom of Ningo; on the Seacoast, two miles
Easterly from Little Akara, lies one, and the only Village called Labbede; a
delightful place, Walled, and fortified with Cliffs by the Seashore.

The Country hereabouts has plain, and many well-water'd Meadows, convenient
for Pasturage of Cattle.

The Trade of the Inhabitants consists chiefly in Cows; Maintenance.
whereof they breed some up themselves, and others they fetch over-Land from
Ley, a Place eight or ten miles lower, which they then sometimes sell again to
the Akraman Blacks, and to those of the uppermost Places.

The Government of this Country belongs to a petty, Government.
yet absolute, Prince.

THE TERRITORY OF NINGO, OR NIMGO.
THe Country Ningo has on the West, Borders of the Kingdom of Ningo.
Great Akara; on the North, Equea and Little Akara.

On the Seacoast in this Territory are four places; Ningo, three or four miles
from Akora, and two from Labbede; Temina, one mile from Ningo; Sinko, a mile
from Temina and Pissy, all with Cliffs before the Walls in the Sea.

Ningo abounds with Cattle, which the Akarians buy and carry to sell with
Canoos to Moure.

Within the Country stands another fair City called Spicei, where grow many
good Oranges.

The Inhabitants generally support themselves by Fishing; Maintenance.
which they do in a strange manner, and with as uncouth Implements, being like
Baskets, or Coops, such as they put Chickens under, with which, going along the
Shore in the Night with Lights, they throw them over those Fishes which they
get sight of.

Ningo, Sinko, Pissy, some years since Places of good Trade; but having now for
a long time given out no Gold, they are not visited by the Merchants; who for
that cause go no lower than Akara, where, as it is before related, the
Gold-Coast is reckoned to end.

Thus much we have thought fit to speak of the Maritime parts of the
Gold-Coast, want of knowledge not affording farther Discoveries. We now go to
the Inland Countries, beginning with Igwira, lying on the West of the
Gold-Coast.

THE KINGDOM OF IGWIRA.
THe Kingdom of Igwira borders on the South, The Kingdom of Igwira.
on Atzin and Small Inkassia; on the North, upon Great Inkassia; and on the
East, on that of Mompa.

It is reported to yield great quantities of Gold; for the Blacks say, It is
full of Gold.
that the Gold which comes from Assine and Albine, fifteen miles Westward of
Cape de tres Puntas, is all Igwira's Gold. At Little Commendo lived for some
years two Citizens, which had with a small stock of Merchandise so managed
their affaris, that they returned back very Rich; but the Ways are somewhat
dangerous by reason of Thieves.

In this place the Portugals had a Fortification, wherein they Traded, and
brought their Merchandise in Canoos up the River, which flows through Igwira;
but after the Netherlanders began to frequent it, the Portuguese soon deserted
the place.

THE KINGDOM OF GREAT-INKASSIA, OR INKASSAN.
GReat-Inkassia, or Inkassan, has on the South Igwira; in the East, Great
Inkassia.
Wassa and Wanquy.

These People are little esteemed for Trade; There is little Trade.
but they come sometimes and take their way throw the Kingdom of Adom, and
bring some small quantity of Gold, especially if there be no Shipping before
Assine and Albine.

The DOMINION of INKASSAN-IGGYMA.
THis Territory has on the South great Inkassan; Inkassan-Iggyma.
and on the East, Wassa and Wanqui.

Little Commerce have the Whites in matter of Trade with these People.

The LORDSHIP of TABEU.
TAbeu a small Tract, Tabeu.
borders on the South at the Kingdom of Anten, lying at the Sea; on the West
and North, on that of Adom; and on the East, on Guaffa; where a small River
makes a Boundary to both.

Men, Women, and Children drive altogether a Trade with Hens, Mill and other
Wares to Sama, where the Hollanders have a Fort; formerly all this used to be
brought up by the Portuguese, and sent to the Mine.

THE KINGDOM OF ADOM.
ADom lies Eastward of Tabeu and Guaffo, Adom.
to the North of Wassa, on the East North-East of Abramboe.

The Inhabitants come sometimes and bring Gold on the Shore by Small-Commendo,
to the Merchants there Dealing; but this only, if the ways of Ante be not
obstructed by Wars.

Mompa.
MOmpa has on the West Igwira, Mompa.
on the North Great-Inkassia, Wassa, and Adom, and on the East Anten toward
the Shore.

VVassa.
THe Country of Wassa has for Borders on the North Wanque, Wassa.
in the East Abramboe and Kuiforo, on the West Great-Inkassia, on the
North-West Inkassia-Iggoma. Full of Gold.
It has the repute to yield great quantity of Gold, insomuch that the
Inhabitants are always at Work upon it, neither caring to Till or Ear their
Land; that single Commodity bringing from their Neighbors store of Provision.

Most of these People come with those of Adom to Traffic there for Gold, at
the Seashore, with the Whites for European Wares.

VVanquy.
WAnquy has on the West Kassa, Iggyma, on the South Wassa, Wanquy.
and on the North Bonoe.

It has Gold, and good Cloth, which the Inhabitants, who drive a Trade with
the Akanists in the Country, know how to make very Artificially.

Abramboe.
THis Territory borders on the West, at Adom and Wassa, Abrambe.
in the South at the Kingdom of Guaffa or Commendo, lying at the Sea, in the
North at Kuyforo; in the North-East at Akamy; in the East at Atti; and in the
South-East on Fetu.

It is a very populous Country, Trade.
and most of the Inhabitants maintain themselves by Husbandry, yet many come
also every Week to Moure to the Whites, to barter Gold for Cloth, and Linen,
but especially Iron.

They are a Warlike People, and no great friends of the Akanists, because long
since in the Wars with them, many of them were Slain, and most of their Towns
Burnt, yet they were afterward united again in a new League of Friendship.

Kuyforo.
IT has for Borders on the West, Wassa; on the South, Abramboe; Kuyfora.
on the North, Bonoe; and in the East, Akany: The Land wholly without Wood, and
the People mean and simple, with whom Foreigners have little Commerce.

Bonoe.
BOnoe lies encompassed on the West with Wanquy; Bonoe.
on the South with Kuyforo; on the East with Akany, and Inta: A Place little
known, and of small Trading.

Atty.
THe Territory of Atty is circumscribed in the West by Abramboe; Atty.
on the South, by Fetu, Sabou, and Fantyn; and in the North, by Dahoe.

The Inhabitants maintain themselves most by Tillage; but used before the Wars
with those of Sabou, to trade with Foreign Merchants, which the Akanists have
taken from thence.

Here is held a great Market or Fair, extraordinarily crowded with a full
concourse of People, from far distant places; who come thither to Purchase
Iron, and other Wares bought of the Whites.

Akanien.
THis Kingdom, Akanien.
whose Inhabitants are known to Traders, by the name of Akanists; has for
Boundaries, in the West Kuyforo, and Bonoe; in the South, Dahoe, Atty, and
Abramboe; on the North, Inta; and in the East Akim, or Great-Akamy.

The Akanists are a plain-dealing people, The Custom and Nature of the
Inhabitants.
just and honest in point of Trade; and to defend their Privileges, stout in
the Wars, knowing well how to use both Shields, Azagians, and Swords.

Their Language holds great affinity with that of Fetu, Language.
Atty, Sabou, Commendo, Abramboe, and Attyn; but more pleasant, and
consequently more acceptable: Such as Trade on the Seashore, besides their
own, usually speak Portugals.

They are Rich in Gold, They are rich, and great Traders.
and Slaves, and so great Traders, that two Thirds of the Gold which the Whites
fetch yearly from the Gold-Coast, comes from their hands: For they come to the
Seashore to Little-Commendo, Kormantyn, and Moure, where many of them dwell
with their Wives and Children.

They show great Industry and Diligence, Traveling with the Goods they Buy
from the Whites, carried by their Slaves to diverse Markets up in the Country;
and passing through the countries of Atty, Sabou, and other Neighboring
Regions without hindrance; enjoying every where much Freedom, and for their
Merchandise are courteously entertained by the People.

Inta, and Ahim.
INta has in the South, Akany; in the West and North, Unknown Land; Inta.
in the East, Ahim, and Akam.

Little can be said of this Place, as to matter of Trade.

Ahim, otherwise called Great-Akany, has on the West for Limits Akany; on the
South, Aqua, and Sonqua; on the North, Inta, Akam, Kuahoe; and in the East,
Aqumboe.

The Inhabitants are naturally Stately and Proud, Their Nature.
which proceeds from their Wealth, consisting chiefly in Slaves.

These come very seldom to the Seashore to Trade with the Whites, Trade.
but wholly deal in the Country with their Neighbors; giving Gold for
Clothes, and other Wares, which most frequently they have from the Country of
Abonce, or else from the Akanists their next Neighbors.

Akam.
AKam touches in the West upon Into, as the South on Ahim; in the North, Akam.
an unknown Land; and in the East, on Kuahoe, and Taffo: little known, and as
little taken notice of, because they have nothing fit for Commerce.

Aqua.
AQua has on the West Atty, and Dahoe; Aqua.
in the South the Territory of Fantyn, lying at the Sea; and on the North,
Ahim. A place of little consequence, belonging to Fantyn.

The TERRITORY of SANQUAY.
SAnquay lies in the South, on Fantyn; in the North, on Akim; Sanquay.
and in the East, on Agwana. The People live hardly, being forced for supply of
Provision to come to the Rough Point to buy Fish; which by reason of their
remote distance, seldom comes home other than stinking. It yields obedience to
the King of Agwana.

The TERRITORY of AQUUMBOE.
AQuumboe has in the West, Aquumboe
Ahim; in the North, Quahoe; in the South, Agwana; in East, the Country Abonce
and Aboera; of little farther note or value than only to be named.

Abonce.
THis small Country borders on the West, Abonce.
at Aquumboe; on the South, at Agwana; on the North, at Amboera; on the East,
upon Great Akara, and part of Aboera.

Here is held the Market of Great Akara, though about two hours Journey behind
it; whither resort out of diverse Countries several sorts of People.

Kuahoe.
KUahoe has on the West, Kuahoe
Akam; on the South, Aquumboe and Ahim; on the North, Tafoe; on the East,
Aboera and Kamana.

The Inhabitants are deceitful and false, and therefore little esteemed by
their Neighbors.

Tafoe.
THe Country of Tafoe lies bounded on the West, Tafoe.
by Aka; on the South, by Kuahoe; on the East, by Kammana and Kuahoe. It Is
reported to yield great store of Gold; which the Natives bring chiefly to
Abonce, but some small quantities to Moure.

Aboera.
THe Territory of Aboera has on the West, Aboera.
Aquumboe; on the North, Kuahoe and Kammana; on the South, Abonce and Great
Akara; on the East, Bonce. It possesses much Gold; which the Inhabitants of
Abonce bring to the Market of Great Akara, and there Truck for foreign
Commodities.

Quahoe.
QUahoe has on the South, Kammana and Small Akara; and on the West, Quahoe.
Tafoe. From hence also they bring Gold to accommodate and enrich the Market of
Great Akara.

Kammana.
KAmmana has on the West, Kuahoe; on the North, Quahoe; on the South, Kammana.
Aboera and Bonoe; on the East, Equea, Lataby, and Small Akara.

The Inhabitants follow Husbandry, and not only get their own Living thereby,
but furnish and feed many of their Neighbors.

Bonoe.
BOnoe touches on the West upon Aboera; on the North, upon Kammana; Bonoe.
on the South, has Great Akara; and on the East, the Territory of Equea and
Ningo.

The People drive a Trade, and carry their Merchandise to sell only among
their Neighbors.

Equea.
THe Territory of Equea has on the West, Bonoe; on the North, Equea.
Kammana; on the South, Ningo; and Lataby on the North.

The Inhabitants maintain themselves by Traffic.

Lataby.
LAtaby borders on the West upon Equea and Kammana; Lataby.
on the North and East, on Small Akara; on the South, upon Ningo and Latibo.

The Natives hold here also a great Fair or Market, whither all sorts of Wares
are brought; but much exceeded by that at Abonce.

Akarady.
AKarady has for Limits in the West, Akarady.
Kammana; on the North, Quahoe; on the South, Lataby and Ningo.

This Country abounds with Gold, which (as likewise all that which comes to
Akara) is as well cleared of Dross, as that brought by the Akarists; which the
Inhabitants bring for Vent to all the adjoining Markets and Factories.

The Land hereabouts has few Trees, and those also yielding little profit,
whereas Kormantyn and other places lying upward, have many, to be admired for
their fertility and usefulness.

Insoko.
INsoko lies, Insoko.
according to the report of the Akarists, four or five days Journey from the
Seashore; but that the Countries between are for the most part unknown to
them, because they very seldom go to Insoko, by reason of the great numbers of
Thieves that haunt the Ways.

The Inhabitants make very fine Clothes, Their Clothes.
whereby those, which making a safe Voyage return from thence home again, may
gain vast Riches: they are bought for Royals of Eight, or other Pieces of
Silver, and sometimes for fine Linen: but as the same Akanists say, know
nothing either of Gold, or Copper, neither have they any Concern in it.

Thus much as to the Country in general; we will now proceed to declare a more
particular Relation of its Nature, Air, Plants, Beasts, Customs, and Religions,
and what else obviously we meet with concerning the same.

THe whole Gold-Coast, The Nature of the Country.
especially about Myna, appears Wild, Desolate, Mountainous, and full of Woods,
having such narrow Ways, that two cannot go together, and those so encumbered
and overgrown with Brambles and Trees, that the Sun can hardly through their
density be discerned: in short, they are fit hiding-places for Thieves, and yet
few such found there.

From Cape de Tres Puntas to Akara, it lies high; and higher up into the Land
the Soil is fruitful, intermingled with good Pasturage, very convenient for the
Feeding of Cattle in; as also for Planting of Mill and other Corn, the Shore
extending East North-East.

The People here know not what a Frost means, There is no Pressed.
so that indeed we may justly say, they have no Winter, but one continual
Summer, covered by the continual Heats of the Air and Sun: yet notwithstanding
this certain warm temperature of the Clime, has distinguished the Seasons of
the Year, attributing some Months to Summer, others to Winter, by peculiar
observing the difference of the Weather: and accordingly they reckon it Winter
when the Sun shines in a Perpendicular Line from the Vertical Point of the
Heavens upon their Heads, which happens in April and June; and they judge it
Summer when the Sun is farthest from them, which is in October, November,
December, and February; the reasons whereof we will endeavor briefly to give
you.

In January blow along this Coast out of the South-West hard Sea-Storms, but
harder in February, which sometimes bring with them a Hericane, and sometimes
Rain. In the latter end of March, and beginning of April, great Tempests a rise
both at Sea and Land, by the Portuguese called Ternados; and by the
Inhabitants, Agombrettou; attended with great Rains, mixed with Thunder,
Lightning, and Earthquakes, which continue to the end of May: They foresee the
coming of this strange Weather by the clouding of the Sky in the South-East;
yet then is the Sowing-time for Mill.

The Ternados past, the long Rains begin and continue in a manner without
ceasing to the beginning of August.

These Rains bringing a sudden chilness upon the Air, The alteration of the
Weather occasions Sickness.
which newly before was as it were parching hot, occasions oftentimes in the
Bodies of Foreigners there resident, strange Sicknesses, because they know not
how to preserve themselves from the Cold and Wet so well as the Blacks: and
moreover, the Skins of the Blacks are so hardened by the heat, that, as if
naturalized, they are little offended thereby; whereas the English and
Hollanders, living in colder Climates, when they feel those violent scorchings,
to them unaccustomed, fall into violent Sweats, which by an insensible
transipration exhales even the radical Moisture, and so leaving the Vitals
without assistance, subject the Body to all casual Infirmities.

During the Season of Rain, viz. May and July, little or no Land-Winds stir;
but from the Sea; they blow out of the South-West, and West South-West, causing
the Waves to roll very high.

In August the Rainy Season begins to cease; and yet then the Sea has a
rolling motion, with tumultuous Billows.

In September the Weather grows fair, and the Air clear, with gentle
South-Winds.

In October, November, December, January, and February, they reckon the Summer;
for then is the fairest Weather of the whole Year, especially in December and
January, which have the hottest days. In February stiff Land-Winds begin to
blow; one especially, among the Blacks called from one of their Months
Hermanta, The Wind Hermanta.
coming out of the East South-East, and continues sometimes not above three or
four days, and sometimes almost a fortnight; otherwhiles a whole month, though
very seldom: Then is the Air cold, foggy, and moist, with some sharpness;
whereby many, especially Foreigners, get sore Eyes.

There are also every day two several Winds, (as we said before) the Landwind,
beginning in the Morning, which they call Bofoe; and toward Noon, the
Sea-wind, and by them called Agan-Brettou.

Of Fruits this Country is reasonably provided, The Plants and Fruits.
which they feed upon the whole year.

First, there grows Rice, also Turkish Wheat called by the Indians, Mays; which
the Portuguese brought out of the West Indies, to the Island St. Thomas, and
from thence carried over to the Gold-Coast to supply their necessities: For
before the coming of the Portuguese, this Plant was unknown to the Inhabitants.
But at this day the Country is filled therewith, whereof they chiefly make
Bread.

The Mill by the Inhabitants called Mieuw, Mill, or Mi^^.
the usual Bread-Corn of the Blacks, grows there in abundance, which the
Inhabitants have had from all ages. The Seed bears a resemblance of our Tares,
but sweeter of Taste, and white, and grows with long Ears like Bearded-Wheat,
or Rye. It attains perfect growth and maturity in three Months; then being cut
down, it lies in the Field a Month to dry: And lastly, the Ears cut off and
bound in Bundles, and brought into their Huts, the Straw serves for a Cover to
the Habitations. Of this (as we said) being a Juicy and excellent Grain, they
make Bread with little labor, considering it must not be Ground.

They have also Potatoe's, Jams or In-Jams, which grow like Turnips, under the
Ground, and boiled afford as good Food: So the Bananasses, and Bakoves they use
with equal advantage, as we Apples or Pears.

Ananasses not much eaten, because of their tartness; yet remarkable in this,
that the longer they are kept, the more they Grow.

Of Lemmons and Oranges they have great plenty; yet the Inhabitants make little
use of them, for the beforementioned reason: But the Lemmons are by the
European Merchants bought up, who Press out the Juice into Vessels to Transport.

Palmeto-Trees grow in every place, from whence they daily get so much Wine,
that seldom any in the evening can be found Sober: In like manner also, they
get Tow to make Ropes from the Rind, and extract Oil of Palm from the Nuts.

LIving Creatures breed here of several kinds, Living Creatures.
both Beasts and Fowls, Wild and Tame; Elephants.
particularly Elephants, white Tigers, Leopards, and other Beasts of Prey,
frequenting the Woods.

An Elephant is in the Minish Tongue called Osson; Hares.
A Tiger, Bohen: Hares also, and Hearts, Staggs, Hinds, and Dear, like those in
our Parks, only their Horns like Goats.

There are many Dogs, Dogs.
called by them Ekia, or Kua; and Cats as in Europe: but the Dogs are sharp
Snouted, and of more various Colors; as Black, Red, Yellow, White, and
Spotted; otherwise not much differing from ours in Shape, but much in Nature;
for they will run away when men strike them, without making any kind of Noise,
but not without Biting, though they cannot Bark.

These Dogs they so frequently Eat, They are eaten.
that in many places they are brought to Market, and driven Coupled with Cords
one to another. The first Gift that a man gives when he Buys his Nobility, is a
Dog. The Blacks keep many of them, and have them in great esteem.

Cats, Cats.
which they term Ambaio, are much cherished, for their killing Mice, wherewith
the Inhabitants of the Cities and Towns are much pestered; and their Flesh
serves them for Food.

Bulls called in the Minish Tongues, Nanne Bainin; Cows, Nanne Boewesja; Oxen,
Cabrietes. Sheep.
Ennan or Nanna; and Sheep, Cabrietes; of which last there are very few found,
and those seldom killed. The Cows and Oxen are small body'd like Yearling
Calves, having Horns standing cross; but the Females never give any Milk. The
young Calves called Nanne Bay, very bad Food, caused by the dryness of the
Pasture, and heat of the Country.

Hens were brought hither by the Portuguese, Hens.
from St. Thomas Isle, and have wonderfully increased, to the great refreshing
of Merchants, and Strangers, when they come on Shore: They grow fat as Capons
by the feeding on Mill, but are small Body'd, and lay Eggs, not much greater
than Pigeons.

The Pigeons, brought thither also by the Portuguese, Pigeons.
are in the Country Phrase called Abronama, that is, The White men's Fowl.
They differ little from those among us, only smaller Headed.

Swine, which they name Ebbio, were Transported thither first from Portugal;
Swine.
but their Flesh by the change of the Climate becomes unsavory, so that they
run wild as a prey fit only for ravenous Beasts.

The Dutch carried thither some Geese, which the Blacks call Apatta, and make a
choice Dainty at their chiefest Festivals.

They have no Horses; and if one be presented to them, they kill, and eat it.

But Apes, or Monkies, are almost innumerable. Apes.


Gatamountains breed here of two sorts; one with white Beards, Catamountains.
black Faces, and a speckled Skin, white under their Bellies, with a broad
black List on their Backs, and black Tails; the other, with white Noses; all
which are caught by the Blacks with Snares, hanged on the Trees.

There are also some Civet-Cats, called Kankan.

THe Fowl here are not only numerous, but bold, Fowls.
by reason they are seldom shot or caught; some bearing the same shape with
those of Europe; other differing, and strange: As first, blew Parrots, which
taken young out of their Nest, learn much better to speak, than such as have
flown Wild; but they never learn to Speak so plain as the green Brasilian
Parrots.

There are also a kind of Green Birds, with Orange Spots on their Bills, and
long Tails, which the Blacks call Ahuront, and we, Paraketo's: Paraketo's.
and another like the former, somewhat bigger, and of a Blood-red Color, with
a black Spot on their Bills, and a black Tail.

A kind of Gold-Finch, yellow Body'd, Breeds here likewise, but for fear of the
Serpents and other venomous Beasts, build their Nests on slender Boughs of high
Trees. In the Fields, amongst the Mill, Nest a sort of Bull-Finches, which the
Blacks put alive in their Mouths, and eat with the Skin and Feathers on: so
Sparrows also, and many other small Birds.

There are other Birds like Cranes, with a head like a Turky-Cock, but so
mischievously devouring, that the Blacks to prevent their coming down, carry
them Food to the Mountains: they continually dabble in the Dirt, and all manner
of noisome Filth, that they stink, even at a distance, as bad as the most
loathsome Carrion.

Also Water-Snipes, Turtle-Doves, with a black Ring on their Necks; Pheasants,
Spotted with white, but the Flesh unsavory; and Peacocks, in shape like ours,
but with some difference of Feathers.

The Bird Pettoir the Blacks look upon as a great Presager of good or ill
Fortune, and therefore esteem it much.

The Cranes, Hearons, Storks, Crows, and Lapwings, differ not much from those
with us; only the Crows are Parti-colour'd, such as we have in England about
Royston, and therefore styled, Royston-Crows.

Owls, Batts, Gnats, and great black Pismires, that make holes in the earth
like Field-Mice, and do much hurt to Bees, which they rob both of Honey and Wax.

Land-Crabbs, or Tortoises, by them called Bonzeronzes, of a Purple Color,
Land-Crabs, or Lobsters.
which keep under ground like Moles, they eat with delight, as a most desirable
Dainty.

Serpents and Adders, of an extraordinary magnitude, are found here, Serpents.
using both the Land and Water; having a Belly and Mouth so big, that they can
swallow Hens, and Geese whole: Some of the Negro's think their flesh fit to be
eaten; but how it nourishes, their Diseases caused by such foul Feeding, give
the best account.

Sometimes these Countries are plagued with Locusts, Locusts, or Grasshoppers.
which come flying out of Arabia in such numerous Shoals, They spoil the Fruits
of the Field.
as cloud the Sun; and where they fall, eat up all they find, whether Corn,
Grass, or Fruits; which certain hazard, makes the People so careless and
unconcerned for the future, that they never lay up any Store of Corn, but Sow
and Plant only so much, as they guess they may spend in the whole Year.

Diverse Villages lying near the Sea, Salt.
have Salt-Pans; as Antin, Labbede, Sinko, and others; but the best are at
Antin, and Sinko: from whence carried through the whole Country to be sold.

They make their Salt very Fine and White, How it is made.
and with little trouble, by reason it needs to be but once boiled. When made
ready in manner aforesaid, they put it into small Rush Baskets, like
Loaf-Sugar, covering it over with green Leaves, that it may not grow brown by
the heat of the Sun.

The whole Country produces Gold, The Country is full of Gold.
which the Blacks call Chilea; some found on the Shore, and at Low Water,
sought for by the Women, and found by Pieces, to the value of a Noble.

But that which chiefly comes to Europe, From whence the Gold comes.
is Dug out of the Rivers, or Mines by the Blacks, far up within Land, and
by them brought, and sold to those of Fantyn, Akanian, Adom, Akara, and other
places, in Barter for European Wares; for few which live in these places, know
the Mines, nor has any Whites ever been by, or near the same: For every
particular King sets secure Guards upon the Mines within his Dominion, wherein
he imploys his Slaves to work; and when he has gotten a quantity together, he
Trafficks for it with others, lying nearer the Shore; till by the passing
through many hands, it at last arrives in the Trading Ships of the European
Merchants.

In some places, How the Gold is taken up in the River.
especially at the plentiful Gold-River Atzine, under the Cliffs and
Water-falls, shooting down from the Mountains, Gold is taken up, in this
manner: They Dive with a hollow Wooden Tray to the bottom, and rake there
among the Earth, Stones, and all that they can come at; with which having
filled their Dishes, they come up above Water, and washing the Mass, find the
Gold; for sometimes whole pieces are washed down by force of the Water, through
the Gold-Veins; whereof the King of Egwira has a great many, which he keeps
for his Fancy, ascribing a secret Power and Virtue to it.

Sometimes they get by this Diving good store of Gold, but otherwhiles in whole
days make no advantage.

Besides this Diving, In what manner the Gold is found.
Gold is found in diverse other manners, viz. in pieces like Beans, or in Dust
as small as Sand, or Filings of Copper; yet being very ragged, like broken
Coral, or Stone, and intermingled with Grit, Clay, or Earth, which they cleanse
in the running Streams; yet not so, but that much Dross remains among it.

Many hold opinion, In what Tract of Land the Gold is found.
that all the Gold found and had near the Coast of Guinee, is gotten within
twenty miles of the Seashore, in a Tract of Land from Cape de Tres Puntas,
till they come beyond Pichy and Sinko; so concluding, for that they of Soko,
lying only three or four days Journey from the Shore, know of no Gold, neither
have they any Trade in it; and beyond Pichy and Sinko they have scarcely heard
how they dig it.



Adjoining to the Village Little Commendo, near the Sea, lies a Hill, A
Gold-Mountain near Little-Commende.
which appearing to contain in its bowels much Gold, in the Year Sixteen
hundred twenty two, the Inhabitants begun to dig for it, but because they were
ignorant in the method of Myning, the hollowed Earth fell in, smothering diverse
of the Workmen: wherefore the King of Guaffo by advice Issued out an Edict,
that none might dig any more therein; and so that Work remained ever since
unattempted.

The Natives make strange reports of unusual Apparitions within the Mines, as
that sometimes there is such a noise and tumult heard, Conceit of the Blacks of
the Gold-Mynes.
that none dares stay there; and that otherwhiles the Laborers are driven
thence by force and violence, without seeing any thing; and that sometimes a
Golden Dog, or such like Beast appears to them on a sudden, and straightway
vanishes again. Things that to lighter Judgments may seem fabulous, yet
credited by Antiquity, and, as we may suppose, not without reason; Pliny.
for they making Pluto the God of Riches, it is no marvel if he defend his
Possession, thus violently, and without his leave, invaded and ransacked. But
whether those related Fancies of the Blacks be true or not, signifies little;
however, this we may be infallibly assured of, that this Gold is gotten with
great labor and trouble: for if any can find two or three An English is one
Peny-weight in Gold, that is four Shillings in Money.
Englishes in Gold in a whole Day, he has labored very hard, and has gotten a
good days Wages for his pains.

The Air, to all but its Natives, proves very unwholsom, The Air unhealthy in
the Gold-Coast to Strangers.
as experience teaches: for all Strangers which lie on Shore, whether in Forts
or Storehouses, are afflicted with grievous and mortal Sicknesses; whereas on
the contrary, the Indigenae look fresh, live healthy, and attain to a great Age.

Some of the most Ingenious Blacks attribute the cause thereof to the
multiplicity of Lightning and Thunder; whose frequency diffuseth the Infection,
as the two sorts of Winds from Sea and Land, dissipate unhealthy Fogs and
Vapors.

Foreigners which come to Guinee, Worms.
especially this Gold-Coast, are very much tormented with Worms breeding in
their Bodies; so also are the Blacks about Myna; whereas those that live four
and twenty miles lower Easterly, are always free from that trouble.

These Worms called Ikkon, do not affect every one equally that has been
there, but some sooner, others later: some get them while they are yet upon the
Coast; others in their Voyages; a third after the ending of their Voyage, nay,
four, five, six, yea, twelve Months after their coming home; and others have
been two or three times there, and never had any touch of them.

From whence they have their original and breed, Their Original.
has been much disputed: some lay the cause upon their excessive use of Venus,
some upon their eating of Fish which have Worms in their Bodies, or upon much
Swimming and running into the cold Water; others, that they proceed from the
overmuch Drinking of Palmito-Wine, eating of Kankaiens, that is, their Bread
made of Mill: but all these seem mere Fancies, without a show of reason; for
diverse in all those particulars most temperate, have nevertheless this
Distemper; whereas on the contrary, others the most loose and debauched have
never had any of them. But those speak with most probability, who say that
these Vermin proceed either from a peculiar Malignity in the Air, or from
drinking of the Water which the Negro's draw out of Wells in some places, and
sell to the Whites: for most true it is, that several have drank much Water,
and yet not been afflicted with Worms, but then they resided at Akara, and
other adjacent places; but those which lie before Moure, and drink of that
Water, shall be tormented with that Elminthick Evil.

These Worms breed in several manners; By what accident they come.
in some they bring Fevers, or shaking Agues; in others, fainting Fits, with
great pain: in some they cause Frenzy; some can neither go nor stand, or lie,
or sit, while others scarce feel a Distemper. They show themselves with a
little Pimple or red Spot, hard in the Flesh; wherein sometimes may be seen the
Worms between that and the Skin: at last they cause Ulcers upon the Ball of the
Foot, on the Arms, Knees, Thighs, or Hips, and indeed in all fleshy places,
continuing with some near three Months, whereas others have scarce any pain
three Weeks, yet perhaps have ten Worms hanging out of the Flesh and Skin at
once.

The Worms are of several lengths and bigness; Their Form.
some a Yard, others a Yard and a half long, and some shorter; but generally as
thick or big as the Bass-String of a Theorboe.

The Cure cannot be perfected till the Worm breaks through the Skin, The Curing.
and thrusts out his Head; then they tie it, that it may not creep in again,
and at length draw it quite out; which they do by winding the end hanging out
about a Spoon: if in the extracting it happens to break, there commonly ensues
a renewing of the Wound. The Blacks never use any means, but only wash the
affected part with salt Water. But the best Cure is to cleanse the Body of
putrifi'd humors, and to anoint the place with fresh Butter. In the performing
which Cure, the Place where the Worm appears must be defended against Cold, to
prevent swelling and exulceration.

The Negro's, The Venerial Pox.
among other Sicknesses, are very subject to the Venerial Pox; which they cure
by drinking Sarsaparilla.

Wounds, by them called Mapira, growing from Blows, they cleanse little,
without using any Medicine, because they have none, nor any Chirurgions to
apply them.

Swellings which will not ripen, or come to Suppuration, Swellings.
they cut with three or four long slashes, then let it heal of it self; whence
it comes that they have so many Cuts and Scars in their Bodies.

They use no artificial Pbloebotomy, How they let Blood.
but only cut the Flesh till the Blood comes out.

All the help they give the Sick, is to Shave them, if Parents or Children,
otherwise they will not offer them one drop of Water or Oil, but let them
perish with hunger and perplexity. The Sick are called Myarri, and mortal
Diseases Jarbakkasi, and a dead Body Ou.

The Men are of a middle Stature, free and airy of disposition, well made, The
Constitution of the Inhabitants.
strong Limm'd, and swift of Foot, with round Faces, midling Lips, but flat or
Camosi'd Noses, (with them a beauty) little Ears, white Eyes, with great
Eyebrows, and great Teeth, that shine, and are as white as Ivory, caused by
rubbing them with hard Wood, wherewith they keep them always very neat and
clean. Their Visages seem to shine with Sweat, or else foul'd with Dirt, Scurf
and Nastiness; continuing Beardless till thirty years old: their Shoulders
broad, Arms brawny, with great Hands and long Fingers, whereupon they let their
Nails grow like Claws, sometimes to the length of a Joint, and as a great
ornament, is especially used among the Nobility. Lastly, they have little
Bellies, broad Feet, long Toes, and furnished, as most of the Blacks upon the
Guinee Coast, with large Propagators.

They have quick and ready Wits, to help in any sudden emergency, Their Kind.
and show themselves withal very considerate, whereunto they add great craft
and subtlety. Covetousness they learn from their Cradles, which makes them
always craving, and with such petulancy, as not to receive a denial. Courteous
enough in outward appearance to Strangers, but envious, and given to revenge
amongst one another; and where they can play the Masters, fear not to manifest
their Ambition, Treachery, domineering and supercilious Tyranny.

The People neighboring the Shore, both Men and Women, Expert in Swimming.
have great skill in Swimming; but the Men within Land use it so little, that
they seem afraid at the sight of any great River. They can keep long under
Water, and Dive exceeding deep; wherefore the Portugals bring of the expertest
from hence to the West Indies, to use them in the Pearl-fishing in the Island
Margaretta. Children not exceeding two years of Age betake themselves instantly
to the Water, and learn to Swim, because unskilfulness therein is counted a
great shame.

The Women are slender-Body'd, and cheerful of disposition, but have such great
Breasts, that they can fling them over their Shoulders, and give their Children
Suck that hang at their backs.

They have great inclinations to Dancing; The Women are inclined to Dancing.
so that when they hear a Drum or other Instrument, they cannot stand quiet,
but must show their Skill. They meet usually in the Evenings to Revel; while
some Dance, others Play upon Instruments, as Copper Panns, struck with Buttons,
or Drums made of a hollow Tree, and covered over with a Goats Skin, or such
like barbarous Music. They Dance commonly two and two together, The use of
Castinetto's came from Africa.
Leaping and Stamping with their Feet, Snapping with their Fingers, and Bowing
their Heads one to another; some have Horses Tails in their Hands, which they
cast one while upon one Shoulder, and one while upon the other; others with
Wisps of Straw in their hands, which they let fall, then again suddenly
reaching it, they cast it up aloft, and catch it in their hands. This Dancing
having continued an hour, or an hour and a half, every one returns home.
Besides these Evening-Pastimes, they have a sort of Dancing-Schools, wherein
the younger Breed are taught.

These People are seldom free from Lice, The Blacks are Lousy, though Clean.
and Fleas, although they keep themselves clean in their Bodies, for they Wash
every Morning and Evening from Head to Foot, and anoint themselves with Oil of
Palm, or Suet, to make them look Smooth, and that the Flies may not bite their
Naked Body. The Women moreover anoint themselves with Civet, and fine smelling
Herbs, to be the more acceptable to their Husbands. They count it a great shame
to Break Wind in the presence of any: they never do their Easement upon the
ground, but make a Hut, whereinto they retire, and when full, burn them to
Ashes. They cannot Evacuate their Water in a continued Current, as usual in
humane Creatures, but rather like Hoggs, by intermissive girdings.

When they meet any of their Friends or Acquaintance in the Morning, Their
Salutation.
they Salute them with great Courtesy, Embracing one the other in their Arms,
and closing the two first Fingers of the Right Hand, snap two or three times
together, each time bowing their Heads, and saying, Auzy, Auzy, that is, Good
Morrow, Good Morrow.

Another (as it were) innate quality they have to Steal any thing they lay
hands of, Exquisite in Stealing.
especially from Foreigners, and among themselves make boast thereof, as an
ingenious piece of Subtilty; and so generally runs this vicious humor through
the whole Race of Blacks, that great and rich Merchants do sometimes practice
small Filching; for being come to the Trading Ships, they are not at rest till
they have taken away something, though but Nails, or Lead, that is Nailed to
the outside of the Ships to prevent Worm-eating: which no sooner done, then
with a singular sleight of hand, they convey from one to another; but if they
chance to be trapp'd, they all leap instantly Overboard for fear of Beating;
but if caught, and soundly Bastinado'd, then as past doubt of other punishment,
they never avoid the Ship, but come again the next day to Trade.

They little esteem any Promises made to Foreigners, They keep little of their
Promises.
but break them if they can see any advantage in it; in brief, they are a
treacherous, perjured, subtle, and false People, only showing Friendship to
those they have most need of. When they make a Promise or Oath to the Whites,
they cast their Face to the Ground; then bowing, speak these words thrice, Jau,
Jau, Jau, every time striking their hands together, and stamping upon the
ground with their feet, and lastly kiss their Fetisy, or Sants, which they wear
upon their Legs, and Arms.

Most of their Food is Bread, Most of their Food is Bread.
by them called Kankaiens, Baked or Boiled of Mill, How it is made ready.
mixed with Oil of Palm, and sometimes with green Herbs; the Mill they prepare
by Pounding in a Stone-Mortar, afterward cleanse it in a Wooden Shovel; then
the Women Grind it every day twice upon a flat Stone, which stands a man's
height from the Earth, with another Stone a Foot long, just as the Painters
usually Grind their Colors, which is no small labor, though little regarded
by the men: Thus made into Meal, they mingle it with water, and make Cakes or
Balls as big as both ones Fists, which they Boil or Bake upon a hot Hearth,
bound up in Cloth. Others add thereto Maizr.

They seldom eat Flesh, Other Food.
but all sorts of Fish; Potatoes also, and Injames, which they Boil; as also
Bananasses, Bakovens, Rice, and several other sorts of Fruit which the Country
affords.

Their daily Drink is Water and Palm-Wine; Drink.
yet they make another Liquor of Mace, which they call Poitou.

The Men Drink stoutly, especially hot Liquors, such as Palm-Wine, The Men are
inclined to Drinking.
Brandy, and other Wine, so that the Evening seldom sees them Sober: In
Drinking they use strange Customs; for the first Drinker must lay his Hands
upon his Head, and with a loud voice cry out Tautosi, Tautosi: After Drinking
they pour a little as an Oblation to their Fetisi upon the Earth, crying aloud
I. O. U. which if they omit, they are persuaded it will do them no good, but
vomit it up presently.

Nor have they a less Voracity in Eating, being scarcely satisfied with Food;
Gluttony in Eating.
their Caninus Appetitus being so insatiate, that when they have as it were but
newly swallowed the last, they will fall to afresh, as if pined for hunger: nor
do they chew it like us, but take it in broken Gobbets with the three
middle-Fingers, Unmannerly.
and throw them into their Mouths down their Throat, without ever casting it
beside.

WAlled Cities they have none, nor good Towns near the Sea, Towns or Villages
what they are.
only upon the Shore some Villages appear, of no great consequence, being
ill-favoredly built, and worse ordered; for they so stink of Dirt and
Filthiness, that sometimes when the Land-Wind blows, the Stench may be smelled
a mile and a half in the Sea. The Towns more within the Land are much bigger,
and fuller of Trade, and People who live more at ease; for such as live at the
Sea, are Interpreters, Brokers, Rowers, Skippers, or Seamen, Servants, Fishers,
and Slaves of the other. But although, as we said, the Towns lie open round
about, and not enclosed; yet they are commonly built in places of Defense: for
they stand on high Hills, encompassed with Woods, and have no other comings to
them, but through small Paths, which are easily to be defended.

Their Houses are very slight, and little better than Hog-Styes, Houses.
or at the best like the Tents in Forts, or Bulwarks, being erected in the
following form: Four Trees, or Posts, to a Man's height, are set in a Square
in the Earth, How they are made.
and next those other Posts laid and bound fast; round about this Draft are
many small Sticks placed one by the other, and bound so close together that
they cannot put a hand between them, and Plastered from the top to the bottom
with Loam of yellow Earth, to the thickness of almost half a Foot, which the
heat of the Sun dries so hard as a Stone; within the House, in stead of
Painting or Whitening, they lay another Stuff of red, white, or black Earth,
which made thin with Water, they daub over with a Straw-wisp, The Roof.
and is the chiefest Pride, and greatest ornament of their Habitations. The
Roof consists of two apiece pieces, made of Palm Tree Leaves, standing
sloaping aloft, and bound close together when it rains; The Going (...).
but ordinarily set open with two sticks in fair Weather, that the Sun may
shine into their Houses: The Entrance or Door is a square hole, made at one
side with a Shutter of Rushes before it, which can be opened and shut, The
Floor.
being made fast with a cord or rope of Mille-straw: The Floor compacted of
Red-earth, laid very flat and even with a round hole in the middle, to set the
Pot with Wine de Palm in, when they drink with one another. Commonly such a
House is built in eight or ten days, and one may buy it for twenty Shillings,
or little more. Three or four of these Huts always stand together in a square,
with a Yard in the middle, where the Women boil their Meat, hedged about with
Straw of Mill to the height of a Man.

In this manner the Houses stand all in a heap, only parted by the
aforementioned Straw of Mill, and no farther distant from one another, than
that one man can go between; so that the Passages are merely narrow Alleys, and
very slippery in the time of Rain, by reason of the fatness of the earth; but
they dry up again in Sun-shiny Weather as hard as stone.

The Mansions of the Braffo, The Houses of the Braffo.
or Governor, stand commonly by the Market, and has none other adjoining
thereto, but only those of his Wives and Children; they are somewhat larger
and bigger than those of the common people, and covered with Straw of Mill.
His People and Guards have every one a particular Chamber. In the middle of his
Court stands a square Hut, open round about, but covered on the top, wherein he
sits in the daytime with his Nobility that come to speak with him. Before the
Court-Gate stands always two Pots in the Ground with fresh Water, for their
Fetiso to drink out of.

The best of their Household Stuff is commonly one or two wooden Chests, Their
Household Stuff.
bought of the Whites, wherein they Lock all they possess; so that little can
be seen in their Houses. They have some Kalabasses, which they call Akoffo,
made of the Straw of Mill, wherein they commonly carry their Wares and other
Goods to sell. Their Arms, such as Shields, Assagays, or Lances, hang on the
Wall for Ornament. The remaining part of their Goods consists in a Mat to sleep
on, two or three stumps of wood for Stools, a Pot or two to boil in, two or
three Kalabasses to drink Palm-Wine out of, and a great Kettle to wash
themselves in.

Along the whole Coast the Inhabitants use light and nimble Boats, Canoos.
or Sloops; by them called, Ehem; by the Portuguese, Almades; and by the
English and others, Canoos: with which they go some Leagues to Sea, and row up
the Rivers from one place to another: How they are made.
They are made of one entire piece of Wood, or the body of a Tree cut long-ways
with Cutting-Knives; then made hollow on the sides, and narrow above, with a
flat bottom, and without any covering over head; the Ends before and behind
narrow, and close together as a Hand-bow, and almost in the same fashion; the
Head somewhat lower, the Sides a finger thick, and the Bottom two: And after
the hollowing, they burn the Wood with Straw, to prevent Worms, and cleaving by
the Sun.

At each End the Canoo has a Bow like a Galley, The Shape.
a foot long, and a Knob a hand thick, whereby the Blacks carry them in and out
of the Water upon their shoulders; for they suffer them not to lie soaking in
the water, but set them upon Props to dry; by which means they both preserve
them from rotting, and make them more pliable and swift in the using. Behind
they have a Rudder like an Oar, being a long Stick with a round leaf at it: The
common ones, The Bigness.
wherewith they go out a Fishing, are generally sixteen foot long, and one and
a half, or two foot broad. Those made for the Wars, and to carry Beasts or
other Wares, are five and thirty and forty foot long, five broad, and three
foot high; some so large, that fifty or sixty men may stand in them with their
Arms; which sort are made about Cape de tres Puntas, because there grows mighty
large Trees, being seventeen or eighteen fathom in thickness.

They lie not high with their Sides above water, but oftentimes he that steers
the Helm, sits with his body most in the water: The small ones will hold only
one man in the Breadth, but seven or eight in the Length; which are rowed with
Oars made of hard wood, in shape of a Spade, with an extraordinary Fol: 4 5 3
Fol: 4 5 4
dexterity Galley-fashion; and make such swift way in Still-water, that they
seem to fly; but in Rough-water they will not go forward so fast: The smaller
sort, by reason of their narrowness, overset very easily which the Negro's with
great facility turn and leap into again.

Furthermore, for the prevention of Mishaps, and as good Omens of a happy
Voyage, they deck them with several Fancies and Conceits; as the Ears of Mill,
and other painted Emblems and Devices. Some when they go a long Journey, kill
(to the Honor of their Fetisi) a Sheep or Buck, and hang the same opened at
the head of their Canoo for a show.

The Inhabitants of Mongoba, Konda-Quoia, Ruono-Monou, Places where no Canoos
are used.
and some others in Gessymonou, use no Canoos; but the Korredebo's, near Rio de
Galhinas or Maqualbary, and such as have many Lakes in their Country, pass
over in Canoos. All others make Bridges, which they fasten on the other side of
the River to Trees, and bind them fast with small Ropes, which serve in stead
of Railes to hold by, that by the swinging they may not fall off. These Bridges
they make, how wide soever the Rivers be, and go with heavy burdens over them,
and by reason of their shaking, call them Jenge, Jenge, and extraordinarily
necessary, by reason of the fierce Cataracts of Water falling from the high
Cliffs, sufficient to bear down fixed Bridges, and altogether unpassable by
Canoos.

The men of all degrees go habited, either in Linen, The Clothing of the Men.
or Cotton Cloth girt round about their middle, and hanging down to their Knees.

They have a great fancy in Shaving their Hair, How their Hair is dressed.
wherein they observe no particular fashion; for one cuts it like a Half Moon,
another Crossways, the third with three or four Tufts; so that amongst fifteen
men, hardly two are alike.

They wear as an Ornament on their Arms, Rings of Ivory, stripped and streaked
with Crosses, three or four on one Arm, and about their Necks a String of
Venetian Crystal, or Coral, which they break into pieces; but persons of
Eminency wear them commonly of Gold: As also on their Legs, Strings of small
Crystal, mixed with Golden Studds, and other Ornaments of Gold. At their Feet
they have commonly some Wisps, or other stuff hanging, kept for their Sants
which they call Fetisies. On their Heads some wear Caps made of the Peeling of
Trees, with a long Tail tied to it, in stead of a Hat-band, died and drawn with
several Colors. Others have Caps or Hats of Sedge or Reeds; a third, Hats with
broad Brims, Woven of green Bulrushes; a fourth, made of Dogs-skins, and
Cabriets or Sheepskins.

The Women go Apparelled in Linen for the most part, fastened or tied close
under their Breasts, somewhat above the middle, and reaching to the Knees with
a Girdle of a hand-breadth, Red, Blew, or Yellow, to which hang their Knives,
Purses, and Keys for an Ornament; besides many Tassels of their Sants or
Fetisies.

Thus they go Clothed in the house, but when they walk abroad, they lay off
this Garment, and washing their Bodies from top to Toe, put on a longer, coming
down to their Feet like a Petticoat, over which, as the former, girt close,
being Mantlewise, they throw another of Say, or other such thin Stuff.

Their Heads are finely dressed, and their Hair neatly Plaited, The Head-gear of
the Women.
in the midst with a Tuft, trimmed round about with Strings, anointed with Oil
of Palm; in their Hair they have usually long slender Kammeties or Bodkins,
with two Teeth, about the length of a Finger, with which they thrust in their
Hair, when any thing troubles them; also in Salutation they draw these Bodkins
out of their Heads, and stick them in again. Upon their Foreheads they have
three or four Cuts, about the length of the first Joint of a Finger; so also on
their Cheeks, which being swelled up, they Paint with several Colors: Beneath
their Brows, they make white Strokes, and stick their Faces full of white
Spots, which at a distance seem like Pearls. They hang in their Ears Brass and
Tin Rings, and put on their Arms, Copper and Ivory Armlets; and on their Legs
Rings of Copper. Young unmarri'd Maids wear many small Iron wreathed Rings on
one Arm.

But the chiefest Pride consists in their Shining Teeth, which they pick and
rub with a certain piece of Wood, till they become as smooth, clean, and white,
as polished Ivory.

The People lying near the Shore, Their Employment.
maintain themselves either by Fishing, Boiling of Salt, Tilling of Land, or
Merchandise; as also, by being Factors and Interpreters to those which come out
of the Country with Gold, to Trade upon the Coasts with the Whites; but the
Inland, some by Husbandry, others by Trading, many by Plaiting Caps of
Bulrushes, or Dogs or Kabriten skins. Others Weave Caps, Purses, and Garments
of the Peeling of Trees, Painted with all sorts of Colors, and very
Artificially made, as though Woven of Flax or Hemp.

The Inhabitants of Atzyn, Ante, Guaffo, Terra Pekine, and Cabo Cors, maintain
themselves by Fishing: Those of Little-Inkassia, by Husbandry and Burning of
Lime.

They of Labbede, though lying near the Sea, make their best livelihood by
keeping of Cattle, and making of Salt.

The Blacks of the Town Moure, use the Fishing Trade, but the chiefest help
they have is Merchandise, and to entertain the Akanists, which come to them
with Gold.

The People of Sabou, as most of the Inlanders, bestow their whole time and
labor in Tilling and Manuring their Fields, whereby in the Town Moure, lying
on the Seacoast, in the Kingdom of Sabou, Provision of Mill, Injam's, Fruit,
Hens and other things, may be had cheaper than in any other place of the
Gold-Coast.

Their manner of Tillage proves very laborious, How the Lands are Tilled.
being done by the hand, without help either of Horses or Oxen; and besides,
they are forced to clear the Land of Wood, which cut down to ground, the Stumps
and Roots they burn to Ashes, which serve them in stead of Marl, or Dunging.

The Seed-time, Seed-time.
with them begins commonly on the twentieth of April, in the Rainy-Season, when
the Soil is moistened and become soft; then every man with his whole Family goes
into the Field, and takes his best Clothes and Jewels with him, They are
greatly busied.
wherewith he adorns his Wife, Children, and Slaves; giving them also plenty of
Victuals, with Wine of Palm; in the Evening returning home, followed by his
Retinue, Singing and Dancing.

The next day they begin to Sow the Land of their King and Braffo, The King's
Land first Tilled.
or Captain of the Town under whom they live: for which they are entertained
with Wine of Palm, boiled Mutton, and other Food: afterward every Man takes
care for himself. In the midst of the Field, so soon as the Mill springs up,
and comes to Blossom, they erect a little wooden Hut, Thatcht with Straw, where
they set their Children to keep little Birds out of the Corn.

These People are so Lazy, Their Laziness in Tilling Land.
that seldom any of them will sow more than he shall have need of that Year for
his Family; whereupon oftentimes, by ill-thriving of the Grain, caused by
excessive Drowth, or the multitude of Locusts, there arises a great Famine:
yet these in certain hazards prevail not to make them more industrious; one
reason whereof among other may be, for that none have any propriety in Land,
but the King holds all Woods, None possesses any Land of his own.
Fields, and Lands, so that none without his leave may Sow, or Cultivate to
his best advantage for improvement.

Every man may take as many Wives as he pleases, or can maintain: Marriage.
and besides, if he enjoy other women, his Wives may not hinder him from so
doing; but he must give every one of them the worth of five or six Shillings to
satisfy and quiet them; whereas on the other side, if the Woman flies out to
another man, the Husband may put her away and sell her.

When a young Man has intention to Marry, Woeing before Martiage.
and has seen a Maid he likes, he requests the Parents to have her to his Wife
(which if she be not a Slave) they will easily consent to, especially if the
Bride-Gift be offered, that is, about a Mark, for the Parents, and as much in
two little Clothes for the Bride, who then is brought to the House with her
Companions, who stay there with her for eight days, that the Bridegroom may
settle his Affections, and make himself acquainted with the Maid.

And notwithstanding that the Blacks along this Coast have so many Wives, Every
Town keeps two or three Whores.
yet in Atzyn, and in all the adjoining Countries, by Custom, at every Town
they keep two or three others, which they call Abrakrees; concerning whom the
Cabosero's have a great Ceremony performed in this manner: First they set these
Curtizans there with much Laughter and Sport upon a Straw-Mat to show;
whereupon one of the eldest among them takes a young Hen, and opens the Bill of
it with a Knife, letting some drops of Blood fall upon her Head, Shoulders, and
Arms. In the mean time denouncing Death to any of them that shall take for the
Hire of their Prostitution above three or four Kakravens; all that she gets she
must give to the Cabo-Sero; English Money.
for which she has the liberty to go into any House, and eat without reproof
or denial; Their Liberty.
so may she in the Market, and not be refused upon a great Penalty. When this
is done, one of the Company is sent aside with her, who having searched her,
and returning testifies her to be a sound Woman: then with the rest of her
fellow-Strumpets being washed, and sitting down upon a Mat, a Basket of Bread
is put into their hands, and Chalk or Sand strowed upon the Shoulders, Arms and
Breasts. Lastly, they run into the Town with great mirth and clamor, Dancing;
and drinking Wine of Palm, or Bordon. The following day they sit upon their
settled place, where all that go by must give two or three Kakroves.

IN Burying the Dead they make great Lamentations and Mournings, The Funeral.
People of all sorts attending it to the Grave. Persons of Quality are laid in
a Chest, others bound in a Mat with their best Garments, and some Ornaments of
Gold, but they take them away as soon as the Corpse is laid in the Ground, and
lay another Garment or two in the place, with some Goats-Flesh for Food in
their Journey to the other World.

When a King, or other great Lord dies, The Funeral of their Kings.
the Funeral concludes with the death of some Slaves, and is done only to show
the Power of the Deceased.

The Women after their Husbands Death are not endowed of their Estates, but
have merely his Clothes and Jewels; which also are many times lessened by the
Man's Bequests in his Lifetime.

In the Inheritance of the Crown the Brother succeeds; Their Inheritance.
or for want of Brothers, the eldest of the Family, without any consideration
of the Children: so also private Estates goes to the Brothers, or for want of
Brothers, to the Sisters Children; only at Akara the Children Inherit as well
the Fathers, as the Mothers Goods.

The Language of this People differs in several places; Their Language.
for between Kormantyn and Akara, being but fifteen leagues, they have no less
than four: but the Akarists, Kormantyns, Fantyns, Moureans, Minaers,
Commondans, as also those of Sama, or Agitaki, or Akitaki, Aquaffo, Fetu, Igwa,
Anemabo, Adja, Sabou, Abramboe, use all one Dialect.

The People of Akara, Ningo, and Sinko, though near Neighbors, yet understand
not one another Tongue; but all that dwell upon the Shore, or Trade with the
Whites, speak most of them a mixture of broken Portuguese, Dutch, and French:
yet in all this variety of Tongues, they all are ignorant of Writing, not
knowing indeed what a Letter means.

The English, Merchandise.
Netherlanders, and French, drive great Trade with the Blacks upon the
Gold-Coast, exchanging their European Commodities for Gold, and to that purpose
in several places near the richest Trading-Towns, Ledger-Ships, Factories, and
Forts for the keeping of their Wares, convenience of Dealing, and against the
Intrusion of Enemies. The chiefest Places where Settlements are made, are Atzyn
in the Kingdom of Atzyn, the Town on Cabo tres Puntas in Little Inkassia,
Botrow, Takarary, Samo in the Kingdom of Anten, Agitahi, or Little Commendo,
Daan, or Del Mine in Guaffo, Moure in the Kingdom of Sabou, Anemabo, Adja,
Kormantyn, Fantyn, and Akara.

The Wares brought thither, Commodities brought by the Netherlanders to the
Gold-Coast.
and commonly bartered for Gold, are these following, and the like: Sleasy,
half White, and course Hessen Linen. Half worn Sheets. Ticking for Beds. Cyprus
Clothes. Red, Blew, Yellow, and Green Cloth. Turkish Tapistry. Gray Says.
Frize, White, Red, and Green Blankets, or Ruggs. Turkish Carpetts. Red, and
Yellow Says. Stew-Pans. Barbers Basins. Great Scotch Pans, two Fathom in
circumference. Brown Kettles. Beating Banns. Painted Dishes, with men's Pictures
in them. Copper Pots. Round Copper Stewing-Pans, Tin'd in the inside. Copper
Locks. Trumpets. Copper Armlets. Tin Baking Pans. Dishes, and broad Pans. Large
Combs. Great and small Fishooks. Flat and thin Lead. Spanish Wine.
Sarsaparilla. Bars of Iron, of two, or three and thirty Bars, to a thousand
weight. Handles for Cutting-Knives. Great Seamens Knives. Looking-Glasses. Fine
Coral, or Venetian red Beads; and all sorts of Venetian Beads. Another sort of
Bluish Beads. Great Sheepskins. Sheeps Tallow. Some East- India Stripped, and
Wrought Cloth; and such like.


The Clothes which are made at Cape de Verde, and along the Quaqua-Coast, The
most Vendable Commodities.
and at Arder, are also vented on the Gold-Coast; for the best and most desired
Wares, are Linen, Cloth, Copperwork, Basins, Kettles, Knives, Ironwork, and
Brandy.

Here is generally a certain Rate or Price set upon every Merchandise, in
relation to the Gold: as for example, an Hundred twenty and eight Else of
Sleesy Linen, is oftentimes Apprized at a Bandy of Gold; by the Blacks called
Ta, and is as much as two Ounces and a half English, which reduced to Coin, at
four Shillings the Penny Weight, comes to Eight Pounds Sterling.

The Sleesy Linen the Blacks use for Clothes; To what use the Blacks put the
Wares they buy.
the small Cruises to put Oil in, with which they anoint themselves; but the
great ones are set on the Graves and covered up; the Barbers Basins to Wash,
and Shave themselves withal; the great Scotch Pans to kill Pigs or Sheep in,
and Dress them in stead of a Trough or Tub; of Iron they make Arms, as
Assagays, or Lances, Swords, Hewing-Knives, to open the Ground, and cut Wood
with. The Yellow, Blew, and Green Cloth, when cut into long Pieces, about a
hand broad, make Girdles, wherein they stick their Knives, Poniards, Benesen,
and such like; the Venetian Beads, they wear strung on the Peelings of Trees,
about their Necks, Hands, and Feet.

The Maritime Blacks, serve the Merchants, Strangers, and other Blacks which
come with Gold out of the Inland Countries, for Brokers and Interpreters, for
which they receive a Reward, by them called Dache, that is, a Gift, or Present.

The time of making a Voyage to this Gold-Coast, out of Europe for Trade,
Navigation.
asks no particular season; but may be done all the Year; for wherever the
Ships Arrive, they may Ride at Anchor safe, for which the Ground is very
convenient, being Sand and Clay mixed together.

For the Weighing of Gold, they have small Scales made of Copper, Gold-Weights.
with very long Strings, and round, and hollow Weights, like an Orange-Peel.

The People far Upland have Wooden Weights in some, and in other places Red,
and Black Beans, of which they know exactly how many make such and such Weights
of the Whites.

At Akara they use diverse sorts, both of small and great Weights. A Bandy is 2.
Ounces, 8. Englishes, or 1d. weight.
A great Bandy, their heaviest holds out two Ounces and eight Penny Weight, and
is by them called Ta; a small Bandy weighs one Ounce and fourteen Penny Weight;
A small Bandy is 1 Ounce. 14. Englishes. 60. Guilders. 16. Penny Weight in Gold,
is an Ounce. 1. Penny Weight in Gold, is, 4. Shillings English.
according to the Custom on the whole Gold-Coast, sixteen Penny Weight make
Ounce of Gold, such an Ounce they call Ossuachican; one Ounce and four Penny
Weight Ossuanon; ten Penny Weight Osserou; five Penny Weight Exykbas; four,
Serou; three, Sanna; two, Jarruka; and a Penny Weight Matabbe, or Medratabbe.

The Linen which they Buy they Measure by two Fathom together, The Measure.
which cut asunder they call, Jektam.

They of Atzin have but little Trade, by reason the Merchants in their Travel
are often Robbed and Murdered on the ways, by the confining People which are
under no King nor Government, but each follows his own wicked Inclination,
having amongst them neither Law nor Justice: And therefore the Trading
Inhabitants Travel through the Territories of Igwyra, and Jamou, both which have
settled States, whose Kings, for the benefit of the Custom, keep the Waysfree
and clear.

The Blacks of Takorari, carry themselves very rudely to all Whites; they were
formerly visited with Sloops and Ketches by the English, and Hollanders for
Trade; but finding that their Gold come but in small quantities, it has been
discontinu'd.

The Akanists have Commerce with the Inhabitants of Soko, and bring from thence
Clothes, which they Exchange for Ryals of Eight, or other Pieces of Silver; but
this very seldom, by reason of the great danger of the Ways, as we mentioned
but lately: however such as do venture, and make a safe Journey, gain great
Riches by the aforementioned Clothes.

In Sama the Portugals and Dutch have a Factory, and Trade with the People of
Adom and Wassa for the same Wares that were wont to be Vented at Ante, viz.
Iron, Says, Course Linen, Seamens Knives, Beads, old Sheets, and such like.

Those of Ante have some Gold brought to them from Egwyra and Mompa, but are
hindered from improving their Trade by the Wars of the Antinars against those of
Adom.

Before Little Commendo, formerly on the Sea, was a great Trade driven by the
English, but since the Dutch won the Castle De Mine, it is removed thither;
only at Commendo, upon the Kings entreaty, a Storehouse is built, and
furnished with all sorts of Goods, but cannot draw thither much Trade.

Cabo Cors for some years had repute for the chiefest Place of Trade on the
Gold-Coast, but of late so decayed, that scarce any show of it remains: yet
still the Merchants keep a Storehouse there to furnish the Inhabitants, and
those that come daily from Fetu thither to Market.

These Blacks, The Blacks are cunning in falsifying their Gold.
as they have good Judgment, and can quickly see if the Gold be good or not, so
they know by a peculiar Art, to falsify and embase that which they intend to
give to the Whites, in diverse manners.

Most of their Cheats they practice in their Gilded Arm-Rings, which they mix
with Copper, as likewise among other pieces of Gold, and cannot be
distinguished from the Gold, when newly Clipped, but grow commonly Rusty and
Pale, having lay'n some time amongst the Gold: the best proof they make by
Strong Water.

Their melted Gold (which Art of Melting they have learned from the Portuguese)
they falsify with two much red Copper, or Silver mixed amongst it; for without
one of these two the Gold will not Run. This is a Cheat very common and usual
among those of Fantyn.

They have yet another Trick, to cover Silver and red Copper over with Gold, so
as not to be discovered unless you cut it.

Formerly the Portuguese used to punish the Blacks very severely, if they
brought but one Peny-weight of falsifi'd Gold to sell, without any respect of
Persons.

The Gold as it comes out of the Mine, without Melting or Refining, is taken
for the best, that is, when the Sand, or Dust is merely Sifted out: Besides,
one Mine affords much better Gold than another; for the deeper they fetch up
the Gold, the worse it proves, being spoiled by too much Quicksilver.

Amongst the Gold brought from the upper Places of this Coast, that of Atzyn
and Adom bears the Credit as the best, because it is observed, that the People
Melt it without falsifying.

The Akanists bring most melted Gold, which is taken for good; but they must be
narrowly inspected, for they are ingenious at Gilding.

The Akaras Gold has a good repute for Purity, The Akaras Gold is the best.
if the Dust the quite blown from it.

They have no Coin amongst them; There is no Coin.
but the Subjects pay Tribute in weighed Gold; but if it be a small Parcel
under any Weight, then they pay one another with Pieces of melted Gold, as big
as Pins-heads cut apiece, Kakraven.
which they call Kakraven; and the Portuguese, Denier and Pai, being about a
Grain, or less. This invention the Portuguese taught them first; for before
their arrival the Blacks knew nothing of them: but they finding neither Coin,
nor any small Weight of Gold for to pay, when they bought Fruit, or any other
Provision, thought on this way of Payment in stead of single Money: since which
time, all along the Coast, an infinite number of these Pieces may had; when the
other Blacks, where the Whites are not known, use no such, but sell their Gold
as it comes from the Earth: for in stead of Coin or Money to pay one another in
small Sums, the People of Akara have little Iron Spikes, or Crosses of a Finger
long, with a Half Moon on the top.

When they go to the Wars they Paint their Faces, Breasts, Arms.
and whole Bodies, with yellow, white, and red Colors, and make upon it
Crosses, Snakes, and such like, hanging a round Ring, made of the Branches of
Trees, as thick as an Arm, about their Neck in stead of a Corslet, to keep off
the blows of their Cutting-Knives, and set on their Heads Caps like a Helmet,
made of Crocodiles, or Leopards-Skins, adorned with red Parrots Feathers, and
before with two or four Horns. The Grandees wear a Garland of Elephants, or
Sea-Horses Teeth: About their Bodies they have a Leathern Girdle, that comes
betwixt their Legs, with a small Cloth before their Privacies; and in the
Girdle they stick a Knife, or Poniard, whose Sheaths are made of Dogs, or
Buck-Skins, adorned with a great red Shell of a Hand breadth on the top. The
common Soldiers use great Chopping-Knives, broad at the ends, and small; and in
stead of a Handle they adorn it with a Bone of an Ape or Tiger, which they
stick at one side of their Girdle.

Their other Arms are Darts, Shields, Assagays, or Lances, and two-edged
Swords, with Handles of the Bones of Lions, Tigers, and other dangerous Beasts,
Knobb'd at the ends, and covered with a Plate of Gold, or with Skins of Fish.
Their Assagays, or Lances, Darts, Arrows, and Bows, have several other
fashions; but mostare Tipped at both ends, with Iron of an equal weight, that in
the throwing, they may fly level.

Their Shields are commonly six Foot long, and four broad, made of Matwork, or
Wood, in manner of a four square Tray, bowed inward, having in the midst a
Wooden, Iron, or Copper Cross, which they hold by. Some persons of State, cover
their Shields with Tigers Skins, and put an Iron or Copper Plate above that,
two Foot long, and one broad. The Bows are of straight, hard, and tough Wood,
and the Strings made of the Peeling of Trees; the Arrows, at one end, in stead
of Feathers, have a rough Dogs Skin drawn half over them; and at the other, a
small Head Poisoned: but they may not carry such Poisoned Arrows, except in the
Wars against their Enemies.

Their Drums are of two sorts, one made of hollow Trees, Drums.
drawn over with a Goats Skin, being very deep; whereupon with Drum-Sticks,
like Pestels, they Beat when the King keeps a Feast, for they lie commonly
before the Kings, or Captains house. The others made also of hollow Trees, but
smaller, round above, and sharp beneath like a Top, which they hang about their
Necks; and therewith, after their attendance is ended, they go about Drumming;
which they use to none but the Nobility.

Their Trumpets, or Horns, cut out of Elephants Teeth, finely Striped, Their
Trumpets, or Horns.
with a square Hole in the middle or end, wherein they blow; but none may have
these but the King, or Captain.

Most of the Blacks, lying near the Sea, know also pretty well how to use Guns
dexterously, which they learnt from the Portuguese.

Those of the Town Mine, use now for the most part Muskets: In casting of
Lances, or Assagays, they have such a slight, that they will hit the White,
though no bigger than a Sixpence, standing some Paces distant. They never fight
but with continual Drumming, and Sounding the Horn. The Prisoners on both sides
they make Slaves, and Feast in some places upon the Slain, making Drinking-Cups
of their Skulls.

In Drawing out to Fight they keep no Order, They fight without order.
but all run together, falling on furiously, with great Cries and Shreekings;
in which Service all are bound to follow the King, saving only, very old Men,
and Youths under eighteen or twenty years of Age.

The Victor uses great Cruelty against the other, cutting off their Heads,
sparing neither Women, or Children, and triumphing therewith two or three weeks
together, continually Chanting forth their own Praises, and whatever may tend
to the dishonor of the Enemy; and this Custom has been practiced not only
here, but too frequently in other parts of Africa.

The Kings have here absolute Command, The Command and Deminion of the King.
and Govern according to their own wills, their little Territories: and
although in outward appearance, the Subjects seem not to give that Honor and
Respect as befits them, nor themselves to take such State as is proper for
them; yet they do (as we said) what they please, Burning, and Destroying,
Placing, and Displacing, as Fancy, Humor, or Anger moves them. They alone make
War, and Peace, nor dare the justest or most bold Magistrates punish the
Villainies of their Retainers.

All the Towns lying near the Sea, are every one Governed by a Captain, or
Braffo, and Kaboseros, or Chief Officers, appointed in the Kings Name.

Fidalgo's, There are many of the Nobility.
or Noble Persons, the King makes in too great abundance, considering the
smallness of their Ability, and Means to live on, which are diminished also by
the Purchase of their Honor. Now it is to be observed, that by three Gifts,
How they are made.
any man may attain to the degree of Nobility; that is, of a Dog, a Sheep, and
a Cow, together with some other things of less consequence; as Wine of Palm,
and Brandy Wine: so that this Honor, viis and modis, costs them near a Hundred
Marks, and distributed in this manner: First he buys for those that undertake
to recommend his cause to the Braffo, or Captain of the Town, a Cow, whereto
all the Nobility are invited, and without fail appear at the set-time, Dressed in
the best Attire, to help to order the Feast, and to show Feats of Activity and
Mirth. In the mean time, the new Nobleman having made all ready to entertain
his Guests, sends to another Fidalgo, a Hen, and a Pot of Palmito-Wine to his
house. On the Feast Day, all the Inhabitants of the Town come together, and go
to the upper end of the Market, provided with all sorts of playing Instruments
for their Sports; as Drums, Horns, Bells, and other devises, to whom the Braffo
joins, accompanied with many Youths Armed with Shields and Spears, or Lances;
and their Faces Painted with Red and Yellow Oker.

At last comes the new made Fidalgo, into the company of the other Noblemen,
with a young Man Attendant, carrying a Stool after him, upon which he seats
himself; when presently his Fellows wish him good luck, pulling a handful of
Straw out of the Roof, and lay under his Feet; then address themselves to
tender their Civilities to his Wife, tying up her Hair with many Golden
Fetissies, and Crosses, having about her Neck a Gold Chain; and putting in one
of her hands a Horses Tail, and on the right Arm a Gold Ring, with a broad
Pendulum of Gold, like a Potlid: thus Attired and Attended with many other
Women, they follow the beforementioned Cow through the Market, Singing and
Dancing, till returned into the same place; the Men make strange Sport,
Drumming, Dancing, Fencing, Singing and Leaping about them: At last they carry
them through the Town upon a Stool, casting Meal in their Faces; thus their
exorbitant Pastimes continue till Evening, and then the other Nobles conduct
them to their usual Habitations.

The next day, (for this Solemnity continues three) they spend as the former.

On the third, the Executioner Slaughters the Cow, and cuts it into four
Quarters, of which every one has a piece given; but the Instituters of the
Feast may not Eat thereof, as conceited, that if they did, they should die
within the Year.

During the Feast a white Flag stands upon his House in token of Joy, and an
open Court; and after the Solemnity ended, the Head of the Cow is brought to
his House, Painted with many Colors, and hanged about with Wisps of Straw, and
Devices, in token or confirmation of his Nobility; whereby he has gained great
Freedom and Privileges: for now he may buy Slaves, and Trade for other things,
which before he had no permission to do. They take great care therefore about
it, although perhaps the acquiring cost them all they are worth, and thereby
are much poorer than before: but he soon gets it up again by Presents brought
him from others, each according to his ability. And now as soon as he has
gained an Estate again, he bestows it upon Slaves, wherein their Riches and
Reputation consists.

These keep one among another a yearly time of Feasting; where they make good
Cheer, new Paint the Cows Head, and hang it about with Ears of Mill. Besides
this, the Nobility in general keep one Feast upon the sixth day of July; where
they Paint their Bodies with Stripes of red Earth, and wear on their Necks a
Garland of green Boughs and Straw, as a Badge of their Nobility. In the Evening
they all come as Guests to the House of the Braffo; where they are entertained
with exceeding Mirth and Feasting, even to Excess and Drunkenness.

These People are so conceited of their old Idolatrous Customs, Religion, or
Worship.
that they deride, as it were, the Religion of the Whites, under what Name or
Notion soever. Several times have the Portuguese and French, by Jesuits sent
thither, endeavored to convert them to the Christian Faith, yet never have
been able hitherto to effect any thing worth relating. And thus have we
traveled through the Gold-Coast.

The Coast from Rio, Volta to Arder.
SEven Miles Eastward from Akara, The River Rio da Volta.
on the Shore, lies a Town called Sinko; twelve Miles from that, the River Rio
da Volta falls into the Sea. Coming with Ships before this River, the Entrance
seems very little, because of a Shelf which lies before it, and closes it up:
yet more within Land it may be discerned to run with an open and wide Channel.

Between Sinko and Rio Volta stands a Town called Ley, whose Inhabitants
maintain themselves by selling Cows; wherewith, though at a dear Rate, they
furnish themselves with Meat.

Three Miles from Rio Volta lies a Point, called in Portuguese, Cabo Montego,
a low Country, having little Wood, and the Shore spreading East South-East.

From Cabo Montego Eastwards, the Coast shoots out with a great Belly, so that
from one Corner to the other, Observe, Spanish Miles, or Leagues, (as we said
before) such as twenty five make a Degree.
it is ten Miles Sailing. The Country seems Craggy, yet watered with a small
River, whose Mouth is stopped with Sand, and has Trees on the East Quarter.
Beyond all the Land lies flat as far as Popo, or Popou, and shadowed with good
Boscage.

THE KINGDOM OF ARDER.
THis Kingdom of Arder contains about twelve Miles in length, The Kingdom of
Arder.
beginning four Miles Eastward of Popou, and ending at Aqua.

Three Miles Eastward of Popou on the Shore, appears a Town named Foulaen; The
Town Foulaen.
five Miles Eastward of which, on the same Coast you come to Little Arder,
Little Arder.
three hundred Rods in length; beyond which, about fifty Rods from the Shore,
runs a River of brackish Water. From Popou the Coast reaches East and by South
to Arda; and for eight Miles low Land, spotted here and there with Trees. Two
Miles Westward of Arder stand four Woods. A Mile to the North North-East of
Arder, Jakkeins
you may see Jakkein, a Town so called from the Governor thereof.

The City is encompassed fifteen hundred Rod about, with an Earthen Wall, and
includes a stately Palace, the Residence of the Governor, and watered with a
small Rivulet.

Three days Journey from Jakkein lies the Jojo; Jojo.
and a quarter of a Mile farther a Town called Ba, surrounded with a Mud Wall;
Ba.
over which a Fidalgo Commands in the King's Name. On the Seacoast stand two
Gates, and on the Land-side runs a fresh River, which reaches to Benyn.

About twelve Miles to the North North-East up in the Country, lies Great
Arder, an open Village, and straglingly built, but containing in circuit, as
the Natives report, above three Miles. They may conveniently Ride to Arder on
Horseback, or be carried in a Litter or Wagon, there runs so straight a Way
thither from the Shore. In the midway stands a Retiring place for Travelers,
where they brew Beer of Mill. The King has his Residence in this Village, and
two Palaces, but he dwells only in one, the other being reserved as a
Retirement upon casualty of Fire. Both these Palaces are environed with an
Earthen Wall of four or five Foot thick, with Coverings of Reeds, and have
several Chambers and Apartments within.

Here are no Walled Cities, but open Villages in abundance, fitly situate for
Merchandise, and defensible for the Inhabitants.

The Air proves unhealthy to the Whites: The air unhealthy.
for the greatest number of them that go to Land are quickly seized by a
Sickness, which for the most part kill's; whereas the Natives are very fresh
and sound, and attain a great Age.

This Tract of Land is every where plain and fruitful, thin of Woods, The
conditions of the Land.
but full of fine Villages, the Ways very convenient to Travel in, and several
fullstream'd Rivers, that irrigate, and with their Waters fertilize the Ground.

The Valleys are enricht with diverse Fruits throughout the whole year, Their
Fruits.
as Injames, Potato's, Oranges, Lemons, Coco-Nuts, Palm-Wine, and such like.
The Injames are eaten either boiled, broiled or roasted, with Butter for Sauce.

In the Marshes of Arder they make much Salt; which those of Kuramo buy and
carry away with great Canoos.

Here breed many Horses.

The Houses are mere Mud-walls, two or three Foot thick, Houses.
and covered with Straw.

Their Household Stuff no other than that before described on the Gold-Coast;
Household Stuff.
and as there also, for Ornament, hang on the Walls their Arms, viz. Shields,
Assagays, or Lances, Bows and Arrows.

In Places of retirement, or, as we may call them, Inns, Beer of Mill.
between the Shore and Great Arder, and in the Town Offer, they brew Beer of
Mill in this manner: First they steep the Mill in Water till it shoots,
afterward dry it in the Sun, then stamp it to Meal in great Mortars, and pour
upon it boiling hot Water. They know also to make this Mash Work with Yeast,
and to make it thick or thin, as they please. But this Beer, by the heat of the
Mill, will soon sour, and drinking of it causes the Scurvey, but mixed with
Water makes a good wholesome Drink.

Their Bread made of Mill they call Kanties, and their other Victuals Kade;
Food.
being green Herbs, Rice, Beef, Pork, Cabrietes or Mutton, Dogs, and Hens.

The Men have three, Habit.
sometimes four Garments hanging about their Middles, one shorter than another,
so that part of them all may be seen; but the upper part of the Body, and Feet
up to the Knees, remain naked. The better sort have very sumptuous Clothing of
Silk, wrought all over with Gold; upon which they wear fine white and thin
Cotton Clothes; so that the glance of the Gold shines through it.



The Women are so addicted to Dancing, The kind of the Inhabitants.
that they cannot forbear upon the hearing of any Instrument, though they be
laden with one Child in their Belly, and another at their Backs, where they
commonly carry them.

Both Men and Women keep their Bodies very clean, washing every morning and
evening; the Women anoint themselves usually with Civet, and other sweet
smelling Herbs and Plants, to seem the more acceptable to their Husbands.

When a young Man intends to put himself into a Married condition, and has
observed a Maid that pleases his eye, instantly he seeks to make acquaintance
with her, which has no difficulty, because of the great freedom they have; by
which means it happens often, that a mean young Man, gets a Noblemans Daughter;
and if they agree between themselves, the Marriage is concluded, without need
of acquainting the Parents on either side.

A Nobleman may Marry as many Wives as he pleases, and every year, over and
above, gets two or three of his Companions Daughters, eight or ten years old,
who serve him as Naked as they came from their Mothers Womb, till he enjoys
them, and then they obtain a little Garment on, and are esteemed for Women.

The confirmation of the Marriage, is, by giving two or three little Clothes by
the Bridegroom to the Bride, and seven or eight Pots of Drink; to the Friends
and Neighbors to make merry with.

A Common Man, as before is declared, may Marry as many Wives as he can keep;
yet for all that they run a Whoring, and must not be found fault with; but if a
Woman go Astray, the Man may reject or sell her; so that hereby it seems, The
Conditions of the Women.
that they are much subjected to their Husbands, yet they are inclined to
Wantonness, wherein they neglect no opportunities to satiate their Lusts; and
this causes in many, an absolute sterility; in others, a seldom pregnancy, so
that they have but few Children; perhaps, two or three in their whole lives: if
some happen to have eight, or ten, they win infinite respect, both from the
Husband and other Friends; whereas the Barren are despised by all: and although
they love multiplicity of Children by one Woman, yet they question that Woman's
honesty, that has more than one at a Birth.

At Funerals they have many solemn Ceremonies, The Funeral.
for all the Neighborhood attend; and the Nobleman, in whose Precinct the
Deceased formerly lived, gives Clothes to wind up the Corpse in, which is then
laid in a Vault of his own Dwelling House, bravely Hanged with Mats.

Their own Mother Tongue is with them little esteemed, which they seldom speak;
but most of all the Alkomysh, which in that Country is held to be a noble
Language.

The Europeans drive here a great Trade, especially in Little Arder, Their
Merchandise.
whither they bring several Commodities, to exchange for Slaves, Cotton
Clothes, and Akori: but the readiest Merchandise which the Blacks Barter for
here, are little Horns, called Bousiers, found under the Islands of Maldivi's,
and brought over out of Goa, and Kochin in stead of Ballast: but it happens
sometimes, that the Bousiers are hard to be gotten, and dear, every Pound worth
Four Shillings; and then, in stead of them, other Wares are brought thither,
especially fine Red Beads: but when the Trade is managed with Bousiers, they
Barter usually one third part of Bousiers, and two third parts of other
Merchandise.

The other Commodities fit for Dealing, and to Purchase Slaves; are, Javan,
White and Red Damasks. Gold Leather. Cypress Cloth. Red Cloth, and broad Lists.
Staves of Iron. Red Copper Pieces. Fine Linen. Copper Armlets. Red Beads. White
Horse Tails, with the Dock. Black Hats, with flat Crowns, and broad Brims.
Cambrick. Gilded Looking-Glasses. Brandy. Gold, and Silver. Red Cloth. Mariners
Knives. Italian Tape, but no other Colors besides red and white. Stripped
Armosines, or Doublets with white Stripes for the Ground. Light Damasks.
Flowers wrought with Gold and Silk. White Flowered East India Damasks. Indian
Armosines, or Habits, and the like.


But all these Wares or Commodities are not only esteemed in the Coast of
Arder, but also at Benyn and Kio Lagos.

The Inhabitants of Little Arder, Their Maintenance.
and of all the other Towns lying near the Sea, maintain themselves partly by
Fishing and making of Salt, and partly by Merchandise, but within the Country
by Tillage only.

The Method of their Husbandry and Solemnity of their Seed-time, Tillage.
is the same with that we described of the Gold-Coast.

In the Village Ba, every four days they have a free Market of Salt,
Merchandise.
brought from Jojo in great quantities by Canoos, and from thence carried to
the Territory of Ulkuma, where it is ready Barter.

Four or five Miles from Ba, by a great Tree, a free Market is kept every day,
where the Inhabitants, sometimes to the number of three or four thousand, come
with all sorts of Commodities.

When the Merchants Land at Arder, they are brought to the King, where they
must give an account of their Trading to him in the Portugal Tongue: for none
may Trade there before he has first offered his Goods to the King, that, as he
says, his Subjects might not have the best Merchandise, and he the course;
besides this, they must give to the King for a Present, a Lump of fine Coral,
six Pieces of Cypress Clothes, three of Maurisses, and one of Diaper: yet
nevertheless the Whites must seem to set out the best Wares, as Silk, and the
like, uppermost; though generally they conceal better, because then the
Subjects must have the worst only; which would not be for the Merchants
profit: however, as we said, they must seem to correspond.

After the delivery of the Silk Wares, and some other sleighter, yet in the
King's Court several Presents must be given to his Son; to the Foella, or
Captain of the Whites; to the Porters, or Door-keepers; and to diverse other of
the Courtiers.

After leave obtained from the King to Trade, all the Nobility conduct the
Whites off to the Stock Fish Town, lying a Mile from the South-West Shore,
where a convenient place is appointed for them to Truck for Slaves.

But for liberty to Trade for Akory they must pay more, forty Pieces of yellow
Armlets, twenty Hens, a Cabriet, or Sheep, besides other things to those that
make Proclamation, that every one that will Trade with the Whites, may now do
it freely.

The Wages for carrying the Merchandise to the King, is two yellow Rings, for a
Chest or Pack carried by two Men; and four, for what four Men carry.

As soon as they come to Land, there must be something given to the Honga, or
Captain of the Boat; for which he must be ready at all times with his Boat on
the Shore for fear of any mishap, to preserve Goods and People; because by the
beating of the Sea against the Shore, the Landing proves very dangerous.

When the Merchants have done, and are ready to depart, they must pay to the
King two Muskets, and five and twenty Pound of Gunpowder, or for want of
that, in Silkworms, the worth of nine Slaves; to the Carte, to the Foello, or
Captain of the Whites, and to Honga the Captain of the Boat, to each of them a
like Present.

Provisions for the Whites may be had here for a reasonable Price, that is, a
Cask of fresh Water, and a Sag of Wood, for two yellow Armlets; a Kof, or Chest
of Salt, for three; five Hens, for four; a Pot of Beer, for one.

In time of Wars none are exempted from Service, The Wars.
but very old Men and Children; their disorderly manner of Fight you have
before described, as also their Barbarism to the Slain and Prisoners, and
Method of Triumphing with their Heads; and therefore we will not here repeat,
and cloy you with the same things again.

The King of Arder has absolute and Sovereign Power over his Subjects,
Dominion.
and according as they reckon State, carries a Majestic Splendour, both in
Clothes and Servants, his Subjects tendering him great respect: He Creates
Noblemen and Courtiers at his pleasure, and punishes Offenders, not any daring
to contradict.

Every Town, as Jakkijn and Ba, has their Fidalgos or Noblemen to preside it,
in the King's Name, who exacts a great Revenue from the Inhabitants, by Order
from the King.

When the King dies, Funeral.
for two or three months after, two sit waiting by him, and some Servants are
Strangled, as an ostentation of Power, not in expectation of Service in the
other world.

The Crown descends to the Eldest or Youngest Son, after their Fathers Decease,
and takes all his Father left, but his Wives, whom all but his own Mother, to
whom extraordinary respect is shown, he imploys in his works of several kinds.

The Goods of the meanest sort, after their decease, falls to the Noblemen,
whose Vassals they were.

Their Religion consists in no appointed Meetings, or settled Form, Their
Religion.
though they have Fetiseros or Priests; for every Person of Quality has his
own Chaplain, and if any be sick in their Family, the Fetisero comes, and
taking Oxen, Fetisero's, or Priests.
Sheep, and Hens for a Sacrifice, cuts their Throats, and with the Blood
besprinkles their Fetisi or Sant, that is, sometimes no more than an old
Earthen Pot, or Basket.

Every Family has a Meeting once in six months, at which, their Priest offers
Sacrifice to their Fetisi or Sant, put under a Pot with Holes; and then they
enquire of what they desire to know: If the Fetisi be unsatisfied, the Priest
can get no words from him; if otherwise, he has an answer by a gracile, or
small-piped voice, (as if it came from the Fetisi, whereas, indeed it is a
counterfeited sound by their Priests:) Then the Inquirer takes a Basin, filled
with Beer and Meal, and gives to the Priest; then suddenly, somewhat in the
Pot, under which the Fetisi sits, leaps; whereupon all promising obedience to
the answer, and drinking a draught out of the Basin, depart.

They believe another life after this, but not for all; for they say, that a
man after death, perishes, and his blood congeals; so that none must expect
any Resurrection, saving those that are slain in the Wars, which they aver to
have found by experience; and that the Bodies slain in the Wars, lie not two
days in the Graves. But more probably, this seems a cheat of their Fetisero's,
who in the night, steal the bodies from their resting-places, to make the
people believe they were risen, and gone to another life; and to this end, to
make them the more stout and valiant in the Wars.

Sixteen miles Eastward of Little Arder, Rio Laga.
Rio de Lagas empties his Waters into the Sea, before which a Shelf lies, that
choaks the whole River, except at the East Side, where they may Row in with a
Boat, but not without danger to overset in a rolling Sea. This Flood goes in
at North or North-west, and so passes to a Town called Curamo, lying on the
South: Curamo.
from which Cotton-Cloathes are brought to the Gold-Coast, and with good Profit
Traded for by the Europeans there.

The Kingdom of ULKAMI, or ULKUMA.
ULkami, or Ulkuma, a mighty Country, The Kingdom of Vlkami
spreads Eastward of Arder between that and Benyn, to the North-East.

From hence they send many Slaves, partly taken in the Wars, Their Trade.
and partly made such as a punishment for their offenses, to Little Arder, and
there sold to the Portuguese to be transported to the West Indies.

The Boys in this Region are, Religion, or Worship.
according to the Mahumetan manner, Circumcised; but the Girls, when they
attain the Age of ten or twelve years, they put a Stick up their Privacies,
whereon Pismires, taken out of the Fields, are set to eat out the Flesh.

The Monarchy of BENYN.
THe Kingdom of Benyn, Borders of the Kingdom of Benyn.
or Benin, so called, from its chief City Great Benyn; borders in the
Northwest, on the Kingdom of Ulkami, Jaboc, Jejago, and Oedobo; in the North,
on that of Jaboc, eight days journey above the City Benyn; in the East, on the
Kingdom of Istanna, and Forkado; and in the South, on the Sea.

How far this Principality of Benyn spreads, Bigness.
from South to North, is as yet unknown, by reason several places continue so
full of great Woods, that they cannot be Traveled; but it has from East to
West about a hundred Spanish Miles.

This Kingdom boast many good Towns, Latb^.
though little at present known, as lying eight or nine days journey beyond the
City of Benyn; besides an innumerable number of Villages and Hamlets, sprinkled
as Beauty-Spots on the Verge of the River; but the rest of the Country, not
Inhabited, so overgrown with Brambles, and Bushes, as makes it unpassable, save
only where some narrow Paths lead from Town to Town.

Twenty miles or thereabouts, up the same River, near its Head-Spring, stands a
Town called Gotton, Gotton.
considerable for its length and extent.

Nine or ten miles from which, The City of Benyn.
but more into the Country Northward, Benyn shows its self; a City of that
largeness, as cannot be equaled in those Parts, and of greater civility than
to be expected among such Barbarous People; to whom better known by the name of
Ordor.

It confines within the proper Limits of its own Walls three miles; Bigness.
but taking in the Court makes as much more. The Wall upon one side rises to
the height of ten Feet, double Pallasado'd with great and thick Trees, with
Spars of five or six Foot, laid Crossways, fastened together, and Plastered
over with Red Clay, so that the whole is cemented into one entirely; but this
surrounds hardly one side; the other side having only a great Trench, or
Ditch, and Hedge of Brambles, unpassable, with little less difficulty than a
Wall, and consequently a good Defense.

The Gates, Strength.
being eight or nine Foot high, and five broad, and made of one whole Piece of
Wood, hang, or rather turns on a Pin, in the middle, being the fashion of that
Country.

The King's Palace is Quadrangular, The Kings Court.
standing on the right hand of the City, as you enter at the Gate from Gotton,
of no less compass than it, and in like manner surrounded; sub-divided into
several stately Courts, Houses, and Apartements in the Countries; containing
within fair and long Galleries, one larger than the other, but all supported on
Pillars of Wood, covered from the top to the bottom with melted Copper, whereon
are Engraven their Warlike Deeds and Battles, and are kept with exceeding
Curiosity. Most of the Roofs of this Palace are covered with Palm Canes, and
every corner adorned with a Turret, rising high with a Spire, on whose tops, as
we do here, place De Stadt BENIN. The City BENJN.
Fanes; so they set Birds with outstretched Wings very Artificially.

The City has thirty very Strait and Broad Streets, each a hundred and twenty
Foot wide, from one side of the Houses to the other; from which, by several
smaller cross Lanes or Passages, you may go to any part within the Walls.

The Houses stand built in Rows, in good order close by one another, Houses.
as here in Europe, having slop'd Roofs, covered with Palm Canes; they seldom
exceed one Story, but of great capaciousness, with long Galleries, and many
Chambers, Traverses, and Apartments, especially the Houses of the Nobility; and
all the Partitions made of red Earth, with great Art and Beauty, which by
washing and rubbing they keep Smooth, Bright, and Shining as a Looking-Glass;
of the same matters are the Cielings made: In short, the Houses are neatly
Built here, beyond those of all other places in this Country, and every one
furnished with a convenient Well of pure and fresh Water.

A days journey Eastward of Benyn, lies the Village Koffo. Koffo.


The Country appears low and full of Wood, in some places beautified by Rivers
and great Lakes; but between Gotton and great Benyn, the King has appointed
certain Officers to supply the necessities of all Travelers in what they want;
for whose more fitting Accommodation, great Pots full of cool and pleasant
Water, clear as Crystal, with Drinking-Horns near them, are set by the way
side; yet none dares take it without paying the appointed Price.

Among other Rivers that run through this Territory, Rio Benyn.
by the Inhabitants called Arbo; and by the Whites, Rio de Benyn, seems the
best: It lies eighteen miles Eastwardly from Rio Lagos, and with a broad and
wide Mouth, enters the Sea: It has a pretty convenient coming for Ketches and
Slopes, but upward, grows more narrow and crooked, dividing into many lesser
Branches.

Here grow exceeding variety of Plants, and Fruits; as Oranges, Lemmons, and
the like.

There grows also Pepper, called Benyn Pepper, but not in any quantity, Fruits.
and very often it grows like that of the East Indies, but smaller; and Cotton
in great abundance, whereof the Inhabitants make very fine Clothes.

Here breed diverse sorts of Wild and Tame Beasts; as Tigers, Leopards, Beasts.
wild Board, Hearts, Civet and wild Cats, Elephants, Horses, Asses, Goats, and
Sheep, which have no Wool, but Hair, only long Legs, and well tasted flesh;
besides many sorts of Squirrels, Land-Tortoises, Serpents, and the like; and of
Fowls, Parrets, Pigeons, Pheasants, Storks, Turtle-Doves, and other great
Birds; as Ostriches, and many others.

The Rivers feed Crocodiles, and very large Sea-Horses; Fishes.
also diverse kinds of Fish, among the rest, a certain small one, which if
touched by any, causes a quaking and trembling in the Arm, and therefore
called, The Quaking-Fish, perhaps the Torpedo of Pliny.

The Inhabitants are all fashionable people, The cordition of the Inhabitants.
excelling other Blacks of this Coast, living together under good Laws and
Justice; and showing to all Foraigners which Trade upon their Coast, great
courtesy.

Their Clothing, much like those of Arder; Their constitution.
for persons of Ability wear two, three, or four Garments, one shorter than
another, so pink'd, that the undermost appears through the upper; but the
Common People have scarce one to cover their naked Bodies.

The Women have a blue Cloth from the middle, reaching below the Knee, Clothing.
and some small covering over their Breasts; their Hair neatly tied up, and
Pleited on the Crown of the Head like a Garland, the one half of a black, the
other of a red color, with Brass Rings on their Arms.

No man may go Clothed to, or in the Court, unless the King appoint him his
Habit; insomuch that there are Men in the Palace of twenty, or twenty four
years of Age, who go stark naked, without any sign of shame, only with a Chain
of fine Coral or Jasper about their Necks. But when the King gives them
Garments, and together with them a Wife, ever after they always go Clothed,
and wash their Hair, which never grows to such length as to need cutting.
Neither may the Women put on any Clothes, till given by her Husband; so that
Women of twenty, and five and twenty years old run along the Streets stark
naked without shame or rebuke: but when the Husband has once Suited her, he
causes a House to be made for her, and sleeps by her, as by his other Wives.

Every Man Marries as many Women as he desires, Marriage.
yet keeps besides a great number of Concubines: But a White or a Christian may
not be permitted to keep a Girl, because forbidden on pain of Death.

The Woman that has had a Son by her deceased Husband, A Widow is a
Woman-Servant to her Son.
may not Marry again, but must be a Slave to her Son. Now if it happen, that
any Man have a mind to such a Widow, he sues to the Son for her, promising to
give him another young Maid in her stead, which must continue his Slavess as
long as he please.

If the Parents bestow not their Daughter in Marriage before twelve or fourteen
years of Age, after that time they have nothing more to do with her.

All the Women that after the death of the Husband admit another into their
private Embraces, fall to the King, whom he bestows in Marriage; but such as
keep themselves more reserved, the Son claims, and bestows upon request, as we
have said already.

Sometimes the King does not bestow these Women in Marriage again, but makes
Regetairs, or Nurses of them. These, considering they need not stand in fear of
a Husband, choose as many single Men as they like, to whom they prostitute
themselves at pleasure: and when any of them prove with Child, and bear a Son,
they are free from paying of Tribute; but if they have a Girl, it becomes the
King's due to dispose of.

There are great Regetairs, to whom the inferior give a yearly account, as they
again to the great Fiadores, or Treasurers of the Empire, who declare the same
to the King only.

No Man may sleep with his Wife when she has lay'n in Childbed, before the
Child is a year and a half old: but she knows well enough how to play her Game
in the mean time with others; of which if the Husband get any knowledge, he
complains to the Fiadoors.

There are no Twins found, Why there are no Twins.
though likely enough that some are born; yet concealed with all care possible
by the Midwife, because they count the bearing of two Children at a Birth, a
great shame to a Woman.

They bury their Dead with all their Clothes, Funeral.
and kill certain Slaves to serve them in the other World; after which they
spend some days with Dancing and Playing about the Grave: nay they sometimes
dig the Corpse up again, to honor him with new Sacrifices both of Men and
Beasts. When a Woman dies, her Friends take Pots, Pans, Chests, and Boxes, and
go with them upon their Heads along the Streets, with the sound of Drums and
other Instruments, Singing to the honor of the Deceased. And according to her
Degree and State, kill at the Grave some Slaves, and set near the Corpse; so
that no person of ability dies there, but the Funeral is attended with much
expense of humane Blood.

Concerning Inheritance, Inheritance.
the Husband takes all the Goods the Wife leaves behind her, except what she
has given her Children, while living; whereas the Woman may not, after the
decease of her Husband, take the least part, because they all, as well Wives,
Slaves, as other Goods, fall to the King; who for the most part, if there be a
Son, bestows them on him.

No Foreigners can Trade up the River of Benyn without Order of the King; who
chooses one Fiadoor, Merchandise.
or Councellor of the Kingdom to Treat and Trade with them: Neither may those
appointed for the Trade, so much as converse with the Whites, or come into
their Storehouses, much less buy any European Wares, but are constrained to
take them at the dearest rate of the Fiadoors. On the other side, no Fiadoor,
or Steward, may deal for any thing that belongs to the Wars; so that every
one must keep himself within the bounds of his Office.

When a Ship with its Lading Toweth along the Shore, a Messenger, When a new
Ships Lading comes, Fiadoors are sent to Gotton.
or Passadoor, is sent to acquaint the King with it; who immediately dispatches
two or three Fiadoors, accompanied with twenty or thirty Veelies that are
Merchants, to go down and Trade with the Whites: These with great diligence go
over-Land from Benyn to Gotton, where they Press as many Canoos as they want.
Being thus arrived and provided of Boats, they choose the best Houses and
Dwellings, and without asking the Owner's leave, bring in all their Goods,
turning him to shift for his Family; and yet he is bound the first day to Cook
their Meat for them, without having any recompense for his pains.

When the Fiadoors come the first time into the Storehouses, How the Fiadoors
welcome the Whites.
they have neat Habits, with a Chain of Jasper about their Necks, and so
kneeling, present the Salutation from their King and his Mother, and the
greatest Fiadoors, in whose Name they bring somewhat to eat, ceremoniously
enquiring of the state of their Country, Wars against their Enemies, and such
like: so after a small Repast and Entertainment they take their leave, without
speaking of Merchandise; and the next day they return, asking to see the
new-come Merchandise, which is showed them. Such Goods as they have brought of
before, continue at the set Price; but new Goods have a Price set upon them:
and when they have beat down Commodities as low as they can, and the Market
set, they go on to Trade.

The Commodities, Benynish-Wares.
which the Europeans and other Whites Trade for in the River of Benyn, are
Cotton-Cloathes, Jasper-Stone, and Women-Slaves, Leopard-Skins, some Pepper and
Akori, which is a certain bluish Coral, Akori is a kind of blue Coral.
growing like a Tree in the Water. This Akori, carried to the Gold-Coast, the
Women wear for an Ornament in their Hair.

The Inhabitants call the beforementioned Clothes Mouponoqua, being made of
Cotton-Yarn, either all blue, or Stripped with white and blue, two Else and a
half, and two Else three quarters long, and scarce two Else broad. And the
other smaller, three of which make a Garment Ambasis.

The Whites give in Exchange for these Clothes, such and the like Wares
following: Cloth of Gold and Silver. Red Cloth. Canvas, stripped with red at one
end. All sorts of fine Cotton. Linen. Confection of Oranges and Lemons, and
other green Fruits. Crimson Velvet. Brass Armlets, each of five ounces and a
half. Lavender, and Violet Cotton-Seed. Course Kersies. Fine Coral. Flowered
Stuffs, and stiff Gumm'd. Red Glass Pendants for the Ears. Iron Staves. Gilt
Looking-Glasses. Crystals. East India little Horns, or Shells, which they use
in stead of Money.


The greater Stripped Clothes, transported to the Gold-Coast, have a good and
quick Vent; but those that are all blue, are sold for most advantage in the
River of Gabon in Angola.

Every three or four days, in the Town of Gotton, a Market is kept, to which
those of Great Benyn, Arbon, and other Towns round about, repair; where not
only the aforesaid Clothes, but all sorts of Provisions may be had.

The Inhabitants of Benyn have for their own use other Clothes, made in Coffo,
a Town lying a days Journey Eastward from thence; but no Whites may come there.

Between Gotton and Benyn great Plains spread themselves, wherein on Set-Days
rich and plentiful Markets are found, extraordinarily crowded by all sorts of
Dealers.

All Differences arising about Trade, the Nobility decide; for the Judges of
the Place meddle not, so long as any remain there that belong to the King.

Their Arms are Shields, Arms, or Weapons.
Spears, Bows, Lances, or Assagays, and empoyson'd Arrows, which the
Fetisero's, or Devil-Hunters, prepare very artificially. The Nobility, when
they go to the Wars, Cloathe themselves in Scarlet, as a Badge of Eminency;
others have Gorgets of Elephants and Leopard-Teeth, and high red Caps, Wrought
and Quilted with Leopards and Civet-Cat Skins; unto which hangs a long Horse
Tail for Ornament.

The common Soldiers usually go with the upper part of their Body naked, but on
the lower wear a Cloth as fine as Silk.

In Fighting they keep a good Discipline and Order, for none may stir from his
Place, though he see Death inevitable before his Eyes. None participate of the
Booty but the General, or Field-Martial, by them called Owe-Aserry, or
Siasseere: and yet every one thanks the King, that he will account them worthy
of Employment, and deign to send them to the Wars for him. What Arrows remain
after the Battle unshot, they lay up in several Chambers in the King's Armory,
and presently make as many new again; which poisoned by the Fetisero's, become
useful for further Service.

The King of Benyn can raise (as they say) in one day twenty thousand Men in
Arms, The Potency of the King.
and in time of need, eighty, or a hundred thousand: so becomes dreadful to all
his Neighbors. The care and charge of his Militia he reposes in a
Field-Martial, or Generalissimo, who Commands over all the Forces, and in all
things acts according to his own pleasure.

The King rules with an unlimited Power, Government.
and so absolute a Sovereignty, that all his Subjects, how great soever, be no
better than Slaves: And that accounted no small Privilege, that Parents
present to him their Children, to receive a peculiar Mark to authorize them to
be reckoned in that number.



His Jurisdiction extends over many Cities, Towns and Villages, wherein none of
his Neighbors can equal him. Besides, he holds as Tributaries the Kingdom of
Istama, Forkado, Jaboe, Isago, and Oedobo.

For the more orderly Government of the Kingdom, he makes three chief
Counselors in Great Benyn, called by the Portuguese, Figdares; who manage the
Affairs of the whole Country under the King, (besides whom none superior to
them but the Field-Martial, and the King's Mother:) These have Command over
every Corner and Quarter of the City, and draw great Profit from thence: their
Names of Office being Ongogue, Ossade, and Arribo.

These send into every City or Town, a certain number of Noblemen, called also
Fiadoors, who decide all Causes, except such as relate to Life and Limb, and
may condemn the guilty Person according to the greatness of his Offense, in a
Mulct or Penalty; but those greater Trials are sent to Benyn, to be decided
where the Courts of Justice sit. But the Judges oftentimes, though unknown to
the King, yet not without the connivance of some of the greatest Fiadoors, are
Bribed to partiality.

The present King keeps a thousand Wives; The King of Benyn keeps many Wives.
for by the Death of his Father Kambadie, such Women as had been taken up for
his use, but never known by him, became his Sons by Inheritance: the rest, with
whom the Father had familiarly conversed, may never Marry again, but are shut
up together in a Cloister, and kept by Eunuchs.

This Prince makes great Wars against his Neighbors toward the East and North,
winning from them many Cities and Towns, He makes great Wars.
and thereby enriching his Treasury, with great Booty of Jasper-Stones, and
other things.

He keeps such a reserved State, Comes but once a year out of his Court.
that he appears but once a year at the chief Festival out of his Court, before
the Commons, and then on Horseback, adorned with all sorts of Royal Ornaments,
and attended with three or four hundred Noblemen, both on Horseback and on
Foot, and many Musicians before and after, in that manner as is mentioned in
the foregoing Description of the City of Benyn. But he rides not far, only
fetching a little compass, soon returns. As an Ornament to this short
Cavalcade, he exposes to sight some tame Leopards Chained, which he keeps for
his Recreation, many Dwarfs and Fools, to show mimick Tricks, and antic
Postures, and make Pastime for the People.

At this Festival, ten, twelve, thirteen, or more Slaves, for the honor of the
King, are put to death; which they believe, after they have been a while dead,
are going to another Country, and there reviving, enjoy the greatest felicity
imaginable.

Upon another Day the King shows his Riches, consisting in Jasper-Stone,
Coral, and other Commodities, before all Men, hanging out to public view; and
then he bestows many Presents of Slaves, Women, and other things, on the
well-deserving: And also confers on his Favorites many Offices, which concern
the Government of Cities and Towns.

The King's Mother, The King's Mother is in great Honor.
for her greater honor, has a particular Palace without the City, rich and
stately built; where she keeps Court, with many Women and Maids Attendants; and
so highly esteemed, that her Counsel is used in all Causes of the Land: yet
nevertheless, by a particular Custom, which they term Law, the King and his
Mother may not see one another as long as they live.

When a King dies, The Funeral of the King.
a great Cave is dug in his Court, broad below, and narrow above, and so
deep, that the Diggers must be drowned in the Water.

In this Cave they put the Corpse, and then all his Favorites and Servants
appear to accompany and serve him in the other Life; and when they are gone
down to the Corpse in the Cave, they set a great Stone over the Mouth, the
People that day and night standing round about it.

The next day some go to the Cave, and removing the Stone, ask them within,
What they do? and, If none be gone to serve the King? To which then perhaps
nothing else is answered but No.

The third day they ask the same Question, and then sometimes receive answer,
That such are the first, and those and those are the second, whom they highly
praise, and esteem happy.

At length, after four or five, or more days, the Men dead, and none left to
give answer, they give account thereof to the new established King; who
presently makes a great Fire over the Cave, whereat spending a great quantity
of Flesh to give away to the Common People, so solemnizeth his Inauguration.

After the Cave stopped, many Men, as they pass along the Streets, and some in
their own Houses, are struck down dead; whose Heads covered with a Cloth none
dare remove, but so let it lie to be devoured by Carnifferous Fowl; which are
of these two sorts, one called Goere, and the other Akalles.

Some hold opinion, that into the forementioned Cave, no living, but only the
Trunks of beheaded Men are put; as also that they throw in great part of his
Royal Vesture, Household Stuff, and other Wealth.

By the King's Order yearly Festivals are kept, The Festival time of the
deceased King.
in Commemoration of the deceased Kings; wherein they make horrible Sacrifices
of Men and Beasts, to the number of four or five hundred; but never more than
three and twenty in a day: most of them Malefactors, who have deserved Death,
and reserved in the Trunk of a Tree for this Time. But if it happen that there
be not Malefactors enough, then the King, to complete the number, sends for
some of his Servants in the Evening into the Streets, to take all those that go
without Lights, and bring them into the Prison. If the surprised be a poor, or
idle person, he must expect no favor, but hurried to Prison, soon receives his
doom; but a rich Man may redeem himself. The greatest Fiadoors cannot excuse
their Slaves from this duty but by another. And in this manner, the Fetisero's
intending to make a humane Sacrifice to the Devil, gets a Man by order from the
Court, which they may dispose of as they please.

The Crown descends to the Sons, and for want of Sons, to the Brothers.

When the King lies upon his Deathbed, he sends for one of his Nobility, The
Inheritance.
whom they call Onegwa; to whom he declares the right of Succession, and who
shall be his Heir; which this Nobleman does reveal to none, till a competent
time after the King's Death; but then takes upon him the oversight of the
deceased King's Goods and Children, who come with great humility and Salute
him, not as yet knowing who shall Inherit the Crown. Every one makes address to
this Onegwa with great respect, in hopes of future advantage, but he continues
silent till the appointed time; when sending for the Owe-Asserry, that is, the
General, tells him which Son the deceased King appointed to Inherit the Crown:
whereupon the General, without speaking a word, withdraws to his House; and the
Onegwa sets up that Son to be King; whereof the retired General receiving
notice, after five or six days, he comes again to the Court, and calling for
the Onegwa, demands if that were the old King's will; wherein receiving an
affirmative satisfaction, immediately they present the deposited Inheritance of
the Crown, and he receives the Dominion; whereupon, after thanks returned, he
puts on Royal Robes, and sits down. Then come all the Vassals, from the highest
to the lowest, and do homage upon their Knees.

This Solemnity ended, the King retires to another Town, called Goseboe, The
new King may not at first dwell in Benyn.
to keep his Court; for till a set time-he may not come to Benyn, unless to
make a wicked Sacrifice of Men and Beasts: But when the Siasseere thinks time
enough to have been spent, and that the Lessons and Life of his Ancestors be
enough inculcated, the same Siasseere, or General, invites him to, and
entertains him in Benyn; where thence-forward he keeps his Court, and Rules
according to his own pleasure.

The King once settled upon the Throne, The new King kills all his Brethren.
endeavors to cut off all his Brothers, to secure himself against Competitors:
of late some of them have been spared; but they made such ill use of that
favor, by confederating with the Friends of some condemned and banished
Fiadoors, that this present King smothered, and other ways put to death all his
Brethren, not clandestinely, but upon public notice: though some stick not to
report, that he forced them to hang themselves, because none may lay hands on
the Royal Blood to kill them; yet after their Death he ordered them to be
hanged with great Magnificence and State.

Their Religion, if any, consists in honoring the Devil, to whom, Religion.
as we said before, they sacrifice Men and Beasts: for though they well know
and believe, that there is a God, who has created Heaven and Earth, and still
Rules, yet they esteem it unnecessary to Pray to, or Serve him, because he is
not evil, but good; but they seek to appease the Devilwith Sacrifices, for that
he always prosecutes them with evil. They call God, Orisa; and the Whites,
Owiorisa, that is, God's Child. They have wooden Fetisies, or Idols, which they
Worship; and Fetisero's, or Priests, who enquire of, and receive answers from
the Devil. The Fetisi also foretells what shall befall them, either in the Wars,
or otherwise, by a contrived sound, proceeding out of a Pot with three holes,
as is related before. They offer yearly great Sacrifices to the Sea, that it
may be favorable; and swear no greater Oath, than by the Sea and their King.
They observe many high and solemn Times, with Dancing, Leaping, Playing,
offering both Men and Cattle.

In the Village Lebo, lying before the River Arbon, or Bonya, lives a
Conjurer, all whose Ancestors practiced the same Art: for they could, by report
of the Inhabitants, Charm the Sea in diverse manners, now raising Tempests, anon
causing a Calm; sometimes foretell Wracks and Losses, otherwhiles the safe
arrival of Ships from strange Countries; for which, or rather for fear, the
King gave him this Hamlet, with all the Slaves; which he yet possesses. He has
such strange fancies and behavior, as if possessed, that none dare take him by
the Hand.

The Bonyan Agents, when they come thither, stand in great awe of him; and he
himself dare not come to Bonya, nor near it, by command of the former Kings:
yet the Prince has many of those Necromancers about him, and holds them in
great esteem.

The Kingdom of ISAGO, JABOE, and ODOBO.
THe Tributary Dominion of Isago borders in the West, The Kingdom of Isago.
on the Dominion of Benya, being a Country full of Horses, which the
Inhabitants use only for Wars; whereof having gotten together a very
considerable Body some years ago, The fruitless Invention of the Isagos's on
those of Benyn.
they intended to set upon the Bonyans; who being preacquainted with their
Design, underhand dug many Pits in the Fields, and covering the same with
Earth, went to meet the advancing Enemy; but soon retreated, as if surprised
with fear, till they had drawn the Foe within their danger: The Isago's
supposing they had fled indeed, betook them to a speedy pursuit; but in stead
of their hoped Victory, they fell into the prepared Pits: out of which the
Benyans fetched and killed most of them, making the Country Tributary: Since
which they never have dared to act against the King of Benya.

At the same West Side lie the Kingdoms of Jaboe and Odobo, Jaboe. Odobo.
but of smaller Power, and less considerable then the Isagon; whose King,
though subjected as before related, yet in Power and Ability falls little short
of the Benyan himself.

The Jurisdiction of Istanna.
IStanna, lying to the East of Benyn, has been formerly very powerful, The
Kingdom of Istanna
but diverse years since reduced and brought under the subjection of that King,
to whom they pay an annual Tribute.

The Territory of Gaboe.
GAboe lies at the River Benyn, The Kingdom of Gaboe.
eight days Journey above the great City of the same Name.

The Europeans get in this Country much Akori, which they carry to the
Gold-Coast, and many Jasper-Stones: but most of the Trade is for Slaves: The
People seem to be good natured, and their Custom little differing from those of
Benyn.

Biafar, or Biafra.
MOre on to the East lies the Kingdom of Biafar, or Biafra, The Borders of the
Kingdom of Biafar.
according to Anamin and Linschot, having on the West certain Mountains, which
divide it from that of Medra, and spreads Southward to the fourth Degree of
North Latitude. The chief City also called Biafra, and according to Hues,
situate in six Degrees and ten Minutes.

The Inhabitants are generally inclined to Conjuration and Witchcraft; The
Inhabitants inclined to Witchcraft.
so that they believe by that Art they can do all things, viz. procure or cause
Rain, Lightning and Thunder, or any other Weather, foretell Events to succeed,
and what not? for which knowledge they honor the Devil so much, that they
sacrifice, not only Beasts and Herbs to him, but also their own Children.

The Principality of Owerre, or Forkado.
ABout four and twenty miles Eastward of Benya, The Kingdom of Owerre.
Rio Forkado intermingles with the Sea; near or by whose Banks the Territory of
Owerre, otherwise called the Kingdom of Forkado, claims a situation.

The Edges of this River are pleasantly shaded on both sides by neighboring
Trees, and the Stream very commodious for Ketches of a reasonable Burden, being
in breadth half a Mile, and in depth twelve Foot, or more.

A Mile inwardly upon a small Outlet, stands a Fishers Village, called Bolma.

About seven and twenty Miles upward appears the chief Town Owerre, The City
Owerre.
where the King keeps his Court, containing half a Mile in circumference, and
surrounded on the Land-side with Woods. The Buildings not contemptible,
especially the Houses of the Gentry, yet covered with Palm-Leaves, and made up
of gray Earth.

The King's Palace is built after the method of that in Benyn, but much less.

The Air proves very unhealthful, Unwholsom Air.
not only by reason of the great Heat, but also from bad and unwholsom Mists;
whereof Strangers Trading in the River being ignorant, and carelessly lying and
sleeping in the Evening, or in Moonshine, oftentimes die suddenly.

The Soil is so barren, Plants.
that Grass and Corn are strangers to it; but it yields many fruitful Trees, as
those bearing Coco-Nuts, sour and sweet Grapes, with diverse others; also a
little Pepper. Baranasses in great numbers, and Mandihoka; of which they make
Farinha, or Bread.

By reason of the barrenness of the Fields, there are neither Horses nor Cows;
but Poultrey they have in abundance, and very large; being roasted eat well.
Fish also, and Sea-Calves, whose Flesh dressed yields a pleasing relish.

Both Men and Women are of comely Stature, and fair Countenances, according to
the account of Beauty in that Country, and all marked with three Cuts, each
something more than an Inch long, that is, one in the Forehead above the Nose;
and one on each side of their Head by the Temples; and may wear their Hair long
or short as they please.

Their Habit resembles those of Benyn, Habit.
as to Fashion, but commonly made of Silk, which the other may not wear,
fastened under their Armpits with a curious Girdle.

Every one here, Marriage.
as in other parts of Africa, may take as many Wives as he will, or as he can
get; and sometimes the King bestows some Widows, as a mark of his Favor.

The Whites come and Trade in the River Forkado, Trade.
with the same sort of Wares as in Benyn, which they exchange for Slaves,
Jasper-Stone, and Akori; but they hold them in great esteem, and will not sell
them but above the value. They are no quick nor expert Dealers, but cheapen a
Commodity a whole Month, only to beat down the Price; but to little purpose,
because the Merchant rates his Goods according to the value set by the Natives
upon their Commodities, which he never recedes from.

The Portuguese used in former times to trust them always, which the present
Traders never do; so that they now bring the Slaves when they fetch their Goods.

The King of Owerre, Government.
though Tributary to Benyn, Governs notwithstanding his People with full Power,
as an absolute Prince; and has a Council consisting of three great Noblemen,
whose Power and Command none dare oppose.

The King which Governed in the Year Sixteen hundred forty four, was a Mulato,
by the Portuguese and other Europeans, called Don Anthonio de Mingo; whose
Father, by Name De Mingo, was Married to a Portuguese Maid, which he brought
with him out of Portugal, where he had been himself in Person, and had this Son
born by her. He goes like a Portuguese, wearing always a Sword or Poniard by
his Side.

Their Religion comes near that of Benyn, Religion.
only they do not sacrifice so many Men, but esteem it a great abomination and
delusion of the Devil; so that by a little instruction they might be brought to
the Christian Faith. They alllow neither Conjurers nor Witches among them. In
brief, both the Inhabitants and the King himself maintain in some measure the
Roman Religion.

There is a Church with an Altar in the City Owerre, and on it stands a
Crucisix with the Pictures of the Virgin Mary and the Apostles, and two
Candlesticks besides them, into which the Blacks come with Beads like the
Portuguese, and Read their Prayers. They are in general very zealous, and can
Write and Read, and are desirous of Books, Pens, Ink, and Paper.

The Coast of the Cape of Formosa, to the Highland of Amboises.
AT the East End of the Kingdom of Owerre, Cape of Formosa.
shoots a prominent Point into the Sea, by the Whites called Cabo Formosa, that
is, The Fair Cape, perhaps for its fair and pleasant appearance at Sea. It
lies in the height of four Degrees and eight Minutes North Latitude; so low
and plain, that they can discern no Land at five and twenty Fathom Water.

The Country between the River Benyn and Cape Formosa, appears a very low
Land, but full of Trees.

About a Mile to the Westward a small River takes its course; and upon the
Banks of the Sea stands a Village called Sangma; and a sandy Bank, Sangma.
dry at Lowwater.

Between this Cape and Rio Reael, or Calabare, lie seven small Rivers, with
broken Land.

The first little and narrow, called Rio Non, Rio Non.
about half a Mile Eastward of Cabo Formosa.

The second Rio Odo, in the height of four Degrees and ten Minutes, Rio Odo.
four miles from Formosa, and three and a half from Rio Non.

The third and fourth of a like bigness, and not far distant from each other.

The fifth Rio St. Nicholas. Rio St. Nicholas.


The sixth Rio de tres Jermaus. Rio de tret Jermaus.


The seventh Sambreiro, the next to Calabare, and spreads North-West. Rio
Sambreiro.


All these Rivers are passable only with Boats, and that in the Good Time, Are
not Navigable.
as they call it, viz. from October to June; yet enter the Sea such force, that
they discernably penetrate it above half a mile.

In diverse Maps and Sea-Cards some others are named, as Rio di Tilana, Rio de
St. Barbara, and Rio de St. Bartholomew.

The Territories of Calabare, Krike, Moko, Bani, etc.
THe Country of Calabare lies near the River of the same Name, The Country
of Calabare.
and the next Westward to Sambreiro, or Sombreiro, being about sixteen miles
from Cape Formosa.

This River in some places very shoal, The River of Calabare.
and therefore only Navigable for small Ketches; spreading Northerly, and has
within its second Point, at the Western-shore a Hamlet, Wine-Village.
called by the Whites, The Wine-Village, from the abundance of Wine there, but
by the Inhabitants, Fokke. Then dividing into two Branches, one at the
Westerly-end, the other at the Easterly-shore: In the Eastern you find a Road,
or Haven for Ketches, which put into this River for Trade, of about two miles
and a half in bigness.

At the North-side of the aforementioned Branch appears the Village Calabare,
The Village Calabare.
the chiefest Place of Trade, surrounded after the Country manner for Defense
with Pallisado's; and on the North having a Moorish Ground. Southward of this
you discover a long, low Island, full of Trees, separated from the Continent
only by a small Pool. Eight miles Westward hereof lies a Hamlet named Belli,
Governed by a Captain. Fourteen miles Westward runs the Easterly Branch, whose
Banks are garnished with diverse Villages.

Northward of Calabare, Krike.
a Territory called Krike shows it self, bordering upon another named Moko.
Moko.


Southward of which last, Bani.
at the Seacoast, comes the Lordship of Bani; wherein is seated a pretty large
Town, by Name Kuleba, the Residence of a Deputy-Lieutenant, who Commands over
eight or ten adjacent Townships.

All the Blacks inhabiting the Easterly-shore of the greater Calabare, Those of
Calabare are Cannibals.
toward the North, are Cannibals; for they eat up whatever Enemies they kill,
but their Prisoners they sell for Slaves. The Number One they call Bar; Two,
Ma; Three, Terre; Four, Ni; Five, Sonny, etc.

The Women here have a peculiar way of Circumcision with Pismires, as before
related in Arder, and therefore we shall not repeat it.

In Moko they have Coined Money, made of Iron in form of a Roach, the Rundle as
big as the Palm of a Hand, with a Handle about an Inch long.

The Whites give here in Barter for Slaves, Trade.
great Copper Armlets, long-fashion'd, and with a round Bow very neatly made,
else the Blacks, who are very curious therein, will not buy them: also red and
smooth Copper Bars, (the smoother the better) every Piece of a Pound and a
quarter weight, and about an Ell long: for fourteen of those they purchase a
good Slave. The Blacks fashion these Bars longer and thinner; which they divide
into three parts, and then brayed, or twist them together like a Rope made of
three Strings; which they fashion into great and small Armlets and Collers, or
Neck-bands: for the Armlets, termed Boctu, brought thither by the Whites, they
use only in stead of Money.

The Blacks in this River use great Canoos, Canoos.
wherein twenty Row on each side, can carry sixty or eighty Men, and are cut
out of the entire Body of a Tree, by burning and cutting it hollow, and some
near sixty, nay seventy Foot long, sharp before and behind, but wide in the
middle, having Planks laid cross from side to side, and fastened, which lie a
hand-breadth over: on which Planks, and on the edges of them, such as manage
the Boat, sit; which they drive forward, not with Rowing, but with Padling.

On each side hang two great Shields, How they are Armed.
with some Bows and Wooden Assagays, or Lances, to defend themselves against
the Assaults of their Enemies. Every Canoo has also a Hearth; near which the
chiefest of the Boat have their Sleeping-places.

When they stay out a Nights with their Canoos, How they make Tents over their
Canoos.
they make a Tent over them, with Mats hanged upon Polls, set up in holes of
the sitting-Planks: under this covert they lay small flat Sticks, bound
together with Rushes, whereupon they lie down to rest and sleep; but the Slaves
lie dispersed about the bottom of the Boat.

The Slaves brought by the Blacks to sell, at the River Calabare, From whence
the Slaves come, which the Netherlanders buy.
come most from the East, and are the same which they take Prisoners alive in
the Wars; for those that are killed, they eat, as we said before.

Eastward of Great Calabare, about two miles from its East Point, The River
Loitomba.
glides the River Loitomba, otherwise, Rio Sante Domingo, whose East corner a
petty Town shows it self, large and full of Merchants, who Travel into the
Country to buy Slaves, which they sell again to the Whites.

After Loitomba, follows Old Calabare, by some styled Old Kalhorgh, The River
of old Calabare.
passing through a Plain, but Woody Country; from the East Point of Rio Reael,
to this, the Coast spreads East South East sixteen miles.

Next you come to Rio del Key, a very great and wide River, Rio del Key.
with three Fathom Water, and a Muddy Ground, neither troubled with Sandy
Shoales, nor Rocks.

At the Northerly Shore thereof, lies a Township, over which (some years
since) one Samson had the Command; but driven out by those of Ambo, he has
ever since maintained himself by Robbing; for his Village was so wasted by
Fire, that very few Houses remained, and those all made of Palm Canes, from the
top to the bottom, as well the Sides as the Roof.

The Country far and near, is all low and marshy Ground, Constitution of the
Country.
so that there is no fresh Water, but that which runs from the Village, or
gathered from the Roof of the Houses.

The People living up higher, called Kalbongos, are very subtle and cunning;
Nature of the Inhabitants.
so that a White must look well to himself. Both Men and Women go naked, only
a small covering before their Privacies; and so barbarously cruel, that the
Parents sell their Children, the Husband his Wife, and one Brother and Sister
the other; and as to decency or order, scarce a degree above Beasts.

The Men tie the top of their Virile part with a piece of Bark, Apparel.
or else put the same in long Callabashes; the rest of their Bodies remain
Naked, only Painted with Red Colors. They wear their Hair Pleited in several
Fashions, and many have their upper Teeth filled as sharp as Bodkins or Needles,
chiefly supporting themselves by catching Fish.

When any amongst them stands accused, Oath.
he clears himself by taking an Oath in this manner; He cuts himself in the
Arm, and sucks up his own blood, and this they repute a sufficient Purgation:
and this custom those inhabiting the high Land of Amboises in Ambo and Botery,
also observe.

This River affords many Slaves, for Copper Bars, Trade.
and likewise for counterfeit Corral Beads, and Copper Basins, which on the
Gold-Coast for their sleightness cannot be sold: Akori also, and Elephants
Teeth, against Knives, and Assagayes, or Lances; the Teeth generally so large,
that three pieces make a hundred weight.

Between Rio del Key, and that of Kamarones, narrow, but deep Rivers, Little
Kamaroms.
makes his way; from whence the Coast spreads East South East, about three
miles, with low and Woody Land, and a plain Shore.

The Trade here agrees in all points with that at Rio del Rey, Trade.
but differ in speech; for here they call the number One Mo; Ba, Two; Melella,
Three; Meley, Four; Matam, Five.

The Territory of AMBOSINE, or the High Land AMBOISES.
THis Lordship of Amboisine, The Territory of Amboises.
by the Europeans called the High Land of Amboses, because they suppose it to
be as high as the Pick of Tenariffe, and by the Spaniards therefore named, Alta
Terra de Ambosi; takes place between Rio del Rey, The Village Bodi.
and Kamarones. At the West side thereof lie diverse Villages, among others
Bodi, or Bodiwa, otherwise Cesge.

The Country produces great plenty of Grain, Nature of the Country.
but no Palm-Wine, which want, the Inhabitants supply by a Root called
Gajanlas, which they boil in water, and make a Drink of, pleasant in taste,
but hurtful for the belly, if taken in excess. Other Provisions they have in
such quantities, that Seame^ esteem it a good and desirable place to refresh in.

The Islands of AMBOISES.
FOur miles to the South East of this High Land, The Islands of Amboises.
lie three small Islan^^ the Sea, called also Amboises; of which the Eastermost
is the biggest, almost as Towering as the High Land of Amboises, being very
populou^

Within these, great abundance of Provision, good Palm-Wine, and (...) may be
had, but little Trade; and for that reason, as little frequented: (...) before
it the Ships Ride at Anchor, to buy Slaves and Elephants Teeth brought thither
from Kamerones.

The Inhabitants, Inhabitants.
which for the most part speak Portuguese, live on the middlemost Island of the
three, from whence they go often to the main Land (...) get Provision and Fruit.

About five miles from Amboises, River of Kamarones.
the River Jamoce glides in a narrow Current.

In the middle of which, Buffels Island.
toward the South Wall, a small Island called Buffels Island, discovers it
self; from which spreads a Bank of Rocks South Easterly, so steep, that one
side of a Ship touching it, on the other side may find six Fathom water.

Two miles within the third Point, Yeeth Hole, or Monoka.
you arrive at a place by the Whites, called The Teeth Hole, but by the
Natives, Monoka; and opposite to that another, named The Monombas Hole, whereto
adjoyns a Village, the usual Trading place.

At the North, live the Kalbangas, whose Governor named Moneba, has the repute
of one of the powerfullest of the adjacent Princes. The Town where he keeps his
Seat Royal, stands situate on a Hill, very neatly Hedged about with Trees, so
that they account it the pleasantest place in all that Tract; and not only so,
but exceedingly stored with abundance of Provision, as Injames, Bananassen,
Palm Wine, and Bordon Wine, both of the same species; but the latter the worst,
as growing in Fenny places: The Houses are built in Quadrangular form.

Little Ivory can be gotten here, and less Akori, but many Slaves, Trade.
which makes them cheap.

The Commodities desired there, and carried thither by the Netherlanders, are,
Thin beaten Bosses, which they use in stead of Money. Bars of Iron. Copper
Bars. Copper Pots. Hammered Kettles. Violet Beads. Paste of Oranges and
Lemmons. Cows Horns; And such like.


The People which live by the River Kamerones, are strong, fat, and lively,
smooth Skinned, from the top to Toe, and generally of as large a stature, as the
lustiest Englishman.

Next Kamerones, on the Sea Coast, follow the Rivers, Monoka, Borba, or Bourn,
Rio de Campo, Rio Sante Benito, and Rio Danger.

Rio Sante Benito lies in two degrees Northern Latitude, Rio Santo Benito.
and the Coast spreads South and North.

Seven miles Southward, in one degree, and five and thirty minutes, you come to
another River, and four miles farther a third, abounding in Water.

Five miles from the last opens a Bay, bearing eight Fatnom Water.

Six miles below which, a prominant Point, styled, Cape St. John, Cape of St.
John.
fronted with a ridge of Rocks.

None of these Rivers are much frequented for Trade, except that of Danger, in
one degree North Latitude.

The People prove ill Neighbors to each other, being never free from
Animosities, Feuds, and Quarrels upon every trifle.

The Island KORISKO.
THree or four miles Southward of Cape St. John, appears an Island, The Island
Korisko.
to which the Portuguese have given the name of Ilhas des Korisko, that is, The
Island of Lightning, from the more than usually frequent Lightnings happening
there, when they first discovered the place.

The Land toward the Sea Coast is generally Sandy, Nature of the Country.
except on the North West, where Stony. But more within, overgrown with high
Trees, whose Wood is Redder, if Sanutus say true, than that of Brasile; perhaps
it may be the Red Wood which the Inhabitants call Takoel.

The Road for Ships lies in five and forty minutes, Northward of the Line, The
Road or Harber.
and convenient for Shipping: According to Sanute, the Island not inhabited,
being indeed not above half a mile in compass, but the propriety of the Benyan
King.

The Countries lying about the River Gabon, and the Cape of Lope Gonzalvez.
THe River Gabon, The River Gabon.
by Linschot called Gaba, and in some Maps Gabam, lies under the Line.

The North Point of which the Seamen call the Cape of St. The Cape St. Clare.
Clare, much resembling that of St. John, and in a manner differenced only in
this; that coming out of the Sea, and approaching near the Shore, they see a
white Spot against it, as if it were a Sail, which is not to be seen at the
Cape of St. John.

In the Mouth this River is four miles wide, but grows afterward smaller and
narrower; The Island Pongo.
so that it is not above two miles over at the Island Pongo. Its South Point is
low, and overgrown with Trees; but the North Point almost choked up with Flats
and Sands. At the South Shore, about three or four miles inwards, another Point
discovers it self; known by the name of the Sandy Point: many Crocodiles and
Sea-Horses breed herein, to the great damage and hazard, both of the Natives
and Strangers. Five miles more inward, you come to two little Islands; the one,
the Inhabitants call Pongo; and the Whites, Parret Island.
The King's Isle, because he keeps his Court there: and the other, Parrets
Isle, from the great abundance of Parrets breeding within it; which last yields
also great plenty of Bananasses, Injames, Oranges, and other Fruits.

The King of Pongo has the report of a powerful Prince; they entitle him,
Manipongo, that is, Lord of Pongo; as the King of Kongo, Mani-Kongo. It Is true,
two other Princes claim a great Jurisdiction near him, viz. one at Majombo, and
another at Gabon, yet neither dare resist; he, Pongian, and his Palaces named
Goliparta, exceed in magnificence and extent, all the rest of the Buildings
which pretend to Beauty or State.

The Men naturally incline to Cheating and Thieving, The nature of the
Inhabitants.
but not so much among themselves, as toward strangers, to whom also bloody,
barbarous, and unnatural; but the Women show great courtesy and affability,
accounting it an honor to make acquaintance with them.

In Marriage they have no respect to neerness of Relation; Marriages.
for the Mother may Marry her Son, and the Father his Daughter.

The Houses have no other Walls or Partitions than Reeds, Houses.
very neatly ordered, and fastened together, and covered with Leaves of the
Bannana-Tree.

They lie all along on the ground when they eat; Food.
the common People using Earthen Vessels, but more eminent persons Dishes of
Tin. Their Food chiefly Potatoes, and Injames, Roasted or Boiled, and many
other Roots: Also Fish, and Flesh mixed together; but first either smoked or
dried in the Sun: During the Meal they never Drink, but having done Eating,
swallow great Cups full of Water, or Palm-Wine, or a sort of Mead, which they
call Melaffo.

For Apparel they wear Cloth made of Mats, Habit.
and the Shell of the Matombe-Tree, over which some hang the Skins of Apes, or
Sea-Cats, or any other wild Beast, with a Bell in the middle.

Both Men and Women go for the most part bare Headed, having their Hair
Brayded; some wear Hats made of the Bark of Trees, or Coco-nuts; others in
stead of Hats have Plumes of Feathers, made fast to a Wire about their Heads.

Some for Ornament make holes in their upper lips, Their Ornament.
in which they put pieces of Ivory; and in the under lips, for the like
purpose. Many wear Silver Jewels, or Pendants at their Ears and Noses, of three
or four Ounces weight; others put thin pieces of Wood through them, of five or
six Fingers long, or Rings, or Ivory, and pieces of Horn. They color their
Bodies with a Red Paint, made of Takoel Wood, and Dye one of their Eyes with
it, the other Painting white and yellow, and make two or three Rays like
Sunbeams on their Faces. Most of them have rough Girdles of Briffels Skin,
three, four, five, or six hands broad, yet the ends meet not, but remain about
four Fingers breadth asunder, tied together with a small String; to which at an
Iron Chain hang their Knives.

Some hang round Boxes about their Necks, but they will never let any body see
what they have in them: Moreover, their Skins be cut and Carved in diverse
manners, but never go abroad, without either a Sword or Poniard by their sides.
Some Women wear Flaps of Bulrushes, and a few great Rings of Iron, Copper, or
Tin, on their Arms and Legs.

The Whites exchange in the River of Gabon, with the neighboring Blacks, Trade.
Elephants Teeth, which they bring from Kamerones, and Amboise for Slaves; also
Elephants Tails and Skins, which they barter again on the Gold-Coast with great
gain.

When the King of Pongo fears any War, he removes to another Island, partly
defended by its natural strength, and partly, by the great number of Guns,
which he has gotten from the Netherlanders, French and Portuguese Ships,
surprised, or otherwise taken.

Heretofore this King of Gabon, or Pongo, The War of the King of Gabon, against
him of Lope-Gonzalves.
War'd against the King of the Cape Lope-Gonzalves, and overcame him in a
Pitched Field, totally destroying his Army; by which means, he grew very surly
and proud; but by the intercession of the Europeans, at that time, there the
difference was afterward composed; Is Ended.
so that since, they have kept a true Alliance and Friendship one with another.

Some years since, The victory of the King of Pongo.
the same King went with fifty or sixty Canoos through the Country; and first
(with his people about him) came to Kamarones, from whence he carried all away
that he could find, as Elephants-Teeth, and Slaves. The same he did in
Amboises, and in the Countries lying near the Princes of Rey, and Olibata;
which shows him to be a powerful King, and one with whose Subjects the best
Trade may be had, either for Slaves, Money, or Ivory.

Every Village or place has a peculiar Governor, called Chaveponto, Government.
who acts and does all things in the King's Name.

The Cape of Lope-Gonzalves.
EIght miles from the River Gabon, The Cape of Lope Gonzalves.
Northward of Olibata, appears a large and Prominant Point; from the first
Discoverer in Portuguese, called Caba des Lope-Gonzalves, lying in forty six
Minutes South Latitude; or to explain it better, the Cape in one degree, and
the Road, where the Ships come to Anchor, in six and forty Minutes: A little
Southward of this Cape, the River Olibata intermingles with the Ocean.

Here live no People; Trade.
but when the Blacks hear of any Ships arriving, they come out of the Country,
and bring sometimes Elephants to sell; but Olibata yields the most Trade to the
Whites. If the Seamen will have no hindrance in their fetching of Water they
must give the Blacks good store of old white Linen, Beads, and other trifles.

Most of all the Inhabitants, Language.
both here, and at Gabon, speak, besides their own Language, broken Portuguese,
as learned by their long conversation with that People.

The Inlanders have a King of their own, Government.
who lives six or seven miles up in the Country.

In March, May, and June, the Current of the Sea sets under the Line, or from
this Cape Gonzalves, most about the South, along the Coast of Angola, so that
Ships may easily Sail about the South in that time; whereas at other times, it
sets continually to the North, with Southerly Winds, so that it is almost
impossible to come about by the South. Next this Cape, lie the Rivers of
Paradia, St. Bacias, and Fardinand de Vaz.

And thus have we lead you, as it were by the hand, through Negroland.

AETHIOPIA INFERIOR vel EXTERIOR Parts magis Sept^^trionales, quae hie
desilerantur. ride in tabula Aethiopia Superioris.


Nether Ethiopia 489 contains Lovando Towns Cape, Bocle, Sofansa, Mokonda,
where the Kings Mother lives, Sokn, Catta the Residence of the King's Siler,
Lovango his own particular, Cango, Piri, two Chilongo's, Jamba Cosia, Seny,
Gommo, Lanzy, Majumba, Setty, Gobby. Rivers Several, but none particularly
known.
Ansiko Towns Fe^^ or none, at best little known, the Inhabitants being all
Cannibals. Rivers Zaire, Umbre.
Cacongo Goy Towns Cacongo the Metropolis, Molemba, Lemba. Rivers Cacongo the
chief, Sonho.
One City called Goy, and several small Rivers. Congo Towns Panga,
Mongomendoin, Jagado, Lengo, Mussula, Songo, Pinde, St. Salvador, Sundo, Pembo,
Batta; besides abundance of poor Villages. Rivers Danda, Zare, Barbele, Coango;
the River of Red Sand, Brankan, Lelunde, Ambris, Encocoquemat^i, Loze, Onza,
Bengo, Quanza. Mountains Quibambi^, Mountains of the Sun; the Saltpeter Hills;
the Burning Mountains, Otreiro.
Macoco Towns Monsol, and scattered Huts in stead of Villages; the whole
inhabited by Anthropophagi, or Meneaters. Giringboma Pombo Amboille Towns or
Villages they have, by report, but generally unknown, so much as by name.
Angola Towns Lovando St. Paulo, Massagan, Cambamba, Embacca; the Fort Molls;
the Town of St. Esprit, and six other. Rivers Bengo, Quansa, Lucala, and
Calucala. Mountains Mora St. Paulo.
Bengala Towns Mani-cicorgo, the Fort Benquelle, Melonde, Peringe, Maniken,
Somba, Maninomma, Maniken, Somba, Piken, and Manikilonde. Rivers Rio Longo,
Caton-belle. Mountains Sombriera.
Matama, or Climbebe Rivers Bravagul, Magnice, Coari, Port Ambrose. Mountains
The cold Nountains, Crystal Mountains. Towns Molembo.
Caffrary, or the Hottentots Country. Towns The Cape of Good Hope, and about
five hundred or six hundred scattering Houses. Mountains Table-Mountain,
Lion-Mount, Wind-Hill. Rivers The Fresh, and the Salt Rivers, St. Christophers,
Rio Jaquelina.
Monomotapa Towns Banamatapa, the Imperial City, Simbao, Safale, Zimbas, Tete,
Sena, Tambura, Zenebra, Fatuca, Tongue, Pombo d' Okango. Rivers Magnice,
Panhames, Luangoea Arraga, Manajova, Inandire, and Rueruy; all yielding Gold.
Sofala Towns Sofala, Cape das Correntas, Matuka, St. Eubastian, St. Catharine.
Rivers Magnice, Quamba.
Zangebar Towns Rapte a Haven, Quirimba an Island with 25 Houses. Rivers
Quilmami, Obi, Ango. Mountains Graro.
Mozambique Towns Mozambile a large City, Mosambike Island, wherein two Cities
and a strong Fort, Tintonas a Port-Town. Rivers Mekingate.
Quiloa Towns Rapta, a stately City, old Quiloa. Rivers. Cuavo.
Mombaza Towns Mombaza, and a Fort, besides abundance of Villages. Rivers
Onchit. Mountains Amara.
Melinde Towns Melinde, a neat City, with a good Haven; Lambo, Pate where a
Castle possessed by the Portu^ guese and Ampaxa. Rivers Quilmami.
Ajan Towns Ajan, a Seaport, Zoila, Barbore, Brava, Madagaxo, Barraboa,
Barrama^, Ogabra. Rivers Quilmanzi, yielding Gold, Oby.
Adel, or Zeila Towns Ara, Adel the Royal City, Orgabra, Migiate, Sequeta,
Bali, Mautra, Doara, Comezara, Novecaru, and Soceli, Asuin, Guardafuy, Salir,
Barbara, Methi. Zeila, Dalacha and Malacha. Rivers Hoax, Macli.
Socotora Island Towns Sicuthora. Trogloditica Ercocco The Point of Phares,
Set Pozzi, Alkosser Haven, Batrazan. The Haven of the same name; the Islands
Mazula, Dalaca, and Beb^lman^^l, Suachem, and Fartaq^e.



NETHER ETHIOPIA.
HAving performed a serious Journey through Negroland; Nether Ethopia.
we come of course in the next place to a large spreading Country, by
Geographers called Nether Ethiopia, containing diverse Kingdoms, Countries and
People; as amongst others, those of Lovango, Cakongo, Goykongo, Congo, Angola;
the Region of the Caffers; the Regal Commandries of Monomotaya, and Monemugi;
and the Territory of Zanguebar, with many other: It begins Northward of the
River Fair, close by the Line, and spreads it self broad to the East and
South, where it shoots into the Sea, with the most famous Promontory, in
Portuguese called, Cabo de bona Esperanca, that is, The Cape of good Hope.

This, as to the extent wherein we shall more narrowly particularize, as we
come into the several Parts: The first therefore presented to our view, is

The Kingdom of LOVANGO, OR THE Country of the BRAMAS.
LOvango, or as Pigafet, and other Geographers call it, Lovanga; Borders of the
Kingdom of Lovango.
and the Inhabitants at present Lovangas, though formerly Bramas, takes
beginning below the Cape of St. Catherine; and spreads South wardly to the
small River Lovango Lonise, in six degrees South Latitude; by which divided
from that of Cakongo, upon the West washed by the Ethiopick Sea, Or Spanish
miles. Others.
and touched in the East by the Country of Pombo, about a hundred leagues from
Lovango; but Pigafet borders it on the South, with the Cape of St. Catherine,
and spreads that Northerly to Cape Lope-Gonzalvez, and near one hundred leagues
up into the Country.

Samuel Bruno sets for Boundaries in the South, the River Zair, or Kongo; and
in the East, the People Ambois, and Anzikos.

This Kingdom contains many Provinces; among which the four chiefest are
Lovangiri, Lovangiri.
Lovangomongo, Chilongo, and Piri.

Lovangiri has the advantage of many small Rivers to water and refresh the
Soil, and by that means very fruitful, and exceeding full of People.

The Inhabitants use three manner of ways for their support, viz. Fishing,
Weaving, and the Wars.

That of Lovangomongo is a large and Hilly Country, Lovangomongo.
but has much Cattle and Palmito-Trees; so that Palm-Oyl may be had cheap.

The Inhabitants are either Weavers or Merchants. From this Province the Kings
of Lovango drew their original; but Time, and the vicissitudes of Affairs, has
almost deleated it: but at last having fresh information, and finding
themselves more Potent in Arms, they invaded them, and reduced the Country to
their subjection.

Chilongo exceeds all the other in bigness, Chilongo.
being also very populous; in some places Mountainous, and in others Carpetted
with verdant and delightful Plains and Valleys. The People, though naturally
rude and clownish, yet utter great store of Elephants-Teeth. Trade.


The Country of Piri lies plain and even, The Country of Piri.
full of Inhabitants, well stored with Fruits and Woods, and stocked with great
abundance of Cattle, besides innumerable Poultry.

The Inhabitants are a quiet People, averse from Wars; and for their Carriage
well beloved by their King; and surpassing all their Neighbors in richness of
Commodities: yet their chief Maintenance drawn from Pasturage and Hunting.

Lovango, The ancient division of the Country of Lovango.
according to the best intelligence that the Europeans can draw from the
antientest, and most experienced Blacks, has been divided into diverse
Territories, as Majumba, Chilongo, Piri, Wansi, and Lovango, each inhabited by
several People, and Ruled by a particular Governor; who with or without any
respect, The Manners of the old Inhabitants.
Warred upon his Neighbors.

In elder time the Natives were all wild, and Man-eaters, as yet the Jages are.
They used for Bread, Bananos; and for other Food, that which they take in the
Woods by Hunting, as Elephants, Buffles, wild Boars, Bucks, and such like; and
likewise Fish, which the In-landers catch in the Rivers, and the Seacoasters
out of the Sea.

When the aforementioned Governors had these, Mani signifies Prince.
as it were private Feuds, Mani Lovango, who boasted his Extract from Lerri in
Kakongo, politickly made Leagues with some, who by their joint force being
subjected, an occasion of Quarrel was soon picked with the rest, who all but
Mani Wansa, though with great hazard, admitted the Yoke. But much trouble he
had with Mani Wansa, and afterward anew with Mani Piri, Mani Chilongo; by whom
twice beaten, but by his great Power at last made his Vassals. Hereupon Mani
Majumba, who most depended on Mani Chilongo, now seeing him enslaved, would not
expect the Conqueror in Arms, but yielded himself to his Command; after whose
example all the Places lying Northerly, as Docke, Seere, and others, rather
stooped under the Power of so successful and victorious a Lord, than suffer by
the force of his Arms, followed the same course, and timely submitted.

Mani Lovango having thus triumphantly brought his Enemies under, divided their
Country among his chiefest Counselors of Trust, and committing the The City
of Lovango DE STADT VAN LOUANGO.
care of (...) and lived in Piri. But the Place he first selected not pleasing*
(...) for its Mountainousness, or that it lay too far from the Water, he went
thence, and settled in a Place, where to this present the Kings of Lovango keep
Court, the Name Banzat Lovangiri, or rather Lovango; but the Blacks call it
Boary, being situate in a part of Piri.

Of which Piri the Inhabitants were called Mouvirisser, or Mouviri, Original of
the Name of Lovangiri.
a compound Word of Moutsie and Piri, Moutsie being a common Word, signifying
People, so Moutsie Pir signifies People of Piri, and for brevity pronounced
Mouviri. So likewise Lovangiri shows the contraction of Lovango and Piri, which
joined together makes Lovangopiri, and for quickness of speech Lovangiri.

Moreover, the better to secure his new gotten State, Mani Lovango settled his
Brothers or Sisters in the greatest Cities or Towns about him, viz. in Cape, to
have a vigilant eye over whatever might threaten danger from above, and in
Bocke, Chilongo, and Salaly, to supervise and prevent any sudden Onslaught from
below.

The chiefest Towns and Villages of Lovango, are Cape, Bocke, Solansa, Mokonda,
where the King's Mother lives; Soku, Catta, the Residence of the King's
Sisters, Lovanga, his own peculiar, Cango, Piri, two Chilongo's, Jamba, Cotie,
Seny, Gonmo, Lanzy: the chiefest Villages lie a days, or a day and a halfs
Journey from Lovango, besides many small ones farther into the Country, as
Jamba, Cango, Cayt, Bocke, Piri, Cotie, and the Chilongo's.

The Metropolis, and Imperial Chamber of this Kingdom, The chief City of
Lovango.
lying in four Degrees and a half South Latitude, about a mile from the Sea,
has for Name, Lovango, or Barra Lovangiri; yet the Blacks forget not its old
Denomination Boary, or Bury.

The Ground-plat of it takes as much in compass, Bigness.
as our famous City of York in England, but much more straglingly built. It
has large, straight and broad Streets; of which the Inhabitants take great
care, that no Grass grow, nor any Soil lie in them: They stand in very good
order, and are neatly Planted with Palmito-Trees, Bananos and Bakoros, Form.
which stand as straight as it were by a Line. Some of those Trees also stand
behind the Houses, and sometimes quite round about, serving not only for an
Ornament, but also for a Shelter and Shadow.

In the middle of which you come to a great Marketplace, The Court of the King.
by whose side stands the King's Court, surrounded with a Hedge of Palm Trees,
containing in circuit as much as are in ordinary Towns, beautified with many
Houses for his Women, that live six or eight together, not daring to stir from
their appointed Stations without the King's leave, or the Overseers, which use
a diligent and jealous eye over them.

The Houses are built long-ways, with two Gable Ends, and a sloaping Roof,
which rests on long thick Posts, that lie upon Stays about two or three Fathom
high. The breadth, length, and height of them is near alike, that they may
stand in equal and uniform distances; and within they have sometimes two or
three Rooms or Chambers apart; in one of which they keep their Riches, and that
has Doors at the hinder end, locked up with a double Lock: some have round
about a Fence of Palm-Boughs plash'd; others of Bulrushes wreathed; some make
Lebonge, or Wickers, braided together, which enclose six, eight, or more
Houses, and they dwell in them as in a Precinct, being to each other very
trusty, and in all accidents helpful.

Their Housholdstuff consists chiefly in Pots, Calabasses, Wooden Trays,
Housholdstuff.
Mats, a Block whereon they put their Caps, some small and great Baskets, of a
neat fashion, into which they put their Clothes, and other trifling things.

Besides the aforementioned Division of Lovango, The Country bordering on
Lovango.
other Territories lie about it, some of which pay Tribute, and others not; and
therefore the Tributary being Majumba, Dirge, and diverse others, are not
unproperly reckoned as Members of Lovango, and put into the King's Title.

Majumba lies within three or four Degrees South Latitude, Cape Niger.
bordering in the West upon the Sea; where appears a high black Point, by the
Portuguese named Cabo Niger, that is to say, The Black Point, because it shows
afar off, by reason of Trees upon it, black.

Next this Cape follows a Road, The Road of Majumba.
by Seamen called The Road of Majumba, about half a mile in length, that is,
from the Cape Niger to the South Point, being low and overgrown with Trees.
Within the Country you discover a red Mountain, The Mountain Metute.
by the Inhabitants styled Metute. Not far off a great Salt Lake, a mile broad,
opens to the view; out of which some Waters, about half a mile Northward of
Cape Niger run into the Sea, but the passages are sometimes choked up by the
Waves, that beats extraordinarily against them.

On the Shore stands the Village Majumba, The Village Majumba.
built in one long row, so near the Sea, that the incroaching Waves oftentimes
necessitates the Inhabitants to remove behind the Village: on the North a River
very full of Oysters poures its Water into the Sea, and has in its Mouth, at
the most, not above six, sometimes but three or four Foot of Water; yet farther
within boasts a considerable bigness, breadth, depth, and length, extending at
least fifteen miles upward Southward of Lovango, to the great help and
convenience of those that fetch Red-Wood, which otherwise they must carry much
farther; whereas now they bring it in Canoos down the River.

Majumba is barren of Grain, but yields plenty of Banano's, which they call
Bittebbe and Makondo; of which they make Bread: abundance also of Palm Trees,
from whence they extract Wine; and the Rivers afford plenty of Fish.

The People having no peculiar Prince, are very rude and savage, giving
themselves to work all manner of mischief.

Here was formerly a great Trade for Elephants-Teeth, Trade
but now almost decayed and lost.

The Manibomme, that is, the Deputy of Lovangiri, pays for all the Red-Wood
brought from Set down the River to Majumba, Ten in the Hundred.

The Women fish for Oysters out of the aforementioned River, fetching them up
in great Trays from the bottom, then opening and smoking them, they will
remain good for some Months: These smoaked Oysters, as all other sorts of
Flesh or Fish so smoaked, in the Country Language are called Barbette.

Over this Territory one of the Counselors of State to the King of Lovango,
Government.
named, as we said, Manibomme, Commands, rendering no account to his Master, but
only the Red-Wood.

Eight or nine miles Southward, lies a Point called Quilongo, or Sellage,
according to the Name of the neighboring Village.

This Tract of Land appears to ships at Sea, Prospect of Majumba at Sea.
coming out of the South, with two Mountains, in the shape of a Woman's two
Breasts, and therefore called Quanny.

About two miles Southward of the Breasts, glides the River Quila, abounding
with Fish, and precipitating it self with a strong Water-fall into the Sea.

THe Dominion of Chilongatia Mokonga, is a large compass of Ground, lying
Northward of the River Quila, in former times a free Kingdom, but now by
Conquest a Member of Lovango; yet still enjoy their ancient Customs and
Privileges, paying Tribute only.

The Manibeloor, or Governor of Chilongo, has absolute Superiority during his
life; and after his Decease the People may choose another, without asking the
King of Lovango leave.

THe Jurisdiction of Set, about sixteen miles from the River Majumba, The
Territory of Set.
borders in the West, at the Sea; and watered by a River also named Set.

Here grows both great and small Mill, the first called, Massa-Manponta; and
the other, Massa-Minkale.

Many Potato's, in the Country Phrase styled Iqua Anpotte; and Palm-Wine,
Plants.
with them Malaffa, as the Trees, Mabba; or the Nut, Imba; and the Pith or
Kernel, Inbonga.

This Province yields extraordinary plenty of Red-Wood, besides other sorts of
Timber. Of this they have two sorts, the one by those of Set, called Quines,
which the Portuguese used to buy, but is not esteemed in Lovango; the other,
By-Sesse, being much heavier, and redder, bears both a good Price and
reputation. The Root of this By-Sesse, called Angansy Abysesse, exceeds in
hardness and deepness of color, which makes it much valued. With this Wood the
Blacks drive a great Trade all over the Coast of Angola, and in Lovango,
dealing indeed very seldom with any other than their own People; being at first
brought from Set, where the Governor receives the Custom of Ten in the
Hundred, which we mentioned before.

Some Hens and Goats breed here, though not in great numbers; but the Woods
afford all sorts of wild Beasts.

The Inhabitants feed upon Mill, Banano's, and wild Creatures.

Between Set and the Cape Lope-Gonzalvez, lies Gobby, a Territory having
Morasses, Lakes, and Rivers, all Navigated by Canoos.

The chiefest Town lies about a days Journey from the Seashore.

The Rivers feed many Water-Elephants, and diverse Fishes; but the Land breeds
few Cattle, besides Beasts of Prey.

Though the People claim a kind of propriety in Wives, yet is it such as merits
not to be brought under the name of Marriage, not for that they take as many as
they can, but because when any Friend comes to visit the Husband, he
immediately, as a mark of amity, prostitutes one of his Wives to him. And in
all other Cases gives such liberty, that Women taken in Adultery, receive
commendations and rewards, rather than obloquy and punishment.

A Man, when first Married, gets not esteem nor regard among the Woman's
Friends, till he has smartly beaten and boxed his Wife; and thenceforward they
reckon him one of that Family: And this usage has by custom become so
naturalized, that a Woman suspects her Husbands Love, unless he frequently beat
her.

Their Language has affinity with that of Lovango, Language.
differing only in some few words, so that they easily understand each other.

They make great Wars upon their Neighbors, especially those of Comma, between
Cape de Lope-Gonzalvez and Gobby.

The Commodities brought out of Europe thither, are Muskets, Powder, bright
Copper Kettles, white and brown Linen, and ordinary Cloth.

Their Arms consist in Arrows, Arms.
Bows, and Assagays; the first they call Insetto, the second Matta, or Boeta,
and the third Janga and Zonga.

The Government of the Country remains at this time in the hands of a Woman.

In all other Customs, Religions, and Conjurations, they agree with those of
Lovango, only they are more deceitful and treacherous.

DIngy borders at Lovango, The Territory of Dingy.
Cadongo, and Vango, a great Country, and full of Towns and Villages. A
Tributary to the Lovangian King; yet has its own Lords, which Rule by
succession. As to the Plants, Beasts, Customs of the Inhabitants, Governments,
and Religions, take here this brief account.

This Country of Lovango affords diverse sorts of Fruit, Plants.
viz. Massa-Mamponta, or great Mill; Massa-Minkale, or little Mill; and red
Mill, which they use in stead of Tares.

There grow also Potato's, called Limbale Ampaita, Bakovens, Injames, with them
Imbale, Emtogifto, or Ginger, and other strange Fruits, as Goebes, Mandonyns,
or Dongo and Fonsi; and some Herbs, the chief of which they account Insansy,
bitter of taste; Imboa, and Insua; Purceline and wild Fetherfew.

They have also Malanga, or Pumpkins; Mampet, or Sugarcanes; Mihenga, a juicy
Fruit; but they Plant no more of it than they can eat from hand to hand; and
Maye-Monola, or Tobacco.

Grain of Paradise, by them styled Indonga-Anpota, grows here, but in no
quantities, because neither Sown nor Planted.

Also great abundance of Banano's and Mandioque, or Farinha; of which they make
Bread.

Of the Leaves of Majaera they make a pretty relishing and savory Food,
dressing it with smoaked Fish, Palm-Oyl, Salt, and Achy, or Brasile Pepper: but
their common Food is Fondy, or Sonsy, made of the Flour of Mill.

There are also many Calabasses, which grown ripe, they dry and make Dishes of
for several uses.

A sort of little Apples grows on low Trees, which prove a very refreshing
Fruit, and good to put into Drink as Spice, or as the Kola. There is a larger
sort thereof called Cucomba, crude, sour, and corroding, but boiled, tastes
very well.

The Kola grows on great Trees in Husks, ten and twelve together, and yields
Fruit once a year. This, as experience teaches, eaten in the Evening hinders
sleep.

The Root Melando, Melando.
whose Leaf climbeth up on a Tree or Pole (like our Hops) eaten gives an
Aromatic taste.

Cassia Fistula, Cassia Fistula.
or Pipe Cassia, they use in their Witchcrafts and Enchantments.

Of Oranges, Oranges, Lemons, and Coco-Nuts.
Lemons, and Coco-Nuts, they have but few; for setting no value on them, they
will not bestow the pains to transplant and propagate them.

Achy, Achy.
or Brasilian Pepper, grows wild, and much used; so also Cotton.

Their Fields produce three sorts of Grain, Grain, or Pulse.
or Pulse; the first great Wheat, or Gabba, growing under the Earth; the second
sort about the bigness of a Rouncifal, or Horse-Bean, grows on Trees about
eight or nine Foot high, in Cods, and eaten with Enganga; the third sort shaped
like a little Bean, grows along the earth in rows of white Cods, almost the
same length with those of the Turkey Beans. Besides these they have two other
sorts, accounted so choice a Dainty, that they are esteemed a Food only for
the Rich; the one sort resembles our Garden-Beans; the other Turky-Beans, both
white, but have some difference in the shape.

All these Fruits continue the whole year through, except between Majumba, and
Cabo de Gonzalvez; whose Inhabitants use Bananos in stead of Bread; and Fish
for other Provision.

Matombe Trees grow numerously, Matombe.
but yet exceeded by the vast multitude of Palm Trees.

These Matombes afford, first good Wine, which they drink in stead of that of
Palm, but not so strong: The Branches make Rafters and Laths for the Houses,
and Couches to Sleep on: The Leaves are used for Tiles, and Fence off the
greatest Rains.

All the Garments worn in Lovango, are made of these Leaves, which they use
also in stead of Money, having no sort of Metal Coined: but because the
Matombe Leaves are not so strong as those of the Palm; the Clothes made thereof
are in less esteem, seldom making of it any other than course Jago-Clothes.

Their manured ground is so furtile, that it affords three Crops, The Seed
ground.
viz. small Mill, little Beans, and Wigge that is sown with Mill, as Rape
with us.

Some have their Lands, one, two, or three miles; others, a day or two's
Journey from their Dwellings, whether they go at Seed-time, and remain with
their Families, till they have Sowed their Ground, then return to their
Habitations again.

They Plough not the Land, but break it up with an Instrument like a Hoe, How
their Land is Plowed.
or rather a Masons Trowel, but broader and hollower.

Hoggs, Cabrietes, or Sheep, Goats, Cows, and all sorts of Fowls, The living
Creatures.
breed more plentifully here, than in any other places, on the Coast of Congo,
or Angola.

The Inhabitants are strong Limbed, The kind of Inhabitants.
large of Stature, and decent in Behavior; commonly jealous of their Wives, yet
themselves Wanton and Unchaste; covetous and greedy to attain Riches, yet
generous and free hearted one to another; very much addicted to Drinking Wine
of Palm, yet slighting our European Wine; no Zealots in matters of Religion,
yet extremely Superstitious, so that it is pity they want the knowledge of Real
and Divine Truths.

The Men wear long Garments, Their Clothing.
reaching from then middle down to their Feet, and below bordered with Fringe,
but leave the upper part of their Body naked: The Stuffs whereof they are made,
may be divided into four sorts, one of which none may wear but the King, and
those he permits out of singular Favor, or as marks of Dignity. They are called
sometimes Libongo; otherwhiles Bondo, which no Weavers are permitted to Sell,
upon pain of Death. There are two other sorts usually sold, the best called
Kimbes, being a Habit for the greatest Nobleman; made very fine, and with
curious Workmanship Flowr'd, Fit for Handkerchiefs.
and beautified with exquisite Imagery, each Cloth holding about two Spans and
a half in Square, which a Weaver with his greatest diligence may well spend
fifteen or sixteen days in Working to finish it. The second sort called Sokka,
are less by one half than the Kimbes; yet many that have little handled their
Work, would easily mistake the one for the other; for both are high, and
Cutwork, with Images, or Figures upon them, but the turned side gives the
distinction, by the Courseness or Fineness. Six of the forementioned Pieces
make a Garment, which they know how to Color, Red, Black, or Green.

The two other sorts of Clothes are a wearing for Common People, being plain,
without Images or Figures, yet have their distinctions; one being closer and
firmer wrought than the other. These are many times Slashed or Pink'd, from the
middle to the knees, as old fashioned Spanish Breeches were wont, with small
and great cuts.

Every man, by promise or injunction, is bound to wear a Furr-skin over his
Clothes, right before his Privacies; viz. of a tame Cat, Otter, Cattamountain,
great Wood or wild Cat, or of an Agali, or Civet Cat; with whose Civet they
sometimes also anoint themselves. Besides these, they have very fair speckl'd
Skins, called Enkiny, of high Price among them, which none may wear, but the
King and his peculiar Favorites.

Some Persons of high Degree when they Travel, wear six or eight Skins for
Garments; others, as the King and his greatest Nobility, cause five or six
Skins to be sewed together, interlac'd with many white and black speckl'd Tails
of the forementioned Enkiny.

Cross-wise in the midst of the Skin, they set commonly round, Tufts made of
the aforesaid Furr, and white and black Parrets Feathers; and at the edges
Elephants Hair, spread round in winding-Trails. Every one also wears a String
about his middle, made of the peeling of Matombe Leaves, of which there are two
sorts; one called Poes-anana, and the other Poes-anpoma; with which they tie
their Clothes fast.

Besides they have two Girdles one above another, that is, one of fine Red or
Black Cloth, slightly Embroidered in three or four places; the other of Yarn,
wrought in Flowers, and fastened together before with double Strings, called
Pondes. These Girdles are commonly three or four Inches broad; wherefore the
Clothes sent thither out of Europe with broad Lists, serve to be Embroidered
and Quill'd to make such Girdles.

Some wear Girdles of Bulrushes, and young Palm Branches; others of peelings of
a Tree called Catta; and in other places Emsande, which they Weave and Pleit
together; of the same peelings Match for Guns is made, which stand the
Portugals in good stead.

Between the upper and lower Girdle they set several sorts of Ornaments, and
about their Necks white and black Beads; the latter they call Insimba Frotta,
and the white Insimba Gemba; but the last bears the greatest value.

Others wear Triangular Breast-Chains, brought thither out of Europe, Their
Ornament.
and by them named Panpanpane; some Ivory cut in pieces, and some sort of flat
Scalops, which they polish very smooth and round, and wear them strung as
Neck-Laces.

On their naked legs they put Brass, Copper, or Iron Rings, about the bigness
of the smallest end of a Tobacco Pipe; or else trim them with black and white
Beads.

On their Arms they wear many Rings of several fashions, and light; which they
temper in the Forging with Oil of Palm.

Over their Shoulders they hang a Sack, about three quarters of a yard long,
sewed together, only a little opening left to put in the hand.

Upon their Head they have an artificial Cap, made to sit close.

And in their Hands, either a great Knife, Bow and Arrows, or a Sword; for
they never go without Arms.

The Women's Clothes, which come a little below their knees, are made of the
same with the Men's; over which they sometimes put some fine European Stuff or
Linen, but without any Girdles: The uppermost part of the body, and the Head
remains always naked and bare, but on their Arms, Legs, and Necks, many Rings,
Beads and other Toys.

Their usual Diet is fresh and smoked Fish, especially Sardyn, Food.
which they take with a Hook, and Boil with Herbs and Achy, or Brasilian
Pepper. People of Quality eat with their Fish Massanga, or small Mill, first
stamped with a Pestle, then Boiled with Water, and so Kneaded together.

They Swear by the King, speaking these words, Fyga Manilovanga; Their Oath, or
Swearing.
but the highest Oath is, the Drinking of Bonds Root; and never used, but when
something is presently to be undertaken or performed.

The Bonds is only a Root of a Tree, of a russet Color, very Bitter, Bonds
Root, or Adjuration Root.
and astringent; and gets (as they say) by enchantment of the Ganga, or
Conjurer, perfect power and virtue. This Root they scrape with a Knife, and put
into a Pot of Water, of which the accused Party takes about a Pint and half,
administered by a person appointed by the King for that purpose.

By this Bonde-Drink also, they find out the cause of any Casualty or Mishap,
and how it chances; for they believe that none can die, but he must be brought
to his end, either by himself, or another: So when any falls into the Water,
and is drowned, they will not consider the accident, but stiffly maintain he was
bewitched; and that some enemy has by his Moquisies, or Sorceries brought it
upon him. If any in a Wood, or by the Way, be killed by a Tiger or Wolf, they
firmly believe and say, that the Tiger was a Dakkin, that is, a Sorcerer or
Witch, who had by the Moquisies or Idols, changed themselves into such a beast;
and he that should go about to persuade them to think otherwise, they would
laugh him to scorn, and hold him for a fool; so if any man's house or goods
happen to be burned, they say, that one or other of the Moquisies has set it
on fire; or if at any time they have a more than usual drowth, they say, one
Moquisie or other, has not his desire, and therefore keeps back the Rain; and
therefore to enquire and find out such things, who should be the cause thereof;
Bonde-drink is put in practice.

In like manner, if any weighty or criminal matter, either of Sorcery or Theft
be laid to any ones charge, and it cannot be ascertained by the Oracle of Ganga
or their Conjurer; they forthwith condemn the suspected person to drink of the
Bonde-drink, which is performed in this manner;

The Complainant must go to the King, How the Bonde-drink is drank.
and beseech him to appoint an administrator of the Bonds; for which he pays
the King his due. These Bonde-givers are about eight or ten persons, appointed
by the King and his Nobility; who meeting under the open Heaven, in a broad
way, sit down upon the ground, and about three a Clock in the afternoon, begin
their work, for by that, the Complainers must be there; who coming with their
whole Retinue and Generation, the Bonde-givers, admonish to bring to light the
righteousness of the Matter, without any siding or partiality; which he adjures
them to with an Oath by their Fetisies, which they have standing round about
them. Then also appears the Accused, with his Family; for seldom one person
alone, but commonly, the whole Neighborhood is accused; these meet, and
standing in a row, come by course one by one to the Bonde-givers, (who have a
little Drum, upon which they continually Beat,) and receiving about a Pint and
a half of Liquor, they retire to their places again.

After this, one of the Bonde-givers rises up, with certain sticks of a
Bacoven tree in his hands, which he flings after the Accused, requiring him to
fall down; and if he have no guilt, to stand up and make Water, in token of his
Innocence. Then the Bonde-giver cuts the Root before them all, that every one
may walk up and down over it. In the doing whereof, if one or other of them
chance to fall, then the standers by set up a loud Cry, and the party fallen,
lies like a possessed man, speechless, but with horrible Convulsions in all
his Limbs, not enduring his body to be touched; and this they hold for a
certain sign, that such a Person is guilty of what he was charged withal. But
those which Urine, receive acclamations of joy and praise, and both Strangers
and his Friends conduct him to his Dwelling, declaring his innocence to every
one they meet. On the other hand, if it be a matter criminal, that the
questioned Person stands thus convict, or that he has many ill-willers, they
presently carry him about a quarter of an hours Journey from the place of Trial
to a broad Way, and there cut him in pieces: but if it be but some Peccadillio,
or they have a mind to spare the accused, then with Man's Ordure, mingled with
Water and some green Herbs poured into his Mouth (which is the only Antidote)
they seek to expel the Poison.

Some when they are accused have permission for their Slaves to drink in their
stead; but if he falls asleep, the Master himself must take it, and in his
sleep the Antidote is given. If the Master fall, and it be a great Crime, he
must die; but a small matter, he buys off the offense with some Slaves.

The Bonde-givers oftentimes use great juggling and imposture; for though a
Person have no guilt, yet he will by his Sorcery make him fall, if either the
People hate him, or the Accusers be great.

Many also, whose guilt their evil living sufficiently demonstrates, so corrupt
by Bribes and Gifts, that they seem innocent; but by this means it goes very
hard with the Poor, who generally suffer, while it may be the guilty sit by
laughing at their inferiors; so true is that of the old Poet, Nil habet
infoelix Paupertas durius in se
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit --
No pressures those in Poverty more gall
Than scorn, and be contemptible to all.


Lastly, the Accusers bring the Convict naked (for the Master of the Bonds
takes his Cap and his Clothes as his Vails) before the King's Court, where he
receives sentence of death, to be hewed in pieces, as we related before.

They use no peculiar Ceremonies in Marriage, Marriage.
nor scarce trouble themselves for consent of Friends: some choose Children of
six, seven, or eight years of Age, who when they arrive to ten, they take home
and bring up in private: If afterward any behave themselves impudently, the
Husband may without any Man's gainsaying punish her.

But some Parents will not let their Daughters Marry, till arrived to perfect
Womanhood; and then whoever desires to Match with her, he goes to her Friends,
and buys her of them at a certain Price.

If it happen (as it does very often) that a Maid be enticed to leudeness
before Marriage, they must both appear in the presence of some hundreds of Men
before the King at his Court, and declaring their fault, the King gives pardon.

And this they judge so necessary, that many assuredly believe, if they had not
obtained absolution from the King in manner beforementioned, that the whole
Country would perish with drowth, and it would not Rain; whereas yet the like
business is performed by others that have no such belief, without acquainting
the King.

The Child follows the Mother, and is a Slave if she be so, though the Father
be a Freeman; but if the Mother be free, and the Father a Slave, yet the Child
is free.

Every Nobleman may have as many Wives as he has ability to Cloathe, and can
procure Fish and Wine for their moderate Maintenance; so that some have ten or
twelve; but every ordinary person has commonly two or three.

The Women do all the servile works, for they break the Ground, Sow and Reap,
pluck up the Mill, beat it into Meal, boil it, and give it to their Husbands
to eat, who take care for nothing but Drink. When the Husband eats, the Wife
sits afar off, and takes the leavings; and withal so slavishly subject to
their Husbands, that they dare not speak to them but upon their bare Knees, and
in meeting them, as a demonstration of their submission, must creep upon their
Hands.

They color their whole Bodies with Takoel-Wood ground upon Stones, and so
made a fit Painting.

If it happen, that one enjoys another Man's Wife, they fall into great
contention about it, until satisfaction be given to the injured Party, and
agreement made, to which of them she shall belong: Nor does this Quarrel bound
it self within the Families of these, but all the Neighbors of the Place, where
the injured Person dwells, think themselves obliged to help him; as on the
other hand, the Offender's Neighbors help him, yet still with this caution,
that they spare no endeavor to make peace: However this raises jealousies among
them, which sometimes rise to that height, as to end in blood.

When any die, ^^nerals for the Dead.
they make great show of sorrow, lamenting and howling in the Way, like People
distracted; then the Friends bring out the Corpse into the Street, to wash and
make clean, continuing their barbarous lamentations, and interrogating, Why he
died? and, Whether he wanted Meat and Drink? with other like idle Fancies; in
which madness they keep up two or three hours. In the mean time his nearest
Relations bring several of their Goods to cast by the Corpse in the Grave, as
also all his own, and then snatching it up, run away therewith, as if they had
stoll'n it. Part of the Goods they bury with him, and part they set upon the
Grave upon Poles; but first they cut them to prevent stealing. In the Evening
the Friends assemble again, and bemone the Dead: And this they continue six
Weeks every Morning and Evening.

When any of Quality dies, The Funerals for the Great Men.
the Friends gather together; with whom join those of other Neighborhoods, and
such as dwell in Towns and Places remote, that scarce knew him, and then go
about crying and mourning, the Tears running down their Cheeks and Breasts,
with both their Hands upon their Heads, and so come to the Habitation of the
Deceased; where setting themselves about the Body, they begin again to howl in
a fearful manner.

The Dead lies in the midst, or sits sometimes upon a Mat, or Block, supported
and propp'd up with Wood to keep him from falling. They pare his Nails, shave
off his Hair, anoint his Body with Takoel-Wood; and in the mean while the Women
run about and relate his Life and Speeches by rule and order, setting forth
also the greatness of his Lineage and Family, with what State and Grandeur he
maintained himself and Retinue, whom he accounted his Friends, and whom his
Enemies. This Relation of his Enemies immediately raising jealousies in the
heads of his surviving Friends, they begin to enquire into the cause of his
Death; whereof not able to obtain any certainty, they resolve to go to the
Moquisies for advice. While this continues in debate, every one brings and
gives to the next Friends, or those whom his Death most concerns, some Clothes
or Garments, wherewith to defray the Expenses, which they shall be at in
searching out the cause of the Deceased's Death. This having continued two,
three, or more days and nights, with some remission of Laments; at last they
run away with the Corpse, and bury it either in the Fields, or by Chienga, where
diverse Wizards called Kokokoo, dwell, throwing part of his Goods into the
Grave, and part over it, as we have it, and particularly one of his Moquisies,
that is, a Pot, a Wooden Shovel, an Arrow, Kalbas, a Cup to drink in, Tobacco,
a Pipe, a Staff, Lances, or such like. After this the nearest Friends continue
their Morning and Evening Laments, sometimes for two or three Months, or
longer.

Now if the nearest to the Deceased will show his duty, in searching after the
cause of his Death, he falls upon the inquiry; for which they use several ways,
but the following is the most common.

They go to the Conga, or Wizard, sitting upon the Ground behind a House, How
the cause of any Man's death is searched after.
and lay a great Knife down before him, which he oftentimes touches, and then
rubs his hands one upon another; whereupon they speak to him in these words:
Such a one is deceased, or dead, we have buried him, is he brought to his end
by Witchcraft? or have his Moquisies killed him? If upon this enquiring the
Hands begin to strike hard one upon another without any more rubbing, they take
it for granted his Moquisies killed him. Again, if the hands in rubbing happen
to strike one another, and he brings them right again with clapping, then they
begin once more, and ask again, Such a one is dead, and brought to his end by
Moquisies, or Witchcraft, where dwells he? who has done it? here or yonder, or
is he of his acquaintance? etc. till they know more; or if they suppose more
had a hand in it than one, they ask, Whether Man or Woman did it, by what
Moquisies he was bewitched, and what cause they had for it, and the like.
Sometimes they run two or three Months from one Town to another, and from one
Ganga to another, and leave no Moquisies almost unasked, till at length they
suppose how it was done, or in what Town he dwells, or under whom he lives: If
they dare not name or discover the Person, they take the whole Town, that they
may find out the Guilty therein; and applying themselves for that end to one of
the King's Nobility, enquire whether there be a Bony, that is, a Hamlet where
they suppose the suspected Party to be, that he may drink Bonds, who gives
them leave: Then he goes to the chiefest of the Bonds, called Konda, and seeks
for some to make ready the Bonde-Drink, and to administer it.

In the Morning when they intend to begin, they come to the Boany, or Hamlet,
together, setting themselves down in the midst of the Village, in an open place
upon the Market, if there be one: and then the Bonds takes out of every Hamlet
a Man, who drinks for the whole. Now if one of these fall, that Hamlet, for
which he drank, must all hand the Cup one to another, because they believe the
guilty Person hides himself therein.

If all the Men escape, then comes the lot to the Women, who drink not
themselves, but others in their Names; and if there shall fall one, or more,
the Women for whom they drank are taken for guilty, and as Sorceresses are put
to death. But of this we have said more than enough.

The Children inherit not after the Father's Decease, but the eldest Brother,
Their Inheritance.
or Sister; and he or she is necessitated to bring up the Children, till they
can live of themselves.

There are many Handicrafts among them, as Weavers, Smiths, Cap-makers,
Employments.
Potters, Bead-makers, Carpenters, Vintners, or Tapsters, Fishermen,
Canoo-makers, Merchants, and other Traders. They make a kind of Hemp, taken out
from the peeled Leaves of the Matombe-Trees, about three quarters of a Yard
square. This Hemp is of two sorts, the one called Poesana, fit only for course
Clothes; and the other Poesampama, whereof they Weave finer.

The Portuguese buy those Clothes in great abundance, and carry them to Lovango
Saint Paulo, where they are delivered in stead of Money; for in that place they
are the standard to value all Commodities by. Every Cloth, called by the
Portuguese Panos Sambes; and in Country phrase, Mollole-Vierry, consists of
four pieces stitched together, called Libonges; seventeen such are valued at
for one piece of Slezy Ticking; and every pound of Ivory, bears the price of
five Libonges.

In like manner the Inhabitants of Lovango, Money.
in stead of Money, use slight woven Clothes, made of the Leaves of
Matombe-Trees, every Cloth consisting of four pieces, each of about a Span and
half square; of which one is worth a penny: but of late these Clothes are
fallen low, and consequently little used.

Most of the riches of the Inhabitants consists in Slaves, Riches.
for what other wealth they have, is lavish't out profusely in idle expenses.

The Merchandises brought out of this Country by the Whites, Trade.
are Elephants Teeth, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, and other things; but are gotten
with great labor, by the Inhabitants, because of the far lying off of the
Mines.

From a certain place called Sondy, not far from Abysine, or the Empire of
Prester John, most of the Copper is brought thither.

Toward September there flock to Sondy, many Smiths from several Countries to
melt Copper; who continue there till May, and then depart, because of the
approaching dry time. But by the unskilfulness of the Inhabitants, this Copper
is much debased, who melt all Metals one among another; to prevent which, some
have been sent where the Mines are, to teach them to distinguish and separate
the Metals; but they would never permit them to do any thing, or be drawn to
alter their own vicious method.

The Whites bring also out of this Country Elephants-Tails, which the
Portuguese buy and carry to Lovango Saint Paulo, where they prove very good and
ready Merchandise; that is, an hundred Hairs put together, they value at a
thousand Rees. This Hair the Blacks braid very finely, and wear about their
Necks; but the greatest and longest Hairs braided, they wear about the Waste;
of which, fifty Hairs are sold for a thousand Rees.

Lovango, uses to vent yearly great abundance of Ivory; but every year the
quantity decreases, because the Blacks fetch it so far out of the Country, and
carry it upon their Heads. The chiefest place where the Staple for this
Commodity remains, is called Backkamele, about three hundred miles up into the
Country, so that the Blacks have near three months labor, before they can
finish their journey forwards and backwards.

The Merchandise brought by those of Lovango, are Salt, Oil of Palm, broad
Knives, made by themselves, course Slesie Tickings, black Looking-Glasses,
Cushion Leaves, and some other Trifles, besides Slaves and Elephants-Teeth: In
the former of which, they make use of these Slaves to carry their goods from
place to place, to save other extraordinary charge of carriage.

The Roads from Lovango to Pombo, Sondy, Monsel, Great Mokoko, and other
places, are much infested by the Jages; so that it is dangerous for Merchants
to travel that way; though they usually go in whole Troops under a chief
Commander that is very faithful to them.

But for the obtaining of free Trade in Lovango, the Whites must continually
give presents to the King, and his Mother the Queen, and two Noblemen,
appointed Overseers of the Factory, called Manikes, and Manikinga, and several
others.

In Trading, the Blacks of Lovango use their own Language, yet some Fishermen
on the Shore speak broken Portuguese; and there commonly serve as Brokers,
between the Buyers and Sellers; as in Europe.

The King of Lovango has several eminent Counselors, Government.
with whom he advises in matters of State, Entitled, Mani-Bomme, Mani-Mambo,
Mani-Beloor, and Mani-Belullo, Mani-Kinga, Mani-Matta, and others.

The first, or Mani-Bomme, which is as much as Lord Admiral, has under his
Jurisdiction Lovangiri, and is indeed the most eminent of all the rest.

The second, Mani-Mamba, supervises Lovangomongo; but not alone, for he has
generally two or three joined with him in Commission.

The third, Mani-Beloor, is chief Superintendent over Chilongo; and besides
that Charge, has the Office of Searcher over the Dockies or Sorcerers, and
takes care of such as fall under the Bonds.

The great Province of Chilongatiamokango, as free Lord he rules without
acknowledging any subjection to the King.

Mani-Kinga, is Lord Lieutenant of Piri; and Mani-Matta, Captain of the Guard;
for Matta signifies a Bow, and Mani a Prince.

The King, for the better managing of his weighty affairs, has several other
inferior Officers; as Manidonga, Governor of Pattovey to Guard the King's
Wives; two Manaenders, that is, Butlers to the King in the day, and two other
for the night: Moeton Ambamma, servant of the great Captain Bamma; with a
multitude of others.

Besides all these, the great Butler bears no small sway; his title,
Mabonde-Lovango, that is, Upper Butler of Lovango, for he takes care of all
Vyands, and has four other under him; whereof (as we said) two in the day
time, when the King is in the Wine-House; and two in the evening perform their
service: and lastly, every division of the Country has a particular Nobleman
appointed by the King; as we in Hundreds have Justices of the Peace.

The King of Lovango has the repute of a potent Lord, The Power of the King.
being able to bring numerous Armies into the Field, and that not so much
respected, as dreaded by the Kings of Calongo, and Goy; yet he lives in
friendship with them, and holds good correspondency with those of Angola; his
Jurisdiction extends into the Country Eastward, almost as far as on the Sea
Coast, being known by the general name of Mourisse, and Manilovango.

The administration of Justice, and punishing of Vice, Justice.
seems to be according to the Law of Retaliation; for Theft is not punished by
Death, except it be against the King; but when they take a Thief either in the
very act, or afterward, the things stolen must be made good by him or his
Friends, and the Thief bound, exposed for a scorn and derision of every one, in
the midst of the Street.

If any be found Guilty, whose miserable poverty affords no means of
satisfaction, then may the offended seek remedy, every man of the Tribe or
Generation whereof he was, and make them work for him, till he receive the full
recompense of his losses.

The King has (by the report of the Blacks) near seven thousand Wives; The
King has many Wives.
for after the decease of one King, his Successor keeps all his Wives, and
brings also many besides to them.

These Wives are kept in no great respect; for they must work no less than
other women: Some few of them he selects for his Amors, and with them spends
much time; the other he shuts up as Nunns in Cloisters.

When one of these proves with Child, one must drink Bond for her, to know
whether this Woman has had to do with any other besides the King. Now if the
Man who has so drank be well, they judge the Woman upright; but if the Man
falls, she is condemned and burnt, and the Adulterer buried alive.

The King as supreme Governor, A Mother is appropriated for the King.
appropriates to himself one to be as a Mother, a grave Matron, and of good and
tried experience, which they call Makonda; whom he reverences with more honor
than his own natural Mother. This Makonda has a great prerogative and
privilege, to do good offices both to the Nobility and common People, that
fall into the dis-favour of the King; who is necessitated in all weighty
affairs to use her Counsel: for she has such authority, Her Authority.
that if the King provokes her any way, and does not grant her Suit speedily,
she may take away his life.

Besides, she takes the advantage (without any daring to control her) to
satiate her unruly appetite, as often, and with whom she pleases; and whatever
Children she has by such means, bears all the same repute that proceeds of the
Royal Race: but if her Gallants meddle with other Women, they are by authority
of the Law, punished with Death; so that these accounted felicities carry with
them their infortune: and if they imagine themselves detected, they have no way
to preserve their Lives but by flight.

When the King dies, The Inheritance of the Crown.
his Children succeed not, but the Crown devolves to his eldest Brother; and
for want of Brothers, to his Sisters Children.

Such as may pretend any right to the Crown, have their Dwellings in several
Cities and Towns; and as they come nearer to the Government, the nigher they
draw toward Lovango: now so soon as the King dies, the Lord which dwells in
the next Town of all, comes to the Dominion, and he that dwells nearest to
him, supplieth his place again, and so on to the last, with this Proviso, that
they must be of Noble Blood by the Mothers side.

Mani-Kay, the first Successor to the Throne, dwells in a great City, called
Kay, about a mile and a half, North North-West from Lovango.

Mani-Bocke, the second, dwells in a Town four or five miles up into the
Country, called Bocke.

Mani-Cellage, the third, resides in a pretty large Town, by Name Cellage, ten
or twelve miles Northward of Lovango.

Mani-Katt, the fourth, remains in the Village, about fifteen miles from
Lovango.

Mani-Injami, the fifth, holds his Seat in a Hamlet called Injami, Southwards
toward Calongo.

After the Decease of the old King, Mani-Kay succeeded, and Mani-Bocke came
again in his place, and every one follows his Lot.

The King's youngest Brother has his Mansion in Chilasia, and from thence
comes to Bocke upon the first Vacancy; and if he has a Child by his Wife, and
have offered Sacrifice to their Cares, or banished Gods, removes to Kay, the
next place to the Royal Seat.

After the decease of the Mani-Kay, immediately enters upon the Government, yet
comes not presently into the Court, but continues near six Months in his own
City, till all Ceremonies of the Burial be performed.

The word Mani signifies Lord or Prince, and is the greatest Title of Honor or
Expression which they give one among another; the King himself has the Title
of Mani-Lovango, which signifies, Prince of Lovango; as Nani-Kay also
signifies, Lord of Kay; Mani-Bocke, Lord of Bocke.

The King and his Brothers are commonly jealous one of another; for if any one
of them happen to be sick, they presently suspect State Policy.

The King commonly wears Cloth or Stuff, which the Portuguese, The King's
Clothing.
or other Whites, bring to them. The King and great Noblemen have on their
left Arm the Skin of a wild Cat sewed together, with one end stuffed round and
stiff.

The King has peculiar Orders and Customs in Eating and Drinking; Customs of
the King's in Eating and Drinking.
for which he keeps two several Houses, one to eat in, and the other to drink
in; and although he has many Houses, yet by virtue of this Custom he may use
no other. He makes two Meals a day, the first in the Morning, about ten a
Clock; where his Meat is brought in covered Baskets, near which a Man goes with
a great Bell, to give notice to every one of the coming of the Kings Dishes:
whereupon the King, so soon as he is acquainted with it, leaves the Company he
is withal, and goes thither. But the Servitors go all away, because none, He
that s^^s the King Eat must die.
neither Man or Beast may see him eat, but it must die; and therefore he eats
with his Doors shut. How strictly they observe this Custom, appears by the
ensuing relation.

A Portuguese of Lovango, named St. Paulo, lying in Angola to Trade, had
presented the King with a brave Dog, which for his faithfulness he loved very
much: This Dog, not so strictly looked to by his Keeper, while the King was
eating, ran smelling and seeking after his Master, whom he missed, and came at
length, without any body's minding him, to the Door, which with his Nose he
thrust open, and went to the King whom he saw eating: but the King caused his
Servants instantly with a Rope to put the Dog to death; for be it Man or Child,
Mouse, Cat or Dog, or any other living Creature that has seen the King eat, if
it can be gotten, it escapes not death.

It happened, that a Noble-man's Child, about seven or eight years old, who was
with his Father in the King's Banqueting House, fell asleep, and when the King
was drinking, awaked; whereupon it was instantly sentenced to die, with a
reprieve only for six or seven days at the Fathers request; that time elapsed,
the Child was struck upon the Nose with a Smiths Hammer, and the blood dropped
upon the King's Makisies, and then with a Cord about his Neck was dragged upon
the Ground to a broad Way, to which Malefactors are drawn, which cannot bear
the trial of the Bond.

When the King has done eating, he goes accompanied in State with the
Nobility, Officers, and common People, to his Banqueting House, the greatest
and most sumptuous Structure in all his Court, situate on a Plain, fenced with
Palm Tree Boughs; wherein the most difficult causes of difference, are decided
and determined in his presence.

This House stands with the fore-side open, The King's Banqueting House.
to receive all advantages of the Air; about twenty Foot backward is a Skreen,
or Partition, made cross, one side eight Foot broad, and twelve Foot long,
where they keep the Palm-Wine, to preserve it from the sight of the People.
This Partition has Hangings from the top to the bottom, of fine Wrought,
Tufted, or Quilted Leaves, called by them Kumbel; close to which appears a
Tial, or Throne, made with very fine little Pillars of white and black
Palmito-Branches, artificially Wrought in the manner of Basket-work.



The Throne holds in length, The Royal Throne.
a Man's Fathom, in height, a Foot and a half; and in breadth, two Foot, on
each side stand two great Baskets of the same work, made of red and black
Wicker, wherein, as the Blacks say, the King keeps some familiar Spirits for
the Guard of his Person: next him sit on each side a Cup Bearer, he on the
right hand reaches him the Cup when he is minded to drink, but the other on the
left, only gives warning to the People, to that end holding in his hands two
Iron Rods, about the bigness of a Finger, and pointed at the end, which he
strikes one against another; at which sound the People, who are commonly as
well within the House as without, with all speed grovelling into the Sand with
their Faces, and continue in that posture so long as the same Irons continue
the voice or signal, that is, till he has done drinking, and then they rise up
again, and according to custom, signify that they wish him health, with
clapping their hands; which they hold for as great an honor, as with us in
Europe, the putting off the Hat.

Now as none may see the King Eat or Drink without bazard of death, None may
see the King (...).
so no Subject may drink in his presence, but must turn his Back toward him.
But the King drinks here seldom, except for fashion-sake, and then not till
about six a Clock in the Evening, or half an hour later, if any difficult
controversy has been in debate; but sometimes he goes thence at four, and
recreates himself among the Wines.

About an hour after Sunset he comes the second time to the aforementioned
Place to Eat, where again as before, his Meal is made ready. After which he
visits his Banqueting House again, where he remains for about nine hours,
sometimes not so long, as he finds himself disposed or indisposed: In the night
one or two Torches are carried before him to Light him.

None may drink out of his Cup besides himself; nor any eat of the Food he has
tasted, but the remainder must be buried in the Earth.

The King never comes abroad but upon a remarkable Day, (...).
that is, when an Ambassador addresses from some Foreign Prince, or some
strange accident has happened; or when a Leopard is taken in the Country, or
else lodged about Lovango, ready for the chase and slaughter; or lastly, upon
the Day on which his Land is Tilled, and his chiefest Nobility bound to bring
him Tribute. For this his Appearance there is a place appointed opposite to his
Court, being an even and great Plain, in the midst of the City.

The Stool, or Seat whereon he then sits, stands raised upon a Foot-pace, The
King's Seat.
dressed with white and black Wickers, very artificially Woven, and other sorts
of curious adornings; behind his Back hangs on a Pole a Shield, covered with
diverse party-colored Stuffs, brought out of Europe.

Near him stand also six or eight Fanns, by them called Pos, or Mani, Fan.
and containing in length and breadth half a Fathom, at the upper end of a long
Stick which runs through the middle of it, having a round Brim, in form of a
half Globe fastened, interwoven with little Horns, and with white and black
Parrots Feathers between: Those Fanns certain People, which the King keeps for
that purpose, move with great force, which agitating the Air, causes a
refreshing and pleasant coolness.

Before the King's Seat lies spread a great Cloth twenty Fathom long, and
twelve broad, made of quilted Leaves sewed together, upon which none may go but
the King and his Children; but round it they leave room for two or three
persons to pass by, the Nobility sitting in long Ranks, every one with a
Buffles Tail in his Hand, which for the most part they move in the presence of
the King: Some sit upon the bare Ground; others upon Clothes made of the same
Stuff with the King's: Behind them stand the People; as behind the King all his
great Officers, not few in number.

In this public Solemnity of State, Playing Instruments.
there are some that very curiously Play upon several Instruments of Music, of
which they use three sorts; first, Wind-Instruments, made of Ivory in the shape
of a Hunting-Horn, hollowed as deep as possible, with a hole at the great end,
and an Inch and a half, or two Inches broad: Of these they have several sorts,
eight or ten whereof joined in consort yield a pleasant sound.

The second sort are Drums, made of whole hollowed Pieces of Timber, covered
over at one end with Leather, or Skins of Wild Beasts, and at the other end
with a small Opening, in which may be put two Fingers. They bear commonly on
four of these together, sometimes striking with the Palms of the Hands
flat-ways, sometimes with one Stick and one Hand.

The third resembles a Pan or Sieve, such as they use for Meal, but the Wood
bigger and deeper; round about which are some long Holes cut, two and two
together, each about a Fingers length: In each Hole they put two Copper Plates,
fastened to the Wood with Copper Pins. This Instrument being stirred, gives a
sound almost like the tinckling of little Bells on the Wheels.

At this time many of the Nobility salute the King, How the Noblemen salute
the King with leaping.
leaping after a manner which they call Chilomba, which they do with great wide
Paces and Strides, along by the void spaces of the Cloth spread upon the rising
Foot-pace; this they perform backward and forward two or three times, moving
their Arms this way and that way: Leaping thus, the King and his Nobles receive
them with outstretched Arms, and they clap together their Hands two or three
times, and then cast themselves just at the King's Feet into the Sand, and roll
over and over in it, in token of Subjection. Such as are extraordinary
Favorites, having performed this Exercise, run directly to the King, and
leaning with both Hands upon his Knees, lay their Heads in his Bosom.

The Chiefest Noblemen have a Seat separate from the King's, to which, for
their greater Honor, some of the inferior Subjects make the like Leaping; and
sometimes also not only one Nobleman salutes another so, but the King himself,
though seldom, uses it.

Before the running Passage, Cryers.
about the King's Seat, stand three or four Cryers, with Instruments in their
Hands of the fashion of Sheeps-bells, but thick and heavy of Iron, upon which
they strike with a Stick, to give notice of Silence or Quietness, from whence
proceeds a dull and hoarse sound. These Cryers are also Officers of the City,
to proclaim the Orders of the King, as also to signify when any thing is lost
or found.

They have no decorum of Modesty or Civil Deportment; but shamelesly, in what
Company soever, even in the King's presence, discover their Nakedness before
and behind, in their unseemly and barbarous Dances.

Before the King's Cloth sit some Dwarfs, Before the Kings Cloth sit Dwarfs.
with their backs toward him; Pigmies indeed in Stature, but with Heads of a
prodigious bigness: for the more exact deforming whereof, they wear the Skin of
some Beast tied round about them. The Blacks say there is a Wilderness, where
reside none but Men of such a Stature, who shoot those Gigantick Creatures the
Elephants. The common Name of these Dwarfs is Bakke Bakke; but they are also
called Mimo's.

There sit also certain White Men by the King, Their Complexion.
with Skins on their Heads, and indeed at distance seem like our Europeans,
having not only gray Eyes, but red or yellow Hair; yet coming nearer, the
discovery grows easy: For they have not a lively Color, but white, like the
Skin of a dead Corpse, and their Eyes as it were fixed in their Heads, like
people that lie a dying: The sight they have is but weak and dim, turning the
Eye like such as look asquint; but at night they see strongly, especially by
Moonshine.

Some are of opinion that these white Moors ought to be accounted Fairies,
Their Generating.
and to have sprung from a great-bellied Black with Child, upon seeing a White;
as we read, That a white Woman being Pregnant, upon the seeing a Picture of a
black Moor, brought forth a black Child. However this seems worthy remark, if
true, as reported, That these Whites of either Sex are incapable of Coition.

But Isaac Vossius, in his Book of the Original of Nile, and other Rivers,
Voscius lib. de Orig Nili. and lior. Fluminum.
says, Though this sort of Men be generated of black Parents, yet is it
probable, that in the Mid-land Countries of Guinee, People may be found of the
like white Color: And in my Judgment (continues he) it may be concluded, That
they are a kind of Leapers, and the difference of Color proceeds from a
Sickness common among the Moors, especially those that dwell in dry and hot
places; for if these did not continually anoint the Skin, they would all
perhaps be afflicted with the same Evil: For this cause there passes no day
among them without anointing, for which they use not only Oil, but Fat, and
Ointments, wherewith they smear all their Bodies over, and by that means not
only prevent the parching of their Skin, but makes it of a shining black, the
chiefest Beauty with them.

The Portuguese call these white Moors, Albinoes, and attempted to take some of
them Prisoners in the Wars, and carry them over to Brasile to work; for they
are very strong, but so addicted to idleness, that they had rather die than
undertake any toylsom Labor.

The like sort of Men have been found by the Netherlanders and Portuguese, not
only in Africa, but also in East India, in the Island of Borneo, and in New
Guince, called the Country of Papos. Thus far Vossius.

The King uses them in most of his Religious Ceremonies, as in making
Mokisies, from whence themselves have generally that Name among the
Inhabitants, which in our Language properly signifies Field-devils.

This Solemn Appearance of the King in Public, begins commonly about three a
clock in the Afternoon, and continues till about four or five.

All the Wives of the Subjects of this Realm must yearly, from the first to the
fourth of January, being the Seed-time, break his Land to be sown; for the
space of about two hours going in length, and one hour in breadth: but the Men
are then most of them in Arms, and in their best Habits, going constantly to
and fro, to warn the Women to work, and to take care that no violence be done
to any.

Here also the King shows himself at three a clock after noon, in his highest
State, to encourage them to work; and in the Evening they all eat at his
Charge: So that those days are accounted high Festivals.

In like manner must every Noble-mans Subjects, with their Women, Till their
Land: And when they have performed these Services, then they may go work for
themselves. And as we have heretofore declared, Every one may Till what Ground
he will; but that which one has cultivated, another may not meddle withal.

If any Ambassador, How Ambassadors or Noblemen speak to the King.
or Nobleman of the Country desire to speak to the King in Person, they must
first give notice thereof with the sound of two or three Hand-clappers, which
every one present in like manner answers; then the Suppliant cries out aloud,
Empoo lausan biau Pongo, that is, Hearken for Gods sake; whereto the People
about him answer, and speak, Tiesambie Zinga, which signifies, Long live God:
After which the Petitioner begins his Speech with the word Wag, usual among
them; and ends with the words In Mama, Wag, which is as much as to say, I
herewith conclude: Whereupon those that have any thing to say against it, begin
and end in the same manner. And this form of Speech they use in all their
Matters of Justice, Warrants, and Orders of the King.

When any Nobleman has shot a Leopard, What is done when a Leopard is taken.
he brings as a token of it, the Tail to the King, upon the top of a Palmeto
Pole, and pitches it in the Earth, and this without any noise or further
ceremony.

When the Inhabitants of Lovango have lodged a Leopard in the Woods, every one
is warned by the sound of Trumpet to be ready to attend the King at the Game.
If it be far without the City into the Woods, the King is carried in a
apiece Seat, about two Foot deep, made of black Tin, and artificially
wrought, by four Men, two before and two behind, holding two Poles, on each
side one, covered with blue Cloth. Being come to the Leopards Den, they
instantly beset it round, every one being ready prepared, some with Bows and
Arrows, and others with Lances and Darts.

Before the King, standing a little elevated, they spread long Cord-Nets;
incircled by the People, that to rowse the Beast, make many strange and uncouth
noises, with Horns, Drums, Shouting, and the like; but at last having in vain
tried all means of escape, tired out and overpowered with multitude, he falls a
Prey to his eager Pursuers, who forthwith bring him into the Plain before the
King's Palace, where the Hunters triumph over the Carcass with Dancing,
Leaping, and Singing, and all kinds of Revelling Pastimes.

Afterward the King appoints diverse Noblemen to oversee the Stripping of the
Leopard, and bring the Skin to him; but the Flesh, together with the Bowels,
the Gaul only taken out, they bury very deep in the Earth, that it may not be
dug up again. The Leopards Gaul is Poison.
The Gaul, which they reckon to be a most venomous Poison, they cut up in the
presence of many, and fling into the midst of a River, that none might make use
thereof to the damage of another.

The Ceremonies at the Funeral of a King are these: The Funeral of the Kings
First they make Vaults under ground, wherein they place the dead King in his
richest Habit, upon a Stool, and by him all manner of Household Stuff, as Pots,
Kettles, Pans, Clothes, and Garments.

Then they make many little Images of Wood and Red Earth, and set round about
the Corpse, Representatives of his Servants and Houshold-goods.

Next, the Bodies of many Slaves are set by the Corpse, either in the same or
some adjoining Vault, to serve the King, as they believe, in the other World,
and to show when they shall come to the great Monarch, what manner of Person he
has been here: for they believe after this another Life, yet in general deride
the Resurrection of the Dead.

The Commons show themselves very humble to the Nobility; The Nobility are very
much honored.
for at the meeting of them in the Streets, they fall down upon their Knees,
turning their Head another way, signifying thereby, that they are not worthy to
look upon such: yet when he speaks, then they speak again: So that we may not
without Reason affirm, That they are little better than Slaves, beyond whom
priviledg'd only in this, that they may at pleasure pass into any other
Country, which a Slave without leave cannot do.

Noblemen of State have usually, besides their Mansion-Houses, also a
Wine-Cellar, as has been said before concerning the King; where they spend
some part of the Day and the Evening in Eating and Drinking; some days they
have two, three, four, and well near eight Callabasses of Wine of Palm; of
which they impart some quantity to their Women, but the rest they drink with
their Subjects.

Their Diet is commonly brought thither to them, whereof every one present may
take his part.

In like manner, whoever has any Cause, may daily come and speak with a
Nobleman, there being (as it were) a public place of receipt, and where petty
Differences arising between parties, are heard and determined.

The Inhabitants of the Kingdoms of Lovango, Kakongo, and Goij, Religion, or
Worship.
have no knowledge of God at all, or his Word, but only the bare Name, which
their Language denominates Sambian Ponge, but neither care nor desire to learn
more.

All acts of Devotion they perform to the Field, and House-Devils, Field-Devils
are prayed unto by those of Lovange.
represented under the shapes of Idols, of which they have great numbers; to
each of whom they give a peculiar name, according as they attribute to them
power, having their distinct Jurisdiction: to some they ascribe the power of
Lightning; and the Wind; and also to serve as Scar-Crows, to preserve their
Corn from Fowl, and other Vermin; to one they give the command over Fishes of
the Sea; to another, over the Fishes in the River; to a third, over the Cattle,
etc. Some they make protectors of their health and safety; others, to avert
evils and misfortunes: to this, as an expert Oculist, they commend the charge
of their sight; of that they desire instruction in the mysteries of hidden
Arts, and to be able, even to fore-judge destiny; neither do they believe them
at large, but circumscribe them to limited places, In what shapes they show
themselves.
and show their Figures in several shapes; some of Images, like men; others of
Poles, with small irons on the top, or else a little Carved Picture; some of
which shapes or representations, they carry commonly with them when they travel
from one place to another. Their greater Idols are stuck with Hens or Pheasants
Feathers upon their heads, and with all sorts of Tassils and Fassils about
their bodies: Some make them in the fashion of long Slips, which they wear
about their necks and arms; others of Cords, trimmed with small Feathers, and
two or three Simbos, or small Horns, with which they adorn their middle, neck
and arms: some are nothing but Pots filled with white earth; others, Buffels
Horns, stuffed with the same matter; and at the small end, having Iron Rings.

They yet make another sort more ridiculous than any of the former; the manner
thus: They take an ordinary round Pot without feet, which they fill with red
and white earth, kneaded together with water, a pretty height above the upper
edges, which they mark on the outside quite round with white streaks, and
stripe it upon the top, with variety of Colors.

One of these Idols (as they say) is jealous of another, insomuch, Several of
their Idolgods are Field-Devils.
that when they have made one, they presently go to work upon another; and
several times are necessitated to make many, lest they should offend such as
seem to be neglected, still making their addresses to all, with equal
indifferency, as their Protectors and Guardians.

They have to instruct them in the making these Idols, particular Masters, in
their Language called Enganga Mokise; whose skill therein they much admire,
being put in practice in this following manner.

First, the Person being advised thereto by the aforementioned Enganga Mokise,
How they make their Mokise.
or Conjurer, invites, for the furthering of the Work, their whole Tribe,
Acquaintance, Relations, and Neighbors, to assemble together: then the Inviter
makes for his Mokise (as they term it) a house of Palm-Boughs, wherein he
continues the space of fifteen days, nine of which he must not speak; and
during the whole time, have no converse with any body.

On each side of his mouth he wears a Parrets feather; and may not clap his
hands if any one salute him, but as a sign of greeting, strikes with a small
upon a Block in his hand, made sloaping, narrow at the top, and in the middle
hollow, and on the end a Man's head Carved: Of these Blocks, this Devil-Hunter
has three sorts; one great, the other of a middle size, and the other small.

These prepared and made ready, a Fellow brings a Drum to a plain place,
whereon no Trees grow, about whom all the Undertakers, Friends and Relations,
make a Ring; whereupon the Drummer standing in the middle, begins to beat, and
sing before the Conjurer, who begins to Dance, followed by every one, while he
with an open throat, chants forth the praises of the Mokise, desiring his aid;
the Undertaker also (if in health) Dances about the Drum, two or three days,
without perceiving any thing of the Devil all that time.

At length the Devil-hunter presents himself near the Undertaker, with hideous
noises and outcries, yet nothing visible all this while, only the Drumming
ceases a little; and then the Enganga strikes upon the aforementioned Blocks,
speaking some words, and making sometimes red and white spots in several parts
of the Undertakers body, viz. on his Temples and Eyelids, the pit or hollow of
his Stomach, and every Limb, to make him capable of entertaining the evil
Spirit.

Being possessed, he makes ugly wry faces, and stretching his body in unseemly
postures, with terrible shreeks, takes fire in his hands, and bites without
hurting himself; sometimes their Devils take him away from them all, and carry
him into the wilderness to some desolate place, where he sticks over his whole
body green Leaves: During this absence, which has no set time of continuance,
his friends use all possible endeavors to find him out, but in vain. This they
perform with Drums, which they beat all the time, the noise whereof, having
reached the ears of the Possessed, he betakes himself thither, and so is
carried again to his house.

The Devil being thus entered, and he Possessed, he lies as it were dead; then
the Conjurer asks what shall be inflicted upon him? whereto the Spirit makes
answer, by the mouth of the Possessed, and lays his injunction upon him: upon
this they begin again to sing and to dance, till the Devil comes out of him
again; then a Ring is put about his Arms, to put him in remembrance of his task.

When these people Swear, they Swear by this Ring, wishing, That Devil who
causes them to wear this Ring, may break their necks if it be not true; which
is the sooner believed, because they will not swear lightly, nor to any thing
but the truth; they infallibly keep their words in what they promise, though to
the hazard of their lives, as has often appeared. When the Devil speaks out of
the Possessed, which oftentimes happens, he endures great pain, being thrown
from one side to another, and frothing at the mouth.

There are yet other Mokisies, in different manners, which we will relate in
short: When any one amongst them grows sick, they use to cry or call upon their
Devil, till he enters into the sick man; and then they demand why this man is
sick? whether he has broke his commandments? and many more such like questions;
whereupon the Spirit answers out of the mouth of the sick, and is immediately
by promise of some gifts, hired to effect his cure.

They hold several opinions concerning the soul; An opinion concerning man's
soul.
for those of the King's family believes, that the soul when any one dies, is
born again in some of the same family; others, that the soul and body have one
determinate end; some, like the Greeks and Romans, place the soul among the
Hero's, or else bring them into the number of their Tutelar Lars; others give
them a common place of resort, under the earth; while another sort make for
them little Receptacles under the Roof of their Houses, about a span in
height; before which places, when they eat or drink, they make some offering.

They further believe, that none can die of a natural death, They believe a man
cannot die a natural death.
but all come to their end by mischance, that the Insiliator has some hidden
place, where he not only effects clandestinely his desires, but also by the
power of Conjuration, may ask the deceased to come out of the grave, and keep
him for his service: These (as they say) are fed daily by the Conjurers, with
food boiled without any Salt; for if any Salt should come in or near it, the
body would follow him openly.

They make it an Article of the highest Faith, that when a Mokisie offends, or
that injunctions or promises made to him, are not fully performed, that he has
power to kill. Now the reason of these promises happens upon various occasions;
when a child is born, they call a Fetisiro to it, How the injunction is made.
to enjoin the child somewhat to keep as a law; and this they not only do to
every individual person, but to whole Tribes.

The Fetisero asks the Parents of the child, what their injunction is, and
their Ancestors; then he proposes somewhat, saying, the Oracle, by the Fetisie,
has given him to know, that the child shall have such an injunction, not to do
so and so; wherein the Mother takes care to instruct the child from its youth,
that when it shall come to years, it may be able to keep it.

These injunctions are manifold, as that they may eat no such Flesh, Herbs,
Injunctions, how manifold they are.
nor Fruits, or eating thereof, they must eat it alone, leaving none, and
besides bury the bones in the ground, that they may not be scraped up again,
and eaten by any Dog, Cat, or other living Creature.

Some are enjoined not to go over any water; others may not pass over a River
with a Canoo, yet admitted to walk, swim, or ride through: some must not shave
the hair of the Head; others may, as also their Beards; which again in diverse,
is an offense beyond pardon.

Several are commanded to forbear all Fruits; indulging to others a liberty to
devour all, yet again restraining many.

In relation to Garments the commands are general; Injunctions about men's
Clothes.
for all men must wear a Girdle made of the skin of some living Creature, which
must be fastened in a peculiar manner above their Belly; Caps upon their heads,
or else in stead thereof, a Cord or some Covering of Clothes called Libonges,
or otherwise.

The Women must go with their heads always uncovered, Of the Women.
and wear four or five Clothes of Kimbi, or Sambes or Libonges sewed together,
beneath their Waste, before the Belly, in stead of a Girdle.

When a man at any time comes into a house, and sits down unawares upon the
corner of a Bed, wherein a man and woman have lain together, when he has
received information of his fault, he must go instantly to a Smith, which
commonly sit with their tackling under the open heaven, and tell him the cause
of his coming, who then blows up a fire, and taking him by the little finger of
his left hand, turns it over his head; then striking two or three strokes with
his Hammer, and blowing with his mouth upon his hands put together, he
pronounces some words with a low voice, wherewith the promise unwittingly
transgressed is cleans'd. This ceremony they call Vempa-Momba, that is, A
Benediction, or Purification.

If an unmarry'd man have gotten a foolish child, he may not eat of the breast
or udder of a Buffle; but by getting another more witty, becomes free again, to
eat as at first.

These and the like Fopperies they observe with all exactness; The virtue
ascribed to these Injunctions.
believing that none have any sickness, sorrow, or affliction, but for breaking
the same.

Now because the word Mokisie will sometime be mentioned, it is necessary to
show the meaning thereof, and how they use it.

By the word Mokisie, What Mokisie fignifies.
they mean a natural Superstition, and firm Persuasion that they have of
something, to which they ascribe an invisible power, in working good to their
advantage, or evil to their prejudice and detriment, or from whom they expect
to learn the knowledge of past or future things. It cannot properly be called
Idolatry, because these people have no knowledge of any Deity, or Diabolical
Spirit, having no particular name for the Devil, only call all Mokisie, where
they suppose an overruling power.

Whatever they effect by it, The vanity of the Mokisie.
is done by mere imagination, or if by natural means, it happens more by
chance, than any knowledge they have. Any man that is sound, and determines to
live after the manner of his Mokisie, observing temperance and chastity, takes
the natural course to preserve his health; but their ignorant stupidity
ascribes it to the operation of the Mokisie. On the other hand, if any be sick,
and use means for the recovery of health, the good success thereof the Mokisie
gets the praise of, although the cause of the sickness were removed by the
goodness and bounty of nature, or the strength of his constitution. But if the
person by the violence of the sickness happen to die, they certainly believe
him killed by Sorcery, for transgressing against his Mokisies.

The ancient use of this Common Custom, seems an infallible demonstration to
the besotted people, of the great virtue of the Mokisies, and it confirms them
not a little in their foolish belief, because they see their King and the
Grandees of the Country, make it their work.

The King has the general style of Mani-Lovango, Why the King is called
Mokisie.
but the people call him Mokisie, because he has (as they say) a great power
to kill any body with a word speaking, and can spoil the whole Country; and
prefer and put down, make rich, or poor at his pleasure; cause rain; transhape
or metamorphose himself into the shape of a beast, and innumerable such like;
which all serve to manifest his greatness, and strike an awe into the Subjects
of his Potency.

Thus also it stands with the other Lords, The higher a man is, the more
Mokisies he has.
whose might, honor, and esteem, grows from the same root.

As for example, the King's Sister, as soon as she has a child, holds by
assignment the Village Kine for a dewlling place, and may not eat Hogs flesh:
when the child has attained age and growth, it visits the Moansa, and dares
not eat the fruit called Kola with company, but only alone: Afterward it
goes by the Ganga, Simeka, and then it dare eat no sort of Poultry, but those
killed, and boiled by himself, and must bury the remainder; when he comes in
Sallasy, he has other and more Mokisies; and so in Boeka, and Kaye, till
brought to the King. Then is he advanced in all power and wisdom, as having in
imagination, attained the active intelligence of the Mokisies.

All Conjurers and Priests are called Ganga, All Conjurers are called Ganga.
or Ganga Mokisie; otherwise Ganga Thiriko, Ganga Boesy-batta, Ganga Kyzokoo,
Ganga Bombo, Ganga Makemba, Ganga Makongo, Ganga Nijmy, Ganga Kossy, Ganga
Kymaye, Ganga Injami, Ganga Kytouba, Pansa, Pongo, and Mansy, and innumerable
other such names, either given to, or assumed by them from the Mokisies they
serve.

The Mokisie Thiriko is a great Village, four miles Northward of Boary^,
wherein is a great house built on Pillars, resembling a man. The Ganga of this
Mokisie, being Lord of the Village, performs every morning his Service and
Ceremony, with some words and Conjurations; being answered in the mean time by
a youth that stands by him; this Ganga commends to his Mokisus the health of
the King; the welfare of the Country; the good flourishing of the Seed;
success for the Merchants; and full Nets for Fishermen. All the bystanders, at
the mentioning the King's long life and health, clap their hands, in token of
their affections and assent.

The Mokisie of Boesy-batta, has many standing round about him, Mokisie,
Boesy-batta.
when he sets himself to his Devotion, viz. Drummers, Singers, Dancers, and the
like; but he chiefly wears a apiece Pouch of a Lions skin, tied round
about with a wicker thread, and above with a Collar of Leather, so hanging
about his neck. In this Budget, they have all sorts of Implements a man can
think on, A master of Slaves.
at least that may easily be gotten, as all sorts of little Horns, Shells,
small Stones, Iron Bells, dried Sprigs of Trees, Herbs, Feathers, Gums, Roots,
Seeds, Keys, Patches, Shreds, Gratings, Scrapings, Horns, Teeth, Hair, and
Nails of white little Dwarfs, called Doend us. In brief, crammed with a whole
Pedlars Pack, and dressed with Feathers, Strings, Cords, Snips of Cloth, and
the like.

To this they add, two Baskets thick covered with Shells, Feathers, Iron Hooks,
and an Herb fetched from a far distant Mountain; in which they cut a hole where
they pour in Wine, of which they give often to drink.

The simplicity of the Maujeres deserves well to be laughed at, for when they
bring any thing upon the account of Trade, into another Country from home,
perhaps forty or fifty miles, they must have such a Sack of Trumpery, which
sometimes weighs ten or-twelve pounds, aloft upon their Pack, though the burden
it self makes them ready to sink under it; But they say, that it rather takes
from, than adds to their carriage; whereby it appears, what effects the
strength of imagination can do.

The Ceremonies of their Public Devotions are strange and ridiculous, How the
service of these Mokisies is performed.
for in the first place they bring forth a Bag of Jewels; then the Ganga sits
down upon a Mat, and with a Leather Bag, thumps upon his Knee, having always
some little Iron Bells betwixt his fingers; then again he strikes upon his
breast, and paints with red and white upon his Eyelids; Body and Face, using
many strange motions and postures of their Body, Hands, Head and Eyes; now
raising the voice to a high pitch, then depressing it, frequently speaking the
word Mariomena; whereupon, those that sit round about, with all the rest of the
assembly answer Ka.

After this has continued a great space, the Ganga or Conjurer begins to turn
his Eyes, and look as if he were distracted, so that they must hold him; but by
virtue of a fowr Water, or Juice drawn from Cane, wherewith they sprinkle him;
recovering, he tells what he has received from Boesy-batta, and what must be
done in such and such cases; as of theft, sickness, and the like.

Besides this, they use so many other Cheats and Delusions, that if we should
but name them, would swell to a bulk too Voluminous for our Design.

Lykokoo, is a black Wooden Image, cut in the shape of a Man sitting; and in
Kinga, a Town lying by the Seacoast, where they have a common Burialplace,
they recite a thousand ridiculous Rhymes concerning this Kikokoo; As, That he
preserves them from Death; Sorcerers, or Doojes.
That he keeps them from hurt by Sorcerers, or Doojes, as they call them; That
he makes the Dead arise out of the Graves in the Night, and forces them to
labor, by going to the Shore, and helping to catch Fish, and to drive the
Canoos in the Water, and in the Day hunts them to their Graves again; and the
like Fictions, which the elder Folks make the young believe, and imprint it in
them from their Infancy.

It happened once formerly, that some Mariners of a Portuguese Ship, that went
to Lovango, in the Night stole Kikokoo out of his House, and brought it on
Board, and in the way an Arm and the Head brake off: But having occasions
afterward to go to Lovango again, they durst not venture thither, without
restoring Kikokoo: So nailing the Head and Arm again fast to the Trunk, and
being come upon the Road, they set him in the dead of the Night into his House
again. The next day there arose a Report among the Blacks, That Kikokoo was in
Portugal, and that a Ship with Goods had taken him away. Afterward there came
by mishap a Portuguese Ship to strike upon the Rocks of Lovango, whereupon they
cried, That Kikokoo had broken the Ship, because the Portuguese had driven a
Nail into his Head. Thus they are taught at every turn to defend the Honor of
the Moquisies, and to misapply every Accident, for confirmation of their Folly.

When the Bonfires of Bomba are made, they lay many Drums upon the ground,
which they beat with their hands and feet, sitting round about a Post that is
set in the middle; among which the Daughters of Kimbos-bombos all dance, moving
their Bodies, Eyes, and Head, like mad Folks; and with obscene Postures, sing
certain Verses, wearing upon their Heads a Bush of all sorts of colored
Feathers, and on their Bodies strange fashioned Garments, with a red and white
painted Rattle in each Hand. In brief, The more apishly they behave themselves,
the freer and braver they are esteemed to be. A thousand more ridiculous and
bestial Ceremonies these shameless Gangaes practice at their Bonfires, mocking
their Moquisies, and dare do whatsoever they think convenient.

Malemba is a Moquisie of great esteem, and serves to support the King's
Health. It is a Mat of about a Foot and half square, with a Band at the top,
upon which hang some small Baskets, Scallops, Feathers, dried Pipes of Cassia,
Iron Bells, Rattles, Bones, and other such like Trinkets, all painted red with
Takoel. The Ceremonies belonging to this are performed with little Drums or
Tabers, upon which a Boy strikes with his Hand. Afterward some Painting of
Takoel and Holy Water, taken out of a Pot with a Brush, is sprinkled upon the
Ganga's and King's Body, with a Song of Probation serving to the purpose. Also
the Nobility, which peep, have for their pains, out of the same Pot, a red
Streak put upon their Bodies, and have afterward the Honor to carry away
Malemba, with his Pots, Brushes, and Cans, and to hang them in their Places.

Moquisie Makongo they solemnize with Rattles, Makongo.
Drums, small Wicker-baskets, and Red-colour'd Fish-hooks; but not worth
farther mentioning, being all foppery.

Moquisie Mymy is a little Hut, Mymy.
that stands on the back of a Way planted round with Banano's, Bakovens, and
other Trees, having an elevated Tial or Throne, upon which a Basket stands full
of all sorts of Trumpery, not worth naming. The chiefest is a Bracelet of
Beads, with some little Shells found on the Seacoast, by which there hangs a
hollowed piece of Wood, upon which they knock. No Black, who has companied
with his Wife that Night, dare be so bold as to touch this Moquisie, such an
Esteem they bear to it.

Moquisie Kossie, is a Sack with some Horns, full of Whiting, and other Aragh.
Kossy.
The Service is performed with Rattles, long Sticks, singing uncouth Songs in
the Night, creeping upon their Knees, Washing, Spitting, Shouting, tying Rings
and Bands about their Bodies, and such like things: This they boast as an
infallible Preservative against Thunder and Lightning, and to prevent
Sicknesses.

The Moquisie Kymaye is a Town close by Boarye, Kymaye.
and consists of old Potsheards, rotten Blocks, whereupon they set Caps, and
worn Rags; so that the appearance of this Ganga seems a Frippery of old Patches
and Tatters. The Ganga plays with the Jugling-Box, painted white, knocks with a
new Cap full of Stones, blows in his Hands, strikes his Arms and Navel, sits
upon a Skin, and is a rare Physician for those that are well. He makes it rain
(surely a strange thing!) in December, January, February, March, April, nay
till May. He takes care of the Sea, Fishery, Canoos, and for other things,
accompting himself a Kykokas Fellow.

The Moquisie Injami stands about six Miles Southerly from Lovango, Injamy.
and is also a great Image, standing in a Hut: Hither they Journey from East to
West, passing by the way over a round Hill, which none must ride or be carried
over, but must go on foot; for otherwise they pollute it.

Kitouba is a great wooden Rattle, upon which they take an Oath, Kitouba.
not to make any sick, to bewitch them, or use other wickedness.

Panza is a Stick like a Halberd, with a carved Head, Panza.
and daubed with Red Coloring.

Pongo is a Basket covered all over with Simbos, and conceited Carvings, Pongo.
and full or Trifles. It serves also for Witchcraft.

Moanzy is a Pot buried in the Ground, between some spreading Trees, Meanzy.
with an Arrow stuck in it, and a Rope strethed over it, on which some Leaves
hang. They which go about with this Pot, wear a Copper Armlet, may eat Kola,
but with no Company, and the like Fopperies. These, and a multitude of other
more Moquisies they have, which every one in particular observe exactly; so
that none may drink out of another Cup in the Marketplace, being kept in a
common Inn or Toping-house, where both Men and Women in great Companies tipple
Palm-wine.

Every Male they Circumcise, more out of Custom than Injunction; Circumcision.
for they are not able to give any Reason why they do it, more than, That it is
an ancient Use, and has been derived to them from hand to hand, by their
Parents, for many Ages.

The Kingdom of ANSIKO.
THe Kingdom of Ansiko (whose Inhabitants are of two sorts, Ansikos, Borders of
the Kingdom of Ansiko.
by Marmol called Anzinguis, and Jages) has according to Pigafet on the East
side a Lake, out of which the River Umbre flows, afterward intermingling
Streams with that of Zaire, and the Dominion of Wangou; in the West, the
Country of Amboe, or the People Amboes; in the North, diverse Wildernesses of
Nubia; in the South, the Territories of Sunde, Songo, and Kongo: In a word,
Philippus Pigafet dilates it from the River Zaire to Nubia: But Janik gives it
for Borders the Kingdom of Kongo, without naming any other Countries that touch
upon it either East or West.

Here grow two sorts of Sandal-wood, Two sorts of Sandal-wood.
viz. Red, called Tawilla; and White, Zikengo; with which last, being the best,
beaten to Powder, and mixed with Palm-oyl, the Inhabitants anoint their Bodies,
for the preservation of Health. The People boast of rich Copper Mines, whose
Metal they furnish the Kingdom of Kongo with. Beasts.
The Woods breed Lions, and many other Beasts, common with Lovango.

The Natives in general are a nimble, Constitution of the Inhabitants.
active, and well-shap'd People, climbing the craggy Mountains with notable
agility.

They take little care for their Living, and dare undertake any thing, without
apprehension or fear of Danger; among themselves unanimous; to Strangers, with
whom conversing, upright and true-hearted: but they have, by reason of their
Beastial Nature, little Trade with the Whites.

Their common Food is Men's Flesh; Food.
insomuch that their Markets are provided with that, as ours in Europe with
Beef or Mutton: All Prisoners of Wars, unless they can sell them alive with
greater advantage; otherwise, as we said, they fatten them for Slaughter, and
at last sell them to Butchers, to accommodate the Markets.

To this Savage Barbarity they are so naturalized, that some Slaves, whether as
weary of their Lives, or to show their Love to their Masters, will proffer
themselves freely to be killed and eaten. But that which is most inhumane, and
beyond the ferity of Beasts, is, that the Father matters not to eat his Son,
nor the Son his Father, nor one Brother the other; but take them by force,
devouring their Flesh, the Blood yet reeking hot between their Teeth. Lastly,
Whosoever dies, be the Disease never so contagious, yet they eat the Flesh
immediately, as a Festival Dish.

The Habit of the common sort of Men differs not much from what before
described; Apparel.
for they go with the upper part of their Bodies naked, and without any thing
on their heads: but People of Quality have Clothes of Silk or Cloth, and on
their Heads red or black Caps, of their own making, or else Portuguese Flannel
Bonnets.

The Noble and other Women of Quality, cover themselves from Head to Foot with
Mantles; but the common Women wear only a Cloth hanging down, girt about their
Middle, and without Shoes.

The Men may keep as many Wives and Concubines as they please; Marriage.
but the Teeming Women after their Delivery, take no care to breed up their
Children, but kill them and eat them up immediately.

They have neither Houses, Goods, Towns, or settled Dwelling-places; but rove
like the wild Arabs, or barbarous Scythians, from place to place, neither
Sowing nor Mowing, but living wholly by Rapine and Pillage, eating the Fruits
of other Men's Labors, wherever they come, devouring and spoiling all before
them.

Their Language differs wholly from the Congish, Language.
which they endeavor to learn and become very expert in, though they make
little use thereof, in regard of their Savage and unconversible Natures.

In stead of Money, Money.
they use Simbos; or little Horns, as those of Lovando, with whom they drive a
great Trade, carrying thither Slaves and Ivory, which they exchange for these
Horns, Salt, Silk, Glass-Dishes, and such like.

Their Arms (for they love War) are short Wooden Bows, Arms.
covered with diverse colored Snake-skins, that they seem to be made of one
piece; which they do to strengthen, and that they may hold it the faster in
their Hands. They make these Weapons of a kind of tough black Canes, which
prove very lasting and serviceable. The Arrows are short, light, and thin, made
of hard Wood, which they commonly hold together with the Bow in their Hands:
In the use whereof, for Shooting, they have so great dexterity, that they can
discharge eight and twenty Arrows before the first falls to the Ground, and can
kill a Bird flying. Besides these, they use also a sort of Pole-axes, whose
Handle having a Knob at the end, is covered with Snakes-skins: The Head shines
very bright, being fastened in the Wood with Copper Pins, and like those in use
sometimes among us, has at one end a sharp Edge like a Hatchet, and at the
other a Hammer. In Fighting, they defend themselves from the Enemies Arrows
with the flat Sides thereof, in stead of a Shield, and turn every way with such
readiness, that they void all the Shafts aimed at them.

They wear also Ponyards in Scabbards of Serpents-skins, in Belts of
Elephants-hides, three Fingers broad, and two thick. Some have Shields made of
Wood, covered with the Skin of the Beast Dant.

They worship the Sun, as their chief Deity, in the Shape of a Man; Religion.
next to that the Moon, in the Figure of a Woman: But besides these, every one
has his peculiar Idol. When they go to Battle, they sacrifice to their Idol,
out of which their Devil speaks very plain, and tells them what they must do.

The Anzikos live under a peculiar King, called the Great Makoko, Government.
whom they report to possess thirteen Kingdoms, making him one of the most
Puissant in Africa.

The Jages have three Governors; the first entitled Singe, the second Kobak,
and the third Kabango, of which every one leads a distinct Army. They maintain
continual Wars against other Blacks, and eat, as is beforementioned, all the
Slain, but sell the Prisoners; and in defect of Buyers, kill and eat them also.
Such as desire to List themselves in their Companies, must first receive the
usual Marks, viz. knock out the two upper and the two lower Teeth before, and
make a hole through the middle of their Noses, into which they thrust Feathers.

There are at present no Jages to be found of the first Race; but those that
now assume that Name, derive their Extract out of the several Countries wherein
they have Warred, and been Victorious, being chosen thereto in this manner.

So soon as they have won a Battle, The Jages how they are bred.
they search among the Prisoners for the handsomest Youths, of whose Courage
they make trial, by shooting at them, by, and over their Heads: Wherein if any
discover a fear of the Arrows, as Cowards, and unfit for Service, they knock on
the Head, and eat; but those that appear fearless and undaunted, they make
holes through their Noses and Ears, knock out their Fore-teeth, and so bring
them up to all Savage Cruelty; who by practice at last stray so far from
Humanity, that they exceed the natural Jages. These possess not only this
Country of Ansiko, but wander almost through all Africa; although now they
have their chief Residence here, and in the South-East of Angola.

The Natural Jages, as the Ancientest People of Angola relate, are not the
Indigene of that Country; but came many years since, with an Army of an
hundred thousand, out of Serre-Lyons, and overran the whole Coast, beyond the
Kingdom of Benguella: But finding themselves too weak to make further way, and
not willing to return, they settled hereabouts; but not contented with that
Resolution, they ranged till they came to the Kingdom of Monomotapa, who
overcame them in a Fight, and made them retreat. Others contradict this,
averring it improbable at least, that the Jagos should first come out of
Serre-Lyons, and conquer as far as the Kingdom of Benguella, a Tract of above
seven hundred Leagues, wherein they must pass so many Kingdoms, great Rivers,
and Mountains.

The Jurisdiction of KAKONGO.
KAkongo takes beginning in the North at the River Lovango Lovize, Boundaries
of the Kingdom of Kakongo.
in about fourteen Degrees and a half South Latitude, and borders in the South
and West at the Kingdom of Goy, and ends at the River Sambo, some Miles up in
the Country.

The Chief City is pleasant and well built, Chief City.
abounding with all sorts of Provisions.

From Kakongo Southwards, all the Country by the Seacoast for thirteen Miles,
and for two Miles and a half Northward of the beforementioned River Lovango
Lovize, lies very low; but afterward grows Mountainous, beyond this rising
still higher: The Blacks call it Kaskais, but the Europeans the Highland of
Kaskais; about which place, a Mile Southerly, a great Water falls into the Sea.

This Kingdom can show only one good River, The River of Kakongo.
called also Kakongo, which mingles with the Sea in five Degrees South
Latitude, gliding some eighteen Leagues through the Country.

A Mile Southward of this Stream lies the Village Molemba, The Village Molemba.
upon a great Bay, making a convenient Haven or Road for Ships. The Country
thereabouts, called Little Kaskais, spreads the Bay of Cabinde, in five Degrees
and five and twenty Minutes South Latitude, being both before and all along the
Coast very Rocky, and full of Cliffs: yet between the chief City and the River
Sonho, full of Woods, pleasant Fields, and high Mountains; but cannot boast any
Fertility, because for the most part untilled; although so Populous, that it
dares number Inhabitants with Lovango it self.

The Natives are treacherous, Constitution of the Inhabitants.
revengeful, turbulent, and quarrelsom: yet show but little Spirit in the Wars;
all their Neighbors, especially those of Goy, continually infesting them,
without fear of revenge; and perhaps would utterly destroy them, but that the
King of Lovango interposes in their behalf, whose Mediation in such Cases
prevails much with all his Neighbors.

Trades and Handicrafts are common with these People and those of Lovango;
Trade.
such are Husbandry, Fishing, and dealing in Clothes, black stitched Caps,
broad Irons, Beetles, Hammers or Mattocks, Tobacco, Red-wood or Takoel, and
Linen; which Commodities they carry to Congo, Sonho, and other Places, and
there exchange for Slaves.

The Merchandises brought thither out of Europe, and desired by the
Inhabitants, are one and the same with those Vented in Lovango; but the
Presents given for the permission of Trade, are less.

Their Customs, Shape, Clothing, Riches, Administration of Justice,
Inheritance, Government, and Religion, differ little or nothing from what we
have already described; we will not therefore nauseate the Reader with a
needless Repetition.

The King of Cakongo may not touch, or wear any European Wares, A Command on
the King.
nor dares any habited therewith touch him, because, forsooth, commanded by the
Moquisie. In all other things agreeing with Lovango.

At the River Sonho the Kings of Lovango and Cakongo keep a continual Watch, to
receive the Custom of the traveling Merchant, and to observe that none should
act any thing prejudicial to the Country.

At the side of the River Cakongo lies the Territory of Serre, or Sarri, The
Territory of Sarri.
subject to the King of Cakongo, but was some years since, for a Mutiny and
Rebellion against him, in a manner totally laid waste.

Upon the Edge of this, and near neighboring to Goy, The Territory of Lemba.
a Territory called Lemba, claims a situation, being a High-land, comprehending
only one Village of the same Name, whither the Whites come to Trade for
Elephants-Teeth, Slaves, and Copper; the last of which they bring from more
adjacent Mines, that produce every year no small quantities.

The Dominion of GOY.
GOy borders in the West, upon the Shore; on the South, Borders of the Kingdom
of Goy.
at the River Zair, or upon Congo; upon Cakongo on the North; whose chief City
delightfully situate on a Plain near the Shore, boasts many Inhabitants; where
several small Rivers have their Out-lets into the Sea, whose Waters both
refresh and fatten the Soil they pass through. On the Coast by the River Zair,
you discover Punto de Palmerino; Punto de Paomerino.
and six hours Journey toward the Bay of Cabinde, where the Portuguese Ships
take in fresh Provision, The Bay Cabinde.
passing to Lovando St. Paulo. This is a good Road for Ships, in regard they
may be plentifully furnished with Provision at reasonable Rates, always
provided, that the Governor have due respects tendered to him by considerable
Presents.

Both Men and Women give themselves wholly up as it were to wantonness; yet
toward Strangers they are churlish and uncivil, Constitution of the
Inhabitants.
not only exacting from them beyond reason, but defrauding them by many subtle
and slye inventions.

The Country abounds with Mill, Beans, and Fish: But the Portuguese have a
Storehouse, to buy Clothes called Panos Sambos, the proper Commodity of this
Place, because made no where else, made Tufted like our Plushes, but without
Flowers or Imagery. To Barter for these they bring out of Majumba red Wood,
which the Natives choose at the highest Price before the richest European
Merchandise, resting in their original simplicity, without desire of better
knowledge from abroad; for they never Travel from home, but only when the King
sends them as Agents to any of his Neighbors, with whom he holds a League of
Amity.

This Kingdom, in the Year Sixteen hundred thirty one, Destruction of the
Kirgdom of Goy.
was absolutely conquered by the Duke of Sonho, who established his Son in the
place of the Deceased King; by whose assistance the Father afterward got a
great Victory over the Cokongian, whose chief City he ruined and burned. The
King of Congo takes upon him the Title of Lord over both those last mentioned,
but has neither Tribute nor Subjection from them; for each has an absolute
and independent Sovereignty within his own Dominion.

The Kingdom of CONGO.
IN the description hereof great differences arise among Geographers; Borders
of the Kingdom of Congo.
some make it begin in the East, at the Territories of Lovoto and Quilango, in
six Degrees and a half South Latitude, and to extend thirty or forty miles into
the Country, as far as the a So we render it in English.
Dukedom of Sonho: bordering the Western part with the before-nam'd Sonho, and
spreading in the North to the River Zair. Pigafet and Linschot conterminate it
in the North with Lovango and Ansiko; in the South, with Angola and Malemba; on
the East, setting the Crystal, Saltpeter, and Silver Mountains, with the
Rivers Verbele, (and Cakongo, says Jarrik) and the People Giagnas, or Galas,
deadly Enemies to Congo; and in the West, with the Ocean. Marmol places for
Boundaries in the North, Benyn; on the East, the Islands of the Azzinguis, or
Anzigos and Mondequestes, which dwell about the Lake Zambea, (out of which it is
said the River Zair takes its original) the People of Pangudingos, Quilos,
Bambos, Condongos, Sonnos, Libros, Bankares, Zakilos, and Maria; Bigness.
on the South, the Mountains of the Moon, which divide it from Abyssiny and
Kaffrari, or the Region of the Kaffers. Some reckon the greatest breadth to a
hundred and twenty Leagues, and its length by the Coast seventy two.

The common Division of it is into six Dukedoms, Division.
viz. Bamba, Songo, or Sonho, Sundo, Pango, Batta, and Pombo.

The Dukedom of Bamba, lying in the North, reaches Westward, to the Coast of
the Rivers Amaois and Dantis; in the South, to Angola; and has for Borders in
the East, according to Pigafet, by the Lake Chelande, or Aquilonde, the
Territory of Sissina.

On the Seacoast of this Territory Pigafet places diverse Lordships, as Lembo,
Dondi, Bengo, Koanza, Kazzansi; and to the Inland, Angazi, Chingengo, Motello,
Chabonda, and many other of smaller note.

Others, who seem to have been diligent searchers herein, intermix with the
aforenam'd these following, being (say they) Governed by several Lords in the
Name of the King of Congo, which the Portuguese call Sabos, or Sovasen. Such
are Vamma, Roansa, Hany, Kalle, Kovangongo, Engombia, Muchama, Kahonde, or
Cabonda, Motemmo, Kanvangongo, Moffoula, or Mussula, Motemma, Quingongo, Oanda,
Quina, Bamba, Bumby, Ensala, Lovoto, Quitungo.

The Dominion of Vamma, Dominion.
coasting the River Danda, lies at the Seacoast. Next this up the River, are
seven or eight small Provinces, but of so little Power and Command, that the
Names thereof are not mentioned.

Further up the River you come to Koansa, Koansa.
under which, and the forementioned Manivamma, stand all the other little
Sovasen.

Then follows the Jurisdiction of Kalle, Kalle.
situate a little to the South, and Commanding over some small Tracts of Land.

Kanvangongo neighbors this; Kanvangongo
and somewhat Southerly lies Engombia, Muchama; or according to others,
Engombia, Cabonda, giving Laws to diverse petty Lordships adjoining.

REGNA CONGO et ANGOLA.


From the forementioned River Danda Northward, Motemmo Kanvangong.
appears Motemmo Kanvangongo; as at the West, on the Seacoast, lies the a So
we may call them
Earldom of Mussula, comprehending within it the Provinces of Pumbo and Bamba,
and holding under his Obedience, all the Countries from Danda to the River
Loze, along the Seacoast. The Sovas of Mossulo is very strong, but
nevertheless not so powerful as the Konvangongo. Here grow some Nutmegs.

Eastward of Motemmo Konvangongo comes Motemmo Quingengo; and about the
South-East, Kahende, formerly one of the most potent in this Tract, but at
present very much weakened.

This Jurisdiction of Kahende, as also that of Quingengo, Kahende.
lies six or eight days Journey from Konvangongo, shooting to the East: to
these two all the Country Eastward from Konvangongo, begins the Territory of
Ambuela, or Amboille; a distinct Government of it self, without relation to
Congo.

South and South-West of Ambuela you come to Oanda, Oanda.
divided from the former by the River Loze, and borders in the West upon Bamba.
It is a great and mighty Country, subject to Congo, but was in the Year
Sixteen hundred forty six, overrun and laid waste by the King of Gingo, and
the People carried away for Slaves.

Next Oanda Eastward follows Quina, containing a small compass of Ground, Quina.
and less Power.

On the West of Oanda, going down to the Seacoast, Bamba touches; between
shoots a corner of Pembo.

Then come you to the Dukedom of Bamba; to the South or South-West of which
lies the Province of Bumby, inconsiderable for Strength or People: bordering
in the West upon Mussulo.

Between Pembo and Quina lies Ensala, whose Governor has the Title of
Mansala; in the Year Sixteen hundred forty three he opposed the King of Congo;
who requesting aid from the Hollanders, they sent him a Company of fifty
Soldiers, that helped him to harrase and spoil the Country.

Beyond the River Loze you pass to Lovato and Quintingo, Lovato and Quintingo.
extending along the Seacoast, and about thirty or forty miles into the
Country as far as Sonho, or Binda.

All these Dominions have in certain places their Boundaries and distinct
Divisions, strictly observed by the Sovasen, or Lords; The dividing of the
Dominions.
which Limits for the most part are diverse Mountains, in the Kongoasch Tongue
called Quibambis: near which stand several Frontier Towns, the usual Residences
of the Sovasen; by which means there seldom arise any differences among them
concerning Bounds.

At the River Onza, near the Seacoast stand three Villages Triangular-wise;
the first the South Side, called Mongonendoin; the second, two miles more
Inland, Jagado; and the third, Lengo.

Not far distant from these appears Mussula, or Mossola, a Place of Trade,
frequented by the Hollanders.

The chief City bears the Name of Panga, seated about five and twenty, The Head
City Panga.
or as some say, six and thirty miles up into the Country, six days Journey
from Lovando St. Paulo in Angola, and about the midway between the Dukedoms of
Sonho and Pembo in the Mountains. This Town takes up a great compass of Ground,
lying very straglingly built after the manner of Lovango and Cakongo, and
divided in the middle by two small Rivulets, or Brooks.

This Dukedom has the Command over many Villages, Government.
and some pretense to the two Ondans, lying to the Southward of Danda; but it
proves a bare Claim without any Possession.

This Lord of Bamba is very Puissant, bearing the highest Command at the
Congian Court, being Captain General of all the Forces there; yet holds the
Place ad placitum Regis, and is disposable by the Successor to whom he thinks
fit.

The Inhabitants are Christians for the generality, and keep among them for
their Instruction, and to perform sacred Offices, diverse Jesuits, Mulatto's,
and Black Priests.

Songo, The Teritory of Congo.
or Sonho, the second Principality of Congo, butts upon the River Zair and
Lebunde, on the South Side surrounded almost with a Wood, called Findenguolla.
Some enlarge it from the River Ambois, in seven Degrees and a half South
Latitude, to the red Mountains, which border upon Lovango; so that according to
this last Description, it conterminates in the North, upon Ansiko; in the
South, on the River Ambris; and in the West, upon the Sea.

This Territory comprehends many petty Lordships, heretofore absolute, but now
made Tributaries to Congo. The chief City Songo stands near a pretty large
River.

A quarter of a mile distant forward comes the Village Pinde, which the Duke
has lent the Portuguese for a Place to Trade in.

Sundo, Sundo.
beginning about eight miles from St. Salvador, the Metropolis of the whole
Kingdom, spreads it self beyond the Cataracts of Zair, by both its Shores to
Ansiko, toward the North. On the East Side it runs to the place where Zair
unites it self with Baranka; and from thence to the Foot of the Crystal
Mountains; and in the South touches upon Pango. The chief City, also called
Sundo, the Residence of the Governor, has its Situation on the Borders of
Pongo, by the Water-falls of Zair.

The fourth Province styled Pango, The Territory of Pango.
has Sundo in the North; Batta in the South; Pombo, the Dewlling Place of the
King, in the West; and the Mountains of the Sun in the East. The Head City,
seated on the Westerly Shore of the River Barbele, was formerly called
Panguelongos, but at present, Pango; heretofore free, but now acknowledging the
King of Congo; whose Protection they craved against the Incursions and Inroads
of their Neighbors.

Batta, The Territory of Batta.
formerly called Aghirimba, to the North-East, or rather full North of Pango,
about a hundred a Spanish Miles.
miles into the Country, reaches Eastward above the River Barbele, to the
Mountains of the Sun, and the Saltpeter Hill; and on the South dilates to the
Burning Mountains, by the Portuguese called Montes Quemados: it is eminentest
City also Batta. This Tract between Pango and Batta are fruitful, and yield all
sorts of Provision for the support of life.

All along the Way from St. Salvadore to Batta, stand Huts, the Dwellingplaces
of the Inhabitants.

About a hundred and fifty miles from Batta Easterly, The Territory of Conde.
lies the Territory of Conde, or Pembo de Okango; through which the
strong-running, and deep River Coango makes its way, till meeting and
intermingling with the larger Waters of Zair, it loses both Name and Current.

This Country, from the prevalency of an ancient Custom, always has a Woman
to Rule it, who pays Tribute to Mani-Batta, or The Prince of Batta, who
receives it in the Name of the King of Congo, although he reap no benefit
thereof. To the East beyond the River Congo, according to the relation of the
Condians, are found white People, with long Hair, but not altogether so white
as the Europeans.

BANSA oste de Stadt SALVADOR Hoost-stadt van het Rijk CONGO. BANSA or SAS^^DOR
the Chief City of ye. Kingdom of CONGO.


The Lordship of Pembo stands as it were in the middle of the whole, The
Territory of Pembo.
encompassed by all the rest, and contains the head City of the Kingdom,
formerly by the Blacks called Banza, that is, Head; but at present by the
Portuguese, St. Salvadore; and by Marmol, Ambos Congo. It stands about the
middle of Congo, on a very high Quarr-Mountain, eight and thirty Dutch miles,
or as others Write, fifty Italian miles from the Sea, South-East from the Mouth
of the River Zair, and delightfully shaded with Palm, Tamarinde, Bakovens,
Kolas, Lemons and Orange Trees.

The top of the Mountain Otreiro yields a curious prospect of all the adjacent
Places, at great distance both to West and North, without any interposing stop
to the Eye.

This Town has neither Enclosure nor Wall, except a little on the Southside,
which the first King built, and afterward gave that part to the Portuguese to
inhabit for their convenience. Here also his Royal Palace shows it self, which
he surrounded with Walls, in such manner, that between it and the Town remained
a great Plain, in the middle whereof they have erected a beautiful Church;
besides these, Noble-mens Houses and others fill up the top of the Mountain:
for every Grandee settles his Dwelling as near the Court as he may be
permitted, and with his Retinue takes up as much Ground as an ordinary Town may
be builded on.

The common Houses stand in good order, and appear very uniform; The King's
Court.
most of them large, well contrived and fenced about, but generally Thatcht,
except a few belonging to the Portuguese.

The King's Palace is exceeding large, surrounded with four Walls, Houses.
whereof that toward the Portuguese part consists of Chalk and Stone, but all
the rest of Straw, very neatly wrought: the Lodgings, Dining-Rooms, Galleries,
and other Apartments, are Hanged after the European manner with Hangings of
Mats, made with exquisite curiosity: within the innermost Fence are some
Gardens, plenteously stored with variety of Herbs, and Planted with several
sorts of Trees: within these are some Banquetting-houses, whose Building,
though mean and slight, yet they esteem rich and costly.

The City boasts ten or eleven Churches, that is, one great one, Churcher.
being the chief of all; then the Seven Lamps Church, the Church of the
Conception, the Church of the Victory, or Triumph; a fifth, dedicated to St.
James; a sixth, to St. Anthony; and a seventh, to St. John: the other three
stand within the Court-Walls, viz. the Church of the Holy Ghost, of St. Michael
and St. Joseph.

The Jesuits have here a Cloister, Cloister.
where they Teach and Instruct every day the Blacks in the Christian Faith, in
an easy and winning method.

Here are also Schools, Schools.
where Youths are brought up and taught the Latin and Portuguese Tongues.

All these Churches, and other public Erections, except the Jesuits Cloister,
have the Foundations of Stone, but covered with Straw, and very meanly provided
with Utensils for celebrating Divine Offices.

There are also two Fountains, one in St. James Street, Fountains.
and the other within the Walls of the Court, both yielding good and sweet
Fountains of Water.

A small River, or rather a Branch of Lelunde, called Vese, The River Vese.
affording very good and well tasted Water, flows in the East at the Foot of
the Mountain close by the City, to the great benefit of the Inhabitants; for
from thence the Slaves, both Men and Women, fetch Water daily to serve the
Town. The adjacent Fields by this River are made very pleasant and fruitful,
and therefore the Citizens have all their Gardens upon its Banks. What Cattle
they have, are Pastur'd and kept for the most part in the City, as Hogs and
Goats, a few Sheep, but no Cows, which lie in the Nights closed in with Fences
joining to their Houses.

Rivers which water this Kingdom, Rivers.
descending from North to South, are first Rio de las Borrenas Roxas, that is,
The River of red Sand; another, at whose Mouth lies a Street called in
Portuguese, Bacas de las Almadias, that is, The Gulf of Canoos.

Here lie three Islands, the greatest and middlemost of them inhabited, and
provided with a convenient Haven for small Barques; but the other without
People, harboring only Beasts.

After these, The River Zair.
Southwards you may see the great River of Zair, which, according to Pigafet,
derives its Head out of three Lakes; the first, by the same Pigafet and others,
entitled Zambre; the second, Zair; and the third, a great Lake from whence the
Nyle is supposed to draw his Original, as out of the second Rise; out of which
the Lelunde and Coanze run: but Zambre is the principal Head that feeds the
River Zair, being set as it were in the middle Point of Africa, and spreading
it self with broad Streams into the North, whither, according to common
Opinion, it sends forth Nylus; to the East, the great River Cuama and Coavo; to
the South, those of Zeila, Manice, or Manhessen; and lastly to the West, this
of Zair; which dividing it self into several Branches, moisten and pinguifies
the Western part of South- Africa, Congo, Angola, Monopotapo, Matamam,
Bagamadiri, Agasymba, and so to the Cape of Good Hope; whereas the Nyle, Cuama,
Coavo, Zeila, Manice, spread over the whole Abyssine Countries, and all others
on the Seacoast, from the Mouth of the Red Sea, to the River Cuama; and
therein the Kingdoms of Melinda, Barnacassus, Quilor, Mombaza, Mozimba,
Mombara, Membaca, Mozambico, and other strange Lands.

The River of Zair breaks forth with an opening above three Leagues in breadth,
in the Elevation of five Degrees and forty Minutes, and with so great force and
abundance of Water runs into the Sea, that the fresh Stream coming out
West-North-west, and North-east and by North, makes an impression therein above
twelve Leagues, and when you are out of sight of Land, yet the Water appears
black, and full of heaps of Reeds, and other things, like little floating
Islands, which the force of the Stream, pouring from high Cliffs, tears out of
the Country and throws into the Ocean, so that the Seamen, without a stiff
Gale of Wind, can hardly Sail through it, to get into the Road within Padron,
on the South Side of the River. This violent and precipitate descent carries
the Stream against you fourteen or fifteen miles. It sends forth on both sides
many Branches or Rivers, to the great convenience both of the Inhabitants and
foreign Tradesmen, who thereby in Boats and Canoos pass from one Town to
another. In the Towns seated on these outstretched Arms, dwell People small of
Stature, probably Pigmies.

The Islands Bomma and Quintalla lie in the Mouth of this River, In Zair Le
several Islands
and others higher upwards, exceeding full of People, who rebelling against the
King of Congo, set up peculiar Lords of their own.

That of Bomma has Mines of Iron; The Island of Bommo.
and though boasting many Inhabitants, yet shows few or no Houses, because of
the Morassness of the Country, which for the most part lies under Water; so
that the Blacks with Canos go from Tree to Tree; among which they have raised
some places, made of Leaves and Boughs, on which they reside and rest
themselves, without any Coverture.

These Islanders appear strong, yet well set, live very beastially, The Manners
of the Islanders.
are great Sorcerers, speak ore tenus with the Devil; in doing of which at
first they come together all on a heap, and afterward one of them runs about
with a Vizard on: this continues three days, which expired, they use another
Ceremony, and then the Fiend speaks through the vizarded Man. They live in
peaceable Times by bartering; in time of Wars they deal in nothing but Weapons,
Arrows, Bows, and Assagays, or Lances.

They have no Marriages or Betrothing, Marriage.
but from their Youth up go one to another, as their Affections or Lusts lead
them, commixing merely like Beasts, without any Solemnity; for they know Laws
of no Chastity, but take as many Concubines as they please: nevertheless, the
first, being the eldest, has the command and supervising over all the rest.

In the Island Quuntalla is an Idol made of Money, which none dare approach, An
Idol of Money in Quuntalla.
but the Servants or Minister appointed to attend, and take care to secure the
Way to it from being discovered, themselves being obliged as often as they go
thither, to take a peculiar Path that no other may find. Many Kings and People
sacrifice to this Idol, especially in Sickness, several of their most costly
and highest prized Goods, which none are permitted to make use of, but by
length of time decay and rot: for as soon as they are dedicated, the Attendant
carries them into a great Plain, where the Idol stands, surrounded with a Wall
of Elephants-Teeth in stead of Stone, and there hanging upon Poles, remain till
they be quite rotten.

These Islanders also have particular Heads, and chief Officers, Government.
chosen by most Voices.

Several other Rivers pay their tributary Waters to increase the swelling
Current of Zair, the most eminent are Umbre, Brankare and Barbale.

Umbre, by Sanutus called Vambere, rises in the North, out of a Mountain in
Negro-Land, and loses it self on the East Side in the Zair.

Brankare, as Pigafet, or Bankare, as Sanutus calls it, takes the original
out of the same Mountain, and after a long course, discharging his Meandring
Stream into the Sea, says the same Sanutus; but Pigafet, from the information
of Edward Lopez, averrs it mingleth with Zair, on the Easterly Borders of
Pango, not far from the Foot of the Crystal Mountain.

The River Barbele, so called by Linschot; or Verbele by Pigafet, springs out
of the same Lake which the same Author makes the Head-Source of Nylus to flow
from; after which it shoots through the Lake Aquilumde, and visiting the City
of Pango, it enlarges the Zair with the addition of its Water.

Southward of the Mouth of the River Zair shoots out a Promontory, The Cape of
Padron.
called in Portuguese, Cabo de Padron, who above a hundred years since erected
a small Chapel, and set up a Cross; and about five miles from Padron is the
Residence of the Earl of Sonho, where the Netherlanders Trade. A little way
within Padron lies St. Paul's Point, affording a convenient Road for Ships.

A mile and a half from thence lies a Creek called Pampus Rock. Pampus Rock.


More on Southwards you come to the Rivers Lelunde, or Lolongo, Ambris,
Enkekoquematari, Loze, Onza, Libonge, Danda, and Bengo.

Lelunde, running between Zair and Ambris, The River Lelunde.
has its Head-Spring in the same Lake with Coanza, or Quanza, so passing close
by the Foot of the Mountain, where the Royal City St. Salvadore stands, runs
down from thence, with many windings West-North-west to the Sea; into which it
falls with a strong Current: but in the Summer so shallow, that it is not
passable with Vessels of any Burden: The Blacks frequent it with Canoos,
notwithstanding the hazard of Crocodiles, which in great abundance breed there.

Next you come to Ambris, Ambris.
lying in six Degrees South Latitude, a great River, and full of Fish, but
Rocky at the entrance, yet passable enough for small Boats. It has the same
original with Lelonde, taking likewise its course not far from St. Salvadore;
the Water seems muddy caused by the swiftness of the Stream: at whose Edges
begins the Dukedom of Bamba.

Thirty miles up this River is a Ferry, A Ferry.
where every Traveller for his passage over, must pay a certain Toll to the
King of Congo. On the South Banks of it many people inhabit, who get their
Living by making Salt, boiled of Seawater in Earthen Pots, and proves gray and
sandy; yet they carry it to Pambo, and several other Places, and drive a great
Trade therewith.

Enkokoquematari is the next, Enkokoquematari.
whose beginning lies undiscovered to the Europeans, and the whole in a manner
of no use, great Flats and Sands stopping up the Mouth, so that it will not
bear a small Boat, and within so scanty of Water, that a Canoo can hardly make
way.

Loze, Loze.
another mean Brook, yet up in the Country passable for a Boat.

About twenty miles upward you must pass a Ferry, where all Travelers for
going over must pay Custom to the Duke of Bamba.

Onza, or, as Pigafet, Onzoni, is Fordable, and not to be Sailed by any
Vessels, because of its shallowness.

Lihongo, Lihongo.
by some called Lemba, can boast neither greater depth, or better qualities.

Danda, The River Danda.
a little more Southward, has at the Mouth five or six Foot Water: it is full
of Fish, and feeds many Crocodiles and Sea-Horses, and affords on each side
fruitful Grounds; somewhat high on the South Side, but on the North, for half a
mile low Grounds.

Bengo, The River Bengo.
by some taken for a Branch of Danda, with Quanza another, lying makes the
Island Lovando: it affords good Sailing with Sloops, about fourteen miles
upward, and in the Mouth sometimes seven or eight Foot Water, notwithstanding
the Flats of Sand. It comes a great distance out of the Country, and so
inundates in the time of Rain, viz. March, April, and May, that with the
violence of its Stream it sometimes carries away much of the Earth on one
side, which either joins again on the other, or else driven into the Sea.

The Winter there bears almost an equal temper with our Summer, The Climate of
Air.
so that the People alter nothing of their Apparel, nor require the warmth of
Fire at that Season of the Year; for the difference between Winter and Summer
is scarely discernable, only the Air, so long as it Rains, is a little Cooler;
but the wet Season once past, the Heat is almost intolerable, especially two
hours before and after Noon.

The Winter commences in mid- March, The Seasons of Rain.
and the Summer in September: in the former the great Rains begin, and continue
March, April, May, June, July, and August, during which time they have scarce a
clear day; the lesser Rain, in September and November. The Summer on the other
side is exceeding hot and dry.

This Country, Congo is watery.
from the several Rivers, has great store of Water; so that the Inhabitants
are very curious in their choice of it: for they will not drink the usual, and
every where to be had, but take care for the freshest and best, as appears by
them of St. Salvadore, who make not use of such as the adjoining Plains afford
them, but cause their Slaves to fetch other, more sound and healthy (as they
suppose) out of Fountains, a little lower on the North-side.

The Lands in the time of Rain, by the muddiness of the water, The King of the
Land.
are made exceeding fruitful, and fit to bring forth all manner of things.

The Dukedom of Batta, and other lying round about, has fat and fertile
ground, affording all manner of Provision.

The Territory of Pembo, especially about Saint Salvadore, because of the fresh
and serene Air, abounds with rich Pastures, Plants.
and produces many flourishing and thriving Trees.

Here grows a kind of Grain, by the Inhabitants called Luko, Luko.
not unlike our Rye, but smaller: this they Grind into Meal, by a Hand-Mill,
and make Bread of it.

Abundance also of Mill, which the Natives call Mazza, Manputo, Mill, or
Mazza.
or Portuguese Corn; as also Mais, or Turky-Wheat, wherewith they fat their
Hogs; and Rice in such plenty, that it hardly bears any price.

Lemmons, Oranges, and Pome-Citron-Trees grow in every corner, bearing fruit of
a pleasant, yet brisk taste; also Bananasses, Dates, Coco-Nuts, and Palm Trees;
besides others producing Colas, which the Inhabitants chaw, as the Indians,
Betel. The Trees called Ozeghes, yields Fruit like yellow Plums, delightful in
smell, and delicious in taste; and with the Branches make Fences, Pallizadoes,
and Arbors, to shelter them from the scorching Beams of the Sun. Nor do they
want Melons, Cucumbers, and Citrons, of an extraordinary bigness, and pleasant
taste.

The Shore of the River Lelunde, going to Saint Salvadore, stands beautified
with abundance of Cedars, which the ignorance of the people make no other
account of them, than to make Canoos, and Fuel.

Cassia Fistula and other Drugs, fit for the use of Apothecaries; as Tamarinds
in Europe, grow plentifully, and have the repute of a good remedy in Fevers.

In the Towns near the Sea, they have store of Beans, Mill, and Poultrey,
which the English, Netherlanders, and other Traders, buy with Panos, Simbos,
little Looking-Glasses, and other Trifles.

In Bamba, a Province of Congo, Beasts.
and there especially they have good stocks of Cattle, viz. Cows, Oxen, Swine,
and Goats: Besides plenty of Fowl, as Turkies, Hens, Ducks and Geese. Elephants.
The Elephants breeding here in numerous droves, grow to an extraordinary
bigness; insomuch, that some of their Teeth have weighed above two hundred
weight: in Congoish Language, such a Tooth they call Mene-Manzo, and a young
Elephant, Moane-Manzo.

The Elephant (if the Blacks report true) casts not his Teeth, having indeed
but only two. But they Hunt and Shoot them with Lances and Darts, making from
them a double advantage, both of Merchandise and Victuals. There are many
scurfed or hollow Teeth found in the Wilderness, which by lying many years in
rain and wind become so. This Commodity, from the infinite abundance brought
thence, within these fifty or sixty years, begins to abate much, because they
are compelled to fetch them further out of the Country.

The Elephant being struck with a Lance or Assagay, will use all means to
assault and kill the person that wounded him; but as if teaching humanity to
the beastial Blacks, neither eats the body nor insults over it, but making a
hole with his Teeth in the ground, puts the dead body thereinto, and covers the
place again with earth and boughs of Trees: therefore such as go to hunt after
a wound given, hide themselves at first, and afterward following afar off,
till loss of blood bringing faintness, they dare approach nearer, and add more
fatal wounds, to accelerate his death: For these Blacks have no knowledge how
to take the Elephant alive, as they in the East Indies: Some of these beasts
have in their head a sort of Bezar-stone of a purple color, which diverse have
supposed to have a Medicinal quality.

The Buffle, in the language of the Country, called Empakasse, has a red
Skin, and black Horns, of which the Inhabitants make musical Instruments. It is
a mischievous beast, and dangerous to be hunted, especially after they are
shot, if not right struck; wherefore the Huntsmen, who mean to shoot a Buffle,
first choose out a secure place, where they may not fear the furious assaults
of the enraged Creature. They say, that if a Cow happen to eat where a Buffle
Pastures, it will instantly die; for that the breath of the Buffle proves
mortal poison to other Cattle: The flesh of it is very gross and slimy, yet the
Slaves eat freely of it, cut in slices and dried.

Here breeds in the Woods another Creature, Azebro.
seldom to be found elsewhere; they style it Zebro, or Zebra, in shape like a
Mule, with a Skin stripped, on the head, and over the whole body, with colors
of white, black, and bluish. They are very wild and swift, hard to be taken
alive, and if taken, more difficult to be tamed, though the Portuguese say,
that some years since they sent four of these Azebras to Portugal, for a
Present to the King, who used them for a Caroch, and rewarded the person who
brought them over, with the Notaryship of Angola, to him and his Heirs.

Empalanga, Empalanga.
is a great Beast like an Ox, having two Horns, and very savoury; they are of
several colors, some brown, others red, and some white.

Envoeri, Envoeri.
also a great Beast like a Stag, with two Horns.

The Makoko, Makoko.
differs little from a Horse in bigness, but has long and slender Legs, a long
and gray Neck, with many white small stripes, and upon his head long sharp
Horns, wreathed below: the Dung of this Creature resembles that of a Sheep.

Tigers, in the Congoish language called Engri, never hurt the Whites; Engri,
or Tigers.
so that when he meets a White and a Black together, he will assail the Black,
and let the White pass unmedled with; therefore the King of Congo has
appointed a reward for those, that can make appear by bringing of a Tigers
Skin, that he has killed one; with this proviso, that the hair of the Lips
remain upon it, because they account them a venomous and mortal poison.

The Leopards generally prey upon Cattle, so do the Lions, but they are not so
cruel as the Tigers, nor so much dreaded.

The Quumbengo, or Wolves, here very numerous, have a thick head and neck,
almost like the Wolfs in Europe, but much bigger, gray headed, speckl'd with
black spots like the Tiger, but much more ill-favored: Foxes, Stags, Deer,
Conies, and Hares, swarm in incredible multitudes, because they are never
hunted as here with us.

Civet-Cats, the Blacks catch and make tame, for their perfume.

The Territory of Batta affords many Beavers, Beavers.
whose Skins are of great value, one of them being as dear as a Sheep; so that
none is suffered to wear them without the King's License.

Moreover, Apes and wild Cats grow troublesome by their numbers, especially in
Songo, by the River of Zaire.

Wild Boars, by them called Emgalo, may be seen here with two great Tusks,
Emgola, or Wild-Boars.
with which he tears violently; the Blacks stand more in fear of this, than any
other Beast, and if they do but hear him, will make away with all speed
possible. The filings of their Teeth (which the Portuguese highly esteem, and
are very seldom gotten) taken in some Liquor, are reputed for a powerful
Medicine against Poison; and Teeth themselves rubbed against a stone, and
administered in a little Water, proves an infallible Cure against an Ague. They
say, this Beast finding himself sick, regains his health by such rubbing of his
Teeth upon a stone, and likewise with his Tongue.

Roebucks, called Golungo, breed here abundantly, but no bigger than Sheep,
Rocbucks.
of a brown color, with some white specks, and two sharp little Horns: several
of the Blacks kill and eat them, but the Congoians, They are by those of Congo
and Ambonde, a forbidden food.
and Ambondes will by no means taste their flesh; nay they bear such an
antipithy to it, that they will not touch any thing out of that Pot, where
their flesh has been boiled, nor come into the place where the fire was that
dressed it, nor lay their hands on ought wherewith it was slain: But of this
niceness can give no other reason, but that the flesh is their Quistilla, that
is, a food prohibited to them by Authority, and ancient Custom, by Traditions
delivered from hand to hand by their Forefathers; for they firmly and
undoubtedly believe, that if they should do the contrary, they should not only
be lame in their bodies, but their fingers and toes would rot off.

Lastly, Bears, Foxes, and poisonous Serpents, frequent the Woods, and
infinitely damage the people.

Besides these varieties of Quadrupeds, they show many sorts of Winged Animals;
as

First Peacocks, which none but the King only may have, Peacocks.
and he keeps them with great care in enclosed Woods, upon the borders of
Angola.

Of Partridges they have two sorts, tame and wild; as also Pheasants, Pigeons,
Turtle-Doves; Eagles, Falcons, Merlins, Sparrow-Hawks, Pellicans, green and red
Parakitoes, Cranes, Storks, with red Bills and red Legs, and half white and
half black Feathers.

There are also Owls, which they call Carjampemba, that is, Devils, because
their appearing presages ill luck.

This Region produces two sorts of Bees; Bees.
one that Hive in the Woods, in hollow Trees; and the other in the Roofs of
Houses.

The Pismires, Pismires.
by them styled Ingingie, are of four sorts; the biggest have sharp stings,
with which they raise swellings upon men; the other three are somewhat smaller.

Ensingie, Eusingie.
is a little Beast, with a Skin speckled black and gray.

The Entiengio, a small Creature, very curiously streaked, slender body'd, with
a fine Tail and Legs, never comes upon the earth, for the very touch thereof
proves mortal to it, therefore keeps in the Trees, and has always twenty black
Hair'd Creatures called Embis attending, that is, ten before it, and ten behind
it. This they take in Snares, and when the ten first are taken, the ten behind
betake themselves to flight; by which means the Animal bereaved of its
Lifeguard, at last is also taken.

The Skin of this little Beast bears such a value, that the King only may wear
it, unless perhaps by particular favor, some great Lords may be admitted;
among which the Kings of Lovango, Cakongo, and Goy, are taken in.

Some have reported, In Congo are no Gold-Mines.
that about Saint Salvadore there are Gold-Mines; but without any ground of
probability, because the Portuguese are greedy of Gold, having conversed so
long in the Country, would not have left them undiscovered.

But they find many Copper-Mines in several places, But of Copper.
especially in Pembo, near the before-nam'd City, whose Metal shows so deep a
tincture of yellow, that reasonable Artists have mistaken for Gold; but upon
proof, the error becomes quickly rectified.

The like Mines are found in Songo, yielding better Copper than that of Pembo;
whereof in Lovando the Purple Armlets are commonly made, which the Portuguese
carry to Calabare, Rio de Rey, and other places.

In Bamba, Silver-Mines and other.
says Linschot, there are Mines of Silver, and other Metals; and in Sundo, to
the East Side, of Crystal, and Iron; the last bearing the highest value,
because it makes Knives, Swords, and other Weapons.

Quarries of Stone they meet with frequently; Stones.
as also Rocks of red Marble, besides many precious Gemms; as Jasper,
Porphirie, Jacinth, and the like.

The Inhabitants of Congo, The kind of the Inhabitants.
known by the name of Macikongen, are very black; yet some few differ, being
only a kind of Olive-Colour: their Hair black, curled; their Bodies of a
middle stature, and well Set; the whites of their Eyes of a Seagreen, and
their Lips not so thick as other Blacks; wherein those of Congo differ from the
other Blacks, especially from those of Nubia and Guinee.

Although some of them be surly and proud, Their condition.
yet in general they carry themselves very friendly toward strangers, being of
a mild conversation, courteous, affable, and easy to be overcome with reason;
yet inclined to drink, especially Spanish-Wine and Brandy: Such as converse
much with them, discern a quickness of reason and understanding, ordering their
conceits and discourses so rationally, that the most knowing Persons take great
delight in their facetious humor.



In the Wars they show little Courage, for the most part going by the lose, if
the Portuguese give them no assistance; for twenty Whites will put to flight a
thousand Congoians.

These of Sango, are a proud, lazy, and luxurious people; but have a winning
behavior and volubility of speech, beyond those that dwell on the Northside of
the River Zaire.

These of Bamba have the repute of the most Warlike and strongest of all in
these parts, for they are such men, that can cut a Slave in two in the midst,
with a Sword; or strike off the head of an Ox at a blow: And which is more,
seeming incredible, that one of their strongest men can with one Arm, hold up a
vessel of Wine, which weighs three hundred and five and twenty pound weight,
till the Wine be drawn out at the Spigget.

They have all a native propensity to Stealing; and what they so get, They are
inclined to stealing.
they drink out instantly with their best Companions in Wine; one of which goes
before the maker of this Feast, and other Friends crying aloud, Behold the King
of Congo! doing him that honor, for the good Cheer and Courtesy received from
him that day.

In the ways from the Cities Saint Salvadore, and Lovando Saint Paulo, many
discarded Noblemen, fallen into disfavor with the King, keep in great Troops
and Companies, Robbing and Plundering all Travelers, till restored again into
the Princes Grace.

They much practice the villainous Art of Poisoning, They are given to poison
one another.
whereby for the smallest trifle, they execute a fatal revenge: They are
severely punished.
But those that use it had need have a care, for if the Author or Contriver be
detected, he must die without mercy; which severity they abate nothing of at
present: and for discovery, so strict inquiry is made, that it is very
difficult to pass unknown; by which means this inhumane Custom begins to decay.

Eminent People, especially in Cities, go richly habited, Apparel.
in great and long Mantles, of fine Cloth or black Bais; under which white
Shirts appearing on the upper-parts of their Bodies; and upon the lower, wide
and long Coats, of Satin, or Damask, Bordered or Embroidered about the edges:
Some wear Clothes made of Peelings of Matombe-Trees, and Leaves of Palm,
colored black and red; but all bare-legg'd, and upon their Heads only white
Cotton Caps, but adorn their Necks and Arms with Gold and Silver Chains, or
Strings of the best red Coral.

Those of Sango wear Coats from the Navel to the Ankles, and Mantles over the
rest; but the Women cover their Breasts.

They play at Cards for Pastime, Their Play.
Staking little Horns or Shells, reckoned among them as current Money.

The Citizens of Congo maintain themselves chiefly by Merchandise; Their
maintenance.
but the Country people, by Tilling of Land, and keeping of Cattle. Those
about the River Zaire live by Fishing; others by drawing of Tombe-Wine; and
some by Weaving.

When they travel from one place to another, The Congoians do not ride on
horseback, but are carried by men.
they ride not, but are carried by men in Hammacks, as the foregoing Plate sets
forth; or else sitting upon a kind of Biers, made fast with a Cord to a Pole,
upon the shoulders of their Slaves, or by hired people; with an Umbrella
overhead, to prevent the scorching of the Sun: wherefore those that will go
speedily, take with them many Slaves for their Journey, that when the first
grow weary, he may be carried by the other.

They Marry and Betroth in Congo after the manner of the Christians; but will
not be circumscribed thereby from keeping every one as many Concubines, as they
can provide Clothes and Expenses for.

When the young Maids in Congo dispose themselves for a double Estate, they go
into a dark house, and Paint themselves red with Oil and Takoel, Wood of
Majumba, staying therein about a month; and then chooses out her eldest
Freeman, that has been most diligent and serviceable to her, and takes him to
Husband.

When any Man or Woman among them dies, they blame the Survivor, The cause of
the death of Man or Woman is laid upon the Survivor.
firmly believing such Persons cannot die by being called: to explain which, we
must tell you, That they conceit, that none die either by Poison, Violence, or
otherwise, until their Friends in the other World call them; whereupon the
Relations of the Deceased take away all things from the Survivor, and for eight
Days afflict him with diverse Pains and Torments, as shaving his Skin, and the
like, saying, Thus must you bear the Punishment, if guilty, or having a hand in
the Death of our Friends. The eight days ended, they bring him or her to a new
Trial, by Pleading; and if upon that quitted, they dwell still in the House, as
before; but if found guilty, are banished thence.

There is a prevailing Custom among them, That if there be three Brothers,
Inheritance.
and one of them die, the two that survive, share his Concubines between them:
And when either of the two remaining die, the longest Liver takes all: After
whose Decease, all the Concubines stay in the House, and become his due that
happens to dwell therein afterward.

Those of Congo reckon the Year by the Cossionoes, or Winter-seasons, The
Account of their Year.
which there begin upon the fifteenth of May, and end the fifteenth of
November; The Months by the Full Moon, and the Days of the Week by their
Markets; because they have every Day one in a several Place; but know not how
to parcel out Time into Hours, or less Spaces.

These People, before the Arrival of the Portuguese, who instructed them in the
Christian Faith, had no particular or proper Appellations; for the Common
People called themselves by the Names of Herbs, Plants, Stones, Fowls, Beasts,
and Living Creatures. The Lords bare the Title of the Lordship they commanded,
as the Lord of Songo was called Mani-Songo, that is to say, Lord of Songo; Mani
signifying Lord, and Songo the Country. But at this day, both Men and Women,
Persons high and low, even the King himself, commonly receives a Name in
Baptism.

They seem well experienced in several Handicrafts, but yet will not take upon
them any Works of hard Labor.

Congo, Songo, and Bamba, vent few Slaves, and those the meanest of all;
because being used to live idly, when they are brought to Labor they quickly
die. The best come thither out of Amboille, Gingos, Jages, Caseudas, Quilax,
Lembo, and other Territories thereabouts, above Massignan in Angola.

The Europeans also drive a little Trade with Simboes: But the chief Dealing in
Songo, consists in Pannos Sambos, Oil of Palm, Palmito-Nuts, and such like.
Heretofore they brought thence many, and those very large Elephants-Teeth; but
of late fallen to nothing.

The City Saint Salvadore is the Staple for the Portuguese Merchants in those
Countries, of whom the Natives desire chiefly to buy Cypress Clothes, or
painted Table-clothes, called Capes de Verdura, blue Cans, Biramks, or Surats,
Copper Basins, English Cloth, great Simbas of Lovando, Baesier, and other
inconsiderable Trifles, as Rings, Beads, and such like.

They use no Measure or Weight, except among the Portuguese; Housholdstuff.
nor have any Housholdstuff, save only Swords, Shields, and a few Slaves.

Their Wealth consists chiefly in Elephants-Teeth and Simbos, or little Shells,
Riches.
which pass in stead of Money.

The Citizens of Saint Salvadore amount to near forty thousand, of which most
are Gentlemen and Nobles; yet wretchedly poor: For among them all, you shall
scarce find ten or twelve that have a Gold Chain, or small Jewel.

The Revenues of the King consist especially in yearly Tributes, The Revenue of
the King.
paid him by the Dukes of Bamba, Batta, Sundo, Nambanganga, Bumby, Mussulo,
Oando, Quingengo, and others under the Titles of Earldoms, as those of Pembo,
Pango, and many others, which falls out on St. James his day, when the King
rewards them with some small Trifle, as a Mark of his Favor. Some have not
doubted to aver, That the whole Income of the King amounts not to above one
hundred and twenty French Crowns, besides some small Presents made by every
Lord above his Tribute, the greatest whereof rises but to a couple of Goats,
the most only giving Fruits, as Bacovens, Wine, Nuts, and Oil of Palm.

They have no Coined Money, Simboes or Horn Shells are their Money.
either of Gold, Silver, or Copper; but, as we have often mentioned, make all
their Markets with little Shells, called Simboes, which pass here as Current,
but in other Countries of no esteem or value: And the Portuguese use them in
their Passage, when they or their Pomberoes, that is Slaves, are sent with
Merchandise to Pombo, and other Places lying up the Country, out of Angola,
Lovando, Sante Paulo, through Congo.

Apothecaries or Doctors they have none, Medicines for Cure.
nor any Physic but what themselves make of Plants, Barks of Trees, Roots,
Stones, Waters, and Oil, which they administer for Agues, Fevers, and almost
all other Maladies.

Fevers, Sicknesses.
the most common Distemper of this Climate, they cure with the beaten Root of
Zandel-wood, Zandel-wood.
mixed with the Oil of Dates, anointing therewith the Body of the Sick two or
three times from Head to Foot. Pain in the Head, by letting Blood in the
Temples, with little Shells sharpened; wherewith opening the Skin, they suck
with the Mouth till they draw the Blood.

The Pox, or Venerial Distemper called Chirangas, rages among them extremely,
which they cure with red Wood called Tavilla.

The King appoints a Judge in every particular Province, Government.
to hear and determine Civil Causes, and Differences that happen; who, though
there be no settled Laws or Statutes, may Imprison and Release, or impose a
Pecuniary Mulct or Fine upon them. But in more weighty Matters every one may
appeal to the King; before whom also Criminal Causes come, wherein as Supreme
Head he gives Sentence.

In Matters of State, Council of State.
and such as concern Peace and War, the King takes advice of ten or twelve
Counselors, his Favorites, who conclude for the Welfare of the Kingdom, and
set forth and publish the Decrees, by his Order, and in his Name.

These punish Witchcraft and Idolatry openly, Punishment of Offenders.
with great Severity condemning the least Sorcerer to the Fire. Whosoever
kills a Man, first having his Offense openly read before him, and then
convicted by Witnesses, is condemned to die.

When an Offender suffers Death by Judgment of the King, The punishment of
Death is also with Confiscation of all his Goods.
he forfeits all his Goods and Slaves; so that none of his Relations enjoy
ought that was his: And sometimes, to supply the King's Coffers, others are for
small cause, or if but suspected, though the Witnesses fall short in the proof
of the Fact, Banished, and their Goods Confiscate, and seized to the King's Use.

When they march out with an Army to encounter their Enemies, Arms.
the Commanders wear Square Caps or Bonnets, trimmed with Ostriches, Peacocks,
and other Feathers; partly to make the greater show, and partly to seem the
more terrible. The upper part of their Bodies are naked, only over the
Shoulders they have Iron Chains hanging, with Links as big as ones little
Finger.

The Common Soldiers use great and broad Swords, which they buy of the
Portuguese, Ponyards with Hafts like Knives, Bows six Handfuls long, Arrows,
Muskets, Pistols, and Shields, made of Barks of Trees, and covered with a
Buffles Hide. The whole Strength of their Battle consists in the Infantry or
Foot-Souldiers; for they have very few or no Horse.

In the Onset and Retreat they use little Discipline or Order; Confused
disorder in fighting.
but upon the Word of Command, the Drums beating, and Horns blowing, they march
forward far distant from one another, and in that Motion give the first Charge
with a Flight of Arrows, which done, they very dexterously wheel about, and
leap from one place to another, to avoid the Enemies Arrows. In the Van
commonly some sturdy Youths draw out, who with the ringing of Bells that hang
at their Girdles, encourage and animate the other. After the first have fought
till they be weary, upon the sound of one of their Horns, directed by the
Commander in Chief, they Retreat, and others instantly supply their Places; and
this continues so long, till one of the Armies proves Victorious.

If it chance that the General of the Army be killed, they instantly betake
themselves to Flight, and leave the Field, no Force or Authority being able to
make them Rally.

In going out to War, they take little care to be furnished with Provision; so
that many times when they come into a Country with their Army, they are forced
for very hunger to leave the Enemy, though half Conquered, and Retreat into
their own Country. But now at length they begin to take notice of these
Miscarriages, and by the Instructions of the Portuguese, to alter and amend
their evil Discipline.

Most of the Territories and Lordships of Congo, Government.
have peculiar Governors or Provincials, entitled Mani, that is, Lord; whereto
they add the Name of the Province, as Mani-Vamma, that is, Lord of Vamma,
Mani-Coansa, Mani-Hany, Mani-Kelle, and many others: But Bamba, Pembo, Pango,
and Batta have the Titles of As was said before, so we call them.
Dukedoms, and others of Earldoms; wherein the Blacks imitate the Portuguese,
as their Apes: But the Portuguese style themselves all Sovasen. When they show
themselves openly before the People, they appear very Stately, sitting upon
great Velvet Chairs, with Velvet Cushions, and spreading upon the Ground before
them costly Tapestries; and this also the Portuguese taught them, to strike an
awful Reverence into their Subjects, of their Grandezza.

The Titles that the King uses to manifest his Greatness, The King's Titles.
are these: Mani-Congo, by the Grace of God, King of Congo, Angola, Makamba,
Okanga, Cumba, Lulla, Zouza; Lord of the Dukedoms of Batta, Sunda, Bamba,
Amboille, and the Territories thereof; Lord of the Earldoms of Songo, Angoy,
Cacongo, and of the Monarchy of Ambondes; Ruler of the great and wonderful
River of Zaire.

He rules with absolute Power and Sovereignty over his Subjects, His Dominion.
who never approach near him, but with the most humble Postures of Reverence;
and whoever fails to tender their due Respects and Obedience, he punishes with
Perpetual Slavery.

But the Pomp of his Majesty and Greatness he shows especially when he Treats
his Nobility, His Feeding of the Nobility, glorious.
that are serviceable to him. This himself in Person deals out in the following
manner.

At Noon the King causes all the Noblemen, then in the Bounds of the Palace,
to be numbered: Whereupon all the Pots are brought before them, one with boiled
Beans, another with Flesh, and a third with Mill, without any Spicery but
Salt, and some Oil of Palm. To the greatest Lords he sends every one his Part,
in a Wooden Platter, together with a small Flask of Palm-Wine: But those of
less Quality are by Name called up, and Accommodated by six, seven, or eight
together, to whom the King directs such a great Pot of Mill, Beans, or Flesh,
according to their Number.

After the Feast is ended, they come all into the King's Presence, and falling
upon their Knees, clap their Hands, and bow their Heads, in token of Thanks and
Submission, and so depart to their own Homes; only some Favorites stay all the
day long, and drink so much Tobacco and Wine of Palm, that every one, as well
the King as Nobles, are so highly fluster'd, that they cannot go from the Place.

When the King goes abroad, With what State he goes abroad.
not only the Nobility, but also those that dwell about the Court, or by
occasion are found there at that time, attend him; some going before, others
following; but all dancing and tumbling with antic Postures, to the Music of
certain ill-tun'd Drums, and long Ivory Flutes like Cornets, until the King be
within his House.

At the King's going to Church, presently, as soon as he is come without the
Palace, not only his own Grandees, which at all times are ready, but also the
Portuguese, as well Temporality as Clergy, must wait upon him, and again from
the Church to his Palace; but at no other time are the Portuguese obliged to
such Attendance.

When he shows himself openly to the People, he is always attired in his
richest Robes, that is, a great long Mantle or Cloak, of Silk, Velvet, or fine
Cloth, most splendidly beautified: On his Fingers he has some Gold Chains,
intermixed with fine Coral; and upon his Head, a bordered and preciously adorned
Cap.

He has in his Palace about a hundred Waiters, who all have Lodgings in the
Court. He eats his Meat after the manner of Europe, at a high Table, where he
always sits alone, with some few Pieces of Plate for his use. All his Waiters
go clothed in black Mantles of Bais.

The Chair upon which he sits has Covers of red or green Velvet, fastened on
with great gilt Nails, and costly Tapestry spread before him, and Cushions for
his Footstool.

When the Hollanders in the Year Sixteen hundred forty two, Hollanders sent to
the King in Embassy.
came the first time to the King, as Ambassadors from Lovando Sante Paulo,
immediately after they had forced it from the Portuguese, they got Audience at
the Evening, in the Dark, passing through a Gallery two hundred Paces long, set
on both sides with two Ranks of Men, with Wax Candles in their Hands burning.

The King sat in a small Chapel, hanged with Rush Mats, The State of the King.
from the top of which a Branch hung with Wax Candles; Habited in a Cloth of
Gold Coat and Drawers, and about his neck three heavy Gold Chains: He had on
his right Thumb a very large Granate or Ruby Ring, and on his left Hand two
great Emeraulds; upon the left Sleeve of his Coat, a Gold Cross was fastened,
richly enclosed in a piece of well-polish'd Crystal: On his Head a fine white
Cap, and on his Legs a pair of Russet Boots. At his right side stood an
Officer, that sometime gently fanned the Air with a Handkerchief; and at his
left side another, holding a Tin Bow, and a Tin Scepter, covered with fine
stripped Cloth in his Hand. His Seat a red Velvet Spanish Chair, aloft above
which, upon a Border, was embroidered in Letters, Don Alvarez King of Congo.
Right before him lay spread a great Turkey Carpet, and over his Head hung a
Canopy of white Satin, set with Gold, and trimmed about with a deep Fringe. A
little on the right side kneeled before him Don Bernardo de Menzos, his
Interpreter and Secretary.

The King's Apparel is very glorious and rich, His Clothing.
being for the most part Cloth of Gold or Silver, with a long Velvet Mantle.

This King wears commonly a white Cap upon his Head; He wears a white Cap.
so do his Fidalgoes, or Nobility, in his Favor: And this is indeed so eminent
a token thereof, that if the King be displeased with any of them, he only
causes his Cap to be taken off from his Head: For this white Cap is a
Cognizance of Nobility or Knighthood here, as in Europe every Order has a
peculiar Badge to distinguish it.

When the King goes abroad with all his Nobles adorned with white Caps on
their Heads, When the King is desirous to have Taxes, he lets his Cop blow off.
he sometimes puts on a Hat, and at pleasure lays that aside, and resumes his
Cap, which he then puts very loosely on, upon set purpose that the Wind should
blow it off the easier; which according to design happening, his Fidalgoes run to
take it up, and bring it to the King again: but the King as offended at the
Disgrace, will not receive the same, but goes home very much troubled; the
next day he sends two or three hundred Blacks abroad to gather in Taxes; so
punishing his whole Kingdom, for the offense of the Wind in blowing off his
Cap, which he caused of set purpose.

He has one Married Wife, The Queen is called Mani-mombada.
which they call Mani-Mombada, that is Queen; all the rest, Taxes for the
Queen, how raised.
being no small number, are Concubines. For this Wife a Yearly Tax is gathered
through the whole Kingdom, by them called Pintelso; every House paying a Rate
for their Beds, viz. a Slave for every Spans breadth: so that if it be three
Spans broad, they pay three Slaves.

The Queen has her Lodgings in the Palace, Her place of abode.
apart, with her Ladies of Honor, which have little Courtship or Art to set
them forth; yet they go almost every night abroad to take their pleasure, and
to satisfy their wanton desires; only some stay according to their turns to
wait upon the Queen, who will her self, if she finds a convenient opportunity,
and a Person that dares venture to come in the Night over the Straw Walls into
the Court, to her private Lodgings, not be backward to receive their proffered
Kindness: But this she does with great circumspection; for if the King should
hear of it, it would endanger both their Lives.

The King, on the contrary, keeps as many Concubines as he pleases; as well of
the Ladies of Honor belonging to the Queen, as of others, without check: but
the Priests spare not to reprove him for it openly in their Preaching.

When the King dies, his Relations put him into the Grave in a Sitting Posture,
to whom formerly a dozen young Maids leaped out of free choice, and were buried
alive, to serve him in the other Life, as believing, That he should not remain
dead, but go into that other World, and live there. These Maids were then so
earnest and desirous of this Service to their deceased Prince, that for
eagerness to be first, they killed one another. And their Parents and Friends
gather together all sorts of stately Clothes, and put them into the Grave, to
the intent that when they arrive in that strange Country, they may buy such
things as they have occasion for therewith.

The Funeral of the King, in stead of other Mourning, is celebrated eight days
together with continual Eating and Drinking; and this kind of Mourning they
call Malala, and every Year after Solemnize it with an Anniversary-Meeting in
the same manner.

This Custom is not only used for the King, but also for the Nobility,
according to their Quality, and continues to this day; but by the progress of
Christianity, teaching better things, they have laid aside totally the burying
of People alive.

In the Succession to the Crown they observe no Order; Inheritance of the Crown
neither Legitimation nor Seniority taking place further than the Ruling
Grandees please; they, according to the humor of barbarous Nations, esteeming
all alike Honorable: For which reason the Nobles choose one out of the King's
Sons (whether Legitimate or Illegitimate it matters not) for whom they have the
most respect, or think the fittest; or else perhaps sometimes swayed by
extravagant Fancies, relinquish all the Children, and give the Crown to a
Brother or Nephew.

The Coronation of the King they Solemnize after this manner. The manner of the
King's Coronation.
All the Nobles and Portuguese assemble before the Palace, in a apiece
open Court, built for that purpose of old, encompassed with a slight Stone Wall
about five Yards high; in the middle of which stands a great Velvet Chair and a
Cushion, with a stately Carpet spread before it, and a Crown wrought of Gold,
Silk and Silver-Wyre laid thereon; as also three Gold Armlets, about the
thickness of a Finger, and a Velvet Purse, wherein is the Pope's Bull, or
Letters of Confirmation to the new King.

The intended King after some time comes into this Congregation, by invitation
of the Nobless concerned primarily in the Election; where all things prepared,
there stands one up, which in the nature of a Herald proclaims these words:

You that shall be King, be no Thief, neither covetous nor revengeful; but be a
friend of the Poor: You shall bestow the Alms for the releasement of Prisoners
or Slaves, and help the Needy, and be charitable to the Church, and always
endeavor to keep this Kingdom in Peace and Quietness, and fully observe and
keep the same without breach of League with your Brother the King of Portugal.

After this Speech ended, the Music begins to play with excellent Melody;
which having continued a convenient season, the last two Fidalgo's go seemingly
to seek him amongst the People, the remaining part of them sitting upon the
Ground. These two in a short time find him they sought for, and bringing him
one by the right Arm, and the other by the left, place him upon the
forementioned Royal Chair, and put the Crown upon his Head, on his Arms the
Gold Armlets, and the usual black Cloth, or Bayze-Cloak, upon his Body; then he
lays his Hand upon a Mass Book and the Evangelists, which the Priest holds to
him, Clothed in a white Garment, hung with white Tassels, and the King swears
to do and keep all that he has been forewarned of, by him the formention'd
Herald. After the ending of these Solemnities, the twelve Noblemen and the King
go to the Palace, accompanied with all those that were present at the
Coronation, who cast Earth and Sand upon him, for a Token of rejoicing, and for
an Admonition, that though he be now King, he shall be Dust and Ashes.

The King after his Crowning remains eight days in his Palace, never going
forth; in which time all the Black Nobility, none excepted, and all the
Portuguese come to visit and wish him good success: the Blacks do him a kind of
Homage, lying down upon both Knees, clapping their hands, and kissing the
King's Hand: the Portuguese sit kneeling upon one Knee, and so the Priests and
Clergy, by that humble posture acknowledging his Sovereignty.

After the eight days past the King appears in the Market, and makes a Speech
to the People, expressing his readiness for the performing of that which was
propounded to him, with assurance to them, that he will seek nothing more than
the quiet and welfare of his Kingdoms and Subjects, and the propagating of the
Christian Faith.

The People of Congo, take the Oath of Fidelity to their King, like other
Christians, but forget it quickly, Murdering him upon any slight occasion,
either by Insurrections or Treason; so that within these forty or fifty years
they have had many Kings: for if all things go not to their minds, or if it
Rains too much or too little, or if any other accident happens, the King bears
the blame.



The Earl of Songo, the most Potent in all Congo, was subject to this King; but
considering the Woods of Findemguolla, which surrounds his Country like a
Bulwark, he fortified it, and made it almost impregnable; so casting off the
Yoke, he will not acknowledge the King of Congo for his Sovereign, but only as
a Friend of Songo.

Formerly this Earl, before the taking of the City Lovando St. Paulo by the
Netherlanders, in the Year Fifteen hundred forty and three, by instigation of
the Portuguese, would have burnt their Warehouses, but that he was afterward
prevented, and his anger aswaged.

This Province of Songo yields Copper, There is Copper in Sougo.
much better than that of Congo, and some Cotton, but they Vend little of it.

In the Year sixteen hundred thirty six, Wars between the King of Songo and the
Earl of Souho.
the King of Congo, Don Alvares, the second of that Name, for some cause given
by the forementioned Earl, with a great Company of Men, and the assistance of a
Company of eighty Portuguese Soldiers of Lovando St. Paulo, drew into the
Field: But the Songo's, by a sudden Sallying out of the Wood, The Overthrow of
the King of Congo.
routed the King's Army, and took him Prisoner; so that for his release and
restoration to his Kingdom, he was forced to give to the Earl two Territories,
the one a Principality, called Mokata, a great Land of Tillage, lying where the
River Zair bordereth nearest to Songo. Yet afterward the Quarrel was renewed,
and Forces on both sides drawn into the Field, A second Overthrow.
and the Controversy coming to be decided by the Sword, the King lost the Day,
and together with it many Slaves. These two Victories exceedingly puffed up the
Earl. It was imputed to the King as a great miscarriage, that this last he drew
into the Field with a small Force, whereas he has innumerable People under his
Command: but this oversight he quickly amended, and has taken severe revenge
of the Songo's for the Losses formerly received. But this kept them not long
quiet, A new War.
for the old Earl being dead, in the Year Sixteen hundred forty and one, there
arose a new and bloody War between the King and the Earl Don Daniel du Silva,
arising upon this ground: When after the Decease of Don Michael, who Ruled
about the Year Sixteen hundred and six, his Son, the forementioned Don Daniel
du Silva, could not come to succeed, because a Faction raised against him was
too strong, he fled to the Duke of Bamba; in whose Court he remained a long
time: but at last, by the help of his Confederates, got the possession of his
Inheritance, and burning with revenge for his sufferings and disgrace, he gave
occasion of Quarrel, by refusing to request of the King of Congo, according to
the old Custom, the confirmation of his Possessions, first accusing him as one
that had a hand in his long Expulsion, and therewithal adding, that the
Election of his Subjects did enough confirm him in his Government, and
therefore he needed no other. The King of Congo enraged hereat, and accounting
it a great dis-reputation and diminution to his Royal Authority, to be so
Bearded, as a manifestation of his high displeasure, placed his Son, the Prince
Don Alphonso, in the Principality of Makata, formerly given, as we have said,
to the Earl of Songo, for releasing of the King Don Alvarez, giving him in
charge not only to keep it, but from thence to make War upon the Earl.
Hereupon Discontents daily growing on, the King of Congo raised a great Army,
which he gave to Don Alphonso, who therewith invaded Songo, and using all the
extremities of War both against his Country and Subjects: But the Songo's, a
very Warlike People, in the Year Sixteen hundred forty and five, the nine and
twentiteth of April, in a Pitched Battle, defeated and put to flight the King's
Army, and took the forementioned Prince of Mokata, together with many
Grandees, Prisoners, and according to the Custom of the Country, chopped off all
their Heads; only he kept Alphonso Prisoner, being his Cousin, and would not
suffer him to depart from him.

The King by this overthrow provoked more than ever to take revenge, raised in
the following Year so great a Force, that he doubted not therewith to overrun
the whole Earldom at once: Of this Army, consisting of almost all the Nobility,
together with three or four hundred Moulatto's, the Duke of Bamba was made
General, and therewith drew near to the Borders of Songo; but was unawares
fallen upon by an Ambuscade out of the Wood Emtinda Guola, on the last of July,
and his Army not only totally defeated, A third Overthrow.
but the Duke himself necessitated to yield to the Earl some Places and
Countries, The Duke of Bamba taken Prisoner.
before wrested from him, for the release of Prince Alphonso his Son. Who was
no sooner come, home in safety, but the Congo's, inclined to the old revenge,
and not being able to digest the disgrace, began new Quarrels, which quickly
broke forth into a great flame.

During this War the King sent Ambassadors with Letters to Brazile to Grave
Maurice, Ambassadors sent both from Congo and Songo to Brazile.
who had the Government of that Country for the States of Holland, together
with many Slaves for a Present to the Council, and two hundred more, with a
Gold Chain, to Grave Maurice himself. Not long after their arrival came thither
also three Ambassadors from the Earl; one of which was Shipped from thence to
Holland to the States; the two other required of Grave Maurice, that he would
give no Assistance to the King of Congo; which in some manner he hearkened to,
and to that end wrote Letters to their Governors in Congo and Angola, not to
intermeddle in the Wars of these two Princes, for that they were both in League
with the Hollanders.

The Ambassadors having been treated with all Civility, Presents.
and received their Dispatch, returned with Letters and Gifts: to the King was
sent a long scarlet Mantle, bordered with Gold and Silver Lace, a Silk Coat,
and a Beaver Hat, with a Hat-band about it, wrought all over with Gold and
Silver; and to the Earl, a Sedan, covered with red Silk, edged with Gold and
Silver, a long Mantle, and a Beaver Hat; besides, in particular from Grave
Maurice, a Sword, with a Girdle richly embroidered with Silver.

Afterward the King and the Duke of Bamba the second time sent Ambassadors to
Grave Maurice, The Congo's Ambassadors come into the Metherlands.
which he received and entertained sumptuously, desiring his favor, that they
might go into the Netherlands; which being granted, and they arrived in
Holland, they show to that State, and to the Prince of Orange, their
Credentials from the King, and other Letters to the Governors of the West India
Company; to whom, among other things, they declared many Customs of their
Country, and in particular, how their Kings sits upon his Throne, causing his
Greatness to appear by long silence; As also how the Inhabitants, after the
manner of the Heathens, did worship and adore him.

Before the coming of the Portuguese into these Countries, Their Religion.
and their converting them to Christianity, the People of Congo had several
sorts of Idols; for every one according to his pleasure, without any rule or
reason, chose himself a god which seemed most for his advantage. Some
worshipped Dragons, Serpents, Goats, Tigers, and many other living Creatures;
others adored Fowls, Plants, Trees, yea, the very Skins of these Beasts stuffed
with Straw. To these Idols they used several Ceremonies, which chiefly
consisted in humility, as bending of Knees, laying their Faces on the Earth,
and daubing them with Dirt, and sacrificing, or offering to them all their best
and dearest things; but at last they were brought to light out of this
Idolatry, in which they had for many Ages lay'n drowned, by the endeavors of
the Portuguese; the manner and occasion whereof happened thus:

When Don John, the second of that Name, King of Portuguese, was bent upon the
discovery of the East-Coast and Country of Africa and the East Indies, in the
Year Fourteen hundred and eighty four, he equipped a Fleet to that purpose
under the Command of Johan Cano, who being come before the River Zair, sent
Agents to the King of Congo; but they not returning, he took four Congo's that
came to see the Ships, and after some time spent in Coasting returned, carrying
them with him, whom the King received with great courtesy, and immediately
dispatched Cano back to Congo with great Presents; who being come upon the
Coast, sent one of these four Natives to the King of Congo, entreating the
return of the Portuguese, whereto easily consenting, Cano sent home the three
remaining Congo's.

The forementioned Portuguese, during the time of their stay and detention in
Congo, became so intimately acquainted with the Duke of Songo, Uncle to the
then King, and a Man of a noble spirit, that they instructed him in the
Christian Religion, and demonstrated so plainly the error of their Idolatrous
Ways, that the Duke went himself to the King in Person to relate it to him, and
advise with him about the change of their Religion; whereupon the King after
many persuasions and arguments, at length condescended to send an Embassy to
Portugal, requesting the King to send some Priests for their instruction; and
accordingly Zakuten that had been there before, was sent with Instructions,
Letters, and a noble Retinue, who arriving there, first learned the Portuguese
Tongue, and soon after he, with all that belonged to him, received Baptism:
This gave such encouragement to King John, that according to desire he
dispatched away Zakuten, with some Priests, and all sorts of Church-Ornaments,
where both Prince and People received them with inexpressible joy.

The first that publicly received Baptism was the Duke of Songo, The Duke of
Songo is Baptized.
with his Son, in the Year Fourteen hundred ninety one, himself being named
Emanuel, and his Son, Anthony: afterward the King himself followed the steps
of the good Earl, taking the Name of John; the Queen, Eleanor; and his youngest
Son, Alphonso. This good example prevailed with many, not of the Nobles only,
but of the Commonalty of all sorts, and each succeeding day increased their
number; since which time the Portuguese have not spared any hazards, labor or
pains, both to increase and confirm the new planted Religion, which has been
answered with a suitable success.

Amongst these are many Schoolmasters, who besides Reading and Writing, teach
the Catechism, wherein they make their Scholars perfect; who in general follow
and obey the Commands and Canons of the Holy Catholic Church.

But although most of them at this day in some measure profess the Christian
Religion, many still retain Idolatry according to their ancient Use; There are
many Idolaters found amongst the Congians, but more Hypocrites.
and others who boast themselves Christians, practice nothing agreeable
thereto, except in the presence of the Whites, and in a place where it may
redound to their Profit, and then they will cunningly play the Hypocrites: and
at best intermingling their vain Idolatry therewith.

The Churches there are built after the manner of their Houses, wherein are
always attending many Priests, both Mullato's and Blacks, which oftentimes
celebrate Mass.

When the Duke goes to those sacred Duties, he puts on his most costly Apparel,
adorned with many Gold Chains, or Strings of pure Corral, Ushered by Music,
attended with a Guard of Musketeers, and followed by a great throng of People.

In the Year Sixteen hundred and four, and again in One thousand six hundred
forty seven, by order of the Pope, at the entreaty of the Congian King, Don
Alvares the second, fourteen Capuchins from Sicily and Cadiz Landed in Songo,
from whence with License they traveled to Congo, only leaving some of their
number to propagate and Preach there.

Those of Oando say they are Christians, Those of Oando call themselves
Christians.
and if they listed, might be so re vera, having such excellent Instructions
daily inculcated to them.

In the Reign of Alvarez the first of Congo, the Christians received not only
a Check, but underwent heavy Persecution, when Patience only used Arma
Ecclesiae, Preces and Lacrymae; but Providence never suffering such raging
impiety to go unpunisht, for Sequitur impius, ulter a tergo Deus, the Jages,
who had long possessed the Kingdom of Ansiko; a savage People, residing in Huts
and Woods, without Prince or Government, like the wild Arabs, fell into the
Kingdom of Congo like an irresistible inundation, The Jages overcome the
Kingdom of Congo.
ruining the same with Fire and Sword. The Province of Batta lay first in their
way, where, on a certain Plain before the City of St. Salvadore, the King gave
them Battle, but with the loss of many People, insomuch that he was forced to
retreat into the City; from whence, not after driven, he fled for safety,
together with many Portuguese and chief Lords of the Realm, to Ilhas das
Cavallus, that is, Horse-Island, leaving the City to the Jages for a Prize, who
burnt it, together with the Churches, laying waste the whole, and carrying away
the Inhabitants, whom they killed and eat: The Husbandmen fled to the Woods and
Wildernesses, choosing rather to die there of Hunger, than to fall into the
hands of such inhumane Cannibals: Nor did that necessity only follow the
Woods, but the Famine spread over the inhabited Parts, so that for a little
Meat a Slave was given, at that time worth at least ten Crowns; nay more,
thousands sold themselves for Slaves to the Portuguese of the Island of St.
Thomas, to preserve themselves from starving; amongst which were some of the
Royal Blood, and many of the chief Lords.

The Congo's King finding himself too weak to withstand his Enemies, by the
Counsel of the Portuguese sent an Agent to Don Sebastian, then King of
Portugal, praying his Aid; who immediately sent him a Supply by Shipping of six
hundred Soldiers: In which Expedition many Nobles and Reformado's put
themselves into the Service, under the Command of Don Francis de Govea, a Man
who had often been in Asia and Africa; who after a fortunate Voyage arriving at
St. Thomas Isle, where by Order they put in for Recruits of Ammunition, and to
Victual and refresh, they went over to Congo, and Landed at Horse-Island, where
the King of Congo then had his abode; where the General having received new
Supplies of Portuguese and Congo's, went over to the Main Land, and Fought the
Jages, beating them in diverse Battles; insomuch that Alvarez, after a year and
a halfs exile, was restored to his Realm.

The King being thus re-setled in his Throne, required for the establishing of
the Christian Religion, that Priests might be sent thither; and as an
acknowledgment of this Aid and Assistance, he obliged himself by a Written
Obligation, to send yearly a Present of Slaves, and withal to own him as his
Lord: The King of Portugal refused the same, modestly returning, That he
acknowledged the King of Congo for his Brother at Arms; but answered his Desire
for establishing the Christian Religion. At length after four years the General
departed, only leaving behind many Portuguese, as a Guard to secure the Peace
of Congo for the future. Thus far we have proceeded in the Affairs of Congo:
But Eastward of Lovango, and North-east of Goy and Cakongo, lie diverse unknown
Countries, as Bokke, or Bukkemeale, Ukango, Sondy, Pombo, Fungeno, Makoko,
Girituma, Combo, d' Okango, Amboille; of which we shall give you some
particulars.

The TERRITORY of BOKKE, or BUKKE-MEALE.
THis Territory, whose Inhabitants are Jages, lies (according to supposition)
about a hundred Leagues up in the Country, to the North-East of Lovango; for
the Blacks which go thither to Trade; are three months in their journey, going
and coming.

Out of this Country comes most of the Elephants Teeth, which the Mouirisen
of Lovango buy of the Jages, who go higher up in the Country to buy them of a
sort of little people, called Mimos, who are under the great Makoko's Command,
and live in the Deserts. The Jages report, that these Dwarf-like Race, can by
Enchantment, make themselves invisible, and so kill or shoot the Elephants,
whose flesh they eat, and sell their Teeth to the Jages, which barter the same
with the Mouirisen for Salt, carried from Lovango, by Slaves in Matteten, or
Bakets upon their heads.

But here we must take notice, that all the Teeth which the Mimo's bring, are
not of Elephants which they Shoot, but many are of those which die naturally,
and are found in the Woods, and therefore look of a decayed color, as if they
were rotten.

The Inhabitants of Bokke-Meale are subject to the Command of the King of
Lovango, pay him Tribute, and serve him in the Wars. Government.


Between Lovango and Bokke-Meale, lies a desolate place, full of great Woods,
six or seven days journey, and without other Inhabitants than Elephants,
Tigers, Wolves, and such like wild Beasts.

The Country of OKANGO.
OKango, a large and mighty Territory, lies to the East of Kongo. Okongo.


The Inhabitants file their Teeth sharp, and lead an idle and shirking life;
neither able to endure labor or hardship, and therefore contemptible among
their neighbors and strangers.

In this Country they make Clothes of the Bark of Trees, some with Flowers,
and others without, which they send to other Countries, in exchange for such
things as they want, and submit to the Commands of a Sovasen, whom they entitle
Mani.

The Territories of CONDE, or POMBO de OKANGO.
ABout a hundred and fifty-miles, North-East from the Dukedom of Batta, you
come to a Country called Congo, or Pombo de Okango, watered by the swift and
deep River Coango, which loses its course by running into the River Zaire.

The Natives aver, that there are found Eastward of the River Coango, a white
People with long Hair, though not so fair as the Europeans.

THE KINGDOM OF FUNGENO.
THis Jurisdiction of Fungeno is tributary and subject to the great Makoko, The
Kingdom of Fungeno.
and lies between the River Zaire, and Coango, Eastwards of Konde, or Pombo d'
Okango.

The Portuguese Trade here for few Slaves; chiefly with a sort of small Pans,
or Clouts, made of the Pith or Bark of the Matombe-Tree, pulled out longways.

These Clouts the Portuguese always used at Lovando, in stead of Money; and
every thing may be had in the Markets for them: nor do the Portuguese make a
small gain out of them.

The Trade of the Portuguese, limits not it self to these people only, but
extends further to the Dominion of Nimeamay, lying to the South-East of Makoko,
who travel from their own Country thither without any fear or hazard, in
regard the Kings of Nimeamay and Makoko hold a friendly correspondence, and
firm league of amity with each other.

THE KINGDOM OF MAKOKO.
MAkoko, a potent and large Jurisdiction, lies Northward of Zaire, behind
Congo above two hundred, or (as others) two hundred and fifty Spanish miles,
from Lovango, or Congo.

The Inhabitants bear one general name of Monsoles, or Metica's; being also
Anthropophagi, or Men-eaters, like the Jages, or rather indeed the right Jages.

The eminentest place of this Kingdom, known to the Whites is Monsol, seated
about two hundred miles from the Seashore.

This King has the repute of greater puissance than he of Congo, as having ten
other Kings Tributary to him.

This King keeps constantly, within appointed places in his Court, two hundred
Slaves; of which, part are given him yearly for Tribute, and part condemned
persons; all fed by their keepers, like stall'd Oxen, or fatted Sheep and Hogs,
being the store to supply the King and his Courtiers with choice Provision, for
whose use slain, and their flesh served up as a delicate Morsel; for they eat
it rather out of a devilish wantonness, than necessity, for that almost all
sorts of Cattle breed there in infinite multitudes; neither is the Land wanting
of any other product fit for humane Food.

In Monsol is kept a great Market of Slaves, Trade.
whither the Portuguese of Lovango send their Pomberoes with Merchandises,
which sometimes tarry out a year or two; when at last, having bought some
Slaves, Elephants Teeth, and Copper, they make the new-bought Slaves to carry
all on their heads to Lovango; so that they are at no charges, to bring their
biggest Teeth or Copper out of the Country.

The King according to his manner, keeps in great State and Pride, The King's
State.
though falling short of Congo, whose Princes have been instructed to bear a
Majestic Port, by the Portuguese so long resident among them.

The Treasure and Riches of this great Prince, consists chiefly in Slaves, The
King's riches.
Simbos of Lovando, Boesies, or small East India Horns, and some Clothes;
things with the Whites of a small value, but by them esteemed more than the
best Gold or Silver.

He keeps continually a mighty and very numerous Army upon his borders, His
power.
to prevent the Innovation of an implacable Enemy, called Mujako; who lives
Northward from him; of whom we have as yet no other knowledge, than to guess
him powerful, in regard he could never be subdued by Makoko.

In the Deserts of this Kingdom inhabit those little men mentioned before, to
shoot and kill the Elephants, and sell their Teeth to the Jages; as they again
to those of Congo and Lovango, who exchange them for other commodities with the
Portuguese, and other Europeans.

The Kingdom of GIRIBUMA, or GIRINGBOMBA.
THis Principality has its situation to the North-East of Makoko, The Kingdom
of Giringbo^nba.
and the King thereof very powerful, holding as his Tributaries fifteen other
great Lords; yet willingly, never drawn to quarrel with his neighbors,
especially of Makoko, with whom he holds a firm alliance, which is the easier
maintained, because they all agree in their heathenish Superstition.

East South East from the great Makoko, you arrive at another mighty Kingdom,
called Monimugo, and by others Nimeamay; whose Jurisdiction reaches to the
borders (as some say) of the Kingdoms of Mombase, Quiloe, Soffale; as in the
Description of those Countries shall be more spoken of at large.

POMBO.
THe Country properly called Pombo, lies more than a hundred Leagues from the
Sea Coast, and (as some say) touching upon Aethiopia superior Abysine.

Others divide Pombo into diverse Kingdoms, stretching themselves as far as a
great Lake (perhaps the Lake Zambre) between both the Seas. But the certain
place where this Lake arrives, is altogether unknown, which no White ever yet
heard of, or has seen; only the Portuguese relate, that a certain Kaffe of
Mosambique which traveled cross through the main Land of Saffola to Angola,
came by it.

Both the Portuguese and Blacks that live in Lovango, The trade of the
Portuguese to Pombo.
Congo, and Lovando Saint Paul, drive a great trade here by their Servants sent
thither with Merchandise; who chiefly for Slaves, Which is drove by Slaves, or
Fombo's.
Elephants Teeth, and Panos Limpos, barter and exchange Canary, Malago, or
Medera-Wines, great Simbos, Boxes, and other Commodities.

These Servants or Pomberos have yet other Slaves under them, sometimes a
hundred, or a hundred and fifty, which carry the Commodities on their heads up
in the Country, as we have heretofore related.

Sometimes those Pomberos stay out a whole year, and then bring back with them
four, five, and six hundred new Slaves. Some of the faithfullest remain
oftentimes there, sending what Slaves they have bought to their Masters, who
return them other Commodities to trade with anew.

The Whites are necessitated to drive their Trade in this manner, Why the
Whites cannot go to Pombo.
by reason (according to their relation) it is impossible for them to wade
through the badness of the ways, and undergo so great hunger and trouble, as
attends that Journey, besides the unwholesomeness of the Air, which causes
extraordinary swellings in the heads of the Whites.

Their journey from the Seacoast out of Lovango, and Lovando Saint Paul to
Pombo, proves very toilsome to the Blacks themselves, because there be many
Rivers, which sometimes after the Rain, grow so deep, but they stop the other
hazards, often arising by the barbarous Jages.

This Province owns for its supreme Lord and Governor, the great Makoko.

The Dukedom of AMBUILLA, or AMBOILLE.
EAstvvards of Quingengo, one days Journey, The Dukedom of Ambuilla.
begins the Dukedom of Ambuila, or Amboille in the North, and North-East,
divided by the River Loze, from Oande. On the East side, this Dukedom has the
Territory of Quitere, Quiandange; and to the South, Kanvangombe, where the
Rivers Danda and Loze (as some say) take their original.

This Principality has many pleasant Fields, Trees, and Fruits, and abounds
with Cattle, as Goats, Sheep, Hogs, and Cows: It was never subject to Congo, It
is not subjected to the Kingdom of Congo.
but vies with it for wealth and magnitude, holding in subjection above fifteen
Domi^ions; whereof the five chiefest are Matuy-Nungo, Pingue, Hoiquyanbole,
Ambuibe, and Lovando; the other not named.

This Country affords many Slaves, and the Trade driven there, is in Pombo.

The Kingdom of ANGOLA, or rather DONGO.
THis Country, by the Portuguese called Angola, Angola is the name of the
Governors, and not of the Country.
lies between the River Danda and Quansa; the name of Angola belongs not
properly to the Land, but is the Title of the Prince, who assumed and continues
it from the first King thereof, who fell off from Congo, to whom it belonged,
by right of inheritance: the right name being Dongo, although formerly, It is
rightly called Dongo.
and still by some called Ambonde, and the Inhabitants Ambond's.

It spreads in the West to the Sea Coast, and then from Danda or Bengo, Borders.
to the River Quansa, a tract of about fifteen miles, but runs about a hundred
miles up into the Country. Jarrik gives it for borders; in the North, the
Kingdom of Congo; in the South, that of Mataman; in the East, Malemba or
Majemba; and in the West, the Sea; where it spreads (says he) from the River
Quansa, about ten degrees South, Latitude, and ends at the Sea near Cowes-bay,
a tract of five and thirty Leagues. Pigafet adds to it all the Countries, from
Cowes-bay beforementioned, to Cabo Negroe; a tract of about fifty more.

This Kingdom of Angola (for so we shall style it) is watered by diverse Rivers;
as Bengo, Quansa, Lukala, and Kalukala.

The River Quansa, for Danda and Bengo, are included before in Congo; The River
Quansa.
lying in nine degrees and twenty minutes South-Latitude; four miles and a half
Southward off The Sleepers-Haven; or six miles from Cape de Palmarinko; and
five to the Northward of Cape Ledo, Its original.
has an uncertain original; for it is reported, that no Whites have ever been
so far, as where the same rises: But the common opinion holds, that it comes
out of the great Lake Zambre, by many made the head of the Rivers Zaire, Nyle,
Niger, and many others.

It has been liken'd to the River Lukar, Course.
in Spain, being at the entrance about half a League wide; and at the
Northside, deepest to come in with Ships. It carries but twelve foot in depth
at high water, ebbing and flowing about four foot; but within they find water
enough, yet Navigable no higher than the Village Kambambe, by reason of the
strong water-falls.

It runs up from the East to the West, very full of winding Reaches, by reason
whereof, from the Mouth to Motahoama, is thirty Leagues Sailing, whereas the
direct way is but twenty. In Sailing by it, the opening can hardly be seen at
the Sea, by means of a black and woody Island, lying right before it.

Several Islands discover themselves herein; The Island Massander.
for about nine miles up, it divides into two Arms, which include an Island
about four miles long, and half a mile broad, called Massander, or Massandera.

This Island produces many sorts of Fruits, especially Mandikoka, which planted
there, grows extraordinary thick; of which they make great quantities of
Tharinka, or Maiz; also Mill three times a year, besides Palm Trees, and a
Fruit named Gojaves.

Ten or twelve miles above this, Motchiama.
lies another, entitled Motihiama; three miles long, and half a mile broad,
very low ground, excepting two Mountains, beset with all sorts of Plants, and
Herbs, and Feeding; there are many Goats, Sheep, Hogs, and Hens.

Some years ago five or six Families of Portuguese lived here, who had many
Slaves, and maintained themselves chiefly with Mandihoka.

Lucala, The River Lucala.
by Pigafet called Luiola, comes out of Amboille, having its head near the rise
of the River Danda; and running South Westward, till about six and twenty miles
from the Sea, joining with Quansa, and by that mixture loosing its name.

The small River Kalukala, runs cross the Territory of Ilamba, with such
extraordinary Creeks and Meanders, that there is hardly one of the two and
forty Dominions, wherein this Kingdom is divided, that lies above an hours
walk from it.

Some Lakes appear at the corners of Quansa or Bengo; the chiefest whereof may
be seen in the Lordships of Quihailo, Angolome, and Chame.

Angola contains diverse inferior Ditions; Territories of the Kingdom of
Augola.
as Lovando, Sinso, Ilamba, Ikollo, Ensaka, Massingan, Embakka, Kabamba; every
one of which comprehends several Provinces, ruled by particular Jovassens or
Governors, viz. Lovando contains nine and thirty Ilambas; forty two Ikollo; and
Ensaka diverse, but uncertain; Massingan twelve, which some bring under Ilamba;
Kambamba sixty; and Embakko sixty.

In Lovando, The City Lovando Saint Paulo.
stands the City Lovando Saint Paulo, on the rising of a Hill, by the the
Seacoast.

On the Northside of this, appears another Mountain, called Mora Saint Paulo,
somewhat higher than that of the City, and so steep, that its with much
difficulty ascendable; yet on the sides thereof, the Jesuits have erected a
Cloister, neighbored by three or four adjoining houses.

LOANDA^^ S. PAUL^^


This City was built by the Portuguese in the Year Fifteen hundred seventy
eight, when Paulus Dias de Nevais was sent thither to be the first Governor for
them in this Country.

The City takes in a great compass of Ground, being built with many fair
Houses, Churches, and Cloisters; but neither Walled nor Fortified. Some Forts
are raised at the Waterside, for the securing of the Haven.

Before the subduing of it by the Netherlanders, in the Year Sixteen hundred
forty one, the Portuguese had six Churches there; two greater, one called Saint
Maria de la Conception, and the other Corpo Santo; and four lesser, one for the
Jesuits, named Saint Antonio; one for the Blacks, styled Saint Gosce; one
Cloister and Church for the Franciscans, and an Almshouse, with a Church
entitled Misericordia. Over this Almshouse, besides the Receptions for Poor,
are four and twenty Chambers, for the Governor and other Officers, viz. a
Steward, a Doctor, a Barber, an Apothecary, and others.

This House has some Revenues of Land, which being but mean, has been
augmented by a Rate upon Ships: for every Ship which puts in there, must pay
two Rees to the Treasurers of this House.

Sinso is the Country situate to the North of Lovando Sante Paulo, up the
River Bengo.

Ilamba, or Elvama, a large Tract of Land, above an hundred Miles in length,
Ilamba.
beginning South-East, and East-South-East from the Territory of Ikollo, and
spreading from the River Bengo to Quansa, and from Kalumba to Massinga, still
growing wider the further you go; and every where so well Peopled, that in two
or three Miles distance is a Village; which proceeds from the Negroes
separating themselves from each other by peculiar Marks: So that the whole
stands divided into two and forty Dominions.

The first of these, neighboring Ikollo, is called Chonso; Dominions of the
Territory of Ilamba.
and afterward the rest lie one behind another, according to their Order, viz.
Namboa, Quolomba, Bamba, Golungo, Makea, Kombi, Quitendel, Etombe, Quitalla,
Kambkaita, Andalladongo, Quiambatta, Nambaquiajamba, Kangola, Quihaito, Chombe,
Angolome, Gumbia, Massingan, or Massagan, Kaoulo, Kahango, Karanga-Pase,
Guenka-Atombe, Hiangonga, Quilambe, Quapanga, Kabanga, Kabuto, Kandalla,
Gongue, Kahonda, Kunangonga, Mossunguapose, Kamanga, Kalunga, Bagolunge,
Quibilacapose, Koslakase, Nambua, Kallahanga, Nimenesolo. These are the
chiefest which make up Ilamba, and wherein may be raised ten or twelve thousand
Fighting Men, armed with Bows and Arrows.

The Sovasen maintain the Boundaries so exactly, that never any Complaint is
heard of one wronging or incroaching upon another, unless it be in open Wars;
and then the Conqueror becomes wholly Master of his Enemies Country.

This Territory can show neither Artificial Forts, or Natural Fastnesses of
Woods for a Defense against their Enemies; some little Groves may be seen upon
Hills, but so inconsiderable, as hardly worth mentioning: Yet these People
cannot easily be conquered, because they use such good Discipline, shooting
their Arrows either lying upon the ground, or kneeling.

From Ilamba North-west, and West-north-west, lies Ikollo. Ikollo.


Ensaka takes beginning six or seven Miles Eastward of Lovando Saint Paulo,
Ensaka.
and situate between the two Rivers Quansa and Bengo. It Is but a small
Jurisdiction, and may be traveled through in half a day.

Here in some few Places the Inhabitants Till their Ground.

Two or three Miles in the Country, on the Hills, stands a Wood, enclosed
about with Bushes and Thorns, to the great accommodation and strengthening of
the whole: For if the Inhabitants should retire thither, it were impossible to
force them out, save only for want of Water, there being none but what the
Rivers Quansa and Bengo bring thither.

Nine Miles Eastwards, Massingan.
and above the Island of Motchiama, in the Province of Missingan, or Massagan,
stands a small Town of the same Name (where the Portuguese have a Fort) erected
between Quansa and Sunda, the last of which environs it on the North, as the
former on the South: And about the distance of two hours walk, intermingle
their Streams, from which Conjunction the Town derives its Appellation,
Massingan signifying A mixture of Waters. It was at first an open but pretty
large Village, but since augmented with many fair Stone-Houses, whereby at
length it is become a City. The first Portuguese Governor of Angola, in the Year
Fifteen hundred seventy eight, by command of his Master erected this City of
Lovando Saint Paulo, and also the Fort there, when by the help of the Congeses
he warred against the King of Angola in the Country: And now inhabited by many
Families of Portuguese, besides Mulattoes and Blacks.

Kambamba edges upon Quansa, The Tertltory of Kambamba.
where stands a Village denominated also Kambamba, Eastward of Massingan about
a days Journey. The Portuguese have a Fort here also, wherein diverse Families
reside, and many Free Blacks, that have good store of Slaves.

About eight days passage up the River Lukala, The Territory of Embakka.
you arrive at Embakka, where is a Village of the same denomination, twelve
days Journey from the Sea side. In this place the Portuguese have their Bounds,
beyond it claiming no Interest.

The unwholsomness of the Air breeds diverse Sicknesses, Constitution of the
Air, and Sicknesses.
especially violent and burning Fevers, which kill in few Hours, unless
prevented by frequent Phlebotomy.

The Pox is so common among them, Pox.
that they think it no Disgrace; and for Remedy use Ointments, and Physical
Herbs taken inwardly; but through want of Skill, the Cure remaining imperfect,
many die.

They have another frequent Distemper called Bitios de Kis, suprising them with
Melancholy, great pain in the Head, Faintness and soreness of Limbs, and makes
their Eyes stand out staring, as if they would fall out.

The Cure, which immediately must be used upon the appearance of the Symptoms,
they perform by washing the Fundament very clean, and putting a Pill made of a
quarter of a rinded Lemmon therein, with the Finger holding it in as long as
may well be endured; which is not done without great pain and burning, a sign
of the right Bitios. This Medicine, though seeming but mean, yet proves the
only Remedy against this Disease, if timely applied: But if the Distemper be
grown inveterate, and far rooted (which the swelling out and opening of the end
of the Gut, and a whitish looseness testifies) then a Mixture of Juice of
Tobacco-leaves, Salt, and Vinegar, steeped together two hours, then stamped in
a Mortar, and so much thereof put into the Fundament as can well be done, and
kept there as long as possible, reduces the Part again to its proper condition,
and absolutely cures the Disease. But this Medicine is so painful, and hardly
to be endured, that the sick Person must be fast held by two strong Men, else
he can never receive the intended Advantage.

The Bitios also are cured by frequent Clysters, or Serringing the
Fundament-Guts with the purified Decoction of the Plant Orore de Bitos, and
dried Roseleaves mixed, with one or two Yelks of Eggs, and a little Allom, and
Oil of Roses. For the preventing hereof, so soon as the tokens of it are
perceived, the Fundament must first be well cleansed; then a Medicine made of a
newlaid Egg, well beaten with a little Rose Water and Sugar, with which mix
White Lead scraped small; then dipping fine Lint into it, put it up into the
Fundament. Observe here, That White Lead is taken for a rare Cure against this
Evil.

Another Disease sorely afflicts them, taking away in a manner their Sight, so
that they grow Pur-blind; but by applying the raw Liver of a Hey, regain their
former Health. Few escape the misery of sore Legs, whose malignity is such as
will hardly admit Cure.

They labor under another sort of Distemper, Beriberi.
which the Indians call Beriberi, being a Lameness of all the Limbs, and
supposed to have its original from the ill curing of the Bitios, and not
cleansing the Blood enough.

The best Medicine against this is, to anoint the Joints before a Fire, with an
Oil by the Indians called Man-Tennah, which in the Island of Sumatra drops out
of the Rocks, like Stone-oyl, and proves very wholesome and serviceable against
all Colds, weakness of Limbs, and Strains.

The Boasi is a Malady very common and pernicious, rotting off the Nose, Boasi.
Hands, Feet, Fingers, and Toes; spreading from Joint to Joint with great pain,
until without Remedy it brings them to their End.

Embasser, a usual Sickness, proceeds from the hardness of the Spleen, Embasser.
which makes them grow melancholy, yellow of color, heavy-hearted, and faint:
But Broth made of the Root of the Tree Embotta, that part especially that lies
to the Morning-Sun, restores their Health.

Of the Branches of this Tree, being very strong and tuff, they make Bows.

The Smallpox also rages here much; Small Pox.
and by reason of their unskilfulness in the use of fitting Medicines, proves
many times very mortal.

The Land about Lovando, for want of convenient Moisture, proves barren; The
nature of the Soil
but on the opposite side, by the River Bengo, fruitful, yielding store of
Mandiboka, Mill, Beans, and many sorts of Fruits and Herbs; which, upon the
Portuguese first arrival, was overgrown with Bushes and Brambles: But the
Portuguese Governor of Lovando, Ferdinando de Sousa, in the Years Sixteen
hundred twenty nine, and thirty, commanded the Inhabitants, every one acording
to the number of Slaves they had, to take each of them a piece of Ground at the
River, and clear it from the Bushes, Brambles, and Weeds, and make it fit for
Sowing and Planting; by which they brought it to the present Fertility.

This Labor at first was ill resented by the Inhabitants, who were drawn to it
with great difficulty; but when they tasted the Profit, and saw the
Fruitfulness, every one sought to get a Plantation, and took so much Ground as
they could Manure. In this manner the Ground was planted with Mill, Beans, and
all sorts of Herbage; and by Time and Practice the People still improving,
became not only a necessary Plantation, but as it were a pleasant Garden for
the whole Country. But afterward, in the Year Sixteen hundred forty one, when
the Netherlanders took the City Lovando Saint Paulo, all was burned and ruined:
So that this Tract of Land, formerly, as we said, a Garden of Pleasure, became
afterward a Den for Lions, Tigers, and other wild Beasts: However, after some
time a Peace being settled between the Dutch and Portuguese, their joint
Endeavors restored it to the former Beauty and Fertility.

The chiefest Products of these Parts are small and great Mill, Plants.
whereof they make Bread; Chesnut-colour'd Beans, called Enkossa, a fatning and
delicate Food, yet too much eating of them causes a pain in the Belly: Also
Oranges, Lemons, Dates, Bananos, Ananasses, Potatoes, Cocos, Arosses, and
Palm-oyl-Trees, Anones, Guajaves, Wine, or Gegos.

Anones, Anones.
so called by the Portuguese, from a Duke which brought this Fruit first
thither, is a pleasant Fruit, very delightful in taste, Ash-colored, as big as
ones Hand, and almost round, like a Pineapple.

Guajaves, Guajaves.
or Gojava, so called by the Portuguese, by the Natives Cienko, and by the
Dutch, Granate-Pears, is a Fruit very delicious in taste, but the coldness of
its Quality makes it thought unwholesom.

Arosses, Arosses.
or Granate-plums, a Fruit almost like Guajaves, but smaller, wholesome to eat,
and of a pleasing sharp taste.

Gegos grows on high Trees, Gegos.
in shape like a Prune, but of a greenish yellow color, having great Stones
within, with some Pulp, sharp of taste, cooling, and wholesome; given to the
Sick in stead of Refrigerative Juleps.

Tamarinds also grow here plentifully, Tamarinds.
and very good. Small Coco-Nuts, which by some are taken to be of the same
sort, and the same nature against Poison, as the Coco-Nuts of the Island
Maldivia, lying between Madagascar and the Cape of India, called Komorri; and
therefore called by the Portuguese, Coquos de Moleva.

Maginette, a sort of Grain like Pepper, but bigger, grows on Bunches, within
which are Seeds like those of a Pomegranate; which taken out, show of a purple
or dark red Color; but afterward, by drying in the Sun it grows black, and
has a biting taste like Pepper.

There grows also a small Tree, Pepper.
to the height of three or four Foot, with small and narrow Leaves, whose Fruit
bears the resemblance of Coriander, at first appearing in green Knots,
afterward in Blossoms, and lastly in a kind of small Grain. These Benies grown
ripe, and dried in the Sun, shrink like East India Pepper, turning black and
hard, and little differing from it in taste, only not so hot, which makes it
pleasant to eat, and fit to be used in all Food. It grows much in Benyn, and
many other places of Nether-Ethiopia. Cotton grows wild here; and if it were
manured and looked after, might be had in great abundance: It blossoms in June
and July, and is ripe in December.

Both Garden and Field-Fruits spring here with little Labor; viz. Turnips,
Radishes, Cabbages, but more open than those with us; Caulyflowers, Carrots,
Purslane, Spinach, Sage, Hyssop, Thyme, Sweet Majoram, Corianderseed, and such
like.

The Tree called in Portuguese, Pon del Colra.
Poa del Cebra, that is, Serpents-wood, has a powerful Operation against
Fevers, as the Mofrossasonho prevails against Poison.

Of the Root called Mandihoka by the Blacks of Angola, Mandihoka.
and by the Islanders of New-Spain, and the West Indies, Juca, by the Mexicans,
Quauhkamotli, and by the Portuguese, Farina, yields very good Meal, whereof
they make Bread, as we of Wheat or Rye, and other sorts of Dainties. No Place
in Angola besides produces so much of this Grain; partly caused from the
fruitfulness of the Soil, and partly from the neerness to the City Lovando
Sante Paulo, where the Markets are always ready to vend it.

This Plant is of diverse sorts, which seem all one at a distance, yet both in
Roots, Color, and Worth, are known to be far differing by the Husbandmen.

The Leaves of this Plant resemble those of an Oak, of a deep Green, The Shape.
with many Veins and Prickles; the Stemm or Body shoots upright ten or twelve
Foot high, spreading with many Branches: the Wood weak, like a Willow, the
Blossom small, and the Seed like Palma Christi, but of no value; only the Root
may be eaten.

In the Planting and using Mandikoka they practice this method: After the Earth
is prepared, by being well wrought, beaten small, and thrown up in Hills like
Mole-hills, little Twigs or Slips cut off from the Branches of it, about a Foot
long, and an Inch thick, are set sloaping one against another, on every Hill
two or three Sticks, with the ends about a Hand-breadth above the Earth; which
immediately take Root, and in nine, ten, or twelve Months, shoot up to the
height of twelve Foot, with many Branches, and a Body as big as a Man's Thigh:
Then to make the Root grow large, the Ground must be Weeded two or three times,
and kept clean: And when it is grown to its perfect maturity, they cut the
Stemm close to the Earth, being good for nothing but Fuel; but the small
Boughs they fit for the next Planting, How the Root Mendikoka is ground to Meal.
and so from time to time. Afterward the Root being dug up, and the Shell
taken from they make it Farina, by Grinding it in a Mill made like the Wheels
of a Wagon, but a Span broad upon the Soal, Shod with Copper; in which are
made many sharp Points in manner of a Grater, and underneath a Trough, into
which the Meal falls. He which holds the Root to the Wheel, has diverse little
Boys to attend and bring him Roots, as there are Slaves to take the grinded
Meal out of the Trough, to dry it in Copper Pans, which to that end like a
Furnace stand over the Fire.

For this work many Houses are built, above a hundred Foot long, and thirty or
forty Foot broad; wherein on both sides stand the Furnances, that is, on each
side ten, and three Mills unfixt, and movable upon occasion from place to
place. Every Husbandman may make as much Farina, or Meal, as he thinks fit,
both for his own use, and to sell; and if he has a House with twenty Furnaces,
uses commonly for Planting, Weeding, Howing, Grinding, and Drying, fifty or
sixty Slaves. Every Alquer of Meal, or two Aroben, One Aroben is thirty two
Pounds.
they sell sometimes in Lovando St. Paulo for two hundred and fifty, or three
hundred Rees.

The Gumm Almesiga distills from a Tree, and smells like Gumm Elemi, The Gumm
Almesiga.
being a wholesome Medicine for many Distempers, especially Colds, and bruised
Limbs.

From another Plant they extract Aloes, found by experience no worse than that
which comes from the Island Sokotorina.

Orore de Bitios, an Herb so called for its Curing the Disease Bitios.

By the Rivers side grow the Trees Mosuma, The Tree called Mosuma.
of which all the Canoos in that Country are made. This Wood has some
similitude of Cork, and sinks not though it be full of Water. On these Trees
grows the Kapok, a Woody and soft Stuff, which by Seafaring People is used in
Cushions and Bolsters, in stead of Feathers.

The rest of the Trees are generally called Likonde, or Alikonde, The Tree
Likonde.
delighting in dry Grounds. Some of these enlarge to the thickness of eight,
ten, or twelve Fathom in the Body, but the Root never goes above a Foot under
Ground, so that the greatest of them may easily be blown down. The Fruit
resembles for bigness Palm-Nuts, but somewhat longer, having within, a white
Kernel, yet never eaten by the Blacks but for hunger and want, for it is a
dangerous Food, and causes great Mortality. The Wood of it is not fit to burn;
but of the Peeling of the Rind, as we of Flax, they make Clothes, and Sacks for
Mill; and of the Stems, or Bodies, Canoos and Boats.

In Marshy places grow many Sugarcanes, Sugarcanes.
but by report of the Inhabitants unfit for use, and therefore not much
Planted. The Extract of the Cane is brown, yet better than St. Thomas to make
Sugar-Loaves.

On the Shore of the River of Kalukala, and Ilamba, they have many delicate
Oranges and Lemons, Citrons, Pomegranates, Pears, Guayavas, Gego's, Ananasses,
and in some places Vines, Planted by the Portuguese; for the Blacks take no
care to propagate foreign Plants.

In the Kingdom of Angola are almost one and the same Beasts as in Congo, viz.
Tigers, Leopards, Lions, red Buffles, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, very great wild
Cats, and Catamountains, the Beast Makako, Empalanga, Civet-Cats, Rhinocerots,
wild Bears, Emgalla, and Camelions: Besides Cattle for Provision, as Sheep,
Goats, Hogs, and the like.

The Woods of this Kingdom, are much frequented by the Beast called by the
Africans, Quoias Morrou, and by the Indians, Orang-autang, that is Satyrs, or
Wood-Men, found also in the Kingdom of Quoia, as is before mentioned, and in
the Island of Borneo in the East Indies. This Beast in shape so much resembles
a Man, that some have held opinion, that it is of humane mixture with an Ape;
which fancy nevertheless the Blacks themselves explode. Such a Creature was
some years ago brought from hence into Holland, and presented to Frederick
Henry Prince of Aurange. Gestait. Tulp. Obs. 3. ^. 56.
It was as tall as a Child of three years old, neither fat nor slender, but
square-set, and well-proportion'd, very nimble and quick, with strong, and
brawny Limbs: in the forepart all over bare and naked, but behind rough, and
overgrown with black Hair. The Face seemed like a Man's at a glimpse, but the
Nose flat and crooked: it had Ears also like a Man's, and on the Breasts plump
Paps, (for it was a Female) and a Belly with the Navel sunk in: the Elbows had
also their proper Joints and Ligaments, the Hands had orderly Fingers and
Thumbs, the Calves of the Legs and the Feet beyond the Heel-bone, plump and
brawny, and would often go upright, and could lift heavy weights, and carry
them from one place to another. When it would Drink, it lift up the Cover of
the Can with one Hand, and held the other under the bottom, and afterward
wiped the Wet from his Lips with a singular comeliness: it laid it self
suddenly to sleep, with its Head upon a Cushion, and covered the Body over with
Clothes with such dexterity, that any would think it were a Man lay there.

The Blacks report strange things of this Animal, averring, that it not only
sets upon, and overpowers Women and Maids, but also dares attempt upon Armed
Men: in brief, it seems to be the very Satyr of the Ancients, whereof Pliny and
others, by report, and Poets, in the way of Fiction, have Written so much.

The Beast Goulongo bears the similitude of a Sheep or Goat, Goulongo.
and the Flesh has the same taste. The People of Congo eat not of it, by
virtue of an ancient Custom imposed upon them by the Devil, or Fetisies, when
they were Heathens, which yet to this day is observed by them.

They have also there Night-Owls, very fine colored Hens, Storks, white
Ravens, and a few Ostriches, besides many Birds of Prey, as Eagles, Hawks, and
such like; Ring-Doves, Geese, Ducks, Sparrows, Swallows, great Bats in
abundance, Canary-Birds, Parrots, Parakito's, Magpies, two or three sorts of
Partridges and Pheasants, with very fine colored Feathers. The first sort have
a Cap of Feathers on their Heads; the second is callow, or ball'd, but have
blue and black Plumage upon their Bodies, with some white intermixed: black and
white Pelicans, much larger body'd than a Kite, but with a straight Bill, but
their Necks very long, which they can turn so round, that they open their
Breasts with their Bills, and feed the Young with their Blood. There is also a
certain small Bird, as in Lovango, whose Whistling or Singing, being heard by
the Blacks as they Journey, is by them taken for a certain sign of the approach
of some wild Beasts.

The Houses of this Territory are much infected with poisonous Vermin,
Poisonous Beasts.
Scorpions, Millepedes, Otters, and Serpents; among which one is by the Blacks
of Quoia, called Minia; by those of Angola, Embamma: Minia, or Embamma.
It has a Mouth wide enough to swallow a whole Buck or Heart, lying in the Ways
like a dead Trunk of a Tree, but falls upon transient Beasts or Men with great
nimbleness.

Another sort of poisonous Serpents breed there, whose Backbone they wear
about their Necks as an infallible Remedy against the King's Evil.

The Lakes feed also many Creatures, especially those of Angola, Quihite, and
Angolm, in the Province of Massingan; wherein, among others, is taken a Fish,
by the Inhabitants named Ambisangalo and Pesyengoni; by the Portuguese, Pezze
Mouller; but by the other Europeans, Mere-men, and Mere-maids; they contain in
length full eight Spans, having two short Arms, and Hands with long Fingers,
but they cannot close them fast together like Men, but only bend them a
little: their Fingers, by reason of some Flesh that grows between them, cleave
together, as the Feet of Swans or Ducks: Their Heads has an Oval shape, small
Eyes, a flat Nose, wide Mouth, but without a Chin, or Ears apparent.

The Males have Genitals like Horses, and the Females two strutting Breasts,
yet not distinguishable one from the other in the Water, being both of a sad
gray color: they do no hurt, neither come upon the Shore; their Flesh tastes
like Pazke in the upper part, but downwards is somewhat leaner, yet affords the
Inhabitants pleasant Food, especially if broyl'd.

They take them with Nets, How they are taken.
and afterward kill them with Harping-Irons, and Lances.

In the Heads of these Monsters is a certain Bone, A Medicine in them.
which beaten small, and taken in Wine, powerfully helps the Gravel in the
Reins or Bladder: that of the Male is best. The Bone about the place of the Ear
the Portuguese wear as a Sovereign Remedy against the infections of ill Air. Of
the Ribs, in Angola, they make Bead-Bracelets, held to be very good for
stenching of Blood, especially those made of the left Rib, lying next the Heart.

These Creatures are also caught about Sofala, on the East-Coast of Africa, and
being Salted make good Food at Sea, if quickly spent, but if kept stale, grows
rank, and becomes dangerous Meat for those which have foul Diseases, as the
Pox, or such like, in their Limbs.

In these Lakes breed moreover great numbers of Sea-Horses, Alligators, or
Crocodiles, and many other amphibious Animals.

The Rivers Quansa, Lukala, and Bengo yield great plenty of excellent Fish;
among which great Crabs. And the Sea affords almost infinite sorts,
particularly Pergomoulato's, which the Portuguese style Pellado, almost like a
Roach. Esquilones, Quikousses, Kussones, Syopos, Dorades, Benitos, Halbekores,
Pergos de Morochermes, Roukadores, Koruines, as also Mokerell; besides Oysters
and Mussles.

The Blacks in Angola about Lovando St. Paulo, The Inhabitants are Idle.
are very lazy, and will rather suffer hunger, than take pains to Plant or Sow
their Ground; and to supply the wants brought on them by idleness, buy
Provisions of their Neighbors for Slaves.

In every Dominion of Angola are four sorts of People, Several sorts of People.
the first Noblemen, called Mokata's; the second styled Children of the
Dominion, being Natives, and for the most part Artificers, or Husbandmen; the
third, Quisiko's, or Slaves, and so propriated and united to the Lords
Dominions, as his other Goods, and inheritable as them; the fourth Mobika's,
also Slaves of the Sovasen, gotten by War, or otherwise. Many times some of the
second sort by misdemeanors, how small soever, become Slaves; for if Sovase
have but the least notice, that one of his Vassals, or Tenants, endeavored to
do him wrong, or sought to assist his Enemy in the Wars, he would not only
make him alone a Slave, but also his Wife and all his Friends, or Kindred, nay,
and perhaps put them to death.

In all this spacious Tract of Nether-Ethiopia, Their Houses.
there are no Houses with Roofs, save only in Lovando St. Paulo, and
Massingan, both Cities, and built by the Portuguese. The rest are made of
Sticks and Thatch, very poorly and slightly, though in some places stronger
than other. The Houses of the Nobility have Rooms jetting out, enclosing a
Court, and an outward place of Receipt.

Their Music must needs be very mean and harsh, having but one sort of
Instrument, called a Cas, made Basket-fashion of the Stock of the Palmito-Tree,
Carved in Flowers, and covered with a Board, which being struck yields a
Taboring sound.

Pigafet says, Their Food.
the Inhabitants have so great a love for Dogs-flesh, that they feed and fat
them in great multitudes, and when killed, dress them as a dainty Dish.

Their Clothing comes very near to that of Congo; the Ornaments of their Necks
and Arms consisting in round Glass-Beads, which they call Anzalos.

The Angolish Tongue differs from Congo's only in the pronunciation; Language.
yet that makes it seem another Speech.

The Men, as we said before, may have as many Wives as they can feed, Marriage.
and the first is accounted the superior of all, if Married according to the
Christian manner.

A Woman, as long her Children have no Teeth, keeps from her Husband; but as
soon as it has any, all the Friends and Acquaintance, both Men and Women,
carries it in their Arms from House to House, Playing and Singing, to receive a
Gift for it, and seldom or never are put off with a denial.

When any Person dies, they wind up the Corpse, being first washed clean,
Funeral.
then Combing out the Hair, and putting on new Clothes, they carry them to the
Grave, made like a Vault, where they set them upon a Seat of Earth, with many
round Glass-Beads, and other Goods about them. Among the better sort Blood is
sprinkled upon the Earth, and Wine poured out for a remembrance of the Deceased.

The punishment of Offenses is done in one and the same manner, that is, The
punishment of Offenses.
the Offender, together with his Wife and Children, and their whole Stock, are
made Slaves to the Sova's. But sometimes they accuse not one another, but work
their own revenge, by poisoning of their Adversary.

In the Enquiry they take no care whether the Party be guilty, or punishable
indeed, but the Saying of the Sova's, or Averment of one single person, carries
the Cause.

In stead of Money they use, as in Lovando, Clothes are their Money.
the small Clothes called Libonges, and Panos Sambos, whereof we gave you there
a full account.

Of these some are single marked, with the Arms of Portugal; others double
marked; and some unmarked.

The single-marked Clothes, as also four unmarked, tied together, go for a half
Tester, and one alone for two Pence; but every double-marked Cloth is worth ten
or eleven.

None of the Portuguese may bring those Clothes into Lovando, but only the
Factor of the Merchant who dwells at Lisbon, and sent thither to buy them up,
whereof he makes no small Gain.

Out of Benyn come blue Cotton-Clothes, by them called Mouponoqua, but by the
Portuguese, Panos res gatto de Berre; they are five Clothes together, and a a
Yard and a half, or two yards broad. There is another sort, in Portuguese
called Pannos de Komma de Figures, of blue and some white mingled, with
Figures, about six or seven Yards long, and above a Yard broad. Both these
sorts the Portuguese Vend in great quantities, and at high Prices in Congo,
Amboille, the Kingdom of Gingo, and other Places.

The like small Clothes are brought from the Island St. Thomas; but the Dye is
not so good, and the Stuff courser. These they exchange for Slaves, to send
into Portugal.

They have two sorts of Simbo's, which serve in lieu of Money, viz. Simbo's, or
little Horn-Shells.
pure Simbo's, taken under the Island of Lovando, and used for Trade in Punto;
and impure, or Brazile, brought from Rio de Janero, and used in Songo and
Pinda, and in the Countries of Anna Xinga, beyond Massingam, and among the
Jages.

The Simbo's of Lovando are also of two sorts, a finer and a courser, separated
by Sifting, the latter they name Simbos Sisado's; the other, Fonda and Bomba.
Both these they send to Congo, being carried thither upon the Heads of the
Blacks, in Sacks made of Straw, every Sack weighing two Aroba's, that is,
threescore and four Pound.

They use also in Lovando, in stead of Money, the red Takoel Wood of Majumba,
and Pio de Hikongo, brought from Benguella; which cut into Pieces of about a
Foot long, have their set value, which every one knows.

The Fruit Cola is there commonly sold for Clothes, four Fruits for one
Libongo, or unmarked Cloth.

The chiefest Trade of Portuguese and other Whites, Trade.
consists in Slaves, carried from thence by Shipping to several Places in the
West Indies, as to the Islands of Porto, Rico, Rio Plata, Santo Domingo,
Havana, Carthagena, and to the Main Land, especially to Brazile and other
Places, to labor in the Engines and Sugar-Mills, and to dig and work in the
Mines; which toil these Angolian Blacks, and no Whites can undergo: so that the
Portuguese and Spaniards must thank the labor of Slaves for most of their
Riches which they possess in the Indies. It is certain the Spaniard used
heretofore to send over upon his own account to the West Indies every year
above fifteen thousand Slaves for those Works; and it is judged, that the
Portuguese to this day send no fewer.

All those Slaves the Portuguese cause to be bought by their Pombero's, as is
before related, above a hundred and fifty, and two hundred miles up in the
Country; from whence they bring them down to the Seacoast.

These Slaves get but little Food on the Way, and lie on the bare Ground every
Night under the open Heaven, without any other Covering, by which means they
grow poor and faint: but the Portuguese in Lovando, before they Ship them away,
bring them first into a great House, which they have built there for that
purpose, and give them their fill of Meat and Drink, and likewise Palm-Oyl to
refresh and anoint themselves withal: But if it happen that there be no Ships
ready, or that they have not Slaves enough to send away, then they use them for
tilling the Ground, and to plant or cut Mandihoka: but at last when they put
them on Board, they take great care to preserve them from Sickness; and that
they may come safe and sound to their intended Port, provide Medicines,
especially Lemons and white Lead, to use against the Bitios; and if by chance
any fall sick, they separate him from the rest, and lay him alone to be Cured,
where he is well provided for with warm Diet.

In the Ships they have Mats to lie on; of which they take great store with
them, especially when they go over to the West Indies, to give every ten or
twelves days a fresh Mat.

But the Hollanders take no such care in transporting their Slaves to Brazile,
but strip them poor and faint, without any Provision of Mats or other things,
by which means many die at Sea.

In the Village Kambamba the Portuguese deal for many Slaves, but not so much
as in Massingan and Embakko; for there when the adjacent Blacks want any
Merchandise, they bring their Slaves to the Portuguese Colonies for exchange.

The Commodities which the Portuguese and other Whites carry thither, are
amongst others of all sorts, Cloth with red Lists. Great Ticking, with long
Stripes, and fine wrought. Red Kersie. Sleasie, and other fine Linen. Fine
Velvet. Small and great Gold and Silver Laces. Broad black Bayze. Turkish
Tapestry, or Carpets. White, and all sorts of colored Yarn. Blue and black
Beads. Stiching and Sowing Silk. Canary Wines. Brandy. Linseed-Oyl. Seamens
Knives. All sorts of Spices. White Sugar, and many other Commodities and
Trifles: As great Fish-Hooks. Pins of a finger long. Ordinary Pins. Needles,
and great and small Hawks-Bells.


The Inhabitants in general gather no great Riches, being content with a little
Mill, and a few Cattle, together with Palm-Wine and Oil.

Their Arms consist in Bows and Arrows, but the chiefest have Lances, Axes,
and Chopping-Knives; which last they wear in their Girdles on their left sides:
in short, they use almost the same Arms, as those of Congo, and observe the
same order in Fighting.

This Country is so populous, that the King can in a very short time bring a
hundred thousand men all Volunteers into the Field; and if occasion requires,
ten hundred thousand pressed Soldiers; so that if they were as valiant as
numerous, they might well be dreaded: but their little courage, and less
conduct has appeared in several Encounters with the Portuguese; particularly,
in the year Fifteen hundred eighty four, twelve hundred thousand Angolians were
put to flight by five hundred Portuguese, and some few Congians: And the
following year, Six hundred thousand Angolians, by two hundred Portuguese, and
ten thousand Blacks.

The Territory of Ilamba can raise twelve thousand men, Armed with Bows and
Arrows, who Fight very circumspectly, and Shoot lying or creeping on the ground.

The Kingdom of Angola, or rather Dongo, has at present a particular Governor
or Prince, who acknowledges no kind of subjection to the King of Congo;
although formerly, when divided into diverse Lordships, the several Sovasen
showed all due obedience to that King.

But a hundred and fifty years since, one of these Sovasen called Angola, with
assistance of the Portuguese, Trading with him, made Wars with the other, and
overcame them one after another, till he made them all Tributaries; yet he let
them still remain in possession, each of his own Dominion.

This was he that afterward came to the Crown, and named himself Incue, from
the great multitude of people under his subjection; and was not inferior in
Power (says Pigafet) to the King of Congo: to whom (as Linschot writes) he
sends Presents, though he be not his Vassal.

After this Angola Incue, in the year Fifteen hundred and sixty, his Son Dambi
Angola, a great enemy of the Portuguese, was chosen King, who Deceased in the
year Fifteen hundred seventy eight, and his youngest Son, Quilonge Angola, or
Angolaire, that is, Great Lord, was left his Heir and Successor to the Crown.

He renewed the old League made by his Predecessors with the Portuguese, and
Paulus Dias de Nevais their Governor; but afterward without cause, cut off
thirty or forty of them on the way, going with several Merchandises to the
Royal City; whereupon Dias made War upon him, and took many places, subjecting
them to the Crown of Portugal, which ever since, together with many other, from
time to time subdued, have remained under them.

The King deceasing in the year Sixteen hundred and forty, Anna Xinga cannot
come to the Crown.
without Maleissue, left three Daughters, and a Nephew; the eldest of these
called Anna Xinga, notwithstanding she was Baptized a Christian, would assume
the Crown after the Heathenish manner: But the Portuguese favored the Nephew,
and so helped him with assistance of Arms, that by force he gat the Throne;
whereupon Anna Xinga, with many Grandees, fled, but has never ceased to claim
the Kingdom as her Inheritance, alleging her Nephew but an Usurper.

In this Quarrel she fought three several Battles, She is several times
over^^^^^.
and was as often routed and vanquished, and has since kept her self an
hundred and fifty miles up into the Country, beyond Embatta; where,
notwithstanding her former ill successes, making new Wars toward the
Wilderness Jages, she has gotten many Cities, Villages, and Countries; whereby
gathering fresh Vigor, she came again upon the Portuguese, by whom, under the
Command and Conduct of Major Pavo Darouva, Conquered, and two of her Sisters
taken Prisoners; one of which Baptized Dama Maja, of her own free will
continued among the Portuguese, and kept her self stately according to her
manner, oftentimes receiving many Slaves for her maintenance.

According to the last accounts, this Xinga can be little less than sixty years
of age, and oftentimes for some past years, has been reported dead; yet the
Subjects concealed, She keeps her self secret.
and kept it so secret, that notwithstanding the Portuguese consign Commodities
thither for Trade by several persons, they cannot by ours or others attain the
certainty thereof: For all Decrees, Orders, and Transactions relating to
Government, are still Proclaimed in her Name.

She is a cunning and prudent Virago, She is warlike.
so much addicted to Arms, that she hardly uses other exercise; and withal so
generously valiant, that she never hurt a Portuguese after Quarter given, and
Commanded all her Slaves and Soldiers the like.

She and her People (for the most part) lead an unsettled life, Her Idolatry.
roving up and down from place to place, like the Jages: Before any enterprise
undertaken, though of meanest concern, they ask council of the Devil; to which
end they have an Idol, to whom they sacrifice a living Person, of the wisest
and comliest they can pick out.

The Queen against the time of this Sacrifice, Clothes her self in man's
apparel, (nor indeed does she at any time go otherwise habited) hanging about
her the Skins of Beasts, before and behind, with a Sword about her Neck, an Ax
at her Girld, and a Bow and Arrows in her Hand, leaping according to their
Custom, now here, then there, as nimbly, as the most active among her
Attendants; all the while striking her Engema, that is, two Iron Bells, which
serve her in stead of Drums.

When she thinks she has made a show long enough, She sacrifices men.
in a Masculine manner, and thereby has wearied her self; then she takes a
broad Feather and sticks it through the holes of her boar'd Nose, for a sign of
War.

She her self in this rage, begins with the first of those appointed to be
sacrificed; and cutting off his head, drinks a great draught of his blood.

Then follow the Stoutest Commanders, and do as she has done; and this with a
great hurly-burly, tumult, and playing upon Instruments about their Idol.

Among all her most precious things, she bestows no such care on any, as the
Bones of one of her Brothers, who Reigned before her, which lie together in a
costly Silver Chest, long before gotten of the Portuguese.

The Queen keeps fifty or sixty young men in stead of Husbands, each of which
may have as many Wives as they please, with this proviso, that if any of them
be with Child, themselves must kill the Infant as soon as born.



In the year Sixteen hundred forty eight, the four and twentieth of June, the
third day after the New Mood, according to the relation of one Fuller, a
Commander in the Service of the Netherlanders; who was appointed with sixty men
to assist this Queen against the Portuguese; and in that regard, stayed so long
time with her, that one of these her Gallants had a hundred and thirteen Wives,
without any offspring; for that after the manner of their Devilish
Superstition and Idolatry, he cursedly made away, or killed their Children.

The Queen used this very Custom at that time; neither dare any of those
selected young men own their Sex, or mention hers: And for the more orderly
concealing thereof, she clothes them in Women's Apparel, according to her
manner, and goes her self in Man's Habit; giving out, that they are Women, and
she a Man. All these have Women's names, but the Queen (her self) a Man's,
especially in the Army, and will acknowledge no otherwise; nay her Favorites
dare not say the contrary, upon the peril of their Heads: and as a testimony
herein of their obedience and constancy to her, permits them to go freely among
her women; and if they fail in their obligations, they seldom escape to tell
further news.

In the year Sixteen hundred forty six, she overran with her Army, Ruined
Oando.
and spoiled all the Villages of Oanda, and made the Inhabitants Slaves.

But the Quisamens residing on the South Side of the River Quansa, send every
year Tribute to her, for an acknowledgment both of their Friendship and
Subjection.

After her death, the Portuguese set another of her Family as King of Dongo,
Angola Sodesie is chosen King.
by name Angola Sodesie, who always privately sent Presents to them, in token
of submission.

The King holds his residence a little above the City Massingan, Dwelling plac^
of the Kings.
in a Stony Mountain, above seven Leagues in compass; enclosing within it many
rich Pastures, Fields, and Meadows, yielding a plentiful Provision for all his
Retinue: into which there is but one single passage, and that (according to
their method) well Fortified; so that he needs neither to fear any Enemies from
the Queens side, nor from the Jages.

The King here, The King only may keep Peacocks.
as he of Congo, keeps a great many Peacocks; a peculiar only to the Royal
Family, and of so high esteem, that if any one should adventure to come to take
but one Feather from a Peacock, with intention to detain it, he should
immediately be put to death; or else be made a Slave, with all his Generations.

This Kingdom stands divided into several Provinces, The Dominions of Angola
are governed by Senasea.
and every Province subdivided into inferior Lordships, Commanded by a
particular Sovas.

Every Sovas has a certain number of Makottes or Counselors, Their Command.
who in all addresses fall down on their Knees, clapping their hands; with whom
he consults of all weighty Concerns.

These Sovasens live privately in Villages, Their dwelling places.
enclosed with thick Hedges, and have only some narrow ways for entrance; and
the Habitations cannot properly be termed Houses, but slight Huts, made of
Rushes and Straw, after the Country manner.

The Governors of all the Territories which the Portuguese hold in Angola by
force of Arms, The co^quer'd Sovasen must pay tribute to the Portuguese.
are bound to pay a Tribute of Slaves to them yearly; and to do them other
services, under the Title of Vassals.

The Portuguese Governor of Lovando, use to Farm this Tribute of the Sovasens
to some of their own Nation, who were not content with what was the settled
Revenue of Slaves, but oftentimes take as many more, which made the Natives
bear a mortal hatred to them.

The Sovasens moreover are bound to appoint Carriers for the Portuguese, when
they travel through the Country, to bear them in Seats from one place to
another: For if a Portuguese be minded to travel from Lovando Saint Paulo, to
Massingan, when he comes at Evening into a Village where he intends to Lodge,
he sends to the Sova to let him know, he has an occasion for so many of those
Carriers; who must not fail to provide them: And this they do every Evening, to
have fresh Men for the next days Journey.

In the year Sixteen hundred forty one, The City Lovando Sante Paulo overcome.
the Netherlanders, under the Command of Cornelius Cornelisen Jol, otherwise
called Houtebeen, took from the Portuguese the City of Lovando Saint Paulo,
upon this account, and in this manner:

Grave Maurice of Nassaw, For what reason it was undertaken by the
Netherlanders.
or General of the Netherlanders in Brasil, taking into consideration, that the
State of Brasil could not consist without many Blacks from the Coast of Africa,
not only to work in the Sugar-Mills, and to Plant the Cane-Fields and cleanse
them of Weeds; but also to Manure more Ground for the Planting of Mandihoka,
and all manner of Fruits; and that this Work could not be done better by any,
than these African-Slaves: And besides that, there were not Slaves enough
brought from the Coast of Arder, Kalbarine, Rio del Rey, and other places
thereabouts; concluded on, to set out a Fleet under the Conduct of the
forementioned Houtebeen; and some Landforces under the Command of one James
Hinderson, to take Angola from the Portuguese.

The Fleet consisted of twenty Ships, great and small, Manned with two thousand
Soldiers, nine hundred Seamen, and two hundred Brasilians, which set Sail from
Fernabuck the thirtieth day of May, The Fleet set Sail from Fernabuck.
in the year Sixteen hundred forty one; and after many oppositions, to come
about to the South, the nineteenth of July, in eight and twenty degrees
South-Latitude, the Fleet began to want fresh water.

The fifth of August the Fleet came to Cabo Negro, in sixteen degrees; They
come to Cabo Negro.
from thence to Flies-Bay, in fifteen degrees; and on the one and twentieth
day, they overcame, and took a Portuguese Carvill sailing along the Coast,
laden with Wines from the Maderas, called the Jesu-Maria-Joseph, the people of
which served them for Pilots, to bring them into the Haven of St. Paulo.

The four and twentieth, the Fleet came within sight of Land, and Hinderson
went the same day with his Soldiers, set in order against the City, ordering
the Snap-hances to March in the Van. The Portuguese Governor, Caesar de
Meneses, stood not far from thence on the Shore, with nine hundred Whites, and
Armed Inhabitants, and a great many of Blacks; besides two Pieces of Ordnance,
in a Fighting Posture.

But so soon as the Netherlanders came near, and began to fall on, The enemy
leaves the City
the Blacks first betook themselves to flight; afterward the Portuguese; and
at last the Governor followed, leaving behind them the Ordnance; and soon after
the City, with all Forts and Batteries, without further resistance; so that
none was found therein, but one drunken Soldier, and a very old Man.

The Booty there, consisted of nine and twenty Brass-Pieces, Booty.
and sixty nine of Iron; besides store of Arms, Ammunition, and provision of
Victual, as Meal, Wine, and thirty Sheep, small and great.

But because there was no fresh water, the Netherlanders after their Conquest
Fortified a House lying near the River Bengo, for convenience of fetching
Water; upon which the Blacks made an assault, but were beaten off with loss of
eighty men.

Two days before the appearance of the Dutch Fleet, the Governor had some
notice of it, but supposing the Netherlanders had come only to fetch a Booty
of Slaves and other Goods, and so to return; gave order, that his Wives and
Children, with the best Goods and readiest Merchandise, Meneses complains of
wrong.
should be brought and hidden in convenient places. But when he saw that they
aimed at the conquering of the City, and all the Forts by War, and to keep them
for their own; he by Letters complained to Jol of injury, and put him in mind,
That the States of the United Netherlands, and the King of Portugal were
agreed, and in League with each other; and therefore expected the Surrender of
the City.

Notwithstanding this expostulatory Letter, and friendly Summons, The answer of
the Netherlanders.
the Dutch within the City returned answer, That they were not acquainted with
the Agreement of the Portuguese, nor had heard of it; but if the Governor had
in truth known any such matter, he should have given them timely notice before
the City was subdued, and they had not been dealt with as Enemies.

At last, when the Portuguese Governor, who was retired to Massingan, found
that the unwholesomness of the Air killed many of his Soldiers, and that he
could not expect to regain Lovando by complaint or fair means; and knowing
himself too weak to attain it by force, sent a Messenger, desiring a Truce for
eight days; intending in that time, either to join with the Netherlanders, and
declare himself for the States; or to depart: An agreement between the Enemy
and the Netherlanders.
But when he proposed unequal matters, he was required to depart with his
Soldiers sixteen miles from Lovando, and make a mutual agreement; and to
declare in nine months, whether he would submit, or depart. Hereupon Caesar de
Meneses drew to the River Bengo, and sitting down there with his people, began
a new Plantation, and managed it with such industry, that in short time he
Planted Gardens, and could not only himself eat the Fruit of the Ground, but
also afford some to those of Lovando.

The Dutch therefore grew jealous of him, The Enemy began to be supported.
as having heard farther, that he to strengthen himself, had taken away all the
Ammunition from Massingan, doubled his Guards in Bengo, and delivered out
Powder and Ball to his Soldiers, expecting an addition of two hundred men out
of Bahia: And therefore to prevent any future inconveniences, it was concluded
to send a Party of Soldiers privately to surprise the Leaguer of the
Portuguese; And to that end, in May, Sixteen hundred forty three, there went
out about a hundred men, who in the Evening came near the Camp: the Sentinel,
upon the first discovery of them gave fire, and was seconded by the rest of the
Soldiers; whereupon the Dutch fell on: They were deseated.
and being come to the Marketplace, the Guard lying before the Governors
House, Sallied out upon them, as also did the Moradores, with their
Snap-hanses, but were quickly routed, and twenty killed, and as many wounded:
The rest, among which the Governor himself was one, were taken prisoners, and
with the Plunder and Spoil of all brought to Lovando Saint Paulo, and from
thence sent to Taernabock in Brasile; only the Governor Petro Coesar de
Meneses, with some of the chiefest they kept prisoners there.

The Portuguese seemed highly discontent at these Transactions, The discontent
of the Portuguese upon subduing the City.
which they showed in their Declarations and Letters sent to Lisbon; firmly
maintaining them to be contrary to their ten years Truce, concluded in the year
Sixteen hundred forty one; which according to the first, second, and eighth
Articles was instantly to begin in Europe, and beyond Europe, as soon as
tidings could come of it: Adding further, that they had accordingly sent
notice, but on the contrary, the Hollanders sent instructions to Houtebeene
their Admiral in America, to subdue all they could.

Till the year Sixteen hundred forty eight, Lovando subdued again by the
Portuguese.
the Netherlanders possessed this City; at which time the Portuguese regained
it by Treaty, on the one and twentieth of August; and accordingly on the four
and twentieth of the same Month, the Dutch marched from thence.

While the Hollanders held it, The Fort Molls.
they erected a Fort on the Northside of the River Quansa, to hinder the
Portuguese going up and down; to which they gave the name of Molls, being two
and thirty paces long, and twenty broad, made up with Planks and Pallisadoes,
and filled with Earth; the top about four foot thick, furnished with
Port-holes, and grown round about with Bushes, where were Planted four Pieces
of Ordnance, with a Guard of Soldiers.

MOst of the Inhabitants are Idolaters, Religion.
and have their Moquisies and Idols made of Wood, in the midst of their Cities
and Towns; giving them particular names, and swearing by them usually, but in
their more particular Adjurations, they follow the Customs and Frantic Humors
of the Ganga: whereof we spoke not long since, with this only addition, That
at last the Conjurer or Ganga takes a red hot Iron, and strokes every one with
it over their Arms or Legs; yet the place touched therewith, receives no damage
by burning in the body of any, but the guilty: And this Superstition has so
won upon their infidelity, that the very Children of the Country in trivial
matters put it in practice: But the Fathers of the Christian Religion, would
severely punish the same, if it should come to their knowledge.

Most of their wooden Idols are made up in the shape of a Goat, with a
Tortoise head, feet of Beasts, and small bones of Elephants, which they call by
a general name Ganganjumba, through which (they say) the Devil speaks to them.

For the service of these Idols they have Priests called Ganga's, which they
adore like gods, for they think, that their lives, health, Ganga's, or
worshippers of the Devil.
nay the preservation of all things lies in their power; as that they have the
command of Rain and Wind, cause fertility or barrenness upon the ground;
inflict sicknesses, and restore health, for indeed they know how in some manner
to administer Physic.

In short, all the Blacks of Angola (till of late) lived in Paganism, using a
Dance, by them called Quimboara, in which they say the Devil certainly enters
one of them, and out of him informs them of future, and answers to past events.
But now many of them, by the endeavor of the Portugal Jesuits, The Angolians
become Christians.
have been brought to the Catholic Religion, especially in the year fifteen
hundred eighty four; at which time many thousands received Baptism: insomuch,
that in Fifteen hundred and ninety, there were above twenty thousand Families
of Angolians found that were Christians; and in the same year, fifteen hundred
more were converted; the Portuguese to this day labor very much in the same
good Work.

Every Sova has a Chaplain in his Banza or Village, to Christen Children, and
Celebrate Mass, which on many works effectually to their confirmation; though
others in public appearing Christians, yet in private adhere to their damnable
Idolatry.

The Supervising and Command of Lovando Sante Paulo, Government of the City
Lovando Sante Paulo by the Portuguese.
and the rest of Angola, subject to the King of Portugal, in matters of State,
lies in the hands of a Governor, two Bradores; or Burgesses, and one Ovidor, or
Chief Justice, for matters Criminal, and two Judges called Jeuses, with one
Secretary.

The King of Portugal has great Revenues from Angola, The Revenues of the King
of Portugal from Angola.
partly by the yearly Tributes of the Sovasen, and partly by the Customs and
Taxes set upon Exported and Imported Goods and Slaves. This Revenue, for all
Rights and free Transportation to Brazil, Rio dela Plata, and other places, is
said to amount to a great sum of Money yearly; which in Lisbon is Farmed to
one, or more, by the name of Contractadore, who keeps his Factor in Lovando, in
the nature, and with the authority of Consul; deciding all matters of Trade,
and Moneybusinesses: He has to attend him one Secretary, two Notaries, and two
Porteras, or Door-keepers.

The Church Government of the Portuguese in Lovando a Bishop manages,
Church Government.
who is Suffragan of him of the Island of Sante Thombe, by reason that Island
prescribes antiquity, and as showing the first claims to be there the
Mother Church of the Christians.

The Island of LOVANDO.
BEfore the City Lovando Sante Paulo, in eight degrees, The Island Lovando.
and eight and forty minutes South-Latitude, lies the Island of Lovando, five
miles with its North-Point to the West of the River Bengo, making a good and
convenient Haven for Shipping. The whole being not above seven miles in length,
but in the broadest place, it is not above half a League over; insomuch as
those that Sail by in a Ship, may easily see the Sea run between it and the
main Land.

Pigafet supposes it to have begun from the setlings of Sand and Mud, thrown up
there in heaps, by force of the two greater Waters of Bengo and Quansa.

The whole spot appears an even Champaign, but very dry and Sandy, only in
some places may be seen a few Bushes and Brambles; and on the Northside, here
and there, some Haw-thorn Shrubs. The Land by the Seaside shoots down so steep
and sloaping, that the Sea, not above a Musket Shot from the Shore, has above
seven or eight and twenty Fathom Water; and a mile from thence a Line of a
hundred Fathom can reach no ground.

Pigafet places on this Island seven Towns, Towns called Libar.
by the Inhabitants called Libar, or Libata; but Linschot will hardly allow
them Villages, however the Portuguese attribute to the best, the title of Sante
Esprit.

Here are two Churches or Chapels for the exercise of Religion; and the
Portuguese have diverse Gardens and Orchards, wherein grow Oranges, Lemmens,
Citrons, Pomegranates, excellent Figs, Bananos, Coco-nuts, Grapes and other
Fruits; but Corn is so great a stranger to it, that they are compelled to fetch
Supply from other places.

This little Tract produces the great Tree, by the Natives called Ensada; by
Clusius, the Indian Fig Tree; by Linschot in Portuguese, Arbor de Raiz, that
is, the Rooting-Tree.

It springs up commonly with one thick body to a great height, at the top
shooting forth many branches; from which pendulously descend several small
Strings of a Golden color, which once touching the ground, take fast root, and
spring up again like new Plants, and in short time, increase to a large Bulk;
from whence, as the former, fall new Pendulums, that rooting again, spread; and
so ad infinitum: so that sometimes one single Tree will extend its bounds above
a thousand paces, and seems like a little Wood or Thicket.

The great Sprouts with so many close Boughs, deny the Sunbeams a peeping
place to view the inside of those vaulted Cavities, whose redoubled Mazes yield
three or four times reiterated Ecchos, to such whose retirements draw them
thither for divertisement and shadow.

The Leaves of the young Boughs, resemble those of the Quince-Tree, being of a
whitish green, and woolly. The Fruit within and without red, springs between
the Leaves of the young Branches, like an ordinary Fig.

Very credible eyewitnesses report, that under one of these Trees, three
thousand men may shelter.

Under its outermost or first Bark, Of its Bark, Clothes are woven.
they find somewhat like a Thread or Yarn, which being beaten, cleans'd, and
drawn out at length, the common People make Cloth of.

This Tree grows also in Gone, and the Indies, where the Inhabitants, by cutting
away the thin Boughs, make Arbors under them for cooleness and shade.

It seems contrary to the ordinary rules of experience, Pigafet.
and therefore strange, that digging here two or three hands breadth deep, very
swift Water rises at the time of the Seas flowing; whereas digging at the time
of ebb, it comes forth salt or brackish.

The Islanders use Canoos, of the bodies of Date Trees joined together, in
which they fight at Sea.

Formerly the Jages abode here, but the Portuguese drove them out in the year
Fifteen hundred seventy eight, and pursued them to Massingan; at the same time
raising a Fort there for their security.

Under this Island are the Simbos taken up, Here is the fishing of Simbos.
which carried to Congo and other places, go for current Money; so that this
place may justly be termed, the Mint of Congo.

This Island obeys the King of Congo, although by report, The Island Lovando is
under Congo.
beyond it he does not possess one foot of ground Southward of Bengo, upon the
main Land; however by that he claims to himself all the Revenue of the Fishery
aforesaid, and has his Governor to oversee the same, and take the King's due,
which is indeed what he pleases, and by compute amounts to eleven thousand
Ducats Annually. And although on all the Shores of Congo, these fashion shells
are found, yet those of Lovando have the highest esteem, by reason of their
thin and shining black or gray color.

This Island makes the Haven before the City Lovando, Barra de Korimba.
where lies two Entrances, one on the South, called Barra de Korimba, formerly
bearing above five Fathom water, but is at present almost filled up, and
choked with Sand: on the other side of this Entrance, heretofore the
Portuguese had two Batteries, but the force of the water has almost washed
them away.

About two miles from Barra de Korimba, on the main Land, Punto de Palmarinho.
appears a little Promontory in Portuguese, called Punto del Palmarinho.

A mile and a half more Southerly, lies the Sleepers-Haven; Sleepers-Haven.
and also the Clay-Ovens, or Lime-Kilns, where the Portuguese burn Lime and
Oystershells.

Four miles and a half from Sleepers-Haven, you come to the River Quansa, where
formerly stood a Fort of the Netherlanders, which we mentioned before, called
Molls.

The Territory of Quisama, or Quissamba.
THe Territory of Quisama, or according to Pigafet, Quissamba, The Territory of
Quisama.
lies on the South Side of the River Quansa, and spreads thence twenty miles
upward, and more.

This Country (as the rest) comprehends diverse Dominions, It is divided into
diver Dominiens.
of all which Motchima claims the rule as chief Lord, viz. Zourube, Godgo,
Zautatsa, Molunua, Katakahajo, and Zuino.

The Natives here, need not complain of Nature as a Stepmother; the Land
without any great labor producing abundance of Mill for Bread, besides other
useful Plants and Trees: as particularly

The Alikonda, eight or ten Fathom round, but very porus and weak; Trees
Alikenda.
fit for no use, but to make Trays to hold water: their innermost Bark some
convert into a kind of Thread, whereof they make Aprons or Coats to wear about
their bodies.

The Portugueses Quacumburez, which the natives call Quisamo, Trees Quacumburez.
never grows bigger than a man's Waste, with few Leaves, but thick and large;
the Wood so tender, that a strong man with a Sword may cut it quite in two: out
of the rifts in the body flows a great deal of juice like Milk, but of so
poisonous and destroying a quality, that if any one should get the least drop
thereof in their Eyes, they would instantly grow blind. The same juice poured
into the water, will immediately cause the Fish to swim at the top, as if they
were dead.

The Blacks hold the shadow of this Tree poison, and will not be persuaded to
rest under it; for they say, that the juice is so great a corrosive, as 'twill
gnaw their bowels in pieces, without possibility of help or Antidote; as has
been experienced by a Lord, that was poisoned with it by his Slaves.

The Beasts breeding in these Parts, Beasts.
are Hogs, Goats, Bucks, Sheep, wild Cows, Elephants, Tigers, and Leopards. In
short, the same conveniences may be had here as in Ilamba and Enraka.

Fresh Water they have none, Want of Water.
save such as is gathered in the time of Rain, and preserved in Troughs made of
hollow Trees; and the Places where they keep them are reserved by the Fetisies
command with so strict a secrecy, that if by misfortune any fall into the
Enemies hand, he will rather be cut in pieces than be brought to discover them.

In the Lordships of Zuina, Salt-Mynes.
Gungo, and Katta Kabajo, great Mountains lift up their Heads, whose opened
sides show many Salt Pits, which those Blacks subject to the Sovasen under
whose power they are, may freely fetch out by their Slaves, paying the
appointed Custom.

This they dig out in Pieces of a Dutch Ell long, and a Hand broad, every one
weighing eighteen or twenty Pounds, as clear as a piece of Ice or Crystal, and
as white as our best Salt, and of so good a savor, that a little Piece put in a
Pot or Kettle, give both the Liquor and Meat a pleasant seasoning.

From the bowels they dig Iron, Iron-Mynes.
but enough only to make Arms and Implements for Tillage or Husbandry.

The best Trade of these Quisamites consists in the fore-recited Salt and
Mill, Trade.
which they exchange for Slaves to be employed in the digging of it, for they
work not themselves, out of an opinion of their noble Extract. And not only
the Blacks, but the Portuguese also buy great quantities of it for their
People, no other being to be got, unless from Lovando.

The Blacks of Lovando appropriate to themselves the whole Country on the
South Side of Quansa for twenty Leagues.

The Island of LIBOLO.
IN the next place follows, The Territory of Libolo.
toward the South, Libolo, bordering with one Point to the East, on the Empire
of Monopotapa; but in the South, at Rio Longo, near Benguelle. It Is parted into
many Sub-divisions; thirty of which the Portuguese brought under some years
ago, and keep them still in strict Command and obedience, reaping great
advantage from Cattle, which are the same here, as we mentioned before in other
parts of Angola, and exceeding them in nothing but plenty of Bees and Honey.
More we cannot inform you of from hence, for that they lie as yet undiscovered
to our European Merchants.

The Country of BENGUELA. or, BEGALA.
THis Country Modern Geographers place at the Seacoast, and make it spread
from the River Quansa, to Cabo Negro, in the height of sixteen Degrees; though
others will have it go farther than Rio Longo, in eleven Degrees and four
Minutes South Latitude. The Places, Rivers, Bays, and Villages, lying at the
Seacoast within that compass, may be these:

About three miles from the South Point of Quansa, lies Maysotte-Bay; before
which a small Rock hides it self. Three miles and a half forward you arrive at
Cabo Ledo; And five from thence appears Cabo de tres Puntas. Cabo Ledo.
And two miles yet Southerly Cabo Falso; And five beyond that, another.

Six miles and a half from Cabo St. Bras, lies Hens-Bay, Hen-Bay.
so called from the abundance of Hens thereabouts; and between both, Benguella
Viella, that is Old Benguela, a Champaign and very fruitful Country.

The Hen-Bay contains about a mile and a half in breadth, holding ten or twelve
Fathom Water, with muddy Ground. On the South Side stands a great Village on a
Hill, where large Cows, Sheep, Hens, and Elephants-Teeth may be had; yet they
have no fresh Water.

Three miles and a half from this Bay lies Rio Longo, Rio Lengo.
otherwise called Rio Moreno, in eleven Degrees and four Minutes South
Latitude, so shallow at the Mouth, that a small Boat cannot go in or out
without difficulty.

In former times the Portuguese attempted to enlarge the Entrance into this
River; but by reason of its shoalness, the strong Water-falls, and great
numbers of Rocks, they found it not feasible.

Five miles from Rio Longo appears a great Village, named Manikikongo; upon the
Ascent a high Mountain, where the Portuguese once had a Storehouse, and bought
Cows, Hogs, and Elephants-Teeth, for Linen and East India pressed Clothes. The
Inhabitants here are very earnest for Muskets and Powder.

Eleven miles from Manikikongo runs the Salt River Katon-belle, dividing it
self in two or three Branches, being free from all Winds, and has fifteen and
sixteen Foot Water, so that the great Ships may come before it.

About the North Point of Katon-belle lies the Good Bay, Good Bay.
so called by reason of its ground of Anchoring.

The Countries upon the Seacoast are fruitful and low, but the In-lands high,
and overgrown with Woods.

A mile and a half from Katon-belle you discover a fresh River, that falls into
the Sea but in the times of Rain.

The Bay of Benguella, having good Ground for Ships to ride at an Anchor,
reaches from one Point to the other, a mile and a half in breadth. On the
North-side stands the Foot of Benguelle, built apiece, with Pallizado's
and Trenches, and surrounded with Houses, which stand in the shadow of Bananos,
Orange, Lemon, Granate-Trees, and Bakovens. Behind this Fort is a Pit with
fresh Water.

Here lie seven Villages, that pay to those of Bengala the tenth part of all
they have for Tribute.

The first, Melonde; the second, Peringe; both about a League from the Fort,
Under Benguelle are seven Villages.
and a mile one from another; the other five are, Maniken, Somba, Maninomma,
Manikimsomba, Pikem, and Manikilonde; of all which Manikisomba is the biggest,
and can bring three thousand Men into the Field.

Here formerly lived some Portuguese, which afterward out of fear of the
Blacks fled to Massingan, but were most of them killed in the way.

On the West Point of the Bay of Benguelle, is a flat Mountain called in
Portuguese Sombriero, from its shape, representing afar off a three-corner'd
Cap; and by it an excellent Bay, having at the South-east-side a sandy Shore,
with a pleasant Valley and a few Trees, but no Water fit to drink.

Four miles from thence they have a Salt-Pan, which produces of gray Salt,
(like French Salt) as much as the adjacent Countries can spend.

In Bengala is a great Beast, The Beast Abada.
called Abada, as big as a lusty Horse, having two Horns, one sticking out in
his Forehead, and another behind in his Neck: that in the Forehead is crooked,
but smooth, rises sloaping before, and very sharp, but at the Root as thick as
an ordinary Man's Leg, being many times one, two, three, or four Foot long; but
that in the Neck shorter and flatter, of color black, or a sad gray, but being
filled appears white, the Head not so long as the Head of a well-shaped Horse,
but shorter and flatter, with a Skin Hair'd like a Cow, and a Tail like an Ox,
but short; a Mayn like a Horse, but not so long, and cloven Feet like a Deers,
but bigger.

Before this Beast has attained the full growth, the Horn stands right forward
in the midst of the Forehead, but afterward grows crooked like the
Elephant's-Teeth. When he drinks he puts his Horn first in the Water, for
prevention (as they say) against Poison.

The Horn they report to be an excellent Medicine against Poison, The Horn is
good against Poison.
as has oftentimes been proved; but they find more efficacy in one than
another, occasioned by the timely and untimely killing of the Creature. The
trial of their goodness the Portuguese make in this manner: They set up the
Horn with the sharp end downwards on a Floor, and hang over it a Sword with the
Point downwards, so as the Point of the one may touch the end of the other: If
the Horn be good, and in its due season, or age, then the Sword turns round of
it self, but moves not over untimely and bad Horns.

The Bones of this Beast ground small, and with Water made into Pap, they
prescribe as a Cure against inward Pains and Distempers, being applied
outwardly Plaister-wise.

The Kingdom of MATAMAN, or rather CLIMBEBE.
THe Kingdom of Mataman, Name.
commonly so called, took that Denomination from its King, the proper and right
Name, according to Pigafet, being Climbebe, or Zembebas.

Its Borders, Borders.
as the same Author, Linschot, Peter Davitius, and other Geographers hold, in
the North, upon Angola; Eastwards, on the Westerly Shore of the River
Bagamadiri; to the South it touches upon the River Bravagul, by the Foot of the
Mountains of the Moon, near the Tropic of Capricorn, which the chiefest
Geographers make a Boundary between this Kingdom and those Mountains, and the
Country of the Kaffers; to the West along the Ethiopick-Sea, that is, from
Angola, or Cabo Negro, in sixteen Degrees South Latitude to the River Bravagul,
a Tract of five Degrees and fifteen Minutes, every Degree being reckoned
fifteen great Dutch Leagues, or threescore English Miles.

Two Rivers chiefly water this Kingdom, Rivers.
viz. Bravagul and Magnice; the first takes its original out of the Mountains
of the Moon, Linschot.
or the River Zair, and unites its Waters with those of Magnice, springing out
of a Lake, by the Portuguese called Dambea Zocche, and falling in the
South-east into the Indian-Sea.

The Places of this Kingdom coasting the Sea are these: Next the Black Cape,
right Eastward, you may see the beginning of the Cold Mountains, Mountains of
the Moon.
on some Places for the abundance of Snow with which they lie covered, are
called The Snowy Mountains.

Then you come to the Crystal Mountains, Crystal Mountains.
that shoot Northerly to the Silver Mountains, and to Molembo, by which the
River Coari has its course, and makes a Border to the Kingdom of Angola.

At the Southerly Coast of Cymbebas, near the Sea, Calo Negro.
in sixteen Degrees and sixty Minutes South Latitude, appears Cabo Negro, or
The Black Point, so denominated because of its blackness, whereas no other
black Land can be seen from the one and twentieth Degree South Latitude. On the
top of this Point stands an Alabaster Pillar, with an Inscription, but so
defaced by the injuries of Time and Weather, that it is hardly legible, and
formerly upon the Head of it a Cross raised, but at present fallen off, and
lying upon the Ground.

The Coast from hence spreads a little North-east, and East-North-east. The
spreading of the Coast.
The Country round about shows nothing but barren and sandy Hills, without
green; and high sandy Mountains, without any Trees.

More Southerly, in the height of eighteen Degrees, you come to a Point, by
the Portuguese called Cabo de Ruy piz das Nivez, or Cabo de Ruy Pirez, having
to the Northward a great Inlet with sandy Hills, and the Shore to the Black
Point; but Southward a High-land, altogether sandy, and reaches to nineteen
Degrees.

Farther to the South, in nineteen Degrees and thirty Minutes, lies a Bay
called Golfo Prio, and Prias das Nevas, with double Land, and full of Trees:
afterward you come to the open Haven of Ambros, in the one and twentieth
Degree; then going lower to the Southward, the Seacoast resembles what we
mentioned in the North, showing high, white, sandy Hills, barren Land, and a
bad Shore.

A good way to the Westward of Cabo Negro lies a great Sand in the Sea, in
Portuguese called Baixo de Antonia de Viava, or The Cazado, dangerous to
Sailers, being sometimes covered with Water.

The Air bears a good temper, and the Earth, though sandy toward the Sea, yet
affords all things necessary for the use of Man. The Mountains rich, not only
in Crystal, but other Minerals: Northerly it becomes more full of Trees, to the
height of two and twenty Degrees South Latitude; from whence there drives into
the Sea, a hundred and fifty Miles from the Shore, certain green Weeds called
Saigossa, and seems as a Mark to Seamen, whereby they know how near they are
to the Main Land of Africa. At a great distance also are seen many Mews, or
Sea-Pies, with black Feathers at the end of their Wings, which assure the
Mariners by their appearance two or three together, that they are infallibly
near the African Continent.

The Government of this Jurisdiction rests in the hands of a King, Government.
who as an absolute Monarch, Commands all at his pleasure: yet some Lords,
whose Commands lie by the Seashore, pride themselves with the empty Title of
Kings, while they neither possess Wealth or Countries, whose Products are
sufficient to make them known to Foreigners of the least esteem.

Kaffrarie, or the Country of Kaffers, otherwise called Hottentots.
KAffrarie, The Country of the Kaffers.
or according to Marmol, Quefrerie, took Denomination from the Kaffers, the
Natives thereof, which others name Hottentots, by reason of their lameness and
corruption of Speech, without either Law or Religion.

Maginus spreads this Country along the Seacoast, from the West Side of Cabo
Negro, lying in sixteen Degrees and fourteen Minutes, to Cape of Good Hope, or
Cabo de bona Esperansa; and from thence up Northward to the River Magnice,
otherwise called St. Esprit, but with what ground of reason, we must leave to
de determined.

Sanutus begins Kaffrarie at the Mountains of the Moon, near the Tropic of
Capricorn, in three and twenty Degrees and a half South Latitude, so along the
Western Coast to the Cape of Good Hope: This beginning of Kaffrarie, according
to most Authors, Davitii Lahasse Ethiopie. p. 475.
from that remarkable Boundary, the Tropic of Capricorn, has been
indisputably settled; but they spread the end of it, as we said, to the Cape of
Good Hope and Zanguebar: Between which Northward, along the Seacoast, are
none, or very few distinct Kingdoms; and therefore this being the outermost
Southern Borders, may not inconveniently be extended to Zanguebar; so that the
whole Tract lying Southward of Zanguebar, and the Kingdom of Monomotapa, are to
be understood in the general Name of Kaffrarie. So then, according to this last
limiting, it has on the East and South, the Indian, and in the West, the
Ethiopick-Sea, which meet together to the Southward of the Cape of Good Hope,
and on the North at Mataman and Monopotapa.

This Country so Bounded, lies encompassed in the North with those high,
cold, bushy, and sharp Mountains of the Moon, always covered with Snow;
nevertheless it has about the Cape in some places, several large and pleasant
Valleys, into which flow diverse Rivulets from the Hills.

It is not divided into any particular or known Kingdoms, yet inhabited by
several People; some Governed by Kings, others by Generals, and some are
without any Government at all. We will give you a glimpse of them in their
Customs and Natures, as far as any Discovery has hitherto given us any
information, and that from the hands of such as for some time lived on the Spot.

The chiefest People hitherto discovered in this Southerly part of Africa, are
the Gorachouqua's, Goringhaiqua's, Goringhaikona's, Kochoqua's, Great and
Little Kariguriqua's, Hosaa's, Chaniouqua's, Kobona's, Sonqu's, Namaqua's,
Heusaqua's, Brigoudins, and Hankumqua's; the eight first neighbor the Cape, and
the farthest not above threescore miles from it.

The three first, viz. Gorachouqua's and Goringhaiqua's have their Dwellings
within four or five hours Journey of the Great Cape; but the Gorinhaikona's, or
Watermen, are within a quarter of an hours walk from thence.

GORINGHAICONAS.
THe Goringhaicona's, or Watermen, have a Governor called Demtaa, who was once
taken Prisoner by the Hollanders, but was afterward by carrying himself with
Civility, released and settled in his old Dominion.

Their best Seat contains scarce five Houses, and not above fifty People, with
Women and Children, living in a condition of Poverty, below all the rest of the
Hottentots.

GORACHOUQUAS.
THe Gorachouqua's are about three or four hundred fighting Men, besides Women
and Children, and maintain themselves by Pasturage, and Profit of good Cattle,
as Sheep and Cows.

Their Governor called Chora, has a Brother called Jakin, both going in
tallow'd Skins: but they have great store of Cattle.

GORINHAIQUAS.
THe Goringhaiqua's, or Cape-mans, by reason that they always lived nearest to
it, are more than equal in People to those last mentioned, for they can between
both raise about a thousand fighting Men; yet all their Towns and Villages make
up but ninety five poor Huts covered with Mats.

These People obey a Governor, whom they call Gogosoa, who was in the Year
Sixteen hundred sixty two, according to the averment of such as had been there,
a hundred years of age, and had two Sons, the eldest named Osinghiakanna, and
the other Otegnoa, both which always sought to Overruled their Father, but
chiefly the eldest, by inventing all means to make him away.

In the Year Sixteen hundred fifty nine, The original of the War between the
Gorinbaiqua's and the Notherlanders.
there grew between these People and the Hollanders a Dissension, for the
possession of the Country about the Cape; where the Natives endeavored to turn
them out, alleging they had possessed it beyond all remembrance; and with such
malice did they manage it, that they slew many of the Dutch when they saw
opportunity; at the same time robbing them also of Cattle, which they drove
away so swift, that they could not be shot, always choosing to Fight in stormy
and rainy Weather, as well knowing that then they could do but little Execution
with their Arms.

These, upon information received by advice of one of their own People, by them
called Nomoa, and by the Netherlanders, Doman, who went from thence to Battavie
in one of the Companies Ships, and stayed there five or six years, observing
their actions with such inquisitive diligence, that he remembered no small part
thereof. Doman being come again to the Cape in those Ships which were ordered
for Holland, kept a great while amongst them in Dutch Habit; but at last betook
himself to his old Companions, informing and instructing them in all the
actions and intentions of the Netherlanders; as also the manner and use of
their Arms.

He, together with another stout Soldier, by the Hottentots called Garabinga,
were always their Captains, and with great skill and conduct led on and brought
off their followers always with success.

After the War had continued three Months, A Skirmish between five Hottentots
and five Netherlanders.
in August Sixteen hundred fifty and nine, on a Morning went out five
Hottentots (one of which was the aforementioned Doman) to forage, and as they
had robbed a Countryman of two Beasts, five Dutch Horsemen rid after them,
whom they resisted like brave Soldiers, by reason they saw no means to fly,
yet scorned to desire Quarter, insomuch that they wounded three of the Horsemen,
one through the Arm, and the other under the short Ribs, and the other in the
Back; but the Hollanders remained not in their debts, but shot down three of
the five, one of which called Epkamma, was shot through the Neck, had one of
his Legs broken in pieces, Epkamma taken.
and a great Wound in his Head; being thus wounded, he was taken, and brought
on a Horse into the Fort, but Doman with the other escaped, swimming over a
River.

The wounded Epkamma being brought into the Fort, His Discourse concerning the
beginning of the Wars with the Netherlanders.
and asked for what reason they did make War with the Netherlanders, and sought
to do mischief every where by robbing, murdering, and burning, though
excessively pained with his Wounds, returned this answer: What was the reason
that the Netherlanders Ploughed their Land, and Sowed Corn on their Ground,
where they should drive their Cattle to Pasture, and by this means took the
Bread out of their Mouths; That to revenge themselves of the injury and wrong
that was done them, they fought; for they were not only forbidden to keep away
from those and other Pasturing places, which they had possessed peaceably so
long (whereinto they had permitted the Netherlanders only in the beginning, to
come as a refreshing-place) but they saw also their Countries divided and taken
away without any recompense. At last, asking if the same had been done to the
Netherlanders, how they would carry themselves? Moreover they understood, that
the Netherlanders did strengthen themselves daily with Forts; which according
to their opinion, could be for no other end, but to bring them and all what
they had at length under subjection. The Hollanders replied in short, That they
had now lost the Country about the Cape by the War, and therefore they should
never think to regain it either by Hostility or Peace.

The last Discourse of this Epkamma (who died on the sixth day) was, That he
was but a mean Person, but he advised them to invite his Governor to the Fort,
and to discourse the business with him, and to order every one his own again as
it could best be found, for the prevention of farther mischief and trouble.

This being held for good counsel, two or three Netherlanders were sent abroad,
with Entreaties to the Governor Gogosoa to come to the Fort, and to Treat
concerning a Peace; but all in vain: for they went on furiously against such
Places as they saw fit; insomuch that the Hollanders scarce saw any means how
to decide this matter for the best. The placing and appointing of good Watches
to secure the Planters, which lived but two hours Journey from the Fort,
signified but little; for those Hottentots drove away all their Cattle, and
were so quick and nimble in the action, that it was impossible to overtake or
retrieve them.

Ten or eleven Months were spent by these Salvages, in murdering, robbing, and
stealing; but at last the Quarrel was decided in this manner:

A certain Hottentot of Eminency, by the Netherlanders called Herry, In what
manner the War was laid aside.
and by the Natives, Kamcemoca, being banished to Conney-Isle for a Crime
committed, after three Months abode there, went in a dark Night with another
Companion, in a leaky Fisher-boat, furnished with two Oars, the Wind serving
them fitly, and came to the Main Land, where they found their Friends the
Gorachouqua's and Goringhaiqua's.

The Escape of these two being told to the Dutch Governors, he sent six
Dutchmen abroad, to go and seek so far along the Shore, till they found the
Boat or some signs of them. Whereupon they being provided with Victuals for
four or five days, went out, and the next day found the Boat above thirty miles
from the Fort, in a fine small Sandy Bay, with the Oars by it, and some Grass
in the same; so that it seemed as if they had taken their nights rest therein:
but they met no people in all their journey; only they saw some Rhinocerots,
Elephants, and other wild Beasts. So after four days they came again to the
Fort.

At length the aforementioned Herry or Kamcemoca, Herry comes to the Fort.
in the Year Sixteen hundred and sixty, in February came to the Fort with the
Governor of the Negery, called Chori, accompanied with a hundred other people,
but all without Arms, and bringing with them thirteen fat Cattle, desiring they
would receive the Cattle as acknowledgment of Friendship, and to permit them
free egress and regress amongst them, as formerly: Which accepted, it was
further agreed, The difference decided.
That the Hollanders might Sow as much Ground, with Corn and other Seed, as
was within the compass of three Hours Journey; but with this Proviso, That they
should not Plow any more Ground than was already Plowed. Upon the Ratifying
this Agreement, these Hottentots were treated in the Fort with Bread, Tobacco,
and Brandy; whereof the rest having notice, both Men, Women, and Children came
thither.

After a little time, the General of the Goronghaiqua's, or Caepmans, Gogosoa,
made an Agreement and came with Chori to the Court, The Gorinchaiqua's are
treated in the Fort with Brandy and Tobacco.
for whose Entertainment there was, upon the command of the Dutch Governor, a
whole Tub full of Brandy, with a wooden Dish in it, set amongst them all,
whereat every one began to make merry.

When the Men began to be intoxicated, and their Heads fail them, there were
about two or three hundred little pieces of Tobacco thrown amongst them, in the
scrambling for which, they made a horrible noise. The noise and hurly-burly
over, they began to leap and dance, Their strange Dance.
with several strange Gestures; the Women in the mean while clapping their
Hands, and continually singing, Ha, ho, ho, ho, with so great noise as might
easily have been heard a Bowe-shot from the Fort. By such hideous outcries,
when either Lion or Tiger by night approaches, they fright away the fierce and
hungry Beast.

After these Exercises, the chief of them were presented with Coral, The
Princes are presented with Gists.
Plates of Copper, and a little Roll of Tobacco besides; but the Commons
contented themselves with the foresaid Entertainment: and so having slept all
night in the Fort, they withdrew; only Herry remained there three or four days.

This Herry spoke a little English, which he learned by conversing with their
Plantation and Fort at Bantam in the Indies, whither he went in an English
Ship; but coming afterward again to the Hope, he went among his own People.

COCHOQUAS, or SALDANHARS.
THe Cochoquas, Cochoqua's.
or Saldanhars, so called because they reside generally in and about the Valley
of Saldanha-Bay, about eighteen Miles North-westward of the Cape, are divided
into fifteen or sixteen Clans, each about a quarter of an hours Journey
asunder; yet all comprehended within the Walls of four hundred and fifty
Houses: Every Division or Clan consisting either of thirty, six and thirty,
forty, or fifty Houses, more or less, all set round together, and a little
distance one from another.

They possess Flocks of goodly Cattle, well near an hundred thousand, and above
two hundred thousand Sheep, which have no Wool, but long curled Hair.

They are all under one Prince or King, They are under one King.
entitled Coehque, who dwells about fifty Miles from the Cape, and for his
better ease, appoints under him a Deputy or Viceroy. The Coehque who Reigned in
the Year Sixteen hundred sixty one, was named Oldasoa; his Viceroy, Gonnomoa;
and the Third Person in the Kingdom, Coucosoa. Gonnomoa was exceedingly black,
beyond all others of his own People, a gross and heavy-bodied Man, having three
Wives, and by them many Children; whereas the King himself, who deceased in the
Year Sixteen hundred sixty one, of a languishing and painful Disease, never had
more than one. This Prince was a Person handsom-bodied, well-set, very
courteous, and much bewailed by his Subjects: He left behind him his only
Daughter, named Mamis, handsome and very comely of feature, but Camoisie-nos'd,
as all the Blacks in general are.

Great and Little CARIGURIQUAS, or HOSAAS.
THese lie most in the Valleys, Great and Little Cariguriqua's.
boasting of nothing but very fair Cattle, whereof exceeding choice and
careful, because they have nothing else in the dry time of Summer to live upon.

If you go farther up into the Country, you come to the Chainouquas, Cabonas,
Sanquas, Namaquas, Heusaquaes, and Hancumquas.

CHAINOUQUA'S.
THe Chainouquas at present live three Months Journey into the Country,
Chainouqua's.
with their Families, Retinue, Wife, Children, and Cattle, according to the
report of the other wild Natives, very near the Cobonas, being not above four
hundred Men, but rich in Cattle.

Their Prince, They are under a Prince.
called Sousoa, an old Man, had two Wives, but both dead; and has a Son named
Goeboe, whose right Leg, broken in pieces by an Elephant, is wholly useless to
him. Upon every Remove, he rides upon an Ox, and must be lift up and down.

His Clothing is a fine Leopards Skin, with the spotted side turned inwards,
and the ill-favored fleshy side, well liquor'd with Grease, according to the
manner of the Country, outward.

CABONA'S.
THe Cabona's are a very black People, Cabona's.
with Hair that hangs down their Backs to the Ground.

These are such inhumane Cannibals, that if they can get any Men, Cannibals,
they broyl them alive, and eat them up. They have some Cattle, and plant
Calbasses, with which they sustain themselves.

They have, by report of the Hottentots, rare Portraitures, which they find in
the Mountains, and other Rarities: But by reason of their distance, and
barbarous qualities, the Whites have never had any converse with them.

In the Year Sixteen hundred fifty nine, one of the Chainouquas, called
Chaihantimo, went into the Cabonas Country, and with the help of the People
took and brought thence one of their Women, whom he made his Wife.

The Netherlanders stirred up with a desire to see this strange sort of People,
desired Chaihantimo that he would order this Woman to come to the Fort of Good
Hope; whereto, upon promise of a Requital, he consented, and sent some of his
People to fetch, and tell her, That her new-married Husband would desire her to
come to a People called Dutchmen, who wore a great many Clothes, such as
neither she nor any of her Nation had ever seen.

This Woman, partly out of obedience to her Husband, and partly for Novelty to
see Strangers, after two days preparation, dressed in her best Apparel, came
thither, under the Conduct of thirty or forty Chainouquas, for an Aid and Guard
against the Cockoquas, with whom the Chainouquas were at that time in War: But
after some days traveling, she was set upon in a great Wood, and killed, and
her People put to flight, who hasted to the Cape to Chaihantimo, to carry him
News of this sad misfortune; whereupon he immediately withdrew to his own
Country, to revenge himself by force of Arms for this Injury.

SONQUA'S.
THe Sonqua's live in a very high Mountain; and though little in Stature,
Sonquas
yet defend themselves by their Numbers, wherein they exceed their Neighbors.

They have no Cattle, but live by their Bows and Arrows, Maintain themselves
by Hunting.
which they handle very expertly in shooting Badgers that shelter under the
Rocks, and in the heat of the day come forth and play, rolling in the Sand; and
also by hunting other Beasts, especially wild Horses and Mules.

The Horses have very plump and round Buttocks, all over striped with Yellow,
Black, Red, and Sky-colour; but the Mules are only stripped with White and
Chesnut-colour.

The Sonqua's in the Year Sixteen hundred sixty two, brought one of the Skins
to the Cape of Good Hope, which the Netherlanders bought for Tobacco, and
having stuffed it with Hay, hung it up in the first Court of the Fort, to be
seen by all that came thither in the Ships, as a Rarity.

The Badgers Flesh affords them an acceptable Food; Food.
for upon that and Roots they chiefly live.

They are great Robbers and Thieves, stealing from their Neighbors all the
Cattle they can lay hands on, and driving the same into the Mountains, hide
themselves and Prey about, without possibility of discovery.

Their Houses are only interwoven Boughs, Houses.
covered with Broom; and those numerous, by reason they never pull them down,
but still build up new.

They wear only Lappets made of the Skins of Wild Beasts sewed together.
Clothes.
The Women have, against the heat and burning of the Sunbeams, a Quitazel, or
Fan of Ostrich-Feathers, made fast round about their Heads.

NAMAQUAS.
THe Namaqua's live about eighty or ninety Dutch Miles East-North-East from the
Cape of Good Hope; Namaqua's.
to whom, in the year Sixteen hundred sixty one, the Governor of the Fort sent
thirteen Netherlanders, to inquire if no Gold, Netherlanders sent to the
Namaqua's to find out gold
or any other Rarities, were to be had amongst them; who, upon their arrival,
were entertained with signs of great Friendship, and presented with Sheep; and
as a further manifestation of kindness, they were welcomed with rare Music, of
about an hundred Musicians in Consort, which stood all in a Ring, every one
with a Reed in his hand, but of an unequal length (in the middle of whom stood
a Man that kept Time) which yielded a pleasant Sound, like our Trumpets.

After the ending of this Music, which continued two or three hours, upon the
entreaty of the King, they went into his House, and were treated with Milk and
Mutton. On the other side, the Netherlanders presented the King with some
Copper, Beads, Brandy, and Tobacco, which they accepted kindly, and in a short
time learned the use of it. At last the King showed them a place just without
their Hutches, to take their Repose in at convenience.

The same Year, Thirteen more sent cut to the same end.
on the thirteenth of November, were fourteen more sent out; and the next Year,
on the thirteenth of February, twelve of them returned, the other having been
killed by an Elephant. These having been above an hundred Miles in the
Country, could find none of those People; but at last, by some other Negroes
were informed, That the Namaqua's were withdrawn so far, that there was no
likelihood to come near them that Year. By which means both the said Attempts
became fruitless.

These Namaqua's are of a great and gigantick Stature, and numerous in People.

The Women are handsome-bodied, and well-shaped; but rather by Nature than Art:
Clothes.
for they are nothing curious in their Habits, all going dressed in Skins of
Beasts wrapped about their Bodies.

Their Ornaments are Glass Cambayan Beads, which they buy from the Portuguese
about Monomotapa, Kortada, Bellugarins, etc. for Cattle.

The Men wear an Ivory Plate, made very artificially, before their Privacies,
and a round Hoop of the same on one Arm, besides many Copper Rings.

Every Namaqua has always a small handsome Stool, made of Wood and Ropes,
hanging upon his Arm, which he carries every where along with him, to sit upon.

The Government consists in a Single Person, the present named Akambia,
Government.
whose three Sons are of an extraordinary Stature.

BRYGOUDA'S.
SOmewhat farther into the Country dwell another People called Brygouda's,
Brygouda's,
of whom little can be said, in regard few (if any) Europeans ever conversed
with them: Only the Namaqua's report them very populous, rich, Are populous.
and full of Cattle, beyond all that live about the Cape of Good Hope.

HEUSAQUA'S.
THe Heusaqua's lie North-West-ward from the Great Cape; Heusaqua's.
but so far distant, that little knowledge has been gained of them, and that
from bare report, none having ever seen their Country, or been among them; the
best Intelligence has been drawn from the Mouths of three of themselves, that
came to the Fort of Good Hope, with the Governor Chainouqua's, to sell some
Cattle, and returned with all convenient speed.

These Heusaqua's only maintain themselves with Planting (for the rest of the
Hottentots neither Sow nor Plant) of a powerful Root, Maintain themselves by
planting the Root Dacha.
which they call Dacha; sometimes eating it, otherwhiles mingling it with Water
to drink; either of which ways taken, causes Ebriety. When they become
intoxicated therewith, they play many strange and antic Tricks, as if they were
mad; in the middle of which the Women come and strew the dried and pulverized
Herb Boggoa on their Heads, being of a yellow color, and strong scent, and for
that only use fetched from the Mountains.

These People have great skill in the catching both old and young Lions in
Snares, which they make tame, and lead with a Rope about their Necks like a
Dog. Some of their Lions, which they have had along time, they frequently carry
to the Wars, and by that means put their Enemies to flight without any
resistance: A thing that seems very strange, yet most certainly used amongst
them.

All the Places of Kafrarie, known by the People of Europe, generally lie at
the Seacoast, being principally Capes, Bays, and Havens; for Towns or Villages
there are none, the Savage Inhabitants contenting themselves with the homely
Covert of moveable Huts, after the manner of the wild Arabs.

This Country shoots very far into the South, Cabo de Bona Esperanza, or Cape
of Good Hope.
showing several Capes and Promontories; amongst which, the chiefest the Cape
of Good Hope, or Cabo de Bona Esperanza, lies in four and thirty Degrees and
one and twenty Minutes South Latitude. When this Point was discovered, and why
so called, we have before related.

The next and most Southerly Point of Africa, the Portuguese call Cabo das
Anguilhas, Cabo das Aiguilhas, or Needle-Cape.
the Needle-Cape, or the Head of the Needle, situate about twenty Dutch Miles
Eastward from the Cape of Good Hope, in full thirty five Degrees South
Latitude. It was so called by them from the Compass-Needle, which they observed
to stand due South and North at this Point; but several late experienced
Seamen affirm it to vary five or six Degrees from the North, Westward.

Here lies a great Shelf of Sand, full of Fishes, which extends eighteen Miles
into the Sea, beginning in the West by the Sweet River, and ending in the East
at the Fish-Bay.

Between these Points, Cabo Falso, or False Cape.
in the Height of four and thirty Degrees and a half, five or six Miles
Eastward of the Hope, appears Cabo Falso, or False Cape; for Sailing out of
India, and making this Cape in clear Weather, they mistook it for that of Good
Hope, by reason of its near resemblance to the same; but coming nearer, they
found their Error. This Cape may be known by three high Hills, near adjoining
to each other, whereof the two outermost are highest.

The Cape of Good Hope appears in the form of a hanging Island, with a small
Isthmus between two Bays, joined to the Main Land, and contains several high
and craggy Mountains; of which, two more remarkable, the Table, and the
Lion-Mountain.

The Table-Mountain, Table-Mountain, or Table-Cape.
in Portuguese called Tavoa de Cabo, lies about an hours Journey from the
Shore, Southward of the Fresh and Salt River, and has received that name from
its shape, because it is flat on the top like a Table.

At the Salt River they climb up this Mountain by a Cliff, in all other places
not being ascendible, by reason of its great steepness; and that way, asks four
or five hours Labor to gain the top: And this height makes it visible above ten
Leagues to the Offin. Against ill Weather, two or three Hours before, it is so
covered with thick Mists and Clouds, that they cannot discover the top.

Close by Table-Mount, Fragosos.
lie those towering Hills in a row, which the Portuguese call Os Picos Fragosos.

The Lion-Mountain, Lion-Mountain.
so called either from the abundance of Lions upon it, or because it appears
out at Sea like a Lion, lies somewhat more Westerly, and closer to the Sea
than the Table: so that its Tail makes the Point at the end of the Bay. Between
these two appears a pleasant Valley.

Near the Table rises another, Wind-Mountain.
called Wind-Hill, because always troubled with rough Winds.

Beyond these, to the South, you come to a Valley overgrown with Brambles,
other Bushes, and Wood.

Further up into the Country are some standing-Waters, overgrown with
Bulrushes, Canes, and Sedg-weeds, wherein breed many Wild-fowl, Geese, Duck,
Teal, Snipes, and such like.

Along the Seacoast several good Bays or Creeks open themselves, affording
convenient Havens for Ships.

Eighteen Miles North-West from the Cape of Good Hope lies Soldanha-Bay,
Soldanha-Bay. Memoires de Thomas Roe.
where the Soldanhars have their chief Residence. Some would make the Country
lying at this Bay, an Island, contrary to the received Opinion of all
Geographers; and to support their Fancy, aver, That it is divided from the Main
Land of Africa by a deep Bay at the South-East side, and on the East side by a
small River below Table-Mountain, and inhabited by five or fix hundred People.

The most eminent and fairest place is Table-Bay, Table-Bay.
having on the South Side the Conneys or Badgers-Island. It contains four Dutch
Miles in compass; so that CABO DE BONE ESPERANSE.
a whole Fleet of Ships may easily ride there, having under the Shore four
Fathom water and Sandy ground, and Land-lockt against all Storms and Tempests,
except only the North-West Wind.

At Table-Bay, and the foot of the Table-Mountain, The Fort or strength of the
Netherland West India Company.
the Netherlanders have a Fort, for the defense and shelter of their Shipping
in their Voyages; Built in a Quadrangular form; Fortified with a great many
Pieces of Ordnance, and a convenient Garrison of Soldiers, strong enough to
repulse any Army of native Assailants: By which they have a Garden of fifteen
Acres of ground, Planted with several Trees and Fruits, besides the Plantation
on the other side of Table-Mountain, full as big again.

A Governor Commands this Fort, assisted by two Merchants, a Book-keeper, or
Clerk, Accomptant, some Assistants, and a Sergeant over the Soldiers; all
which are chief Men and Counselors.

Without this Fort, diverse free people of several Nations have their residence,
transported out of Holland; and maintain themselves chiefly by Tillage and
Planting, but they pay for their Privilege a part of their Harvest to the
Governor for the Benefit and Advantage of the Company.

In the Latitude of four and thirty degrees, and forty minutes, Eastward of the
Needle-Cape, lies another Bay; first called Flesh-Bay, Flesh-Bay.
by reason of the abundance of Cattle to be had there.

This Bay, wherein lies a small Island, standing open to all Winds, except on
the North; and at the West Side runs a Brook of fresh Water from the Mountain,
yielding no small refreshment to Seamen.

Eight or ten miles Eastward, you arrive at Fish-Bay, Fish-Bay.
so named from its abundance of Fishing.

Fifteen or twenty miles Eastward hereof, in the elevation of four and thirty
degrees, and thirty minutes, you discover Muscle-Bay; so called by the Dutch,
Muscle-Bay.
but by the Portuguese, Seno Formoso, that is, Faire-Bay.

Next Seno Formoso follow Seno del Lago, that is, The Bay of the Lake,
Faire-Bay.
because the Sea has washed into the Shore in such a manner, that it seems to
be a great Lake rather than a Bay, containing many Islands and Havens; and
amongst others, Ilehos Ctaos.

Between these are three Capes placed in the Maps, viz. Cabo de Sante
Fransisko, Cabo das Sorras, and Cabo do Aregito, and an Isle called, The Island
of Content.

Somewhat higher Northerly, the River St. Christopher glides along; Rio de
Santo Christian.
the Portugnese call it, Rio de Sante Christian, and the Inhabitants Nagoa; in
whose Mouth three Islands are seen.

Next this River appears a Tract of Land, by the Portuguese called Terra de
Natal, that is, The Land of the Nativity of Christ; so called, from the day of
its first discovery.

The Southermost Country of these parts, is watered by three known, Rivers.
besides many other unknown Rivers, viz. The Sweet, and Salt River, and Rio de
Jakquelina.

Just about the foot of Lion-Mountain, flows the Sweet River, Sweet-Rivers.
which takes its beginning out of the descent of Table-Mount, and runs down
very swiftly through, not above knee-deep. Pigafet will have this River take
its Original out of the Lake Gale, between the Mountains of the Moon on the
West Side, and to fall into the Sea by False-Cape: whereas the common African
Maps place there the River Kamissa.

To the East, beyond Terra de Natal, opposite to this little River, in the year
Sixteen hundred forty and four, some few Dutchmen erected a Fort or Bulwark,
with four Angles, for the defense of this fresh water, but they never finished
it.

Half a mile Eastward runs the Salt-River; so called from its plenty of Salt,
for on a great place of Sand, three or four miles upwards, by heat and drought
so much fine and white Salt continually grows, that a Ship might soon be Laden
therewith.

Rio de Jackquelina has its Original within the Country, and its Outlet
about half a mile Eastward into Table-Bay.

As to the Air, quality of the Soil, Plants, Beasts, Customs, Food, Clothing,
Arms, Language, Religion and Worship, of this people in general; we cannot say
much, that little we shall speak, will have only relation to the Hottentots,
lying close to the Cape, as the Garouchouquas, Goringhuiquas, Goringhaiconas,
Cochoquas, or Saldanhans, great and little Cariguriquas, and Hosaas; for of the
rest, viz. the Vanouquas, Cabonas, Sonquas, Mamaquas, Heusaquas, Brigoudys,
Hancumquas, hitherto little or no information has been had, other than that in
general they agree with those that lie nearest to the Cape.

The Air about the Cape of Good-Hope is always Serene, Air.
Clear, and Temperate, and by consequence very Healthy, because neither the
Heat parches, nor the Cold pierces too much. In June and July, blow the
stiffest and sharpest storms of Wind from the Southerly Points, which continue
till December, mixed with Mists, Snow and Frost; so that the waters in June and
July are often Frozen the thickness of the back of a Knife.

The Vale-Winds, Wind.
or Hurricans, blow sometimes so terribly from the Mountains, which are
commonly covered with thick Clouds, which hover there, and break with that
violence, as if all above ground would be rent to pieces. At this time, when
the Winds bluster and tear so horribly, they make a hollow Sea at the Point,
which too often proves dangerous for Ships.

It Rains there in the Winter, that is, in May or June, so extremely, as if it
did almost pour down, whereby the low grounds are laid under Water, yet without
any prejudice; for after the falling away of the Water, the ground appears more
fresh and flourishing.

The Soil about the Cape, is in some places very rich and ferile, fit to be
Husbanded, and to produce all manner of Fruits; although other parts be full of
Clay, Stony, Gravelly, or Sandy: some Trees grow here and there, but so hard
and knotty, as makes them fit only for Fuel: yet the natives report, that in
the Country there grow such Trees, that a hundred men may shelter themselves
under one of them; perhaps the Indian Fig Tree, by Linschot called Arbar de
Raise.

There grow in the Winter, Plants.
especially among the Saldanhars, certain little roots which they eat; some of
them have a taste like Anniseeds, others like Jerusalem-Artichokes, others as
Acorns.

The Valleys and Plains under, lie verdur'd with Grass and sweet Herbs, which
being boiled with fresh Meat, make a pleasant Sallet.

Close by the Fort of Good-Hope, on a Mountain called, The Vineyard, the
Netherlanders have Planted forty thousand Vine-stocks, which all at this day
send forth lusty Sprouts and Leaves, and bear Grapes in such abundance, that
sometimes they press Wine of them: They have there also Peaches, Apricocks,
Chestnuts, Olive Trees, and such like Fruits.



There grow wild upon the Mountains, and in the Valleys, and on the banks of
the Rivers, many other sorts of Plants; as among the rest a peculiar sort of
Tulips, Sempervive, Fritillaria, or Speckled Lillies, Penny-Wort, or
Dragon-Wort with sharp pointed Leaves, Sorrel with knotted Roots, and white
Blossoms.

The Tulip bears a bole bigger than ones fist, having thick Shells, The
Cape-Tulip.
but of a faint smell. The Blossom that shoots out before the Leaves in April,
of a very high red color, appearing very gloriously, and has five broad,
long, and thick Leaves; within having whitish red Stripes, and at the end a
round Stalk of a span long, streaked and speckled with purple upon a white
ground. It grows upon the Mountains.

The Sempervive or House-Leek, has Leaves almost a finger thick, whitish
green, and as big almost as the Palm of ones Hand.

The Fritillaria, or the speckled Narcissus, which some reckon as a sort of
Dentilaria, or Eminie; has in stead of Leaves, Sprouts of a fingers length,
thick and juicy, with sharp and round broken edges like Teeth, of a pale purple
above, and underneath green: At the Leaves comes a flower that has five limber
Leaves, sharp at the ends, with a high Crown or Tuft in the middle, hollow
within, enclosing another flower, which has also five Leaves, all yellow, but
of a dark-brown at the ends, with some very red standards in the middle: this
Plant has no smell, and grows upon barren and Sandy Mountains.

The Sorrel with knotted Roots, shoots up a span in height, has hard, pale
green Leaves, long and slender, which stand aloft on the Stalk five or six
together, for below the Stalk is void of Leaves.

In the very Sea it self, about the Cape may be seen several Plants, viz.
Sea-Plants.
a Fort of Canes; by the Portuguese called Tromba's, which grow with Moss,
being large and thick, in the fashion of a Cornet; some such (but longer) are
found on the Cape, and the Island of Tristan de Cunba; from whence Linschot
says it flotes along, driven by the Wind thence to the West side of the Cape,
near the Shore, upon sight whereof, the Seamen infallibly know they are near
this Coast.

Also Sargossa, a kind of a Lentil, drives along, being an Herb like Sedge, or
Wild-Cresses; which are to be seen an hundred miles far and wide in the
Ethiopian Sea, driven upon heaps.

They have also Coral, Tortoise-shells, Pearls, and in the Salt-River pure
white Salt.

About Cabo das Aiguilhas, or Needle-Cape, are Sharks-bones found, which the
Goldsmiths use; although some are of opinion they came from the Sea-Cat or
Bleach, with which that Sea abounds.

In the particular relations of this Country, Cattle.
we told you they had great store of Cattle; We will now only add, That the
Oxen are very fair, fleshy, and thick, and some near half a foot higher than
those among us; with very fine, slender, and long crook'd Horns: Others have
their Horns flat and hanging down loose by their bodies.

They have infinite flocks of Sheep, very large, with long Legs, and Hair in
stead of Wool; their tails are nothing but fat, and some of them so heavy, that
they have weighed eighteen or twenty pounds and more.

The Woods, Valleys, and plain low Gronds, feed many wild Beasts; as Stags or
Hearts, Roe-Hindes, and wild Cows, who run together by sixty, seventy, yea a
hundred in a Head. Badgers, of a red color, but so slow in running, that a man
may easily outstrip them, yet their flesh is accounted a pleasant food.
Wild-Bears, Wild-Goats, Hares, Conies, Ringstreak'd Tigers, a fierce and
dangerous Beast, Leopards, Wolves, Rhinocerots, and Elephants.

On the tops of the Mountains, keep multitudes of fierce Lions, which in dark
Moons come out of their hideous Dens of shelter, and seek their prey close
under the Fort; and therefore they always about the Enclosure (where the Cattle
are kept in by night) kindle great fires to scare them away.

There are found great Beasts like Elephants, with two Horns at their Noses,
such as the Rhinocerots has one. It ordinarily goes swifter than a man, in its
speediest course, has a skin with short Mouse-dun hair, a tail and feet like
an Elephant, straight and round ears, and a short bunch of black hair, in stead
of a Mane on the Neck.

Here have been seen many Jack-alls, being a creature that by his quick scent
discovers prey for the Lion, and is both his Guard and Spy.

The Ocean also produces many Creatures, as Sea-Rabbits, Sea-Dogs, Sea-Wolves,
or Sea-Bears, who in the Summer swim in the Sea, but in the Winter remain under
ground, and keep on Shore, and in the Cliffs.

The Sea-Wolves, or rather Sea-Bears, because with their paws and gestures more
resemble Bears than Wolves, only they have sharper Snouts, and are a fiercer
Creature, biting cruelly; they exceed men for the most part in swiftness of
running, so without two or three they are not to be taken.

On the Shore of the Rivers, are many Sea-Horses, Porcupisses, or Sea-Hogs, and
Sea-Cats.

Many sorts of small and great Fowls are found here; Fowls.
as Partridges, Ducks, Sparrows, Geese, Wild-Ducks, Parrets will yellow Bills,
More-hens, Wagtails, Gulls, Teal, Wood-Snipes and Water-Snipes, and Cormorants,
being a black sort of Fowl, as big and as large as Ducks or Geese.

Here also breed the Pinguyns, Pinguyns.
with small thick Feathers, more like Bristles or Beasts Hair than Plumes; in
stead of Wings they have a Leather Finn on each Foot, wherewith they swim; they
have very tough Skins, are cruel in biting, ready in diving, and keep as well
in the Sea as at Land. They harbor in the Sedges, lie in a Burrow scraped out
hollow, and lay their Eggs in the Sand, to the number of four or five, bigger
than Goose-Eggs, and with a white Shell. They have so slow a pace that we
easily catch them, or follow them to their Nests, which they defend with
biting, and are not to be forced thence without Staves. Their Flesh is Oily,
and not good to eat, except they be two or three times boiled in fresh Water,
and then fried in a Pan with Butter or Suet.

There are also Moor-Cocks, Marsh-Fowl, with red Bills and Legs, wild Peacocks,
white Shovelers, as big as a Hen, with a Neck in two or three Joints, Herons of
three sorts, viz. blue ones, white ones, of a middle size, and black, as big as
Sea-pies, which keep most in Moorish places; Cranes, several kinds of Hawks,
Peacocks, Pheasants, Partridges, Ravens, Crows and Ostriches.

The Bird Flemengos increases here numerously; in bigness like a Goose,
Flamengo's.
with long and red Legs, Bills, and Wings; the other parts have all white
Feathers.

Also white Lapwings, which fly so boldly, that they will come to the Muzzle
of a Gun.

The Fowls which come from Land and frequent the Sea, are of diverse sorts, as
the Antenagas, great speckled Fowls, which many times sit upon the dry places
within the Water about the Needle-Cape.

Alcatraces, a gray Fowl, almost like a Lapwing.

Pheasants, little bigger than Swallows, white-feather'd, with gray or black
Specks, ringstreaked, and speckled in their Bodies, and therefore easy to be
known from the other.

The Gavoitoyns, or Dyvers, which sit in the Water about the Cape.

Garagias, almost the same with the Alcatraces.

Jan-van-Genten, or white Plovers, tipped with black at the end of their Wings.

Another sort of great Fowls, called in Portuguese, Mangas de Velludo, or
Velvet-Parrots, have black Tufts like Velvet on their Wings, and in flying hold
them not steady, but flutter as Pigeons.

As the Air is thus replenished with good Fowl, no less does the Sea, Fishes.
and other Waters abound with the variety of Fish, particularly one sort called
Huygen, in shape like Carps, being of a very pleasant taste.

Rough Mullets, Lobsters, Breams, and Crabs, of a large size.

Mussles also among the Rocks, and great and small Oysters with Pearls in them.

In Table-Bay, and thereabouts, play many Whales, and other great Fishes.

Bottle-heads, out of which may be boiled Train-Oyl as well as out of Whales.

The People which dwell about, and near the Cape of Good Hope, The Constitution
of the Kaffers, or Hottentots.
are of a middle Stature, Slouch-body'd, and uncomely of Person; of a Tawny
color, like Mulletto's: But those about Flesh-Bay are somewhat smaller. The
Hair of their Heads in general resembles Lambs Wool, short and Curled, but the
Women's thicker than the Men's, especially among the Cobona's. They have broad
Foreheads, but wrinkled, clear and black Eyes, but all, both Men, Women, and
Children, have Camosie-Noses, and blab-Lips. Their Mouths well fashioned, and
bearing a proportionable bigness every way, with very clean and white Teeth.
Their Necks are of an ordinary length, with narrow Shoulders, and long Arms,
but about the Wrists very thin, their Hands well shaped, their Fingers long,
letting their Nails grow like Eagles Talons, which they count an Ornament. Most
of them have their Bellies long and wrinkled, with Buttocks sticking out. Their
Legs handsome, but small Calves, little Feet, especially the Women. They are
swift of Foot, and so strong, that some can stop an Ox in his full course.

The Women are little of Stature, especially among the Cochoqua's, or
Saldanhars: and some cut their Faces, as if they were drawn with a Pencil. The
Married Women are so great Breasted, that they can give them into the Mouths
of their Children to Suck behind over their Shouldets, where they commonly
carry them.

All the Kaffers are void of Literature, They are Unlearned.
stupidly dull and clownish, and in understanding are more like Beasts than
Men: but some by continual converse with European Merchants, show a few sparks
or glimmerings of an inclination to more humanity.

Notwithstanding this their brutish ignorance, they observe the Laws and
Customs of the Country with as much seriousness and observance, as the most
orderly People in Europe; as a proof whereof you may take this Instance: In the
Year Sixteen hundred fifty nine, when the Cape-men happened to be at ods and
controversy with the Netherlanders, being asked what cause they had for that
Quarrel; gave for answer, that it was only in return of the wrong done them by
the Netherlanders, in taking away their Seed and Lands, as before we have more
fully related.

In kindness and fidelity toward their Neighbors, They are kind and faithful.
they shame the Dutch, and all other Europeans, because whatsoever one has,
they willingly and readily impart it to others, be it little or much.

Sometimes by eating the Root Dacha, mixed with Water, they become Drunk, and
then go about, not knowing what they do; others constrained by poverty, seek
here and there to take what they can find from any body; but if it happen to
come to light, their Skin must pay dear for it.

There appears also among them some sparks of Pride: for when they come to the
Fort of Good Hope, they cast on their filthiest, greaziest, and most stinking
Skins, and adorn their Ears and Necks with red and yellow Copper Beads,
supposing themselves exceeding pompously dressed.

Notwithstanding the meanness and poverty of their Condition, yet they bear a
high mind, and are ambitious; they will rather fall to open enmity, than a Like
our Quakers.
bow or give any reverence to each other; and he that gets the Victory, does
not only play the Lord for that one time, but always vaunts and braves it over
his vanquished Enemy.

Their Clothing is very sordid, The Clothing of the Men.
and vile, most of the Men wearing only a Sheeps Pelt, or Badgers Skin, in
manner of a Mantle about their Shoulders, with the hairy side commonly within,
and tied under their Chin.

Such a Mantle consists of three Pieces, neatly sewed together with Sinews of
Beasts in stead of Thread. When they go abroad, or upon a Journey, they throw
another Sheeps-skin, with the Wool on the outside, over the undermost. Upon
their Heads they wear a Cap of Lamb-skin, with the Woolly side inward, and a
Button on the top.

Their Shoes are made of a Rhinocerot's Skin, and consists of a whole flat
Piece, before and behind of a like height, with a Cross of two Leatherbands
fastened to their Feet. Before their Privacies hangs a little piece of a wild
Wood-Cat, or ring-streaked Tiger, or Jack-alls Skin, tied behind with two
Thongs.

DRACHT en WAPENING der HOTTENTOTS.


The Habit of the Women differs little from the former, The Habit of the Women.
being a Sheep-skin Mantle on the upper part of their Bodies, with the Wool
inwards; but somewhat longer than the Men; also another Skin hanging behind to
cover their back-parts, and a square Piece before their Privacies.

On their Heads they wear a high Cap of a Sheeps, or Badgers Skin, bound to
their Heads with a broad Fillet: In all the rest following the Men's Garb.

No less uncomely are their choycest Ornaments, for the Men have their Hair
dressed up, or adorned with Copper Plates, white little Horns, and great Beads.
They pull all the Hair out of their Chins, and daub their Faces with Black, and
then anoint them with Grease and Tallow, and thereby seem as if they never were
washed.

Those which dwell close by the Cape on the Shore, and come to the
Netherlanders Ships, presently run to the Cook's Kettle, or Pottage-pot, and
anoint themselves with the Soot thereof, which they esteem a Princely Ornament.

Such as are rich, and have good stocks of Cattle, liquor the outside of their
Mantles and Caps with Grease; whereas the Poor wear them starved and
unliquor'd. Also most of the Princes and Kings, and Kings Daughters,
particularly the King of Cocoquas, his Viceroy, and Daughter Mamis, wear fat
besmeared Skins. In their Ears they hang great bunches of Beads, of which some
contain ten or eleven Strings, each weighing near a quarter of a Pound. About
their Necks they put red and yellow Copper Chains, or Bracelets of Beads, and
upon their Arms Ivory Armlets, and forwards near the Wrists, Bracelets of
Copper, which stick so close, that it makes their Arms sore, and sometimes come
to ulcerate before they will lay them off.

Many of them wear as an Ornament, the Guts of Beasts, fresh and stinking,
drawn two or three times one through another, about their Necks, and the like
about their Legs.

Some wear a sort of Roots gathered from the bottoms of Rivers, which in their
Journeys through Woods, where Lions, Leopards, and Wolves frequent, by the Fire
side (which they kindle at the Place where they stay all night, for the driving
away wild Beasts) they chew into little bits, and spit out of their Mouths
round about, with firm persuasion, that there is such virtue in them, as no
Beast can endure the smell of it.

When they go abroad they have usually an Ostrich Feather, or a Staff, with a
wild Cats Tail tied to it, in one Hand, in stead of a Handkerchief to wipe
their Eyes and Noses, and beat away the Dust, Sand, and Flies, and in the other
Hand a slight Javelin.

The Women never go abroad without a Leather Sack at their backs, having at
each end a Tuft or Tassel, and filled with one trifle or another.

Their Weapons, or Arms, are Bows and Arrows, and small Darts, three, four, or
five Foot long, having at one end a broad sharp Iron fixed, which they handle
and throw very dexterously.

Their Food consists generally of only a sort of round Roots, Food.
of the bigness of Turnips, dug out of the Rivers and other places, and then
boiled or roasted to eat. They kill no great Cattle, but such as either by
sickness, lameness, or age, are unfit to follow the Herd; nor any Sheep, except
at a Wedding. They are utterly ignorant in all sorts of Cookery, and therefore
fall upon dead Cattle like Dogs, eating it with Guts and Intrails, the Dung
only thrust out; and when they can find no defunct Beast, they look out dead
Fish on the Shore; as also Snails, Catterpillars, and Mussles. They find great
relish in the Flesh of Sea-Dogs, or Badgers, which they kill in the Night,
coming by thousands on Shore, with Sticks, and either raw, or half cold, and
unwashed, they broyl in the Fire, and eat; not forbearing the most noysom
Grease of Whales and other Draff cast on Shore. Train-Oyl, and Grease of a
Stranded Whale at the Salt-River, broyl'd out by the Sun, they sup up by whole
handfuls, and cut Collops out of the Flesh, which they bury under the Sand to
eat afterward. Some time they tear pieces of their dried hard Sheeps-skin
Mantles or Cloaks, with their Teeth, and eat it.

They take great delight in our Bread, for which they are willing to barter
Cattle. The Honey found in the Woods they eat up Wax an all; and in stead of
Physic administer to the Sick, Cabbages, Coleworts, and Mustard-Leaves, with a
little beaten Lard boiled with it.

Their common Drink is Water, Drink.
or Mill; but they are very greedy of Brandy or Spanish Wine, as also of
Tobacco, but quickly become Drunk with it.

They use no Trades, Handicrafts, or Arts; with Bulrushes make Mats, wherewith
they cover their Houses; they Forge the sharp Heads of their Lances being Iron;
in the doing whereof they use only a Stone and Hammer, making it malleable
with Wood-Coals.

The Goringhaica's dwelling by the Cape, Employment.
employ themselves in Fishing, which they sell to the Netherlanders for Bread
and Tobacco. Most of the other have no skill therein, nor any Vessels to go out
to Sea, so that in all Journeys they go by Land, and on Foot. In stead of
Horses they have great Oxen, who carry their Goods and Commodities from one
place to another, which they lead and guide with a Stick thrust through their
Noses, as with a Bridle.

The Cochoqua's, or Saldanhars, are a kind of Herdsmen, and live by keeping of
Cattle, whereof they have above an hundred thousand Head, all very fair,
besides as many Sheep. The like do the Cariguriqua's and Hosaa's: None amongst
them all Sow, or Plant, but only the Heusaqua's. When they perceive any wild
Beasts in the Night, whether Elephants, Elans, Rhinocerots, Lions, Tigers,
Bucks, or Horses, then all the stoutest Men run forth, and make a great noise
to fright them away. But if by day any devouring wild Beast appear, then all
that can carry Arms go forth, every one provided with two or three Assagays, or
Lances, and encompassing the same with extraordinary outcries and shoutings,
they let fly their Darts, and Shoot, as at a Mark to wound and kill him.

When a person falls in Love with a Maid, he desires of his Father, Marriage.
that he may Marry her, who consenting, he goes to the Father and Mother of the
Maid, entreating the same: and when the Parents grant his Suit, the Daughter
receives, and as a sign of her acceptance, and in confirmation of the Marriage,
she puts about his Neck, not a Gold Chain, but a fat Cows Chitterling, which he
must wear till it drop off. Then two of the fattest Sheep are sought out of the
whole Flock, and killed, part of whose Flesh being boiled, and part of it
roasted, none may eat but the Married couple and their Parents; and without
this Ceremony the Marriage would not be accounted lawful. The Skins cut in
small pieces, and the Hair taken off, then beaten upon a Stone, and so laid on
hot Coals, they eat with a very great appetite. This pitiful Feast ended, the
solemnity of the Wedding is over.

As to their constancy in Love, they are as in other places, some quickly
nauseating the ties of Marriage, while others observe it with a most
affectionate strictness. For the manifesting of the constancy and true Love
amongst some of these Salvages, we will give you two remarkable Stories, the
one of a Widow, which through excess of grief and sorrow for the death of her
Husband, leapt into a Pit full of Wood, set it on fire, and burnt her self to
death: the other of a young Maid, which for grief threw her self down from a
Rock, because her Parents had caused her Lover to be severely whipped with
Thorns, for Lying with her against their consents.

Whether by the goodness of the Air, or the natural strength of their
Constitutions, these People attain so great an age, as generally they do,
remains a doubt; but this is certain, that most of them live to eighty, ninety,
or a hundred, and some to a hundred and ten, twenty, or more years.

They bury their Dead sitting in a deep Pit stark naked, Funerals.
throwing the Earth upon their Heads with a great heap of Stones over all, to
preserve the Corpse from being raked out of the Grave by wild Beasts.

When a Man or Woman dies, Inheritance.
all the Friends to the third degree of Consanguinity, must by an ancient
custom cut off the little Finger of their left Hand, to be buried with the Dead
in the Grave; but if the Deceased had in his Life any Cattle, and leaves some
Relations to whom they might come by Inheritance, they must cut off a Joint
from each little Finger before they can take the Cattle: for the Sick cannot
giveaway the least thing on his Deathbed, from those to whom it falls by
Inheritance.

As soon as any one falls sick, those about him fetch one skilled in Herbs, who
with a sharp two-edged Knife lets them blood on their Back, then burns them on
their Arms, with a red hot Iron, and drops thereon some Juice of Herbs, with
new boiled sweet Milk: And if this work not a Cure, they give them over for
Dead.

Those which rob in the Day, if they be caught in it, are beaten by the King,
or Choeque himself with a Stick, without other punishment; but those which Rob
in the Night, receive upon discovery a more severe punishment in this manner
inflicted. The Offender is first for a whole day tied Hand and Foot, being
neither allowed Meat or Drink: On the second day some of the Eldest go to the
Coehque, to ask if they shall proceed in the Execution, which is done without
any Condemnation or Trial, but not without sufficient Testimony; whereupon the
King, with a great Train of People following him, comes to a Tree, where he
commands the Offender to be brought before him, whom they bind to the Tree, and
very severely whip all over his Body, that the Blood runs down to his Feet.
After this, being turned with his Face toward the King, a sort of Gum, or
Rozin, melted in a Pot, is poured over his naked Body, from his Neck running
down upon his Breast, so that the Skin immediately peels off; then they let him
loose, and give him some Meat, wherewith a little refreshed, they tie him again
Neck and Heels, and so leave him three days: And lastly, after the enduring all
this pain, he is sometimes banished, and thrust from their Society.

When any are found in Fornication, Incest.
the Parents force them to Marry immediately, if they have a competency of
Estate: But if that cannot be effected, then they wait to know if the Woman be
with Child; and then they enforce a Conjunction, though the Person be so mean
that he cannot maintain a Wife.

When any Person, Rich or Poor, is discovered to have committed Incest, they
believe such People cannot be punished enough, because they say it is an
unpardonable offense; and this from the mere Light of Nature: And therefore
they punish the Transgressors with death; the manner this.

First of all the Man has his Hands and his Feet drawn together with a Cord,
How they are punished.
and so put into a Tub till the next day, and the Woman set by it. The second
day they take him out, and so Manacled set him under a Tree, fastening his Head
to a strong Bough, which one pulls and holds down; then they cut off one Member
after another: Afterward they let the Bough spring up again, with the mangled
Body upon it, for a Spectacle to other Evildoers.

The Man thus dead, they bring forth the Woman, whom bound round about with
many dry Shrub-Bavins, her Hands and Feet tied fast together, they set Fire to
the Bushes, and so burn her to Ashes.

A little above five years ago it happened that a certain Person, a great Friend
and Acquaintance of the Coehques, or King of the Saldanhars, committed Incest;
yet for all that, without respect to his Person, he did Justice upon him.

If any Man of Wealth and Quality, Punishment for killing and wounding.
or reputed Wise, through fury or rage stab or wound another to death, they
take him and beat his Brains out against a Tree, and put him into the Grave
with the murdered Person; for they say, Such a Person being endued with more
Understanding, ought to know better, and to give a good Example to others:
Whereas on the other side, poor simple People are permitted to ransom their
Lives by a Payment of Cattle. Some, for Offenses which deserve Death, have
their Knees nailed through, and an Iron Pin fast driven into each Shoulder, so
dying a lingering death.

They live like the Arabians, Their Houses.
in the Fields, in Huts made of slender crooked Poles, set round and covered
with Bulrush-Mats: Some of these are so large, that conveniently ten or twenty
Men, with Women and Children, may dwell in one of them; though others are much
less, and some so small, that they can take them up, and run away with them.
The Fireplace lies in the midst of the House; but they make no Funnels to
carry up the Smoke.

They kindle Fire with an excellent dexterity, by rubbing one little hollowed
Stick upon another very hard for a great space.

All these Hottentots speak one and the same Language, Language.
which for the difficulty of the pronunciation cannot be learned, to the great
retarding and hinderance of further Discoveries. In all Discourse they cluck
like a Broody Hen, seeming to cackle at every other Word: So that their Mouths
are almost like a Rattle or Clapper, smacking, and making a great noise with
their Tongues.

Some words they know not how to utter, but with very much ado, and they seem
as if they fetched it out behind, at the bottom of their Throats, and as the
People in Savoy that live near the Alps, who by drinking Snow-water have great
Crops or Swellings under their Chins. Brokwa in their Language signifies Bread,
Kahou denotes to sit down, Bou is an Ox, Ba, a Sheep, and Kori, Iron: But now
many of them which dwell close to the Fort of Good Hope, by daily Converse with
the Netherlanders, speak Dutch; as some who have been with the English in
Bantam, stammer some broken English.

They have no inclination to Trading, Trade.
neither hold they any Correspondence with Foreign People. iron and Copper were
the only Commodities desired by them; the former for Arms, the other for
Ornament; both which they so esteemed, that in a Voyage to the Indies, in the
year Fifteen hundred ninety five, the Dutch had in Barter with these People,
for a Cutting-knife, a fair Ox; for a Bar of Iron of seventy pounds, broken
into five pieces, two Oxen and three Sheep; for one Hook-knife, one Bill, one
Ax, one short Iron Bolt, and some pieces of Iron, three Oxen and five Sheep;
and for a Knife, one Sheep. But at this day, grown wiser by Converse, and the
abundance of Commodities carried thither, they prize their Cattle at a much
higher rate, and their former fair dealing is not now found amongst them.

Tobacco, Brandy, and Copper, they chiefly desire at present; but the yellower
the better: So that for four pieces of Copper, as big as the Palm of ones Hand,
and a piece of Tobacco, they usually buy two Cows.

Some of these People have Elective, others Successive Kings or Governors;
Government.
but all their Powers not able to make above four or five thousand Men, and
those living dispersedly in several Plantations, far distant from each other.

Religion is an absolute stranger among all these Salvages, Religion.
insomuch that they never worshipped either God or Devil; yet they say and
believe there is a Divine Power, which they call Humma, which causes Rain,
Winds, Heat, and Cold; but will not worship him, because he sends sometimes too
much Heat and Drowth, and another time an overflux of Rain, contrary to their
desires.

Secondly, They imagine, that they can stop the Rain, and allay the Wind at
their pleasure. First, To cause Rain to cease, they lay a small Cole of Fire on
a Chip, in a little Hole dug in the Ground; and upon that Hole they lay a
Lock of Hair pulled from their Heads, and cover up the Hole with Sand; when the
Hair begins to stink, then they make Water upon it, and so run away shrieking.
To lay the Winds, they hold one of the greasiest Skins upon a long Stick aloft
in the Air, till the Wind has blown down the Skin; and then vainly think the
power of the Wind smothered thereby.

When the New Moon begins first to be discerned, they commonly in great
Companies turn themselves toward it, and spend the whole night in great joy,
with Dancing, Singing, and Clapping of Hands.

They have a Musical Instrument, made with a String like a Bow, and a split
Quill at the end, which being blowed yields a low sound.

Conney and Badger-Islands.
NOrthward of the Great Cape lie three Islands in the Sea, viz. Conneys,
Badgers, and Fransh Island. The Conneys Island, so called from the many Rabbits
breeding in the Cliffs, and on the Shore, lies before the Mouth of Table-Bay,
a League or thereabouts from the Land, five Miles Southward from Badger-Isle:
It contains a Mile and a half in compass, but more overgrown with Bushes than
the Badger, which received its name from the abundance of Rock-Badgers there
found.

Neither of these have any fresh Water; Spilber. Voyage. 1601.
and although the Ground be sandy and full of Bushes, yet they bear many good
Herbs and Flowers, and abound with Cattle.

The Conneys were first brought thither by the Dutch, in the year One thousand
six hundred and one. The Sheep, carried thither first by the English, grow
extraordinary fat, and increase exceedingly; so that some have been found whose
Tails were five and twenty Inches thick, and nineteen pound in weight, with
four and thirty pound of Swet about the Kidneys, besides the Fat that came from
their Flesh; but the Meat gives no satisfaction in the eating, by reason of the
exceeding fatness.

There are many Pinguins, and thousands of Meuwen; and yet for all this plenty,
they both lie desolate, and not inhabited.

A little Northerly lies the Fransh-Island, equal in all things to the
aforementioned, and as them, without Inhabitants.

THE EMPIRE OF MONOMOTAPA.
THis Empire, The Empire of Monomotapa.
by Joseph Barras called Benomotapa, and by Sanutus, Benomotaxa, lies up within
the Country, before the Kingdom of Sofale, near the Sea, enclosed between Rio
de Spirito Sancto, or Magnice, and the great River Quama; both which by some
are taken for two Branches of Zambere.

It spreads Southerly toward the Cape de Bona Esperanza, Borders.
having in the North for Borders the Kingdom of Monimuge, or Nimeamae, and the
River Quama; in the East, the Seacoast of Sofala; in the West and South, the
River Magnice, and the neighboring Mountains. Others.
Cluverius conterminates it in the East, South, and West, with the great Ocean;
in the North, with Congo, the Abyssines, and Zanguibar.

Its Length, The bigness.
between the Lake To and the Ethiopick Sea, together with the Mountains of the
Moon, Cluverius reckons to be four hundred Dutch Miles; and the Breadth,
between the Head-Fountains of Nilus, and the Cape of Good Hope, three hundred
Dutch Miles: For all the little Kingdoms, from the River Magnice to the Cape of
Good Hope, are said to acknowledge the Prince of Monomotapa for their Supreme
Lord. But the whole Compass of this Country is accounted by many but seven
hundred and thirty five French Miles.

The Imperial and Royal Court, being the Chief City, is called Banamatapa;
Chief City.
although by Vincent le Blank, Madrogam, lying six days Journey from a great
House called Simbaoe, or Zimbaoch, and five Miles from Safale, toward the West.

The Houses have almost sharp Roofs, very large, built of Wood or Earth, Houses.
very finely, and whited without and within.

The Palace of the Emperor carries a vast extent, The Kings Palace.
having four Eminent Gates, and very many large Chambers, and other convenient
Apartments, guarded round about with Watch-Towers, and within hung with Cotton
Hangings of diverse Colors, wrought with Gold, and richly Embossed; as also
overlaid with Tin gilt, or, as others say, covered over with Plates of Gold,
and adorned with Ivory Candlesticks, fastened with Silver Chains: The Chairs
gilt and painted with several Colors: The four chiefest Gates of the Court
richly Embossed, and well defended by the Life-Guards of the Emperor, whom they
call Sequender.

The Emperor keeps a great Train of Servants, who all attend in good order,
bowing of the Knee when they speak to him. His Meat is served up to his Table
in Pourcelane, round beset with Gold Branches.

Other Principal Cities are Zimbas, a Mile and half from Sofale; Tete, where
the Portuguese Jesuits have their Residence; Sena, etc.

Certain Warlike Women, like the ancient Amazons, The Residence of the
Amazones.
do possess a peculiar Territory, appointed for them by the King; although
Sanutus appropriates to them a particular Kingdom upon the Borders of Damout
and Gorage, more toward the South.

Not far from Monomotapa is the Province of Chitambo, The Kingdom of Chitambo.
wherein stands the City Tamburo.

This Kingdom has the benefit of a temperate Air, Air.
and enriched with luxurious Valleys, which, though not Inhabited in all
Places, affords Provision of Cattle, and Fruits sufficient to store both
themselves and Neighbors; nor is it destitute of pleasant Woods, stored with
variety of Fruit Trees, Plants.
and in some places abundance of Sugarcanes, that grow without Planting, to
the increase whereof, the Rivers and Brooks that besprinkle the Country do not
a little help.

The greatest Wealth of the Country consists in Oxen and Cowes, Beasts.
with them more highly esteemed than Gold or Silver. They have no Horses, nor
other Beasts for Carriage besides Elephants, which flock together by whole
Herds in the Woods. They show a Beast called Alsinge, resembling a Stag or
Heart; and Ostriches as big as Oxen. There grows upon Trees called Koskoma a
Fruit of a Violet Color, and sweet in taste; of which whoever eats
plentifully, it purges them so violently, that a Bloody Flux, and at length
Death follows upon it.

Here are found several Gold Mines in the Bowels of the Earth, Gold Mines.
and also in some of their Rivers, for which the Inhabitants dive in the
Stream, and take it up with the bottom from the Mud, and so pick it out; which
Gold-diving they also practice in diverse great Lakes, spread far and near in
this Kingdom; for which cause the King of Monomotapa is not without reason
called by the Portuguese, The Golden King.

All the Inhabitants have short and black curled Hair, The Constitution of the
Inhabitants.
and, as Linschot says, are of a middle Stature; though Pigafet makes them a
kind of Giants. They are well set, of a sound Body, of Complexion black, very
apprehensive and quick of Understanding, much addicted to War, and apt to make
Insurrections upon any trivial cause.

Their usual Food is salt Beef, Milk, and a little Verjuyce, and Oil of
Sesamos; Their Bread made of Rice, Mill, or of the Root Ignamees, which they
boil in Basins; The Drink of the Common People, Milk; but of the King, and the
Grandees, Wine of Honey, or Mead, which they preserve in Oxhorns; or Wine of
Palm, made delicious with Manna, Amber, and Musk.

The King bestows every day in Perfumes two pound of Gold, which certain
Merchants furnish him with: For the Torches and Lights which he uses are mixed
with sweet Odours, which he causes to be born before him in the night, being
set in a richly Embroidered Pavilion, carried by four Noblemen, followed by a
great Train, and covered over with a Canopy, in manner of an Umbrella, set with
Precious Stones.

The King never gives Audience to any Man when he Travels, or is ready to take
a Journey; neither goes he out of his Palace, but upon some well-ordered Beast,
an Elephant, or the beforementioned Alsinge.

The King may not Clothe himself but according to the manner of his Ancestors,
The Kings Clothing.
in a long Cloak, made in that Country; for he wears no Foreign Garment, for
fear of Poison; and upon that, a long and great Cloth, in form of a Coat or
Woman's Gown, which comes to his Knees, and from thence to his Middle buttoned
up, with a costly Knot upon his Shoulder. He wears usually at his Girdle a
Spade with an Ivory Handle, and in his Hand two Arrows; intending by the Spade
to give his Subjects to understand, That in time of Peace they ought to be
diligent in Tilling the Land; by one of the Arrows, That he has power to
punish Evildoers; and by the other, that he must offend his Enemies.

The Inhabitants go naked from their Necks to their Girdle; Apparel.
but from thence down to their Feet they have Garments of Cloth of diverse
Colors, and of Wild Beasts Skins, and their Privacies hidden in small Purses.
The Eminentest Persons wear a Skin with a Tail behind them hanging down to the
Ground: But Sanutus says, Their Apparel is made of Cotton Cloth, or great
Indian Stuffs wrought through with Gold Wyre.

The Women go naked as long as they are unmarried, only wearing a small Cotton
Cloth before; but as soon as they are married, and have Children, they cover
their Breasts and Bodies with Cotton Clothes.

Every one may have as many Women as he can maintain; but the first is
accounted the Head of the Family, and all the rest are at her service; and her
Children, after the Fathers death, inherit all the Estate.

The Women are here in so much esteem, that the Kings Sons, if they meet a
Woman on the way, must step aside.

The Houses are built of Wood like Tents, and covered with Straw for a Defense
from the Rain; but the Richer, and Persons of Quality, have them somewhat more
handsome and convenient.

The Inhabitants so honor their Dead, Honor showed to the dead.
that if one of their Friends, or a Woman that leaves Children, Jos. Barros,
lib. 10.
dies, after the rotting of the Flesh, they preserve the Bones, and mark them
for distinction from others, in an open Court, whither they come every seventh
day clothed in white Apparel, and set boiled Flesh and Bread on a Table covered
with a Cloth; then having prayed to them for the Welfare of their King, they
eat up the Meat.

The People are charged neither with Taxes or other Payments to the King;
Revenue of the King.
but when they desire to have Audience from him, they carry a Present with
them, by reason it is contrary to the Custom of the Place, that an Inferior
should speak to a Superior without bringing a Present, for a sign of Obedience
and Honor: And all the Persons of Quality are bound to serve the King seven
days in thirty.

The Merchants that Trade there must also give some Presents to the King, for
the neglect whereof they incur his Displeasure.

The Wealth of this Country consists in Gold found in Mines and Rivers;
Riches. Ja rik lib ca 42. Sanut. lib. 1.
which though little valued, yet they narrowly search for, because they find it
necessary for the Purchase of Outlandish Merchandises. This thirst of Gold has
made the Portuguese so industrious in their Quests, that they possess some
Mines thereof in a Tract of Land above sixty Miles from Monomotapa.

Their Arms are Bows, Arrows, Ponyards, and Hangers, or Scymitars. Arms.


The Emperor keeps continually a strong Army, consisting all of Foot, for they
have no Horse; besides a stout Party of Valiant Amazonian Women, which March
and Fight as well as the Men, burning off their left Breasts, that they may
shoot with the more readiness and ease. They carry the same Arms with the Men,
and shoot backwards or behind them when they fly; but when they observe the
following Enemy to Retreat and draw off, they suddenly face about, and fall
upon them, committing great Slaughter.

None washes their Hands or Face during the Wars: Every one carries his own
ordinary Provisions; but the King provides Sheep and Oxen. They cut off the
Members of those they take in Battle, and drying the same, present it to their
Wives, to wear for an Ornament about their Necks; and she that wears most of
them, has most respect, because it testifies her Husbands Valor.

Before the Portuguese became Masters of this Coast, Government. Osor. de Rebus
Emanuel. lib. 4.
all the Kings acknowledged this of Monomotapa for their Emperor; and still
several of them own him, and pay Tribute yearly.

The Emperor has several Great Lords his Vassals; and for the better holding
of them in Obedience, according to an ancient Custom, keeps their next
Successors, upon pretense to be honorably brought up, in his Court; though in
truth to be as Hostages for their Fidelity. He sends also Agents every year to
his Substitute Kings and Lords, to give them new Fire, with command to put out
all the other. When the Agent comes to the Court of one of these Lords, every
one must put out his Fire, and not kindle it again before the Agent has made a
new one, from whence all the Subjects of this Lord must fetch and carry it into
their Houses. He that seems unwilling in this Work, is taken and punished for a
Mutineer.

The King keeps commonly a thousand Women, or more, being all Daughters of his
inferior Lords; but the first married commands the rest, let her be never so
mean.

The Chief Sovereign is called Benomotapa, that is, Emperor, or Munnemotapa,
Title of Honor. Jos. Bars. lib. 10. ca. 1.
according to the Relation of Texeira a great Traveller.

The King receives and expects extraordinary Honors from his Subjects, by whom
served on the Knee, as we have said; only the Portuguese, Moors, and his
chiefest Favorites may speak to him standing: when he drinks, all the
Spectators sing aloud in his praise: all his Attendance and Retinue, remain
sitting in his presence, in alto silentio, without daring to utter one word.

The King and all his Justices, are very strict in the prosecution of their
Office and Duty, to punish Offenders with great severity.

The Sentences of these Judges are established by the Emperor, and the Offender
immediately punished: As soon as any one has committed an offense, he is
punished in the Field, while the Fact is fresh in memory; but if it require to
keep the Offender some days, they tie him under a Tree, and set upon him a
Watch, by reason they have no Prisons, so that the Offender seeing no way to
escape, poisons himself; so by a sudden death, to be freed from the cruelty of
a lingering punishment. When any injures another without a cause, they lay him
naked upon the earth, and cruelly beat him with a Rope full of knots; which
punishment the Judges themselves are subject to, and the greatest Lords and
Magistrates, besides the Confiscation of their Estates and Offices.

If the Judges have any difficult business, whereof they can find no proof,
they give the suspected person the Bark of a Tree cut small, in Water, and if
he can keep that potion without Vomiting, they clear him, otherwise they
condemn him to death.

These People are for the most part Pagans, they call their chiefest God,
Maziry, that is, The Creator of all things. They show great reverence to a
certain Maid called Peru, in whose honor they shut up their Daughters in
Cloisters as Recluses.

Moreover, Religion.
they set apart as Sacred, some days of the Moon, and the Birth of their King;
but the innumerable number of Erroneous Opinions, darkens all the Splendour of
their Belief, which they should have to God the Creator of Heaven and Earth.
But the earnest endeavor of the Portuguese Jesuits, has converted many to
Christianity, and brought them to receive Baptism.

In the Year Fifteen hundred and sixty, the King himself, with his Mother, and
above three hundred Nobles, and chiefest Lords of the Realm, were Baptized by
the hands of the Jesuit, called Gonzales Sylveyra; but afterward, at the
instigation of some Mahumetans, he was slain by the King's command, with the
imputation of a Sorcerer; but a little time discovering their malice, they made
satisfaction for his undeserved death, with the loss of their own Heads.

The Kingdom of AGAG, and DORO, with the Territory of TOROKA, or BUTUA.
AMongst the substitute Dominions of Monomotapa, are Agag, and Doro, bordering
in the East, on the New-Land; and in the West, at the Kingdom of Takua.

Toroka, or Torea, by some called Butua, or Buttua, takes beginning according
to Linschot and Pigafet, at the Fish-Cape, and so to the River Magnice, or
Sante Esprit; having in the South, the foot of the Mountains of the Moon, and
the aforementioned Cape; in the North, the River Magnice; and in the West, the
Stream of Bravagull.

The chiefest Cities, are Zenebra, and Fatuka.

In this Country, far to the Inland on a Plain, The building Simbaoe.
in the middle of many Iron-Mills, stands a famous Structure, called Simbaoe,
built square like a Castle, with hew'n Stone, of a wonderful bigness; the Walls
are more than five and twenty Foot broad, but the height not answerable; above
the Gate, appears an Inscription which cannot be read or understood, nor could
any that have seen it, know what people used such Letters.

Near this place are more such Buildings, called by the same name, signifying,
a Court, or Palace; and for that, all the places where the Emperor at any time
makes his abode, are called Simbaoe; this Building is guest to be one of the
King's Houses.

The Inhabitants report it a work of the Devil, themselves only Building with
Wood, and aver, that for strength it exceeds the Fort of the Portuguese at the
Seashore, about a hundred and fifty miles from thence.

The Emperor keeps a Garrison in it, as well for the safeguard of the place, as
of several women he maintains there.

A little way from the Seashore, are many beautiful places richly Verdur'd
with Grass, and stockt with Cattle, but destitute of Wood; so that the
Inhabitants use the dried Dung of Beasts for Fuel.

They have many rich Gold-Mines, whereof Boro, Gold Mines.
and Quitici are the names of two, lying about a mile and a half from Sofala.

The Habit of the People is but mean, Clothes.
being only the rough Skins of Beasts.

The Wealth of the Country, besides the beforementioned Mines, Riches.
consists in Elephants-Teeth, whereof they sell infinite numbers; and Salt,
which they send abroad into most parts of Africa, to their no small advantage.

The City Fatuka boasts great abundance of Gold, Silver, and Pretious-Stones,
beyond all her neighbors.

They have a Prince of their own, but a Vassal to the Emperor; Government.
his name Buro.

The Country of INHAMBANE, and INHAMIOR.
THis Kingdom lies a little within the Country, under the Torrid Zone; Jarrik.
lib. 5. c. 9.
having for its Metropolis a City called Tongue.

The heat is so great, that the people of Europe residing there for Trade, are
not able to endure it, but are discommoded by several strange and troublesome
diseases.

The Inhabitants generally keep to their ancient Idolatry, though many by the
diligence of the Portugal Jesuits, have embraced the Christian Religion; and
in particular, as we told you, Gonzalves Silveyra, in the year Fifteen hundred
and sixty, Baptized the King and his whole Court.

The place where the King keeps his Court, lies about half a mile from the
Town Sema; the residence of many Portuguese.

The Kingdom of MONOE-MUGI, or NIMEAMAYE.
THe great Kingdom of Monoe-Mugi, The borders of the Kingdom of Monoe-Mugi.
Pigafet. lib. 2. c. 9. Conge. Jarrik. lib. 3. c. 3.
or Mohememugi, by others called Nimeamaye, situate over against Mombaza,
Quiloa, and Melinde, has for Northern borders Abyssinies, or Prester-John's
Country, and the Kingdom of the great Makoko; in the South, Monomotapa, and
Mosambique; in the East Mombaza, and Quiloa; in the West, on the River Nyle; on
the North-side between that and Prester-John's Country, lie some small
Kingdoms, which being weak of Forces, sometimes pay Tribute to the King of
Monoe-Mugi, and sometimes to the Abyssines.

These Countries abound with Gold, Silver, Copper, and Elephants; The
Inhabitants said to be white Skinned, and of bigger stature than the Europeans,
go naked on the upper part of their bodies, Clothing.
but over their nether parts wear Silk or Cotton.

They use also for Ornament, Chains, or Bracelets of Chemical Stones, which
glister like Glass, and are brought from Cambaye: These Beads serve them also
in stead of Money, Gold being of no value with them.

This King holds an amicable correspondence with Quiloa, Melinde, and Mombaza,
by which means Silks, Cotton-Stuffs, the aforesaid Beads of Cambaye, and many
other Commodities are brought into the Country, and bartered for Gold, Silver,
Copper and Ivory.

He lives also in a League of Peace with the great Makoko; whereby from hence
some Black Merchants have Converse and Trading with the Portuguese, that keep
their Markets in the Kingdom of Fungeno, as also in Pombo d' Okango.

At the end of this Kingdom, on the East, by information of some Black
Merchants of the Kingdom of Nimeamaye, given to several Portuguese, lies a
great Lake, out of which many Rivers (by them unknown) take their Original:
adding moreover, that in this Lake are abundance of Islands, inhabited by
Blacks; and that on the East Side of these Lakes, Land may be seen, where
sometimes they hear the sound of Bells, perhaps brought thither by the
Abyssines; and discern some Buildings, which they suppose Churches; from this
East Side, sometime in Boats there came Tauney-Men, and by chance Blacks; yet
the sides of the Lake are possessed by persons yellowish, with lank or uncurl'd
Hair hanging down at length, who daily come to Trade with the forementioned
Islands. They of Pombo d'Okango, being asked, how many days journey they had
from Okango to this Lake? answered, that at the speediest they could scarce
arrive there in sixty days.

The Valleys between Okango and this Lake, are related to be exceeding
fruitful, being enriched by many pleasant Springs, frequented by diverse sorts
of Beasts and Fowls, shadowed with very fair Palm Trees, whereof the
Inhabitants make Wine and Oil; and so much Honey in many places, that it lies
like Dew upon the ground. No Christian has ever penetrated thus far, nor
indeed are willing, partly because of the desolate and untrodden ways thereof,
and partly for the intemperance of the Air; but principally for fear of the
Jages, the cruellest and most inhumane people, which keep here in great
multitudes.

These Jages are like in Manners, Wars, and Savageness to the Jages of Ansico,
for they eat up all those that they take Prisoners in the Wars, or serve them
as Slaves; and for Ornament have also Feathers stuck through their Noses, and
both the upper Teeth before are struck out; without which marks none can be
received in their Bands or Companies, as we have at large before related.

The Kingdom of SOFALA.
THe Kingdom of Sofala lies between the Rivers Magnice and Quama, upon the
last of which it borders in the North, Borders.
and the Kingdom of Angoche; in the South, on that of Magnice, and the
Territory of Buttua, or Toroa; in the West, on Monomotapa; and in the East, on
the Indian Sea.

The chief City seated in an Island, they call Cefola, or Sofala, The chief
City Sofala.
near which the Portuguese have a strong Fort, built in the year Fifteen
hundred.

This City when the Portuguese first came to it, had but a small extent, and
the Structures were very mean; but since that much improved with neat built
Houses.

Linschot places here few other Cities, and Towns, Geoge. Nub.
contrary to the fancy of diverse African Geographers, who reckon Hantema, and
Dandenia, besides some straggling Huts, termed Villages on the shore, as Sajona,
Boccha, and Gasta.

The River Magnice seven and twenty degrees, The River Magnice.
and forty minutes South-Latitude, was at the beginning called by the
Portuguese, Rio dos Lagos, that is, The River of the Lake, but afterward in
the year Fifteen hundred forty five, Rio do Spirito Sancto. Joseph. Barros.
lib. 10. c. 1.
It has its rise (as some conjecture) out of the Lake Goijame, and after it
has flowed along way to Sofala, divides its self; one of which keeps the old
name, and disembogues his stream into the Sea, between the Fish-Cape, and the
Cape das Torrentas, having first received three other Streams, of which the
chiefest is called by the Portuguese, St. Christophers River, because found on
that day, but by the Inhabitants Magoa; the other called Marches, from Lawrence
Marches, the first discoverer: both which pour down from the Mountains of the
Moon, in the Territory of Toroa; the third styled Arroe, comes about the North
from the midst of the Gold Mines of Monomatapa.

The other Arm of Magnice, The River Quama.
entitled Cenama, or Quama, or Covanga, takes denomination from a Castle or
Fort, which Pigafet says, the Mahumetans possess on its shore, but higher up,
the Inhabitants name it Sambere. This arm has more plenty of water than the
other, being Navigable above twenty miles, and receiving the Stream of Six
other great Rivers, as Panhames, Luangoa, Arruga, Manajova, Grain Gold.
Inandire, and Ruenie, all which make their way through Monomotapa, in many
places casting up Grain-Gold: it empties it full-gorg'd Channel into the Sea by
seven Mouths, which make seven Islands, all well peopled. At the mouth of this
River the Portuguese have a Fort to keep the Inhabitants under obedience, built
in the year Fifteen hundred.

The Kingdom of Sofala shoots not far into the Country, but lies wholly on the
Seacoast: in the midst of it appears the Cape das Correntas, in three and
twenty degrees and a half South-Latitude; between which Cape and the Island of
Madagacar over against this Cape, lies the Banks or Cliffs of India, called in
Portuguese, Baixos da India, very dangerous, and causing many Shipwracks. They
begin about the one and twentieth degree South-Latitude, in the Channel of the
Coast of Sofala.

Matuka reaches from Cape das Correntas to the River Cuama, The Country of
Matuka.
or Quama, wherein are several Gold Mines, belonging to Monomotapa.

On the Coast of Sofala in the Country of Matuka, lies the Capes of St.
Sabastian, and St. Catherine.

The Air is healthy and temperate; The Air.
the Land some places plain, and in some uneven, barren and desolate, from the
mouth of the River Magnice, to the Cape das Corrintas, but from thence to Quama
very fruitful and populous.

Matuka bears not an equal evenness, Sanus.
though being by Quama River, for the most part Mountainous, Scbiq. Spilberg
1601.
Woody, and interlac'd with many Rivulets; the Sea Coast low and plain, full of
shrubby Trees, whose sweet smelling scent heretofore gave a quicker discovery
than the eye could make of the place.

Great wild Elephants numerously overspread the Country, Beasts.
which the Natives neither know how to tame or manage: nor are Lions, Bears,
Stags or Hearts and Bores fewer; besides Sea-Horses that sport themselves in the
River Quama.

The Mines and Rivers afford abundance of Gold, Abundance of Gold.
which the Blacks gather in a kind of little Purses, of no small quantity.

The People are well-set, The constitution of the Inhabitants.
and for the most part black, though some brownish: Those which dwell at Cape
Carnidos are less wild than them about Aiguilhas, or the Cape of Good-Hope;
also taller of stature, and free of converse: they feed on Rice, Flesh, and
Fish.

They go with the upper part of their bodies naked, Clothing.
but wear upon the nether part (from the Waste to the Knees) Clothes of Silk or
Cotton, girt to them with a Girdle, whereto hangs a Dagger with an Ivory
handle; and wind about their heads Silk Stuff, in form of a Turbant; though
some wear Scarlet Colored Caps.

Some of them speak Arabic, Language.
but most use the common Language of the Country; for you are to observe, that
these present people are not the proper Natives of the place, but came before
the Portuguese on this Coast, over Sea from Arabia Faelix, to Trade with those
of Monomotapa: And as they found greater advantage by the increase thereof,
they began to Plant fresh Colonies in the void and desolate Islands, and at
length removed thence into the main Country.

The Inhabitants relate, The Riches. Navig di. T^o. Lopez.
that the Gold-Mines of Sofala afford yearly two Millions of Metigals, every
Metigal accounted for a Ducket, and one third part; and that the Ships of
Zidem, Meque, and many other places, in times of Peace, have yearly fetch from
thence two Millions of Gold: And lastly, that this is the very true Ophir, from
whence King Solomon had his Gold. Hence King Solomon setch^^ his Gold. Moq.
lib. 4.
And indeed according to the Writing of Moquett, no place in Africa affords
better, and greater plenty of this Metal; for the General of Mosambique, during
his three years Service in the Wars, received more than three hundred thousand
Esckusos, or Crowns in Gold, besides the Pay of the Soldiers, and the third
part answered to the King of Portugal.

The Inhabitants Trade with other Mahumetans, coming over-Sea in small Ships
called Zambuks, and bringing thither Silk Stuffs and Ash-colored, Yellow and
Red Kambaian Beads, which they exchange for Gold; as those of Sofala barter
these Wares again with them of Monomotapa for Gold, which they receive without
weight.

They have also abundance of Ivory, which they sell into Kambaya, Voyage of
Spilb.
and Ambergreece, which they get from the adjacent Islands of Usiques.

When the Inhabitants lying near the Sea, see any Outlandish Ships, they
declare by kindling of Fires their coming acceptable. They weave many white
Cotton Clothes: For the Art of Dying they have no skill in; sometime they
unravel the Kambaian colored Clothes, and Weave that among their white Yarn,
and make Cloth of several Colors.

Their Weapons were only Daggers, Bows, and Arrows, Arms. Osor. lib. 4.
Spilber.
but now they have the use of Guns, Powder, and Bullets, by instructions from
the Portuguese.

Pigafet holds an opinion, that the King of this Country was a Mahumetan,
Dominion.
and Vassal to the Emperor of Monomotapa, with whom being at War, he entered
into a League with the King of Portugal; But in the Voyage of Spilbergen, we
find, that the King was a Portuguese by Birth; contrary to what Jarich
mentions, viz. that he is merely Tributary to the Portuguese; but Marmol says,
that in his time he obeyed the Emperor of Monomotapa.

The people (says Pigafet) have embraced Mahumetanism; Religion.
which Osorus also confirms: although Jarick says, they know no Religion at
all, In the fourth Book of the Expedition of the King Emanuel.
but are like a piece of Wax, fit to receive any. Certain it is, that for above
two hundred years the Mahumetans flourished there, and have built a City called
Sofala, upon an Island of the River Quama; who though but intruders, keep under
the native Caffers.

And now it coming just in our way, The differences about the right place of
Ophir.
and seeing both Expositors of holy Scripture, and Geographers understand this
Country of Sofala to be the Golden Ophir, to which King Solomon sent a Fleet
of Ships, Manned with the Servants of Hiram King of Tyrus, from Ezion-geber, a
Haven lying at the Red Sea; returning again after three years Voyage, laden
with Gold, and Elephants-Teeth. We conceive it not unfit in brief to relate the
difference of the ancient Contest about this place, hitherto clearly decided,
with the Arguments on both sides.

Arias Montanus, Baftellus, Goropius, and others, are of opinion, that Ophir
was that part of America, commonly called Peru; and divided North, and South
Peru: therefore they conclude from the word Parvaim, in the Hebrew Text, being
the Plural Number, and that this Gold was brought from the two Peru's; but many
opposite Arguments refel this Opinion.

First, It is probable, that Peru in the time of Solomon was not known; nor
which is more, the Voyage to Peru, over so wide a space of Seas, not possible
to be performed, especially for want of the use of the Lodestone and Compass.

Secondly, There are in Peru no Elephants; so that by consequence, from thence
no Ivory, or Elephants Teeth could be brought.

Thirdly, If Solomon were to go with a Fleet to Peru in America, it might have
been sent more conveniently out of some Haven of the Mediterranean-Sea, as
being nearer than out of Ezien-geber, at the Red Sea, to fetch so long a
compass, by the Cape of Good Hope, and the whole Guinee-Coast.

St. Jerome, an ingenious Expounder of the Hebrew, who in the year Four hundred
twenty two, in the Nineteenth year of his Age, departed this world under
Theodosius the Emperor, by the word Ophir, understands good or pure Gold; and
in his Translation sets down very good Gold, and not Gold of Paruaen, or of any
Country: but this opinion also is long ago rejected.

Athanasius Kircher, in his Book of the Coptick or Egyptian Language, asserts,
that Ophir is a Coptick, or Egyptian word; whereby the ancient Egyptians
understood the Indies, containing the Kingdoms of Malabar, Scilon, and the
Golden-Chersonesus, or the descending Country of Ptolomy, about the River
Ganges, Eastward of a Bay, by him called, The Great; as also Sumattra, the
Molucca Islands, Great, and Little Java; and other adjacent Islands full of
Gold, whither King Solomon's Fleet went with King Hiram: The Gold of Parvaim,
Kircherus judges was the Gold of (...), Javim, that is, of the Islands of
Java; having read in the Rabbis, these two Islands by the same name.

In setting Ophir in East-Indie, (as Kircher does) and not in America, the
chiefest Geographers agree; as Ortelius, Volaterranus, Gramas, and others; yet
diverse make Ophir the same with Sofala, because it has much Gold, and Ivory.
And if all the main Land (included between the Rivers Magnice, and Quama, and
submitting unto Monomotapa) be all as Barros, Calls, or Sofala, as well as the
rest on the Seacoast, it may with great reason be judged, that this Country
can be no other than the Golden Ophir of Solomon; partly because of the Houses
there to be found, near the Gold-Mines; not built after the manner of the
Country, but seem the work of Foreigners; and partly, because of the
Inscriptions in strange and unknown Letters. Moreover, Thomas Lopez in his
Voyage to the Indies affirms, that among the Inhabitants of this Country,
there remain Books which show, that Solomon every three year had his Gold
thence. Besides the Septuagint Interpreters have Translated the word Ophir,
into the Greek word (...), which agrees very near with Sofala. And Josephus the
Jewish Historiographer, calls it Indian-Ophir; adding moreover, that in his
time it was called The Gold-Countrey. A certain Writer, called Eupolemeus,
mentioned by Eusebius, calls it Ophir Ureten, and says, it is an Island of
the Red Sea, from whence they used to Freight Ships to Melanis, a City in
Arabia.

The Country of ZANGUEBAR.
THis Country some will have to be the same which Ptolomy calls Agysynima,
and Paulus Venetus calls Zengibar; Jan. Bar. lib. 13. c. 4.
but the Persians and Arabians, Zanguebar; Zangue, in their Language signifying
Black; and the Inhabitants Zanguy, or Neorroes.

Jan de Barros, extends this Country along the Seacoast, Lib. 12. Borders.
from the Cape das Correntas, to the River Quilmanzi; but Sanutus sets the
Southerly borders thereof at Sofala, and Monomotapa, and the River Quama, and
the Northerly borders at the River Quilmanzi: But Marmol extends it from the
South to the North, to the Cape of Guardaseu, in about twelve degrees
North-Latitude.

It contains the Kingdoms of Angos, or Angoche, Mongalo, Mozambika, Melinde,
Mombaze, Quiloa; and some Islands.

The River Quilmanzi, by Ptolomy, with the near adjoining Cape, called Rapte,
The River Quilmanzi.
and the great River of Africa, takes its original out of a certain Mountain in
Abyssina, which the Inhabitants call Graro; as also the River Obi: But the
Moors, lying at the Mouth thereof, call it Quilmanzi, from the name of a place
they possess, by one of its chiefest Mouths, near the Kingdom of Melinde. The
Portuguese Writers will have this River Quilmanzi, to be the same with Zebee,
which rises out of Maria, a Territory in the Abyssynes, from a place called
Boxa; and from thence running South with a swift course into the Kingdom of
Gingiro. Other Portuguese affirm, That it lies no more than a thousand Paces
from Melinde, being a very great River, flowing out of the Abyssine Country;
but that they could never attain the full knowledge thereof, because those that
were sent to discover it, were driven back, and assaulted by the Inhabitants.

The Air is very Unhealthy, Feverish, and Corrupt; Air.
and no less unwholesome are the products of the Earth, caused partly from the
Moorassness of the Grounds; and partly from the multitude of Rivers and Lakes
which makes this Country a great pack of Islands.

The Inhabitants are black, having short curled Hair: The constitution of the
Inhabitants.
they go from the shoulders down to the middle naked, but have their nether
parts covered with party colored Clothes, or wild Beasts Skins; the Tails
whereof, especially among people of Quality, hang down behind.

The Blacks on the Seacoast, and of the near adjacent Islands, Food.
live upon Fruits, the flesh of wild Beasts, and milk of the Cattle which they
breed; especially the Moors, called Beduines, who dwell a little deeper into
the Country, and Trade with the Kaffers.

Gold is none of the least advantages drawn from this Country, Riches.
wherewith it so abounds, for which only they get a supply of all other
necessaries.

The Natives of the Main-Land are Idolaters; Religion.
but the Islanders almost all Mahumetans, extracted from certain Arabians
exiled from their Country, for introducing of some Heresy in their Religion;
as following the Doctrine of one Zaid, Nephew of Hocem, Son of Haly, whereupon
they were called Emossayders.

The Islands of QUIRIMBA.
OVer against Zanguebar, L'Ambassade de D. Garvas Figuerra en Perse.
lie the Islands of Quirimba, extending above fifteen miles along the Coast, to
the out-lying Point, called in Portuguese, Cabo del Gabo.

They are not all of one equal bigness, nor alike distant from the Main-land,
and severed one from another by Channels, so small and shallow, that at
Low Water they may be Waded over. And although each Island has its particular
name, yet the Portuguse call them all Quirinba.

The Islands were formerly inhabited by the Arabians; as may plainly appear by
the Ruins of the Houses, and Mosques, being built by people less barbarous,
than those that have their Residence there at this day, of Lime, Stone, and
Tiles, like the Cities of Quiloa, Monbaza, and Melinde. But since the
Portuguese began to set forth their Ships to the East Indies, the Soldiers and
Mariners, out of a natural hatred and antipathy to all Mahumetans, thought it
not enough to rob them, burn their Houses, and Mosques, and to carry them away
for Slaves, but with a sweeping Rage, sparing neither Age nor Sex, destroyed
all of the remainder.

These Islands many years since, lay waste and void of people, till some
Portuguese from the Main-Land wafted themselves over thither, and planted them,
and so became subject to the Governor of Mayambique, about three and thirty
miles from thence; from whence every year comes a Judge to decide
Controversies.

The Lord of every Island has his House built of Stone, and Lime, wherein
resides his Wife, Children, and Slaves of both Sexes, as also Friends, and
Servants, whom they hire, to have their assistance against the Negro's of the
Main-Land, which by their living so near, are ready enough to do them a
mischief; And therefore, both themselves and Slaves are Armed with Muskets,
Pistols, and other Weapons.

Most of these Islands are not above half a mile, or a mile in compass, but
very fruitful, full of Palmito-Trees, Oranges, Figs, Grapes, Herbs, and
Pome-Citrons; and excellently accommodated with fresh Water.

They have besides many Oxen, Cows, Goats, and an infinite number of Fowl,
among which, Wild-Pigeons, and Turtle-Doves: but Corn, Rice, Drugs, dried and
confected Fruits, are brought to them from Ormus.

The Island of Quirinba is the biggest, and was the first Peopled, yet has
only twenty five Houses, inhabited by Portuguese and Mesties; they stand not
close together, but lie scattered, here and there two or three together.

Every one of these little Islands has their own Governor, which every three
year are changed. From Gou they receive a Dominican Priest, who celebrates
Mass, and performs all other Sacred Duties; to which end, there stands a
Cloister in the midst of the Houses, whither all those of these Islands come to
do their Devotion.

The second of these Islands called Oybo, Oybo.
is not so big as Quirinba, but the Air more temperate and fresher; so that a
man may well say, that the whole makes one pleasant Garden, moistened and
besprinkled in many places, with the best and most wholsomest Waters in the
world.

The other Islands have no Road nor Haven, where Ships can come to an Anchor,
because in the deepest Channel at a low Ebb, there is not three Foot water.

Over this Island Oybo, a Portuguese Commands, who dwells in a great and
handsome House, with Chambers below and above; and behind it a Garden,
encompassed with a Stone-Wall of two Fathom high, with Spiers at the top, so
that it may seem in stead of a Bulwark: This, with assistance of his Household
Family, who are all Armed, may be defended against any Incursion of the Blacks,
from the Main-Land, if they should offer to attempt it; but they live in good
Peace one with another, because of their mutual Trade.

The Kingdom of MONGALO, and ANCHE, or ANGOS.
UPon one side of the River Quama, lies Mongalo, a Tract of Land inhabited by
Mahumetans, or Moors.

They have abundance of Gold brought thither from Monomotapa; not far from
thence you see the River Ango, by Pigafet, called in Italian, Agnoscia; by
Moquet, in French, Angoche; but by Barbosa, Angos.

The Country produces great store of Mill, Rice, and Cattle.

The Inhabitants are of a middle Stature, but very black; they go with the
upper part of the body naked, but covered from the Girdle downward with Cotton
and Silk Clothes: Some wear Turbants upon their heads, and others Caps made of
Silk Stuff.

They use a peculiar form of Speech, though many of them speak Arabic.
Language.


These Moors of Angos are all Merchants, Trading in Gold, Ivory, Cotton, Silk,
Their Customs.
Clothes, and Kambain Beads, or Bracelets. The Cotton, Silk, Cloth, and Beads,
they receive from the hands of the Merchants of Quiloa, Mombaze, and Melinde,
which bring them thither in small Baskets, or Almides, cut out of the whole
Wood.

They own no Governor, unless one who speak their proper Language, and by
profession a Mahumetan; yet all their care does not keep them from a mixture of
Heathenism.

The Kingdom of MOZAMBIKE.
A Little beyond Angos, appears the Kingdom of Mozambike, so called from the
Island of that name, exceeding those her two neighbors of St. James, and St.
George, living all three near at the Mouth of the River Meginkate.

Over against St. Georges Island, but at the distance of an English mile, you
may see a Point called Cabo Ceira, being a hanging Islet, joined to the
Main-Land of Africa, by a small Istbmus overflowed at High Water; but at other
times passable on Foot.

The Country of Mozambike is very fertile, in producing many sorts of Fruits;
Plants.
as Rice, Citrons, Oranges, and Mill, which the Blacks are compelled to guard
and defend against Elephants by the kindling of Fires, whereof these Beasts are
very much afraid.

There grows also a certain Plant called Pao, or Wood of Antak, which creeps
along the ground, and is very like the Herb Aristolachia, or Heart-Wort. The
Fruit is long, small, with green Seeds or Grains. The Roots have a strange
virtue, in curing a Disease called Antak, which seizes on the Foreigners, by
conversing with the Blacks, and can be expelled by no other Medicine.

The Inhabitants make Wine of Mill, which they call Huyembe, or Pembe.

Here is no want either of tame or wild Fowl, Animals.
nor of Stags or Hearts, wild Hogs, Cows, Oxen, and Elephants; which last are so
numerous, that the Inhabitants dare not travel without fire, to defend them
from their assaults. Wild Hens breed in the Woods, being speckled with many
small white and gray spots: their Heads are much less than our common Hens,
with a short Comb, but thick, and of a high color: and not only the upper
part of the Head, but also part of the Neck, covered with a blue Skin like a
Turkey.

Many Silver, Gold, and other Mines are found in the Country.

The People have short Curled Hair, The Constitution of the Inhabitants.
great Lips, long Visages, and very large Teeth.

They go stark naked, only a blue little Clout before their Privacies: They
Paint there Bodies with diverse Colors, but account it the greatest Ornament, to
have streaks of a certain red Earth. They make in each Lip three holes, in
which they hang Bones, Jewels, and other things. But this Fashion and Trimming
eminent People only use.

They feed in general upon all sorts of Fruit, Food.
and Flesh of Beasts: yet they eat also the Flesh of Men, taken Prisoners in
the Wars, but they esteem the Flesh of Elephants as the choycest Dainty.

They are revengeful and treacherous, dull of understanding, and inured to
labor like Beasts, not grutching to be Slaves.

Every Lordship or Province produces a several Language; Language.
yet it proves no hindrance to their converse one with another.

Their Riches consist in Gold, Riches.
found in the Rivers, Ivory, Ebony, and Slaves; yet are so fearless of any
attempts to be made upon them, that they debar no Foreigners to come into their
Havens, the Portuguese only excepted.

Their Weapons of War are Arrows, Battel-Axes; but can neither boast any number
of People, nor extent of Land.

The Inhabitants are, according to Linschot, some Heathens, and some
Mahumetans; but Pyrard averrs, they have neither Religion nor Laws, but that
they are only Kaffers.

The Island MOSAMBIKE.
THe Island Mosambike, half a Mile from the Main Land, contains about three
quarters of a League in length, a quarter in breadth, the whole compass not
exceeding a League and a half, with a white Shore. It extends South and
North, along the Main Land; between which and this Isle and Fort, appears the
Bay, serving for a convenient Haven, Land-lockt from all Winds, being very
large, and carrying eight or ten Fathom Water: Within a Stones-throw of which
the Ships ride at Anchor.

This Island has the Main Land on the North, and two other uninhabited small
Islets on the South, the one named St. James, or Jago, and the other St George;
but neither affording any convenience, not being inhabited, being wholly
overgrown with Shrubs and Bushes.

Some place two Cities upon Mosambike-Isle, affirming the one to be plentifully
peopled by Portuguese, and the other with Blacks; but Pyrard makes the whole so
fully inhabited, that it seems but one Town, comprehending within its Circuit a
very large and strong Fort, together with five or six Churches, Chapels, and
Cloisters.

From the Description of the Navigation to the East Indies, made by Verhoeven,
in the Year Sixteen hundred and seven, it appears that the City of Mosambike is
very large, having good Walls, fine Houses, and some Churches and Cloisters:
wherewith agrees Paul van Caerden, in the Journal of his Voyage to the
East Indies.

Moquet allots to the City not above two hundred Houses; but Linschot leaves
all the places open and unwall'd, except the Castle, where the Portuguese
Governor with his Soldiers have their Residence.

Garias de Silva Figueora, in his Persian Embassy, comprises in the City an
hundred and fifty Houses, but most of them built of Wood, Straw, and Palm Tree
Leaves.

For the deciding these different Relations we may suppose, that the first
Writer, who places two Cities here, mistook two Villages for Cities; and
Linschot himself mentions the Dwellings severally, making one part of the old
Fort, commonly called Fortarez a Velha, and another of some Houses close by it.
Others may have taken a great number of Houses standing close together to be a
City; however it is, we may modestly guess, that at the time of these Writers
things were found thus.

There is a Cloister of St. Domingo, with a rich Hospital, said to have been a
Castle in former time, built by the Kings of Portugal, into which those of that
Nation are put, coming sick from Sea.

Besides St. Anthony, St. Dominick, and St. Gabriel's Church, all lying without
the Fort; they have another, Nossa Seniora do Balvarte, built close under the
Fort.

The Air being generally more than warm, proves very unwholsom, Air.
insomuch that few live there any while free from dangerous Distempers, which
no doubt are much augmented by the want of fresh Water, there being only one
small Spring, of little consequence, in a Thicket of Palm Trees; so that most
of them drink salt Water, mingled with a little of that fresh.

This great Drought sufficiently declares, that the Land proves barren,
Unfruitfulness of the Soil.
and unfit to produce any thing: Yet provident Nature has recompensed the want
of all other Provision with Coco-Nuts, Oranges, Citrons, Ananassed-Figs, and
other Indian-Fruits, but these only in manured and well cultivated Gardens.

They have neither Wheat nor Rice growing, but all brought from the Main Land,
or from Goa and the East Indies; so also Raisins or Grapes, and Spanish-Wines,
with several other Necessaries both for benefit and sustenance; so that it is
much dearer living here than in any other Place possessed by the Portuguese in
this Coast.

Here breed great Herds of Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Beasts.
with Tails as big as a fifth part of their Bodies; Bucks, Goats, and Swine:
whose Flesh has gained such an esteem, that the Doctors oftentimes order the
Sick to eat it, and forbid them all other sort of Meat; it being a delicate
Food, pleasant and delightful of taste.

There are also many excellent Birds, with black Feathers, and black Flesh,
either boiled or raw, yet accounted no unwholsom Food.

The Haven swarms with Fishes, which the Inhabitants call Marraxos, and the
Portuguese, Tintoreas; they are very ravenous after Man's-flesh, for so soon as
they see a Man fall into the Water by chance, or go to swim, they will
immediately catch and devour him.

The Inhabitants are a mixture of Mestiffs, Mahumetans, and absolute Heathens,
yet all subject to the Portuguese.

The Natives of this Island are black of Complexion, The Nature of the
Inhatants.
and low of Stature, with short Curled Hair like Wool; they smell very rank,
when grown warm; they are by nature barbarous, cruel, and revengeful, but
withal, timorous.

Both Sexes go naked, Apparel.
only the Men have a small Clout before their Privacies, and the Women cover
their Bodies from their Breasts half way to their Knees, with course
Cotton-Clothes.

Their Ornaments consist in three or four Strings of white, Omaments.
green, blue and red Beads about their Necks, and ten or twelve Copper or Tin
Armlets about their Arms. They make holes in their Ears, wherein in stead of
Pendants they hang pieces of Copper or Lattin; cutting and carving the rest of
their Skin for an Ornament.

Their common Food is Fish, Food.
and Rice boiled in Water with Honey.

Their Drink is Palm-Wine and Water, and a sort of Liquor called Arak, made of
Rice.

Their Skiffs, Boats, or Canoos, consists all in one Piece, as we often
mentioned.

They speak generaly a kind of broken Arabic. Language.


There are a certain sort of handsome Mats, Trade.
made by the Inhabitants, which are sent to Goa.

The Portuguese drive a smart Trade here with Spanish-Wine, Oil, Cotton,
Skiffs, red Beads, and such like, notwithstanding they have a quick Market at
Sena, Makuno, Sofala, Quamma, and other places.

Their Arms are Bows, Arm^.
Arrows, or Lances; but of late they have begun to learn the use of Firearms.

The Portuguese have many years ago built a Fort, supposed the strongest they
possess in those Parts, consisting of four Bulwarks, from whence with their
mounted Artillery they can defend and make good the Haven against any ordinary
attempts. It has strong and well designed Flankers, fortified and surrounded
with three double Walls, and a broad Trench made about it in the Year Sixteen
hundred and thirteen.

Several vain Onsets have the Dutch made upon this Fort, but chiefly in the
Year Sixteen hundred and six, when after a formal Siege of thirty two days,
they were compelled to withdraw first, as an effect of their malice, having
burned many Ships, Canoos, Houses, and Churches, those two especially of St.
Gabriel and St. Domingo beforementioned.

Some of the Inhabitants, by reason of the Converse and Trade of the Arabians
on this Coast, are drawn to Mahumetanism, others are Christians; but the most
part of them are Idolaters.

The Kingdom of QUILOA.
THe Kingdom of Quiloa derives the Name from an Island, Situation. Plgaf. 2. b.
8. H.
lying in eight Degrees and fifty Minutes South-Latitude, at the Mouth of the
River Kuavo, said to spring out of the Lake Zambre, and according to Peter
Alvarez, posited so near the Main Land, as if joined to it, and has a stately
City, by some taken for the Rapta of Ptolomy, with lofty Houses after the
Spanish fashion, all adorned with stately Halls, Chambers, and other
Apartments, furnished with costly Housholdstuff, and accommodated both for
Pleasure and Profit with sweet and fertile Gardens.

There lies on the Main Land of Quiloa another City, called Old Quiloa, Sanut.
lib. 12.
built about six hundred years since by one Haly, Son of Hacem King of Cyrus in
Persia, but yields nothing so delightful a Prospect as that mentioned before.

This Kingdom, before the coming of the Portuguese thither, spread it self
along the Seacoast above a hundred and fifty Dutch miles: for he Reigned
formerly over Sofalo, Quamma, Angos, and Mozambike; but when Francois Dulmanda,
in the Year One thousand five hundred and five, put in for this Coast with the
Portuguese Fleet, the King; though invited to Friendship, prepared for a
Warlike Defense; whereupon seven hundred Portuguese went on Shore, who quickly
took the City, and put him to flight.

Sanutus says this Country has such an antipathy to the nature of the
Europeans, that the Portuguese found themselves necessitated to forsake the
same, notwithstanding they had built a Fort there, and made no doubt but to
have been the Masters thereof. But later Opinions hold the Air since that to
have grown more temperate, for that some good and wholesome Fruits have been
found growing there.

Osorius praises it, as being watered with many Fountains, so enriching the
Soil, that it produces all sorts of Grain and Fruits with little labor,
especially Maiz, Rice, Oranges, Citrons, and Lemons.

They have great store of Oxen and sheep, many Hens, Pigeons, Beasts.
Turtle-Doves, and several other sorts of unknown Birds, diverse sorts of wild
Beasts in the Woods, and on the Seashore variety of Fish.

Some of the Inhabitants draw their Original from Arabia, such are brown, some
black, others white. Pigafet affirms them to be all white; whereas on the
contrary, Pedro Alvarez maintains them all black.

Their usual Food is Maiz, Rice, and other Grains, Carrots, Food.
and variety of wild Fruits, a fit Diet for such poor People.

The Merchants, and better sort of Men, go Habited in Cloth of Gold, Apparel.
Silk, or Cotton, with Turbants on their Heads. The Women wear also stately
Apparel, with Gold and Silver Chains on the Arms and Legs, and costly Pendants
in their Ears. In brief, they go Clothed after the Arabian, or rather Turkish
Mode.

They commonly speak Arabic, but understand other Languages, Language.
by reason of their Trading with Outlandish Merchants.

The Riches of the Quiloan Merchants consists in Gold and Silver, Riches.
Ambergreece, Pearls and Musk.

The Inhabitants are under a peculiar King, whom Linschot makes a Vassal, or
Tributary to the King of Mommugi.

They are partly Mahumetans, Religion.
and the rest Pagans.

The Kingdom of Mombaza.
TO the Northward of Quiloa, Borders.
on the Seacoast, you come to the Kingdom of Mombaza, so called from an
Island, in four Degrees and five Minutes South-Latitude; which Sanutus makes in
its Circumference to be twelve Italian miles; but Jarrik only a League, or
thereabouts.

The City being of the same Name, The City Membaza.
built after the Italian manner, bears a considerable bulk, being situate on a
high Rock. The extent of the whole Dominion not very big, bordering on one side
at the City of Orgaba, seated on the Banks of the River Onchit, which poures
her Waters into the Nyle by the Mountain Amara, where the Kingdom of Melinde
begins.

The Turks had formerly thrown up a Fortification at the Shore of this River,
so that none could come into the City but through it, being environed with a
Wall, planted with Guns to defend it against the Portuguese, who in the Year
Fifteen hundred, under the Command of Vasques de Gamma took this Fort, with all
the Turkish Galleys.

At the same time the City was also conquered by a People called Imbires,
living not far from the Cape of Good Hope, by the aid of the Portuguese, after
a long Siege, into which five hundred of them entering by Storm, pulled down the
Walls, Churches, and a greatvaulted Castle, to the ground, and burned all the
Ships in the Haven. The King of Mombaza himself, with all his Courtiers and
great Officers, fell into the hands of these Imbires, which not only put them
to death, but eat them up.

The City was once before, in the Year Fifteen hundred and five, ruined by one
Francois Almede; and some years afterward again rebuilt by the King of
Mombaza: but it long held not up its head, being again assaulted, taken, and
plundered by another Portuguese, called Nunno de Acunha, who endeavoring to
settle, were forced to leave their Conquest and retire to the forementioned
Fort, but were also at last dispossessed thereof by the same King, in the Year
Sixteen hundred thirty one.

The temperature of the Air gives no cause of complaint to such as dwell there,
Air.
nor the barrenness of the Country any discouragement to Planters, there being
store of Mill, Plants.
Rice, many sweet and sour Oranges, and also some very large, with sweet
Rhinds like China-Oranges, Citrons, Pomegranates, and Peaches without Stones.

They have many excellent Sheep, Beasts.
Cows, very large Goats, and Hens.

The People are of a whitish-brown Color, Nature.
somewhat inclining to black, more loving and courteous than those of the other
Places lying near the Sea.

The Women are very richly Habited, Apparel.
in Cloth of Gold and Silver after the Arabian manner.

Their common Food is Mill and Rice; Food.
and their Drink either Areka, made of boiled Rice, or Wine of Honey, which
they keep in great Horns in stead of Casks, cut in several fashions.

They have a King, Government.
whom they honor like a God, and say he Reigns only upon the Earth as the
Portuguese do upon the Sea. He is said to be so arrogant and self-conceited,
that at the falling of Rain against his pleasure, or excessive Heat, he breaks
out into several exclamations against Heaven, and out of madness draws his Bow
against the Sun. In brief, he calls himself the Emperor of all the World, and
imagines that he shall overcome the whole Earth. He keeps commonly an Army of
fourscore thousand Men in the Field, and in their March observes this Order:
First he commands to go before him many Droves of Cattle; next several persons
carry Fire, whereby he intends to declare, that all those whom he Conquers,
must expect nothing else but to be Roasted and Eaten: All the Towns and
Villages he travels through of the Enemies, he ruins, and without
distinguishing of Men from Beasts, kills all he finds, so that all stand in
great fear of him, and betake themselves to flight when they hear of his
approach.

The King of Mombaza and all his Subjects were formerly Idolaters, Religions
but at present embrace Mahomet's Superstition, introduced by their last King,
about the Year Sixteen hundred thirty one. He was from his Infancy inclined to
Christianity, and Married to a Christian Woman, but being too highly affronted
by the Governor of the Portuguese Fort, fell off from it, and then raged
against them with horrible fury, putting all to death that fell into his Hands,
and never ceased till he had expelled them the Country.

This Seat was formerly, for the convenience of its Haven, a Place of great
Trade, being much frequented by neighboring Merchants, from Zanzibar, Penda,
Araer, and other parts of Africa.

The Kingdom of Melinde.
THe Kingdom of Melinde lying more to the North than that of Mombaza, has
received its Name from the chief City, Borders.
seated on the Shore of the Sea. It lies in two Degrees and a half
South-Latitude, and reaches along the Seacoast of Mombaza, to the River
Quilmanzi, and runs into the Country, to the Place called Calice.

The chief City Melinde, situate in a pleasant Plain, The chief City.
and surrounded with several Gardens, contains many Houses, very neatly built
of hew'n Stone, with handsome Rooms, and Painted Cielings. Some will have it,
from the famous Arabian Physician Avicen, called Avicenne Mondelle; from whence
the black Aloe comes to be the same with Melinde.

The Haven lies a little distant from the City, by reason of sundry Rocks,
which makes the Landing-place very dangerous.

The Country is fat and fruitful, and yields all necessary Provisions, Plants.
except Bread, in stead of which the Inhabitants use the Root Potatesen. Some
Rice and Barley grows there, but inconsiderable; nor have they any Wheat and
Rye, but what is brought from Kambaye. There are several sorts of Fruits-Trees;
and above all, very excellent and well tasted Melons, in the Country Language
called Dormous, which the Inhabitants eat in the Summer time as a pleasant
cooler.

There is all sorts of Venison, and Fowl, great and small Cattle, Beasts.
chiefly Sheep, much bigger than those in Europe, with Tails of five and
twenty, and thirty Pound weight: Hens, Geese, and all sorts of Flesh may be had
here in great abundance.

The Inhabitants are some black, Nature of the Inhabitants.
and some brown, with Curled Hair: but those which live by the River Quilmanzi
are white; as also most of the Women of Melinde.

The Women go very nobly apparelled in Silks, Apparel.
and wear Gold and Silver Chains, with a Cloth before their Faces when they go
abroad. The Men go naked down to their Wastes, but from thence wear Cotton or
Silk Coats, with a Linen or Cotton Turbant on their Heads.

The principal Commodities for Trade, are Gold, Ivory, Copper, Quicksilver, and
Wax, which the Mahumetan and Cambayan Merchants barter for Clothes and Stuffs.

For Arms they use Scimiters, Arms.
Shields, Bows and Arrows: Some have reputed them the valiantest of all
Africa; yet those of Mombaza have often put them into fear, and would have
treated them very badly, had they not obtained the Portuguese assistance.

The Subjects honor their King very highly, Honor shown to the King.
carrying him on their Shoulders, and at his going out in the Streets burning
sweet Perfumes before him; which also they use to do before all other Princes
and Lords that come to visit them.

The King takes cognizance in Person of all Matters in debate, Their manner of
executing Justice.
although he has appointed Officers and Judges to officiate in the
administration of Justice: And if any complain of another person to the King,
he must be sure to give a good account of the Matter, or else he runs in danger
of losing his Head: however, upon the Complaint he immediately sends for the
person: if the Complainant be a great Lord, then being come, at the Palace he
winds his Horn, to acquaint the Servants of his coming before the King: If upon
examination he finds both have offended, then the least Offender is sent to the
Lords of the Justice, who punish him corporally by beating with Cudgels; but
the greatest he condemns in a pecuniary mulct. But if only one great Lord has
committed any offense, being brought before the King in his Chamber, he is
stripped stark naked, and laid upon the Ground, where, upon his humble
submission and begging of pardon, he receives some blows with a Wand from the
King's own Hand, more or less, according to the bigness of the Crime: After
which he takes up his Clothes, kisseth the King's Feet, and in all humility
thanks him for the favor received: then he attends the King into his Hall, who
forgives him in the presence of all the Court, with a Command to do Justice,
and afterward goes out of the City in public with honorable attendance, and
returns into his Country with as great satisfaction, as if he had received
some great Present.

When the King travels abroad to view his Concerns, he rides upon a Horse
richly furnished, and going out of the Palace, treads over a new-kill'd Deer;
whereupon all the People give a loud shout: and at the same time the Priests
inspect the Intrails, to know whether his Progress will be prosperous or not.

When he makes his entrance into any City, then all the handsomest Ladies and
Maids meet him, some singing his praise, others carrying and burning Perfumes
before him, others playing with small Sticks on a Basin, and every one striving
to recreate and please him.

When any Native Prince sends an Agent to Treat about some weighty Matters,
they also kill a Deer, which the King steps over thrice, the Soothsayer in the
interim viewing the Inwards, to enquire of the effect that may be produced
thereby.

Some report the Inhabitants of the City Melinde for Heathens, Religion.
others for Mahumetans; but Linschot says they are of both sorts, among which
are many Christians.

The Mahumetans incline to the Sect of the Emoraydes, which disesteeming the
Alcaron, follow the Doctrine of Zayd, the Son of Hoiem.

The Christians have a strong Congregation; as a proof whereof, they have
erected a great Gilded Marble Cross, and have seventeen Churches or Chapels
there.

The Kingdom of Lamo.
MOre Northerly lies the Kingdoms of Lamo, or Lamen, and Pate; but that of
Lamo spreads more to the West, as bordering upon the River Quilmanzi, having in
the North, Melinde; and in the East, Pate.

The chief City Lamo, lying a little Northward of the Line, has a good
defensive Wall, against the Invasion of the Inland People, with whom, though
in War, yet as occasion offers, Trade together.

Both King and People are all Mahumetans, but pay Tribute to the Portuguese,
Government.
to whose Power they submit in all things.

The Kingdoms of Pate, Sian, Chelicie, and Ampaza.
THe Kingdom of Pate extends all along the Seacoast, on both sides the Bay, in
Portuguese called Baya Formosa; and the City is handsome and large, and has a
good Haven.

The Jurisdictions of Sian, Chelicie, and Ampaza, neighbor it on all sides,
having indeed peculiar Lords of their own, but so inconsiderable, that their
whole Strength cannot defend them from being miserable Slaves to the
Portuguese, they Lording over them; nor can the greatness of the Turks, to
whose Protection they sometimes fly, give them either a Relief or Relaxation.

The Portuguese have a Castle at Pate; and another between that and Sian,
called Mondra: But because the Mahumetans showed themselves unwilling to pay
Tribute, and began to raise some Mutinies and Disturbances, the Portuguese
Admiral, Thomas Sousa, in the Year Fifteen hundred eighty nine, pulled it down
to the Ground: And Alphonso de Mello laid waste the City of Ampaza in Fifteen
hundred eighty seven, for the like Rebellion; yet the King, after he had made
Peace with the Portuguese, remained in the ruined City.

The Country of Ajan.
THe Country of Ajan, or Axam, as the Arabians call it, according to the
testimony of Marmol, or rather Habaxa, or Habex, some take for the ancient
Trogloditica, extending along the Shore of the Arabian and Avalitian Gulf, to
the Mountain Elefas Fellos.

This Country has for Borders in the South the great Arm of the River
Quilmanzi, and the last described Kingdoms; in the North, Abyssynie, or
Prester-Johns Country, and the Straights of Mecha; in the West, the Mountains,
out of which the River Quilmanzi shoots, and also the same River, with part of
Abyssinie; and in the East, the Ocean. It concludes within its compass from the
South to the North, the Republic of Brava, the Kingdoms of Madagaxo, Adea, or
Adel, and some other more unknown Places.

This Country affords plenty of all Necessaries for the preservation of Man's
life; but most famous for a Breed of good Horses.

From the River Quilmanzi they extract Gold.

The People living at the Seashore are most of them Whites, but those in the
Country Cole-black, with whom the Beduines, a white People, commixing, produce
Mulatto-Children, neither perfectly white, nor absolutely black.

These Beduines live a toylsom and beastial life, ranging along the Shore of
the River, lodging under the open Canopy of Heaven, and maintaining themselves
by Robbing and Stealing.

The Inhabitants of this Country maintain a continual War against the People
of Abyssinie, and sell all those they take Prisoners to the Arabians, living
beyond the Red Sea in Asia.

The Merchants of Kambaye, Aden, and all the Arabians, come into the Haven of
Ajan to Traffic, carrying thither all sorts of colored Stuffs and Cloth, with
Glass-Beads, and other Commodities.

From Ormus they bring Raisins and Dates, which they exchange in the Havens of
Zoila and Barbore, for Gold, Ivory, and Slaves.

The People inhabiting this Coast are all Mussulines, but those farther into
the Country are Emoraides, otherwise called Beduinen, a sort of Mahumetan
Sectaries.

The City and Republic of Brava.
BEyond Quilmanzi, at the Coast of Ajan, not far from the Seashore, in ten
Degrees and thirty Minutes North-Latitude, lies the City Brava, surrounded
with strong Walls, and full of stately Houses, built after the Moorish fashion.

It is a Place of great Trade, and has abundance of Gold and Silver. The
Inhabitants pay yearly a Tribute of five hundred Metigals of Gold to the
Portuguese, every Metigal reckoned worth a Ducket and a third part of one.

We may read in Texcira, that on the Coast of Zanguebar near Brava, was a piece
of Ambergreece found, so big, that one standing at one side of it, could not
see a Camel on the other side.

This is the only Republic of Africa, being Governed by twelve Xeques,
Government.
chosen by the antientest People out of the Family of the Brothers
aforementioned, who to escape the Persecution and Tyranny of the Kings of
Lakah, Religion.
fled out of Arabia Felix hither, where they still retain the Mahumetanism
which their Ancestors brought with them.

Madagaxo, or Magodoxo.
AS you Travel more Northerly toward the Red Sea, you come to the Kingdom of
Magadaxo, which has been formerly so powerful, that all the Mahumetans on this
Coast were subject to it.

The Country spreads it self, according to Urette, betwixt ninety and a
hundred Leagues in breadth, but he seems to include therein the Kingdom of Adea.

This Territory produces great abundance of Barley, with variety of Fruits, and
feeds huge Droves of Horses and other Cattle.

Some of the Inhabitants are brown, some black, and some white, yet
notwithstanding this difference of complexion, they agree in Language, all
speaking Arabic.

The Head City Madagaxo has gained the repute of great Wealth, by the Trade of
the Kambayan and Aden Merchants, bringing thither all sorts of Clothes, Drugs,
and Spices, and receiving from thence in Barter, Gold, Ivory, and Wax.

They use in their Wars no other Arms, but poisoned Arrows.

The Kingdom of Adea.
THe Kingdom of Adea begins in the middle of Adel, on the Main Land, Borders.
bordering in the South, at Madagaxo; in the West, at Oyja, belonging to
Abyssinie, in the North, at Adel; and Eastward bordered with the Indian-Sea.

The most famous Place of this Realm has the Name Barraboa, that is, The good
Shore; though it be somewhat distant from the Sea, and in passing to it you go
up against the Stream in a Skiff by an Arm of the River Oby, or Quilmanzi.

The Dominion of Granze comes next, having for Limits the Kingdom of Oyja, Xoa,
and Gorage, then Barra Maa, which is, Bad Shore, because no Ships can come near
it. At last, upon the Skirts of this Realm, you find a Place called Ogabra.
Ograbra.


This Country has many great Woods, insomuch that the Inhabitants are forced
to cut down the Trees to make the Ways.

Nature has served them with a plentiful hand, so that they want no Provision,
having extraordinary Herds of Cattle.

They have a peculiar Mahumetan Prince, Government
but dependent upon the Abyssine Emperor, to whom he pays Tribute.

The Inhabitants in general are zealous of Mahomet's Superstition, Religion.
but those of Granze are partly Idolaters, and partly Christians.

Adel, or Zeila.
THe Kingdom of Adel, Borders.
so called by the Portuguese, but by the Natives Zeila, lying at the Seashore,
borders in the North at the Beglierbeyat, or Provinces of the Bassa of Suaquen,
near the Straits of Meche; in the South at Adea; in the West, upon Fatigar in
Abyssinie; and in the East, at the Indian Sea.

Pigafet makes the Southermost Places of this Kingdom to be Meth and Barbosa,
together with a part of the Arabian Gulf, and the Cape of Guardafu.

It extends in length from Zeila to the Cape of Guardafu, Bigness.
along the Seacoast, seventy two Miles; and from Guardafu, along the Eastern
Coast, about eight and forty; but in breadth fifty six.

The Chief City of this Kingdom is Ara, situate in nine Degrees North Latitude,
by some called Arika Gurrele; but by Marmol, Arat, who places the same eighteen
Miles from Zeila; he settles also here the Royal City Adel, and the Towns
Orgabra, Migiate, Sequeta, Bali, Mautra, Doara, Komizara, Novecara, and Soceli.

On the Seacoast Pigafet tells of a small Place named Asuin, or Affion, well
stored with Provision, but wanting a Haven, and so consequently little
frequented by Merchants. Then follows the Cape of Guardafu, or Guardafuy, by
many taken for the Aromata of Ptolomy, lying in twelve Degrees and a half North
Latitude, and very famous, because the Easterly Coast of Africa ends there. It
lies almost at the entrance of the Arabian Gulf; so that the Ships which come
out of India, and will go to Aden, and Ziden, or to Zeila, and Barbara, Sail
close by it. On the Coast of Adel appears a Place called Salie, which Sanutus
takes for that which Ptolomy denominates Mosilon.

Next to Salir, follows Barbara, and Meth; the first lies to the North, on the
Shore of the Red Sea, eleven Miles from the City Zeila; the latter, according
to Sanutus, a small City. Afterward comes Zeila, one of the best Places on
this Coast, being in eleven Degrees and twenty Minutes North Latitude; six and
twenty Miles, says Marmol, from the Straits of Meche.

This City, though built on a low and Sandy Ground, boasts not only a large
Extent, but a very convenient Haven for Ships. It stands within the Kingdom of
Adel, in the Province Baragian, which includes the two other small
Jurisdictions of Dalacha, and Malacha, all under the Obedience of the Turks.

The Houses in Zeila are built of Stone, and the Streets curiously Paved, and
daily frequented with Swarms of People.

The Inland Countries of Adel lie even and plain, The nature of the Soil.
only here and there some easy and pleasant Ascents.

The Plains yield plentiful Returns to the Laboring and Industrious
Husbandman, answering his Expectation in the abundant Product both of Plants
and Beasts, having withal the River Haoax, which takes its original out of that
vast Range of Mountains on the Borders of Xaoa, and Ogge, and feeds the lesser
Stream of Match with Water. Some have not stuck to aver it to be little inferior
to the Nile; but nothing near so long, because it overflows not above six
thousand Paces: Neither does it reach, how full of Water so ever it be, to the
Sea; but is quite drank up by the dry and thirsty Earth before it comes so far.

The City Zeila has no fresh Water within two days Journey, nor other Ground
than Sand; but the Fields at further distance afford such Plenty of all things,
that out of this Haven, and that of Barbara on the same Coast, Ships Transport
Provisions to feed Adom and Ziden, especially Corn, Beans, Barley, and Oil, not
pressed out of Olives, but extracted from the Seed of a Plant called Zerzelin,
or Gerzeluin, or Grugioline; but indeed no other than Sesamos.

Beasts breeding here, are Sheep of two sorts; Beasts.
one with Tails of twenty five pound weight, black Necks and Heads, and the
remainder of their Bodies white; the other quite white, with Tails as long as a
Man's Arm, and crooked as a Vine-Branch. Some of their Cows have Horns like a
Stag, black Hair, and wild; others are red, but with one Horn on their
Foreheads, of a Span and a half long, but turning backwards.

The Inhabitants as far as Barbara are Olivaster-colour'd; Nature of the
Inhabitants.
but from thence more to the North, about Zeila and Barrazan, they grow much
blacker; naturally quarrelsom, and apt to make Wars upon any trivial occasion.

They go covered from their Navel to their Knees with Cotton; but the upper
part of their Bodies remain naked: only Persons of Quality wear Coats, which
in Arabic they call Bernuz.

This Dominion possesses much Gold and Ivory, besides such a liberal Provision
of Victuals, that they feed their Neighbors of several other Countries. They
vend also Clothes, Myrrh, Pepper, and Slaves.

The Merchants of Cambaya and Arabia carry to Barbara all sorts of Cloth, and
Beads which they call Maramugos, Raisins, Dates, and many other things, which
they exchange for Gold, Elephants-Teeth, and Slaves: And those of Quiloa,
Melinde, Brava, Magadoxo, and Mombaza, barter these Commodities for
Arabian-Horse.

The Natives are generally very stout, but badly Armed, Arms.
though continually furnished therewith both from the Turks and Kings of
Arabia, and such like Necessaries; for which their Prince returns many great
Presents of Slaves taken in the Wars: for, to ingratiate himself with those
Mahumetans, he makes continually fierce Wars upon the Christians about him,
especially those of Abissinie, for which the Moors esteem him a petty Saint;
yet all their soothings cannot so save him, but that sometimes the Christians
send him home soundly beaten, teaching him to keep a more mannerly Distance.

The City of Barbara owns the Dominion of the Great Turk, Government.
as do most of all the famous Places upon the Coast of the Red Sea in Africa,
to this Kingdom of Adel, where they say his Jurisdiction ends at the Haven of
Meth; although some will have the whole Coast of Barnagas and Barrazan, nay all
the Places near the Red Sea, stand under his Jurisdiction, without affording
the Abyssines one Haven there: So that none can pass out of the Red Sea into
Abyssine, but through the Turks Dominions.

The Island of Barbora.
OVer against the City Barbora, in the Red Sea, close by the Shore, lies an
Island of the same Name, exceedingly fruitful, and well stored with Cattle.

The Inhabitants are not White, as on the Coast of Magadoxo; but Black, and
exactly Habited as those on the Main Land, whereof we lately made mention.

The Island of Socotora.
THe Island of Socotora, or Sacotora, otherwise called Sicuthora, discovered by
Fernando Bereyra, J. Barros. Ramusse.
is by some taken for the Dioscorides of Ptolomy and Pliny, and by others for
Curia Muria; though somewhat improperly, because that Isle lies over against
the Main Coast of Arabia. ^ Situation.
This has its Situation in twelve Degrees and fifty Minutes North Latitude,
fifteen Miles Southward from the Cape of Guardafuy, formerly called Cape
Aromata, and almost as far from the Mouth of the Red Sea.

Now the most Geographers include this Island of Socotora under Africa, for its
nearness to that Coast; yet some, and those of Nubia, have reckoned it among
the Islands of Arabia Felix.

And as they cannot agree to which it belongs, Bigness.
so they differ no less in its Magnitude; some making it swell to sixty
Spanish, while others straiten it to scarce fifteen Dutch Miles: But it seems
the first comes nearer to the truth, because the latter Discoverers make it
fifteen Miles long, and ten Miles broad at the narrowest; and Pirard reckons it
fifteen French Miles in circumference.

The whole Island stands encompassed with exceeding high Rocks, which enclose
therein diverse fertile Valleys. On all sides Ships may find good Anchorage,
besides the many convenient Bays and Creeks, affording safe Roads: But it
boasts two chief Havens, the one called Cora, and the other Benin.

Here is but only one City, named Sicuthora, seated at the foot of the Cape
Treta, looking to the South, where the Xeque, or Turkish Governor makes his
abode. Others make Tamary the Chief Place, and the usual Dwelling of the Bassa.
A third sort place here three Towns or Villages, inhabited by Arabians: But a
fourth affirm, That the Natives have neither Towns, Villages, nor Houses; but
abide in Holes or Caves in the Rocks.

They have many Temples or Churches, Churche^.
which they call Moquamos; but very small, and so low, that without stooping
none can come into the same. Every Church has three Doors, and one Altar, on
which stands a Cross, with two Sticks, made in form of Flower-de-luces.

The Situation of the Island so near the Line causes the Air not only to be
exceeding hot, Air.
but also unhealthy. And by reason of this excessive Heat, they have great want
of Water: Yet notwithstanding there falls a great Mist in the Nights from the
high stony Cliffs, to the great cooling and refreshing of the parched Earth:
And although a few Rivers may be found, yet they lie at such distances from the
common Passages, and remain so difficult to be found, that many Travelers die
for thirst; only at the Sea side are Trenches, out of which the Arabians
drink. And the Mountains, by reason of their excessive height, have their tops
continually covered with Snow, and cloudy with Mists and Fogs.

The Soil, for want of Moisture, proves very barren, Constitution of the Soil.
producing nothing (as some write) but Dates; for indeed none take care to Sow
any Corn, or Plant Fruits. On the contrary, Beasts.
in the Woods and Mountains breed many Bucks, Goats, Cows, Hogs, Catamountains,
Wild Asses, Horses, Camelions, Wild Hens, or Pheasants, and Turtle-Doves.

But that which above all things makes this Island famous, Aloes Sicotrina.
is the Plant from which the Aloes Sicotrina comes, and also for the great
abundance of Dragons Blood brought thence, being no other than a Gum distilling
from a Tree; the Indians call it Ber, and bruise it with an Iron in the growing
Bark at a set time of the Year. The Seashore also produces much Ambergreece.

The Inhabitants of this Island are Arabians, or Native Sicotrians, Several
Inhabitants.
which last the Arabians call Beduins, and are divided into two Generations:
The one, Nature.
having Beduinsche Mothers, and Arabian Negro Fathers, keep at the Sea side,
are black of Color, curled Hair, tall of Stature, but very ill-favored: The
others are unmixed Beduins, and live within the Country, being whiter than
Native Iudians. Some of them seem to have been born in Europe, by the tallness
of their Statures, handsome Bodies, soundness of Constitution, and the Air of
the Face; only differing herein, that they let their Hair grow without
cutting, which they suffer either to hang over their Necks and Shoulders, or
else tie up or braid the same together behind. They are inconstant,
mistrustful, Constitution.
and cowardly; insomuch that a handful of Arabians will awe vast Multitudes of
them. They have a great fear of all other people, which makes them shun
converse with Foreigners, and are above measure lazy and idle, concerning
themselves in nothing but Fishing, and feeding their Cattle.

Their common Food is Milk, Butter, Dates, and Flesh; Food.
but chiefly Milk boiled with Herbs, and serves them both for Diet and Physic.
In stead of Rye, or Wheaten Bread, they use Rice, brought to them from other
Places, and for want of that, eat Cakes made of Dates.

They wear certain Clothes by them called Cambolins, made of Bucks Hair,
Apparel.
six Spans long and two broad, from their Girdle to their Knees, and over that
another greater black and white Cloth, in form like a Cloak, which they wrap
about from their Shoulders to their Knees, and never pull it off: Barbosa, on
the contrary, writes, That they go stark naked, only with a Clout or Skin of
a Beast before their Privacies, which Corsalis also affirms. Their Heads are
bare, though Thevet says they wear Shashes, as the Abyssine Christians. The
Women wear the same Cambolins, and with it, from their Middle to their Feet,
another great Mantle, without any thing on their Heads. These, as we mentioned
before, live in Holes and Caves, as the ancient Troglodites on the opposite
Coast of Ethiopia, and sleep on the Ground, upon Buck-skins; and their manner
of Salutation consists in the kissing one another Shoulders.

There are no Artists nor Handicrafts found amongst them; only every one knows
how to Weave the forementioned Cambolins, or Hair-Clothes. They are ignorant
and brutish beyond comparison; and as they know no better, so they hate to
learn, and use no other Arithmetic than what they notch on Sticks.

The Men keep as many Women as they can maintain (though Osarius, Marriage.
upon a wrong information, scarcely allows one Woman to a Man) and part from
them when they think meet. When they have any Children, they may charge others
with them, whom they please; and this nominated Father must receive and feed
them as his own, and give them part of his Goods, as to his other Children. The
Children thus given away, they call Children of Smoke; because when the Men and
the Women conclude to dispose of a Child, they make a Fire at the Door of the
House with green Wood, and whilst it begins to smoke, the Man runs out, crying
with a loud voice, That the Child shall be given to such a Man, whose Name they
declare; and so the Father and Mother carry it to him, and he takes care for
it, as we mentioned before.

The Names of the Beduin-Men are, The names of the men.
Lakaa, Sumaa, Xembe, Terremo, Xamaxana, Surrakaa, and other such like; so that
John de Barras seems to have been misinformed, who says, They take the Names of
St. Thomas, and other Apostles: But all the Women are called Maria; not out of
Honor or Respect to the Virgin Mary, but because in their common Language Mary
signifies A Woman.

They never stay to wait for the dying of their sick Friends; The Beduins kill
their sick.
but when they guess them past recovery, they kill them: For they say, That
between being quite dead, and beginning to die, is no difference. When the sick
Persons see their Ends approach, they call their Children and nearest
Relations, giving them many Counsels and Advices, among which the three
following are most usual. First, That they should receive or embrace no other
Doctrine or Religion, than those of their Forefathers. The second, That they
would not make themselves familiar, or have to do with any one of another
Country. The third, That they would take revenge of some Enemies, which they
name: Which last proves many times the occasion of diverse Murders. When any
Person is pursued by another that intends to kill him, and he cannot escape, he
takes and drinks the white Juice of a Tree growing in this Island, being the
strongest Poison that can be found, and which they always carry about them.

The Arabians of this Island, Trade.
according to the Relation of Pyrard, Trade to Goa, Arabia, and other Places,
where they sell their Dates and Rice, brought to them out of Ethiopia, very
curious Mats made of Date-tree Leaves, and great abundance of Myrrh; and from
thence the European Merchants bring Aloes Sicotrina, and Dragons Blood,
vulgarly known among Apothecaries by the name of Sanguis Draconis.

Here are few Fortifications; Strength.
only the King of Kaxem or Fartas erected a Fort or Bulwark, by the Village
Tamara, with another of Stone on the Seashore, which the Portuguese Conquered
under the Command of one Trestan de Cunha, in the year Fifteen hundred six, or
seven; who left it to the Charge of Alphonso Norogue, with a strong Garrison of
Portuguese Soldiers: But the Islanders, instigated by the Mahumetans, to whom
they were before bound in Marriages, broke their Promise made to the King of
Portugal; so that King Emanuel discerning the Nature of the People, and how the
defending of this Fort cost more than it was worth, commanded the same to be
demolished.

Their Arms are broad Hangers, Arms.
with great Hilts: At their Girdle they wear also a Knife, of about three
fingers broad, and sharp. The Hilts of the Hangers are covered with Silver or
Copper, or wound about with Wyre very neatly. Some carry Shields, and ordinary
Guns, in the use whereof they are very expert.

The proper Language of these Beduins is so barbarous, Language.
as not to be understood by others than themselves; but most of them speak
Arabic, by daily Conversation with the Arabians.

The Government of this Island, according to Pyrard, Government.
belongs to a peculiar Xeque, sent thither by the Xerif of Arabia, and has his
abode in Tamary. Formerly the Turk possessed this whole Isle, by Conquest
thereof in the year Fifteen hundred thirty eight, at which time he made himself
also Master of Aden. But the King of Kaxem, or Kajem, which some take to be the
same with the King of Fartas, regained and held it, till the Xerif of Arabia
won it from him, who sends thither a Xeque to Rule as his Substitute.

For the deciding of Differences, determining of Criminal Causes, and managing
Affairs of State, Judges, which they call Caciz, or Hodomas, are appointed,
from whom there is no Appeal. If any one has stoll'n a Buck or a Goat, out of
necessity, or for mere hunger, he may, if he perceives the Owner of the Beast
pursues him, fly to a Temple, by which he is cleared; If coming to the Temple,
and making a noise, another comes to receive him, there may nothing further of
prejudice be offered; but if none comes to him, then they may pull him out,
and cut off his Hand, alleging, That the Temple would not serve him for his
defense, because none would come to receive him.

There are some that to this time hold an opinion, Religion.
That the Islanders of Socotora call themselves Christians, and particularly
show great Honor to St. Thomas, from whom they boast to have received the
Christian Faith; and have been induced to believe the same, by seeing the Cross
upon their Altars, and the Observations and Fastings of their Caciz, and other
Marks of Christianity: But the contrary was afterward found; for certain it
is, That they have no knowledge of Christ, or of Matters concerning the
Christian Religion, except their showing great Honor to the Cross, and because
they have it upon Altars in the Church; but being asked a Reason thereof, they
answer, That it was taught them by Tradition from their Fathers.

They worship the Moon, because they hold her to be the Mother and Cause of all
things; and therefore in great Droughts they set one among them in a certain
place, and make a Circle round about him, out of which he must not stir, upon
pain of death, but there must continue ten days worshipping the Moon; within
which time if it does not Rain, they cut off his Hand. Before the beginning of
Lent, all the most Eminent assemble, and offer Sacrifice to the Moon, of an
hundred Goats and Kids Heads. They observe Lent like the Christians; but they
begin it with the New Moon in April, and keep the Solemnity sixty days; during
which time they eat no Milk, Butter, Flesh, nor Fish, but only Herbs and
Dates, or Rice and Honey, which they buy in the Cities of the Arabians. They
are so zealous Observers of this Fast, that if they find any to have broken it,
for the first time they cut off two Fingers of his Right Hand; the second time,
the whole Hand; and the third time, the Arm.

Every Temple, of which there are many, has a Caciz, called by them Hodamo,
that is, a Governor or Judge in Church Matters; but holds the Office but one
Year, which he enters upon by receiving a Staff, the Badge of his Authority,
and wearing always a Cross of a Span and half long about him, which he may not
part with upon pain of the loss of his Hand. In the Temples, whereinto at the
Rising and Setting of the Moon they enter, they use a Stick of two or three
Spans long, upon which with another Stick they give certain Strokes, thrice in
the Day, and thrice in the Night; held by them for a Work of great Holiness:
Afterward they go in Procession three times round about the Churchyard,
turning thrice after every Circuit; then they take an Iron Pan, made in form of
a plain deep Scale, hanging upon three Chains, into which they put Splinters of
sweet Wood, and hold the Basin over the Fire: then they first perfume the Altar
thrice, afterward the Temple Doors, and say with a loud voice some Prayers in
the Temple, and in the Churchyard, requesting of the Moon to do good to them
only, and no other People: At the performance of this Solemnity, the Hodamo
holds upon the Altar a lighted Candle made of Butter (for they have none of
Wax or Tallow;) and therefore they have in their Temples Dishes of Butter,
wherewith they also every day anoint the Cross and other Sticks lying upon the
Altar. They go upon a certain day of the year, with the greatest Cross, in
Procession round about the Temple, and cause it to be carried by one chosen out
of the whole Assembly, whose Fingers after the ending of the Procession they
chop off, and present him with a little Stick, with certain marks upon it, for
a token, that he should be prejudiced by no body; whereupon thenceforth he is
held in much greater honor than others.

They follow in many Churches the Ceremonies and Customs of Nestorius, because
they were for a long time Governed by Ecclesiastical Rulers which came from
Babylon.

They have no set-Day of the Week to go into their Temples, but assemble on the
Procession-days, or when any new occasion calls them.

They are Circumcised like the Moors; and if they know any one that is not
Circumcised, they cut off his Fingers; for no Uncircumsised may enter into
their Temples: yea, the very Women themselves clap their hands at their
Husbands, if they be not Circumcised. They bear a great hatred against all
Christians; nevertheless some are of opinion, that they have sucked in much of
the Heresy of the Jacobites, and that formerly many were Converted by Francis
Xavier.

According to the Observations of Sir Thomas Roe, Ambassador from the King of
England to Persia, there were in the Year Sixteen hundred and fifteen, upon
this Island four sorts of People, that is, Arabians, not Natives, but Shipped
over thither, together with many others, by order of the King of Kaxem, when
they subdued it. These never appear before the Sultan without kissing his Hand.
The second sort are a kind of Slaves, who labor continually in his service, and
prepare and dress the Aloes. The third are Beduins, the most ancient
Inhabitants, against whom a long time the King of Socotora made War. They live
in great numbers upon the Mountains, and are at this day left in Peace, upon
promise to show their Obedience, and let their Children be instructed in the
Doctrine of Mahomet.

The fourth being indeed the right Proprietors of the Country, are a gross
Body'd and miserable People, which have no constant abode; in the night lying
in the Woods, and going always stark naked: they live by Roots, hold no
converse with others, and lead a life almost like Beasts.

Trogloditica, or New Arabia.
THe Modern Geographers, as Maginus and others, name the Country or Space of
Land, lying between the Nile and the Red Sea, properly New Arabia; but the
Inhabitants, according to Castaldus, call it Sirfi. The Ancients named it
Trogloditica, and Ptolomy, The Country of the Arabians and Egyptians. The
Inhabitants were by the Grecians called Ichthiophagi, that is, Fish-eaters; by
Eustathius, Erembers; by Diodorus, Molgers and Bolgers; and in the holy
Scripture, according to the testimony of Arias Montanus, they are called
Ghanamim; and by Pliny, Therotho's, that is to say, Hunters, for their
swiftness and dexterity in Hunting.

In the bounding of this Country great diversity arises amongst Geographers:
Ptolomy extends Trogloditick Arabia, from the City Suez, by the Red Sea, three;
or according to Peter de la Valla, scarce a days Journey and a half from Cairo
to Mount Elephas, at this day called Felt: so that he compriseth under it the
Seacoast of the Kingdoms of Barnagas and Adel. Some extend the Limits in the
South, to the Territory of Brava, the Kingdom of Magadoxo, and the River
Quilanzi, yet make it begin at the forenam'd Suez; but a third sort narrow it
to the Cape of Guardafuy, and some to the Island Mazua in the Red Sea.

The chiefest Places, as you go from North to South, near Suez, according to
Maginus, are these (though Belloon gives them to the Nether-Egypt:) The Haven
and Point of Pharos, where they say the Children of Israel went over the
Red Sea on dry ground; the Seven Wells, called Set Pozzi in Italian; the
Haven of Alkosser, or Chessir. Sanutus on the other side compriseth a part of
this New Arabia, viz. all the aforesaid Places from Suez to Chessir, under
Egypt, wherein we have followed those who have formerly described Egypt.

They call the Tract of Land from Chessir to the Sea, lying over against the
Haven of Suaquena, Batrazan. In eighteen Degrees and forty Minutes lies the
Haven of Suaquem, in the Territory of Canphila, in a Hollow of the Sea, close
by the People called Nubiers and Bello's.

The whole Coast of this Country lies clogged with high, rough, and
unpassable Mountains, so set back to back, that no access can be had to the
Inland Countries of Ethiopia and the Abyssines, but through the Haven of
Ercocco and Suachem, and that so troublesome, that Travelers can scarce go
above three or four English miles in a day.

The Inhabitants at this day are made up of a mixture of Turks, Mahumetans, and
Arabians.

The Haven of Arquico, or Ercocco.
THe Haven of Ercocco, otherwise called Arquico, and by Jarrick held to be the
Adule of the Ancients, lies against the Island of Mazuan, five or six miles
from Mount Bisan, in fifteen Degrees and a half: It was formerly a Port
belonging to the Abyssines, but since that taken from them by the Turks, to
whom at present they are subject.

The heat of the Air causes an infertility in the Soil as to Corn and Grain,
but as well those as the Maritime Parts afford several sorts of Trees, as
Willows, Jujubes, and Tamarinds; which two last are no despicable Commodity to
the Europeans.

The Inhabitants are Blacks, and go all naked, with a Skin only before their
Privacies: As well Men as Women have upon their Heads Coverings resembling a
Coronet, and the Hair bound up round. The Haven submits to the Commands of a
Turkish Bashaw, Sanut^^.
and by that means inhabited principally with Mahumetans, taking up the rooms
of Christians by them dispossessed.

In the Red Sea lie the several Islands of Mazuan, Paimuras, Delacca, Mayot,
Suachem, and some other.

The Island of Mazula.
ON the Coast of Habex in the Red Sea, you discover the Island Mazua, or
Mazuan, possessed by the Turks at this day, who in the year Fifteen hundred
fifty and seven, did take it away from the Abyssines. Thevet places it half a
French mile distant over against Ercocco, in fifteen Degrees and forty Minutes
North-Latitude.

Between Mazuan and Donkale the Turks had formerly a Castle called Dafalo;
which the Abyssines took and slighted. When the South-winds blow hard, no
Ships without danger can approach the Coast.

The Islanders are good Soldiers; but the Women give themselves over to loose
living, accounting it no dishonor to have many Gallants while they remain
unmarry'd; nor is their profession of Mahumetanism a small encouragement
thereto, the greatest promises of their Prophet aiming at no higher
satisfactions.

The Island of Dalaca.
THevet calls this Island Dalaca; others, Dalaccia, Delaqua, Delalaca,
Dalaqualacari, and Daleck: It lies below Mazua, a little more Southerly; but by
Sanutus set opposite to Mazua; five miles from the Main Land of the Abyssines,
in sixteen Degrees North-Latitude, says Andrew Corsali; but according to Huez,
in fourteen Degrees and twenty Minutes. Marmol places it it eighteen Miles
from Mazua, and gives it one City, of the same Name with the Island. Sanutus
extends it in compass to eighty Italian miles, four reckoned to one of the
Dutch; but Corsali accounts it twenty French miles.

This Island boasts a healthy Air, and plenty of fresh Water, which happening
very seldom in these Countries, invites many People thither. It Is high and
barren, but pleasant, for both the Hills and Dales have lovely Groves of Trees,
yielding a delightful shadow, but no Fruit, contrary to Thevet, who makes this
Island abound with Oranges and Lemons; adding moreover, that in March the whole
Air is perfumed with a most delicious scent. There grows little Corn or Grain,
but what they have (as also Honey, Barley, and Butter) they fetch from the
Abyssines; yet they have very fair Pastures, and full of Grass, which feed
Cows, Camels, and many Goats.

The Inhabitants, an expert and Warlike People, are either black or tawny of
Color, sour of Countenance, treacherous and inveterate Enemies of the Turks,
against whom they hold Wars continually. They speak distinctly, bear no regard
to foreign Merchants; from whom, notwithstanding their most serious
engagements, they steal whatever they can meet with.

Their Language is more difficult and obscure than the Turkish, Persian, or
Indian; but their Habit, if so we may call it, differs not from the last
beforementioned.

Their Government seems Monarchical, Government.
one Person giving the Rule both to this and the adjacent Islands.

Their Religion is as great a mixture as their People, Religion.
of whom most take Christianity from the Abyssines; some are Mamalukes, fled
thither after the loss of Egypt; besides Arabian Mahumetans, of the Persian
Sect, and others pretended Musselmans, professed Enemies to the other.

The Island of Bebel-Mandel.
PAssing from North to South you arrive at an Island now known by the Name of
Bebel-Mandel, but anciently called The Island of Diodorus, situate in the midst
of the Red Sea, which it divides into two Channels, not above a mile from the
Main Land of Arabia, and the like distance from Abyssinia toward the Cape of
Zeila; so that the King of Egypt formerly shut up this Passage on his side,
with an Iron Chain drawn from one to the other. Pigafet will have one of the
Channels toward the West Side to be five and twenty Italian miles, or five
Dutch miles wide, with a good Bottom, and the common Passage for great Ships;
but the other scarce a large Dutch mile wide, full of Rocks, Shelves, and Banks
of Sand. It lies in twelve Degrees and fifty Minutes North-Latitude. Thevet
calls it Muim, and makes it two French miles in compass, having some few Trees,
but otherwise wholly barren. Formerly the Abyssines and Arabians of Aden made
great Wars against the Possessors thereof, by which it became subject sometimes
to the Christians, and then to the Moors, till at last the Portuguese utterly
laid it waste, and so left it without hope of re-peopling.

The Island Suachem, or Suaquem, by Marmol called Suaquum, standing, according
to Thevet, East and West, contains fifteen or sixteen French miles in compass;
but Rosaccio makes it much less, and divides it almost from the City of the
same Name, beautified with many fair built Houses. Maginus supposes the Haven
of this Place to be the Sebastian Mouth mentioned by Ptolomy.

Over against Adel in the Red Sea, lies the Island Barbora, already mentioned.

About Suez inhabit two sorts of Christians, one Circumcised, named Jacobites;
the other Uncircumcised, commonly called Melaquiters.

The Inhabitants of these Islands, and the Places on the Coast of the Red Sea,
Trade with the Arabians over against it.

Sanutus says, that in the Haven of Chessir they have many Huts made with
Mats, wherein they stow the Wares carried from Cairo to Mecha.

The Moors of Ziden convey to Suez all sorts of Spicery, Drugs, precious
Ambergreece, which they bring from the Indies, and transport from thence upon
Camels to Cairo.

In like manner the Merchants bring from Cambaya into Asia, and from all Arabia
to Barbora, all sorts of Clothes, Beads, or Motamugo's, Elephants-Teeth, and
other Commodities.

The Red Sea, by the Moors called Bahar Queizum; by others, The Arabian Bay,
Red Sea. Gaspar. Sam. Bernardino.
and Streights of Mecha, the Burial-place of Mahomet, lies between the Coast
of Ethiopia and Abyssine in Africa, so that it parts Asia and Africa.

At the entrance of this Sea lie two Harbors, the one called Guardafuy; and the
other, Fartague: The breadth between them is sixty Leagues or Spanish Miles,
and the length five hundred; that is, an hundred to the Straights of
Bebel-Mandel, and four hundred from thence to Suez, where it ends.

Geminiano a Jesuit averred, that in former times the Red Sea overflowed all
Egypt, and by its Water took away the color from the green springing Soil; but
after the Water began to fall away and lessen, it remained at length with so
little moisture, that the Sunbeams, which shine down in that place with very
great power, make a reflection of the red Sand from the bottom, which seeming to
give a tincture to the Water from its ruddiness, gave the occasion of
denominating it the Red Sea; though Pliny will have it from a King, who Reigned
here, and in Greek was called Erithreos, that is, Red. To this Opinion inclined
Pomponius Mela, Aristotle, and others: But Quintus Curtius is of a contrary
Judgment, maintaining, that this Sea was called the Red Sea from the Egyptians,
who were drowned in it when they pursued the Israelites, in the Year after the
Creation, Two thousand three hundred fifty and four, according to the
computation of Michael Zapuler, in his Description of the Holy Land. Johannes
de Castro, formerly Viceroy to the King of Portugal in the Indies, affirms,
that the red color of this Sea, arises from the great quantity of Corral
growing at the bottom. Others, that the Rivers which pour into this in the
midst of Winter, having flowed through Countries of a red colored Earth, make
the Water seem red, and consequently gave it the Name. Certain it is, that all
the Water is like that in the great Sea, and saltish.

In this Sea befell the Miracle which the holy Scriptures mention, when Moses
with his Rod commanded a Way for the passage of the Israelites, to the number
of six hundred thousand Men, (Women and Children not reckoned:) and wherein
Pharaoh, in pursuit of them, as he supposed flying, twelve thousand
Foot-Soldiers, and fifty thousand Horsemen, were swallowed.

In this Sea are many strange and remarkable things, as Trees growing, Branches
of Corral, Mushroms, Meremaids, flying Fishes, and other wondrous Creatures.
But how great diligence soever they have used, none could ever take any of
them, although common, and at all times seen along the Coast; for the Egyptians
believe, that they and theirs, by the killing such a Creature, should die
within a year, as they say, they have found by experience. And out of that
conceit, when in the Year Sixteen hundred thirty one, one was taken alive in
the Nyle, by the City Rosetta, the Bey or Governor of the City, commanded it
presently to be put into the Water again, though a Venetian had bought it for
five and twenty Piasters, and rather than incur the hazard, returned him his
Money.

Gaspar de San Bernardino, in his Journey to the Indies by Land, says, the
Entrances into the Red Sea, lie in twelve Degrees and forty Minutes, being no
other than two Points of Land, one on Africa side, called Rosbel, and the other
on the Coast of Arabia, lying right over against it, named Ara. In the midst of
the Passage lies the Island Mium, between which and the Main Land of Asia,
runs a Channel nine or ten Yards deep, and a large League broad; as another
on Africa side shoots down to the depth of sixteen Yards, but useless, because
it has no convenient Haven for Ships, and many dangerous Shelves and Banks.

From this Port inwards, the Sea widens all along till toward the end, where
it grows narrower and narrower; the broadest part is not above thirty Leagues,
or Spanish Miles.

Petrus della Valla, a Nobleman of Rome, in the second Part of his Travels,
describes the Red Sea as follows:

In some places of the Red Sea, unpassable for its shallowness, they gather up
a finer sort of Corral than the common; especially useful to be set in deep
Caves and Grotts, because it represents perfectly the shapes of little Trees,
with great delight to the Eyes of curious beholders. In these Vegetables many
times, by varying colors, or transparency, Nature plays and sports it self
with great curiosity.

The Inhabitants of these Parts pass this Sea in little Barques, made of Planks
joined together, not with Nails, but certain Pitched Towe.

Many Commodities are brought in these Boats to Cairo, which the Proprietors
take in pieces afterward, and sell the Planks at dear Rates, and then return
home by Land to their Houses.

This way of building Boats without Iron-Nails, seems to be no Novelty,
considering Strabo the Geographer many Ages since speaks of Leather-Boats, used
by the Arabians for pastime in the Red Sea: As also of some other made of
Osiers and Brush-wood, with which the Egyptians passed over the Nyle.

I somewhat marvel'd (says the forementioned Petrus della Valla) at the Name
this Sea bears, for that it is not as the Black-Sea, which is so called from
the blackness or muddiness of the Water: For the Water of this is so clear and
pure, that Men may see to the bottom, and shows afar off like other Seas. The
Sand is also like that of other Seas, so that it has borrowed its Name no
otherwise than from the King Erithreos, who (as Strabo says) lies buried in
an Island of the South Sea, and has given the Name of Red to the whole; and
not only to the Arabian Gulf: but whether so or no we will not dispute, but
content our selves, that the holy Scriptures calls it so in several places.

Upper-Ethiopia, Or the EMPIRE of ABYSSINE, Otherwise called
PRESTER-JOHN'S-COUNTREY.
AByssine, Name.
otherwise Prester-John's Country, is by Marmol called, The Kingdom of the
Abixins, or Abexin; or rather Abassia, or Abaxia and Habas, or Elhabas; as the
Coast of the Red Sea, the Coast of Abex.

The name Abyssine, derives its Original either from the Inhabitants, by the
Arabians called Abassi, or Habasschi; and by adding the Arabian Particle El,
comes to Elhabashi; as that by the alteration of the guttural Letters, makes
Abassinia, and Abyssines, or from the people Abassenos; which diverse of the
Ancients, among whom Stephanus in his Book of the Cities, Davity.
places in Arabia Felix, supposing they came from Africa over thither. Some
imagine, that they took denomination from a Territory of Ethiopia, named
Abyssi, lying under the Jurisdiction of Prester-John; under that Title
including Ethiopia below Egypt, mentioned by Ptolomy, Terra Cinnamomifera, or,
The Cinnamon Land of the Ancients, a great part of the Troglodytian Arabia,
with some of Libya.

In the setting down, or delineating the extent of Abyssinie, no small
difference appears among Geographers; one cause whereof may be, that the
borders of this Kingdom heretofore extended through more subjected Territories
than at this day: for the Turks, the Galas, and other neighboring enemies,
have so narrow'd the bounds of these Kingdoms, by rending several Territories
from them, that this present King scarce possesses the half of what his
Predecessors enjoyed; insomuch, that some make that part of Abyssine (which at
this day obeys the Emperor) so small, that he scarce deserves the name of a
Great King: For in the foregoing age, the Galas (a Warlike People) in their
South border, either allured by the fertility of the Soil, or the inexpertness
and indisposedness of the Abyssines to Arms, (their Country being fuller of
Priests and Upper-Ethiopia 632 comprehends
Tigre Towns Boro, a small, but neat City, Emacen, Cire, Ximetu, Arx, Tigre,
Gibeytor, Ambor, Salalam, Sart, Camarra, Barra, and Arrazy, with four famous
Cloisters, the Kings chiefest Palaces, and some Churches, Fremone, Caxumo, and
Angeta. Rivers Mareb, or Marabo. Mountains Gafale, Lamalmon, Guca, the Apelnus,
Amara.
Dambea Towns Dambea, Atsana, Goga, Fogora, Anfras, Ganetus, Jesessus, Old
Gorgora, New Gorgora, and others. Rivers Nyle, Tacaze, Anguet, and Malbegh.
Bagameder Towns Sart, Bagamedri the Metropolis. Rivers Baxila, Zebe, Haoax.
Goyame Towns Zalabacca, Ambaxa, Croia, Cavera, Angula, Anchaka, Sacahala,
Tavia the chief City; Collella, Sulka, Adase, Tempa, Tassala, Fangala, Duniel,
Tankon, and Emberte, besides 40 others. Amahara Towns Azzol, besides a great
number of Towns, Villages, and Castles. Narea Several Towns not named. Magaza
Magaza. Salemt One Town of the same Name, with a few Villages. Ogara One
inconsiderable Town, with some less considerable Villes. Abargele No Towns, and
scarce any Villages of remark. Holkait Only some scattering Villages. Sagueda
No Towns of Note. Semen Full of nothing but Mountains, unknown, and little
inhabited. Salao Little inhabited, with a few poor Villages. Ozeka Well
peopled, but not collected into Towns. Dobay Towns One of the same Name. Lakes
Bardambea, Zella, Sacala. Mountains Gafale.

AETHIOPIA SUPERIOR vel INTERIOR vulgo ABISSINORUM sive PRESBITERIIOANNIS
IMPERIOR.
Monks than Soulders) overran a great part thereof. They fell into the
Province of Bali, in the Year Fifteen hundred thirty seven, and since that by
continual Wars, have so disinabled them, that they have not only wrested that,
but also Fategar, Doar, Ogge, Bizamo, Oifate, Angole, Kambate, and other small
Territories; and probably might have gone on further, even to the Conquest of
the whole, but the Gala's themselves split into Factions, in several Parties
fell upon, destroyed and killed one another. Marmol adds further, that the
Moors, Turks, and Arabians some time since, have taken all the Tract of Land,
lying at the Arabian Gulf, and Red Sea; so that the King of Abyssine has not
one Haven thereabouts, neither can any come into his Country out of that Sea,
but through the Turks Dominions.

Notwithstanding all these losses and dismembrings, the common Vogue stretches
it to that vast magnitude, as makes it exceed all Europe, having in
circumference above seventeen hundred Dutch, and according to Pigafet, four
thousand Spanish miles; but we dare be bold to aver, that at this day it does
not exceed Spain alone in bigness; and that in Africa are many other Kings
which possess many more Kingdoms, and are of greater power than this so much
famed Abyssine.

To reduce then this unsettlement to some certainty, Bigness.
the length taken from Egypt, or rather from Bugia and Nubia, to the Kingdom of
Monomotapa, Pigafet reckons to five hundred, and Cluverius to five hundred and
eighty Dutch Miles; and the breadth, between the Mouth of the Arabian Sea, and
the River Niger, to four hundred and fifty; but in truth, the length both of
Old and New Abyssine, from East to West, that is, from the Mouth of the Arabian
Sea, to the Kingdom of Goiame, a hundred and sixty Miles, and the greatest
breadth, from the Territory of Alaba, to Magazan, or to the United Stream of
the Nyle, and the River Takazu, that is, from the eighth to the sixteenth
degree of North-Latitude, about a hundred and twenty miles; And in this Point,
Joannes Barros a Portuguese, seems to come nearest the truth, when he gives in
circumference six hundred seventy two Portuguese miles, or five hundred and
four Dutch.

The ancient borders of this Kingdom some have placed in the North at Bughia,
or Fungia, where it touches also on Egypt, and Nubia; in the West, Ancient
Borders.
upon the same Nubia; the Countries of Canfila, Danfila, and the Island Meroe;
the Kingdom of Medra; Part of Negroland, Congo; and according to Marmol, the
Country of the Jews within Negroland; next, that of the Amozones, or Maoviste
das Sugetes, that is, The Kingdom of Women, bordering of Sanutus, hit right
upon the Kingdom of Damout; in the South, the Empire of Benomotapa, and (as
Pigafet adds) Monemugi; in the East, the Country of Zanguebar, and Ajan, the
Kingdom of Adel, and others; with the Arabian Gulf: where at this time
Prester-John does not possess so much as one Haven.

But here we must observe, that in this great Roll of Kingdoms, are many
Countries found, which do not acknowledge the Emperor of Abyssine, but are
only named, to show the length, and to distinguish the borders more plainly.

Philippus Cluverius sets down almost the same boundaries, that is in the East,
the Red Sea, with the Kingdom of Ajan and Zanguebar; in the South, Monomotapa;
in the West, the Kingdom of Congo, and Medar; and in the North, Nubia and Egypt.

The ancient state of the Abissines (according to the relation of Jarrik and
Godignus) comprised six and twenty several Kingdoms, and fourteen great
Territories; The Kingdoms were, Tigre, or Tigrai, Dankali, Angole, Boa, or Noa,
Amara, or Ammara, Dambeo, or Bambia, or Dembea, Ankaguccele, Adel, Dabali,
Oecce, Ario; Fatigar, Zengao, Rozanegus, Goyame, Narca, Feth, Koncho, Mahaola,
Goroam, Danimt, or Damut, Dari, Damut, Adaro, and Faskalon.

The fourteen Territories, being not Kingdoms, are, Dubane, a member of Tigre
Xuncho; in the same Realm, bordering at that of Dankali, Daraita, by the
Kingdom of Angote, Bora, between Tigre, and Bagamedri, Calara, or Calaoa, near
Boga, Aga, Arim, near the Kingdom of Dahali, Arbo, Xankala, close by the
Kingdom of Zingere, Xacoxa, or Xankora, Ambyamo by Zanut; according to Peter
Davitu, called Angona, Bergamo, near to the other; Aris, on the other side of
the Nile; and last follows Gara, lying above Aris.

Balthazar Tellez reckons the Kingdoms and Territories formerly subject to
Abyssine, and at this day cut off from it, to be Angote, Doaro, Ogge, Balli,
Adea, Alemale, Oxelo, Ganz, Betezamora, Guraque, Buzama, Sugamo, Balargamo,
Kambate, Doxa, Gumar, Konch, Damut, Mota, Aura, Holeka, Oifate, Guedom, Gangk,
Maralet, Manz, Bizamo.

But this Kingdom has received such diminutions by the Turks and Gala's, that
Prester-John at this day enjoys only six great, and ten small Provinces; The
great are Tigre, Dambea, Bagamedce, Gogamo, Amahara, Narea, and a part of Xaoa.
The lesser are, Magaza, Salemt, Ogara, Abargele, Holkait, Sagueda, Semen,
Salao, Ozeka, and Dobai.

Hereby it may plainly be observed, into how narrow a compass the Dominions of
Prester-John are circumscribed from what Antiquity relates, which we may
believe they did but guess at.

We will therefore first describe the aforementioned six Kingdoms yet remaining
entire to Prester-John; and afterward those of the ancient Abyssine, partly,
to agree with the Ancients in the matter of Beasts, Plants, and Customs; and
partly to survey the whole Circumference both of the Old and New Dominion.

Tigre, The Kingdom of Tigre.
then otherwise called Tigrai, and Tigremahon; and by Francis Alvarez called
Azen, lies the most Easterly, being eminentest, biggest, and best part of the
whole, and takes beginning according to Balthazar Tellez, by the Island Makua,
or Mazua, at the Red Sea, close by the Haven Arquiko; spreading ten or twelve
miles to the Haven of Dafalo: Alvares, Sanutus.
or as others, shooting Northward close by Egypt, Bugu, or Nubie; and Westerly
to Dankali, containing in length ninety, and in breadth fifty Spanish miles.

This Kingdom comprizeth seventeen several Provinces; Davity.
the most Northern of which, lying at Egypt, they call Barnagas, or
Barbarnagas, which Alvarez, Sanutus, and others, make a peculiar Dominion,
because governed by a peculiar Lieutenant of the King's; though in truth
Barnagas is a part of Tigre, and signifies Lord of the Sea; Bar denoting the
Sea in that Country Language, and Nagas, Lord.

Barnagas includes (according to Tellez) three small Lordships, of which
Debaroa, or Doubaroa, so called by the Abyssines; and by Maffe, and Sanutus,
Boroa, or Barvan, is the chief; wherein is a small City, but curiously built,
and populous; seated by the River Mareb, on a pleasant and fruitful Mountain:
Some have taken it for the Colove of Ptolomy, and Colve of Arnian; and by
others, for the great Primis or Premnis. Alvarez and Sanutus give Barnagas in
the North for borders the Country of Bugie, and Nubie; in the West, the Nile;
in the South, the River Mareb, with some neighboring Mountains, over-looking
Tigremahon; and in the East, the Red Sea.

The same Alvarez, and Sanutus, place in Barnagas the Regions of Canfila and
Dafila; and therein a place named Emacen, a day and a halfs journey from
Dabaroa, and thirty miles from Suaquen. Formerly this Province comprehended
Suaquen; the Island Mazua; the Haven Arquiko, and Dalakka: But the Turks and
Moors have many years ago dispossessed the Abyssines thereof.

The same Writers further adds to Barnagas, Cire, Ximeta, and Arrazie, a
Dominion of great consequence; St. Michael d' Joco, a famous Cloister, four
miles from Arquiko; and the Cloister of Bizan, five: Besides the chiefest
Palaces of the Kings, and two or three Churches; one of St. Michael, and the
other of St. Peter and Paul; about which, Maffe assigns some Villages and
Hamlets, as Camarva, and Barra, etc.

Lastly, Barnagas takes in the Jurisdiction of Bur, or Burro, formerly the
Kingdom of the Queen Candace.

Next Barnagas, Sanutus sets Tigremahon, to which he assigns for borders in the
North, the River Marabo; in the West, the Nile; in the South, Angote; in the
East, the Red Sea.

Then follows the Dominion of Cire; and by the Red Sea Amasen, or Agamea;
inhabiting by a people not under Prester-John's Jurisdiction. Arxa, formerly a
great City, where they say, the Queen of Sheba kept her Court; and indeed the
remaining Ruins do manifest an Antique Grandeur.

The other places are, the City Tigre, or Auzen, the Metropolis of the Realm;
the Garrison of Gileitor, Amba, Salalam, Saet, Cora; forty or fifty Portuguese
miles from Makua Southwardly; Fremone, or Framone, otherwise Maegoga, in
fifteen degrees and a half South-Latitude; the usual Habitation of the European
Christians, and Jesuits.

The rest of the most remarkable places, are Caxumo, or Chaxumo, or Accum;
perhaps the Auxum of Ptolomy, or Axomites of Anian; by some taken for the
Courtly residence of the Queen of Sheba, to whom Solomon (as they say) gave a
visit in Egypt; where are seventeen stately Pyramides, and three famous
Churches, one of St. Michael, one of Abba Likanos, and one of Abba Pantaleon.

Northward of Caxuma, lies the Lordship of Tarrete, wherein stands two
Cloisters; one great one called Alleluja, and the other Abbagarima; famous for
the abode of the Jesuits: together with Angeba, beautified with a Royal
Palace, wherein none may have their abode, but the King's Lieutenant.

Somewhat more Westerly appears the Kingdom of Dambea, or Dembea, The Kingdom
of Dambea
bordering in the West, upon Goyan; in the North, upon Fungie; and in the East,
on Bagameder; Several Arms of the Nile cut it almost in the midst, and in the
very Center lies the great Lake Bar-dambea.

The head-City (according to Jarrik) has the same name with the Kingdom; yet
others call it Zambia, or Zamba, where Prester-John keeps his Court, from
October to Easter.

Pigafet calls the principal City Belmachu, and sets other Towns by the Shore
of this Lake; as Atsana, Goga, Fogora, Anfras, Ganetas, Jesessus, Old-Gorgora,
New-Gorgora, and many others.

Bagameder, or Begamedry, a peculiar Kingdom, (according to Sanutus, The
Kingdom of Bagameder.
and Tellez, though others would make it a part of Tigre, or Tigremahon)
borders Eastwardly at Angote; and from thence running South, touches upon
Amahara, near the River Baxila, that hastens there to contribute his Streams to
the increase of the Nile.

The length from the City Sart, the utmost limit of Tigre, amounts to Sixty
Portuguese miles, and in breadth, to near twenty.

Sanutus esteems Bagameder one of the greatest Dominions of Abyssine, beginning
it in the South by Goyame, and so ending upon Amara, Angote, Tigre, and
Barnagas; a Tract of a hundred and twenty Miles to the Island Moroe.

The Head-City Bagamedry, Davity.
situate on a delightful Plain, at the River Suama; by some called, The
Imperial City, because the substitute King of Tigre, after the receipt of the
first Crown, on the place where chosen, takes the second there, as the third
out of the hands of the Emperor himself; which Ceremony has been used ever
since Abibliakane, or Dabba, Likanos, who lived in this City in a Cave, with so
great repute of sanctity, that the King which then Reigned, would receive his
Crown by the hands of this Saint: and all the Kings of Tigre come there to
receive the second Crown.

Southward of Damben, The Kingdom of Goiam.
you arrive at Goiam, or Goyame, in eleven degrees North-Latitude; being in
length (if Tellez and Sanutus miss not their reckoning) fifty Portugal, or six
and thirty Dutch miles, that is, from one Shore of the Nile to the other: For
this famous River encompasses the same, and thereby becomes a Fence to it,
against the Invasion of Enemies.

This Kingdom has a mixture of Inhabitants, but the Natives are the Agoa's, in
the North-West about the Nile; and in the South-East, the Gafates.

The Agoa's possess about forty eminent Towns, besides Zalabaka, Ambaxa, or
Ankassa, Croia, Cavera, Angula, Anchaka, Sakahala; and their chief City called
Tavia.

The Jesuits have their abode; as in Collella, Surka, Adase, Tempa, Tassala,
Fangala, Duniel, Tankon, and Embeste: In the last of which may be seen the
remaining Ruins of several stately Churches, built by a certain Abyssine
Queen, of Stone, hewn like Roses: On the North-side lie many Hills and Woods,
near which ( Sanutus reports) some Jews have their abode.

Amara, The Kingdom of Amara.
or Amaara, or Amahara, lying between the eleventh and twelfth degree of
North-Latitude; borders in the North, at Bagameder, and Angote; in the East,
upon Dankali; and in the South, upon Oleka; from which separated by the River
Ruezar, a branch of the Nile; and in the West at Dambea: Sanutus limits it in
the North with a Lake, on the borders of Angote; in which lies the Island St.
Stephen, with the Mountain Amara, wherein the Princes, the Heirs of the Crown,
are kept; in the East, with the Kingdom of Xaoa; in the South, with the Valleys
and Baquen-Mountains; and in the West, by the places about and near the Nile.

It comprizeth (says Sanutus) a great number of Towns, Villages, and Castles;
of which one more remarkable, called Azzoll; lying on a Hill between two
Rivers, two days journey from the Lake St. Stephen.

Narea; The Kingdom of Narea.
by Godignus, Nerea; and by the Abyssines, according to Davity, Innari; has in
the North-West Damut; in the East, Guraque; and in the South, Gingiro; and
contains three times as much ground as Bigameder.

Xaoa, Xaoa.
divided into the upper and lower borders; in the East, at Oifet; in the South,
at Ganz; in the West, at Gojam; and in the North, at Oleka.

Thus much of the Kingdoms at present, possessed by the Abyssmes.

The other taken from them by the Gala's and Turks, are Dankali, Angote, Damut,
Dahali, Ario, Fatigar, Zengero, Rozanegus, Roxa, Zith, Concho, and Mataola.

After the Kingdom of Tigre, follows that of Dankali, The Kingdom of Dankali.
conterminated on the North; and the East, by the Red Sea; and the Country of
Adel in the West; Balgada in the South, with Dobas, and Angote.

Here are some eminent places; the first Vella, or rather Leila, according to
Davity, a Haven at the Red Sea, lying in thirty degrees North-Latitude.

Corcora a fine place, adorned with a Palace, a stately Church, with a great
and rich Cloister.

Afterward you come to Manadely, a populous Town, containing about a thousand
houses. Formerly the King of Dankali, by the report of Sanutus, maintained a
War with the Abyssines, but became afterward (as Godignus and Jarrik relate)
his Tributary, though since torn from them by the great Turk.

After Dankali, follows Westward that of Angote, Angote.
which Godignus borders in the East, at Tigre; in the North, at the same, by
the River Sabalete; and in the South, at Amara.

The best places of this Kingdom, are according to Sanutus, Dofacso, enriched
with a thousand houses: Corcora of Angote, to distinguish it from Corcora
Dankali: The Country of Ambugana, thirty days journey from Barna, with a
famous Church named Imbra Christus; besides others.

Damut, or Damout, borders in the North, upon Bizami, or Goiame; The Kingdom of
Damout.
in the South-West, at Narea; in the South, at Guraque; and in the East, with
Ganz, and Xaoa.

This Kingdom, the Abyssines, says Davity, divided into two; the one called
Damout Dari, and the other Damout Adari; where stands, The Dead-Mountain, being
the highest and coldest of all Ethiopia; and therefore Prester-John sent such
great ones thither as he desired to have out of the way, because they quickly
died there of hunger and cold.

Next Adel to the side of Mombaza, you arrive at Bahali, or Bali, Da^ali, or
Bali.
then to that of Oecie, shooting inwardly to the Main-Land; then to Ario, or
Aro, limited in the North, by Dunkala; and in the West, by the Territory of
Oifate.

Fategar has in the North, the River Aoaxe; in the West, Fategar.
the Kingdom of Oge; and in the South the Territory of Gamat. Sanutus places at
the utmost borders hereof Adel; and adds also Xaoa.

In this Kingdom, on the Borders of Adel, stands the Ague-Mountain, near a
place (by the people of Europe) called The Market; because the Inhabitants of
both Realms come thither to Trade.

Then you come to the Mountain of the Lake, whose sides boast the Ornament of
many Churches and Cloisters; and the top shows a Lake three miles in
circumference.

Zengero comes next; and after that Rozenagus; Zengero.
from thence traveling Northerly into the Country, you come to Roxa, or Boxa,
bordering upon Zingero; and Eastwards on Goiame.

Close to Narea lies Zeth, or Zesta, deep into the Country; upon which the
Kingdom of Konche borders, as that upon Mahaola.

Faskulon takes place between two Branches of the Nyle; Eastward of Goiame, and
Dambea; and Southward of Bizamo. Jarrik reckons from Dambea, to Faskulon, five
days journey. Thus we have handed you through the Kingdoms, we will now set out
the Provinces remaining, and so proceed to other matter.

The Territory of Magaza, the Northern part of this Kingdom; Territories.
situate between the River Mareb, and Takasa, borders toward the North upon
Nengini; and in the West, touches Fungi, or Bugihe.

Seguede the next, borders North-East upon Magaza; North with Fungie; West at
Olkait; and South at Semen, and Salait.

Olkait conterminates in the East, Sequede; in the North, Fungie; in the West,
Dambea; and in the South, Salait.

Salait has for limits to the North, the Territory of Seguede; in the West,
that of Seinen, and the Kingdom of Dambea; and in the South, Abargale.

Cenen, or Semnen; so called by Balthazar Tellez, in stead of Ximench, or
Ximen; but by Sanutus, Terra di Giudei, Jewen-Land; and by the Abyssines
themselves, Xionenche; borders in the North, at Seguede; in the East, at
Salait. Sanutus says, this Jews Country lies Enclosed between Mountains and
Wildernesses, which in the East, spread toward the Nyle, and Abyssine; and
South, to the Equinoctial; from whence they shoot to Congo; in the West are
unknown Mountains and Wildernesses, toward Benin; and in the North, a ridge of
great Hills, overtopping the edges of Dauma, and Medra.

Abargale stands bounded in the North, by Salait; in the East, by the River
Takara; and in the South, by the Territory of Salaoa.

The limits of Salaoa are in the North, at Abargale; in the East, at the
forementioned River Takaze; in the South, Bagameder; and in the West, Dambea.

Ozeka has the neighborhood of Amaza, North; Marabett, East; Upper-Xaoa,
South; and in the West, Goiame.

Doba lies in the middle of Bagameder; all the other Southern Territories,
formerly belonging to Abyssine, the Gala's possess, as the Turks do the Eastern
Countries toward the Red Sea.

Most Geographers have placed in Abyssine two Arms of the Nyle, The Island
Me^^e.
anciently by Ptolomy named Astapus and Astaboras: The first of these two at
present Niger calls Abani; Barros, Abansi; and Vossius, Mareb: The other,
being Takaze, or Takassen, lies in fifteen Degrees and twenty Minutes Northern
Latitude, and fifteen days Sail from Siena; wherein lies the Island Meroe,
often remembered by ancient Greek and Latin Writers. Diodorus thinks it took
that Name from Meroe the Mother of Cambyses, King of Persia: But Strabo, from
his Sister, which died there. The Inhabitants denominate it Naulebahe, that is,
The Mother of Good Havens; and Marmol, Neuba. Some differ from all before, and
will have it named in the Country Idiom sometimes Saba, then Bed Amara, and
anon Tevet. Many others entitle it Gueguere; which Jovius denies, maintaining
Gueguere to be the same with Syene.

Sanutus reckons the length of this Island to be three hundred and fifty
Italian Miles, or seventy Dutch Miles: But Jovius makes it bigger than England,
though without any Reason, and contrary to the Vogue of all Ages and Authors.

Some Modern Writers seem to make the Kingdom of Goiame, Balthazar Tellez.
almost surrounded by a Branch of the Nyle, to be this Island Meroe; but
Vossius contradicts both the first and last Opinions, affirming, That the
Ancients never had any true knowledge of this Island; but have made one in
Imagination, where never was any, contrary to Strabo, and many others.

The City Meroe, situate by Ptolomy at the North end of the Island, Pliny and
others set seventy thousand Paces more to the South; and Vossius thinks, that
it is the same at this day called Beroa, or Baroa, the Head-City of Barnagas;
and adds moreover, That the Netherlanders have greatly mistaken, in setting it
so far from the Red Sea; an Error caused, as he imagines, by the tedious
uncouthness of the Way: For the whole Coast lies so full of craggy and high
Mountains, as makes it almost unpassable; and their Backs so chained together,
that you have no way to it, but by the Haven of Ercocco and Suachem; and that
so troublesome, that Travelers can scarce ride above three or four thousand
Paces in one day: And therefore (says he) it is no wonder Ancient Geographers,
who in a few known Countries were necessitated to take the Distance of Places
by the Days-Journey, should extend the Country between Meroe and the Red Sea
so far.

This Empire of the Abyssines may justly claim the advantage of diverse good
Rivers, especially the middlemost and principal Channel of the Nyle, Rivers.
and other fertilizing Branches thereof, as Mareb, or Morabo, Tacaze, Anquet,
and Malegh.

The River Mareb takes its Rise in the Kingdom of Tigre, The River Mareb.
two small Miles from Baroa, on the West Side, and runs on to the South,
passing into the dry Country of the Caffers, where one Branch burying it self
under ground for a while, and afterward re-appearing, with an inverted Course
turns back toward its Head, till at last it shoots in a direct Line to the
Kingdom of Denghini, and so at last unites with the River Tacaze.

Tacaze, which Mercator (according to Tellez) holds to be the Assabaras
mentioned by Ptolomy, has its Head-Fountain in the Borders of Angote, The
River Tacaze.
in the Mountains of Axgua, near Bagameder, from three Head-springs, about a
stones cast one from another, whose Waters conjoined, make this River. It takes
a Course a days Journey to the West, between the Precinct of Dagana and Hoaga,
running from thence beyond the Kingdom of Tigre, then cuts through the
Territory of Sire, having on the East Side Fruitful and Tilled Grounds, and on
the West the Wilderness or Desert of Oldeba, formerly boasting many Cloisters,
like Egyptian Thebes; from thence, taking a view of Holcait, it falls through
the Caffers Country, with a great contribution of Water from the River Mareb,
it visits the Kingdom of Denghini, the Moors, Bagihos or Fuches, and at length
pours its Water by the City Jalak into the Nyle.

The Rivers Anquet and Maleg, lying furthest and most Southerly, The Rivers
Anquet and Maleg.
arise in Damut, so flowing through Bizamo, and joining their Streams, make the
Westerly Channel of the Nyle, yet retain the name of Maleg for eighty Miles,
till meeting with the middle Current of the Nyle, they lose their less known,
resuming its more famous Name.

In the South of Abyssinie two other well-known Rivers discover themselves, The
River Haoax.
the one called Zebe, and the other Haoax; which latter, by Godignus called
Oara, springs out of a vast Mountain upon the united Borders of Xaoa and Ogge,
whence flowing North-East, and increased by the conjunction of the River Machi,
passes into Adel, or Zeila, and so through the midst of Gurrule, with a full
Stream; insomuch that Godignus has not feared to affirm it to surpass the Nyle
in Plenty of Water: only it reaches nothing near so far; for it has not, as
the Nyle and other Rivers, its Outlet into the Sea; but is trencht away by the
Husbandmen of Adel into many Brooks and Rivulets, for the watering of their
Grounds, because it seldom raineth in that Conntrey.

The other, called Zabee, begins in the Kingdom of Narea, The River Zabee.
and shoots at the beginning to the West, with a strong Current: Thence it
flows Southwards, and encompasseth the Dominion of Gingiro: Afterward
passing to the South, and, as Godignus will have it, by Mombaza, flows into
the Sea: But Johannes Barros asserts it to be Oby, having near Melinde its
Outlet into the Sea, changing the name into Quilmanzi.

The beforementioned Godignus reckons five Lakes of eminency in those Parts,
Lakes.
viz. Aicha, Dambeabahar or Bar-dambea, Zella, Zacala, and Zoay.

Aicha, the smallest of all, lies in the Kingdom of Angote.

Dambea-bahar, The Lake Bar-dambea.
or Bar-dambea, is so called by the Abyssines, partly for its bigness, and
partly from its Situation in the Kingdom of Dambea; but Ptolomy styles it
Coloe; and Joannes Barros and Mercator, Barcena. In the common Maps it has two
Names; that to the South part, Zambre, and the North part, Zaire, where they
say the River Zaire, which parts Congo and Angola, takes its original, lying
in thirty Degrees and a half South Latitude, and receives a great increase of
Water out of many several Streams and Brooks, which pour down out of the
circumadjacent Mountains, Plains, and Woods. It reaches, according to
Godignus, in length sixty Italian Miles, four of which make a German Mile; and
in breadth, five and twenty: But Balthazar Tellez, a Portuguese Jesuit, makes
its greatest length on the South Side, to be twenty; and the breadth taken in
the midst and broadest place, ten or twelve Spanish Miles. They say this Lake
can show eight and twenty Islands; viz. Deck, which contains twenty Acres of
Land; the others less: Upon seven or eight of which there are Jesuits
Cloisters, now by length of time much decayed.

Most of these little Spots are fruitful, producing Oranges, Lemons,
Pomecitrons, and other Fruits. The Water of the Lake is light, very clear,
healthy to drink, and full of Fish, besides Sea-Horses, which come on Land, and
devour the Fruits of the Field, to the great prejudice of the Husbandmen: And
therefore there is a Reward appointed to all that kill them, who have also a
further advantage in selling their Flesh, accounted a good Food, and their
Skins to make Alenga's, far more useful to such as ride than Spurs, because
they jerk hard, and strike better. But here breed neither Efts, Lizards, nor
Crocodiles, though they abound in other places of the Nyle; perhaps because
these Creatures love not a clear Water, and rather choose troubled and muddy
Streams: Therefore the Cattle feed in safety upon these Shores, and the People
inhabit there without any disturbance.

The Abyssines of these Islands pass this Lake with small Boats, made of the
Plant called Papyrus by the ancient Grecians; of which also the Egyptians
formerly made Boats, and used the Leaves in stead of Paper, whereof we have
treated more largely before in Egypt.

This Lake about the Summer Solstice increases; for from the vast Mountains of
Dambea pour down exceeding many great Streams, Dambea.
whereby it would swell exceeding high, if it did not find an Outlet into the
greatest Channel of the Nyle. Many have thought, that the Nyle takes its
original out of this Lake, but without good ground, it being rather a
Receptacle for it to pass through: However, it is certain, That this Lake
affords it a convenient Supply by the way.

Into one of these Islands the Emperor banishes Rebels and Outlaws; and in
another, strengthened with a Fort, keeps part of the Treasure of the Empire.

The Lake Zella, Zella.
or Zoay, lies in the Kingdom of Oecie, or Ogge, on that side toward the
Kingdoms of Adel and Mombaza.

The Lake of Xacala, Xacala.
or Sacala, lies not far from that of Zella, and each about a days Journey in
length. Sanutus sets in the beginning of Amara, on the East Side, the Lake of
St. Stephen, two Miles long, and half a Mile broad; and an Island in it, in
which stands St. Stephen's Cloister.

This Empire has many and very high Mountains: viz. Mountains.
In the Kingdom of Tigre, between Fremona and Dambea, one called Lamalmon,
Balthazar Tellez.
and another adjoining called Guca: It is half a days Journey to climb up to
the top, by an Ascent going always round, and turning by steps, like a pair of
winding Stairs; but with very dangerous Precepices, and steep falls: On the top
lies a great Plain, a Mile about, where the wearied Travelers and Caravans
bait and rest themselves, because the next day they have a very troublesome and
dangerous way to go through, very small, narrow, and sharp; and on each side so
steep, that the sight cannot reach the depth. By these narrow Paths coming to
the bottom, you meet with Lamalmon, three hundred Cubits high, like a continaul
Hewn Rock, which out in the Country seems a high and strong Castle, where the
Passage is narrow and troublesome; yet Nature has provided it with certain
Steps, in manner of winding Stairs, which run up from one side to the other,
very steep, and exceeding dangerous to climb up. Aloft upon this Mountain also
is a Plain, about half a Mile in compass, and a Musket Shot broad. The People
in this Mountain live in safety, without fear of being assaulted by their
Enemies, and richly provided of Fresh Water and Victuals. From the top of this
Mountain they have the Prospect of the whole Kingdom of Tigre; Northwards and
North-Westwards lies a Ridge of Mountains, which all together make as it were
a great Fence or Enclosure.

The Kingdom of Amara appears full of craggy steep Mountains, among which the
Ape-Hills are not the least. There are also certain Ports called Aquisagi, hewn
in the Rock, between two Valleys, with very narrow Passages; besides other
middle Gates and Ports, about two Miles from the Aquisagi, and one from the
River Anachete: Afterward follow the Gates or Ports of Badassa, that is, the
New Country, about four Miles from the Aquisagi, and a Mile and half from the
Middle-Gates. Near which they have a Passage under Ground, where in very deep
Caverns the Treasure of Prester-John is kept. At these Gates they receive the
Toll for the way, and they serve for Passes between the Kingdoms of Amara and
Xoa.

But that which makes this Kingdom remarkable, is the high Mountain of Amara,
by some called Amba Guexen, by others, Quirem, and by Sanutus, The Royal Mount;
because there, as he says, in a Castle named Amba, all the Children of
Prester-John, as in a convenient Shelter, are kept; from whence none but the
Successor of the Empire can ever come out. It is so high and strong a Mountain
by Situation, that Alvarez, Godignus, and Sanutus, report it fifteen days
Journey round at the Foot, and aloft at the top some few Miles in compass;
being every where, from beneath to above, as it were cut straight up like a
Wall, having only three or four troublesome Avenues to it. Godignus makes this
Rock circular, and places on the top a Plain a mile long, with one only
Building, and that not very stately; and avers, That they have no Water, but
the Reserves of Rain kept in Cisterns cut in the Rocks: But Sanutus adds a
Cloister of St. Anthony's, with eighty six Monks, and stores it with Sheep,
Hens, Geese, and Fruit Trees: And further, this we dare avouch, contrary to the
Fictions of Urrettes, and others, That the Emperor has neither a Library, nor
Treasury for Gold or Precious Stones there; neither does any Penalty fall upon
a Stranger, or other, entering into it.

Southerly from Bar-Dambea lie the Mountains of Gafale, by some mistaken for
the Mountains of the Moon.

There are no Cities in all Abyssine, but only Towns, or Villages; No Cities
in Abyssine.
and those not over-plentifully inhabited: for the King himself keeps almost
continually in the Field, and commonly in Tents or Pavilions. The Chiefest and
most Populous Places are these, being sixty one: Bizan, Asmara, Adegada,
Bebaroa, Goberea, Guele, Auzen or Tigre, Cera, Sart, Amba Salam, Amba Canet,
Gama Assa, Fremona, Alello, Accum, Mascalo, Maebezy, Tres Igregias, Lamalmon,
Oldeba, Arbatanea, Camby, Dancaz, The Court Ganete, Jesessus, Old Gorgorra, New
Gorgorra, Patriarcha, Anfras, Goga, Fogora, Atsana, Alata, Adaxa, Nebesse,
Debra, Semona, Debra Ore, Saza, Adisalen, Enamora, Ligenegus, Debra Selalo,
Cobela, Abola, Serea, Namina, Alagoa, Ondege, Nesaca, Tancoa, Font de Nylo,
Mine; Debra Libano, Amba Guexen, Amba Cel, Tabah Marvam, Amba Legate, Labibela,
Necas Belza, Serra Belza, Bebra Marjan.

The Air in most Places, by the Report of Godignus, has a most healthful
Temperature, being sweetly cooled and refreshed by gentle and fresh Briezes;
but in the lower and Southerly Places, by the scorching heat of the Sun, it
grows more malignant. In the Kingdom of Tigre, Jarrik highly extols the
goodness of the Air: For (says he) although it lie under the Torrid Zone, yet
the continual blowing of the North-winds (there not cold) so clears it, that
many exceeding old People, very fresh, and strong of Limbs, are found there.
The Winter, according to the same Godignus, and Sanutus, begins with the going
out of May, and continues till September; during which time, it Rains and
Thunders moderately every day. They begin their Lent in August, and the other
Seasons follow in course.

As this Country has many great Mountains, so it wants not some fruitful and
large Plains, for the most part well Manured, and bearing all sorts of Grain
and Fruits; in the midst whereof sometimes rise huge aspiring Rocks, which in
the time of War they use for Strengths and Fortresses.

The Soil of Tigre is by the Shores of the River very fat, The Condition of the
Soil.
and fit with a little Labor to produce two Crops in one Year: Every Hedge-row
garnished with good Olive Trees, and every Field with Rye, Barley, Beans, Pease,
and Tares. Fatigar appears for the most part plain, Sanutus, lib. 2.
only here and there rising Summits, bearing Rye and Barley. The Precinct of
Goroma boasts a Fertility capable of feeding Great Armies. Dancali, of small
concern, and unfruitful. In some places grow Wheat, Barley, and Oats; and the
Ground unfit for them, bears a Grain called Tafo de Guza, or Tefet, or Tef, of
great worth for its goodness, daintiness, and durableness, subject to no Worms,
but will remain good a long time; besides two others, named Agoussa, and
Mashella, wherewith they make very good Drink and Bread.

Angote produces every where Rye and Barley, but with small increase; Turkish
Wheat in abundance, besides Beans, Linseed, and Tefet: The Mountains of
Abagana, Barley: The Kingdom of Amara, especially the Fields of Azzel, Barley,
Rye, Oats, and all sorts of Grain.

There grow many several Trees, God^gnu^.
but most bearing Fruit of an unpleasant taste; only one proves of excellent
use in Physic: for when the Abyssines many times eat raw Flesh, which breeds
Worms, which would without doubt eat through the Bowels, if they did not every
Month purge with this Fruit, which presently causes the Worms to die, and
discharges the Body. They have also Citrons, contrary to the opinion of
Boterus, Oranges, Pomegranates, Indian-Figs, Peaches very large and good, and
ripe in the Months of February and March; Pruens, Sebestens, Jujubes,
Tamarinds, and Grapes; but no Wine made thereof, except in the Kings Houses,
and by the Patriarch. They make Oil without smell, and of a Gold-colour; not of
Olives, but of a Fruit called Gecca, whose Leaf resembles that of the small
Vine. They have neither Melons, nor Radishes; but Ginger in abundance, and
Sugarcanes. In Barnagas, and the South part of Tigre, are many Woods, wherein
grow Cypress and Date-Trees, Willows, Jessamine, and Basilicon, yielding an
odoriferous Perfume to the circumambient Air. They have so much Honey, that not
only in the Cloisters among the Clergy, but all the Inhabitants in general,
burn Candles of Wax, and not of Tallow.

All sorts of Cattle, both for use, pleasure, and profit, Beasts.
breed here in abundance; as Cows, Oxen, Sheep, and Goats, Mules, Asses,
Camels, and Horses; of which, Sanutus and Boterus say, the best are of Arabia
and Egypt, or rather of Nubia, being very hardy, Bay-colour'd, and not low of
stature.

Their Beasts of Game are Wild Boars, Elephants, Buffles, Lions, Leopards,
Tygres, Rhinocerots, and Giraffi of an extraordinary bigness; Deer, Civet-cats,
Wild Goats, small Oxen and Cows, so wild and salvage, that they seem not
tamable, having little Horns, standing so loose upon the Skin, that they move
them as their Ears; Wolves, Catamountains, Hearts, Badgers, and very great Apes.

They have innumerable Fowl and Poultrey; as Hens and Cocks, Partridges with
yellow Feet and gray Bills; tame and wild Storks, tame and wild Ducks, Pigeons,
Quails, and Turtle-Doves, Paraketoes and Cuccows, Eagles, Falcons,
Sparrow-Hawks, Kites, Herons, and Cranes. Moreover here are too many noxious
Insects, especially of Grasshoppers, which not only eat up and destroy the Grass
of the Field, but the Leaves of Trees, and sometimes swarm in such innumerable
Multitudes, that they cover the Earth, and for some Miles together darken the
Sun: They are large like Crickets, with yellow Wings.

The Rivers feed all sorts of Fishes, especially Cabosos, Crocodiles, and
Sea-Horses, called by the Inhabitants Gomoras, especially in the Nyle;
Torpedoes, which numb the Hands and Bodies of those that touch them, and have a
quality in them, as the Abyssines superstitiously believe, to drive away Evil
Spirits. In the Lake of St. Stephen, in the Kingdom of Amara, are found great
Fishes, like Conger-Eels, being very fat, and said to have a better taste than
any other Fish elsewhere to be had.

The Earth hides within her Bowels rich Veins of Metals and Minerals; but
partly out of carelessness, and partly out of fear lest the Turk knowing it,
should out of his greediness of Riches invade them with greater Force, they do
seldom dig for them. But this opinion some reject, saying, That the Abyssmes do
as well make use of their Mines, as other People: Whereof, says Jarrik and
Sanutus, they have Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, and Lead, besides whole Mountains
of Sulphur.

The Abyssines are all Black; yet more or less, The Constitution of the
Inhabitants.

Blacker according to the nearness to the Aequinoctial Line.


according to their near or more remote distance to and from the Equinoctial
Line; with black curled Hair, quick spirited, and lovers of Learning and
Learned Men.

The Employment of their mean People consists especially in Tilling the Ground,
keeping of Oxen, Cows, Goats, Horses, Mules, and Camels; Employment.
and greater Persons spend their time in the use of Arms. The Merchants are
most Mahumetans, and inclined to the Hunting of Wild Beasts.

They feed chiefly on Bread and Flesh, especially Venison, a little boiled,
Food.
or broyl'd upon the Coals, and seasoned with strong Herbs, Ginger, and Pepper.

For Drink, they use a Liquor made of Honey, and tempered moderately with
Opium, or the Juice of Moons-Cap; for none may drink Wine, according to
Alvarez, but those of the Royal Blood.

The Common People go close trimmed, without Beards or Mustachioes; but the
Priests go with shaven Heads, and a long Beard. The usual Clothing of the
Inferior Rank is Cotton; but the Rich go in Silk, brought them from India,
Arabia, and Persia.

The Xumi, or Magistrates, and Provincial Governors, as also Captains and
Commanders, wear long Coats of Damask, or other fine Stuff, richly embroidered,
and closed with Clasps before on their Breasts.

The King wears a Robe of Purple, with a Crown upon his Head, set with Precious
Stones: or, as Sanutus tells us, half of Gold, and half of Silver, with a Cross
in his Hand, and Watchet Taffaty before his Face, which he sometimes lifts up,
and lets fall again. His Coat is bordered with Gold, and hemmed with Silk, with
wide Sleeves. The Queen goes habited in white Indian Silk Stuff, covered over
with a light Silk Mantle, with a kind of a Mask before her Face.

The Houses are round-built, Houses.
and flat, covered over with Straw; but containing within many
Banquetting-Houses and Apartments. The Palaces in that Country called
Betenegas, stand open round about; wherein only the Lords may take their
Residence, which wait upon the King.

The Salutation of the Nobility, Salutation.
and People of Account, toward one another, is performed by embracing with the
Arms, and kissing of the Shoulder, saying, God save, or bless you; or else to
fall down upon their Knees, and kiss the Earth three times.

Every one marries as many Women as he will; Marriage. Godignus, lib. 36.
Jovinus, lib 8.
but may not put them away, but for Adultery: The King has usually four, all
Daughters of Neighbor Kings.

The Abyssines, yea the very Women, are diligent and zealous of Literature,
taking great delight to study the Scriptures; yet there are but two Academies
or Universities in the whole Empire: viz. in the Towns of Axum, and Embie.

The Abyssine has a great affinity with the Chaldean, Language.
Hebrew, and other Oriental Tongues, and in their Alphabet have six and twenty
Letters; but differs in the Names, Shape, and Order: But their manner of
Reading, being from the right Hand to the left, agrees with all the Eastern
Countries. They have seven Vowels, which carry no particular Forms or Strokes,
but lie hid in the mute Labial Letters themselves; which by receiving a
different Prick or Stroke, signify a several Syllable or Vowel.

Their Year, Their Yearly Accounts.
or the Account of Time, is twofold; that of Dioclesian, which we have spoken
of before, and the Christian Era, from the Nativity of our Lord.

Upon the Death of the King, the whole Court mourns in Black, so do their very
Tents. When they carry the Corpse to Burial, they bear over it a Goldimbroider'd
Pavilion, or Canopy, hung round about with Curtains of Gold and Silk, very
costly. The Corpse of the meaner sort are smoked with Frankincense, washed, and
wrapped in a Winding Sheet, and so conveyed to the Grave by the nearest
Relations, who shave off the Hair from their Heads, but not their Beards, and
clothe themselves in Black.

They have no common Coin in use, but pay their Silver and Gold by weight, in
small pieces; yet in some places they show a strange Coin of Gold, stamped with
Arabic Letters. Jarrik says, they use Salt in stead of Money; and Pinto gives
to the Abyssines, Oquea's of Gold, whereof every one makes twelve Portuguese
Crusadoes.

The Riches of this King are by some reckoned very great, and by others very
small. Sanutus reports, That he presented to the King of Portugal at one time,
for extirpating of Unbelievers, a hundred Millions of Quarter-ounces of Gold,
and as many Armed Men, with Provisions. Others stick not to maintain, That he
has a Hall set round about with great Chests of Ebony and Cedar, which lie
full of great Smaragdine Stones; and likewise Trunks, or Cabinets, full of
Diamonds, Rubies, Turkoises, Sapphyres, Topazes, Jacinths, Amethysts, and other
costly Precious Stones. Godignus, on the contrary, diminishes the Wealth of
this Kingdom, alleging, That Michael Castagnoso left behind him in Writing,
That at a time when the King by the Portuguese Aid reduced some Countries that
had revolted from their Obedience, having neither Gold nor Silver to requite
them for their Toil and Valor shown in this War, he proffered them a Precious
Stone, which he borrowed of his Mother; which the Portuguese honorably
refused, and satisfied themselves with his Good Will and Intention. But whether
it be, or ever has been so, matters not; it being apparent enough, That they
did possess greater Riches heretofore, than at this day.

They have good Markets for Trade, wherein the chiefest Dealers are Priests,
Trade.
exchanging Corn or Salt, against Cattle, Fowl, and other Commodities: but the
dearest Merchandises are Frankincense, Pepper, and Myrrh, which they barter
for Gold.

Their Arms are Lances or Darts, and Back-swords. Arms.
They use many Bows and Arrows, but not with Feathers. For defense they put on
Helmets, and very strong round Shields. Pieces of Cannon and Muskets they
bought of the Portuguese, at a dear Rate; yet use for the most part Darts,
Arrows, and Slings. The Horsemen, in whom their greatest Strength consists,
wear long Coats of Mail, which come down to their Knees, close Helmets, and
round Shields, with Scymitars and Lances. They that go without a Helmet to the
Wars, cover their Heads with red Hair Caps, like those of the Mamalucks in
Egypt. They provide themselves also with Elephants, Armed, and laden with
Towers; and have Copper Trumpets and Drums, brought thither from Cairo, with
other Drums of Wood, covered over with a Skin, as among us.

The King of Abyssine has many Enemies; but chiefly upon one side the Turk,
who planted themselves along the Red Sea, and not only wrested that whole Coast
from him, but lends his other Enemies great Assistance. On the other side lies
the Emperor of Monomotapa, who continually keeps his Realm in Arms. The King of
Congo neighbors close by that of Goyame, who is said to have kept himself quiet
since he made Peace with King David. But the most dangerous and strongest
Enemies are the Galas, or Galls, as the Abyssines call them, who in the
foregoing Age have bereaved the Abyssines of a third part of their Dominions:
But those of Tigrai have oftentimes worsted them, and especially in the year
Sixteen hundred and seven.

When Prester-John does intend to make War against the Nubians, or any other
People, he causes a Cloth, in form of a Banner, to be carried on the top of a
Lance, to proclaim the War through all the Country.

The Government is absolutely Monarchical, Government.
and the Chief known by the Title of Acegue, that is, Emperor, for the great
number of Kingdoms he was wont to possess: But his Subjects entitle him Negus,
that is, King; the Moors, Asiklabassi; and the Arabians, Sultan Asiklabassi:
But in his Letters to the European Princes, and others, he calls himself Negus
Negas, that is, King of Kings, by reason of his Substitute Kings or Viceroys;
Offspring of the Tribe of Judah, Son of David, Son of Solomon, Son of the
Pillar of Sion, Son of the Seed of Jacob, Son of the hand of Mary, Son of Nahu,
according to the Flesh, Emperor of the Upper, or Higher Ethiopia: King of Xaoa,
Caffate, Fatigar, Angote, Baru, Amarr, Baga, Mediri, Dambea, etc. We generally
call him Prester-John, and by some in corrupt Latin, Pretiose Joannes, that is,
Precious John; to which last Name two Abyssines, coming into Europe, gave
occasion themselves; for when these heard in Europe, that the Emperor was every
where called Prester-John, they endeavored to preserve the Title, seeking to
find out Words of their Mother Tongue, from which the same might be derived:
for which purpose they consultd Belulgian, Beldigiam and other Names. Amongst
those which first introduced the Word Belulgian here in Europe, was one
Zagarab, an Ambassador sent from the Emperor of the Abyssines to John the
third, King of Portugal, and another Abyssine, called Peter, who at the same
time accompanied Francois Alvarez, a Portuguese Priest, as Ambassador to Pope
Clement the seventh. The first caused Damaiaco a Goez, the second Paulus Jovius
to mistake the Name, asserting that Belulgian is a compound word of Belul and
Gian, the first signifies Precious, and the other John, as if they would hint
by that Name, that there was nothing more precious than the Abyssines.

Others would have it, that Prester-John was a corrupt word, of Pharasta-Jan,
that is to say, A Lion on Horseback, because this Emperor is said to exceed all
the Kings of Africa, as the Lion excells all the Beasts. They give also the
Title of Lion, because descended from the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, alleging
that he had Meliloc for his Predecessor, that is, King of Excellency, Son of
Makeda, Queen of Sheba, which came to hear the Wisdom of Solomon.

But it is certain the Name of Prester-John neither proceeded from Belulgian,
nor Beldigian, nor Pharasta-Jan, or from any other such like Abyssine Word; but
it was by accidentally applied to the Abyssine Emperor, when he first of all
began to be known to the King of Portugal: But the better to discover the truth
we must observe, that as the Kings of Egypt were by a general Name first called
Pharaohs, and afterward Ptolomies; those of Persia, Xerxes, and Artaxerxes,
and afterward Sofi; the Moorish Kings, Xeriffs; and the Roman Emperors,
Caesar's; so is also the Name of Prester-John, a general Name, and signifies a
Royal Title, or Dignity of some Christian Princes, who Reigned a very long time
ago.

But these Prester-Johns have not Reigned in Ethiopia, or in any other part of
Africa, as many imagine, contrary to the opinion of the most experienced
Geographers, who unanimously agree they Reigned in Asia; yet in what Place not
fully known: for some making them to have been Kings of Cathay, causes greater
doubt and obscurity, by reason that in the next following years it came to be
known, that Cathay belonged to China, as Matthias Riccius, and after that,
Benedictus Goez, both Jesuits, and next them several others have found: But
besides the Tract of Land by the Name of Cathay, placed within the Confines of
China, Godignus, and with him Kircher, judge it to be probable, that there is
yet a greater Country about the Asiatick, Scythia, Seres, Massagetania, and
other neighboring People, bordering in the South and West at the Confines of
China, which had the Name of Cathay, of which many years ago Prester-John had
the Dominion.

This Country Ptolomy calls Scythia, beyond the Mountain Imaus, and the
Inhabitants Dalanguer and Negrecet, begins at the Foot of Mount Taurus, and
spreads to the Icy Sea, dividing Scythia in two. Paulus Marcus the Venetian
calls it The Dominion of the great Cham; and the holy Scripture, according to
the testimony of Arias Montanus, Gog and Magog.

One of the chiefest Kingdoms of this Great Cathay, is Tebeth, near the Kingdom
of Belor, or Balor, the ancient Dewlling Place of the Zaker; near which the
Geographers, according to the example of Marcus Paulus the Venetian, place the
City Cambalu; so then Cathay compasses that whole Part of Asia, Cambalu is by
many taken for the great City Poking in China.
which Ptolomy places beyond the Mountain Imaus, and borders in the East, on
the Ocean and China; in the South, on the Head-Spring of the River Ganges, at
the Mountain Caucasus, Parapanisus, and Aria; in the West, on whole Scythia,
within the Mountain Imaus; and lastly in the North, at the Icy Sea: Whereby it
appears that all Great Tartary, lying beyond the Mountain Imaus, with the Name
of Cathay, must be understood to be the Countries of Gog and Magog; for Cathay,
which signifies in the Tartarian Tongue, A Kingdom full of Mountains and
Deserts, contains Tartary, Scythia, and the Countries of Gog and Magog. Now
Cathay is divided into the greater, and the less: Great Cathay spreads through
an unfrequented Tract of Land, namely from the Mountain Caucasus, between that
side of the Icy Sea, and the Mountains of China to the Indian Sea; whereas some
will have it join at the out-lying Point of America: But Little Cathay is that
Country which borders on North-China, commonly called Thebes.

In all this far spreading Country of Cathay, one may see, that this supposed
most mighty Emperor, Prester-John, had the Dominion over seventy two Kingdoms,
partly Christians, and partly Heathens, though by the great numbers of Kingdoms
he has gotten many Names, to the great distraction both of Historians and
Geographers: For some make him to be one and the same with the great Cham,
others call him Ashid; some with the Abyssines call him Juchanes Belul, that is
Precious John. Some, as Godignus, with no improbable Reasons, will have it,
that by his Subjects, for their high esteem of the Prophet Jonas, he is called
Joanne, a Name common to all those that ever did possess this Kingdom; though
in these Western Parts he is commonly called by the Latin Churches, Joannes,
with the additional surname of Prester, not that he ever was a Priest, but
because, according to the Custom of the Archbishop, in the time of Peace had a
Cross carried before him at his going out; but ontring upon the Wars, two
Cross-bearers went before him, the one with a Cross of Gold, and the other with
a Cross beset with Precious Stones, for a token of his defending the Worship of
God: for which reason Scaliger derives his Name from the Persian Word
Prestigiani, which signifies Apostolic; which the Europeans understanding
amiss, called him in stead of Prestigiani, Prester-John.

Many years did this Kingdom of Prester-John flourish in Asia, till it fell to
one David, who by one of his supreme Commanders called Cinge, chosen Emperor by
the Army and the Scythians, who in stead of Prester styled him Uncam: In the
Year Eleven hundred seventy eight it was overcome in Battle; whereby the glory
of this Empire, and the Name of Prester-John came in effect to an end, to the
great loss and prejudice of Christendom. But by what mistake the Name of
Prester-John came to the Emperor of Abyssine, we will in brief declare: When
the Portuguese with their Fleets were busy in discovering strange Countries,
there was a great noise through all Europe, of Prester-John and his Excellency,
reported a most powerful Emperor, Lord of many Kings, and of the Christian
Religion, but unknown in what place he had his abode. For which cause when Pike
Kovillan, sent by John the second King of Portugal, first over the
Mediterranean Sea, and afterward by Land, to seek out this Prince, coming into
India, and hearing, that in Abyssine, or that Ethiopia which lies below Egypt,
was a great and powerful Prince, who professed the Christian Religion, he went
thither, and finding many things in him which was reported of the true
Prester-John, he took him for the same Person, and was the first that called
him by that Name, which others that went the ensuing year into Abyssine,
followed, and so easily brought the mistake into Europe, the Emperor of
Abyssine being ever since called Prester-John: Yet Damianus a Goez, in his Book
of the Nature and Customs of the Abyssines, positively denies that the King of
Abyssine was ever called Prester-John; so that in truth that Name properly
belongs to the forementioned Prince of Asia: But seeing that Custom has almost
made it a Law, and the Kingdom of Prester-John in Asia already overwhelmed, the
Name of Prester-John may conveniently be applied and fixed upon the Abyssine
King of Africa, professing the Christian Religion.

Every Substitute Kingdom, as Tigre, Gambea, Goiame, Amara, Narea, has a
Deputy to Rule it in the Name of the Emperor; and the like has every
Territory: Besides, the Viceroy of Tigre bears the Title Tigra Mahon, and must
always be of the Royal Stock. Him of the Country next to the Red Sea, they
style Barnagas, that is, King of the Sea; not that he properly Commands over
the Countries by the Sea, for they are under the Turks, but because the
Country over which he Commands, lies nearer to Sea than any other part of
Tigre. He has his abode most in the City Barva or Debaroa, and wins great
Respect, as well among his own People as Strangers.

The Government of the Kingdom is administered with Discretion and Justice,
which has advanced the honor of the King both at home and abroad.

The Judges show great severity in punishing Offenders, according to the
several qualities of their Crimes, viz. such as shrink from the right and true
Faith, and change their Opinion, the People stone to death; but those which
totally Apostatize, or blaspeme God and the Ghost, are publicly burned alive;
Murderers they deliver to the nearest Relations of the Murdered, to revenge
themselves on him according to their pleasure: Thieves have their Eyes put out,
and afterward by Judgment are appointed for Slaves of the Empire, and given to
the Guides, with whom they may go all the Country over, to earn their Living
by Singing and Playing on Instruments; but with this Proviso, not to stay above
one day in a place, upon penalty of losing their lives. Other small Offenses
they punish with Whipping.

In the Succession of the Crown, the eldest takes place after the Father, but
for want of Issue-male, the most worthy Person of the next in Blood is chosen.
Others affirm, that Seniority creates no Claim, but that the Crown falls to him
whom the Father makes choice of on his Deathbed; but that seems improbable,
because the intended Successor lives at large in the Courts, whereas the rest
are kept on the Mountain Amara; and if he die, another, whom the greatest at
the Court do judge fittest for the Crown, is sent for out.

The great and famous Island Meroe lies divided between three Kings, which
oftentimes War with one another; the first is a Mahumetan Moor; the second, an
Idolater, descended from the Blood of the right Ethiopians; the third, a
Christian Abyssine, and acknowledges that King for his Lord.

The first King of Ethiopia or Abyssinie, The Order or List of the Kings of
Abyssine.
whereof we have certain knowledge, by the information of holy Scripture, was
Chus the Son of Cham, who took possession thereof immediately after the Flood,
six other Kings following him, whose Names, and the time of their Reign remains
unknown: But when the Royal Seat was planted in the City Axum, where it
remained till the coming in of Christ, they began to keep a Chronological
Register, but was afterward transplanted to Sceva, or Saba. The Kings that
Reigned in Axum and Saba, are set down to the number of a hundred fifty eight,
by the following order: Years. Arue Reigned 400 Agabo his Father, a Murderer
200 Ghedue, otherwise Sabanut, Reigned fifty years with his Brother Agaba (yet
in one Territory,) but after the death of Agaba he Reigned a hundred years,
over all Ethiopia 150 Gedue the second, Brother of Agaba, a Warlike Man 150
Makeda, or Makaada, Daughter of Gedue, by Josephus called Nikoules, and by
Herodotus, Nitocris, which was Queen of Saba in Ethiopia (according to St.
Jerome) and not of Saba in Arabia. She began to Reign (according to Genebrard)
about the seventeenth year of Saul, and traveled in the fourth year of
Solomon's Reign, and in the fifteenth year of her own, to Jerusalem 77

Milelech, by the Abyssines taken for a Son of Solomon and this Queen, and
commonly called The Son of Wisdom, his Mother sent in his eighteenth year to
Solomon, for to bring him up in all Wisdom. His Successors until the time of
Jesus Christ, to the number of twenty one, we rank in this following order:
Years. Andaka, Son of Milelech, Reigned 1 Anda his Brother 11 Guaasio, by
Genebrard called Gigasio 3 Zangua 44 Guasio, scarce half a day. Antet, or Autet
61 Bahaza, by Genebrard, Babara 9 Chanada 2 Chanza 10 Endue 9 Guazha 1 Endrach
1 Chaales 1 Setya 17 Safoelia 27 Aglubu, by Genebrard, Aglaba 3 Ausena, by
Genebrard, Anskua 1 Breguas 19 Guaase 17 Besceleugua 17 Baazena, in whose Reign
Jesus Christ was born 27

Furthermore, during the time between Solomon and Jesus Christ, there is in the
holy Scripture a certain King of Ethiopia called Zara, subdued by Abias, King
of Judah, notwithstanding he had an Army of ten hundred thousand Men, with
three hundred thousand Chariots. This Abias lived one thousand five hundred and
eleven years after the Flood. Genebrard says several other Kings of Ethiopia,
that Reigned over Egypt also, as Sabakon, or Sabachon, contemporary with Ozias
of Judah, and Reigned twelve, or according to others, fifty years, and in the
Scripture called Sua, or So; Tarach, who in the Reign of Joa, that assisted the
King of Egypt against Sennacherib King of Assyria. But we must endeavor to
reduce the Succession to known certainty, and then we find after Baazone
followed his Daughter Candace, who for her excellent Qualifications, left her
Name as an honor to all the Queens since, as Pliny has left to Posterity in
his Writing, though they wanted not also peculiar denominations. In her Reign
the Christian Faith first came into Ethiopia by her Chamberlain or Eunuch,
Baptized by Philip the Evangelist, between Jerusalem and Gaza, as may be read
in the eighth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.

Years. After her came Mesne her Son, who Reigned 6 Sekuta 9 Adgala ten years
and seven months. Agba half a year. Mali 4 Akle 13 Didima 10 Ausete. 2 Alda 30
Zecghinos Rama 8 Guzele 26 Besesseoch, or Besesserch 4 Asgua, or Asguak 77 H.
Herk 21 Besesaue, or according to Genebrard, Besasesne, one month. Guachene,
two days. Hadas, four months. Sagel 5 Affe, or Asfe 14 Azgheba 23 Samea, or
Sameas 3 Aiba, or Aibas 6 Sthenden 37 Sacham 9 San 30 Igga 18 Alamide 30
Achinnas 3

Abraham and Asbas, two Brothers, Reigned about the Year 460. seven and twenty
years together: afterward Abraham Reigned fourteen years alone, to whom
succeeded Years. Asfa, and Reigned 7 Sahat 14 Adahana 14 Reth, two months.
Asfa 25 Azba the second 6 Alhamedan 7 Afra and Sahel, each two months. Chebez
14 Asba the third, whom Genebrard seems to call Gebez-Eleoez-Baas 3 Sekul Skull
1 Abra and Adakana 6 Zaham 28 Amida 12 Sahan 2 Azba 4 Zahan the second 15 Gabez
21 Jacob and David, two Brothers, Reigned both 3 Arma, fourteen years, seven
days, and three months. Zittahana 12 Jacob 4 Constantine 28 Bestrael, that is
to say, House of Israel, eight months. Gabra Maschel 14 Nalek, in whose time
many Churches and Chapels were built in Ethiopia 11

After these are set down the following Kings, but without any addition of time
for their Government; namely Bazen, Sentagned, Baarsaghed, Ghermaasser,
Salaajuba, Kallulasion, Sargue, Zarai, Bagahamai, Gianusceda, or Gianasceda,
Zeoneghez, Malghene, Sefarad, Agdahes, Abraha, Azbaha, Asfa, Afrad, Amsi,
Ahari, Arada, Aladona, Alameda, Tabena, Chareb, Gabra, Mashel, Constantine,
Bezaaghe, Asfa, Arma, Gianasfa, Gianascheda, Fresennai, Adarahaz, or Adasahaz,
Aizar, Delnahad, and Mada, or Madai. After him followed the Queen Sahada his
Relict, assumed the Crown, and held it tyrannically, ruining Churches and
Consecrated Places, and hiding all their plundered Wealth under Ground. She
being dispossessed, there rose up these Kings following, viz. Ambasandin,
Goemaosfare, Girgas, Degna, Michael, Bedegaz, Aama, Kulladin, and Shinahami,
who was succeeded by Tredada Gabez his Daughter. All the forementioned Kings
from Bazen to Shinahami, were reputed Saints, and Reigned from the Year Seven
hundred sixty five, to Nine hundred thirty three, being an hundred sixty eight
years.

The forementioned Queen Tredda Gabez, Married a Prince out of Bughu, or
Bugibe, and by him had a Son, afterward King of Ethiopia, whom desirous to
advance to the Throne, she endeavored to extirpate the whole Stock of Milelech,
Son of Solomon and Queen Sheba, but he escaped from this cruel Design, who fled
for refuge to the Grandees of Sceva, who gave him assistance for the regaining
his Inheritance. Some nevertheless make five Emperors of the Race of Treda
Gabez, who (they say) Reigned three hundred thirty and three years: Three of
them only have their Names remembered for their Sanctity and Wisdom, viz.
Lalibala, or Zalibala, Imre, and Nahakulotab. Lalibala caused a new Church to
be cut out of a Rock. Imre was so holy, that an Angel, as the Abyssines relate,
served him always with Bread and Wine to Celebrate Mass; for he was a Priest:
adding moreover, that by his Prayers he caused the Current of the Nyle to stand
still. This was their Descent: Years. The Son of Tredda Gabez, not named,
Reigned 60 His Son 70 Lalibala 60 Imre 40 And Nahakulotab 50

But the Piety of the three last was not a sufficient Expiation for the Crimes
of their Predecessors Usurpations; so that the Line of David was restored to
the Throne by the assistance of those of Sceva aforementioned. The first of
them which inherited the Dominion, and Royal Style of Axum, was Years.
Ikumnanlach, and Reigned 15 Jachahazeou 9 After him Baharsada, or Esbraad, or
Esbrabab, Kademsaghed, Udim and Raab, Reigned in all one with another 15
Andizeon, or Aindizeon; who died in the Year Thirteen hundred and thirty two 13
Sefarad, who died in the Year Thirteen hundred and seventy 28 David, who died
in the Year Fourteen hundred and twenty, and left many Children, but none of
them inherited 33 He was succeeded by Theodoor, who scarce Reigned two months.
Isak, or Jesua, Reigned 17 Andrias 4 Hesbinaam, and Amedes, two Sons of Jesua,
or Isak, Reigned both 5 In their Reign two great Lords instigated the People
against the Sons of David, and set up a young Child in the Royal Throne, during
whose Minority they Governed the Kingdom in his Name, but continued their
Dominon scarce two years before they were caught and punished: whereupon Zerah
of right took the Crown, and Reigned 34 Bethe-Marian his Son, who died in the
Year One thousand four hundred forty eight, after he had held the Scepter,
upwards of 10 Schander, that is, Alexander, died in the Year One thousand four
hundred ninety three, having Governed six months, above 15 Amdezeon, who died
in the Year One thousand four hundred ninety three, Ruled only six months.
Nahu, or Nahod, the Brother of Alexander, taken out of Mount Amara, who died in
the Year One thousand five hundred and seven, having Reigned 14

Then came David his Son, otherwise Athanidinghil, that is, The Incense of
Mary, during whose Minority the Abyssines say, his Mother Helen managed the
State in his behalf.

This was that Helen, who sent her Ambassador Matthias to Emanuel King of
Portugal, to pray his assistance against the Mammelucks and Moors.

Jovius writes, that this King David subdued the Troglodites, and took Casante
the King of Mosambique Prisoner. He vanquished and killed the General of the
Queen of Bethsage, near the Cape of Good Hope, and handled the King of Congo
and Torme so roughly, that he compelled him to pay a very great Tribute, and
gave Hostages. He Fought with, and got two Victories over the King of Adel, or
Zeila, and in the Year Fifteen hundred, sent four and twenty Ambassadors and
Letters to Pope Clement the seventh, with promise of Obedience.

Vignier says he had one only Wife, Bibl. H^stor.
and by her four Sons, the eldest of whom, with the Father, lost his life in a
Battle against the King of Zeila, after he had held the Scepter 33 or 36 years.

Claudius his Son, otherwise called Aznassaghet by Genebrard, which signifies,
He is worshipped to the utmost ends of the Earth. He subdued the King of Adel
in revenge of his Father's death, and died in the Year One thousand five
hundred fifty nine, having Reigned 20 years.

Adamas his Brother, otherwise called Mena, and by the Abyssines, Adamas
Saghet, which signifies Majesty; he died in February One thousand five hundred
sixty three, after he had Reigned four years.

Sarsadenghil, or Sarsadinghil, the Son of Adamas, by his own direction called
Malak Sequet, had two Brothers, each of them having several Sons, the King had
but one, and that illegitimate, by Name Haste Jacob, that is, Lord Jacob,
Prince of Nerea, who after his Fathers death possessed the Kingdom, and
continued, says Godignus, seven years in the Government; he endeavored to
extirpate Christianity: Whereupon a certain Prince, by Name Susneos, who
favored the Professors thereof, sided with them, and making use of that
occasion to set up his pretense to the Kingdom, took up Arms against this
Jacob. Till the Year Sixteen hundred and twenty eight this War continued, when
King Jacob, wounded by the Shot of an Arrow, found himself necessitated to
retire to a Fort, where after a few days he died, leaving two Sons, the one
named Cosme, eighteen years of age; the other about sixteen, by Name
Zaga-Christ, that is to say, The Treasure of God; which were both then in the
Island Meroe, in the City Aich, where usually the Children of Prester-John are
Nursed and Educated.

The Queen Mother Nazarena, seeing this mishap in her Family, arisen by the
death of the King her Husband, and that Prince Susneos, the new King,
endeavored to suppress all those whom his Predecessor had favored, instantly
sent her Sons notice of their Fathers death, ordering them to retire from Meroe
to some faithful Friends of the Emperor their late Father: And to that end she
sent them much Gold and rich Jewels to maintain them, and to raise some Troops
to revenge the death of their Father.

The Prince Cosmes the eldest, took his way to the South, toward the Cape of
Good Hope; the other, Zaga-Christ, drew Northwards with a Company of about five
hundred Men, to the Kingdom of Sanar, his Inheritance: from thence to the
Kingdom of Fungi, where he was nobly entertained by the King, whose Name was
Orbat, a Vassal of Prester-Johns: but not suffered to rest quiet there, he was
forced to withdraw, being pursued by the Horsemen of King Susneos so close,
that he was necessitated to go through the sandy Deserts of Arabia but with the
number of fifty Servants; for all the other, fearing the wearisomness of the
Way, left him; then he came into Egypt to the City Corrigia, and lastly to
Grand Cair, where he was well received by the Copticks, and honorably
entertained by the Bashaw for the space of two days: Thence he withdrew, scarce
accompanied with fifteen Servants (for the other remained, because of weariness
and sickness, in Cair) to Jerusalem, into which he came at the Purification, in
the Year Sixteen hundred thirty and two. He went out of Jerusalem but with
three Servants and eight Clergymen to Nazareth, where he made Confession of
the Christian Religion; and after the stay of some Months left off all his
Servants, and from thence came by Ship to Rome to the Pope, who gave him a
Palace for his Residence; where he stayed two years, and then went from thence
into France, and stayed at Paris about three years, and died at last at Ruel in
the Year Sixteen hundred thirty eight.

Susneos, in the Year Sixteen hundred twenty nine, took upon him the
Sovereignty, and named himself Saghed, that is, Worshipped of all, employing
all his Forces to extirpate the Stock of King Jacob: And having confirmed and
settled his new-gain'd Dominion, he died in the Year Sixteen hundred thirty and
three, and his Son Fasilatas succeeded him.

It is by many concluded, that the Queen of Sheba, by some called Nicaules,
Religion.
and by others Makede, who came out of the South to hear the Wisdom of Solomon
in Jerusalem, and Commanded over these Countries, planted her Imperial Seat in
the Island of Meroe, having learned from Solomon the knowledge of the true God,
so that both she and her People began to embrace the Doctrine of Moses. But
after the increase of Christianity, they received that Doctrine, first brought
into Abyssine by the Eunuch of Queen Candace, by Name Indich; for he being
Baptized in the Way from Gaza to Jerusalem by Philip, upon the command of the
Angel, as we hinted before, he afterward Baptized the Queen, and all the
Subjects of the Country. But after the Division of the World among the
Apostles, they say, the Abyssines fell to St. Matthew, who gathered a rich
harvest of Souls there.

Afterward this People, together with the Copticks, received the Doctrine and
Errors of Dioscorus and Eutiches, and elected a Patriarch to oversee the
Church, who has his chief Residence in the City of Alexandria, and appoints a
Substitute in Abyssine named Eteche, or Chomos, who has many Bishops under him.

The Abyssines (captivated with the destructive Opinions of Eutiches and
Dioscorus) believe, That the Souls of the Saints, after their death, do not go
directly to Heaven, but to the terrestrial Paradise, to remain there till the
day of Judgment; That the Wicked do not go immediately to Hell, but to a place
near adjacent, in which they can see the Punishment prepared for them, waiting
in the mean while for the day of Judgment.

Damianus a Goez affirms, that they conclude a Purgatory, and believe that the
Souls of the virtuous are not plagued there on Saturdays and Sundays, and that
Alms-deeds do exceedingly serve for the mitigating of their pain; but deny that
their Eteche, or Patriarch, can grant Souls any liberty to go out, judging that
only to belong to God, who has limited, or set the time of their punishment.

Godignus affirms, that Children are Baptized with Fire and Water, imprinting a
Mark upon their Foreheads, which they must carefully keep; for they hold it fit
to follow the Rule which the Forerunner of Christ seems to have Preached, when
he said, I shall baptize you in the Spirit and in Fire; but others think, that
the first Christian Kings of Abyssine did it to distinguish the Believers from
Heathens.

Between the Religion or Worship of the Egyptians, Copticks, and Abyssines,
there is no difference at all; for both these People perform the Mass in the
same manner, and consent in the Church Ceremonies, which they observe in the
Consecration of the Body and Blood of Christ, which they perform in this
manner: The Priest at the appointed hour comes into the Church, and when the
People are assembled, in his Priestly Vestments ascends to the Altar, the
Deacon crying with a loud voice in the Coptick Tongue, Blessed be the
Participation; whereupon the Priest, turning to the People, with a loud voice
often repeats these words, Christ be with us all, and the the People answer,
And with thy spirit; After several Ceremonies performed, with Songs of Praise
and Thanksgiving, and at last Prayers being ended, the Priest blesses the
Cover, the Chalice or Cup, the Spoon and Shrine, or Coffer of the Sacrament, by
which they understand, The Ark of the Covenant, as by the Spoon, The Spear of
Christ, and begin the Participation, with stretched out hands, thus:

O Lord Jesus Christ, Partaker of the Divine Substance, who art immaculate,
together with the Father and holy Spirit, our Father, our Lord, our God, and
our Redeemer: Thou art that Bread which descended from Heaven; Thou who art
come to be a Lamb without blemish, for the redemption and life of the World, we
ask and pray thy Deity, that thou will set thy Countenance upon this holy
Mystery, upon this Bread and upon this Cup, which we Priests do set upon this
Table: Bless, sanctify, cleanse, and transmute this Bread into thy holy Body,
and this Wine in this Cup, into thy holy and precious Blood.

In like manner says the Abyssine Priest:

Our Prince Jesus Christ, whose Substance is not created, but thou art the pure
Word: Thou art the Son of the Father; Thou art the Bread of Life, come down
from Heaven; Thou were before thou came in the similitude of an immaculate
Lamb for the redemption of Sinners. Now, O thou lover of Mankind, we humbly
beseech thy Majesty to show thy favorable Countenance and Benediction upon this
Bread, and upon this Cup on this Altar; Bless, sanctify, purify, and
transmute this Bread into thy undefiled Flesh, and this Wine into thy precious
Blood.

Concerning the rest, they use one and the same manner of Incense, and the same
words of Consecration, the same form of Confession, and the same words of
Adoration.

In the Consecration of the Body and Blood of our Savior, both these People
observe one and the same Ceremonies. The Abyssine expresses it with a loud
voice thus:

He stretches out his hands to the feeble; He is become weak, that he may
strengthen those that wait upon him: who the same Night wherein he was
betrayed, took Bread into his holy and immaculate Hands, looked up to heaven to
his Father; he gave thanks, blessing and sanctifying it, and gave to his
Disciples, saying, Take and eat ye all of it: This Bread is my Flesh, which is
given for the remission of sins. Amen.

Whereupon the People say:

Verily, verily, verily, we believe, and trust, and love thee, O Lord our God.
This we believe in truth is thy Flesh.

Then says the Priest again:

In like manner he took the Cup, and gave thanks, blessed and sanctified it,
and said to them, Take and drink ye all of it: This is the Cup of my Blood
which shall be shed for you, for the redemption of many.

Whereupon the People answer:

Verily, verily, verily, we believe, and trust, and love thee, O Lord our God.
This we believe in truth is thy Blood.

In the same manner it is done by the Copticks. That the Coptick and Abyssine
Church has been one and the same from all Antiquity, Nicephorus, Zonoras,
Cedrenus, and lastly the Abyssine Rituals themselves, do testify; for the
common Liturgy, the Admonition that is made of Praying for the welfare of the
Abyssine Church, for the King and Princes of the Empire, Judges and Subjects,
there is also in particular made mention of the Patriarch of Alexandria in
these words:

Pray for our Prince, and our Patriarch, N. N. Lord and Head of the Bishops of
the great Territory of Alexandria, and for our Reverend Archbishop Mark, the
Head of our Country, and for all Bishops, Priests, and true believing
Ministers.

In other Admonitions, the Evangelist Mark, Theon, Petrus, Alexander,
Athanasius, Theophilus, Cyrillus, and other Patriarchs of Alexandria are
remembered; which abundantly show, that the Egyptian, Coptick, and Abyssine, are
in effect but one Church. The Abyssine and Coptick are under one and the same
Patriarch, who has his Residence in Alexandria in Egypt, and in Abyssine has
a Substitute under him, the Head in Ecclesiastical Causes, there called Eteche,
as we said before.

This Man is chosen by the Patriarch of Alexandria, or by the Monks of
Abyssine, and confirmed by the Patriarch. His chiefest Office consists in
conferring of holy or sacred Orders (though the bestowing of Church-Offices
belongs to the Xeques, or King) and the punishing the obstinate, such as stand
in contempt.

Godignus, against the opinion of many, maintains they have no Bishops; but
others, that the Eteche has twelve Suffragans under him.

A Clerk may have one Wife, but is not made Priest till three years after that.
After the death of the first Wife no Priest may Marry again, but by special
consent of the Eteche; yet then he may never celebrate Mass any more: a matter
so severely observed by them, that they do not so much as touch a Candle
Consecrated for the Church.

If a Clerk or Priest get a Bastard-Child, they instantly put him out of his
Office; and if he dies without lawful Children, his Goods Escheat to the King.

They have many Monks, which follow the Rules of St. Anthony, St. Maccair, and
St. Basil: They accommodate themselves every where to the Clergy, which they
boldly visit, do great Penance, live soberly, and Fast often.

All the Clergy, to the very Eteche, and Bishops, dwell in Cloisters, in the
Cities, and in the Wildernesses: they go barefoot, never eat Flesh, nor drink
Wine, and do besides unusual severe Penance: for besides Fasting, they torment
themselves terribly, by being bound to a Cross, and so set for a whole day
broyling in the Sun. Others go stark naked up to the neck into a cool Brook,
and stay there till they are half dead.

Some, which they call The Clergy of Libela, for a Penance carry two foursquare
pieces of Lead of fifty or sixty pound weight, which hang before their Breasts,
and behind their Backs, with which so about them they fall upon their Knees,
with their Foreheads upon the Ground, so that many times their Heads swell, and
their Bodies grow all black and blue. Others sit with a great Stone about their
Necks, which so bows down their Heads that they cannot look up to Heaven, nor
move themselves from the places where they are.

All the Abyssines, Circumcision.
as well Clergy as Temporality, are Circumcised the eighth day after their
Birth, and Baptized the fortieth, but the Daughters the sixtieth: and
afterward in their sixth year are Re-baptiz'd with Fire in this manner: They
take a sharp Iron, which cuts on both sides, and making it red hot in the Fire,
set therewith upon the very tip of their Nose two Marks, to distinguish them
from Mahumetans, who are also Circumcised.

The Water of Baptism they Consecrate with many Ceremonies and Benedictions;
with which they renew their Baptism every year upon the Day of the Three Kings,
because upon that day Christ was Baptized.

The Confession of their sins they say they have by Apostolical command, which
they make standing; after which they receive Absolution. Godignus avers, that
they neither make known the particulars, nor the number of their sins, but say
only in general, Habessen, Habessen, which signifies, I have sinned, I have
sinned. They hold only five mortal sins, fixing upon the last Chapter of the
Revelations, which excludes out of the holy City, Sorcerers, Fornicators or
Adulterers, Murderers, Idolaters and Liars. They acknowledge but five
Commandments, implied by Christ in these Negatives:

I have been hungry, and ye have not fed me; I have been thirsty, and you have
not given me drink; I have been a stranger, and you have not let me in; I have
been naked, and you have not clothed me; I have been sick, and you have not
visited me; I have been in prison, and you have not come to me: Believing that
Christ will say to Reprobates only these words at the last Day.

They perform Mass daily, yet no more but one in every Church, and that usually
in the Evening, an hour and a half before the going down of the Sun, except on
Saturdays and Sundays.

They ordinarily bury their Dead with a Cross and Prayers, reading over them
the Gospel of St. John, the next day give some Alms for the benefit of their
Souls.

They Fast every Wednesday, Damian Goez.
in remembrance of the Council of the Jews, upon the Death of Christ, which was
held upon that day: and every Friday, in Commemoration of the Death of Christ,
eating nothing before the going down of the Sun; observing besides with other
Christians, several other times of Abstinence.

Some of the Clergy in the Cloisters always eat Flesh, because they lie far
from the Sea, and have no Lakes nor Rivers, out of which to take Fish. Others
eat on Fasting-days but only an Apple, with Bread and Water, or else some
Herbs boiled, without Oil or Butter; and some only Bread and Water. Such as
eat Fish, in some Places will touch nothing that has any Blood, but content
themselves with Grasshoppers, Oysters, Lobsters, and the like. Also they use
upon Fasting-days a Grain called Camfa, and another Tebba, both prepared and
made ready like Mustard.

Most of the Abyssines have made defection from their ancient Opinions,
acknowledging the Roman Church to have the true Doctrine, and the Pope to be
Christ's Vicar: for in the time of Pope Clement the seventh, Prester-John sent
to acknowledge him High Priest, with promise of obedience to him and his
Successors: and all that have succeeded him have done the same, till the Year
Sixteen hundred and nine, when the Prince of Narel, Jacob, infected with the
Errors of Dioscorus and Eutiches, got the Crown. After him the Son of
Zaga-Christ, who in the Year Sixteen hundred thirty and three, stepped into the
Throne, embraced the same Opinions, so that he put out of the City all those
that acknowledged and obeyed the Pope. But Cosme, Son of King Haste Jacob,
about the Year Sixteen hundred and thirty, caused in the Kingdom of Dambea,
near his Court, a Church to be built after the European manner, of Cedar-wood,
and Zaga-Christ his Brother, and all his Family, heard Mass openly in the
Kingdom of Goyame: And moreover, being a singular Votary of the Catholic
Religion, established, among others, those Laws, That no Clergyman that is
Married may administer the Lords Supper upon pain of death; That no temporal
Person may have any more but one Wife; and, That none should draw near to the
Lords Table before he had made satisfaction to all whom he had wronged.

In the Year Sixteen hundred and twenty, in the Territory of Agoas, a spacious
Country and fruitful, five thousand Souls were Baptized by the Portuguese
Jesuits. The several states of the Countries relating to Religion, are as
follows.

In Tigre the Turks possess the Places lying near the Sea; Peter Davity, Estats
du Grand Kegus.
but the Bowels of the Kingdom are filled with Idolaters mixed with Christians.
Those of Angote are Christians without mixture; so those of Xoa and Amara.
Damut, according to Sanutus, contains a mixture. Leka remains wholly Christian,
but Bagamedi has some Christians and some Heathens; so Dambea. Mahumetans
wholly possess the City of Aukaguerle: But Dahali contains Christians, Moors
and Mahumetans; Gecie, Moors and Idolaters; Ario and Fatigar, wholly
Christians. Those of Zingaro and Roxa are Idolaters; but they of Ronazegus, all
Christians. Goyame comprehends Heathens and Christians; but Marea, Goroma,
Zeth, Concho, and Mahaola, lie totally involved in Idolatry. Sua has
Mahumetans and Christians; Bora, Calava, and Aga, in show Christians, but in
heart Idolaters; Dubane and Xaucale, Caffers, a People without any Religion;
Xincho, Aris, Evara, and Arbo, none but Mahumetans; Daraita, all Christians;
and lastly, Agoas are most Idolaters, but some Christians, who have many
Monasteries and Convents, both of Men and Women.

They have a great number of Churches; Churches.
the first and principal of all is called Delia Libanos, that is, The Mountain
of Liban, in the Kingdom of Goyame; wherein formerly the Kings of Abyssine used
to be buried; the second, Marcoza Mariam, that is, The Misery of Mary, in the
same Kingdom; the third, Dima, or St. Mary's, in Goroma; the fourth, Macana
Celacen, that is, The Seat of the Trinity, in Amara; the fifth, Laboca, that
is, Mountain of Gold, dedicated to St. Michael, in Goyame; the sixth, dedicated
to Agapite, stands in Dambea; the seventh, St. Saviors, in Abagamedri; the
eighth, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, built of very fine hew'n Stone, with nine
Portals, but was destroyed by the King of Adel or Zeila, and the Saracens, so
that at this day it remains a heap of Ruins, in respect of its former Luster.
In the adjoining Cloister all sorts of Abyssines were kept, together with the
Chronicles of the Kings, as well those Anointed and Crowned in this Church, as
those that were not: There is another Church called Abagarami, or
Batta-Abagarima, also dedicated to the Virgin Mary, but ruined by the Turks;
however, still retaining marks of its ancient beauty, in a Painted and Varnisht
Arched Roof. All these Churches have adjacent Cloisters: But besides the
beforenamed, they have many other Churches, dedicated for the most part to the
holy Trinity, Jesus Christ, or St. Savior, to the holy Cross, the Virgin Mary,
St. Michael, or some other Saint.

Gala's, or Jages.
IN the South of Abyssine, and Eastward of the Kingdom of Congo over against
the Sun and Saltpetre-Mountain, and on either side of the Nyle, upon the
Borders of Monoe-Mugi, certain salvage and Warlike People reside, by those of
Congo called Giaqua's, but in that Country Language, Agaz, according to
Pigafet and Linschot; by the Abyssines, as Jarrick asserts, Gala's, or Galla's;
by Andrew Batel an Englishman, who lived among them six Months, Jagges, or
Jages; but by themselves, Imbangola's, by which Name (as Batel well observes
upon it) they seem to have proceeded from the Imbiers, or Galla's of
Serre-Lions; which Peter Davity says can be no other than the Cumba's, who at
this day possess many Regions toward the South, which they have wrested by
force of Arms from the Abyssine Empire, whose manner of life we have at large
before related.

In several places of Africa, especially in Abyssine, there grows a Plant,
called by the Moors, Muz and Gemez; by the East-Indians, Melapolanda; by the
Egyptians, Mauz; by the Natives of St. Thomas Island, Abella; by the Greeks and
Latins, Maxgraita; in the Scripture, Dudaim; by others, Pharaohs Figs, and
Apples of Paradise, some conceiting that Adam eat of this Fruit; among whom are
the Learned St. Augustine, Moses Berzepha, Bishop of Syria, Nicephorus,
Calistus, Ambrosius, and most of all the Rabbis. It grows to the height of
a Pomegranate-Tree, without any Branches, and but few Leaves, resembling a
Reed; for at first they appear rolled up together, but afterward spread
themselves wide, and growing to six or seven Yards in length, and almost one in
breadth, so that any may shelter themselves from the scorching of the Sun under
one of them, which some make a strong argument to prove, that with the Leaves
of this Tree the Father of Mankind covered himself in Eden, upon the discovery
of his nakedness. The Fruit resembles a small Cucumber, but hangs together in
Bunches: the Rhind of a Gold-yellow color, lovely to look on, and fragrant in
smell. The Fruit within somewhat like that of a Cucumber, but tender, juicy,
sweet, without Stones or Kernels, and wondrous delicious to such as use to eat
it.

Another Plant, The Plant Bahabab.
which the Egyptians call Bahabab, or Baobab, grows wild here, bearing Fruit
in bigness and fashion like a Gourd, but the Leaves bearing the similitude of
those of an Orange-Tree. The Fruit plucked from the Tree, has not only a most
delicious taste, but quenches the Thirst, and cools extraordinarily.

Thus have we led you a toylsom Journey through the Heats and Wastes of Africa
in the Main Land; we will now give you a short sight of the Islands belonging
to it, and so leave you to your contemplations of what you have read and
observed therein.

The African Islands, 659. stand in this order. Madagascar Carkanossi Towns
Franshere, Imanhal, Cokombes, Andravoulle, Ambonnetanaha, Mazomamou, Imouze,
Mazes^^touts, Hatare, and Fananghaa, besides others; and the Fort Dauphine.
Rivers Franshere, Akondre, Imanhal, Manambaton, Manghafia, Harougazarak,
Foutak, and Sama. Mountains Vohitsmassian, the Naked Mountain, and some others.
Manatengha Towns Amboulle, Izame. Rivers Manatengha.
Vohitsbang Rivers Daviboulle, Dandraghinta, Sandrivinangha, Monamboudrou,
Massianash, Mananghare. Itomampo Rivers Itomampo, Jonghainow, Morqua,
Mangharak. Eringdrane Rivers Mangharak, Marsiatre. Matatane Rivers Outhaivon,
Manghasiouts. Mananghare, Mana, Irin, Itapoulabei, Itapoulosirire, Itapaulomai^
thairanou, Faroan, Lamohorik, Manataraven, Mananzau, Andredi, Tenasataniamou,
Tera^minri, Avibaha, Tsabsacke, Fouchurao, Juorhon. Manghabei Rivers
Voulouilou, Maransatran, Marinhou, Jamiami, Mandreri. Towns Rabsimelone, St.
Angelo, besides four other, very Populous.
Ampatte Towns None, only some large Villages, and one Fort. Rivers
Manamboulle, Manamba, Menerandre, The Salt-River, Siveh, Youronbehok, Yorlaghe.
Mountains Hiecla, and another Hill.
Mackicore Rivers Ranoumanithi, Ranoumene, Sohavianh, Soumada, Manatangh.
St. Apollony Nothing considerable; scarcely inhabited. Mauritius Isle, or
Cerne. Affording nothing but Beasts and Fowl. The Islands Primicras Only some
scattered Huts. Gomorre and Gomara Reasonably well peopled, but without Towns;
the Houses built of Stone, daubed over with Mortar. The Island of Ferdinand Po
No People of Europe have ever Traded there; and consequently, unknown. Princes
Island One Town, inhabited by Portuguese, and Slaves, to about 3000. Anaboon
One Town, and some few Villages. St. Thomas Towns Pauosan, well-fortified; St.
Sebastians Castle. Rivers Two small ones, without name.
Ilha Rolls Ilha des Cabres Caracombo St. Matthias Ascension Island. All
places in a manner desolate, and void of Inhabitants; only Carocombo has one
remarkable Hut, but many more remarkably immodest Women: But they all produce
variety of Foul, and some Beasts. St. Hellen Few Houses, but several Cliffs,
Mountains, and Valleys: The chief known, Church-Valley, and Apple-Dale; but
without Inhabitants. Cape Verd, or Salt Islands Ilha del Sal A small River, and
a little Haven. Boavista In a manner unknown, further than sight; only one
River falls into the Sea. Mayo Some Mountains, one handsome Plain, and a
dangerous Road for Ships. St. Jago Towns Praya, St. Jago, the Metropolis of all
these Islands, and a Bishops See, surrounded with two little Rivers. Del Fogo
One Castle, and several burning Mountains. Del Brava Neither Town nor Village,
only one Haven, above which stands an Hermitage. St. Nicholas Two Havens, viz.
Porto de Berguera, and Fuoor Fool. St. Lucy One Harbor, but within very Hilly.
St. Vincent Many high Mountains; a convenient Bay, but dangerous to come to,
and little fresh Water. St. Antonio Two high Mountains; one Village, containing
about 50 Families, and in the whole about 500 Inhabitants.
Gorce No Rivers or Brooks; only two Forts, held by the Hollanders. Canary
Islands are Grand Canary Towns The Metropolis of the whole, a Bishops See;
besides Galdar and Guya, with many dispersed Cloisters Fuertaventure Towns
Lanagla, Tarafalo, and Pozo Negro. Lanecrotte Towns Cayas. Teneriffe Towns
Sancta Cruz, Lagana, Ortom, and Garrico. The famous Mountain called the Pike of
Ten^ Gomere, Palma Both without Inhabitants. Ferro Some Towns, and a little
Water. Holy Haven Altogether void of People.
Madera Towns Funzal, Manchico. Malta Towns Valetta, Citta Vecchia, or Old
Malta; Burgo St. Angelo, or Citta Vittoriosa, and the Town of St. Michael,
besides 60 good Villages. Comin, and Cominot. Only one Fort. Goze, or Gozo One
Castle, and a good Fort, and about 5000 Inhabitants. Lampadowze Altogether
desolate. Linose Lies desolate. Pantalaree Towns Pantalaree. An Abyss called
Fossa.


AN EXACT DESCRIPTION OF THE AFRICAN ISLANDS: AS Madagascar, or Saint Laurence,
Saint Thomas, the Canary-Islands, Cape de Verd, Malta, and others.
With their Names, Scituations, Cities, Rivers, Plants, Beasts, Manners,
Habits, Languages, Riches, Religions, and Dominions.
AFter the Description of the Main Land of Africa, the Subjected Islands
belonging to the same, must be taken notice of; and they are found partly in
the Atlantic Ocean; partly in the Mid-Land; and partly in the Red Sea.

The Isles in the Atlantic, on the East of Africa, are these; Zokotora,
Madagascar, or St. Laurence, the greatest of all; Nossihibrahim, or St. Mary;
Bouebon, or Maskarenhas, or Maskareign; Almirante, St. Francis; As Sete
Jemanas, Os tres Irmanas, Roque Piz, do Natal, do Arko; Don John of Miz, Pemba,
Monfia, Zanzibar, Anisa, Quezimba, Mozambike, Don John of Castro, Cosmoldo, As
doze Ilbeos, John da Novo, Ilhas Primuras, Angoxas, Galaga, Comoro, or Thieves
Island, Aliola, St. Spirito, St. Christophano, Mazare dos Gorajos, St.
Brandaon, St. Apolonu, Mauritius, or do Ciene, Diego Rois, John of Lixbon, dos
Romaros, dos Castellianos: By the Cape of Good Hope lies the Island St.
Elizabeth, Korwli, or Robben, and Dassen Island: South-Westward from the Cape
of Good Hope, lies the Island of Tristano Kunha; but more Southerly are the
Islands dos Pikos, Martyn Vaz, St. Maria de Agosta, de Trinitad, Ascension, St.
Helen, New St. Helen, Annoban, St. Thome, Rolletjes, Princes Island, Carakombo,
Ferdinando do Po, St. Matthias, Ferdinand Noronho, Penedo de St. Paulo, the
Salt or Cape de vard Islands, the Canary Islands, the Islands of Borodon,
Madera, Porto Santo.

The Islands in the Mediterrane; are Galatha, Tabarka, Pantalerce, Malta, Goze,
etc. In the Red Sea, Primeiras, Delacca, Masuan, Magot, Mirt, Suachen, etc.

But here we must observe, that some of these being close by the Main Land of
Africa, are already described in the foregoing part; such be Zokotora,
Quirimba, Zanzibar, Mozambike, Robben and Dassen Islands, Corisco; the Islands
Amboises, Bisegos, De los Idolos, Bravas, etc.

The Island of MADAGASCAR, or St. LAURENCE.
THe Island, commonly by Geographers called Madagascar, and in the Country
Language Madecase; by Theuck, Albazgra; by the Persians and Arabians, Sazandib;
by the Portuguese, Ilha de sam Lourengo, from the first Discoverer Laurence
Almeide, Son of Francois Almeide, Viceroy of the East Indies for the King of
Portugal; who in the Year Fifteen hundred and six, put with eight Ships, first
of all into this Island of St. Laurence.

Gaspar de St. Bernardino, in his Journey through India by Land, affirms, That
in the Year Fifteen hundred and eight (with whom agrees Damianas de Goez) it
was discovered on the outside, and a little afterward, the inside scarifi'd by
one Ruy Pircira de Kontinho; and afterward by Tristano da Kunha, who Sailed
quite round it, upon the Command of Alfonso d' Albuquerque.

There are that report this Island was known to the Ancients, Merkat. Magin.
Ortel.
and that Pliny called it Cerne; Ptolomy, Menuthias; and Diodorus, The Island
of Merchant Jol: but this cannot be, because they never had any knowledge of
the Countries lying Southward above Serre-Lions.

It spreads in length North North-East, Situation. Flakkourt. Fraxscis. Canche.
and South South-West, Southward of the Equinoctial Line; and begins with its
North end from the eleventh or twelfth degree and odd minutes; or according to
Pyrad, from the fourteenth degree, and ends with its South end in the six and
twentieth; that is, from the Cape of St. Sebastian, to the Cape of St. Mary.
Linschot places it a hundred six and twenty Leagues from Cabo das Corinthas, on
the Main Coast of Africa; a hundred and ten from Sofala; and four and forty
from Mozambike.

It is one of the greatest Islands in the World; for the length from South to
North has been reckoned to twelve hundred Spanish, or two hundred Dutch Miles;
though Linschot says two hundred and twenty, the breadth seventy, and the
Circumference nine hundred.

The Sea between the Island and the Main Land, toward that side of the Cape of
Good Hope, sets with a strong Current, and goes with a mighty Tide of Ebbing
and Flowing; making a Channel at the Westerly entrance, eighty five Miles
broad; and in the middle, where it is narrower, over against the Island
Mosambike, four and forty Dutch Miles; but it grows wider again toward the
East. The Ships which go from Europe to the Indies, and from thence back again,
Sail commonly through this Channel, unless Storms and Tempests force them to
Steer another course.

This Island has been Cantoned into many Divisions, Divided into Territories.
whose names we will endeavor to give you; viz. Anossi, or Karkanossi,
Manatensi, or Manapani, the Valley of Amboulle, the Country of Vohitsbang,
Itomampo, Ikondre, Vattemahon, Manamboule, INSVLA S. LAVRENTII, vulgo MADAGASCAR
Anachimonssi, Gringdrane, Vohitsanghombe, Manakargha, Matatane, Antainare,
Galemboulou, Tametavi, Sahaveh, Vouloulou, Andouvoche, Manghabei, Adcimoi,
Mandrerci, Ampatre, Karemboule, Mahafalle, Houlouve, Siveh, Ivoronheok, and
Machicore. All large Territories, but the biggest is Machikore, being seventy
French Miles long, and forty broad; and the most populous are Vohitsanghombe,
and Erindrane.

We will give you a particular account of each, with what is remarkable
therein: Beginning first with Carkanossi, and from thence will run up Northward
to the Bay of Antongil; so turn back to the South, from Carkanossi to the River
Ongelahe.

To the Northward of this great Island, two or three smaller, as Nosey Ibrahim,
or Abraham's Isle, by the French named St. Mary; and another to the South,
called Maskarenhas, or Maskareigne, and by the French, Bouchon.

The whole Coast of this Island on the East Side, The spreading of the Coast.
spreads due North North-East, and South South-West, that is, from the Cape of
Itapere, otherwise called Fitorah, in five and twenty degrees, and six minutes
South-Latitude, to the Bay or Inlet of Antongil; and from thence to the
Lands-end due North, from the Cape of Itapere to the Island of Karenboule,
Westerly.

From Karemboule to the Mouth of the River Sakalite, the Coast runs North-West,
and from thence to the seventeenth degree South-Latitude, North North-East; and
thence to the fourteenth degree, being the Road of the Island due North.

The whole extent comprehends many beneficial and large Rivers, that having
their heads within the Land, irrigate the same to a rich fecundity, and at last
emit their Waters into the Sea; by which means there appear diverse fine Bays,
which make convenient and safe Roads for Ships.

The South Side from the Cape of Itapere to Karemboule, the People of Europe
best know; by most of whom frequented, but especially by the French, who have
to the chief Bay assigned the Name of Dauphin, from a neighboring Fort by them
Built on the Land: But the Inhabitants call it Tolonghare, situate between two
Points, the one called Itapere, in five and twenty degrees, and thirty minutes
South-Latitude; and the other the Point of Dauphin-Bay, in five and twenty
degrees and ten minutes.

Next follows the Inlet of Ranoufouthi, by the Portuguese called, The Bay of
the Gallions; there, The Bay of Karemboule, thirty Miles from the Fort of
Dauphin.

On the South Point you find but one known Bay, to which the Hollanders have
given the name of Sun-Bay.

The discovery of the places at the Sea Coast, from the Point of Antongill
Southerly, to the Bay of St. Augustine, the French ascribe to themselves;
having since the Year One thousand six hundred and forty, settled and Fortified
in the Territory of Carkanossi, on the Southside, and there Built the
beforementioned Fort Dauphin; thereby commanding the Inland parts from the
Country of Vohitsanghombe, in nineteen degrees South-Latitude, to the South
end of the Island; comprising the Dominions of Vohitsanghombe, Gringdrane,
Anachimoussi, Matatam, Antaware, or Mananzary, Ambohitsmene, Ehall, Emboulou,
the little Isle Nossi, Hibrahim, or St. Mary Maskareigne, the Territory of
Lamanouf, Ivourbon, Itomampo, Anamboule, Ikondre, Albssak, the Grape Island,
the Valley of Amboulle, the Lordship of Anossi, or Androbeizaha, Ampatre,
Karemboule, Machikoeo, Mahalle, Ivoronheok, Houlouwe, and Siveth.

The Portuguese in the Year Fifteen hundred and six, put in for this Island in
their Voyages to the East Indies, and discovered many places near the Sea, and
after them the Hollanders; but neither of them penetrated so far as the French.

The Territory of ANOSSI, or CARKANOSSI, otherwise ANDROBEIZAHA.
THis Territory lying in five and twenty degrees and eighteen minutes, Borders.
extending from Manatengha, to the River Mandrerey, in twenty six degrees.

Many Rivers have their passage through it, Rivers.
as Franshere, Akondre, Imanhal, Manambatori, Manghafia, Harougazarak, Fautak,
and Sama; most of which pay their Tributary Waters to Franshere.

This River, The River Franshere.
otherwise called Ravenatte, or Imours, takes original out of the Mountain of
Manghare, in five and twenty degrees and eighteen minutes South-Latitude, two
small miles from Fort Dauphin, falling into the Sea; having first received the
Water of many small Brooks, as Akondre, Imanhal, Manamboaa, Andravoulle, and
some other.

The Water of this River, about a mile up in the Country, is always brackish;
and at the Mouth makes a Lake or Pool called Ambove, of a large half mile
broad, and deep enough to bear a Ship.

It feeds many Crocodiles, as all the other Rivers of this Island.

Half a mile from the Mouth of Franshere, lies Cape St. Romain, so named by
the French; but by the Blacks, Rancratte, or Hehohale, which shows six or seven
Leagues into the Sea from the North-West.

Next this Cape appears a great Creek, in form of a Cross, extending to the
Point of the River called Dian Pansonge, or Fitorah; in the middle of
Tolanghare, an Isle shows it self: to the Northward of which, you may see the
Fort Dauphin, and behind that, the Haven of the same name.

From thence to Cape St. Romain, the Coast bears the name of Sivoure, from a
Lake, made by five or six small Brooks meeting therein; which in time of great
Rain, overflows the adjacent Grounds.

The other Point of Dauphin-Bay, is Cape Itapere; next which follows the Bay of
Lonkar, in five and twenty degrees, affording a commodious and safe Harbor for
Ships and other Vessels to Ride there; only the coming in is dangerous, by
reason of obscure Rocks.

Adjoining to this lies the Island St. Clare, so styled by the French, being a
small Spot before the Haven.

Then passing a little forward, you discover the River Manghafia, able to bear
good Ships; at the Mouth being twenty four degrees and a half, and taking
original out of the Mountain Siliva.

Half a mile North Westward, glides the small River Harangazavah; and a mile
and a half further, that of Monambalou; famous for the Rocks lying in its Mouth.

This Territory has many Islands, full of rich Meadows fit for the Pasturing
of Cattle; and the Country round about very fertile in the producing all sorts
of Provision, yielding to the curious eye a pleasant Prospect, surrounded with
high Mountains, and Checkered with fruitful Plains, beautifully varied with
delightful and easy rising Summits.

By the Shore of the River Franshere, and the other Rivers, lie many Villages;
the chiefest of which are, Franshere, Imanhal, Cokomabes, Andravoulle,
Ambometanaba, Mazomamou, Imouze, Mazofoutouts, Hatare, and Fananghaa, besides a
great number of others.

Eight Miles from Fort Dauphin, lies a Tract of Land called Vohitsmassian,
Vohitsmassian.
that is, The Lucky Mountain, by which the Portuguese formerly had a Fort, with
several Dwellings below it, and Gardens with all sorts of Provisions, but were
at last surpised and massacred by the Natives.

Four Miles from the beforenam'd Fort, lies a naked Mountain and other
neighboring Hills, oftentimes dug by the French, in hopes to find Gold or
Silver; but chiefly by a place where seven clear Springs rise one by another,
and make a Brook, wherein they found many Stones mixed with a Clay or yellow
Earth, full of white and black Clods shining like Silver; but being beaten and
cleans'd, was found too light.

Thirty Fathom above the Springs, the Grass and other Plants have changed their
natural Verdure into a fading yellow, which proceeds from the sulphurous Vapors
of enclosed Minerals; but on the top of the Mountain, all things remain fresh
and green: They say the Portuguese formerly at the foot of this Mountain
toward the North, by digging, found Gold; but since their extirpation, the
Great ones of the Country have filled up the place.

This Territory comprehends two sorts of people, viz. Whites, and Blacks; the
first subdivided into three Clans, named Rohandrians, Anakandrians, and
Onzatsi; the last distinguish themselves into four Tribes, that is, Voadziri,
Lohavohits, Ontsea, and Ondeves: The Whites which have come hither within these
last hundred and fifty years, name themselves Zafferahimini, from the Mother of
Mahomet called Himina; or as others, the Stock of Ramini, whom they account
their Predecessors; or from Ramnaina, Wife of Rahourod, Father of Rahari and
Rakouvatsi.

The Rohandrians are those out of which they choose their King, whom they call
Ompiandrian, or Dian Bahouache; the whole number of them being the chief
Nobility, and reverenced as Princes.

The Anakandrians are extracted from the Nobles, but Illegitimate, or else
sprung from a Rohandrian Man and Woman, either the Blacks, the Anakandrians, or
the Onzatsi: Those they entitle Ontampassemaka, that is, People of the Sand of
Mecha, from whence they say they are come with the Rohandrians. These
Anakandrians have a reddish Skin, and wear long Hair, Curled like the
Rohandrians: both these have the privilege to slaughter any Cattle.

The Onzatsi being the meanest, have their Extract from the Bastards of
Anakandrians, or else from the Race of the Seamen, which the Zafferamini, or
their Predecessors Dian Rakoube, or Rakouvatsi, brought into this Country.
These are also red of Skin, with curled Hair, but may not kill any Creature but
Hens. These are all Fishers.

These People have neither Religion nor Temples, Religion.
but they use a Custom of Sacrificing some Beasts; when they are Sick, or when
they Plant or gather Ignames and Rice, or Circumcise their Children, begin a
War, enter into a new built House, or Bury their Relations: The first Fruits of
Beasts they offer first to the Devil, and then to God; naming the Devil first,
Diaubilis Aminnan-habare, as if they would say, Lord Devil with God. This
Superstition they have inherited from their Forefathers that were Mahumetans,
and blindly continued therein by their Priests, or Ombiassa, great Cheaters and
Liars.

The Blacks, in the Country Language called Oulon Mainthy, and Marinh, are of
four sorts; Voadziri, Lohavohits, Ontsoa, and Ondeves.

The Voadziri, the greatest and richest, possessing some Villages, derive
themselves from the first Progenitors of this Country, before the Whites, or
Zafferaminies came thither; but afterward subjected by them. They have the
Privilege to cut the Cattels Throats, which belong to themselves or their
Slaves, when they are far from the Zafferamini, or there be no Rohandrian or
Anakandrian in their Villages.

The Lohavohits are also Grandees amongst the Blacks, and Offsprings of the
Voadziri; but the difference between them consists in this, That the former
Commands over a Country, and the other scarce has the Rule of a small
Village. They may not (as some report) cut an Ox or Cows Throat, though they
are his own; but must go and fetch an Rohandrian, or Anakandrian, to do it:
Notwithstanding some of them have a thousand Head of Cattle.

The Ontsoa are under the Lohavohits, and their near Relations.

The Ondeves, the meanest of all (as their Name imports, Ondeve signifying A
lost Man) are Slaves both by the Fathers and Mothers side, or else bought, or
taken in the Wars. When the Anakandrians, Ondzatsi, or Voadziri, and Ontsoa,
die, they can leave nothing to their Children, because the Grandees or Great
ones under whose Jurisdiction they stand, take all; only they possess the
Ground to Plant on.

The Voadziri, Lohavohits, and Ontsoa, may at their pleasure submit themselves
to some Great Lord, upon the Decease of their King; for which Submission they
receive a Gift from the same Lord, which intitles him after they die, to
inherit all they possess. The Ondeves dare not forsake their Masters, except it
be in a time of dearth, or for hunger, and that he denies them Sustenance; in
which Case they may freely go to other Masters.

The Country of Anossi is under the Jurisdiction of the French; but was
Governed by the Zaffaramini, or Rahimine, before the French had taken it, under
a Prince whom they honor not as a King, but as a God. He was called Andian
Ramach, and after this death succeeded by Andian Maroarive, who had been a
Christian, Baptized in Choa, brought up by the Jesuits, and kept by the Viceroy
of Goa; till at length returned to his Country, and delivered into the Hands
of his Father Andian Thianban. He was well instructed in the Christian
Religion, and could Read and Write after the European Fashion, spoke good
Portuguese, and could give a Rational Account of his Faith; but as soon as he
came to see his Father, he betook himself to his former Heathenism. He was
killed by a Musket-Bullet at the Siege of the Village Franshere, by the French,
where he had his abode.

The Fort of DAUPHIN in ANOSSI.
ON the outmost Point of the South-East side, close by the Shore, about the
year Sixteen hundred forty four, the French began to strengthen themselves with
a Fort, which (in Honor of their Kings Eldest Son) they entitled Dauphin; and
to settle a Plantation of People, which brought almost the whole Territory
under their Subjection by force of Arms.

In the year Sixteen hundred forty two, a French Sea-Captain, named Ricault,
got leave and privilege for himself and his Participants, of the Cardinal
Richelieu, then Chief Supervisor of the French Affairs, That he might alone
send Ships and People to this Island of Madagascar, and the adjacent Isles, to
erect a Colony for Merchandising there, for the benefit of Trade, and to take
Possession of the whole in the Name of the King of France. This being granted
him for ten Years, with exclusion of all others, a Company was erected by the
Undertakers, under the name of the East India French Company; and shortly after
the King augmented their Term unto the year Sixteen hundred sixty one.

In that Year, in the Month of March, the Company first sent out one Ship,
under the Command of Captain Coquet, to fetch Ebony-wood: With him there were
also sent two Commissioners, called Pronis and Foukenburgh, with twelve others,
to remain there, and expect the coming of a Ship which should set out of France
in November. Coquet landed about September; and in his Sailing by, he put in
for the Islands of Maskarrigne and Diego de Rois, of which Pronis took
possession in the King's Name; then Sailed over to St. Mary's, and the Bay of
Antongill, in the Countrey-Language called Manghabe, where they did the same:
But Foukenburgh and Pronis remained in the Haven of St. Lucie, or Manghafia.
The first of April the Ship St. Laurence arrived, being sent thither by the
Company, under the Command of Captain Giles Rozimont, whilst Captain Coquet was
gone to seek a Lading in the Territory of Anossi and Matatane. Rozimont brought
along with him seventy fresh Men from Pronis, which all fell sick, and so
continued about a Month at Manghafia, a third part of which quickly died;
whereupon the Black Inhabitants made an Attempt upon the new-arriv'd French,
but were bought off, with Presents given by Pronis to the Dian Ramach:
Afterward Pronis sent twelve French to take their abode in the Territory of
Mantane, at a Place called Mananzari, partly to Trade for Rice and other
Provisions, and partly to discover the Country: But in their going over a
River, six of them were killed by Zare Ramehina, a near Relation to Dian
Ramach: In like manner, in Bohitsmene six Seamen of Captain Rozimont's, with
his Son, were slain as they were loading of Ebony-wood.

Rozimont at last laded so much Ebony-wood as he could, and brought over the
six other French to Anossi, to Pronis; for Pronis had in the mean while changed
his Habitation, and was gone from St. Lucies, or Maghafia, to Anossi to take
his Residence with all his People in Tholonghare Bay, near the beforementioned
Fort Dauphin; this place being by them judged the fittest and convenientest,
partly for the commodiousness of the Haven, defended from the worst Winds, and
partly for the easiness in coming to it, not only for Sloops, but also for
Ships.

The Fort Dauphin lies next the Bay of Tholangre, in five and twenty Degrees
and six Minutes South Latitude, over against the Cape of Itapere, situate four
Degrees higher.

Behind the Fort stand several Habitations, among which the House of the French
Governor, with a great Garden, planted with all sorts of Pot Herbs and Fruits:
But in the year Sixteen hundred fifty six, this Fort was burned down by
accident; yet immediately rebuilt, and a good Garrison placed therein.

The French maintain great Wars against the Inhabitants of the neighboring
Territories, marching into the Mountains, burning down their Huts and Villages,
and taking away their Cattle.

In the year Sixteen hundred fifty one, Flacourd being then Commander in Chief
for the French King, with forty French, and as many Negroes, armed with Shields
and Lances, destroyed the Country of Franhere, and laid all the Huts and
Houses in Ashes, carrying away many Cows and Oxen, and both Men and Women; so
that by this means all the Glory of the Roandrians came to nothing.

This cruel Usage raised in the Inhabitants a mortal hatred against the French;
Hatred of the Inhabitants against the French.
increased afterward by the selling of some Men and Women Slaves, by their
Governor Pronis, to the Netherland Governor of the Island Mauritius.

The Territory of MANATENGHA, or MANAMPANI, and the Valley of AMBOULLE.
THis Territory of Manatengha, or Manampani, so called from the great River of
the same Name running through it, lies in three and twenty Degrees South
Latitude, being a very delightful spot of Land.

A little more to the Northward, at the Mouth of the foresaid River, the Valley
of Amboulle shows it self.

This River, The River Manampani.
lying with its Mouth under the Tropic of Capricorn, takes its original out of
the Valley of Amboulle, and receives out of the Mountains Encalida, Hiela, and
Manghaze, additional Streams, sending its Current afterward into the East.

In the Valley of Amboulle, stands a great Town also called Amboulle.

This Valley produces many wholesome Roots and Plants, especially white
Ignames, and Sesamos, whereof the Inhabitants make Oil, which they call
Menaehil.

They have very good and fat Oxen and Cows, besides some considerable Mines of
Iron.

Near the Town Amboulle rises a Hot Bath, whose Water they have reported to
bear a heat sufficient to boil an Egg hard in four and twenty hours; and by the
Inhabitants accounted a powerful Remedy against the Gout or Sciatica.

The Natives employ their time in Forgeing and Making Asagayes, Employment.
Lances, or Darts, and other neat Iron-work.

The People of Amboulle are Governed by a Voadziri, that is, A great Lord,
called Rabertau, being rich in Cattle, and all necessary Provision of Victual:
But his Authority seems small; for upon a scarcity of Provision, his Subjects
will tumultuously force him to supply their Wants: But afterward, when the
Crop in the Field comes to be cut, he repays himself fourfold.

All the People of this Valley live in so great liberty, that their Country is
a Refuge and Shelter for all Rogues and Vagabonds.

Westward of Amboulle lies Izame; The Territory of Izame.
a small place, but rich in Iron-Mines, and Menachil, or Oil of Sesamos.

The Inhabitants, being about eight hundred, are the most undaunted and Warlike
of the whole Island, yielding Obedience to a Voadziri, related in Blood to the
forsaid Robertau.

VOHITSBANG.
THe Territory of Vohitsbang reaches from the River Manatengha, in three and
twenty Degrees and a half, to the River Mananghare, and Borders upon
Anradsahock, and Fangaterre, containing within it a Lordship called
Manacaronha, lying at the River Mambondrou.

This Country boasts several Rivers; as, first, Manatengha, Rivers.
which with four Mouths, viz. Vinangadsimo, Manamaza, Sagandacan, and
Vinangavarats, pours it self into the Sea: D' Aviboule; by the French called
St. Giles, four French Miles from Manatengha: D' Andraghinta, two Miles higher:
Sandrivinangha, a Mile further, issuing out of the Mountain of Viboullo:
Monambondrou, three or four Miles from thence: Massianash, fifteen French Miles
from Aviboulle, where they find a good Bay for Barques, by the French called
Ance de Borgne, that is, The crooked Bay. Four Miles more Northerly lies
Mananghare, which has seven Mouths, but all stopped up with great Rocky
Cliffs. It comes out of Itomampo, lying toward the West; but augmented by
three other fair Rivers, Janghainou, Itamampou, and Mangharak; all which,
uniting with this, lose their Names.

This Coast, from the River Manhafia to Sandravinangha, stands environed with
the high Mountains of Viboulle, full of Woods, Dates, and Honey, and affording
some Gold: And indeed the whole Tract, though very Mountainous, yet produces
abundance of Honey, Oxen, Sugarcanes, Ignames, Rice, and other Provisions for
Food, besides many Iron Mines.

The Inhabitants are all Black of Color, The Constitution.
with bushy curled Hair upon their Heads; living in a perpetuated Contention,
upon ancient Feuds, or old Quarrels, Manners.
intayl'd both to Memory and Revenge from the Parents to the Children. They are
so great Thieves, that sometimes they will take away the Children and Slaves of
their Neighbors, and nearest Kindred in Blood, to carry and sell them in far
distant Places.

They have an innate Enmity to the Zafferamini, as believing, That by their
Skill in Writing certain Characters, they can bewitch, bring Sicknesses upon,
and at last kill them. At the Mouths of Manatengha live none but Ompizees, or
poor Fishermen.

They make their Clothes for the most part of peelings of Trees, Clothing.
which they call Fautastranou, and Avo; or else they buy Cotton Clothes in
Carnossi or Ampatre.

Their Arms are Wooden Shields, covered with an Oxes Hide, Arms.
and an heavy Assagay, or Lance.

They have as many Governors, as Townships; Religion.
but none of them have any Religion: yet they eat no Swines Flesh by Custom,
and are Circumcised.

The Dominions of ITOMAMPO, IKONDRE, VATTEMANAHON, MANAMBOULE, and ANACHIMOUSSI.
ITomampo lies in a Valley surrounded with high Mountains, Itomampo.
about three small Miles in compass, where they Forge excellent Steel.

Ikondre, Ikondre.
a small and Hilly Country, in twenty two Degrees and thirty Minutes South
Latitude, stands in the East and East-North-East divided by high Mountains from
Itomampo, and borders in the South upon Vattemanahon, and Michicore; and on the
North and North-West, touches Manamboule.

Vattemanahon borders East and North-East-wards on Ikondre, Vattemanahon.
and on the Head-springs of the River Itomampo, and Madreri; West and South, on
the Country of Machicore. It appears a wild Country, having been laid waste
in the Wars.

Manamboule has Limits in the East and East-North-East on the River Itomampo;
Manamboule.
in the North, on Anachimoussi; in the West, at Alfissack; in the South, on the
great Mountains, where the River Jonglahe takes its Rise, from thence running
Westwards from Mozambike, into the Sea.

Anachimoussi, Anachimoussi.
a Tract of about four small days Journey in length, abutteth in the East at
the River Jonghaivou, which cuts it through the middle; in the South, on
Manamboule; in the West, on the great Mountains; in the North, on the River
Mangharak, and the Lordship of Eringdrane.

Several Rivers glide through and water these Countries, Rivers.
viz. Itomampo, Jonghainou, Morqua, and Mangharak.

Itomampo moystens and gives name to a small Province, which it passes quite
through, streaming down out of the Mountain of Viboulle, and shooting from
thence into a Dominion called Houdra, lying above that of Inouchon, by the
River Mananghara.

The River Jonghainou, that is, The Middle River, flows out of the Mountains of
Ikondre, and divides Manamboule from Anachimoussi: Afterward takes its Course
Northerly, and then turns into the West, a days Journey from Itomampo, thence
flowing directly West one days Journey, it unites with Manharak, a small Mile
lower; both which joining with Itomampo, make the great Stream Mananghare,
which runs East and South-East eight great days Journey, and at last through
seven Mouths, falls into the Sea.

Maropia, a Branch of Itomampo, passes into Mandrarei.

Mangharak waters the North side of Anachimoussi.

The Soil of Itomampo yields great store of Rice, Nature of the Soil.
Ignames, Sugarcanes, Corn, and Cattle: Anachimoussi, and Manamboule, though
Mountainous, yet complain of no want, hiding within its Bowels good Mines of
excellent Iron: Only Wood is wanting, which they fetch from the Mountains.

The Voadziri of Manamboule, named Dian Panahahe, is become terrible to his
Neighbors, against whom he makes continual Wars, at the Instigation, and by the
Assistance of the French.

ERINGDRANE, and VOHITSANGHOMBE.
THe Province of Eringdrane is on the East environed with great Mountains,
which divide it from Antavare and Ambohits-mene: Borders.
It has in the West three great Rivers, which discharge their Waters into a
large Bay; Situate in twenty Degrees South Latitude, to the side of Mozambike.
This Country is divided into the Great and Small: The Less, watered by
Mangharak, lies to the South; and Great Eringdrane, toward the North: Out of
whose Mountains issues the River Mangharak, from a Head-spring rising in twenty
Degrees and a half; from whence, after a long Course, it unites with another
called Jonghaivou.

Vohits-anghombe, parted from Eringdrane by the River Mansiatre,
Vohits-anghombe.
has on the North the Lordship of Anciarakte; on the East, that of Saharez, in
nineteen Degrees and a half South Latitude, and the high Mountains of
Ambohits-mene; and Westward, the Mozambike Sea.

The River Mansiatre, being very great, takes its Original out of Eringdrane,
The River Mansiatre.
in the height of eighteen Degrees; so passing between that, and
Vohits-anghombe, falls into the forementioned Bay, in twenty Degrees.

This Country abounds with People, and can, if Occasion requires, raise above
thirty thousand Men; as Vohits-anghombe, an hundred thousand.

The Mountains on the East side are full of Cattle, and the Villages beautified
with handsome Buildings. The People make two sorts of Clothes; one of the Thread
of the Banana's Tree, almost as fine as Silk; the other of pure Silk: both
which they sell at reasonable rates. They are naturally inclined to quarrel
their Neighbors, with whom they live in continual Feuds; grown more imperious,
by the Assistance received upon all Essays from the French.

The Territory of MANAKARONGHA, and MATATANE.
BOth these Countries lie between the Rivers Mananghara and Mananzari, on the
Seacoast; touching in the West on the Mountains which divide Anachimoussi and
Eringdrane.

The River Mananghara consists of a Confluence of other meeting Waters; The
River Mananghara.
as Itomampo, Outhaivon, and Mangharak; which last intermingles with the Ocean
through seven Mouths, as beforementioned, every one lying about four French
Miles from another, and known by the Names of Kaloumanga, Maninghivou,
Mananbatou, Mananpatran, Oughamiri, Mananfingha, and Rentofou.

At the River Matatane lies the Territory so called: The Territory of Matatane.
This River has its Original from the Mountains of Vattebei, and enters the
Sea by two Out-lets, distant from each other seven French Miles, with pleasant
Fields between.

The Land hereabouts lies plain and even, producing Sugarcanes, Honey,
Ignames, and Cattle, and well watered with many Streams, replete with Fish:
From these Canes an extraordinary profit might be gained, if the people were
instructed and fitted with Materials to Extract and Boil the Sugar.

The great men have to the number of fifteen or twenty Women, which live apart
in a separate place, surrounded with Hedges, where every one has a small House
to dwell in, into which they dare let none enter, upon forfeiture of their
lives.

They have neither Mosques nor Churches, Religion.
yet give themselves over wholly to Superstition, and Sorcery, as an effect
thereof, giving credit to Charms and Characters written after the Arabian
fashion, which they call Hiridri, Masarabou, and Talissimou. They imagine some
of these able to prevent Thunder, Rain, Wind, and Wounds gotten in the Wars;
and likewise as Preservatives against Poison; good Defenses against Robbing,
and Burning of their Houses and Villages; in short, infallible Remedies against
all Misfortunes. All these Charms the Ombiassen, a Gallimaufry of Priests,
Astrologers, and Southsayers, make and sell to the meaner sort of Blacks, which
wear the same about their Necks, and sewed in their Girdles. They cut the same
Characters also on Gold, Silver, and small flat pieces of Reed for the same
purpose.

The Inhabitants are two sorts, Zaffekasimambou, or Casimambou, the chiefest;
and Zafferahmina, both Whites, but the first more deformed, although generally
Priests, and Learned-men.

About thirty or five and thirty years ago, all the Zafferahimina were killed,
except Women and Children; to whom the Conquerors gave some Islands and Fields
to Inhabit; on which they Planted and fed their Cattle, and are ever since
called Ontampassemaci, which is to say, People of the Sand of Mecha, because
they are Arabians of the Red Sea.

The Casimambou put in for this Island (by their own relation) by the
directions and Command of the Califf of Mecha, to instruct the Islanders in
Mahomets Superstition, about a hundred and sixty years ago: At which time,
their Chief Governor Married the Daughter of a great Lord, and Prince of
Matatam, a Negro; with condition, that her Issue, Male or Female, should be
called after his Daughters name Casimambou, as is usual on the South side of
this Island, and also in Mactricore.

The Zaffekasimombou are mightily increased in number, and teach to Read and
Write Arabic, keeping Schools in all the Villages for the Youth.

The Ontampassimaci live by Fishing, wherein they employ their whole time; and
have arrived to a wonderful dexterity therein.

Next the River Matatam lie along the Sea Coast many others; as Manghasiouts,
Manangkare, Mananhane, Itin, Itapaulobei, Itapoulosirire, and
Itapaulomaint-hiranou, Fonara, Lomahorik, or Morombei, and the Mantaraven.

Manghasiouts, or Manghasies, is an indifferent River, three small Miles from
Matatam; on whose Shore the French have a Factory, but dangerous to come to
with a Boat, by reason of the Rocks and Shelves that clog it.

Four Miles from thence passes the River Mananghan.

The Mananhare, which signifies much Provision; abounds with Fish.

Intin, a Mile and a half from thence; but a small Pool.

The Itapoulobei, Itapolousirire, and Itapaulomain-thairanou, are three small
Rivers, lying two Miles distant from each other, and take their original out of
the neighboring Mountains.

The Faroan, three Miles from the Itapaulominthiranou, is a great River, and
Navigable for a Bark; on whose Banks the Whites of Manouffi have seated
themselves.

Lamohorik, or Morombei, three small Miles from Faraon, comes out of the
High-Land, six or seven Miles toward the West.

Manataraven a small River, lies about six Miles from Morombei.

The Territory of Antavare, Manouffi, and Vobitsmene.
NOrthward of Matatane follows Antavare, situate in one and twenty degrees
and an half South-Latitude, and extending to the Cape Manouffi; delightfully
Watered by the Mananzau, a large and fair River, issuing from the steep Ascents
of Ambohitsmene; or the Mountains lying North and by East.

The Territory of Manouffi, reaches from the Cape of the same denomination, to
the River Mananghourou: fifteen Miles more Northerly, between which Cape and
River, lie three other Rivers, Andredi, Tenasatamamou, and Tentamimi.

Antavane produces plenty of Rice, Ignames, Bananoes, Sugarcanes, Honey, Oxen,
Goats, with all sorts of Fowl and Victual.

The Territory of Ambohitsmene lies North and by West from Antavare, and takes
name from the aforesaid high Red Mountain, in nineteen degrees and a half, or
twenty South-Latitude; which may be seen fifteen Leagues off at Sea, resembling
Table-Mount, at the Cape of Good Hope.

This ledge of Hills runs fifteen French Miles to the Inland; between which
and the Sea the Land appears very low, Marshy, and full of Lakes; among which
one of above fifteen Miles long and broad.

Upon these Mountains, the people of Famantara, have Zaffarahong for their
place of Residence; which place abounds with Gold, Iron, Cattle, Rice,
Sugarcanes, Ignames, Silk Clothes, and other Necessaries.

Twelve Miles from Mananghorou, Avibaha enters the Sea; The River Avibaha.
being (perhaps) an Outlet of the aforesaid Lake.

Three Miles from thence, the River Tsatsack and three other, Foutchurao, and a
Mile and half onward, Ivorhon pours down into a Bay, by the Inhabitants called
Tametavi; but by the French Mariners, Port aux prunes, that is, Plumb-Haven.

The Territory from Tametavi to the Bay of Antongil, that is, to the Country
of Vouloulou, the Long-Point, the Lordship of Andouvoulhe, with the Bay of
Manghabei, or Antongil.
THese Countries begin at the Haven of Tametavi, or Plumb-Haven, lying in eight
degrees and a half, and spreading by the Sea Coast to the Bay of Antongil; in
the Language of the Country called Manghabei, in fifteen degrees
South-Latitude; to the Land-wards enclosed with the Mountains of
Vohits-anghombe, and Ansianach.

After the Plumb-Haven they have four small Rivers, Fautack, Faha, Faho, and
Maroharats, distant a small mile each from another: After that Anacchinquets,
making a deep Haven, with a good Sandy bottom; but open to the North-East East,
and South-East Winds.

Three small Miles Northerly, The Territory of Voulouilou.
you discover Longue-Point. The Country about moistened by the River
Voulouilou.

Five Miles further, The River Ambato.
lies the great River Ambato; famous for the Rocks and obscure Cliffs, but
never comes to the Ocean.

Two small Miles more Northerly, you come to Galemboulou, in seventeen degrees
and an half; a large receptacle for Barks, but very dangerous, because of the
blind Rocks and boisterousness of the Sea: near which stands a Town called
Ratsimelone, but by the French Mariners St. Mala.

Three Miles from Galemboulou, a very fair and great River pours its self into
the Sea; wherein they say the small Island Ambouluossi shows it self.

The River Manangharou running from West to East, The River of Manangharou.
divides its self near the Sea Coast into four distinct Channels; of which it
self being one, retains its name from the Original to the Mouth: The other
three are, Manansatran, the second Marinhou, opposite to the Island Nosti
Ibrahim, or St. Mary; and lastly, the Stream Jamiami, a great and spacious
River, which at its Outlet into the Sea, always holds seven or eight Foot Water.

After this follows the River Mananghare, fronting the North Point of the
Island St. Mary, and the South Point of Antongil Bay; entering the Sea with so
commodious an opening, The Country of Audouvouche.
that a great Bark may easily come in or out.

Following along the Western Coast, the Country of Andouvouche comes to view,
that is, The Bay; but because of the many other, as Antongil, by the
Inhabitants formerly called Manghabei, for Antongil is a Portugal name,
proceeding from a Portuguese Sea-Captain, Antonio Gillo who discovered it.

It lies in fifteen degrees South-Latitude, stretching Northward, and about
six Miles broad. In the deepest part of the Bay lies an Island very high out
of the Water, two large miles about delightfully green, fruitful in all sorts
of Provision; completely stored with fresh Water, Hens, Honey, and Bananoes:
Seamen esteem it a most convenient refreshing place.

At the entrance of the Bay, are three or four other small Islands, either Sown
with Rice, or full of Weeds.

On the North side, are three populous Towns, with several other along the
Shore; neighbor'd by a great River, which divided into two Arms, the one
running to the North, the other to the West; making in the middle at the
parting an Island.

Further on to the North appears another great Town, called by the Portuguese
St. Angelo, surrounded with a strong Pallisado: Opposite to which on the left
hand another, which the Netherlanders in their first Voyage to the East Indies,
in the Year Fifteen hundred ninety five named Spakenburgh, consisting of about
a hundred and eighty Houses: West South-West from the forementioned Island,
glides another River, upon which a Town lies.

The Grounds are exceeding good and fat, well watered, and full of Grass, The
Condition of the Land.
but not over-stockt with Cattle, the richest Person having scarce a Herd of
four and twenty Beasts.

The Towns here show more of Architecture than usual in these parts, and
advantageously Seated, either upon the Mountains, or along the River, Fenced
with Stakes; with two Entrances or Doors, only the one to the Water, the other
to the side of a Wood, for their flight thither, when set upon by the Enemy and
worsted.

All the People from the Plum-Haven to Antongil-Bay, Customs.
observe the same Customs, and all name themselves one among another,
Zaffehibrahim, that is, The Generation of Abraham; or Nossi Abrahim, from the
Island Abraham, whence they are sprung.

By their keeping holy the Saturday, their whiteness of color, and some other
particular Customs, Flaccourt thinks them to be descended from the Stock of the
Jews and Arabians, who fled thither many years ago.

Both Men, Women, and Children are whiter than those of Matatane and
Androbeisaha, with smooth Hair hanging down at length; being good natured,
mild, and hospitable, not inclined to Robbery or Murder.

In Dancing and Singing, they seem to use some kinds of measures; Footing it in
pairs, sometimes making distinct stops, and stretching out their Arms.

All their Songs consist of Epithalamiums; in the Chanting whereof they use odd
Postures, and all the bystanders keep time by clapping of hands, which they
call Manghovah, that is, Keeping, as if they should say they would keep time.

Men and Women, when they have any sickness in their Eyes or Head, they anoint
their Faces, sometimes with white, sometimes with black, red or yellow Colors:
But old Women use that kind of Painting to make them seem the more lively and
youthful.

The Women and Maids have an observant and strict eye held over them, so that a
man cannot without difficulty be permitted access to them.

They are very diligent in Husbandry: In the morning before Sunrise,
Employment.
going to the Rice-Fields, from whence they return not till Sunset.

The Men cut up Canes, called by the Indians, Bambu, and here Voulou, which
being dried they set on fire, and then lay the ashes as Compost upon the ground
to enrich it; after that the Women and Girls set the Rice, Grain by Grain,
making a hole in the Earth with a Stick, into which the Grain being cast, they
fill it up.

The Seed-time (as we may call it) being over, they sever the Rice from the
Weeds, and carry the ripe Corn from the Field into the Barns. In the mean time,
while the Women are busy at their labor, the Men begin in other places to cut
up and burn; for as soon as they see the first Sown Rice come up, they set
another Crop immediately; so that they continually labor, and have the whole
year through Rice in the Leaf, in the Blossom, and in the Ear. The same they do
with all other Dressings and Plantings.

Here you must take notice, that the Canes or Bambu beforementioned, in burning
makes so great a noise, that may be heard at a great distance, as if a
multitude of Ordnance, Muskets, and Pistols were shot off together.

The Merchandise which the French sell to the Galemboulle, Riches.
serves them not for Ornament or wearing, but they keep it up as a Treasure,
and buy Cattle with it in the Country of Ansianackte and the Mountains of
Ambohitsmene.

They find little Gold among those of Galemboulle, but some quantities of
Silver, and that reddish, course, and unrefin'd, or of a base allay.

These people, Religion.
and all the Zaffehibrahims, keep the Saturday holy, as we hinted before. They
do not acknowledge Mahomet, but call all the Mahumetans, Caffers: they
reverence Noah, Abraham, Moses, and David, but take no notice of the other
Prophets, nor of Christ, and hold Circumcision. They observe no Fasts, nor have
any Law or Worship, neither know what it is to pray to God, though nevertheless
they offer Sacrifices of Oxen, Cows, and Goats. They have no Temples, or other
places of Worship or Assembly, but Amounouques or Burying-places of their
Forefathers, to whose memory they show great reverence; by all which, they
seem to have some little Relics of Judaism. They are so greatly addicted to
their own Customs, that they will rather die of hunger, than eat of a Beast or
Fowl killed by any Christian, or one of the Southern Coast.

All the Children born on a Tuesday, Thursday, or Friday, they bring into the
Woods, and lay down as untimely Fruits, for to perish by cold or hunger, or be
devoured by the wild Beasts; although sometime by one or other of the Women,
out of tenderness and compassion, taken up and suckled.

Every Village has a peculiar Lord, Government.
in the Country Language called Filoubei, who administers Justice to the
People; and the eldest takes upon him as a Judge to decide all differences.
They assist and aid one another in the Wars, but if any of the Filoubei
quarrel, all the rest interpose as Mediators, who take up and moderate the
Controversy; but if they will not hearken, they leave them to decide it by
Arms, sitting neutral Spectators.

These people use their Slaves more like Children than what they are, insomuch
that they esteem them as Sons, admitting them to eat at their Tables, and not
seldom bestowing their Daughters upon them for Wives.

The Hollanders have formerly frequented this Bay, to buy Rice and Slaves; and
some years ago began to grow numerous, till the unwholesomness of the Air
killed many; and the Lords of the Country, either by open force, or
clandestine practices, wearied out and destroyed the rest.

This is all that hitherto could be known concerning this Island, at the South
East and East side; for from the Bay of Antongil to the North end, little
discovery has yet been made by the people of Europe; only we have heard of a
Territory called Vohemaro, and in the Portugal Sea-Cards set down by the name
of Boamaro, inhabited by White People. According to the relation of a
Goldsmith, whose Ancestors were the offsprings of Vohemaro. In this Territory
much Gold has been found.

On the East Coast of this Jurisdiction, appears the Bay of Vohemaro, or
Boamaro, lying in South-Latitude.

It remains yet, that we describe the Coast and the adjacent Countries lying at
the Mouth of the River Franshere, as you pass to the West and North, to the Bay
of Zonghelabe; so called by the Inhabitants, but by the Europeans St. Augustine,
and Mansiatre.

The Coast of the Territory of Carcanossi, to the River Mandreri.
BEyond the Mouth of the River Franshere, to the Cape of Monkale, lies a Sandy
way of four great French Leagues; and from thence to the Bay of Ranoifoutchy,
otherwise called the Bay of the Galliones, two Leagues. Upon this Sandy Coast
stand some Bushes between two Lakes, called, The Pools of Ambouve; upon whose
more fertiliz'd Banks grows abundance of Aloes, in the Country phrase named
Tetech.

Beyond Monkale, and Ranoifoutchi you pass through a way called Mozambike; but
the chiefest Village called Italy.

The Bay of Ranoifoutchi has a good coming in for a Bark or Sloop, but not for
a great Ship; it lies open to the South and South-East Winds: the worst that
blow in these Countries, never arising but accompanied with Thunder and
Tempests.

Five Miles from thence glides the River Mandreri, upon whose Banks they make
abundance of Salt, with little labor and cost.

The Soil here cannot produce Rice, by reason of the two much Sandiness, but
Cotton they have in abundance, and Oil made of the Plant Ricinus, good for many
sicknesses, and other uses.

Ever since four hundred and twelve, the Portuguese had at the Bay a
Habitation, under a Captain of their own, called Macinorbei by the Natives, but
by the Portuguese Miosignor; with the addition of the word Bei, that is, Lord.

The Territory of Ampatre, Mananghare, and Caremboule.
AMpatre, has in the East the Territory of Carcanossi, with the River
Mandreri, between both it spreads in length by the Coast twenty French Miles;
in the breadth twelve, from the Sea to Machicore. The Country within has
neither Rivers nor Water, only by chance some Ditches or Ponds, yet boasts an
exceeding fertility, being full of Wood, with which the Inhabitants erect their
Villages, surrounded with Poles and Thorns, so that it is impossible to come
into them, but through the Gates.

The Natives addict themselves extraordinarily to Robbing and Pillaging of
their Neighbors, not only of Goods, but also of their Wives; for which reason
great Feuds arise amongst them, which oftentimes break into an open Hostility.

This Province can bring three thousand men into the Field.

Every Village here (as in the former) has a Lord; amongst which one has the
pre-eminence of Command over the other.

The River of Mandrery, parting Carcanosse and Ampatra, glides very swift, but
lies for the most part stopped up. It takes original out of the same Mountain
with that of Itomampo, and falls at the last by the South into the Sea.

Many Rivers bring hither their tributary Streams, as Maropia, taking his
course by Icondre; Manamaboulle and Mananghare: Manamboulle descending from the
Mountain Hiela, and Mananghare issuing from the same on the South-west side.

Mananghare is inhabited with a People so unaccustomed to War, that every Great
Man appropriates his Neighbors Countries to himself, as if he were the rightful
Owner: whereupon none will either Till or Manure the Land, but let it lie
waste, and become a shelter for wild Hogs and Oxen.

The Mountain Hiela towers up with a lofty height, sending from its sides the
River Manampani. This Hill boasts a great number of Inhabitants, and divides
the Valley of Amboulle, Machicore, and the Carcanossi, one from another:
Westward of which last appears a Territory called Encalidan; between which also
and the Valley Amboulle, a small Tract, styled Caracarack.

Caremboulle, The Territory of Caremboulle.
a small Country, about six Miles in length, and three or four in breadth,
borders in the South, on the Sea; Westwards, on the Bay of Caremboulle; and
East, at Ampatre, where also the River Manambouve gives it a limit.

The River Manambouve has a full Stream, about thirty French Miles from that
of Mandrerey, beginning in Machicore, and running to Caremboulle, a Course of
fifteen or twenty Miles.

Twenty French Miles Westward, the small Rivulet Manamba joins with the Sea.

Menerandre, another small River, two Miles from Manamba, poures down out of
Machicore, and runs South-South-west.

Four Miles from that are two other little Brooks, that fetch their original
out of a small adjacent Mountain.

The Coast of Caremboulle, the outermost South Side of Madagascar, stretches
East and West; but begins from the River Manamba, to run North-west to that
of Manerandre, and from thence to Manamba and Machicore.

The Land of Caremboulle is dry and parched, yet has some few good Pastures
stocked with Cattle.

In Ampatre grows abundance of Cotton, whereof they make Clothes, and some Silk.

The Territory of Mahafalle, Houlouve, Siveh, and Youronhehok.
MAhafalle, seated farther to the West with the Seacoast, reaches to the
Salt-River, called in Portuguese, Sacalite, about fifteen French Miles from
Manomba and Hachicore.

This River, lying in five and twenty Degrees South-Latitude, comes out of the
Region of Houlouve, beginning at the Mouth of the said Sacalite, and shoots
into the Country two days Journey.

Siveh runs along the Seacoast about four Miles in length.

After Siveh follows Youronhehok, wherein appears the Bay of St. Augustine.

Yonglahe, a great River, receives on its North-side, The River Yonglahe.
besides many petty Brooks, the Water of three larger Streams, viz.
Ranoumanathi, Ongehahemassei, and Sacamare. It rises out of the Mountain of
Manamboulle, and runs to the West, having its outlet Southerly into the Sea by
a very fair Bay, called by the Portuguese, St. Augustine, but by the
Inhabitants, Ongelahe. It lies in three and twenty Degrees South-Latitude,
defended from hurtful Winds, and from the South to the North-west passable for
great Ships; yet has some Cliffs lying on both sides, dangerous for their
coming in.

On the South Side of the Bay, the French have erected a Fort resembling four
small Bulwarks, surrounded with Stakes, or Pallisado's, and a Trench of three
Fathom broad, and two Foot deep in Water; having on one side a Way in the
Trench above ten Foot broad, by which they enter into the Fort.

About the Year Sixteen hundred forty and four, the English Landed here four
hundred Men; but near three hundred, with the Captain, died by the Feverish
malignity of the Air and Hunger: at last the remainder were delivered from the
jaws of Death, by means of a Ship that Touched at this Place, and carried them
from thence: for all usually in their Voyages to the East Indies make some stay
here, for refreshing, and bring their Sick there to Land, to recover their
health.

The Territory of Machicore.
THe Territory of Machicore, a great Country, stretches the whole length of
the River Yonghelahe, that is, East-North-East, and West-South-west, seventy
French Miles; and the like difference from East to West; but from the North to
the South, not above fifty, that is, from the aforesaid River to Ampatre and
Mahafalle, but lies utterly waste.

This Province, as also those of Concha, Manamboulle, Alfissach, and Mahafalle,
stood formerly under the Government of one Lord, called Dian Balonalen, that
is, Master of a hundred thousand Parks: Then was the whole in Peace, and
flourished in happiness and Riches, even to excess. But after the death of
Balonalen, who left several Sons, they fell into Wars for the Inheritance in
such a measure, that they were all extirpated.

From Onghelahe right Northwards, appear two great Rivers, the one called
Ranoumanithi, spoken of before, and Ranoumene, which comes out of Anachimoussi,
and poures its Water in two and twenty Degrees South-Latitude, into a Bay near
the Sea; and a third less, known by the name of Ranoumanithi, running toward
the West-South-west into a Bay, in twenty Degrees South-Latitude.

This Country the Portuguese call Terra del Gada, that is, The Country of
Cattle, from the vast Herds thereof breeding in it.

There are three other Rivers run toward the West, the one Sohavianh; the
other Soumada; and the third, Manatangh, all flowing into a great Bay, in
nineteen Degrees.

Higher to the Northward the French have hitherto little knowledge of this
Island; and the Portuguese have for these many years discovered all upon the
Seacoast, except some few Places, as the Country, or Bay of Paxel, of St.
Andrew, Cabo di Donna nostra Cunha, Rio de St. Andreas, Rio de Diego Soars,
and lastly the Cape of St. Sebastian, the uttermost North-west Point of this
Island.

We will proceed now to give you some account of the general state of the
Island.

They find Iron and Steel in great abundance, which they work and cleanse with
more ease and less labor than with us; for the Smiths take a Basket full of
the Mineral, as they find it ready, and lay it upon red hot Coals between four
Stones, set and closed about with Clay, and blown up with a pair of Bellows
made in manner of a Wooden Pump; with which blowing, the Mineral within an
hours time melts, and so drawn off and forced into Bars, or Staves of three or
four pound.

There are also, as they say, Mines of Steel in the Territories of Mahafalle,
Anachimoussi, Inourhon, Icondrean, Manamboulle; and in Amboulle, Anossi,
Matatane, and Manghabei, good Iron. Silver is very common in these Countries;
yet has none ever found there any Mines either of Silver, Copper, Lead, or Tin.

They find Gold also among the Inhabitants, Minerals, or Mines.
not brought thither to them, but found every where in great plenty, and such
as the Europeans have none of; they call it in their Country Language
Voulamene Voutruroa, yet distinguish it into three sorts; the first their
Inland Gold, or Gold of Malacasse, palecolour'd, and is pliable as Lead; an
Ounce whereof is not worth ten Crowns. The second, Gold of Mecha, or
Voulameneraca, which the Rohandrians brought with them out of their Country,
it being very fine, and good Duckat-Gold. The third, that which the Christians
have brought thither, being hardest to be melted, and by them is named
Voulamene Voutrouwa, as they say. The Gold of Malacasse was first found in the
Country, of which there are Mines in the Territory of Anossi, and elsewhere,
by the relation of the Blacks. The Inland Gold they divide into three sorts;
one very fine, called Litteharonghe; the second less fine, styled Voulamene
Sautehy; and a third ordinary, named Ahets-Lovau.

Precious Stones they find in the Rivers and Brooks of many kinds, Precious
Stones.
as Crystal, Topazes, Granats, Amethysts, Eagles-stones, Smaragdines, or
Emerauds, Sapphires, Jacinths, Jaspers, Agats, Blood-stones, (by the Inhabitants
called Rahamanghe, and by the Physicians in Greek, Haematifes) Cornelion,
Toad-stones, and such like.

They find in several quarters of this Island diverse sorts of Waters, Waters.
some running above, and some under Ground, receiving a taste and quality
according to the Mineral they participate of.

In the Valley of Amboulle arises a Spring with very hot Water, a powerful
Medicine against Sicknesses growing from Cold in the Sinews: the same being
drunk is a great Pectoral, and cures all Diseases of the Stomach, opens
obstructions in the Reins and Spleen, and expells the Stone and Gravel.

They have in many places Springs that taste like Iron; as near Fort Dauphin in
Anossi, which the French and the Blacks therefore call the Iron-water.

In a high Mountain in Amboulle are Fountains of salt Water (although thirty
Miles distant from the Sea,) whereof the Natives make Salt.

Manghasia shows a Fountain upon a Hill, out of which issues Jews-Gumme. In the
Precinct of Fanghaterre, Westward of Mount Hiela, are Brooks with white Water,
that taste and smell like Brimstone.

Houlouve, Four setts of Honey.
and Vourouhehock, afford rich Saltpeter Caves; which they name in general
Tentele, and make-four sorts of it; Bee-Honey, called Voatentele; green
Mesquite-Honey, by name Sih; and two sorts of Honey of Pismires, one of Flying
Pismires, Swarming together in hollow Trees; and of other Pismires a little
bigger, which make their Honey in Vontantames, that is, great Mole-hills sharp
and copped above, every where boared through with Ant-holes. All these Honeys
have a very sweet taste.

But besides these, they tell of two other sorts of Honey; one hard and sweet,
more resembling Sugar than Honey, yet called Teutele Sacondre, made of the
Leaves of a little Tree or Shrub, which at maturity turn into yellow, green,
and red Husks; some hold this to be the Tabaxir of the Arabians, or Sugar of
the Bomboes Cane, which yields rather an unpleasant than sweet taste.

There is yet another sort of Honey, said to be Venomous or Poisonous, yet made
by Bees which suck it out of the Flowers of a Tree, bearing strong Poison, and
found in Carakarak, a member of Anossi.

The Inhabitants make three sorts of Wine; the first and commonest, of Honey;
the second of Sugar, which they call Tovach, or Tovapare, being somewhat bitter
of taste like new Beer, or as the Kernel of an Apricock, made in the Countries
of Manamboule, Matatane, and Hanghabei, by boiling the Sugar Canes in Water to
the consumption of a third part, then putting it into great Callabashes, it
becomes Wine on the third day. This Wine has such a corrosive quality, that
put it into an Egg-shell, it will eat the same throrow in the space of one hour.

The third, some make of the great Bananoes Fruits, putting the same into a
Vessel, and boiling it four or five hours, of which comes a tartish Wine like
Sider.

They have several sorts of Oil, Oil.
with which both Men and Women anoint their Heads and Bodies; for want thereof
they take Ox Suet mixed with Wax. The best known and ordinariest Oils are,
Menachtanhe, ( Menaen signifies Oil) Menachil, Menachovivat, Monachmafoutra,
Menach Voarave, Menach Apokopouk, Menach Vintag, and Menach Arame.

Menach Tanhetanhe made of a Plant, in the Country Language called Tanhetanha;
and by us, Tree of Wonder; and in Latin Ricinus; Minalchis Oil they make in the
Valley of Amboulle, of a Fruit or Seed called Voankare; and in Europe, Sesamus:
Menachouvivou they extract of a Fruit as big as an Almond, and has a good
taste both in Eating and Drinking: Menachmafoutra made of the Kernels of the
Fruits of the Dragon-Tree; bears the same thickness as Oil of Nutmegs, but
without smell; it cures Scabs, and dry Tetters: Voarave is drawn from the Fruit
Fontsi: Menachfowaha, of the Fruit Apokapouk, being very Poisonous: Menach
Vintag, of a great Acron: Menach Arame, of the Kernel of the Fruit of the Tree,
from whence the Gum called Tacamahacha proceeds.

From hence Merchants bring diverse sorts of Physical Earth, one red, ( Tamene
in their Speech) as good, if not the same with that, by the Apothecaries called
Bole Armoniack: another called, Terra Sigillata, Sealed Earth; that properly so
named, brought from the Island of Lemnos, and therefore also called Terra
Lemnia; yet according to Flakourt, that of Madagascar, no less esteemed than
the other, and among the Natives called Tavelisse. A third like Chalk,
excellent to wash Linen in stead of Soap, being a fat Clay, like the Earth of
Malta; which they say, carried about one, has power to kill or drive away
Snakes or Serpents, or at least, to resist their Poison; the Vulgar name there
is Tanefoutchi.

They have great variety of Gums, known by the general name Lite; some well
scented, and others without any smell: Of these we will reckon first Litementa,
or Benjoin, Literame, or Taccamahacca: Lite Fimpi, a pleasant scented Gum.
Lite-Enfouraha, a kind of green Rosin, with a Balsom-like smell: Quizominthi, a
black Gum, which serves to Glue the Handles to their Assagays: Hingue, a black
well scented Gum: Litimithsi, black like Jah; very drawing, but quickly grows
dry and hard; yet the Women use it to Gum their Faces, to prevent Wrinkles; it
heals also Wounds and Sores. Litin Bitsik, Gum made by the Pismires in the
Territory of Ampatre; is white, and hangs on a small Branch of a Tree,
enclosing within it small Pismires: Falanoue, that is, Musk, comes from a
Creature as big as a Cat: Litineha is our Dragons Bloods: Litin Barenkoko,
another sort of Dragons Blood: Latinpane, well scented Rosin, of the Tree Fane:
Vahonlitintang, the Sap or Juice of the Tree, Vintang, or Aloe: Litingharonga,
a yellow Gum, like Gutta Gambu, coming from a Tree, out of whose Blossoms the
Bees gather a delicious Honey.

Nature has also stored this Island with many kinds of Plants, as well for
Food as Physic; as first the nutrimental are these:

Rice of two sorts, the one called in the Country phrase Varemanghe, and the
other Vatomandre: The first being of four sorts, two of them are Bearded and
very white; the other two sorts Bearded, with a red Shell, that turns russet
when it is boiled.

The Rice Vatomandre grows never but in Winter; is smaller than the other, and
sowrish of taste.

The Rice Varehondre, differenced only by the name.

Another sort of Rice, called from Varemanghe, because Planted in the Summer to
be Reaped in the Winter, yields not so much as the other; neither is it
Planted, but in a scarcity of other Rice, or when the Grasshoppers or Locusts
have eaten up the former Crop.

There they have diverse sorts of Ignamoe Roots, Roots.
which they all call with the general name of Ouvi, that is to say, Ouviharen,
Soabei, Kambares, Ouvifouthi, Offequa, Mauondre, Valeue, Randre, and Damborn.
The Ouifoutchi are the best and dearest; after these follow the Soabei, which
are white; then the Kambares, some of a Pink color, and some white; very
acceptable in the taste. The Ouifoutchi grow very big in fat ground, some to
the thickness of a man's middle, which being hanged on a Pole, two Negros have
enough to do to carry: but the ordinary ones are as thick as a man's Leg,
whereof a hundred, or a hundred and fifty, buy an Ox: The Soabei are not half
so great: The Kambares and Ouvihare are of one bigness, and a hundred and fifty
given for a hundred Ouifoutchi. One piece of the Ouifantochi planted in the
ground, produces sometimes two others, but commonly but one; but one piece of
the Kambares and Ouvihare produces commonly three or four others: The Ouvihare
are the smallest and cheapest, yet well tasted, and flourish better than the
rest; whereof the Slaves make their best repasts.

The Root Offeque, also a sort of Ignames, or Ouvi, has a bitter taste, which
therefore the Islanders steep and boil to take away the acerbitie before they
sell it. The Negros are very desirous of them, insomuch, that after they have
boiled them as before, they dry them in the Sun, till they grow as hard as
Wood, that they may keep them a year or two without spoiling or rotting.

The Mavandre, a pleasant tasted Root, whereof one has commonly ten or twelve
distinctions, but no bigger than a Hens Egg, somewhat resemble Chestnuts, but
mellower, and hurtful to the Stomach.

The Valeue, differs little from the Soabei and Oviharen.

There are besides these Planted several other, which grow of themselves; as
Ouvi-enpasso, Ouvi-randre, Ouvi-dambou, Fanghits, Vahalaye, Fandre, Hombouk,
and others, which in time of Famine are sought for in the Fields and Woods.

The Ouvi-enpasso are very thick and long Roots, and as pleasant to be eaten
when they are ripe as the Carembares; they grow in the Woods by the Sea side.

The Ouvi-randres are small Roots, of the thickness of a Raddish, with a long
Leaf, growing in Pools.

The Ouvi-dambou is a Root, whose Leaves are like those of a Vine, very
unpleasing, and hard of digestion; so that they seldom eat it but in the time
of Famine.

Vohalaye grows as thick as a man's head, with an ash-colored Shell; and is
eaten both raw and boiled.

Fanghits, are Roots with a Rosy colored outside, and exceeding large; very
sweet of taste, but not so acceptable as the Vahalaye: They satisfy both
hunger and thirst, are eaten raw, being of easy concoction, expelling watery
humors; they grow under Thorn Hedges.

The Roots Fandre and Hombouk, are well tasted, and taken for good Food by the
Ompilamyces and Ompeerees, which neither Sow nor Plant.

Sonres have round Leaves, so broad, that a man may stand under and shelter
himself from Rain: These Leaves with Meat eat like Cabbage; but the Root tastes
as well as the Pulp in the Stalk of a Artichoke.

Houmines, or Voamitsa, resemble a Turnip, one Plant will yield in a year above
a hundred Roots.

They have three sorts of Water Lillies, with Pink, White, and Yellow Flowers;
the Roots of all which are eaten boiled and roasted, as we use Chestnuts. The
Root of the Pink-colour'd, called Fantamou, give a very sweet relish, which
both men and Women feed on with great appetite, as a strong Provocation to
Venus; whereas the Root of the White, or Lazelaze; and the Yellow, Talifouk,
prevents and hinders Love affairs.

Geirst or Ampembe, grows there to the height of a Pike, and is ripe in June.
Fruits.


Voangbe are small Beans, which both green and ripe have a pleasing savor, but
lie heavy in the Stomach; being Sown in June, they grow ripe in three Months.

Voandsourou, are small Pease, no bigger than Tares.

Antah, a sort of good Roman Beans.

Voandre, another sort of Beans, but bearing their Fruits under ground, having
in each Husk only one Bean: Perhaps the Arachidna of Theophrastus; the Leaves
sit by threes, like those of Clover-Grass, but without other Branches or Stalks
than those of the Leaves.

Varuattes, otherwise Ambarvatsi, is a Tree like the Spanish Caper-tree, and
blossoms in the same manner, bearing a Cod or Husk, in which lies enclosed a
small and well tasted Grain: It grows to the height of a Cherty Tree, and some
give the Leaves to Silk Worms to feed on.

There grow also in many places Bananasses, some larger, and some less,
accounted good Victuals; and when ripe, eaten roasted like Apples; many times
they gather the green and unripe Branches, which hanged in the roofs of their
Houses, ripen in five or six days. In Eringdrane they make Thread of the Bark of
this Tree, to be worn into Clothes.

Akondre a small Fruit, whereof one Bush bears above a hundred, and whether
young or old, they are of a green color, but the Root esteemed the best Food.

Ananassen, by the Islanders of St. Mary, and the Bay of Antongil, called
Manassi, grow there in great abundance; but those on the Islands are better
than by the Fort of Dauphin.

Water-Melons, with them called Voamanghe, are of two sorts, one with black,
and the other with red Kernels, but both of them very good to abate thirst.

Likewise Vontanges, or Musk-Melons, like our Citrons, but neither of these are
natural Products; the Seed being first of all brought thither from France.

Voatane are of two sorts, long and round; the long, though not fully ripe,
they boil and eat with Milk and other Victuals, but the dried ones serve them
for Flasks.

Sugarcanes, called Fare, grow there almost without number, especially in
Matatane, Manamboulle, Antavare, Ghalemboule, and the Island of St. Mary; of
which much Sugar might be made, if the Inhabitants understood that Art; but
they extract a strong Wine of them, at the first not very pleasing, nor will it
remain good above three days; and besides, has such a corroding quality, that
being kept from Morning to Evening in a Stone Cup, it will eat the same through;
which the strongest Juice of Lemon cannot do.

Vanto grows upon a thick Tree at the Sea side; which being ripe, the
Inhabitants either eat alone, or with Milk and Salt. The Wood of it proves very
firm, and fit for Building.

Vantaka, a Fruit as big as an ordinary Apple, has a hard Shell, within full
of flat Kernels, whose ripe and pulpy substance, pleases two Senses, the Taste,
and the Smelling, though green, contrary to both; and besides hurtful to the
Stomach. This Fruit, Garzias calls the Queen-Apple; and K. Durant, Marmelos de
Bengala, whereof they say a Liquor may be made like Beer, but causing a Flux of
the Belly.

Voarots is a Fruit of a great Tree, with Leaves like those of an Olive, very
sour, and as big as a Cherry, with a black Shell like a Nut, of which there
are three sorts, white, red, and black.

Voaverone, a Pink-colour'd Fruit, very sweet and acceptable to the Palate. In
Dying it gives a tincture of Black and Violet.

Voahelats, a kind of Mulberry, in the likeness both of Leaves and Fruit, but
so sharp and sour of taste, that it fetches the skin off from the Tongue.

Azorualala, a small red Fruit, well tasted, thick, like a red Mulberry, but
not juicy, grows on small Trees under Hedges.

Voatsoutre, a small thick Fruit, like a Nutmeg, but relishes when boiled or
roasted like a Chestnut.

Tacanhoca, a Fruit which causes Dogs to die. The Tree whereon they grow shoots
up very high, and has Wood exceeding hard, of a Mouse-colour: The Leaves
resemble those of the Almond-Tree, but indented with five or six cuts, at each
of which grows a Flower of the same color, but without Scent, which afterward
changes into a Fruit that stands round about the edges of the Leaves.

Voanane, a Fruit half a Foot long, and proves a powerful Medicine against a
Looseness.

Ensasacale, the Fruit of a great Tree, shooting up very straight, with few
Branches, is long like that of the Pipe Cassia, and so divided into small
Partitions; the color without and within yellow, full of Seed, and containing
some well-scented Juice; it grows neither on the Branches nor Leaves, but on
the Bark, round about the body of the Tree, from the top to the bottom, and is
of three sorts, viz. first the forementioned, then are other blacker above, and
the third of an ash-colored white.

Fonti, otherwise Dourou, shoots up like a Plume of Feathers, with Leaves
resembling Falls a Foot long, and two Foot broad; some more.

The Fruit Voatfonsi, or Voadourou, grows like the Date, or Bananos-Trees, but
in a hard Shell; every Grain resembles a great Pease, covered about with blew
Skin; of which they make Oil, as the Meal of it they eat with Milk. This Fruit,
with the Leaves of Retel, and a little Chalk, the Inhabitants continually chew
for their healths sake, and to preserve a sweet Breath. The dry Leaves they
call Rattes; the Stalks, Falaffes; and use them about their Houses, because
they will keep six years without decaying. The green Leaves serve them for
Mats, Trenchers, and Drinking-Cups.

Hamouton resembles and tastes like a black Plum, but has no Stone, but in
stead thereof ten or twelve Kernels; by the French called (from the abundance
of the Fruit there growing on the Haven) Le Pourt aux Prunes, that is,
Plum-Haven. There is another sort of Alamoutou, called Issaye, like great
Sloes, but has the taste of Figs, with some small Kernels within. The
over-eating of this Fruit breeds a pain in the Stomach.

Sweet and sour Granates, called Voacomani, grow ripe in November and October:
Also small Oranges, named Voang Hissaye, of a sweet taste, and no bigger than a
Plum, and hang ten or twelve on a Stalk.

Citrons, by a general name called Vousara, are of seven sorts; some sweet, and
very large, which they call Vousa-remami; another ordinary sort, called
Voasecats, sour and small like a Plum; two other taste like a Mussle-plum, and
are denominated Voatoulong, the one are great, and the other small; another
Voutrimon, with a thick Shell, grows to the bigness of a Child's Head: The Shell
of this and the Voatoulong is good to preserve.

Ravensara is a great and high Tree like a Laurel, and with such Leaves, but
less.

The Fruit Varvensara resembles a green Walnut, but tastes (as well the Shell
as Kernel and Leaves) like a Clove. The Tree bears no Fruit till the third
year; and when the Inhabitants desire to have these Fruits and Leaves (which
they boil with Ginger, Garlic, and Fish,) they climb not up the Tree, but cut
it down by the Roots: it grows on high Mountains, and there are Males and
Females of them.

Right white Pepper may be had there in such abundance, that a great Ships
Lading might be carried from them every year; it comes to maturity in August,
September, and October.

Cardamoms also grow toward the side of the Territory of Galemboulou, and are
in the Country Language called Longouze, otherwise Melegette, and Grain,
having a black Seed, yielding a Spicy taste.

Likewise very good Ginger called Sacaviro, but according to Flaccourt, not in
any great quantities; though Francis Couche affirms that it grows all over the
Island, and that the Islanders Plant that alone round about their Houses to
catch the Rain falling on its Branches; and likewise about the Hives for a Food
to the Bees. There grows yet another sort on the Mountains, called Sacaviro d'
Ambou, that is, Mountain of Ginger, taken by Flaccourt for Zedoary.

Coco-Nut, by them called Vianiou, are very scarce, and were not known to them
in former times; but as they were brought from other Places, since the Year
Fifty or Sixty, and that by chance many were thrown up by the Sea on the Shore,
which is not without great probability, because from time to time there are
Coco-Nuts found on the Seashore.

Moreover Indian-Saffron, there in the Country called Tametavee, and by
Linschot in Malays, Cunhet, and Curcuma. The Root is like to that of Ginger,
yellow in the inside, and tastes like it, but not so sharp.

Voutzere grows on a middle-siz'd Tree, with broad Leaves, being as big as an
Egg, with much Juice within, like a Coco-Nut: The dry part is good to eat; and
of the Leaves the Inhabitants make Mats, Ropes, and Baskets.

Achith is a certain sort of Vine, with round and indented Leaves, remaining
always green, and never falling off, bearing Fruit called Vouchits, of the
bigness of a green Grape, and ripe in October, January, and February.

Anboutou, a small Herb, proportioned as our Flax, but somewhat rank of taste,
and bitterish. The Inhabitants chew this Herb to color the Gums, Teeth and
Lips black, and to perfume their Breath. It strengthens much, and therefore in
times of Famine they eat it to corroborate the Vitals.

Lengou grows upon a creeping Plant, in bigness like a Nut, with many corners:
The taste comes near that of a green Walnut. They chew the Shell, for the same
reason as the former.

Zemale, a mere stinking Weed; yet used by the Inhabitants to the same purpose
with the two before-going, and also to cure the Scurvey, and Rotting Teeth.

There grows also the Herb which the Indians call Betell, or Bethree; the
Arabians, Tamboul; but the Madagascars, Tamboure; which they continually chew
with a little Chalk; but in the Territory of Matatane, with a Fruit called
Fouronfourau, which is the Indian Areka.

Banghets, by the Indians called Anil, and Enger, is a Plant of which they make
Indico, in this manner. They put a great quantity of this Plant, cut off, with
Leaves and Stalks, when it begins to blossom, into a Tub of Water, and every
day stir it about with a Stick: When it is rotten, which is commonly in three
or four days, they cleanse it from all Dross and Stalks; and the Water, which
has received a dark Violet-colour, they let through a hole in the bottom, into
another Tub, after it has been well stirred: Into this Water, so drawn off,
they put a proportion of Oyl-Olive, and then beat it strongly together, to mix
it: Then they let it stand till the Color settles down to the bottom, and the
Water parts it self from it; which they draw off, till at last there remains
nothing but this Mud, being the right Indico: Then they lay it on a great Stone
in the Shade to dry, keeping all Soil from it.

Fanshaa, a Tree whose Wood is stripped, and very hard; grows high, and affords,
if cut round about, a blackish Liquor.

Ravier, a Plant with Leaves almost half a yard long, and broad, like those of
the Aloe, but not so thick; serving to cover the Huts with, and are called
Fandre.

Latakanghommelahe, the Fruit of a spreading Plant, with white Flowers, that
smell like Jasmine, but are much bigger.

Singofau, is a great Leaf, three Handfuls long, and four Fingers broad,
growing on a Plant, which winds it self round the Body of a Tree, like Ivy. The
Leaf, beaten and rubbed into the Eyes, clears the Sight.

Rhomba, an Herb with great Leaves, grows about a yard high, and smells like
Cloves or Cinnamon: It seems a sort of Balsom.

They have along the Waterside and Ditches much Eastern Cyprus, which they
call Movita, and use it against the pain of the Head.

Tongue is an Herb like our Saponarie, with a Flower like Jesamine, but a
bitter Root, very good against the pain of the Heart, and Poison. They show two
sorts of it; one with white Leaves, being the most powerful; the other with
purple.

Anramatiko, a Plant of two yards high, bearing on the top of the Leaves, being
an Hand-long, a hollow Flower, and Fruit. They are of two sorts; one with red,
and another with yellow Flowers. The Inhabitants dare not pluck these Flowers,
alleging, That whosoever plucks them as he passes along, shall never want
Rain; Which the French have found untrue.

Voame are small red Pease, growing on a little low Plant; by the Goldsmiths in
that Country used to sodder Gold with, in stead of Borax, which they know not.
They use it by mixing the pownded or beaten Pease with the Juice of Lemons, and
wet the Gold therein, which by that means grows tough and forgeable. The
Indians in Malaya call these Pease Konduri; and the Javanars, Saga, using the
same in stead of Weights.

Fiomouts, otherwise Voulibohits, is an Herb bearing yellow Flowers, and thick
Leaves, which the Women apply to any part to take away Hair. The green Herb,
which smells like Melilot, they burn to Ashes, and make into a Lixiviate Liquor.

Fimpi, in bigness represents the Olive Tree, with an Ash-colored Bark, of a
sharper taste than Pepper: Flaccourt takes it for the Indian Costus. The Bark
dried in the Sun like Cinnamon, turns white, and smells fragrantly, either
burned, or unburn'd. The Wood is very white, hard, and strong-scented: The
Leaves have the same smell as the Bark.

The Tree Tetech, by the ancient Greek Druggists called Agollachum, and
Xiloaloe, that is, Aloe-wood; and by the Portuguese, Paodaquilla, grows there
also, to the Height of an Olive Tree, with Leaves somewhat larger than those of
the great Myrthus; but being bruised cause sneezing.

Madrise is a Tree with small Leaves, speckl'd Wood outwardly, but in the Heart
bears a Violet-colour.

Hazon Mainthi, or Black Wood, is a great Tree from whence the Ebony-wood
comes, being the Heart of the Body: It has but small Leaves, like those of
the Myrthus, and of a dark green; and the Bark appears blackish. There are
three or four sorts of them.

Anokouts bears a Fruit a Finger long, but not so thick; of a dark Ash Color,
with Leaves like those of a Pear Tree. The Juice of the Fruit put into new
Milk, converts it into Cream.

Tendrokosses bears a Fruit like Haws.

Tarantalle is a sort of Box-wood.

Sanzene Lake, and Sanzene Vane, are a Wood smelling almost like Cumminseed,
but much stronger. The Inhabitants use this Wood against Fevers and Agues, and
cure with it all green Wounds, being rubbed with Water on a Stone. That which
they call Sanzene Vane is the best.

Enkafatrahe smells like Rose-wood; it is used against the pain of the Heart,
being rubbed on a Stone with Water, and laid on the Breast.

Mera has Leaves like the Olive Tree, with unscented yellow Wood, as hard as
Box.

Vintang, a Tree of which the Inhabitants make their Canoos, because the Worms
never get into it: There issues from it a Gum, very good for the curing of
Wounds.

Azonorouts, a fine Wood, and good to make Combs of.

Tamboubitsi is a Plant whose Wood resembles that of the Orange-Tree.

Fatra bears Benzoin.

Sandraha, a very high and straight Tree, of a blacker Wood than Ebony, without
any Knots, and when planted, as smooth as Horn. In Ranoutfoutchy, and about it,
grow great store of them.

Kokambe, another black Wood, like Sandraha, but crookeder, grows on Stony
Places, is very full of Prickles, and has few Leaves: The Blossoms smell very
pleasant, and likewise the Wood laid on the Fire makes a delicate Perfume.

Envilasse, another sort of Ebony-wood, like the former, but more knotty.

Zaa, a tough Wood, of which the Hilts or Handles of the Lances are made.

Tambourecissa bears Apples, which in the ripening open themselves into four
parts: They are within full of Kernels, covered with a thin Orangy Peel, which
affords a Dye like the American Fruit Rokou.

Anakau, or Anako, resembles the Cypress-Tree, and grows at the Water side.

Asonpassehis brings forth a Fruit well-tasted, and is as big as a Date-Tree.

Vahats, a small Tree, whose Bark at the Root is only serviceable for Dying.
From the fresh Root the Rhind comes off very easily, being moistened with
Water; but from the dry Root it must be taken with a Bone-Knife. When they will
use the same in Dying, they hang it, together with the Silk or Wool, to boil
over a small Fire, with a Lixivium of the Ashes of the Bark, which gives a
Fiery-Red Color; by adding to which a little Juice of Lemon, it turns into a
beautiful Yellow.

The Plant Anghive is of two sorts; a greater, and a smaller. The small
produces a Fruit in bigness like a Goosberry; but the biggest grow as large as
a Hen-Egg, being of a Scarlet color, and a good taste. The Scum of the Root is
good against the Gravel.

Andian Bouloha grows along the Seaside, with Leaves like those of Doggrass.

Varaukoko, a Plant winding it self about great Trees, bears a Violet-colour'd
Fruit, as big as a Peach; sweet and good of taste, but mealy, with four great
Kernels within. Of the Wood they make Hoops for Pails and Tubs; but they rot in
a Years time. Out of the Bark drops a red Gum, like Blood. The middlemost Bark,
being indifferent thick, smells (if held in the Candle) like Gum-Lac, and has
almost one and the same smatch.

Rhaa, in this Country called the Dragon-Tree, from the shape of that
Creature, which the Fruit does represent under the Shell, (which Flaccourt does
positively deny, having, as he says, opened several) grows to the height of a
Nut-Tree, and yields Blood out of the Bark, Boughs, and Body, when cut; from
whence this Tree has gotten its Name; for Rhaa signifies Blood: and the Blood
is as red as that of a Man or Beast, being the same which commonly the
Apothecaries call Dragons Blood.

The Wood looks white, but subject to decay in a short time; The Leaves are
like those of the Pear Tree, but a little longer shaped: The Elowers as red as
Fire, and long: The Fruit, called here Mafoutra, or Voafoutra; and by Dodoneus
and others, Dragonall, has the bigness of a small Pear, and the same shape,
only thicker at the Stalk. Within lies a Stone, covered with a single Skin,
containing a Kernel of the same color, and almost in smell like a Nutmeg.
There are three sorts of this Tree, each of which produces a several Fruit.
From the Kernel of the Fruit they extract a thick and fat Oil, a powerful
Medicine against Burnings, Itches, and Tetters, and effectually operates upon
all Pains. The Scum of the Bark cures the Bloody Flux.

Lalanda is a kind of Jesamin, and grows to the height of a small Tree, with
Leaves like our European Jesamin, and a very sweet smelling Flower, which the
Women lay to steep in the Oil of Sesamos and Menachil.

Honnits Ankazon, a small Tree, bearing a Flower of smell like the Jesamin, but
much larger and whiter, with a white Stalk of above six Inches long.

Voale, a small Plant, bearing an ordinary Blossom.

Langhare grows commonly amongst Thorns, with long carved Leaves, like those of
the Chessnut, but much harder, and somewhat sharper at the ends. The Body of it
rises very straight: The Blossom has a red color, and grows without a Stalk
on the Bark of the Body of the Tree, from the top to the bottom, and no where
else; which chewed in the mouth, by its tartness raises a little Phlegm or
Spittle, and moves to Salubility. The Wood rubbed small, and drank with Water,
or hung about the Neck, is said to drive away the Hiccup.

Mimbouhe, a pretty Plant, yielding well-scented and wholesome Leaves, being
wonderfully cordial.

Horame, a great Tree, distilling a Gum, to the Apothecaries known by the
American Name of Taccamahacca; but it is properly a Rosin. The Tree attains the
bigness of a Poplar, with long and small Leaves, whose Fruit is as big as an
ordinary Plum, or a Walnut, thick and hard. The Wood has been proved very
serviceable to make Planks for great Ships and Barks.

Here grows also the Indian Fig Tree, by the Inhabitants called Nounouk; and by
Linschot, in Portuguese, Avor de Raise, that is, The Tree of Roots, because of
its great increase, by rooting with its hanging Boughs in the Ground,
continually growing into others, which likewise send out more pendent Branches,
to take new root; by that means increasing to a little Wood, or rather a
Collection of shady Bowers, as we have already before more fully described.
Flaccourt reports to have seen several by the Fort of Dauphin, which have put
forth four thick Bodies, every one above two Fathom in compass. The Leaves
carry the similitude of those of a Pear Tree; and the Fruits (called
Voanounouk, that is, Fruit of the Nounouk, or Indian Fig Tree) in taste
resemble the Marzilian Figs. The Tree cut through, yields Milk; and of the Bark
they make Ropes.

Vera, a small Tree, with Leaves like the Almond-Tree, of a dark green color
on the top, and underneath white and woolly; which applied to a Wound, draw and
cleanse it.

Himavale, a little Plant, with six Leaves on each Stalk, which Physically
used, strengthens the Heart, as Cordials, and are of a good smell.

Endrachendrach, a great Tree, with black Wood, hard as Iron, and durable under
Ground as Marble; which also agrees with its name Endrachendrach, signifying
Sempervive.

Tsimandan has but few Leaves; but they good against the Pain of the Heart,
Plague, and other dangerous Sicknesses.

Feaokosse, a Shrub bearing a round Fruit like a Cabbage, and good to eat.

Manoavavatte, a Tree with a hard green thorny Bark, and Fruit like a
Hasle-Nut; of the Wood they make Handles for Lances.

Sira Manghits, signifying, A sweet Perfume, is a little Plant, whose Wood
strengthens the Heart: The Leaves smell like those of Juniper, but the Bark
like a Clove, and yields a good-scented Rosin.

Aboulaza brings forth a Cordial Wood.

Laherik grows with a straight and hollow Body, whereon the Leaves stand
circularly, like a pair of round Stairs.

Fooraha yields a green and well-scented Balsom; a powerful Medicine for all
Stabs, Cuts, and Bruises: The Women mix it amongst their Oils wherewith they
anoint themselves.

Mihahots, whose Wood, used Physically proves very corroborative.

Arindranto, good for nothing but to burn; nor that, till rotten: then it sends
forth a pleasing scent.

Ouviwassa, a creeping Plant, whose Root resembles that of Jalap, and yields a
Gum like that of Scamoni, which eaten, causes a violent Looseness, and without
speedy help, the Bloody Flux.

Saldits, a very curious Plant, with red Flowers, standing one by another, like
a Plume of Feathers. The Seed makes a strong Vomit; but the danger easily
abated, by taking some of the Root.

Pendre bears ten or twelve white Flowers, so odoriferous, that the Women lay
them to steep in the Sun, in their Menachil, or Oil of Sesamos.

Apokapouk has Leaves like Laurel, and such a Blossom, with Fruit as big as an
Almond, but strong Poison: Nevertheless, of the Kernel they make an Oil to
anoint Hair with.

Oniau bears a sort of Almonds, from which they extract an excellent Oil, both
to anoint Hair, and to eat.

Voulo is an Indian Cane, by Linschot and Acosta, from the example of the
Indians, called Mambu and Bambu; full of a milky moisture, which the Arabian
Druggists call Tabaxir, and the Indians, Sacar Mambu, or Bambu, that is, Sugar
of Mambu; very highly esteemed by the Arabians, Persians, Indians, and other
Eastern People. These are the Canes they cut up and burn, to make a Compost of
their Ashes, to enrich the Grounds intended for Planting of Rice. The Fruit
(which it bears not till the third year) is of the thickness of a small Bean,
whereof perhaps good Meal might be made. This Plant yields no less profit to
the Islanders, then the Coco-Nuts do to the Indians; for they make thereof Pots
to boil Rice in, Pails, or Vessels to fetch Water in, Wine and Beer Flasks,
Knives, Violins and Harps, Rice-Measures, Tobacco-pipes, Tinder-boxes, small
Skiffs, for two Men to sit in, and row up and down in the Rivers; Roofs of
Houses, Planks, and Stairs; and likewise Palanquins, or Sedans, wherein the
Grandees of the Country are carried; for which purpose it is bended in its
growth, to make these Chairs the easier.

Ampoufoutchy is a Wood extraordinary light, white, and easy to be wrought. Of
the Bark they make Ropes.

Amaze is a Tree thick in Body, but shoots up aloft tapering like a Pyramide:
The Fruit contains a white Marrow, with many hard Kernels within, like the
Seeds of a Pineapple.

Tanevoule is a Tree whose Leaves grow round about the Branches; without
Stalks, very long and narrow, as if they were glew'd to them.

Onuvane, a sort of knotty Cane, like the Indian. The Root they account good
Meat; and the Wood being Violet-colour, Dies Red. Besides these, are many
others found, which are much like the European, and seem to be one and the same.

The Country of Alfissack produces many Wild Grapes; but the Inhabitants do
not eat them, being ignorant of their goodness. Good Tobacco grows all over the
Country, and Hemp, there called Ahetsmanga Ahetsboule, which Flaccourt affirms
both in Stalk, Leaf, and Seed, not to differ from that of Europe. This Hemp
(says the same Flaccourt) the Inhabitants plant with great diligence, and the
dried Leaf they take in stead of Tobacco, which has a stupifying quality,
causing Drowsiness, Sleep; and pleasant Dreams. Those that are not used to take
it, like two or three days together as if they were distracted; and therefore
none but old Women, and the Ombiassen, that is, the Soothsayers, or Priests,
and Learned Men, take of it. In the East Indies they have a like sort of Plant
called Bangue, and producing the same Effects; but the Stalk is thrown away,
and useless.

Lastly, There grows also Taikombelahe, or Purslain, Cabbage, Radish, Dill,
Turky-Wheat, Toughes, or Mustard Seed, and Datura, or Thorn-apple.

As this Island boasts so wonderful a fertility of Plants, Beasts.
so it is also stored with great numbers of several kinds of Beasts, Vermin,
Fowl, and Fishes.

There are three sorts of Oxen; some with Horns; others without Horns, and
round Heads, called Bouri; and the third with hanging or loose Horns, only
fastened to the Skin. All these have great Lumps of Fat behind in their Necks,
of which the Inhabitants make Suet, and use it in stead of Butter.

In the Territory of Machicore many of those Beasts are found, which in former
times the Inhabitants say have been tame; and indeed they resemble ours in
Europe, only longer Legged, and run through the Woods in great Herds.

There are many Kabrito's, or Rams, whose Females have Young commonly three
times a year, and four at each time. Some of the Sheep have great long Tails of
five and twenty Pound weight, and nothing but clear Fat, which they boil and
eat, being excellent Food.

The Woods swarm with wild Hogs, which do great hurt to the Rice-Fields. The
Flesh of these, but chiefly of the Sows and young ones, is esteemed a choice
Dainty. The common Hogs makes very good and wholesome Pork; for though one eats
never so much of it, he will not surfeit, perhaps by reason of their good
feeding, which consists most in Land-Turtles, and their Eggs.

There are another sort called Tendrak, whose Flesh, though not very pleasing
to the Pallat, yet the Inhabitants hold for a great Dainty: They sleep six
months under ground without eating, and in that time shed their Bristles, and
other new ones appear in their places, sharp, like those of Hedghogs.

Fosse is a Creature preying upon Poultry: they eat the Flesh thereof as
wholesome Diet.

Farassa, a devouring Beast, as big as a Fox, with a great long Tail, and Hair
like a Woolf.

The Dogs are very small, with a long Snout, short Ears like a Fox, and such
like Hair, but of several colors.

Monkies, or Baboons, are of several sorts; and amongst others great ones,
being white, with Spots on their Ribs and Heads, and a long Snout like a Fox;
fierce of nature like Tigers, and make a great noise in the Woods. Another sort
have gray Hairs, are much smaller, with flat Noses, and easily made tame. A
third, and the most common, called Varii, are gray, and long Nosed, with great
shaggy Tails. These may be tamed without difficulty, if taken young, or else
they will starve themselves to death.

There are white Apes, called Sifak, with yellowish Heads, white Tails, and two
Spots on their Sides, are much bigger than the Varii, and usually walk on their
hindmost Legs, and keep in the Woods in great companies. There is yet another
sort of gray Apes, with Eyes shining like Fire, and short Hair, but not
possible to be tamed.

Fitsihi, or gray Squirrels, which commonly keep the Holes of hollow Trees, and
not easily caught.

Vondsira, a small Vermin like a Weazle, of a darkish color, greedily covets
Honey, and smells like Musk.

There are many Civet-Cats, which the People of Manahengha and others eat.

Tre-tre-tre, or Tra-tra-tra, a Beast as large as a Cow, has a round Head, and
a Man's Face, and Feet like an Ape. Flaccourt takes it for the Tanacht,
described by Ambrose Paree: It keeps for the most part alone by the Pool
Lepomami. The Inhabitants stand so much in fear of it, that they fly the sight
of it, as that also runs away upon the appearance of a Man.

Antamba, a great Beast, with a round Head: The Negro's report it as fierce and
ravenous as a Leopard, and that it devours both Men and Beasts, yet seldom
appears, but keeps in the Mountains.

Mangerzahok, a very great Beast, with round Feet like a Horse, and very long
Ears, Brays like an Ass: why may we not suppose it to be a wild one?

Brehis, a Beast with one single Horn in the Forehead, as big as a Goats, is
very wild. But there are neither Tigers, Horses, nor Lions, as some have
Written.

Famokantratra, Vermin.
a small Beast, having Legs at the Tail, above the Neck, and on the outmost
part of the Chin, small Claws, with which it hangs fast on the Barks of the
Trees. It holds the Mouth always open to receive Spiders, Muggs, and other
Vermin, whereon it feeds: It gained the Name Flamokantratra, that is,
Breast-hopper, because it leaps upon the Breast of any that approach near the
Tree where it sits; and sticks so close and fast, that the skin must be cut
away with a Rasor to remove it: for which reason the Inhabitants much fear it.

Camelions, Valaau, Rats, Vourouzi, Mice, and other Vermin, breed here
numerously.

Mandouts are a sort of Snakes as thick as a Man's Arm, but not venomous; yet
much feared by the Inhabitants: It feeds upon Rats, and small Birds, which they
fetch out of the Wastes.

Anakandef, a sort of small Snakes, which creep through the Fundament into Men's
Bodies, as they sit to ease themselves upon natural occasions, and causes
great pain, and in a short time, death. There are many other Snakes, every one
having a peculiar name, as Menore, Save, Mere, Tsiondiballe, Keneutsik, and
others.

Sea and Land-Fowls breed here wonderfully, Fow^.
all called by one general name, Vourou, but smaller than in Europe.

There are Hens, which Lay Eggs no bigger than Pigeons. Also Pheasants, with
Violet-colour'd Feathers, and red Bills, which are esteemed a delicate Food.
Likewise wild Violet and green Pigeons, Turtle-Doves, black and dark colored,
red Paraketo's, small green ones, that Whistle, and mock the Notes or Voices of
other Birds; Turkycocks, white, black, and gray Cranes, with curious Feathers;
wild Herons, with a Tuft on their Heads; Teals, with red Legs and Feet, called
Halire; Lapwings, Dish-washers, and many others.

Sambe, which signifies Burning, is a Bird with Feathers of a deep red color.

Vourondoule, (the Bird of the Dead) they say, makes a great Chirping, and
noise over the House where any one is to die.

Vouronchontsi, white Birds, that continually follow Oxen and Cows, and live by
Muggs and Wasps.

Mangarent Souifoutehy, or Voula, a River-Bird, like a Sea-mew, with a white
and long Bill.

Tahia has black Quills, Feet, and Bill; and, like the Cuckoo with us, sings
this only Note continually, Tahia.

Televa, a River-Bird as big as a Hen, with Violet-colour'd Feathers, and a red
Bill and Feet.

Haretak has a round Tuft on his Head, with black Feathers, and Feet like a
Teal.

Proceed we next to Serpents and other Vermin, among which we shall put in the
first place Scorpions, there generally called Hall, of which there are diverse
kinds, as the Tsingalaha, Huranou, a Water-Scorpion, because it keeps in
Ditches and Standing-waters, kills Beasts and Dogs by sucking their Blood;
Vankoho, or Spiders-head, having a great round and black Belly, is an exceeding
dangerous Creature; for if any be stung by it, they fall immediately into a
Swoon, remaining faint sometimes two or three days together, and as cold as
Ice. They cure it in the same manner as the Sting of a Scorpion, by laying the
Sick before a great Fire, and giving them wholesome Medicines to dispell the
Poison; Anakalife, a Reptile, breeding between the Barks of rotten Trees: It is
about a handful long, full of Legs, flat and thick, with a very hard Skin. The
Sting carries with it a mortal Poison, bringing immediate death, unless
prevented in the same manner as that of the Vankoko and Scorpion.

Akolalau, a small Vermin, in shape like a Wood-Lowse, but does not stink so
much: at full growth it attains the bigness of a Man's Thumb. The lesser sort of
them sit in Houses, Huts, and Chests in great numbers, and eat through all
things they can come at, especially Clothes.

Vombare, a parti-colour'd Creature, some of a Gold-yellow and Silver color,
intermixed with others.

Sakondre, a sort of Meskito's, that sit on the Bark of a small Tree like white
Blossoms, but afterward change into several colors, as green intermixed with
red, and the like. These make a Honey as sweet as Sugar.

Herechereche, a kind of Glowworm, lies in the Night glistering in the Woods,
and on the tops of Houses, like a spark of Fire.

Tsingoulou Voulou are of several sorts, a small Creature, infesting the
Houses, but do a great deal of hurt by running over, and eating the Victuals,
as Honey, Milk, and other Provisions.

There are also Pismires, which make Honey like Bees, in hollow Trees and heaps
of Earth, wherein they sit by thousands.

Worms also breed there of diverse sorts, Worms.
as long Earthworms, called Saho; Wood-worms, from eating the Wood, named
Anakau; and others with a Head like a Boar; Some with Scales on their Bodies,
that eat into the Beams and Planks of a Ship, sloaping to one side, but go not
quite through. Variety of Silkworms, as Landeve, which produce one single
Egg, with small Thorns; Landesaraha lay small Eggs, enclosed in one greater,
wherein sometimes are found above five hundred; The third Landeanakau, make
their Silk on a Tree called Anakui, growing on the Seashore like a Cypress,
and their Eggs hang one by one at a small Thread: this Silk proves the finest
and strongest of all; The fourth, Landevansaqua, makes a fine Silk upon the
Tree Vontonquer.

Land-Turtles, An amphibious Creature.
or Tanou, are many, and of two sorts, the one styled Helintsoka, and the
others Fanou: Nor want they Bouchete, or great Toads, and Saouh Frogs.

The Inhabitants are either white or black; Nature of the Inhabitants.
The Whites divide themselves into three Tribes, Rohandrians, Anakandrians, and
Ondazatsi; The Blacks into four sorts, Linschot.
Voadziri, Lohavohits, Ontson, and Ondeves, as we before related at large in
the Territory of Carcanossi or Anossi.

In some places they tell of a wild People, by them called Ompizees, which let
Hairs of their Heads and Beards grow very long, and go stark naked, only with
a few broad Leaves before their Privacies. They keep in the thickest Woods, and
shun Converse with any other Blacks, living upon Fish, Venison, Fruits, Roots,
wild Honey, and Grasshoppers.

Formerly there lived on the Island Ontaysatrouha, lying between the
Anachimoussi and the River Ranoumene, a People which held conversation with
their Neighbors, but Warred against them continually: and not only against
them, but likewise against all others that traveled through their Country.
They cut the sick Peoples Throats which they thought past recovery, and brought
their Hands to the King to eat.

They feed many Cows, but neither kill them, nor Steers, Rams, Goats, nor Cocks
(Cows Milk being their chiefest Diet) and therefore Heifers, Sheep, and Goats,
they bring to sleep upon Mats, and after their death bury them under ground.
They did eat Dogs with a great appetite, when no longer fit for Boar-hunting.
They tilled their Ground in the same manner as the other Blacks on this Island.
Their Features are frightful and ill-favor'd, for they have small Eyes, a broad
Forehead, sharp Teeth, Camosie Noses, thick Lips, with short curled Hair,
russet Skins, without Beards, great Bellied, and thin Legs. These People did
eat one another up, by which means being reduced to a small number, they were
all, about a hundred and twenty years since, destroyed by their neighboring
People and Enemies; so that now not one of them remains.

Some have reported that Giants and Dwarfs have been found on this Island; but
occular experience has proved that Assertion but a Fable. In a Tract of Land
by Itapere are many Stones erected, under which the Dwarfs are said to lie
buried; for (say the Learned) they came in great numbers, and would have
committed Spoil in the Country of Anossi, whence they had been driven to the
River Itapere: but when for want of Boats they could not come over, they were
all slain by the Inhabitants, and buried; who for a remembrance of the Victory,
raised these Stones as a Monument.

No People in the world are so treacherous, Their Disposition.
spiteful, flattering, and lying, as those of Madagascar, only toward the
South-end in Mangabey they seem better conditioned, are less talkative, not so
cruel in disposition, nor so deceitful; for they live according to other Laws
and Customs, and boast themselves sprung from the Stock of Abraham. All the
other do nothing but cheat, lie, and betray: they promise much, and do little,
unless by compulsion: They Govern by tyrannous cruelty, without mercy or
favor. If it chance that any escape their Enemies or Prosecutors hands, such
is their monstrous ingratitude, that they never return thanks, but ascribe it
to their Auli, or Fortune, and it makes them more perverse than before. Cruelty
and treachery they hold for two Capital Virtues; and those accounted weak Men,
and fainthearted, who pardon an offense, or use remission and compassion: They
forbear not to exercise their barbarous ferocity even upon Children, whom as
they meet they cut or tear in pieces, and rip up the Women with an atrocity
beyond the salvageness of Bruits, taking a delight to see them gasp and pant
for life. Their Recreations are barbarous shriekings, which they term Singing,
and antic skrewing of their Bodies in stead of Dancing. Man-like Exercises
they hate, alleging, that all things laborious bring much more displeasure and
vexation, than delight: These mock at the French when they see them walk, and
count them Fools for wearying themselves without a cause.

The civiler sort of these Islanders employ themselves in tilling the Ground,
Employment.
having little knowledge in Merchandise, neither taking care to find out
Handicrafts and Arts. They neither desire, nor indeed ask for such things as
Foreigners happen to bring thither, but remain satisfied with making and
procuring that which they need for sustenance, Clothing and Housing, without
thought of superfluity: And this manner of life they hold more delightful and
happy, than the enjoyment of superfluous Varieties. Their chiefest handywork is
in building of Houses, working of Iron and Gold, Turning, making of Pots,
Spinning, Weaving, Rope-making, Fishing, Hunting, and above all, (as already
mentioned) cultivating the Ground.

The People of Ompanefavihe make of Iron and Steel, all manner of Implements,
as Bills, Hammers, Knives, Tongs, in their Country Language called Fanghali,
Scissers, little Pinsers to pluck out the Hairs, Spits to roast Meat on,
Forcks, all sorts of Javelins, or Lances, Arrows, and great Butchers Knives.

The Goldsmiths, which proceed most out of the Territory of Voamaro, make of
their Inland Gold, first melted in little Bars, Earrings and Armlets,
Ornaments for the Neck, and other parts of the Body.

The Potters bake or burn with Haw-thorn Boughs, their Earthen Pots of all
sorts, great and small Dishes, Platters, Pitchers, and Cups, which by rubbing
over with a black Earth, shine, and are like Looking-glasses, as if they were
Polished or Glazed.

The Turners and Workers in Wood make Wooden Dishes, Chests, by them called
Vaa, Wooden, and Horn-Spoons, and other Housholdstuff.

In Architecture, if so we may call it, the Zafferamini, Rohandrians,
Anakandrians, are eminent.

They Fish with Nets like those used in Ships, Baskets in manner of Purse-Nets,
Fishing.
Angles, and Lances, with Harping-Irons at the end. Those that Fish in the Sea,
put out with small Canoos, so far as they can see, and catch with the
forementioned Baskets small Fishes, which serve them for Baits to catch bigger.
Formerly they used to take Whales here, but now they have not the boldness to
atempt it.

The Rope-makers make Cords of all sizes and lengths; some of an hundred and
thirty Fathom, besides smaller Tackle, to tie their Baskets and Nets.

The Women Spin, and Weave many sorts of Stuffs, of Flax or Thread, drawn from
Barks of Trees, with which the Men must not meddle, as being an undervaluing.

Their Husbandry and method of Agriculture is performed with little labor; for
they use neither Ploughs or Oxen, but merely with a Bill cut away the great
Trees, with a Cutting-Knife Prune off the Branches, and with other Implements,
called Fangali, take away the Roots and Weeds out of the Earth, and cast it
abroad. Afterward the withered Trees, Branches and Boughs, when a strong Wind
blows, are set on fire and burnt to ashes, and therein, after it is thoroughly
moistened with Rain, they Plant the Igname-Roots, Rice, and other Provision for
Food.

Notwithstanding their ignorance of Arts and Sciences, Games.
they are possessed with the humor of Gaming, of which two sorts are chiefly in
use, Andrauve and Fifangha. At the Game Andrauve they Play with little Shells,
found on the Seashore, which they turn round, that at a little distance they
may strike one upon another. All the Men, as well great as small, are so much
besotted with this Game, that sometimes they will venture a whole Ox at one of
those hits. Fifangha is a very pleasant Sport, but requires greater nimbleness
of Wit and Judgment than that of Andrauve, because it consists most in sleight of hand: two Gamesters can only Play; the manner is with certain round Fruit,
called Bassy, An Herb called Gold-^nappe.
to the number of sixty four, upon a Wooden Table, with two and thirty holes,
in four rows one by another, sixteen for one Gamester, and sixteen for the
other. This Game has great agreement with Chesse, or Draughts.

Their Songs, Songs and Dancings.
which (as we said) are very untunable, yet consist not as to scurrility or
obscenity, but either satirical Reproofs, or high Eulogies of the Vices or
Virtues of particular Persons, or else in exalting the praiseworthy, and
famous Deeds of their Ancestors.

In Singing they continually Dance and Leap, having a Valihan, or small
Instrument of Music in their Hands, with some Strings; or Playing upon a
Voulle, or Bambo's-Cane with six Strings, or upon a Herraavou, a Musical
Instrument struck with little Sticks, somewhat after the manner of a Jewish
Dulcimer.

Those of Carcanossi Dance turning round, and going one after another, then
standing still, and at last falling off on the sides at the sound of a Drum,
but not without showing a thousand fantastic postures.

The Herraavou Players have commonly most followers, which relate or express
nothing but serious Matters, though sometimes old Stories and Fancies.

The Houses have no Chambers above, Houses.
nor Cellars underneath; but merely one Room, which they call Varerarai, with a
small Floor or Cieling. The Roof stands sloaping, made of the Leaves called
Rattes, and Bambo's Canes, or of Boughs. The Walls made of Planks two Inches
thick. The Hearth-place at the end of the House, about four Foot square,
heightened with Sand, upon which lie three Stones to set the Pot upon, but
without a Chimney, so that the Smoke goes all over the House; which makes their
Abodes very unpleasant, they likewise keeping continual Fires, though the heat
of the Weather be never so excessive.

The Warehouses, wherein they keep their Rice, stand by themselves raised upon
Posts, to hinder the Rats climbing up to it.

The Rohandrians spend some time two or three years in building their Houses,
House-warming.
not that the curiosity of workmanship, or largeness of dimensions requires so
much time, but in conjecturing by their Prognostications and Sorcery, about
lucky Days and Hours to work in. The House finished, they set a lucky Month or
Day apart, to keep their Missavatsi, that is, their Entrance, or Housewarming,
which they ceremoniously observe: To which end the Master of the House calls
together all to him, and all their Kindred, Friends and Acquaintance, who bring
Cattle for a Present, some seven, some five, some three, others but one,
according to every ones ability, to the meanest Slave, who bring Baskets of
Mats, Dishes, Earthen Pots, Honey, Wine, Bannanes-Fruit, and Roots of Rice; so
that upon that Day none appears empty handed. It has happened within few
years, that a certain Dian, or Lord, by Name Ramach, presented to another Dian,
called Tserong, at the Mistavatsi of a new House, a Gold Chain, worth an
hundred Beasts, eighteen Baskets of Rice, and as many of Ignames, and so all
the rest, every one according to his Estate, so that this Dian Tserong had the
worth of a thousand Head of Cattle. After all the Presents are brought
together, and the Assembly Day come, Dian Tserong appeared in the Evening, in
his Angarata, covered with a long Garment, and Gold Menilies, and other costly
Habiliments, with a Sword by his side; twenty Ondzatsi, that is, Fishers, who
were followed with Women, with necessaries of Wood to make Clothes with;
afterward came nine Rohandrians, each carrying three Sugarcanes, and eight
Ondzatsi, every one with a Wax Torch; then all the chief Rohandrians made a
turn thrice round about the House; entering into the House, they all one with
one voice make a great noise, crying altogether, Ha; then stamp upon the Ground
with their Feet, and tumble down upon it, crying Hic, hac, ha, whereupon all
the standers by cry aloud, Dria, dria, dria, Rohandria, takalounaho,
falissanaho, that is, Sir, we wish you luck and good speed: whereupon the Dian
Tserong answered, Vellam coua Auareo, that is, The same I wish to you, with
some other words of like good will on both sides. At last Dian Tserong parts
the Sugarcanes among the Rohandrians to eat.

The next day in the Morning a Rohandrian appears bravely Clothed, with a
Girdle across, after the manner of a Star upon his Breast, and after three
times turning round about the House, with a great Slaughter-Knife in his Hands
laid thirty six Oxen upon the Ground, with their Legs tied together, and cut
their Throats, dipped his Finger in the Blood, and put it upon his Forehead, and
upon his Breast, and brought it to Dian Tserong, and the Rohandrians: after
this was done, he with Fuel made a Fire, and singed off the Hair, and cut the
Oxen in pieces, and divided them amongst the standers by: Next morning he fell
to drinking of Wine, and in the Evening eat Rice and other Food, which
continued so for eight days, slaying every day so many Oxen, without reckoning
other Cattle, which he distributed among the Dians, or Lords of the Towns, and
Lovahits; so that above four hundred Beasts were eaten at this Missavatsi, and
yet Tserong had great Gain, and for the Expenses laid out in building of his
House, was richly paid.

This House was about four Fathom broad, and eight or nine Fathom long, but
scarce high enough for a Man to stand upright in, with Walls of Planks two
Inches thick; it stood two Foot and a half from the Ground, and had six Doors,
two before, and two behind, and on each side one, but all low, so that without
stooping none could go in: The Roof ran up to a Point, consisting of Leaves
called Rattes, which lay cross one upon another, bound together with Mahovits,
and Peeling of a certain Tree, together with Bambo's Canes, cut into little
Shingles, very neatly. This manner of Roofing is very handsome, but subject to
burning. Some cover their Houses with green Boughs and Grass; others with broad
Leaves, called Raven pandre, but they are not so durable.

Their Housholdstuff consists in Mats, Housholdstuff.
which they call Sihi, and are twofold; some red and yellow-colour'd, and very
neatly; others common, but yet very convenient; both Braided, or made of
several sorts of Bulrushes; with which (in stead of Tapistry) they hang the
Walls of the Houses, and sleep upon them; for Bedding, Sheets, Mattresses, or
Coverlets, are not made among them, being from their Infancy used to lie hard.
A great many Baskets, wherein they lay up their Clothes, Girdles, or Belts, or
Saravohits, Cotton-Merchandize, and all Ornaments which they have. Little
Earthen Cruises for their Oil, wherewith they anoint their Hair and Bodies.
Kitchin-Vessels, as Earthen Pots, called Villangues, Louvies, Faffes,
Monhonges, and Sines; Wooden Dishes and Spoons, Pitchers to fetch Water in,
Knives called Antsi, great and small, both sorts made very neatly, according to
the Mode of the Place; small Pincers to pull Thorns out of their Feet, and to
pull off the Hair; great Slaughter-Knives, to cut Cattels Throats, Iron Forks
to pull the Meat out of the Pots, Roasters, or Gridirons, of three Irons, or
Ribs, called Zalaza; and a Mortar to stamp Rice in, with a Wooden Basin to Fan
it in. Cruises, or Pots, of above a hundred Quarts, wherein they make Mead of
Honey. But they use no Table-Linnen, Towels, Earthen or Pewter Trenchers, nor
Tables or Stools; but the Earth, spread over with a Mat, serves them both for
Table and Stools; and great Leaves called Rattes, of twelve Foot long, and four
broad, for Trenchers and Table-clothes: of these Leaves also Spons and
Drinking-Cups are made, and Roofs for their Houses, when they are dry.

The Men wear a Cloth, Habit.
called Laneba, about their Bodies, with a Saravorits under their Drawers; but
the Women an Accanza, or long Coat without Sleeves; though those of Manghabei
wear them with Sleeves, and a little Cloth before their Privacies in stead of
an Apron: Both Men and Women go barehead and barefoot, except those of
Manghabei, where the Men wear a foursquare Bonnet, and the Women a Caproeu,
Kerchiff, or Hood, sharp above, which comes half way their Heads, but hangs
behind their Necks, and over their Shoulders.

Their Clothes are of several colors and names; some all of red Silk called
Sohatsmifili; others of Cotton styled Varo; a third of red and mingled-colour'd
Silk, Woven with pure Cotton underneath, and stripped with white; others of
Peelings of the Bark of Fantatstanou, Try, Mouffia, Avo, Courave, and the Thread
of the Bananos-Tree. The best and finest are Cotton-Clothes of Anossi, made by
the Zafferamini, and much bought up. Them which are chiefly desired, have the
breadth of twelve Inches, below bordered with Silk, the Ground of it white,
with black Stripes; and some of black Woven Cotton and red Silk: and the great
Rohandrians themselves may only wear that, and only in great Solemnities:
They provide it also to Livery their Grandees in.

The Clothes of the Bark of Fantatstanou, are made near Manatengha, Manghafia,
Soudrevingha, and Anossi, in this order: The Bark of the Tree, growing at the
Water side, they first draw to Thread, and afterward boil in a strong Lie: the
scowr'd Threads are afterward twisted together, and by means of a Spindle, spun
together, and at last Woven into Cloth. This Cloth so imitates ours of Hemp or
Flax, that such as had never seen it, would have taken it for the same. It
wears strong, and endures three times as long as Cotton. Of this Bark also they
make Sail-Clothes, or Cordage.

The Clothes of the Bark Try are made of the Sazles of Thread, of a certain
Shrub that affords Milk, and grows much in the Territory of Ampatre, wears
very soft, but not so strong as the Cotton. The Clothes called Afouche are
commonly in the Country of Matatane, made of the Bark of the Plant Avo; of
which also they make Paper, soft and gentle, but not strong. Moufia Clothes are
wrought in Galemboullou, Manghabei, and the Bay of Antongil, of the Peelings of
tender Leaves, which shoot from the Tree Moufia, the overgrown being great
stalky Leaves, twelve or fifteen Foot long. Bananos Clothes are very light, and
as fine as Silk Clothes. All these are Woven in the same manner as our Linen.

The Ornaments, Ornaments.
or Firavach, with which these Islanders dress themselves, consist especially
in Chains, which they wear on their Necks, Arms and Legs; Gold Earrings,
Bracelets or Rings, and other small Trifles, Saraves, of Chains of Glass-Beads,
fine Pearls, Corral, Pipes of Gold, Beads of red Crystal, Agats, Cornelions,
Sardonyx, two or four double hanged about the Neck. Salintes consist of pieces
of Corral, Agats, and red Crystal. Endach are made of all sorts of colored
small round Glass-Beads, and four, six, eight, or twelve Strings worn at once.
The Zafferamini, or Whites, of Matatane, have their Ears bored through, wherein
they wear Gold Earrings, which are of two sorts, one of clean and Massy Gold,
which they call Foamitoulie; the other only an East India Snall-shell, covered
over with Leaf-gold, and curiously wrought: for Goldsmiths there have no Borax,
yet they know with small red Beans (in their Country Language called Voamene,
and in the Indian, Condure) how to Solder small Grains of Gold together very
handsomely and artificially. They have the Gilded Shells made into Necklaces, by
them denominated Verenhere. Also Menilies of Gold, Silver, and Brass on their
Arms, and Gold, Silver, and Copper Rings on their Fingers; besides Matahets an
Poutan on their Thighs, Arms, and Legs, of the same Stuff with their
Neck-chains.

The Zafferamini, and chiefest Anakandrians, may wear the beforementioned
Ornaments; but the Blacks not, except the Voadziri, and Lohavohits, to whom and
their Wives and Children it is permitted to wear Gold Earrings, and some
pieces of Gold, but Pendants only of Silver or Copper.

Every one may have as many Wives as he can keep, Marriage.
whom they entitle Manpirate, that is, Make-bates: for the Women of one Man
alone, hate one another as deadly Enemies, and call one another by the Name of
Mirafe, that is, Envy, without taking exceptions at it.

The Women are no less addicted to Venereal Sportings than the Men, and they
let no opportunity pass to accomplish those Designs, having always besides
their Husband one or two Gallants, with whom to take their pleasure.

Unmarry'd Girls give their Viginity to the first that come to them, if they
give them Money; but if they fail of Payment, they deride and disgrace them, by
taking away their Garment, which they cannot regain but by reconciliation. But
Slaves who have no Money, spend their wanton Lusts with Beasts, without being
punished or reproved for it.

Whoredom between unmarry'd Persons they account no sin against God or Man;
yea, no Girl will promise her self to a Suitor, whom she has not had the proof
of often, and a long time before: And Married people themselves think the bonds
of Wedlock a wrong to them.

Young Youths and Girls use their pleasure together in the presence of their
Parents, who are not only pleased therewith, but provoke them to it.

Yet among all this common and beastial licentiousness, they account it a great
shame for their Daughter or Wives, to be too much addicted to wanton
unchastity, to hear them prate of it, or to divulge any evil Prank they have
done: Moreover they think it redounds to their dishonor, that any should ask
them how many Wives they have, or whether they be fair or ill-favor'd.

Here are found some impotent effeminate Men, called Tsecats, who seek for
Boys, and fall in Love with them under pretense of being Women; and to that
purpose name and Clothe themselves as Women, whom in all Cases they avoid and
shun, because they have from youth up made a vow, never to know any of that Sex.

Their manner of Burials has great Ceremonies: The manner of their Funerals.
for the next of Kin to the Deceased wash the Corpse very clean, and adorn it
with Gold Bracelets, Earrings and Chains, decked with Beads and other Gayeties,
and so bury in two or three of his finest Garments; but carry it wound up in a
great Mat to the Grave. Persons of Quality have their Hair shaven off, and
Women have a Quoif put on: but before that is done, all the Acquaintance,
Friends, and Slaves of the Deceased come into the House of the Dead, lamenting
round about the Corpse, at whose Feet a Candle stands burning night and day. In
the mean while the Drummers beat upon the Drums, and many Women and Maids Dance
to the sound thereof a sober Dance; which done, they go to lament in the
Funeral-house, and so fall to Dancing again, the Men by turns exercising
themselves with their Weapons. Those that lament in the House of Mourning,
exalt the Praise of the Deceased, declaring how much sorrow his departure
brings, and speak of him as still alive: Lastly, having bewailed the Corpse till
the Evening, Oxen are slain, and the Flesh when boiled or roasted, distributed
among the Assembly. The next day in the Morning the Corpse is laid into a strong
Chest, made of two pieces of the Stock of a Tree hollowed, close joined, and
therein carried to the Churchyard, by them called Amounouque, where they set
it in an artificial Vault, six Foot under ground, with a Basket of Rice, a Box
of Tobacco, Earthen Dishes, some Comfects, Perfumes to burn, Clothes, and a
Girdle; then being shut up, and a great Stone, twelve or fifteen Foot high, set
before it, many Beasts are sacrificed, of which they leave one part for the
Dead, one for the Devil, and one for God: The acquaintance after eight or
fifteen days send by the Slaves Food to the Dead, and cause him to be saluted
as if alive. They set up also round about the Grave upon Stakes, the Heads of
the sacrificed Beasts, and the Children come thither from time to time to
sacrifice an Ox, and to ask counsel of the Dead about that they mean to
undertake, with these words: Thou who now art with God, give us Counsel in
this, or the other Matter, which they then name. If they be sick, or afflicted
with distemper of Mind, then presently the next Friends to the Sick send an
Ombyasse, or Priest, to seek the Spirit in the Churchyard, who goes thither in
the Night, and makes a hole in the Vault where the Corpse lie, and calls the
Soul of the Father of the Sick, asking it, Whether the Spirit has nothing more
for his Son or Daughter. Furthermore, he holds a Cap over the hole, and
presently shuts the Cap close to it, and runs point blank to the House of the
sick Person, who is sottish enough to say, That he feels himself well, and has
gotten his Spirit again which he had lost in his Sickness, appointing a Present
to be given to the Ombyasse.

When any Person of Eminency happens to die far from his Country, then they
cut his Head off, to bring it to his native Soil, but bury the Carcass where he
died. If he be slain in the Wars, they bury him in that place where killed, but
upon the settling of Peace dig him up again, and lay him in the Vault with his
Ancestors.

The solemnest and highest Oath which they take, Oath.
is by the Souls of their Ancestors.

Among all the Inhumanities of these salvage People, An abominable deed in
forsaking their Children.
the most horrible and abominable is, that the People of Madagascar do cruelly
cast away their Children; so that Men have no cause at all to wonder, why this
Island, so large and fertile, falls short in the account of populosity, because
from the Birth those Innocents are condemned to lose the light of the Day,
before they have scarce seen it, suffering it to perish by the sottish and
damnable advice of their Ombyasses, or Priests, who counsel the Fathers to
leave their Children, and cause them by a Slave to be carried far from the
Town, and under some Hedge, or in the Woods, to be exposed to the mercy of Wind
and Weather, Dogs, wild Bears, and other devouring Beasts, where at last with
much crying and lamenting, they famish for Hunger and Thirst, or are cruelly
devoured.

The cause why they do thus destroy their newborn Children is, that they
believe them born in an unlucky Day, Month, or Hour, and the rather, when the
Ombyasse sees, that the Configuration of the Child's Planets do not serve his
purpose, then says that the Child will be a Murderer of his Father and Mother,
and his Life unfortunate, and inclined to do all manner of evil, and therefore
must be made away.

The unfortunate Months are especially April, which they call Saffard, and the
Fasting Month, Rama-hara; but in every Month the eighth Day, named
Assaronton, and the last Quarter of the Moon, called Alcacossy. Wednesdays and
Fridays in every Week are ill Days, and the Hours which are governed by an evil
Vitang, or Planet; so that these People account almost half the Year unlucky.
Nevertheless, some among them have a little more pity and compassion toward
their Children, and after they have so barbarously exposed them, let their
Slaves (their Maidservants) go instantly, and take it thenceand Suckle it:
however, they account it no more theirs, but appropriate to the Person that
takes it up, or the Nurse. Others are satisfied by performing Falis for their
Children, that is, they sacrifice Beasts and Hens, and shut them half a day (as
they say) to prevent the malign influence of the Constellation that reigns over
them: for if they should let them live, and not perform this, Ceremony, they
would another day be Robbers and Murderers of their Fathers, and adicted to
all Mischief.

If a poor unmarried Woman-Slave have a Child, and her Master has put her
away, she will not stick to drown the Child in the River, or bury it alive in
the Ground, or otherwise kill it, to rid her of the burden, trouble, and care
of bringing up. If a Woman, when she is great with Child, and is very sick, or
has hard Labor, they impute the fault to the Child, and the Woman orders them
to kill, or to bury it alive.

If the Daughter of a Rohandrian has had to do with a Negro before she be
Married (as they all do, none excepted) she either causes an Abortion, or, if
she be delivered, makes away the Child.

Nevertheless, there are some, though few, that do it not, but cause the Child
to be carried afar off, and nursed by her own Negresses.

Lastly, If a Woman die in Labor, they bury the Child alive with the Mother,
saying, That it is better it should die than live, having no Mother left to
bring it up.

The Inhabitants, both Whites and Blacks, Their manner of Eating.
observe a peculiar and evil Custom in Eating, though their Victuals is dressed
very neatly and handsomely.

The People of the Rohandrians eat with Rohandrians; the Lohavohits, with
Lohavohits; the Ontsoa's, with their own Tribe, and never intermixedly;
insomuch that no Rohandrian Woman, married to an Anakandrian, will endure that
her Husband should eat with her: But in Manghabei, the Slaves eat with their
Masters.

They have their Meal-times commonly in the Morning, and in the Evening; but
the Zafferamimi make five or six Meals in a day.

Their usual Food is Rice, Beans, Voanzonrouk, or little Wheat, Food.
called also Voenzou, or Mimes, and Voamitsa-Ofekque; Ignames of several sorts;
Coleworts, which they call Sanzes, and Varuattes; Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Hens,
Capons, Turkeys, by them styled Alcanga; Ducks, Pigs; but never any grown Hogs,
except they Hunt them, and then they and their whole Family eat them: Many
sorts of Sea and River Fish; Menachil, or Oil of Sesamos, and Oil of Ovinaa:
Several Fruits, as Vontaka, Lamontes, Voarats, Voanattes, Lotfes, Sakol, the
Fruit Sakre, Co, Sugarcanes, and Bananoes. They live also, in time of Scarcity
or Famine, upon certain Roots which grow in the Water, and in the Woods; as
Roots of Ouirandre, Oumenpasso, and Ouuirouzes. For Sauce to their Meat, they
usually have Ginger, Garlick-Leaves, and White Pepper, though at the beginning
they looked upon it as Poison. Their usual Drink is warm Water, or the Broth
wherein they boil their Meat. They make Wine of Honey; yet they drink it not,
but in their Missavatsi, and chief Solemnities.

They speak but one Language through the whole Island; Language.
but very different in the Tone and Pronunciation; some giving them a short,
and some a long Accent.

This Language has much affinity with the Eastern, especially the Arabic; and
great agreement with the Greek, as well in the manner of Expression, as in the
connexing of Names and Compound-words. Every thing is called according to the
Action, or manner of Operation by which it is effected: as, a broken Tree, or
Stick, they call Hazonfaulac; a torn Cloth, Sichinrota; a broken Pot,
Vilanghavakqui; broken Thread, Foulomaitou; and so many other things: which
expresses the copiousness of the Tongue.

In the manner of their speaking, there happens a change of some Consonant
Letters. The V is changed into a B, when the anticedent Word ends in a
Consonant; as for Exampie, Vohits signifies A Mountain; but to say Ambohits,
which signifies In the Mountain, the V must be changed into B: The Letter F
they turn into P, thus: Fasso signifies Sand, or the Shore; but when the Word
An comes before it, they must say Anpasso, that is, In, or on the Sand, or
Shore; as also in many others: The Lords Prayer is thus; Amproy Antsica izau
hanoutang andanghitsi, angharanau hofissahots, Vahouachanau hoavi aminay,
fiteiannau boefaizangh an taken toua andanghitsi; Mahoumehanau anrou aniou
abinaihane antsica, aman hanau Mangbafaca, hanay ota antsica; Tona-Zahai
Manghafaca hota anreo Mououany, amanhanau aca Mahatet Seanay abin fiuet seuetse
ratsi, fehe hanau Metezaha hanay tabin haratsian abi, Amin.

The Letters which the Ombiasses or Priests make use of, are the same with the
Arabic, and eight and twenty in number, written from the right hand to the
left; though the Pronunciation of some of them differ from those of the
Arabic. These Letters, about two hundred years ago, were brought in among them
by certain Arabians, who were sent into this Island by the Caliph of Mecha, and
Landed in Matatane, where they Married the Native Women, and Instructed every
one that would in the Arabic Tongue, and Alchoran, as they do at this day.

The Paper they write upon is yellow, and made of the middlemost Bark of the
Tree Avo, almost in the same manner like that of Europe, but with trouble and
preparation; Paper made.
that is, They boil the Bark two days in a great Kettle, with very strong Lie
of the Ashes of the Tree; afterward, being tender and supple, they wash it in
clear Water, and then in a Wooden Mortar beat it to Pap, which they lay
together upon a Sieve, or Canvas, made of small thin Reeds put together, to
drain; and afterward upon a Leaf of Balisier, anointed with Oil of Menachil,
and laid to dry in the Sun: As soon as it is dry, they draw it through a thick
Decoction of Rice, to prevent sinking of the Ink, and then again lay it to dry,
pressing it flat and even.

Their Ink is made of the Decoction of the Wood Arandrantes (of which the
Grandees build their Houses) and the Gum Carabe comes from it, Ink made.
which they let stand till the thinner and more subtle parts exhaled, it
becomes thick again. This Ink proves very good and durable, though not so black
as ours in Europe; but the addition of a little Copperas makes it a pure Black.
It has no need of Gum, the Wood of which being boiled has enough of it self;
and if it chance to be dried, they boil it up with a little Water, and it
becomes as good as at first.

Their Writing-Pens are made of Bamboes Reeds, Writing-Pens.
which they call Voulou; of which, cutting off a Piece the length of ones Hand,
they shape a Pen as we do, fit and convenient to write with.

The Natives of Madagascar number or reckon like the Europeans, Atithmetick.
from one to Ten; and to Ten they add One, Two, and so the following Numbers to
Twenty, in this manner: Issa, or Irache, is One; Roe, Two; Telon, Three;
Effats, Four; Luui, Five; Enem, Six; Fiton, Seven; Valou, Eight; Siui, Nine;
Foulo, Ten; Irach-foulo-ambi, or Iraiche amainifoulo, Eleven; Roe foulo pambi,
Twelve; Roepoulo, Twenty; Telou ambi, Thirty; Effats poulo, Forty; Zatou, An
hundred; Armou, A thousand; Alen, An hundred thousand. Indeed the Blacks of the
Mountains, or on that side of the Country of Machicore, where nothing is
Planted nor Sow'n, know not how to keep any Account.

They use also diverse Weights, Weight.
but none heavier than a Quarter of an Ounce; for the Ounces, half, and whole
Pound they use not. With these they weigh only Gold and Silver. A Quarter of an
Ounce they call Sompi; a Half-ounce, Vari; a Grain, Sacare; a Half-grain,
Nanqui; six Grains, Nanque.

Their Measures are several; viz. Rice-measure, Measure.
with them called Troubahouache, which is said to be the Kings Bushel; Moucha,
or Monca, a Measure of six Pints of cleansed Rice; Voule, Half a Pint; Zatow is
an hundred Voules, and therewith they mete unbeaten Rice.

The Measure for Clothing, Cords, and other things to be estimated by Length,
they name Refe, and contains a Fathom; but Else, Feet, or Inches they have no
knowledge of.

They set forth Lands, not by Rods, Perches, and Acres; but by the quantity of
Rice that may be Sow'n upon it.

The Trade of these Islanders one among another consists in exchanging Wares
for Wares; for Money, Merchandise.
or Coin of Gold and Silver, they have none; and if they get any of Foreign
People, they melt it, and make thereof Bracelets and Armlets: But especially
they use Glass Beads, and other Commodities which the French bring to them, in
stead of Money, to buy Oxen, Cotton, Silk Clothes, Iron Assagays, or Lances,
Bills, Knives, and other Necessaries. Those that have need of Cotton, bring to
the Places where it is to be had, Rice, or Beasts; and they that have need of
Beasts, or of Rice, come with Cotton to the Places where Rice and Beasts are
plenty, to barter one for the other. They exchange also Gold and Silver, for
Copper and Iron: But this only among themselves; for with Foreigners they
neither do, nor care to deal: So that hitherto in that Country there has
little Merchandise of consequence been discovered, although there grows
indubitably Sapphyres, Rubies, Smaragdines, Cornelians, and other Precious
Stones, as appears by the Trials which the French have made of them, and sent
into Europe.

The most desired Merchandises, and by the Islanders best liked, are red Beads
of all Sorts, Sizes, and Colors, pierced with Holes, that they may be strung
into Bracelets; large and yellow Brass Wyre, and several other small Wares; as
yellow little Brass Chains, Scissors, Knives, Bills, Hatchets, Hammers, Nails,
Padlocks, and several other Trinkets, which with great Profit are exchanged and
traded for against their Island Commodities.

Flaccourt, in his Deseription of Madagascar, judges this Island to be of
great concernment, for the advan^ing and settling of Trade on the Coast of
Ethiopia, the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and other Places of the East Indies;
and might bring great Advantage and Profit, by Wood for building of Ships, that
might be carried from thence to all the aforesaid Places, to exchange for other
Commodities: He adds moreover, That this Island may serve for a Ladder or Step,
as may be said, whereby to climb to the Trade and Voyages of the East Indies.

All their Wealth consists in the foresaid Goods, Riche^.
as also in Axes, Knives, Bills, sharp Iron and Steel Spades, Clothes, Oxen,
Fields to plant Rice and Ignames in, and abundance of Slaves. The Zafferamini
possess the most Gold, which they keep as much hidden as they can from the
French.

No Eminent Person upon the whole Island is without some Gold of his Ancestors,
which no way assimilates our European Gold, but is much paler, and almost as
soon melted as Lead; they dig it out of the Ground in several Places. They have
some Gold in Manghabei; but it lies buried in their Churchyards, and they
dare not bring it to light from thence, alleging, They are unworthy of it.

Most esteem the reddest Silver higher than the finest; but the People of
Anossi can well tell how to distinguish it: yet their Goldsmiths would not know
how to work European Gold, because they say it is too difficult to melt. That
of ours they call Voulamena Voutroua; but their own, Ahetslaua, and
Litcharongha, or Voulamena Madecasse.

In Military Affairs these People know nothing; The manner of their Wars.
but in such Cases, by sudden Attempts coming upon their Enemies unawares, and
by surprise; assembling privately, and marching by secret and unfrequented ways
in the Woods. When they come to the Enemies Quarters, they make their Assault
with a hideous and horrible Cry; and being entered, kill all that come next to
hand, not sparing Infants at their Mothers Breasts; exercising this Cruelty
with purpose to extirpate the whole Generation of their Enemies, for fear that
the Successors, sooner or later, if they left them alive, might take Revenge.

They often send Spies into their Enemies Quarters, to know his Condition, and
where the chiefest Town is, and most Cattle; and therefore at such time they
all drive them into the Mountain, to which access is difficult. They send out
sometimes Parties, twenty, thirty, or forty of a Company, to plunder small
Villages, and lay the subdued Towns in Ashes: These Parties they style
Tafichemanthy, that is, A secret Army.

These come usually provided with Auli and Moussanes, that is, with Sorcery,
and written Arabic Letters, with firm belief, That these Letters will do their
Enemies much annoyance, viz. take away their courage, cause them to die by
Sickness, and at least be the chiefest cause of their destruction; whereas, to
them, on the other side, it gives Courage, and brings all Success.

Their Arms are various, Arms.
according to the several Countries. In the Territory of Androbeizaha, they use
a great Assagay, armed at the end with a broad and long sharp Iron Head, and
carry besides ten or fifteen Fiteracks, or small Casting-Darts, as also a great
Javelin, called Renelefo, that is, The Mother of Assagays.

In Manghafia they use a round Shield, and great Canbahi, or Javelin: So do
they also in Ampatre, Mahafalle, Machicore, and Andribeizaha; but the Countries
of Anachimoussi, Eringdranea, and Vohits-anghombe, afford the best-arm'd and
most undaunted Soldiers.

On that side of the River Mananghourou, three Miles below Galemboulou, are a
Generation of about four or five hundred strong, very undaunted, which fight
with Bows, Arrows, and Darts. Those of Manghafia, up Northwards to the end of
the Island, fight Foot to Foot, only with an Assagay, under shelter of a round
Shield. Those of Manamboulle, the most Warlike and undaunted of all, fight both
at a distance, and at hand.

In Battle they keep no Order, Ranks, or File, but Fight in Crowds, every one
resolving to do some Execution. When any fall down wounded, they set up their
Throats with a horrible cry; and no Slave, how mean soever he be, but sticks
his Assagay in the Body of the languishing Person.

While the Men stay in the Wars, the Women cease not night and day to Dance,
and neither sleep nor eat in their Huts; nor, be they never so addicted to
Venereal sports, will they at that time have to do with any other Man,
believing if they should, their Husbands would either be slain or wounded in
the War.

When any great Man finds his Power too weak to follow the War any longer, he
sends one to the Enemy with some Presents to desire Peace, and to appoint a Day
for a Treaty, upon the concluding whereof, they meet one another on the Shore
of a River, each with all his People and Soldiers, standing as ready for a
Battle; where each of them kill a Heifer, and reciprocally send a piece of
Silver to eat, making deep Asseverations, and high Oaths, that if they purpose
any longer to continue the Wars, to rob one another of their Cattle, or make
use of Sorcery or Poisoning to damnifie each others Country, then that the
Silver given each of them at present may cause them to burst; that God may
withdraw his hand from them; that they may be brought to destruction by their
Enemies, and their Generations and Posterity come to an end. But if one of them
be overcome, so that he can no longer maintain the War, then he must submit,
and after sending one of his People for safe Conduct, go himself in Person
thither; and then the Vanquisher gives the Vanquished the Liver to eat, for a
Confirmation that he will remain faithful to him: Whereas yet oftentimes these
Oaths are very slightly accounted, the better afterward to betray one
another; wherefore they also, notwithstanding their Oath, stand upon their
Guard.

They have some superficial knowledge of the Course of the Heavens, Knowledge
of the Stars.
and of the Zodiac, being distributed into twelve Signs, which by the
Ombyasses, or Priests, are called Vintangs, and have the following
Appellations; Viz.

In the Spring there is Alimiza, that is, Libra. Alicarobo, that is, Scorpio.
Alacossi, that is, Sagittary.


In the Summer, Alizadi, that is, Capricorn. Adalou, that is, Aquarius.
Alohotsi, that is, Pisces.


In Harvest or Autumn, Alahemali, that is, Aries. Azorou, that is, Taurus.
Alizozo, that is, Gemini.


In Winter, Asarata, that is, Cancer. Alaasade, that is, Leo. Asomboulo, that
is, Virgo.


The Year they divide into twelve Months, thus denominated: Vatrevate, that is,
March. Saffard, that is, April. Atsisi, or a Soutri, that is, May. Valascira,
that is, June. Fossa, that is, July. Maka, that is, August. Hiahia, that is,
September. Sakamasseh, that is, October. Sakave, that is, November.
Voulanbitou, that is, December. Asarmanghits, that is, January. Asarabe, that
is, February.


The New Year begins with them at the New Moon in March; but they have a
Reckoning by Fasting-time, as also by the Days of the Week, beginning with
Friday.

The Religion both of Whites and Blacks consists only in Superstition, without
the use of Churches or Prayers; yet they observe Circumcision.

They know and believe indeed, That there is a God, who has made Heaven and
Earth, and all Creatures, and innumerable Angels; but reverence or worship him
not: They live according to the Law of Nature, without fearing him; but make
indeed Confession of their Sins, especially decripit old Men, upon their
Deathbeds. They believe also, That there is a Devil, whom they greatly fear,
and call Taiwaddey: That God is all Good, and does no Evil: That he gives Life
to Men, and all Creatures, and bereaves them of it again at his pleasure: That
the Devil is the Author of all Evil and Mischief: That he sends all Sicknesses
and Mishaps into the World; causes all Quarrels, Thefts, and Murders; and is
the Original of Evil: Therefore they Sacrifice unto him, to appease him; they
pray first to him, and name the Devil, before God: But they Pray also to a
Third Power, under the Name of Dian Manang, that is, God, or Lord of Riches,
which they acknowledge to be Gold; which when they see, or have in their Hand,
with great Devotion they hold over their Heads, and kiss it. They believe there
are innumerable Angels and Ministers of God, which do move the Heavens, the
Starry Firmament, and Planets; and govern the Air, Rain, Wind, Water, and
Earth; guard Men's Lives and Habitations, and defend them from all Mischances in
all their Enterprises, either on Water or Land, and in their Houses.

They make the Spirits or Devils, Spirits are sevenfold.
as well good as bad, Sevenfold: The first are the forementioned Angels,
called in their Language Malainghka, which are good Angels, and never do any
Evil; every one with them is known by a particular Name, as Ramichail,
Ragi-bourail, Ranail, Rafil, etc. that is, Michael, Gabriel, etc.

The Spirits of the second Order, called Coucoulampou, they say are beneath the
Host of Angels, and invisible to Men; but nevertheless, Corporeal; That they
dwell in solitary places, and make themselves known to all those to whom they
would show any particular Friendship; That there are Male and Female among
them, and they marry one among another, beget Children, die after a long time,
and as Men, expect after this Life Salvation or Damnation, according as they
have lived well or ill; That they eat without distinction all sorts of Animate
or Inanimate Creatures, without suspicion of any of them being hurtful to their
Bodily Welfare; That they are subject to no Sickness, as void for the most
part of any Accidents; yet they die, and their Lives are restrained within
certain Limits of Time.

The fifth Rank or Order of Angels are called Angats, which signifies a kind of
Separation, or indeed the same with our Ghosts.

The sixth are called Saccara, and no other than the Devils or Evil-Spirits,
which use to Possess and afflict Men, Women, and Children: They see them come
like Fiery-Dragons, which Possess them eight, nay, fifteen days; when they are
Possessed by them, they give them an Assagay or Lance in their hands, with
which they continually go about Singing and Dancing, with strange contortions
of their bodies. Men and Women of the Town flock round about the Possessed Man
or Woman, who also Dance and imitate those Postures by the beat of the Drum.

The seventh sort of Spirits are called Biles, being, as they say, an infinite
number, but all under a Supreme, who is the broacher of all evil; so that he
seems to be Lucifer, or the Devil.

They believe, That God after the Creation of Heaven, Earth, and all Creatures,
Created Adam of Earth, and placed him in Paradise, which they imagine to be in
the Moon, or in the Sun; and after his settling there, forbade him either to eat
or drink, because he had no need to do so; though they say there were four
Rivers, one of Milk, one of Wine, one of Honey, and one of Oil; besides all
sorts of Fruits in abundance. But the Devil (thus they relate the manner of the
Fall) with subtilty and treachery, went to Adam, and said, Why eat ye not of
all these good Fruits? Why do you not drink of that good Wine, and Milk, and
taste this delicious Honey and Oil? Whereupon Adam answered, That God had
forbidden him, which he durst not disobey.

The Devil thus driven away, staid about two hours; then came again to Adam,
and said to him, That he came from God, to give him leave to eat of all that he
had a mind to. Adam thus tempted to taste thereof, eat, and satisfied himself
to the full; but after the digestion of the Food, he had a provocation and
desire to ease himself, which of necessity he must do in Paradise; whereupon,
instantly the Devil went, and complained to God against Adam's bewraying of his
Eden; so that God for that cause drove him out of Paradise, and sent him into
the Country, where he gat a swelling in the Calf of his Leg, which continued
six Months; and when the swelling brake, there came forth a young Maid,
whereupon he sent the Angel Gabriel to God, to ask what he should do with that
Maid; and the Angel returned answer, That he should bring her up, and when she
came to years of maturity, should Marry her; which he did, and named her
Rabouna, that is, Eve.

After the current of some time, she lay In of two Sons, which being grown to a
man-like stature, the Devil who has a thousand Tricks, betrayed them in this
manner; He gave them an Assagay or Javelin in their hands, armed with Iron at
both ends, and raised a quarrel betwixt them two, so that they both took hold
of the Assagays, and each took one end to pull it out of the others hands; but
the Irons not fast Rivetted, by hard pulling came off, where each of them now
having one, they stuck one another in the Belly, and both died of their Wounds.
These two Brothers were Cain and Abel.

They add moreover, That Adam had many Children, which multiplied exceedingly;
but because Men were evil, and would no more know God, he sent a Flood or
Deluge upon the Earth; having before commanded Noah to build a great Ship, to
save himself, with all his Friends and Family, Women and Children, and many
Beasts, a Male and Female of every sort; then God overwhelmed presently the
whole face of the Earth, and all the remainder of Beasts, except four
Mountains, that is to say, the Mountain Zaballicaf, in the North;
Zaballicatoure, in the South; Zaballiraf, in the West; and Zaballibazani, in
the East: whereupon, nevertheless none could preserve their lives.

After the ending of the Flood, Noah came out of his Ship, went to dwell at
Jerusalem, and came from thence to Mecha.

God (say they) gave four sorts of Writings to Noah, who embraced the Law; The
first called Alifurcan, or Alcaron, was for Noah: The second Soratsi, for
Moses: The third Zonboura, for David: And the fourth Alindzini, for Christ,
whom they call Rahitsa. They say also, That Jesus Christ was sent by God into
the world, without being begotten by any Man, but Born by the Virgin Mary;
which brought him forth without pain, and remained a Virgin, calling her
Ramariamia: That Christ was a Man, and God: That he was Crucified by the Jews;
but that God did not permit that he should die, but would have the Body of a
Malefactor found in his place. They observe the Saturday like the Jews, and not
the Friday like the Mahumetans. If they would take in hand a Journey or matter
of consequence, they take council of their Squilles, that is, of Geomancy or
Black-Art, or rather of Auli, which they carry about with them in small Boxes.
They offer great Sacrifices of Beasts, called Mitaha, at the entrance upon new
Built Houses; at the Harvest of their Fruits of the Field; their Wives being
with Child; at the lusty growing of their Plants; the Burial of their Dead, and
Marriage: Fast-Days, by them called Ramahana, or Miafauthe, and by the Turks,
Ramedan, which they observe with great Ceremony, but not in any set Months,
but now in one, and then in another, according to the position and order of the
year.

They Circumcise their Children with great Formality commonly in May,
Circumcision.
when it is Fridays Year, for by the days of the Week they reckon their Years;
especially the People of Anossy and Matatane; for all the other Circumcise at
all times: To the performance whereof come all the Friends in Consanguinity and
Alliance of the Child to the Circumcision into the Town, to which the Parents
bring Wine, and present an Ox or Heifer for every Infant; but poor people less.

The Men play and exercise with Assagays or Lances, among which the Drums, whom
they style Ompivango, beat the Azontake or Drums, made of a hollowed Trunk of a
Tree, covered over with two Skins; the one of an Ox, and the other of a Goat,
upon which they Tabor at one end with a Stick, and at the other with their
Hand; the Female Relations Dance round about those who exercise with Assagays,
and use diverse Gestures and strange Postures; These Pranks finished, all the
young Company Dance and Sing again; then the Master of the Town (who must
celebrate the Circumcision) beginning to drink of the Wine of Honey or Mead,
follow to guzzle as much as possible, for they that Drunk most, are the
greatest honor to the Assembly. In the Evening, Oxen are killed to eat in the
day, sometimes to the number of two hundred. The next Morning (the Feast Day)
every one remains quiet; but the Fathers and Mothers sometime make their
Children ready in the mean time, and the Mothers sleep that night with their
Children, in the Lapa, that is, the Church, being a place erected a Month
before, with diverse Ceremonies, by the Fathers and Uncles of the Children, to
be Circumcised. No Father may approach the Mother that night, nor know any
woman; and no Woman, Maid, or Man, who have used incontinency, must dare to
join himself in person at the Circumcision, for they are possessed with this
Superstitious Opinion, that then the blood of the Foreskin of the Child will
not stench, but the Child die: Neither may any person present wear any red
thing on his body at that time, or if they do, it must be very close from sight.



Early, at break of Day, Men, Women, Maids, and all others, Bathe themselves,
and beating their Drums at Sunrise, chop up some short Prayers, and the
Circumciser himself utters aloud, Salama, Zahanhare Zahomissabots Anauhanau,
Nambouatsitangho, amini Tombuc, Zahomitoulou bouzonhamiuau, etc. Which is, Be
thou Magnified, O my God; I draw near with my Prayers to thee, thou have
Created our Hands and our Feet; I beseech thee forgiveness of our Sins; I kneel
down before thee; I do Circumcise these Children this day, etc.

Afterward they bring the Children into the Lapa, adorned and dressed with
Corals and Bracelets, Precious Stones, and other Ornaments about their Necks:
Here they stay till the tenth hour of the Morning, with an empty body, which
they can discern by the shadow of a Man in the Sun, standing straight upright;
for they measure the shadow with their Feet, which they call Liha, or Pas,
which being nine of their own Feets length, is the time of the Circumcision.
Then the Drums beat, and the Circumciser puts on his Garments, and binds a
Fillet of great strong white Cotton-Yarn to his left Arm, to scour his Knife.
At last, every Father takes his Child in his Arms, and going a Procession
through the Lapa, passing in at the Western Door, and out again at the Eastern,
ten by ten, one after another twice: After some short pause, they begin two
other for the Oxen which are for the Sacrifice; and with the left hand of the
Child touch their right Horn, as they lie upon the ground, with their Feet tied
together: Then all the people are bid to clear the place, and a large Ring
made; whereupon the Circumciser appears with his Knife, to cut off the
Foreskin of every Child, which the Uncle of the Child receives, and lays into
the white and yealk of a Hens-Egg which he holds in his hand; but a Rhoandrian
or Anakandrian kills the Cattle, and cuts for every Child a Hens throat, and
lets the Blood drop upon every Wound; and another puts upon it the Juice of a
certain Herb called Hota, a kind of Clover-Leaf. If the Child be a Slave, and
has no Uncle, then the Foreskin is thrown upon the ground; This day they keep
so holy, that no Sport is made, nor none then drink beyond the measure of
hillarity.

The Priests called by them Ombyasses, and by the Moors, Marabauts; are of two
sorts, that is, Ombiasses Ompanorats, and Ombyasses Omptifiquili; the
Ompanorats are Scribes, who can write Arabic very Expertly; they have many
Books, wherein are some pieces of the Alcaron: most of them understand the
Arabian Tongue, which they teach, together with Writing.

Several Offices are conferred upon the Ombyasses, Ompanorats, which very much
agree with the Church-Offices among Christians; as Male, Ombyasse, Tibou,
Mouladzi, Faquihi, Catibou, Loulamaba, Sabaha, Talisman. Male is a Clerk, which
only teaches to Write: Ombyasse, a Master of Arts: Tibou, an under Deacon:
Mouladzi, a Deacon: Faquihi, a Priest: Catibou, a Bishop: Loulamaba, an
Archbishop: Sabaha, a Pope.

These People cure the Sick, make Hiridzi, or Talismans, or Massasser-Robes,
which are certain Charms or Spells, written with Arabic Letters, which they
sell to the Grandees and Rich men, with promise that they shall be freed from a
thousand Mischiefs, Sicknesses, Thunder, Fire, Enemies, yea from Death it self;
though they know not how to preserve themselves from it.

These Cheaters make great gain of those Letters, receiving for them Beasts,
Gold, Silver, Clothes, and all Conveniences. The people stand in great fear of
these Ombyasses, and hold them for Sorcerers and Witches; as also the Grandees
of the Country, make use of them against the French, but without any effect;
alleging, that their Sorcery can do nothing upon them, because they eat
Swines-Flesh, and are of another Religion. It chanced, that these Ombyasses
close under the Fort of the French (to drive them away) had brought Baskets
full of Papers written with Arabic Letters, Eggs laid upon a Friday, filled
over with Characters, and Arabic Writing, Earthen Pots never yet set upon the
Fire, written upon within and without, Biers to carry the Dead, written upon,
Canoos, Girdles, Scissers, Pinsers of Iron to pluck the Hairs out; In brief,
nothing was omitted that they thought expedient for the Work, yet without any
other effect, than the Pastime of the French at their ridiculous Vanity.

These Ombyasses Ompanorats, are the usual Physicians who visit the Sick, and
give them Medicines, being Decoctions of Herbs and Roots. They also Cure
Wounds, and write Charms with Arabic Characters, which moistened with Water,
they hang about the Necks and Middles of the Sick, to expel all Sicknesses and
evil Influences. They make likewise Geomantick Images, to find out the time of
the Disease, and to discover the Remedies fit for the Malady. If the Sick
recover not as they expect, they acquaint him that he wants somewhat, and so
set upon the Work anew, either till he die, or grow well of himself.

The Ombyasses, in the mean time, get both from the Patient and his Friends all
they require, as Gold, Silver, Corral, Cows, Clothes, Girdles, and other things.

The Ombyasses Ompanorats, among the People of Matatane keep public Schools to
teach Children.

The Omptifiquili are commonly Negro's and Anakandrians, which undertake the
practice of Geomancy, or Soothsaying, in the Country Language called Squili,
and do such like Feats, as in Europe the Books of Geomancy express; only they
erect their Schemes or Work upon a Plank, strewn over with Sand, whereupon
they make Figures with their finger, setting down the Day, Hour, Month,
Planet, and Signs that have Dominion over the Hour, according to which they
Presage.

Strange things are attempted in this Art, yet they seldom hit upon the truth,
but rather judge blindly by guess; nevertheless they are esteemed by all.

There is another sort of Ombyasses among the Negro's, which the Sick also send
to, yet can neither Write nor Read, but make only Geomantick Figures, and use
Crystals, Topazes, Eagle-Stones, Amethysts, and others, which they call by the
general name of Filaha; making the people believe, God sends them these Stones
by the Thunder, to work Cures by; which persuasion has taken so deep root in
the hearts of the Islanders, that they cannot be drawn to believe the contrary.

They have great glistering Crystals, but foul and cloudy, which they say are
Terachs, that is, having others within: when they make Figures, they have one
of these Stones in the corner of their Tables, saying, That it has power to
bring activity into their fingers.

Vincent le Blank, and Casper de Saint Bernardino, Government.
set down six Kingdoms in this Island, which Kings continually wage War one
against the other: But Marcus Paulus Venetus affirms, That in his time it was
governed by four Cheques; but at this day every Territory has a peculiar Lord
or Dian, who usually sets over every Town under his Jurisdiction a particular
Philoubei, that is, Bailiff of the Town.

In the whole there is not a foot breadth of Land but belongs to some Lord or
other, so that it is an error and mistake to say, that every one may make use
of as much Land as he will.

There are not found in this whole Island any written Laws, but all is done
according to the Law of Nature, being threefold; Massindili, or the Princes
Law; Massinpah, the natural Law of particular people, which is no other than
their own way; and Massintane, the Law or Custom of the Country.

The Princes Law, or Massindili is a compound word of Massin, that signifies
Law or Custom; and Hadili that signifies Command, being nothing else but
arbitrary Will, grounded nevertheless upon Reason, consisting in the doing
every one Right, to determine differences; such as have done others wrong, to
punish them in their Estates or Goods. A Thief must recompense his theft
fourfold, if he have wherewithal, if not, he must pay for it with his life, or
be his Slave which he stole the Goods from.

The Natural Law, or Massinpah, concerns every ones particular method in
Working, Speaking, Merchandise, Gesture, and manner of Life.

Massintane, is the settled Custom of the Country, not only there, but in
more civilized Places, held for a firm Law in all Cases. This here extends to
the way of Planting necessary Provisions, Building of Towns, Wars, public
Rejoycings, Dancings, Exercises of Arms, and many other matters.

The Antiquity of this Massintane has so prevailed, that the Law of the Prince
stands upon no other foundation, so that it cannot be altered; nor indeed will
they alter it for any cause whatsoever: That which they have received from hand
to hand, by Tradition from their Forefathers, they esteem more than any thing
else that can be taught them: As for instance, in the manner of Tilling their
Ground, if any should tell them, that the Earth must be dug deep, or stirred
and broken with a Plough, they would not hearken thereto, but instantly reply,
Their Ancestors used no such Custom.

The Person that is hurt or wronged may do himself right, without bringing the
Offender before his Lord; for they make no more of killing a Thief, than they
do about a venomous Serpent, or other Vermin.

Perjured Persons and breakers of their Oath, are punished with heavy
Penalties, and the Women sometime killed by their Husbands for it.

When a Married Woman departs from her Husband, and has a Child by another
man, that Child must belong to the Married Husband, till the Woman (without
consent) Marries another; to which nevertheless he will not agree, till his
Tacq, that is, the Brides Portion which he paid to the Woman's Father at his
Marriage, be restored to him again.

These arise also continual quarrels and differences among particular people
upon Trifles; as either about the Cattle, which run into one or others Torraks,
and spoil or eat up their Rice, or Slander and wrong; or if one Neger steps
over another lying on the Ground, or treads upon his Legs without speaking,
Jossles against another unawares; for all which he is liable to be punished by
the Judge.

The Island of Saint Mary, otherwise called Nossi Hibrahim.
THe Isle of St. Mary, commonly called Nossi Hibrahim, that is, Abraham's-Isle,
lies from the sixteenth to the seventeenth degree South-Latitude, opposite to
the River Manangare, and stands the nearest from Madagascar, two small Miles,
and at the farthest four; containing in length from South to North, about
eleven; and in breadth, from East to West, full two Miles.

To the South of this Island, lies another small one, in the shape of a
Tre-Angle, separated by a Channel of thirty yards broad, and two foot deep in
some places, and in others deeper. This Island has curious Meadows with Grass,
where the Cattle of St. Mary's Isle go to Pasture.

The Island of St. Mary stands encompassed with Rocks, over which, at the time
of High Water the Canoos go, but at Low-Tide they are dangerous, within a foot,
or half a foot of the Surface. On the Shore are found Rocks of white Corral,
which the Negro's seek, and sell to the French.

The whole is cut through by small Rivers and Springs, by which means, together
with its natural fatness, the Ground proves infinitely fertile, and all over
Sown with Rice, whereof sometimes they gather two Crops in a year; there are
also large Sugarcanes, Pease, Bananoes, Ananassen; and better to Bake than in
any place of Madagascar.

The Air is very moist, so that scarce one day in the year passes without
Rain, and sometimes it Showers six days together without ceasing.

The Cattle are very large and fat, feeding at pleasure.

On the Easterly Shore much Ambergreece has been found, of which the Negro's
make Burnt-Offerings on the A Mounouques, or Burying-places of their
Forefathers. Besides, several sorts of Gums which they use for sweet Scents;
and likewise Taccamahacca in great abundance. There grows a Tree, by the
Natives called Thionti, and its Fruit Voathions, which is no sooner fallen from
the same, but it Roots in the Earth and makes such a close Thicket, that it is
impossible to go through it.

There are about ten or twelve Villages Inhabited since the French have had
their abode there; so that the Governor of Antongil, which used formerly to War
against this Island continually, dare not come thither for fear of the French:
The whole contains about six hundred Inhabitants, which call themselves
Zaffe-Hibrahim, that is, Children of Abraham. The Chief Commander has to name
Raignasse, or Raniassa, Son of Ratsiminon, that is, Head, because only
acknowledged by them as Head of the Stock of Abraham, in this Island and
Madagascar.

The Islanders maintain themselves by Planting of Rice, Ignames, Bananoes,
Sugarcanes, Pease, and Beans, and Fishing for Houzites, a sort of Fish, which
they carry to sell at St. Lawrence; paying to the Governor the fifth part for
Tribute, which also they do of Rice, and other Plants.

These Islanders will enter into no League with the Christians, yet Trade with
them, because it seems they have retained somewhat of the Ancient Judaism.

The Island of Maskareigne, otherwise called BOURBON.
THe Island of Maskareigne, or Maskarenhas, so called from the first
Discoverer, a Portuguese, out of the Family of Maskarenhas, by some called
Apollime, but by the French from the houses of Bourbon, Isle de Bourbon; who in
the Year Fifteen hundred sixty nine, by Flakour then Commander of the Island of
Madagascar, for the French East India Company, took possession of it for them.

It lies to the East of Madagascar, in one and twenty degrees and a half
South-Latitude; being fifteen Leagues long and ten broad, and full eight days
Journey in circumference.

There is not one convenient Haven, by reason of the Rocks on the Shore, which
makes the coming of Ships to this Island oftentimes dangerous; but there are
several Roads, the best of which lies West, and North-East; the next is on the
Northside, and another on the Southside, surrounded with Rocks, with an
entrance scarce wide enough for one Ship to come in at; near which the French
have built a Chapel for St. Paul.

At the Southside of this Island stands a Mountain which continually Burns, and
Vomits out Fire; as another on the Island Del Fuoga, one of the Cape de Verd
Islands, and the Mountain Hekla in Ysland; from the South to the Eastside lies
a Tract of Land of twenty Miles, quite burnt up by the sultry heat of the Air;
however, this Country does seem to have been very good formerly.

The Burning begins from the South-Point, and takes its course aloft over the
Mountains: As you travel cross through the Country, from the South to the West,
you may find a small Tract of Land of about six Miles, wherein is a Lake,
whence issues a small River, which runs through all the Country.

The Air, though very hot, has the repute of being healthful, as receiving
frequent cooleness from the fresh Breezes arising out of the Mountains. It has
several Rivulets, Brooks, and Springs, which along the Cliffs, and the gaping
of the Mountains, pour their Water from one quarter into the other.

The Rivers by the French discovered on the Coast, and flowing into the Sea,
are, the grand River Du Galet, the East-River, Stone-Cliffe River, and the
River of St. John, St. Steven, and St. Giles: It lies totally desolate,
notwithstanding the French have sometimes endeavored to have Planted it with
some Colonies of People.

This Island boasts an exceeding fertility both of Plants and Beasts: for
first, there grows Tobacco as good as any Country can afford, abundance of
Aloes, Cubebs, white-tail Pepper, Ebony, and other Wood, serviceable to build
Houses and Ships, Trees which afford well-scented Gums, Benzoia, and others,
besides many Palmito's and other Fruit Trees.

They cannot complain for want either of Fish or Flesh, the Rivers plentifully
affording the one, and the Land the other, viz. wild Swine, very great Sea and
Land-Turtles, wild Pigeons and Drones, the fairest Paraketo's in the world, and
many other sorts of Fowl: The Sea-shores are full of Goats, which are delicate
Meat; yet the Flesh of the wild Swine exceeds all the other for daintiness and
wholsomness, according to the relation of those French of Madagascar, which
were by the Governor banished three years into this Island, where they
preserved themselves, only by this Flesh, without either Biscuit or Rice, or
tasting any other tame or wild Beast, or Fowl. During their three years
continuance there, they averred, that they perceived not the least spice of
either Ague or Fever, neither had pain in the Head or Teeth, notwithstanding
they went continually naked, barefooted, and nothing on their Heads; yea, some
of them coming sick thither, immediately recovered health.

In the Year Sixteen hundred fifty four, a Frenchman called Antonis Thaureau,
went with leave of the French Governor of Madagascar, with seven other of his
own Nation, and six Blacks, to settle themselves in this Island: After a
Journey of twelve days arriving there, they seated themselves at the side of a
certain Lake, which mixes its Water with the Sea, at a place where a great Bay
lies, a convenient Road for ships, in the West-North-West part of the Island.

They took along with them from Madagascar five Cows, with one Calf, and one
Steer, which mixed themselves with five and thirty other very fine and fat
Steers, which were come of those that had been put on Shore five years before.
They immediately built Huts for their abode, and busied themselves in making of
Gardens, and Planting of Tobacco, Melons, and all sorts of Cod-Fruits: but when
the Tobacco was almost ripe, the same, with their Huts, was ruined by a
Heuricane; so that they were necessitated to Build and Plant anew. In the mean
time while the Season of Planting came on again, being in October, November,
and December, (for their Harvest is in April) the aforesaid Thaureau, with some
of the other, concluded to take a Journey round about the Island to discover
the same exactly, and to take notice of the Country; but they found almost
nothing but Plants of Aloes: after two days Journey they came to the Seacoast,
which runs from the Point in the North, to the other in the South, five Miles
long, convenient for Habitation, and very delightful and pleasant Meadows,
watered by seven very fine Rivers, which take their original out of a great
Lake, surrounded with Mountains, where the Standard with the Arms of France
were set up, by the command of Flaccourt.

After a stay of two years and eight months, without receiving any relief from
Madagascar, and seeing no other opportunity to get from thence, they betook
themselves to an English Vessel, which put in there in the Year Sixteen hundred
fifty eight, and in the Month of May, together with their six Blacks, came to
the English Fort of Maderespartan, on the Coast of Cormandel, or Narsinge, a
Mile from the City St. Thomas the Apostle of India, where they arrived on the
twelfth day of the following Month, with a great deal of Aloes, Tobacco, and
Benzoin, in hopes to dispose of those Commodities there; but arriving, they
found the contrary, and that one Roll of Tobacco was enough for the whole Coast
to make Snuff of, by reason of the little use of it: And likewise the Aloes
proved a Drug, because it grew there also.

The Island of St. Apollonie.
THe Island of St. Apollonie, which Francois Caucha seems to take for that of
Mauritius, some Chards place forty Miles Eastward of Mascareigne; but Flaccourt
in his Description of Madagascar, makes it a distinct thing.

The Island of Mauritius, or Cerne.
THe Island of Mauritius, so called by the Hollanders, for the Honor and
Memory of Maurice, Prince of Orange, a Branch from the House of Nassaw, not
well knowing, and uncertain of its proper Name. Some wrongfully hold it to be
the Cerne of Pliny, and placed in eighteen Degrees and thirty Minutes of
South-Latitude, whereas, according to Caucha, it is called, The Island of
Apollonie, and lies in the Elevation of one and twenty Degrees South-Latitude,
close by Mascaronhas.

The Hollanders first touched upon it in the Year Fifteen hundred ninety eight,
the eighteenth of September, in their second Voyage to the East Indies, under
the Command of the Admiral Jacob Cornelius van Nek. Its Circumference they
guess at fifteen Leagues, affording a Haven and convenient Road, but remains
void both of Men and Beasts, except Cats.

The Air seems to be good and wholesome; and there is a River found, which takes
its orignal out of the Mountains, whereof there are many toward the Sea; yet
within the Country are very delightful Plains. By reason of the many and high
Mountains, the whole lies almost continually covered with Snow; and oftentimes
there does such Mists arise from them, that a Man can see no farther than just
down before him. The Ground lies very stony, and so overgrown with wild and
unfruitful Trees, that it is scarce passable. Among them are found many
Palmito's and other Trees, with a green Bark, and Wood underneath as black as
Pitch, which some have taken for the right Ebony; and other Trees, whose Wood
appears of a deep red, or very yellow, like Wax.

Fowl are here innumerable, and so tame and fearless, that they will suffer a
Man almost to touch them, as Pigeons, Turtle-Doves, Cranes, gray and speckled
Parrots, and strange Birds as big as Swans, with thick Heads, whereon are Skins
like Lappets: In stead of Wings (for they have none) they have upon their sides
only three or four black Quills, and behind, in stead of a Tail, four or five
small Feathers, or curled Plumes, standing somewhat higher than the other: they
have large and thick Feet, with a great and ugly Bill and Eyes; and have
commonly a Stone in their Maw as big as ones Fist: the longer the Flesh is
boiled the harder it grows, except it be the Breast, which is very good to eat.
The Seamen that first saw them, gave them the name of Loathsome Fowls. Bats as
big, or rather bigger than Pigeons, with a Head like a Cat, fly there in great
numbers, hanging in the Trees, and doing much hurt to other Fowls. Another sort
of these are hairy all over their Bodies, like Monkies or Cats, and therefore
some have called them Flying Cats, for they are as big as a Hen or Goose: such
as these are found in several places of Asia, as in the Kingdom of Mogor, in
the Territory of Casmir, in Suratta, and neighboring Islands, and likewise in
Brasile: they keep in the closest Woods, and hang with their Claws in the
daytime on the Branches of Trees, and show more like hanging Bags than Beasts
or Fowls. The China's in the Province of Xensi, eat their Flesh with a great
appetite, and report it better and more savoury than that of a Hen: in the
nights they miserably torment Cows, Goats and Sheep, by sucking out their Blood.

Fish may be plentifully taken in the Rivers within the Country, as without in
the Sea, with little pains, two or three Tubs full at one haling; among which
the ignorant Seamen sometimes catch a sort of Fishes of a red color, but so
poisonous, that he that eats of it, has for some days together a most
intolerable pain.

There are also Sea and Land-Turtles, but the best not pallatable, and of an
uncouth aspect; but of the first, some have three hundred Eggs in their Bodies,
as big as Hen-Eggs, and Shells wherein ten or twelve men can stand, and one of
them alive (as they say) can carry seven men.

The Island of Diego Rodrigue, or Diego Rois, and the Islands Primieras,
Angoxos, or Angoises, and Veiques.
THe Islands of Diego Rois, and according to the Portuguese, Diego Rodrigue, or
Rodrigo, lies in the Altitude of twenty Degrees, two and twenty Miles from
Madagascar in the East, and not inhabited.

The Islands in Portuguese called Ilhas Primieras, that is, The first Islands,
lie over against the Coast of Sofale, in sixteen Degrees South-Latitude; and
the Islands of Angozas, to the number of four, hard by the Coast of Mozambique.

Beyond the Cape of St. Sebastian, on the Coast of Sofale, toward the North,
in four and twenty Degrees South-Latitude, appear several Isles, some bigger,
some less, but all called Veiques, nine Miles from the Continent, and eight,
ten, and twelve Miles distant from each other.

These yield Rice, Mill, and a great many Cattle. The Seashore offers
Ambergreece, which the Moors carry to sell to other Places; and likewise great
and small Pearls, which the ignorance of the finders spoil with boiling.

The Inhabitants drive a Trade with those of the Main Land, and are all
Mahumetans.

The Islands of Comorre, or Comarre, and Gomara.
THese by a general Name called Comarre, or Gomara, and by Vincent de Wit
taken for the Thieves Island, lie between Madagascar and the Main Land of
Mozambique. Linschot says there is only one; Sanutus averrs them to be three;
Pyrard, and the forementioned Vincent, five; others eight, and some for four,
as Molaloa, or Molaile; Angazesia, or Augazia; Ivany, or Amtuane; Sir Thomas
Rot.
and Maota, or Majotta; which last three lie close together, but Angazesia,
somewhat Northerly, and Molaloa in twelve Degrees and twenty Minutes; Angezia
lies North-west, five Miles from Molaloa, with its farthest Point in eleven
Degrees and five Minutes, and with the nearest, in eleven Degrees and six
Minutes. The South Side lies very high out of the Water; Ivanny has its
situation Eastward of Majotta and Molaloa; both which have a good Coast. All
these Islands, but chiefly Molaloa, have abundance of Cows, Oxen, Goats, Sheep,
with great and broad Tails, Coneys, Hens, and other Fowls, several sorts of
Fruits, as sour and sweet Oranges, great and small Citrons, Coco-Nuts,
Bananossen, Honey, Betel-Leaves, and according to Sanutus, Ginger, Sugar, and
Rice, which boiled, gives a Violet-colour.

Moors Angazesia, which drive a Trade with Beasts and Fruits in many places on
the Coasts, and the Eastern Islands, in exchange for Calico's and other
Clothes, and Cotton Stuffs.

Their Bread is made of Chestnuts, Baked in an Oven, with a little Honey; and
their Drink Palm-Wine, and the Juice of Coco-Nuts. They never let their Women
be seen with any Strangers but with permission of the Sultan.

Many amongst them can Speak and Write Arabic, some also Portuguese, which
they learn at Mozambique, where they come to Trade with Barks of thirty or
forty Tuns apiece.

The Houses in Molaloa are built of Stone, and daubed over with Mortar, with
low Roofs covered with Boards, and Leaves over them.

Angazesia stands divided among the several Lords; that of Ivanny one peculiar
Governor claims, by the Title of Sultan, who gave Molaloa to his Children,
viz. two Sons and one Daughter, each of whom, during their lives, held their
parts severally.

The Sultan keeps a great Train, according to his manner, being continually
attended by fifty Men, and his Habit a red and blew Cloth hanging over his
Knees down to his Feet, wearing a Turbant; from which his Subjects vary little.

Both the Grandees and meaner sort of People chew continually a mixture of
Oysters-shells, and Nuts Areka, with Betel-Leaves, which cleanses and fastneth
the Teeth.

The Island of Ferdinando Po.
NOt far from Guinee lie four Islands, viz. of Ferdinando Po, Princes Island,
St. Thomas, and Anobon. The Island of Ferdinando Po, the Name of the first
Discoverer, who himself called it Ilhas das Formosa, that is, The Fair Island,
lies in three Degrees and a half North-Latitude, between the High-land of
Amboyses and Rio des Camarones, about four Miles and a half from the Main Land.
It seems the biggest of all the four, although St. Thomas come near it; rises
very high, and produces the Root Mandihoka, Tobacco, Rice, and Fruit Trees.

The People are wild, barbarous, and deceitful, Governed by seven Lords,
continually Warring one against another.

No People of Europe come thither to Trade, because the Inhabitants upon their
Landing make away with all speed, so that they only put in there for fresh
Water.

The Princes Island.
THe Princes Island, or Ilha de Principe, so called in Portuguese, because a
Portuguese Prince did find it out first of all, being the smallest of the four;
it lies in two Degrees North-Latitude, thirty Miles from the Main Land of
Africa, and about four and twenty Northward of St. Thomas.

On this Island blows a more serene and wholsomer Air than on that of St.
Thomas. On the Shore appears a little Town, containing about two hundred
Houses, and defended with Breast-works three Foot high against any Onset;
within which stand four small Cannon, which the Inhabitants have formerly
gotten from some Shipwreck.

The Country has many Trees, most of which produce Oranges, Lemons, Banano's,
Coco-Nuts, and such like. There are also Sugarcanes, and Cotton, of which the
Women Weave their own wearing Clothes; and Mandihoka, and here and there a Vine.

The Inhabitants are Portuguese, but few in number, being but about thirty or
forty; Mulato's, Negro's and Slaves, three thousand, which work in the
Sugar-Mills, and plant Rice, Tobacco, Mill, and other Fruits.

The Island of Anaboon, or Anabon.
ANabon, or Anaboon, which signifies New, or Good Year, so called perhaps by
the Portuguese, because discovered on a New-years-day: it lies in one Degree
and fifty Minutes South-Latitude, or as others, in one Degree and a half, about
five and twenty Miles from St. Thomas, and five and forty from Cabo de Lopez
Gonzalves, on the Main Coast. It takes in Circumference (according to Pyrard)
about five or six French Miles, and in length not above half a Mile. The Harbor
appears at the North-side, but very dangerous, by reason of the Shoals and
Rocks.

This Island has a wholesome Air, many Fountains, Springs, and Brooks, with
fresh Water, only a little brackish at the New and Full-Moon, by reason of the
high flowing of the Sea. It rises with Mountains, whose aspiring tops seem to
kiss the Clouds, and are commonly covered with Snow. The Hills and Dales prove
fruitful in all sorts of Plants, and affords the Eye a pleasant and delightful
sight. The Shores of the Brooks stand beset with Palm Trees, (out of which the
Inhabitants extract the often mentioned Palm-Wine) Ignames, Injames, Potato's,
Banano's, Ananassen, Orange Trees, Tamarind-Trees, Sugarcanes and
Cotton-Trees; also Rice, Maiz, or Turkish Wheat, several sorts of Turkish
Beans, black Physick-Nuts, and many other Trees and Plants.

There are many wild Swine, Stags, Goats, Hens, Pigeons, black and white
Cranes, and other Fowl.

The adjoining Sea produces many sorts of Fishes and Oysters.

Mercator, and some others, make this Island waste and desolate, contrary to
the truth, for it is inhabited, though but meanly, there being some years ago a
few Portuguese, with fifty or sixty Blacks, which all lived by tilling the
Ground, and Fishing. The Netherlanders found in the Year Sixteen hundred and
five, in their Voyage to the East Indies, under the Admiral Matelief, two
hundred Blacks on this Island.

The Town stands surrounded with a Breast-work for Defense, and contains about
a hundred Houses, built of Canes, besides some few of Wood, belonging to the
Portuguese.

The Blacks go stark naked both Men and Women, Clothes.
having only a Cotton Cloth before their Privacies. The Women carry their
Children on their Backs, and when they will give them Suck, they throw their
Breasts over their Shoulders, for they have them very great.

The Portuguese have the Command of it, who send thither a Viceroy. Government.


All the Inhabitants, both Blacks and others, embrace the Christian Religion,
Religion.
converted by the endeavor of the Portuguese.

The Island of St. Thomas.
THe Island of St. Thomas, in Portuguese, St. Thomee, because first of all
discovered on that Saints Day; yet Thevet calls it Santas Honor, and the
Barqarians, Ponkas; it lies in the Ethiopian Sea, right under the Equinoctial
Line, (which comes through the City, and the great Church, and therefore no
Latitude has been ascribed to it) and not far from the Cape of Lopez
Gonsalvez. It bears an Oval form about thirty Miles in Circumference, and in
length and breadth twelve Miles.

The chief City, called Pavosan, or Pavaose, through which run two small
Rivers, has its situation on an even place, on the North-side of the Bay,
somewhat more longer than round, and about half a days walking in compass;
containing about fifteen hundred Houses, every one ten Stories high. On that
side toward the Seacoast defended with some Breast-works of Stone, which the
Portuguese Governor raised in the Year Sixteen hundred and seven, commanding
every one that passed backwards and forwards by the City, to bring one Stone
toward the Building. The Houses are erected of white and hard Wood like Oak,
which grows there on the Spot; before, behind, and also on the top, covered
with Planks made fast together. There stand only on the whole Island three
Stone Houses, in one of which the Governor dwells.

The City boasts of three Churches, whereof the biggest is entitled Conceptio,
or, The Church of the Conception of the Virgin Mary; next, the Church of
Isabella, whereto adjoyns an Hospital, and the Church of St. Sebastian, a small
one, standing by the Castle. But several other Churches stand without the City,
as St. Anthonies, two Muskets shot distant; and somewhat nearer, St. John's:
then you may see the Church of Maitre de Dios, or The Mother of God; about a
Mile from the City, toward the South-east; and about two Miles from it toward
the East, Trinitado, or The holy Trinity; and about three Miles toward the
South-east, the Church of St. Anna.

The Castle of St. Sebastian, Castle St. Sebastian.
seated on an out-lying Corner, at the North-side of the City and of the Bay,
is a handsome Building of Stone, to the height of twenty five Foot, and both of
it self, and by the convenience of the place whereon it stands, seems almost
impregnable: The Garrison within consists of a hundred Soldiers, well stored
and provided with Ammunition and Victuals; besides, continual Supplies are, and
may be brought thither by Sea without hindrance.

The Ground is moistened by several Brooks and Rivers of clear and fresh Water,
to their great enriching.

On the middle of this Island rises a Woody Mountain, continually covered with
Snow, whence diverse Brooks and Streams draw their originals.

The Air is very hot and untemperate, moist, unwholsom, inimical to the People
of Europe, who seldom attain there to the age of fifty years, whereas the
Natives, a People that have but little Blood, oftentimes arrive to above a
hundred. Some affirm, that a young Man in his growth coming thither; shall
never grow bigger, but always remain at his first Stature; and that a dead
Corpse laid in the Ground, will rot and decay in four and twenty hours.

The cause of this unwholsomness has been imagined to proceed from the
overgreat Heats, and damp Fogs. Some have reported, that this malign
intemperature does not spread over the whole, but confined chiefly to the City,
and occasioned by the low situation thereof: for from the Rainwater which
falls down abundantly from the Hills to the Valleys, are exhaled noysom Vapors,
which afterward fall down in the Evenings and Mornings, with an offensive
influence; whose fume or dewy stream received into the Body, corrupts and
irritates the Blood: for the avoiding which direful hazards at those times, the
Portuguese there resident keep within their Houses.

But this Air loses some of these ill qualities in June, July, and August, by
reason of the South-east and South-west dry and cool Winds; which blowing over
from the Coast of Ethiopia, refresh the Country, and clear the Air, to the
great advantage of Strangers, although the Natives receive detriment thereby.

These Islanders, as all others under the Equinoctial, have two Winters, not in
respect of Cold, but only of Moistures, one in March, and another in
September; at which time the Sun shines from the Vertical Point upon the
Inhabitants Heads, without making a Shadow either to the North or South; which
happens twice a year at Noon.

The reason of this double Winter seems to proceed from the violent attractions
of Heat, caused by the scorching beams of the Sun, which so fill the Air with
watery Exhalations, that the Sun, as clouded therewith, shines not out, and so
those dusky Vapors dissolve themselves in great and continuing Rains, the only
sign of Winter, the overheated Air hardly chilled thereby.

The rainy Months continue from December to April, when all the low Land lies
under Water. Our Summer-Moneths, May, June, July, and August, make their
Spring; and with them Summer begins when the Sun first enters into the
beginning of Capricorn, and continues till it comes to the beginning of Aries,
that is, in December, January, February, and the beginning of March; and then
the Air is very moist and hot, so that Foreigners keep themselves in places
under ground, yet oftentimes can neither escape great Sicknesses or Death;
whereas the Natives being of a cold and dry Constitution, live in good health:
yet when the heat arrives at the height, it makes the Inhabitants themselves
so faint, that they can scarce go, and the Ground so hot, that they must wear
Shoes with double Soles and thick Corks, to save their Feet from scorching.

The Sicknesses which proceed from the untemperate heat, Unwholsomness of the
Air.
are burning and pestilential Fevers, seizing Strangers in eight days time,
first by shivering and coldness, afterward with heat through all their Limbs,
for two hours together, and with such violence, that the infected Party
oftentimes on the fourth, or seventh, or at longest on the fifteenth day, dies;
but if he outlive that time, he grows well again on a sudden, and so may
continue, except he prejudice himself by gluttony or drinking; for the best
Medicine is a moderate Diet, to eat little and fast much; besides, to purge the
Body with Juice of Cassia Fistula, and sometimes to breath a Vein, and take
away superfluous Blood.

The Sickness called Bitios de Ku, ranges here also, being cured with Juice of
Lemons, as before related.

The Pox is so customary to the Natives, that they make nothing of it, but
suddenly and with great ease cure it, by means of Quicksilver, yet proves
mortal to many Strangers; who ought therefore to be very careful how they
meddle with the black Women, by reason of the inequality of their Constitutions.

The Dropsy is very frequent, which they cure by applying outwardly the Oil of
Coco-Nuts, and the Juice of several Herbs, of which the Negro's have good
knowledge.

Above a Century of years since, the Kings of Portugal hearing of the
fruitfulness of the Soil, sent some over thither, who died through the
unwholsomness of the Air: Again he sent others, who went first into Guinee,
from thence to Angola, and at last settled on this Island, that they might as it
were Pedetentim, step by step, be enabled to endure the evil temperature
thereof.

Some have reported, that John King of Portugal sold the Jews for Slaves, upon
their refusing to embrace the Christian Religion, and Baptizing their Children,
sent them thither; from whence the Islanders seem to be extracted.

No small number of sick and dead Men had the Netherlanders on this Island,
when in the Year Sixteen hundred forty one, under the Command of Admiral Jol,
otherwise called Houtebeen, they overcame this Island: for there scarce
remained twelve sound and healthful Men in a Company; and Jol himself, with
most of the other Commanders died: Nay, the Distemper came at last with such
wide paces amongst them, that there scarce remained any to be upon the Watch,
or stand Sentinells, and not Seamen enough to Man two Ships: wherefore they
sent to Prince Maurice in Brasile for Soldiers, Provisions, and Wine for
refreshment. Most of them died of great pains in their Heads; some of the
Griping in the Guts in three or four days. The causes whereof might be their
too much eating of Black Sugar, or the Milk of Coco-Nuts, which occasions
Looseness; but indeed the principal cause was those malignant Fogs, against
which they had no shelter. This venomous Air caused a greater Destruction
amongst the People of the Admiral Peter Verdoes, coming thither with his Fleet
in the Year Sixteen hundred and ten, in November; when within fourteen days
there died above a thousand, of which the Admiral himself, and the other
Admiral Storm, together with seventeen Sea-Commanders, and all the
Land-Officers except one. Nay, the Disease raged at length among them with so
great fury, that the Bellies of some being opened, their Cauls were turned to
Water.

The Ground is tough, The Soil.
and of a yellowish Russet Color; and by reason of the many Mists, which fall
every Night, it grows soft, like Wax, and becomes fit to produce all sorts of
Grain, Fruits, and Plants. The goodness and fertility thereof appears by this;
That so soon as a plain Place is left untilled, or laid waste, Trees grow upon
it, and shoot up to a great height in few days, which the Blacks cut down and
burn, to plant the Sugarcanes in their Ashes, which grow every where in the
Valleys, but yield less Juice than those in Brasile.

The Canes Planted in the forementioned Ashes, must have five Months time to
ripen in: For that which is Planted in January, is Cut in June; and that of
February, in July: And in this manner they Cut and Plant all the Year through.
The full-grown Canes, when cut, are grownd small in Water-Mills, which the
Portuguese call Ingenhas; or by the Labor of Slaves or Oxen, in places where
there are no Rivers: Afterward they put the Juice into great Kettles, and boil
it over the Fire, to cleanse it; and with the Refuse they feed the Hogs, which
eating nothing else, grow exceeding fat, and are esteemed such wholesome and
sweet Flesh, that they Diet therewith the Sick, to recover them to their Health.

Seven Ships Lading of Sugar this Island sends forth every Year; that is, Four
for Portugal, two for the Canary and Madera Islands, and one for England: And
there might be a great deal more made, and also whiter; but they want Pots and
other Necessaries to cleanse it, and also Refiners to work it.

The Portuguese have sent for many Artists from the Maderas, to make their
Sugar whiter and harder; but could never effect the same, the Air making their
Labor fruitless, because it does not suffer it to dry: And therefore the
Sugar-makers are necessitated to set the Loaves upon low Planks enclosed round,
and to set them upon Boughs of thick dry Wood, which being set on Fire, make no
Flame nor Smoke, but at length glimmer like glowing Coals, and so dry it, as in
Stoves. Before the coming of the Portuguese, there grew no Sugarcanes, nor
Ginger; but they brought them thither, and planted them.

In the Year Sixteen hundred forty five, there stood on this Island four and
fifty Mills, which every one had their Months to grind, and could make every
Year twelve or fourteen Tun of Sugar. In the Year Sixteen hundred and ten,
there were sixty one Mills, which the Hollanders ruined; so that ever since
they have for the most part been able to do nothing, for want of Coppers, and
Slaves to work.

The Corn never attains to its full growth, because the over-fatness of the
Soil, and the exceeding Moisture, hinders the due Ripeness. There are many
Vineyards, which have all the Year Grapes, both white and red, ripe and unripe;
also sweet and sour Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, Pomegranates, Coco-Nuts, Figs,
Water-Melons, Peaches, Olives, Almonds, and such like; but the Fruits never
grow to a full perfection, because these Plants have need of a closing and
drying Coolness, which here they want. The want of Corn, Nature has supplied
to the Inhabitants by Roots, as Potatoes, or Ignames, their usual and chiefest
Food, of which they have four sorts; one called Benyn; the second, Achorere;
the third, Maniconge; and the fourth Saffranee, according to the Places from
whence brought to this Island. The two first are the best; the one for its
sweetness, and the other for its longest keeping good. The next is Mandihoka;
but they eat little of it, rather sending it to Angola.

In Brasile they plant much of it; only the Root grows nothing near so thick
there, as in these places. And here you must observe, That the Juice must be
pressed out of the Brasilian Mandihoka, being so hurtful and poisonous, that if
any one should chance to eat of it unpress'd, he would run the hazard of his
Life: But on this Island they immediately dry it as it is Grownd, without
pressing, of which none get any hurt or damage by eating.

Banano's also, Bakovens, Kussu-Apples, two or three sorts of Jojoos, or small
Beews, and Turky-Wheat, or Maiz, may be had there; and Pesigos, a Fruit growing
on a Tree of the same name, somewhat hairy on the outside, which must be cut
off; and then you have a little Meat, over a soft Stone, yet pleasant to the
taste, and of a cooling quality.

Another Fruit called Kola, of the bigness of a Walnut, grows on very high
Trees, in a light green Shell or Cod: It consists chiefly in four or five sharp
red Kernels, lying close together; they taste like a raw Chessnut, but somewhat
bitterish; yet a draught of Water after it, makes it seem sweet. They drive a
good Trade herewith to Lovando St. Paulo, whither they carry it by Shipping.

Neither do they want Palmito-Trees, out of which the Inhabitants make Wine,
and out of the Kernel of the Fruit extract by Decoction Palm-Oyl, which they
send over to Angola.

Of the Cotton growing there, the Inhabitants make sad and light blue colored
Clothes, like those of Benyn, but nothing near so good; however, transported to
Lovando St. Paulo, they yield sufficient profit.

Lastly, Cabbith-Trees, called Musen, and by the Egyptians, Mauz; and by the
Islanders, Abellance, which in a Years time grows very high: Besides Potherbs,
Cabbages, Turnips, Sallads, Lettuce, Parsley.

They cannot complain of want of Cattle, having Swine, Cows, Sheep, Goats,
Rams, and some small Horses. Nor of Fowl; Turkeys, Geese, Turtle-Doves, Hens,
Moor-Hens, Sparrows, Linnets, Paraquetoes, and several other sorts of Birds,
breeding there in abundance.

Neither are the Sea or Rivers less kind, yielding several sorts of Fish. In
short, This Island might with reason enough be termed a happy Habitation, if
the Air was but of a good temper.

The offensive Vermin are of three sorts: Wasps, much bigger than ours in
Europe, grievously tormenting all that go into the Woods upon any occasion:
Pismires, which eat up all they find, even to the grown Sugarcanes; but they
die upon the change of Weather: And Rats, great Enemies also to the
Sugar-Plants.

The Inhabitants are of two sorts: Portuguese, which first found this Island
desolate, and inhabited the same; and Blacks, sent thither from Angola to work.
Those which are born on this Island, of a Portuguese Father and Mother, though
they have lived there a long time, are white, like the Portuguese; but the
Children of a Portuguese-Man and a Black-Woman, are Brown, or Yellow, and
therefore called Mulatos. There used every Year to be sent from Lovando St.
Paulo thither, about five thousand young Blacks for Slaves.

The Native Portuguese go clothed like their Countrymen, Apparel.
and the Negro-Merchants with their Families follow the same Mode; but the
Slaves, as well Men as Women, go naked, only with a Clout or Palmito-Leaf
before their Privacies.

They make Bread of Potatoes, Food.
and drink Palm-Wine, or Water, or Goats Milk. In the time of great Heat, five
or six Families come together, to eat their Meals in company, in Caves under
Ground, where every one brings his own Food, and his own Household Stuff.

The Commodities carried from thence to other Places, consist chiefly in
Muscovado-Sugar, yearly made to the quantity of a hundred thousand Arabe, every
Arabe being thirty two Pounds, being packed in Leaves, and brought over to
Europe; the afore-mentioned Cotton Clothes, the Fruit Kolas, and such like. The
Merchandise transported thither by the Portuguese, and others, were Linen of
several kinds, all sorts of colored Yarn, Says, Silk Stockings, French Serges,
mixed Hair-Says, Axes, Chopping or Hewing-Knives, Iron, Salt, Linseed Oil, Red
Copper in Plates, Copper Kettles, Rosin, Pitch, Tar, Ropes, Earthen Sugar-pots,
of bigness to contain twenty or thirty Pound weight; Brandy, and all sorts of
Strong Water, Canary-Wine, Olives, Capers, fine Flower, Butter, Cheese, and
such like.

The Revenues which the Portuguese have yearly from this Island, Revenues.
amount to a considerable Sum: For all Exported Goods must pay the Tenth of
every thing for Custom to the King, either in Ready Money, Sugar, Palm-Oyl, or
Clothes. Of Slaves brought from one place to another, they give one out of ten.
Those which fish with a Net at the Shore, answer every fifth Fish: And for the
Fishing with a Canoo in the Sea, for every eight days they must pay the Value
of three Pence: Nay, every Plant which the Country produces must pay somewhat
to the King.

All the Inhabitants are Christians, Religion.
except some Slaves, or Merchants, which have not constant Habitations there.

The Archbishop of Lisbon sends thither a Suffragan-Bishop, to supervise
Church Affairs, who holds his Episcopal See in the Principal City.

The Civil Government is managed by a Commander in Chief, sent thither by the
Crown of Portugal. He keeps his Residence in the Chief City Pavoason, attended
with a Judge, to administer Justice to the People.

The Inhabitants, Government.
as well in the City as the Country, bring all their Differences before the
Governor and Judge, to be decided; but may appeal from thence to Lovando St.
Paulo. They are also bound to furnish the Governor, the Castle, and other
Places of Guard, with Firewood; and to Build or Repair his House at their own
Charges; and also all Bridges; and to keep all Roads and Ways clean and good.

During the War between the Crown of Portugal, and the States of the United
Provinces, this Island was in the year Sixteen hundred forty one, on the second
day of October, overcome in the following manner. Jol, whom we mentioned
before, landed with his People two Miles from Pavoason, by a Sugar-Mill at St.
Anns, where he took his Repose that Night, and the next day the Ships came
under the Castle, and the Soldiers marched thither by Land; where arriving,
they found all void either of People or Garrison; only the place was Fortified
by six Pieces of Ordnance: From thence, having reduced it, they went to the
great Fort, surrounded with a Wall of twenty eight Foot high; where after a
long Fight, for want of Ladders to scale the Walls, they were necessitated to
Retreat, with the loss of many Men: But the City Pavaoson they easily gained,
being void of Citizens, Soldiers, and all moveable Goods. Afterward the
forementioned Fort was surrendered by the Governor, who with eighty
Garrison-Soldiers, Blacks, Whites, and Mulatos, marched out, and with five and
twenty Soldiers of the Kings Band, were Shipped over to Lisbon. In the Fort
came to the Victors hands six and thirty great Pieces of Ordnance, of which
twenty were of Brass; abundance of Powder, Match, and Bullets; but Victuals
scarce for one Month. The City and Fort thus taken, the Admiral Jol caused the
Portuguese to be called into the City again, to Treat with him upon Equitable
Concerns; whereupon two of the chiefest came and bought off the Destruction of
the Mills, and preservation of their Canes, for five thousand and five hundred
Crusadoes, and ten thousand Arohas of Sugar: But the Kings Revenue and Treasure
came to the Victors. Formerly, in the year Sixteen hundred and ten, this Island
had been mastered by the Dutch, the City burnt, and the Plunder, consisting of
a thousand Chests of Sugar, a great many Elephants Teeth, Silk, Woollen Cloth,
and one and twenty Pieces of Ordnance, Shipped away. But the Admiral himself,
and the Vice Admiral, together with seventeen Seas, and all the Land-Officers
except one, and the number of a thousand poor Soldiers, died there, as has
been already mentioned.

Ilha Rolls.
ANother small Island, in Portuguese called Ilha Rolls, lies to the Southward
of St. Thomas, about three Musket Shot distant, with a convenient Passage
between both, and good Anchorage for Ships: Only there appear between this and
Ilha del Cabres, seven Rocks above Water, which the Portuguese Seamen call Los
Set Pedros.

The Island Ilha del Cabres.
IN the next place you come to Ilha del Cabres, or Goats-Isle, about two
Musket Shot from St. Thomas, with a Channel for Ships between. The Country
rises Mountainous, and full of Wild Lemon-Trees.

The Island Caracombo
BElow the River Gaba, or Gabon, not far from the Aequinoctial-Line, Linschet
writes of it in Gniuee.
lies the Island Caracombo, whose Soil produces many unknown Fruits, Beasts,
and Fowl: There are oftentimes an hundred Birds-Nests upon one Branch of a
Tree, made there by a wonderful Art, to keep the Serpents from them.

The Women are yellow, and impudently immodest, prostituting themselves before
any Spectators. Some Ships riding at an Anchor at a certain time under this
Island, there came off from it in a Barque eight and twenty Men to the Ship
side, with a Drum, and a hollow Stick in stead of a Pipe. Four or five of them
went aboard; whereof one, whose Countenance, Breast, and Arms were white, held
a green Branch, with a Clock, and a Bird, whom the Master entertained with
Victuals, wherewith they seemed highly pleased. Afterward a Pot of Palm-Wine
was set before them, out of which they drank to one another. At length some of
the Seamen went with them ashore, to Barter, as they had desired, Iron against
Ivory; and coming into the Village, they saw a Hut of about three Foot high,
with a Roof, but somewhat open at one side, where stood a Crock covered with a
Net, which they would suffer no body to touch, or to see what was within. On a
Stick close by stood a Child's Scull, with a Bone in the one Eye; and by that
lay several other Bones, both of Fishes and Beasts, on the Ground; whence they
guessed it to be a Burying-place. These People have neither Faith, nor
Religion; yet Circumcise their Children.

The Island of St. Matthias.
MOre toward the West, in one Degree and fifty Minutes South-Latitude, you
arrive at St. Matthews Isle, so called by the Portuguese from the day of its
Discovery: A small Spot, desolate, and not inhabited, though heretofore some
Portuguese dwelt upon it. It has one Brook of very good fresh Water.

Ilhas das Ascension, or Ascension-Island.
Toward the South appears Ascension-Isle, in Portuguese, Ilhas das
Ascension. It lies eight Degrees and a half Southward of the Line, one hundred
and ninety Spanish Miles North-West from St. Hellens; but larger, and full of
Mountains. It has no fresh Water at all, nor one green Branch or Leaf; but all
withered, dry, and scorched: Only infinite numbers of Fowl as big as Geese
frequent it, because they find plenty of Fish to feed upon.

The Island of St. Hellen.
THe Island of St. Hellen, so called by the Portuguese, because first
discovered by them on St. Hellens day, being the one and twentieth of April,
lies in sixteen Degrees and fifteen Minutes South Latitude, in the Main Ocean,
about five hundred and fifty Miles from the Cape of Good Hope, three hundred
and fifty from Angola, and five hundred and ten from Brasile. The Circumference
extends to about seven Miles, being high out of the Water, HELEN^
and surrounded on the Seacoast with steep Rocks, showing within many Cliffs,
Mountains, and Valleys; of which, one named Church-Valley, where, behind a
small Church, they climb up to the Mountains; and to the South; Apple-Dale, so
called from the abundance of Oranges, Lemons, and Pomegranates, enough to
furnish five or six Ships. On the West side of the Church Ships have good
Anchor-hold; but they must lie close under the Shore; for from the tops of the
adjacent great Mountains, the Winds blow downwards with a very great force.

The Air seems very temperate and healthful; insomuch that sick Men, Air.
brought ashore there, in a short time recover: Yet the Heat in the Valleys is
almost intolerable, whereas the Mountains have as great an excess of Cold. It
rains there commonly every day in Showers five or six times; so that want of
Water causes not the Barrenness of the Soil: For besides the Rain, it has
other good and wholesome Water; particularly, in the Church-Valley, whither
Seamen come for Fresh Water, as also to two neighboring Places. And further,
notwithstanding the general accusation of Sterility, the Ground of its own
accord brings forth Pease and Beans wild, that for want of Gatherers falling
make a new Increase; also whole Woods of Orange, Lemon, and Pomegranate Trees,
all the year through laden both with Blossoms and Fruits; very good Figs,
abundance of Ebony and Rose-Trees: Besides in the Valleys, Parsley,
Mustard Seed, Purslain, Sorrel, and wild Roman Cummin-seed.

The Woods and Mountains are full of Goats, very large Rams, and Wild Swine,
but difficult to be caught. When the Portuguese did first discover this Place,
they found neither four-footed Beasts, nor Fruit Trees, but only Fresh Water:
The Fruit Trees they brought thither afterward, which so increased since, that
at present all the Valleys stand full of them, to the great wonder of the
Beholders, seeing the Island is seldom frequented, and not at all Inhabited.
Lastly, Partridges, Pigeons, Moor-hens, and Peacocks, breed here numerously,
whereof a good Marksman with his Gun (and not otherwise) may soon provide a
Dinner for his Friends. On the Cliff-Islands, at the South side of this, are
thousands of gray and black Meawes, or Sea-Pies, and also white and colored
Birds, some with long, and some with short Necks, who lay their Eggs on the
Rocks; and so unaccustomed to fear, that they suffer themselves to be taken up
with the Hand, and gaze at their Surprizers, till knocked on the head with
Sticks.

From the Salt Water beating against the Cliffs, a Froth or Scum remains in
some Places, which the heat of the Sun so purifies, that it becomes white and
good Salt. Some of the Mountains yield Bole Armoniack, and a fat Earth like
Terra Lemnia.

The Sea will answer the pains of a patient Fisherman, who must use an Angle,
not a Net, because of the foul Ground, and beating of the Sea. The chief are
Mackrels, Roaches, Carps, but differing in color from those among us; Eels as
big as a Man's Arm, and well-tasted; Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters, of as good a
relish as our English; and very good Mussles: Yet all these Conveniences have
not brought thither any settled Colony; the King of Portugal, as they say, not
permitting any of his Subjects to dwell there, lest they should appropriate it
to themselves.

The Cape de Verd, or Salt-Islands.
THe Cape de Verd Islands, are so called for their nearness to Cape Verd, on
the Main Coast of Africa; but the Portuguese name them Ilhas Verdes, Green
Islands, because the Sea thereabouts is always covered with green Weeds, so
thick, that one can scarce discern the Water, and the Ships can hardly Sail
through them: They are also commonly known by the name of the Salt-Islands,
because of the many Salt-Pans, especially in Ilha del Sal, Boavista, Mayo, and
St. Jago. Some take them for the Gorgons in the Atlantic Sea, spoken of by
Mela; others for the Gorgades of Pliny, an ancient Dewlling Place, as the Poets
feign of three Sisters, the Daughters of Forkus, viz. Medura, Sthenio, and
Euryale; and some stick not to believe, that they were anciently called
Hesperides, from the neighboring Cape of Hespiere, mentioned by Ptolomy.

They lie over against the Main Coast of Africa, Situation.
between Cabo Blank, and Cabo Verd; from the nineteenth, to the fifteenth
degree of North-Latitude, about two and forty Miles from the Shore.

Writers differ about their number very frequently; Number.
for some reckon them twelve, others eleven, some nine, but most agree upon
ten, generally known by the corrupt Portuguese names; as follows, Ilha del Sal,
Ilha Bovista, Ilha Mayo, Ilha del St. Jaga, Ilha del Fogo, Ilha del Brava, Ilha
del St. Niklaos, Ilha del St. Lucie, Ilha del St. Vincent, and Ilha del St.
Antonio; besides some other nameless Islands.

The most Westerly, is St. Antonio, next those of St. Vincent, and St. Lucie;
and the most Easterly Boavista.

All these, or at least some of them, are said to have been discovered in the
Year Fourteen hundred and forty, by a Genoes, called Anthonio Nolli; thou
Jarrik affirms the Portuguese had that honor six years after; whereas Sanutus
gives it to a Venetian called Lovis, Extracted out of the House of Cadamosto;
sent abroad by the Infanta of Portugal, to discover new Countries.

The Salt-Island, Salt-Island.
or Ilha del Sal, lies with its South end on the North-Latitude, of sixteen
degrees and eight and thirty minutes; and with the South-East Point in sixteen
degrees and forty minutes. It shows, coming out from the Canaries, or out of
the North afar off, very high like a Hill, but nearer appears low. On the North
side runs a River, and in the South-West a small Haven, and close by that
another small Island: A Musket shot to the Southward of the West Point, where
by a long Sandy Valley, fresh Water comes out of the Mountains, is a good Road
for Ships.

Buena, The Island Boavista.
or Boavista, that is, a pleasant sight, perhaps for its pleasant appearance
afar off at Sea; they make its North Point eight Miles, and its South seven
Miles from the Salt-Island. It may be distinguished at Sea from the
Salt-Island, by the many white Banks on the North Coast, which the other has
not on that side; twenty Miles some have guessed (but none know certainly) its
circumference.

There is a long River which runs from the North end, North-East, and
North-East and by East, a whole Mile; and some hold that it runs into the Sea
with mighty Breaks, to the great hazard of adventuring Ships without a skilful
Pilot.

IN SULE PROMONTORII VIRIDIS, Nispanis ISSAS DE CABO VERDE, Belgis DE SOUTE
EYLANDEN.


There shoots also another Rieff from the South-Point, with some Rocks above,
and some under Water, about a Mile and a half long, East, and East and by North
from the Point. Under the South-West Point, where the Shore spreads West,
South-West, and East North-East, is a good Haven, wherein Ships may Ride in
fifteen or sixteen Fathom Water very good ground.

Mayo, lies eight or nine Miles South South-Westward, from Boavista, being the
least of all, and not above seven Miles in circuit. It has within some sharp
Mountains, and on the North side a Plain, a Mile broad, where a Rieff at the
North-East Point shoots a good way from the Shore; and likewise another to the
Westward, both which make a dangerous passage for Ships.

The common Harbor stands at the South-West side of the Shore, where Ships Ride
in fifteen or sixteen Fathom Water, with a Sandy bottom; and have the West
Point of the Island North and by West; and the South end of the Island St. Jago
South-West.

On the North side lies behind a black Point a convenient Harbor, neighbored
on the East side, by a Village of ten or twelve houses.

The Island of St. Jago, the famousest and biggest of all those of Cape de
Verd, Island St. Jago.
contains in length about twelve Miles, spreading North-West and South-East; at
the South-East Point, you come into the Road of the Island Mayo, being five
Miles broad.

From the South-East Point, the Shore spreads two Miles South-West, where the
City Praya, signifying The Strand, has its situation on a convenient place
between two Mountains, on a little rising Summit, surrounded with two Rivers,
which falling into the Sea, make two Harbors; one called Porto de Praya, a
spacious Bay, where a hundred Ships may Ride at Anchor in fourteen Fathom
Water, within Musket Shot of the Shore, with a defense from the Winds. Beyond
Porto de Praya, toward the City lies an Out-Point, in Portuguese called Cabo
de Tubarao; and North-Westward from this Cape, the other Haven, by the
Portuguese called Porta Riebeirra Korea, very convenient, because lying between
two Mountains, whose middle shoots through by a River, which takes original two
Miles from thence, and falls into the Sea by a Mouth, a Bow shot wide, not far
off, which more Northward appears St. Mary's Haven.

Jarrik places in this Island, a City called St. Thomas, seated conveniently;
but that is uncertain, yet the Town of St. Jago may be seen, being the
Metropolis of this and the other Islands, and the residence of the Portugal
Bishop.

Somewhat more Westerly, on a Point, a Fort or Castle shows it self two Miles
from Porto de Praya; and North-Westward from thence you come to Porto de
Canisos.

Ilha del Fogo, or The Island of Fire, Island del Fogo.
because of its Vomiting Smoke and Fire out of its highest Hills; lies in
fourteen degrees, and twenty minutes North-Latitude, twelve Miles
North-Westerly from the South-West Point of St. Jago.

On the West side you discover another Road, with a Castle adjoining, Built at
the foot of a Mountain; but the Haven affords little convenience, by reason of
the strong Current before it. Those that Sail out of the East, and intend for
this Harbor, must make to the Northward about the Country, or else they will
scarce fetch it, for the Wind blows very hard, and the ground is deep, and runs
down sloaping; so that indeed none can be had but under the Castle.

Four Miles South-Westward from del Fogo, Island del Brava.
lies Ilha del Brava, or The Desolate Island; having on the West side a
convenient Entrance for those that will take in fresh Water. But the Haven lies
to the South-East, with fifteen Fathom Water, so that an East India Man may
Ride there with his Starne moved toward the Shore. Above the Haven stands a
Hermitage with people.

South-Westward from Ilha Brava, Island St. Nicholas.
in the Altitude of twelve degrees and almost thirty minutes, appears a dry
place two Ships length, and one broad.

St. Nicholas-Isle, seventeen Miles from the Salt-Island, sets its North-West
end in sixteen degrees and twenty minutes, at the West end three Miles broad,
and at the East a Mile and a half, and seven or eight long.

M. Figuredo places the Haven at the South side, giving it the name of Porto de
Berguira, with an Islet at the entrance; and to the North-West lies (beyond
the Point) the Haven Fuoor Fool.

St. Lucie, Island St. Lucie.
a high and Hilly Island, eight or nine Miles long, with its South end in the
Altitude of sixteen degrees and eighteen minutes. At the South-East end are two
small Islands; as on the East South-East end the Haven, with a fine Sandy
Shore: On the South-West toward St. Vincent, lies another Harbor of twenty
Fathom Water.

Thirty Miles Westward from the Salt-Island, Island St. Vincent.
and two Miles West from St. Lucie, lies St. Vincent, in the Altitude of
seventeen degrees, five Miles long. It has at the North-West side a half
Oval-Bay, a Mile and a half wide, and surrounded with high Mountains. The high
Mountains of St. Anthonys-Isle defend this Bay from the West and North-West
Winds; so that it seems the most convenient Haven among all the Islands; yet
the coming to it is dangerous, by reason of the strong Winds, blowing
impetuously from the high Mountains. The South end of St. Vincent has a little
fresh Water, but elsewhere cannot be had one drop.

St. Anthony, Island St Anthony.
the most Northermost of all, in seventeen degrees North-Latitude, two Miles
and a half from St. Vincent, has two high Mountains, the one almost as high as
the Piek of Teneriff in the Canary-Islands, but both most commonly covered with
Clouds. There live about five hundred Inhabitants on this Island. At the
North-West end stands a Village of about twenty Huts, wherein dwell about fifty
Families, as well Negro's as Whites; Governed by a Captain, Priest, and
Schoolmaster, all which speak very good Portuguese, but they live very poorly.
At the Northside is a Road in the Latitude of sixteen degrees and fifty minutes
North-Latitude.

The unwholesomeness of the Air in all these Islands, Air.
breeds generally in the Inhabitants Burning-Feavers, Belly-Ach, and the
Bloody Flux.

Their Situation being between the Equinoctial and Tropic of Cancer, affords
the Inhabitants two Summers. When the Sun enters into Cancer, which is in June,
it Rains there continually with Storms of Thunder, Lightning, and Wind, which
continues till the middle of October; which Jarrik seems to affirm, where he
writes, That it does Rain there in August, September, and October; and the Air
about the middle of June gets a remarkable change, growing damp and foggy with
Mists out of the Sea.

The Portuguese find these Islands wild and desolate; Plants.
but most of them now are Tilled and bare Rice, Mayz, Tares, Oranges, Lemons,
Citrons, Bananoes, Ignames, Potatoes, Cucumbers, Cotton, Pomegranates, all
sorts of Figs, Coco-Nuts, and Vines, which bear Fruit twice a year.

The principal Cattle breeding here, are Goats and Sheep, Beasts.
but they have a few Oxen and Cows.

Fowl, and Poultry increase even to admiration; such are Hens, Crains,
Turtle-Doves, Turkicocks, Morehens, Quails, and Birds which the Portuguese call
Flamingo's, that is, Flemmings, with white Feathers, red Quills, and a Body
like a Goose.

Their greatest Wealth consists in Goat Skins and Salt, Riches.
which they send in great Parcels from the Islands Del Sall, Boavista, Mayo,
and St. Lago, by Shipping into Europe. This as to the general, we will now
descend to particulars.

The Inland of Del Sal, lies almost covered with Stones, but without either
Plants or Trees, only toward the South-East Point, hard by a white Sandy
Bank, are seventy two Salt-Pans.

Many Turtels and Fish are taken between the Cliffs, out of which the Slaves
decoct a Train-Oil, all out of the Salt Water, for they have no fresh. In
short, such is the sterility, as affords no other refreshment but poor Goats,
yearly killed in great numbers for their Skins.

Two Miles from the Road on the South side of the Country, is a Pond of
Salt Water nine or ten foot deep, into which a Brook runs with very clear
water, but not held to be very wholesome, because brakish.

St. Jago yields all sorts of Fruits, having indeed a very fruitful Soil; Trees
of Cedar, Colcoes, Oranges, and the like, all along beautify the Banks of the
River Ribeira Korea. They have also Rice, Maiz, Mill, Cotton, and Sugarcanes.
The European Herbs and Plants sent thither grow very well there, but must be
every year renewed. All the Wine they drink, Lisbone furnishes them with; but
other Provisions they can spare to their Neighbors. The Cattle there breeding,
are Oxen, Horses, Asses, and Goats, besides Hens.

Ilha Brava, produces Figgs, Mulberries, and other Fruits; also Mill, Maiz,
Water-Melons, and many others. Some Goats, but they may not be sold without
leave of the Governor of St. Jago.

On the Island St. Nicholas are but few Trees. It feeds many wild Cats and
Goats; close by the Shore is fresh Water in a Pond, which in time of Rain flows
over the Shore into the Sea.

St. Lucie appears Mountainous, with many Woods, and some fresh Water: At the
West side, has no other Inhabitants than Mice, and Tortoises.

At the Watering-place of the Island St. Vincent, fresh Water may be had out of
Wells, but not very pleasant. Below on the highest Mountain, there flows a
Brook, whose Waters are fresh and well tasted; all the rest sulphurous and
brackish, and for that cause unfit to drink. The parched ground bears little
but stones, being every where so bare, that there is neither Leaves nor Grass
to be found, but only a few Shrubby Bushes, which Seamen pull up and fetch for
Fuel; and Coloquintida, which grows in so great quantities, that it cannot be
destroyed. There are many Tortoises, very good in taste, and so big, that the
Seamen who touch at this Island for fresh Water, are compelled to hale them
Aboard with Ropes. They come every night in June and July, out of the Sea to
the Land, when the Inhabitants casting them upon their backs, by reason of
their weight they cannot turn themselves again. The Country has many Rocks,
but little Water. The Goats they kill for their Skins, which they send yearly
to Portugal in great quantities. Their Inhabitants are Blacks, who live there
very soberly without Recreation; fetching their Water in Leather Sacks made of
Goats Skins; in the Year Sixteen hundred twenty three, they were only nineteen
persons, eight Men, seven Women, and four young Girls.

Ilha de Mayo, a Rocky and dry Land, with little Grass; affords only some few
Figg-trees, which by the heat of the Climate, and dryness of the Ground, never
bear any ripe Fruit; for though the Figgs have a promising color, yet they are
insipid or tastless. But Goats, or Cabriets, or Sheep breed so numerously, that
above five thousand Skins are carried thence yearly. They have also some little
Horses, Asses, Oxen and Cows, Turkeys, and Hens, of the bigness of a Pheasant,
with white and black mixed and speckled Feathers; but all wild, and in a manner
untameable.

There are many Salt-Pans, which after they have let in the Salt Water, being
shut up, the heat of the Sun consolidates, and brings to a Gray-Salt; but it is
a toilsome work to gather it, and yet more troublesome to get on Shipboard,
because the Boats are not without great danger of being swallowed up by the
Whirlpits.

The Inhabitants are Whites and Blacks, usually sent thither from St. Jago; In
the Year Fifteen hundred and five, they were two hundred and five and twenty,
Whites and Blacks, Old and Young, Exiles and Slaves; but in the Year Sixteen
hundred twenty and eight, there were only fifty, besides Women.

The Inhabitants have neither Corn nor Clothing, unless brought them from St.
Jago; but there are many Goats which the Portuguese and Blacks there resident
catch up with Dogs, partly for the Skins, and partly for the Flesh.

St. Anthonio has many Woods, and therein several sorts of Fruits; as Oranges,
Lemons, Dates, Pomegranates, Sugarcanes, Bakovens, and Melons: One Orchard
lies in this Island, of which nothing can be seen from Sea, but a high
Palm Tree, which the people of the Ships, in the Bay of St. Vincent discern
plainly, and commonly send their Boats to barter Knives, and other such small
Toys for Fruit, with the people who have a Portuguese Governor; their number
generally about five hundred, most of them Blacks, who from another Orchard
bring the Fruits upon Asses to the Shore side, to sell to the Seamen. In the
latter end of December, they have great ripe Citrons, Lemons and Oranges, many
Bananoes but unripe, Potatoes and Melons, very large, and singular good.

The Island Goree.
THe Island Goree lies in fourteen degrees and fifteen minutes North-Latitude,
about a Stones throw from the firm Land of Cape de Verd, in South South-East,
about half a Canon shot in length, and a Musket shot in breadth.

This Island has one little Bay, with a Road for Ships, from whence the
Seamen go Ashore, no other place affording that convenience; neither has it
any Brooks or Rivers of fresh Water, but fetch all they use from Cape Verd.

In the Year sixteen hundred and seventeen, King Biram of Cape Verd gave it to
the Netherlanders, who in a little time erected a Fort there.

At present there are two Forts or Batteries, one on the North-West end, upon a
high Mountain, reasonable strong, and built of thick Stones; and the other upon
the Shore, called The Fort Nassaw, where they can Land with nothing The Fort
SNASSAO and ORANGE upon ye Island GOEREE.
Het FORT NASSOU van Binnen. met ORANJE. op ^ EILANT GOEREE.
INSULAE CANARIAE alias FORTUNATAE dictae
but Boats and Lighters. The Fort on the Shore, is bigger than the upper, and
contains a Storehouse for Merchandise, and several Dwelling-places for the
Soldiers and other people.

In the Year Sixteen hundred sixty three, both these Forts, together with the
whole Island, were taken by Captain Holmes, so the Royal African English
Company; but the year following, on the four and twentieth of October, by
Admiral de Ruyter regained: It was at that time possessed with about sixty
English Soldiers, under Sir George Abercromy, Chief Governor of the Island;
all which, with convenient Boats for their hire, were carried to the River
Gamboa: Then both the Forts, together with the whole Island, was left possessed
with about an hundred and fifty Hollanders, Commanded by Johannes Cellarius,
who presently caused the fallen Batteries to be made up, raising the upper
Fort, with a Breast-Work of three Foot higher, and fully repairing the lower.

The Canary Islands, or Islands of the Canaries.
THe Canary Islands, by the consent of most eminent Geographers, are held to be
the Insulae fortunatae, or Fortunate Islands of Ptolomy and Pliny, though
Ptolomy places them not far enough to the North, setting the most Northerly
part of them but at sixteen degrees North-Latitude, whereas they extend to the
thirtieth degree; and therefore we may suppose that they mistook them for the
Islands of Cape Verd, last before mentioned.

Some will, that the Canaries received that name from the Spaniards, who
attributed to all the proper Denomination of the most Eminent, which they
called Canary, from the many Dogs found at the first discovery thereof; Can
signifying a Dog in Spanish; whereas the name of Canary was known a long time
before by Pliny and Ptolomy: the Moors of Barbary call it Elbard, from the
Pike-Mountain of Teneriff.

Ptolomy computes the number of these Islands to six, and names them, Gramage.
lib. 9. c. 3.
Apropite, Here or Autolala, Pluitalia, Casperia, Canaria and Centuria; Pliny
makes the same number, but differences their names thus; Ombrio, great and
small Junonie, Capraria, Niraria, and Canaria. There are that make Ombrio and
Junonie, the same with Porto Santo, and Madera; Pluitalia for Lancerote;
Casperia or Capraria, for Fuerte-ventura; Canaria for the Grand Canary, which
still holds its name. At this day the Canary Islands, the Holy Haven, and
Madera, being included, are seven, and known to all by the same names, viz. As
the Island of Palma, Fierro, or Ferro, Gomere, Teneriff, Grand Canary,
Fuerta-Ventura, Lancerota, or Lanceroto: to which number Purchase adds, Lobos,
Rocha, Gravosa, Santa Clara, Alegranca, and Inferno: by Sanutus reckoned in
this order, Vecchio Marino, Sante Clare, Rocho, Gravosa, and Alegoranca:
Ortelius brings among them one that he calls Selvaia or Savage, the most
Northerly of all, placed in the same rank with that of Alegranca; and besides
Gravosa and Coro, which Thevet calls the Heart Island. But these small Spots
are of such little concern, that many do not so much as name them.

These Canary Islands, whereof Lasaretto, Fuerte-Ventura, Grand Canary,
Situation.
and Teneriff are the chiefest; they have their situation between six and
twenty degrees and thirty minutes, and twenty degrees and thirty minutes
North-Latitude, opposite to Cape Nun in Morocco, seventy or eighty Miles from
the Main-Land of Barbary, and nine or ten distant from each other.

They were for many Ages known to the Ancients, When found.
in the time of Pliny, Mela, and Strabo; but by negligence of Posterity, the
places lost as to knowledge, though Geographers had preserved their memory by
Recording their Names, which gave the curious cause of enquiry: Some Centuries
they continued forgotten, till in the Year Four hundred and five, John King of
Castile transferred all his Right therein, to a French Nobleman of Chaux in
Normandy, by name, John of Betancourt; who provided with Ammunition and
Victuals, Sailing thither, at their first coming took in the Haven of
Lancerota, and the Castle; and having built the Cloister of St. Francis,
together with a Church, returned victorious to Spain; where, according to
Grammay, for a Sum of Money he tranferr'd his Right to Diego de Herrera, who
subdued the Island of Fort-aventure, to which he first gave the name of St.
Bonaventure. But Sanutus writes, that Betancourt took in the Island of
Lancerota and Fort-aventura, by the Consent, and at the Charge of the King of
Castile, to whom he sold the Inheritance thereof after his death. Grammay
affirms, That Diego de Herrera made himself Master of Ferro and Gomere; but not
able to defend his Conquest, he sold his Interest in the whole to King
Ferdinand; who after a doubtful and hot dispute with the Inhabitants, overcame
the Grand Canary. Afterward Alphonses and Bartelt de Lugo, sent thither in the
Year Fifteen hundred and twelve, subjected Ferro and de Palma. Sanutus on the
other side mentions, That Gomere and Ferro, with the three other, Grand Canary,
Palma and Teneriff, were found first by Alphonses de Lugo, and Peter de Vera,
Noblemen of Xeres, and by order of King Ferdinand, and Queen Isabella; and that
Palma and Teneriff were subdued by Alphonses de Lugo, and the three other by
Peter de Vera, and Michael de Maxica.

If we enter into a serious scrutiny of the quantity of those Islands in
general, The quantity of the Islands in general.
we shall find, that in respect of their Situation, being near the Tropic of
Cancer, they are subject to great heat, sufficiently testified by the early
Harvest in March and April. The Grounds boast a more than ordinary fertility,
but especially they carry Repute and Glory for the Delicious Canary-Wine,
wherewith they furnish the whole world. Sanutus avers, That formerly but one of
them brought forth this Wine and Corn, but now all are equally productive of
both. There are also Figgs, Oranges, Pomegranates, Citrons, Peaches, and other
Fruits; besides many Sugarcanes, Palm Trees, and Pepper-Trees, which grow on
the Banks of the Rivers.

There grows also a Plant, commonly called Oriselle, held by most Herbalists to
be the Phalaris of Dioscorides, and by De la Champ upon Pliny, for the Gierst
of Theophrastus; from whence grows the Canary Seed, which the Inhabitants
propagate diligently to feed Canary Birds.

They have also a black Gum or Pitch, styled Bre, but principally in Teneriff,
burned out of Pine in the following manner; They cut the Trees in pieces, which
they lay cross one upon another over a Trench, whereinto the Pitch (dissolving
by the heat of the fire) falls.

They are competently rich in Cattle, Cattle.
as Oxen, Goats, Wild-Asses, Roe-Bucks, with many sorts of Fowl, amongst which,
Canary-Birds, which sing very clear and pleasantly.

The Inhabitants are a sturdy and strong people, The constitution of the
Inhabitants.
neither White nor Black, but Tauny, with flat and broad Noses, lively and
nimble Spirited, stout-hearted, and inclined to Wars. There remain yet some few
of the ancient Barbarous People, called by the Spaniards, Guanchas; but they
have in some measure laid aside their Native rudeness: Some of them seem to
have a Caninus Appetitus, an unsatisfi'd Voracity, so that one of them will
sometimes eat up twenty Rabbets, and a whole Goat at a Meal. By continual
converse, most of them, besides their Lingua Vernacula, or Mother Tongue, speak
good Spanish.

In Grand Canary, the chiefest of the whole knot, Government.
the Bishop and Inquisitors have their Seat, and the Chief Governor a Spaniard,
his Residence, attended by all inferior Ministers of Justice, for the deciding
of differences, arising between the Inhabitants: And by the equal care, both of
the Ecclesiastical and Civil Power, Christianity has gained so firm a footing,
Religion.
that admits of no Opponent or Rival; those obstinate persons that fled into
the Mountains, being utterly extirpated.

The Merchandise brought from thence, are Canary-Wines, Goat Skins, Sugar, and
such like.

The Grand-Canaries.
THe Grand-Canaries, according to the common opinion, is the same with the
Ancients, so lying Westward of Lancerote, near the Cape of Bajader, but more
Northerly, seven and twenty degrees, and thirty minutes from the Equator; the
length accounted thirty French, or eighteen Dutch Miles; though Thevet shortens
the length, and in breadth gives it no more than twelve French.

Here stands the Metropolis of the whole, being the Bishops See, containing the
Cathedral, and some Cloisters of St. Francis and others. They have besides the
Cities of Galdar and Guia, with diverse dispersed Cloisters, built by the
Munificence and Generosity of the Genoese Merchants.

It excells in grandeur and fertility all the rest, being inhabited by nine or
ten thousand Souls, holding a Jurisdiction over them, as well in Spiritual as
Temporal Affairs.

Fortaventure, or Fuerteventura.
FOrtaventure, or Fuerteventura, by some taken for the Casperia of Ptolomy,
Gramay lib. 9. c. 3.
and Capraria of Pliny, lies close to the Main Land of Barbary, in eight and
twenty degrees North-Latitude, Northward of Lancerote; and Westward of the
Grand-Canaries, fifteen Miles in length, and three in breadth, strengthened
with three Cities on the Seacoast, namely, Lanagla, Tarafalo, and Pozo Negro.

On the North side opens a Haven called Chabras, and another on the West side
very convenient.

Lancerote.
LAncerote, Bacchius.
or Lancerota, as some imagine, the Pluitalia of Ptolomy, and Pluvalia of
Pliny, though more probably it might be Ferro, which lies Northerly of
Fuerteventura, and Westerly of the Grand Canaries, in nine and twenty Degrees
and thirty Minutes of North-Latitude, twelve Miles in length, and seven Miles
in breadth. Gramay places in it the City Cayas, which in the Year Sixteen
hundred and eighteen, together with the Island, was Plundered by the Tukish
Pirates of Algier, who carried away Captive fourteen hundred and sixty eight
Men.

Teneriff.
Teneriff, or Tenarife, supposed to be the Nivaria of Pliny, lies to the West,
six Miles from the Grand Canaries, in seven and twenty Degrees, and thirty
Minutes North-Latitude. Thevet and Sanutus make it the biggest of all the
Canary Isles, extending the length of it to fourteen Legaues; but Gramay will
not allow so much. It has on the North-side the Haven of Santa Cruize, and
three fine Cities, Lagana, Ortone, and Garrico, together with St. Christophers.

Here stands the so famed Mountain, by the Moors called Elbard; by the
Spaniards, El Pico de Terrairo; and by us, The Pike of Teneriff, thought not to
have its equal in the World for height, because it spires with its top so high
into the Clouds, that in clear Weather it may be seen sixty Dutch Miles off at
Sea; nor can it be ascended but in July and August, lying in all the other
Months covered with Snow; though upon this and the near adjacent Islands none
is to be seen. To come to the top requires three days Journey: from whence may
be seen all the Islands lying about thirty Dutch Miles off in the Sea.

Here they find great quantities of Sulphur, with abundance of Fruits, Wine,
and Sugar. The Inhabitants are reckoned to be about the number of five thousand.

In the History of the Royal Society of London, lately set forth by Dr. Thomas
Sprat, we have a Relation from some considerable Merchants, and Persons worthy
of Credit, who went to the top of this Pico Teneriff, set down in these
following words:

HAving furnished our selves with a Guide, The Royal Society of London.
Servants, and Horses to carry our Wine and Provision, we set forth from
Oratava, a Port-Town in the Island of Teneriff, situated on the North-side, two
Miles distant from the Main Sea, and traveled from twelve at night till eight
in the morning, by which time we got to the top of the first Mountain toward
the Pico de Terraira: there under a very large and conspicuous Pine Tree we
took our Breakfast, Dined, and refreshed our selves till two in the afternoon:
Then we passed through many sandy Ways, over many lofty Mountains, but naked
and bare, and not covered with any Pine-Trees, as our first nights passage was:
this exposed The pike Mountain upon The Island Tenerieto. De PIEK-BERGH op het
EILANT TENERIETO
us to excessive heat, till we arrived at the Foot of the Pico, where we found
many huge Stones; which seemed to have falln from some upper part: about six in
the Evening we began to ascend up the Pico; but we were scarce advanced a Mile,
and the Way being no more passable for Horses, we left them with our Servants.
In the ascent of one Mile some of our Company grew very faint and sick,
disordered by Fluxes, Vomitings, and Aguish Distempers, our Horses Hair
standing upright like Bristles; and calling for some of our Wine, carried in
small Barrels on a Horse, we found it so wonderfully cold, that we could not
drink it till we had made a Fire to warm it, notwithstanding the Air was very
calm and moderate: but when the Sun was set, it began to blow with such
violence, and grow so cold, that taking up our Lodging among the hollow Rocks,
we were necessitated to keep great Fires in the Mouths of them all night.
About four in the morning we began to Mount again, and being come another Mile
up, one of our Company failed, and was able to proceed no farther: Here began
the Black Rocks. The rest of us pursued our Journey till we came to the
Sugar Loaf, where we began to travel again in a white Sand, being fitted with
Shoes, whose single Soles are made a Finger broader than the upper Leather, to
encounter this difficult Passage; having ascended as far as the Black Rocks,
which lay all flat like a plain Floor, we climbed within a Mile of the very top
of the Pico, and at last we gained the Summit; where we found no such Smoke as
appeared a little below, but a continual perspiration of a hot and sulphurous
Vapor, that made our Faces extremely sore. All this way we found no
considerable alteration of the Air, and very little Wind; but on the top it was
so impetuous, that we had much ado to stand against it whilst we drank the
Kings Health, and fired each of us a Piece. Here also we took our Dinner, but
found that our Strong Water had lost their Virtue, and were almost insipid,
while our Wine was more spiritous and brisk than before. The top, on which we
stood, being not above a Yard broad, is the brink of a Pit, called The Caldera,
which we judged to be a Musket Shot over, and near fourscore Yards deep, in
form of a Cone, hollow within like a Kettle, and covered over with small loose
Stones, mixed with Sulphur and Sand, from among which issued diverse Spiracles
of Smoke and Heat, which being stirred with any thing, puffs and makes a noise,
and so offensive, that we were almost suffocated with the sudden emanation of
Vapors upon the removing one of these Stones, which were so hot, as not easily
to be handled. We descended not above four or five Yards into the Caldera,
because of the slipperiness under foot, and the difficulty; but some have
adventured to the bottom. Other matters observable we discovered none, besides
a clear sort of Sulphur, which lay like Salt upon the Stones. From this
renowned Pico we could see the Grand Canaries, fourteen Leagues distant; Palma,
eighteen; and Gomera, seven; which interval of Sea seemed not much wider than
the Thames about London. We discerned also the Herro, being distant about
twenty Leagues, and so to the outmost Limits of the Sea much farther. As soon
as the Sun appeared, the Shadow of the Pico seemed to cover, not only the
whole Island, and the Grand Canaries, but the Sea to the very Horizon, where
the top of the Sugar Loaf, or Pico, visibly appeared to turn up, and cast its
Shade into the Air it self, at which we were much surpised: But the Sun was
not far ascended, when the Clouds began to rise so fast, as that they
intercepted our Prospect both of the Sea and the whole Island, except the tops
only of the subjacent Mountains, which seemed to pierce them through. Whether
these Clouds do very surmount the Pico, we cannot say, but to such as are far
below, they seem sometimes to hang above it, or rather wrap themselves about
it, as constantly when the West-winds blow; this they call The Cap, and is an
infallible Prognostic of ensuing Storms. One of our Company who made this
Journey again two years after, arriving at the top of the Pico before day, and
creeping under a great Stone to shroud himself from the cold Air, after a
little space found himself all wet, and perceived it to come from a perpetual
trickling of Water from the Rocks above him. Many excellent and exuberant
Springs we found issuing from the tops of most of the other Mountains, gushing
out in great spouts, almost as far as the huge Pine Tree, which we mentioned
before. Having staid a while at the top, we all descended the sandy Way, till
we came to the Foot of the Sugar Loaf, which being steep, even almost to a
perpendicular, we soon passed: And here we met with a Cave, about ten yards
deep, and fifteen broad, being in shape like an Oven, or Cupola, having a hole
at the top near eight Yards over: This we descended by a Rope that our Servants
held fast at the top, while with the other end, being fastened about our
middles, we swung our selves, till being over a Bank of Snow, we slid down,
lighting upon it: we were forced to swing thus in the descent, because in the
midst of the bottom of this Cave, opposite to the overture at the top, is a
round Pit of Water, like a Well; the surface whereof is about a Yard lower, but
as wide as the Mouth at top, and about six Fathom deep: We supposed this Water
not a Spring, but dissoved Snow blown in, or Water trickling through the Rocks.
About the sides of the Grot, for some height there is Ice and Isicles hanging
down to the Snow: But being quickly weary of this excessive cold place, and
drawn up again, we continued our descent from the Mountains by the same Passage
we went up the day before, and so about five in the Evening arrived at Oratava,
from whence we set forth; our Faces so red and sore, that to cool them we were
forced to wash and bathe them in Whites of Eggs. The whole height of the Pico
in perpendicular, is vulgarly esteemed to be two Miles and a half. No Trees,
Herbs, nor Shrubs, did we find in all the Passage, but Pines; and among the
whiter Sands a kind of Broom, being a bushy Plant; and on that side where we
lay all night, a kind of Coalon, which had Stems of eight Foot high, and the
Trunk near a Foot thick, every Stem growing in four squares, and emerging from
the Ground like Tufts of Rushes: Upon the edges of these Stems grow very small
red Buttons, or Berries, which being squeezed, produce a poisonous Milk; which
falling upon any part of a Horse, or other Beast, fetches off all the Hair from
the Skin immediately. Of the withered Sticks of this Vegetable we made our Fire
all night. This Plant is also universally spread over the Island, and is
perhaps a kind of Euphorbium.

Of the Island Teneriff it self, this account was given by a judicious and
ingenious Man, who lived twenty years in it, as a Physician and Merchant; his
opinion is, That the whole Island being a Soil mightily impregnated with
Brimstone, did in former times take Fire, and blow up all, or near all at the
same time; and that many Mountains of huge Stones calcined and burnt, which
appears all over this Island, especially in the South-west part of it, were
cast up, and raised out of the bowels of the Earth at the time of that general
Conflagration; and that the greatest quantity of this Sulphur lying about the
Center of the Island, raised up the Pico to that height at which it is now
seen. And he says, That any one upon the Place, that shall carefully note the
situation and manner of those calcined Rocks, how they lie, will easily be of
that mind; for they lie (says he) three or four Miles almost round the bottom
of the Pico, and in such order one above another almost to the Sugar Loaf, as
it is called, as if the whole Ground swelling and rising up together by the
ascension of the Brimstone, the Torrents and Rivers of it, did with a sudden
eruption roll and rumble them down from the rest of the Rocks, especially (as
is said before) to the South-west; for on that side from the very top of the
Pico almost to the Seacoast, lie huge heaps of these burnt Rocks one under
another: and there still remain the very tracks of the Brimstone-Rivers, as
they ran over this quarter of the Island, which has so wasted the Ground
beyond recovery, that nothing can be made to grow there but Broom: But on the
North-side of the Pico, few or none of these Stones appear; and hence he
concludes, That the Vulcanio discharged it self chiefly on the South-west-side.
He adds farther, That at the same time, Mines of several Metals were blown up,
some of those calcined Rocks resembling Iron, Oar, some Silver, and others
Copper; particularly on the South-west part, called Azuleios, being very high
Mountains, where never any Englishman but himself (that ever he heard of) was.
There are vast quantities of a loose bluish Earth, mixed with blew Stones,
which have a yellow rust upon them, like that of Copper or Vitriol; as also
many small Springs of Vitriol-water, where he supposes a Copper Mine. And he
was told by a Bell-Founder of Oratava, That he got out of two Horse-loads of
this Earth, as much Gold as made two large Rings. And a Portuguese who had been
in the West Indies, told him, That his opinion was, there were as good Mines of
Gold and Silver there, as the best in the West Indies. Thereabouts also are
Nitrous-waters and Stones, covered over with a deep Saffron-colour'd rust,
tasting of Iron. And farther, he mentions one of his Friends, which of two
Lumps of Earth, or Oar, brought from the top of this side of the Mountain, made
two Silver Spoons. All this he confirmed by the last Instance of the
Palm-Island, eighteen Leagues from Teneriff, where, about twelve years since,
so Vulcanio was fixed, the violence whereof made an Earthquake in this Island,
so great, that he and others ran out of their Houses, fearing they would have
fallen upon their Heads. They heard the noise of the Torrent of flaming
Brimstone like Thunder, and saw the Fire as plain by night for six weeks
together, as a burning Torch, and so much Sand and Ashes, brought from thence
by the Wind and Clouds, fell upon his Hat, as would fill the Sand-box of his
Inkhorn.

In some places of this Island grows a crooked Shrub called Legnan, which
they bring for England as a sweet Wood. There are likewise Apricock,
Peach-Trees, and others, which bear twice a year; also Pear Trees as pregnant;
Almonds, with a tender Shell; Palms, Plantains, Oranges and Lemons, especially
the Paeguada's, which have small ones within them, from whence they are so
denominated. Also they have Sugarcanes, and a little Cotton, Coloquintida,
etc. The Roses blow at Christmas. There are good Carnations, and very large;
but no Tulips will grow or thrive there. Samphire clothes the Rocks in
abundance, and a kind of Clover, the Ground. Another Grass grows near the Sea,
which is of a broader Leaf, so luscious and rank, that it will kill a Horse
that eats of it, but no other Beast. Eighty Ears of Wheat have been found to
spring from one Root, but grows not very high. The Corn of this is transparent
like the purest yellow Amber, and one Bushel has brought forth a hundred in a
seasonable Year.

The Canary-Birds which they bring to us in England, breed in the Baranco's, or
Gills, which the Water has fretted away in the Mountains, being places very
cold. There are also Quails, Partridges, larger than ours, and exceeding
beautiful, great Wood-Pigeons; Turtles at Spring, Crows, and sometimes the
Falcons come flying over from the Coast of Barbary.

Bees are carried into the Mountains, where they prosper exceedingly. And there
they have wild Goats, which climb to the very top of the Pico sometimes; also
Hogs, and multitudes of Coneys.

Of Fish they have the Cherna, a very large and excellent Fish, better tasted
than any we have in England; the Mero, Dolphins, Lobsters, without great Claws,
Mussles, Periwincles, and the Clacas, which is absolutely the very best
Shellfish in the world; they grow in the Rocks, five or six under one great
Shell, through the top-holes whereof they peep out with their Nebs; from whence
(the Shells being broken open a little more with a Stone) they draw them. There
is also another sort of Fish like an Eel, which has six or seven Tails of a
Span long, united to one Head and Body, which is also as short. Besides, there
they have Turtles and Cabrido's, which are better than our Trouts.

The Island is full of Springs of fresh Water, tasting like Milk; which in
Lalagima, where the Water is not so clear and lympid, they cleanse by
percolating it through a kind of spungy Stone, cut in form of a Basin.

The Vines which afford those excellent Wines, grow all about the Island within
a Mile of the Sea; such as are planted farther up are not esteemed, nor will
they thrive in any of the other Islands. Concerning the Guanchio's, or ancient
Inhabitants, he gave this full account:

The third of September, about twelve years since, he took his Journey from
Guimar, a Town for the most part inhabited by such as derive themselves from
the ancient Guanchio's, in the Company of some of them, to view their Caves,
and the Corpse buried in them, (a favor they seldom or never permit to any,
having the Corpse of their Ancestors in great veneration, and likewise being
extremely against any molestation of the Dead) but he had done several
Eleemosinary Cures among them, for they are very poor (yet the poorest think
themselves too good to Marry with the best Spaniard) which endeared him to them
exceedingly, otherwise it is death for any Stranger to visit these Caves and
Bodies. The Corpse are sewed up in Goat Skins with Thongs of the same, with very
great curiosity, particularly in the incomparable exactness and evenness of the
Seams; and the Skins are made very close and fit to the Corpse; which for the
most part are entire, the Eyes closed, Hair on their Heads, Ears, Nose, Teeth,
Lips and Beard, all perfect, only discolored, and a little shrivelled;
likewise the Pudenda of both Sexes. He saw about three or four hundred in
several Caves, some of them standing, others lying upon Beds of Wood, so
hardened by an Art they had (which the Spaniards call Curay, to cure a piece of
Wood,) that no Iron can pierce or hurt it. These Bodies are very light, as if
made of Straw; and in some broken Bodies be observed the Nerves and Tendons,
and also the String of the Veins and Arteries very distinctly. By the relation
of the most ancient of this Island, they had a particular Tribe that had this
Art only among themselves, and kept it as a thing sacred, and not to be
communicated to the Vulgar. These mixed not themselves with the rest of the
Inhabitants, nor Married out of their own Tribe, and were also their Priests
and Ministers of Religion. But when the Spaniards conquered the Place, most of
them were destroyed, and the Art perished with them; only they held some
Traditions, yet of a few Ingredients that were used in this business; they took
Butter (some say they mixed Bears-grease with it) which they kept for that
purpose in the Skins; wherein they boiled certain Herbs, first a kind of wild
Lavender, which grows there in great quantities upon the Rocks; secondly, an
Herb called Lara, of a very gummy and glutinous consistence, which now grows
there under the tops of the Mountains; thirdly, a kind of Cyclamen, or
Sow-bread; fourthly, wild Sage, which grows plentifully upon this Island. These
with others, bruised, and boiled up with Butter, rendered it a perfect Balsom.
This prepared, they first unbowel the Corpse (and in the poorer sort, to save
Charges, took out the Brain behind:) after the Body was thus ordered, they had
in readiness a Lixivium made of the Bark of Pine-Trees, wherewith they washed
the Body, drying it in the Sun in Summer, and in the Winter in a Stove, this
repeating very often: Afterward they began their Unction both without and
within, drying it as before; this they continued till the Balsom had penetrated
into the whole Habit, and the Muscle, in all parts appeared through the
contracted Skin, and the Body became exceeding light: then they sewed them up
in the Goat Skins, as was mentioned before.

The Ancients say, that they have above twenty Caves of their Kings and great
Personages, with their whole Families, yet unknown to any but themselves, and
which they will never discover.

Lastly he says, That Bodies are found in the Caves of the Grand Canaries, in
Sacks, quite consumed, and not as these in Teneriff.

Anciently, when they had no knowledge of Iron, they made their Lances of Wood,
hardened as before mentioned.

They have Earthen Pots, so hard that they cannot be broken: Of these some are
found in the Caves, and old Bavances, and used by the poorer People that find
them, to boil Meat in.

Their Food is Barley Parched, and then Ground with little Stone-Mills, and
mingled with Milk and Honey, which they always carry with them in Goat Skins at
their Backs.

To this day they drink no Wine, nor care for Flesh: they are very ingenious,
lean, tall, active, and full of courage; for they will leap from Rock to Rock,
from a very prodigious height till they come to the bottom, sometimes making
ten Fathom deep at one Leap, in this manner: First they Tertiate their Lances,
which are about the bigness of a Half-Pike, and aim with the Point at any piece
of a Rock upon which they intend to light, sometimes not half a Foot broad; in
leaping off they clap their Feet close to the Lance, and so carry their Bodies
in the Air: the Point of the Lance comes first to the place, which breaks the
force of their fall; then they slide gently down by the Staff, and pitch with
their Feet on the very place they first designed, and so from Rock to Rock,
till they come to the bottom: But their Novices sometimes break their Necks in
the learning.

He told also (and the same was seriously confirmed by a Spaniard, and another
Canary Merchant there in the Company,) That they Whistle so loud, as to be
heard five Miles off, and that to be in the same Room with them when they
Whistle, were enough to endanger the breaking of the Tympanum of the Ear; and
added, That he (being in Company of one that Whistled his loudest) could not
hear perfectly in fifteen days after. He affirms also, that they throw Stones
with a force almost as great as that of a Bullet; and now use Stones in all
their Fights, as they did anciently. Thus far Mr. Sprat.

Gomere.
IN the West of Teneriff lies Gomere, in six and twenty Degrees and a half
North-Latitude, a barren Island, yet producing Wine and Sugar.

Palma.
THe Island of Palma, the most Westerly of all the Canaries, lies twelve Miles
Northward of Ferro, and four from Gomere, in eight and twenty Degrees
North-Latitude. It is small, but exceeding fruitful, has plenty of Pasture,
affords many Grapes and Coleworts, Sugar, and other Fruits, and abounds with
Cheese and Milk; but the chiefest Trade consists in Wine.

Ferro, or Iron-Isle.
THe Island called by the Spani^rds, Hierro; by the Portuguese, Fierro, and by
the Italians, Ferro (which all signify Iron, lies four Miles from Gomere, in
six and twenty Degrees and forty Minutes North-Latitude, and held by some
undoubtedly to be the Pluitalia of Ptolomy, or Ombron, or Pluvialia of Pliny
and Solinus. It comprehends some Towns, of which the chief possesses a
Cloister and a Church of St. Francis; it has little Water, and that which they
have is brackish and unsavory: but this inconvenience and want receives a
strong supply from a Tree, always covered with thick Mists or Clouds, except in
the hottest time of the day: this Mist casts so great a dew upon the Tree, that
from the Leaves drop constantly pure clear Water, twenty Tuns in a day, falling
into two Stone Cisterns, each of twenty Foot square, and sixteen Hands deep,
made for that purpose on the North-side of the Tree.

When the Spaniards at the Conquest hereof found no Springs, Wells, nor Rivers
of fresh Water, they stood amazed, and asked the Inhabitants whence they gat
their Water? they answered, That they preserved the Rainwater in Vessels; for
the Tree they had covered with Canes, Earth, and other things, in hope by this
means to cause the Spaniards to leave the Island: But this subtilty did them
little good; for a Woman had discovered the Secret to a Spaniard that was her
Gallant, who disclosed it again to the Spanish Commanders. In brief, this Tree
affords so much Water, that it not only furnishes the Inhabitants and their
Cattle, but also Ships which by accident come thither.

This Tree, which the Inhabitants call Garoe, and the Spaniards, Santo, that
is, Holy, attains a competent bigness, having always green Leaves like the
Laurel, but not much bigger than those of a Nut-Tree, and a Fruit like an Acorn
in the Shell, with a very sweet and Spicy Kernel; and for defense and
presenvation they have enclosed it with a Stone-Wall.

Here grows some Corn, Sugarcanes, much Fruit, and Plan^^ in great abundance;
besides many Cattle, affording the Inhabitants much Milk and Cheese.

The small Islands, lying near, and about the Canaries, as Vecchio Marino,
Rocha, Graciosa, Santa Clare, Alegranca, Inferno, and Salvaies; little can be
said of them, but only that Salvaies, is the most Northerly; Vecchio Marino,
or Vecchi Marini, lying between Lancerote and Forteventure; Santa Clare, a
little Northward of Lancerote, and smaller than Graciosa; Alegranca more
Northward than the three former: But all these deserve rather the name of Rocks
or Cliffs than Islands.

The Description of these Islands, Linschot and others, add as a Wonder, a
certain Island called St. Borondon, or Porondon, a hundred Leagues, or
thereabouts, from Ferro; which such as have by accident seen, greatly praise,
as being full of Trees, very delectable, fruitful, and inhabited by Christians,
whose Language and Descent is not known; but never any have been able to find
upon Design. Many Spaniards have attempted to discover it, but in vain;
whereupon some have believed, that it never appears to those that seek after
it: Others are confident, that it appears only upon some certain Days, or is
constantly covered with Clouds, or that by a special power of the Sea, Ships
are driven from it.

Santo Port, or Holy-Haven.
THe Island of Santo Port, or Holy-Haven, being situate in the Atlantic Ocean,
opposite to the Cape of Cantyn, in the Kingdom of Morocco, in two or three and
thirty Degrees and thirty Minutes North-Latitude, Ortelius held to be the Cerne
of Ptolomy; others, the Ombrio, or Pluvialia of Pliny; but more probably it
seems to be the Pena of Ptolomy, from the Latitude. It contains five Miles in
compass, and was first discovered in the Year Fourteen hundred twenty eight, by
two Portuguese Noblemen, Jan Zarco, and Tristan Vaz, being then uninhabited
and desolate, but soon after Peopled, and provided of all Necessaries. They
have no Haven there, but one very convenient Bay.

This Island bears Corn and other Grain; and breeds also Oxen, wild Hogs, and
an infinite number of Coneys; besides, as good Honey and Wax as can be had in
the most famed Places.

There grows also a Tree, from which issues a Gum by the Apothecaries and
Druggists, called Dragons-Blood.

The Island of Madera.
LOwer to the South appears an Island, by the Spaniards called Madera, Ortelius
Syntagm.
and by the Portuguese, Madeira, Gramay, Afr, lib. 9.
because at the first Discovery they found it overgrown with Wood, distant
about thirty Miles from Santo Port, and sixty from the Canaries, in thirty
Degrees and one and thirty Minutes North-Latitude, between the Straights of
Gibraltar and the Canaries.

The Form resembles a Triangle, Cadam. Sanu^.
holding in compass (according to Sanutus) an hundred and forty Italian Miles,
and five and thirty Dutch Miles long, from East to West, and six broad.

In the Year Fourteen hundred and twenty, John Gonzalves, and Tristan Vaz, both
Portuguese, sent forth by Henry the young King of Portugal, to discover new
Countries, first took notice of it; whither being come, and seeing it (as we
said) overgrown with Wood, thought it little worth: but an accident happening
amongst the Wood, uncovered this fruitful piece of Ground, that Nature had so
long kept hidden, and by burning cleared it of that which had hindered the
inhabiting it. By this means the Portuguese gained it, but underwent many
hazards therein before they could make any advantage from it, in regard the
Fire raged so furiously, as that it forced them for a time to forsake the
Place. The burning continued seven years among the thick Trees; but at length
the Fuel failing, the Fire extinguished of it self; whereon immediately
planting and manuring it, it is become at this day one of the best and
delightfullest Places that can be found.

The Discoverers at the beginning divided it into four parts, that is, into
Monchrico, or Manchico, Santo Cruize, Fonzal, and Camerade Lobes, that is, The
Chamber Wolves, so called, because at their first coming on Shore they found a
great Cave resembling an Arched, or Vaulted Room, under a Point of Land
reaching into the Sea, where were the prints of the footings of Sea-Wolves.

The chiefest Places of this Island are, the Head-City Funzal, or Funhial, the
Seat of the Bishop, comprehending a Collegiate-Church, three other great
Churches, two Cloisters, of the Order of St. Francis, one for the Men, built by
the King of Portugal, and the other for Virgins, built by Gonzalves, Governor
of the Island; and a College for the Jesuits.

Manchico, or Manchrico, showing a fair Church, named Santa Cruize, and a
Cloister of St. Bernard.

Moquet affirms, that the whole contains many Castles, six and thirty eminent
Parish-Churches, five Cloisters, four Hospitals, and two and twenty Hermitages.

In the Year Sixteen hundred twenty five, there were computed in this Island
six thousand ninety six Houses, which at this day are increased to a greater
number.

The Air keeps so even a temperature, that neither Heat or Cold invade it with
excess: the Ground enriched by many excellent Springs of fresh Water; and
besides fertilitated with the advantage of seven or eight small Rivers; so that
every part lies carpetted with a pleasant Verdure, or beautified with the
delightful prospect of various Fruits, always flourishing on their natural
Stems, and gathered, as well please the Palate, as the Trees refresh the Body
by their cooling shade: But especially it affords an excellent Wine, better in
the second and third year than in the first.

The Earth, though Mountainous, affords plenty of Corn that multiplies sixty
fold. Cadamast computed the product of one Harvest to thirty thousand Venetian
Measures, called Stares, every one reckoned at three and thirty Pound.

The Grass and Trees shoot up so high, that the Inhabitants are necessitated to
cut up and burn part of it: in the Ashes whereof they plant Sugarcanes, which
in six Months bring forth Sugar: for those planted in January are cut up in
June, and so the rest, each according to the Month wherein they were planted.

The Trees of most consequence are some that bear Gum, as Sanguis Draconis,
MELITE INSULA vulge MASTA.
mentioned before, and a sort of Guaiacum, but of little esteem, because not so
good as that in other Places.

Here is much tame Cattle; as upon the Mountains many wild Swine, Partridges,
Doves and Quails.

The Inhabitants are much civiler than those of the Canary-Islands, and Trade
with all sorts of Countries, giving in Exchange for their Commodities, Sugar,
Honey, Wax, Oranges, Citrons, Lemons, Pomgranates, Wines, and Leather.

THe Island of Malta.
THe Name of Malta seems to be derived from Melite, so called of old, which not
only the ancient Geographers, Strabo, Mela, and Ptolomy, but the holy
Scripture it self mentions; though there be another Melite, near the City
Ragousa, and the Coast of Damiata, at this day called Meleda. Cluverius in his
Description of Sicily, supposes that the Iste Hiperia, spoken of by Homer, as
the Habitation of the People called Phaeacians, who being hunted thence by the
Phenycians, took their flight to Corfu, or Scherie, anciently Phaeacia, is no
other than this: And assuredly, the Phaeacians were the Inhabitants of Corfu,
which came first from Malta, as Homer, by placing the Mountain Melite in Corfu,
plainly makes manifest. Cluverius endeavors to maintain by demonstrative
reasons, that it was the most ancient Ogygia, the Habitation of the Nymph
Calipso, Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, who received and entertained Ulysses
suffering Shipwreck, where he stayed seven years, but at last by the order of
Juno was commanded to quit his Mistress, and leave the Country.

This Island has been commonly accounted in Europe, but Ptolomy places it in
Africa; and the very Tongue there spoken, being broken Arabic, proves it
African, no less than its being in the Atlantic Sea, though it seem nearer to
Europe.

It lies in six and forty Degrees of Longitude, and in five and thirty and ten
Minutes North-Latitude, or according to Ptolomy, in four and thirty Degrees
forty Minutes, and has in length, from East to West six Leagues, in breadth
three, and in compass fifteen.

It has on the East, the Mediterranean Sea; on that side next Candia, in the
North, the Island of Sicily, not above fifteen Leagues distant; in the South,
Tripolis, in Barbary and the lesser Africa; in the West, the Islands of
Pantalaree, Linose, and Lampadouse. The Sea which divides it from Sicily bears
the Name of The Channel of Malta. Ptolomy places there a City of the same Name,
and two Temples, one of Juno, and the other of Hercules.

At this day it contains four Walled Cities, besides a great number of Towns;
the Cities are, Valette, Citta Vecchia, that is, The Old City, otherwise Old
Malta, Biurgo Sante Angelo, or The City of Angels, otherwise Citta Victoriosa,
and the City or Town of St. Michael, or Sangde.

Valette, by the Italians called Terra Nuova, and by the French, Ville Neuve,
gained that Name from the Grand Master Jan de Valette, otherwise Parisot, who
presently built it after the Siege of the Turks in the Year Fifteen hundred
sixty five, who had then straightened this Island, and taken the Castle St. Elmo,
lying before the City.

The City stands founded upon a Rock, and an elevated piece of Ground, called
Scebarras, which severs the Haven Marza Mazetta, and the Great Haven, being
indeed an Isthmus, the Sea beating on three sides of it; and a great Trench
hewn out of the Rock, cuts it off from the rest of the Island. On the outmost
Point of that Rock, before it, stands the Castle St. Elmo.

It appears very strong, surrounded on the out side with Ditches cut in the
Rocks, fortified with Bulwarks, and very delightful Outworks; within
beautified with straight and broad Streets, of which the chiefest are Strata
Reale, or The High Street; and Strata Merchanti, The Merchants Street. The
Houses lofty, built of hewn Stone, with flat Roofs, according to the manner of
the Eastern Countries, to the number of about two thousand. Every House had
formerly a Cistern to catch Rainwater; but Strangers at this day fetch it from
some fair Springs, neighboring the Port del Monto, on the Seacoast, whither
the Water has been brought some Miles out of the Country by Conduits; an
Invention of the Grand Master Alofi Vignacourt, to the great Relief and Comfort
as well of the Inhabitants as Foreigners, which lie with their Ships before the
City: for the Water spouts by the opening of an Engine in the City, and by
Pipes runs into the Cask in the Boats.

Three Gates give entrance into it; one at the Haven called Porta del Monte,
and two at the Land-side, viz. Porta Reale, and Porta Boucheria, or The
Slaughterhouse Gate.

There are seven Churches; the chiefest is that of St. John, the Patron or
Guardian-Protector of the Order of the Knights of Malta; on the right side
whereof, stands the Figure of that Saint, in a lively Representation. The other
are, St. Augustine, St. Dominico, St. Maria Jesus, St. Paulo, Madona de
Carmine, Collegio de Jesu, La Madama de la Victoria.

There are also seven Palaces or Courts, called Auberge, or Bergia, for the
seven Languages; for into so many Nations of several Tongues, are the Knights
divided; in every one of which the Superiors have their Residence, and live
upon the Expense of the Order: As Bergia or Auberge, di Provence; Bergia de
Auvergne or Alvenia, Bergia de France, Bergia di Italia, Bergia di Arragon,
Bergia de Alemagna, Bergia di Castilia; that is to say, The Palace or Court of
Provence, The Palace of Auvergne, The Palace of France, The Palace of Italy,
The Palace of Arragon, Germany, and Spain. Formerly there was a Bergia di
Angliterre, but at this day annihilated.

There are several Cloisters; as, of St. Ursula, St. Catherine, and di Repenti.
The Palace of the Grand-Master (for here he holds his Court) stands between St.
Elmo and St. John's, wherein is a great Hall, the usual Place for the meeting of
the Grand-Master, with the Counselors, or Knights of the Great Cross.

In the Court behind the Palace, stand fixed in the Wall the Portraictures of
two very ancient Marble Heads, raised upon an Arch, bigger than the Life; one
with this Inscription, Zenobia Orientalis Domina; and the other; Petesilia.
They were found in Malta, in the Year Two hundred seventy six.

They have a Marketplace, to which the Country People bring all sorts of
Fruit, Fowl, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, and other provision, to sell.

Near the Castle of St. Elmo you may see an Hospital, The House of the ^ick.
being the House of Entertainment for the Sick; a stately Building, especially
since the Enlargement in the year Sixteen hundred sixty four; wherein every
Sick Person has a Chamber, in a great Hall, thirty Paces long, and ten broad,
standing near one to another, on each side five and twenty. The Sick are served
in good order, VALETTA CIVITAS NOVA MALTAE Olim Millitae.
by the Knights themselves, and their Meat made ready in Silver Vessels, as
Trenchers, Dishes, Porrengers, and Drinking-Cups, brought to every ones Bed,
according to the Prescript of the Physicians, which are usually four, and visit
them Morning and Evening.

There is an Arsenal, or Magazine of Arms, Magazine of Arm^^
under the Inspection of a Cavalier, or Knight; wherein they have a very large
and stately Hall, completely furnished with all sorts of Warlike Weapons. In
the middle stand five square Wooden Buildings, whose in-sides are adorned in
very good Order with all sorts of Defensive Arms, as Cuirasses, Coats of Mail,
Caskets, Head-pieces, Shields, Back-swords, Halberds, Pikes, Half-Lances,
Muskets, Dags, Ponyards, Pistols, Snap-hances, and such like. Above hang many
Bows, and other Weapons, used of old by the Knights of Rhodes. In brief, there
are sufficient of all sorts to equip six and thirty thousand Men. There are
three or four complete Suits of Armor, Cap-a-pe; the middlemost being that
which the Grand Master De la Valette, in the Siege in the year Sixteen hundred
sixty five, used. There is also a Piece of Cannon upon the Carriage, made of
Leather; but with so great Art and Curiosity, that it seems verily an Iron
Piece. All these Arms are kept very clean and bright, by Officers to that only
purpose appointed. Every Knight, notwithstanding all this Provision, has his
Arms by himself, in his own House; as have also the Citizens, and Country
People. The Banjert is a large House or Prison, wherein many Slaves of all
Nations are bought and sold.

They have a Custom-house, Treasury, Chancery, and Magazine for Wine and Corn;
a Castle for the Courts of Justice, Princely Stables for Horses, and a separate
Field, with all Conveniences, for the Founding of Great Ordnance.

The Castle of St. Elmo, built upon a Rock, on the Out-point of Valette toward
the Sea, is as it were encompassed with several fair and large Havens; three on
the right side, and five on the left; all guarded by the Castle of St. Angelo,
built on the Point of Burgo, or Citta Vittorioso. Between this Castle and
Valette are Corn-pits hewn in the Rocks.

In the great Haven over against Valette, are two long slips of Land, Fort St.
Angelo.
with their Points; in one whereof, seated upon a Rock, lies the Castle St.
Angelo; and besides it, nothing remarkable, but an old small Church, built
first by the Clergy of this Order, wherein you may see the Tomb of the
Grand-Master Philip de Villiers d' Isle Dam, who there with the Order, after
the loss of Rhodes, in the year Fifteen hundred and thirty, the six and
twentieth of October, took his first Residence, after eight Years Adventures.
It was formerly strengthened with many Bulwarks and Walls; provided with Wells
of Water, a Magazine of Arms, together with a Palace for the Knights: but since
the Siege of the Turks, in the Year Sixteen hundred fifty five, greatly
decayed. Here stands also an Hospital for sick and poor Diseased Mariners, who
are served by the Junior Knights, with Silver Vessels, in good order. Lastly, A
Yard or Dock for the Building of Galleys, with Barrakes or Storehouses
adjoining; neighbor'd by the stately Mansion of the General of the Galleys.

Beyond this, upon the same Rock, stands Citta Vittorioso, so called because of
the forementioned Siege which it endured from the Turks.

It was built by the Grand Master Philip de Villiers d' Isle Dam, when the
Knights had first the Possession of this Island given them; and at this day
conveniently Fortified. It contains in Circuit half a Mile, wherein about
twelve hundred Houses, and these following Churches, viz. St. Andria, Maria
della Carne, St. Spirito Santo, St. Laurenzo; by the Market La Muneiata, St.
Scholastique, a Cloister of Nuns, and Grecian Church. The Inquisitor has there
also a Palace for his Residence.

On the other Slip of Land, Fort St. Michael.
more inwards, lies the City called La Isula, at the East end whereof stands
St. Michaels Fort, parted only from the main Land by a deep Trench; the whole
erected about the year Fifteen hundred and six, by the Grand Master Claudius de
la Sangle, and now strongly Fortified according to the Modern way. It has in
compass about a small Mile, and chiefly inhabited by Mariners, who continually
keep Vessels abroad against the Turks.

Between Burgo and La Isula lies a Haven, wherein all the Capers and Galleys of
Malta harbor, with their Prizes, as well Turks as Christians: The Entrance, at
the coming of the Turkish Fleet, was chained up. In La Isula are four Churches;
Maria Porto Salvo, Madama de Victoria, St. Philippo Nere, and St. Julian. At
the end of the Haven, beyond the City, on the East side, lies Burmola, as
being without the City, inhabited by Strangers; together with two Havens, one
called La Marza, and the other La Marza Picciola, that is, The Small Haven.

Citta Vecchia, Old Malta.
or The Old City, which Ptolomy called by the Name of the Island Melite; and
others, Old Malta, is said to have been built by the Carthaginians; but the
Inhabitants know it by the Name of Medina, derived from the Arabic Language,
in memory of the Arabians, who so called it, from a City of the same
denomination in Arabia, the Sepulcher of Mahomet.

The principal Church is that of St. Peter's, being the first which the
Christians built in this Island, after the Preaching of the Apostle St. Paul.
Without the City stands another, dedicated to St. Agatha, where, upon the
Altar, sits a white Marble Image of St. Agatha Preaching. Under this Church is
a Grot, with two or three Entrances; yet few People venture into it, because of
the several strange Meanders, and dismal narrowness of the place; and therefore
one of these Entrances, being more dangerous than the rest, was closed up by
Command. They go in by a Rope, made fast above, by which they slide down,
carrying with them burning Torches.

Towns, Towns.
in Italian called Casals, and by the Inhabitants, in Arabic, Adhamet; Jerome
of Alexandria, in his Siege of Malta, computed to be about five and forty;
Bosio, to forty; others, scarce to six and thirty: but the Knights themselves,
according to Davity, reckon them sixty.

The Parish Or Nasciaro.
Naxarro (for this Island the Knights have divided into several Parishes) has
under it, according to Bosio, the Towns of Gregoor, Or Mossa.
Musta, and Muslimet; the Parish Bircarcara, the Towns Tard, Lia, Balsan,
Bordi, and Man: Then follows the Parish of Cordi, but without any annexions:
The Parish of St. Mary of Or Di Loreto.
Birmiftuch contains the Towns Luka, Tarcien, Gudia, Percop or Corcap, Or Saf.
Saphi, Or Mechabib.
Mikabiba, and Farrugh; That of Or Siggo.
Siguiau, the Towns Or Gighibir.
Quibir, Or Scilia.
Siluch, and Cidere; That of Or Sabbug.
St. Catherine, the Towns Biscatia, Zakar, Asciak, Gioanni, and Bisbu; The
Parish of Zarrik takes in Or Grendi.
Crendi, Leu, Or Miliers.
Meleri, Or Bukkaro.
Bukakra, and Maim: Then the Parochial Towns of Zabugi, Muxi, and Alduvi; and
lastly, that of Dingli, comprehending some small Villages.

Two or three Miles Northward of Valetta, appears Nasciaro, graced with a
very fine Church, to which adjoyns a Garden of Pleasure, called by the name of
the Grand Master, St. Anthony, being very large, and divided into several
Quarters, all full of Vines, Oranges, Lemons, Pomegranates, Citrons, Olives,
and other Fruit Trees; together with a handsome Palace, having many Rooms of
Entertainment, besides private Recesses, and particular Apartments: This, in
regard of its distance, is not so much frequented, as that of San Gioseppo,
being nearer, whither the Grand Masters and the whole Court often retire for
Recreation.

On the South-Coast, and that side toward Tripolis, this Island has nothing
but great Cliffs and Rocks; but on the other side, several Capes, convenient
for small Boats. First, passing to the East, you come to the Haven of Marza
Scola (Marza signifies A Haven) and a small Mile from thence, to the South-West
of Sirok, to Marza Sirokko, that is, The South-West Port, being very large and
capacious. From thence turning to the South, you may see Golpho de Pietra
Santa, or Holy Stone Gulf, opposite to the small Island Fursula, or Forrola.

But to the Westward appear two great Roads; one called Antfega, but according
to the Maltesian Orthography, Hayntoffeka; and the other, Porto del Mugaro.
Passing thence Westwards, you arrive at Meleca, a good Landing-place, over
against which the Island Goze shows it self, severed from Malta by a narrow
Channel, entitled Feo.

The Eastern Coast brings you to Porto delle Saline Vecchie, The Haven of the
Old Salt-Pit.

Right out from thence, over against Sicily, you come to Cala di Sante Paulo,
The Cape of St. Paul, and by that a Bay; so called, because the Inhabitants
believe, That the Ship wherein the Apostle Paul was brought over Captive, by
Storm was cast away, and Shipwrack'd against this Place; though some (with what
Reason we will not determine) imagine that Shipwreck to have been suffered not
here, but upon the Island Melite by Ragousa.

This Bay sends an Arm well near two Italian Miles up into the Country; but
neither broad, nor deep. The adjacent Shore being full of Rocks, scarcely
appearing above the Surface of the Water, confirms the Arguments of St. Paul's
Shipwreck here. In the place where the Viper leaped out of the Fire to the hand
of the Apostle, the first converted Christians erected a small Chapel, being
since decayed by Wind and Weather; but of late renewed again: So that now there
stands a handsome little Church, rebuilt in the Year Sixteen hundred and
sixteen, by the Grand Master Alophi Tignacourt. Above the Altar in the Church
are to be seen diverse Images decyphering the Miracle done by the Apostle, in
flinging off the Viper from his Hand, himself kneeling; with many Figures of
Men and Women, bigger than the Life, round about, in Old Maltesia Garments, cut
out with excellent Postures, to admiration. Above this Altar-piece, stands this
Inscription in Latin: Vipera, Ignis acta Calore, frustra Pauli manum invadit:
is Insulae benedicens
Anguibus and Herbis adimit omne virus.
M. DC. V.
(That is)
The Viper, constrained by the Heat of the Fire, leaped in vain upon the Hand
of Paul:
He blessing the Island, took away all Poison from the Serpents and Plants.
1605.


Close by the Sea is a Rock, with a small Pit, out of which very sweet and
rellishing Water issues, which they say came miraculously, by the Apostles
striking the Rock, for want of Water to quench his thirst. A little more
Southerly lies a Salt-pit, called Saline Nova; and close by it, under the
Shore, the Island Gallis. Toward the South you have Cala di Marco, and Cala di
St. George: And lastly, Punta di Dragut, over against Valetta, and the Castle
of St. Elmo. There are moreover two Havens; one styled Marza di Musseto, and
the other called Marza, or Il Porto Grande, The Great Haven, between Valetta
and Fort St. Angelo; whose Entrance, called Bocca el Porto, is defended on the
one side by a Redoubt raised upon the Point; and on the other side, by the
Great Guns of the Bulwark of Valetta.

South-Westwards from Old Malta, The Garden Boschetto.
the Grand Master has his fairest Garden of Pleasure, called Boschetto, seated
on the top of a high Rock, not without great Charge, all the Earth being
carried up to it; and planted with Orange, Lemon, Citron, Pomegranate, Olive,
and other Trees; together with several rare and unusual Plants: Near which he
has a Park of Deer, a Warren of Hares, Coneys, and a Wood of Olive Trees,
wherein breed Stags and Hinds; besides several excellent natural Springs, and
rare artificial Waterworks; and a Palace beautified with spacious Halls and
Chambers, with a flat Roof, upon which some Pieces of Ordnance are planted:
From this Place you will easily believe the Prospect cannot be unpleasant.
Between this Court Boschetto, and Old Malta, lies Gardino del Vescone, The
Garden of the Bishop.

Not far from Citta Vecchia may be seen a Grot of white, but soft Stone,
wherein the Apostle Paul, after his Shipwreck, Preached: And three Italian
Miles further, The Court Balda.
the Court Balda, or Vassalo, extraordinarily frequented; for it has an
Orchard so fruitful, that the like is not in the whole Island; planted with
many sorts of very large Grapes, white and brown Figs, and delicious Peaches,
with a most delightful Fountain. A Mile without Valette lies a Cloister,
called St. Mattheo della Makkluba, where, upon St. Matthias day, a great Fair
is holden.

Fifty or sixty Paces from that Cloister, formerly stood the Town Makkluba, but
now quite swallowed up in Earth, nothing remaining but a Hole forty or fifty
Fathom deep, and in the opening at the top, five hundred Paces in compass.

Three Miles from thence, right over against the Island Forfala, you arrive at
Gibel Ciantor, containing a Garden, and small Church, under which is a Cave,
with a very fair Spring, furnished with a Stone Table, and Seat, for those that
come thither to recreate and take their pleasure. From this place runs a
steep winding Way, from below, to the top of the Mountain; and from thence
another, as rugged and rocky, to Boschetto beforementioned.

The Ground, The strange power of the Stony Rocks.
or rather the Rocks (which are most of them black, yellow, and soft, and
therefore easy to be wrought) they say, that since the Apostle Saint Paul did
that Miracle there, have been blessed, with producing certain great and small
Serpents Tongues, of several colors and forms; as also of round Orange
colored, and black Serpents eyes and Teeth, and certain Scaly Stones, in the
form of a Serpents Skin; besides several other rarities, so shaped, that they
seem to represent the Life. These Eyes and Serpents Tongues, they say, have a
wonderful virtue in them, against all sorts of Poison, and Bitings of Venomous
Beasts; not only to preserve from the hurt, but afford a powerful Remedy to
such as have taken Poison, or been bitten by any Venomous Creature; yea some
have no less commended them than the Bezoar-Stone in Europe.

The manner of using these Stones, is thus; The Eyes are commonly worn upon the
Ring-finger, as a precious Stone, so that it may touch the bare Skin, and the
Tongues upon the Neck and Arms, Water, or Wine, or some other moisture mingled
therewith and taken, or therein for a while laid to steep, or else Wine or
Water, drank out of Cups or Cans made thereof: Also the Stone of St. Paul's
Cave, being very white and soft, has the like virtue ascribed to it against
all Biting and Stinging of Venomous Beasts.

The whole Island stands upon a Rock, so that no place can be found, where the
Earth lies more than four Foot deep; the best quarter is about Boschetto, and
if the rest of the Island were as this, the Knights would not need to fetch
their Provisions from abroad; yet notwithstanding the natural unfruitfulness,
by labor and diligence, the Soil brings forth many things, particularly Corn,
but in no great abundance, for all will not suffice to feed the Inhabitants
above three months; the rest they fetch from Sicily, and other places.

Cummin, in the Arabic called Camum or Cemum, and by the Indians in the
Malayan Tongue, Jenta Nyeran, they Sow in great quantity, because it thrives,
as delighting in a stony Soil. They have of two sorts, one white, slender and
sharp, of a rank smell, and tart in taste, called Cimonageron, that is, wild
Cummin, and like the Ethiopian Cummin of the Apothecaries: The other much
smaller, like Annise-seed, whitish, having a deadish taste, and sweetish. The
first they use in stead of Spice, the other the Inhabitants mix with Bread, to
give it a pleasant relish; from hence they are brought all over Europe.

Also Cotton, as good, if not much better than grows any where else; only we
must observe, that the Cotton Planted here is but an Herb or Shrub, with a
stalk of a Foot and half long, sown, and dying every year; but the other which
grows in Egypt, and all over Assia, shoots up to the height of a Tree, with a
Stem, and hard woody Boughs. The Fruit of this Maltesian Plant, grows to the
bigness of a Hasle-Nut, those that are ripe split open into three or four sharp
Wedges, out of which the soft white Wool appears, enclosing within a slender
white and Oily Seed, in taste like an Almond or Pine-Kernel.

The Inhabitants Sow it upon the Barly-Land, after the Crop taken off, that
is, in April and May, and pulled up in September. It grows also in Lemnos,
Candia, Sicily, and France, brought thither out of Italy. They say, the profit
arising thereby every year, amounts to three hundred Cantares of Cotton, every
Cantare being a hundred weight.

Many sorts of Flowers, especially Roses of a lovely smell, flourish here;
besides Thime, and all sorts of Herbs, of a most pleasant taste. And the Vines
bear Grapes, as big as Plums, both white and red, which hang five Months in
the year ripe on the Vine. They have also Olives, Almonds, very excellent
Figgs, sweet and sharp Citrons, of an extraordinary bigness and beauty.
Apricocks, and very large Peaches, besides Melons, Dates, and other Fruits,
common in Europe. For want of Wood they burn the Dung of Beasts dried in the
Sun, or wild Thistles: But some of the better sort use the Wood of Olive Trees
for Fuel, brought from Cicily, and sold by the pound.

The Villagers keep many Sheep, Goats, Hogs; Mules, and Asses, Beasts.
which serve in stead of Horses: Their working-Horses, to the number of about
four or five hundred, are all Unshod, and fed only with Straw and Fetches.
Conies, and Hares, Partridges, and Quails breed here in great numbers; but
Falcons and many other Fowl flock thither, especially in March and September,
in great multitudes out of other Countries.

The People of Bosio are of opinion, that not so much as one Serpent is found
upon this Island, nor any other Venomous Creature; and that if any be brought
from other places, they die presently. But Crusius affirms, there are Serpents
and Scorpions, but without Poison, caused by the Benediction of the Apostle,
since his Shipwreck, and the shaking of the Viper from his hand into the fire;
insomuch, that no person born in Malta, (others say also, of all Nations that
inhabit there) can receive hurt from them; and confirm it by Occular Testimony,
That several Persons, Young, and Old, have played with, handled, and held them
to their naked Breasts and Bodies, without receiving the least hurt.

Men and Women of Quality, Clothing.
go Clothed after the Cicilian and Italian manner; but the Villagers wear a
small and single Coat, called Capotin, which covers half their Thighs, with a
Cape, and a blew Cap upon their heads; and some have Shoes of rough Goats
Leather, tied with a Leather Point; but Foraigners go every one Habited
according to the fashion of his Country.

The Natives use a proper and peculiar Tongue, Language.
that is, broken Arabic, and every Town almost has a peculiar Tone and
Propriety: The Vulgar can speak no other than their Mother Tongue, but the
Citizens have learnt Italian and French.

Their Marriages are made by giving of a Handkerchief, and the Bride and
Bridegroom commonly lie together before the perfecting of Ecclesiastical
Ceremonies.

They Bury their Dead after the Grecian fashion, Burial.
that is, hiring Mourners to follow the Corpse, who for their small stipend, not
only make hideous Ululations, but tear their Hair, and scratch their Faces;
the Friends cutting their Hair off, and casting it upon the Corpse.

Most of the Inhabitants are poor, Riches.
because of the infertility of the place, and maintain themselves by Planting
Cummin-seed and Cotton, which they exchange with those of Cicily for Corn,
Wine, fresh and salted Flesh, Pease and Beans, Oil, and other Commodities.

The Country People use long Swords, A^^^s.
and great Daggers, Lances or Darts, not less than our Half-Pikes, which they
use with great dexterity on Horseback; but the Knights have Muskets, and other
Firearms.

The Walls, Bulwarks, Breast-works; Cities and Castles, are Fortified with
great numbers of Ordnance, besides the beforementioned Armory in Valetta; and
seven well Rigged and stoutly Manned Galleys, which the Knights of the Order
always keep ready for Fighting, Commanded by an Admiral, who carries a Silver
Cross in his Flag, upon a Red Field; so that the Italians Proverbially say of
this Island, Malta fior del Mundo, Malta is the Flower of the World; partly in
respect of their Arms, Fortifications, and Castles; partly because of the
valiant Defenders, the Malta Knights, who have had their abode here many years.

They suppose at this day there are upon the whole Island Forty thousand Souls,
the Knights and Soldiers included. In the Year Fifteen hundred and ninety, the
number of them (according to Bosio) was no more than seven and twenty thousand,
but since greatly increased.

In the two Burgs, lie near two thousand Men; the Knights keep about four
hundred Horses to serve in the Wars, which every six Months are Trained and
Mustered; besides, every Knight who has four hundred Scudi, must keep a Horse
in his Stable ready for service.

This Island was anciently under the Jurisdiction of King Battus, Ancient
Government.
an Enemy of Queen Dido, but afterward Subjected to the Carthagenians; as at
this day many Stone Columns found therein, and Insculp'd with Punick Letters.
Afterward the Romans became Masters of it, at the same time when they
Conquered Cicily, by whom deserted, the Mahumetans took into possession, about
the Year of our Lord, Eight hundred twenty eight; but they were driven thence
in the Year One thousand and ninety, by Roger the Norman, Duke of Cicily, who
reduced it under his own Power, from whom it remained under the King of Cicily,
till overcome by the Emperor Charles the First, after his Conquest of Cicily
and Naples, who gave it away to the Knights of St. John's Order, then called
Knights of Rhodes, and at this day Malta Knights; as appears by Monimus of
Utina, exhorting Philip the Second to recieve them.

But for the better information of the beginning and continuance of this Order
of Knights, the Possessors and Lords of this Island, it will be necessary to
deduce the matter somewhat higher.

When the City Jerusalem was exceedingly harrased by the Saracens, The original
of St. John's Order, or Knights of Malta
who possessed the same, Califf Aron used the Christians more gently, because
of a good understanding between Charles the Great, first Emperor of Germany and
him; but after his death, this City fell into greater miseries, by quarrels
between the Mahumetans of Persia and Egypt, for now it was under the Persians,
and then under the Egyptians, who at last growing Masters of the Holy Land,
treated the Christians very severely, and caused the Church of the
Holy-Sepulchre to be Ruined, which remained seven and thirty years desolate,
till the Reign of Constantine Monamaque, Emperor of Constantinople, who Rebuilt
it at his own Charge, with the consent of Bomensor, Califf of Bomansar, by
others called Maabad Abutamin, Mustansir Billa, Son of Ali Taher, in the Year
One thousand forty eight.

At the same time some Nobles and Italian Merchants of the City Amalfi, in the
Kingdom of Naples, visited much the Havens and Sea-Towns of Syria and Egypt,
carrying thither by Shipping rare and precious Commodities, which were so
acceptable to the Natives of that Country, that the bringers were respected by
all persons, even the Governors and Califfs themselves; by which means they had
liberty to Trade every where, and visit the City of Jerusalem, and the
Holy Land: But they having no Dewlling Place for their abode, nor any Church to
exercise their Religion, concluded to entreat the Califf of Egypt to grant them
a place in Jerusalem, whereon they might build a Church, with a house for their
abode, who immediately granted them a place near The Church of the
Resurrection, where they afterward built a Church to the honor of the Virgin
Mary, with a Cloister and House. Afterward they sent for from the Mountain
Cassin, an Abbot, with Monks of the Order of St. Benedict, to whom they gave
the same Church and Cloister, with a proviso to receive and entertain all
Christian Pilgrims or Travelers; and this Church was called St. Mary the
Latin, because built by the Latin Christians. On the report of this Work begun,
many Men and Women betook themselves thither: And therefore that the Women
might have a more honorable abode, another Cloister was built, by the name of
St. Mary Magdalene, into which a certain number of Religious Women betook
themselves, to receive and entertain all Pilgrimesses which came thither. But
when at last these Cloisters began to grow too small for such great numbers as
thither resorted, the Sisterhood concluded to build a great Hospital or
Almshouse, for entertainment both of Sick and Well; and put at the same time
an Overseer therein, chosen by the Abbot. They built also next it a Church, by
the name of St. John Baptist, because they had understood, That Zacharias, the
Father of St. John Baptist, had often traveled to this Place.

These Cloisters, and this Hospital, for want of Revenues, were only maintained
by Alms, sent to them by those of Amalfi, and other parts of Italy which Traded
in Syria; which continued as long as Jerusalem remained in the Hands of the
Infidels: In which time a certain Holy Person, by name Gerard, was Overseer of
this Hospital; and over the Cloister of Women, a Roman Virgin called Agnes.
When this Gerard had served this Hospital a long time, he concluded, with the
Advice of his Benefactors, to take upon him the Apparel or Habit which the
Knights at this day wear; that is, a black Cloak or Coat, with a white
eight-pointed Cross upon it. The like the Abbess Agnes and their Institution
was allowed by Pope Honorius the Second, and the Patriarch of Jerusalem. Gramay
affirms, That at the entreaty of this Gerard, this Order was allowed in the
year Eleven hundred and thirteen, by Pope Paschal the Second, under the
Discipline of St. Augustine, which has been ever since followed by them: And
likewise the same Pope Paschal took the same Gerard, and these Hospitallers
(for so they were at first called, from this Hospital) under his Protection,
and granted them great Privileges, commanding, That after the death of this
Gerard, they should choose another Governor, to whom was given the Title of
Master of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem. Megisser affirms, That when the
Christian Princes had Besieged Jerusalem, under the Conduct of Godfrey of
Bouillon, Duke of Lorain, as Chief Commander, these Hospitallers joined
privately with him, and by means of their Assistance beat the Turks, and won
the City, in the year Eleven hundred and nineteen. This Godfrey of Bouillon,
being afterward chosen King of Jerusalem by the Christians, gave to this Order
great Gifts, and put into their Hands the Government of many Towns, to defend
the same.

In the year Eleven hundred seventy eight, these Hospitallers fought with
Saladine Caliph of Egypt, and won a great Victory; but with the loss of the
Grand Master De Mozins; there remaining on the Mahumetan side above five
thousand slain. In like manner, the Knights in the same year, in July, under
the Command of the Grand Master Garnier, gave a bloody Battle to that Enemy,
wherein Guy the Christian King of Jerusalem, and the chiefest of the Realm
remained Prisoners, Downfall of the Knights.
with a downfall of all the Knights: The Grand Master himself mortally wounded,
died of his Wounds ten days afterward.

The twelfth of October, They are drove out of Jerusalem.
in the same Year, Jerusalem was Conquered by Saladine; by which means, all the
Christians of the Latin Church, and these Hospitallers, were driven out of the
City, which with their own Money redeemed above thirty thousand Prisoners.
These did aid the Christian Princes very much, in the regaining of the Holy
Land, and the City Akre, which happened in the year Eleven hundred ninety one,
the twelfth of July, at which place they have since had their usual abode: And
notwithstanding the loss of Jerusalem, the Hospitallers and Templars remained
Masters over one part of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and made Ameury van
Ansignan, King of Cyprus, King of Jerusalem; but after his decease, the Knights
and Templars governed it themselves, under the Grand Master Godfrey Rat, as
Chief Commander.

About the year Twelve hundred twenty five, these Knights overcame the City
Damiata in Egypt, under the Conduct of the Grand Master Guerin de Montaign.

In the Year twelve hundred and sixty, under the Grand Master Haegues de Revel,
they took from the Saracens the Castle of Lebion; whereupon the Sultan
concluded to destroy and root out all the Hospitallers, and to that end
Besieged and took the Castle of Assure in the Year One thousand two hundred
sixty five; and the following year the Hospitallers and Templars were beaten by
the City Ptolemais, or Alkre, or Acon; three years afterward they lost the
Castle of Krak, or Montreol.

In the Year Twelve hundred eighty two, The Knights are drove out of the
Holy Land.
the Hospitallers obtained a great Victory under the Grand Master Nicholas de
Orgui, against the Turks, Besieging the Castle of Margat, their chiefest
strength; which yet was delivered up in the Year twelve hundred eighty five to
the Sultan Melechsait; from whence they went to the City Alkre, but stayed not
there; for by the loss of Tripoli in Syria, and likewise of Sidon and Barut, in
the Year twelve hundred eighty nine; and the before-nam'd Alkre, in the Year
Twelve hundred ninety one, the eighteenth of May, to the Sultan Melekseraf, all
the Christians, and by consequence these Knights were utterly expelled out of
the Holy Land, after a possession of a hundred ninety one Years, ten Months,
and three days, since the winning thereof by Godfrey of Bouillon.

The Knights betook themselves from thence to the Island of Cyprus, under the
Grand Master Jan de Villices, where the King gave him and the Templars the City
and Haven of Timesso for their abode.

Pope Clement the First, granted afterward to this Order, all the Goods and
Lands which they took from the Infidels; for which cause they gathered a strong
Army, under the Command of the Grand Master Foulques Villaret, and took Rhodes
from the Turks, with several other adjacent Islands; whereupon they removed
from Cyprus to Rhodes, and were since called The Knights of Rhodes. About this
time the Order of Knights Templars was suppressed, and their Goods conferred
upon these Knights by the Pope.

A long time they defended Rhodes against the assaults of the mahumetans,
chiefly in the time of Habusar, Sultan of Egypt, who Besieged it five years;
and in the Year Fourteen hundred and eight, the Grand-Seignior Mahomet, or
Mihammed, attempted with an Army of Three hundred thousand Men, but was
necessitated to leave it with a great loss of Soldiers; but at last the Bassa
Ibrahim, by the Command of Solomon the Magnificent, overcame the City, and the
whole Island in the Year Fifteen hundred twenty two, on the day of St. John
Baptist, having an Army of two hundred thousand men, whereof the Siege devoured
above a hundred thousand, whereas the Island was scarce furnished with six
hundred Knights, and five thousand Inhabitants.

After the loss of this Island, they went away from it, according to the
Agreement made with the Turks, and Landed first at Castro in Candia, but went
thence to Messina in Cicilia; and from thence, in the Year Fifteen hundred
twenty three, to Civita Vecchia; thence again to Viterbo, a City in Tuskani,
where the Pope entertained them a while; they went from Viterbo in July, in the
Year Fifteen hundred twenty seven, to Cornetto, from thence to Franche, and
from Franche to Nize in Savoy: out of this, in the Year Fifteen hundred twenty
nine, they betook themselves to the City Auguste in Cicilia, and from thence to
Sarragoa, where they remained by leave of the Emperor Charles the First, who
took a great content in them for their Valor, which they manifested every
where, to the destroying of the Turks and Corsairs; insomuch, that Charles at
last, in the Year Fifteen hundred and thirty, the four and twentieth of March,
out of a voluntary Donation, transferred the Tenancy to the Knights of the
Islands of Malta and Goza aforementioned, with a Proviso to give every year for
an Acknowledgment, a Falcon, which the Grand Master should bring himself, or
send to the Viceroy of Sicily.

In the same Year, The Knights take their abode in Malta.
the six and twentieth of October, the Knights took possession thereof, under
the Grand Master Philip de Villiers, and have since that been called, The
Knights of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem in Malta, or singly, Knights of
Malta.

The intention of instituting this Order in the beginning, was to serve the
Pilgrims which traveled to Jerusalem, and to assist them with all their Power
to keep the Ways secure for such as traveled to visit the Holy Sepulchers. But
at this day their chiefest business is against the Turk, and all Infidels, and
to serve Christendom as a Buckler of Defense against them.

These Knights glory in themselves, A Letter from the Grand Master Lackaris.
that they are an Order which hitherto has had no other Foes, than those that
are Enemies to the Name of Christ, being a renowned as well as an admirable
Institution, without advantage, or any other reward than that of Virtue, their
probity continually exercising it self in the prudent Education of its noble
Posterity, even with the hazard of their lives; and wishing nothing else, but
to persevere in the showing of their Valor in Fighting against the Wicked. They
manage great Wars against the Turks and all Infidells, without joining or
confederating with any Party in the Quarrel of Christendom, and are by all
Christian Princes known to be impartial, being indeed an Order consisting of
the flower of the Nobility of all Europe, established in the defense of
Christian Princes, who by their glorious Enterprises of a renowned and Holy
War, have five whole Ages approved themselves famous and honorable toward
Christendom, and at all times formidable to their Enemies. They have in
Services and Warlike Exploits so highly merited of the Roman Emperors, Kings,
and other Christian Princes, that they stand in a perpetual League with them,
and have been received into the Protection of the Roman Empire, according to
the purport of the Letters from the Emperor Charles the fifth given and granted
at Antwerp, the four and twentieth of May, in the Year Fifteen hundred and
forty, where he says:

The aforesaid Order many years since, and even beyond imagination, have been a
continual Defense against the Turk, that great Persecutor of our Faith, and
have most valiantly spent their Blood against him for the defense of Religion,
and performed many excellent Deeds; whereupon our Predecessors, Roman Emperors
and Kings, have received them into singular Protection and Favor.

The Popes, who confirmed the Institution of this Order, held to be Temporal
and Secular, not only in respect of their chiefest Employment, but for that
they stand exempted both in their Persons and Goods, from the Power and
Authority of the Clergy. All Temporal Princes and Lords in their Leagues with
this Order, have always distinguished them from the Spiritual, neither are
their Goods chargeable with Impositions as those comprised under the Colleges,
or Cloisters of other Spiritual Societies.

This Order possesses in several Countries of Europe, The Goods of this Order.
as in France, Spain, Portugal, Germany, the Spanish Netherlands, many Houses
and Goods of the Country, called Commanderies, that is, Offices, Places, and
Governments.

This Order used formerly, Laskaris in a Letter of (...).
in the time of the Spaniards, to possess several Goods and Commanderies in the
United Netherlands, especially at Harlem, called The Goods of the Order of St.
Johns-House in Harlem, which they hold to be wholly incorporated and annexed to
the Grand Master of Malta, and the Grand Prior.

Many times have the Knights requested of that State the appointment of these
Commanderies, particularly the Grand Master Laskaris himself, by Letters of the
fifteenth of September, in the Year Sixteen hundred fifty two, requested of the
States, that by their Authority they might be admitted to the Bailiwick of
Utrecht, the Commanderie of Haerlem, and other Goods, within their hands: and
farther to that end sent Ambassadors to present their Case to the Assembly of
the States, but could never reap any fruit of their Design. Over all the Goods
in the Netherlands, the Landgrave of Hess, Grand Prior and supreme Master of
this Order in Germany, has obtained the Investiture.

These Knights set a high esteem upon their Rights and Privileges, that they
may employ them to the designed use in their Hospital, and the Holy War against
the Infidels: and also for that they approve the honorable Reward of their
Order, for whose prudent and illustrious Deeds against the Infidels, they say
they were granted them.

The Knights of this Order are distinguished into several ranks: The Knights
are distinguished into several Ranks.
The first are Noble Knights, called Knights of Justice, and bear a Cross of
Gold: These must show a Noble or Gentile Extract for four Descents both of
Fathers and Mothers side, before they can be received. Also Knights of Grace,
or Favor; but they differ little from the first, only that they cannot come to
the Dignity of the great Cross, nor of Grand-Master.

There are Priests which celebrate Mass, but give Money for their reception
into this Order; besides the Friars Servants at Arms, being Spiritual Persons,
wearing a Cross of Cloth upon their Cloak, but by permission of the
Grand-Master, they may wear one of Gold: These are appointed to Offices, having
small Commanderies under them, and obtain Place in the Order, after four
Expeditions in the Galleys, or ten years abode in Malta. The Priests make but
two Expeditions in the Galleys, yet there is but one of them in every Galley,
called The Prior of the Galley.

Some Inhabitants in the Islands wear a half Cross, and therefore called
Demicrucians, by that means free from Taxes and Imposts, but never admitted,
nor can execute a Commanderie, nor have Dignities in the Order.

Pensioners Donatists, that is, such as are presented with no other intent than
to serve the Auberges, and maintained by the Knights of every Language to which
they belong.

All the Knights are distinguished into eight several Languages: The Knights
are distinguished into eight Languages.
The first is of Provence; these are honored with the Dignities of Commanders,
Language of Provence.
of Grand-Prior of St. Giles, the Grand-Prior of Toulouse, and Bailiff of
Monosque. In the Priory of St. Giles is fifty Commanderies, that is, inferior
Governments, and in that of Toulouse, five and thirty.

The second, that of Avergne: Of these is the Marshal of the Order, Language of
Avergne.
the Grand-Prior of Avergne, who has under him forty Commanderies, and eight
Servants, the Bailiff of Laureal, at this day Lions.

The third is that of France: Of these is the Grand-Hostilier, Language of
France.
the Grand-Prior of France, with five and forty Commanderies under them; the
Prior of Aquitain, with sixty five; the Prior of Champain, with four and
twenty; the Bailiwick of Moree; and lastly the Grand-Treasurer.

The fourth, that of Italy: Language of Italy.
Among these we have the Admiral of the Order of Rome, with nineteen
Commanderies under him; the Prior of Lombardy, with five and forty; the Prior
of Venice, with seven and twenty; the Priors of Barlette and Capove, who
together have five and twenty; the Prior of Messine, with twelve; the Prior of
Pise, with six and twenty; the Bailiff of St. Euphemie; of St. Stephen of
Monopoli; of the Holy Trinity of Venice; and of St. John of Naples.

The fifth of Arragon, Language of Arragon.
containing Arragon, Catalonia, and Navarre: Out of these they choose the Grand
Protector of the Order; the Grand Prior of Arragon, otherwise the Castilian of
Emposte, having nine and twenty Commanderies; the Prior of Catalonia, eight and
twenty; the Prior of Navarre, seventeen; and the Bailiff of the City of Caps,
or Capes in Barbary, while Tripolis was under the Christians, but now totally
lost.

The sixth, Language of England.
that of England, which comprehended the Turcopoliers, the Priors of England
and Ireland, with two and thirty Commanderies: but these have been suppressed
many years.

The seventh, The Germane Language.
of Germany; whence is elected the Grand Bailiff; the Prior of Germany, at this
present the Landgrave of Hess, a Prince of the Empire, who by virtue thereof
has under him in high and low Germany sixty seven Commanderies; yet those in
the United Netherlands have been seized and alienated several years. Within
this also are comprised the Prior of Bohemia and Hungary, and the Bailiff of
Brandenburgh.

The eighth is the Language of Castile, Language of Castile.
containing Leon and Portugal. This furnishes Persons for the Dignity of the
Grand Chancellor of the Order, the Priories of Castile and Leon, with seven and
twenty Commanderies under them; the Priory of Portugal, with one and thirty;
the Bailiff of Povede; the Bailiwicks of Negropont lies common to Castile and
Arragon.

All Knights are received into this Order, Who are received into this Order.
if they can show their Gentility before the Commissaries, appointed by the
Provincial Chapiters, and in their absence, the Senior Deputy.

The Servants, or Ministering Friars, and Priests or Chaplains, show the Honesty
of their Parents, and their own good Education.

Out of this number are chosen the Master of the Court of the Grand Master, the
chief Esquire or Armor-bearer, his Deputy, and the Judge-Advocate.

All received into this Order make three Promises, The Election of the Order.
or Vows, viz. of Chastity, Obedience, and voluntary Poverty, with promising
moreover to wage War against the Idolaters and Mahumetans.

Every Brother, or Knight, is bound to wear a black Mantle, with a white
eight-pointed Cross, and in the time of War, a red Mandilion, or Cassock over
their Armor, which they call the Sopravest, or upper Garment, with a white
Cross, but not eight-pointed, as upon the Mantle: But such as have resided ten
years in Malta, and made four Expeditions in Person in the Galleys, may wear
the great Cross upon the Breast; yet they must afterward present their Request
in full Council. The Grand Master, the Bishop of Malta, the Prior of the Church
of St. John, the Conventual and Capital Bailiffs, wear the great Cross upon
their Breasts; but all the other, the little One. Every Brother by obligation
must every day repeat an hundred and fifty Pater Nosters for such as have been
slain in their Wars: But the Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and Clerks, perform
other Offices. All (except the Sons of great Lords, generated by a Father,
Grandfather, and great Grandfather of Temporal Nobility) Sons of covetous
Persons, or that are sprung from Saracens, or Mahumetans, (though deriving from
the greatest Princes) such as do Homage to any other Order, (though by the
appointment of the Chapter) greatly Deformed, Murderers, or vicious People,
nor any under eight and twenty years of age, may be received into this Order:
yet the Grand Master may admit Boys of twelve years old, of what Nation soever
they be, into Salary. Those also designed to be taken into this Order, must be
of comely Personage, strong Limbs, sound in Body and Mind, and of good
Behavior; and every one must show that he belongs to the Priory he says he is
of. They must as Probationers before they receive the Garment, stay a Year and
a Day in the Cloister. The Servants, Brothers, and Chaplains, must not be of
Vulgar Extract, but must manifest that they are descended from Worthy Parents,
which have never wrought in any Handicraft, and have always lived honorably
and virtuously. The Pensioners, or Half-Cross-men, are to be received by
Bailiffs, Priors, and others, with permission of the great Lord, and may wear
but three Branches of the Cross of Malta on the left side of their Coat, and
may not set the upper Branch. These may not be received if they be descended
from Jews, Saracens, or Mahumetans; or if they have not lived well, or have
exercised any Mechannick Art, and have not given some part of their Goods or
Estate to the Order: but they may be Married. No Knight, of what Dignity
soever, may bestow his Goods farther than his Salary. For petty Crimes they
allow a Sanctuary; but Robbers, or Pirates, burners of Houses, betrayers of
their Country, Thieves, false Witnesses, sacrilegious Persons, and such like,
are utterly excluded from all Mercy.

The chief Head of this Order calls himself Lowly, The Title of the Grand
Master.
or Humble Servant of the holy House, or Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, and
of the Order of Soldiers of the holy Sepulcher of our Lord, Defender of
Christian Arms. But the received Title is, The Illustrious and most Reverend
Prince, Lord Prior A. of V. Great Master of the Hospital of St. John of
Jerusalem, Prince of Malta and Gaza.

The Habit of the Grand Master is a long Coat, Garments.
hanging down to the Ground, with wide Sleeves, and a round Bonnet upon his
Head. For the upholding of his State and Grandeur, he has several
Commanderies, lying in every Priory, and united to the Grand Mastership.

After the death of one Grand Master, the Knights choose another, who is
afterward Inaugurated with great State and Solemnity.

In brief, we will give you a Catalogue of all the Grand Masters since Gerard,
the first Instituter of this Order, to the present Cottoner, by way of
Chronology.

The first Grand Master, or rather Founder, of this Order was, The first Grand
Master.
as before related, one Gerard, though Menenius sets down one Raymond du Puy
for the first, affirming that Gerard gave only the first Fundamental Rules,
but Raymond du Puy was the first Grand Master; however; we will begin with
Gerard, who died in the Year 1118.

Raymond du Puy, a Dauphiner or Florentine, as Massiger will have it, by the
Latins of his time called De Podio, the first Grand Master of the Hospital of
St. John, according to the Tradition of the Knights; although some set before
him one Roger, who in the Year 1130. as they say, had the Government. This
Raymond seeing the Society increase in number, grow rich in Means, and that
they were most of them nobly descended, persuaded them by his example to take
up Arms for the defense of the Faith, as a Matter suitable to their Devotion
and Nobility. According to the relation of the Knights themselves, this
Raymond, and not Gerard, Instituted the wearing of a black Coat, with an
eight-pointed white Cross. He also settled a general Assembly, wherein for the
future, Vacancies were to be supplied by the approbation of the Knights: which
Rule Pope Calixtus the second allowed and confirmed in the Year 1120. and
afterward his Successors Decreed, That the Knights should live according to
the Order of St. Augustine. This Raymond first bore in his Standards, or
Banners, a Silver Cross in a yellow Field, by order of Pope Innocent in the
Year 1130. and since that time the Spirituality distinguished into Knights,
Chaplains, and Servants of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem. He died in
the Year 1160.

Augea de Balben, a Dauphiner, died after three years Reign, in the Year 1167.

Arnold de Comps, deceased in the Year 1167.

Gilbert de Assaley, an Englishman, unhappily brought the Order into a Debt of
an hundred thousand Crowns, and therefore was dismissed in the Year 1169. but
coming home to his Country by Sea, was cast away with all his People in the
same Year.

Gaste, or Cast, succeeded, and died within the said Year 1169.

Joubert came next, and died in the Year 1179.

Moger, or Roger de Moulins, was killed in a Battle against Saladin, in the
Year 1187.

Garnier of Naples in Syria, died of a mortal Wound received in Battle, having
Reigned scarce six Months and ten Days, in the Year 1187.

Ermengar, or Emengar extracted out of the House of Aps in Vivarez, died in the
Year 1192.

Godfrey of Duisson, died in the Year 1194.

Alfonsus, a Portuguese, was descended from the Kings of Portugal: but seeing
himself envied by the Knights because of his morosity, laid down his Office,
and went the same Year to Portugal, where he was poisoned by his Brother in the
Year 1026.

Godfrey, or Geofrey le Rat, Grand Prior of France, died in the Year 1027.

Guerin de Montaigu, of Avergne, in the Year 1230.

Bertrand de Texi deceased in Akra in the Year 1240.

Guerin, or Gerin, was taken Prisoner in a Battle against the Infidels,
Corasminers, and sent to the Sultan of Egypt, where he died in the Year 1245.

Bertrand de Comps, a Dauphiner, died of his Wounds received against the Turks,
in the Year 1248.

Peter de Vellebride, taken with Lewis King of France, in a Field-Battel, by
the Sultan of Egypt, Melechsala, and released by the Hospitallers, in the Year
1251. and died at Akra in the same Year.

William de Castelnau, or of New Castile, of the Alberge of Avergne, died in
the Year 1260.

Hugues de Revel, a Dauphiner, ended his Life in the Year 1278.

Nicholas de Orgue, deposed in the Year 1288.

John de Villiers, a Frenchman, died at Cyprus, in the City of Limesso, in the
Year 1203.

Odon des Pins, of Provence, was for his carelessness and covetousnesness, cited
to appear at Rome, and answer the Complaints of the Hospitallers, but died in
the Way to Italy, in the Year 1296.

Guilliam de Villaret, born in Provence, or rather (according to Davity) of the
House of Villaret in Dauphin, died also in Cyprus, having seen the downfall of
all the Templars, in the Year 1338.

Folque, or Fulques de Villaret, a Branch of the same House, was (through the
hatred of the Knights for his overgreat austerity) dismissed, and Maurice de
Pagnak of Provence chosen, to the great dislike of the Pope, who sent two
Prelates to Rhodes to take cognizance of the Matter, with Command to the Grand
Master De Villaret and Pagnak, to appear before him in Avignon, as they did. In
the mean time the Pope chose one Gerard des Pins, Governor of the Order, to be
Grand Master. During this Contest Maurice de Pagnak died at Monpeliers, in the
Year 1322. and then Folque was restored: but seeing himself afterward hated of
the Knights, he laid down his Office in the Year 1323. and lived like a private
Knight: He died the first of September, and was buried at Monpeliers, in the
Year 1327.

Elion of Velleneune, of Provence, was presented by the Knights before the
Pope, to establish him in this Dignity. He held at Monpeliers a general
Assembly, in the year 1330. two years after went to Rhodes, and cleared the
Order from all Debts, and enriched it. He got afterward the Name of The Lucky
Governor: He first commanded the Palace of the Grand Master to be fortified
with Walls and Towers, and divided the Languages, Bailiwicks, and Dignities of
the Order. He died at Rhodes the 27 of May in the year 1346.

Deodat de Gozon of Provence, about four years before his Election had killed a
Dragon or venomous Serpent, which poisoned and devoured the Inhabitants of
Rhodes; for which cause (according to Megisser) he was called. The
Dragon-killer. He died in the year 1353.

Peter of Coraillon of Provence, died the 24 of August, in the year 1355.

Roger des Pins, deceased the 28 of May, in the year 1356.

Raymout Berenger was extracted out of the ancient House of the Berengers of
Dauphin: He would have laid down his Office of his own accord, but Pope Gregory
not permiting of it, he died Master in the year 1373.

Robert de Jully of Julliack, Grand Prior of France, died the 29 of June in the
year 1376.

John Fernandez de Heredia, of the Alberge of Arragon, born at Valentia, was
after a second Marriage made Knight, and chose Grand Master. He besieged the
City of Patras in Morea, slew the Governor in Battle; but was afterward in a
Siege taken by the Turks, to whom he was forced to render Patras, and all the
other conquered Places for his Release; yet the Turks carried him to Albania,
and made him a Slave till the year 1381. when he was released: Afterward he
was deposed from his Dignity by Urban the sixth, because he went to Avignon to
acknowledge Clement the eighth; and in the year 1383. was substituted in his
Place Richard Caracciolo; but the Order would not own him: so that Richard died
at Rome in the year 1395. in the lifetime of Heredia, who yielded up quietly
his Life, in the year 1396.

Filibert de Nadaillack, or rather Naillack, of the French, Grand Prior of
Aquitain, died after a Reign of 25 years, in the year 1421.

Anthony Fluvian, of the Language of Arragon: He Governed the Order with great
Wisdom and Discretion, and died the 29 of October, in the year 1437.

John de Lastick of Dauphin, of the Alberge of Avergne, where he was Prior, and
chosen to the Mastership in his absence: He held before his coming to Rhodes,
an Assembly at Valentia in Dauphin, and came in the year 1438 to Rhodes, and
died the 19 of May, in the year 1454.

Joubert, or Jaques de Milly, of the same Place, and where also he was Prior,
died the 17 of August, in the year 1461.

Peter Raimond Zacosta, by Megisser called Acosta, of Arragon: He erected the
eighth Alberge of Castile and Portugal, whereas before there were but seven,
and built the Tower of St. Nicholas, at the Mouth of the Haven of Rhodes, in
the Place where formerly the Collossus stood. He died at Rome the 21 of
February, in the year 1467.

Baptista Ursina, of the Italians Alberge, sprung from the House of Ursina, a
Prior at Rome, was chose the fourth of March 1467. and died the eighth of June,
in the year 1476.

Peter de Aubusson, Prior of Avergne, died at Rhodes the third of July, in the
80 year of his Age, after a Reign of 27 years, in the year 1503.

Emery de Amboise, Grand Prior of France, died at Rhodes the 13 of November, in
the year 1512.

Guy de Blanchefort, Prior of Avergne, Nephew of the Grand Master of Abousson:
but passing in a Ship to Nice to Sail over to Rhodes, died on the Sea the 24 of
November, in the year 1513.

Fabrice de Caretto, Extracted out of the Stock of Marquis de Finale, a
Genouese, was Elected the fifth of December, in the year 1513. and died the 16
of January, in the year 1521.

Filips de Villiers d'Isle Adam, Grand Prior of France, during whose Government
the Knights lost Rhodes, and got of the Emperor Charles, the Island Malta. He
died at the Age of 70 years, the 21 of August, in the year 1543.

Perin de Ponte, an Italian, born at Ast, Uncle to Pope Julius the third, was
chosen the 26 of August the same year, and died the 17 of November in the year
1535.

Didier de Tolon, of St. Jalle, of the Language of Provence, and Prior of
Toulouse, died at Montpelier, being upon his departure for Malta, the 16 of
September, in the year 1536.

Jan de Homedes, of the Alberge of Arragon, came after his Election the 21 of
January 1538 to Malta. He had lost one of his Eyes in the Siege of Rhodes, and
caused the Forts of St. Elmo and St. Michael to be built, and died in the 80
year of his Age, the 16 of September, in the year 1553.

Claude de la Sengle, of the French number, was chosen at Rome, whether he had
been sent Ambassador, and came to Malta in January 1554. He enriched the Order
very much, and died the 18 of August, in the year 1557.

Jan de Valette, that is to say, Parisot of Provence, was chosen the 21 of
August 1557. to the great content of the whole Order, for the Respect he had
from all Nations. In less than two years he was General, or Admiral of the
Galleys, Marshal of Lango, Great Commander, Prior of St. Giles's, Lieutenant of
the Grand Master, and lastly Grand Master. He erected a Castle on the Island
Goze, forsook the Castle of St. Angelo, and went to the Borough of Malta, which
he valiantly defended in the year 1565. against all the Power of the Turk.
After the breaking up of the Siege, he new fortified the Island, and begun the
new City, from his Name called Valette; whereof he laid the first Stone the 28
of March, in the year 1566, and proceeded in the building of it, with
permission of the Pope for the Laborers to work on Holidays. He died the 21 of
August, (being the day of his Election) in the year 1561.

Peter de Mont of Italy, proceeded in the building of the new City, wherein he
settled the Residence of the Order, and made his entrance into the same with all
his Knights on the 18 of March 1571. and died the 17 of January, in the year
1572.

John Bishop of Cassiere in Provence, but a Gascon born, erected the great
Church of St. John Baptist in Valette, and gave a Revenue of a thousand Crowns,
with a Chapel adjoining, for the Interment of the Corpse of the Grand Masters
his Predecessors de novo. He fell into hatred with many Knights, and was
summoned to Rome. In the mean time Pope Gregory the Eighth sending one Gaspar
Vicomte to Malta, to Govern the Order during his absence, he died at Rome the
21 of December, in the year 1585. aged 78 years.

Hugues de Loubenx Verdale, of the Alberge of Provence, but a Gasconer by
birth, was elected the 12 of January, 1582. He had from his youth exercised
himself in Letters and Arms, amended or repaired the Fortifications of the
Island, reformed the Election of the Order, caused a History to be written of
their Acts, by one Jaques Bosio, to the Expense of the Order of more than two
hundred thousand Crowns, which they were indebted; and therefore was accused by
the Treasury-Chamber, That he had employed it ill. He died at last in Malta,
the fourth of May, in the year 1595.

Martin Garcez, of the Language of Arragon, was Elected the eighth of May,
1595. in the sixtieth year of his Age. He took off Customs and Impositions, and
Commanded, That no Knight, nor Grand Master himself, should particularly for
his own Advantage go and take Prizes of the Turks. He died the seventh of
February, in the year 1601.

Alof de Wignacourt, a Frenchman, had been formerly Grand Hospitaller of the
Order, and Captain of the New City. He was Chosen the 10 of February, in the
year 1601. He furnished the City Valette with good Water from distant Springs,
and strengthened the Island with diverse new Fortifications. He died the fourth
of September, in the year 1622.

Louys de Mendez, of Vasconsales, a Portuguese, was Elected the 27 of
September, in the year 1622. and died the 17 of March in the following year
1623.

Anthony de Paul, of Provence, but extracted from the House of Paul of
Toulouse, was Elected the 12 of March, in the year 1623. and died in the year
1636.

Johan Paulus Laskaris, a Piedmontese, of the Alberge of Provence, was chosen
the 12 of June, 1636. at seventy years of age, having been made Knight for his
great Deserts, the 24 of April, in the year 1583. He died, being 90 years old,
in the year 1657.

After Laskaris, followed Martinis de Rodin, who died in the same year 1657.
Then succeeded Annetus Clermon de Gissans, who died in the year 1660. After
him, Raphael Cottener, who deceased in the year 1663. and was succeeded by
Nicolaus Cottener. So that to conclude, At Jerusalem, Margat, and Ptolomais,
have been four and twenty Grand Masters; at Rhodes, seventeen; and at Malta,
nineteen: In all, sixty.

The Islands of Comin and Cominot.
THe small Islands of Comin and Cominot, lying Westward between Malta and Gozo,
are both subject to the Commands of the Malteses: Both at this day Inhabited;
but first Peopled by the diligent care of the Grand Master Wignacourt, who for
the better security thereof, erected a Fort upon it. Cluverius takes Comin for
the ancient Hefestia, or Island of Vulcan, being very small, not above four
English Miles in compass, but exceeding full of Cattle. To the Southward of
this lies Folfola, or Forfora.

The Island of Goze, or Gozo.
THis Island, by the Italians called Goze; by the Sicilians, Gozo; by the
Inhabitants, Gaudish; and by the Arabians, who sometimes possessed it, Gaudosh;
is taken for the Gaulos of Pliny and Mela, and the Gaudos of Strabo; but
Mercator makes it to be the Isle by the Ancients dedicated to Juno.

It lies about two Miles West-North-West from Malta, containing about eight
Miles in circumference, three in length, and one and a half in breadth; so
surrounded with Cliffs and Rocks, that it is dangerous to come at it.

There are no great Towns, but only small Villages, and the Houses generally
built at great Distances: The chiefest are, Scilendi, Douere, and Muggiare.

The Air is very healthful: The Ground to admiration fertile, with many easy
and delighful Ascents, every where watered with innumerable Springs, and
producing Corn and Fruit, sufficient not only to the Inhabitants, but affording
some to those of Malta. There are a great many Sheep, Hares, Fowl, and plenty
of Honey. Toward the side of Barbary rises a natural Rock, where brave
Faulcons are taken, whereof the Grand Master sends yearly to the King of Spain
for an acknowledgment.

The Inhabitants in Nature resemble those of Malta, and speak, like them,
broken Arabic. There are about five thousand Resiants, whom the Turks invaded
and miserably spoiled in the year Fifteen hundred fifty one. There is a Castle
seated on a Hill; but small, and of little consequence; yet stored with a large
number of Ordnance, and underneath defended by a Fort, newly strengthened in the
year Sixteen hundred and eighteen, with a Bulwark.

The Island is a Peculiar of the Grand Master of Malta, who calls himself
Prince of it, and sends thither one with the Title of Governor every three
Years.

The Inhabitants, although they speak Arabic, nevertheless embrace the
Christian Religion.

The Island of Lampadouse.
THe Island of Lampadouse, by the Italians called Lampedosa, and by Ptolomy,
Lipadusa, lies about five and twenty Miles West-South-West from Malta, in four
and thirty Degrees North Latitude.

It remains desolate, and without Inhabitants. Ariosto, in his Orlando Furioso,
represents this Island without Houses; but Cruzius affirms, That there are the
Ruins seen of an old Castle, Houses, Walls, and Towers of Cities; but that
none can remain there, because of a Nootlot; by which Word they seem to mean,
Apparitions of Spirits, as the same Cruzius insinuates, when he says, The Place
is every Night disturbed and haunted with uncouth and mischievous Spectrums.
However, this remains undoubtedly true, That there is a Church called St. Mary
of Lampadouse, divided into two parts; the one part dedicated to the Religious
of the Christians, and visited by Travelers, which come to offer there Money,
Clothes, Bread, Gunpowder, Bullets, and many other things; the other by the
Turks, which also come there to offer, with like devotion in their way; but
neither of these take away any thing of what is brought there, it being both
reported and believed, That he that brings nothing, or will take any thing,
cannot come off with such their Sacrilegious Pilferings. However, the Knights
come thither with their Galleys, and take away the Gifts there left by the
Christians, which they carry to Sicily, to the Hospital of Trepani, called
Nunciata, for the maintenance of Sick, as well as Poor; or else to Malta.

The Island of Linose.
THe Island of Linose, by Ptolomy (if Sanutus guess not amiss) called Ethuso,
and made African, lies seven or eight Miles, or according to Brevis, five Miles
to the North-East of Lampadouse, in four and thirry Degrees North Latitude,
almost over against the City of Mahometa in Barbary: The Circumference about
five Miles; but affording no convenient place to receive Shipping.

In the Year Fifteen hundred sixty five, the Turks besieged Malta and Gozo,
with eight and thirty thousand Soldiers, and a hundred ninety three Ships,
Galleys, Galleons, and Brigantines, under the chief Command of the Bassa
Mustapha, and his Substitute Bassa Piali, in this order. The Turkish Forces
appeared the eighteenth of June, about four or five Miles from Malta; upon
notice whereof from the Castle, and the Old City St. Angelo, a great fear
possessed the poor People in the Country, who immediately betook themselves,
with what they had, to the Fortified Places; but the Knights, Soldiers, and
other Warlike People, betook themselves to Arms. The Grand Master De Valette
caused immediately all the Water on the Island to be poisoned with Arsnick, or
Ratsbane, and other appropriate Drugs; and mustered all his Forces, consisting
of about eight thousand five hundred Fighting Men of all Nations; with one
Troop of Banditi, or Exiles, of Cicilia, who behaved themselves very valiantly.
In the Night the Turks went out with a Rere-guard of five and thirty Ships, and
set three thousand Men on Shore by the Cape of St. Thomas, who were followed
continually by many others in Barques; for their Landing in the daytime was
prevented by the Marshal Copier, who was drawn thither with a thousand Horse;
but the Grand Master commanded him at last, That as soon as the Enemy was
Landed, he should Retreat to the Fort; and sent the General of Gio, with a
Troop of Knights and Foot-Soldiers, to impede their March. The Marshal, before
he had received these Orders, had sent a Party of Horse, under the Conduct of
one Egaras, to Mugaro, to get Intelligence, and to entrap one Turk or other, in
hopes to learn some News: But this prevented not their coming on, and making
further Attempts; whereby, after many flerce Assaults made upon the Besiged,
with the loss of many of their Men, the Besieged at last were reduced to
Extremity; when in a lucky Hour, they received not only Comfort, but fresh
Courage, by the coming of Don Alvaro Garcia, who after a long stay, provided
with a good number of Ships and Soldiers, came in the sight of Malta about
Noon, on the sixteenth of September, in the year Fifteen hundred fifty six; but
kept till the next Break of day about the Island Comin; and then he approached
with his Fleet under Malta, by a Place called Melekka, and Landed all his Aids
in less than an Hours time; but went back himself with his Galleys to Sicily,
with promise to return again in six days. Hereupon both the Bassa's gave
command to Fire all the Guns against the Fort, and the Island Sengle, and
immediately to bring them on Board the Ships; and so presently forsaking their
Trenches, and setting their Huts on fire, sailed away with their Fleet. The
Bassa's arriving at Galipolis, made their Adventures known to the Grand
Seignior by Letters, and how that since their departure from Constantinople,
they had lost thirty thousand Seamen and Soldiers together. The Grand Seignior
received this Letter with so much discontent, that he threw it on the ground,
and said with a loud voice, That his Sword had no luck in another Man's Hand:
Yet notwithstanding, the Bassa's were received with signs of great Honor at
Constantinople, with the Beatings of Drums, and Sounding of other Instruments.

The Pope also held a Solemn Procession at Rome, wherein himself in Person
assisted, to thank God for the Preservation and Deliverance of Malta; and
wished the Grand Master, in his Letter to him of the tenth of October, much
Happiness with his Glorious Victory. The Grand Master Valette caused by a
Collection to be gathered at Lions, Marseiles, Lovorn, Naples, and on other
Places, Gunpowder, Saltpetre, Metal for casting Guns, all sorts of Arms, Masts
for Shipping, all sorts of Necessaries of Wood and Iron, and other needful
Things, for the strengthening of the Island. Moreover it was concluded (for the
better convenience of the Island) to build a City on the Mountain Sceberras.
Toward the building of this City, since called Valette, thirty thousand
Escues, or Gold Crowns, were taken up at Interest by the Order at Palermo: The
Pope himself gave to that end five thousand out of his own Purse, and sent
thither a great quantity of Gunpowder and Saltpetre, with a Master Builder
called Francois Laparel, and offered the Grand Master a Cardinals Cap; but he
modestly refused the same. The King of Spain gave toward this Building a
Present of thirty thousand Escues; the King of Portugal, thirty thousand
Crusadoes; and the French King, a hundred and forty thousand Guilders. Then
immediately, by the command of the Grand Master, all sorts of People were set
to work upon the Fortifications, and to scowr and cleanse the Ditches and
Moats, to which the Knights themselves put their helping hand: And from the
Castle of St. Elmo, where only before a Ditch had been, there was now a Moat
cut in the Rock, down to the Sea.

The Grand Master being brought to the corner of the Bulwark St. John, after
many Benedictions, and other Ceremonies, laid the first Stone of this City:
Whereupon the Master Builder Laparel kissed his hands, and had bestowed on him
a gold Chain with a Medal, which the Grand Master put about his neck. Under
this Stone several Gold, Silver, and Copper Medals were laid, for an
everlasting Mark and Remembrance of the Building, whereof the best had this
Latin Inscription, Immotam Colli dedit, that is, He has built the City
immovable upon a Rock. On this first Stone Letters were cut, which manifested
the utmost danger which they endured in this Siege, with the Happy Success, and
their Deliverance; and likewise the Occasion and Reason of this Building, with
a Prayer to God, and the Name of the Grand Master Valette the Founder. The same
Grand Master presented the City likewise with a Coat of Arms, being upon a
Round Scutcheon, a Field Or, charged with a Lion Gules: After which Ceremony,
all the Guns round about were Fired, and Gold and Silver Money, Coined with the
Picture of the Grand Master, thrown amongst the People, who all cried, Vive le
Grand Valette, that is, Long live the Grand Valette. The Charges to the Workmen
amounted daily to the Sum of fifteen hundred or two thousand Crowns; but to
ease the Payment, and to make good the Charges, the Grand Master caused Copper
Money to be made: One Piece to the value of two Tarins; on the one side, with
the Arms of the Order and the Grand Master; and on the other side, with the
Mark or Ensign of his Dignity, with these Words about the Border, Non Aes, sed
Fides; that is, Not Coin, but Fidelity.

The Island of Pantalaree.
THis Island (which Mercator holds to be the Cossyra of Ptolomy; but others,
the Pacinia of the same Author) lies between Sicily and the Main Land of
Africa; or between Malta and Tunis, two or three Miles from the City Mahometa,
right over against Susa, a City in the Kingdom of Tunis, in five and thirty
Degrees North Latitude, according to Hues.

It comprehends in Circuit about seven or eight Miles, and in breadth three or
four. On the Seashore, toward the North side, lies a City of the same Name
with the Island, Fortified with an unaccessible Castle, built upon a steep and
pointed Rock.

The most part of it appears Mountainous, full of great Rocks and Cliffs,
yielding a glittering black Stone. In the midst of the Island may be seen an
Abyss, or Bottomless-pit, called Fossa. The dryness of the Soil makes it
incapable to bring forth Rain: But it affords variety of Pot Herbs, abundance
of Cotton, Annise, Capers, Figs, Melons, and excellent Grapes. There grow also
little Trees, by the Moors called Ver; and by those of Sicily, Sinko; which
bears a round, sharp, and red Fruit, but becoming black in ripening, of which
the Inhabitants make Oil, useful not only to burn in Lamps, but to eat;
wherewith the Women anoint their Heads and Hair, both for Ornament, and to make
it grow thicker. There are no Horses, but Oxen in great numbers, with which
they Till the Ground. These Islanders live hardily, and are dexterous in
Swimming; and although they use both the Arabic Habits and Language, yet they
have approved themselves to be good Christians.

Thus having penetrated the Center and Inmost Parts of Africa, till of late
altogether unknown; and accurately set forth the Circumference and Coasts of
its vast Dominions; Describing exactly, and by good Authority, large Tracts of
Land, hitherto not so much as once heard of, or in the least surveyed by the
most Modern Authors: Our next Voyage (by Gods Conduct) we intend for America;
hoping to receive that good Encouragement, that shall enable us to lead you
through that New and Golden World, where you shall meet with the like, or more
Variety of Wonders, than hitherto has pierced any English Ear.

FINIS.
Directions for placing the Maps and Sculps in AFRICA.
THe Map of Africa Fol. 2 Egypt Fol. 35 Alexandria Fol. 55 Cairo Fol. 65 The
Caravan Fol. 69 Balzom, Boome, etc. Fol. 74 The Egyptian Pyramids, a whole
Sheet, Fol. 77 Another half Sheet of the Pyramids ibid. The inside of the great
Pyramid ibid. A half Sheet of the Mummies Fol. 84 Datura, Cassia, Plants Fol.
101 The Map of Barbary Fol. 146 Fez and Morocco Fol. 158 The Royal Palace, with
part of the City Morocco Fol. 164 Salee Fol. 178 La Rache Fol. 195 Arzilla Fol.
196 Tangier Fol. 197 The Fight, and Relation of it Fol. 219 Algier, or Alzier
ibid. Gigeri, or Gigel Fol. 244 Tunis Fol. 251 Tripoli Fol. 273 Nigritarum
Regio Fol. 315 Guinee Fol. 376 The Fort Tacaray Fol. 416 Castle del Mina Fol.
424 Castle del Mina, as in the Portuguese time Fol. 425 Castle Cormantine Fol.
431 The City of Benyn Fol. 470 Aethiopia Inferior Fol. 489 The City of Lovango
Fol. 491 Regna Congo and Angola Fol. 522 Bansa, or the City Salvador Fol. 524
Lovando St. Paulo Fol. 552 Cabo de Bona Esperanza Fol. 584 The Hottentots, and
their Clothing Fol. 590 Aethiopia Superior, vel Interior Fol. 632
In the ISLANDS.
INsula St. Laurentii, vulgo Madagascar Fol. 660 St. Hellena Fol. 727 Insula
Promontorii Fol. 728 The Fort Orange and Nassau upon the Island Goree: The Fort
Nassau within Fol. 732 Insula Canaria Fol. 733 The Pico of Teneriff Fol. 736
Melete Insula, vulg. Malta Fol. 745 Disegno della Citta Valette Fol. 746
The half Sheets whereon are two Plates, are to be placed according to the
direction of the first.


