OBSERVATIONS Upon the EARL OF NEW-CASTLES DECLARATION.

LONDON Printed in the year, 1643.

OBSERVATIONS. upon The Earl of Newcastles LATE DECLARATION.
IT is no new thing (though it was never so frequented as now) for Incendiaries
to accuse the innocents as disturbers of the public tranquillity of the
Country.

Observation. It is well your pen goes on so far without particulars, perhaps
you expect an application from us, and you shall have it; you say (for
Incendiaries to accuse innocents was never so frequent as now:) you say true;
for you have laid on the bias in this so even, as the accusation will draw as
well toward you as us, so as it is no new thing for the Earl of Newcastle to
accuse the Lord Fairfax, Sr. John Hotham, and the rest of our worthies, as in
his former Proclamations and warrants appear, accusing them for disturbing the
Countries tranquillity, when indeed it is his own he means; wrapping the peace
of his Army cunningly in the name of the Country.

Declaration. The Roman was angry that his neighbor should defend himself,
and my Lord that I should protect his Majesty's good subjects.

Observation. He is not angry that you defend your self; so you defend not
your self against the justice of Parliament, nor that you should protect His
Majesty's good subjects, so that the subjects were good you protected; not
Papests, not delinquents, not the malignants of the Country.

Declaration. Neither is the Lord Fairfax able to bring any one particular
instance to make good his general calumniations.

Observation. Here is a whole leaf spent in vindication, and after much ado,
he has at length taken great pains to excuse himself into as much offense
as he stands charged with; for had he said less, the reader perhaps had
believed more; Apologies having ever laid on more than they took off; and it is
always a mistake in the guilty, that they think they have never said enough,
unless they say two much: for particular instances, we shall render a whole
catalogue of Barbarism and inhumanity, as your vast and arbitrary impositions,
your cruel imprisonments, your stripping many good people naked, and so
turning them forth.

Declaration. The Laws are indeed an excellent standard, and measure of
Justice; but when they become spiders webbs, to entangle some and let others
through, and when some men must observe Law, and others be free from all Law.

Observation. The Laws indeed are an excellent, etc. I would your Lordships
Judgment and practice could be reconciled; and that you would not any more
offend against so great a light, and conviction, for the more you admire the
Laws, the more you condemn your self in the breach of them; for your
instance of the spiders web, it suits well with your book, which is not only a
network of wi^ to catch the light opinions, but a poison to venom them.

When some men, you say, most observe Law, and others be free, you would seem
to argue the Parliament into a strange delinquency, as if they broke all Laws
themselves and yet enjoined an obedience to others, but you mistake the Laws,
and distinguish not betwixt the primae and the primis ortae, the Laws of
Parliament, and the Laws in Parliament, or made there; for these latter, they
are dispensable by ordinance and a fundamental power; and a Parliament cannot
in that capacity transgress so as private men, nay as themselves when out of
that capacity and become private, for in Parliament a man sits as a Lawmakers,
out of it, as a Law-observer; and had your Lordship kept your seat there and
not deserted the Kingdom, or derived your power from thence, and not from
personal commands, you had then been also a Lawmakers, whereas now you are a,
Law-breaker.

Declaration. If I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children
cast them out? etc. So say I, if I be a delinquent for raising defensive arms
by virtue of His Majesty's Commission, with whom alone the power of the Militia
is entrusted, etc. What is the Lord Fairfax?

Observation. For the text you tell us of, if I by Beelzebub, etc. I cannot
call it a quotation, but a plundering of Scripture for your own advantage; and
you that would make God speak in so common a business, may find him silent in
a more serious occasion: for the case of the Militia I refer you to the
Parliaments Declarations who have more ably righted themselves than you can
wrong them: for His Majesty's authority, we should easily submit, were it
rightly stated and dispensed, for he is a Kingdoms, not yours, he is a
Parliaments, not a privadoes; if one should show the Kings Seal and had
stolen the Signature, you would soon deny his power; so you show us the Kings
authority, and we answer that you came not rightly to it; and the Justice you
pretend, is as if you should take the Scepter and knock your fellow Subjects in
the head with i^, for justice from a private hand is but revenge, and though
the Scepter be sacred in the Kings hand, yet not when you guide the stroke.

Declaration. Let him show but any one particle of known Law, Statute or
Common, which I have violated,

Observation. An unheard off impudent challenge against clear experience, his
gathering force, his arming of Papists, his Plundering, his boundless taxes,
are these against no known Law? his forcing elections of Mayors, as the Mayor
of York contrary both to Laws and Customs; but what means he by this known
Law? a law known only to himself and the rest? or to the law-dispensers, the
Judges, or to the Parliament which is able to make the Law best known, whose
interpretation must needs carry a more irrepealable and public cognizance,
being the very Court where the Law took being.

Declaration. Either for a Company of far fetched, dreare bought principles,
drawn without Art or Judgment, by factions or unskilful persons out of the law
of nature or nations, as a Lesbianrule to* serve their ambitious ends,

Observation. It seems by this, you are angry at our Laws of Nature and
Nations, calling them in the leaf before, Laws in the Clouds: what? are you
angry that we have yet a Law reviving which you cannot force or wound, and
that our fundamentalls should be hid so deep that you should not be able to
root them out; it had been a sad misfortune had we had no other principles
left us, but what such hands as yours might have pulled from us.

Declaration. Or for Arbitrary government, which knows no bounds or limits,
but the will of head strong discontented persons.

Observation. For the calumny of Arbitrary government cast on the Parliament,
this is an old trick, to bring a Parliamentary power into equal contempt with
the privadoes, but you can hardly persuade the people that this Arbitrary power
in the Parliament, can be such as can hurt the people, as if the Kingdom would
destroy it self, and that public counsels should be totally biassed with
private interests, this is as difficult to believe as to believe that an Army
of Papists should fight for the Protestant Religion, and that to fight against
a Parliament should be the next way to defend the Laws.

Declaration. With what face can these men name the Laws of the Land? when one
of them has lately told the world in print, that they are but inventions of
men, etc.

Observation. For what one of them has told the world in print, I shall not
need to answer, that were to take the pen out of the authors hand to whom it
more justly belongs: for your reproach here in your first line, with what face
can these men name the Laws? I must say rather, with what face can you thus
revile the supreme court of a Kingdom?

Declaration. In a word, I raise arms by the Law and for the Law, to protect
the Laws and Religion established,

Observation. This is the Argument these men fight with, to defend established
Laws, and an established Religion; What? are there no corruptions in either,
no need of any Reformation? sure by the same power our Ancestors made old
Laws, we may make new: but persuade us if you can* that you fight to protect
the Laws; can a Parliaments enemy be a friend to the Laws? can he that would
stop the fountain w^sh well to the streams? will he that wounds the body,
defend the sinews? and for subverting Religion established, is a Reformation
or melioration a subversion or destruction? This is your Lordships ignorance or
rather your Chaplains malignity, for I read Clergy Ink in all your paper.

Declaration. That I have in mine Army some of the Romish Communion, I do not
deny, yet but an handful,

Observation. Of the Romish Communion, a very cleanly and near express for so
foul a business, but let me translate you into plain English, what is this
Romish Communion, but right down Papists, the ever known enemies of our
Religion and Laws, and if Papists, then their Priests and M^sses and
superstitions sure, and thus you break more known Laws; and for the handful
of them, that is no excuse, had you read ever any more Scripture than that you
quoted, you might remember a little leven levens the whole lump, and have no
communion with the unfruitful works of darkness; what concord has Christ and
Baal?

Declaration. Yea, it was a note higher in them in a war, pretended against
Papists to make use of Papists, etc. Nay do they not still admit all sorts of
Sectaries, Brownists, Anabaptists* Familists?

Observation. For this first Calumny you are beholden to a former Declaration
from Court, and I shall at this time be beholden to another of the Parliaments
for wiping it off; for those you call Sectaries, we can easily suffer that, so
we purchase a truth, let us have it under what notion you will, nor can this
parti-coloured-coat you put on it make us love it the less; I would you were
all so minded, not to be so easily worded and witted out of your Religion and
conscience.

Declaration. But let us enquire who are Malignants, are they who will not
willingly part with their Religion upon arbitrary Votes?

Observation. Thus you continue your former reproaches, and to render the
results and suffrages of the Parliament under the contemptible notion of
Arbitrary Votes; and if you would a^ke who are Malignants, let me help you;
What are those that brought the Innovations into the Church, the Tyranny and
Oppressions into the State, and drew his Majesty from the Parliament, and keeps
him still? What are those that bring in an Army of Papists, and those that
daily fill our Kingdom with Arms and Forces from foreign parts? if these be
not Malignants, they are a term very like it.

Declaration. If the common Adversary did not keep them in a kind of Herodian
unity for a time, your Brownists would soon condemn the Disciplinarians for
Malignants, and your Anabaptists again your Brownists,

Observation. These errors and differences you have named to us, if they be
errors, they are but errors on the right hand, and never so destructive as
Papists and Prelatists, nor is the truth lost in these graduall differences of
opinions, the Apostle will instruct you not to condemn one another for that,
so they be not destructives to the foundation: Paul and Barna^as went several
ways in a passion, and yet about the same business, even to preach Christ.

Declaration. Can the Kings forces be said to make an invasion in his own
Dominions etc.

Observation. You tell us of the King under a wrong notion still, as I told you
before, show his name or authority in its right luster, and then you do
something; and though a King cannot make an invasion in his own Dominions, yet
as a mispersuaded and seduced King he may, as a man may destroy his own goods,
kill his own wife, son, or servants; propriety gives a man a just liberty or
prerogative, but no such boundless or arbitrary power.

Declaration. Did they not rob and plunder at Darneton? did they give an
assault upon Pierce-brig to their loss.

Observation. For their plundering at Darnton; as you say of the Romish
Communion, so say I, perhaps the soldier might reach forth his hand further
than his Commander gave him leave, as is usual in times of war, and scarce
preventable. And for the loss at Piercebrig, we know little, but a loss of
powder and shot on our parts, and a loss of a Howard, Colonel and others on
yours.

Declaration. Neither did I then set foot into this Country, but at the earnest
solicitation and ^^treaty of the prime Nobility and Gentry of Yorkshire.

Observation. In the first part, I am glad you decline the first occasion of
your coming, it is a sign you are seeing an error in what you did; and for
the prime Nobility of York-shiere that did solicit you, I perceive your
Lordship understands not our country aright, we shall inform you better, the
Earl of Cumberland was one, who was malignant enough to be General in the
city, but not resolved enough for the field, one whom your Excellency has
casheered from a General into a Leiftenant General, and from thence into his
house at Skipton, where I leave him: the Lord Falconbridge, the Lord Dunbar
were the rest, two, as your Lordship says of the Romish communion, the Lord
Savill, who is now of your cabinet, though not of your counsel, Sr. William
Savill, to whom you were beholding for his timely notice of the loss of
Leedes, and his own provident escape, Sr. Marmaduke Langdaile whom the former
Lord Strafford had affrighted out of all Conscience and Religion at once, and
of a Patriot made him a Court. stalking-horse.

Declaration. And he that sheddeth man's blood without a commission from the
King of Heaven who only has original power over the lives of his creatures,
and no multitude of men in the world collective or representative whatsoever,
by man shall his blood be shed.

Observation. His Lordship his right on the words of the text, but he misses
the sense, he brings in a private law in a public quarrel, and for a
Commission from the King of Heaven, they can sooner show that than his Lordship
his from Heaven, for bringing his Papists, the enemies of truth, to fight for
it, I have said you are Gods, is sure Commission enough; and for your saying,
no collective or representative body whatsoever, is it not civil blasphemy
thus to revile Courts of Justice, and like a casheerd Judge to rail against
that Bench where he can have no place himself.

Declaration. It is an easy thing for an Orator to cast a mist before the eyes
of the People, and to make them a plausible discourse of the cause of God, etc.
they had hard hearts if they could not afford themselves a good word.

Observation. It seems your Lordship has made such use of it your self, you
accuse it in others, and what ever good words they afford themselves, I am sure
he that reads your book will see, you are not far behind, to your self, if
you have not got the start, but whatever good words they give themselves, I
think they have few enough from you, but you would feign jest your readers into
a belief of your accusation, for your naming Religion and Scripture too as you
do, you do so mingle them in your State discourses, as if you had got on your
Chaplains gown, and yet would talk like a Lord.

Declaration. These very men have taught the contrary, have protested the
contrary, ante mota certamina, then themselves condemned this very doctrine
which now they practice.

Observation. What do you tell us of what they then condemn and now practice,
are you angry at any change for the better? and for your Latin ante mota
certamina, I shall draw up a squadron of Latin to give fire on his Lordships,
non est pudor transire admeliora.

Declaration. Are they successors in Dectrine of those first Reformers in
Germany? no; what these old Protestants allowed, etc. these new condemn, this
is beyond the power of an omnipotency to make both parts of a contradiction
true, no Protestants to be Protestants.

Observation. They are successors in Doctrine so far as their Doctrine is
successor to Christ's and his Apostles, but no further, and, it is true, we
condemn what those Protestants allowed, but it is because we have had a longer
light of the Gospel with us, shall we not see clearer at our noon, than they
in the first dawning; and to make a contradiction good, and yet no omnipotency
neither; we are Protestants in protesting with them against Rome and the
corruptions of it, no Protestants in what they protest with it; for Gods
omnipotency I could wish your Lordship more tender of his name and word than
you are, but I know not where to have you for certain, you are now in Divinity,
then in war, you are now in a surplesse, anon in buffe.

Declaration. Could these Ambassadors of peace kept themselves for that theme
which was bequeathed them by their Prince of peace they might long enjoy their
benifices.

Observation. It is well, and your Lordship might add also, could the ministers
have held their peace while your army of Papists had come in at this back door,
and while all the Altars and ceremonies, all the malignity and profaneness, all
the oppression had gone on its course, they had enjoyed their livings, no; the
godly Ministers are not easily bribed to hold their peace at these evils, as
perhaps your Bishops and Doctors of York, Durham, nor can the good Divines so
easily hold their peace as yours, who are less used to the Pulpit.

Declaration. If any Ministers have assumed a Plurality of Professions and
added the sword to the word,

Observation. For wearing a defensive weapon in such offensive times, was never
condemned, no not by Apostolical practice* if a sword had been so inconsistent
with a Divine, I suppose S. Peter had not made use of one in our Saviors
company, and if they please to think of Zwinglius, Charmier, and other such
worthy Divines, who were as famous for their Arms as arguments.

Declarition. Lord how these men are touched to the quick, when any but
themselves do offer to plunder,

Observation. It is well that now at last your Lordship will sport your self
into that guilt, which of late you would not own, we see you are content now
to wrap your self up in the name of a Plunderer, so long as it is in so good
Company.

Declaration. They have spared no age, etc. and all this done by a company of
men crept out now at last out of the bottom of Pandora^s Box.

Observation. His Lordship spends a whole leaf in idle and groundless
aspersions, which I will not confute, but let the whole Country do it, only
this I will add, had he not stuffed his paper wi^h these, his Declaration had
been shorter wasted; he says our company have crept out of the Box, what if I
say, his Lordship then and whole Army has crept into it, for I think they were
boxed of late and that soundly too; I am sorry that his wit gives me the hint
to be thus ridiculous, but since he will laugh, we shall laugh for company.

Declaration. There may be treason against the King, none against them, there
may be* forfeitures of estates to the King, none to them.

Observation. But if they be armed, as they are by a Sovereign or Parliamentary
power, what is done against them in that capacity is as ^uch treason, as he
that strikes a Judge on the Bench or Magistrate in his place, strikes not so
much the man as the Authority, and so are the forfeiture two even to them thus
enabled and ministerialized by Ordinance, and now all he says after, is on
mistaken principles.

Declaration. I made a public Declaration against Plundering, in Print,

Observation. And it was wisely done, however to declare against Plundering,
now had you so good Rhetoric as to persuade the people you plundered not
though you took all, that were a quaint device; but well, as your Lordship
says, it is hard if you cannot afford your self a good word; it had not me
thinks been amiss, had you carried your Declaration in one hand and your sword
in the other, and so have plundered by the book.

Declaration. But what has been done in that kind, has been done by the
Gentry, when I have rather acted the part of the Minister to execute what they
resolved,

Observation. I have rather acted the part of a Minister, etc. your Lordship
does well to speak truth, it is pity but the blame should ly where it ought;
indeed we wonder you casheered not those Gentry ere this, as you have done
Savill and Gower, etc. certainly they have not dealt fairly with you, to bring
you in and promise you pay, and now not to be able to perform, either their
abilities are very little or their honesties.

Declaration. It were a more conscionable and discrect part of them to repair
all as one unanimous body to their Sovereigns Standard, etc.

Observation. They are all under the right Standard already, under the Royal
Parliamentary power, and they fight against you and the rest for painting a
counterfeit, and displaying it to seduce both them and theirs, your Lion, or
Crown, or such paintings is no Regal Authority, colors make not a cause no
more than a Crucifix makes Christianity.

Declaration. His Lordship talks of driving me and my Army out of the
Country, if it be not a flourish, but a true spark of undissembled Gallantry,
he may do well to express for time and place.

Observation. Your Lordship makes a challenge, you know neither has the
Fairefaxes or Hothams of any of our worthies ever declined you in the Field;
nor me thinks should you challenge again having lost it so lately, if you
challenge to save blood and misery, you had better single your self for a
Duel with one of them, but perhaps you fight better in company: I like your
challenge in paper well, it is safe fighting and wri^ing at distance, yet such
speedy decision would do well, I would our Southern Army were in that point of
your Lordships mind, we should not languish so long; for the sparks of
Gallantry you call for in our Champions, I believe you found rather their
flames then their sparks, your Army though^ it too hot staying.

Postscript.
Our Gentry is taxed by this Declaration for breach of Promise, but the breach
was (...) their parts, and conditional convenants as such were, do ever stand
and fall with their conditions.

FINIS.

