Infant Baptism OF CHRIST'S Appointment, OR A Discovery of Infants Interest in
the Covenant with Abraham, showing who are the Spiritual Seed and who the
fleshly Seed.

TOGETHER, With the Improvement of Covenant Interest by Parents and Children.

By S. P. Minister of the Gospel.

Mark. 10. 14. Suffer little Children to come unto me and forbid them not.
LONDON, Printed for Edward Giles, Bookseller in Norwich, near the Market*place.
1687.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Am sensible, that many Books have been already written by others on this
Subject of Infant Baptism, and it was formerly far from my thoughts to make an
addition; but the irregularity of one, who left his Gospel station without
previous declaring any such intention to me, (with what ensued) occasioned my
fresh search into the controversy, and my drawing up the ensuing Sheets,
wherein some Scriptures are cleared further than ever they were formerly to me.
The Importunity of some friends of the same mind with my self, together with
the misrepresenting of me by some others of the contrary persuasion, have
prevailed with me to let them be published.

I am the more encouraged seeing the Primitive Churches or Elders, did often
assert controverted Truths, even when they had a Common Enemy the Pagans, and
after the Arians against them. If the Lord may bless this short Tract, so far
as any who are wavering may be established, and those which have been otherwise
minded may be convinced, I have my design. It is the clearing of truth that I
aim at, and not the reviving or continuing, much less the increasing of
differences.

I think they are most guilty hereof, who will hold Communion with no other
Churches, but those who are of their own persuasion in point of Baptism; if I
may obtain their Conviction that such rigidness is ungrounded, this will then
conduce to peace; and I have given such Scripture grounds for my judgment, as I
hope will prevail further with those which will read without prejudice. I can
hold Communion with those that differ from me about Infant Baptism, provided
they live peaceably otherways, and be of a Gospel conversation.

If any shall reply to this with virulency and passion: I shall spread it
before the Lord and say, the Lord rebuke thee; but if they do it with the
Spirit of meekness, and with such Scripture evidence as I be convinced, that
the substance of what I have here written is Error, I do hereby promise, the
Lord permitting to retract it, if I may be permitted to Print it: So as if I be
silent Reader, thou may know I find no cogent Scripture light for my
Conviction.

I account Infants Covenant interest to be the grand argument for their
Baptism, and so have insisted on the proof of it.

That evasion, that Infants of believing Gentiles are not the Seed of Abraham,
that will not hold; For, if the Infants of believing Jews be, then undeniably
the Infants of believing Gentiles are so.

And run it up to the Primitive Gospel times after the death of Christ, the
Infants of believing Jews were the Seed of Abraham, unless any can prove that
they were cut off by a repeal or otherwise, and so that they were damnified by
their Parents believing.

Yea some Jews did believe on Christ before his Death, and how could their
Infant Seed then be cut off! the Covenant with Abraham was undoubtedly then in
force after the Parents believing, and so their Infant Seed in it still with
their Parents after their believing.

Indeed it cannot be proved, that the Covenant with Abraham, was abrogated by
the Death of Christ, though the Law in some respect was.

Nor can it be proved, that the Jews or their Seed were broken off, by a Repeal
of that Covenant with Abraham, or any otherways then by their own degeneracy
and positive unbelief, Romans 11. 20. because of unbelief they were broken off,
and this I think not at the Death of Christ, but some time after, Act. 13. 46.
and thus by degeneracy and rejecting the Covenant (as now so) in preceding
Ages from the days of Abraham, Parents and Children might be cut off from
Covenant interest, witness Ishmael and Esau, etc. whilst yet Infants Covenant
interest still continued where the Parents did not so degenerate. And seeing
the Infant Seed of the Jews remained in Covenant in Gospel times, till their
Parents were broken off, and especially the Seed of believing Jews; hence the
Infant Seed of believing Gentiles are the Seed of Abraham; for there is no
difference between Jews and Gentiles in Gospel times.

So that Abraham's Covenant being still in force, unless any can prove a repeal
of it, as to that part which concerns Infants they say nothing convincing,
and Infants must be in it still.

And observe, this seems to be the special reason, why there is no express
particular command in the new Testament for the Baptizing of Infants, as of
Believers; because there was no need of a new grant of what they had a right to
ever since the days of Abraham, the sign being entailed to the Covenant
Interest.

The work therefore was, to command the Parents to Repent and Believe on the
Messiah already come, as the way to continue their own interest in the
Covenant, upon which their Infant Seed had their Covenant Interest continued
also, and consequently their right to Baptism the first Sign of it; for Baptism
is not barely by virtue of a Command, but with relation to the Covenant as a
sign thereof. And let it be observed, if Circumcision had still continued as
the token of the Covenant and Infants to pass under it, yet the Messiah being
come, the Preaching must have been (Repent and Believe and be Circumcised) as
now it is (Repent and Believe and be Baptized,) yet no Jews would rationally
have understood that in Gospel times, their Infants had been excluded from
Circumcision, without a Repeal of their Ancient Covenant privilege, which we
find not with reference to Baptism.

The two principal Objections of those called Baptists are, the one the want of
a Divine Command expressly for Infant Baptism, which I have here enervated; the
other is concerning the two Seeds of Abraham, his natural or fleshly Seed, and
his Spiritual Seed, of which see in the Discourse it self. It is the
degenerate, adult natural Seed of Abraham, or others claiming Interest even in
special blessings by fleshly descent, that is the Carnal Seed rejected; but
that it is the Infant Seed is wholly without proof. Indeed if all the Infant
Seed had been excluded, I doubt not but it would have been upon record, as an
Objection and Stumbling block in the way of the captious Jews against Christ,
and the dispensation of the Gospel, that the Covenant with Abraham was violated
as well as the Law of Moses.

Weigh all in the balance of the Sanctuary without prejudice, and the Lord
give one heart and one way, and give thee understanding in all things. So
prays he who is.

Thine in Gospel bonds. S. P.
March. 29. 1687.
OF Infant Baptism.
IT is a matter of great Importance rightly to determine, who are the Subjects
and what is the form of Gospel Baptism, to prevent error in that
administration, and the lamentable Church-dividing Consequences thereof.

It is the Covenant Interest and Baptism of the Infant Seed only of Visible
Believers that I plead for; and there are such vast numbers (even Millions) of
these, that if Men unduly exclude and raze out the names of so many out of that
great Charter of Heaven, they will have a dreadful account to give thereof to
God.

Those who deny Infant Baptism often call upon us to give express Scripture for
it, and speak slightly of Consequences.

But let them know that Scripture Consequences ( i. e. naturally deduced) are
valid arguments, for Jesus Christ proves an Article of Faith viz. the
resurrection Mat. 22. v. 31. 32. from Ex. 3. v. 6. where is no express word of
it, and so the proof is only by consequence. See others. Joh. 7. 38. Joh. 5.
46. 47. Luke 24. 44, 45, 46. Act. 10. 43. and 28. v. 23. it would destroy
almost all preaching to deny Consequences. Besides, what express Scripture have
they for admitting Women to the Lords Supper? as to 1 Cor. 11. 28. if (...) may
rarely be extended to the female yet (...) [himself] limits it to the male. So
what express Scripture have they for Baptizing again those who were Baptized as
with us in Infancy? I conclude, things may be forbidden by good consequence;
but to those who are otherwise minded for ever to silence this weak Objection,
I add, That there is nothing against Infant Baptism, but by consequence, and
that not good. If the Command to Baptize Professed Believers did forbid to the
Baptizing of Infants (as it does not) yet it were only by consequence. I argue
thus,

There is no express Sctipture against Infant Baptism, if there were, the
Controversy were presently at an end.

Therefore Infants may be Baptized, for where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression, Romans 4. 15.

Undeniably then, either Scripture Consequences must be owned, or else Infants
may lawfully be Baptized, for there is no express Scripture or Law against it.

1. The Proof of Infant Baptism.

Position. That Infant Baptism is an Appointment of Christ. Or,

That it is the will of Christ that some Infants should be Baptized.

Argument 1. Some Infants are Discipled so as to have the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit upon them.

Therefore by the will of Christ they are to be Baptized.

For that is the Commission, Mat. 28. 19. (...) Disciple ye all Nations,
Baptizing them --

All then who are discipled by the Will of Christ, are to be Baptized; and they
are Disciples, not only who actually learn, but who are in the School of Christ
his Church in order to their future Learning: Saul made havoc of the Church,
Act. 8. 3. Which is expressed, Act. 9. 1. by the Disciples of the Lord. So
then, to be a Churchmember, is to be a Disciple. Thus Act. 15. 10. The Yoke of
Circumcision was laid upon the Disciples; Doctrinely imposed upon the Parents;
but Practically upon the Infant Seed at eight days old; for so was the
Institution, Genesis 17. v. 10, 12, 13. And so they are Disciples. See also Act.
21. 4, 5. where Children seem to be numbered among Disciples.

And as to [the Name] of the Trinity, that of being [Holy] is attributed often
to Father, Son, and Spirit, Lev. 19. 2. and 20. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 15. Heb. 7. 26.
Ephesians. 1. v. 13. and 4. 30. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8. And it is given also to the Church and
its Members, Exodus 19. 6. Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 14. v. 2. 21. and 26. 19. and 28. v.
9. Romans 11. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 9.

And this very Name of the Lord [Holy] he has imposed upon the Children of
Believers, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your Children Unclean, but now are they
Holy; i. e. Holy by a Separation unto God and his Service; which often in
Scripture denominateth Persons, or Things Holy, as the Church -- and it cannot
be meant of Legitimation; for if both the Parents were Unbelievers, yet the
Children might not be Illegitimate; For Marriage is honorable in all, Heb. 13.
4. Nor is it meant of being only Sanctified to use; for there is a vast
difference between being Sanctified to, and being Holy, as Mr. Cotton says,
Afflictions, Temptations, yea, Sin it self, is Sanctified to Believers: And yet
none will say that Sin -- is Holy.

Therefore it must be meant of Relative Faederal Holiness; and so that Name of
God is upon the Children of Believers, and consequently, they are to be
Baptized.

Arg. 2. If some Infants be visibly or externally in the Govenant which God
made with Abraham, then by the will of Christ they are to be Baptized.

But some Infants are visibly or externally in the Covenant which God made with
Abraham.

Therefore by the Will of Christ they are to be Baptized.

The Consequence [that those who are so in Abraham's Covenant are to be
Baptized] I prove: For,

1. All the Seed of Abraham in their Generations, are expressly Commanded to
keep the Covenant, by applying the Token of it, which is Baptism; Genesis 17. 9.
Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee in their
Generations.

So long then as Abraham has a Seed (which undeniably he has in Gospel Times)
even in all their Generations here is a standing Command to keep the Covenant.

And how keep it? v. 10. 11. This is my Covenant -- And mentioning
Circumcision, he says, [ It shall be a Token of the Covenant between me and
you.] So then the keeping it is by applying the Token of it. But he varieth the
Phrase, as Mr. Whiston excellently observes, an Intimation that he purposed a
change in the Token of the Covenant. It is not said, That the keeping of it in
all their Generations, should be by Circumcision as the Token of it.

The Covenant in Gospel Times cannot be kept by Circumcision, for that is
abrogated, and cease to be a Token of it; and therefore it must be kept by
Baptism, which now is the Sign or Token of it, that being for the Remission of
Sins, Act. 2. 38, 39. which is a great Blessing of the Covenant, Heb. 10. v.
16, 17. This then is a full Command to Baptize all in Covenant now, for the
keeping it, as it did command of old to Circumcise them when that was the Token
of the Covenant. The alteration of the Sign is no hindrance at all; as the
Second Commandment of Old did require Circumcision, Sacrifices, and Passover,
and now these are abrogated, it does equally require the observing Gospel
Institutions, as Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, and is kept thereby: And the
Fourth Commandment required the Observation of the Seventh Day as a Sabbath,
yet now is kept, by observing, the First Day of the Week as a Sabbath. So the
Command of keeping the Covenant, was observed of old by Circumcision, but is
now by Baptism, since that is become the Token of it, and cannot be obeyed
otherwise.

2. Baptism is the first Sign of the Covenant, and no Scripture Warrant is
found to delay the applying of it to Persons visibly in the Covenant: Some call
it an Initiatory Sign* which is so far true, as that speedily after coming
under the Covenant it is to be submitted to, and is urged early. Act. 2. 38.
and practiced. v. 41. Act. 13. 24. Act. 22. 16. such then who are faederatiare
to be signati. Mat. 28. 19.

Yea Baptism follows a being Externally and Visibly in Covenant, as in Simon
Magus. Act. 8. 13. Simon himself believed, and when he was Baptized, yet he was
not internally and savingly in the Covenant, for he was in the gall of
bitterness still v. 21. 22. 23. wanted faith and repentance, his heart was not
right.

And let this ever be remembered, that some are internally, invisibly, and
savingly in that Covenant, so as to partake of special grace blessings, and
privileges, as Justification, Adoption, Sanctification etc. Romans 4. v. 2, 3,
13, 16, 17. Gal. 3. v. 16, 17, 18, 26, 29. and these shall never totally and
finally fall away, Jer. 32, 40, 41. Joh. 10. 28. Romans 11, 2, 7.

Others are Externally and Visibly in that Covenant, and many of these are
branches in Christ, that may be taken away, cast forth and burnt. Joh. 15. v.
2. 6. may be broken off. Romans 11. v. 17. 20. thus the Jews for positive
unbelief were broken off, which those who are internally in it cannot be.

And hence though the Children of some Godly Parents may degenerate and prove
wicked, yet this is no more against their former visible Covenant Interest and
Baptism, then the same in Professed Believers, who may degenerate also as Simon
Magus did, who before was duly Baptized, only upon a Visible External Interest
in the Covenant.

3. There is a Connection between the Covenant and Baptism. Act. 2, 38, 39.
whence I argue thus,

Those to whom the Promise is made are Commanded to be Baptized. [Be Baptized
for the promise is to you.]

But the Promise is to Repenters and their Seed.

Therefore Repenters and their Seed are commanded to be Baptized.

All that have the Promise to them are to be Baptized, seeing the [for] does
intimate that to be the ground, motive and inducement to the applying Baptism,
that the promise is to them.

And undeniably they are the Jews, which he speaks to v. 36. Let all the
house of Israel know -- them he commands to repent and be Baptized. v. 38.
and adds [ for the promise is to you and your Children]

So then, in Gospel times there is a promise which the Jews and their Seed had
a joint Interest in, (before their rejection) which was sufficient to entitle
them to Baptism. All repenters and believers are noted by [ you] but here are
two, not only [ you] but also [ your Children] within the promise, it is still
double as it was of old, to Abraham and his Seed. Genesis 17. and it tended
greatly to their Comfort, that such a promise of ancient date was still to them
and their Seed, although they had Crucified and Slain Jesus Christ, the Lord of
Life; yea, if for the present they were but externally in Covenant, yet it
might be a great support in their Soul distress, that yet it was hopeful that
they might obtain the special internal blessings of it, as remission of sin --
seeing an external Interest is a great advantage that way, telling that their
condition was not yet hopeless.

And this promise extending to the Jews and their Seed, must also reach to the
Seed of believing Gentiles, else the Jews should have more privilege then
they, whereas there is no difference in Gospel times.

And those words [as many as the Lord our God shall call] are not a limitation
of the former part of the verse, but of the words immediately foregoing [ and to
all that are afar off] if that be meant of the Gentiles, as Ephesians. 2. 13. 17.
then it tells us, that the promise is not to all Gentiles universally and
without exception, but only to such of them as shall be called or believe, and
their Seed, else they were less privileged then the Jews.

Or if as some think it refers to the Jews, because the calling of the
Gentiles, was as yet a great mystery unto Peter, Act. 10. and might have been a
stumbling block to these Jews, then these [afar off] must be the posterity of
the Jews to succeed in ages to come, who were then afar off in time; and if so,
then by [Children] must be understood not the posterity of the Jews which was
to come after, but their present Children even Infants, to them belongs this
promise.

And this Promise is not to them only in the tender or offer of it, for that
may extend to all afar off, this is limited to those of them which the Lord
shall call. This Promise is not absolute, absolute, it is so far conditional as
to individuals of the Seed, as all the Children of Believers may not, and such
as reject the Covenant shall not be saved; but it is absolute as to the
Species, as they are in a Covenant-state with God, as the Seed of others
uncalled are not, and are under a greater probability of obtaining spiritual
blessings as remission of sin and eternal Salvation, have higher advantages
that way, than the Seed of those who are out of Covenant. It is mentioned as a
great privilege, that the promise is to them and their Children, it is then to
oppose God for any Man to say, he does not make the promise any otherwise to
them and their Children, then he does to all others in the World, and
especially seeing Baptism is here entailed to it.

I now shall prove [ That some Infants are visibly or externally in the
Covenant, which God made with Abraham.] For

Some Infants for many hundreds of years in all Old Testament times, were so in
that Covenant made with Abraham, and God has never repealed it or cut them off.

Therefore they are in it still. That they were in it is undeniable, for at the
Eighth day they were to be Circumcised else the Lord says they have broken his
Covenant. Genesis 17. v. 14. it could not have been broken by neglecting that
token of it, if they had not been in it. It is impossible to break that
Covenant that they are not in.

And let any prove, that God has repealed it, or cut Infants out of it in
Gospel times, if they can.

To evade this they tell us, that the Infants of believing Gentiles are not the
Seed of Abraham.

I shall prove,

Posit. That the Infant Seed even of believing Gentiles, are visibly and
externally in the Covenant which God made with Abraham. For

1. The Infant Seed of believing Gentiles in the days of the Old Testament,
were so in that Covenant with Abraham, and therefore they are in it still,
unless God has repealed it.

The Scripture witnesses that the Gentiles have greater privilege in Gospel
times, then they had before Isa. 42. 6. Acts 10. 45. Romans 11. 11, 12. Gal. 3.
14. and who dare say that it is diminished? let them prove it.

Its clear, that not only the natural fleshly Seed of Abraham, but those born
in his house, and bought with his money (which were Gentiles) were to be
circumcised, even Infants at Eight days old, not of his Seed, Genesis 17. v. 12,
13, 14. and this is an everlasting Covenant, and if they were not circumcised,
the Covenant with Abraham was broken, v. 14. and therefore those Sons of
strangers Gentiles, were within the Covenant made with Abraham, how else could
they be under circumcision, the token of it and so, as it was violated if it
were neglected? Yet these Gentiles had no right to the Land of Canaan, which
argues, that Abraham's Covenant was not merely for the Land of Canaan, or
merely typical as some would have it, nor only for Abraham's fleshly Seed, but
extended to some Gentiles; Indeed the Church was then Domestical in Abraham's
family, he would have none there but such as owned the true Religion, such only
were to be in his house and bought with his money, as were then Church members,
for he commanded not only his Children but his Household after him, Genesis 18. v.
19. and they shall keep the way of the Lord.

And afterward such of the Strangers Gentiles, who became Proselites and owned
the Jewish religion were to be circumcised, Ex. 12. v. 44, 48. 49. when a
stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the Lord, let
all his males be circumcised -- one Law shall be to him that is homeborn and
unto the stranger. So then, upon a profession of faith or true religion,
strangers Gentiles were in the Covenant with Abraham in that day and came under
the token of it, Circumcision and their Infant seed, as well as upon a
profession of the faith of the Gospel, any are owned in Covenant now, and their
Infant seed must be in it with them, unless any can show a repeal, or that they
are less privileged then they were. And methinks we have the contrary. Act. 2.
39. the promise is [ to you and your Children] i. e. to the Jews, [and to as
many as the Lord our God shall call] i. e. of the Gentiles answerable to the
Proselites of old, so Isa. 56. v. 5, 6.

2. The Blessings of Abraham in Gospel Times are come upon the Gentiles by
Faith, Gal. 3. 14.

Therefore the Infant Seed of the Gentiles are, in Gospel Times, in the
Covenant which God made with Abraham.

For Abraham had no other to communicate but Covenant Blessings, and not the
Land of Canaan, for that is not given to the Gentiles; and therefore the
Blessings are, Genesis 17. 7, 8. -- I will -- be a God to thee, and to thy Seed
after thee in their Generations. And this for many Generations did extend to
Parents and their Infant Seed, v. 9, 10, 11. -- So as they passed under Token
of the Covenant, and were intended thereby all the time of the Old Testament.

He speaks indefinitely and in general of the Blessings of Abraham, not a
parcel of them, but in the Latitude, and as amply as of Old: And therefore by
Faith God is visibly a God to the Gentiles, and to their Infant Seed; unless
any can prove that God has repealed that part of the Covenant which concerns
the Infant Seed in Gospel Times.

3. The Infant Seed of the Jews were in the Covenant made with Abraham in
Gospel Times, after the Death of Christ, after all Legal Observations were
abolished.

Therefore the Infant Seed of Believing Gentiles are in the Covenant made with
Abraham in Gospel Times.

For there is no difference between Jews and Gentiles in Gospel Times. Romans 10.
12. For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek ( i. e. the
Gentile) for the same Lord over all, is Rich unto all that call upon him. So
Romans 3. 22. Act. 15. 9. Putting no difference, Gal. 3. 8. The Jews and Gentiles
then are equal in respect of Gospel Privilege; yea, there is no difference in
respect of External Privilege and Covenant Intrest, for the Partition Wall is
broken down that was between us, and both made one, Ephesians. 2. 14. And the same
Olive Tree which the Jews are broken off from, that the Gentiles are grafted
into, Romans 11. v. 17, 19, 23, 24. So that the Jews are not Privileges above
the Gentiles.

Now that the Infant seed of the Jews were in the Covenant made with Abraham in
Gospel Times, I prove.

1. From Act. 3. 25. Ye are the Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenants
which God made with our Fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed shall all
the Kindreds of the Earth be blessed. This was after the Death and Resurrection
of Jesus Christ, after the abrogation of all Legal Sacrifices and Ceremonial
Observations; yet still these Jews were within the Covenant made with Abraham,
Children of it; yea, before their repentance, for he says, v. 19. repent
therefore etc. and their being still in Covenant is used as an argument to it,
they were not yet cast out of that Covenant, and that included not only the
Parents but the Infant seed, as I have proved already, so Act. 2. 38, 39.

2. The Jews and their Infant seed were in the Covenant made with Abraham, the
day before the Gospel came to them, therefore they were in it in Gospel times
after, unless God repealed it or cast them out, which let any prove who can.

I run it up to the Primitive times, to determine this question thus. In the
Apostles days immediately before their Preaching the Jews and their Infant Seed
were unquestionably in the Covenant made with Abraham, and under the token of
it Circumcision; therefore the Infant seed were in that Covenant after; or else
undeniably the coming of Christ, and the Jews believing on him and being
Baptized, was exceedingly to their damage, injury, and disadvantage. For this
is to say, that the day or moment before a Jew did believe and was Baptized,
his Infant seed were in Covenant with God, the day or moment after the Infant
seed was out of that Covenant. Dare any say that to be out of Covenant with
God, or to be cast out is no damage, no disadvantage? is it not mentioned as a
mystery, to be strangers to the Covenants of promise, Ephesians. 2. 12? it is the
misery of the Jews, to be broken off from being externally in Covenant, and a
mercy to the Gentiles to be graffed into the Olive, Rom 11. v. 17, 19, 22, 24.
as promoting a partaking of the fatness of the Olive.

If it was a privilege to be in that Covenant, then it must needs be a loss
and damage to be out of it. When the question was, Romans 3. 1. What advantage
then has the Jew? or what profit is there of Circumcision? God by the Apostle
answers, v. 2. much every way -- Is it not then great boldness for any Man to
contradict God, and say, it is a mercy rather than a misery to be broken off
from it? If any abuse the Covenant made with Abraham, and Circumcision to the
denying that Christ is come, and to the seeking Justification by their own
works or righteousness, on such a false legal ground as Christ profits
nothing, and so, as they oblige themselves or are bound to keep the whole Law,
and hinder their being justified; what is all this to the proving that it is no
damage or disadvantage for any to be cast out of the Covenant with Abraham,
even as to external Interest in it?

If after the Jews believing and being Baptized* their Infant seed remained in
that Covenant, then consequently the Infant seed of believing Gentiles are in
it also, for now there is no difference.

4. The Seed of Abraham are the same for species or kind in all generations,
and therefore the Infant seed of believing Gentiles are in the Covenant made
with Abraham. Its true there is a numerical difference, Abraham has a greater
number than he had for his seed in the Nations of the Gentiles, Mat. 28. 19.
Galat. 3. 14. and in Gospel times there are great alterations in the outward
state and condition of the Church, and in the outward administration of the
Covenant, but as the Covenant it self, so the seed in it are for substance the
same in all ages of it.

The Seed internally in that Covenant, so as to obtain justification and
Salvation, they were and are the same. He says to Abraham and his Seed were
the promises made, even one seed 430 years before the Law, and so the Covenant
cannot be disanulled. Gal. 3. v. 15, 16, 17. the stress of the Apostles
argument is laid upon the sameness of the seed, admit one of another kind and
his proof would fail. Also as to external Interest in the Covenant the seed is
for kind the same. It is true, Abraham was so far privileged as to have a
promise, that of his natural seed concerning the flesh, Christ should come.
Romans 9. 5. yet after Genesis 17. 7. when persons rejected the Covenant, though
they were of the fleshly seed of Abraham, yet they were cast out, and also some
strangers Gentiles becoming Proselites, and owning the Covenant with Abraham,
though not of his fleshly seed, yet were admitted to the external privileges
of his Covenant. v. 12, 13. Ex. 12, 48, 49. and their Infant seed came under
the token of it, and so were Covenanters.

If any raze out the Subjects of any Covenant (without their forfeiting their
privilege) it is presently null and void.

If the Infant seed were rased out of the Covenant with Abraham, who
undoubtedly for many hundreds of years were Subjects of it, then the Covenant
with Abraham were disanulled, which the Apostle says it cannot be, Gal. 3. 17.
but comes upon the Gentiles. v. 14. so as they enjoy what the Jews were broken
off from Romans 12. v. 17, 19. and seeing the promise of being a God to Abraham
and his Seed, by Divine Warrant intended the Infant Seed with the Parents, in
all the time from Abraham to the coming of Christ, hence that must be the
meaning of it still, if Jesus Christ has not repealed it, and consequently the
Gentiles being now in that Covenant, the Infant seed of the believing Gentiles,
must be visibly and externally in the Covenant, which God made with Abraham.

I omit other Arguments insisted upon by others, least I should actum agere. As
to the antiquity of the practice of Infant Baptism, besides what Justin Martyr
and Irendus say, Cyprian who flourished about Ann. 250. or 255. in his Epistle
to Fidus, who questioned whether Infants might be Baptized before the 8th. day;
Cyprian with Sixty six Bishops in a Council unanimously declared to Fidus, that
they might be Baptized before the Eighth day; which very question presupposes,
that the Baptizing of Infants was then a thing granted, and unquestionable only
the particular day doubted of by some. Neither may any conclude Cyprians
testimony to be spurious seeing he is cited and approved not only by August.
but by Hierom. Contr. Pelag. lib. 3. and Christ says, out of the Law, Joh. 8.
17. the testimony of two Men is true, i. e. is to be received as true.

Neither does the unsoundness of Cyprians judgment about Baptism otherways
invalidate this; for I do not allege him to make his opinion an Argument for
Infant Baptism, but only to prove matter of fact, that it was then a common
practice in the Church, when they might as easily know what was practiced in
the Apostles days, as we may know what was a Custom a 100 or a 150 years ago.
And seeing the doubt of Fidus was grounded on the ancient Law of Circumcision
on the Eighth day; hence the Ancients then made the Covenant with Abraham, an
Argument for Infant Baptism, and also thought Baptism came in the room and
place of Circumcision. It cannot be denied that Origin Augustine, Theodoret and
others were for Infant Baptism.

. 2. Objections against Infants Covenant Interest and Baptism answered.

That the Covenant which God made with Abraham was of grace, and in the
Substance of it continuing in Gospel times is evident; for the Apostle
establishes Justification even of the Gentiles, the Romans by faith in a way
of grace, by the example of Abraham, Romans 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 16, 17. and by
his being the Father of many Nations; now if the Covenant with Abraham had been
expired, his arguments had been easily evaded; by saying, that Abraham was
justified in one way, we in another, and that Abraham's Covenant was at an end;
its true some appendixes relating to its administration as Circumcision -- are
abolished, but the Apostle from the date of it 430 years before the Law,
concludes peremptorily, that it cannot be disanulled, Gal. 3, 16, 17. and
carefully observe that when the Scripture speaks of an old Covenant, which is
disanulled, it always is the Law at mount Sinai. Jer. 31. v. 32. Heb. 8. v. 9.
it never says, that the Covenant made with Abraham is abolished, but the
contrary; declaring that the Law coming 430 years after could not disanull it.
Also in Gospel times, they are said to be Children of the Covenant. Act, 3. 25.
And hence all those notions, that the Covenant made with Abraham, was a
Covenant of works, a legal temporal one, or mixed his natural seed, having but
temporal promises by it in the land of Canaan, or a typical Covenant, I say
these, as not true, vanish and come to nothing. And it is very considerable
that in that Covenant with Abraham, the Lord promises to be a God to him and
his Seed after him, Genesis 17. 7. and then a Second time, with that temporal
promise of the Land of Canaan to his Seed, he twisteth this, v. 8. and I will
be their God. So that visibly he is a God to the same Seed, which he promises
the Land of Canaan too; and for him to be a God to any, is far greater than any
temporal good whatsoever.

I shall now consider what is objected, to prove a repeal of the Infant seeds
Interest in the Covenant with Abraham, and also against their Baptism.

Ob. 1. Mat. 3. 9. Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our
Father. Joh. 8. 33. we be Abraham's Seed.

None be the Children of Abraham, but those that do the works of Abraham. v.
39. if ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do the works of Abraham, and so
Infants are not the Seed of Abraham.

A. 1. These are severe reproofs to a degenerate adult seed, who trusted in
their privilege in having Abraham to their Father; but speak nothing of
cutting off all Infants from a Govenant Interest which they formerly had. All
this might be said to such as were wicked and rested in birth privileges, in
any times of the Old Testament, when yet Infants were undoubtedly in the
Covenant, both before and after; and so it is nothing to the purpose. Jer. 7.
4. Trust ye not in lying words saying, the Temple of the Lord are these. Yet
all this may be said to such persons in Gospel times, of whatever persuasion,
Baptists, Congregational Men, or any other, that own Infants in Covenant; think
not to say you are Church members or Baptized, whilst you do not the works of
Abraham, and yet we may own Infants Covenant interest, where the Parents are
Believers.

2. It is certain, that when that was said, Mat. 3. 9. and Joh. 8. 39. the
Covenant Interest of the Infand seed was not repealed, nor they cut off from
it; For this was some time before the Death of Christ; till which there was no
abrogation or disanulling of any legal observations, much less of privilege by
Abraham, Ephesians. 2. v. 14, 15, 16. Col. 2. 14. the Jews were not broken off till
afterward; and so Infants yet were of the seed of Abraham.

Ob. 2. None but those that are Christ's visibly, and that are of the Faith,
are Abraham's seed, Gal. 3. v. 16, 26, 29. Infants then are not the seed of
Abraham.

An. 1. Here is not a syllable for a repeal of any privilege, which Infants of
old undoubtedly had by the Covenant with Abraham, or as his seed: here is
nothing for cutting off any that were of the seed, as Infants once were, Genesis
17. Deuteronomy. 29. v. 10. to 14. rather he asserteth the sameness of the Covenant in
respect of its seed, and that it could not be disanulled, see Gal. 3. 16, 17.
and as God claimed Israel as his, Exodus 4. 22. Lev. 20. 26. So if Infants be
still in Covenant, why may they not visibly be Christ's?

2. The Apostle here speaks of a seed of Abraham as to Justification and
Life, and it is they which are of Faith, v. 8, 9, 10. And this not in
opposition to an Infant seed, but to an adult seed, which sought Justification
by works of the Law, as those verses witness, and v. 24, 26, 29. And thus it
was in all Ages since Abraham, when Infants were certainly in Covenant; yet
then the seed of Abraham, as to Justification, were they of the Faith, and not
of Works; and only real Believers are this seed. What is this against Infants
being a seed as to Ordinances, as well as unsound Professors? This is confirmed
to be the meaning in the next Chapter, Gal. 4. v. 24. to the end, where they
that were born from Mount Sinai, from the Law and Works are said to be born
after the Flesh, they are in the Apostles sense the fleshly seed, which with
Ishmael, are to be cast out; and they by Promise are those of the Faith.

What is all this against Infants being of Abraham's seed, as of old; and the
less, because they are of the Faith, as their Covenant Interest follows
Faith, viz. of the Parent to whom the Promise is given for the seed, as that
Promise was directed to Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. for him to act Faith upon the Lord
in it, for his seed as well as for himself; and other Believers are to do the
like.

Hence see the true meaning of Gal. 3. 16. To Abraham and his seed were the
Promises made: he says not unto seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy
seed, which is Christ: i. e. Always Abraham had but one seed, Christ, and those
that are Christ's, and are of the Faith as to Justification; he never had two
seeds for that end; in the times of the Old Testament there was but one seed,
not two seeds, one by the Law, and another by Promise, but only one in Christ
by Promise: and that this is the intendment, is evident, seeing he adds, v.
18. For if the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise, but God
gave it to Abraham by Promise. So that the [one seed] excludes only a
pretended seed, seeking Justification by the works of the Law; such God never
owned for the seed.

And so it is not in the least mentioned to exclude Infants, as a fleshly seed,
from an ecclesiastical seed, nor to repeal any privilege or limit to cut them
off from what they had before the coming of Christ, this is not in the least
the meaning; for all the time wherein Infants enjoyed such privileges, yet
there was but one seed in the Apostles sense: and which further clears it,
observe this, Gal. 3. 16, 17. intends that Promise to Abraham, which was 430
years before the Law, which can be only that, Genesis 12. 3. as any may find by
computing the time, this was when Abraham was seventy five years old, v. 4. and
so they greatly mistake who would have it expounded, Genesis 17. 7, 8. where
Infants Covenant Interest is asserted, it is no repeal, no restriction, or
limitation thereof, no cutting them off from any privileges granted or
confirmed to them there; for that was not four hundred and thirty years before
the Law; but when Abraham was ninety and nine years old. v. 1. which was twenty
four years less.

4. Some Infants are visibly Christ's, and so are Abraham' s seed: as Abraham
had a natural fleshly seed, and a spiritual seed, consisting only of real
Believers, which are justified, and shall certainly be saved, Gal. 3. 8, 9, 11.
Mark 16. 16. So also Abraham had, and has an ecclesiastical seed, he was, and
is a Father of the visible Church, and all in it are his seed in this sense,
where are many foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. 1, 2. unsound Professors of Faith,
which yet are duly baptized, as Simon Magus was, Act. 8. 13. Such as may be in
Christ, and be taken away and cast forth, Joh. 15. 2. 6. and be broken off,
Romans 11. 20. which none of his spiritual seed of real believers can be. Either
then such Hypocrites are the seed of Abraham or not. If they be, then he has a
seed which are not his Spiritual seed; If they be not, then we may Baptize some
who are not the seed of Abraham, and then why not Infants? Neither need we call
this a third seed of Abraham any more than of old, and especially, seeing that
Church consists much of his Spiritual seed, as sharers in highest privileges
in special and eternal blessings, though it extends to others as sharers in
inferior blessings; both are his seed as Ishmael and Isaac were, though one
had higher blessings then the other, Genesis 17. 20. 21.

And undeniably many hundreds of years even from Abraham till the coming of
Christ, an Infant seed of Jews and Proselites were of Abraham's Church-seed, and
must be so still unless any can show a repeal; and this will hardly be found,
seeing Jesus Christ has declared, that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
19. 14. Mark 10. 13, 14. Luke 18. 15. And if Infants be of the Church, then are
they Christ's, for that is his, Mat. 16. 18. Romans 16. 16. 1 Cor. 12. 27. Joh.
15. 2, 6. Neither do some Characters of the Church forbid their being members
of it, seeing they were undoubtedly such, and these Elogiums are given to it,
in respect of its better part, or what they may, ought or hopefully will be
afterward; as it is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 25. 1, 2. yet some foolish
Virgins there, and those are golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. 12, 13, 20. yet some
drossy and lukewarm not pure gold.

And further consider, the visible Church was founded on the Covenant made with
Abraham, not only as consisting of Jews, but Gentiles in the Nations, Genesis 17.
4, 5. behold my Covenant is with thee, and thou shall be a Father of many
Nations; and that Covenant extended to Infants, v. 10, 11, 12, 13. and is still
continuing, Romans 4. 17, 18. Gal. 3. 17. let any prove that Infants are cut out
of it, else they are of his Ecclesiastical seed still. It is true, Ceremonial
observations of very ancient date, and Ordinances of of the Law are abrogated,
Heb. 9. and 10. but the Covenant with Abraham is another thing, and from the
date of it so long before the Law, the Apostle proves cannot be disanulled by
it, Gal. 3. 17. The ceasing of Circumcision does no more abolish the Covenant
with Abraham or Infants Interest therein, then the abolishing of Sacrifices,
Passover, and other Ceremonial observations does null the Second Commandment,
which during their continuance, commanded a worshipping God by them.

And also the Church before the Death of Christ, and after, are essentially the
same, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. Who has made both one, and has broken down the middle
wall of partition between us, having abolished -- the Law of Commandments -- So
then Jesus Christ by his Death did not pull down one Church, and erect another,
but equalized Jews and Gentiles, made both one; that the Gentiles should be
fellow heirs, and of the same body, Ephesians. 3. 6. Ordinances are altered in
Worship, but the Church is in Essence the same.

And once more, the same Olive Tree, the Covenant with Abraham, and visible
Church, which the Jews were broken off from, for unbelief. Romans 11. 20. the
same the Gentiles were graffed into, v. 17. and the Jews shall again be graffed
into that, as into their own Olive Tree, v. 23, 24. and there could be no such
graffing into the same, if the stock the Covenant or Church were not the same.
And hence Abraham has an Ecclesiastical seed the visible Church (for there is
no breaking off from the invisible Church) and Infants being of old members of
it, they are so still (else it were not the same) and so they are visibly
Christ's and of Abraham's seed.

5. Some Infants are visibly of the faith, and so are Abraham's seed: I do not
say, that faith seminal and habitual or actual, is in all Infants Baptized or
others, for then either all of them must be saved, which they are not; or else
they might loose that special faith; but they are visibly interested in the
Covenant or promise, which is the word of faith and may bear that name; and the
Lord being visibly their God, Genesis 17. 7. 8. they are so under the promise of
after faith and repentance, otherwise then others are. If they have not faith
for the present, yet visibly they are under a promise of it, it is hopeful for
the future they shall have it, which promise, Baptism may be a sign and seal
of; it may seal a doctrine of faith even where a principle of it is yet wanting,
and by Baptism they are obliged to seek it.

Also by the faith of the Parents, they may be deemed of the faith with them,
as all Jews (Infants and all) were the Circumcision, for there are many
promises given for the faith of such Parents to act upon, which no unbelieving
Parents can claim for their seed; as that he will Circumcise the heart of their
seed, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. pour his spirit on them, Is. 44. 3. that the word shall not
depart out of their mouth. If. 59. 21. see also Ps. 25. 13. and 112. 2. Prove.
11. 21. the contrary of the seed of the wicked, Ps. 37. 28. but especially that
great and comprehensive promise is to believers, that he will be the God of
their seed, Genesis 17. 7, 8. and these are fulfilled absolutely to the Collective
body the Church, though not te every individual, but under limitation. And
Parents by rejecting the Covenant and Unbelief, may forfeit this privilege for
their seed as well as for themselves, as the Infant seed of the Jews were
broken off by their Parents unbelief, Romans 11. 20. Else it must be said that
their seed remained in Covenant after in Gospel times; and if Parents forfeit,
there may not be an uninterrupted Succession of the Church in some of the
posterity of Believers, yet if the rejected seed do after personally believe,
they obtain the promises for themselves and seed again. Act. 2. 39.

In short, Abraham was equally a Father of the Jews (called the Circumcision)
by faith, as he was and is a Father of the Gentiles, the circumcision by faith.
Romans 4. v. 10, 11, 12. there is no difference of his common fatherhood to both
it is by faith; so that the Jews were as much Abraham's seed of faith, even when
they were the circumcision as the Gentiles are, and so the Jews Infant seed,
were Abraham's seed of faith, externally when circumcised of old, and as well
then may the Infant seed of believing Gentiles, be Abraham's seed of faith now;
and the rather because he received circumcision, as a Seal of the righteousness
of that faith, which he had being uncircumcised v. 11. that he might be a
father to believing Gentiles. And observe, that the Covenant was made with him,
and he circumcised as a visible Believer, circumcision was a Seal of the
righteousness of faith, which is common to all Believers among Jews and
Gentiles, not peculiar to him.

Also he received Circumcision, not merely by virtue of a command or
institution, but as a token of the Covenant. Genesis 17. 9, 10, 11. So as the
Covenant could not be kept after circumcision was Instituted without it, v. 14.
whilst it continued; nor without Baptism now a token of the same Covenant, and
connected with the promise, Act. 2. 38, 39. in like manner, and so Infants
being in Covenant, as Abraham's seed of faith are to be Baptized.

Obj. 3. There is no kind of Covenant holiness in the natural seed of
Believers, more than in the seed of Unbelievers now under the Gospel; for no
person is to be accounted common or unclean by nature more than others, and so
no person to be accounted clean or holy by nature more than others. Act. 10.
28. God is no respecter of persons -- Typical Ceremonial holiness is abolished
of the seed as well as of Beasts, Birds, Garments, Temple, etc.

A. The Typical ceremonial holiness abolished, is not said to be by Nature.
Act. 10. 28. it was by the Law; such as of Birds, Beasts, Garments, Temple,
etc. and this is at an end, nothing now unclean or holy in that sense; but that
is nothing against the relative federal holiness of persons long before the
Law, by the Covenant with Abraham visibly having God their God, and being his
People. Genesis 17. 7, 8. otherwise then other People, being separated to the
Service of God, and not afar off but nigh to him. Ezekiel. 16. 8, 9. Ephesians. 2, 3,
14, 19. and this is not merely by nature, but as in the force of Gods Covenant.
Galat. 2. 15.

As to Act. 10. 28. It declares that no person is common or unclean so as to
bar him from the Preaching of the Gospel; the Gentiles are as clean and holy
now as the Jews in that respect; Peter might go in to Cornelius, no difference
of Nation or outward state or condition to hinder it ( Col. 2. 11.) all on
equal terms, and alike; the means of grace may be extended to the Gentiles; the
offer is larger then it was; not straiter here is no excluding or casting out
of Infants from any privilege.

Indeed the Jews of old were forbidden Marriage and Covenants with the
Gentiles, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. but not keeping company with them, as Calvin says, we
find no clear prohibition of the Jews going in to the Gentiles from the Law,
but from the observation of the Fathers; However, there can be no pretense for
such uncleanness of Persons, as Peter means till the Law, and the abolishing
this by the Gospel, is nothing against the federal holiness of Infants or
others, long before the Law by the Covenant with Abraham.

As to Act. 10. 34, 35. it imports that God is no respecter of persons, as to
acceptance with him; be he Jew or Gentile of what Nation soever, he may be
accepted of God, if he be a fearer of God, and a worker of righteousness else
not, whatever privilege he enjoys, Church Membership, Baptism, Lords Supper,
etc. what is this against the federal holiness of their seed, who are fearers
of God and externally in Covenant with him?

2. In Gospel times there is a relative federal holiness, whereby some are
differenced from other by a Separation from the world for God, Romans 11. 16. 1
Pet. 2. 9. ye are a holy Nation, yea this reaches Infants. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else
were your Children unholy, but now are they holy.

It cannot be meant of legitimation, for if both the Parents be unbelievers,
yet the Children are legitimate. Heb. 13. 4. the marriage bed is undefiled in
all. It is not barely a being sanctified to use, for so are the unbelieving
Husband or Wife to the Believer. v. 14. yet are not holy. Tit. 1. 15.

It is not qualitative holiness, if it were to be sure they may be Baptized; it
must then be relative or federal holiness.

Obj. 4. If the Children of the flesh are not the Children of God, Romans 9. 8.
then Infants are not the seed of Abraham, they may be by Election, not by
Calling. Abraham has two seeds, a fleshly seed, who had promises of the Land
of Canaan; and a spiritual seed Heirs of eternal Life, the Heavenly
Inheritance, this was never given to the fleshly seed.

Ans. Children of the flesh by degeneracy and a legal Birth, are not the
Children of God: Of these he speaks, Romans 9. v. 8, 31, 32. Gal. 4. v. 29, 30.
This is nothing against Infants Privilege.

Also Children of the flesh, Infants or adult, are not internally and savingly
the Children of God, so as to inherit the Heavenly Inheritance only by fleshly
descent; but Infants of Believers are externally and visibly the Children of
God as well as others, Genesis 17. 7, 10, 11. Exodus 4. 22. Romans 9. 4. To them
pertains the Adoption, and so they are externally and visibly Children, if
not by regeneration, yet by dedication and separation for God from others. This
renders it probable and hopeful they shall afterward share in the spiritual
and eternal Blessings, until they evidence the contrary by rejecting the
Covenant, as Ishmael and Esau did.

Thus the Infant seed of Believers are not the spiritual seed of Abraham only
by fleshly descent, but they are ecclesiastically and externally the seed of
Abraham, with their Parents, by virtue of the Covenant.

But to clear this Text and Matter, I shall add these things.

1. Here is no repeal of any Covenant Interest, which Infants undoubtedly had
before the coming of Jesus Christ; without which, all said is nothing* to the
purpose: it is not said, those that of old were the seed of Abraham, now are
not so any longer; but rather the contrary, for (till actually cast out) he
concludes them highly privileged, Romans 9. 4. Who are Israelites to whom
pertains the Adoption and the Glory of [the Covenants] -- and the Promises.
So that still in Gospel times, till cast out for positive Unbelief, externally
they had an Intrest in the Covenants and Promises, as in former days, and so
their Infants shared with them.

2. The Children of the Flesh, which here are denied to be the Children of God,
are an adult, corrupt, degenerate seed, seeking Justification by a Legal
Righteousness. Romans 9. v. 8, 31, 32. Israel which followed after Righteousness,
has not attained to the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought
it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. Such are a fleshly
seed, Gal. 4. 29. and obstinately erring in such a Fundamental in matter of
Faith, in any Age, were not the Children of God; they are adult ones that thus
advance their own Righteousness, Infants do not so, and therefore are not the
Children of the flesh here intended.

Indeed the Parents may so forfeit their Covenant Interest, and consequently,
their Infant seed may loose it also, because their Right was by their Parents.

3. The Children of the Flesh, whether adult, or Infants, are not the Children
of God spiritually, or are not the spiritual seed of Abraham only by a fleshly
descent, so as to be Heirs of Salvation, Eternal Life, the Heavenly
Inheritance; but yet may be the seed of Abraham ecclesiastically and
externally, as of old, and nothing is here against it.

Mr. Strong does well distinguish Abraham as a Father; he is 1. a natural
Father to the Jews only. 2. a spiritual Father to all true Believers. 3. an
ecclesiastical, or church Father, Romans 11. 16, 17. answerably he has a natural
fleshly seed, a spiritual seed, and an ecclesiastical seed. Paul ardently
desired, that Israel might be saved, Romans 10. 1. and Romans 9. v. 3. mentions
Election, calling Salvation v. 11, 24, 27. and in these respects it might be
said in all ages of the Old Testament, the Children of the flesh are not the
Children of God, as to Vocation and Salvation, when yet Infants were
unquestionably externally in Covenant, and so then they may be still, and all
this that is said is not against it. They may be a seed as to Ordinances,
though all of them be not so as to Life and Salvation.

The same may be said of Gospel Churches, all are not Israel that are of Israel
-- there being foolish Virgins there as well as wise, Mat. 25. 1, 2. how then
can this prove, an alteration of the Covenant, or that the Infant seed is now
excluded, seeing the same might have been truly said in all times?

4. That many of the fleshly seed of Abraham might be rejected, and yet the
word or promise of God not be made void; the Apostle here and Romans 11. is
asserting the rejection of the Jews, and now obviateth their objection, Romans 9.
v. 6. [Not as though the word of God has taken none effect] i. e. Not that God
does violate his promise of being a God to Abraham and his seed, for all are
not true Israelites nor of the seed of Abraham, who are his fleshly seed, v. 6,
7. only that did not render them the Children of God, and entitle them to the
promises v. 8. this he proves, because Ishmael, who was of Abraham's fleshly
seed of old was cast our, and where there was no disparity or unlikeness in
birth or works, yet Jacob was loved, and Esau hated, v. 8. to 14. neither does
this preferring one before the other, where there was equality in themselves,
speak any unrighteousness with God, v. 14. for his own will is the determining
rule of his showing mercy, v. 15. to v. 24. This is the clear and true meaning
of this Scripture, these instances show that being the Children of the flesh of
old, did not make them the Children of God, as to his love -- when yet
undeniably the Infant seed were externally within the Covenant, how then can
this speak now for the excluding of them? when the same might be said in all
ages since Abraham, viz. that the Children of the flesh, are not the Children
of God so as to obtain spiritual Blessings, but may be rejected, when they bear
upon that plea of fleshly descent, and yet highly degenerate as the Jews did.
It proves no alteration of the Covenant in respect of its ancient extent as to
the seed. What is said, is intended against an adult corrupt seed, making a
carnal plea or claim, not against an Infant seed. The same might be said now to
a Church under a like degeneracy, and making such a carnal plea, even where
there is an owning Infants Covenant Interest and Baptism. The Question here was
not whither an Infant seed were still in Covenant as they were of old? but
whither the promise was void and of none effect ( v. 6.) if a corrupt adult
fleshly seed were rejected?

5. The fleshly Children of Abraham, were not the Children of God exclusively,
or in opposition to a Spiritual seed, even of Gentiles by faith; the Jews often
cried out, we are the seed of Abraham, claiming Interest in the Covenant, and
engrossing all promises and special blessings, only by being his fleshly seed,
hereby excluding the Gentiles, unless joined with them turning to the Jewish
Religion; on the contrary the Apostle declares, that there is a spiritual
seed, even of the Gentiles by faith, and that hereby they obtain spiritual
blessings before the Jews Romans 9, 8, 30, 31, 32 who are denied to be that
spiritual seed (though they were the fle^^^y seed of (...)) being without faith
and not doing the works of (...), Romans ^. ^. 10. 11. Gal. 3.

What is this against those, who pretend not to be Abraham's carnal fleshly
seed, nor to be actually interested in special blessings by fleshly descent,
nor trust in carnal privileges? What is this for the excluding Infants out of
a Covenant state* an the result of that promise to Abraham ^ I will he the God
of thy seed ^ Genesis 17. 7, 8. for many 100 years an Infant seed had a Covenant
Interest jointly with their Parents, and this was no Typical promise, let any
prove that Infants are cut off from their share in it, else their Covenant
Interest must hold still, whither Baptism may be applied, or not without an
express Command of which before.

Abraham had a spiritual seed all along by faith, whose Infants were in
Covenant with their Parents for many generations, and why should not their
privilege continue still to the spiritual seed, though the carnal fleshly seed
were cast out, and their privilege expired with it.

Infants Covenant Interest was not the peculiar privilege of the fleshly seed
of Abraham; for the Infant seed of Proselites and those strangers, Genesis 17. 12,
13. Ex. 12. 48. were in the Covenant made with Abraham and under the token of
it, so as that Covenant was broken if that was omitted, yet they were not of
the fleshly seed of Abraham, and so these may be in still, though his fleshly
seed be cast out.

And once more, if all the Jews at the first dawning of the Gospel day, had
become the spiritual seed of Abraham by faith (as many of them did) none of
them then had been rejected; for it was for unbelief, that they were broken
off, Romans 11. 20. and what syllable is there to prove, that there would have
been an exclusion of their Infant seed, from that Covenant Interest weh they
had the day before their Parents believing. And hence it follows.

6. That the expiring and ceasing of some carnal privileges of old, afforded
to the fleshly seed of Abraham, hinders not the Covenant Interest of the
Infants of the spiritual seed by faith; if the separation of the fleshly seed
of Abraham, to the bringing forth of the Messiah ceased and expired at his
coming, that was but one privilege of the Jews, that of them as concerning the
flesh Christ came, Romans 9. 5. and yet Covenant Interest continued still [ to
them pertains the -- Covenant, and the promises] v. 4. Act. 3. 25.

If the aforesaid separation and the privilege thereby, as Dr. O. says was
temporary having a limited season time and end, and upon his actual exhibition
in the flesh it was to cease, and if some carnal ordinances failed and be at an
end, being abundantly supplied by his being come; yet what is all this to
prove, that God no longer is visibly a God to the Infant seed of the Spiritual
seed of Abraham? that is not temporary, but by an everlasting Covenant, and
fails not.

Infants Covenant Interest is no branch of those privileges which he says are
expired; but on the contrary Dr. O. mentions this as one promise to the
Church [ that God will be a God to them and their seed for ever.] Exercit. 6.
on Heb. Neither does this make three parties in the Covenant [Abraham and his
seed, and their Infant seed] any more than it did before the coming of Christ,
when Parents and their Infants made one joint Subject all along, as Isaac and
his Children, and Jacob and his, and those Circumcised, Josh. 5. and theirs.

The Jews ungroundedly claimed all promises, by their being the fleshly seed of
Abraham, but the spiritual seed may duly claim that promise for their Children,
there being nothing for the nulling of it.

Besides, Dr. O. once and again there declares, that the Church is one and the
same, not one Church taken away and another set up in the room, the Olive Tree
is the same, only some branches are broken off, etc.

Infants were of the Church, show when they were all cast out; the same that
the Jews were broken off from the Gentiles were graffed into, Romans 11.

Let any prove that the Church State in the Substance of it, was any part of
that which was abolished by the death of Christ.

They were added to the Church, Act. 2. 47. i. e. to the Church under its new
administration. By breaking down the partition wall, the former confinement of
the Church to the Natural seed of Abraham was taken off, and it has
enlargement by the access of the Gentiles, but is not straightened by excluding so
vast a number as all the Infant seed. The degenerate, obstinate, unbelieving
Jews were broken off for the reformation of the Church, but it was not
dismembered by cutting off all the Infant seed, who had actually done neither
good nor evil, nor had their Parents rejected the Covenant. Some ordinances of
worship expired, and new were appointed as D. O. well observes, but I cannot
find that God cast out any who formerly were members of it (as Infants were)
without a forfeiture of their privilege.

Obj. 5. Infants are not capable of entering Covenant with God, and if they were
absolutely in it, then God did not perform his promise, because many prove
wicked; and if only conditionally then it is no more to them then others, and
what advantage by it?

A. 1. Infants were of old in Covenant, and so are capable, Genesis 17. v. 10, 11,
12. Deuteronomy. 29. v. 10, 11, 12. ye stand this day all of you -- your little ones
-- that thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God -- So then
little ones are in a capacity to be engaged by Covenant for the Lord.

I may ask were they absolutely in it or conditionally?

2. Some answer, the Infant seed of Believers are in Covenant absolutely in the
Species, conditionally in the individuals Cobbet.

Many promises run to a Collective body, as the Church, and are accomplished
there, and yet may not be made good to every member particularly; as it is
promised, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church, Mat. 16.
18. and yet Satan may prevail against particular Members or Churches.

So the Covenant of not drowning the World, does not secure every particular
Man from drowning.

3. As to advantages, there are many, as a Covenant-state is a state of greater
nearness unto God then others are in; is declared to be a privilege, Romans 3.
1, 2. and 9, 4. and it is a misery to be strangers from the Covenants of
promise, Ephesians. 2. 12. many advantages I could discover of being externally in
Covenant, and thus Men may be in it and may so miscarry, as to be rejected, as
Ishmael, Esau, the Jews, Romans 11. and yet God not break Covenant against
Infants Baptism, it is objected thus.

Obj. 6. Faith and Repentance are required before Baptism, Mark 16. 16. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved, Act. 2. 38. Repent and be baptized.
-- If the Jews, the natural seed of Abraham, might not be baptized without
Faith and Repentance, much less others. And such affirmative Precepts have
their negative; and so Infants not believing or repenting, may not be baptized.

Ans. 1. I freely grant, that those which believe and repent are to be
baptized; but I deny the consequence, that therefore Infants may not be
baptized.

Such Texts conclude affirmatively, that such may; they do not conclude
negatively, that none else may: as for example, it is said, Act. 8. 37. If thou
believe with all thy heart, thou may, i. e. be baptized. This does not
conclude negatively, that none else may; if any will say hence, none may be
baptized who do not believe with all their heart, then they can baptize none;
for they cannot know that another does believe with all his heart; and Simon
Magus, who did not so, yet was duly baptized, Act. 8. 13.

If it could be proved that it is intended exclusively, then

2. It imports, that none but those who believe and repent of adult ones, may
be baptized, it is not to be understood in opposition to Infants: often
affirmative Commands intend only capable Subjects; and the negative part
extends no further. Thus, as believing and repenting are commanded before
Baptism, so confession with the mouth is commanded before Salvation, Romans 10.
v. 9. 10. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus -- thou shall be
saved; and with the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation. Will any hence
deny that any Infants can be saved, because they do not confess with their
mouth the Lord Jesus? It is meant of adult ones only, who are capable subjects.
So labor, by a general term, is commanded before eating, 2 These. 3. 10. We
command you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. Will any
conclude thence, that Infants shall not eat, because they will not labor? So
some commands about eating the Passover, as with sower herbs -- are intended
only for capable subjects, not sick Persons or Infants. That of preaching the
Gospel to every creature, Mark. 16. 15, 16. is meant not to Infants, but
others. So as to Baptism, the command to believe and repent before it,
concerns capable subjects only; and the negative part only says, that adult
Believers and impenitent ones may not be baptized, it concludes nothing
against Infant Baptism.

That new Institution of Baptism was firstly to be received by the adult, being
given to a Church where many such are found, and so it was proper to preach to
them, believe, repent, and be baptized; and thus, we going to Turks, Indians,
or others, where Baptism has not come, we may preach in the same language,
believe, repent, and be baptized, without excluding Infants from it: Yea, of
old the Proselites and Strangers must own the Jewish Religion, make a
profession of Faith and Love, as Isa. 56. v. 3. to 8. Exodus 12. and then had
Circumcision for themselves and their Infant seed.

3. Faith and Repentance were then necessary even for the Jews, the natural
seed of Abraham, that they who were Parents may have right themselves unto
Bapism and other Gospel Privileges, and so their Infant seed may have right
also: For as in other ages of the Church, when the Lord gave forth new
Revelations and Ordinances for the Tabernacle and Temple, he required the
receiving of them by Faith and Obedience, else they were to be cut off, Lev. 7*
v. 20, 21, 25, 27. and 17. 4, 9. and 19. 8* and 23. v. 27, 29. And after great
Apostacies and Backslidings, they were severely threatened, if they repented
not* So at the dawning of the Gospel day, Jesus Christ the promised Seed being
actually come, this made a great addition to that important Article of Faith;
now all were obliged under the highest penalty to the Faith of this, that the
Messiah was come, that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, Joh. 8. 24. If ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. This was the Test in those
times* and for Unbelief the Jews, the natural seed of Abraham, were broken off,
Romans 11. 20. On this account was the command in that day to them, [ Believe*
and be baptized] for by persisting in positive, obstinate unbelief, as to his
being come, there was a rejection of the Covenant, and losing their own right*
and so their Childrens right, which resulted from theirs must needs be lost
also. If Parents be cast out of Covenant, then I plead not for their or their
Infants Baptism. That faith then was indispensibly necessary to the continuing
their Covenant Interest, as well as to their Baptism, yea if circumcision on
the 8th day had continued to this day, yet this faith of his being come, would
have been necessary thenceforth in the Parents, in order to their Childrens
sharing in it. But where the natural seed of Abraham by such faith, laid hold
on the Covenant and continued their Interest in it, here is nothing to prove
any alteration or curtailing of the Covenant, so as to cut off their Infant
seed from it, or to exclude them from Baptism.

Also the natural seed of Abraham had then exceedingly corrupted themselves,
and hainously sinned; even so as to Crucify Christ the Prince of Life, on
which account he commands to Repent and be Baptized, Act. 2. v. 36. 38. When
they were under such transgressions, well might they be exhorted to repentance
in order to Baptism, and to prevent their forfeiting all and utter rejection,
and the Lords saying to them Loami, ye are none of my People. Certainly a
Church which owneth Infant Baptism* having members under such a horrid offense,
may require a manifestation of repentance from the Parents before they do
Baptize their Infants.

In short I have discovered, that Infant Baptism follows Parents Faith; and
Repentance is pre-required to Baptism of a degenerate adult seed, but this is
nothing against Baptizing Infants of a spiritual seed by faith.

. 3. Of the validity of Baptism in Infancy.

Some speak contemptuously of the Baptizing of Infants and undertake to
Rebaptize, but

Pos. Baptism administered in Infancy is valid, is no nullity.

I have proved there is Scripture warrant for Infant Baptism, some Infants are
the proper Subjects of it, and so its no nullity.

Arg. 1. Our Baptism in Infancy has all the Essentials of Gospel water
Baptism, therefore it is valid is no nullity.

For, if a sin in Circumstantials and accidentals of an ordinance did null it,
then none were valid; no person is so Baptized, but some sin in it would render
it a nullity; seeing there is not a just man upon Earth that does good and
sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. 1 John 1. 8. and the contrary is clear, Zippora
circumcised when Moses should have done it, Ex. 4. 25. and yet it was valid for
the Angel of the Lord was pacified, v. 26. So the high priests were not of the
right line but yearly, yet Christ owneth them, Joh. 11. 51. and 18, 13. and I
ask if a person erreth in his profession of faith, and yet they Baptize him, if
he after be profane, will they say it is a nullity? will they if he repent
Baptize him again!

Now our Baptism in Infancy has all Essentials of water Baptism, for it has
right matter and form; here is right matter, ex qua constat, viz. Water without
undue mixture, here is the sign, and the thing signified by it is evangelical;
also the right matter circaquam, capable Subjects rational creatures, none else
can be in Covenant, nor in a capacity to have the things signified, the graces
and benefits of the Covenant. That Infants have right to it, I have evidenced,
that they are capable is undeniable, as they were of circumcision, which had a
spiritual signification as well as Baptism, what hinders their receptivity?
Infants are capable of a principle of faith and repentance, antecedently and of
actual believing and repenting consequently, and one end which Baptism obliges
to is after repentance, Mat. 3. 11. Act. 19. 34. Also it has the right form,
an application of water in a solemn significative way, in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Mat. 28. 19. we use washing tho not submersion;
it is such an applying of water, that is the substance of the external form of
Baptism, and if there were a sinful defect (which I think there is not) in the
want of sub mersion, yet it can be but an accidental one, and so it can never
be proved that it renders it a nullity. In Infant Baptism there is the Internal
form, consisting in the relation of the sign and thing signified, and the
External form the applying water in a solemn way with the words of Institution
in the name of the Father -- which must needs be more of the substance of the
ordinance then submersion can be, and it is a principal part the face, which is
is applied to for the noting profession, as the fathers n^me in the forehead,
Rev. 14. v. 1, and so it is valid.

Arg. 2. Our Baptism in Infancy answers to the Scripture signification of the
word, and to what is signified by that Ordinance, therefore it is valid and is
no nullity. The word (...) is rendered mergo, lavo, it notes a small use of
water, as Luke 16. 24. that he may [dip] and it is not the whole finger, but
only the tip of it. Also (...) mergo, lavo, it signifies not necessarily to
dip or plunge, but as well to wash, and this both in common and in sacred use,
it cannot be confined to submersion or overwhelming in the water, and so such
dipping cannot be essential to Baptism, so as the not using it should render it
a nullity. see Mar. 7. 4. (...) except they wash, they eat not. Will any say,
except they plunged their whole bodies under water they eat not, surely no, but
only washed their hands, as v. 3. yet they, the persons by that small
application of water are said to Baptize or wash, and v. 8. Luke 11. 38. so in
a sacred sense. 1 Cor. 10. 2. and were all Baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and
in the Sea.

Who will say they were dipped in the cloud, or their whole bodies plunged in
the Sea? but the cloud did sprinkle or pour water upon them.

So our pouring water on the face of an Infant in such a manner, is truly
Washing or Baptizing of it. And seeing dipping or plunging is not prescribed by
the Lord, only washing, yea if it were so as it were a sin to omit it, yet for
any to lay so great a stress upon that modality, placing so much Religion in it
as if all were hull without it, I fear cannot be excused from Superstition,
which is ungroundedly charged upon others.

We answer, the Scripture signification of the word Baptize, and
Conscientiously think that Christ has left us to a liberty, as to that mode,
has not obliged us to submersion, because whatever might be done in hot
Climates, yet in cold Countries such a usage would make the service of the
Gospel worse, then that of the Law, against Mat. 11. 28. it would without a
Miracle hazard life; whereas God will have mercy rather than Sacrifice, let us
not then be censured for the omission of it.

Yea further, the thing signified is answered by our Baptism in Infancy, be it
a sign of regeneration, or of being buried with Christ, Romans 6. 4. Col. 2. 12.
or both; for, either notes Communion with Christ in his Death, and that is
expressed even by sprinkling, ye are come to the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 10.
24. and Heb. 10. 22. sprinkling notes the thing signified by Baptism, and so
may express Baptism the sign; but we use washing by pouring water upon, and
that is expressive in both, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Rev. 1. 5. has washed from our
sins in his blood, Tit. 3. 5. no necessity that Baptism should resemble his
death or burial in every thing, not in his being carried into the Sepulcher,
and being there till the third day, they would not willingly be so long under
water; our being buried with him in Baptism is a metaphorical expression,
noting Communion sharing in his death, which aptly is expressed by washing.

Obj. 1. But the first pure way of Baptizing was by dipping, they went into and
came out of the water, Mark. 1. 9. Mat. 3. 15, 16. Act. 8. 38. 39. and John
Baptized in Arnon because there was much water there, Joh. 3. 23.

A. 1. If this was the mode or usage in those hot Climates, then it is lawful
there, but it does not follow that it is necessary in cold Climates, much less
so as it were a nullity without it.

2. Some usages in the first administration of ordinances, being
extra-essential to them may lawfully be omitted afterward in some cases:
circumstances much alter cases; as the Passover must be brought the tenth day,
and kept till the 14th, and the blood of it must be struck on the door posts in
Egypt, and be eaten in have, with loins girded etc. Ex. 12. but all these
things were not duty afterward, let it be proved that they were used by Christ
and the Apostles. Baptism was applied to Christ at above 30 years of age, to
the Jailer at midnight. Act. 16. 33. So the Lords Supper was at first
administered only to Men, to the Apostles in an upper room at night; yet all
these things are not necessary duties for our imitation, so as a variation is
sinful.

3. The words do not necessarily note any more, than that they went to or unto
and came from the water; (...) is often rendered not [into] but [to or unto] as
Mat. 15. 24. I am not sent, but (...) to or unto the lost sheep, so Act. 16.
40. Romans 15. 16. And (...) signifies [from] as Mat. 1. 17. -- from Abraham --
Mat. 7. 23. depart (...) from me ye workers of Iniquity, and 9. 15. Mark. 14.
2. Mat. 27. 45.

Thus [(...)] Act. 8. 39. is rendered as well from as out of, Mark. 6. 14. [
from] the dead, Mat. 19. 20. [ from] my youth, not out of my youth.

And thus these Texts necessarily import only, that they went to or unto and
from the water, and however they might go into and come out of the water
without dowzing or plunging their whole bodies into the water; and its said as
much of Philip as of the Eunuch, he went into and came out of the water, Act.
8. 38, 39. and will any say, that he which Baptizeth must always plunge himself
into the water?

4. None of these Texts speak a word, that the Baptizing was in the form of
Submerston, Dipping, or Plunging; it might be only by pouring water on them by
washing, for ought is said here.

As to Joh. 3. 23. the word (...) many waters may note, that there were many
rivelets here and there where he came, which were not usual in those parts; and
however John having many hundreds perhaps thousands to Baptize, in those hot
Countries where he might go many miles for a little water, to show the
convenience of that place above others, it might well be said, he Baptized in
Arnon, because there was much water there, and I am informed, that Arnon is so
shallow a water, that no person can be overwhelmed in it.

And now what remains, that can pretend to invalidate Baptism in Infancy? if
it be said, their not being professed Believers, or their wanting faith.

I add, that God his declaring Infants visible Covenant Interest, is as good an
Evidence of their right to Baptism, as the visible profession of faith can be.
And if the want of faith would render the Baptism a nullity; then such as
appear to be but formal professors, they loose their Baptism, and if they
become real Believers afterward, they must be Baptized again.

If they object against the Administrator; it falls heavy upon themselves;
for according to their own principles, how is it possible for them to find a
regular Administrator! If Infant Baptism be a nullity; and Baptism be that,
which constituteth a Gospel Church or any person a member thereof, as they
affirm; then their own Baptism is a nullity, unless they can prove a lineal
succession from John Baptist or the Apostles, or that he which began their
Rebaptizing work had an immediate call, as John Baptist and the Apostles had.
For he that first began this Baptizing work in their way, had no other Baptism
but that in Infancy; if that were null, then was he an unbaptized person and no
Church member, neither could he make himself a Church member, wanting that
which should constitute him, so viz. Baptism. I ask what Scripture is there
express or by consequence for an unbaptized person (and no Church member) to
Baptize himself or others without an immediate call? without that (all Baptism
and Church Membership) in their way is unattainable, impossible to be attained,
and so the principles have a tendency to destroy both Baptism and Churches.

I shall from the premises, add two Corolaries.

1. That to Baptize again those that being Children of Believers were Baptized
in Infancy is a great sin, seeing Baptism in Infancy is valid; there is no
Scripture warrant for Rebaptizing any with water, and so it is a taking the
name of the Lord in vain. As to Act. 19. 3, 5. To say they were Baptized in the
name of Christ, therefore they were Rebaptized with water, is a plain non
sequitur. If this were a second Baptism it was with the Holy Ghost and with
fire, v. 6. -- the Holy Ghost came on them. Or one of them may be figurative,
and note the owning of the doctrine, as Mat. 21. 25. Act. 18. 25.

2. That to admit as members, and so Baptize again such who are known owned
members of a rightly constituted Church, without its knowledge or consent is
highly irregular; it is without Scripture warrant, it obstructeth and disableth
for those mutual duties, which the membership in the first Church required at
theirhands; there are various duties omitted, which are charged in the Church
where they are members, Rev. 7. and 3. it breaks the peace by division; it
violateth all Gospel order.

Neither will it be a Salvo to say, that Churches are not rightly constituted
for want of their Baptism; this is enervated already, by proving the validity
of Infant Baptism. And it is built upon a great mistake, viz. That Baptism does
constitute a Church, and make one a Member of it. Whereas it is not true, for
at the first Institution of Baptism, John the Baptist administered it to
multitudes who were Members of the Jewish Church before, and so were not made
Church Members by it, the same Church which Jesus Christ was a Member of, and
Baptized in, and so of a Gospel stamp. The Baptism of John was Essentially the
same with ours, being that which Jesus Christ (the head of Baptized ones)
passed under, yet what Church was Christ made a member of thereby? If that did
constitute, then one member may be a Church, for where the form is, there is
the thing formed, yea an excommunicate person an Apostate, one that renounceth
the Gospel and all Churches, yet his Baptism remaining he must still be a
Church member, for where the form is, there is the formatum; and if such had
lost their Baptism, then if ever they be reduced they must be Rebaptized;
whereas Patient one of the Baptists says the Ordinance of Baptism is to be
received but once, as a Man is to be regenerated but once, born but once,
changed from death to life but once. To conclude, where Churches are of a
Gospel constitution (which must be by other means then Baptism) it is sinful to
withdraw members from them under pretense of bringing them under Baptism;
therefore follow after things which make for p^^ce, Romans 14. 19. and as 1 Cor.
10. 32. Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God.

AN APPENDIX.
HAving Evidenced the Covenant Interest, not only of Believers, but of their
Infant seed, I may add two other Inferences thence.

Inf. 1. Then it is of great concernment to own the high privilege and
glorious advantage of Believers and their seed above all others in their
Covenant Interest.

Some would deny this external Covenant Interest to be a privilege, directly
against Romans 3. 1, 2. What advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there
of Circumcision? much every way.

It is then a high advantage, although internal special privileges be wanted, or
be not actually enjoyed, as Justification, etc. for in that respect he expressly
declereth the Jew was not better, v. 9* 22. all are under sin, and there is no
difference. There is unspeakable condescension in it, that God will admit any
of his creatures into Covenant with himself, when he might have dealt only in a
way of Prerogative and Sovereignty with them.

There are many privileges and advantages of being even externally and visibly
in Covenant with God, as

1. The Covenant-state it self is agreat privilege, above what others enjoy:
for, it is a great misery ( Ephesians. 2. 32.) to be strangers to the Covenants of
promise. Being in Covenant, speaks some nearness to God when others are at a
distance afar off, v. 13. argues relation to him, Ex. 4. 21. and having the
Kingdom of God nigh, Luke 10. 9, 11. and 11. 20. in Ordinances and influences
from the fatness of the Olive. Romans 11. 17. 24.

2. Various Divine Promises believing Parents may act faith upon the Lord in
for their seed above others: Genesis 17. 7. 8. Is. 44. 3. Is. 59. 21. -- whereas
the seed of the wicked are under threatenings, Ps. 37. 28.

If it be said, how does God keep Covenant* then, seeing many of the seed of
Believers prove wicked?

This is answered before; Abraham had an Ishmael, and Isaac an Esau -- who were
visibly in Covenant and under the token of it, yet God kept Covenant; but the
Lord rejects* none till they cast themselves out of Covenant, as Ishmael did
and others may do, who are only externally in it, thus the Jews were externally
in Covenant, as their privilege, Romans 9. 4. to them pertains -- the
Covenants, and many of them were bad and broken off, Romans 11. 20. yet God kept
his Covenant; so if some of the seed of Believers be wicked, yet God may keep
Covenant.

And from these promises, Believers have a higher encouragement than others can
have, to hope that their seed shall afterward share in Spiritual and Eternal
Blessings, tho they be not regenerated and sanctified for the present. As
Monicha the Mother of that famous Austin, mourning for his sinful courses, [be
of good cheer (said a Minister) for it cannot be that a Child of so many
Prayers and Tears should perish.]

Also they may be secured and delivered from many evils and temporal judgments,
which others lie open to; God remembers his Covenant for his, Ex. 3. 6, 7.
Lev. 26. 41, 42. they are sealed. Rev. 7. 2* 3. from hurt which others are
exposed to.

Inf. 2. Then the Govenant Interest of Believers and their seed, lay Parents
and Children under powerful obligations to Duty and Caution.

Indeed every privilege is improvable toward Duty especially such as this.

As to Parents.
1. Beware of degenerating or forfeiting your Interest in the Covenant: for,
you forfeit not only for your selves but for your seed also, their right
resulting from yours. Thus not only the Jews were broken off, but their
posterity by their unbelief; and the sin of Parents often has dreadful
consequences to their seed; says the Lord, Is. 14. 21. prepare slaughter for
their Children for the iniquity of their Fathers. Often a keeping the Covenant
or Commands is required, as Deuteronomy. 4. 40. and 12. 25. 28. that it may go well
with their Children after them.

2. Be much in giving instruction and Counsel in the matters of the Covenant to
your Children; leave not your posterity ignorant thereof, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7. these
words which I command and thee -- thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
Children, Deuteronomy. 11. 19. and 32. 46. Ephesians. 6. 4.

3. Be much acting faith upon the Lord in the Covenant, and pleading that with
him in Prayer for your seed; seeing he has said he would be a God to them as
well as to your selves. Thus Abraham having a promise for his seed, he acts
faith and pours out his Soul to God, Genesis 17. 18. even for Ishmael, although but
externally in Covenant with him, and it was with good success, v. 20. and as
for Ishmael, I have heard thee --

4. Be in a Submission to the will of God in the distinction, which he makes
in the distribution of Covenant blessings; the Lord vouchsafes to one, what he
will not grant to another, Genesis 17. 19. My Covenant will I establish with
Isaac. i. e. in the special blessings of it, not with Ishmael. And afterward,
when he was mocking, he was rejected, Genesis 21. 9. 12. yet God is quieting
Abraham there; let it not be grievous in thy sight.

This is difficult work for Parents to acquiesce and sit down without murmuring
complaints, when the Lord rejects some of their seed, who sin, whilst he
communicates his grace to others.

5. Be good presidents and examples to your seed that are in Covenant; they are
apt to follow your course, walk and conversation; and be good Copies or
Patterns to them, for imitation in keeping the Covenant.

6. Lay your seed as much as possible under engagements for owning the
Covenant: Eli a good Man reproved his Children, 1 Samuel 2. 24* yet not doing his
utmost to restrain them from sin, his house is severely threatened, 1 Samuel 3.
13. 14. I will judge his house for ever.

If Parents do not what they can to restrain their Children from sin it is
greatly displeasing unto God.

And God highly commends Covenanting Abraham, for commanding his Children and
his Household after him, to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. he would have
us by Counsel constrain Children unto duty, as a way to mercy.

As to Children who are growing up.
1. Beware of trusting in your privilege, or in being externally in Covenant,
neither Children nor adult ones, are to take up their rest in any outward
privilege, Mat. 3. 9. say not we have Abraham to our Father --

2. Beware of a rejection of the Covenant, as Ishmael did, least the Lord
reject you as he did him; although your first Covenant Interest is by your
Parents, know this will not always last, your standing there afterward, must
be in your own right by taking hold of the Covenant.

It is indeed a difficult question. How long are the Infant seed interested in
the Covenant, upon the account of their Parents faith?

I think it is, till either the Parent or the seed do reject or cast themselves
out of the Covenant; Ishmael was circumcised on his Fathers account, when
Thirteen years old, Genesis 17. 25. but a certain number of years cannot be
assigned as the determining rule for all, how long they are in Covenant upon
the account of their Parents. There may be a difference herein as to years.

If early you reject the Covenant, you may early be cast out, or when you are
very young. And the Covenant may be rejected various ways, not only by
rejecting of Jesus Christ, through positive unbelief as the Jews did, Romans 11.
20. but by acting contemptuously against the matters of the Covenant, as
Ishmael did mocking, Genesis 21. 9. how young soever, if you come to scoff or mock
at Religion or matters of the Covenant, especially if you be descended of
Religious Parents, you are in eminent danger of being cast out. And so by
preferring carnal sensual enjoyments before Spiritual Blessings, as Esau did,
who in distress sold his birthright for a trivial matter, even the gratifying a
sensual appetite, Heb. 12, 16. as a profane person, he was rejected.

3. Set your Covenant Interest against all temptations to sin; God has impressed
something of his name upon you, calling you holy; and then depart from
Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Do not act against the name of God and Jesus Christ,
which you are solemnly engaged for the owning of Mat. 28. 19.

You that are the Children of Believing Parents if you live in sin, know you
sin at a higher rate than others, because against the Covenant that you are
under, as well as against your Religious Education; your sin admits of higher
aggravations than others, for you forsake the God of your Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 7.
22. and 24. 24. to aggravate the evil of Nabals doings, it is said 1 Samuel 25.
3. and he was of the house of Caleb. The excellency of the Forefather Caleb
increased the Sin of Nabal, he being a degenerate Plant.

4. Improve your Interest in the Covenant toward seeking an Interest in Jesus
Christ, and the Saving Blessings of the Covenant: He urges attendance unto the
voice of that Great Prophet Jesus Christ, Act. 3. 22. And it is from their
being the Children of the Covenant, v. 25. Do not content your selves with
being externally in Covenant in Parents Right, but seek a Personal Interest in
the special Blessings of the Covenant.

5. Make your Covenant Intrest a Provocation to Repantance; Act. 3. 19. Repent
ye* -- Why? v. 25. ye are the Children -- of the Covenant, -- Act. 2. 38, 39.
Repent -- Why? for the Promise is to you.

6. Walk suitable to your Interest in the Covenant, in imitation of Abraham.
When they pleaded they were the seed of Abraham, Christ reflecteth on them,
because they did not the Works of Abraham, Joh. 8. 39. O walk in the steps of
the Faith of Abraham, Romans 4. 12. Against Hope believe in Hope, that you may be
blessed with Faithful Abraham.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
TO prevent Mistakes, know that page 3. runs not upon my Principle, but is
an Argument ad hominem; and the meaning is only this, that Infant Baptism is
not expressly forbidden, therefore either it is lawful, or else Scripture
Consequences must be admitted, which is undeniable.

ERRATA.
IN the Preface, page 4. line 5. blot out that. In the Book, p. 4. l. 14. for
(...) r. (...). p. 10. l. 5. for faederatiare r. faederati are. p. 24. l. 13.
for mystery r. misery. p. 28. l. 12. r. Romans 11. p. 34. l. 5. for yet r. yea.
p. 38. l. 11. r. from being. l. 12. after limit for to r. and. p. 40. l. 16.
for that r. the. p. 46. for te r. to. p. 69. l. 6. for are r. were. l. 22. 24.
for may r. might. p. 78. l. 6. for in r. of. l. 22. for Arnon r. Aenon. so also
p. 81. In the Catalogue, p. 1. l. 4. for Definitive r. Defensive. p. 3. l. 21.
for Sadbury r. Sudbury.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and are to be Sold by Edward Giles,
Bookseller in Norwich, near the MARKETPLACE.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence. A Word in Season. Definitive
Armor against four of Satan's most fiery Darts. Sermons upon the whole first
and second Chapter of the Canticles. Thirteen Sermons upon several useful
Subjects, all Published by John Collins, D. D. of Norwich. The way of the
Spirit in bringing Soul to Christ. The Glory of Christ set forth, with the
necessity of Faith, in several Sermons: both by Mr. Thomas Allen, late Pastor
of a Church at Norwich. Enoch's Walk with God and Christ, a Christian's Gain:
by Mr. Timothy Armitage, late Minister at Normich. A Discourse of the
preciousness of Christ, and of the preciousness of Faith. Precious Promises the
Portion of Overcomers. Sermons on five several useful Subjects; all by Mr. John
Longher, Minister in Norfolk. The Saints Ebenezer, by Mr. Fran^^s English, late
Minister in Norwich. Directions to spell English right. The History of the
Protestant Reformation, as it was begun by Luther. The Dead Saint speaking,
being a Sermon preached upon the Death of Mr. Newcomb of Dedham in Essex. The
English Presbyterian. The Miracles of Christ. The ordinary matter of Prayer,
drawn into Questions and Answers. Two Treatises, the first, Rejoicing in the
Lord Jesus in all Cases and Conditions: the second, Of a Christian's Hope in
Heaven, and Freedom from Condemnation by Christ: both by Mr. Robert Asty, late
Minister of Jesus Christ in Norwich. Obedience to Magistrates, recommended in a
Sermon preached September the 9th. 1683* being the 'Thanksgiving Day for his
Majesty's Deliverance: by Jonathan Clapham, Rector of Wramplingham in Norfolk.
A Present for Youth, and an Example for the Aged; Two Discourses, one of
Spiritual Blessings; the other, That God has an high account of the least
Grace in the Saints: by Mr. John Cromwell, late Pastor of a Church of Christ in
Norwich. Infant Baptism of Christ's Appointment: by Mr. Samuel Petto, Minister
of the Gospel in Sadbury in Suffolk. Of the Conversion of Sinners to God in
Christ, the necessity, nature, means, and signs of it, with a concluding Speech
to the Unconverted: by Martin Pinch, a Servant of Christ in the Work of the
Gospel, in the City of Norwich. Sincerity, or the upright Man's Walk to Heaven,
delivered in several Sermons in the Parish Church of St. Michael, in
Long-stratton, in Norfolk* by James Oldfield, late Minister there
The End of the Catalogue.

