NEWS FROM Doctor's Commons: Or, A True NARRATIVE OF Mr. HICKERINGILL'S
Appearance there, June 8. 1681.
Upon a Citation for Marrying People without Bannes or License.
WITH A PROTESTATION AGAINST THEIR SPIRITUAL COURT.
To which is Added, An ESSAY Concerning the Virtue of SEQUESTRATIONS.
IT is too notorious and vulgarly known, that the Waspish Swarms in Doctors
Commons, have been as stinging as stingy against Mr. Hickeringill; and the
little In7s;ects as full of malice as venom against him as their hearts could
hold, ever since the Publication of the Naked Truth, the Second Part.

And yet, poor Hearts, they had better have been quiet and let him alone, for
they always meddle with him to their hurt; as well as shame and confusion, and
come home by weeping-cross.

But some men will never take warning: Quos Deus intendit perdere dementat
Prius, was once accounted truth, though spoke by a Stoic. Men doomed to Ruin
when their Facts are bad,
Do blindly run upon their Death like mad.


We will begin (as the Men of Doctors Commons did begin with Mr. Hickeringill,
namely) with the Citation, in these words following.

RObertus Wiseman, Miles and Legum Doctor, Almae Curiae Cant. de Archubus,
London, Officialis Principalis legitime constitutus,
Vniversis and singulis Clericis and Literatis quibuscunque in and per totam
Provinciam Cant, ubilibet constitut. salutem.
Vobis conjunctim and divisim committimus, ac firmiter injungendo mandamus,
quatenus (ratione literarum requisitorialium ab Ordinario loci obtent.)
Citetis, seu citari faciatis peremptory Edmundum Hickeringill, Clericum,
Rectorem Rectoriae and Ecclesiae Parochialis omnium Sanctorum in Villa
Colcestriae in Com. Essex, Diaec. Land Cantiaeque Provinc. quod compareat coram
nobis, nostrove Secretario, aut alio Judice in hac part competen. quocunque in
Aula publica infra Hospitium Dominorum Advocatorum London, locoque judiciali
ibidem sexto die post Citationem hujusmodi ei in hac part factam si Juridicus
fuerit, alioquin proximo die Juridico ex hinc sequen. haris causarum ibidem ad
jura reddenda consuet. certis Articulis, Capitulis, sive Interrogatoriis meram
animae suae, salutem, morumque and excessuum suorum reformationem and
praesertim ejus solemnizationem, seu potius prophanationem Matrimonii inter
diversas personas clandestine absque eorum Bannis in Ecclestis suis
Parochialibus trina vice publicatis, vel Licentiis sive facultatibus in ea
part legitime obtent juxta Canones and Constitutiones Ecclesiae Anglicanae in
ea part editas and provisas, aliaque crimina and delicta concernen. ei cum
venerit ex officio nostro ad promotionem Thomae Doughty, Generosi objiciend.
and ministrand. de Justitia sive juramento responsur. ulteriusque factur. and
receptur. quod justum fuerit in hac part: and quid in praemissis feceritis,
Nos nostrumve surrogatum aut alium Judicem in hae part competen. quemcunque
debite certificetis una cum presentibus.

Dat. Tricesimo May, 1681.
WE live in an Age wherein some men are grown Libertines; and since the
Dissolution of the Parliament at Oxford, some are grown so wonderful light and
wanton, that they kick up their Heels at all Correction; and defy a Parliament
with as much courage as they defy God and the Day of Judgment, when they cry
God-damn-me.

These are very merry days, if they would but last.

When Mr. Hickeringill came into the Hall at Doctors Commons, June 8. 1681. He
went up to the Doctors, Habited in their Formalities, and with their Caps on,
and he also put on his Hat; which Sir Robert Wiseman no sooner espied, but he
bid Mr. Hickeringill be uncovered: But Mr. Hickeringill replied to him in
Greek, and to all Sir Robert's Repartees; and discoursed for a considerable
time: Mr. Hickeringill discoursed still in Greek; at length Sir Robert's
patience being spent, (and none of the Doctors would find any more Greek to
answer Mr. Hickeringil than Sir Robert did), it was ordered, that this
appearance, and Answer in Greek, only should be Registered as a Nonappearance:
Wherefore then Mr. Hickeringill did Repeat in English that he had said in
Greek; telling Sir Robert, that he first demanded to see or hear their
Commission and Authority for citing him thus from his Family and Home, and out
of the Diocese where he dwells, contrary to 23 H. 8.9. And that till it did
appear to him that this was his Majesty's Court Ecclesiastical, he would pay no
respect to it, nor be uncovered before men that were all (except Sir Robert)
his Juniors at the University, and most of them very much his Inferiors in many
other respects, not suitable to his modesty there to particularize; Degrees (so
easily purchased) and empty Titles being admired by none but Women and Fools.
Whereupon, instead of showing a Commission, Sir Robert again bid him be
uncovered, which still he refused: Then Sir Robert made signs to an old Fellow,
a kind of Sumner, to come behind Mr. Hickeringill and snatch his Hat off, which
he did; but Mr. Hickeringill forthwith snatched his Hat from the said Fellow,
and clapped it fast upon his Head, and there kept it during his stay there;
throwing amongst them a Protestation (which was read in Court) and to this
effect.

The Protestation of Mr. Edmund Hickeringill, Rector of the Rectory of
All Saints in Colchester, in the County of Essex, Delivered to Sir Robert
Wiseman, at the Hall at Doctors Commons, June 8. 1681.
1. I Protest against all your Proceedings as contrary to his Majesty's Laws
and Prerogative, since you will show no Commission derived from his Majesty for
such Proceedings, and whereby you claim Jurisdiction over me, and that by the
sight of which Commission, or hearing the same read, I might know whether it
were requisite in my case and circumstances to appeal from the same, or make
exceptions to the same, if it do not give you cognizance of the Crime, or
pretended Crime, objected against me; and whether it be not counterfeit, or not
Sealed with the Kings Great Seal of England: The old Ecclesiastical Popish
Jurisdiction being (as their Divine-Service and Mass) Foreign, and in a Foreign
Language, and exploded by 1 Eliz. 1. by the name of Foreign Jurisdictions, and
the High Commission Court (by the same Statute, 1 Eliz. 1.) set up in the room
thereof, being also exploded by 13 Carol. 2.12. wherein his present Majesty
obliges himself to grant no more Commissions Ecclesiastical, which makes me
believe you have no Commission at all, nor Authority to cite me thus before
you: And therefore it is that I will not be uncovered before you, until it
appear that you are his Majesty's Court Ecclesiastical, by Commission derived
from him.

II. I protest against your Proceedings, because in the Citation of me (hither)
there is no mention of the Kings Name, nor the Kings Arms in the Seal thereof,
but only the name of Robert Wiseman, Knight, and Doctor of Law, and to appear
before him or his Surrogate, whereas he is neither Archbishop of Canterbury,
nor so much as Dean of the Arches; and therefore he being (at best) but a
Surrogate or Deputy, he cannot have nor constitute a Surrogate of Deputy under
him.

III. I protest against your Proceedings, because I am cited out of the Diocese
where I dwell, contrary to the 23. H. 8.9.

IV. I protest against your Proceedings, because there is no certain day nor
time mentioned in your Citation, to limit and direct my appearance at a time
certain.

V. I protest against your Proceedings, because there is no certain and
particular penal Crime (mentioned in particular in the Citation) to which and
for which I am bound to make answer: For it is a duty, not a crime, for a
Presbyter (as I am) to join People together in holy Matrimony; nor any
Profanation, though the Register get not unmerciful and unjust Fees for a
formal License; nor any penalty for marrying People without Bannes or License;
nor any thing more cusromary or more universally practiced among the Ministers
in the Country, where I live, than to marry without Bannes or License: Nor do I
acknowledge that the sixty second Canon (pretended to be consirmed by King
James) is a Law of England, nor any other Canons or things that are not enacted
and confirmed by King and Parliament; the naked truth whereof none dare deny,
without incurring a Praemunire; the King and Parliament together, having in
England the only Legislative power. Besides, the Canons clash one against
another; for those made in Queen Elizabeth's time order, That such as marry
without Bannes or License, shall be suspended ab ossicio, for six months only:
But the sixty second of King James's Canons decrees Suspension for three years;
whereby it seems, the Synod-men, the longer they lasted, the more they grew and
improved (not in goodness and mercy) but in rigor and severity. God bless us,
and all Englishmen from such Legislators; and the bottom of the Plot, and
design of that Canon and Prosecution upon the same, seems to be calculated to
get money for Licenses, for the benefit of Registers, Commissaries, Officials,
and such like motly-Crew and Lay Elders, those Ecclesiastical Fellows, whilst
the Ministers and Clergy do the drudgery, and truckle under them, and truckle
for them: And is it not a Soul-saving and wholesome Canon, that stops a
Ministers mouth, and silences him from Preaching the Gospel for three years
together, because a couple are honestly married for Five Shillings, without
giving the Commissaries, Officials, and Registers (those Poscinummia and
Crumine mulgae) eleven shillings and four pence more for a License?

VI. I protest against your Proceedings, Argumento ad Hominem, because
according to your own (not my) Canons, no Sentence ought to pass upon a
Presbyter, but by a Bishop; and here is no Bishop to hear the Proceedings, and
therefore if afterward any Bishop do pass Sentence, Re in andita in propria
persona He must do it by a blind implicit faith, in the reports of other men,
which (I suppose) no Bishop will be so rash as to venture upon.

Edmund Hickeringill.

Mr. Hickeringill told Sir Robert, the penalty and danger incurred by the said
Statute of 23. Hen. 8, 9. for thus vexatiously citing him out of the Diocese;
and threatened Sir Robert, that he would sue him, and prosecute him according to
that Statute.

But Sir Robert replied, That he would stop proceedings. Mr. Hickeringill (not
content with that) replied, Who shall pay me for the vexatious Citation, and
unwarrantable trouble and charge you have put me to?

But Sir Robert said nothing to that, nor to the Protestation; it might as well
have been Greek, for it non-plust all reply.

Nor are all the Sir Roberts (or) Wisemen in England able to answer that
Protestation; for who can patch up an old rotten foundation that (at first and
at best) was but a Popish invention, not warranted in the Holy Scripture, for a
Bishop to vex and domineer, and pill and poll, and plague his Brethren, Clergy
and Laity, biting and devouring (what even birds of prey will not do) their
Kind, in spite of the Law of Christ, Luke 22.25, 26) by illegal Fees,
Extortions, Exactions, Gitations, Excommunications, Absolutions, Dispensations,
Commutations, Procurations, Visitations, Sequestrations, etc.

Which last is an art so dark and unintelligible, and as little known, as
seldom or never insisted upon, of all other the mysteries of Iniquity: which
makes me subjoin this following Essay,

But some will say, if Bishops Courts be dissolved (as seems to be undeniably
proved in the Naked-Truth, and in a Book (so styled) lately published; then
what are Bishops good for? And what shall they do? To which I answer, Let them
sit in Parliament, and other Councils, when his Majesty shall think fit to call
them; let them say their Prayers, Preach, give Alms, Baptize and Catechize, and
to the work of their Ministry; and if that be not work enough for one man,
(which was a great deal more than the Apostles ever did, who never were
Parliament Men nor Privy-Councellors) then let them persuade the King and
Parllament (if they can) to set up their High Commission Court again, and give
them power (as formerly) to be mischievous.

Bless us, (good God!) what would Ambition and Covetousness, Rage and folly be
at, if it could speak?

Is not stately Lordships and Manors, City and Country-houses, vast Revenues,
and great and manifold Preferments, enough to satisfy men, but they must rob
the Spittle, and he uneasy, except they have power to be mischievous? Well,
God forgive them, and give them repentance, (that is the worst I wish them) and
send them more money, and (when they have got more wit and more grace, then
also, and not 'till then) more Power.

An Essay concerning Sequestrations, by Edm. Hickeringill.
IF ever any Rags of Popery remain in a Protestant Constitution and Government,
(some think) that old Popish Invention called Sequestration, will still stand
up and plead for its self.

Sequestration is a term of Art well known in the late Times, namely, when
Lands in controversy or dispute, or in Abeyance, or in nubibus, are put into
the hands of an indifferent person or persons to retain the rents and profits,
or take them into custody, till the controversy be decided, and till there be
a lawful Incumbent (by Institution and Induction); or, if a Donative, until the
Patron do bestow the same upon a Clergyman.

Sequestration is a Roman word, and honest enough, if it had not been so often
abused, and where Arbitrary Government (as in the late times) comes in fashion,
it is of use, of wicked use.

For Silent leges inter arma, we must not talk of Law, of the ancient and
fundamental Laws of England, when either War, Force, Popery (or its Twin)
Arbitrary Government, comes into play, and is on the winning-hand.

The Pope had a Trick of old, when any Bishopric or good Living became vacant,
it should go hard but he would have a snip out of it, before he put in a new
Incumbent; and this taking the Benefits into his own hand, he called
Sequestration, (that is) keeping the profits in an indifferent hand, to be
ready for the next lawful Incumbent, having some respect in the interim, in
making some provision for the Cure, answerable to the profits of the vacant
Benefice.

The Kings of England, and the Pope, have (of old) had many a shroud and weary
Tugg for the Profits in the Vacancies of Bishoprics, etc. But King Hen. 8. and
his own Daughter Qu. Eliz. (that set the Pope at Defiance) made bold to keep
the Profits of the vacan Bishoprics in their own hands, (righ and good
reason), for by 35 Edw.. 1.1. the King of England are declared the sole and
only founders of Bishoprics, and Archbishopricks, etc. as other great then of
the Realm, and Lords of Manors, etc. endowed the Parish-Churches; and
therefore the custody of the Profits of the Benefice (in the Vacation) belongs
to the Patrons, and of the vacant Bishoprics to the Kings (and not the
Bishops) by 25 Edw. 3. Anno Dom. 1350, and by the Statute of Carlisle 35 Edw.
1.1.

How comes the Pope then, and Bishops, to be so busy in sending out
Sequestrations in every Vacancy? why, some men love to be doing, if it be but
at small games (they will play) rather than stick out; and send out
Sequestrations, if but for the sea sake; come, come, something has some savor.
For some men dare in dasiance of the said Statute, take upon them to Sequester
the Profits of vacant Benefices, which the said Statutes do aver to belong to
the Patrons, in these very words 25 Edw. 3. Kings, Earls, Barons, and other
Nobles, as Lords and Advowees, have had and ought to have the custody of such
voidances. Besides, men that love to be dubling, and have an Oar in every Boat,
they think there is some sport in casting the Net, though it does not always
bring of Fish in it.

But a main reason certainly is, That they cannot endure to hear that
Ecclesiastical Profits should come into (though they came out of) Lay-fingers.

And therefore a heavy-do they kept (the Bishops) with Q. Eliz for keeping the
Bishopric of Ely so long vacant, and sequenstring all the stately Manors,
Rents, Revenues (one of the best in England at that time) and putting the
moneys thereof. (as at this day) into (a place that often needs the same) the
Exchequer.

Putting off the fretting-Bishops with a Complement, namely that she kept the
said stately and rich Bishopric vacant so long (as only) till she could find a
man fit for it. And the man that fitted her pretensions (that is) would be
content to part with the said rich Lordships, Rents and Revenues, and in lieu
thereof take a Pension, was the man for her purpose, resigning all to the
Crown, (from whence they came, and that changed the rich Abbey of Ely into a
Bishops-See, in the reign of Hen. 1.) and in exchange, contented with a yearly
Pension out of the said Exchequer in ready money when he gets it.

Thus Hen. 1. kept the Archbishopric of Canterbury by Sequestration, from the
death of Anselm (five years) till Rodolph (a man for his turn) suceeded, that
Rodolph that would not consecrate Thurstan Archbishop of York, except he would
swear obedience to him in the Sea of Canterbury: Thurstan scorned the motion,
and the Pope took part with Thurstan, and bid him not yield and inch; but
Rodolph endeavored to be above him, and the King took part with Rodolph, but
to no purpose; for, the King was glad (at length) to connive and submit.

Nay, that I Will say for the Clergy in Popish times, and foppish times, they
shall justle for the place, and bustle for profit (where there is any to be got)
as well as the best carnal Layman of them all.

And the true reason (in Law) why the King, Nobles, Patrons, etc. ought to have
this Privilege (which the Pope and Bishops have long usurpt), is (says my Lord
Cook) because the King is sole founder of Bishoprics, Instit. 1 Part: p. 344.
and Patron of Benefices; and at this day, all Donatives (which the King
creates) shall (for this reason) be visited by the Chancellor (not the Bishop
nor Archdeacon.) And if the King license a subject to erect and found a Church
or Chapel, it is to be visited by the founder only, not by the Bishops; And by
parity of reason, the Churches and Chapels of dissolved Monasteries are to be
visited by the owners only, that bought and paid for them. And for like reason
Kings of England (before the Pope's Usurpation) (as sole owners and founders of
Bishoprics) did deliver to the Bishop-Elect the Crosier or Pastoratoral staff,
and the Ring, whereby there was a wedding made betwixt him and his
Church-Cathedral, or Mother Church. And K. Hen. 1. (being requested by the
Bishop of Rome to make the Bishoprics Elective) resused; Bak: Chross:
but King John was glad to part with this choice flower of the Crown to
preserve the Crown its self; or which otherwise that Bishop had made bold to
deprive him.

It Is true, at this day Bishops are (in effect) the Kings creatures, I mean of
his creation only, and the Election (by the Chapter, etc.) is but mere fanm;
but still the Chapter (at this day) does not part with this shadow; as neither
with their grants of Sequestrations, Licenses to Preach, Ecclesiastical
Court-keeping, demand of Synodals, Procurations, exacting Fees and Oaths from
Churchwardens, (unconscionable Oaths like the etc. Oaths, and impossible to be
kept) all, all shadows that still they dote on, how illegal soever, and
ridiculous to all unbiast and knowing men.

One would think the Pope might be satisfied with St. Peter's Patrimony (as big
and rich as all England) in Italy, at least with those may happy obventions for
Indulgences, Jubilees, Miracles, Canonization, Annates, Installations,
Pensions, Consecrations, etc. and not (as he does) claim and get the
first fruits also, and Tenths of every Benefice in Popedom.

And one would think that the magnificent and extravagant charity and
benevolence of those that founded and endowed the Bishoprics in England with
such large Immunities, Profits, Honors, Privileges, Manors, Palaces, Country
and City-houses, etc. might content the greediest Bishop in Christendom,
without shipping some part of the fleece of every flock.

Surely they do esteem themselves of another make, another temper, other
metal, and of another mould than other Priests; or, at least, that the Bishop
is the man, and the Rectors and Vicars, but his Journey-men, or Curates; (for
so it seems to be intimated by that passage, Send down upon our Bishops and
^urates); and as if the Rectors and Curates in England has not as undoubted a
right and Freehold in their Benefices, as a Bishop in his Bishopric; which (as
they certainly have) so they cannot be deprived or lose the same, but by twelve
men of their Peers, according to those Statutes (that one would wonder at the
impudence of such as dare invade them), namely, 9 Hen. 3.29-25.25 Edw. 3.4-28
Edw. 3.3-36 Edw. 3.15. 17 Car. 1.10. And they will certainly come within the
danger of those Statutes whenever they are so venturous as to trust to their
Sequestations as a Title in Law, Cook. Instit. part 1.344. a.
or think it sufficient whereupon to ground an Ejectment* or dispossess any man
of his Possessions; whether his Title to that Possession be good or bad, it is
not of spiritual cognizance; for a Benefice, whether void or not void, shall be
tried by the Common Law. And God keep us all and our Freeholds from
Arbitrary-sway, and out of the hands (shall I say?) clutches and paws of greedy
dogs that can never have enough, I mean unreasonable and wicked men, who show
their abilities in nothing more than being able to crush; the more's the pity,
(I say again) that they should have more power than wit or grace.

Thus in the days of Popery, if there happened to be in any part of the Land, a
supereminent piece of good land, fat Meadows, pleasant and stately timber'd
woods, a serene air, a rich soil, and a convenient situation and habitation,
then the Church-mens fingers itcht to be at it, and then -- Hey -- for St.
Clare, St. Katharine, or St. Bennet. The good land was soon converted to Popery
and Supersition, and became -- the Holy land, and Church-land, belonging to an
Abbey, Priory or Nunnery of the Benedictines, Franciscans, Dominicans,
Carthusians, etc.

And though this Spiritual Jingo Janutus is clear enough discovered in England,
yet still the same itch sticks to some men's fingers; and they are still in
defiance of Statutes, (men's Proprieties, Advowsons, and Lay-fees), scratching
and clawing, fingering, and playing their tricks and their pranks with the
Leiger-demain of a Sequestration; playing their Canons and Proclamations (as of
old most Arbitrarily) against the Sacred and fundamental Statutes of the Realm,
and is it not high time then that they should be looked after, what were the men
that occasioned (by evil counsel) the Veterane mischiefs?

And if at this time of day they be so daring and bold, when their Jurisdiction
is so cripled, what would they do, nay, what would they not do, if they again
retreive (as some men hope) their High Commission Court? without which, what
(ever did, or ever) can their inferior Courts signify, more than a May Game,
or to be laughed at? But, if the Inquisition be set up again, then have, at the
Naked Truth with fire and faggot, Bell, Book and Candle, and with a vengeance:
But, Dat, Deus immiti cornua curta. --

London, Printed for R. Janeway in Queens Head, Alley in Paternoster Row, 1681.


