THE Oxford-Act: A POEM.

LONDON; Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, MDCXIII.

A True Relation of their Practice At Oxford Town when there an ACT is.
CANTO I.
HAlf Choakt in the Dust of our lewd Town,
Tired with their Follies and my own;
To breath a Wiser Air, and better,
With many a Token, many a Letter,
I tript to the other Alma Matter.
Thousands One, Hundreds Six, Tens Ninety,
Three Ones the Year exactly point to ye,
When a remarkable Occasion
Brought there the Learned and Wise oth' Nation:
The Act which some believed must be
Turned to a Jewish Jubilee,
Whose joyful sound that Nation hears
No more than Once in Fifty Years.
The Act, which now they discontinue
So long, some thought, they never had any;
But that some forward Scribes in Iniquity
Had feigned it like their own Antiquity.
Often would the new created Sophister
Where Boy cried, want ye any Coffee, Sir?
Start from brown-study, answering rather
When comes the Act, the Act, Dear Father?
The Beardless Father sighed, but knew
No more of that than I or You;
For all his Logic and his History,
This an unfathomable Mystery.
Even the Grave Doctors scarce could tell
Without the help of Chronicle,
When last they in their Boots appeared,
And Bugbear Terrae-Filius feared.
Now one, and then the other Faction
Putting the Dons' beyond their Action:
Now Whig, as Nobbs had then bedighted him
With Horns and Tail cried Bough, and 'frighted 'em;
Till they stark staring run with one Mouth,
To rail at, and discomfit Monmouth:
Though wiser Came to save his Bacon,
His Picture kept till he was taken.
Then their Loved Chancellor's Picture banish,
As Rome unfortunate Sejanus.
More Loyal Oxford, Windsor trusted
With many a Pondrous Pike and Musket,
Soon formed in Squadrons and Battalions
To swinge the Duke's Tatterdemalions:
But Blessings on that Noble Lord,
Who saved the Labor of their Sword;
Who did the Tall-Young Man betray,
And run most Loyally away.
O happy Oxford! happy since
Fate gave thee such a grateful Prince;
True to his Friends beyond comparison,
He Jefferys sent to pay thy Garrison;
Whose Musick-Speech so sore did fright ye
The Act that Summer cried Goodnight to ye.
Since then, Confusion on Confusion,
All Chaos till the Revolution;
Till a New World rose from black Billows,
And Surges rolled as soft as Pillows.
Yet then Fate had so long been thwarting,
So stunned with the old Blows of Fortune,
The Aged Matron did appear,
She scarce got Breath in Four long Year:
But now recovered brisk and Bonny,
As Bridegroom's self, in Moon-call'd -Honey,
An Act as I before have told y' it
She Will have, and all crowd to behold it.
Expect not all the Nation over
From Cornish Mount, to Peer of Dover,
I should recite, since did I know it,
'Twould look like Herald, not like Poet:
Then rest content with what I give ye
To further trouble save, Hyperbaton.
believe me.
I Will only sing what Troops have gone down
From thee, O Trinobantick-London!
Three Aldermen, and one wise Justice,
Some of the Orphans trusty Trustees.
To show their equal Wit and Valors
Ten Woollen-Drapers, Nine stout Tailors.
Likewise to Visit their Acquaintances
A well-teeth'd Band of Fifty Prentices.
Three Jolly Landladies went jogging,
Their Rosy Cheeks, confessing Nogging;
Their Cheeks with Sweat and Gravy running,
And wot ye what -- They went a Dunning;
Some certain Lads that shall be nameless,
(For we'd have none should justly blame this,)
Not long since made an Expedition
In Water-Poet's low Condition;
(For which the Rude would call 'em Blockheads,)
London to see with empty Pockets:
On these kind Hostesses they lighted,
And since they found themselves not slighted,
Them now to see the Act invited:
Which kindness they accept the rather,
In hopes of Ready-Bill from Father.
In The Name of the Beadle, what ill Fortune,
Before Remembrance drew a Curtain,
That I, on these lewd Scholars plodding,
The Cream of the Jest had half forgotten.
Upon the Road in the Crowd I saw there
Two Booksellers and One poor Author:
The Author first through Dust was trudging;
With Clouted-Shoon, like D -- well drudging;
By Sympathy I looked upon him,
And cast a few good Wishes on him,
And him behind my self had Mounted,
But that my Steed too weak I counted;
For my own Worth 'twould hardly bear,
Much less my Fellow-Traveller.
While thus my natural Benignity,
Beheld with Grief such an Indignity,
And did against hard Fate dispute it,
Why Booksellers ride, and Authors foot it;
Who should I see with all their Tackle
Within a Leathern Tabernacle
But Two, as Witty S -- has it,
Of The honestest that ever sold Gazette.
The Name of the First, but hold, let us pass it;
The Second too shall secret be,
Lest we should spoil good Company.
They Hemmed to my poor Militant Brother:
He heard, (for sharp are Ears of Author.)
Then took him up, and kindly carried
To Town in their Triumphant Chariot.
Me soon they spied, as soon they beckoned,
I joined their Train, and made a Second.
On Conversation quickly fall,
Slap-dash, And how, and how goes all?
Who last the Athenians did be-rogue Sir,
What Auction, or what Catalogue Sir?
This idle News let us throw away,
And to the Business of the Day;
Lest we our Embryo-Notions smother
With Gravity, subjoins the other.
You know e're Fortune did convene us,
What was agreed upon between us;
That whosoever a Project started,
We'd both go halves, and have it parted.
Speak then, since yet my Noddle will not stir
And none that is here will us misconster
If any Prodigy or Monster;
Any rare glorious Fight or Murder
Of this side Tweed, or on the further;
For Doeg's Fustian Quill to utter,
Doubly inspired with Bread and Butter.
Not one of these my dear Acquaintance,
Who right or wrong still mind the Main-chance;
Not one good Whim, or I cannot think on it,
Replies the first, however let us drink on it:
How good Wits jump! The Thought they blessed,
Well-motion'd strait cried all the rest.
High did they heave the Courteous Bottle,
Transfused to Sympathetick Noddle,
Whose Blood exhausted, fills their Veins,
And crams Capacious Guts with Brains.
When one with Thanks to the Juice that gave it,
Cries out, I have it Lads, I have it.
This very Act, although 'twill many
Cost dear, with us shall turn the Penny.
Whatever we lose, we'll make Reprisal,
Whoever gains not, you and I shall.
My very Thought, I Will swear't says the other
However you came to hit on it Brother,
Bear witness else, O'ambling Author!
Say, did not I my self propose
This very Notion at the Rose?
Your're both my Friends, Poeta loquitur.
may Riches seize me
And make me dull, if I Would displease ye:
Yet (as for Fibbing I defy it,)
'Twas the self-same, or very nigh it.
However I Am sure you will do a fair thing,
And stand to your Authentic Bargain;
Your Servant's here to nick the occasion
And give a Full and True Relation.
For that, cries he, if we find Stuff,
We can have Journey-Men enough.
Trade's bad, Paper's too dear of Conscience,
Naught sells besides the Athenian Nonsense.
Oth' last true Bloody Fight I printed,
In this own fruitful Brain-pan minted.
The Hawkers, which you would scarce believe,
Six Quire returned me out of Five. Certainly some Rogue or other must print it
upon him.

All this Sir not to beat you down;
To Generous Souls what is Half a Crown?
Below your Works intrinsic Value
No, by no means Sir would we paul you:
We can be Civil Sir, you know it,
And we'll in the next Edition show it.
Nor for the first will we be stingy,
Or down to next to nothing dringe ye:
To hold you by the Teeth and Neck fast,
We'll give y'e a Guinea and a Breakfast;
Nay Brother, we'll that Breakfast double,
Never stand upon it but make it a Couple;
Besides one Generous Pint to inspire him,
And for this high Achievement fire him.
The other adds, well hanged, I Will take it,
And a rare piece never doubt on it make it. Poeta loquitur.

I Will do my best at Joque and Rallery,
Nor fear but 'twill, Pit, Box and Gallery.
Be each of you a careful Waiter,
An Eves-Dropper at the Theater.
Come you but all well-laden home,
With Thyme, i will work it into Comb.
He said, and we by this were got over,
Thy Clowdy Brow, Sky-clistring Shot-over; Shot-over-Hill.

And just as we had closed our twatling
Over Maudlin-Bridge the Wheels went rattling.
The College self's a little beyond,
You Will see it next Door tot'h Sign of Grayhound:
Nor could we much besides discover,
For now Dame Night came fluttering over:
Black Ghosts arose, and Gown-Men fled,
And Tom had warned the Sun to Bed.
Since for his Exit, vain's our Sorrow,
We'll Sleep, and tell you more to Morrow.
The End of the First Canto.
CANTO II.
EXpect not our bold Muse should call
The witty Moonshine and the Wall,
To tell you what this Night betided,
Which knew no more than you and I did:
To leave then honest Townsmen snoring,
Some Scholars Tippling, others Whoring;
Some from the intruding Proctor scampring
TO avoid enchanted wooden Cramp-ring;
Or when that Cunning-Man has spied 'em,
Charmed by those powerful Words, Per Fidem;
Tripping away, without Bayardo,
Unto the Castle or Bocardo, As much as to say they go afoot thither.

As Rats are rim'd to sore Mishap,
And run their Heads into a Trap;
As Salt on Birds directly thrown
Probatum est, Similie.
their all they are own,
So here -- But letting that alone. Similie.

The Reader thinks as we intended
We'll here go on where last we ended,
Comprizing in immortal Sing-Song
How all the old Dons were at it Ding-dong.
Their Themes, the manner and occasion
Of every strenuous Disputation;
All this from point to point reciting,
And both his greedy Ears delighting.
Thus he, thus let him like a Nisi,
But we intend more to surprise ye,
To change the Scene, invert the Order,
Jogging in Road direct no further,
But with some Two or Three Supposes
Wiping our Gentle Reader's Noses;
Shall tell 'em all we did discover
Of this famed Act, as all were over;
As by good Author 'twas related,
The Price you know before debated:
And if he gives the secret Histories
Of any Scholar and his Mistress;
If Gown turned up he makes the wonder
At strange unheard Discoveries under,
We Are not to answer for his Sawc'ness,
As knowing nothing of the Busi'ness:
Take Word for Word, from just Relators,
Not Paraphrasers, but Translators;
It Is He, not we, are now to deal w'ye,
And so he prayed me, Sirs, to tell ye.
The First rare Scene in this great Drama,
Was Mr. Vice's grave Pragramma;
That all the Lads with Care exceeding
Should show their Haviour and their Breeding;
On pain of Black-Book and the Proctors
Abusing none, besides the Doctors.
That those whom trembling Soph acknowledges
Right Worshipful of Halls and Colleges,
Should signify to their Societies
During the Act, though now so nigh it is,
All Doctors should their Scarlet wear,
As blushing at the Crimes they hear.
And when the little Tingle-tangle
The Signal gives, prepare to wrangle.
All things and Places rightly stated,
For Graduates, and Non-graduated.
For Doctors, Masters, Ladies, Fiddles
The Gall'ries are reserved; the Middle's
Left open (Thanks,) for the Rascality,
Servitors, and Promiscuous Quality.
Next the Curators must take care
No breach of Peace be suffered there;
All with Decorum done, and Gravity,
No Rudeness, or lewd Mob-like pravity:
The Doctors, as it is hoped, abused,
The Innocent Ladies too misused;
Each little freedom there must pocket,
Clap and Forgive the ill-manner'd Blockhead.
And further, for the preservation
Of Alma Mater's Reputation,
No Scholar, be he less or bigger,
Not Gown'd and Capp'd in Mood and Figure,
Must have the Privilege to hear
His Betters hist in the Theater.
Next such a Hist they could supply it
From nothing but a Polish Diet;
Their Names enough to have abasht one,
Legassick, Strauchan and Borashton.
The stately Persian Monarchs use
By length of Whiskers Porters choose;
So we our Proctors much the same,
By Hardness, and by length of Name,
Who meet at One, Tmesis.
that Mob may fear 'em,
In The Apo -- (what do you called) -- dyterium.
Expect not I should make Relation
Of every Poem and Oration;
The Ladies heard, (them I Will not flatter, or lie,)
And Edified most supernaturally:
As when St. Tony Preaching stood Similie.

To's Four-Legg'd Brethren in the Wood.
Although his Language was unwonted,
They could not Hum, yet Thanks they grunted;
Fain on their Mast would had him Dine,
And proved themselves all well-bred Swine.
Now the full-button'd Youth appear,
And Squeaking, fill the Theater;
Their Parts well conn'd, say over prettily,
Nay humor all things wondrous wittily.
The prettiest littlest harmless Bawbles,
Young Vnfledg'd Lords, and Callow Nobles;
The Ladies might, nor would they scare 'em
For Nosegays in their Bosoms wear 'em;
Not so when Men of Parts and Converse,
They Have wit to scorn -- to write -- their own Verse.
Once harmless Worms, now fledged in Vices,
They Are Basilisks all, and Cockatrices;
Their Mouths, their Eyes, their Tails discover
Stings, Poison, Murder, Death all over.
Yet honest they perhaps continue,
Nor know they other use of Guinea,
But hungry Poet to requite
Who did their Gaudy Verses write.
Who if he dares but claim his own,
When Bully meets him out of Town,
Shot up to a Man, and strangely grown,
With Valiant Whip he will kindly Lace him,
Or else most gratefully dry-baste him.
Henceforth beware, dear Brethren, of it,
Take they the Honor, you the Profit:
Bought Wit is best, and't has been said for it,
It must be theirs who fairly paid for it.
One sings, tho in Heroicks, odly
A Catalogue of the new Bodley:
While from another you may hear
Our swinging the French-Fleet, last Year.
A Third describes in lofty Fables
Their addled -- No-Descent -- at Naples.
A Fourth sings Britain's Ancient Glories,
Which the vile World will now think Stories.
A Fifth great Ormonds Praises writes,
Heroically, as he Fights.
The next brave Savoy's long Recovering,
Who over the Gallick Foe is hovering;
His Illness, how th'Allies deplore it,
And all he did, since and before it.
But we had Prose as well as Verse Sir,
Of which I Will be a true Rehearser.
How did the sharp Inceptor Budgell
His Holiness, and Socinus Cudgel?
How Tod dispute, as sweet as Timbrel,
Of Schism and Athanasian Symbol?
How he who could in Egg-shell scribble
A General-Council prove fal-lible.
How Bedford talk at this great Season,
Of Fault, and Pain, and Light of Reason.
How Brazan-Nose, thy famed Entwistle,
Geneva and Cracow bids go whistle:
What Cradock the vain Deist say to
What he de Opere Operato.
What next of Royal Christ-Church, Langford
Which will not come in, tho I should hang for it.
No more will any Physick-Question
Of Sagittary or of Thurston:
But Spirits and Piss, and Blood together
And Gout may go I care not whither.
Friend a majori proves, a Brute
Has Sense, because he can Dispute.
Brown will not let Fanatics baffle us,
While Prince has power of Adiapharous.
Of Kecking, Hannes and Salt's Discourses,
And strange Narcotick Powers and Forces.
Last Dale affirms in sober Sadness
All great Wits have a spice of Madness,
Himself he would for an Instance give 'em,
But is there any will believe him?
In this Employ the Day well worn,
They to the Tennis-Court adjourn.
A Theater, tho far less spiteful
Than is their old, far more delightful;
Where the young Lads that never ventured,
Never 'till now, are fairly entered:
What there they do among the Wenches
Say, O ye Stools, O speak ye Benches:
Yet do not speak, your Voice would have us,
Like Vocal Head or Board 'twould scare us.
But Luna now is Heaven adorning,
So Friends adieu till the next Morning.
The End of the Second Canto.
CANTO III.
MUse tell the Man, who like Almanzor
To every Mortal Wight cries Stand Sir;
Discourteous Knight, whose Tongue dead-doing
Draws not for Ladies aid, but ruin:
Whether he Terrae-Filius height,
Or Musick-Speech, pronounce (not write,)
Midst Doctors, or their Wives is forraging, Hysteron Proteron.

His use, abuse, and Primitive Origin.
But Terrae-Filius first invade,
And conjure up from Native Shade.
Have you not Read or Heard, Sir Reader,
Of an old Grecian Master Gardener? Epicurus.

Who that he might be famed for something,
Said, Man grew out of Earth, like Pumpkin?
Never gern, and show your Teeth, this Doctrine is
Embraced by th'Wits, and sage Autochthones;
You some such Story, will ye, will ye,
Must own in the Name of Terrae-Filii;
Of Dunghill Race, and Education,
For strange Equivocal Generation:
Firm Proof you from their Birth may gather,
The Earth their Dam, the Sun their Father:
Hence, like their Brother Dors they rise,
And mean, but only mean the Skies:
When those in vain they have long affected,
Thither in vain their flight directed;
To Native Dirt, they sink forgotten,
By every Foot to nothing trodden.
The Titans first of this lewd Race,
Which did even Mother-Earth disgrace;
Proud big-bon'd, brainless, graceless Giants,
They Jove himself set at defiance;
Who whirled his vengeful Thunder at 'em,
And sunk 'em under Styx Ten Fathom.
This Mother Terra took so ill
The Old Crone maintains the Quarrel still,
Was with new Rebel-Bastards gotten,
As soon as 'tother, dead and rotten:
With weaker Arms these Heaven assailed,
The others Fought, these only Railed;
Their Malice-impotent began
With Jove himself, then each Good Man;
Old Comedy, and lawless Satyr,
The Effect of Lewdness, and Ill Nature.
The Language was, which first they spoke in,
All Gravity and Virtue mocking:
They pleased toth' Life, the Mobs ill Natures,
Whose Meat and Drink's to abuse their Betters;
This the true rise of all thy Scoffing is,
And sharp-edg'd Jests, O Aristophanes!
The Wittiest Knave we ever saw since
The Terrae-Filius of old Athens.
He with grave Socrates did squabble,
And on him loo'd the grinning Rabble,
Abused the Doctor and his Wife,
Which cost the good Old Man his Life.
'Twou'd be too long to tell the occasion
That brought 'em first to the British Nation;
And which oth' Druids did invite 'em
To Beaumond, alias Bellositum,
Who there of yore professed Astrology,
Sage Ethics, Physics, and Theology;
Which if you question, plain and liquid it is
Beyond dispute, in Wood's Antiquities;
Ascetick-Wood's, whose known good Nature,
So justly curbs his harmless Satyr;
Who takes such care on each occasion
To vindicate the Reformation:
None better could since or before do it,
Heylin or Harmer never did more do it.
Tho some there are perhaps would blame us,
For making their first rise so famous;
And think these Under-Graduates-Oracles
Deduced from Cornwal's Givary Miracles,
From immemorial Custom there,
They raise a Turfy Theater;
Where from a Passage Underground,
By frequent Crowds encompassed round,
Out leaps some little Mephistophilus,
Who even of all the Mob the Offal is,
True Terrae-Filius he, we reckon is,
Or Anti-Theos Apomechanes;
Who Rimes, and Joques, and lays about him,
While Brawny Thousands clap and shout him.
Whence our new Merry-Andrew's Rise is,
Transplanted thence to Ford of Isis.
And next the Muse her Slave beseeches,
For a few Words of Musick-Speeches;
Whether from those old Strolling-Pedlers,
The Bawdy Corybantick Fiddlers,
Who Isis Temple often had been in,
Not loved for nothing by the Women:
Or blind Welsh Harpers, who for Farthings,
Told Tales, sung Songs, let F -- s, sold Bargains.
We'll not dispute, since there is no time for it,
Nor can we reason find, or Ryme for it.
But to particulars descending
To Canto's haste, and Poems ending.
But who alas! who can suffice,
Tho Tongues he had, like Argus-Eyes,
To tell of all the witty Rubs,
Spawned by who knows how many Clubs?
Against grave Doctors and fair Ladies,
As always at the Act the Trade is.
Sure there is a Letch'ry in Abuses,
They both have read Flagrorum usus,
Tho an odd way, you would think to move 'em,
The more their flogg'd, the more they love 'em.
Here the Wags maul one old Sincater,
Not Hobbs himself e're did it better;
Whose very Beard has found 'em matter
For Thirty Years Abuse and Satyr:
There generously another Hector,
And reverenced the poor Rector:
Not Colmer more, or great T --,
Him, or his Piece of Matrimony:
With Jest so easy, all must take it,
Of Gospel, and of Woman Naked.
And sure, but him, none e're had knowledge
Of what is what in all the College:
Not one of their Young Senior Fellows,
But's of his Chastity so jealous,
Should you a Naked Woman show 'em,
You Would fright 'em so, 'twould quite undo 'em:
Put 'em beyond that fair occasion,
Beyond hot Crust and Disputation,
Away, Sans Fear or Wit they would scamper,
In spite of Ditch, of Wall or Rampire,
As Serpent, (swallow't he that can,)
Fly from the sight of Naked Man.
Nor all is born by Doctors Backs,
For Cambridge too come in, for snacks.
And is it thus, O ye Oxonians!
Ye treat your Brother Heliconians,
The Christians, Jesuits, and the Jonians?
They Will fit you for it, and not be here,
'Till this time comes again next Year.
Next enter Smith, and very odd is it,
That he talks thus, the Chaste, the Modest;
See but with how much Grace he Blushes,
At every Word all over Flushes.
His Wit, his Modesty, or Learning;
Whether's the most needs deep discerning,
His Wit, all raised by Contribution,
Or Military-Execution;
For he so neatly has expressed it,
It Is all his own, as he has dressed it.
His Modesty sure's more than common,
Since known to' above 500 Women:
At Spencer's Squire of Dames he would laugh,
Whom he out-throws a Bar and half.
Then for his Learning, it is notorious,
Made by his Modesty more glorious;
But his chief Excellency is
As Envy own, in Languages;
The European not enough,
The Modern only trifling stuff,
With a far larger Scheme delighted,
All Babels are in him united.
What ever Traffiick brings from far
Indian, Chinese, or Malabar;
A natural Hottamtot he would ape,
Deep versed in the Language of the Cape;
A happiness so strange and rare,
The Company should him prefer,
Either to lie their Leiger there,
Or be at least Interpreter:
What near the Line, or near the Tropic,
Sclavonian be it, or Ethiopick;
All, all is his own, he has no small smattering,
Familiar-like, his Greek and Latin:
Yes, even his Greek in which he would have ye
To know, he would out Aristotle's Davy.
However he came by it, he will teach ye
Scarce Satan more, what is Entelechy:
It Is true, such Roots are often found
To thrive the best in Barren Ground;
But here is the wonder of the thing,
That they from fruitful Noddle spring,
As full of Wit, by the issue all-may-see,
As Aldermans of Sense or Policy.
How plentifully this he squandered!
How neatly did he Merry-Andrew't!
Prick up your Ears to Repetion,
Ladies, I am a bad Physician;
My Urinal I can produce ye,
And other Instruments could show to ye,
By help of which there is none who better
Can cast or judge a Ladies Water:
I Am an Anatomist too and please ye,
Of all the Female ails can ease ye,
Not Saffold more, whose Art I'nherit,
I the sole Heir of his Great Spirit.
But, be the Naked Truth confessed,
I Am at Man-Midwifery the best.
Have you not heard of a Young Maiden,
Whom Modesty like mine, invading;
When our lewd Sex, ours only were
Assistants at the Groaning Chair;
No Mortal having liberty
Without them to be born or dye;
Finding besides they would often be fleering,
And their poor Female Patients jeering;
Nay sometimes when they ought to bleed 'em,
Do something else, like Dr. N --
What does she but clap Foot in Stirrup,
Equipped with Breeches, Sword and Peruque;
Till on a Stage good Fortune thanking,
A Quack she spies a Mountibanking:
Patience she had some half an Hour
To hear of Famed Orvietan's Power
Another half the Mob he assured,
What Crowds by others killed he had Cured:
And if there is any Females here
Who need a Father Confessor,
I Will not one Syllable discover,
But be as secret as a Lover.
Cure all their ails, tho never so many,
Nor till performed, will ask a Penny.
Not as some Tinkering Doctors do
Who mend one Hole, by making too.
Ay here is the Man, the Virgin cried,
And to be short, her self applied
To Quack, desiring if he is able
To teach this Skill so admirable;
He did, since then, your Sex invaded
Our Art, nor with us longer Traded;
But when you more than usual yelp it,
Yes, thank ye, when you cannot help it.
Then gladly must you send again
For me, or Doctor Ch --
For him at least, since as for me
I come uncalled, without a Fee,
Except a Drubbing on occasion
Out of mere Superarrogation:
Disguised lest you my Beard should gape on
With mighty Muffler, clean white Apron,
And cleaner Sleeves, I Am neat and ready,
With Eye like Eagle, Hand like Lady.
But one thing more, I should have got me,
A Lions Heart, for your Anat'my.
That failing me, I quaked and trembled,
My Ears and Tail in vain dissembled.
The Ass peeped through and I was known,
And over the cursed Balcony thrown.
Judge if my Skill not cost me dearly,
Which at your Service is sincerely,
TO anatomize on all occasions
Your pretty Parts and Reputations.
No Favor or Affection shown,
Not your Sex only, but my own
Shall feel the dint of Musick-Speech,
And first have at Lucretius -- Cr --;
Nor can there any thing be stranger
Than the occasion of my Auger.
Not that his first so well was done,
That Envy said 'twas not his own;
For some may so malicious be,
To say the same of this and me;
Nor that he is but a bad Translator
Of Horace, (tho pray show me a better;)
But wot ye what is the very cause,
A curse upon his Lockram Jaws.
There was a Lady loved a Swine,
Preferring his sweet Face to mine;
Judge you, and if there is Justice in ye,
I dare show with him for a Guinea.
Here Is Eyes and Nose, here is Foot and Leg too,
To say no more of Shape and Neck too:
And him, yes him, O Times, O Mores,
To have that Phiz preferred before us!
That makes me fret as String of Fiddle,
And thus snap off my Tune in the middle.
That heap of Scandals I Will not write,
Which made for Sm -- the Ladies Fight.
Tho other Lovers sure 'twould ruin,
At Oxford it is their way of woing.
So fair Grimalkin none espouses,
How well so e're the old Gib-Cat Mouses
E're Musick-Speech's on the Houses;
And when they have pulled each others Furr,
'Twill then be time enough to purr.
See how this Strokes, the other woes him,
That fain would lay in Lap or Bosom;
While back and forth he brushes by 'em,
With Tail on end, as he would defy 'em.
Nor from each other need you guard 'em,
They Will not fight long, you need not part 'em.
With what you have heard, pray rest contented,
My Book and Canto here are ended.
FINIS.

