Imprimatur.

Junii 24. 1689. W. CANT.

Bishop OVERALL's Convocation-Book, MDC VI. Concerning the GOVERNMENT OF God's
CATHOLIC CHVRCH, AND THE KINGDOMS OF THE Whole WORLD.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.

AN Advertisement TO THE READER.
THat Convocation in which the Acts and Canons (now Printed) passed, was first
called An. 1603. 1mo Jac. and continued by Adjournments and Prorogations to
1610.

The Three following Books are published from a Copy carefully and faithfully
transcribed from the Original MS. which was Bishop Overall's, and drawn up by
him; after whose Decease, it came into the Possession of Dr John Cousin,
sometime his Secretary, and after Lord Bishop of Duresm, who bequeathed it,
with other his Books, both Printed and Manuscript, to the Public Library, by
him founded, at Duresm, for the use of that Church, where (it is supposed) it
is yet to be seen.

The First of these Three Books was also heedfully compared, and in some casual
defects, supplied from another MS* which from the Attestation of Archbishop
Bancroft (who there presided) at the end thereof, under his own hand, seems to
have been the Original, that then passed the Upper-House of Convocation; And
after his Decease, it came to his Successors the Archbishops of Canterbury. And
among them, to Archbishop Laud, as appears under his own handwriting, in the
last Page of it. And is now, or was lately, in the Possession of Dr Barlow, the
present Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

In the First and Second of these Books, there were several Amendments made by
the Upper-House of Convocation; all placed at the end of Bishop Overall's MS.
and according to such Amendments, inserted in their proper places, is the
following Book Printed.

NOte, That the Numeral Letters in the Margin, throughout the First Book, refer
to the Pages in Bishop Overall's Original MS. at Duresm, as in the second Page
following, ii. p. in MS. means the second Page in that MS. and sic de caeteris.

In the first Book of that MS. Placet is set at the bottom of every Page, and
in the Printed Copy that word is sometimes misplaced by a line or two; as on
the Margin, p. 10. Placet is set against l. 8. which should have been against
l. 10.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 8. it be called, read it be not called, p. 15. marg. r. Deuteronomy. 33.
p. 17. marg. r. Number. 27. p. 21. l. 26. expelled r. repelled, p. 25. marg. 1 K.
2. 9. p. 60. l. 25. our pleasure r. their pleasure, p. 63. marg. Joseph Antiq.
l. 11. r. l. 2. p. 65. Artic. l. 7. of their r. other, p. 75. marg. Jos. Ant.
l. 15. r. l. 18. p. 77. l. 5. quia r. qui, p. 88. l. 19. Priest r. Priests, p.
103. marg. r. Luc. 2. 51. p. 122. l. 21. unless r. and least, p. 149. l. 13.
were assured r. we are assured, p. 165. l. 25. after did not, add only, p. 252.
l. 27. But r. that, p. 278. l. 19. Rulers r. rules, p. 282. l. 14. Vrsinus r.
Vrsicinus, p. 296. l. 7. above r. about, p. 297. l. 22. Charls's r. Charles, p.
302. l. 21. deprived r. depraved, p. 324. marg. Cassan. in catalog. pro censid.
28. r. consid. 29. p. 332. l. 4. revenge our r. revenge thy, p. 337. l. 7.
ridiculous Joys r. ridiculous Toies.

Bishop OVERALL's CONVOCATION-BOOK, 1606. CONCERNING The Government of God's
Catholic Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole WORLD.
LIB. I. CAP. I.
AMongst those Attributes, 1 Timothy 6. 15.
and Names of God, Apocal. 19. 16.
which are common in the Scripture to all the blessed Trinity, Joh. 1. 2, 10.
are these, To be the Creator, Hebr. 1. 3, 10.
and Governor of the World, the Lord of lords, Coloss. 1. 16.
and King of kings, which be there applied as well to the Son of God, Prove. 8.
our Lord Jesus Christ, the second Person in the sacred Trinity, as to God the
Father, and God the Holy Ghost. Agreeably whereunto, and not otherwise, our
chief purpose being to imitate the Scriptures, in setting out, and describing
the Deity, and Dignity of our Savior Christ, by his Almighty Power, and
universal Government of all the World, as Heir of all things, and Head of his
Church; we hold it fit to begin with his Divine Power of Creation: and
thereupon in the sense aforesaid do affirm, That He in the beginning did create
both Heaven and Earth; and that amongst the rest of the Creatures, which he
then made, he Created our first Parents, Placet eis.
Adam and Eve, from whose Loins Mankind is descended.

CANON I. ii. p. in MS.

IF any Man therefore shall affirm with any Pagan, Heretic, Atheist, or any
other profane Persons, which know not, or believe not the Scriptures, either
that Heaven and Earth had no beginning; or that the World was made by Angels,
or the Devil; that the World was not otherwise made by Christ, than as he was
an Instrument of God the Father for the making of it; or that he did not as
God, create our said Parents, Adam and Eve; he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. II.
TO him, that shall duly read the Scripture, it will be plain and evident, That
the Son of God having created our first Parents, and purposing to multiply
their Seed into many Generations, for the replenishing of the World with their
Posterity, did give to Adam for his time, and to the rest of the Patriarchs,
and chief Fathers successively before the Flood, Authority, Power and Dominion
over their Children, and Offspring, to rule and govern them; Ordaining by the
very Law of Nature, That their said Children and Offspring (begotten and
brought up by them) should fear, reverence, honor, and obey them. Which power
and Authority before the Flood, resting in the Patriarchs, and in the chief
Fathers, because it had a very large extent, not only for the Education of
their said Children and Offspring, whilst they were young; but likewise for
the ordering, ruling, and governing of them afterward, Placet. iii. p. in MS.
when they came to Men's Estate. And for that also it had no superior
Authority, or power over, or above it on Earth, appearing in the Scriptures,
although it be called either Patriarchal, Regal, or Imperial, and that we only
term it Potestas Patria: yet, being well considered, how far it did reach, we
may truly say, that it was in a sort Potestas Regia; as now in a right and true
construction, Potestas Regia may justly be called Potestas Patria.

CAN. II.
IF any Man shall therefore affirm, that Men at the first, without all good
Education, or Civility, ran up and down in Woods, and Fields, as wild
Creatures, resting themselves in Caves, and Dens, and acknowledging no
superiority one over another, until they were taught by Experience the
necessity of Government; and that thereupon they chose some among themselves to
order and rule the rest, giving them power and authority so to do; and that
consequently all civil Power, Jurisdiction, and Authority was first derived
from the people, and disordered multitude; or either is originally still in
them, or else is deduced by their consents naturally from them; and is not
God's Ordinance originally descending from him, and depending upon him, he does
greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. III. lv. p. in MS.

BY the sin of our first Parents, Adam and Eve, both they, and in them all
their Posterity, being so fallen from God, as that they were not able by any
natural power, or faculties in them to discharge their duties toward him, or
rightly in any sort to know him, as they ought, unto Salvation, or duly serve
his Divine Majesty; it pleased Almighty God in mercy (besides the Law of Nature
left in them) to propound unto them another kind of Doctrine, than Nature could
ever have taught them, viz. the Mystery of Salvation through our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; how the Son of God, who created them, when they were not,
should in fullness of time take upon him their Nature, and reconcile to God
again as many as should believe in him; the ground of which Doctrine God
himself did lay down as the foundation of the Church of Christ, when he said,
that the seed of the Woman should break the Serpent's head.

CAN. III.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that our first Parents after their
Fall, or consequently any of their Posterity could serve, or please God truly
by any natural Powers, or Faculties, that were left in them after the said
Fall; or that the Mystery of Salvation through Jesus Christ, was not a secret,
whereunto our corrupt Nature could not attain; or that our Savior Christ is
not the promised Seed that should break the Serpent's head; or that any can
possibly be partakers of Everlasting Life without Faith in him, he does greatly
Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. IV. v. p. in MS.

AS the Son of God, having created Mankind, did ordain by the Law of Nature,
and Light of Reason, that there should be some amongst them furnished with
lawful Power, and civil Authority to rule and govern the rest, in things
belonging to this natural Life, and civil Society, according to the true Rules
both of Nature and Reason: So did he also, according to the supernatural
Doctrine of the Gospel, not only ordain, that there should be some likewise in
his Church, to rule and govern it; but also gave them another kind of Power,
Superiority, and Authority, which is termed Ecclesiastical, both for the
teaching, and instructing of his People in the Mysteries hid from Nature,
concerning their Salvation through the Seed of the Woman: and for the better
direction and government of them in the Service of God, touching their Duty
toward God, and their Neighbors. The Institution of which Ecclesiastical
Calling, Genesis 4.
and Authority, as also the Manner of the Worship of God, 2 Pet. 2. 5.
through the blessed Seed, from the Fall of our First Parents to the Flood,
although besides their Sacrifices, Prayers, and Preachings, they be not
expressly set down in the Scriptures; yet it is not to be doubted, but that,
first, Adam for his time, and afterward the Heads of every Family of the
Faithful, were not only civil Governors over their Kindred, but likewise had
the Power and Execution of the Priestly Office; and that they were themselves
instructed and taught from God, as they afterward did instruct, and teach such
as were under them in the said Mysteries of Man's Restitution, through the
promised Seed, by Faith, and in the right Worship and Service of the true God.
Placet eis.


CAN. IV. vi. in MS.

IF therefore any Man shall affirm, that the Son of God having from the
beginning a Church upon Earth, did leave them till the Flood without Priests,
and Priestly Authority to govern and instruct them in those ways of their
Salvation, and in the right manner of the worship and service of God; or that
they might teach them any other Doctrine in that behalf, than that, which they
had received from God himself, he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. V.
AS all Mankind, Genesis 5.
from the Creation of the World, till the Flood, Genesis 9. 19.
descended from the Loins of Adam; so after the Flood, Genesis 10. 32.
have they all descended from the three Sons of Noah, Sem, Cham, and Japhet.

CAN. V.
AND therefore if any Man shall affirm, with any Pagan, or profane Atheist,
either that there was not any such general deluge; or that there is any Nation,
or people in the World, that does not descend from one of the said three Sons
of Noah, he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. VI. vii. in MS.

NOAH lived after the Flood, 350. Years, and saw his Children's Children
wonderfully multiplied; during which term of Years, he was the Patriarch, or
chief Governor over them; ruling and ordering them by Virtue of that
Superiority, Power, and Authority of the Sword of Justice, which was given unto
him by Almighty God, and was also warranted by the Laws of Nature and Reason.
Touching this Patriarchal, or, in effect, Regal Government of Noah, there is
more expressed in the Scriptures, than there was before the Flood, of the Power
and Authority of Adam, or of any of the chief Fathers and Rulers that were
descended from him. Genesis 9. 6.
For now there is mention made by God himself of punishing Blood by Blood, Romans
13. 4.
which was done by the Sword of Justice, Epiph. in Anchor.
being the chief Ensign, and Warrant of Supreme and Regal Authority. Luther. in
Genesis Perer. in Genesis Func. Chron. Sulpit. Sever.
Also the Extent of this Right and Authority was so large, as that he lawfully
distributed the whole World unto his said three Sons, and their Posterity. So
that his said three Sons, Selnec. Georg. Fabric and Nic. Gibbons in Genesis
after him, were by the Ordinance of God (the chief Author of the said
Distribution) made three great Princes; and also the Sons of those three great
Princes (of whom about Seventy are named) were the Heads, and Governors of the
Families and Nations that descended from them, according to their Tongues, in
their several Countries.

CAN. VI.
IF any Man shall therefore affirm, either that the civil Power, and Authority,
which Noah had before the Flood, was by the Deluge determined; or that it was
given unto him again by his Sons and Nephews; Placet. viii. in MS.
or that he received from them the Sword of his Sovereignty; or that the said
distribution did depend upon their consents, or received from them any such
Authority, as without the same it could not lawfully have been made; or that
this Power, Superiority, and Authority, and all the Parts thereof, which Noah's
three Sons, and their Children had (as is before declared) did not proceed
originally from God, or were not properly his Ordinances, but that they had the
same from the People, their Offspring, He does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. VII.
IT is also certain, that as the Civil Magistrates, and their Authority
continued after the Flood for the government of Mankind according to the Laws
of God and Nature, that thereby they might be kept in Order, touching their
Duties both toward God and their Neighbors, agreeably to the said Laws,
written afterward more fully by God himself in two Tables: so did the
Priesthood and Authority Ecclesiastical also by the like Ordinance of God
continue, especially amongst the Offspring of Sem, both to govern them
Ecclesiastically, and to instruct them in the Mysteries of their Salvation
through the blessed Seed of the Woman, according to the Doctrine of the Gospel,
which was from time to time in diverse Manners delivered by the Son of God unto
them. This Priestly Office, and Ecclesiastical Authority, Placet. ix. in MS.
was yet joined, (as before the Flood) with the Office of the chief Fathers,
and civil Governors. Noah himself was both a Prince and a Priest; Genesis 8. 20.
he built Altars, offered Sacrifices, and taught the Church, Genesis 9. 28.
after the Flood 350. Years, all that which he had learnt from his Fathers,
concerning the Creation of the World, the Fall of Man, and of his Restitution
by Christ, and generally, all that did concern necessarily, either civil
Societies and Government, or Ecclesiastical Assemblies and Authority, not
omitting the very Ceremonies. Gen 8. 20.
After Noah, the chief Fathers, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did execute that
Office, God himself renewing unto them this Promise of Salvation through the
blessed Seed; and not only confirming the same to Abraham, Genesis 17. 10.
and his Posterity by the Sacrament of Circumcision; but likewise teaching and
instructing them in that Heavenly Mystery, sometimes by his own Voice, and
sometimes by Visions, and diverse other ways, whereof the Scriptures make more
plain mention, than they do of the delivery of the same Evangelical Doctrine
before the Flood.

CAN. VII.
IF any Man shall therefore affirm, either that the Priestly Office, and
Authority Ecclesiastical, which Noah had before the Flood, was by that Deluge
determined or that it was by the Election of his Offspring conferred again upon
him; Placet. x. in MS.
or that Sem, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were neither Priests, nor had any
Ecclesiastical Authority, until they were chosen thereunto by their Children
and Nephews; or that the Priesthood and Ecclesiastical Authority were not the
Ordinances of God, for the governing and instructing of the Church, according
to the Will and direction of God himself delivered and revealed unto them, as
is aforesaid, he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. VIII.
AS before the Flood Cain and his Posterity were opposite to the Posterity of
Seth, and might therefore generally have been called the Church Malignant; so
fell it out after the Flood in the Generations of Japhet, but especially of
Cham, against the Posterity of Sem, in whose Lineage the true worship of God,
through the blessed Seed was especially continued: and not that only, Genesis 6.
but in like manner as the Children of Seth in process of time provoked against
them the wrath of God by corrupting their ways, and following in their
Conversations the Generations of Cain, Genesis ^.
and were in that respect all of them, with the rest of Cain's Offspring,
justly punished and drowned by the Flood, saving eight Persons (Noah and his
Wife, Sem, Cham and Japhet, and their three Wives) so did the Posterity, not
only of Cham and Japhet, as well before as after the confusion of Tongues,
Placet. xi. in MS.
and the death of Noah, but likewise the Offspring of Sem (who were called
more effectually to the knowledge of the Mysteries of Christ, and right service
of the true God) leave the ways of Noah and Sem, and gave just occasion to
Almighty God (had he not bound himself by his Covenant to the contrary) to have
drowned them all again. Genesis 10. 8.
Nimrod, descended of Cham, not contenting himself with the Patriarchal, or
Regal mild Government, ordained of God by the Laws of Reason and Nature, became
a Tyrant, and Lord of Confusion; and by Histories it is apparent, that within
few Ages after the Death of Noah's Sons, great Barbarism and confusion fell
among their Generations, through their Pride and dissoluteness, in that they
thought scorn to be governed, either Civilly or Ecclesiastically, as God
himself, by Noah, had ordained, or to be ruled otherwise than as they list
themselves: and touching the Service of God, and the Ecclesiastical Authority,
they mingled with true Religion many false worships, and chose Priests among
themselves to serve God after their own Fashions; or rather they devised to
themselves many Gods, and found out Priests accordingly, such as were content
to train them up in those kinds of Impiety. In Chaldea it self, and the places
adjacent, Placet. xii. p. in MS.
the Children of Sem were all of them almost grown to be Idolaters; insomuch as
God himself to keep a remnant more carefully, that should through the public
profession of his name be partakers of his Mercies in Christ, called Abraham
with his Family from the habitation of his Fathers, to become a Stranger in the
Land of Canaan.

CAN. VIII.
IF therefore any Man shall affirm, That the said Posterity of Noah's Children
did well in altering either the manner or form of civil Government, which God
had appointed, by bringing in of Tyranny or factious Popularity; or of the
Ecclesiastical, by framing unto themselves a new kind of Priesthood and worship
after their own humors; or that it was lawful for such as then served God,
upon any pretense to have imitated their Examples in either of those courses,
he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. IX.
IT is apparent in the Scriptures, That although God was not pleased, that the
Issue of Jacob's Children should by the Example of the Sons of Noah, grow up to
become the heads of so many several Nations, Placet. xiij. in MS.
but continuing together, should make one People and Nation to be ruled and
governed by the same Laws and Magistrates: yet it seemed good to his Heavenly
Wisdom, that in so great a People as should descend from Jacob's Children, no
one Tribe or Family should continue charged, both with the Civil (or Regal) and
Ecclesiastical Function; and therefore Jacob making way to the fulfilling of
the will of God herein, did take just occasion, moved thereunto by the Spirit
of God, to deprive his eldest Son Reuben of his Interest by Birthright in both
those Prerogatives, to be disposed afterward by God unto other of his Brethren.
Now after Jacob's Death, the former thereof, viz. the Scepter, in process of
time, fell to Judah, as Jacob before had Prophesied; and the other also, viz.
the Priesthood, was afterward given to Levi by God's Ordinance.

CAP. X.
AFter Jacob's Death, till Moses was sent to deliver the Children of Israel out
of Egypt, there is little in the Scriptures touching either the Civil or
Ecclesiastical Government. Placet. xiv.
It appears, that Joseph being a great Prince in Egypt, by the King's
Authority, was, whilst he lived, chief amongst his Brethren: but after his
Death, through the Tyranny of the Kings of Egypt, which God suffered to lie
heavily upon them for many Years, the civil Authority, which any of the Tribes
had, was very small; there was such jealousy of their number, (which daily
encreast above all ordinary expectation) as it is not likely, that the Kings
successively would suffer any great Authority to rest in them; howbeit we
think, they had some, either the chief heads of the Tribes generally, or of the
Tribe of Ephraim and Reuben (for it may be Jacob's Prophecy of Reuben's losing
the Prerogatives of his Birthright, was not presently executed) which did in
their civilaffairs, appertaining to themselves, bear some chief sway amongst
them. And touching the Priesthood, although the People were then generally much
polluted with Idolatry, yet therein also they had some, most likely the
firstborn, who although they durst not there offer Sacrifices to God, as they
should, in that servitude: yet some of them (we doubt not) instructed the
people in matters concerning the Promises of the blessed Seed, and performed,
Josh. 24. 15.
as they might, the other Offices of their Priesthood, Ezekiel. 20. 8.
although many of the People, and of the Priests, as it seems, were then
greatly polluted with Idolatry.

CANONES IX, and X.
IX. IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the uniting of the Children
of Jacob into one Nation, or the severing of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Functions (the Prerogatives of Birthright) from Reuben the firstborn, and
dividing of them from one person was made by themselves;

X. Or that their servitude in Egypt was unjustly suffered to lie upon them so
long by Almighty God; Placet. xv.
or that they being his Church, he left them destitute of such comforts of
direction, and instruction, as were necessary, those times considered, for
their Civil or Ecclesiastical Estate; or that the People took upon them the
appointing of the heads of their Tribes and Families, or the choice of their
civil Superiors, or of the Priests, or that the Example of those wicked Kings
may be any lawful Warrant for any other King so to oppress the People, and
Church of God, he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XI.
WHen the time came that God in mercy was pleased to deliver the Children of
Israel out of Egypt, and to place them in the Land which he had promised them,
he raised up his Servants, Moses and Joshua, to take that charge upon them;
Deuteronomy. 33. 5.
and accordingly Moses being made their Prince, or (as the Scripture speaks)
their King, did not only by God's Appointment and Assistance lead them, out of
Egypt, but governed them, (being 600000 Men, on foot, besides Women and
Children) forty years by his Authority in the Wilderness; and Joshua likewise
succeeding Moses, in the same Princely Power and Authority, did, after many
difficulties, bring them into the Land of Canaan, and gave them lawful
possession thereof. So that although formerly the Children of Israel were kept
in such great Servitude and Bondage, whilst they were in Egypt, as
notwithstanding their number, they were no way able, like a free People, to
lift up their Heads: yet now they are knit together in one Body, Placet. xvj.
and settled, as a particular State, and free Nation, in their own Country,
being ruled and governed successively after a mild and temperate manner; first
by Moses, in the Wilderness, (as is aforesaid) and then by Joshua, in Canaan,
whilst he lived.

CAN. XI.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the Children of Israel were
delivered out of Egypt by their own strength, and not by God's special
Direction, and mighty Power; or that it had been lawful for them (not warranted
by God) to have departed thence, as they did, (without License first obtained
of King Pharaoh) or that Moses and Joshua were not called to that high
Authority by God himself, but received the same from the People, as depending
upon their choice; or that Dathan and Abiram (descended from Reuben) can be
justified, in challenging of Moses, that he took too much upon him, in
executing only that Authority which God has given him, he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XII.
AS Almighty God took order for the settling of his People in the Land of
Canaan, and established a Princely Authority, to rule and govern them civilly;
so was he no less careful of his Church. For however the Priesthood was
disposed of before this time, Exodus 28.
yet now it is apparent in the Scriptures, Levit. 8.
that the same was after settled in the Tribe of Levi, Number. 1, and 3.
and Aaron was made, Placet. xvij.
by God's appointment, (for the better Government of the Church) the Chief and
High Priest; the whole Priesthood being assigned to his Children, and their
Offspring, as well to succeed him in the said highest place; as also to
execute the other inferior Functions belonging to Priests; and the rest of the
Tribe of Levi were to attend other Ecclesiastical Services.

CAN. XII.
IF any man therefore shall affirm, either that the Tribe of Levi was assigned
by the People, to undertake the said Ecclesiastical Offices; or that Aaron and
his Posterity were chosen by the People, to be their Priests; or that they were
not chosen directly by God himself; or that the People had any lawful Interest,
at any time afterward, either to choose their Priests, or (they being appointed
of God, as is aforesaid) to deprive them of their places; or that Corah, of the
Tribe of Levi, can be justified in saying, That Aaron took too much upon him,
thereby repining, either that Aaron was rather made High Priest, than he
himself, or that the Priesthood was annexed to Aaron's Posterity, whereas the
rest of the Levites were to serve in inferior places; he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XIII.
BEfore Moses's Death, Number. 6. 18.
God had appointed Joshua to succeed him, but in Joshua's days he appointed
none to follow him immediately: whereupon, after his Death, the Israelites were
left without a Chief Head, or Prince to govern them. They had then remaining
the particular Officers and Judges appointed by Moses, at Jethro's Council, in
their several Tribes; as also the general Senate of Seventy Elders, ordained by
God, upon Moses's complaint, over all the Nation. Yet there fell very great
Disorders and Confusions amongst them, for want of a chief Judge and Governor,
whereby they might see their own Disabilities and Errors, and find, by
experience, what it was to want a chief Governor; and furthermore be moved,
when they were in distress, to fly unto God, and depend only upon him for the
raising up of One, from time to time, to deliver and defend them: and it is
apparent, that the People, shortly after Joshua's time, falling most strangely
into gross Idolatry, and being, from time to time, Judge. 2. and Chapter 11. and 13.
during the History of the Judges, very grievously afflicted by the bordering
Nations, and such as dwelt amongst them, when they found themselves still
unable to withstand their Enemies, using any great Force against them; then
they had (for the most part) recourse to God by Prayer, who did, at such times,
Placet. viij.
appoint one for their Prince, chief Captain and Ruler, to deliver them from
their said Enemies; we say, for the most part, because sometimes they attempted
some matters of Importance without seeking any chief Governor from God, Judge.
9.
as, at one time, the People of Sichem presumed to choose them a Prince of their
own, after Gideon's Death, which turned both to his Ruin, and their
Destruction. And it is here generally to be observed, that when there was the
greatest liberty among the Israelites, during the time from Joshua to Saul
(whatsoever the People thought of their own Courses) the Disorders and
Idolatry, Chap. 17. 6, 18. and 19. 1. and 21. 26.
in those days, were ascribed, by the Holy Ghost, to the want of Judges, Chief
Rulers or Kings, amongst them, who should have reformed those Enormities, not
only in them, but likewise in the Priests themselves; if they did not their
Duties, especially in suppressing of Idolatry, as they should have done.

CAN. XIII.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the Israelites fell not into
many Evils and Disorders, by being left destitute of a certain chief Governor
after Joshua's Death; or that when God raised up Judges to rule and govern
them, the Peoples consent was necessary thereunto; or that the said Judges,
being once appointed by God to those places, received their Authority in that
behalf from the People; or that the fact of the Sichemites may lawfully be
imitated by any Christian People, in so choosing to themselves a King or Judge,
according to their own humors; or that the want of Kings, Princes and Rulers
in any Country, is not the Mother of disorder and confusion; he does greatly
Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XIV.
IT is manifest in the Scriptures, That Moses (directed by the Spirit of God)
did foresee, that the time should come, when the Israelites being quietly
settled in the Land of Canaan, should be governed by Kings after the manner of
other Nations. Deuteronomy. 17. 15, 16.
And therefore Almighty God did set down by Moses's Pen, the Duty of all Kings,
and the Rules whereby they ought to govern. Jacob also (being illuminated by
the same holy Spirit) did not only foretell, Placet. xix.
that it would come to pass, that the Tribe of Judah should bear the Scepter;
and that the Kingdom, or Government of Judah, should be held by Succession,
according to the manner of other Nations; but likewise, tha the said Scepter or
Government, Genesis 49. 10.
should not be taken away from that Tribe until the coming of Christ. And it
seems, that the People were not altogether ignorant of this foreseen
alteration; when finding diverse wants and confusions amongst them after the
Death of one Judge, before God was pleased to appoint them another; they first
offered rashly to Gideon, Judge. 8. 22.
their Prince, that his Children and Offspring should succeed him in that
Government. And afterward, being weary of depending upon God's pleasure, and
misliking the rule of Samuel's Sons, 1 Samuel 8. 5.
they urged him undutifully and unseasonably, that they might have a King to
rule over them as other Nations had: meaning thereby principally (as we
suppose) that such their Kings might by Succession govern them; so as one being
dead, they might still have another. 1 Samuel 9. 17.
We say, that they urged Samuel to this purpose undutifully and unseasonably;
and that thereupon Saul was appointed to be their King: because otherwise, if
they had expected God's good pleasure and time, and contented themselves with
his care over them, in raising up (when he thought meet) their Judges to govern
them; they should have found shortly after, that the Prophecy of Jacob should
have been fulfilled, and that God would have given the Scepter of Judah into
the hands of David, and of his Posterity according to their desire.

CAN. XIV.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the People of Israel did not
grievously sin in being weary of Gods immediate Election and appointment of
their chief Governors; or that the peoples preposterous have did any way
prejudice the Dignity and Authority of Readiness Regal Power, Placet. xx.
or afterward of the Scepter of Judah; or that the People then had in
themselves any Authority to set up a King over them (for then they would not
have been so earnest with Samuel to make them a King) or that after David's
advancement to that Kingdom, he was not as truly called thereunto by God
himself, as Aaron was to the Priesthood; or that David's Posterity had not by
God's Ordinance as rightful an Interest to succeed him in his said Kingdom, as
either Aaron's Sons had to succeed him in the Priesthood, or Moses, Joshua, and
the rest of the Judges, notwithstanding that God himself did choose, and named
them particularly, had in their Governments; or that the People then had any
more Authority to have withstood either David, or any of his Posterity from
being their King, than they had to have expelled either Moses or Joshua, or any
of the rest of the Judges, whom God by name did appoint to govern them; he does
greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XV.
IT is manifest in the Scriptures, that the Kings in the Old Testament
(notwithstanding that they had their Kingdoms by Succession) were as strictly
bound to the observation of God's Laws in their Government, as Moses, Joshua,
or any other the Judges, or Princes, elected, named, and appointed by God
himself. They knew well, as Jethro said, that it was impossible for themselves
to hear and decide all the Causes and Controversies that might happen in their
Kingdoms: Placet. xxi.
and by Moses's Example were not ignorant, that they might appoint and have
Judges to govern under them, not only in every Tribe, but generally over all
their Kingdom; and therefore they did therein accordingly follow the Example of
Moses, being approved by God himself: no ways either diminishing their Regal
Authority, or purposing to puff up their Subjects with a conceit of any their
own Interest in the Government, which they had not from, or under them; but
thereby ordering their Kingdoms with such a temperate and Fatherly Moderation,
as was most agreeable for the Government of God's People.

CAN. XV.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the Kings in the Old Testament
were not bound as strictly to observe the Laws of God in their Governments, as
were Moses, Joshua, and the rest of the Judges; or that they had any greater
liberty to do what they list, than the others had; or that they had no
Authority, by the Example of Moses, and of all the rest of their Predecessors
in their Princely Government, to delegate and appoint such Judges and
Governors under them, as the other Princes formerly under them had appointed;
or that because the said Kings did imitate the said Princes, in appointing such
Judges to assist them in the Government of their Kingdoms, therefore their
Governments were to be judged rather Aristocratical than truly Monarchical; he
does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XVI.
WHen God first ordained civil Magistrates, and gave them Authority, his
meaning was, that the People, whom they were to govern, should be subject unto
them. From the beginning of the World, till Moses's time, whilst the People of
God, that professed his true Worship, were governed by that Authority, Placet.
xxij.
which was Potestas Patria, and in a sort Regia; their Children and Nephews
were bound, by the Law of Nature, to honor, reverence and obey them. God
having raised up Moses to deliver the Children of Israel out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.
27.
and to govern them afterward, as their King or chief Ruler; they promised that
they would hear him, and do those things, which he, in the Name of God, should
command them. Being in the Wilderness, Number. 12. 10.
his own Sister Miriam, for using some undutiful speeches against him, Chap.
16. 32.
was stricken by God with an exceeding great Leprosy; and so odious was the
murmuring of Korab, Dathan and Abiram, and their Confederates, as the Lord
caused the Earth to open, and to swallow some of them quick, and the Fire to
consume the rest. Joshua succeeding Moses, the People professed their
Subjection and Obedience unto him, saying, Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18.
All that thou have commanded us, we will do; and whithersoever thou sendest
us, we will go; as we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee.
Whosoever shall rebel against thy Commandment, and will not obey thy Words, in
all that thou do command him, let him be put to death. During the Reign of
all the Judges, though the People are noted for many great Enormities; yet we
do not find, that they rebelled, or showed any great disobedience against them,
whom God had set over them to rule them, except the particular murmuring and
opposition of the Ephramites, against Gideon and Jephtha, at their first
entrance, upon conceit they had been contemned; which opposition God punished
with a great overthrow of them. When the People had Kings, according to the
manner of other Nations, to order and govern them; their subjection was rather
increased than diminished, according to Samuel's description of the King's
(Claim or) manner of ruling, 1 Samuel 8. 10.
which should reign over them, To command, not only over the Persons of his
Subjects, but also over their Goods: which manner of ruling or dealing, by any
King, without a just cause, as it was Tyranny; so to deny it, when the
necessity of the King and State did require it, according to the Laws of the
Kingdom, was a great neglect of preserving the public good, and a high degree
of disobedience. Exodus 20. 12.
Besides it is generally agreed upon, that Obedience to Kings and civil
Magistrates is prescribed to all Subjects in the Fifth Commandment, Placet.
xxiij.
where we are enjoined to honor our Parents. Whereby it follows, that
subjection of Inferiors unto their Kings and Governors, is grounded upon the
very Law of Nature; and consequently that the Sentences of Death, awarded by
God himself, against such as showed themselves disobedient and incorrigible to
their Parents, or cursed them, or struck them, were likewise due unto those,
who committed any such Offenses against their Kings and Rulers, being the Heads
and Fathers of their Commonwealths and Kingdoms; which is not only apparent by
way of consequence, but likewise by Example, Practice and Precept; as, where
Shimei is judged to die for cursing of David, 1 Kings 2. 9.
the Lord's Anointed; 1 Samuel 24. 7.
where David himself, Exodus 22. 28.
appointed by God to succeed King Saul, Eccles. 10. 20.
would not be induced, by any persuasions, to lay violent hands upon his Master
the King; and where it is said, Principi populi tui non maledices; and again,
Ne maledicas Regi in cord tuo: to which purpose more might be alleged.

CAN. XVI.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, that it was lawful, in the Old Testament,
either for Children or Nephews, to have been disobedient to their Fathers,
being their chief Governors, from the Creation till Moses's time, or afterward
for the Children of Israel, either under Moses, Joshua, the Judges, or their
Kings, to have been disobedient to them in their lawful Commandments, or to
have murmured, or rebelled against them; or that it was, in those times, more
lawful unto Subjects, for any cause whatsoever, either to curse their Princes,
Kings or civil Governors; or to bear Arms against them, or to depose them from
their Kingdoms or Principalities, or to lay violent hands upon their Persons,
than it was in the said times lawful upon any occasion, Placet. xxiv.
for Children, either to have cursed their Parents, or to have rebelled against
them when they did reprove or correct them, or to have withdrawn themselves
from their subjection, saying unto them, (they being private Men) We will be no
more your Children, or you shall be no more our Fathers; or (bearing civil
Authority over them) we will depose you from your Government over us, and will
be no longer ruled by you; or to have offered any violence unto them, or to
have beaten them, and much less to have murdered them; He does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XVII.
WHen God appointed Princes, Judges and Kings to Reign over his people, the
manner usually was, that they had notice of it; thereby to conform themselves
to obedience. Exodus 4. 30.
Moses and Aaron acquainted the Israelites with God's pleasure for their
deliverance out of Egypt, by their service, agreeably to his Promise formerly
made to Abraham: and they cheerfully, and with great thankfullness submitted
themselves to be ruled by them. Number. 27. 18.
God having appointed Joshua to succeed Moses, Deuteronomy. 13. 9.
the same was signified by Moses to the Israelites, and they willingly
protested their obedience unto him. Likewise no sooner did the Lord assign
Judges to defend and govern them, but presently they followed, and obeyed them.
Upon the people's request, 1 Samuel 10. 24.
Samuel having anointed Saul for their King, when the same was made apparent to
them, 1 Samuel 16. 13.
either by casting of Lots, or by answer from the Lord, they shouted when they
saw him, Placet. xxv.
and said, God save the King. King David being anointed by Samuel at God's
appointment to succeed King Saul, and after Readiness Death coming thereupon by
God's direction to Hebron, 2 Samuel 2. 4.
the Tribe of Judah presently anointed him again for their King, 2 Samuel 5. 1,
etc.
and yielded themselves to be governed by him. Seven years after (all which
time, King David had Wars with Ishbosheth, Readiness Son) the rest of the Tribes
came unto David, and acknowledged, that God had ordained him to be their
Governor. King David growing old, 1 Reg. 1. 34.
and having appointed, by God's direction, his Son Solomon to be anointed King
in his own Life time; 1 Chronicles. 28. 5.
when the people knew, that Zadok the Priest had so anointed him, they
forthwith upon the blowing of the Trumpets, 1 Reg. 1. 39.
said all with one Voice, God save King Solomon. Afterward also the like
course was held upon the Death of every King, to make his Successor known to
the people. Sometimes they were so addicted unto new Kings, as they expected no
further Circumstance, but submitted themselves to their Government: and
sometimes it was held fit for the young Princes to imitate King David's
Example, 1 Reg. 12. 7.
by kind usage, and loving words, to knit more firmly their Subjects hearts
unto them.

Placet eis.
CAN. XVII.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, xxvi.
either that the callings of Moses, of Aaron, of Joshua, of the Judges, of
Saul, of David, of Solomon, or of any other of the Kings of Judah, elected and
named by God himself, or coming to their Kingdoms by Succession (according as
Jacob by the Spirit of Prophecy had foretold) did receive any such virtue or
strength from the people, their said notice, presence and applause, as that
without the same the said callings of God, either by Name or by Succession had
been insufficient; or that, if the people had withstood any of them, so called
by God, as is aforesaid, they had not thereby sinned, and unjustly opposed
themselves against God; or, that the Kingdom of Judah, by God's Ordinance going
by Succession, when one King was dead, his Heir was not in Right their King,
(however by some Athaliah he might be hindered from enjoying it) or, that the
people were not bound without any further circumstance upon sufficient notice
of their former King's Death, to have obeyed his Heir Apparent, as their lawful
King; he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XVIII.
ALthough we doubt not, but that the Priests and Levites in the Old Testament,
were reckoned amongst the rest of such, as were subject to their Princes,
Judges, and Kings; yet we have thought it fit to make the same more apparent by
some particulars. Aaron the chief Priest, Placet. xxvii.
and the rest of the Levites, after that Aaron was possessed of the high
Priesthood, were at Moses's direction all the time that he lived: and when he
the said Aaron had in some sort forgotten his duty to Moses, in joining with
his Sister undutifully against him; he found his offense therein, and did
humbly submit himself in this sort to him; Number. 12. 11.
Alas, my Lord, I beseech thee, lay not this sin upon us which we have
foolishly committed. It is likewise manifest in the Book of Joshua, that
Eleazer, who succeeded Aaron, with the rest of the Priests and Levites under
him, disposed of themselves, and of their service, as Joshua, their Prince and
Governor did command them. And how obedient and humble, both the Priests, and
the Levites, and the Prophets themselves were to their Kings, the Examples of
Zadok, Jehojadah, Azariah, Helchiah, Nathan, and diverse others do declare, they
submitted themselves to their directions, and when they came into their
presence, made Obeisance before them upon their Faces to the ground. Likewise
having Offices distributed, and assigned severally unto them by sundry Kings,
they executed the same in the service of the Temple accordingly. And as, while
they did their duties, they were cherished; so upon any notorious offense
committed by them, they were censured and punished. 1 Reg. 2. 26. 35.
Solomon deposed Abiathar from the High Priesthood, and placed Zadok in his
room. And Josiah likewise thrust all the Priests from the Altar of the Lord in
Jerusalem, 2 Reg. 23. 5.
who had burnt Incense in the high places. xxviii.


Placet eis.
CAN. XVIII.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the Priests in the Old
Testament were not as rightly and properly subjects to the civil Governors, as
the rest of the people; or that when they any ways offended, they might not be
punished as lawfully by them as any others; he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XIX.
AS we have said of the people, that when the Kings of Judah were to succeed
one another, their Duty was to come together with joy and gladness to receive
them for their Kings (as sent unto them as from God himself) and accordingly to
submit themselves unto their Authority and Government: so at such times, the
Priests for the most part, besides their general duties, as Subjects, had some
further service to be then by them performed: the parts of which service are
all of them manifest in the advancement of King Solomon to the Royal Throne of
his Father King David; 1 Reg. 1. 33, etc.
where the Priests, by King David's direction, did give thanks to God, and
prayed for King Solomon; they offered the peoples Sacrifices of Praise and
Thanksgiving to God for their new King; and Zadok the High Priest did himself
anoint him. Howbeit this their service thus by them performed, did neither give
to King Solomon any Right or Title to succeed his Father; nor to themselves any
privilege or exemption from their subjection and Obedience unto him. 1 Reg. 1.
7.
Abiathar the High Priest did anoint Adoniah to have succeeded King David;
Placet eis.
and no Duty (of likelihood) was omitted which was to be done in such a solemn
action: xxix.
but thereby Adoniah received nothing but a badge of Treason against the King
his Father, which he carried with him to his Grave; and Zadok the High Priest
(notwithstanding that he had anointed King Solomon) was afterward as much
subject, and as dutiful unto him, as he had been before unto his Father King
David. Nay, the greater the services are of any persons to their Sovereigns,
the greater is, and so ought to be, their subjection and obedience unto them.

CAN. XIX.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that Adoniah was ever lawfully King
of the Israelites, because Abiathar the High Priest had anointed him; or that
King Solomon received from Zadok, or from the holy Oil, which he poured upon
his Head, any Interest to his Fathers Kingly Seat, which he had not before by
the Ordinance of God, and his Fathers appointment; or that Abiathar might not
justly have been condemned for a Traitor, in that he anointed Adoniah, as is
aforesaid; the Right of the Kingdom being then in King David, and in him by
God's appointment, to be disposed of, and bestowed upon his younger Son
Solomon; or, that it had not been a traitorous offense in Zadok, Placet. xxx.
if being commanded thereupon by King David to anoint King Solomon, he should
have refused so to have done; or, that either Zadok, or any other Priest, who
afterward according to their duties, anointed the Kings of Judah, were thereby
more exempted from their subjection and obedience unto them, than were the rest
of the people by their joy and applause, when their Kings were newly advanced
to their Kingdoms; he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XX.
AS it is apparent in the Scriptures, that the Israelites generally, as well
the Priests as the People, were equally bound, as Subjects, personally to
honor, reverence, and obey their Kings: So is it there also as manifest, that
the Authority of their Sovereigns over them, did not only extend to civil
Causes, but in like manner to Causes Ecclesiastical. For as it was then the
duty of Parents, so by the Law of Nature, was it of good Kings and Civil
Magistrates, to bring up their Children and Subjects, in the true service and
worship of God; as having a care committed unto them, not only of their Bodies
but likewise of their Souls. In which respect the chief charge that all
Subjects and inferior Persons, of what condition soever, should diligently
observe the said Law of Nature (being the very same in substance that God,
writing with his own Finger, gave unto Moses, and styled by the name of his Ten
Commandments) was principally imposed upon Kings and civil Rulers. "They were
to provide, that their Subjects had no other God but him, who made Heaven and
Earth; Placet. xxix.
that they made to themselves no graven Images, nor bowed down to them, nor
worshipped them; that they did carefully meet at certain times, to serve,
honor, and magnify the Name of God; and that they might not be negligent in
the observing of the rest of his Commandments." And albeit, through the sin of
our first Parents, both Kings and Subjects were become unable so to perform
these their Duties of Piety, as they should have done; and that therefore the
Priesthood was not only to instruct them in the mysteries of their Salvation
hid from Nature, but likewise to teach them, that Grace did not so evacuate the
Law, but that still they were bound to obey it, with this addition or
interpretation, That their Faith being grounded upon the blessed Seed of the
Woman, if they endeavored to do that which God had commanded them, that which
either they did amiss, or omitted, should, upon their Repentance, be forgiven,
and not imputed unto them. Yet this mystical and Heavenly Doctrine did no way
release, or set at liberty Kings and Princes from their Charge before
mentioned; but rather laid a heavier burden upon them, to provide that their
Subjects might be trained up both in the Doctrine of Faith, and in such
Obedience to God, as his said Commandments, so qualified by Grace, as is
beforementioned, did require.

CAN. XX.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that Natural or Political Fathers
(Kings and Princes) in the Old Testament, had not a charge laid upon them by
God to bring up their Children and Subjects in his fear; or, that the
Institution of the Priesthood did more prejudice the Authority of natural
Fathers, Placet. xxxij.
or of Kings and Princes in that behalf, than Grace did abrogate the
Commandment and the Obedience of the Law; or, that Natural Parents, Kings and
Princes in those days, were not more strictly bound by the Doctrine of Grace,
than they were before (in respect of God's great Mercy unto them) to provide,
that their Children and Subjects were not suffered, either to have any false
Gods among them, or to bow unto, or worship the likeness of any thing, which
they had made to themselves, to blaspheme and take in vain the blessed name of
God; or to profane his Sabbaths, or to neglect the observation of the rest of
God's Commandments, by committing of Murder, Adultery, Theft, and such like
Offenses, to the displeasure of God, and disturbance of their Families,
Principalities and Kingdoms; or that the Kings, Princes, or Governors of the
Israelites, being instructed in the Mysteries of their Salvation, were not as
much bound, by the Law of Grace, to bring up their Subjects in the true
Doctrine, that was grounded upon the blessed Seed, as they were by the Law of
Nature, that they should carefully observe the moral Precepts and Commandments
of God; or, that being so far bound, they had not equal Authority to compel (as
need should require) all their Subjects, of every Calling and Condition
whatsoever, to keep and observe both the said Laws, as well of Grace, as of
Nature; He does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXI.
ALthough it were sufficient to have showed, xxxiij.
that godly Kings and Rulers amongst the Jews, had Authority from God, as well
in causes of true Religion, as in other of their temporal Affairs; yet, if they
had never put the same in practice, some scruple, in the minds of the simpler
sort, might thereby have risen, to the prejudice of it. But this point also is
manifest in the Scriptures, and ought always, with due thankfulness for the
same, to be remembered. It is true, that the Dignity of the Priests, in the Old
Testament, but especially of the High Priest, was very great and eminent:
howbeit (the same notwithstanding) had it not been for godly Kings and Princes,
Religion, among the Jews, after the first public establishment of it, would
not have continued, so long as it did, without very great and intolerable
Corruptions. Moses did blame Aaron, Exodus 32. 4. v. 21.
for yielding to the making and worshipping of Idols, and reformed the offense.
And again, when Aaron, being consecrated High Priest, had, Lev. 10. 16, 17.
with his two Sons, Eleazar and Ithamar, done amiss, in burning the
Sin-offering, which they should, by God's appointment, have eaten; and Moses,
being angry with them, reproved them for it. In the days of the Judges, when
the People fell to the worshipping of Baalim and Ashtaroth, Judge. 2. 13. and
10. 6.
the Scriptures are silent, what became of the Priests; but it is apparent,
that, during the lives of the Judges, Placet. xxxiv.
the People were, by them, restrained, in some sort, from that Impiety,
whereunto, Judge. 2. 18. Cap. 17. 7, etc.
still after their death, they greedily returned. 2 Chro. 19. 4, 8.
When Jehosaphat came to his Kingdom, he found the People so destitute of
Teachers, as that he was moved, in zeal, to send the Priests and many of the
Levites through all the Cities of Judah, to teach and instruct them. Ahaz, the
King of Judah, was a very great Idolater, 2 Reg. 16. 3. v. 11.
delighting himself altogether in the Abominations of the Heathen; and Vriah,
the High Priest, was a fit Instrument for him; For what the one did wickedly
command, the other, to the intolerable Profanation of God's true Worship, was
ready to put the same in execution. In the days of Manasses and Ammon, Chap.
23. 11.
Groves were planted hard by the Temple; Horses were kept by the entrance of
the House of the Lord, either to be offered (as it is thought) for Sacrifices to
the Sun; or else to carry the Picture of it as an Idol to be worshipped: The
Priests sundry of them served in high places, and many of the People burnt
incense unto Baal, Placet. xxxv.
to the Sun, to the Planets, and to the Host of Heaven: all which abominations
the godly King Josiah did abolish, reforming both the Priests and the People:
and afterward, when the Kings of Judah did altogether neglect their Duties in
Church Causes, Religion decreased, and went to havoc. Insomuch as the
Scriptures rehearsing the causes of the Destruction of Jerusalem, do set down
this, 2 Chr. 36. 14.
among the rest, for one, viz. All the chief of the Priests had trespassed
wonderfully, according to all the abominations of the Heathen, and polluted the
house of the Lord, which he had sanctified. Much more might be alleged to this
purpose; as also to show how King David, 1 Chronicles. 15.
King Solomon, and King Jehosaphat distributed the Levites and Priests into
their Orders, 2 Chronicles. 10.
and prescribed certain Rules for them to observe in the manner of their
Attendance and Service. But to the purpose in hand this is sufficient.

CAN. XXI.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the godly Princes and Kings, in
the Old Testament, did not practice their Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical;
or that, in such their Practice of it, they did not that which they were bound
to do; or that amongst the Jews the true Worship of God was not very much
furthered, Placet. xxxvj.
and continued by the godly Care and Endeavors of their Princes and Kings; or
that the want of such godly Kings and Princes was not then an occasion, and an
opportunity taken, both by the Priests, and by the People, to follow their own
fancies, and to run into many Disorders, false Worships, Idolatry, and sundry
such Abominations; He does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXII.
WHat we have said, either of the Authority of Kings, or of the practice of it
in Causes Ecclesiastical among the Jews; we would not have it extended so far,
as if we imagined that in matters of Religion Kings might then lawfully
command, and do what they list. In the separation of the Priesthood from the
Regal Principality (the same having been formerly in one Person) they were then
so, by God, distinguished, as in some things, appertaining to the Office of
Kings, no Priest, as he was a Priest, had any Authority to intermeddle; as in
some other things, appertaining to the Office of Priests, no King, as he was a
King, might lawfully be an Actor: both of them having their bounds and limits
appointed unto them by God, which, without Sin, they might not exceed. And
therefore, as we greatly blame the High Priest, 2 Reg. 16. 11.
Vriah, for obeying the wicked Command of King Ahaz, in building, by his
direction, an Altar in the Temple, according to the Form of One that was in
Damascus: 2 Chr. 26. 17.
so do we greatly commend the godly Zeal of Azariah, the High Priest, and of
Eighty other Priests that were with him, in withstanding as far as lawfully
they might) Vzziah, King of Judah, when in the Pride of his Heart, he went into
the Temple of the Lord, and would have burnt Incense upon the Altar of Incense,
which none might lawfully do but Priests. But it is to be observed, that they
did not withstand the King by force, or Armies, but told him that it did not
appertain unto him, Placet. xxxvij.
but to the Priests, to burn incense unto the Lord; and therefore urged him to
go forth of the Sanctuary. Howbeit the King, being angry with them, for the
same, persisted (as it, appears) in his former purpose; and having Incense in
his hand, would have burnt it upon the Altar, if God himself had not struck him
in the Forehead with a Leprosy, wherewith being terrified (as also with a
great Earthquake then happening, as some learned Men have written from Amos 1.
1.) he was constrained, not only to desist from that rashness, and to depart
hastily out of the Sanctuary; but likewise as a Leper, to dwell in a house
apart (according to the Law) and Jotham his Son, 2 Chr. 26. 21.
as Viceroy, ruled his Father's house, and judged the People of the Land Vzziah
himself, during his life, remaining King.

CAN. XXII.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that Uriah, the High priest, was
bound to have built the said Altar, because King Ahaz did command him; or that
Azariah, and the other Priests did amiss, in reproving King Uzziah so plainly;
or that they lawfully might have used any violence or force against the King's
Person, either in hindering him from burning of Incense, or in thrusting him
out of the Temple, or in compelling him to dwell apart in a house, as he did
(though he was a Leper) if he had not, of himself, yielded to the observation
of the law in that behalf; Placet. xxxviij.
or that he was deprived of his Kingdom, either by the said stroke of God, or
by his dwelling in a house apart; or that any thing, which the Priests then
did, might have been a lawful Warrant to any Priest afterward, in the Old
Testament, either to have deposed, by sentence, any of their Kings from their
Kingdoms for the like offenses, or to have used Arms, or repressed such their
unlawful attempts, by forcible ways, though they had imagined the same might
have tended to the preservation of Religion; or, that either before that time,
or afterward, any Priest did resist by force of Arms, or depose any of the
Kings, either of Israel or of Judah, from their Kingdoms, though the Kings of
Israel, all of them, and fourteen of the Kings of Judah, were open and plain
Idolaters; he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXIII.
WE have showed before, that King Solomon did lawfully depose Abiathar from the
Priesthood, and placed Zadok in his room; but that any Priests, in the Old
Testament (as likewise we have before declared) did ever depose, from their
Crowns, any of their Kings, how wicked soever, or had any Authority so to do,
it can never be proved. Howbeit one Example of Jehoiada, 2 Reg. 11. 1.
the High Priest, is fit to be considered. After the Death of Ahaziah King of
Judah, his Mother Athaliah finding his Children to be very young, killed them
all but the youngest, and reigned, by Usurpation, six Years over the Land. The
said youngest Child, (whose Name was Joash) was secretly conveyed away by his
Aunt Jehoshabeth, his Father's Sister, and the Wife of Jehoiada the
High Priest; who kept him so secretly in the Temple, Placet. xxxix.
as that Athaliah the Usurper could never hear of him. Now after the said six
Years, that Joash, the true and natural Heir apparent to the Crown, had been so
brought up; he, the said Jehoiada, being the King's Uncle, and the chief Head,
or Prince of his Tribe, sent through Judah, for the Levites and chief Fathers
both of Judah, and of Benjamin, to come unto him to Jerusalem: who accordingly
repairing thither, and being made acquainted, by him, with the Preservation of
their Prince, (as is aforesaid) and that it was the Lord's Will that he should
reign over them; they altogether, by a Covenant, acknowledged their Allegiance
unto him, as unto their lawful King; and so disposed of things, as presently
after he was crowned and anointed: which dutiful Office of Subjects being
performed, they apprehended the Usurper Athaliah, and slew her, as before it
was, by the said States, resolved. In all the process of which Action nothing
was done, either by Jehoiada, the High Priest, or by the rest of the Princes
and People of Judah and Benjamin, which God himself did not require at their
hands; Joash their late King's Son, being then their only natural Lord and
Sovereign, although Athaliah kept him for six years from the Possession of his
Kingdom.

CAN. XXIII.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that Athaliah did well, in
murdering her Son's Children; or that Jehoiada and his Wife, did amiss, in
preserving the Life of their King Joash; or that Athaliah was not a Tyrannical
Usurper, (the right Heir of that Kingdom being alive) or that it was neither
lawful for Jehoiada, Placet. xl.
and the rest of the Princes, Levites, and People, to have yielded their
subjection unto their lawful King; nor, having so done, and their King being in
Possession of his Crown, to have joined together for the overthrowing of
Athaliah the Usurper; or that Jehoiada, the High Priest, was not bound, as he
was a Priest, both to inform the Princes and People, of the Lord's Promise,
that Joash should reign over them, and likewise to anoint him; or that this
fact, either of the Princes, Priests or People, was to be held for a lawful
warrant, for any afterward, either Princes, Priests or People to have deposed
any of the Kings of Judah, who by right of Succession came to their Crowns, or
to have killed them for any respect whatsoever, and to have set another in
their places, according to their own choice; or, that either this Example of
Jehoiada, or any thing else in the Old Testament did give then unto the
High Priest any Authority to dispute, determine, or judge, whether the Children
of the Kings of Judah should either be kept from the Crown, because their
Fathers were Idolaters, or being in possession of it, should be deposed from it
in that respect, or in any other respect whatsoever; he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXIV.
ALmighty God foreseeing what Defects there would be sometimes in Kings and
civil Magistrates, and sometimes not only in the inferior Priests, but
likewise in the Highpriests themselves; did still (as occasion required, and
for the benefit of his Church) raise up, and send unto them his Prophets, Men
endued by his holy Spirit with extraordinary Authority, Knowledge, Zeal and
Courage; who neither feared King nor Priest, but told them plainly of their
faults, denounced the Judgments of God against them for their Sins, Placet. xli.
and executed without respect of Persons such other parts of their duties, as
God himself immediately gave them in Charge. Notwithstanding the Priests stood
much upon their Authority, and bragged, that the Law should not perish from
them, Jer. 18. 18.
flattering themselves and the people with lying words (as appears by the
peoples Speeches, taught most likely by them) The Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7. 4.
the Temple of the Lord, This is the Temple of the Lord; yet the Prophets told
them plainly, "That they erred, that they were covetous, receivers of Gifts,
and false Dealers; that they had polluted the Temple of God; that the Law
should perish from them; that God himself had found their wickedness in his own
House; that Jerusalem should be destroyed; and that they themselves should be
carried into Captivity." In respect of which, their faithful, bold, and plain
dealing, according to God's Commandment, and particular directions, the Priests
were for the most part greatly moved, and incensed against them. Jer. 20. 2.
Pashur, the High Priest, struck the Prophet Jeremy upon the Face, and
afterward cast him into Prison; also his Death was conspired amongst the
Priests; and the rest from time to time were little better treated by them. It
is true, that there were in those times very many false Prophets; who
pretending, that they likewise were sent from God, did greatly trouble that
Church and State; but their falsehood and lewdness, ought neither to have
prejudiced the good Priests, nor the true Prophets.

CAN. XXIV.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the Priests in the Old
Testament, from the highest to the lowest, were not bound to have obeyed the
directions which God himself delivered unto them by his Prophets;
notwithstanding that now and then some of them were of the Tribe of Levi,
Placet. xlii.
and consequently in other Causes were subject unto them; or, that the Examples
of the true Prophets were any lawful Warrant, either for any false Prophets, or
for any other person or persons whatsoever, to have railed, libelled,
threatened, or denounced the Judgments of God against any of the said Priests,
according to their own malicious humors (God himself having never given them
any such Warrant or foreknowledge to pronounce of such particular Judgments to
come:) or, that because the High Priest, and the rest of the Priests did amiss
in the malicious prosecution of God's true Prophets, they might not therefore
lawfully take order for the punishment of false Prophets, he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXV.
IT is apparent likewise in the Scriptures, that as the godly Prophets in the
Old Testament dealt with the Priests; so did they in like manner deal with
their Kings; although otherwise they were their Subjects, and owed them as much
duty as any other. 2 Samuel 12.
Nathan the Prophet, by God's particular direction, spared not King David to
tell him of his offenses. 1 Reg. 14.
No more did Abijah, 1 Reg. 18.
Jeroboam; nor Elias, King Ahab: they denounced God's Judgments boldly against
them, and accordingly they came to pass. Also the Lord, being not bound to
those Laws which he prescribes others to observe, 1 Reg. 19. 16.
commanded Jehu, a Subject, to be anointed King over Israel; 2 Reg. 9. 3.
of purpose to punish the sins of Ahab and Jezabel: and accordingly Elizeus the
Prophet caused Jehu to be anointed, and God's Message to be delivered unto him;
who presently upon the knowledge of God's will, and the submission of the
Princes and Captains of Israel unto him, v. 13.
as to their lawful King, did put in execution the said Message by killing
Joram (before that time his Sovereign, Placet. xliii.
but then his Subject) and by destroying and rooting out the whole Posterity,
Sons, Familiars, and Priests of Ahab. In like manner, Samuel (a Prophet, but
the subject of King Saul) did not refuse, when God directly, and in express
terms, bad him, both to tell his Master the King, That the Lord had rent the
Kingdom of Israel from him, 1 Samuel 15. 28.
and to anoint King David to succeed him. We say, to succeed him, because we
think, that God's purpose only was to cut off Readiness Posterity from reigning
after him; and not actually, while he lived, to deprive him of his Kingdom; but
principally to provide that David might succeed him. Certain it is, that David
lied not, when, notwithstanding that he himself was anointed to succeed King
Saul; 1 Samuel 24. 6.
yet he called him his Master, and the Lord's anointed: also he prayed, that
God would keep him from laying his hands upon King Saul; for that he was the
Lords anointed. Likewise, when one of the Captains would have slain King Saul,
1 Samuel 26. 9.
he said, destroy him not, for who can lay his hands upon the Lord's anointed,
and be guiltless? Furthermore, when the Messenger brought him news of Readiness
Death, 2 Samuel 1. 14.
Was It thou not afraid (quoth he) to put forth thy hand to destroy the anointed
of the Lord? and commanding the said Messenger to be killed for his offense
therein, Thy blood (says David) be upon thine own head, for thine own mouth
has witnessed against thee, saying, I have slain the Lord's anointed. Besides,
it is manifest, that the Tribes of Israel accounted Saul to be their lawful
King, Placet. xliv.
during his life. And also that they construed Samuel's words to be meant only
of David's Interest to succeed him after his Death: and Samuel himself
(notwithstanding all that he had done was by God's Commandment) left the
success thereof to the disposition of his Heavenly Providence; and afterward, 1 Samuel 15. 30, 31.
both honored Saul before the People, as his King; and likewise continued,
whilst he lived, a dutiful Subject unto him.

CAN. XXV.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the Prophets were to blame for
dealing so sharply with Kings and Princes, being their Sovereigns; as though
God's express Commandments had not been sufficient to have authorized them so
to have dealt; or, that the Example of God's Prophets in this behalf were a
sufficient Warrant for any false Prophets, or other lewd Persons, to have
railed and libelled against their Kings, or to have denounced such judgments
against them, as they in malice either desired, or vainly imagined; or, that
any Prophets, Priests, or other Persons, having no direct and express Command
from God, might lawfully imitate the said facts, either of Samuel or of
Elizeus, in anointing and designing Successors to Kings, which otherwise had no
just interest, title and claim to their Kingdoms; or that it is lawful for any
Captain or Subject, high or low whosoever, to bear Arms against their
Sovereign, or to lay violent hands upon his Sacred Person, by the Example of
Jehu, (notwithstanding that any Prophet, or Priest should incite them
thereunto, by Unction, Placet. xlv.
or any other means whatsoever; except first, that it might plainly appear,
that there are now any such Prophets sent extraordinarily from God himself,
with sufficient and special Authority in that behalf; and that every such
Captain and Subject, so incited, might be assured, that God himself had, in
express Words, and by Name, required and commanded him so to do;) He does
greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXVI.
FUrthermore, that nothing may be omitted, concerning the Authority and Dignity
of God's Prophets, in the Old Testament; the Words of the Lord to Jeremy, in
that behalf, are, with due care and diligence, Jer. 1. 10.
to be observed. Behold (says the Lord) I have set thee over the Nations, and
over the Kingdoms, that thou may pluck up, and root out, and destroy, and
throw down, and build, and plant. Now for as much as it does not appear in the
Scriptures, that the Prophet Jeremy did, at any time, as a Warrior and great
Emperor, dispose of Nations and Kingdoms, or plucked up, rooted out,
destroyed, or threw down Kings; or that he built, or chose, or set up Kings, in
the places of those that he had deposed or thrown down; the ancient Writers, do
deliver the true sense and meaning of the said words, when they expound them in
sort and effect, as follows: I have set thee over Nations and Kingdoms, that
is, I have imposed upon thee the Office of prophesying, not only against the
people and Kingdom of Judah, but likewise against the Nations and Empires,
Placet. xlvi.
viz. the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Babylonians, etc.
That thou may pluck up, root out, destroy, and throw down; that is, that thou
may pronounce that wicked Nations shall be pulled, or carried away out of
their own Provinces; and that thou may prophecy, that they shall be
destroyed, or killed and dispersed in diverse places, or consumed. That thou
may build and plant; that is, that thou may declare, that both the Jews,
and other Nations, shall, after a just and due Castigation, be repaired and
restored to their own proper Countries. So that the Prophet Jeremy, and the
rest of the Prophets, in like manner, although they were chosen of God, to
denounce to wicked Persons, Countries, Kingdoms and Nations, his deserved
Judgments for their Sins; yet were they neither the Workers, nor the Authors of
those Judgments. Genesis 7. 1, etc.
Noah denounced the Flood, 2 Pet. 2. 5.
but it cannot therefore be truly affirmed that Noah drowned the World. Dan. 4.
22.
Daniel denounced Nebuchadnezzar's fall, but it was not Daniel that took his
heart and understanding from him, nor that made him to eat Grass like an Ox.
Samuel denounced the Judgments of God against King Saul; but Samuel did not
thrust him out of his Kingdom. And even so, although the Prophet Jeremy
denounced the Bondage of Babylon, and many other Judgments of God, against the
said Nations; yet it cannot be either truly said, that Jeremy delivered the
whole Kingdom of Judah into Captivity, or that he overthrew, or destroyed any
of the rest: only he prophesied, as God did command him, and left the
Executions of such Judgments to the Times and Persons, which the Lord had
designed and appointed for that purpose.

CAN. XXVI.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, that the Prophet Jeremy had any Authority
to depose Kings from their Kingdoms, Placet. xlvii.
for any cause whatsoever, and to bestow them upon others, as he thought fit;
or that, albeit the said words were spoken by the Lord to Jeremy, and that he,
being otherwise an inferior Priest, had no Authority, literally, so to cast
down and set up Kings, yet the Highpriests, Men of greater Power and Dignity,
might then have used Kings in that manner and sort, according to their Deserts
(the benefit and preservation of the Church so requiring): or that any of the
High priests (as deriving their Authority, either from the said words, spoken
to Jeremy, or from any thing else, that is written in the Scriptures) either
might, or ever did take upon them, to give this Neighbor Kingdom to one Man,
and that remoter Kingdom to another Man; or to depose any of their own Kings,
either of Judah, or of Israel, from their Kingdoms, though many of them (as
elsewhere we have said) were exceeding great Idolaters, and sundry ways stained
with lamentable blots; he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXVII.
THE History of Jehu beforementioned, does put us in mind, what is written of
Ahud, one of the Judges of Israel. We have elsewhere showed, that from Joshua's
Death to the time of Saul, God himself, when his People were oppressed by their
bordering Neighbors, did still raise up unto them, Governors and Leaders,
called Judges, without respect either of any Tribe, Placet. xlviii.
more one than another, or of the dignity of any Person, or of the Peoples
pleasure, choice and consent first required; but simply, according to his own
choice and wisdom: In which number the said Ahud was one; the manner of whose
entrance into that charge, we could not (our course considered) pretermit with
silence. The Israelites had been eighteen years in subjection to the Moabites;
as they had been a little before, eight years to the Aramites. They knew that
it was not lawful for them of themselves, and by their own Authority, to take
Arms against the Kings, whose Subjects they were, though indeed they were
Tyrants: and therefore they cried unto the Lord for succor. Who, in compassion
of their servitude and miseries, Judge. 3. 9, 15.
appointed Othoniel to deliver them from the Aramites; and afterward Ahud from
the Moabites. In the choice of which two Judges it is to be observed, that the
Scriptures do tell us, that God raised them up (and therefore it is most certain
he did so) and also, that in such raising of them to their places he made them
Saviors to his People (as the Scriptures speak) giving them thereby Authority
to save and redeem the Israelites from the Tyrants that oppressed them: without
both which Prerogatives it had been altogether unlawful for them to have done
as they did. Besides, it appears in the Scriptures, that when the Lord did
thus choose out, and authorize the said Deliverers and Rulers, he did not only
give them, by his holy Spirit, full assurance of their lawful Callings, but
likewise did furnish them with such wisdom and courage, as was necessary for
them in those kinds of Services. So as Ahud (at whom we principally aim) being
thus both called and instructed from God, Placet. xlix.
how he should begin his Peoples deliverance from the Moabites, by killing of
Eglon their King, he framed his course accordingly; and preparing for himself a
meet Weapon, took a fit Opportunity, and thereupon (as God had directed him)
he, wholly resting upon the Lord's assistance, executed that Judgment upon the
said King; and afterward so vanquished the Moabites, and subdued them under the
hand of Israel, as the whole Land was at rest from the oppression of their
Enemies eighty years. Besides, it is to be observed, that as God's appointing
by Name and Election of Moses, Joshua and Saul, and after that the Kingdom was
held by Succession; the very being of the King's Son, and the true Heir
Apparent after his Father's Death, gave unto them all the actual Interest,
Right and Possession (as Possession in those cases is to be expounded) of their
several Governments, to do any act or acts, as well before as after any
subsequent Formalities and Ceremonies: even so the said form of calling the
Judges by God himself immediately, made them also Judges actually, and did give
unto them a full and absolute Authority (independent upon any but upon him that
gave it them) to undertake any thing, that by God's direction appertained to
their places. Placet. l.
Again, there is one other Example of Jehu amongst the Kings of Israel, which
we have before touched, like unto this of Ahud: wherein it appears, that he
the said Jehu was of a Subject first made the King of Israel, before it was
lawful for him to have killed Joram; As Ahud, a Subject, was first made the
Judge, Prince and Ruler of the People, before he might have lawfully killed
King Eglon. Both which Examples (being but in number two throughout the
Histories of all the Princes, Judges, and Kings, either of Judah, or Israel) do
make it known unto us, That although the Lord both may, and is able to
overthrow any Kings or Emperors, notwithstanding any claim, right, title, or
interest, which they can challenge to their Countries, Kingdoms or Empires; yet
foreseeing in his Heavenly Wisdom, and Divine Providence, what mischief private
Men, under color of these Examples, might otherwise have pretended, or
attempted against their Sovereigns (as being either discontented of themselves,
or set into some fury by other Malicious Persons) he did so order and dispose
of all things in the Execution of these such his extraordinary Judgments, as
that thereby it might plainly appear to any (that should not wilfully hoodwink
himself) never to be lawful for any Person whatsoever, Placet. li.
upon pretense of any Revelation, Inspiration, or Commandment from his divine
Majesty, either to touch the Person of his Sovereign, or to bear Arms against
him; except God should first advance the said Person from his private Estate,
and make him a King, or an absolute Prince, to succeed his late Master in his
Kingdom, or Principality.

CAN. XXVII.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that any godly, or dutiful Subject
in the Old Testament, did ever (by the direction of God's Spirit) account this
fact of Ahud to be a lawful Warrant for him to have murdered the Kings, under
whose subjection he lived, for any cause whatsoever; though he should have had
never so many motions in his heart thereunto; or, that the High Priest himself,
or all the rest of the Priests (who then lived) joined together with him, could
have given Authority to any Person, born a Subject, to have so dealt with his
Sovereign, though he had been never so wicked, and that such his Death, might
have availed the Church (in their Opinions) never so greatly; or, that either
the said High Priest, and all his Consistory of Priests, might lawfully have
encouraged any, who being born Subjects, should have pretended in their Zeal
toward Religion, never so many Illuminations, Directions, or Commandments from
God, to have laid violent hands upon their King the Lord's anointed, Placet.
iii.
for their proceeding in that course; or, that any Person, born a Subject, and
affirming by all the Arguments, which Wit or Learning could devise, that God
had called him to murder the King, de facto, under whom he lived; yea though
he should have first procured himself to be proclaimed, and anointed King, as
Adonijah did, and should afterward have laid violent hands upon his Master;
ought therefore to have been believed of any that feared God; except (which is
impossible) he should first prove his Credit, in so affirming, to be equal with
the Scriptures, and that Men were bound as strictly to believe him, in saying,
that God called and stirred him up to the perpetrating of that fact, as we are
bound to believe the Holy Ghost, (by whose Instinct the Scriptures were
written) when he tells us, that God raised up Ahud for a Savior to his
People; He does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXVIII.
HItherto in the whole course of that mild and temperate Monarchical
Government, which it pleased God to establish among his own People; the duty of
Inferior Persons and Subjects, of all sorts, was ever Obedience. They neither
took upon them to choose their Governors, nor to bear Arms against them.
Howbeit it happened otherwise amongst some other Nations. Placet. liij.
Nimrod, not contenting himself with the portion, which, by Noah's general
direction, appertained unto him, could never have erected his Tyrannical
Government, if a number of rebellious and discontented Persons had not cleaved
unto him (as the factious Sichemites did to Abimelech) and made him their King.
The Romans, having Kings, rebelled against them, and took the Government into
their own hands; the execution whereof did trouble them exceedingly. Sometimes
they committed it to many, and sometimes to fewer: their two Annual Consuls
pleased them long, but at the last they thought it fit to have a Dictator;
till, in the end, Julius Caesar and Augustus reduced their Government again
into a Monarchy. And as the Romans dealt with their Kings, so did the People,
in some other Countries, with their Governors. Whereupon diverse other kinds of
Governments, termed according to their Temper, Aristocratical, Political,
Tyrannical, Oligarchical or Democratical, etc. were afterward settled in many
places. The Inconveniences of which Forms of Government being found (upon many
occasions oftentimes) to be very great; the People have been driven, of
necessity, in sundry Countries, to frame them again, as near as they could, to
the Monarchical Government, either by electing to themselves, Kings, upon
certain Conditions, to reign over them; Placet. live.
or by appointment of Dukes or Princes to be the Managers of their chief
Affairs, according as they themselves should direct them. Besides, as the said
rebellious Humors of the People, declining from their Obedience, did, in many
Countries, alter that temperate and fatherly Government, which Noah had
prescribed unto his Offspring, and which God himself established afterward
amongst his own People: so did the ambitious and insatiable dispositions of
sundry, no less elsewhere impeach the same; as by the beginning and progress of
the four Monarchies, it is most apparent. Dan. 2.
In all which Abberrations from the said mild and temperate Government, Ecclus.
10. 4.
before specified, Almighty God (who, for the Sins of any Nation or Country,
alters their Governments and Governors; transferreth, sets up and
bestows Kingdoms, as it seems best to his heavenly Wisdom) did ever, by his
Foresight and Providence, so dispose both the Rebellion of Subjects, and the
Malice and Greediness of encroaching Kings upon their Neighbors, as albeit
such their attempts of all sorts, were, in themselves, very wicked and
detestable in his sight; yet he (having the skill to bring Light out of
Darkness, and to use wicked Instruments and Actions for a good purpose) did
always frame and apply them to execute his own just Judgments. Placet. lv.
When the Sins of a Nation (but principally of his own People) were of that
Nature, Height and Ripeness, as his Justice could not fitly be put in execution
by any other, but by the wicked: for example, in the overthrowing of Jerusalem
(God's own City) in burning of the Temple (that was the place of his Glory) and
carrying his own People into Captivity, (though never so much by them deserved)
no godly King could well have been employed; but such a One only as the King of
Babylon was. In respect of which their Employment, such wicked Instruments to
execute God's just Judgments, Jerem. 27. 6.
are called sometimes his Servants, Isaiah 10. 5.
and the Rods of his Wrath; or, as Attila termed himself, the Scourge of God.
And when, having attained their ungodly desires (whether ambitious Kings, by
bringing any Country into their subjection; or disloyal Subjects, by their
rebellious rising against their natural Sovereigns) they have established any
of the said degenerate Forms of Government amongst their People; the Authority
either so unjustly gotten, or wrung, by force, from the true, and lawful
Possessor, being always God's Authority (and therefore receiving no impeachment
by the wickedness of those that have it) is ever (when any such alterations are
thoroughly settled) to be reverenced and obeyed, and the People of all sorts (as
well of the Clergy, Placet. lvi.
as of the Laity) are to be subject unto it, not only for fear, but also for
conscience sake: the Israelites in Egypt, after Joseph's death, being oppressed
very tyrannically, many ways, did never rebel against any of those Kings, but
submitted themselves to their Authority, though their Burdens were very
intolerable, both in respect of the impossible works imposed upon them, and
because also they might not offer Sacrifices to the Lord (a special part of
God's Worship) without apparent danger of stoning to death. Besides, it may not
be omitted, when God himself sent Moses to deliver them from that Servitude, he
would not suffer him to carry them thence, till Pharaoh, their King, gave them
license to depart. Afterward also, when the Jews, being brought into subjection
to the Kings of Babylon, did, by the instigation of false Prophets, rebel
against them, they were, in that respect, greatly condemned by the Prophet
Jeremy: and in their Captivity (which shortly after followed) they lived by the
direction of the said Prophet, in great subjection and Obedience; they prayed
not only for their Kings and for their Children, that they might live long, and
prosper, but likewise for the State of their Government; the good success
whereof they were bound to seek and regard, as well as any other of the King's
dutiful Subjects. And thus they lived in Babylon, Placet. lvii.
and other places of that Dominion, till the King gave them leave to depart;
notwithstanding, in the mean time, they endured many Calamities, and were
destitute, for many years, of the public Service and Worship of God, which was
tied to the Temple, and might not elsewhere be practiced or attempted.

CAN. XXVIII.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the Subjects, when they shake
off the Yoke of their Obedience to their Sovereigns, and set up a Form of
Government among themselves, after their own humors, do not therein very
wickedly: or that it is lawful, for any bordering Kings, through Ambition and
Malice, to invade their Neighbors: or that the Providence and Goodness of God,
in using of Rebellions and Oppressions to execute his Justice against any King
or Country, does mitigate or qualify the Offenses of any such Rebels or
oppressing Kings: or that, when any such new Forms of Government, begun by
Rebellion, are after thoroughly settled, the Authority in them, is not of God:
or that any, who live within the Territories of such new Governments, are not
bound to be subject to God's Authority, which is there executed, but may rebel
against the same: or that the Jews, either in Egypt or Babylon, might lawfully,
for any cause, have taken Arms against any of those Kings, or have offered any
violence to their Persons; He does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXIX.
ALthough the Jews upon their deliverance out of Captivity, Placet. lviij.
and restitution to their own Country, received many favors from the Persian
Kings, Nehem. 9. 36.
and had liberty given them to live in a sort according to their own Laws; yet
they never recovered their former Estate, but lived in great subjection and
servitude under them, whilst that Monarchy endured. The Temple and City of
Jerusalem were again built, but not with the magnificence which they had
before. Zorobabel first, Ezra 4. 20.
and then Nehemiah, were made successively by the said Kings, the Rulers and
Governors of the Jews so restored, but with diverse restraints. It was not
forgotten, what mighty Kings had ruled in Jerusalem, and therefore the said
Rulers were not permitted to govern any more in that Regal sort. Nehem. 9.
They were still subject to the direction of those Kings, and paid unto them
very large Tribute and Customs; insomuch, as when the Priests gave public
thanks unto God, for his restoring unto them the state which they had, they
said thus withal unto him, as bewailing their condition, Placet. lix.
Behold we are Servants this day in the Land which thou gave our Fathers; it
yields much fruit unto the Kings, whom thou have set over us, because of our
sins; and they have dominion over our Bodies, and over our Cattle at our
pleasure, and we are in great affliction. The extraordinary favor which was
showed to any, was principally extended toward the Priests, over whom the said
Kings had not so jealous an eye, as they had over the Princes, and the rest of
the People. Howbeit (the same notwithstanding) they the said Priests were
subject to their own immediate Princes, both in Temporal and Ecclesiastical
Causes; as formerly the Priests had been to the Kings of Judah before the
Captivity. Ezra 2. 63.
"Their Governors forbad certain, who said they were Priests, Nehem. 5. 12.
13. 15. 13. 13.
from eating of the most holy things. Nehemiah ministered an Oath unto the
Priests: he reformed the abuses of the Sabbath, and prescribed Orders for the
better observing thereof. He appointed certain of the Priests to oversee the
Tithes in the Treasury. He commanded the Levites to cleanse themselves, and to
keep the Gates, and to sanctify the Sabbath. Eliasib, the High Priest, having
defiled the Temple, by letting Tobias, a Stranger, a Chamber in the Court of
the House of God (where in before times the Offerings, the Incense, the Vessels,
and such other things, used in God's Service, had been kept,) Placet. lx.
Nehemiah, the Governor, was greatly offended with it; and displacing the said
Tobias, cast forth all his stuff out of his said Chamber, and brought thither
again the Vessels of the House of God, with the Meat Offerings and Incense."

CAN. XXIX.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that Almighty God kept not his
promise to the Jews made in his name by the Prophet Jeremy, as touching their
deliverance by Cyrus out of their Captivity; because they were not restored to
any such perfect liberty and Government, as they had before: or, that the said
Kings of Persia, continuing still by God's appointment a supreme Authority over
the Jews so restored, might by them for any cause, or under any color, have
been defrauded of their Tributes, or resisted by force of Arms, or otherwise
impeached, either in their States or Persons: or, that Zorobabel and Nehemiah
were not lawful Princes over the Jews, because they were placed in that
Government without the Peoples Election: or, that they the said Princes, by
dealing in Cases Ecclesiastical (as is aforesaid) did take more upon them, than
by God's appointment appertained to their charge: or, that the Priests, both
high and low, had not grievously sinned, if they had not submitted themselves
in the said Ecclesiastical Causes, to the direction of those their civil
Governors; he does greatly Err.

Placet eis. Placet. lxi.

CAP. XXX.
THE High Priest (as before we have said) in that mild and temperate
Government, which God himself had Ordained, was the second Person in the
Kingdom. Whereupon the same (after the Captivity) being turned, as it were,
into a Dukedom, and (for ought that appears) the Princes after Nehemiah's
time growing poor, by reason of their payments to those Kings to whom they were
Tributary; and receiving small assistance or countenance from them, because
they were still jealous of them, whereas the Priests (it seems) being freed
from all-Tributes and Impositions, grew rich, and were no way suspected: it
came to pass (the sins of the people so requiring) that the High Priest did
easily oversway both their Princes and their People, and thereby attained very
great Authority in that Principality. Only they stood in awe for the time of
the Kings of Persia, to whose Obedience they were bound by an Oath, when they
were made Highpriests: but otherwise, for ought we find, they had no great
regard of any other Authority: which so advanced the dignity of the Priesthood,
as afterward the practices of the High-Priest's Children, to succeed their
Father in that high dignity, grew as troublesome to the People, as was their
servitude to the Persians. Placet. lxii.
For Jesus, the younger Brother of John, the second High Priest after Eliasib
(mentioned by Nehemiah) procured by corruption the favor of the chief
Governor of the Persians in those Countries adjoining for his assistance, to
deprive his Brother, that he himself might enjoy the High Priesthood; whereof
his elder Brother having some notice, did kill him in the Temple: which the
said Governor took in so evil part, as he spoiled the said Temple, being (as
he said) profaned with Blood; and laid an exceeding great Tribute in that
respect upon the People, to endure for seven Years. But John the High Priest
continued in his place. After whose Death, Nehem. 13. 28.
his two Sons, Jaddus and Manasses, fell at great variance: the younger (to
make himself strong against his elder Brother) Married contrary to the Law of
God, with a Daughter of Sanballat, another Chief Ruler in Samaria, under the
King of Persia. For which offense Jaddus (notwithstanding the Authority of
Sanballat) removed him from the dignity of Priesthood: Jos. Antiq. l. 2. c. 8.
and thereupon, he the said Manasses, procured by Sanballat's means, a Temple
to be built in Mount Garizin, near Samaria, in form and magnificence like to
that in Jerusalem, where he flourished; and whither all the lewd persons of
Judah had daily recourse. Upon which occasion much trouble arose afterward
betwixt the Samaritans, Placet. lxiii.
and the Jews. The said Jaddus lived till the Monarchy of the Grecians began;
who, when Alexander (having overthrown Darius the King of the Persians) sent
unto him, Jos. ibid.
that he should assist him in his Wars, and become Tributary to the
Macedonians, as he had been to the Persians; returned for his Answer, that he
might not yield thereunto, because he had taken an Oath for his true Allegiance
to Darius, which he might not lawfully violate whilst Darius lived, being by
flight escaped, when his Army was discomfited.

We have here cited, and shall hereafter cite some things out of the Books of
the Maccabees, and other ancient Historiographers, of purpose to continue the
manner of the Government of the Jews, in what case they stood from time to
time, after the days of Nehemiah: not meaning thereby to attribute any
Canonical Authority unto them, nor to establish any point of Doctrine out of
them, but only to proportion and measure the regiment and actions of that
people, by the rules and analogy of the holy Scriptures.

CAN. XXX.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, contrary to the grounds and truths of the
said holy Scriptures, Placet. lxiv.
either that, albeit Kings of Persia had authorized some succeeding Princes, as
they did Zorobabel and Nehemiah (and whether they did so or no, is not
certain;) yet the High Priests might afterward have lawfully born the sway,
that they did, and not been subject unto them, as their Predecessors had been
to Zorobabel and Nehemiah; or, that if Nehemiah continued alive in that
Government, till Jaddus's time (as it is probable he did) he might not
lawfully, being authorized as before, (though he were old) have reformed any
abuse in the Priests, both high and low: or, that they were not bound in
Conscience to have obeyed him therein: or, that the Jews might lawfully have
rebelled for any cause against the Persians, during their Government over them:
or, that Jaddus, the High Priest did amiss in binding his Allegiance to King
Darius by an Oath: or, that he had not sinned, if he had refused (being
thereunto required) so to have sworn: or, that having so sworn, he might
lawfully have born Arms himself against Darius, or have solicited others,
whether Aliens or Jews, thereunto; he does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXXI.
ALexander, by God's Providence, having vanquished the Persians, the Jews
(amongst many other Nations) became his Subjects. Placet. lxv.
He dealt favorably with them, released them of some Payments, granted them
liberty, to live according to their own Laws, and left their Government, in
every point, as he found it: their Duties, ordinary Tributes, and some of their
Royal Prerogatives, always reserved to the Macedonians, as they had been before
to the Persians; but this their tolerable Estate endured not long. For, upon
Alexander's death, his chief Captains conspiring together, made such a
scambling Division of the Empire, amongst themselves, as they could; every one
almost, notwithstanding, seeking how he might suppress the rest, and attain the
whole alone to himself. So as, thereupon, the Jews were as free from the
Macedonians, as any other of their bordering Neighbors; none of the said
Captains having any lawful Interest, or Title, to Judah. But that which turned
to the benefit of some others, brought a great detriment (for want of Ability)
unto them: for one of the said Captains having gotten to himself a very strong
Kingdom, in Syria, and another of them in Egypt, the Jews dweling betwixt them
both, were miserably, on every side, vexed by them. Placet. lxvi.
Sometimes the Egyptians, by Oppression and Force, brought them under their
Subjection, and imposed great Tributes upon them: and sometimes the Syrians,
growing mightier than the Egyptians, did likewise very greatly afflict them;
especially in the Reign of Antiochus Epiphanes, whose Invasion and Government
was most unjust and Tyrannical. "He shed innocent Blood on every side of the
Sanctuary, 1 Macc. 1. 37.
spoiled the Temple, erecting in it the Abomination of the Gentiles, and caused
it to be named the Temple of Jupiter Olympius. 2 Macc. 6. 2, 4.
The Books of the Law, by his Commandment, were cut in pieces and burnt; and
they, with whom they were found, were put to death. A general Commandment was,
by him, published, that they should offer no more Sacrifices, nor circumcise
their Children, nor execute any other parts of their own Law in the Service of
God; but wholly to conform themselves therein to the manner of the Gentiles."
Whereupon the People, by heaps, forsook the Lord, and offered Sacrifices to
Idols; and such as refused so to do (choosing rather to obey God than Man) were
most cruelly slain and murdered, by thousands; until Mattathias, moved with
the monstrous Cruelty and Tyranny of the said Antiochus, made open Resistance;
the Government of that Tyrant being not then, either generally received by
submission, Placet. lxvii.
or settled by continuance. It is not pertinent to our purpose, to intermeddle
with sundry Questions, which might here arise. Only we observe, that Mattathias
undertook that charge; that he commended the same afterward to his Sons, and
that it continued in them and their Posterity, until both they and their whole
Country were vanquished by the Romans.

CAN. XXXI.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the Jews, generally, both
Priests and People, were not the Subjects of Alexander, after his Authority was
settled amongst them, as they had been before the Subjects of the Kings of
Babylon and Persia: or that they might lawfully have born Arms against him; or
that they were not all bound to pray for the long life and prosperity, both of
Alexander and his Empire, as they had been bound before, to pray for the life
and prosperity of the other said Kings and their Kingdoms, whilst they lived
under their subjection: or consequently that they might lawfully, upon any
occasion whatsoever, have offered violence and destruction, either to their
Persons or to their Kingdoms, for the long continuance and prosperity whereof,
they were bound to pray: or that, after the Jews were delivered from their
servitude under the Kings of Syria, lxviij.
and the Government over them was settled in Mattathias's Posterity, it was
lawful for the People, upon any occasion, to have rebelled against them, or to
have offered violence to their persons; He does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXXII.
THE afflictions, which the Jews endured, whilst the Government of the Grecians
lasted, were much the more grievous unto them, by reason of the great disorders
which were then amongst their Priests. For whereas they should have been a stay
and a comfort unto them in their greater miseries; their negligence one way,
and their ambition another way (in striving about the High Priesthood) did so
distract them into parts taking, as that thereby great effusion of blood did
oftentimes ensue: shortly after Jaddus's time, this was the general report,
which, for their Wickedness, was given out of them, 2 Mac. 4. 14.
The Priests were now no more diligent about the Altar, but despised the
Temple, and regarded not the Sacrifices. They did not set by the honor of
their Fathers, but liked of the glory of the Gentiles most of all. The Temple
was full of dissoluteness and gluttony of the Gentiles; which dallied with
Harlots, and had to do with Women within the circuit of holy places; Chap. 6. 4.
and brought in such things as were not lawful. Placet. lxix.
The Altar also was full of such things, as were abominable, and forbidden by
the Law; and two or three of the High Priests applauded thereunto. Jos. Ant. l.
12. c. 6.
Simon, the High Priest, leaving three Sons behind him, Onias, Jason, and
Menelaus, was not long dead, but Jason for three hundred and sixty Talents of
Silver, procured such assistance of Antiochus King of Syria, as he thrust his
elder Brother Onias out of the High Priesthood; and not long after had the same
measure repaid unto him again, by his younger Brother Menelaus; who upon some
cunning information, and for six hundred and sixty Talents, got the place
himself. 2 Macc. 5. 5.
Whereupon Jason assembled Forces, drove Menelaus into a Castle, slew the
Citizens without Mercy, and in the end being repulsed, died abroad as an exile.
Menelaus afterward caused his Eldest Brother, Onias, 2 Macc. 4. 34.
to be Murdered; because he blamed him for stealing certain Vessels of Gold out
of the Temple. Next Menelaus succeeded Alcimus, whereas Onias, the Son of Onias
beforementioned, should in right have had that dignity. Of all which, four
Persons, eminent in their time, these things are left for Records unto
Posterity. Placet. lxx.
Jason to get Antiochus's good will for the High Priesthood, promised him,
besides his great Bribe, to set up a School of Gentilism; likewise to build a
Brothel-House by the Temple; and that the People of Jerusalem should be named
Antiochians, after the Kings Name. He drew his Kinsmen to the Custom of the
Gentiles, and sent to Tyrus three hundred Drachms of Silver for a Sacrifice to
Hercules. Menelaus also took the like course or rather a worse; for besides,
that he conformed himself wholly in effect to the manners of the Grecians; 2
Macc. 5. 15.
it is further thus written of him; Antiochus went into the most holy Temple, 2
Macc. 13. 3.
having Menelaus, that Traitor to the Laws, and to his own Country, to be his
Guide. He thrust himself into the Kings Army against Judas Maccabaeus, and the
City of Jerusalem; hoping thereupon to have attained that Government. But
Lysias the King's Lieutenant, crossed his purpose therein, and informed the
King, Jos. ant. l. 12. c. 15.
that he the said Menelaus had been the cause of all the mischiefs which had
ensued the Wars with the Jews; as being the Man who persuaded his Father
Antiochus Epiphanes, to compel them to forsake the Laws of their Fathers;
adding thereunto, that whilst Menelaus lived, the Jews would never be quiet.
Whereupon the King commanding him to be put to Death, he was smothered in
Ashes; Placet. lxxi.
because he had committed many sins by the Altar, whose fire and ashes were
holy. Alcimus, Jos. ant. ibid.
the High Priest, next succeeding, was no sooner in his place, but he took upon
him to be the Captain of all the ungodly Men of Israel, 1 Macc. 7. 5.
and solicited King Demetrius to make War against Judas Maccabaeus;
complaining, that he had killed all the King's Friends. The King thus
instigated sent an Army against Jerusalem, with one Bacchides and Alcimus;
who, pretending that they came in Peace, and being thereupon trusted by the
Maccabees themselves (because he was a Priest of the Seed of Aaron) did
traitorously notwithstanding, and treacherously, Murder sundry of the Jews, and
held the Government of that Country, till Judas Maccabaeus put him to flight. 1
Macc. 9.
Howbeit, accusing the Maccabees again of wicked things, he urged afterward the
said King to send a new Army against them, and was himself, as it seems, in
the Host, when Judas Maccabaeus was slain. Besides, it is also reported of him,
how he commanded that the Walls of the Inner-Court of the Sanctuary should be
destroyed, v. 54.
and how he pulled down the Monuments of the Prophets, and how in that his so
wicked and profane an attempt, he was stricken with the Palsy, Placet. lxxii.
and died with great torment. Now concerning Onias, (who if he had been of
lawful Age, and might have had his right, ought to have been High Priest before
both his Uncles, Jason and Menelaus) when he perceived that Alcimus had gotten
that place, and saw no probability how he might get it from him, he fled into
Egypt, and there procured a Temple to be built, like unto that in Jerusalem;
whereof he was made the principal Ruler. So greedy was he of the
High Priesthood, that seeing he might not be High Priest in Jerusalem, he
would needs be a High Priest in Egypt against God's Command. But perhaps the
High Priesthood amongst the Jews was better bestowed afterward. Indeed now it
came into the hands of the Maccabees: but how they used it there is little
mention. Placet. lxxiii.
It is probable, that being so distracted as they were, and so continually in a
manner vexed with Wars, they had no time to execute that office in such sort,
as otherwise diverse of them no doubt would have done. But it cannot be denied,
that some of that rank were greatly puffed up with that Authority, and did
thereby much forget themselves, and the holy Duties appertaining to the
High Priesthood. Else would not Aristobulus have so unnaturally famished his
own Mother, nor have suffered the cruel Murder of his Innocent Brother
Antigonus; nor would Alexander, succeeding Aristobulus, have committed the like
Murder upon his younger Brother; nor would afterward, the two Sons of the said
Alexander (viz. Hircanus and Aristobulus) have grown through their ambitious
desires to such mortal hatred. For Aristobulus thrusting his eldest Brother
Hircanus from the High Priesthood, and he the said Hircanus continuing still
his claim, they never ceased their Hostility, till Pompey having subdued them
both, brought both them and the whole Country under the subjection of the
Romans. We omit what great sums of money they bestowed on either side, to
procure Pompey's favor; to whom they had committed the deciding of their
Causes; and also how Hircanus assisted Pompey in his attempt against
Jerusalem, Placet. lxxiv.
partly in hope thereby to get the High Priesthood, and partly in malice
against his Brother; who, as long as he could, defended that City; the Issue of
all which strife was this, Pompey subdued the City; slew twelve thousand Men;
Aristobulus is put from the High Priesthood; the civil Government is separated
again from the High Priesthood; the High Priesthood is bestowed upon Hircanus
for his Service, and the civil Government thenceforth translated to strangers;
the Temple was spoiled, and Jerusalem was made Tributary to the People of
Rome. Of all which Calamities falling in this sort upon the Jews, the
dissension betwixt Hircanus and Aristobulus, was held in those days to have
been the cause; to the great blemish of their credits, professing themselves to
be God's Highpriests. Besides, while Jason, Menelaus, Alcimus, and the
Maccabees were busied in their said Un-Priestly Contentions, and Greekish
profanations, diverse Sects of Religion arose, and increased among the Jews;
especially, that of the Pharisees, a crafty and an arrogant kind of Men,
seditiously bent against their Kings, and impugners without fear of their
Authority. Jos. ant. l. 17. c. 13.
In which course they were the rather animated, because they found through
their Hypocrisy, Placet. lxxv.
that Women were generally addicted to them, and that the People did so admire
them, as they believed in effect whatsoever they told them against any, Jos.
ant. l. 13. c. 23.
although it were never so false, or maliciously devised by them. And thus
Religion went in those days, when the Priests had gotten the Reins into their
own hands, although we doubt not but that there were some few, notwithstanding,
both of the Priests, and of the People, who disliking of all their said
hypocritical, ambitious, profane, and wicked Practices (covered sometimes with
a pretense of Zeal, and sometimes with the glorious name of the High
Priesthood) did truly from their hearts, both fear and serve the Lord.

CAN. XXXII.
IF any Man therefore (because in the Law of God there was great obedience to
the High Priest, prescribed and required; or, that it is said by the Prophet,
That the Priests Lips should preserve knowledge, and that the People should
seek the law of his mouth: whereas the meaning of the Holy Ghost in those and
such like places, only is, that the Highpriests were to be obeyed, when they
commanded that which was not repugnant to the law of God; and that the Lips of
the Priests ought to preserve knowledge) shall affirm, Placet. lxxxvi.
either that it was not wickedly done by their Priests, to thrust the People
into many imminent dangers, for the maintenance of their lewd quarrels and
factions: or, that they did not grievously offend God, when they forsook his
true worship, and brought heathenish and profane Sacrifices into his Temple:
or, that the People were bound to obey, when they required them to conform
themselves to the Idolatrous worship of the Heathen: or, that it was lawful for
any of the said Highpriests, by injury, bribery, or cruelty, to seek the High
Priesthood? or, that the Priests and People, that joined with them, did not
wickedly, who assisted Pompey to invade Jerusalem, and to bring their own
Country in Bondage to the Romans: or that any such Pharisaical Sects, (never
ordained by God) were lawfully then permitted, to seduce the simpler sort of
the People, leading them into Factions and Dislike of their Superiors; He does
greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXXIII. lxxvii.

THE Jews being subdued by the Romans, and brought under their subjection,
about sixty years before the coming of Christ, were used by them very kindly,
and with great respect. They had liberty granted them, to live according to
their own Laws; so as they paid their Tributes, and framed their Behavior to
Quietness and Obedience. Hircanus, the High Priest, Jos. de bell. Jud. lib. 6.
c. 11.
placed by Pompey, lived long after, in great Authority. But nothing would
satisfy them; till, in the end, it came to pass, that as the Ambition and
Strife, betwixt Hircanus and Aristobulus, brought Pompey upon them; so now
their own Wickedness, and rebellious Hearts, were the cause of their greater
Servitude, Afflictions and Miseries. The remnant of the Maccabees (Aristobulus
and his two Sons, Alexander and Antigonus) would never desist from their
rebellious Attempts, until they were all cut off. Antipater, the first
Governor, Jos. Ant. l. 14. c. 18, 19.
or Procurator, appointed by the Romans, was poisoned by one Maticus, hoping
thereby, that Hircanus, Placet. lxxviij.
the High Priest, might have got a more absolute Authority, and have been the
chief Governor. Alexander, Jos. ib. c. 10.
the Son of Aristobulus, had been before very troublsome, and carried many
after him to their destruction; but Antigonus, his Brother, did far exceed him;
who, by the help of the Parthians, rose up against Herod, the Successor of
Antipater, and taking that Government upon him, cut off Hircanus, his Uncle's
Ears, Jos. ib. c. 13.
that thereby he might be unable afterward to bear any more, to his prejudice,
the Office of the High Priest. But shortly after he was subdued, and put to
death; and his Father, before him, was poisoned by Pompey's Followers. Howbeit,
no sooner were these Maccabees thus suppressed, but diverse other rebellious
Persons, thrust forward the People into Arms, under pretense of their Love they
bare to their Country, and to the ancient Liberties thereof. In which their
wicked Fury, sometimes they were content to follow this Man, as their King, and
sometimes that Man; Jos. ib. l. 17. c. 12.
such as were, one Simon, one Athrogus, and Manahemus; Id. de bell. l. 2. c. 17.
all of them very lewd and base Companions: and at some other time every
Rebellious Rout or Company would needs have a King of their own; Placet. lxxix.
whereby, in every corner of that Commonwealth, there was a Petty King, Jos.
Ant. l. 15. c. 1, 2.
who still led the People, by heaps, to the slaughter, and perished themselves
with them. Also there were some amongst them, who finding no good success, by
having of such Kings, did run into a contrary course, affirming it to be
unlawful for the Jews to acknowledge any Man, but God himself, to be their
King; Id. de bell. l. 2. c. 7. and l. 6. c. 12.
and that they ought rather to suffer death, than to call any Man Lord. The sum
is, That, notwithstanding any great Distractions, Dissension, or bloody Combats
amongst themselves, (which were very many and strange) their Hearts were so
hardened in Rebellion against the Romans and their Governors, as they refused,
either to pay them any more Tribute, or to pray for them; but standing upon
their Walls, when they were besieged, Caesari, and Patri ejus maledicebant.
There was never (we think) so obstinate and desperate a People; for, in their
greatest extremities, and when they saw nothing but imminent Death, destruction
of the Temple, Placet. lxxx.
and the extirpation of their whole Nation, no reasonable Conditions or
Persuasions could move them. Titus himself made a notable Oration unto them,
and commanded Josephus to deliver his Mind at another time more amply, if it
had been possible to have reclaimed them: which Duty, so imposed upon him,
Josephus performed very eloquently. He told them, "that though the Romans had
dealt sometimes very hardly with them, yet their Rebellion was ever the cause
of it; that albeit Men might lawfully fight in defense of their Country, when
it was invaded by any; yet being subdued, and a new Government settled amongst
them, it was not lawful, by Rebellion, under pretense of Liberty, to cast off
that Yoke; that their Forefathers being in Bondage, under the Kings of Egypt
and Babylon, and diverse times in many other distresses, did never, of
themselves, by force of Arms, seek their Liberty, or Deliverance; but ever
expected the Lord's leisure, who always, in due time, had compassion upon them;
and that although they were then in the greatest distress, that ever People
were, and could expect nothing but utter Ruin and Desolation; yet if then they
would submit themselves, they might be received to Mercy. For (says he) the
Romans ask but their ordinary Tribute, Placet. lxxxi.
which your Forefathers paid unto their Predecessors: and if yet they may
obtain the same, they will neither destroy your City, nor touch your Sanctuary;
but grant unto you freely, your Families, your Possessions, and the Practice of
your Sacred Laws." But all these Offers they refused. Howbeit the compassion of
Titus toward them still continuing, he again (when they saw their Destruction
more apparently) required the said Josephus to deliver his Mind, to the same
effect, to their chief Captain, that he had done before to the People: which he
accomplished (but in the hearing again of the People) very thoroughly; and in
the end (finding them obstinate) I my self deserve blame, says he, qui^^ haec,
adversus fata, suadeo; Deique sententia condemnatos servare contendo.
Whereupon, shortly after, Titus (protesting how loath he was thereunto) assailed
them with all his Forces, which slew an infinite number of them, burnt the
Temple, and destroyed the City. Since which time, they that then escaped, and
the rest of all the Race of the Jews, have been dispersed far and near, and
lived like a cursed Generation, in all Slavery and Servitude. So that, although
we doubt not, but that this heavy Judgment of God fell upon them, principally
for the hardness of their hearts, in that they did not only refuse to hear the
Voice of our Savior Christ, Placet. lxxxii.
but likewise most maliciously, unjustly, and shamefully put him to death: yet
the immediate, and apparent cause of it, was their never-before-heard-of-like
obstinate Rebellion.

CAN. XXXIII.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that Aristobulus, the Father, or
either of his two Sons (Alexander or Antigonus) having all of them submitted
themselves to the Government of the Romans, did not sin, when afterward they
rebelled against them: or that Maticus did not very wickedly in poisoning of
Antipater, because he thought thereby the better to strengthen Hircanus in his
High Priesthood: or that the People ought not to detest all such seditious
Persons, as under pretense of Liberty and Religion, shall solicit them to
Rebellion: or, that the Jews were not bound, both to have paid their Tribute,
and to have prayed for Caesar without dissimulation, sincerely and truly,
notwithstanding any pretense of Tyranny, which they had wilfully drawn upon
their own heads, or of any cause whatsoever: or, that such as cursed Caesar
(their chief Governor) did not thereby deserve any corporal punishment, which
is due to be inflicted upon such Traitors: or, that the Rebellion against any
King, absolute Prince, or Civil Magistrate, Placet. lxxxiii.
for any cause whatsoever, is not a sin very detestable in the sight of God,
and therefore by all that fear the Lord to be eschewed, because it ever tends
to mischief, and sometimes to the overthrow of the Kingdom, Principality, and
Country, where it is raised; He does greatly Err.

Placet eis.
CAP. XXXIV.
WE have spoken in the former Chapter of the Rebellion of the Jews, against
their civil Governors, and the success thereof. We made no mention, either of
the Priests, or of any of those Sects of Religion, which then bare sway amongst
them. Indeed it is likely, that if they had done their Duties, the People upon
their Repentance, might have regained God's Favor, and prevented that utter
desolation: but it happened otherwise, Jos. ant. l. 17. c. 18.
two factious Persons (Judas and Matthias) the best learned Men of the Jews,
and the most skilful Interpreters of the Laws of their Country, growing into
great favor with the People, because of their said skill, and for that they
took great pains in teaching of their Children, professing that they would
refuse none that had any desire to be virtuously brought up; and did thereupon
draw unto them many Disciples; and the rather, for that they pretended
themselves to be propugnatores pietatis. The Issue of which godly pretense was,
Placet. lxxxiv.
that having thereby got a number to follow them, they stirred them up to
Sedition against the civil Magistrate, under color, that in contempt of their
Laws he had made some Innovation. But they were presently vanquished; Matthias
and diverse others were put to death; Jos. ib. l. 15. c. 13.
and the High Priest himself (as having his part in that sedition) was deprived
from that Dignity. When Herod upon occasion caused his Subjects to bind
themselves by an Oath, quod non decessuri essent a fide, and officio; the
Pharisees refused to take that Oath: whom he forbear at that time, because he
favored greatly one Pollio, a chief Man of that Sect. But about fifteen years
after, when it was again thought fit to have the like Oath ministered, and that
all the whole Nation of the Jews did accordingly take the same, and thereby
bound their Faith and Allegiance, both to Herod and unto Caesar, saving the
Pharisees (being then in number six thousand) who would not yet be induced to
take it; Jos. ib. l. 17. c. 13.
they were censured and fined for their offense; and diverse of them thereupon
entering into some traitorous Courses and Conspiracies, with sundry Courtiers,
against their Prince, they were (as they deserved) put in like manner to death.

Not long after another Sect sprung up, Placet. lxxxv.
whereof the chief heads were Judas Gaulonites, Sadoc a Pharisee, Judas
Galilaeus, Ibid. l. 18. c. 1, 2.
and one Simon of Galilee, who professed themselves to be propugnatores
libertatis publicae. Id. de bell.
These men were so far from moving the people to obedience, Jud. l. 2. c. 7.
as they stirred them up (as much as they could possibly) to Rebellion, Id.
antiq. Jud. l. 18. c. 1.
telling them, that to undergo any Impositions or Taxes, Id. de bell.
was manifest acknowledgment of their servitude; Jud. l 2. c. 7.
and that it was a shame for them to pay Tribute to the Romans, or Dominos post
Deum far mortales: by which means they perturbed the whole Nation, Id. antiq.
l. 12. c. 1.
and filled every place with their Robberies and Slaughters; Id de bell. l. 2.
c. 17.
under pretense indeed of defending their Countries, sed revera privatorum
lucrorum studio. Also it was Eleazarus, the Son of Ananias, the High Priest,
who would not suffer the inferior Priests to offer Sacrifices and Prayers, (as
formerly had been accustomed) for the long life and prosperity of the Emperor;
nor could be drawn by any persuasion from his obstinacy therein, but proceeded
from evil to worse; and so excited the people to Arms, as his rebellious course
therein was held to be the Seminary, and matter of those Roman Wars, Placet.
lxxxvi.
which overthrew that Nation. It is true, that the Highpriests were not
themselves so busy as the inferior Priests that lived under them. For the
Romans suspecting (of likelihood) that if the Priesthood should have been held
by Succession, and for term of Life, Id. antiq. l. 18. c. 3. and l. 20. c. 8.
by the chief Persons of Aaron's Posterity, the same might have grown dangerous
unto their Government; did thereupon take order, that the Princes and
Presidents which ruled in that Country, should have the appointing of such, as
should be High Priests, to be chosen by them out of Aaron's Kindred; and that
they should also have Authority to alter, and change them from time to time, as
they found occasion. Whereby the High Priesthood came to be but an annual
Dignity; and sometimes it was not held so long: which caused them for the most
part to keep themselves from entering into any actual Rebellion against their
Governors; though otherwise they were in effect as hollow-hearted unto them as
any other of the Priests. Joh. 19. 15, 12.
For albeit in their hatred and malice against Christ, Placet. lxxxvil.
they could say, We have no King but Caesar; and tell Pilate flatly, that if he
delivered Christ, he was not Caesar's Friend: Matthew. 22. 17.
yet what their private opinions were, does plainly appear, Mark 12. 14.
by their sending of the Pharisees unto Christ with their entangling Questions;
Luke 20. 22.
to know of him, Whether it were lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar or not:
supposing if he were not a Dissembler, (as they themselves were) that he would
deny it to be lawful, and so should incur the danger thereunto appertaining; or
if he answered that it was lawful, he might thereby bring upon him the hatred
of the People; whom they suffered (for ought that we find to the contrary) to
be brought up in the rebellious Doctrine of some of the Pharisees, and to hold
it unlawful to pay Tribute unto Caesar. Besides, what a false, ignorant, and
wicked Generation they were, is manifest by the whole course which they held
with our Savior Christ. It being agreeable to the just Judgment of God, that
the most impious Hypocrites, who then lived, should be the chief Actors in the
Crucifying of Christ; which was the most horrible fact that ever was committed.

CAN. XXXIV.
IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that because the civil Magistrate
had made some Innovation, Placet. lxxxvili.
which they liked not, or for any other respect, the said Judas and Matthias,
might lawfully move the People to Rebellion, though otherwise they taught Men's
Children never so diligently: or, that the Pharisees in refusing to bind their
Allegiance and Faith to Caesar, by an Oath, did not thereby show themselves to
be traitorously affected toward him: or, that it was not a seditious Doctrine
to be detested of all good Subjects, which Judas Gaulonites, and his Fellows,
delivered to the People, in teaching them to refuse all Taxations imposed by
the Romans, their lawful Magistrates; and rather to rebel than to pay any
tribute unto them: or, that they did not very grievously sin (both the
High-Priest's Son and the rest) who either refused to offer Sacrifice, or to
pray for Caesar: or, that the Highpriests then were not a wicked Brood,
degenerated far from their first Institution; or, that they did not greatly
offend God, in permitting the People to be infected by their inferior Priests,
and other religious Persons, with any of the said false positions, and
traitorous conceits: or, that they (the said Highpriests) did not most grossly
err in all those points, and particulars, wherein they opposed themselves
against the Person and Doctrine of our Savior Christ; He does greatly Err.
Placet.


Placet eis.
CAP. XXXV.
WE have followed thus far that mild and moderate lxxxix.
Form of civil Government, which God himself established, and preserved in the
Lines of Seth and Sem, until through the obstinate Rebellion, from time to
time, of the Jews, the Fame and the Authority thereof were first greatly
diminished, and afterward taken wholly away from them. But it is further to be
considered, that as, in the first Chapter, we have showed the Creation of all
the World, to be ascribed to the Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity:
so is the Government of it, in the same sense, attributed to him. Psalm. 24. 1.
The Earth is the Lord's, and all that therein is; Isaiah 3. 1.
the round World, and all that dwell therein. Ezra 1. 5.
Whereupon he was called ordinarily, Jerem. 31. 35.
in the Old Testament, Dominator, Dominus, the Lord of Hosts, the God and
Possessour of Heaven and Earth. So as he being the universal Lord, and Ruler
over all the World, the whole World was his Universal Kingdom: in the
Government whereof he ever used the Ministry of civil Magistrates, as well in
other Countries, Placet. xc.
as amongst his own peculiar People of Israel, without any desert of theirs,
but as in his Heavenly Providente he thought it most convenient. Jer. 27. 5.
I have made (says he) the Earth, the Man, and the Beasts that are upon the
ground, and have given it to whom it pleases me: Dan. 4. 14. 12. 17, 32.
and again, the Prophet Daniel tells us, that God changes the times and
seasons, that he has power, and bears rule over the Kingdoms of men; that he
takes away Kings, and sets up Kings: and that it was the God of Heaven,
Dan. 2. 37. 5. 8.
who gave unto Nebuchadnezzar so great a Kingdom, Power, Strength and Glory, as
then he had, to rule, with Majesty and Honor, a very great Empire. In respect
whereof, although Kings and Princes might have been satisfied with the Titles
of Lieutenants or Vicegerents in Earth, to the Son of God; yet he did
communicate and impart so much of his Power, Authority, and Dignity unto them,
as he was content to style them with his own Name: I have said, You are gods,
and the Children of the most High. Howbeit, for all their said Dignity and
Greatness, he did not leave them at liberty to do what they list, but held
himself the Helm of every Kingdom, Placet. xci.
and used their Services in such sort, as were they good or bad, and their
designments holy or wicked, he ever made them the Executioners of his own just
Judgments, Will and good Pleasure; according as he was minded, either to bless
or to punish any Kingdom, People or Country. In regard of which his Might,
Providence, and Wisdom, whereby he rules them after that sort, he is called
the Lord of lords, the King of Glory, and the God of gods; Psalm. 24. 10. 50. 1.
that is, of Kings, Princes, Judges and Rulers of the Earth. And it may not
here be omitted (which indeed arises of the Premises) that the Son of God, in
disposing of the Government, under him, of the Earth, did not appoint any one
man to be the sole Monarch of the world; as from whom all other Kingdoms,
Governments, Kings and Princes should receive their Directions, and unto whom
they should be subject. It is true, that Adam, whilst he lived, was the chief
Governor under the Son of God, Placet. xcij.
over all his own Offspring; and that Noah likewise, during his Life, had the
like Authority. But when, after the Flood, the Issue of Sem, Cham, and Japhet
grew to a great People, their Father, Noah, did not commit, to any one of them,
the Government of the rest, and of all of their Posterity; but divided the
whole World amongst them three: and from them, no one sole Monarch or Monarchy,
but many Kings. Principalities, Kingdoms and Governments, by God's Providence,
have descended. It is more than probable, that if the Son of God had been
pleased to have committed to any one Man, a Government of so large an extent,
he would have trusted his Servant, King David, with it, being a Man according
to his own Heart. But the Kingdom of Israel, wherein David reigned, was bounded
within the strait Limits assigned to the Twelve Tribes. And such other Kings,
as swerved, after that time, from David's mild and temperate Government, and
took upon them the Titles of Monarchies, having enlarged their Kingdoms by
Injury and Oppression of their Neighbors; where, in their Pride and
Greediness, but the Scourges and Rods of God's Indignation, Placet. xciij.
and had their fatal Ends accordingly. So as where the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 2.
37, 38.
speaking of the Kingdom of Nebuchadnezzar, calls him King of kings, and
says, that he was the Ruler over all places, wherein the Children of Men
dwelt; Ezra 1. 2.
and Cyrus, the King of Persia, affirms, that the Lord God of Heaven had
given him all the Kingdoms of the Earth: For as much as it is apparent, both by
the Scriptures, and other Histories, that neither of them both had the Tenth
part of the World under their Jurisdiction; and that there were very many
Kings, who had Absolute Government in their Kingdoms, and were no ways subject
unto them; the said places, of necessity, must receive this Exposition, That
either they are to be understood Hyperbolically, whereby, to express the
Greatness of a thing, it is said to be bigger than it was; or by a Synecdoche,
which uses the whole sometimes for a part; or according to the usual Phrase of
the Scriptures, where All are often taken for Many: or else both Daniel and
Cyrus spoke after the manner of the Chaldaeans and Persians, who, to extol the
Greatness of their Kings, and the better to please them, did, peradventure, so
enlarge and amplify the Style. Placet.


CAN. XXXV. xclv.

IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that the Son of God (according to
the Doctrine of the Old Testament) was not the Governor of all the World: or
that he did not appoint under him diverse Kings, Princes and civil Magistrates,
to Rule and Govern in the Kingdoms, and Places assigned unto them: or that
having so appointed them, he did not himself direct, uphold, and rule them by
his Omnipotence, according to his Divine Wisdom; and might not, in that
respect, be truly called The Lord of lords, and The God of gods: or that all
the World, and the particular Kingdoms, and civil kinds of Government in the
World were not in respect of the Son of God, as he is the Governor of the
World, and the Lord of lords, and God of gods, one Kingdom, Principality or
Government (thereby to impeach the mild and temperate Government, which he had
established amongst the Jews:) or that he ever committed the Government of all
the World, after Adam and Noah's times, to any One Man, to be the Sole and
Visible Monarch of it: or that the said Kingdom of Christ, as he was the Lord
of lords, and God of gods, and so governed the whole World, was otherwise
visible upon the Earth, than per parts, viz. by the particular Kingdoms, and
kinds of civil Government, or perhaps by some Representation; He does greatly
Err. Placet.


Placet eis.
CAP. XXXVI. xcv.

AS there has been from the beginning one Universal Kingdom throughout all the
World, whereof the Son of God was ever the sole (though invisible) Monarch, as
we have showed in the former Chapter: So it is generally agreed upon among all
Christians, That from the Creation of Mankind, during the times aforesaid,
there has always been One Universal or Catholic Church: which began in Adam,
and afterward (as his Posterity multiplied, both before and after the Flood)
was dispersed over the face of the whole Earth; and whereof the Son of God
likewise was always the head and sole (though invisible) Monarch. The
foundation of which Church was ever one and the same Rock, to wit Christ Jesus,
the promised Seed of the Woman, that should break the Serpents head: and as
many Persons, Families, Societies, and Companies, as truly believed in that
blessed Seed, without exception of any sort, or distinction of People, were the
true Members and parts of the Catholic Church. Placet. xcvi.
For the death of our Savior Christ, which long after did actually ensue; was
virtually, through Faith, as effectual to all Believers before his Passion, as
it has been since. In respect whereof the Holy Ghost did not only affirm, That
Jesus Christ was the same, (that is, the Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
and Redemption of those that believed in him) yesterday, (that is, before and
after the Law) as to day (that is, now in the time of the New Testament:) but
likewise, that he was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World: because
his Death and Passion, being ever as present in the view and sight of God the
Father (before whom a thousand years are but as one day;) the same was
typically represented by Sacrifices and effectual Sacraments; and the merits
thereof have from the beginning been communicated to all Believers. So that
although in imitation of the Scriptures, we have spoken hitherto but of one
particular Church, and of the Succession of it in the Lines of Seth and Sem:
yet there have been other particular Churches in all Ages, which were built
upon the said Rock and promised Seed. Cain offered his Sacrifice to God as well
as Abel; though it was not for his sins accepted: and it is not to be doubted,
but that every chief Family of his Posterity had their Priests and public
worship of God; Placet. xcvii.
albeit mingled with some such Superstition and Idolatry, as offended God, and
made them less acceptable in his sight. For as of the Posterity of Seth many
perished; so we are to judge on the other side, that many of Cain's Line died
in God's favor: except we should think, against the rules of Charity, that the
Curse which fell upon Cain, killing his Brother Abel, did cause his Offspring
to become as brute Beasts: whereas having Adam their Grandfather, it is more
than probable he did better instruct them, and prevailed at least with some of
them. Likewise after the Flood, all Noah's Offspring, being one Church under
him, and grounded upon Christ the true Foundation of it, although afterward,
when they were settled in their several Countries, allotted unto them, they
swerved greatly from that Purity in Religion which Noah had taught them; yet
they had still their Priests, their Sacrifices, and some outward worship of God
amongst them. Besides, hitherto all the World being as one People, Placet.
xcviij.
if there were then any visible Churches at all upon the Earth; it cannot be
truly said, that the calling of Abraham out of Chaldaea, and the Erecting of
the true worship of God in his Family, did make them to be in worse case than
they were before. If Churches before, they so continued after, though
Superstitious and Idolatrous Churches. Again, it is generally held, that God
did not therefore distinguish the Jews from other Nations and People, and
settle his public worship amongst them; as purposing thereby, that his
Catholic Church, in their times, should only consist of them and of their
Nations; and such other Proselytes as would be circumcised, and join themselves
unto them: but much more, because by that means the truth and certainty of all
the Promises and Prophecies concerning the coming of the Messiah, might be
faithfully and diligently observed, and kept in one Nation, and visible known
place and People. For it is plain in the Scriptures, that after the said
distinction, many of the Gentiles served God, Placet. xcix.
and believed in Christ, and were thereby made the true Members of the
Catholic Church; though they were not circumcised, nor had any meddling with,
or dependency upon the Jews. Some are particularly named; as Job, Jethro,
Rahab, the Ninevites, the Widow of Sarepta, Naaman, Cornelius, and some others:
by whom we are not only to judge of their Families and Governments, that they
were so many particular Churches: but likewise, that in every Country, and
People, many such godly Men from time to time might have been found; who with
their Families, and peradventure Subjects, were so to be held and esteemed of.
We will not enter into the discussing of these places, how far they may be
extended. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11. 6.
For he that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seek him. John 1. 4.
In the word was life, and the life was the light of men. Romans 3. 29, 30.
Is God, the God only of the Jews, John 10. 16.
and not of the Gentiles also? Yes, of the Gentiles also: for it is one God,
who does justify Circumcision by Faith, and the uncircumcised through Faith. I
have other sheep, Placet. c.
which are not of this fold. Only we do further observe, that it was lawful for
any of the Gentiles to come into the outward Court of the Temple, to bring
their Sacrifices unto the Lord, and there to offer up their Prayers likewise
unto him: that accordingly they did often resort to the Temple for Devotion
sake, there to worship God: as by the Examples of the Eunuch of Ethiopia, Acts
8. 27.
and of certain Grecians, that are mentioned in the Scriptures: John 12. 20.
and that many of them were so addicted to the true service of God, as the
Prophet Haggai calls our Savior Christ, Desiderium Gentium. So that the
Catholic Church, consisting from the beginning till Abraham's time, of such
only as were afterward for distinction sake called Gentiles; although God was
then pleased to bestow his Mercies more plentifully upon that one particular
Church of the Jews, deduced from Abraham, Placet.
than upon any other, or indeed upon all the rest, ci.
for the principal Causes before-specified; yet they were not utterly so
rejected, or cast out of God's favor, but that many of them did continue as
dutiful Children in the Lap and Bosom of the said Catholic Church. Of which
Catholic Church, it is true, that Adam and Noah, for their times, were (under
Christ) the chief Governors. Howbeit afterward the Posterity of Noah being
mightily increased, when thereupon he distributed the whole World among his
three Sons, and their Issue; he did not appoint any one of them to be the Ruler
of the said Catholic Church; but left the Government of every particular
Family or Church unto their chief Heads, Princes and Priests; and of the whole
to the Son of God, and sole Monarch of it; who only was able to undertake such
a charge Neither do we read, that Aaron, or any of the Highpriests, took upon
them at any time to extend their Jurisdiction beyond the bounds and limits of
the twelve Tribes; or so much as once dreamed, that the whole World was their
Diocese: that which they had being indeed more than they well ordered. Placet.


CAN. XXXVI. cii.

IF any Man therefore shall affirm, either that during the continuance of the
Old Testament, the Merits of Christ's Death actually to come, were not
sufficient to save all true Believers: or, that there was then no Catholic
Church: or, that at any time there was any other Rock but Jesus Christ, the
blessed Seed upon whom the Catholic Church was then built: or, that many of
the Gentiles were not always (for ought that is known to the contrary) true
Members of the Catholic Church: or that Christ himself was not the sole Head
or Monarch all that while of the whole Catholic Church: or, that the said
Catholic Church, after the Members of it were dispersed into all the places of
the World, was otherwise visible than per parts: or, that Noah did appoint any
Man to be the visible Head of the said Catholic Church: or, that the
High Priest among the Jews, had any more Authority over the Catholic Church of
God, than King David had over the Universal Kingdom of God: or, that the said
High Priest had not greatly sinned, if he had taken upon him, or usurped any
such infinite Authority; He does greatly Err.

Placet eis.

The said XXXVI. Chapters, with the Constitutions made upon them, have passed
with one Consent, both the Convocation-Houses, and so are approved.

Sc. Dr. Richard Bancroft Archbishop of Canterbury.
R. Cant.

The said XXXVI. Chapters, with the Constitutions made upon them, have been
diligently read, and deliberately examined; and thereupon have likewise passed,
with one Consent, in the Convocation-House of the Province of York.

Sc. Dr. Thornborough Bishop of Bristol, and Dean of York; which Archbishopric
was then Vacant. He was afterward, Bishop of Worcester.
Jo. Bristol praeses Convocat. Eborac.

LIB. II.
CAP. I.
IN pursuing our intended course, through the Old Testament, and until the
Destruction of Jerusalem, we over-slipped and passed by the fullness of that
time, wherein the Son of God, (the Maker and Governor of all the World) our
Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of
the Virgin Mary. So as now we are to return back, and prosecute our said
course, as we find the true Grounds thereof are laid down, confirmed and
practiced in the New Testament. At our entrance into which course, we confess
our selves to be indeed greatly astonished, considering the strange
Impediments, and mighty Stumbling Blocks, which, through long Practice, and
incredible Ambition, are cast in our way [in that we find the Estate of that
Church (which would rule over all) to be degenerated, in our days, as far, in
effect, from her primary and Apostolical Institution and Rules; as we have
showed before, the Estate of the Jewish Church to have swerved, through the
like Pride and Ambition, from that excellent Condition, wherein she was first
established, and afterward preserved and beautified by Moses, and King David,
with the rest of his most worthy and godly Successors.] Aug. de Haeres. cap.
46.
For except we should condemn the Old Testament (as many ancient Heretics have
done) and thereupon overthrow all, which hitherto we have built; and not that
only, but should furthermore, either approve of their gross Impiety, who read
the Scriptures of the New Testament, as if they were falsified and corrupted,
and by receiving and rejecting as much of them as they list, do prefer before
them (as not containing in them all necessary Truth for Man's Salvation)
certain obscure, and Apocryphal Writings; Or, should our selves impiously
imagine, that the New Testament (as now we have it) was but a rough Draught,
and a fit Project compiled, for the time, by the Apostles, to be afterward
better ordered, polished, and supplied with certain humane Traditions and
Doctrines, by some of their Successors: We can see no Authentical Ground, nor
sufficient Warrant, in those Writings, which ought to be the true Rule of every
Christian Man's Conscience (as not being there to be found) for any Apostolical
Priest or Bishop either to pretend, that all the particular Churches, in the
World, are under his Government; or to tell the Subjects of any Christian King,
opposite in some points, unto him, That they are no longer bound to obey him
their said King, but until they shall be able, by force of Arms, or by some
secret Practice, to subdue him; or to challenge to himself an Absolute and
Universal Authority and Power over all Kings and Kingdoms in the World, to
bestow them, in some cases, (under pretense of Religion) when he shall think
the same to be most available, for the strengthening and upholding of such his
pretended Universal Power and Dominion. To the Proof whereof, before we address
our selves; because the same does much depend upon the admirable Humiliation of
the Son of God, in taking our Nature upon him, and performing the Work of our
Salvation, in such a manner, as he did: We have thought it our Duties (lest
otherwise we might be mistaken, either through Weakness, Simplicity or Malice)
first, briefly to observe (notwithstanding our Savior's said Humiliation) the
most wonderful Dignity, Preheminency and Royalty of his Person.

It is many ways apparent, that the mean Estate and Condition of our Savior
Christ, here upon Earth, was one especial Motive, both to the Jews and
Gentiles, why, in their carnal Judgments, he was, to the one sort a Scandal,
and to the other a Scorn; as if he had been a Man out of his Wits, and preached
he knew not what. In which respect, partly not only the People of the Jews, the
Priests of all sorts, the Scribes and Pharisees, with the rest of their
Hypocritical Orders; but likewise the civil Governors, as well Romans as Jews,
did utterly despise him, hate him, deride him, beat him, and put him to death.
Since which time sundry sorts of Heretics have stumbled at the same stone,
laboring, by all the means they could, to impeach and dishonor the Person of
Christ, in regard of the mean show of his humane Nature, notwithstanding the
many Arguments which they might have found in the Scriptures, (had not their
Hearts been hardened) of his Divinity. On the other side, we are not ignorant,
how the Bishop of Rome, and his Adherents, supposing it would too much impeach
their Credits, and worldly Reputations; if they should be too much pressed to
deduce the principal strength of their Estates and Callings, from the said mean
Condition of our Savior Christ, whilst he lived in this World; do thereupon
attribute sundry Virtues, Powers, and Branches of Authority unto his humane
Nature, which do not, in Truth, belong properly unto it, but are rather
appertaining to his Person, being both God and Man; as hoping thereby to get
some fair Pretenses and Colors for the upholding of their usurped Greatness,
and pretended uncontrollable Sovereignty. For the avoiding therefore of these
Extremities, and because such as deny the Pope's Supremacy, are most falsely
charged, by sundry passionate, and inconsiderate Persons, to be Men, that
believe no one Article of the Christian Faith: We have thought it meet, to make
it known, to all the Christian World, how detestable, to the Church of England,
all such false Doctrine is, as does any way, not only impeach the Sacred Person
of our Savior Christ, but likewise the other two Persons of the Blessed
Trinity, God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost; in that the dishonouring of
One of them, is the dishonouring of them all Three.

We do therefore, for our selves, and in the Name of all the rest of the Church
of England, acknowledge and profess, from the bottom of our hearts, the Truth
of all that is written in the Sacred Scriptures; and consequently, and in more
particular manner, whatsoever is written in the same, that does appertain to
the most Holy and Blessed Trinity. Out of the Doctrine of which Sacred
Writings, because the Apostles and Churches of God, (moved thereunto, by sundry
sorts of Heretics) have, long since, most faithfully and learnedly deduced,
into certain Summaries, rightly termed Creeds, all those Points of true
Doctrine, which do concern God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
and are necessarily to be believed, under pain of condemnation: We do
resolutely embrace, and steadfastly believe, all and every one the Articles of
the Apostles Creed; and all and every one the Articles of the other Creeds,
made, by sundry Councils, for the further Declaration of the Christian Faith,
and Apostolic Creed, as of the Nicene Creed, made, by the Council of Nice,
against Arius, who denied the Divinity of the Son of God; and of the next
Creed, made in the first Council of Constantinople, ratifying, and further
declaring the Nicene Creed against Eudoxius the Arian, and Macedonius, who
denied the Holy Ghost to be God; and of the Creed, made in the first Council of
Ephesus, against Nestorius, who taught that the two Natures in Christ, were not
united together personally, but that the Word, which did take our Nature upon
him, for our Redemption, did only assist Christ, our Savior, as one Friend may
assist another; and of the Creed made in the Council of Chalcedon against
Eutyches, who did confound the two Natures of Christ. Against any of which
Articles whosoever does oppose himself, and does wilfully continue in such his
Opposition; we hold and judge them to be worthily subject to all those
Censures, and Anathematisms, which the several Constitutions and Canons of the
said Councils have justly laid upon them.

Also with the same Resolution and Faith beforementioned, we receive and
believe all and every one the several Points and Articles of the Athanasian
Creed, made a little after the Council of Nice, against such blasphemous
Opinions, as in those times were either directly or indirectly, published in
Corners, and spread here and there to the seducing of many. According to some
Articles of the which Creed, that do more nearly concern our Course; We
steadfastly believe and confess, "That our Lord, Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
is both God and Man: God of the substance of the Father, begotten before all
Worlds; and Man, of the substance of his Mother, born in the World: perfect
God, and perfect Man, of a reasonable Soul, and humane flesh subsisting: Equal
to the Father, as touching his Godhead; and inferior to the Father, as
touching his Manhood: who although he be both God and Man; yet he is not two,
but One Christ: One, not by Conversion of the Godhead into Flesh; but by taking
of the Manhood into God: One altogether, not by Confusion of substance, but by
Unity of Person." In respect of which Personal Union of the two Natures of our
Savior Christ, without confusion or mixture of either of them, thus described
in the said Creed; whatsoever is affirmed in the Scriptures, as well of the one
Nature as of the other, the same is also truly to be affirmed de toto
Composito, that is, of his most sacred Person being both God and Man; the
Essential Properties of them both remaining notwithstanding distinguished.

For as the said personal or hypostatical Union of the said two Natures, does
not make the one Nature to be the other; the divine Nature to be the humane
Nature, or the humane Nature to be the Divine Nature: so does it not make the
Essential Proprieties of the one Nature to be the Essential Proprieties of the
other Nature; but as well the Proprieties and actions as the Natures themselves
do remain distinguished, though united in one Person; both of them concurring
together, the Deity in working that which appertains to the Deity, and the
Humanity executing those Essential Proprieties and actions which do belong unto
the Humanity. For Example, the Divine Nature appeared in Christ by Miracles,
when his humane Nature was subject to many opprobries and injuries. In that our
Savior Christ did satisfy 5000. Persons with 5. loaves, did give Water of
Life to the Woman of Samaria, did walk upon the Sea dry-foot, did by his
Commandment calm the Winds; he showed thereby some effects and works of his
Divine Nature: because they were (as one well says) verbi propria, non carnis,
the Proprieties of the Word, and not of the Flesh. Again, in that Christ brake
Bread, this was an Office of his humane Nature, but in that he multiplied it,
the same did appertain to his Divine Nature. In that he cried out, Lazarus come
forth, that was the office of his humane Nature; but in that he quickened him,
and raised him from Death, that did belong unto his Divine Nature. In that he
said, Thy sins are forgiven thee, that was an office of his humane Nature; but
in that such sins were indeed remitted, the same did appertain to his Divine
Nature. In that our Savior Christ died, the same did proceed from the Flesh;
but in that by his Death he did expiate our Sins, that did proceed from the
Spirit. In that he was Buried, did proceed from the Flesh; but in that he did
raise himself from the dead, that was he Office of his Divinity. In that he
gave Bread to his Apostles in his last Supper, he did it as Man; but in that he
made them partakers of his blessed Body, he did the same as he was God. In that
now being in Heaven, he does possess that Kingdom in the name and behalf of his
Elect, that does appertain to his humane Nature; but that he does now remain
with us, and dwell in our hearts, that is an Office of his Divine Nature. In
that he makes Intercession for us, that does belong to his humane Nature; but
in that he does justify us, regenerate us, work in us both to will and to
perform, in that he rules us and leads us in the way of his Commandments;
all these Offices do appertain unto his Divinity. Lastly, In that he shall come
in the Clouds, and say unto one sort of Persons, Come ye blessed, and unto the
other sort, Depart ye Cursed; he shall do the same according to his humane
Nature: but in that he shall judge every Man according to his knowledge of all
Men's hearts, their cogitations, desires and works, that he shall do as God.

Nevertheless any thing by us thus affirmed notwithstanding, Christ himself is
not divided, though the Proprieties and actions of his two Natures, are in this
sort to be distinguished: as God himself is not divided, although the three
Persons in Trinity are rightly held to be indeed distinguished: and yet all the
said actions and proprieties of the two Natures of Christ, distinguished, as we
have expressed they are, are notwithstanding very truly to be affirmed of his
sacred Person. The reason whereof, has been before touched, and it is this;
because seeing that both the Natures are joined together in the Person of the
Son, by an Hypostatical, and consequently a true and essential Union; so as
Christ is thereby both true God, in regard of his Divine Nature, and true Man,
in respect of his humane Nature: Whatsoever is the Propriety of the Divine
Nature, and of the humane Nature, the same is wholly, and altogether in Christ,
and is necessarily therefore to be affirmed of him, both essentially and
properly. In respect whereof, we say, that Christ was dead, and that he could
not die; that he is both finite and infinite; eternal and temporal; in every
place, and yet circumscribed in one place. For, of necessity, whatsoever are
the Properties of the humane Nature, the same are truly and properly to be
affirmed de vero homine: and whatsoever are the Proprieties of the Divine
Nature, the same are likewise to be affirmed de vero Deo; Christ being (out of
all Controversy amongst the Children of God) and verus homo, and verus Deus.
And thus we have, after a sort, both briefly and truly set down the Force and
Efficacy of the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures of Christ, being
distinguished, but no ways confounded; as the same, together with the true
Doctrine of all other necessary Articles, concerning the Blessed Trinity, does,
by the Scriptures, most truly expounded in the Creeds abovementioned, many ways
very notably appear.

To this purpose much more might have here been added by us; if (our Course
considered) we had thought it necessary. Only we have thought it fit,
furthermore to profess, and make it thereby known to all Men; that there are
some other Creeds, made by other Councils and particular Bishops, like to
Athanasius, and other worthy Persons: as Irenaeus's Creed, Tertullian's Creed
(as we may so term it) Damasus's Creed, the Creed ascribed to St. Ambrose, and
to St. Augustine, Te Deum laudamus, etc. the Creed of the first Council of
Toledo, St. Jerome's Creed, the Creed ascribed to Leo, which was approved by
the Council of Chalcedon, and the Creed of the sixth Council of Constantinople,
against the Monothelites, holding that in Christ, both God and Man, there was
but One Will: all of them tending to the setting forth the Orthodoxal and true
Doctrine of One God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, not confounding the
Persons, nor dividing the Substance; and of One Christ, true God and true Man,
not confounding his Natures, nor dividing his Person. Which Creeds we do
receive, embrace, and reverence in such sorts, as they have been received,
embraced and reverenced hitherto, by all the particular Churches of the
Christian World; in as much, as they agree both with the Scriptures, with the
Apostles Creed, with the four Creeds mentioned of the four first general
Councils, and with the Athanasian Creed; which contain in them that Faith,
which was then, and so still ought to be accounted the true, Catholic Faith:
nothing, in effect, being contained in all the Creeds before, by us specified,
which may not be deduced, by necessary consequence, out of the said Athanasian
Creed; and the Conclusion of which Creed is, in these words, expressed; This is
the Catholic Faith, which except a Man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved.
To which Conclusion, that, in sense, is very consonant, wherewith Damasus does
end his Creed, in these words; Read these things, believe them, retain them: to
this Faith submit thy Soul, and thou shall obtain Life and Reward from Christ.

In which Creeds, containing the Catholic Faith, in those days, or in any of
the rest, we have thought it good, here to remember, that there is not any one
Article, to warrant or prove those new Articles, which were coined long after
the making of any of the said Creeds, by the Bishops of Rome, and are added to
the Nicene Creed, by Pius IV. in the professing of the Roman Faith: especially
that New Article of the Pope's Supremacy, which is still so stiffly maintained
and urged upon many, under pain of the loss of their Souls, viz. that it is
altogether necessary for them, if they will be saved, to be obedient to the
Bishop of Rome. Which New Article, being but an extravagant Conclusion; made by
a very strange Man, and built upon as strange Collections out of the
Scriptures; We leave it for a novelty unto all the Articles of the ancient
Catholic Faith: and will now address our selves to prosecute the same course
and points in the New Testament, which we held in the Old.

CAP. II.
IT is a certain rule in Divinity, that Grace does not destroy Nature. The
Doctrine of the Seed of the Woman, that was foretold should break the Serpents
head, did not abolish the Moral Law. The Ceremonies in the Old Testament, which
shadowed and signified the mercies of God in Christ, had no power to extinguish
the Laws, first imprinted in men's hearts; and afterward engraven in Tables of
stone by the Finger of God. The Prophets foretelling the coming of Christ, and
the merits of his Passion, did likewise reprove all sins and offenses committed
against the Ten Commandments. Christ testifies of himself, that he came not to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 5. 17.
but to fulfill them. By his Death he has delivered us from the Curse of the
Law; but not from the obedience of it. And St. Paul says, Romans 3. 13.
that the Apostles did not make the Law of none effect through Faith; but they
did thereby establish the Law. For that Faith does only apprehend Christ truly
to Salvation, which works by Charity; that is, which purges the Conscience
from dead works, to serve the living God; and brings forth by the Spirit,
Obedience to the Precepts and Laws of God.

It has been showed by us at large in the former Book, that although the Son
of God having made the World, did by his mighty Power and divine Providence,
retain, as it were, in his own hands, the general Rule and Government of it:
yet for a more visible benefit and comfort to Mankind, he did divide and
distribute the same into diverse Countries, Principalities, and Kingdoms: and
ordaining civil Magistracy, did not only appoint Sovereign Princes and Kings as
his Deputies and Lieutenants upon Earth, to rule and govern under him, such
Countries and Kingdoms as he had allotted unto them; but did likewise tie
Mankind by one of the Moral Laws engraven in their hearts, that they should
honor them, serve them, and be obedient unto them. Which particular
Commandment was no more abolished by the Incarnation of our Savior Christ,
than were all the rest. Nay it was in truth of such force and public note, as
that our Savior having most willingly subjected himself to the obedience of
the whole Law, did very carefully, upon every occasion, show himself most
observant of this one Law amongst the rest. For in the whole course of his Life
here upon Earth, we find not any alteration that he made in the Civil State
where he was conversant: which he must of necessity have done, if his coming
into the World had any way impeached the Authority of the civil Magistrates. It
is expressly recorded of him, Luc. 2. 51.
that he lived in subjection to his Parents; herein fullfilling the said Fifth
Commandment, which contains as well the subjection due to Authority Civil as
Paternal. Romans 1. 3.
He was made of the Seed of David according to the flesh, as the Apostle
speaks; and so had (no doubt) according to his Manhood, great natural
compassion of those Miseries and Afflictions, which the Jews at that very time
endured under the Romans. Howbeit as knowing the duties of their Allegiance, he
neither moved, nor any way encouraged them to take Arms against the Emperor;
nor filled their heads with shifts and distinctions, how Subjects in this Case
and that Case, were superior to their Sovereigns; nor did any way approve of
those rebellious courses in them, whereunto they were of their own dispositions
very greatly addicted. He was so far from these exorbitant and bad Humors; as
still he showed, when there was cause, his great detestation of them. He did
himself very willingly pay Tribute when it was demanded; and upon fit Occasion,
gave all the Jews this following Rule, that they, living under Caesar, were
bound to pay unto him those things that were his; meaning such Obedience,
Custom, Tributes, Tolls, Taxation and Payments, as, by the Laws, both Divine
and Imperial, were due unto Caesar. And certainly if ever it had, and might
have been lawful for private Men, in respect of their own Zeal, to have used
Force against Authority; it seems to us, that it might have been born with in
the Apostles, upon some such Accidents, as then fell out. Judas had betrayed
their Master, and thereupon a Multitude was sent, with a public Officer, to
apprehend him. Which the Apostles perceiving, conferred together, as it
seems, how to make Resistance, Luc. 22. 49.
and said, in their Zeal, Master, shall we smite them with the sword? But Peter
seeing (of likelihood) the Haste, Violence, and Fury that was used, by the said
Multitude, did, upon the sudden, pluck out his Sword, and without any
expectation, what Christ would answer to the said Question, smiting one of the
Company, did cut off his Ear. Now if we shall consult, with Flesh and Blood,
who would not approve this Fact of St. Peter? But our Savior Christ, being
void of any Heat or Passion, and only respecting the Will of God, and the due
Observation of the said particular Law; did utterly condemn, in St. Peter, that
violent and unlawful Attempt: because he, being but a private Man, had nothing
to do with the Temporal Sword, which belonged to the Civil Magistrate; and much
less should have used it against Authority. And therefore, as well to let St.
Peter see his Offense, as also to leave a Caution, for the bridling, from
thence forwards, of all future rash Zeal, in such a Case, he justified the Law
of God, and did leave the same, for a Rule, to all Posterity, saying, All that
take the sword, shall perish with the Sword: meaning all private Persons, that
shall, at any time, abuse, after that sort, the civil Sword, which does in no
wise appertain unto them.

Besides, it is manifest, that our Savior Christ, if, as he was God, he had
been disposed, was able to have defended himself against all the World. Nay, as
he was Man, he might, by Prayer to his Father, have procured sufficient
Assistance against the Force of all his Enemies; had he not well known that
Course to have been repugnant to the Obedience, which he had undertaken, of the
said Commandment, and no way agreeable to the Vocation and Work which he had in
hand: and therefore persisting in his Reproof of St. Peter, Think thou
(says he unto him) that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he will give me
more than Twelve Legions of Angels? but it is ever apparent, in all the
Proceedings of our Savior Christ, whilst he lived in this World, that he never
liked, in any, the Resistance of Civil Authority by Force; or approved of any
inconsiderate and rash Zeal, bent against Magistrates, or any other Persons;
but was always ready to blame and check the same, as he did, when he found it
in two other of his Apostles, who, to revenge an Injury offered to their
Master, sought to have had it punished from Heaven. For when the Samaritans
refused (upon conference and direction, we doubt not, of those that were in
Authority over them) to give Christ entertainment, Luc. 9. 54, 55.
and lodging in one of their Cities; James and John were so moved therewith, as
they would needs have license of him, to command that Fire should come down
from Heaven, as Elias did; showing thereby, that in their Heat (if they had
been able) they would have had them all destroyed. But our Savior Christ,
disliking such fiery and rash Zeal, rebuked them, and said, You know not of
what spirit you are: that is, in effect, as if he should have said, You may
pretend Elias's Fact, but you are far from Elias's Spirit. He only executed the
Judgment of God, as, by the Spirit, he was extraordinarily directed; whereas Ye
have received no such direction, but are only in your Passion and Heat stirred
up to Revenge.

The Conclusion hereof is, That Christ, our Lord, all the time he remained here
upon Earth, did not only, in his own Person, show himself obedient to civil
Authority, according to the said fifth Commandment; but did likewise utterly
condemn, in others, (upon every occasion offered to him, throughout the Four
Evangelists) all inconsiderate Zeal, and Opposition, against Temporal
Magistracy. Insomuch as concerning his own said Obedience, when he was
apprehended (notwithstanding Peter's Sword) he submitted himself to the public
Officer, that was then sent for him: and likewise being afterward carried to
Pilate, (the Civil Magistrate, at that time, under the Emperor) and before him
falsely charged, by his malicious Adversaries, with Treason; he behaved himself
in such dutiful manner, as was fit and convenient for him, that truly had
professed subjection, and did in no sort seek to decline his Power and
Authority; either by alleging that he was not the Emperor's Subject, or that
Pilate was not his competent Judge, or by using any other Tergiversation or
Evasion: but acknowledged, very freely, his said Authority to be lawful, and
yielding himself thereunto, did confess that it was given him from above. John
19. 11.


CAN. I.
AND therefore if any Man shall affirm, under color of any thing that is in
the Scriptures, either that the Doctrine of Grace in the New Testament does
more abolish the rules of Nature, or Moral Law of God, than it did in the Old;
or that through Faith the said Law was not rather established than in any sort
impeached; or, that because as many as believe are redeemed, and made free from
the Curse of the Law, they are therefore exempted, and free from the obedience
of the Law; or, that by the Incarnation of our Savior Christ, obedience to the
Fifth Commandment, touching honor due to Parents and Princes, was in any sort
impeached, the rest of the Law being established; or, that our Savior Christ
having undertaken the fullfilling of the whole Law (as far forth, at the least,
as ever Mankind was bound to have fullfilled it) came short in this one Law, by
exempting himself from any obedience due to the civil Magistrate; or, that he,
having tied himself according to the said Commandment, as well to the obedience
of the civil Magistrate, as the obedience which was due to his Parents, did
not, whilst he lived in the World, fulfill the Law wholly concerning them both;
or, that he did any way, or at any time encourage the Jews, or any other,
directly or indirectly, to Rebel, for any cause whatsoever, against the Roman
Emperor, or any of his subordinate Magistrates; or, that he did not very
willingly, both himself pay Tribute to Caesar, and also advise the Jews so to
do; or, that when he willed the Jews to pay Tribute to Caesar, including
therein their duty of obedience unto him, he did not therein deal plainly and
sincerely, but meant secretly that they should be bound no longer to be
obedient unto him, but until by force they should be able to resist him; or,
that he did not utterly and truly condemn all devices, Conferences and
resolutions whatsoever, either in his own Apostles, or in any other Persons,
for the using of force against civil Authority; or, that it is, or can be more
lawful for any private Persons, either of St. Peter's calling, or of any other
Profession, to draw their Swords against Authority, though in their rash Zeal
they should hold it lawful so to do, for the preservation of Religion, than it
was for St. Peter for the preservation of his Masters Life; or, that by
Christs's words abovementioned, all Subjects of what sort soever, without
exception, ought not by the Law of God, to perish with the Sword, that take,
and use the Sword for any cause against Kings and Sovereign Princes, under whom
they were born, or under whose Jurisdiction they do inhabit; or, that seeing
our Savior Christ would not have the Samaritans to be destroyed with Fire from
Heaven, although they were at that time divided in Religion from the Jews, and
refused to receive him in Person, it is not to be ascribed to the Spirit of
Satan for any private Men to attempt by Gunpowder, and Fire from Hell, to blow
up and destroy their Sovereigns, and the whole State of the Country where they
were born and bred, because in their conceits they refused some part of
Christ's Doctrine and Government; or, that Christ did not well, and as the said
Fifth Commandment did require, in submitting himself as he did to Authority,
Matt. 26. 55.
although he was first sent for with Swords and Staves, as if he had been a
Thief, and then afterward carried to Pilate, and by him (albeit he found no
evil in him) condemned to Death; or, that by any Doctrine or Example, which
Christ ever taught, or has left upon good Record, it can be proved lawful to
any Subjects, for any cause of what nature soever, to decline either the
Authority and Jurisdiction of their Sovereign Princes, or of any their lawful
Deputies and inferior Magistrates ruling under them; He does greatly Err.

CAP. III.
IT IS many ways very plain and evident, that the Jews did expound all those
places of the Prophets, which do notably set forth the spiritual Kingdom of our
Savior Christ, to be meant of a temporal Kingdom, which he should erect upon
the Earth. And upon that false ground they did imagine, that when their
expected Messiah should come into the World, he was to advance them unto a
glorious Estate here upon Earth, and to reign in the midst of them as a most
mighty and temporal Monarch. Which erroneous conceit, when Herod heard of the
Birth of Christ, made him to fear lest the newborn Babe should deprive him, of
his Kingdom, and induced him thereupon to seek his destruction. Thence also did
proceed, that when the People were so much moved with admiration of one of
Christ's Miracles, as that they used these words, This is of a truth the Prophet
which should come into the World; John 6. 14, 15.
they presently devised how they should make him their King. But Christ
perceiving their drift, prevented their purpose by departing from them; as well
observing and knowing, that their erroneous imagination of him. Nay the better
sort of those that followed Christ, were not free from this erroneous
cogitation; as it appears by the Petition, Matthew. 20. 21.
that the Mother of Zebedee's Children, Mar. 10. 35, 41.
made unto Christ, saying, Grant that these my two Sons may sit, the one at thy
right hand, and the other at thy left hand, in thy Kingdom. It seems, by St.
Mark, that her said two Sons, James and John, did join with their Mother, and
made likewise the same Petition themselves, unto Christ, in their own Names.
And it is plain, that the rest of the Apostles, having aspiring Minds to have
been great Men in the World, (as dreaming of a Temporal Kingdom, that Christ
was in time, to establish amongst them) when they heard this Suit, did begin,
as the Evangelists testify, to disdain at James and John, for seeking, in that
sort, to prefer themselves before them; some of them perhaps thinking
themselves more worthy of those two great Dignities, than either of them were.
But our Savior Christ, finding these carnal Imaginations amongst them, did
thoroughly reprove them, for those their vain conceits; and did make it well
known unto them, how far they over-shot themselves, when they supposed that he
should become a Temporal King; or that they themselves should be honored by
him with Temporal Principalities. Which Course also our Savior Christ held,
Luc. 22. 24.
when (as St. Luke says) There arose a strife amongst the Apostles, which of
them should be the greatest. For then, they persisting in their former Error,
he did again renew his Reproof (if this were a several contention from the
former) saying unto them, The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they
that bear rule over them, are called Benefactors, (as using to reward their
Servants with great and extraordinary worldly Preferments;) Mat. 20. 25, 26.
or as St. Matthew records Christ's Words, (whether upon this, or the former
Occasion mentioned, it is not greatly material, because they are all one in
sense) Ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles have Dominion over them, and they
that are great, exercise authority over them: but (says Christ) it shall not
be so among you. But whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
servant; even as the Son of Man came not to be served, but to serve: or as St.
Luke has Christ's words, Ye shall not be so: that is, Ye shall not live as
Kings upon the Earth, nor have such worldly Estates, as that thereby ye might
have occasion to vaunt in the World, what great Benefactors you have been, in
advancing your Followers, to this or that Dukedom, according as great Kings and
Monarchs are accustomed to deal with their Servants, and principal Subjects*
but let the greatest amongst you be as the least, and the chiefest as he that
serves. For who is greater? he that sits at the table, or he that serves?
Is not he that sits at the table? and I am among you as he that serves. By
which words of our Savior, it is very manifest, how far he was from
challenging to himself any worldly Kingdom; and how much his Apostles were
deceived, in apprehending what great Men they should become, by being his
Followers and Disciples.

To this purpose much more might be here alleged by us: as also, it would not
be forgotten, what we have before observed in the former Chapter, tending to
the same effect; in as much as Christ having made himself subject to the
Obedience of the Fifth Commandment, which tied him as well to be a Subject unto
the Emperor, under whom he was born, as to the obedience of his Parents; did
thereby show himself to be no temporal Monarch. Howbeit, all this
notwithstanding, there are some so much addicted in these days unto the said
erroneous opinion of the Jews; as for the advancement of the glory of the
Bishop of Rome, they will needs have Christ to have been here upon the Earth a
Temporal King; Affirming, "that upon his Nativity all the Kings in the World
lost their Regal Power and Authority, all their Kingdoms being devolved unto
him; and that they could no longer possess them by any Right, Interest, or
Title, until they had again resumed them from him, as he was Man, and forsaken
their ancient Tenures, whereby they had held them of him, as he was God."
Insomuch as some of them say in effect, that neither Augustus Caesar, nor
Tiberius, his Successor, were lawful Emperors, from the time of Christ's Birth
for above the space of thirty years, until our Savior had required the Jews to
pay Tribute to Caesar: as if in so doing Tiberius had again received thereby
his former right to the Empire; and that thereupon he was from that time
forward to hold it of Christ, as he was Man. In which erroneous conceits these
Men proceed further than ever the Jews, or the Apostles in their weakness did.
For the Jews never imagined of their Messiah, that when he came into the World
he should abolish all civil Government amongst the Gentiles, and be a temporal
King to Rule all Nations; or that as many Sovereign Kings and Princes, as
should from that time forward desire to rule their Subjects by any lawful Power
and Authority, must receive and hold the same from (the said Jews) their
temporal Kings: but did restrain their conceits within more narrow bounds,
thinking, that their Messiah should not have such intermedling with the
Gentiles, but only restore the Kingdom of Israel, which had for a long time
been miserably shaken, and rent in pieces, and live in that Country amongst
them in a much more glorious form and state, than any of their Kings before him
had done. And yet notwithstanding, these the said Persons, having
inconsiderately so far overrun the Jews in their Follies; are possessed
nevertheless with some Imaginations (no doubt) that because the Pope does
either applaud, or wink at their proceedings, they may in time make it probable
to the simpler sort (who when force is to be used, do bear the greatest sway)
that as all Emperors and Kings, forsooth, held their Kingdoms from Christ, as
he then was, and still is Man; so ought they now in these days to hold them of
the Pope, in that (if Men might safely believe them) our Savior Christ did (as
they say) after his Ascension, bestow all such Worldly Dominions upon St.
Peter, and consequently upon his Successors, the Bishops of Rome; and that now
all Worldly Principalities are theirs, and must be held of them, as they were
before of Christ after his Incarnation, by as many Kings and Princes as desire
to hold their Kingdoms by any right title.

But these are Men not to be feared; For to say the truth of them, they are all
of them in effect, either but gross and unlearned Canonists, or else but new
upstart and sottish Nerians, and of great affinity with the Canonists; who
meaning (as it seems) to outstrip the Jesuits, do labor as much to make the
Pope a Temporal Monarch, as the Jesuits have done for his pretended Spiritual
Sovereignty: whose endeavors are altogether (as we suppose) to be contemned;
in that both the sorts of them, as well Canonists as Nerians, are more
voluminous in their Writings than substantial; filling them principally with
very idle and ridiculous Canons and Decrees of the Pope's own making; and
having no true feeling, or sense of Divinity, do handle the Scriptures, when
they have leisure to come unto them, with so foul and unwashed hands, as that
their Master either is, or ought to be ashamed of them, in that he permits
their so absurd Books to come abroad into the World.

Besides, it will not a little hinder their credit (if it make them not a scorn
to all Posterity) even amongst such Men as have otherwise made themselves
Vassals to the Sea of Rome; because the said Jesuits, and some others, not to
have been despised for their learning, whilst they had strived to advance the
Pope's Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical, have themselves (in a manner) broken
the Neck of his fondly-conceited temporal Monarchy. "Some of the chiefest among
them affirming very peremptorily, That our Savior Christ, as Man, was never a
temporal King upon Earth; nor ever had any such temporal Authority, Bellarm. de
sum. Pontif. l. 5.
or Government, as does appertain unto Kings and Sovereign Princes." We will
set down some words of one that is of especial Authority amongst them; not
because we intend to ground any thing upon them, but for that they are true,
and may perhaps be of more force than ours are like to be with some kind of
People; the rectifying of whose hearts in the truth we tender as much as we do
our own. "Christ (says he) did not take Kingdoms from them whose they were;
for Christ came not to destroy those things that were well settled, but to make
them better. Therefore when a King is become a Christian, he does not lose his
Earthly Kingdom, but procures a new Interest to a Kingdom that is Eternal.
Otherwise the benefit of Christ should be hurtful to Kings, and Grace should
destroy Nature. And again; Christ, as he was Man, whilst he lived upon the
Earth, neither did, nor would receive any Temporal Dominion. And again, I say,
that Christ was always, as the Son of God, a King and Lord of all Creatures, in
such sort as his Father is: but this Eternal and Divine Kingdom does not
abollish the Dominions of Men. Again; I affirm not (says he) that Christ, as
he was Man, could not, though he would, and had thought it expedient for him,
have received Regal Authority: but yet I say, that he would not, and therefore
that he did not receive, nor had, not only the Execution of any Lordship or
Regality, but neither the Authority or Power of any Temporal Kingdom. Again,
Christ, as he was Man, had no Temporal Kingdom, neither by Inheritance nor by
Election, nor by Conquest, nor by any special Gift of God: and therefore he
concludes, that Christ had no Temporal Kingdom at all; because every such
Kingdom is gotten by one of the said four means. Again, says he, Christ never
used, in this World, any Regal Power: He came to minister, and not to be
ministered unto; to be judged, and not to judge. And again; Regal Authority was
neither necessary nor profitable to Christ; but plainly idle and unprofitable.
For the End of his coming into the World, was the Redemption of Mankind: but to
this end Temporal Power was not necessary, but only Spiritual. Lastly, All the
places of Scripture almost, (says he) where is a Treaty of the Kingdom of
Christ, ought necessarily to be understood of his Spiritual and Eternal
Kingdom: and therefore it cannot be deduced out of the Scriptures, that Christ
had any Temporal Kingdom." So as, in this Man's Judgment, neither St. Peter,
for his time, nor since, any of his Successors, did ever receive any Temporal
Kingdoms from Christ, (he himself being never possessed of any, as he was Man)
either to retain, in their own hands, or to commit the Execution of them, as in
their Right, to other Kings and Temporal Monarchs.

But to omit the further prosecution of this Loyolist's said Positions,
delivered truly in this point, more at large, and proved by sundry Arguments in
his Book, quoted by us: because he is a Man (though he be a Cardinal, and of
great Estimation with his own Society) whose Credit seems to decay,
especially with the said Canonists, and others of that like Crew. For if the
rest shall hereafter proceed with him, as One of them has already done (by
perverting the whole drift of his Disputation, in that behalf, very childishly
and grossly) he will be driven, ever it be long, to range himself in the Troops
of some, who are falsely supposed Heretics; in that the said grave Canonist is
so courageous, as he dares to adventure the pronouncing of a Curse, of the
greatest nature, against him, by name, even Anathema sit, and therefore We will
clear our hands of him, and drawing to an end, in this matter, leave the
Conclusion of it unto Christ himself; who knew his own Estate, when he lived
here in the World, as well as any Canonist, either by Birth of Padua, Naples,
or Rome, or of any other City or Country whatsoever.

It is true that our Savior Christ, as soon as he was born, was a Spiritual
King, not only over the Jews, but also over all Nations. And therefore, when at
the time of his Arraignment, before Pilate, though in scorn the Jews termed him
King, and that indeed he could not truly have denied it; yet he did not
equivocate therein, but confessed unto them, what manner of King he was. For
Pilate saying unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews? John 18. 36.
and telling him that the Jews and Highpriests had delivered him into his
hands; Jesus answered thus, My kingdom is not of this World: if my kingdom were
of this World, my Servants would surely fight, that I should not be delivered
to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence. As if he should have said, I
am no Temporal King, nor have any Temporal Kingdom, in this World: for if I
had, my Subjects (no doubt) would never have suffered me to come to this
distress: or if it had been my hap, so to have been dishonored, as now I am;
they would (out of all doubt) have fought on my behalf, as all dutiful Subjects
are bound to do, when the Persons of their Sovereigns shall be in any danger.
But my Kingdom is of another Nature: it is no Temporal Kingdom; either of this
World, (that is, such a Kingdom, as those who are Temporal Kings do possess) or
from hence, that is, my Kingdom requires no worldly Assistance; the World has
given me no Subjects, neither have I any worldly Estate or Possessions; so as
it might be affirmed truly, either of me or of my Kingdom, that either for the
Dignity of my Person, or the strengthening of my Government, I have any thing
hence, that is, from the World.

CAN. II.
AND therefore if any Man shall affirm, under color of any thing, that is in
the Scriptures, either that the Jews did not err, in conceiving that their
Messiah, when He came into the World, should as a Temporal Monarch, reign
amongst them; or that the Apostles themselves were not somewhat tainted with
such like imaginations; or, that Christ's Answers to his said Apostles, did not
sufficiently show unto them, that he came not into the World, to erect for
himself a temporal Kingdom, and that therefore they were not to expect from him
such worldly preferments, as they had dreamed of; or that the Son of God, in
that he was made Man, did by his blessed Nativity deprive all the Civil
Magistrates, in the World, of that power and Authority, which he had formerly
given unto them, as he was God; or that Christ, as he was Man, was, by his
birth, made a Temporal King over all the World; or that all Temporal Princes,
and Sovereign Kings, were thenceforth bound to hold their several Countries,
and Kingdoms no more under Christ, as he was God; but as being Man, he was
become a Temporal Monarch over all Nations; or that the Emperor Tiberius, who
then reigned, did govern the Empire for the space of above fifteen Years,
without any lawful Authority, until our Savior Christ willed the Jews to give
unto Caesar those things that are Caesar's; or that Christ having willingly
undertaken, for our sakes, the fulfilling of all the Law, (and consequently of
the Fifth Commandment) did not hold it to be a part of his Office to obey the
Emperor, upon whom he had, as he was God, bestowed such lawful Authority, as
did appertain unto his Government; or that either Christ's fact, in paying of
Tribute, or his words, in willing the Jews to give unto Caesar those things
that were Caesar's, did then import that neither Obedience, Tribute, Custom,
nor any other Duty of Subjection, did, until that time, belong to the Emperor,
as being thitherto, by Christ's Birth, deprived of all his Regal Authority; or
that it is not a great Impiety, in any Political Respect whatsoever, for any
Man, to maintain, when Christ says, his Kingdom is not of this World, that it
was a Worldly and Temporal Kingdom; or when Christ says, his Kingdom was not
from hence, that it was, notwithstanding, as a Worldly Kingdom, from hence, as
having all other Kings and Princes here in the World, as Vassals, in that
respect, and subject unto it; He does greatly Err.

CAP. IV.
The sum of the Chapter following.
That our Savior Christ in working our Salvation, whilst he lived upon the
Earth, conformed himself wholly, and his obedience unto the Ecclesiastical
Government, and Laws of the Church then in force; inveighed not with any
bitterness against the Highpriests, though they were his Enemies, and in many
points faulty; but had ever a great respect of them, in regard of their
Authority; made no new Laws when he expounded the old; erected no particular
Congregations, or Churches apart from the Congregations and particular Churches
of the Jews; but did together with his Apostles and Disciples, join with the
Church of the Jews in their public worship and service of God; omitting no one
circumstance, Ceremony, or duty, undertaken voluntarily by him, which he did
not very thoroughly perform, even with the loss of his Life.

AS our Savior Christ, whilst he lived in the World, did no way disturb the
civil state, but upon every fit occasion did submit himself unto it: So may it
be truly said of him concerning the State Ecclesiastical, formerly by God
himself established, and remaining still among the Jews (though in a very
corrupt manner) that he did in every thing, thereunto by the Law of God
appertaining, conform himself unto it, while it lasted: I say, while it lasted;
because upon his Death there was a great alteration. According to the
Ecclesiastical Laws, then (whilst he lived) in force, he was first Circumcised,
and so made himself subject to the fullfilling of the whole Law. Levit. 12. 8.
Then (as the Law did likewise require) he was brought by his Mother to
Jerusalem, to be presented to the Lord, and to have an Oblation (suitable to
their poor Estate) of a pair of Turtle-Doves, Exodus 13. 13.
or two Pigeons, offered to God with the price of Redemption for him, Number. 18.
16.
in that he was a Manchild, and the firstborn. There were no kind of solemn
Feasts appointed by the Law, which he honored not with his presence according
to the Law: Nay he was pleased to be present at the Feast of the Dedication of
the Temple, Deuteronomy. 16.
which was instituted by Judas Maccabaeus, Joh. 10. 22, 23.
and his Brethren: as well to teach all Posterity, by his Example, what godly
Magistrates may ordain in such kind of Causes; as also how things so ordained,
ought to be observed. And as he was Circumcised, so did he celebrate and
observe the chief Feasts of the Passover: omitting nothing, which either on the
behalf of the Jews, or for our sakes, he had undertaken to perform. And
although the Priests in those days were very far out of square, and that our
Savior Christ had very just cause in that respect to have reproved them
sharply, as other Prophets had often dealt with their Predecessors: yet he did
so much regard them, by reason of their Authority, unless he should otherwise
have seemed to have contemned both them and it; as he did rather choose to let
them understand their offenses by Parables, Matthew. 21. 16.
than by any rough reprehension: -- 25. 28.
still upholding them in their credits and authority, as by the Law of God in
that behalf it was provided. When amongst many other his wonderful great
Miracles, he had healed certain Lepers, he bad them go show themselves to their
Priests; Matthew. 8. 4.
because they were appointed Judges by the Law to discern the curing of that
Disease, Mark 1. 44.
before the Parties (though indeed healed of it) might intermingle themselves
with the rest of the People; Luke. 5. 14.
and did further require them to offer for their cleansing those things, -- 17.
14.
which Moses had commanded in testimonium illis; that is, that so the said
Priests might plainly see, both that he was a Keeper of the Law, and also, that
he had healed them, and so be driven to repent them of their incredulity, or at
the least prevented thereby from slandering either him, as a Breaker of the
Law, or that which he had done for them, as if he had not thoroughly healed
them. Neither is it any way repugnant hereunto, that when our Savior Christ
found chopping and changing, John 2. 15.
by buying and selling in the Temple, he made a Scourge of small Cords, and
drove them thence with the Sheep, Oxen, Doves, and Money-Bags; forbidding them
to make his Fathers House an House of Merchandise. For he did not thereby, in
any sort, prejudice the Authority of the Priests (who should chiefly have
prevented such gross abuses, and traffic in the Temple) as if he had done the
same, either as a chief Priest, or a Temporal King (according to some Men's fond
imaginations) by any Pontifical, or Regal Authority: but his fact therein
(howsoever it might show the negligence of the said Priests) did only proceed
from his Divine Zeal, as he was a Prophet, and could not endure such an
abominable profanation of God's House: many Prophets before him having done
matters very lawfully of greater moment, through the like divine and
extraordinary Zeal in them, without any impeachment of any Power, either Regal
or Pontifical. Howbeit, that our Savior Christ was oftentimes very vehement
against the Scribes and Pharisees, it is plain and manifest, when joining them
both together, Matthew. 23.
he termed them serpents; the Generation of Vipers, and denounces against them
in one Chapter eight Woes, concluding thus, How should you escape the damnation
of Hell? The reason, that these Curses and hard censures were jointly laid upon
them, was because they themselves were joined together in all kinds of Impiety
and Malice against Christ; and were neither of them, especially the Pharisees,
any Plants of God's Plantation. For whilst not only the Highpriests were still
in Faction and Fury one against another, as well for the getting, as the
keeping that high preferment; and that many of the inferior Priests were
either siding amongst themselves for one Party or other, or else more idle and
negligent in discharging of their duties than they ought to have been; these
two Sects thrust themselves into the Church, and through their Hypocrisy so
prevailed with the People in short time, as the Priests afterward either could
not, or would not be rid of them: because on the one side they thought it in
vain to strive with them, they were so backed; and on the other side they found
them so diligent in discharging of those duties, which did appertain to
themselves, and withal so careful to uphold the state and authority of the
Priesthood. "By means whereof they grew very shortly into so great estimation,
Jos. Antiq. l. 18. c. 2.
that (as one writes of the Pharisees) whatsoever did appertain to public and
solemn Prayers, and to the worship of God, it was done according to their
interpretations, and as they prescribed." And the Scribes being likewise
Doctors, and Expounders of the Law, and concurring still with the
interpretations, and prescriptions of the Pharisees, came not by that policy in
their credits and reputation had of them, far short behind them. The
distinction between them may well be expressed by comparing the Pharisees unto
the Divines amongst our Adversaries, who take upon them to search out more
thoroughly the mysteries of the Scriptures; and the Scribes to their Canonists,
who in respect of their said Divines, are but Novices in God's word, and
Applauders to the Pope's Decrees, as the Scribes were, being compared to the
Pharisees, in that they held it for a principal part of their office, to uphold
and maintain, as much as they could, the Traditions of the Pharisees, and did
only take upon them to deal with the bark and literal sense of Moses's Law,
leaving the more profound knowledge and mystical Interpretation of them unto
the said Pharisees. But the Issue of the labors of both these Hypocritical
Sects was such, as being blinded with their own devices, they became to be the
speciallest Enemies that Christ found upon the Earth, and opposed themselves
most against him. And yet notwithstanding, because he found them in so great
Authority, and perceived how the knowledge of the Law, which ought to have been
received from the lips of the Priests, did then depend upon the lips of the
Scribes and Pharisees, he did neither blame them for it, nor impugn the said
Authority. Insomuch as the multitude being many ways factious, and (though very
ignorant) were become great Questionists, touching the Points of the Law; he
referred them, with a very good Caution, to the Scribes and Pharisees, to be
instructed by them, saying, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's seat: all
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe and do, that observe and do; but
after their works do not, for they say, and do not. Whereby it appears, how
respectful our Savior Christ was for the free passage and observation of
Moses's Law; in that he was content that the Scribes and Pharisees
(notwithstanding he knew their Hypocrisy and Corruption, and how they had come
by that Authority, which they then enjoyed) should yet instruct the People
under them; so as the People did beware of their wicked Conversation, and
approved no resolutions, that they might receive from them, which were not
first proved unto them out of the Laws of Moses, and were fit to proceed from
his Seat.

Touching which last point of Moses's Law, and how nothing ought to have been
taught out of Moses's Seat, but that, which Moses, by the direction of the Holy
Ghost, had prescribed; for as much as our Savior Christ did well see, and
understand how the Scribes and Pharisees, had, by their false Interpretations
and Glosses, perverted and corrupted the true sense and meaning of diverse of
Moses's Laws, he was greatly moved therewith, and did take great pains to
refute the said false glosses and interpretations, and to restore to the Laws
mentioned their true sense and original meaning. Wherein, although by his
strict Exposition of those Laws he might seem (to some not well advised) to
have so extended and enlarged the meaning of them, as if he had thereby
prescribed some new points or laws of greater perfection than were originally
contained in the true meaning of the old; yet we cannot find, how either the
said points may otherwise be termed new, than as Gold first purified and fined,
after it has either in time grown rusty, or been by false mixtures cunningly
corrupted, may be called new gold, when it is again purged from the said false
mixtures and refined; Or how the observation of them can bring with it to Men
any greater perfection in the New Testament, than God himself did expect of his
Servants in the Old Testament, by their observing of the said Laws (so
expounded by Christ) in their ancient sense and meaning, which they first had,
when by his appointment Moses did give them unto them. For if in proper Speech
he had made any new Laws, coming only to fulfill the old, as himself in a true
sense affirmed, the Jews might have had some good color to have blamed him; in
that, during the continuance of their Ecclesiastical Government, if any new
Laws had been then to have been made touching the worship of God, the Authority
in that behalf was limited by God himself unto their own Church Governors.
Again, considering that the Son of God in taking our nature upon him, did so
make himself of no reputation, as being (of his own goodness toward Mankind) a
Servant to his Father, he became (to do his will) obedient unto the death, even
the death of the Cross; It cannot well be imagined by any, that have any true
understanding of the Scriptures, that the Son of God, having so debased himself
(as is aforesaid) did ever think in that his so admirable humiliation, of any
Rules, or new Laws of greater perfection than he had before required and
prescribed unto his true Servants and Children, as he was God in Majesty and
Glory, without any such Exinanition, as the Apostle speaks of. The obedience
and duty which Almighty God ever did, or ever will require of his Servants,
was, and is always to proceed, as well from their hearts, as from any other
external actions. Insomuch, as if it fell out (as it may at sometimes) that
they cannot perform their said duties, in respect of some impediments that will
hold them from Christ: In that Case, be it riches, they are to leave them;
their Eyes, their Hands, or their Feet, they are to cut them off; Nay be it
their Blood, their Hearts, and Lives, they are rather, than to forsake their
God, and his Christ, to yield them all in this World, with what ignominy
soever, to the end they may receive them again with glory in the Kingdom of
Heaven: Than which great obedience and perfection, what can be imagined
greater? Or who is there in the World, that truly professes Religion, who in
that Case is exempted from it? Certainly, we think, none, of what Estate and
Condition soever they be; but do rather hold, that as they, who shall yield up
their Lives under pretense of any extraordinary perfection (saving in the Case
above-expressed) are far from that which they make show of, but are rather to
be accounted desperate; so are they, in our Judgments, to be reckoned Men of
very extraordinary humors, and most ignorant Persons, if not such counterfeit
Hypocrites, as were the Scribes and Pharisees in professing extraordinary
austerity of Life, that they might be the better esteemed amongst Men, who
shall without any necessity, either pull out their Eyes, or cut off their Feet
and Hands, or forsake their Riches and Worldly Estates, as blessings of God not
compatible, but repugnant to that perfection which God does require at any
Man's hands.

It is not our purpose to prosecute all those particulars mentioned in the
Evangelists, wherein our Savior Christ showed his Obedience: there being in
effect nothing that he did, which was not either figured in the Law, or
foretold by the Prophets, that he should perform. The time of his Incarnation,
with the manner of it; his Entertainment in the World; his diligence in
Preaching; his whipping, blows, and scorns offered unto him; the Wounds of his
hands, feet and side; the beginning and progress of his Spiritual Kingdom; the
seveal duties appertaining to him, as he was a Prophet, and likewise as he was
our High Priest, the Institution of Baptism, and of Christ's last Supper; his
Righteousness and Mercy; his Death, with the manner of it; his Resurrection and
Ascension, with a number of other points; they were all foreseen, figured, and
described by the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures; and were accordingly, with
admirable Patience, Humility, Obedience, Courage, Zeal and Alacrity executed,
undergone, and accomplished by him in such manner and sort, with the
observation of all necessary circumstances, and by such degrees, as from the
beginning were limited and thought fit for so great a work. For all things
could not be done together by him, and at once. Although after his Baptism he
Preached most diligently, wrought strange Wonders, and did choose, to assist
him, his Twelve Apostles, and Seventy Disciples, who did likewise preach,
baptize, and wrought Miracles in his Name: yet neither he, nor they did collect
any particular Church or Churches, apart from the Synagogues of the Jews; but
held Society and Communion with them, in all things, that did belong to the
outward Service and Worship of God: because, until his Passion, as well the
Ceremonies of the Law, as the Aaronical Priesthood, together with the
Authority, thereunto appertaining, were all of them in force; and therefore it
was not lawful, whilst the Old Church did stand, to have erected a New.
Moreover it is not to be doubted, but that as before Christ's Incarnation there
were many faithful and godly Persons, that believed in Christ, to come, and by
that their Faith were saved: so there were many such Believers, after his
Incarnation, who were likewise the Children of God, though they were ignorant
(for a time) that Christ, when he was come, was the Messiah, whom they
expected: none of the Jews so believing, being in state of Damnation, until
after they had seen Christ, heard him preach, been present at his Miracles, or
at the least had received full instruction of them all from his Apostles and
Disciples, they did notwithstanding reject him. In which respect, the true
Believers amongst the Jews, in those days, might not well have been
distinguished into several, and different Congregations or particular Churches,
without many great and apparent Inconveniences, but this Point is yet plainer,
in that the Jews, who believed, at that time, that Christ, whom they saw, and
heard, was the true Messiah; were, notwithstanding, subject to the Obedience of
those Ceremonial and Levitical Laws, which did concern them every one in his
Calling, which does appear by the Examples of Christ himself and his Apostles:
who, although they were baptized, did not sever themselves from the manner of
Worshipping of God in those times. Insomuch as first they did celebrate
together the Feast of the Passover, before our Savior Christ made them
Partakers of his last Supper. Neither is it to be questioned, but that many,
who did believe in Christ, (their and our Savior) then amongst them, had new
born Children, before his Passion, which were as well circumcised as baptized.
For then, as Circumcision was not repugnant to Baptism, no more was Baptism any
Impediment to Circumcision, being both of them so united together, and
qualified, as they could not well be severed, during the Continuance of the
Levitical Law, and Priesthood.

We grant, that upon our Savior Christ's Birth, and further proceedings in the
execution of his Office, not only the Jewish Ceremonies, but in like sort their
Priesthood began both of them to shake, and did, after a sort, draw near to
their End: but until our Savior Christ said upon the Cross, John 19. 30.
It is finished, and that the vail was rent in twain, Matthew. 27. 51.
from the top to the bottom, they neither of them had utterly lost their
Levitical Natures, Power and Authority, And therefore it must be held, that
although, by the preaching of our Savior and of his Apostles, many Men's hearts
were drawn to believe that Christ was the Messiah, whom they expected, and that
they were thereby made actually Partakers of many of those Mercies, which, by
Figures, and Sacrifices had been formerly set out unto them; as also, that in
regard thereof, they might be termed, in a right, good sense, the beginning of
a New Church: yet did they, neither in respect of their Faith and Baptism, make
any Separation, but were only the better part of the old Church: nor might
they, in regard of either of them, have lawfully exempted themselves from the
Government of it. Which is further manifest by the words of our Savior Christ
himself, Matthew. 18. 15.
when he says thus; If thy Brother trespass against thee, go, and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone. If he hear thee, thou have won thy Brother.
But if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, that, by the mouth of
two or three Witnesses, every word may be confirmed. But if he will not
vouchsafe to hear them, tell it unto the Church. For by the Church, in this
place, the Ecclesiastical Courts established amongst the Jews, at that time,
must (as we think) be understood, there being then no other Courts, of that
Nature, amongst them, which had any Authority to punish any such obstinate
Persons, as Christ there speaks of. So as our Savior Christ did here refer
the Parties, offended by some of their Brethren, to the said Ecclesiastical
Courts; in the same respect and sense, and no otherwise, then he sent the
Lepers (whom he had healed) to the Priests, according to the Law; or when he
referred the multitude to the Seribes and Pharisees, to be instructed by them,
because they sat in Moses's Chair. Besides whatsoever is spoken by the
Evangelists, of the Church that should he built upon a Rock so strongly, as
that the Gates of Hell should not be able to prevail against it; or of the
Power and Authority to bind and loose, by Censures, or otherwise: that is no
way to be applied to the said Church or Sanhedrim, mentioned by St. Matthew, or
to any particular Assembly of Christians, either before the Passion of Christ,
or afterward; but was only spoken and delivered, by way of Prophecy, of the
Catholic Church, which, after the Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior
Christ, should be established in the World, in a more conspicuous and universal
sort, than formerly it had been. And yet we do not deny, but that Christ, in
the said words, Tell the Church, meaning the Jews Courts, or Sanhedrims, might
very well insinuate, in that he called not those Courts by their own Names, but
termed them the Church, that, in such cases as there are by him mentioned, the
Christians, in time to come, should accordingly repair unto their
Ecclesiastical Courts, to be established among them throughout the Christian
World, for Reformation of Offenders, and Satisfaction in Points of Religion; as
the Jews of all sorts (whether Believers or not) were bound, until the Death of
Christ, to repair to their Priests and Sanhedrims, if either they meant to be
truly instructed in the Laws, or to have such manner of Offenses lawfully
punished by those kind of Censures, that Christ, in the said place, speaks of.

But what should we insist so much upon this point, to prove that all the Jews,
that either believed in Christ, or did reject him, were bound (before the
Passion of our Savior Christ) to be obedient to the Ecclesiastical Governors,
established, by God himself, in that visible Church: considering how careful
our Savior Christ was, upon every occasion offered, for the preservation of
their Authority, whilst it was to endure, and with what Humility he did submit
himself unto it? For being sent for by them, he was content, at that time, to
go unto them, and to be examined by them; when he had found them many ways
before to be his mortal Enemies: and knew how at that present, they were
plotting to take away his Life, by corrupting of Judas to betray him into their
hands, and by suborning of false Witnesses to accuse him: as also, how, after
they had examined him, they would use him most despitefully and scornfully,
spit in his Face, and buffet him, beat him with Rods, carry him bound as a
Malefactor, and deliver him to Pilate the Civil Magistrate; Likewise how they
themselves would be his Accusers; how they would practice with the People to
prefer Barabbas's liberty (being a Murderer) before his, and to cry out with
them, to Pilate, Let him be crucified, Let him be crucified; Crucify him,
Crucify him; their Outrage and Fury being so bent against him, as that they
themselves would have put him to death, if by the Laws of the Romans (whereunto
they were then subject) they might have been permitted so to have done.

CAN. III.
AND therefore if any Man shall affirm, under color of any thing that is in
the Scriptures; either that our Savior Christ whilst he lived upon the Earth,
was not obedient to the State Ecclesiastical, as he was to the Temporal: or,
that all Christians by his Example, are not bound to be as well obedient to
their Church Governors, as they are to their civil Magistrates: or, that
Christian Kings have not now as full Authority to appoint some Festival Days of
public thanksgiving to God, in remembrance of some great and extraordinary
mercies of his, showed unto them upon those days, as Judas Maccabaeus had to
ordain the Feast of the Dedication of the Temple to be yearly celebrated: or
that, where any such Festival Days are appointed, the Subjects of every such
King, ought not by Christ's Example, in celebrating the said Feast, to observe
and keep them: or, that all the true Members of the Church are not taught by
Christ's Example, in his observing of the Ceremonial Law, being then in force,
that they likewise are bound to observe all such Constitutions and Ceremonies,
as for Order and Decency, are with all due Cautions established in any
particular Church, by the chief Governors of it, until it shall please them
the said Governors, to abrogate them: or, that all Christians are not bound by
Christ's Example, to refrain all bitterness of Calumniation and Detraction, and
to deal temperately and mildly with their Ecclesiastical Governors, in respect
of their Authority, that it be not brought into contempt, though they find some
imperfections, either in their Persons, or in their Proceedings; as he our said
blessed Savior, in the same respect, dealt with the Priests of the Jews,
though they had many ways transgressed, and were his mortal Enemies: or, that
Christ, by whipping Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, did either impeach
the Authority of the Priests, or practice therein any Pontifical or Temporal
Power, as if he had been a temporal King, or did the same by any other
Authority, than as he was a Prophet: or, that Christians are not now as
strongly bound in doubts of Religion, to repair unto the chief Ministers and
Ecclesiastical Governors, although they are not always tied to do as they do;
as were the Jews in such like Cases bound to repair to them, that sat in
Moses's Seat: or, that every true Christian, when for the said Cause he
repaireth to the chief Ministers, and Governors of the Church, to be resolved
by them, is any further now bound to depend upon such their Resolutions, than
they are able to show them unto him out of the Word of God; or than the Jews
were bound to believe the Scribes and Pharisees, though they sat in Moses's
Chair when they taught them any thing which was not agreeable to that which
Moses had commanded: or, that Christ's Example in condemning the false
Interpretations and Glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, and in restoring to
the Law the true sense and original meaning of it, has not ever since
warranted learned and godly Men, when they found the Scriptures perverted by
those that govern the Church, of purpose to make their own gain thereof, and to
maintain their great Usurpations, to free the same by searching the said
Scriptures from all such false Interpretations and Glosses, and to make plain
(as much as in them did lie) the true sense and meaning of them: or, that our
Savior Christ, when he purged diverse parts of the Law from the gross and
erroneous Expositions of the Scribes and Pharisees, did give any other sense
and meaning of them; or infer upon it any new Rules of greater perfection,
either as he was Man, or as he was a Prophet, than they had, and contained
originally, when he first gave them to the Israelites, as he was God: or, that
it is not an erroneous and fond conceit, like unto that of the Sectaries among
the Jews (especially of the Pharisees) for any sort of Persons, (no way able to
perform their duties to God, in such manner and sort as they ought) once so
much as to imagine, that by the observation of their own rules, they are able
to attain to greater perfection, than by the observation of God's rules: or,
that it is not as vain and fond an imagination as the former, for any Christian
Man to think, that the enjoying of such Possessions and Riches as God has
blessed him with, is repugnant to that perfection which God has required at
his hands; or that the same are otherwise incompatible with the said
perfection, than in such cases only, when either they must leave their Worldly
Estates, or Christ their Savior: or, that our Savior Christ, by laying of
some grounds for the future estate of the Church after his Passion, did thereby
erect any new Churches apart from that Church which was to continue until his
Death: or, that the Example of Christ and his Apostles, in holding Society and
Communion with the Jews, in the outward worship and service of God, does not
condemn all such Sectaries as do separate themselves from the Churches of
Christ, whereof they were once Members; the same being true Churches by lawful
Authority established, under pretense of they know not what new Christianity:
or, that there ought not to be now amongst Christians, Ecclesiastical Courts
for Ecclesiastical Causes, as well as there were such Courts amongst the Jews
for such kind of Causes: or, that all Christians are not now bound to repair,
as well to Ecclesiastical Courts and Governors, for reformation of such
Offenses, as are of Ecclesiastical Counusance, as the Jews were bound to repair
to their Sanhedrims, to have those Evils redressed that were to be reformed by
those Courts: or, that as many as do profess themselves to be true Imitators of
Christ in their Lives and Conversation, are not bound to such obedience unto
their Princes and Rulers, how evil-disposed soever they be, yea though they
seek their Lives) as Christ showed and performed, both to the Ecclesiastical
and Temporal State of the Jews, at what time he knew they were plotting his
Death; He does greatly Err.

CAP. V.
The Sum of the Chapter following.
That our Savior Christ, after his Resurrection and Ascension, did not alter
the form of temporal Government, established by himself long before his
Incarnation: and that therefore Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign Princes, though
they were then Infidels, were nevertheless to be obeyed by the Subjects, as
formerly from the beginning they had been.

IT has been before observed by us, that our Savior Christ, whilst he lived
in the World, was no temporal King, nor had any temporal Dominion, Court,
Possessions, Regal State, Dukes, Earls, Lords, or any other Subjects, as other
temporal Kings had, to obey and serve him. But perhaps after his Resurrection,
it was for otherwise with him. Indeed so it was; For whereas the Son of God,
God himself, equal to the Father, by being made Man, did cease to put in
practice the Glory and Majesty of his Deity in his humane Nature, otherwise
than by doing such Miracles as he thought necessary for the Conversion of those
who were to believe in him: Now after his Resurrection and Ascension, the state
of his humane Nature was become (as it may well be said) much more glorious;
because his Divine Nature did communicate unto his Humane Nature. So many
divine Dignities and operations of his Deity (in respect of the hypostatical
Union betwixt them) as the same was capable of, without turning of his Divine
Nature into his Humane Nature: It being always to be understood, that the said
hypostatical and real Union, notwithstanding there was never any Confusion
betwixt the two Natures of Christ; both of them always retaining their distinct
and essential Proprieties. Which ground observed, we may truly say, that the
Attributes are admirable, which in regard of the said Union are and may be
ascribed unto our Savior Christ, as he is Man; especially after his
Resurrection and Ascension. For some short proof hereof these following Places
may suffice. Before our Savior Christ commanded his Apostles to go and teach
all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; he told them, (lest they should have doubted whether he had any
Authority to make them so large a Commission) that all power was given him in
Heaven, Matthew. 28. 18.
and in Earth. He also was before (as the Holy Ghost testifies of him) made
Heir of all things, Hebr. 1. 2.
and so had a true Interest in them; and after his Resurrection, Hebr. 2. 9.
had the full possession of them. We see Jesus (says the Apostle) crowned with
glory and honor. And again, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22.
When God raised up Jesus from the dead, he set him at his right hand, in
heavenly places, far above all Principality and Power, and Might and
Domination, and every Name that is named not in this world only, but in that
also which is to come; and has made all things subject under his feet. Apoc.
11. 15.
And again, The kingdoms of this world are our Lord's and his Christ's. -- 17.
14.
And again, The lamb is Lord of lords, -- 19. 16.
and King of kings. And to conclude, He has upon his garment, and upon his
thigh, a name written, The King of kings, and Lord of lords.

Howbeit, all that we have hitherto said notwithstanding, though all the World
does actually appertain to our Savior Christ (now in Glory) as he is Man, in
respect of the said Unition, or hypostatical Union: yet did he not alter, after
his Resurrection and Ascension, the manner of temporal Government, which he had
ordained throughout the World before his Incarnation, as he was God (his humane
Nature being invested by the power of his Divinity in manner before expressed
with all his said Glory, and Authority:) but does still continue the sole
Monarch over all; distributing that his universal Kingdom, as formerly he had
done, into diverse Principalities and Kingdoms, and appointing temporal Kings
and Sovereign Princes, as his Substitutes and Vicegerents to rule them all by
the Rules and Laws of Nature, if they be Ethnicks, or if Christians, then not
only by those Rules, but also as well by the Equity of the Judicial Laws, which
he gave to the Jews, as by the Doctrine of the Gospel, more thoroughly opened
and delivered with all the parts of it, by himself and his Apostles, than in
former times it had been. Of Christian Kings, we shall have fitter place to
speak hereafter. Now we will prosecute this point, concerning the Regal
Authority of Princes that are Infidels, and consider more particularly, Whether
they did not, and so consequently do not still, as lawfully enjoy their
Kingdoms and legal Soveraignties under our Savior Christ, after his
Resurrection and Ascension, as they did before, either of them; and likewise as
they did before his Incarnation; according to that which we have delivered in
the former Chapter. And the especial Reason that moves us so to do, is the
audacious temerity of the before-named ignorant Canonists, and of their
adherents, the new Sectaries of the Oratory Congregation: who, with the like
Ignorance and Folly that they told us, how all Kings lost their Interest and
Authority over their Kingdoms, by the birth of our Savior Christ, do
furthermore endeavor very wickedly and sottishly to pervert such especial
places in the Apostles Writings, as are, most aparently, repugnant to their
said Fancy, or rather Phrenzy. To make their dealing with one place apparent,
Romans 13.
is sufficient for our purpose. Whereas St. Paul, writing to the Romans,
wills them to be subject to the higher Powers, or teaches them (as a late
absurd Canonist abridgeth the place) Obediendum esse Principibus, Dr. Mart.
Tract. de Jurisd. par. 1. c. 24. n 38.
that Princes are to be obey^d: He speaks not (says he) de Ethnicis, as that
place is corruptly alleged, sed quatenus de illis intellexit, that is, in such
a sense as he meant it. And what the Apostle meant, he is not ashamed to tell
us in this sort, saying, (1.) the Apostle speaks of the Roman Empire, which
Christ had approved, when he bad the Jews pay Tribute to Caesar, (2.) the Text
does expound it self, for he writes to Christians; whom he counsels to be
obedient to Princes, lest they should sin; for Princes are not to be feared for
good works, but for evil: therefore he does not simply command Obedience to
Ethnic Princes, etc. (3.) The like manner of writing, St. Paul used in
exhorting Servants to honor their Lords, etiam infideles, though they were
Infidels, for the Reasons by him there mentioned. (4.) By those Monitions
(meaning the said Commandments of the Apostle, concerning Obedience of Subjects
to their Princes, and of Servants to their Masters) just Dominion is not
founded in the Persons of Ethnicks, (nam Paulus, qui hec dicit, non erat summus
Pontifex; for Paul, who said so, was not the chief Bishop, etc.) (5.)
Furthermore, in that time of the Primitive Church, the Church could not, de
facto, punish Infidels, and transfer their Kingdoms, etc. Thus far this
audacious and unlearned Canonist: the very citation of whose Words, we hold
sufficient to refute them; although he alleges for himself to support them
very grave Authors; the Distinctions (forsooth) the Gloss, Hostiensis, and
Praepositus: adding that some other Canonists do concur with him. Only we will
oppose against him and all his Fellows (to show their Follies by a proof of
this Nature) the Testimony of the Pope's chief Champion, the only Jesuit
without Comparison (now a principal Cardinal) who maintains in express Terms,
"That Infidel Princes are true and supreme Princes of their Kingdoms: and
writes thus against the said Assertion of the Canonist directly: saying, God
does approve the Kingdoms of the Gentiles in both the Testaments." Dan. 2.
Thou art King of kings, and the God of Heaven has given thee thy Kingdom and
Empire, etc. Restore those things unto Caesar that are Caesar's. Matthew. 22.
Note, that he says not Give, but Restore those things that are Caesar's; that
is, those things which in right are owing unto him. Romans 13.
And Give unto all Men that which is due unto them; Tribute to whom you owe
Tribute; and Custom to whom you owe Custom. Et jubet ibidem etiam propter
Conscientiam obedire Principibus Ethnicis: At certe non tenemur in Conscientia
obedire illi, qui non est verus Princeps: "that is, and we are commanded in the
same place, even for Conscience, to obey Princes that are Ethnicks: but
assuredly we are not bound in Conscience to obey him who is no true, lawful, or
right Prince." Hitherto the Cardinal.

We would not have cited this Man's testimony thus at large, were not All, that
he has said therein, thoroughly supported by all the Learned Men (as we
suppose) of his Society; and sufficient to refel the Vanity of the Canonists,
and their Fellows in that folly. For if we should insist herein upon the
Authority of Men, all the ancient Fathers do fully concur with us: that through
the whole course of the Scriptures, Obedience was, and is as well prescribed in
the Old Testament to Ethnic Princes, as unto the Kings of Judah: and so
likewise in the New Testament, as well to Infidel Princes as Christian: the
Precepts of the Apostles in that behalf being general, and so to be applied, as
well to the one sort as to the other; in that they hold their Kingdoms of
Christ equally (as is aforesaid) and therefore ought to be equally obeyed by
their Subjects, with that general Caution which was ever understood, viz. in
those things which they commanded them, and were not repugnant to the
Commandments of God. And therefore the Judgments of the ancient Fathers, being
in this sort only remembered by us, we will not much insist upon them; but give
that honor which is due (especially in a matter so apparent) unto the sole
Authority of the Holy Apostles; who writing by the direction of the Holy Ghost,
those things which Christ himself before had taught them, do give unto all
Christians and Subjects, to what manner of Kings soever, these Precepts
following.

"Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; Romans 13.
for there is no Power but of God: for the Powers that be, are Ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves Judgment. For Princes are not to
be feared for good works, but for evil. Will thou then be without fear? Do
well: So shall thou have praise of the same: for he is the Minister of God for
thy Wealth. But if thou do evil, fear; for he bears not the Sword for naught:
for he is the Minister of God to take Vengeance of him that does evil.
Wherefore ye must be subject, not because of wrath only, but also for
Conscience sake. For this cause ye pay also Tribute: for they are God's
Ministers, applying themselves for the same thing." In which words of the
Apostle, in saying, that Princes have their Power from God, and that he is
God's Minister; there is no repugnancy to that which we have abovesaid,
concerning the great honor and dignity of the humanity of our Savior Christ,
after his Resurrection and Ascension; to prove that Kings do hold their
Kingdoms under Christ, as he is Man, the Lamb of God, and Heir of all the
World. For we were very careful to have it still remembered, that all the said
Power and Dignity which he has, as he is Man, does proceed from his Divinity:
and likewise, that by reason of the real Union of the two Natures in our
Savior Christ, that which does properly belong to the one nature, may very
truly be affirmed of the other. So as it may, in that respect, be very well
said, and truly; that all Kings and Princes receive their Authority from
Christ, as he is Man; and likewise, that they receive their Authority from
Christ, as he is God: and that they are the Ministers of Christ, being Man; and
the Ministers of God, without any limitation. But it is plain, that the said
words of the Apostle do very thoroughly refute the vanity mentioned of the
Canonists, and their new Companions: in that by the said words it appears
very manifestly, That Kings do not otherwise hold their Kingdoms of the
humanity of Christ, than they did before of his divine nature. They have their
Authority (says the Apostle) from God; and they are God's Ministers. And there
is nothing written, either by St. Paul, or by any other of the Apostles, which
swerveth in any point from this Doctrine, where they write of the obedience due
unto all Kings and Sovereign Princes: whose testimonies in that behalf, we are,
as we promised, a little further to pursue.

"I exhort, 1 Timothy 2. 1. etc.
says St. Paul, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and
giving of thanks, be made for all Men; for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority: that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable Life in all Godliness and
Honesty. And again. Tit. 3. 1.
Put them (that is both old and young, and all sorts of Persons that are purged
to be a peculiar People unto Christ) in remembrance, that they be subject to
the Principalities and Powers; and that they be obedient and ready to every
good work. Also St. Peter says to the same effect* 1 Pet. 2. 13. etc.
Submit your selves unto all manner of Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake;
whether it be unto the King, as unto the Superior; or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent of him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well. For so is the will of God; that by well doing, ye may put
to silence the ignorance of foolish Men as free, and not as having the liberty
for a Cloak of Maliciousness; but as the Servants of God." Honor all Men; love
Brotherly Fellowship; Fear God; Honor the King. And the same Apostle, 2 Pet.
2. 10. etc.
describing the nature of false Teachers, which in times to come would thrust
themselves into the Church, and by feigned words, make a Merchandise of their
Followers; amongst other impieties, he notes them with these, "That commonly
they are despisers of Government, presumptuous Persons, and such as stand in
their own conceits; Men, that fear not to speak evil of them that are in
dignity: but as brute Beasts, led with sensuality, and made to be taken and
destroyed, speak evil of those things which they know not." And with St. Peter
in this point, the Apostle St. Jude does concur: Jud. 18, 19 v. 8.
where speaking of those who in future times should be Makers of Sects, "He
terms them Mockers, and Men that had not the Spirit of God. And speaking also
of such like wicked Persons as were crept into the Church in the Apostles days;
he says, they did despise Government, and speak evil of them that were in
Authority." In all which places thus by us noted, concerning as well the
dignity and Authority of Sovereign Kings and Princes, as the fear, duty and
obedience, which all their Subjects were truly and sincerely, without murmuring
or repining, to yield and perform unto them, though they were then Ethnicks:
When we consider the manner of their delivery of that Evangelical Doctrine, and
their grounds thereof; as also how vehemently they have written against all
such Persons, as either did then, or should afterward, oppose themselves unto
it, by despising of civil Magistrates, speaking evil of them, or in any other
sort whatsoever; We are fully persuaded, that they neither commanded, taught,
or writ any thing therein, but what they knew to be the will of God, and did
accordingly believe to be true; for we hold it resolutely, That whatsoever the
Apostles did either write, teach, or command, they writ, taught, and commanded
it, as they were inspired and directed by the Holy Ghost: 2 Timothy 3. 16.
because when our Savior Christ was to leave the World, 2 Pet. 1. 21.
he promised to send unto them the Holy Ghost, Joh. 16. 7. 13.
the Comforter and spirit of truth; which should lead them, not into any
By-ways, or shifting conceits, but into the direct and plain paths of all
truths: and did very shortly after perform that his Promise, when upon the day
of Pentecost they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, Act. 2. 4.
as St. Luke witnesses. Besides, the Apostle St. Paul himself does profess,
both in his own name, and in the behalf of the rest of the Apostles, his
Fellows, that their Master being the truth it self, after he had so mercifully
and liberally performed his said Promise unto them, they did not deal with the
word of God, as Vintners, Regraters or Merchants do with their mixed Wines and
adulterated Wares; that is, mingle it with any untruths or superstitious
conceits, or vent it out otherwise than the truth did therein warrant them; or
did apply it with fraud, either to serve their own, or any other men's
designments; or delivered it with any such inward Reservations, and mental
Evasions, as when they did most seem to their hearers to speak one thing
directly, they had such another meaning, as when time should serve they might
make use of. But whatsoever they said, 2 Cor. 2. 17.
they spoke it sincerely, sicut ex Deo, as God did guide them by the Holy
Ghost; coram Deo, as in the sight of God; unto whom one day they were to give
an account of their said sincerity; and in Christo, as their blessed Savior
himself had preached, taught them, and had commanded them.

CAN. IV.
THerefore if any Man shall affirm, under color of any thing that is in the
Scriptures, either that the Deity of our Savior Christ, does not since his
Resurrection and Ascension, otherwise execute the Majesty and Glory thereof in
his Humanity, than it did before his Passion: or, that Christ now in Glory, is
not actually the Heir of all things, as he is Man so highly exalted, and both
King of kings, and Lord of lords: or, that he now sitting at the right hand of
God, in Glory and Majesty, as he is Man, has made an alteration in the manner
of temporal Government, ordained by himself long before, as he is God: or, that
now all the Kingdoms in the World, being but one Kingdom in respect of himself,
he does not allow the distributing of that his one Universal Kingdom, into
diverse Principalities and Kingdoms, to be ruled by so many Kings, and absolute
Princes under him: or, that such Kings and Sovereign Governors, as were
Ethnicks, were deprived by Christ's Ascension into Heaven, and most glorious
Estate there; from the true Interest and lawful Possession of the Kingdoms,
which before they enjoyed: or, that the ancient Fathers were deceived, in
holding and maintaining, that all Christians in the Primitive Church were bound
to obey such Kings and Princes as were then Pagans: or, that the Subjects of
all the Temporal Princes in the World, were not as much bound in St. Paul's
time to be subject unto them, as the Romans were to be subject to the Empire,
not only for Fear, but even for Conscience Sake: or, that St. Paul's
Commandment (by virtue of his Apostleship, and assistance of the Holy Ghost) of
Obedience to Princes, then Ethnicks, is not of as great force to bind the
Conscience of all true Christians, as if he had been then Summus Pontifex: or,
that any Pope now has power to dispense with the said Doctrine of St. Paul, as
the said Canonist, by us quoted, does seem to affirm; where after he has said,
That the Apostle St. Paul, commanding all Men to be obedient to superior
Powers, was not the highest Bishop, he adds these words, Papa major est
administratione Paulo; and Papa dispensat contra Apostolum in his, quae non
concernunt Articulos fidei: The Pope is greater in Authority than Paul; the
Pope does dispense against the Apostle in those things that do not concern the
Articles of Faith: or, that the Primitive Church was not as well restrained de
jure by the Doctrine of Christ's Apostles, as de facto, from bearing Arms
against such Princes as were then Ethnicks, and transferring of their Kingdoms
from them unto any others: or, that St. Peter himself (who our Adversaries
would make the World believe, was then the highest Bishop) concurring with the
Apostle St. Paul, when he commanded the Christians in those days to submit
themselves unto the King, as unto the Superior, (they both of them were
assured, commanding therein, as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost) did leave
this Doctrine, so jointly taught, to be dispensed with afterward by any Pope,
his Vicar; led by what Spirit is easy to be discerned, being so far different
from the Holy Ghost, which spoke (as is aforesaid) by the said Apostles: or,
that it is not a most wicked and detestable assertion for any Man to affirm,
That the Apostles in commanding such obedience to the Ethnic Princes then, did
not truly mean as their plain words do import, but had some mental
Reservations, whereby the same might be altered, as occasion should serve: or,
that the Apostles at that time, if they had found the Christians of sufficient
force, for Number, Provision, and Furniture of Warlike Engines, to have deposed
those Pagan Princes, that were then both Enemies and Persecutors of all that
believed in Christ* would (no doubt) have moved and authorized them to have
made War against such their Princes, and absolved them from performing any
longer that Obedience, which they (as Men temporizing) had in their Writings
prescribed unto them: or, that when afterward Christians were grown able for
number and strength, to have opposed themselves by force against their
Emperors, being wicked, and Persecutors; they might lawfully so have done, for
any thing that is in the New Testament to the contrary: or, that these, and
such like Expositions of the meaning of the holy Apostles, when they writ so
plainly and directly, are not very impious and blasphemous; as tending not only
to the utter discredit of them and their Writings, but likewise to the
indelible stain and dishonor of the whole Scriptures, in that they were
written by no other Persons of any greater Authority than were the Apostles,
nor by the Inspiration and direction of any other Spirit; He does greatly Err.

CAP. VI.
The Sum of the Chapter following.
That our Savior Christ after his Resurrection and Ascension did not in Effect
alter the Form of Ecclesiastical Government amongst the Jews; the essential
parts of the Priesthood under the Law (otherwise than as the said Priesthood
was typical, and had the Execution of Levitical Ceremonies annexed unto it)
being instituted and appointed by God to continue, not for a time, but until
the End of the World.

WE have deduced, in our former Book, the joint Descent of the State, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, from the Beginning of the World unto the
Incarnation of our Savior Christ. Since whose Birth, seeing we have found no
alteration in the Temporal Government of the World, either while Christ lived
here upon the Earth, or during the time of his Apostles; assuredly we shall not
find that the alteration, which, upon Christ's Death, fell out in the Church,
was so great, as some have imagined. For as our Savior Christ according unto
his Divine Nature having created all the World, was the sole Monarch of it, and
did govern the same visibly by Kings, and Sovereign Princes, his Vicegerents
upon Earth; so he in the same Divine Nature being the Son of God, and
foreseeing the Fall of Man, and how thereby all his Posterity should become the
Children of Wrath, did of his infinite Mercy, undertake to be their Redeemer;
and presently after the Transgression of Adam and Eve, put that his Office in
practice: Whereby, as he was Agnus occisus ab origin Mundi, he not only began
the Erection of that one Church, selected people, and Society of Believers,
which eversince has been, and so shall continue his blessed Spouse for ever;
but also took upon him thenceforward and for ever to be the sole Head and
Monarch of it, ruling and governing the same visibly by such Priests and
Ministers under him, as in his heavenly Wisdom he thought fit to appoint, and
as we have more at large expressed in our said former Book: Especially, when he
settled amongst the Jews a more exact and eminent Form of Ecclesiastical
Government, than before that time he had done. In the which his so exact a
Form, he first did separate the civil Government from the Ecclesiastical, as
they were both jointly exercised by one Person, restraining the Priesthood, for
a time, unto the Tribe of Levi, and the civil Government unto temporal Princes,
and shortly after, more particularly, unto the Tribe of Judah. Concerning the
Priesthood thus limited, we need to say little; because the Order and
Subordination of it is so plainly set down in the Scriptures. Aaron and his
Sons after him, by succession, had the first Place, and were appointed to
exercise the Office of Highpriests; and under their sovereign Princes and
temporal Governors, (as we have showed in our said first Book, cap. 18.) did
bear the chief sway in matters appertaining to God. Next unto Aaron there were
24. Priests of an inferior Degree, that were termed Principes Sacerdotum, that
governed the third sort of Priests, allotted unto their several Charges: and
this third sort also had the rest of the Levites at their direction. In like
manner these Levites neither wanted their chief Rulers to order them, according
as the said third sort of Priests did command (which Rulers were termed
Principes Levitarum, in number 24.) Nor their Assistants the Gabionites,
otherwise called Nethinaei, to help them in the Execution of their baser
Offices. Of this notable Form of Ecclesiastical Government, it may be truly
said in our Judgments, That the same being of God's own framing, it is to be
esteemed the best and most perfect Form of Church Government, that ever was, or
can be devised: and that Form also is best to be approved and upheld, which
does most resemble it, and comes nearest unto it.

We said upon a fit Occasion, l. 2. c. 4.
That by the Death of our Savior Christ, the Church Government then amongst
the Jews, was greatly altered: and therefore do think it very convenient in
this place more fully therein to set down our meaning. It is very true, that
before the Death of Christ, the outward Service of God did much consist in
Figures, Shadows, and Sacrifices; the Levitical Priesthood itself (as it was to
Aaron and his Stock, and in some other Respects) being only a Type of our High
Priest, Jesus Christ. But afterward, when by his Passion upon the Cross he had
fulfilled All, that was signified by the said Figures, Shadows, and Sacrifices;
and had likewise not only abolished them, but freed the Tribe of Levi, of the
charge of the Priesthood, and removed the High Priesthood (as it was typical)
from the said Priestly Tribe, unto the Regal Tribe of Judah; the same being now
settled in himself, our only High Priest, according to the Order, not of Aaron,
but of Melchizedech: He has by that his Translation of the Priesthood, Hebr.
7. 12.
freed his Church from the Ceremonial Law, -- 10. 10.
which contained in it little but Patterns, Shadows, and Figures of that one
Sacrifice offered by him upon the Cross, -- 9. 14.
which does sanctify all the faithful, and purge their Consciences from dead
works to serve the living God. Nevertheless in this so great an alteration,
although all the said Figures, Shadows, Sacrifices, and whatsoever else was
typical in the true Worship of God, and Priesthood of Aaron, were truly
fulfilled, and had their several Accomplishments according to the Natures of
them. Yet we are further to understand, that as from the beginning there was a
Church, so there was ever a Ministry; the Essential parts of whose Office
(howsoever otherwise it was burdened with Ceremonies) did consist in these
three Duties; viz. (1.) Preaching of the Word. (2.) Administration of
Sacraments: and (3.) Authority of Ecclesiastical Government: and that none of
all the said Figures, Shadows, and Sacrifices, or any other Ceremony of the
Levitical Law had any such relation to any of the said three Essential Parts of
the Ministry, as if either they the said three Essential Parts of the Ministry
had only been ordained for their continuance until the coming of Christ; or
that the accomplishment or fulfilling of the said Ceremonies had in any sort
prejudiced or impeached the Continuance of them, or any of them. So as the said
three Essential Parts of the Ministry were in no sort abolished by the Death of
Christ; but only translated from the Priesthood under the Law to the Ministry
of the New Testament: Where, in the judgment of all Learned Men, opposite in
diverse points one to another, they do or ought for ever to remain to the same
End and Purpose for the which they were first ordained.

Now concerning the two first Essential Parts of this our Ministry, or
Priesthood of the New Testament, there are no Difficulties worthy the insisting
upon, how they are to be used. Only the third Essential Part of it, as touching
the Power of Ecclesiastical Regiment, is very much controverted, and diversely
expounded, extended, and applied. For some Men, relying upon one Extremity, do
affirm, That it was in the Apostles time radically inherent only in St. Peter;
and so, by a certain consequence, afterward in his supposed Vicar the Bishop
of Rome, to be derived from St. Peter first to the rest of the Apostles and
other Ministers, while he lived, and then after his Death, in a fit proportion
to all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers to the end of the World from the Bishops
of Rome: and that St. Peter during his time, and every one of his Vicars, the
Bishops of Rome successively, then did, and still do occupy and enjoy the like
Power and Authority over all the Churches in the World, that Aaron had in the
Church established amongst the Jews. There are also another sort of Persons,
that run as far to another extremity, and do challenge the said Power and
Authority of Ecclesiastical Regiment to appertain to a new Form of
Church Government by Presbyteries, to be placed in every particular Parish:
Which Presbyteries (as diverse of them say) are so many complete and perfect
Churches; no one of them having any dependency upon any other Church: So as the
Pastor in every such Presbytery, representing after a sort Aaron the High
Priest; there would be by this project (if it were admitted) as many Aarons in
every Christian Kingdom, as there are particular Parishes. And the Authors of
both these so different, and extreme conceits, are all of them most resolute
and peremptory, that they are able to deduce and prove them out of the Form of
Church Government, which was established by God himself in the Old Testament.
Howbeit, notwithstanding all their vaunts and shows of Learning, by perverting
the Scriptures, Councils, and ancient Fathers; the Mean betwixt both the said
extremes is the truth, and to be embraced: viz. That the administration of the
said Power of Ecclesiastical Regiment under Christian Kings and supreme
Magistrates, does especially belong, by the Institution of Christ and of his
Apostles, unto Archbishops and Bishops: This Mean bearing the true
Pourtraicture, and infallible Lineaments of God's own Ordinance
abovementioned; and containing in it diverse Degrees of Priests, agreeable to
the very order and light of Nature; some superior to rule, and some inferior
to be ruled, as in all other Societies and civil States it has been ever
accustomed. So as we are bold to say, and are able to justify it, That as our
Savior Christ, as he is God, had formerly ordained in his National Church
amongst the Jews, Priests and Levites of an inferior Order, to teach them in
every City and Synagogue; and over them Priests of a superior degree, termed
Principes Sacerdotum; and lastly, above them all, one Aaron with Moses, to rule
and direct them: So he, no ways purposing by his Passion more to abrogate or
prejudice this Form of Church Government ordained by himself, than he did
thereby the temporal Government of Kings and Sovereign Princes; did by the
direction of the Holy Ghost, and Ministry of his Apostles, ordain in the New
Testament, that there should be in every National Church, some Ministers of an
inferior degree, to instruct his People in every particular Parochial Church
or Congregation; and over them Bishops of a superior degree, to have a care
and inspection over many such Parochial Churches or Congregations; for the
better ordering, as well of the Ministers as of the People within the limits of
their Jurisdiction: And lastly, above them all Archbishops, and in some
especial places Patriarchs; who were first themselves, with the advice of some
other Bishops, and when Kings and Sovereign Princes became Christians, then
with their especial aid and assistance, to oversee and direct, for the better
Peace and Government of every such National Church, all the Bishops, and the
rest of the particular Churches therein established. And for some proof hereof,
We will conclude this Chapter with the testimony of one of no mean account and
desert: Who (when Archbishops and Bishops did most obstinately oppose
themselves, as being the Pope's Vassals, to the Reformation of the Church) was
the principal Deviser of the said Presbyteries (though not in such a manner as
some have since with too much bitterness urged) whereof, out of all Question,
he would never have dreamed, if the said Bishops had not been so obstinate, as
they were, for the maintenance of such Idolatry and Superstition, as were no
longer to be tolerated. "That every Province had amongst their Bishops one
Archbishop; Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 4. 4.
that also in the Nicene Council, Patriarchs were appointed, who were in Order
and Degree above Archbishops; that did appertain to the preservation of
Discipline." And a little after, speaking of the said Form of Government so
framed, although he showed some dislike of the word Hierarchia; yet, says he,
Si, omisso Vocabulo, rem intueamur, reperiemus Veteres Episcopos non aliam
regendae Ecclesiae formam voluisse fingere, ab ea, quam Dominus verbo suo
praescripsit.

CAN. V.
AND therefore if any Man shall affirm, under color of any thing that is in
the Scriptures, either that our Savior Christ was not the Head of the Church
from the beginning of it: or, that all the particular Churches in the World are
otherwise to be termed One Church, than as he himself is the Head of it; and as
all the particular Kingdoms in the World are called but one Kingdom, as he is
the Only King and Monarch of it: or, that our Savior Christ has not appointed
under him several Ecclesiastical Governors, to rule and direct the said
particular Churches; as he has appointed several Kings and Sovereign Princes,
to rule and govern their several Kingdoms: or, that by his Death he did not
abolish the Ceremonial Law, and the Levitical Priesthood, so far forth as it
was Typical, and had the Execution of the said Ceremonial Law annexed unto it:
or, that he did any more abrogate by his Death, Passion, Resurrection and
Ascension, the Power and Authority of Church Government; than either he did the
other two Essential parts of the said Priesthood or Ministry, or the Power and
Authority of Kings and Sovereign Princes: or, that he did more appoint any one
chief Bishop to rule all the particular Churches, which should be planted
throughout all Kingdoms, than he did appoint any one King to rule and govern
all the particular Kingdoms in the World: or, that it was more reasonable or
necessary (as hereafter it shall be further showed) to have one Bishop to
govern all the Churches in the World, than it was to have one King to govern
all the Kingdoms in the World: or, that it was more necessary or convenient, to
have every Parish, with their Presbyteries, absolute Churches, independent upon
any but Christ himself; than that every such Parish should be an absolute
Temporal Kingdom, independent of any Earthly King, or Sovereign Magistrate: or,
that the Government of every National Church under Christian Kings, and
Sovereign Princes, by Archbishops and Bishops, is not more suitable and
correspondent to the Government of the National Church of the Jews, under their
Sovereign Princes and Kings, than is either the Government of one over all the
Churches of the World, or the settling of the Form of that National
Church Government in every particular Church; He does greatly Err.

CAP. VII.
The Sum of the Chapter following.
That the Form of Church Government, which was ordained by Christ in the New
Testament, did consist upon diverse degrees of Ministers, one above another;
Apostles in Preeminence and Authority superior to the Evangelists; and the
Evangelists superior to Pastors and Doctors: And that the Apostles knowing
themselves to be mortal, did, in their own Days (by the Direction of the Holy
Ghost) as the numbers of Christians grew, establish the said form of Government
in other Persons; appointing several Ministers in sundry Cities, and over them
Bishops; as also over such Bishops certain worthy Persons such as Titus was,
who were afterward termed Archbishops; to whom they did commit so much of
their Apostolical Authority, as they held then necessary, and was to be
continued for the Government of the Church.

WE had in our former Book the Scriptures at large, containing the Histories
and Doctrine both of the Law and the Gospel, after the manner that was then
prescribed, from the time of the Creation until the days of the Prophet
Malachy; that is, for above 3500. years: Whereupon we did ground the particular
Points by us therein handled, concerning the Government as well Ecclesiastical
as Temporal. And for the Supply of the other years following till the
Incarnation of our Savior Christ, we observed some things to the same purpose
out of the Apocryphal Books, second to the Scriptures, and to be preferred
before all other Writers of those times. But now forasmuch as the New Testament
is but, in effect, a more ample Declaration the Old; showing withal, how the
same was most thoroughly fulfilled by our Savior Christ (without the
impeachment of any kind of Government, by himself ordained, as before we have
expressed) and because the Books of the Evangelists and Apostles do only contain
the Acts and Doctrine of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, with the Form and
Use both of the Temporal and Ecclesiastical Government, during the time whilst
they lived here upon the Earth; (St. John, who lived the longest of them all,
dying about sixty six Years after Christ's Passion:) although the Holy Ghost
did judge the said Books and Writings sufficient for the Church and all that
profess Christianity, to teach and direct them in those things which should
appertain either to their Temporal or Ecclesiastical Government, or should be
necessary unto their Salvation: Yet for the said Reasons, we were induced, for
the upholding of the Temporal and Ecclesiastical Government in the New
Testament, to insist so much as we have done upon the Precedents and Platforms
of both those kinds of Governments established in the Old Testament; albeit we
want no sufficient Testimonies in the New to ratify and confirm as well the one
as the other.

First, therefore we do verily think, That if our Savior Christ or his
Apostles had meant to have erected in the Churches amongst the Gentiles any
other Form of Ecclesiastical Government than God himself had set up amongst the
Jew: they would have done it assuredly in very solemn manner, that all the
World might have taken public notice of it: considering with what Majesty and
Authority the said Form was erected at God's Commandment by his Servant Moses.
But in that they well knew how the Form of the Old Ecclesiastical Government,
in substance, was still to continue and to be, in time, established in every
National Kingdom and Sovereign Principality amongst Christians, as soon as they
should become for number sufficient Bodies and ample Churches to receive the
same; as before the like opportunity it was not established amongst the
Israelites: they did in the mean while, and as the time did serve them, attempt
the erecting of it in such sort, and by such fit and convenient Degrees, as by
the direction of the Holy Ghost, they held it most expedient, without
intermission, till such time as the work was (in effect) accomplished.

It has been before touched, how our Savior Christ here upon Earth, did not
only choose to himself, for the business he had in hand, twelve Apostles, who
were then designed, in time to come, to be the Patriarchs and chief Fathers of
all Christians, with some Resemblance (as it has been ever held) of the twelve
Sons of Jacob, who had been in their days the Patriarchs and chief Fathers of
all the Israelites: But likewise he took unto him (over and besides his said
Apostles, 70, or as some read 72 Disciples, to be in the same manner his
Assistants, in imitation of Moses, when he chose 70. Elders to be helpers unto
him, for the better Government of the People committed to his charge. None of
these, either Apostles or Disciples, had then any other Duties committed to
them, but only of Preaching and Baptizing: for the Power of Ecclesiastical
Regiment they might not then intermeddle with, because it did appertain to the
Priests, and Courts of the Jews. But afterward that want, and some other
defects in them, were thoroughly supplied, when our Savior Christ upon his
Resurrection, and a little before his Ascension, enlarging their Commission,
did commit unto his Apostles the Administration of the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; and shortly after furnished, not only them, but the said Disciples also
(according to their several Functions) most abundantly with all such Gifts, and
Heavenly Graces, as were necessary for them in those great Affairs which were
imposed upon them. Whereby we find already two complete Degrees of
Ecclesiastical Ministers, ordained by Christ himself immediately; viz. His 12.
Apostles, and his 70. Disciples; the one in Dignity and Authority above the
other, the Disciples in that respect being termed Secondary Apostles; and were
the same (as it is most probably held) who were afterward called Evangelists. We
will not intermeddle with the Prophets in those times, of whom the Scriptures
make mention; because diverse of them were no Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments, of whom only we have here taken upon us to entreat; leaving in like
manner the said 70. Disciples, or Evangelists, as before they had been
assistants unto Christ, so now to be directed by his Apostles. Touching whose
blessed calling it is to be observed, that the end of it was not, that they
should only for their own times, by Preaching the Word, Administering the
Sacraments, and likewise by their Authority of Ecclesiastical Regiment, draw
many to the embracing of the Gospel, and afterward to rule and order them, as
that they might not easily be drawn again from it: but were in like sort to
provide for a Succession in their Ministry, of fit Persons, sufficiently
Authorized by them, to undertake that charge, and as well to yield some further
assistance unto them, whilst they themselves lived, as afterward; also, both to
continue the same, in their own Persons, unto their lives end; and in like
manner to ordain, by the Authority of the Apostles, given unto them, other
Ministers to succeed themselves: that so the said Apostolical Authority, being
derived in that sort from one to another, there might never be any want of
Pastors and Teachers, for the work of the Ministry, and for the Edification of
the Body of Christ, unto the end of the World.

This being the duty of the said Apostles, and that it may be evident what it
was, which they did communicate unto the Ministry; it is to be observed, that
some things in the Apostles were essential and perpetual, and was the substance
of their Ministry, containing the three Essential Parts before mentioned, of
Preaching, administering the Sacraments, and of Ecclesiastical Government; and
that some were but personal and temporary, granted unto them for the better
strengthening and approving of the said Ministry with all the Parts of it; there
being then many Difficulties and Impediments, which did many ways hinder the
first Preaching and Plantation of the Gospel. In the number of the said
personal or temporary Gifts or Prerogatives, these may be accounted the Chief.
(1.) That they were called immediately by Chirst himself, to lay the Foundation
of Christian Faith among the Gentiles. (2.) That their Commission to that
purpose was not limited to any Place or Country. (3.) That they had power,
through Imposition of their hands, to give the Holy Ghost by visible Signs.
(4.) That they were directed in the performance of their Office by the especial
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost: and lastly, That their Doctrine which they
delivered in Writing, was to be a Canon and Rule to all Churches for ever. All
which personal Prerogatives, although they did then appertain, and were then
adherent to the Essence of the Apostolic Function, and were necessary, at the
first, for the establishing of the Gospel; yet it is plain, that they did not
contain in them any of the said Essential Parts of the Ministry, and likewise
that they could not be communicated by the Apostles unto any others. So as
either the Apostles, for the Propagation and Continuance of the Eccelesiastical
Ministry, did communicate to others the said three Essential Parts of it, viz.
Power to Preach, to Administer the Sacraments, and Authority of Government:
wherein must be Degrees, some to direct, and some to be directed, or else they
died all with them, which were a very wicked and an idle conceit; the Apostles
having Power to communicate them all alike, as by their Proceedings it will
appear. At the first, they themselves with the Evangelists, and so many of the
Prophets as were Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, after they had converted
many to the Faith; did execute in their own Persons, agreeably to their several
Callings, all those Ecclesiastical Functions, as were afterward of necessity,
and in due time to be distinguished, and settled in some others. Whereby it came
to pass, that the Church in Jerusalem, during that time, had no other Deacons,
Priests, nor Bishops, but the Apostles, the Evangelists, and the said Prophets.
But afterward the Harvest growing great, as to disburthen themselves of some
charge, they Ordained Deacons; So their own Company, Apostles, Disciples, or
Evangelists, and Prophets, coming short of that number of Laborers which the
said Harvest required; they did for their future aid, choose unto themselves, by
the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, certain other new Disciples and Scholars,
such as they found meet for that work; and after some good experience had of
them, made them by the Imposition of their hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Priests and Ministers of the Gospel; but did not for a time tie them to any
particular places, as having designed them to be their Fellow Laborers, and
Coadjutors.

These Men the Apostles had commonly in their Company, and did not employ their
Pains and diligent Preaching for the speedier Propagation of the Gospel, (which
was their first and most Principal Care) but likewise did use to send them
hither and thither (their Occasions so requiring) to the Churches already
planted, as their Messengers and Legates, sufficiently authorized for the
dispatching of such Affairs as were committed unto them. Romans 16. 21.
Of this number were Timothy, Titus, Marcus, Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 25.
Sylvanus, Philem. 1. 24.
Andronicus, and diverse others; who in respect of such their Apostolical
Employments, and because also the Apostles did oftentimes commend them greatly,
and joined their Names with their own in the beginnings of sundry their
Epistles to diverse Churches, Romans 16. 7.
were Men of great Reputation and Authority amongst all Christians in those
days, 2 Cor. 8. 23.
and had the name it self of Apostles given unto them, Phil 2. 25.
as formerly it has been observed of the 70. Disciples. And these were the
Persons, who were afterward, when they were tied to the oversight of diverse
particular Churches or Congregations, termed Bishops, as it will afterward
appear. Now because these Apostolical Persons were still to attend upon the
Apostles, and their Designments, as is above mentioned; and for that the number
of Christians every where did still increase, the Apostles held it necessary to
ordain, by imposition of their hands, a second degree of Ministers, who were
thereupon still to remain in the particular Churches or Congregations, that
were already planted in diverse Cities (for in those populous places Churches
were first settled) whilst the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, that were
Ministers, with their Coadjutors, were traveling from place to place, as the
Holy Ghost did direct them, to plant and order other Churches in other Cities
elsewhere, as God should bless their labors.

The office of this second degree of Ministers was by Preaching and
Administering the Sacraments, to confirm and increase, to their utmost ability,
the number of Christians in those Cities, where they kept their residence; and
likewise in the absence of the Apostles, by their common and joint counsel, to
advise and direct every particular Congregation, and Member of it, as well as
they could, when any difficulties did occur. Besides, it appertained unto them
by Preaching of the Gospel, and of the Law, and upon Conference with such as
were Penitent, to bind and loose Men's Sins, and to keep back from receiving the
holy Communion, such as were notorious and obstinate Offenders, until either
willingly by their persuasion, or afterward by the Apostles further
Chastisements, they were brought to Repentance. Only they wanted Power and
Authority of Ordination to make Ministers, Act. 14. 23.
and of the Apostolical Keys to Excommunicate. 2 Timothy 1. 6.
For the Apostles had reserved in their own hands those two Prerogatives, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
and were themselves (during those first times, 1 Cor. 4. 21.
now spoken of by us) not so far from the said Cities, 2 Cor. 13. 2.
Churches, 1 Cor. 5. 3, 5
and Ministers, but that they well might, and did thoroughly supply all their
wants whatsoever, and also set an order in all matters of difficulty, when they
fell out amongst them, concerning either Doctrine or Discipline, sometimes
themselves in their own Persons, and sometimes by their Letters, or Messengers,
as the importance of those Causes did require. In these times it may well be
granted, that there was no need of any other Bishops but the Apostles, and
likewise, that then their Churches, or particular Congregations in every City,
were advised and directed touching points of Religion, in manner and form
aforesaid, by the common and joint advice of their Priests or Ministers. In
which respect, the same Persons who then were named Priests or Ministers, were
also in a general sense called Bishops. Howbeit this course dured not long,
either concerning their said common direction, or their names of Bishops so
attributed unto them; but was shortly after ordered far otherwise, by a common
Decree of the Apostles, to be observed in all such Cities where particular
Churches were planted, Jerome. in Ep. ad Tit. c. 1.
or (as one speaks) in toto Orb, throughout the World. For the number of
Christians growing daily in every City throughout those Provinces and
Countries, where the Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, with their Coadjutors,
first traveled to plant the Christian Faith; it was still more and more
necessary, that they should be distinguished into more Congregations than they
were before, and that also the number of their said Ministers that were to be
resident amongst them, Romans 16. 17.
should be accordingly increased. 2 Cor. 1. 11. and 3. 4.
By reason of which increase, Gal. 1. 6. and 3. 1.
as well of Christians and particular Congregations, Phil. 3. 2, 8.
as of their said Ministers; Col 2. 4, 8, 18
as also for that now it began to come to pass, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
that neither the Apostles, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2, 3.
nor the Evangelists, Act. 20. 29, 30.
nor their Coadjutors and Messengers could be always so ready, 2 Pet. 2. 1. etc.
and at hand, or present with them, 1 John 2. 18. and 4. 1.
as before they had been; many Questions, Dissentions, and Quarrels, fell out
amongst them (both Ministers and particular Congregations mentioned) as by the
places quoted in the Margent it is evident; the People being as apt, through
affection and private respects, to adhere to one Man more than to another, as
sundry of their Ministers then were prompt for their own glory to entertain all
Comers, 2 Cor. 1. 24. 4. 17. 10. 12, 18. 11. 5, 23. 12. 11.
and to embrace every occasion that might procure them many Followers; not
sparing to oppose themselves in their Pride against the very Apostles, and to
charge them with ambitious seeking of pre-eminence above their Brethren
Ministers; as if they had meant to tyrannize and domineer over all Churches. 3 John 9.
Insomuch as St. John complained in his time of such Insolences: and St. Paul
was driven to purge himself; but yet in such sort, as he stood upon the
Justification of his Apostolical Authority; I grant, says he, That they are
Ministers of Christ; but withal he adds these words, I am more; protesting,
that although he was more than they were, yet he sought to have no Dominion
over the Faith of any. The places quoted in the Margent deserve due
consideration, and many other to the same purpose might be added unto them.

Now forasmuch as the Apostles did well understand the said Oppositions,
Dissentions, and Emulations; and that the People had as well Experience, what
Equality wrought amongst their Ministers in every place, whilst each Man would
be a Director as he list himself, and accordingly broach his own Fancies
without Controulment, or sparing of any that stood in his way; as also how
themselves (the people) were distracted and led to the embracing of Diverse
Sects and Schisms: they (the said Apostles) having now no such leisure and
opportunity, as that they could themselves every where appease these Quarrels,
did find it necessary to settle another Course for the redress of them by
others. For whereas before, the Apostles held it convenient, when they first
planted Ministers in every City, to detain still in their own hand the Power of
Ordination, and the authority of the Keys of Ecclesiastical Government (because
they themselves, for that time, with the Evangelists and others their
Coadjutors, were sufficient to oversee and rule them:) Now for the Reasons
abovementioned they did commit those their said two Prerogatives, containing
in them all Episcopal Power and Authority, unto such of their said Coadjutors,
as upon sufficient trial of their Abilities and Diligence, they knew to be meet
Men; both, whilst they themselves lived, to be their Substitutes, and after
their deaths to be their Succcessors, both for the Continuance of the work of
Christ, for the further building of his Church, and likewise for the perpetual
Government of it. And in this manner, the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments,
who had the charge but of one particular Church or Congregation, and were of an
inferior Degree, were distinguished from the first and superior sort of
Ministers, termed (most of them) before, The Apostles Coadjutors; and now and
from thenceforth called Bishops. Unto which sort of worthy and selected
Coadjutors, and unto some others also of especial Desert so advanced to the
Titles and Offices of Bishops, the Apostles did commit the charge and oversight
of all the particular Congregations, Ministers and Christian people that dwelt
in one City, and in the Towns and Villages thereunto appertaining. And such
were the Angels of the seven Churches in Asia, Apoc. 1. 11.
who were then the Bishops of those Cities, with their several Territories; and
so in all times and ages that since have succeeded, have ever been reputed. And
unto some others the most principal and chief men of the said Number, the
Apostles did likewise give Authority, not only over the particular
Congregations, Ministers and People in one City, and in the Towns that did
belong unto it; but likewise over all the Churches in certain whole Provinces
and Countries, 1 Timothy 1. 3.
as unto Timothy all that were in Asia the less, Tit. 1. 5.
and unto Titus all that were planted throughout the Island of Crete. And this
sort of Bishops who had so large Jurisdictions over the Bishops themselves in
particular Cities, were afterward called Archbishops: Over whom, in like
manner, as likewise over all the rest, Bishops and Ministers, and particular
Churches, the Apostles themselves as the chief Fathers and Patriarchs of all
Churches, had whilst they lived, the chief pre-eminence and oversight to direct
and overruled all, as they knew it to be most convenient and behoofull for the
Church: communicating notwithstanding unto the said Bishops and Archbishops
(now their Substitutes, but in time to be their Successors) as full Authority
in their absence (with the limitations mentioned) for the ordering of
Ministers, for the use of the Keys, and for the further Government of all the
Churches committed to their charges, by the good advice and counsel of the
inferior sort of Priests, or Ministers under them, when Causes so required; as
if they (the Apostles themselves) had been present, or could have always lived
to have performed those duties in their own Persons; their Patriarchal
Authority for Government not ceasing, or dying with them. Of this Authority of
Ordination and Government, given to Bishops by the holy Apostle St. Paul, he
himself has left to all Posterity most clear and evident Testimonies; where
writing to two of his said Bishops, Timothy and Titus, he describes very
particularly the Essential parts of their duties, and Episcopal Office, in
manner and sort following.

"For this cause I left thee at Crete, Tit. 1. 5.
that thou should continue to redress the things that remain; and should
Ordain Priests or Elders in every City, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
as I appointed thee. -- 3. 10.
Lay hands hastily on no Man; -- 5. 19.
neither be Partaker of other Men's Sins. Let them first be proved, then let
them minister, if they be found blameless. Against a Presbyter or Priest,
receive no accusation but under two or three Witnesses. Them that sin rebuke
openly, -- 1. 3, 4, 7.
that the rest may fear. I pray thee to abide at Ephesus, to command some, that
they teach no strange Doctrine, neither that they give heed to Fables and
Genealogies which are endless, and do breed Questions rather than godly
Edification, which is by Faith. They would be Doctors of the Law; and yet
understand not what they speak, Tit. 1. 10, 11.
neither whereof they affirm. There are many disobedient and vain Talkers and
Deceivers of Minds; whose Mouths must be stopped; which subvert whole Houses,
teaching things which they ought not, -- 3. 9.
for filthy lucre's sake. Stay foolish questions and contentions; -- 10.
reject him that is an Heretic after one or two warnings. -- 2. 15.
These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all Authority: See that no Man
despise thee. What things thou have heard of me, the same deliver to faithful
Men, which shall be able to teach others also. Put them in remembrance, and
protest before the Lord, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
that they strive not about words, -- 2. 14.
which is to no profit, -- 16.
but to the perverting of the Hearers. -- 23.
Stay profane and vain bablings; for they shall increase unto more ungodliness.
Put away all foolish and unlearned Questions; knowing that they engender
strife. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 5. 21.
and the Elect Angels, that thou observe these things, without preferring one
to another; and do nothing partially." Diverse other particulars might be
hereunto added, were it not that these are sufficient for our purpose, to show
as well what Power was given to the said Timothy and Titus (two Apostolical
Bishops newly designed unto their Episcopal Functions) as also what Authority
the Apostle himself had, whilst he lived, both of prescribing rules unto them,
and also of exacting the due observation of them: He retaining still in his own
hands, as full power and ample Jurisdiction over them, as they the said Bishops
had received from him over the rest of the Ministry, within their several
charges.

And thus we see, how by degrees the Apostles did settle the Government of the
Church amongst the Gentiles converted to Christ, most suitable and agreeing
with the Platform ordained by God himself amongst the Jews. Ministers are
placed in particular Congregations, as Priests or Levites were in their
Synagogues. Four and twenty Priests termed Principes Sacerdotum, had in that
Kingdom the charge over the rest of the Priests: and amongst Christians, one
sort of Priests named Bishops or Archbishops (as their Jurisdictions were
extended) had the oversight of the rest of the Ministry or Priesthood. Lastly,
as over all the Priests, of what sort soever, and over the rest of all the
Jews, Aaron had the chief preeminence; so had the Apostles over all the Bishops
and Priests, and over the rest of all Christians. There was only this want to
the full accomplishment of such a Church Government, as was settled amongst the
Jews, that during the Apostles times, and for a long season afterward, it
wanted Christian Magistrates to supply the rooms of Moses, King David, King
Solomon, and of the rest of their worthy Successors. There is no mention in the
Scriptures of the particular success that the rest of the Apostles had in
planting of Churches throughout all Africa and Asia the great, and a great part
of Europe: but we doubt not, but that they followed that same course in those
parts nearer, or better known to us; they proceeding within their limits, as
St. Paul did within his. And moreover, we have sufficient warrant by the said
Practice of our Apostles to judge, that if all the Kings, and Sovereign Princes
of the World would have received the Gospel whilst the Apostles lived, they
would have settled this Platform of Church Government under them in every such
Kingdom, and Sovereign Principality: that as the three Essential parts of the
Priesthood under the Law, were translated to the Ministry or Priesthood in the
New Testament; so the external show or practice of them, might have been in
effect the same under Christian Princes that it was under the godly Kings and
Princes of Judah: Christians of particular Congregations to be directed by
their immediate Pastors; Pastors to be ruled by their Bishops; Bishops to be
advised by their Archbishops; and the Archbishops, with all the rest, both of
the Clergy and Laity, to be ruled and governed by their godly Kings and
Sovereign Princes.

CAN. VI.
AND therefore if any Man shall affirm, under color of any thing that is in
the Scriptures, either that the Platform of Church Government in the New
Testament, may not lawfully be deduced from that Form of Church Government,
which was in the Old: or, that because the Apostles did not once for all, and
at one time, but by degrees, erect such a like form of Ecclesiastical
Government, as was amongst the Jews, therefore it is not to be supposed, that
they meant at all to erect it: or, that their expectation of fit opportunity to
establish that kind of Government in the Churches of the Gentiles, being
converted to Christ, has any more force to discredit it, than had the want of
it for many years amongst the Jews to blemish the dignity of it, when it was
there established: or, that the Apostles had no further Authority of
Church Government committed unto them, after the Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ, than they had before his Passion: or, that there was not as great
necessity of sundry degrees in the Ministry, whilst the Apostles lived, one to
rule, another to be ruled, for the establishing and government of the Church,
as there was whilst the Priesthood of Aaron endured: or, that Christ himself
did not, after a sort, approve of diverse degrees of Ministers, some to have
pre-eminence over others, in that having chosen to himself twelve Apostles, he
did also elect 70. Disciples, who were neither superior nor equal to the
Apostles, and were therefore their inferiors: or, that he did not very
expressly, after his Ascension appoint diverse Orders and degrees of Ministers,
who had power and pre-eminence one over another; Apostles over the Prophets and
Evangelists, and the Evangelists over Pastors and Doctors: or, that the
Authority of Preaching, of Administration of the Sacraments, and of
Ecclesiastical Government, given to the Apostles, was not to be communicated by
the Apostles unto others, as there should be good opportunity in that behalf:
or, that because there were some personal Prerogatives belonging to the
Apostles, which they could not communicate unto others, therefore they had not
power to communicate to some Ministers, as well their Authority of Government
over other Ministers, as their Authority to preach and administer the
Sacraments: or, that in the Authority of Government so to be communicated unto
others by the Apostles, there are not included certain degrees to be in the
Ministry, some to rule, and some to be ruled: or, that it was not lawful for
the Apostles to choose unto themselves Coadjutors, and to make them Ministers
of the Word and Sacraments, though they tied them for a space to no certain
place, more than they themselves, and the Evangelists, were limited or tied;
but kept them in their own Company, as if they had been (in a manner) their
Fellows, and employed them in Apostolical Embassages, as there were occasions:
or, that the Apostles might not lawfully ordain a second Order of Ministers, by
Imposition of their hands, to Preach and administer the Sacraments, and to tie
them to particular Churches and Congregations, there to execute those their
duties: or, that the Ministers of that second degree and Order, so tied unto
their particular Charges, had any power committed unto them, either at all to
make Ministers, or to pronounce the Sentence of Excommunication against any of
their Congregation, but by the direction of the Apostles, when they had given
the Sentence, during all the time that the Apostles kept in their own hands the
said two points of Ecclesiastical Authority: or, that it was not expedient for
the Apostles to retain in their own hands, the Power and Authority of
Ecclesiastical Government for a time, and whilst they were able to execute the
same in their own Persons, or by their Coadjutors, as they should direct them;
and not to communicate the same, either to any their said Coadjutors, or other
Persons of the Ministry, until they themselves had good experience and trial of
them; and that the particular Churches also in every City, found the want of
such Men, so authorized, to reside amongst them: or, that when the said
Ministers, placed in diverse particular Churches in sundry Cities, fell at
variance amongst themselves; which of them should be most prevalent amongst the
People, and drew their Followers into diverse Sects and Schisms; it was not high
time for the Apostles (seeing by reason of their great affairs and business
otherwise, they could not attend those particular brawls and inconveniences)
to appoint some worthy Persons in every City, to have the rule, government, and
direction of them: or, that when such Men were to be placed in such Cities, the
Apostles did not make especial choice of them, out of the number of their said
Coadjutors, and likewise out of the rest of the Ministry, to execute those
Episcopal duties, which did appertain to their Callings: or, that when they had
so designed and chosen them to be Bishops, they did not communicate unto them,
as well their Apostolical Authority of Ordaining of Ministers, and power of the
Keys, as of Preaching and Administering the Sacraments: or, that it was not the
meaning of the Apostle St. Paul, that such Persons, as Timothy and Titus were,
ought to be made Bishops in such Cities and Countries as were that Province of
Ephesus, and Kingdom of Crete, to have the like Authority and Power given them
in their several Cities, with their Suburbs, Diocese, or Province, that was
committed to Timothy and Titus, for the ruling of those Ministers and Churches
under them: or, that the Authority given by the Apostle St. Paul, or by any
other of the Apostles to Timothy and Titus, and such like other Bishops or
Archbishops, did any more diminish the Power and Authority which the Apostles
had in their own hands, before they appointed any such Bishops and Archbishops,
to rule and govern them all; than their giving Power and Authority of Preaching
and Administering the Sacraments, did impeach their own Authority so to do; He
does greatly Err.

CAP. VIII.
The Sum of the Chapter following.
That the Churches and godly Fathers, that were immediately after the Apostles
times, and all the Ancient Fathers since, did account the Form of
Church Government, established by the Apostles (of Priests and Ministers for
more particular Charges; of Bishops superior to the said Priests; and of
Archbishops to have the care and oversight of the said Bishops and Churches
committed unto them) not to have been ordained for their times only, but to be
continued to the End of the World; the same reasons exacting the continuance of
it, which moved the Apostles (by the Direction of the Holy Ghost) first to
erect it.

WE have pursued the Form of Ecclesiastical Government, so far forth as it is
expressed in the Scriptures, and as it was put in practice during the Apostles
times. For the further proof whereof, we have thought it expedient briefly to
observe, what the primitive Church, Ancient Fathers, and the Ecclesiastical
Histories, have in their Writings testified, and said of this matter: as
whether they held, that Timothy and Titus were Bishops in the Apostles times,
and had Authority over the Churches and Ministry committed to their Charge: and
whether that Form of Church Government in the Apostles times, wherein were
diverse Degrees of Ministers, one sort to direct and rule, viz. Bishops, and the
other to be directed and ruled, was only necessary for the first plantation of
the Churches, but not so afterward, when the Churches were planted; as if it
had been a lawful Form of Government, whilst the Apostles lived, but upon their
Deaths, it became presently to be unlawful. It is very apparent and cannot be
denied, That in many Greek Copies of the New Testament, Timothy and Titus are
termed Bishops in the Directions or Subscriptions of two Epistles, which St.
Paul did write unto them. These are the words of the said Directions: The
second Epistle written from Rome unto Timotheus, the first Bishop elected of
the Church of Ephesus, And again, To Titus elect the first Bishop of the
Cretians, written from Nicopolis in Macedonia. Moreover, agreeable to the said
Subscriptions, the ancient Fathers generally, having (no doubt) upon their due
searching the Scriptures fully considered of the Form of Ecclesiastical
Government, whilst the Apostles lived, do with one consent, whenever they
expound the Epistles of St. Paul to Timothy and Titus, or have Occasion to
speak of the Authority of those two Persons, very resolutely affirm, That they
were by the Apostles made Bishops. And the same also, they do testify of St.
James the Apostle himself, called the Lord's Brother; that he was made by the
rest of the Apostles, his Colleagues, Bishop of Jerusalem: and so also of the
Seven Angels of the Churches in Asia, that they were so many Bishops of the
Apostles Ordination. Tertull. contra Marcion. l. 5.
Besides, the said ancient Fathers did very well know that when St. Paul said
to Timothy, Chrysostom. Hom. 10. in 1 Timothy
I charge thee in the sight of God, Ambr. in 1 Timothy c. 6. Occum. in 1 Timothy c 6.
and before Jesus Christ, that thou keep this Commandment without spot, and
unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; that it was
impossible for Timothy to observe those things till the coming of Christ, he
being to die long before: and that therefore the Precepts and Rules which St.
Paul had given unto him, to observe in his Episcopal Government, did equally
appertain as well to Bishops, his Successors, as to himself, and were to be
executed by them successively after his Death unto the Worlds End, as carefully
and diligently as he himself, whilst he lived, had put them in Practice. Ambr.
ibid.
One of the said Fathers does write as follows: "With great Vigilance and
Providence, does the Apostle give Precepts to the Ruler of the Church: for in
his Person does the safety of the People consist. He is not so circumspect, as
fearing Timothy's care, but for his Successors; that after Timothy's Example
they should observe the Ordination of the Church, and begin themselves to keep
that Form which they were to deliver to those that came after them." Again, it
is evident by the Ecclesiastical Histories, that not only St. James, Timothy,
and Titus, were made Bishops by the Apostles; Eusebius. l. 3. c. 35.
but that likewise Peter himself was Bishop of Antioch; so termed, because of
his long stay there: Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
and that the Apostles likewise made Evodius Bishop of Antioch after St. Peter,
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 23.
and St. Mark Bishop of Alexandria, and Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna; and that
St. John, returning from Patmos to Ephesus, went to the Churches round about,
and made Bishops in those places where they were wanting: and also, that diverse
others of the Apostles Coadjutors, besides Timothy and Titus, were made by them
Bishops, and did govern the Cities and Provinces where they were placed,
according to the same rules, that were prescribed to Timothy and Titus: Origin.
in Romans c. 16. Ambr. in Coloss. c. 4.
as Dionysius the Areopagite was the first Bishop of Athens; Caius the first
Bishop of Thessalonica, Archippus the first Bishop of the Colossians; and we
doubt not, but many more by diligent reading may be found, that were in the
Apostles times made Bishops.

Furthermore it is apparent by the testimonies of all Antiquity, Fathers, and
Ecclesiastical Histories, that all the Churches in Christendom, that were
planted and governed by the Apostles, and by such their Coadjutors, Apostolical
Persons, as unto whom the Apostles had to that end fully communicated their
Apostolical Authority; did think, that after the Death, either of any of the
Apostles, which ruled amongst them, or of any other the said Bishops ordained
by them, it was the meaning of the Holy Ghost, testified sufficiently by the
practice of the Apostles, that the same Order and Form of Ecclesiastical
Government should continue in the Church for ever. And therefore upon the death
of any of them, either Apostles or Bishops, they (the said Churches) did always
supply their places with others the most worthy and eminent Persons amongst
them: who with the like Power and Authority, that their Predecessors had, did
ever succeed them. Insomuch as in every City and Episcopal See, where there
were diverse Priests and Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, and but one
Bishop only; the Catalogues of the Names, not of their Priests but of their
Bishops, were very carefully kept from time to time, together with the Names of
the Apostles, or Apostolical Persons, the Bishops their Predecessors, from whom
they derived their Succession. Of which Succession of Bishops, whilst the
Succession of Truth continued with it, the ancient Fathers made great account
and use, when any false Teachers did broach new Doctrine, as if they had
received the same from the Apostles; choking them with this, that they were
not able to show any Apostolical Church that ever taught as they did. Iren.
adv. haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
Upon such an occasion, Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, within 75. years (or
thereabout) after St. John's Death, does write in this sort: Habemus annumerare
eos, qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis, and Successores
eorum usque ad nos, Tertull. de praescrip. adv. haeres.
qui nihil tale docuerunt, neque cognoverunt, quale ab his deliratur. And so
likewise, not long after him, Tertullian, to oppress some, who (as it seems)
drew Companies after them, says thus: Edant Origines Ecclesiarum suarum;
Evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum ita per Successiones ab initio decurrentem;
ut primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis, aut Apostolicis viris, qui tamen
cum Apostolis perseveraverit, habuerit autorem, and Antecessorem: Hoc enim modo
Ecclesiae Catholicae sensus suos deferunt. Aug. Epist. 24.
And St. Augustine, Radix Christianae Societatis per seeds Apostolorum, and
Successores Episcoporum certa per Orbem propagatione diffunditur.

Again, forasmuch as it was thought by our Savior Christ, the best means for
the building and continuing of his Church in the Apostles times, to ordain
sundry degrees of Ministers in Dignity and Authority one over another, when
such a kind of pre-eminence might have been thought not so necessary, because
the Apostles by working of Miracles, might otherwise (as it is probable) have
procured to themselves sufficient Authority: How can it with any reason be
imagined, but that Christ much more did mean to have the same still to be
continued after the Apostles days, when the gifts of doing Miracles were to
cease, and when Men's Zeal was like to grow more cold, than it was at the first.
It savoureth assuredly, We know of what Faction, Indiscretion, or Affection for
any Man, either to think that Form of Church Government to be unfit for our
times, that was held necessary for the Apostles times; or that Order, so much
commended amongst all Men, and is most properly termed Parium, dispariumque
rerum sua cuique loca tribuens Dispositio, should be necessary to build the
Church, but unfit to preserve it; or, that the same Artisans, that are most
meet to build this or that House, are not the fittest both to keep the same in
good Reparations, and likewise to build other Houses when there is cause. No
Man can doubt (who is of any reading) but that, when the Apostles died, there
were many defects in many Churches: and that likewise there were a number of
places in the World, where the Apostles had never been, and where there were no
Churches planted, or established. Whereupon it follows of necessity, that if
the said Form of Government in the Apostles days was then necessary for the
planting and ordering of Churches; that the same did continue to be as
necessary afterward, for the supplying of such defects, as were left in some
Churches, and for the planting and ordering of other Churches in those places,
that had not received the Gospel, whilst the Apostles lived. And to this
purpose it does much avail, that for ought we can find, there can no one Nation
or Country be named since the Apostles days, neither in times of Persecution
nor since; but when it first received the Faith of Christ, it had thereupon
both Bishops and Archbishops placed in it for the Government of the Churches,
that were there planted; imitating therein for their more certain direction the
Government of the Churches, that were erected by the Apostles, and had been
deduced from them, agreeable (in substance) with the Form of Ecclesiastical
Government, that was once amongst God's own People the Jews. Which was no new
conceit amongst the ancient Fathers; as it may appear by the words of one of
them; Jeron. Ep. ad Evagr.
"Who says (in effect) that Bishops, Priests and Deacons, may challenge now
that Authority in the Church, which Aaron and his Sons, and the Levites, had in
times past; and that the Apostles in establishing of their Government in the
New Testament, had respect to that which was in the Old; for as much as
concerned the Essential parts of that Priesthood."

Moreover the Primitive Churches, presently after the Apostles times, finding
in the New Testament no one person to have been ordained a Priest, or Minister
of the Gospel, mediately by Men, but either by Imposition of the Apostles
hands, or of their hands to whom they gave Authority in that behalf, as unto
Timothy and Titus, and such other Bishops as they were; and knowing that the
Church of Christ should never be left destitute of Priests and Bishops for the
work of the Ministry: they durst not presume upon their own heads to devise a
new form of making of Ministers, nor to commit that Authority unto any other,
after their own Fancies; but held it their bounden duty to leave the same where
they found it, viz. in the hands of Timothy and Titus, and consequently of
other Bishops their Successors. Whereupon it follows very necessarily, that
none of the Primitive Churches, or ancient Fathers, did ever so much as once
dream, that the Authority given by St. Paul to Timothy, and to Titus, and to
the rest, who were then made Bishops, as well for the ordering of Priests, as
for the further order and government of the Church, did determine by the death
of the Apostles: Considering, that presently after, as long as they were in
being, and lived, and ever since till very lately, it was held by them
altogether unlawful, for any to ordain a Priest or Minister of the Word, except
he were himself a Bishop: and no one approved Example for the space of above
1500. years, can be showed (for ought we find) to the contrary. It is true,
that one Coluthus, being himself but a Priest, would needs take upon him to
make Priests, in spleen against his own Bishop (the Bishop of Alexandria) with
whom he was then fallen at variance: and that the like attempt was made by one
Maximus, supposing himself to have been a Bishop, where he was indeed but a
Priest, as it was decided by the first Council of Constantinople. Howbeit such
their Ordinations were accounted void, and utterly condemned as unlawful; they
themselves not escaping such just reproof, as so great a Novelty and
presumption did deserve. We acknowledge, that for the great dignity of the
Action of Ordination, it was decreed by another Council, That Priests should
lay their hands, with the Bishop, upon him that was to be made Priest: but they
had not thereby any Power of Ordination; but only did it to testify their
consent thereunto, and likewise to concur in the blessing of him: neither might
they ever in that sort impose their hands upon any without their Bishops.

Again, the said Primitive Churches and ancient Fathers, finding how the
Apostles, by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, had ordained Bishops, Timothy,
Titus, and such like, for the ordering and appeasing of such Quarrels and
Contentions as arise amongst the Ministers and People, for want of some amongst
them of Authority to govern them; they might thereby have been confirmed more
and more in their Judgments (if at any time they had doubted of it) concerning
the necessity of that Apostolical Form of Government, that it was for ever to
continue, to the end the Schisms and contentious Persons might be still, by the
same means, suppressed, that they were whilst the Apostles lived. For they ever
observed what the want of Bishops would work in the Church; and how the
contempt of them, and disobedience to their directions, was always a chief
cause of Sects and Schisms. Which made them easily to discern, that if the
Apostles had not provided for the continuance of their Apostolical Authority in
Bishops, who were to succeed them in the Government of the Church; but had left
an equality in the Clergy, that every one might have proceeded in his own
particular Church after his own Fashion; there would have been nothing in the
Church but Disorder, Scandals, Sects, Schisms, and all manner of Confusion. One
of the ancient Fathers perceiving in his time, what Pride and Contempt certain
unstaid and contentious Persons showed toward their Archbishops, did lay it
upon them as a property of Heretics, and feared not to compare them to the
Devils. These are his words, Quilibet haereticus, etc. loquens cum Pontifice,
nec eum vocat Pontificem, nec Archiepiscopum, nec Religiosissimum, nec Sanctum;
sed quid? Reverentia tua; and nomina illi adducit communia, ejus negans
autoritatem. Diabolus hoc tum fecit in Deo: Ero similis Altissimo. Non Deo, sed
Altissimo. And another Father, long before the days of the former, did
accordingly observe, that Heretics and Schismatics did usually spring from no
other Fountain, Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 3.
but his, Quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur; nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus
Sacerdos; and ad tempus Judex vice Christi cogitatur: that the Priest of God
(meaning every such Bishop as he himself was in his own Diocese) was not
obeyed; nor one Priest in the Church acknowledged for the time to be Judge in
Christ's stead. Id. l. 4. Ep. 8.
And again, Vnde Schismata and Haereses abortae sunt, and oriuntur; nisi dum
Episcopus qui unus est, and Ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam praesumptione
contemnitur? Whence have Schisms and Heresies sprung up, and do spring: but
whilst the Bishop, which is one and rules the Church, is by the proud
Presumption of certain men despised? A third Father also, though at some times
he had a sharp tooth against Bishops, as they carried themselves in his time,
does confess nevertheless, That when Schisms first began, Bishops were
ordained, Vt Schismatum semina tollerentur; and in another Place, in Remedium
Schismatis, ne unusquisque ad se trahens Christi Ecclesiam rumperet. Also where
the same Father does write against the Luciferians, Hieron. adv.
and undertaketh the defense of Bishops in a right point, Luciferianos.
untruly by them impugn'd, he speaks of their Authority within their several
Diocesses after this sort, Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate
pendet: Cui si non exors quaedam, and ab hominibus eminens detur potestas, tot
in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata, quot Sacerdotes: that is, The safety of the
Church does consist in the dignity of the chief Priest: unto whom, if an
extraordinary and eminent Power from other men be not yielded, there will be as
many Schisms in Churches, as there are Priests.

Lastly it is to be observed, that in the Apostles times the Roman Empire had
wrought a great confusion in all the Kingdoms and Countries about it; whilst in
the greediness of Honor in that state they had subdued their Neighbor Kings
and Princes, and turned their Kingdoms and Principalities into Provinces and
Consulships and diverse other such like Forms of Regiment; leaving the same to
the Government of their own Substitutes, to whom they gave sundry and different
titles. Which course, held by that state, caused the Apostles, in their
planting of Churches, when they could not perform that which otherwise they
would have done, to frame their proceeding as near unto it, as they could. In
the chief Cities, which had been Heads of so many Kingdoms, and were still the
Seat then of the principal Roman Officers, principal Persons were placed, who
were Bishops, and more than Bishops: as St. James at Jerusalem, (although
Jerusalem, notwithstanding it was honored with the name and title of the Sea
of St. James, was not the Metropolitan Seat, or Archbishopric of that
Province, but Caesarea; whose Right is saved in the giving that honor to
Jerusalem in the first Nicene Council;) St. Peter first in Antioch, and then in
Rome; and St. Mark in Alexandria: who remained in those places, as was then
most behooveful for those Churches, as so many principal Archbishops,
Patriarchs, to rule and direct all the Bishops, Priests, and Christians, in
Palestine, Syria, Italy, and Egypt. And in other Cities also and Countries, not
so famous then as the said four, there were appointed, according to the
largeness of their Extents, in some, Bishops, to govern the Ministers which
were in such Cities; and in some others, such as Timothy and Titus were, who
(as we have showed in the former Chapter) had the oversight committed unto
them, as well of Bishops, as of the rest of the Churches within their limits.
All which particulars, so put in practice by the Apostles, were very well know
to the Primitive Churches, and ancient godly Fathers, that lived the first 300.
years after Christ; and gave them full assurance, that they might lawfully
pursue in those days that Form of Church Government which the Apostles
themselves had erected: the state and condition of the times remaining still
one and the same, that it was, when the Apostles lived. Whereupon, by their
Example, they did not only continue the Succession of Bishops and Archbishops,
in those places where the Apostles had settled them: supplying other Churches,
either not thoroughly settled, or not at all planted, when the Apostles died (as
before has been mentioned) with the like Church Governors: but did likewise
preserve, and uphold in those parts of the World, where Christianity did then
chiefly flourish, the Succession of Patriarchal Archbishops in the
abovementioned four most principal Cities, Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome, and
Alexandria. Insomuch as it is commonly held, that this Apostolical Order was
thus distributed, and settled by the Fathers of the Primitive Church long before
the Council of Nice; and that then in that holy Assembly, it was only but so
acknowledged and continued, idque ad Disciplinae conservationem, Calvin.
as a very worthy Man has observed.

The consideration of all which particular points, concerning the placing of
Archbishops and Bishops in the Territories of the Romans, according to the
Dignities and chief honors of the Cities and Countries where they were placed;
does very thoroughly persuade us, that (as we observed in the former Chapter) if
all the said Kingdoms, and Sovereign Principalities, then in subjection to the
Roman Empire, had been freed of that servitude, and governed by their own Kings
and Princes, as they had been before: the Apostles (though the said Kings and
Princes had refused to receive the Gospel) would notwithstanding as much as in
them lay, have settled in every one of them, for the Government of the Church
there, the like Form that God himself did erect amongst the Jews, and that they
themselves did establish in their time in the like Heathenish places, as is
aforesaid; that is, in every such Kingdom Ministers in particular Churches, or
Congregations; Bishops over Ministers, and Archbishops to oversee and direct
them all. And assuredly, if when Christian Kings and Sovereign Princes did free
themselves from the Yoke of the Empire, they had either known or regarded the
Ordinance of the Holy Ghost, for the Government of the Churches within their
Kingdoms and Principalities; they would have been as careful to have delivered
their Churches from the bondage of the Bishop of Rome, as they were their
Kingdoms from subjection to the Empire. For all, that is commonly alleged to
the contrary, is but the fume of presumptuous Brains. The chief Archbishops,
either in France or Spain, have as full Power and Authority under their
Sovereigns, as the Bishops of Rome had in times past over Italy, under their
Emperor: and by the Institution of Christ, they ought to depend no more upon
the Sea of Rome, than they do now one upon the other: or than the Archbishops
of England, under their most worthy Sovereign, do depend upon any of them: as
it will hereafter more plainly (we hope) appear by that which we have to say of
that infinite Authority which the Pope does vainly challenge to himself.

CAN. VII.
AND therefore if any Man shall affirm, under color of any thing that is in
the Scriptures, either that the Subscriptions, or Directions of the second
Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy, of of his Epistle to Titus, though they are
found in the ancient Copies of the Greek Testament, are of no Credit or
Authority: or, that such an Impeachment and Discredit laid upon them, is not
very prejudicial to the Books and Writings of the Holy Ghost: or, that it is
not great presumption for Men in these days, to take upon them to know better,
Whether Timothy and Titus were Bishops, than the Churches and godly Fathers
did, which were planted and lived either in the Apostle's times, or presently
after them; except they have some especial Revelations from God: or, that
whilst Men do labor to bring into discredit the ancient Fathers and Primitive
Churches, they do not derogate from themselves such credit as they hunt after,
and as much as in them lies, bring many parts of Religion into a wonderful
uncertainty: or, that it is probable, or was possible for Timothy to have
observed those Rules that St. Paul gave him unto the coming of Christ; except
(as the Fathers expound some of them) he meant to have them first observed by
himself and other Bishops in that Age, and that afterward they should so
likewise be observed by all Bishops for ever: or, that the ancient Fathers, and
Ecclesiastical Histories, when they Record it to all Posterity, that these Men,
and those Men, were made by the Apostles, Bishops of such and such places, are
not to be held to be of more credit than any other Historiographers, or
Writers: or, that when the ancient Fathers did collect out of the Scriptures
and practice of the Apostles, the continuance for ever of that Form of
Church Government which was then in use, they were not so thoroughly illuminated
with the Holy Ghost, as diverse Men of late have been: or, that it was an idle
course held by the Primitive Churches, and ancient Fathers, to keep the
Catalogues of their Bishops, or to ground Arguments in some Cases upon their
Succession, in that they were able to deduce their beginnings, either from the
Apostles, or from some Apostolical Persons: or, that the Form of Government,
used in the Apostle's times, for the planting and ordering of Churches, was
not, in many respects, as necessary to be continued in the Church afterward;
especially considering, that many Churches were not left fully ordered, nor in
some places were at all planted, when the Apostles died: or, that true and
perfect Order, grounded upon the very Laws of Nature and Reason, and
established by the Holy Ghost in the Apostles times, was not fit for the
Churches of God afterward to embrace and observe: or, that any Church, since
the Apostles time, till of late years, when it received the Gospel, had not
likewise Archbishops and Bishops for the Government of it: or, that diverse of
the ancient Fathers did not hold, and that very truly (for ought that appears
to the contrary) that our Savior Christ and his Apostles, in establishing the
Form of Church Government amongst the Gentiles, had an especial respect to that
Form which God had settled amongst the Jews, and did no way purpose to abrogate
or abolish it: or, that any since the Apostles times, till of late days, was
ever held to be a lawful Minister of the Word and Sacraments, who was not
Ordained Priest or Minister, by the Imposition of the hands of some Bishop: or,
that it is with any probability to be imagined, that all the Churches of
Christ, and ancient Fathers from the beginning, would ever have held it for an
Apostolical Rule, That none but Bishops had any Authority to make Priests, had
they not thought and judged, that the same Authority had been derived unto them
the said Bishops from the same Apostolical Ordination, that was committed unto
Timothy and Titus, their Predecessors: or, that the Apostles, and all the
ancient Fathers, were deceived, when they judged the Authority of Bishops
necessary at all times for the suppressing of Schisms; and that without
Bishops, there would be in the Churches as many Sects as Ministers: or, that
when Men find themselves, in regard of their disobedience to their Bishops, so
fully and notably described and censured by all the ancient Fathers for
Schismatics and contentious Persons, they have not just cause to fear their
own Estates, if they continue in such their willfulness and obstinacy: or, that
the Church Government, by us above treated of, is truly to be said to savor of
Judaism, more than the observation by godly Kings and Princes, of the Equity of
the Judicial Law, given to the Jews, may truly be said to savor thereof: or,
that it does proceed from any other than the wicked Spirit, for any sort of
Men, what godly show soever they can pretend to seek to discredit (as much as
in them lies) that Form of Church Government, which was established by the
Apostles, and left by them to continue in the Church to the end of the World,
under Archbishops and Bishops, such as were Timothy and Titus, and some others,
then called to those Offices by the said Apostles, and ever since held by the
Primitive Churches, and all the ancient Fathers to be Apostolical Functions; or
to term the same, or any part of it to be Antichristian; He does greatly Err.

CAP. IX.
The Sum of the Chapter following.
That our Savior Christ, upon his Ascension into Heaven, did not commit the
Temporal Government of the whole World unto St. Peter. That the Apostles and
whole Ministry did succeed Christ, not as he was a Person immortal and glorious
after his Resurrection; but as he was a Mortal Man here upon the Earth before
his Passion. That Christ left neither to St. Peter, nor to the Bishops of Rome,
nor to any other Archbishops or Bishops any temporal Possessions; all, that
since any of them have gotten, being bestowed upon them by Emperors, Kings and
Princes, and other their good Benefactors. And that the Imagination of St.
Peter's Temporal Sovereignty, is very idle; the same being never known unto
himself, (for ought that appears) and argues great Ignorance of the true
nature of the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ: for the erecting whereof the
spiritual working of the Holy Ghost with the Apostles, and the rest of the
Ministry of the Gospel, was, and is only necessary.

IT has been showed by us before that our Savior Christ, after his
Resurrection and Ascension, became actually in the State of the Heir of all
things, Governor of all the World, and King of kings, even as he was Man: his
divine Nature working more gloriously in his Humanity, than formerly it had
done. Howbeit although we also made it plain, that notwithstanding the said
Glory, Power, Rule, Dominion and Majesty, wherewith Christ is really possessed,
sitting in Heaven at the right hand of his Father; he made no alteration in the
Form, and manner of Temporal Government; but left the whole World to be ruled
by Kings and Sovereign Princes under him, as it had been before; himself
retaining still in his own hands, the Scepter and chiefest Ensigns of Royal and
highest Majesty, to direct and dispose them all according to his divine
pleasure: Yet the Parasitical, and sottish Crew of Romish Canonists, with the
new Sectaries, their Companions, will assuredly moil and repine thereat: Dr.
Mart. de Jurisd. Part. 1. c. 5.. 6.
telling us by the Pen of one of their Fellows (the veriest Idiot we think
amongst them,) "That all Power, Dominion, and Worldly Principality, was left by
Christ, after his Ascension, unto St. Peter: That two times are to be
considered in Christ; the one before his Passion, when propter humilitatem, he
refused to judge, Id. ib. c. 22.. 4, 5.
that is, to show himself a Temporal Magistrate, the other after his
Resurrection, and then he said, All Power is given unto me, in Heaven and in
Earth:" That Christ, after his Resurrection, gave his Power to St. Peter, and
made him his Vicar, and that ex potestate Domini, the Power of his Vicar is to
be measured. And to advance that Power, as highly as he can, supposing, that
what he can say thereof does belong to St. Peter, he quoteth a number of places
out of the Scriptures, Id. Append. ad c. 22.
concerning the Dignity, Honor, Royalty and Majesty, attributed to our Savior
Christ after his Resurrection and Ascension, by reason of the Unition so often
before by us mentioned: and does conclude, "That cessantibus rationibus
humilitatis, necessitatis, atque paupertatis, that the reasons of his former
humility, necessity, and poverty ceasing, Christ did show himself to be the
Lord of all; ut ascensurus ad Patrem eandem potestatem Petro relinqueret. And
moreover he is peremptory, that Peter did exercise this temporal Power in sua
propria natura temporaliter, in the proper nature of it temporally: for it is
said in the Acts, Id. ib. c. 22.. 6.
c. 5. that he condemned Ananias and Sapphira, pro crimine facti ad panam
civiliter, for the crime of a fact to a punishment civilly. Now if Peter were
so great a Temporal Monarch, whilst he lived, what must we think of his Vicar,
the Pope; and how royal is the Estate of all Archbishops and Bishops, that have
any dependency upon him? Bellarmin. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 3.
For as the especial Jesuit and Cardinal (an Enemy to the Canonists in this
point) does infer, Si Papa est Dominus totius orbis Christiani supremus, ergo
singuli Episcopi sunt principes temporales in oppidis suo Episcopatui
subjectis: If the Pope be Lord of all the Christian World, then it follows,
that all particular Bishops are temporal Princes in the Cities and Towns
subject to their Bishoprics."

To the manifestation of all which the said Canonist his so absurd and gross
assertions, before we proceed any further; We hold it not unfit, for the
reasons elsewhere specified by us (when we showed, that Christ was no temporal
Lord, nor had any temporal Dominion after the manner of other Kings) First to
hear the Cardinal, how he shakes the very groundwork and foundation of all
these Vanities. For whereas his Opposites would make St. Peter, and
consequently the Pope, his Successor, to derive such their infinite Power, and
temporal Authority from Christ, after his Resurrection, as he was then a Man,
immortal and glorious, having cast off his former infirmities and mortality.
The Cardinal is resolute to the contrary, Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l ^. c. 4.
and does reason in this sort. "Christus, ut homo, dum in terris vixit, non
accepit, nec voluit ullum temporale Dominium. Summus autem Pontifex Christi
Vicarius est, and Christum nobis repraesentat, qualis erat, dum hic inter
homines viveret: Igitur summus Pontifex, ut Christi Vicarius, atque adeo ut
summus Pontifex est, nullum habet temporale Dominium." Christ, as he was Man,
and lived upon the Earth, neither did, nor would receive any temporal Dominion:
But the Pope is Christ's Vicar, and does represent Christ unto us, in that
Estate and Condition that he lived in here amongst Men: therefore the Pope, as
Christ's Vicar, and so as he is the highest Bishop, has no temporal Dominion.
And again, "Dicimus, Papam, habere illud Officium, quod habuit Christus, dum in
terris inter homines humano more viveret. Neque enim Pontifici possumus
tribuere officia, quae habuit Christus, ut Deus, vel ut homo immortalis, and
gloriosus; sed solum ea, quae habuit, ut homo mortalis." We say, that the Pope
has that Office that Christ had, when he lived in the Earth amongst Men, after
the manner of Men: for we cannot ascribe unto him those Offices which Christ
has, as he is God, or as he is Man, immortal and glorious; but only those
which he had as a mortal Man. Neither does he stay here, but goes on forward,
Idem ibid.
saying; Add, that the Pope has not all that Power which Christ had as a
mortal Man. For He, because he was God and Man, had a certain Power, which is
called a Power of Excellency; by the which he governed both faithful Men and
Insidels: but the Pope has only committed unto him his Sheep; that is, such
Persons as are faithful. Again, Christ had Power to institute Sacraments, and
to work Miracles by his own Authority; which things the Pope cannot do. Also
Christ might absolve Men from their Sins, without the Sacraments, which the
Pope cannot.

Nay the Cardinal was so far from believing, that all Power and Worldly
Principality was left by Christ unto St. Peter, and so unto his Successors; as
he confesses in effect, that neither St. Peter as he was Bishop of Rome, nor
any of his Successors can challenge so much as a rural Farm, or any other kind
of temporal Possessions, which have not been given unto them by the Emperors,
and other Temporal Princes. And lest such gifts might be held by any to be
unlawful; he, to prove the contrary, alleges, that they were godly Princes
who so endowed the Church of Rome.These are his words: Bell. de Romans Pont. l.
5. c. 9.. quartoque
"Qui donaverunt Episcopo Romano, aliisque Episcopis Principatus temporales,
pii homines fuerunt, and ea de causa praecipue a tota Ecclesia commendati sunt:
ut patet de Constantino, Carolo magno, and Ludovico ejus silio, qui inde Pius
appellatus est." They who gave to the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops,
temporal Principalities, were godly Men, and for that cause especially were
commended by the whole Church; as appears ofConstantine, Charles the Great,
and Lewis his Son, who in that respect was called Lewis the Godly. Id. ibid.
Jam vero.
Again, That the Pope holds in right that Principality which he has, may
easily be perceived, quia dono Principum habuit, because he had it by the gift
of Princes. Of which gifts, he says, the Authentical Instruments remain still
in Rome:adding nevertheless, that if they had been lost, "abunde sufficeret
praescriptio octingentorum annorum;" Id. ibid. le
that a prescription of 800. years, were abundantly sufficient to prove the
Pope's right. Id. ibid. c. 10. tertio objicit.
And unto these words of Bernard, " Forma Apostolica haec est; interdicitur
Dominatio; indicitur Ministratio; he answers, that Bernard does speak of the
Bishop of Rome, secundum id, quod habet ex Christi institutione. Also Gregory
the First, denouncing a Curse against that Bishop, qui jubet alicui Agro more
fiscali Titulum imprimi, who does challenge to hold any Possessions, as an
absolute Temporal Prince, in right of his Church," the Cardinal does answer,
That it is not to be marvelled, that Gregory would not have Bishops, nor the
prefects of the Patrimony of the Church of Rome to use, More fiscali, in
recovering the Possessions of the Church; For, says he, "Nondum habuerat
Ecclesia politicum principatum; sed possidebat Bona temporalia ad eum modum,
quo privati homines possident. Itaque aequum erat, ut Agros, quos suos esse
censebat Ecclesia; si forte ab aliis occuparentur, in Judicio legitimo eos
repeteret; non autem More fiscali propria sibi Autoritate vendicaret:"that is,
for as yet (meaning when Gregorylived, which was 600. years after Christ) the
Church had no political Principality, but did possess her temporal goods in the
same manner, whereby other private Citizens possessed theirs. And therefore it
was agreeable to Equity, that if perhaps the Possessions which the Church
supposed to be hers, were occupied by other men; she was to require them,
Judicio legitimo, in a temporal Court of the Prince, of whom the same were
held; and might not challenge them to her self, by her own proper Authority,
More fiscali, as Sovereign Princes do, when their right is detained from
them.Lastly, Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 11.
the Cardinal is so far driven by a worthy Man, and some others of our side,
who held it unlawful for the Bishops of Rome, or any other Bishops, to be
absolute Worldly Princes (whosoever do bestow that Sovereignty upon them) the
same being directly against Christ's words, Vos autem non sic, and for many
other reasons; as he flies to the times of the Maccabees, when the Ordinances
of God, as touching the High Priesthood, were utterly neglected, and nothing
(in effect) left in the Church, but Pride, Presumption, Blood and Confusion (as
we have declared in our first Book, cap. 32.) and would gladly thereby uphold
the Pope's Regalities. Bell de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 9. denique probatur.
These are his words, Although perhaps it were absolutely better, that Bishops
should deal with Spiritual matters, and Kings with temporal: Yet in respect of
the malice of times, experience does cry, that some temporal Principalities
were not only profitable, but also of necessity; and by the singular Providence
of God, given to the Bishop ofRome, and to other Bishops. For if in Germany the
Bishops had not been Princes, none had continued to this day in their Seats. As
therefore in the Old Testament, the Highpriests were for a long time without
temporal Authority, or Empire; yet in the latter times Religion could not have
continued, and been defended, except the High Priest had been King, (that is,
in the time of the Maccabees:) So we see it has fallen out to the Church; that
she, which in her first times had no need of temporal Principality to defend
her Majesty, does now seem necessarily to have need of it.As though he should
have said; Now, that the Church of Rome has in her Pride and Presumption,
determined still to Tyrannize over all Kings, Priests, Kingdoms and Churches,
contrary to the rules and prescription of our Savior Christ, and of his
blessed Apostles; the Popes must needs be temporal Kings.

Thus far we have followed the Cardinal; who is bold to affirm, That neither
St. Peter, nor the Popes, his pretended Successors, nor any other of the
Apostles, nor of their Successors, Archbishops, or Bishops, nor any other
Minister, nor all the Ministers in the World, (if they were together) do
succeed Christ, as he was after his Resurrection or Ascension, a Man immortal
and glorious; but only as he was a mortal Man, and lived here in that Estate
upon the Earth, without the enjoying of any temporal Kingdom, or Regal
Possessions; contenting himself to be only a Spiritual King, and to have in
this World a Spiritual Kingdom, that is, his Church; so termed, because he
rules only in those Men's hearts which are true Members of it; the Gospel also
being named Evangelium Regni, because it contains the Doctrine of our
Messiah, and Spiritual King, and how he does establish his Spiritual Kingdom,
in and amongst Men. Of which Spiritual Kingdom some little further
consideration, and how our Savior Christ obtained it, and then did, and still
does govern it, will make the folly of those Men more apparent, which cannot
apprehend the Excellency of it, except it have joined with it all Worldly
Principalities, and Authority. None is ignorant, that has any sense of
Christianity, how all Men by nature were the Children of wrath; and how before
they embraced Christ by Faith, Ephesians 2. 2.
they walked according to the course of this World, and after the Prince that
rules in the air, even the Spirit that still works in the Children of
Disobedience. Which wicked Spirit being termed the Spirit of darkness, Romans 13.
12.
all his Subjects and Servants, Ephesians. 5. 11.
and whatsoever they take in, hand, are called the Children and works of
darkness. From whose Service, had not our Savior Christ delivered us, and by
subduing, and vanquishing this wicked Prince, taken actually the possession of
our hearts, where the Devil before reigned; we had been still in the state of
wrath and damnation. Ephesians. 5. 8.
Whereas now through Grace, and by Faith Christ dwelling in our hearts, we are
no more darkness, Gal. 5. 16, 22.
but light in the Lord: nor are to hold any longer fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, or of the flesh; but are bound, being replenished
with God's holy Spirit, to bring forth the fruits and operations of the same.
To this vanquishment of Satan, by our Savior Christ, these Scriptures
following have relation. Luc. 11. 22. etc.
If I, by the Finger of God, do cast out Devils, doubtless the Kingdom of God
is come unto you: When a strong Man armed keeps his Palace, the things which
he possesses are in Peace: but when a stronger than he comes upon him, and
overcomes him, he takes from him all his Armor, wherein he trusted, and
divides the spoils. Joh. 12. 31.
Again, Now is the Judgment of this World; now shall the Prince of this World
be cast out. And again; Col. 1. 9. etc.
We cease not to pray for you, etc. That you might walk worthy of the Lord,
etc. Giving thanks to God the Father, etc. Who has delivered us from the power
of darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, in whom
we have Redemption through his Blood. Again, Col. 2. 14, 15.
Christ putting out the handwriting of Ordinances, that was against us, etc.
He took it out of the way, and fastened it upon the Cross, and has spoiled the
Principalities and Powers, and has made a show of them openly, and has
triumphed over them in himself. 1 John 3. 8.
And lastly, He that commits Sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from
the beginning. For this purpose appeared the Son of God, that he might loose
the works of the Devil.

Now our Savior Christ did, by fullfilling the Law for us, and the Sacrifice
of himself once offered upon the Cross, vanquish both the Devil, Death, and
Hell; to the end, that as many as believed in him, might not perish, but have
life everlasting. And therefore knowing Faith to be the Means of so unspeakable
a Benefit, he vouchsafed not only to be our Priest, but our heavenly Prophet;
laboring, by Preaching and Miracles, to beget Faith in the Hearts of his
Hearers, that, Satan being expelled thence, he himself with his Father might
abide and make their Mansion in them. To the performance of which most
admirable work, how our Savior Christ, being equal with his Father, became a
Servant for our sakes (as it was the will of God, whereunto, of his own accord,
he conformed himself) and what a poor Estate he held, whilst he was upon the
Earth; how he was born in Poverty, lived in Poverty, and died in Poverty; how
maliciously and scornfully he was oftentimes entreated; how as, when he spoke
the truth, his Enemies said he blasphemed; So, when he cast out Devils, Matthew.
12. 24.
they told him, that he cast them out by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils;
how in the whole course of his Life, he was so far from being a temporal King,
or having possession of any Regal State, as he had not so much as an House of
his own to rest his head in, but was glad to lodge now with one man, and then
with another, as the Occasions and Times served; and how in the end, he was
content to satisfy the Malice of his Enemies, by submitting himself for our
sakes, unto the Death of the Cross, it were a needless labor for us to pursue;
the Evangelists have so plainly set down all these particulars and many more
besides to that purpose. Likewise it shall be sufficient for us sparingly to
recount how our Savior Christ was not only content to preach and work Miracles
himself for the conversion o^ those that heard him: but did to the same end, as
well before his Passion as after, authorize likewise his twelve Apostles and
seventy Disciples to preach and work strange Miracles; and furthermore ordain a
Succession of the Ministry, for the increasing of this his Kingdom unto the end
of the World; himself never forsaking his Church and Ministers, but still
assisting them in that their spiritual Charge, which he had committed unto
them. For although that he himself by his Death and Passion has vanquished
Satan, and rules in the Hearts of the Faithful; yet by reason of our
Infirmities and Weakness of Faith, and through the Malice of the Devil, who
never cease, like a roaring Lion, to seek whom he may devour; this spiritual
Kingdom of Christ is but now begun in us, and upheld in us by the most merciful
hand of our Savior Christ, through the operation of the Holy Ghost, and by the
labor of the Ministry. But in the end, through the Virtue of Christ's Passion,
shall be brought to pass, that which is written, 1 Cor. 15. 54. etc.
Death is swallowed up in victory. O Death, where is thy sting? O Hell, where
is thy victory? The sting of Death is sin; the strength of sin is the Law: But
thanks be unto God, who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Apoc.
20. 10. 14.
And again, Death, Hell and the Devil shall be cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone. In the mean while, and during the time of this our Pilgrimage,
Ephesians. 4. 27.
we are for the continuance of Christ's dwelling in our Hearts, to follow the
Counsel and Direction of the Holy Ghost, That in no sort we give any place to
the Devil: Jam. 4. 7.
but that we resist him with all the force we are able, for in so doing he will
fly from us. And for our better Resistance, that we might be able to stand
against the Assaults of Satan, we have a notable and complete armor appointed
us by the said Holy Spirit which is agreeable to the Nature of the Enemies we
have to fight with. For (says the holy Apostle) we wrestle not against flesh
and blood; but against principalities, against powers, and against worldly
governors, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12.
the princes of darkness of this world; against spiritual wickednesses which
are in the high places.

And thus we have a brief and short Idea of the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ:
Whereof when the Apostles, after they were replenished with the Holy Ghost,
upon the day of Pentecost, had full understanding and notice: they never
dreamed (for ought that appears to the contrary in the Scriptures) of any
Worldly pre-eminence or Principalities; who should sit here, and who should sit
there; but contented themselves with the same estate and condition of life that
their Master had led before them; remembering how he had described the same unto
them, when he first sent them to preach amongst the Jews. Matthew. 10. 16, etc.
Behold (says he unto them) I send you as sheep in the midst of Wolves. Beware
of men; for they will deliver you up to the Councils, and will scourge you in
the Synagogues. And ye shall be brought to the Governors and Kings, for my
sake, in witness to them and the Gentiles. And ye shall be hated of all Men for
my sake. When they persecute you in this City, flee into another: the Disciple
is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord: If they have called
the Master of the House Beelzebub; how much more them of his Household?
Whosoever will be a perfect Disciple, Joh. 16. 20.
shall be as his Master. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and
lament, and the World shall rejoice. -- 2.
The time shall come, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
service. And as Christ did thus foretell them, so it came to pass. For no sooner
did they begin to Preach the Gospel, after the Ascension of Christ; but they
were whipped, scourged, cast into Prison, bound with Chains, and most cruelly
entreated. St. Paul does testify somewhat hereof; when writing in the name,
both of himself and of the rest of the Apostles and Ministers, he says thus;
In all things we approve our selves as the Ministers of God; 2 Cor. 6. 4.
in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes,
in prisons, in tumults, in labors, by watchings, by fastings, by long
sufferings, by dishonor, by evil report; as Deceivers, and yet true; as
unknown, and yet known; as dying, and behold we live. Besides, that which he
speaks of his own particular condition, does argue the estate and condition
of his Fellows; though one would have thought, that little more could have been
added to the barbarous Cruelty last mentioned to have been Executed upon them.
For comparing himself, and his pains, with certain false Brethren, that were
crept into the Church amongst the Apostles, and sought for their own
commendation to impair the credit of this our Apostle; 2 Cor. 11. 23, etc.
he writes in this manner. They are Ministers of Christ; I am more: in labors
more abundant, in stripes above measure, in Prison more plenteously. Of the
Jews five times received I forty stripes, save one. I was thrice beaten with
Rods. I was once stoned. I suffered thrice Shipwreck. Night and day have I been
in the deep Sea. In Journying I was often, in perils of Water, in perils of
Robbers, in perils of mine own Nation, in perils amongst the Gentiles, in
perils in the Wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils amongst false
Brethren; In weariness and painfulness, in watching often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides these things which
are outward, I am cumber'd daily, and have the care of all the Churches. Much
is not written of St. Peter, by the Evangelist St. Luke: but it is not to be
doubted, that his Case was as bad as any of his Fellows. When he began to
Preach, Act 4. 21.
he was called in question with great eagerness; -- 5. 18, 40.
and vehemently threatened. Also with some other of the Apostles, he was cast
into Prison, and beaten. Likewise when James was killed by Herod's Commandment,
Peter was again Imprisoned, and laden with Irons; and had assuredly, in all
likelihood, escaped hardly with his Life; but that the Angel of the Lord
delivered him. Act. 12.
In a word, after many Afflictions, Injuries, Calamities and Miseries, endured
by the Apostles, whilst they lived in this World; they were in the end (as well
St. Peter as almost all the rest) most spitefully and cruelly, by the Enemies
of Christ, and of their own Salvation, put to Death. During the course of whose
lives, in so great dangers and manifold distresses; out of question, they would
greatly have marvelled, their hard Estates considered, but especially St.
Peter, if he had known himself to be the sole Monarch, under Christ, over all
the World; and that the Emperor, and all other Kings, had been at that time
his Vassals; and that likewise they (the rest of the Apostles) had been under
St. Peter, so many Sovereign and Temporal Princes, to have commanded and ruled
amongst them throughout the whole World. Neither do we see any true cause, that
might have moved St. Peter to have concealed that his so eminent temporal Power
and Authority; if he had thought it to have been the Ordinance of God: or, at
least, if he for modesty would have been silent, why the rest of the Apostles
should not have published it; that the civil and temporal States in those
times, who knew no such Ordination made by Christ, might have been left
inexcusable. Besides, the concealing of a truth of so great importance, was an
injury offered to all the faithful in those days; who had they been truly
taught in these Men's conceits, ought to have left their Obedience to the
Emperor in all temporal Causes; and for the dignity of the Gospel, to have
adhered unto St. Peter, to have been directed in them, by him their temporal
Monarch. The consideration of all which inconveniences and consequents, does
persuade us to think, that none of the Apostles ever dreamed of any such
temporal Sovereignty; notwithstanding, that they knew well the Scriptures; how
Christ told them, That All Power in Heaven and Earth, was given unto him; how
St. Peter had two Swords; and how Ananias and Sapphira, for lying to the Holy
Ghost, were stricken suddenly from Heaven with Death.

Touching the two first of which places, the same being notoriously abused, and
wrested by the Canonists and their Adherents, to prove the Popes temporal
Monarchy; Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 5.. sed occurrunt.
the said Cardinal does very resolutely reject the Arguments which are thence
by them deduced. And to the first he answers; "Potestatem, de qua hic
loquitur Dominus, non esse potestatem temporalem, ut Regnum terrenorum; sed vel
tantum spiritualem, ut B. Hieronymus, and B. Anselmus exponunt; qui hunc esse
volunt sensum eorum verborum; Data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo, and in
terra, i.e. ut sicut in coelo Rex sum Angelorum, ita per fidem regnem in
cordibus hominum: vel, ut addit Theophylactus, esse potestatem quandam summam
in omnes creaturas, non temporalem, sed divinam, vel divinae simillimam, quae
non potest communicari homini mortali:" That the Power, whereof the Lord here
speaks, is not a temporal Power, like the Power of terrene Kings; but it is
either a spiritual Power, as St. Hierom, and St. Anselm do expound the said
place; who will have this to be the sense of those words; All Power is given me
in Heaven and Earth; which is to say, that as in Heaven I am King of Angels, so
by Faith I do reign in the hearts of Men: or, as Theophylact adds, it is a
certain supreme Power, not temporal, but divine, or most like to the Divine
Power, which cannot be communicated to any mortal Man.

And for the second Argument, drawn from St. Peter 's two Swords, the same is
set down by our said Cardinal in these words. Ibidem. secundo objiciunt.
"Secundo objiciunt Scripturam, Luc. 22. Vbi Dominus duos gladios Petro
concedit. Cum enim Discipuli dicerent, Ecce, duo gladii hic: Dominus non ait,
nimis est; sed satis est. Quare B. Bernardus 4. 4. de Consid. and Bonifacius
octavus in Extravag. Vnam sanctam, de Majoritate, and Obedientia, ex hoc loco
deducunt, Pontisicem duos gladios ex Christi institutione habere:" that is,
Secondly, they object the Scriptures, Luc. 22. Where the Lord does grant two
Swords to Peter. For when the Disciples said, Behold, here are two Swords; the
Lord answered not they are too many, but they are sufficient. Therefore St.
Bernard, and Boniface the eighth, do hence deduce, that the Bishop of Rome, by
Christ's Institution, has two Swords. Unto which objection our Cardinal says
thus. "Respondeo, ad Literam, nullam fieri mentionem in eo loco Evangelii de
gladio spirituali, vel temporali Pontificis; sed solum Dominum illis verbis
monere voluisse Discipulos tempore Passionis suae in iis angustiis, and metu
ipsos futuros fuisse, in quibus esse solent, qui tunicam vendunt, ut emant
gladium; ut ex Theophylacto, aliisque Patribus colligitur." I answer, that
according to the Letter, there is no mention made in that place of the Gospel,
either of the spiritual, or temporal Sword of the Bishop of Rome: but that
Christ meant only in those words, to admonish his Disciples, how they should be
in the time of his Passion in those straights and fear wherein Men are
accustomed to be, who sell their Coat to buy them a Sword; as it is to be
collected out of Theophylact, and other Fathers. And for Bernard and Boniface
he says, They did expound the said place mystically, and meant not to have
their words so far extended, as the Objector would have them. Which answer, it
is likely Bernard, if he were now alive; would take in good part: but
assuredly, if any Cardinal in Bonifacius 's days had made it, he would have
smarted for it; and might perhaps have tried the depth of Tiber. Neither do we
suppose, that the now Pope will give him any great thanks for it: nor that in
all likelihood he has received any greater commendation for his plain dealing,
in answer to another Objection, which is grounded upon the Authority of Pope
Nicholas. Who in an Epistle of his to Michael, the Emperor of Constantinople,
does write thus: "Christus B. Petro, vitae aeternae clavigero, terreni simul
and coelestis Imperii Jura commisti." Christ did commit to St. Peter, the Key
bearer of Everlasting Lise the right and interest, both of the Earthly, and of
the Heavenly Empire. To which saying of Pope Nicholas, the Cardinal makes two
answers. Bell. ibidem. Ad testimonium.
"Ad testimonium Nicolai dico; Imprimis, illud citari a Gratiano d. 22. Can.
Omnes; sed non inveniri inter Epistolas Nicolai Papae." To the testimony of
Pope Nicholas, I answer; First, that the said is cited by Gratian, but it is
not to be found amongst the Epistles of Pope Nicholas: As if he should have
said, That testimony is forged. And the effect of his second Answer is, That if
any Man shall urge, that Testimony of Pope Nicholas, in the sense objected,
they make him directly repugnant to himself, in the rest of the said Epistle.

And concerning the other Argument, by our said Canonist alleged, of the Death
of Ananias and Sapphira; the ancient Fathers, in the Primitive Church, would
certainly have scorned it, if ever they had heard of it. Peter, knowing by the
instinct of the Holy Ghost, that Satan had possessed both their hearts, and how
they lied not to Men, but to God; did only pronounce that Sentence of Death
upon them, which the holy Spirit did suggest unto him. Wherein although there
may appear, what force the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, had,
when it was brandished by St. Peter, through the Operation of the Holy Ghost;
there was assuredly no use of any material and civil Sword: for if there had,
another manner of Form of outward Justice would first have been held, before
they had been Executed. And to conclude this point, We do freely profess, That
the nature of Christ, his Spiritual Kingdom being thoroughly weighed, we cannot
find to what purpose, either St. Peter, or any of his Successors, should have
been made temporal Monarchs over all the Civil Magistrates in the World:
because all their temporal Forces, and Swords joined together, had not been
able to have vanquished one wicked Spirit of the Air, or have opened the door
of any one Man's heart for Christ, or the Holy Ghost to have entered and have
made their habitation in it.

CAN. VIII.
IF therefore any Man shall affirm, under color of any thing that is in the
Scriptures, either that our Savior Christ has otherwise committed the World
to be governed under him by Kings, and Sovereign Princes, but so, as he
himself, with his Regal Scepter, does rule and govern them all, according to
his Divine Pleasure: or, that it is not a sound Argument, that the Bishops of
Rome, in taking upon them to be temporal Kings, have wholly perverted the
Institution of Christ in that behalf; in that they are driven to justify their
facts therein, by the Examples of the Maccabees, and those times of so great
confusion: or, that our Savior Christ, whilst he was here upon the Earth, did
not fully content himself to be only a Spiritual King, to rule in Men's hearts:
or, that to the end he might erect such a Spiritual Kingdom, he did not conquer
the Devil, Sin, Death, and Hell, and thereby took possession in the hearts of
all true Believers: or, that before our Savior Christ does begin to reign in
Man's heart, he does not first, by the Ministry of his Word, beget a lively
Faith in it: or, that whilst he lived here in the World, he did not satisfy
himself, for our sakes, with a very mean and poor Estate, being in himself most
rich* because he was God, and in his humanity, the Heir of all things: or, that
he did not Institute and Ordain a Priesthood, or Ministry, to continue to the
end of the World, for the continuance and augmenting of his Spiritual Kingdom:
or, that the Children of God, notwithstanding that they are redeemed, through
Faith by Christ, and delivered out of the Iaws of Hell, and Satan, are not
still to take heed, and beware of him, and to arm themselves accordingly
against his Forces: or, that our Savior Christ, when he told his Apostles and
Disciples, That the Servant is not above his Lord, but that whosoever would be
a perfect Disciple, should be as his Master, did not mean, that his Apostles,
and after them their Successors, Archbishops, Bishops, and the rest of the
Ministry, should hold their Services and Offices under him, to do as he did,
when he was a Mortal Man of poor Estate, and subject to many bad Vsages, and
Injuries: or, that because our Savior Christ, after his Resurrection and
Ascension, when he was become a Man Immortal and Glorious, did then enlarge the
Commission of his Apostles, and ordained by them a succession of the Ministry
for the government of the Church he did thereby make them any more partakers of
his Regal Authority, whereof his humane nature was then actually possessed, for
the state and exercise thereof, by reason of the free and unrestrained
Operation of his Deity, than he made their natural and corruptible Bodies,
incorrupt and spiritual Bodies, or endowed them in this life, with any of that
Glory, Power, and Heavenly Estate, which they were to enjoy after their Deaths,
and blessed Resurrection: or, that the Apostles after Christ's Death (not
exempting St. Peter) did not find their Estates in this World very suitable to
their Master's, whilst he lived with them, all things happening unto them, as
he had foretold them: or, that either St. Peter, or any of the Apostles, or of
their Successors, either then, or since that time, could challenge so much as
this, or that one temporal farm, by virtue of their Ecclesiastical Functions,
more than their Master had, or that either they were themselves possessed with,
as their own, before they were called to that Ministration, or than was
afterward given unto them by godly Emperors, Kings and Princes, and other
devout and religious Persons: or, that if St. Peter had known himself to have
been under Christ the sole temporal Monarch of the World, it had not been his
duty to have made the same known; at least, to the Apostles, and such as were
converted to Christ, to the end they might have honored him accordingly, as
his dutiful and loyal Subjects: or, that it had not in all probability, if St.
Peter meant to show himself to be a temporal King, by the Deaths of Ananias and
Sapphira, been much more expedient for the success of the Gospel in those days,
if he had used such his Regal Authority against those civil Magistrates, which
were Enemies to Christ, and to all that Preached in his name: or, that it may
be rightly imagined, with our dutiful regard of St. Peter's Sincerity, that
ever he would have been so earnest with the dispersed Jews, to have submitted
themselves for the Lord's sake unto Kings, and other Governors, to have obeyed
them and honored them, if he had known them to have had temporal Authority,
because they did not acknowledge themselves to be his Vassals: or, that it did
not proceed from the great Wisdom of God, to abridge in the Apostles of Christ
(even in St. Peter himself) that great Power and Authority which Christ had; as
appears by his words, when he said, that if he had thought it fit, he could
have twelve Legions of Angels at his Commandment, to have defended him from all
his Enemies (the Scribes and Pharisees, with all their partakers;) in that
perhaps the Apostles, even St. Peter himself, might have abused it: or, that it
is not more than probable, that howsoever St. Peter would have used the said
Power and Authority, if he had had it, if the Bishops of Rome had received it
from him, they would certainly have made great havoc and confusion in the
World with it: or, that if all the Kings and Sovereign Princes in the World had
been subject to St. Peter, and were thereupon in the like subjection to the
Bishops of Rome, they (both St. Peter, and his Successors) might not have had
ready at their Commandment (if Kings and Princes had done their duties) more
than twelve Legions, to have confounded all Men, that should have disobeyed
them: or, that therefore it is not as absurd an imagination and conceit for any
Man to think, that Christ did give so great temporal Authority, either to St.
Peter, or any of his Successors, over temporal Kings and Princes, that they
might have so great Armies, when they list, at their directions; as if any Man
should hold, that because they are Christ's Vicars, they may have twelve
Legions from Heaven to do them service, if perhaps temporal Kings and Princes
should be negligent, or refuse to be at such charges at their Commandment: or,
that it is not a kind of madness (the true nature of Christ's spiritual Kingdom
and Church, here upon Earth considered) for any Man to conceive, and thereupon
maintain, that any such Omnipotency of temporal Power in St. Peter, ever was,
or ever shall be, available to vanquish the Devil, or remove him out of his
Palace, or to spoil him of all his Principalities, or to beget Faith in the
Children of God, or to erect in their hearts a Tabernacle for Christ, and the
Holy Ghost; which are only the peculiar and proper actions of our Savior
Christ, as he is our Spiritual King, and of St. Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles, with all their Successors in their degrees, and as they are his
Spiritual Ministers; He does greatly Err.

CAP. X.
The Sum of the Chapter following.
That the Bishops of Rome have no temporal Authority indirectly, over Kings and
Princes, throughout the Christian World, to depose them from their Kingdoms,
for any cause whatsoever.

BEcause we have been bold to use the Authority of the Cardinaliz'd Jesuit
against the ridiculous Canonists, and their Companions, the new Sectaries of
the Oratory-Congregation, concerning the Pope's temporal Authority over all
Kings and Princes in the World directly: We may not do him so much injury, as
once to pretend, that he favors either us, or any point of truth (for our
sakes) that we defend. It may rather be ascribed unto him for a singular virtue
(his bringing up, and course of life considered) if he study not to impugn it
with all the strength that he has, either of his Wit or Learning.
Nevertheless, albeit he has traveled exceedingly in his Books de Romano
Pontifice, to advance the Papacy to his uttermost Ability; and had no purpose
therein (we are well assured) to give us any advantage (who do oppose our
selves against the whole drift of those his Books:) Yet he has so mustered and
marshalled his matters and Forces together, as whilst he endeavors to fortify
the Pope's Authority, and to encounter the Assaults that have been made against
it, he has done more for us, against his Will, to the prejudice of his Master,
whom he labors to uphold, than we could ever have expected at his hands.
Insomuch, as we are verily persuaded, the time will come before it be long,
that his Works will be thrust into the Catalogue Librorum prohibitorum; because
dealing with our Arguments, as he did in the said Books de Romano Pontifice,
and thinking that he would no further yield to the truth, by way of Objection,
than as he should be able sufficiently to refel it; it has often fallen out
with him, as it will ever do with all Impostors, that the very meaning of the
truth, according to the nature of it, has (notwithstanding all his cunning)
very much prevailed against him, to the everlasting glory of her own name, and
forcible strength to discover Errors, like to the Sun's to expel Darkness. We
will not here otherwise make proof hereof, than, as by the matter we have in
hand, and are purposed to prosecute, we are after a sort urged and compelled.
For albeit hitherto he has seemed to have joined with us (as he has indeed,
more than now, we are persuaded, he does well vouchsafe) yet foreseeing what
tempests he was otherwise like to have endured, in affirming so peremptorily
(as he did) that the Pope had no temporal Authority at all, as he was either
Christ's, or St Peter's Vicar: he minced his matter in the titles of his
Chapters to that purpose with the word Direct (whereof in his reasons he never
made mention;) and then falls upon this Issue, That Indirecte, the Pope has
Authority over all Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign Princes, to hurry them
hither and thither; to depose and remove them from their Regal Estates and
Dignities; to dispose of their Kingdoms according to his own Pleasure; to
release their Subjects of their Oaths and Obedience, and to thrust them into
all Rebellions, Treasons, Furies, and what not against them. In the which his
course this is our comfort, that by direct dealing, the Cardinal did find no
ways or means how to withstand the truth; but is driven by indirect shifts and
bypath, to oppose his labors (we fear, reclamante Conscientia) how to save
his own Worldly credit, he might cast a mist upon the truth; if not to depress
it (which was not in his power) yet at the least to obscure it, to darken it,
and perplex it.

Some of the principal Reasons, which he has used to this purpose mentioned,
are of this kind and consequence. Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 6.
" Bona corporis, the good things that do appertain to the Body, as health
especially, are to be preferred before Bona fortunae, as the Philosophers call
them; that is, Riches and all other Worldly Dignities and Preferments
whatsoever: Therefore the calling of Physicians, the end whereof is the health
of Men's Bodies, is to be preferred before all other temporal Callings that are
in the World. Or thus; Natural Parents, be they Emperors, Kings, or Sovereign
Princes, do give unto their Children their natural Being only: but
Schoolmasters do adorn by Instruction, and beautify their Minds: therefore
Schoolmasters are more to be honored by young Lords and Princes, than are
their Lords and Kings, their natural Parents. Or thus; One end why Men were
first Created, and afterward born, be they Kings or Princes, Priests or private
Persons, was to live in the World: but for the supporting of Men's Lives,
Husbandry, and many other Occupations, are of greater Importance and Necessity,
than are either Kings, Princes, Lords, or civil Magistracy: therefore those
Men's base Callings are to be preferred before the Callings of the other. Or, as
if a Man should reason thus; They, that have the chiefest charge of Souls
committed unto them, are to be esteemed, as Men in this World, of the highest
Calling: but all Christians generally, have every one of them a greater charge
committed unto them of their own Souls, than any sort of Priests or Ministers
have: therefore every Christian is in that respect, in Calling and Dignity, to
be preferred before the Calling of any one Pastor, Priest, Prelate, or Pope."
Now after he has dallied with such sophistications and comparisons betwixt the
Body and the Soul, the Flesh and the Spirit, he falls upon some particulars;
the more fully (as he says) to express what he had formerly delivered. The sum
of which particulars is, Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 6.
That although the Pope, as he is Pope, cannot ordinary, ordinarily depose
temporal Princes, or make civil Laws, or judge de rebus temporalibus; yet in
ordine ad Spiritualia, he may do them all. And this he takes upon him to prove
by five main reasons, grounded (God knows) upon very weak Foundations.
Ibidem, c. 7.
Of which his odd number, for the glory of them, this which follows is the
first.

"Civil Power is subject to Spiritual Power, when they are both part of a
Christian Commonwealth: therefore the Spiritual Princes may command temporal
Princes, and dispose of their temporal affairs in ordine ad Bonum spirituale, n
order to a spiritual good." The Antecedent of which Argument may briefly be
refuted, for ought that he has said to justify it, in manner as follows. For
in saying, that this subjection of the temporal Power to the Spiritual, is, but
where both these Powers are part of one and the same Christian Commonwealth, he
makes the Estate of Christian Kings and Princes, inferior and worse than the
Estate of those that be Infidels: Whose political Power being no part of any
Christian Commonwealth, is not subject to the Ecclesiastical. Again, to prefer
the Ecclesiastical Authority of the Church, for honor and dignity in this
World, before the temporal Authority of Kings and Princes, is in effect, to
prefer the poor and base Estate of our Savior Christ, as he was a mortal Man
here upon Earth, subject to many wants, oppressions, and injuries, before the
glory and majesty of his Divine Nature: in that Kings have their Authority and
Calling from Christ, as he is God: Whereas all Ministers, even St. Peter
himself, and consequently the Pope, are but Christ's Vicars and Substitutes, as
he was Man, subject to the said wants, miseries, and Oppressions. Moreover, in
that every Soul, by the testimony of St. Paul, is subject to the Power and
Authority of temporal Princes; and that they must be so, not because of wrath
only, but also for Conscience sake: forasmuch, as the points of subjection
there specified, are commanded to all Men to be observed, and Sacerdotibus, and
Monachis, non solum saecularibus, to Bishops and Monks, Hom. in Romans 13.
and not to secular Priests only (as Chrysostom, says by our Interpretation,
adding to these words of the Apostle. Let every Soul be subject to the higher
Powers, Etiamsi Apostolus sis, si Evangelista, si Propheta, sive quisque tandem
fueris, although thou art an Apostle, or an Evangelist, or a Prophet, or
whosoever thou art:) and because, for ought we have read, none of the ancient
Fathers do herein dissent from Chrysostom; We hold it to be very plain, and
evident to our understandings, that the Ecclesiastical Authority, to be
exercised in this World, by any manner of Ecclesiastical Persons whosoever, is
inferior, and of a lower degree, than is the Authority and Power of temporal
Kings and Princes. For if the Authority of such Ecclesiastical Persons, whether
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Bishops or Priests, either Regular or Secular,
cannot exempt them from the Authority of Kings, it must follow of necessity,
that it is subject and inferior to their temporal Power and Authority.

Another of the Cardinal's Reasons, whereby he would gladly prove the Pope's
indirect temporal Power (to omit the rest of his absurd trifling about the
first) is built upon a very traitorous Position, never heard of in the Church
in the times of the principal ancient Fathers. For how earnest soever he seemed
before in refuting their Opinions, who hold, That no Princes are to be obeyed,
if they be Infidels; he thinks he is able to shift off that in effect with
his juggling and indirect Fetches. These are his traitorous words. "It is not
lawful for Christians to tolerate a King, Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 7.
being an Infidel, or an Heretic, if he endeavor to draw his Subjects unto
his Heresy or Infidelity: but to judge, whether a King does draw his Subjects
to Heresy or no, does belong to the Pope, unto whom is committed the charge of
Religion, and therefore it belongs to the Pope to judge, whether a King is to
be deposed or not." Concerning the Assumption of this Argument, touching the
presupposed charge of the Pope, in matters of Religion, over all the Churches
in the World, we shall have a fitter occasion to touch it, after a sort, in the
next Chapter: Now we will only briefly handle the falsehood of his Proposition,
Of the Power of Subjects over their Sovereigns. Where, after he has abused a
place in Deuteronomy, and spent some idle conceits of his own, he writes in
this sort. "Although Christians in times past did not depose Nero and
Dioclesian, and Julian the Apostate, and Valens the Arrian, and such like; id
fuit, quia deerant vires temporales Christianis; it came to pass, because
Christians did then want temporal Forces. For that otherwise they might
lawfully so have done, appears by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. Where he commands
new Judges of temporal Causes to be appointed by Christians, that Christians
might not be compelled to plead their Cause before a Judge, that was a
Persecutor of Christ. Upon which Text the Cardinal makes this Gloss. Sicut
novi Judices constitui potuerunt; ita and novi Principes, and Reges propter
eandem causam, si vires adfuissent: as new Judges might have been appointed; so
might new Princes and Kings for the same cause, if the Christians then had been
able, by reason of their Forces, to have created, to themselves, such new Kings
and Princes." Thus the Cardinal: Who undoubtedly was brought into some hard
straight, or else he would never have written in this sort. St. Peter and St.
Paul lived and dyed under Nero, who was a Persecutor: and shall we think, that
St. Peter and St. Paul had taught the Christians in those days, to have thrust
Nero from his Imperial Seat, by force of Arms, if they had been able? Certainly
it is a blasphemous assertion, and worthy of as great a Censure, as if he had
termed those holy Men, in plain terms, Dissembling Traitors, or denied the
Scriptures to have been written by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Again, he
himself is not ignorant, how grossly he lies, even against his own Conscience,
in saying, that it was for want of strength, that the Christians in the days of
the other persecuting Emperors, did not rebel against them; Tertullian in
express terms affirming the contrary: "First, that they, the Christians in his
times, wanted no Forces to have born Arms, and endangered the whole Empire; And
secondly, That it was far from their hearts so to do, because they had been
taught otherwise by the Doctrine of Christ in his holy Gospel. Besides, it is
apparent, that in and about Tertullian's time, these four were Bishops of Rome,
Victor, Zephyrinus, Calixtus, and Vrbanus: so as the Cardinal does in effect
cast a great Imputation upon them of negligence, or insincerity; that the
Christians in their days, wanting neither number nor strength to have bridled
their bad Emperors, they by their Papal Authority did not depose them.
Dioclesian began his Empire about the year 288. during the time of whose
Government, Gaius, Marcellinus, and Marcellus, were Popes, when the number of
Christians was greatly increased throughout all the World: and yet, for ought
that appears to the contrary, no Man living, either Pope, Priest, or Prelate,
did so much as then dream of this damnable Doctrine. Julian the Apostate began
his Reign about the year of Christ 360. and Valens 8. years after him; in whose
times Liberius and Damasus, were Bishops of Rome; which Damasus was a Man that
wanted no Courage: nevertheless we do not read, that either he, or Liberius,
ever attempted to Excommunicate, or depose, either of those Emperors, or that
they held it lawful for them so to have done. In the space of time betwixt
Nero, and Damasus, the most principal Men of all the ancient Fathers lived, as
Justinus Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian,
Athanasius, Jerome, and Augustine: who never had learned, nor did in their times
teach it for sound Doctrine, either that the Christians had Authority to bear
Arms against their Sovereigns; or that the Bishops of Rome might lawfully
depose Kings and Princes, either for Heresy, or for Cruelty, and thrust their
Subjects (to serve their turns) into such furious and rebellious courses. So as
it was great boldness, for the Cardinal of his own Head, to broach so palpable
an untruth; especially seeing it carries with it so many Arguments to convince
his want herein of all Honesty, Sincerity, and Conscience.

But why should we be so earnest with the Man? considering, that although it be
certain, that neither St. Peter not St. Paul, nor any of the said ancient
Fathers or Popes ever thought it lawful to depose such Emperors and Kings as
before we have spoken of, when they should be able through the Numbers and
Forces of Christians so to do; Yet the same did proceed in the most of them
from their Ignorance and want of Learning. "For (says he) that Christians, if
they had been able, might so have done, is apparent by the Apostle's words:
where it is plain, that they had authority to make Judges; and consequently,
that if they had been able, they might have thrust the said wicked Emperors
from their Thrones, and have made to themselves new Kings of their own."
Assuredly the Devil himself did never abuse any place of Scripture (for ought
that we remember) so palpably and grossly, as the Cardinal does this: and
therefore we will bestow no great Pains to refute him. It shall be sufficient
briefly to observe, that in the Judgments of Jerome, Austin, Ambrose, and
Chrysostom, the Judges which here the Apostle speaks of, were only such, as
might by way of Arbitrament, end such Suits, as arose amongst Christians in
those days; and not such Judges, as by Law and Authority might have compelled
them to have stood to their Sentences: for that had been indeed to have
encroached upon the Authority of the civil Magistrate; which was far from the
Apostle's intent and meaning. Theodoret. in 1 Cor. 6.
"And therefore, says Theodoret, Sciendum est, etc. It is to be observed, that
these words (of choosing Arbiters) do not repugn to those things which are
written to the Romans. For here the Apostle does not command Christians to
resist the Magistrates, but wills them that are injured, not to use the
Magistrates:" meaning, that it was fitter for Christians to compound their
causes and quarrels amongst themselves, rather than to the dishonor of their
Profession, contend before such Magistrates as were Infidels, and were like
enough to despise and contemn them, Aqu. in 1 Cor. 6.
because they could not better agree amongst themselves. And the Cardinal's own
Doctor, commenting likewise upon this place does write in this sort, " Sed
videtur, etc. But that which is here said by the Apostle does seem to be
contrary to that which St. Peter says, Be subject to every humane Creature for
God, 1 Pet. 3.
whether to King as excelling, or to Rulers as sent by him. For it does
appertain to the Authority of a Prince to judge of his Subjects, and therefore
it is against the Law of God, to prohibit, that a Subject should submit himself
to the Judgment Seat of his Prince, if he be an Infidel. Sed dicendum, etc. But
it is to be answered, that the Apostle does not here forbid, but that faithful
Men, living under Princes that are Infidels, may appear in their Judicial Seats
if they be called; for this were against the Subjection which is due unto
Princes: but he forbids, that faithful Men do not of their own accord,
voluntarily choose the Judgment Seat of Infidels." But if these Authorities
will not serve, we will be bold to present against him the Judgment of a whole
College, first published in Rhemes, and then set out again the second time, by
the same College at Doway, approved in both Places; at Rhemes by Petrus
Remigius, Hubertus Morus, Johannes Lebesque, Guil. Balbus; and at Doway by
Will. Estius, Barth. Petrus, Judocus Heylens, all of them great Doctors of
Divinity in those Places, and one a Doctor of the Canon Law, Vicar general of
the Archbishopric of Rhemes. Rhem. Test. in 2 Cor. 6. 6.
The said College writing upon these words [But brother with brother contendeth
in Judgment, and that before Infidels] says thus; "To be given much to
Brabling and Litigiousness for every trifle, to spend a pound rather than lose
a penny, the Apostle much reprehendeth in Christian Men. For a Christian Man to
draw another to the Judgment-Seats and Courts of Heathen Princes (which then
only reigned) and not to suffer their Controversies and Quarrels to be taken up
among themselves, Brotherly and peaceably, was a great fault." What the
Cardinal's Friends will say, of his perverting the Apostle's meaning with so
desperate an Exposition, we are uncertain: but of this, we are sure, that the
Estate of that Church must needs be very miserable, that cannot be upheld
without so apparent injury done to the Holy Ghost. Which observation we thought
fit to make in this place; because he once having past the bounds of all
Modesty, or rather Piety, is grown to that presumption and hardness of heart,
against the truth, as that he dares to ground another of his Reasons, to
prove, that the Pope has Authority indirectly, to depose Kings and Princes,
upon these words spoken to St. Peter, Pasce oves meas, Feed my Sheep. Touching
which words, because we have a fitter place to entreat, we will here be silent,
and address our selves to his fourth Reason, as idle, and as false, as any of
the rest.

These are his words. "When Kings and Princes come to the Church, that they may
be made Christians, they are received cum pacto expresso, vel tacito, with a
condition expressed or implied, without any mention made of it, that they do
submit their Scepters unto Christ; and do promise, that they will keep and
defend the Faith of Christ, Etiam sub poena Regni perdendi, even under pain of
losing their Kingdoms: Therefore, when they become Heretics, or do hinder
Religion, they may be judged by the Church, and also deposed from their
Principality, and there shall be no injury done unto them, if they be deposed."
For answer whereof; first, we say, That in all the Forms of Baptisms which
hitherto have been published, we cannot learn, that there was ever any such
express Covenant, as the Cardinal here mentions, required of any King, when
he came to be Christened. Baptism is the Entrance, ordained by Christ, into the
Church, which is his spiritual Kingdom; and agreeably to the nature of that
Kingdom, all who are thereby to enter into it, of what Calling or Condition
sover they are, as well poor as rich; private Persons as Princes, are
(according to the Rules of Baptism practiced in all the particular Churches in
the World, for ought that is known to the contrary) either themselves in their
own Persons, or if they be Infants, by their Sureties to profess their belief
in Christ, and to Promise, that they will forsake the Devil, and all his Works,
the vain Pomp and Glory of the World, with all covetous desires of the same,
and carnal desires of the Flesh; and that they do constantly believe God's holy
word, and that they will keep his Commandments. The willful breach of any of
which points, and perseverance in it without Repentance, does indeed deprive
every Christian Man, of what Calling soever he be, from the interest he had (by
his said profession and promise, when he was Baptized) to the Spiritual Kingdom
of Christ in this Life, (that is, from being a true and lively Member of the
Church and mystical Body of Christ) and from the Kingdom of Glory in the Life
to come. But that any Man, by the breach of any Promise made when he was
Baptized, should lose that which he gained not by his Baptism; or that the
Church did never receive any King or Prince to Baptism, but either upon
condition in express terms, or by implication made either by himself, or by his
Godfathers, that he would submit his Scepter unto Christ, that is, unto the
Bishop of Rome (as the Cardinal's drift shows his meaning to be) and promise
to keep and defend the Faith of Christ under pain of the loss of his Kingdom,
is certainly a Doctrine of Devils, and was never heard of in the Church of
Christ for many hundred years; but is utterly repugnant to the Analogy of
Scripture, and to the true nature of Christian Baptism. These secret intentions
(for, as we have said, there was never any Form of Baptism, that contained any
such express contract, as the Cardinal speaks of) Mental Reservations, and
hidden Compacts, such as Men were never taught in the Primitive Church, nor
ever dreamed of, or suspected to be thrust into one of the holy Sacraments, may
well become the Impostors of Rome, but are altogether contrary to the meaning
of Christ, and of his holy Apostles: In whose days, he that believed was
baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, without any
such juggling, or snares laid to hazard and entangle Men's temporal Estates.
There is nothing in the Gospel, whereof Men ought to be ashamed, or which will
not abide the touchstone of truth, if it be compared with the rest of the
Scriptures; or, that does not promote the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, it being
called in that respect, Evangelium Regni, the Gospel of the Kingdom. Now
whether this underhand bargaining be suitable or no, with the sincerity of the
Holy Ghost; or whether if it had been known in the Primitive Church, that all
Men, who would submit themselves to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and be
baptized, did thereby bind themselves to be subject, and at the Commandment of
the Bishop of Rome for the time being, under pain to lose all their Worldly
Estates; the knowledge thereof would not rather have hindered, than either
promoted or furthered the good success of the Gospel; no Man is so simple, but
he may easily discern it. Assuredly the Grecians, who did so long oppose
themselves against the Authority which the Bishops of Rome did challenge over
all Churches, were ignorant of this mystical point of Baptism: and so were all
the Churches in the World for many Ages, or else there would not have been so
great stirs in the World about the continual Usurpations and Encroachments of
the Bishops of Rome, as are many ways testified by sundry Ecclesiastical
Histories. But we insist too long upon this so ridiculous and impudent a
fiction, and therefore will come to the Cardinal's principal reason of the
Pope's said indirect temporal Authority, to toss Kings and Kingdoms up and down
as he list.

"The Ecclesiastical Commonwealth (says he) must be perfect and sufficient of
her self, in order to her own end; (for such are all Commonwealths that are
well instituted) and therefore she ought to have all necessary Power to the
obtaining of her own end. But the Power of using and disposing of temporal
things, is necessary to the Spiritual End; because otherwise Evil Princes
might, without punishment, nourish Heretics, and overthrow Religion: and
therefore the Ecclesiastical Commonwealth has this Power." Hitherto the
Cardinal. The substance of whose Argument is, that the Church of Christ cannot
attain to her Spiritual End, except the Bishop of Rome have Authority to
dispose of temporal Kingdoms, and to punish Kings by deposing them from their
Crowns, if he hold it expedient: For the refutation of which vain and false
Assertion, there are very many most direct and apparent Arguments: We will only
touch some few of them. Our Savior Christ in his days, and the Apostles in
their times, and the Primitive Churches for the space of 300. years, brought
the Ecclesiastical Commonwealth (as here it is termed) unto her Spiritual End,
as directly and fully, as either the Bishops of Rome, or any other Bishops have
at any time done since: and yet they took no Power and Authority upon them, nor
did challenge the same, of disposing of temporal Kingdoms, or Deposing of
Princes. Besides, if such an indirect temporal Power be so necessary in these
days, for the upholding the Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, as that without the
same she cannot attain the Spiritual End, or be a perfect Ecclesiastical
Commonwealth, when there are so many Christian Kings and Princes; then was the
same much more necessary for the attainment of the same end, in the said times
of Christ, of his Apostles, and of the Churches in the Ages following for 300.
years, when the civil Magistrates were Pagans and Infidels, and for the most
part, Persecutors of the truth. But we hope, we may be bold without offense to
say, that there appeared then no such necessity of this pretended temporal
Power and Authority, in any Ecclesiastical Persons, over Kings and Kingdoms,
for the disposing of them; and that nevertheless, the Ecclesiastical
Commonwealth, in those times, did attain her Spiritual End, and was as perfect
an Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, as it is now under the Pope's Government,
notwithstanding all his temporal Sovereignty, wherein he so ruffleth. Again, we
are persuaded, that it cannot be showed out of any of the ancient Fathers, or
by any general Council, for the space of above 500. years after Christ, that
the Bishops of Rome were ever imagined to have such temporal Authority to
depose Kings, as now is maintained; much less was it ever dreamed of, during
that time, that such Authority was necessary for the attaining the Spiritual
End, whereunto the true Church of Christ ought to aim; or, that the
Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, ordained by Christ and his Apostles, could not be
perfect without it. It were a miserable shift, if any should either say, that
during all the times abovementioned, first the Apostles, and then the holy
Bishops, Martyrs, and Fathers after them, were ignorant of this new temporal
Power, or at least did not so thoroughly consider of the necessity of it, as
they might have done; or that whilst they lived, there could indeed no such
matter be collected out of the Scriptures, for that in those days the
Scriptures had not received such a sense and meaning as might support the same:
but that afterward, when the Bishops of Rome did think it necessary to
challenge to themselves such temporal Authority, over both Kings and Kingdoms,
the sense and meaning of the Scripture was altered. But be this shift never so
wretched or miserable, yet (for ought we perceive) they are in effect, and
still will be, both in this cause and many others, driven unto it: the
Scriptures being in their hands a very Rule of Lead, and Nose of Wax, as in
another more fit place we shall have occasion to show: moreover, if the Bishops
of Rome have this great temporal Authority over Kings and Sovereign Princes, to
preserve the State of the Church here upon Earth, that she may attain her
Spiritual End; assuredly he has made little use of it to that purpose. For it
is well known, and cannot be denied, that for the first 300. years of Christ,
the Doctrine of the Gospel did flourish far and near, in Greece, Thracia,
Sclavonia, Hungary, Asia minor, Syria, Assyria, Egypt, and throughout the most
part of Africa, where there were many very worthy Apostolical, and notable
Churches; in the most of which places, there are scarce in these days any
footsteps or visible Monuments of them. And although afterward during the space
of above 700. years, much mischief was wrought in these parts of the World,
better known unto us than the rest, by sundry sorts of Scythians, and Northern
People: yet after the days of Gregory the Seventh, when the Bishops of Rome did
most vaunt of this their Sovereign Power over Kings and Princes, the Turks
gained and encroached more upon Christendom, still retaining that which they
then had so gotten, than at any time before. Whereby it is to us very evident,
that neither Christ, nor his Apostles, ever ordained, that the means of
building of the Church of Christ, and the conservation of it, should consist in
the temporal Power or Authority of any of their Successors, to deprive
Emperors or Kings from their Imperial or Regal Estates: and that the Bishops
of Rome may be ashamed, that having had so great Authority in their own hands,
extorted from the Emperors, and other Kings, per fas and nefas, since Gregory
the Seventh's time, they have made no better use of it; but suffered so many
famous Countries and Kingdoms to be utterly overrun and wasted by Pagans and
Infidels; considering that they pretend themselves to have so great an
Authority for no other purpose, but only the preservation of the Church, that
she might not be prevented of her Spiritual End. But what should we speak of
the shame of Rome, whose forehead has been so long since hardened? or ever
imagine, that Almighty God either did, or will bless her Usurpations and
Insolences against Emperors, Kings and Princes, for any good to his Church,
other than must accrue unto her through her Persecutions and Afflictions? For
it were no great labor to make it most apparent by very many Histories, if we
would insist upon it, that the Bishops of Rome, in striving first to get, and
then to uphold (after their scrambling manner) this their wicked and usurped
Authority of troubling and vexing Christian Kingdoms and States with their
manifold Oppressions and quarrels, have been some special means, whereupon the
Saracens, Turks and Pagans have wrought, and by degrees brought so great a part
of Christendom under their Slavery, as now they are possessed of. For it is but
an idle and a vain pretense, that the preservation of as much of Christendom,
as is yet free from the Turk and Paganism, is to be ascribed to the Bishop of
Rome, and his Authority, that so the Catholic Church might attain her
Spiritual End, which ought to be the planting of Churches and Conservation of
'em: it being most manifest, to as many as have any wit, experience, and sound
Judgment, that as the very situation of the said Countries, which now Pagans
enjoy, made them very subject unto the Incursion and Invasions of Saracens and
Turks, God himself, for his own Glory, having his Finger and just operation
therein; so through his most merciful goodness, and care of his Church, he
blessed the situation of the rest of Christendom, being now free in that
respect from those kind of violences, and endowed the hearts of Christian Kings
and Princes with such Courage and Constancy, in defense of Christianity, and of
their Kingdoms, as notwithstanding that the Popes did greatly vex them in the
mean while, they did mightily repel the Forces of their Enemies, and most
religiously uphold and maintain the profession of Christ: So, as the
preservation of the Gospel in these parts of the World, may more truly be
attributed to the working of the Spirit of God in them, than to the Bishops of
Rome; who have been the chief Authors and occasions of many incredible
mischiefs.

Now lastly, and for conclusion of this point; had not Satan with all Power and
Signs, and lying Wonders, so inveigled and seduced the hearts and minds of the
adherents to the Sea of Rome, as that by degrees, they leaving the love of the
truth, are therefore given over by God unto such strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
10, 11.
that they should believe lies (as the Apostle speaks;) amongst many other of
the gross errors maintained by them, we might marvel at this, that ever they
durst take upon them, in these times of so great light, to write and defend it
with such resolution and confidence, that the Ecclesiastical Commonwealth (as
they term it) cannot be perfect, nor attain her Spiritual End, except the Pope
may have the said temporal Power and Authority to depose Kings: considering how
far the true nature of the Church, which is the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ;
and the true Means and Armor, that Christ, our Spiritual King, has indeed
ordained and appointed, for the Edification and Defense of this his Spiritual
Kingdom, and for the attainment of the supernatural, and right end and beauty
of it, are repugnant to these their Carnal, and Worldly conceits. Touching the
true nature of the Church, and Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, we have before
spoken: and the true Spiritual End of the Church, being by teaching the ways of
truth, to bring as many as possibly they can, to the knowledge of their
Salvation, through Christ, so as by Faith they may become true Members of his
Spiritual Kingdom in the Life to come; the means ordained for that purpose, do
contain the full duty and office of all Bishops and Ecclesiastical Ministers;
who are furnished by Christ, neither with temporal Swords, nor Imperial
Authority to depose Kings and Sovereign Princes, but ought to carry themselves
toward all Men, especially toward Kings and Princes, if they be either Pagans,
or Enemies to Religion, as Christ himself, and his Apostles did; by Preaching
and Praying for them, by Humility and Patience, to endure whatsoever punishment
shall be thought fit to be imposed upon them for doing of their duties; and
never to intermit such their pains and diligence, to the end, that if it please
God to bless those their Ministerial so great labors, their Auditors of all
sorts, private Persons, Kings and Prince, may be brought to the knowledge of
the truth; that so Satan being expelled out of their hearts, Christ by Faith
may reign in them. To the effecting of which so great and so divine an
alteration, and change in Men's Souls, there is no Worldly Force, nor temporal
Sword, which will serve the turn. And therefore the Apostle, speaking of this
matter, does write in this sort; 2 Cor. 10. 4, etc.
The Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal: as if he should have said; We do
not come with Troops of Men to promote the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ; but
with Weapons of another nature, with the glad ridings of the Gospel, with the
Doctrine of Salvation to all Believers, and with the Furniture of the Holy
Ghost: which Weapons are not weak, but mighty through God, and able to cast
down holds, that is, all the carnal Forces of Men, all Principalities and
Powers, that shall presume to rise up against Christ. And through the assurance
and experience, which both St. Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, had in the
force of these Weapons, he says further, that with them they overthrew
Councils, and every high thing, that did exalt it self against the knowledge of
God; and that they brought into Captivity, all imagination or understanding to
the obedience of Christ: away then with the Pope's Carnal Weapons, and with all
their Illusions, and Juglings, that seek to uphold them: for such Weapons were
never ordained by Christ for his Apostolical Warfare.

CAN. IX.
AND therefore if any Man shall affirm, under color of any thing that is in
the Scriptures, either, that the external Callings in this World of those Men
(as Ministers and Schoolmasters) that have to deal with the information of Men's
Minds and Souls, are superior, and to be preferred in Honor and Wordly
Dignities, before the Callings of Kings and Sovereign Princes: or, that because
health is better, and more to be desired in this Life, than any Worldly
Preferments, therefore the Calling of Physicians, who are ordained for the
health of Men's Bodies, ought to be superior to all other Worldly Callings: or,
that the Regal, and Political Power of the King, when it is part of a Christian
Commonwealth, is thereby brought into greater servitude and thraldom, than is
the Regal and Political State of Ethnic Princes, when the same are no parts of
a Christian Kingdom: or; that to prefer the Ecclesiastical State for Worldly
Authority, before the State of Kings and Sovereign Princes, is not (in effect)
to prefer the humbled Estate of Christ, as he was Man, living here upon the
Earth, before his glorious Estate, after his Ascension, and before the glory
and majesty of the Divine Nature: or, that any Ecclesiastical Authority, which
the Apostles ordained, did either free them, or any of their Successors, from
subjection to Kings and Princes, and to their temporal Authority: or, that St.
Peter, being an Apostle, and so subject to the civil Sword of Temporal
Authority, could lawfully, by any indirect device, challenge any temporal Power
and Dominion over Kings and Princes; for that had been to have extorted the
temporal Sword out of their hands to whom it appertained, and to have incurred
again the commination of his Master, when he told him, how all that take the
Sword shall perish with the Sword: or, that it is not a most profane impiety,
tending altogether to the discredit of the Scriptures, for any Man to hold,
that St. Peter and St. Paul had so instructed the Christians in their times, as
that they knew, if they had been able, they might without offense to God, have
deposed Nero from his Empire: or, that the Christians in Tertullian's time,
when they professed, that notwithstanding their numbers and forces were so
great, as they had been able to have distressed very greatly the Estate of the
Emperors (being then Persecutors) they might not so do, because Christ their
Master had taught them otherwise; ought not to be a sufficient Warrant for all
true Christians to detest those Men in these days, and for ever hereafter, who
contrary to the Example of the said Christians in the Primitive Church, and the
Doctrine of Christ, which was then taught them, do endeavor to persuade them,
when they shall have sufficient Forces, to Rebel against such Kings and
Emperors at the Pope's Commandment, and to thrust them from their Kingdoms and
Empires: or, that this Devilish Doctrine of animating Subjects to Rebellion
(when they are able) against their Sovereigns, either for their Cruelty,
Heresy, or Apostasy, was ever taught in the Church of Christ by any of the
ancient Fathers abovementioned, during the Reigns of Dioclesian, or Julian the
Apostate, or Valens the Arrian, or of any other the Wicked Emperors before
them: or, that it is not a wicked perverting of the Apostles words to the
Corinthians (touching their choice of Arbitrators, to end dissentions amongst
themselves, rather than draw their Brethren before Judges that were Infidels)
to infer thereof, either that St. Paul intended thereby to impeach, in any
sort, the Authority of the civil Magistrates as if he had meant they should
have chosen such Judges, as by civil Authority might otherwise have bound them,
than by their own consents to have stood to their Award; or to authorize
Christian Subjects, when they are able, to thrust their lawful Sovereigns from
their Regal Seats, and to choose unto themselves new Kings into their places:
or, that any of the said ancient Fathers, or godly learned Men, for many
hundred years after Christ, did ever so grossly and irreligiously expound the
said place of the Apostle, as our Cardinaliz'd Jesuit has done: or, that it
can be collected out of the Scriptures, that either Christ, or any of his
Apostles, did at any time teach or preach, that they, who meant to be Baptized,
must receive that Sacrament upon Condition, that if at any time afterward, they
should not be obedient to St. Peter, for his time, and to his Successors, they
were to lose and be deprived of all their temporal Estates and Possessions: or,
that it can be proved, either out of the Scriptures, or by any of the said
ancient Fathers, or showed in any ancient Form of Administration of Baptism,
that ever there was any such Covenant made, by any such faithful Persons, when
they were Baptized, or required of them, to be made by any that Baptized them:
or, that if such a Covenant were by Christ's Ordinance to be made in Baptism,
it ought not as well to be made by Farmers, by Gentlemen possessed of Mannours,
and by Lords of greater Revenues and Possessions, as by Kings and Sovereign
Princes: or, that it were not an absurd Imagination to think, that Christ and
his Apostles did only mean, that Emperors, Kings and Sovereign Princes, should
be received to Baptism upon the said Condition: or, that all Christian Men
ought not to judge, that the eleven Apostles, if they had known of any such
bargain, or condition in Baptism, would have dealt as faithfully with the
Church, and in the behalf of St. Peter, in preaching and teaching the same, as
now our Cardinal, and other such like Persons of the Roman strain, do by their
Writing, Publishing, and maintaining of it in the behalf of the Bishops of
Rome: or, that either Christ, or his Apostles, knowing that Baptism ought to be
received with such a Condition, did think it convenient, that the same should
be concealed, not only whilst they lived, but for many hundred years afterward,
until the Bishops of Rome should be grown to such a head and strength, as that
they might without fear of any inconveniences, make the whole Christian World
acquainted with it: or, that it is not an idle conceit for any Man to maintain,
that the Renunciation of the effects of Baptism, does deprive Men of their
temporal Lands and Possessions, which they did not hold by any force of
Baptism; or make them subject in that behalf to the deprivation of the Bishops
of Rome: or, that Apostasy from Christ, put on in Baptism, does any further
extend it self, than to the Souls of such Apostates in this Life, in that the
Devil has got again the possession of them, and so depriveth them in this
World of all the comfort and hope they had in Christ, leading them on to the
bane, both of their Bodies and Souls in the Life to come: or, that any
Ecclesiastical Person, has any other lawful means, to reclaim Wicked,
Heretical, or Apostated Kings, from their Impiety, Heresy and Apostasy, than
Christ and his Apostles did ordain to be used, for winning Men at the first to
embrace the Gospel: or, that Christ himself, while he lived, did attempt,
either directly or indirectly, to Depose the Emperor, by whose Authority he
was himself put to death, as holding, that the Church could not attain to her
Spiritual End, except he had so done: or, that by the death of Christ, the
Church did not attain to her Spiritual End, without the Deposition of any
Emperors or Kings from their Regal Estates: or, that ever the Apostles in
their days, either preached or writ, that the Ecclesiastical Commonwealth could
not be perfect, except St. Peter for his time, and after him the Bishops of
Rome, should have temporal Power and Authority to Depose Emperors and Kings,
that the Church might attain her Spiritual End: or, that the Church in their
days did not attain to her Spiritual End, although no such Authority was then,
either challenged, or put in practice: or, that the Church could have attained
to that her Spiritual End in the Apostle's times, if the said temporal Power
and Authority had been then necessary for the attaining of it: or, that our
Savior Christ and his Apostles, did propound a Spiritual End unto his Church,
and left no other necessary means for the obtaining of it, than such as could
not be put in practice, either in their days, or for many hundred years after:
or, that the Churches of Christ, after the Apostle's times, for the space of
300. years, being wonderfully oppressed with sundry Persecutions, did not
attain to their Spiritual End, without this dreamed off Temporal Authority of
Deposing Kings and Emperors, then their mortal Enemies, not in respect of
themselves, but of the Doctrine of Salvation, which they taught to their
Subjects: or, that this new Doctrine of the Necessity, that the Bishops of Rome
should have temporal Authority, either directly or indirectly, to Depose
Emperors and Kings, for any cause whatsoever, (or that else the Church of
Christ should not be able to attain to her Spiritual End) was ever heard of,
for ought that appears for many hundreds of years after the Apostles times,
either in any Ecclesiastical History, or in any of the ancient Fathers, by us
abovementioned: or, that the Bishops of Rome, with all their Adherents, whilst
they would make the World believe, that the Church of Christ cannot attain her
Spiritual End, except they have temporal Authority, indirectly to Depose for
some Causes, Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign Princes, are more learned now,
than either the ancient Fathers, or the Apostles themselves were; and that they
know the sense of the Scriptures, better, than either they the said ancient
Fathers did, or the Apostles that writ them; who (for ought that was known for
many hundred years) never preached, taught, or intended to have any such
Doctrine collected out of their Writings and Works: or, that it may, without
great Impiety, be once imagined, that if such a necessary point of Doctrine,
concerning the said great temporal Power in the Pope over Princes, as without
the which, the Church of Christ could not attain her Spiritual End, had been
known to the Apostles and Ancient Fathers, they would not have been as careful
and zealous to have preached and divulged the same unto all Posterity, as now
the Bishops of Rome, and their Adherents are: or, that we ought not rather to
believe, that the Bishops of Rome, and their Adherents, through their forsaking
the love of the Truth, are given over by God unto those strong Illusions, that
they should believe lies, and maintain them as stiffly as though they were true,
than once to conceive, that the holy Apostles and ancient Fathers, were either
ignorant of this supposed temporal Authority to Depose Kings and Princes, for
the end so often mentioned, or thought it fit to dissemble it, or to write of
it so darkly, as for many Hundred years it could not be understood: or, that
God has not wonderfully blinded the hearts and understandings, both of the
Popes, and all their Adherents in this particular matter (amongst many others)
in that the nature of the Church, and Spiritual Kingdom of Christ considered,
they dare presume to maintain it so confidently, that the said Spiritual
Kingdom of Christ, cannot attain to her Spiritual End, without the Bishop of
Rome, his Temporal Authority, indirectly in some Cases, to Depose Kings and
Sovereign Princes: or, that the true Spiritual End of the Church consisting in
this, that the Devil being banished out of the hearts of all her true Members,
Christ may retain his Possession of them, through their Faith and diligence, to
repel Satan, who daily labors to regain to himself his own Possession; it is
not more than a kind of phrensy, to hold and maintain, that any temporal
Authority, managed by the Pope, or by his Commandment, against Kings and
Princes, has any force or power, to work or procure this Spiritual End, either
by expelling or repelling of Satan, or to nourish Faith, or to continue the
reigning of Christ in any Men's hearts: or, that it is not an impious and a
profane assertion for any Man to defend, that the Weapons and Armor of this
Spiritual Warfare, undertaken by Christ, and his Apostles, and by all godly
Bishops, and true Priests and Ministers of the Gospel, are not sufficient of
themselves to procure to the Church her Spiritual End, without the Pope's
carnal Weapons, or temporal Authority to Depose Kings, when to him, with the
assistance of his Cardinals, it shall seem expedient; He does greatly Err.

CAP. XI.
The Sum of the Chapter following.
That there is no more necessity of one visible Head of the Catholic Church,
than of one visible Monarch over all the World.

IN the 35th and 36th Chapters of our first Book, We have showed at large, that
our Savior Christ, the Son of God, having created the World, and taken upon
him to be the Redeemer of Mankind, after their transgression through Adam's
Fall, did not only, as he was the Son of God, govern all the World (the same
being in that respect but one Universal Kingdom) and appoint several Kings and
Sovereign Princes, as his Substitutes, to rule the same under him in their
several Countries and Kingdoms, leaving no one Emperor, or temporal Monarch to
govern them all; but likewise, as he was the blessed Lamb, slain from the
beginning of the World, he did (for his own Glory, and our endless Comfort)
erect for himself, in this World, a Spiritual Kingdom, called his Church,
consisting of such Men, dispersed throughout the World, as did profess his
name; and being himself the only Head and Governor of it (in which respect it
is rightly to be termed, but One Catholic Church) did appoint no one Priest
over the whole Catholic Church, but several Priests, and Ecclesiastical
Ministers, to rule and govern the particular Churches in every Province,
Country, and Nation. And in such manner and form, as our Savior Christ did
rule and govern his Universal Kingdom, and Catholic Church, before his
Incarnation; So does he still rule and govern the same: notwithstanding any of
those vain pretenses, and ridiculous Usurpations, which the Bishops of Rome, or
any of their Adherents, are able to allege and maintain to the contrary.

In the Gloss of one of the Books of the Canon Law, Extravag. l. 1. c. 1. de
Major. and Obed. unam sanctam.
not long since Printed, and approved by Gregory the Thirteenth, a
Glossographer, and now an Authentical Canonist, does write in this sort. "Dico,
quod potestas Spiritualis debet dominari omni creaturae humanae." I say, that
the Spiritual Power ought to domineer over every humane Creature. And why says
he so? Forsooth, "Per rations, quas Hostiensis inducit in summa:" for certain
causes and reasons, which Hostiensis (another Canonist) does allege in his
sum. But he stays not there: he has another motive, which he sets down
thus: "Item, quia Christus, etc." Also, because Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
when he was in the World, and also from everlasting was the natural Lord; and
by the natural Law he might have given Sentences against the Emperor, and any
other whatsoever, of Deposition and damnation, and any other Sentences; "Vtpote
in personas, quas creaverat, and donis naturalibus, and gratuitis dotaverat,
and etiam conservabat:" As against Persons, whom he had created and endowed
with natural and free gifts; and also whom he did preserve: and "eadem ratione
Vicarius ejus potest:" and by one and the same reason (says he) his Vicar may
so do. What? would Pope Gregory, by his Canonists, make Men to believe, that
all Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign Princes, are Persons of the Pope's
Creation? or, that he does bestow on them freely, any gifts or benefits of
Nature? or, that their preservation does depend upon his good favor and
Providence? But the idle Canonist, his Wit does serve him no better, than to
make (in effect) this fond Collection: Christ, the Creator of all things, does
govern, rule, dispose, and preserve all his own Creatures: therefore the Pope
must likewise govern, rule, dispose and preserve them all, though he created
none of them. And why must he so do? he wants not a very substantial reason
that moved him so to collect; which follows in his own words: "Nam non
videretur Dominus discretus fuisse (ut cum Reverentia ejus loquar) nisi unicum
post se talem Vicarium reliquisset, qui haec omnia posset. Fuit autem iste
Vicarius ejus Petrus. Et idem dicendum est de Successoribus Petri; cum eadem
absurditas sequeretur, si post mortem Petri humanam naturam a se creatam sine
regimine unius personae reliquisset." For Christ should not have been thought a
Person of sufficient discretion (that with his Reverence, I may so speak)
except he had left behind him one such Vicar, who might do all these things.
And this his Vicar was Peter. And the same is to be said of the Successors of
Peter: seeing the same absurdity must follow, if after Peter's Death he had
left Mankind created by himself, Harding's Confut. of Juel's Apol. 19.
without the regiment of one Person. And Mr. Harding, one of our own
Countrymen, does wholly concur with this profound Canonist; saving that he
deals more civilly with Christ, in using the word Providence instead of the
Canonist's Discretion. Thus he writes. Except we should wickedly grant, that
God's Providence does lack to his Church; reason may soon induce us to believe,
that to one Man, the chief and highest of all Bishops, the Successor of Peter,
the Rule and Government of the Church, by God, has been deferred. And he
further does express his opinion to this effect; That if God had not ordained
such a Monarchical Church Government; he should have brought in amongst his
faithful People, that unruly confusion and destruction of all Commonwealths, so
much abhorred of Princes, which the Grecians call an Anarchy; which is a state,
for lack of order in Governors, without any Government at all.

That our Savior Christ is the sole Governor, Head, and Archbishop of his
Catholic Church, as he is the only Governor, Ruler, and Monarch, over all the
World: and that his Discretion, and Divine Providence, is no more to be
blemished, or impeached, by the Cavils of any Impostors, in that he has
appointed no one Priest, Archbishop, or Pope, to be his Vicar General, over the
whole Catholic Church, than for that he has not assigned any one King,
Emperor, or Monarch, to rule the whole World under him; this is the point,
that here we purpose to make good: taking it in this place for granted, that
there was never any one Man in the World, to whom our Savior Christ did commit
the Government of it, after the time that it was Peopled, and thoroughly
inhabited; that is, from Noah's Flood at the least hitherto. They, that labor
to prove, that the Bishop of Rome is Head of the Universal Church, and that
Christ should have showed little Discretion, or Providence, if he had not so
ordained it, do insist very much upon the grounds of natural reason and
philosophy; Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 2.
telling us out of Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, Isocrates, Stobaeus, Hesiodus,
Euripides, Homer, Herodotus, and diverse others, That of all the kinds of
Government that are, the Monarchical Government is the best; "That in a great
Host, consisting of Soldiers of diverse Nations and Countries, and perhaps of
many Sovereign Princes, and Kings, there must be one General to govern them
all; That all things naturally have a propension and aptness to Monarchical
Government; That Bees of every Hive have their King; That in every Flock of
Sheep there is a principal Ram; That in every Herd of Cattle has a Leader;
That Cranes do not fly promiscuously, and in heaps, but have one whom they do
all very orderly follow; Sand. de visib. Monarch. l. 3.
That amongst Celestial Spheres, there is but one Primum Mobile; That in the
number of the lights of the World, one is greater than the rest; That there is
a certain Principality in the Elements; That the Fountain is but one, from
whence diverse times there flow sundry Streams; That into one Sea all Rivers do
run and return; That the thing which is most one, is less easily divided; That
it is rather one, Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 9.
which is simply one, than a multitude conspiring in one;" And that for these,
and many other like reasons, seeing the Monarchical Government is best, and
that we may be sure, that Christ would have his Church governed by the best
manner of Government, (except we should think him to have dealt absurdly, as a
Person void, both of good Discretion and Providence); It follows therefore,
that Christ committed the Government of it unto one; first to St. Peter, and
then to his Successor, the Bishop of Rome for the time being. If this one
Jesuit and his Fellows, would upon the said Philosophical premises, have
concluded thus, That it therefore had followed, that Christ himself does not
only retain in his own hands, the sole Government of his Catholic Church, as
he is the only Redeemer of it, but likewise the sole Government of the whole
World, as he is the Creator of it; the Conclusion had been true, although the
premises had not enforced it. But how stiffly soever they meant to insist upon
the said Conclusion, without any regard of truth, so they may blear the Eyes of
the simpler sort with such their vain Illusions; We may be bold (as we hope)
resolutely to defend and maintain it, that the said natural reasons are of as
great strength to prove, That there ought of necessity to be one temporal
Monarch over all the World, as one Ecclesiastical Monarch over the whole
Catholic Church: although in very deed they are far too feeble and weak, to
prove either the one or the other. For who knows not, that when the
Philosophers did write in commendation of the Monarchical Government, they only
had Relation to particular Nations and Countries; endeavoring to prove, that
it was better for them severally to be ruled by that Form of Government, which
is called Monarchical, than by any of the rest, Aristocratical, Democratical,
or any other? And it was so far from their meaning, to have their said reasons
wrested to prove, that one mortal Man ought to have the Government of the
Catholic Church, the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ; as they never dreamed (for
ought that appears) that one Man, in their Judgment, was fit or able to take
upon him the Temporal Government of the whole World: To which purpose, a
principal Lawyer amongst our Adversaries, Covatruv. 2. part. Relect. 9. tom. 1.
number. 5.
does write in this sort. Natura ipsa institutum non est, quod universus Orbis
uni Principi subditus sit. It is not ordained by nature, that the whole World
should be subject to one Prince. If then it be an idle vanity for any Man to go
about by natural reason to prove, that one Man ought to be the temporal Monarch
of all the World, which nature her self did never intend: it is then certainly
a kind of madness or phrenzy, to rely upon such proofs for the Popes spiritual
Authority over the whole Catholic Church; neither of them both being
comprehensible, or subject to the apprehensions of nature.

Again, these Patrons for the Pope, and his Primacy, over the whole Catholic
Church, have not only such Arguments, as we have heard, drawn from natural
reason, but some likewise deduced from sundry similitudes, and those out of the
Scriptures; upon which they rely with some more confidence, as reason is they
should: saying, Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 2.
that God made all Mankind, ex uno Adamo, of one Adam; to signify thereby, that
he would have all Men to depend, ab uno, of one: but the Old Testament was a
figure of the new; and that therefore, as there was but one High Priest amongst
the Jews to govern that one Church; so now there must be but one Pope to govern
all the Churches in the World: that Aaron was not only a figure of Christ, but
likewise of St. Peter: that the Church is compared to an Host well ordered; to
a humane Body; to a Kingdom; to a Fold; to an House; to a Ship; and that
therefore she must have but one Captain; one humane Head; one King; one Pastor;
one Householder; and one Pilot: that although there be but one, and proper Head
of the Church, which is Christ, that governs the same spiritually, yet she
has need of one visible Head, or otherwise the Bishop of Rome, and all other
Bishops, Pastors, Doctors, and Ministers, were needless: that although Christ
be the Head of the Church, yet he ought to have one underneath him, by whom she
may be governed; as a King, when he is present, may govern his Kingdom himself;
but being absent, does usually appoint another under him, who is called his
Viceroy: that every Diocese and Province has her Bishops and Archbishops, to
govern the particular Churches under them, within their several Charges; and
that therefore there must be one Bishop of the whole Catholic Church, to rule
and govern them all: Lastly, That as there is but one God, one Faith, and one
Baptism; so there must be in the Catholic Church, but one chief Bishop and
Judge, upon whom all Men ought to depend. Many more are the reasons, grounded
upon diverse other similitudes, which our Adversaries have heaped up together,
to uphold the Pope's Authority: all of them being as vain and frivolous as the
former. For it is certain and manifest, that as the Catholic Church is
resembled in the Scriptures, to an Host well ordered, to a humane Body, to a
Kingdom, to a Flock of Sheep, to an House, and to a Ship: so Christ only is
intended thereby to be her only General, her only Head, her only King, her only
Shepherd, her only Householder, and her only Pilot. Neither can any other thing
be enforced from the words mentioned of one Faith, and one Baptism, but that as
we are only justified through a lively Faith in Christ, so there is but one
Baptism ordained, whereby we have our first entrance into his Spiritual
Kingdom, and are made particular Members of his Catholic Church. Besides, in
the like sense, that the Catholic Church is resembled to an Host well ordered,
to a humane Body, to a Kingdom, to a Flock, to an House, to a Ship; so may the
Universal Kingdom of Christ over the whole World, as he is the Creator of it,
be resembled to them all, and the aforesaid Titles respectively attributed unto
him. The whole World is an Host, under him, well ordered, and he is the General
of it. The whole World is but as one Body, whereof he is the Head; being the
Life of all Men, from whom, as from their Head, they have their Sense,
Understanding, and Motion. The whole Universal World is but his Kingdom, and he
is the King of it, ruling and disposing it, as seems best to his divine
Wisdom. The whole World is with him but one Flock, and he is the Shepherd of
it, all Men in it being the Sheep of his Pasture, to whom he gives food and
sustentation in due season. Also he orders all the affairs in the World, as a
good Householder does order and direct all the businesses and troubles
appertaining to his Family. Likewife the whole World may aptly be compared to a
Ship, in that the State of all Mankind, living in it, is subject, as a Ship on
the Sea, unto all manner of contrary Winds, Tempests, and Storms; of which Ship
were not Christ, as he is the Creator of the World, the only Pilot, the World
could not subsist. And as the Catholic Church is resembled to a Fold, which
contains in it all that believe in Christ; so may the universal Kingdom of
Christ, over all the World, be compared unto a Fold, in that it contains in
it all Mankind generally, his Heavenly Care and Providence evermore protecting
them.

Moreover, as there is but one Catholic Church, one Head, or Spiritual Ruler
of it, (Christ our Redeemer) one Christian Faith, one Baptism, one Gospel, one
Truth, one and the self-same Form or Nature of all the several Theological
Virtues, and one Inheritance; which are all of them to be taught, embraced, and
expected by all that are true Members of the Catholic Church: So there is but
one Universal Kingdom in all the World (the Creator of it being the sole
Emperor and Governor of it) one moral Faith, one Nature of Truth to be
observed amongst all, one rule and nature of Justice, one moral Law, one nature
of Equity, one Kind, Form, or Nature of all the several Virtues, both Moral and
Intellectual, which are to be put in practice, as occasion requires, in this
one Empire, by as many, as expect from Christ, their Emperor, any happy
success in their Worldly affairs. But as all these Unities in the temporal
Monarchy of Christ, are no sufficient grounds to warrant this assertion, that
there ought to be one temporal King or Emperor under Christ to govern the
whole World; so the aforesaid Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Unities, are not
able to establish, or uphold this Inference; That one Pope must of necessity
have the Government under Christ of the whole Catholic Church. Also from the
authority of Scripture, that God made all Mankind of one Adam, to signify, that
he would have all Men to depend upon one; why may it not as well be collected,
that he meant, that all the Men in the World should depend upon one Emperor
for causes Temporal, as upon one Pope in Causes Ecclesiastical? Likewise it is
a very absurd conceit, that our Jesuit maintains, when he says, That
although Christ be the Head of the Church, yet he ought to have one underneath
him, by whom she may be governed; as a King, when he is present, may govern his
Kingdom himself, and when he is absent, appoint his Viceroy. Of likelihood
this Fellow would persuade us, that Christ is sometimes absent from his Church;
to the end, that the Pope may be his grand Deputy: For otherwise, by his own
Example, Christ may govern the Catholic Church without the Pope; as the King,
ruling himself in his own Kingdom, needs no Viceroy. That Christ is never
absent from his Church; but does by his Power, Grace and Virtue of the Holy
Ghost, still defend and protect it. It is plain by his own words, where he
says, Matthew. 28. 20.
Lo, I am with you always unto the end of the World. It is true, that he told
his Apostles, that he was to depart from them; meaning, that they must be
deprived of his Corporal presence: but did he signify unto them, that for their
comfort he would leave St. Peter in his place, and after him the Bishops of
Rome, St. Peter's Successors, to govern his Church to the end of the World? No
such matter. These are our Savior Christ's words. Joh. 16. 7.
It is expedient for you, that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you; but if I depart, -- v. 13.
I will send him unto you. Again, When he is come, which is the Spirit of
truth, he will lead you into all truth. Joh. 14. 16, 17.
Again, I will pray to my Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that
he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth. -- v. 26.
Again, The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
Name, he shall teach you all things. -- v. 18.
And again, I will not leave you comfortless; but I will come unto you. Which
he does continually, when he upholdeth his Church daily against Satan, and all
that do malign it. So, as we may far more rightly and safely, term the Holy
Ghost to be Christ's Vicar General over all the Catholic Church, than we may
ascribe that title to the Pope: the Holy Ghost being ever present and ready,
not only to defend the Church generally, but to aid and comfort every
particular Member of it, wheresoever they are dispersed upon the face of the
Earth; which we suppose the Pope is not able to perform.

We have before labored to make it manifest, that our Savior Christ is the
Creator of the World, and the Governor of it; that he has redeemed and
sanctified unto himself his Church, whereof he is the sole Monarch; that he
has neither appointed any one Emperor under him to govern the whole World,
nor any one Priest or Archbishop, to rule the whole Catholic Church; that, as
in respect of Christ, the Creator, all the World is but one Kingdom, whereof he
is the only King; so, in respect of Christ our Redeemer, all that believe in
his name, wheresoever they are dispersed, are but one Catholic Church; and
that the said one Catholic Church is not otherwise visible in this World, than
is the said one Universal Kingdom of Christ, the Creator of it; viz. by the
several and distinct parts of them, as by this, or that National Church, by
this, or that temporal Kingdom. For our Savior Christ having made the external
Government of his Catholic Church suitable to the Government of his Universal
Monarchy over all the World, has by the Institution of the Holy Ghost ordered
to be placed in every Kingdom (as before in another place we have observed)
Archbishops, Bishops, and inferior Ministers, to govern the particular
Churches therein planted; Priests, Ministers in every particular Parish, and
over them Bishops within their several Diocesses; as likewise Archbishops to
have the Inspection and charge over all the rest, according to the Platform
ordained (in substance) by himself in the Old Testament; as he has in like
manner appointed Kings and Sovereign Princes, with their inferior Magistrates
of diverse sorts, to rule and govern his People under him, in every Kingdom;
Country, and Sovereign Principality; some of their said inferior Magistrates
having Authority from their Sovereigns in particular Parishes, some in
Hundreds, some in Shires or Countries, and some in Governments of larger
extents; there being amongst them all diverse degrees of Persons, one over
another, and their Kings and Sovereign Princes, excelling them all in Power and
Authority, as the Persons appointed by God, to rule and direct all their
Subjects, of what calling soever, in the right use of the Authority and
Magistracy; which they have committed unto them.

And we cannot but wonder, as well at our said Jesuit, where he says, That
although there be but one, and proper Head of the Church, which is Christ, that
governs the same spiritually; yet she has need of one visible Head, or
otherwise the Bishop of Rome, and all other Bishops, Pastors, Doctors, and
Ministers, were needless; as likewise at our Countryman Harding, who says (as
is above-noted) that if God had not deferred to one Man, that is, to Peter and
his Successors, the Rule and Government of the Church, he should have brought,
amongst his faithful People, that unruly Confusion which is called an Anarchy.
For, were these their vain conceits and imaginations true, then would it by the
same reason follow, that albeit there be but one, and proper Monarch over all
the World (which is Christ that created it) yet the same has need of one
visible Monarch; or otherwise Emperors, and all other Kings, Princes, and
civil Magistrates, were needless; or otherwise, Christ should have left amongst
his People throughout the World, that unruly confusion and destruction of all
Commonwealths, so much abhorred of Princes, which the Grecians call an Anarchy;
which is a state, for lack of order in Governors, without any Government at
all. The fondness of which two consequents, do so plainly argue the folly and
falsehood of the two former, as we need no other refutation of them. For if all
Christian Kingdoms, and Sovereign Princes, would banish the Pope, with his
Usurped Authority, as the Monarchy of Britany has done, and retain under them
the Apostolical Form of Church Government, by Archbishops and Bishops, with
other degrees of Ministers (as before we have diverse times specified) they
should find the Churches, in their several Dominions, as well governed by them
(the said Archbishops and Bishops) without one Pope to rule the whole Catholic
Church; as they have experience of the sufficiency of their own Regal and
Sovereign Form of Government in their several Kingdoms and Countries,
notwithstanding there be no one Monarch over all the World to command or direct
them. And for an Example not to be controlled, to make this good that here we
affirm; we leave unto them God's own Form both of Temporal and Ecclesiastical
Government, established by himself amongst his own people the Jews. Nay, why
should we doubt, but that Kings and Sovereign Princes, notwithstanding the
Mists and Darkness wherewith the Bishops of Rome have daily sought to dim their
Eyes, have had long since a Glimpse of this Light, and Truth? About 400. and
some odd Years since, in the latter end of the Reign of Henry the second, and
in the days of Richard the first, both of them Kings of England, first Baldwin
and then Hubertus being Archbishops of Canterbury, there was a mighty
Controversy betwixt them and the Bishops of Rome, about the erecting of a new
Cathedral Church in Lambeth; the said Kings and Archbishops having a resolution
utterly to banish out of this Kingdom the Popes Authority, if the Monks of
Canterbury in their Allegation to Pope Celestine, against the said Cathedral
Church, did inform him truly. These are their Words, as they are recorded by
Reginaldus, one of the said Monks (as it seems) then living, who has written
a whole Book of that matter. Reginaldi Ep. de temp. Baldwini. p. 98. col. 1.
In tantum enim jam opus processit, quod ibi ordinatur Decanus, Praepositus,
and plusquam quadraginta Canonici de Bonis Cantuariensis Ecclesiae fundati,
genere nobiles, divitiis affluentes, cognati Regum and Pontificum. Quidam ipsi
Regi adhaerent; quidam Fisci negotia administrantes, familiares Episcopis, and
iisdem confoederati. Adversuss tantos and tales quid poterit Ecclesia
Cantuariensis? Certe timendum est non solum Cantuariensis Ecclesiae, sed (quod
Deus avertat) ne hujus rei occasion sedis Apostolicae Autoritati in partibus
Anglicanis derogetur. Quum enim fundaretur Canonica illa, vox erat omnium,
sententia singulorum, ut ibi essent Episcopi, quasi Cardinales; Archiepiscopus
sederet quasi Papa; and ibi omnis Appellatio subsisteret and querela. Hoc
quidem Rex Henricus machinabatur, approbant quamplures Episcopi; hac de causa
(ut dictum est) ut possent de sub jugo sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae colla
excutere. Now the building of the said Church is so forward, that there is
ordained there a Dean, a Provost, and more than 40. Canons, founded of the
Goods of the Church of Canterbury, by birth Noblemen, abounding in Wealth,
Allies of the King, and of the Bishops. Some of them do adhere to the King;
some have Offices in the Exchequer; all of them familiar Friends to the
Bishops, and of a Confederacy with them. Against such and so great Persons,
what is the Church of Canterbury able to do? Certainly it is to be feared, not
only that the Church of Canterbury shall hereby be overthrown; but that upon
this occasion, the Authority of the Apostolical See (which God forbid) shall in
England be greatly diminished und prejudiced. For when this Canonry or
Cathedral Church was founded, it was the common fame, and the opinion of every
Man, that it was founded to this end, that Bishops should be there as it were
Cardinals, and that the Archbishop should sit amongst them as Pope, and that
there all Appeals and complaints should be determined. This assuredly was
plotted by King Henry, and the same very many Bishops do allow, for this cause
or end, that so they might deliver their Necks from under the Yoke of the Holy
Church of Rome.

Again after the Death of Celestin the Fourth, the Cardinals being at so great
a Dissension amongst themselves as that they could not agree for the space of a
Year and nine Months, who should succeed him; both the Emperor and the French
were greatly moved and offended therewith. The Emperor finding his advice unto
them to hasten their Choice, to be despised and scorned, and how dishonestly
some of them had broken their Promises and Oaths unto him made in that behalf;
he gathered a great Host, and dealt sharply with them. And from France they
received a Message, that if they continued to dally, as they did, in prolonging
the choice of a new Pope, they would utterly leave Rome, and choose to
themselves a Pope of their own, to govern the Churches on this side the Alps.
Hereof Matthew Paris writes thus. Matt. Paris ad annum 1243.
" Per idem tempus miserunt Franci solennes Nuncios ad Curiam Romanam;
significantes persuadendo praecise, and efficaciter, ut ipsi Cardinales Papam
rite eligentes Universally Ecclesiae solatium Pastorale maturius providerent:
vel ipsi Franci propter negligentiam eorum de sibi eligendo, and providendo
summo Pontifice citra Montes, cui obedire tenerentur, quantocyus
contrectarent." About that time the State of France did send their solemn
Messengers to the Court of Rome, signifying unto them, and persuading them,
precisely and effectually, that either the Cardinals should more speedily
provide for the Universal Church, her Pastoral Comfort, by their due choice of
a new Pope: or else they themselves (the French) because of their negligence,
would forthwith fall into deliberation of choosing and providing for themselves
a Pope on this side the Mountains, whom they might be bound to obey. Thus the
said History. Whereby, as also by the former words of the Monks of Canterbury
it is very evident, that both England and France, was long since in
deliberation to have abandoned the Authority of the Bishops of Rome out of both
those Kingdoms, as finding no necessity of the Universal overswaying power of
the Roman Papacy; and that the Churches within their several Countries and
Territories, might receive as great benefit and comfort, by the Ecclesiastical
Government of their own Archbishops, in every respect, as ever they had done
from the Bishops of Rome. For as it may truly be said, not of one King to
govern all the World, but of every particular King in his own Kingdom; so may
it be truly affirmed, not of one Pope to govern the whole Catholic Church, but
of every Archbishop, in any National Church and Province, to rule and direct
the same; that under the Government of one (viz. of Kings for temporal Causes,
and of Archbishops for Ecclesiastical Causes) there is the best order, the
greatest strength, the most stability for continuance, and the easiest manner
and form of ruling.

We have spoken hitherto of the Government of the Church, especially as it was
in the Apostles times and afterward, for the space of 300. years, when the
civil Magistrates were Enemies unto it. Whereby we do infer, that if the
particular Churches, settled then almost in every Country and Nation throughout
the World, had so good success, when there were no Christian Magistrates, nor
had any assistance of the temporal Sword, for the strengthening of their
Ecclesiastical Government, but only Ministers, to teach and direct their
Parishioners in the ways of Godliness; and Bishops over them in every Diocese,
to oversee and rule, as well the Ministers, as the several People committed to
their charge, that they taught no new Doctrine, or ran into Schisms; and
Archbishops over them all, in every National Church and Province, for the
moderating and appeasing of such oppositions and dissentions, as might
otherwise have risen amongst the Bishops, and so consequently have wrought
great distraction betwixt their Diocesan Churches: how much more then are the
said particular Churches like to flourish and prosper, under such a Form of
Ecclesiastical Government, wherein the Christian Magistrate is become to be, as
the chief Member of the Church, so the chief Governor of it; to keep as well
the said Archbishops within their bounds and limits, as all the rest of the
Clergy, and Christians, Bishops, Ministers, and Parishioners, that every one,
in their several places, may execute and discharge their distinct Offices and
Duties which are committed unto them.

We shall have fit occasion hereafter to speak of the Authority of Christian
Princes in Causes Ecclesiastical: here we do only still prosecute the
Government of the Church (when temporal Kings and Princes were her great and
mortal Enemies) and the Folly, (if not the obstinacy) of our Adversaries, who
either see it not, or will not acknowledge it, that peace and quietness may as
well be preserved, in all the Churches in the World, by Archbishops and
Bishops, without one Pope to govern them all; as by Kings and Sovereign Princes
in all the Kingdoms and temporal Governments in the World, without one temporal
Monarch to rule and oversway them. For our Adversaries shall never be able to
prove, that it may be ascribed (as we have before said) more to any want of
discretion and due Providence in our Savior Christ, that he has not appointed
the Pope to govern the Catholic Church, than that he has not assigned the
Government of the whole World to one King or Emperor. Rather it is to be
attributed to their audacious temerity and presumption, that will either
enforce our Savior Christ to be contented with that Form of Government in his
Church, which they think good to assign unto him, and so make him to divide
stakes (as the Phrase is) with the Bishops of Rome; or else to be reputed
amongst them for a Person of little Discretion and Providence, and to have
dealt absurdly, in ordering and settling the external Government of his Church,
as he had ordered and settled the external Government of his Universal Kingdom,
over all the Kings and Princes in the World. Which profane, wicked, and
blasphemous proceedings with Christ, will (no doubt) in short time, receive a
heavy Judgment; in that, although the Man of sin has long wrought in a
mystery, and taken upon him, for his time, and so every one of his Successors,
during their Lives, to sit in the Temple of God, vaunting, that the said
Temple, or Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, is wholly at his Command; yet now he
begins to be revealed and disclosed to be that Impostor, that by the
assistance of Satan, has with power, and signs, and lying wonders, in all
deceiveableness and unrighteousness, long abused the Christian World, and is
consequently to be consumed by our Savior Christ, with the Spirit of his
mouth. In the mean while, and till this work be thoroughly effected, we are not
to censure Christ, either for his Discretion, or Divine Providence, but indeed
to admire and magnify them both; considering, that by his Government, both of
the Universal World, as he is the Son of God, and of his Catholic Church, as
he is the Redeemer of it (in such manner and form as we have before expressed,
by several Kings and Priests, within their Kingdoms, Provinces, and Diocesses)
he has left unto them certain general rules and motives, which being
diligently observed, do tend to the universal good and preservation, both of
the one and the other; though they have no assistance therein from the Bishops
of Rome. For as it is an apt and good reason to persuade all Kings and
Kingdoms, to live quietly with their Neighbor Princes, and Nations, and to be
at a firm League and Friendship with them, because they have all but one
Heavenly King, are Members and Subjects of one Universal Kingdom; have, or
ought to have, but one moral Faith, one rule of Justice, one square for Equity,
one nature of Truth, one moral Law, one Kind, Form, and nature, of all the
several Virtues, both Moral and Intellectual; one natural Instinct, to know
God, and to worship him, and one Form and Rule of mutual love and affection: So
the particular Churches, dispersed over the World, when they had small Comfort
from the civil Magistrate, held themselves bound to have a special care one
over another, that matters of Religion might proceed by one rule, with mutual
Agreement and Uniformity, for avoiding of Schisms; in that they well knew, they
had all but one Redeemer and Savior, one Heavenly Spiritual King, or
Archbishop, were all of them Members of one mystical Body, whereof Christ was
the Head, had all of them but one Faith, one Baptism, one Spiritual Food, one
Hope, one Bond of Charity, one Redemption, and one Everlasting Inheritance in
the Life to come. Which were such Arguments of mutual Consociation in those
days, as when any great matters of importance did fall out in any one Country,
through the willfulness and obstinacy of Heretics and crafty Seducers of the
People, which perhaps were countenanced with some of strength and greater power
than could easily be withstood; their Neighbor Churches adjoining, did
sometimes assist them, by their Letters, with the best counsel they could give
them; and sometimes did send some especial Learned Men unto them, for the
better suppressing of those Evils; and sometimes (when occasions fell out
thereunto moving) sundry Archbishops and Bishops of several Countries, with
other learned Priests, and Persons of principal note, did as they might, for
fear of danger, meet together, and upon due and mature deliberation, did so
order and determine of matters, as thereby Heresies and Contentions were still
suppressed, and the Churches in those Countries received great comfort and
quietness. And if in those troublesome times the peace of the Church were thus
preserved; how much more, now under Christian Magistrates, may it be
strengthened, upheld, and maintained without the Pope* not only within their
several Kingdoms, but likewise throughout (in effect) all these Western Parts
of the World, if Christian Kings and Sovereign Princes would agree together for
a general Council; to the end, that all those Heresies, Errors, Impostures and
Presumptions, wherewith the Church of Christ has been long, and is now
miserably shaken, and disturbed, might be at the last utterly suppressed and
extinguished?

Many other means might here be alleged, to show how the state of Christian
Religion is to be upheld and maintained, without any assistance from the Bishop
of Rome. But our purpose being in this place to resemble and compare the
government of the Catholic Church, with the Universal Government of the Son of
God, over the whole World; We hold it sufficient to observe, That every
National Church, may as well subsist of her self, without one Universal Bishop,
as every KIngdom may do without one general Monarch. Nevertheless we
acknowledge, that in this particular Tractate we have been very tedious; and it
may be thought perhaps by some, that our pains therein is altogether
superfluous; because many of our Adversaries do (in effect) acknowledge, that
there is the like necessity of one Emperor to govern all the World, as there
is of one Pope to have the oversight and ordering of the whole Catholic
Church. Indeed, upon the sifting of the usurped Authority of the Bishops of
Rome, our Adversaries finding, that by their Arguments to bolster up his said
Authority, the Erection of one Man to govern the World in temporal Causes, is
as necessarily to be enforced, as of one Pope to govern the whole Church in
Ecclesiastical Causes; they are grown to this most admirable Insolency, and
most high presumption, as that they dare affirm, and do take upon them, without
all modesty, to maintain it, That the Pope is both the Monarch of the Catholic
Church, and the Emperor of all the World. Which mystery of theirs is thus
managed, and by piecemeal unfolded after this sort: viz. That to ease the
Pope, lest he might be oppressed with multitude of affairs, if he should take
upon him, in his own Person, to govern the whole World, as he does direct the
especial affairs of the Catholic Church; they do assign unto him Power and
Authority to create and delegate under him, as his Feudatary, or Vassal, this
one supposed Emperor, to whom (they say) he may commit the special Execution
of his temporal Sword, to be drawn and put up, at his direction and
commandment. Dr. Marta de Jurisd. par. 1. c. 20.
And for this one base Emperor over all the World, many are now as busy, as
others are, Carerius.
to maintain the Pope's Supremacy over the whole Catholic Church. Now to
prove, that the Pope has Universal Dominion over all the World temporaeliter,
temporally, and likewise sufficient Power to institute and appoint one Emperor
under him, as his Substitute, to rule the whole World, they use this Argument.
Marta ibid.
" Summus Pontifex instituit, ac confirmat Imperatorem: sed Imperator habet
Dominium universale temporaliter in toto Mundo: Ergo and Papa habet hoc idem
Dominium temporaliter. The Bishop of Rome. does ordain, and confirm the
Emperor: but the Emperor has universal Dominion temporally in the whole
World: therefore the Pope has the very same temporal Dominion." And about ten
years since, one Andrew Hoy, the Greek Professor at Doway, made an Oration, De
novae apud Europeos Monarchiae pro tempore utilitate; taking upon him to prove,
that the King of Spain was the fittest Person of all the Kings and Princes in
Europe, to be advanced unto this great Monarchy.

But what should we trouble our selves with this point? The King of Spain (we
suppose) will greatly scorn to be the Pope's Vassal, and the Emperor that now
is, or that shall succeed him hereafter, as likewise all the Kings and Princes
in the World, may see most evidently, how grossly and shamefully they are
abused, and how notably they neglect the greatness of their own Callings;
especially they, who have been heretofore, or shall be hereafter Emperors, in
that they do intermeddle any thing at all with the Pope, or receive from him,
either their Confirmation or Coronation; in that thereby he presumes most
ridiculously, and without any show of truth, to challenge them for his Servants
and Vassals. It has been before showed, by the Judgment of the Cardinalized
Jesuit, That the Bishops of Rome have no temporal Possessions at all; but such
as they have received from the Emperor, and other Kings and Sovereign Princes.
In consideration whereof, seeing, that now they insult so notably over them
all, both Princes, Kings, and Emperors, being so far from acknowledging
themselves to be the Emperor's Subjects, or to hold their said Possessions,
either of him, or of any King, that bestowed them upon them: We do verily
think, that the said Princes, Kings, and Emperors, who have been so beneficial
to the said Bishops, shall never show themselves to be of that Princely
Magnanimity, and Prowess, which their high places do require, nor free their
Sceptres from the thraldom and base subjection to their usurped Authority;
until either they take from them, what before they gave them, or bring them to
a more dutiful acknowledgment of their Duties unto them. And what we say of the
Popes, we likewise do hold concerning all the Clergy besides, in Europe, or
elsewhere, that, if they shall either withdraw themselves from their subjection
unto their temporal Sovereigns, under whom they live, or deny to hold the
Possessions of their several Churches of their said Sovereigns, or to do them
Homage for the same; they may lawfully, in our Judgments, not only resume the
said Possessions into their own hands, but likewise proceed against them as
Rebels and Traitors, according to the Form of their several Laws. But this is a
Digression. For in the beginning of this Chapter, we undertook to deal with
those only, who, though they maintain the Popes general Supremacy over the
Catholic Church; yet they deny upon many weighty reasons, that God did ever
ordain any one Emperor to govern all the World. But how long they will deny
it, we know not; in that the principal Jesuit himself writes thus: " Vtrum
expediret omnes Provincias Mundi, etc." Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 9.. Utrum.
Whether it were expedient that all the Provinces in the World should be
governed by one chief King in things Politic, although the same be not
necessary, it may be a Question: Mihi tamen omnino expedire videtur, si possit
eo perveniri sine injustitia, and bellicis cladibus: Yet it seems to me
expedient, if such a Monarchical Government over all the World, might be gotten
without Injustice, and such Calamities and Miseries as usually follow War. What
this Jesuit does incline unto, it is hereby evident: But in that he confesses,
that such a Monarchical civil Government is not necessary, that is enough for
our purpose, because hereby it likewise follows, (as before we have showed)
that the Government of the Pope over the whole Church is, in every respect, as
little necessary.

CAN. X.
AND therefore if any Man shall affirm, under color of any thing that is in
the Scriptures, or that can be truly grounded upon natural Reason, or
Philosophy, That our Savior Christ should have showed himself to have had no
discretion, except he had left one chief Bishop to have governed all the
Churches in the World: or, that except he appointed one to the said end, he
should, as a Person void of Providence, have left his Faithful People in a
miserable confusion, and without any Government at all: or, that any of all the
Arguments, that may be deduced from Philosophy, and natural Reason, to prove,
that one Man ought to have the Government of the whole Catholic Church in
spiritual Causes, are not as forcible to prove, that one King or Emperor ought
to have the Rule and Government over the whole World in Causes temporal: or,
that any of the Philosophers ever meant to have their reasons (alleged by them
to prove, that in every particular Country, the Monarchical Form of Temporal
Government was the best) to be extended to prove, that there ought to be either
one Bishop over all the Catholic Church (whereof they had no knowledge) or one
Emperor over all the World: or, that, because all Men have their beginning
from Adam, it does not as well follow, that there ought to be one Emperor to
govern all the World, as one Bishop over the whole Catholic Church: or, that
Aaron was any more a Figure of St. Peter, and his Successors, that they
severally, in their times, should govern the whole Church, than King David was
of Augustus the Emperor, and his Successors, that they severally, in their
times, should have committed unto them the Government of the whole World: or,
that the resemblances in the Scriptures of the Church unto an Host well
ordered, to a humane Body, to a Kingdom, to a Fold, to an House, to a Ship, may
not fitly be applied as well to the Universal Kingdom of Christ over all the
World, as unto the Church; and so consequently as well to our Savior Christ,
as he is the Governor of the whole World, that he is the General of that Host,
the Head of that Body, the King of that Kingdom, the Shepherd of that Flock,
the Householder of that Family, and the Pilot of that Ship; as may these Titles
be ascribed unto him, as he is the only Archbishop of the whole Church, viz.
That he is the only General of this Host, the only Head of this Body, the only
King of this Kingdom, the only Shepherd of this Flock, the only Householder of
this Family, and the only Pilot of this Ship: or, that the said Unities,
concerning the Universal Kingdom of Christ, are not of as great validity to
prove, that there ought to be one temporal King under him, to govern his
Universal Kingdom over all the World; as are the other Unities, touching the
Church, to prove, that there must be one Bishop under him, to govern all the
particular Churches in the World: or that, because Kings, when they have
occasion to be absent from their Kingdoms, do commonly appoint some Viceroy,
to Rule their People until their return; it thereupon follows, that Christ,
supplying his corporal absence from his Spiritual Kingdom the Church, by the
comfortable presence of the Holy Ghost, was of necessity to leave one carnal
Man to be his Vicar General over his said Spiritual Kingdom: or, that seeing
our Savior Christ held it expedient for his Catholic Church, that he should
deprive her of his corporal presence, that she might be ruled by the Holy
Ghost; it is not to be thought great presumption for any Man to tell us, that
his corporal presence is necessary for the Government of the said Catholic
Church, as if he meant to put the Holy Ghost out of Possession: or, that either
the said one Universal Kingdom of Christ (the King, and Creator of it) is
otherwise visible upon the Earth, than by the particular Kingdoms, and several
kinds of Governments in it (and perhaps in a sort, and by Representation, when
some Neighbor Kings, either in Person, or by their Ambassadors, may be met
together for the good of their several Kingdoms:) or, that the said one
Catholic Church of Christ (as he is the chief Bishop over all) is otherwise
visible on the Earth, than by the several, and particular Churches in it, and
sometimes by general and free Councils lawfully assembled: or, that it is a
better consequent, that if the Catholic Church have no visible Head, all other
Bishops, Doctors, Pastors, and Ministers, are needless; than if one should say,
because there is no one King to govern all the World, therefore there is no use
of Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign Princes, or civil Magistrates: or, that it
does more follow, that Christ should have left his Faithful People in a
confused Anarchy, except he had left St. Peter, and his Successors to govern
the whole Church; than it does, that the whole World has been left by him in a
Confusion, without any Government in it, in that he has not left one Universal
Emperor: or, that the intolerable Pride of the Bishop of Rome, for the time
still being, through the advancement of himself, by many sleights, stratagems,
and false Miracles, over the Catholic Church, (the Temple of God) as if he
were God himself, does not argue him plainly to be the Man of Sin, mentioned by
the Apostle: or, that every National Church, planted according to the Apostle's
Platform, may not by the means, which Christ has ordained, as well subsist of
it self, without one Universal Bishop, as every Kingdom may do under the
Government of their several Kings, without one general Monarch; He does greatly
Err.

The End of the Second Book.
LIB. III.
CAP. I.
IN pursuing our intended Course through the Old Testament, and until the
destruction of Jerusalem, we overslipt, and passed by the fullness of that time,
wherein the Son of God (the Maker and Governor of all the World) our Lord, and
Savior Jesus Christ, was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin
Mary. So as now we are to return back, and prosecute our said Course, as we
find the true grounds thereof are laid down, confirmed, and practiced in the
New Testament. At our Entrance into which Course, We confess our selves to be
indeed greatly astonished, considering the strange impediments, and mighty
stumbling blocks, which through long practice, and incredible Ambition, are
cast in our way [in that we find the Estate of that Church (which would rule
over all) to be degenerated in our days, as far in effect from her primary, and
Apostolical Institution and Rules; as we have showed before, the Estate of the
Jewish Church, to have swerved through the like Pride and Ambition, from that
excellent Condition, wherein she was first established, and afterward
preserved, and beautified, by Moses, and King David, with the rest of his most
worthy and godly Successors.] Aug. de Haeres. c. 46.
For except we should condemn the Old Testament (as many ancient Heretics have
done) and thereupon overthrow all which hitherto we have built; and not that
only, but should furthermore, either approve of their gross Impiety, who read
the Scriptures of the New Testament, as if they were falsified and corrupted,
and by receiving and rejecting as much of them as they list, do prefer before
them (as not containing in them all necessary Truth for Man's Salvation)
certain obscure and Apocryphal Writings: Or should our selves impiously
imagine, that the New Testament (as now we have it) was but a rough Draught,
and a fit project compiled for the time by the Apostles, to be afterward better
ordered, polished, and supplied with certain humane Traditions and Doctrines,
by some of their Successors: We can see no sufficient Warrant, or probable
reason, why the Bishop of Rome, should take upon him (as he does) so eminent
and supreme Authority, over all the Kingdoms and Churches in the World, to rule
them, direct them, bestow them, and chop and change them, under pretense of
Religion, as he from time to time shall think fit: Sure we are, if the
Scriptures may retain their ancient Authority, and continue to be true Rulers,
and principal Directors to all Apostolical Bishops; that in them there will not
be found any shadows, or steps, of those so high and lofty conceits. To the
proof whereof, before we address our selves; We have thought it very expedient,
for the carriage of our course more perspicuously and clearly; to make it
apparent, by what degrees and practices the Bishops of Rome have proceeded in
aspiring to that Sovereignty and Greatness which now they have attained.

Placet eis. John Overall, Prolocutor.

CAP. II.
AS it was said long since; Religion brought forth Riches, and the Daughter
devoured the Mother: So may it very truly be said in these days, The Empire
begat the Papacy, and the Son has devoured his Father. For (as we suppose, by
the Effects) no sooner did the Bishops of Rome, even in the first times of
Persecution, get any rest and courage; but they began to think with themselves,
That they were as able to govern all the Churches in the Empire, as the
Emperors themselves were to govern all the Kingdoms and Nations, then subject
unto them: and that Rome was as fit a Seat for such a Bishop, as it was for so
great an Emperor. Some Seeds of this Ambition began to sprout there, Eusebius. l.
5. c. 24. Id. ib. c. 23.
when Victor presumed to threaten the Greek Churches, concerning the Feast of
Easter: although Irenaeus, then living, did greatly dislike it; and the Bishops
of Asia, little regarding him in that behalf, said, They nothing cared for such
his threats. Geo. Vicelius Epit. Romans Pontif.
And it was not, we suppose, an idle conceit of one, who writing an abstract of
the Bishops of Rome, and comparing those that were before Victor, with those
that followed, says thus, In his Papis abundat Spiritus; in posterioribus
malesuaeda Caro: The Spirit abounded in the former Popes; but in those that
succeeded him, the seducing Flesh.

Some more Light whereof, as also of the said undermining Ambition, brake out
(little above 50. Years after Victor) in Cornelius, the 22th Bishop of Rome.
Who notwithstanding the great trouble he had at home with his
Fellow-Counter-Pope Novatianus, could find such leisure (under pretense of
Importunity and threatenings) as to entertain a complaint against St. Cyprian,
which was preferred unto him by one Felicissimus, a Priest, sent to Rome from
Fortunatus, an Usurping and Schismatical Bishop; whom together with
Felicissimus, St. Cyprian, with other African Bishops, had lawfully
excommunicated, for sundry their lewd and ungodly actions. With which injurious
course, St. Cyprian being made acquainted, and somewhat moved, he writ to
Cornelius an Epistle, wherein he justifies his Proceedings, and disliketh
those of his Adversaries. First, because there was a Decree amongst them, and
that also Equal and Just, That every Man's Cause should be there heard where
the fault was committed. Secondly, For that a Portion of the Flock was
committed to several Bishops, which every one of them was to rule and govern,
being to yield an account of his actions to God. Whereupon he infers thus;
saying, "It does not become those, over whom we bear rule, to run gadding
about, nor by their crafty and deceitful rashness, to break the united Concord
of Bishops; but there to plead their Cause, where they may have both accusers
and witness of their Crime: Unless (says he) the Authority of the Bishops of
Africa, does seem unto a few desperate and outcast Persons, to be less than the
Authority of other Bishops."

It appears furthermore, that for the better Government of the Churches in
those times of Persecution, it was thought fit, that there should be 4.
Patriarchs, who were to take upon them the Inspection, and especial charge of
all the Bishops, Priests, and Churches, that were severally assigned unto them.
Wolfgang. Lazius Comment. Reip. Romans l. 2. Baron. t. 1. Ann. 39.
In which distribution the Bishops of Rome got the first place; it being then
thought convenient to seat their chief Bishops in the principal Cities of the
Romans, and to grant unto them Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, much
resembling the Prerogatives, which those Cities had in Causes Temporal. Of all
the Eastern Lieutenantships, that of Syria was the Chief: and therefore
Antioch, being the Principal City of that Province, was made also the Seat of
one of the said Patriarchs. Afterward likewise Alexandria, exceeding much in
honor the City of Antioch, another Patriarch was there placed; who, according
to the Dignity of that City, had the precedence of the Patriarch of Antioch.
Whereby we judge, that the Patriarch, or Bishop of Rome, had the first place
amongst the rest of the Patriarchs; because Rome was then the chiefest City in
the World, and the Seat of the Empire. Which point is yet more manifest, by
these words of the Council of Chalcedon: Sedi Veteris Romae Patres merito
dederunt Primatum, quod illa Civitas aliis imperaret. Howbeit (this Primacy, or
Precedence notwithstanding) the Bishop of that See, before the Council of Nice,
confirmed by Constantine the Emperor, was little more respected, than any
other of the Patriarchs: as a principal Person (afterward of that Rank)
testifies, Aeneas Sylv. Ep. 288.
saying, Ante Concilium Nicaenum ad Romanam Ecclesiam parvus habebatur
respectus: Before the Council of Nice there was little respect born to the
Church of Rome: Although, we doubt not by the premises, but that the Bishops
thereof endeavored what they could to equal the Primacy of that Patriarchship,
to the honor and dignity of that Imperial City; as by their subsequent
practices it will more plainly appear.

Placet eis. John Overall.

CAP. III.
COnstantine the Emperor having received the Gospel, did in his Zeal greatly
advance the Dignity of the Bishops of Rome, by endowing of that Bishopric with
great Honor and temporal Possessions. Besides, (whether it grew from the
Cunning of those Bishops, and their especial Instruments, or through the Zeal
of the People, or by both those Means) it is apparent, that within some 47.
Years after Constantine's Death, that Bishopric was grown to so great Wealth,
as when it was void, Ammian. Marcellinus l. 27. Alphons. Chi^ccon. in vit.
Damas.
many Troubles, Garboiles, and Contentions arose for the obtaining of it. After
the Death of Liberius, the second Bishop after Constantine, such were the
Tumults in Rome betwixt Damasus and Vrsinus in striving for that Place, as
there were found in the Church of Sicininus, slain on both sides in one day
137. Persons, and great Labor was taken before the People could be appeased.
"Whereat (says the Writer of that History) I do not marvel, and that Men
should be desirous of that Preferment: considering, that when they have got it,
they may ever afterward be secure; they are so enriched with the Oblations of
Matrons; they ride abroad in their Coaches so curiously attired, and in their
Diet are so delicate and profuse; Hieron. ad Pammach.
Vt eorum Convivia Regales superent Mensas, as their Feasts exceed the Fare of
Kings." Insomuch as a desperate Heathen Man was accustomed, in scorn to
Damasus, after he had gotten the Victory against his Adversary, to cast out
these Words Facite me Romanae Vrbis Episcopum, and ero protinus Christianus,
make me Bishop of Rome, and I will presently become a Christian. Which alluring
Plenty and Delicacy being added to the Primacy of that Place, and to the
aspiring Humors of those Bishops; their Ambition began to show it self daily
more and more. Insomuch as they hardly endured that any of the other Patriarchs
should have any extraordinary Reputation, being ever most jealous of their own.
The Fathers of the Greek Church, met together in the General Council at
Constantinople about 40. Years after the Death of Constantine, finding
themselves grieved (of likelihood) with the Proceedings of the Bishops of Rome;
and that the Bishops of Constantinople, were not so much regarded in Rome, as
they ought to have been, (Constantinople being then the chief Seat of the
Empire) did define with one Consent, Tripart. Hist. l. 9. c. 13.
"That as Causes did arise in any Province, Conc. Constant. 1. Can. 1.
the same should be determined in the Council of the same Province." And
furthermore, they made this Canon; Constantinopolitanae Civitatis Episcopum
habere oportet Primatus honorem post Romanum Pontificem; propterea quod sit
Nova Roma. Annot. in cap 5. Council. C. P. edit. Venetiis, 1585. Surius in
Council.
With these Proceedings, the Bishops of Rome were afterward (as one notes)
much discontented; as fearing (we suppose) lest by these Beginnings New Rome
might in time more prejudice old Rome, Chalced. Can. 28.
than they could well brook or endure. But that all Causes should be tried in
the Provinces, where they did arise, it was no marvel, though they disliked it.
Therefore to meet with that Inconvenience (as they might) after some distance
of time, one Apiarius being excommunicated in Africa, and thereupon appealing
to Rome, Zosimus the Bishop there, did very readily embrace his Cause, and
without hearing of the other side, pronounced him innocent, and so absolved
him. Which Fact of his was afterward approved by Boniface the first, and
Caelestinus the first; pretending, as it seems, that as in all Civil Causes
for these Western parts, there lay Appeals to the City of Rome; so in all
Ecclesiastical Causes, when Men received (as they thought) Injury under any of
the Patriarchs or other Bishops, they might, if they would, appeal to the
Bishop of that See. And to justify that their ambitious Challenge, they forged
a Canon of the Council of Nice, as it was directly proved in the African
Council, holden at Hippo, about the Year 423. Whereupon the Bishops of the said
Council (in which number St. Augustine was one) perceiving what the Bishops of
Rome meant by that slight, Council. Afric. per Surium. cap. 101.
viz. that if once they might obtain a Power to receive Appeals from all the
Churches within the Empire, they would shortly after grow to challenge some
Universal Authority over all the said Churches: did, to prevent the same, make
two Decrees; "That if any Clergyman would appeal from their Bishops, they
should not appeal but to the African Councils, or to the Primates of their
Province: adding this Penalty, That if any did appeal to the transmarine
Parts," Conc. Afric. Can. 92.
a nullo intra Africam in Communionem suscipiatur. And their second Decree is
thus set down by Gratian, Distinct. 99. primae.
Primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum, vel summus
Sacerdos, aut aliquid hujusmodi; Praefat. in Con. Afric. vel Carthag. 6. in
Con. editis Venetiis. 1585. Sander. de Visib. Monarch. l. 7. Turrian. l. 3. pro
Epistolis Pontif.
Sed tantu primae sedis Episcopus: Vniversalis autem, nec etiam Romanus
Pontifex appelletur. It is strange to consider, how the Bishops of Rome were
vexed with this Council; and how from time to time they sought to discredit it:
as also what Shifts and Devices their late Proctors have found out to the same
Purpose; but all in vain: For the Truth of that whole Action is so manifest, as
it cannot be suppressed by any such Shifts or Practices whatsoever.

Placet eis. John Overall.

CAP. IV.
ALthough the said Council of Africa troubled the Bishops of Rome, as is
abovementioned: Yet, shortly after, some other new Occasions happened, which
stung them more sharply. For about the Year 451. when the City of
Constantinople was grown to be in very great Honor; it seemed good to the
Fathers of the Greek Church, and others assembled in the General Council,
Council. Chalced. per Surium Can. 28.
holden at Chalcedon, to make this Canon following, "The ancient Fathers did
justly grant Privileges to the Throne of Old Rome, because that City bare then
the chief sway: and with the same Reason 150. godly Bishops being moved, did
grant equal Privileges to the Throne of New Rome, rightly judging, that the
City of Constantinople, which was then honored with the Empire and Senate,
should enjoy equal Privileges with Old Rome; and, that in matters
Ecclesiastical, she ought to be extolled and magnified as well as Rome, Surius
in Can. 28. Council. Chalced.
being the next after her." Against this Canon Pope Leo stormed exceedingly;
and the whole Council it self, in respect of the said Canon, is of later Years
sought to be discredited.

But the great and main quarrel betwixt New Rome and Old Rome, began about the
Year 586. when John the Patriarch of Constantinople, not contenting himself to
have equal Privileges with the Bishops of Rome, would needs be accounted the
Universal Bishop. Which Challenge did the rather move the Bishops of Rome,
because they found, that Mauricius the Emperor inclined greatly to his desire.
Whereupon Pelagius the second, and after him Gregorius the first, as fearing
the Issue that might ensue of that Contention, to the great prejudice of the
Church of Rome; they blew successively both of them a hasty Retreat, and
pretended very earnestly, that it was utterly unlawful for any Bishop to seek
so great an Authority over all other Bishops and Churches. And first Pelagius,
opposing himself against the said John, Patriarch of Constantinople, wrote thus
to certain Bishops: 1 Epist. Pelag.
Let none of the Patriarchs ever use this so profane a word: 2. Tom. 2. Council.
For if the chief Patriarch be called Universal, the name of the other
Patriarchs is derogated from them: but far be it from the mind of every
faithful Man, so much as to have a Will to challenge that to himself, whereby
he may seem, in any respect, how little soever, to diminish the honor of the
rest of his Brethren. But Gregory in this point exceeds. Greg. l 4. Epist.
32. Ibid.
He tells Mauricius the Emperor, Ep. 36. 38.
and others, in sundry of his Epistles, That it is against the Statutes of the
Gospel, for any Man to take upon him to be called Universal Bishop: That no
Bishop of Rome did ever admit of that name of singularity, Ibid. Ep. 34.
and profane Title. Ibid. Ep. 38.
That John, his endeavor therein, was an Argument, that the times of
Antichrist drew near: That the King of Pride was at hand, and that an Army of
Priests was prepared for him: and thus he concludes, I considently affirm, Id.
l. 6. Ep. 30. ad Mauricium.
that whosoever calls himself Universal Bishop, or desires so to be called,
he does in his Pride make way for Antichrist. After Gregory succeeded
Sabinianus: who had so hard a conceit of Gregory, his Predecessor, that he was
purposed to have burnt his Books, rather (as we suppose) because he had written
so much against the Title of Universal Bishop, than for either of the
Conjectures, Plat. in vit. Sabia. 1.
which Platina mentions. But the Issue of the said Contention was this:
Mauricius the Emperor being slain by Phocas, his Servant, and Phocas himself
having gotten the Empire; Plat de Bonifac. 3.
Boniface the third prevailed so far with him, after much and great Opposition,
as the Emperor gave Order, that the Church of Rome should be called, and
accounted, Caput omnium Ecclesiarum. Genebr. Chronol. de Bonifac. 3.
Which another Man of great account amongst them in these days, reports after
this sort. The Contention betwixt the Patriarch of Constantinople, and the
Bishop of Rome; for the Primacy was again determined by Phocas the Emperor,
pronouncing out of the old Councils and Fathers, that the Church of Rome should
be the Head of all Churches. For his [Again] he might well have left it out; as
also his Phrases of Councils and Fathers; and therefore we prefer in this point
Platina before him; Plat. in Bonifac. 3.
who making neither mention of Councils, nor Fathers, deals more truly, and
says, That the Church of Constantinople sibi vendicare conabatur, that place,
which Boniface obtained from the Emperor Phocas: and that the same was
obtained upon these grounds, viz. That whereas the Bishop of Constantinople
insisted, eo loci primam sedem esse debere, ubi Imperii Caput esset; It is
answered by the Bishop of Rome, and his Agents, that Constantinople was but a
Colony, deduced out of the City of Rome; and therefore, that the City of Rome
ought still to be accounted Caput Imperii: That the Grecians themselves, in
their Letters, termed their Prince the Emperor of the Romans; and that the
Citizens of Constantinople, were called not Grecians, but Romans. Indeed
Platina further says (being peradventure of our mind) that he will omit, how
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were given to St. Peter, and so to the Roman
Bishops, his Successors, and not to the Bishops of Constantinople: and we
likewise, following his Example, as a thing impertinent to our purpose, will
here omit the same. Only we do observe, that the contention betwixt the Bishop
of Rome, and the Bishop of Constantinople, was de Primatu; and that the Bishop
of Rome obtained that place by Phocas his means, which the Bishop of
Constantinople did challenge to himself. Whereupon we offer to Men's
Considerations, these two Arguments. Whosoever takes upon him that Primacy, or
place in the Church, which John, Bishop of Constantinople, did challenge to
himself, is the forerunner of Antichrist: but the Bishops of Rome do take upon
them that Primacy and place: Ergo. Again; Those Priests, which do adhere unto
him, that takes upon him that place and Primacy, which John, the Bishop of
Constantinople did challenge to himself, are an Host prepared for the King of
Pride: but all the Priests, that do adhere to the Bishop of Rome, do adhere
unto him, that takes upon him that Primacy and place, which John, the Bishop
of Constantinople, did challenge to himself: Ergo. But our purpose is not to
dispute: only this we add, that till this time, that the Bishop of Rome had
prevailed so far with Phocas, as is aforementioned, his Predecessors, Innocent.
3.
notwithstanding their great Authority, after Constantine's Reign and favor
with the Emperors succeeding, Episc. Atinacensi in l. 5. Decret. Constitut.
they behaved themselves dutifully toward them, and acknowledged them to be
their Lords and Masters. Bishop Jewel's Defense of his Apol. Part 4. Dr.
Harding ibid.
But afterward, in short time, they left those Phrases, and began to call the
Emperors their Sons. To which alteration, a very worthy Man taking exception;
he is answered by another of many good parts (it must be confessed) after this
sort. St. Gregory might call Mauricius his Lord, either of Courtesy, or of
Custom; and yet our holy Father, Pius the Fourth, shall not be bound to do the
like; in consideration, that the Custom has long since been discontinued.

Placet eis. Jo. Overall.

CAP. V.
ALthough when the Bishops of Rome, after much opposition, had obtained their
desires for their Primacy beforementioned, they might well enough (as we
suppose) have been contented: Yet forasmuch as still they remained in greater
subjection to the Emperors, than they thought was agreeable with their
greatness, their aspiring mind rested not there; but began shortly after to
cast about, how they might in their places be independent and absolute. For the
compassing whereof they took hold of every occasion, that might serve, or be
wrested, and drawn to that purpose. At the first receiving of the Gospel, Men
are ever, for the most part, very zealous, and great Favorers of the Ministry.
In the Apostles times they sold their lands and possessions, Act. 4. 34.
and laid the price of them at the Apostles feet. Gal. 4. 14, 15.
St. Paul was received by the Galatians, as an Angel of God; yea, as Jesus
Christ: and such was their love toward him, that to have done him good they
would have plucked out their Eyes, and given them unto him. When the Emperors
of Rome became Christians, they did exceed in this behalf; especially toward
the Bishops of that See: bestowing upon them very great riches and ample
possessions. Of all which zealous Dispositions, benefits and favors they ever
made, above all other Bishops, their greatest advantage, by employing the same
to the advancement of their greatness. Wherein they were furthermore very much
helped, and furthered by the Authority which the Emperors gave unto them in
temporal Causes: holding them for their Gravity, Learning and Discretion very
meet, and sit Persons in their own absence from Rome, to do them that way very
great service.

Besides, if we shall deal sincerely and truly (as we hold our selves always
bound, and more strictly in a cause of this Importance;) we must needs confess,
that it has been the manner of Divines, from the Apostles times almost, to
magnify and extol the worthiness and excellency of their own calling: which was
a very commendable and necessary course in many (the ordinary contempt of the
Ministry considered) and had been so in all of them, if they had not therewith
depressed too much the Dignity and pre-eminence of Kings and Princes.
Comparisons in such Cases were ever worthily held to be odious. Bishops and
Priests, might without any just reprehension, have been resembled to Gold, to
the Sun, and to what else is excellent; without comparing the highest
Magistrates, under God, in respect of themselves, to the Moon, to Lead, and to
some other things of such like base Estimation. And we doubt not, but that they
would have refrained from such Comparisons, if they could have foreseen, how
the Bishops of Rome would to the disgrace and dishonor of civil Authority,
have wrested and perverted them: notwithstanding, that their Inferences
thereupon have ever had more show and probability, than substance and truth;
except we shall say, that the Callings of Schoolmasters and Physicians, are in
Dignity to be preferred before all other Temporal Callings, because the end of
the one is the instructing of Men's understandings, and of the other, Health;
which either are, or ought to be, both of them in their kinds, of greater
Estimation, than any other things whatsoever.

We shall not need to trouble our selves with the citing of any Authorities, to
prove how eagerly the Bishops of Rome (especially after Boniface the Third had
obtained of Phocas the said Supremacy) have pressed the same Comparisons; It is
so evident, both in their own Writings, and likewise generally in all their
Treatises, who from time to time, have labored with all their force and might,
to advance, above all other Authority upon Earth, the Sovereignty of that See.

Placet eis. John Overall.

CAP. VI.
ALbeit the former occasions (as they were handled) and particularly the device
last before specified, wrought very much in the hearts of the simpler sort, to
the debasing of the Imperial and Regal Authority, in respect of the Spiritual;
and that it was therefore prosecuted and amplified, with all the skill and
rhetoric that could be: Yet there was another matter, which troubled the
Bishops of Rome exceedingly, and never gave them rest until they had prevailed
in it; as if without it they had gained little by their Primacy. It seems,
that Constantine the Great, when he left Rome, notwithstanding his especial
benefits and favors to the Bishops of that See, did in his wisdom think it
fit, that none should be advanced to that Bishopric without the Emperor's
consent. For the better manifestation whereof, it is to be observed, that
whilst the Bishops of Rome were laboring so earnestly for their Supremacy,
till Phocas's time, the City of Rome had been four times surprised by diverse
barbarous Nations, Genebr. Chronol.
An. 413. by Alaricus, the second King of the Goths, Innocentius the First
being then Bishop, An. 457. by Gensericus, the Leader of the Vandalls, Leo the
First being then Bishop, An. 470. or thereabouts, by Odoacer, Simplicius being
then Bishop, An. 493. or thereabouts, by Theodoricus, and the East Goths,
Gelasius the First being then Bishop; and was again, by Belisarius, the Captain
of Justinian the Emperor, recovered out of their hands, about the year 537.
Sylverius being then Bishop. By all which attempts of the said barbarous
Nations, although the Empire received great detriment; yet the Bishops of Rome
had leisure to contend for Superiority; because the said barbarous Nations,
being Christians, and very superstitious, did sometimes greatly honor them,
and rather admired their Pomp and State, than sought any ways to impeach it.
Which caused, as it seems, that the Bishops of Rome, at the last, began to
favor them more than they did their Emperors. Insomuch, as An. 536. the said
Sylverius obtained that Bishopric (as one notes) Theodohato Gothorum Rege
jubente; Alphons. Ciacc. de vit. and Gest. Roman. in vit. Sylverii.
cum antea non Regum, sed Imperatorum autoritas soleret intervenire: by the
Commandment of Theodohatus, whereas before, in the choice of the Bishops of
Rome, the Authority of the Emperors, and not of those Kings, had been usually
obtained. Whereupon when Belisarius had recovered the City from the Goths, Id.
ibid. ex Anastas. Procop. de bell.
and was informed by certain sworn Witnesses, Goth. l. 1.
that the said Sylverius was plotting, how he might render it again unto the
Goths; Evagr. l. 4. c. 18.
he the said Belisarius removed him from the Sea, and placed Vigilius in his
room. Onuphr. in vit.
Whereof the Emperor being advertised, did approve greatly that which
Belisarius had done; Pelagii 11.
and took a strict Order with Vigilius, that no Bishop of Rome should
thenceforward be consecrated, until the Emperor had approved of him, and
confirmed his Election: So as thereby the Emperors, (having then their
Residence at Constantinople) might be always assured of the Qualities and
Dispositions of the new Bishops, whose Authority then began to be great: Lest
otherwise some factious Person, or Enemy of the Emperors, being advanced to
that See, the City of Rome, and Italy it self, might perhaps by his means,
revolt from the East Empire; as a great Friend to Rome has very well observed:
Who furthermore adds thereunto, unto, Onuph. ubi supra.
that this Custom did afterward continue, until the time of Benedict the
Second, that is, for 150. years: in which space Gregory the Great, and Boniface
the Third (who had prevailed with Phocas for the Supremacy of Rome) and 18
Bishops more successively enjoyed that Bishopric.

It was but touched before, how in the time of Sylverius the Authority of the
Bishops of Rome was grown great; whilst by the Incursions of the said Barbarous
Nations into Italy, the Power of the Emperors in this West part of the world
was greatly decayed. And although Justinian the Emperor recovered in some good
sort the former Estate of the Empire, in these Parts: Yet not many Years after
the Lombards setting Foot into Italy did greatly impair the same. But the utter
ruin of it did principally proceed (for ought we find to the contrary) from the
Bishops of Rome. For when about the Year 686. the Emperor Constantine the
Fourth, Platin. in vita
greatly favoring Benedict the Second, Benedict. 2.
gave the Clergy and People of Rome license to choose and admit from that time
forward their Bishops, without any further expectation of the Emperor's
Authority to approve and confirm the same (little remembering the Wisdom and
Providence of Justinian) they, the said Bishops, grew to great Presumption and
Boldness against their succeeding Emperors; until by their means, Rome, Italy,
and the Western Parts of the Empire were utterly cut off from the East Empire:
which Justinian, and his Successors by keeping the Bishops of Rome in some due
Subjection, through their Authority in their Preferments to that See, did seek
to have prevented. No sooner had the same Emperor given the Bishops of Rome
this Immunity, and Freedom; but, to omit what dangerous Quarrels arose amongst
the Citizens of Rome in the choice of their Bishops, scarce 20. Years were
passed, before they began to insult greatly over the Emperors. It is noted for
a great Commendation in Pope Constantine the first, Onuphr. in vita Constantin.
1.
because he was the first that durst take upon him, openly to resist
Philippicus, the next Emperor after the said Justinian, in Os, to his Face.
But the Opposition which Gregory the second made against Leo the third (the
next but one to the said Philippicus) is indeed very memorable. He proceeded so
far against him, for giving Commandment throughout all his Empire, that, for
the avoiding of Idolatry, Images should be removed out of all Churches;
Sabellicus Ennead. 8. l. 7.
as by his Letters sent abroad, far and near, he procured such passing hatred
against Leo, especially amongst the Italians, as they brake out in diverse
places into open Rebellion. Blondus Decad. 1. l. 10.
Wherein they went so far, that every City and Town rejected the Magistrates
appointed by the Emperor's Authority, and created Magistrates of their own,
whom they called Dukes; entering into a course to have abrogated the Empire of
Constantinople, and to have set a new Emperor in Italy. From which Course,
Papir. Masson. l. 3. in vit. Greg. 2.
although the Pope dissuaded them, as disliking (we suppose) to have an
Emperor so near him: Yet he took such Order, as both Rome, and the rest of the
Italians withdrew, Blondus ibid.
from that time forward, their Customs, and Tributes, which had, beforetimes,
been paid to the Emperor: And their Rebellion so increased every day against
him, that the Romans forsook him, and submitted themselves, Alphons. Ciaccon.
in vit. Gregor. 2.
by an Oath, to the said Gregory the second, to be ordered and governed by him
in all things. Whereby, Rome, and the Dukedom thereof, was violently taken from
the Emperor of Constantinople, and bestowed upon the Bishop of Rome. In
respect of which most irreligious and un-bishop-like Proceedings, the Patrons
of that See do greatly commend him. Papir. Masson. in vit. Gregor. II.
One of them says, "That the Bishops of Rome are either beholding to him, or
to none, for their Principality. For (as he in the same Place further
affirms) he made his Successors great Princes: the Beginning whereof was
hard, the Progress more easy, and the Event prosperous and happy: Tantae molis
erat Romanam condere Gentem; It was a matter of so great difficulty to erect
the Papacy." Indeed it is behoveful for them to measure the Pope's dealings, by
their Success and Events; for otherwise, they were in themselves very
abominable: Every Pope growing still one more insolent than another, as
appeared by the practices of Gregory the Third, persisting in his Predecessors
steps, against the said Emperor; and of Stephen the Second, against
Constantine the Son of Leo.

Now whilst these famous Popes were playing their parts on the one side (as we
have showed) against the Emperor, to withdraw the hearts of the Italians from
him: the Saracens were as busy against him on the other side. Which might have
moved their Holiness (if they had had the fear of God before their Eyes) rather
to have procured some Assistance from the Italians to the Emperor, in a Case
of that Nature, than to have drawn his own Subjects from him. But their course
was bent another way. For the Lombards beginning to trouble Rome, and they
being ashamed to crave Aid from the said Emperor, whom they had so abused:
they left their own Sovereigns, under pretense, that in regard of their Wars
with the Saracens, they were not able to assist them; and procured assistance
from France: Platin. in vit. Steph. 2.
First by Carolus Martellus, and then by Pepin his Son: the said Stephen the
Second, having bound the said Pepin (as it seems) by an Oath, that if he
overcame the Lombards, all that appertained to the Exarchate of Ravenna,
Alphons. Ciaccon. in vit. Steph. 3.
which had lately been the Emperors, might be annexed to the Bishopric of
Rome: which was afterward, by him, performed accordingly.

Suitable hereunto were the proceedings of Pope Adrian the First. Marianus
Scotus.
Who being again troubled with the Lombards, Hermanus Contractus.
obtained help from Carolus Magnus; by whose coming into Italy, Plat. in
Adrian. 1.
the Lombards were shortly subdued, and the Pope's Estate greatly advanced; but
the Emperor's was in effect utterly overthrown, concerning his Interest and
Authority, which he had before in those Parts. For the said Carolus having
vanquished the Lombards, Sigibert. Ann. 781.
and none else there being able to resist him, he caused the said Pope to
Anoint his Son Pepin King of Italy, Otho Frising. lib. 5. cap. 28.
and so returned into France. But abo^^ Four Years after, Leo the Third being
Pope, and afterward fallen into so great Hatred amongst the Romans, Sigibert.
Ann. 800.
as he hardly escaped them with his Life: He the said Leo used such means, Otho
Frising. lib. 5. cap. 30.
as that he brought the said Charles again to Rome; before whom Leo purged
himself by his Oath from those Accusations, Platin. in Leon. 3.
wherewith the Romans charged him. In Requital whereof, and the rather, because
at that time Irene the Empress, and Wife of Leo the Fourth, Reigned at
Constantinople after her Husband's Death, (which the Romans disliked;) the said
Charles was in Rome created Emperor over the Western Parts, which belonged
before to the ancient Empire. Touching which Point, an ancient Historiographer
writes in this sort: Sigibert. Ann. 801.
The Romans, who were in Heart long before fallen from the Emperor of
Constantinople, taking this occasion and opportunity, that a Woman had gotten
the Dominion over them, did with one general Consent proclaim King Charles for
their Emperor, and Crowning him by the Hands of Leo the Third, Saluted him as
Caesar and Emperor of Rome. And this was the fruit of the Exemption which was
granted to the Bishops of Rome, by the Emperor Constantine the Fourth, for
their Preferment to that See, without the Emperor's Approbation; Rome and
Italy are cut off from the ancient Empire, a new Empire is erected by the
Practices and Treacheries principally of the Bishops of Rome, it being in a
sort necessary, that so notable a Treason against the said ancient Empire,
should be especially effected by such notorious Instruments.

Placet eis. JO. OVERAL.

CAP. VII.
CHARLES the Great having possessed himself Jure Belli of the greatest part of
Italy, and made his Son King thereof, although he bestowed much upon the Church
of Rome, and used Pope Urban very honorably; yet, he being a wise and a very
provident Prince, could not be ignorant how insolently the Bishops of Rome had
behaved themselves toward their former Emperors; and how traitorously they had
long sought to make them odious in Italy, after they had gotten themselves to
be released from the Emperor's Authority in their Advancement to that See.
That he might therefore prevent the like dangers for the time to come, and
secure both himself and his Posterity, in that behalf; He so used the matter
with the said Urban, as he brought the Popes to their former Subjection. The
Relation whereof is thus recorded by a principal Upholder of that See.
Distinct. 63. Adrianus.
Carolus being returned to Rome (says he) appointed a Synod there with Pope
Adrian in the Patriarchal Palace of Lateran: Which Synod was Celebrated by One
hundred and fifty three religious Bishops and Abbots. At what time Adrian the
Pope, with the whole Synod, delivered or yielded to Charles 's Interest and
Power of choosing the Bishop of Rome, and of ordering the Apostolical See.
Moreover, He the said Adrian defined, that all the Archbishops and Bishops
through all particular Provinces should receive from the said Charles their
Investiture; and that none should be Consecrated by any, except he were first
commended, and invested Bishop by the King, under pain of Excommunication.

Howbeit, Platin. in vit. Paschal. 1.
when Charles being dead, his Son Ludovicus was (as it seems) so wrought upon
through the softness of his Nature, as he was contented, that the Romans
according to their own Judgment, should Create and Consecrate their new Bishop,
so it were done without Tumult, Alphons. Ciaccon. in vit. Paschal. 1.
or Bribery; always provided, that the new Bishop should advertise him by his
Legates, as touching his Consecration, and conclude a Peace with him; Or, as
another says, That Legates should be directed unto the Emperor, and to his
Successors Kings of France, Distinct. 63. Ego Ludovicus.
to make a League of Friendship, Love and Peace betwixt them, and the Bishops
of that See. With this Order, though it tended much to the prejudice of the
Empire, the Bishops of Rome were not long satisfied, as brooking no show of any
Superiority over them, but were still shifting, as they might, to cast off
likewise that Yoke: Which Otho the First well perceiving, when he came to the
Empire, sought to reform (as knowing how dangerous their ambitious Humors were
to his Estate) by causing Leo the Eighth, Distinct. 63. in Synodo.
with all the Clergy and people of Rome, to decree in a Synod about the Year
964. "That he (the Emperor) and his Successors, should have the power of
Ordaining the Bishops of Rome; that if any should attempt any thing against
this Rule, he should be subject to Excommunication; and that if he repented
not, then he should be punished with irrevocable Banishment, or be put to
Death." Afterward, also about the Year 1046. Sigebert.
Henry the Third, finding those Bishops still to persist in their said aspiring
Course of ^^empting themselves from the Emperor's Authority, and that thereby
there grew diverse Schisms and Quarrels in their Elections; Genebr. Chronol.
he held a Council at Sutrium, not far from Rome, wherein it was determined,
that the Romans should no more intermeddle with the Choice of their Bishops;
but that the same should always be referred to the Emperor. At what time also,
the Emperor made the Romans to swear, that from thence-forward they would
neither Choose, nor Consecrate any Pope, but such a One as he should tender
unto them.

By these and such like other means, from the time of Charles the Great
hitherto, for about the space of 236 Years, the Emperors kept the Bishops of
Rome in some reasonable good Obedience toward them; but not without their own
great trouble, and much kicking and repining by those Bishops at it, as growing
daily worse and worse: Insomuch, as there being Sixty of them, if not more, who
succeeded in that See, within the compass of the Years beforementioned; about
Fifty of them did so degenerate from the Virtues of their Predecessors (as a
great Friend in his time to the Papacy, reports;) That they rather deserved
to be termed Apotactaci, Genebr. Chronol. Saeculo 10.
Apostaticive potius quam Apostolici; Unruly, or Runnegates, than Apostolical
Bishops. The last of which number was Leo the Ninth, who within five or six
years after the said Council of Sutrium, renounced the Emperor's Favor,
whereby he was preferred to the Papacy, Otho Frising. lib. 6. cap. 33.
being persuaded by one Hildebrand, That it was unlawful per manum Laicam, to
take upon him that Government, Plat. in Leon. 9.
and was thereupon again chosen and admitted Pope by the Romans, contrary to
their former Oath, and to the Decree of the said Council. This Hildebrand being
a man both of a great Wit and Courage, and having an Eye himself unto the
Papacy, made his way in that behalf, by thrusting five or six Bishops
successively into Opposition against the Emperor; of purpose, that if it were
his Fortune to come to that Place, he might find the Ice broken by them to his
own Rebellion, and most traitorous Designments. The said Leo became a Warrior
and General of the Field against some troublesome Persons in Italy, called
Normans, by Hildebrand's means (as it seems) Cujus Consiliis, Alphons.
Ciaccon. in vit. Leon. 9.
and nutu Pontificatus munus perpetuo administravit. The like Sway he also bare
with Pope Nicholas the Second, who made him Archdeacon of Rome, in requital for
his helping of him to the Popedom; and by whose Advice the said Nicholas held a
Council in the Church of Lateran, Alphons. Ciaccon. in vit. Nicol. 2.
wherein it was Ordained, That from thenceforth the Bishops of Rome should be
chosen by the Cardinals, with Approbation of the Clergy and People of Rome.
Genebr. Chronol.
Also the said Hildebrand opposed himself against the Emperor, Alphons.
Ciaccon. in vit. Alexand. 2.
and prevailed therein for Alexander the Second; the Emperor having appointed
Honorius the Second to that Place: Which Alexander so advanced, Genebr. Chronol.
made a Decree, That no man should in time to come receive any Ecclesiastical
Living or Benefice from a Layman, because it was then called Symony so to do.
And thus these Popes by Hildebrand's Instigation decreed, and did what they
list, to the great prejudice of the Emperor, and of his Authority; the same
being now, in respect of former times, almost at the last cast.

Placet eis. John Overall.

CAP. VIII.
IT was great Policy in the Emperors (as we have showed) to do what they could
for the Maintenance of their Authority in placing of the Bishops of Rome, and
in bestowing of other Bishoprics and Abbacies within their Dominions: But such
was the Ignorance, Hypocrisy and Superstition of those Times, so far spread by
the inferior Bishops and Priests, and so rooted every where in men's Hearts by
the Bishops of that See, under color of Religion, and of their pretended
Supremacy, derived by them from St. Peter, as they feared not to attempt any
thing against any whosoever, so the same might tend to the Advancement of their
own Authority. Again, it was a great Oversight in Charles the Great,
considering his Wisdom, and that he well knew the proud and aspring Minds of
those Bishops, that after his own Coronation at Rome by Leo the Third, he did
not provide for the benefit of his Successors, that none of them after that
time should ever be Crowned there, or by the Bishop of that Place. For that
Slip and Omission, being not well looked to, and Reformed by any that did
succeed him, became at the last the great Bane of the Empire. Besides, the
State of the Emperors shortly after the Days of the said Charles, Otho
Frising. l. 6. c. 1. Got. frid. Viterbiens. Chron. part. 17.
did very greatly decay; Insomuch, as within about Sixty Years, Ludovicus the
Second had but the Ninth part of the Empire, the rest being diversely and by
sundry Distractions and Divisions, rent and drawn from it.

Which Weakness of the Empire being thoroughly known to the Bishops of Rome, and
it discerned by them to decrease more and more; they grew more insolent than
ever they were, and began to insist upon their Pre-eminence and great
Superiority over the Emperors; because forsooth they received at their hands
the Diadem and Crown Imperial. These things will appear manifestly by the
Proceedings of those succeeding Bishops, if we shall begin with Hildebrand
before mentioned; who after he had procured Six Bishops of Rome to be poisoned
by one Brazutus (as many thought) was upon the Death of Alexander II. Ann.
1073, Benno Cardin. in vit. Hildebr. Balaeus in Greg. 7. Functius in Comment.
Chronolog. l. 10 Platin. in Greg. 7. Lamb Schafnaburg. de Reb. German.
or thereabout, made Pope himself, and termed Gregory the Seventh, with the
Consent of Henry the Fourth then Emperor, as some say; without it, say others:
But whether with it, or without it, when he had gotten that Place, so long by
him expected, he ruffl'd and bestir'd himself very notably in it.

About that time there was a great Rebellion against the Emperor in Germany by
the Saxons; who very well knowing the Pride and violent Disposition of the Pope
against the Emperor, and how apt he would be to take any Occasion that might
tend to his own Glory, and to the Honor of his Place, desired his Assistance,
deprived the Emperor very shamefully; and the rather to allure the Pope unto
them, told him by their Agents, Aventin. Annal. l. 5.
that the Empire was but Beneficium Vrbis; and thereupon moved him, that He and
the People of Rome would together with them administer the Empire, and take
Order by a Decree of Council, and Agreement of Princes, who should be Emperor:
Grata admodum Gregorio is it haec fuere; These things pleased Gregory
exceedingly, as a Friend to Rome affirms. He thought, that in such a whirling
of things he was not to sit idle; as being persuaded, that a fit time was come
when he might free the Bishops of Rome from Servitude, shake off the Yoke of
the Emperor (his Abilities being diminished) abrogate his Authority, lawfully
translate the whole Powerto himself, and so establish the Pontifical
Principality. And nothing seemed more Glorious for him, than (Fear being taken
away) to stand in dread of no mortal man, and to enjoy the Liberty of the
Church as he list himself; there being an Emperor whose Arms and Force were
not to be feared, as who did Reign but at the pleasure of the Bishop of Rome.
Which Points thus debated with himself, and probably resolved, he joined
Friendship with the said Rebels and Traitors, promising them his best
Assistance, agreeably to their own Desires; and thereupon being furthermore
strengthened by the Amity, which he likewise had entertained with certain other
Rebels in Italy, Lamb. Schafnaburg. An. 1077.
and by the Purse of a great Lady in that Country, one Machtilda, his
Concubine, as it was supposed; he following the traitorous Humors stirred up
by himself, and maintained a long time in sundry of his Predecessors, did
prosecute the Emperor with admirable Malice, Pride and Contempt, because he
opposed himself in his own Right, and for his own Defense against him. Which
the Pope took in such Scorn, Platin. in Greg. 7. Abbas Uripergens.
as he Cursed him by his Excommunication, released his Subjects from their
Oaths of Allegiance, and stirred them up by all the means he could to take Arms,
and to enter into any wicked Practices that might tend to the Emperor's
Overthrow. Genebr. Chronol.
Noluit enim, etc. For he would not endure it, (as One says) that his Consent
should be required in the Election of the Bishop of Rome; nor that the Emperor
according to his will should have the bestowing of the Bishoprics, that were
included within the limits of the Empire.

Surely, it might have pleased him to have endured both the one and the other,
as sundry Popes, his Equals, had done before him. And howsoever, this Attempt
of Gregory, is eagerly maintained in these days, and held to be Apostolical;
yet then it seemed very strange to many. Therefore an ancient Historiographer
writes in this sort. Otho Frising. l. 6. c. 35.
Lego and relego Romanorum Regum, and Imperatorum Gesta, etc. I read over and
over again, the Acts of the Roman Kings and Emperors; but can find in no
place, that any of them before Henry the Fourth, was excommunicated by the
Bishop of Rome, or deprived of his Kingdom. Id. de Gestis Fred. l. 1. c. 1.
And again, the Empire was the more vehemently moved with Indignation, through
the Novelty of this Attempt; because such a Sentence against the Emperor of
Rome, Sigibert. Ann. 1088.
was never heard of before those times. And another more ancient than the
former, Vincent. in spec. hist. l. 25. c. 84.
and almost of 500. Years standing, does not only term the said Fact of the
Pope, a Novelty; but says in Effect, that it was an Heresy. These are his
words: Surely this. Novelty (I will not call it Heresy) was never before heard
of in the World, viz. That Priests should teach the People, that they owe no
Subjection unto Evil Kings; and that notwithstanding they have taken an Oath of
Fidelity unto them, yet they owe them no Fidelity, nor are to be acounted
perjured, that violate the said Oath: Nay, that if any obey their King in that
Case, he shall be held for an excommunicate Person: and he that attempteth any
thing against such a King, shall be absolved both from the Offense of
Injustice, and of Perjury.

To this Heretical Novelty, Abbas Uspergens.
and most insolent Attempt (which since has had many false Colors cast over
it, Lamb. Schafnaburg. An. 1077.
to cover the Lewdness and Deformity of it) we might add the said Pope's very
admirable Pride, Platin. in Greg. 7.
in permitting the said Emperor, when he came unto him, to be absolved from
the said Excommunication, to stand barefooted, in the Frost and Snow, Three
days at his Gates. But that which ensued this Novelty, or Heresy, this
Unpriestly and Inhumane dealing, with so great a Person, is most remarkable
above all the rest: viz. How he wound himself, like a cunning Serpent, into the
Interest of the Empire, and upon a slight Occasion. The said Rebels of
Germany, in their Fury against the Emperor, having suggested unto him,
Aventin. Annal. l. 5.
That the Empire was a Benefit belonging to the City of Rome, to be bestowed
where she thought fit; although they added therewith, that the same was to be
done by the Bishop, and by the People of Rome, with the Consent of other
Princes: Yet he, finding what would serve his turn, and was most available to
his own Designment, did afterward, of himself, and by his own Authority, take
upon him to dispose of the Empire (as being void by Virtue of a second
Excommunication) and did accordingly send a Crown of Gold to Rodulphus Duke of
Suevia (now also grown a Traitor) with this Inscription; Aventin. l. 5. Matthew.
Paris in Gulielmo 1. Paul Langius, An. 1078.
Petra dedit Petro; Petrus Diadema Rodulpho: Christ gave St. Peter Authority to
make Emperors; and I, his Successor, do thereupon send you this Crown, and by
my Authority, from St. Peter, do give you the Empire.

It is plain and evident, that many Emperors, in former Ages, bestowed the
Papacy; and sometimes took it from one, and gave it to another: but that ever
Pope there, before this Man, did so dispose of the Empire, we do not find it in
any approved Author. Neither can we conceive, or easily believe, that Christ
ever gave St. Peter any such Authority, as is here dreamed of. Only we observe,
by the Report of One (no Protestant) "That Gregory, Aventin. Annal. l. 5.
to justify and color his said Presumption, bragged above measure, that the
West Empire was his; that he was both Bishop and Emperor, Christ having
imposed upon him those two Persons; that he had no Equal, and much less any
Superior; that he might take all Right and Honor, from other Men, and
transfer the same unto himself;" and do much more than here we will mention:
But touching any Proof for all these great Prerogatives, we find none; Except
this will serve his turn, That St. Peter received power to bind and loose;
which we hold insufficient, notwithstanding that the Papists nowadays do
allow them all, and admire him for it.

It has been a usual Custom, for the Pope's Friends, to extol those Bishops of
Rome most, who showed themselves, whilst they lived, the greatest
Practitioners, and Traitors against the Emperors. Agreeably whereunto One
says of him, Genebr. Chronol.
"That he was a Man worthy of the Pontificalship, because he depressed the
Insolency of Politics, terrified Monarchs with the Glory of his Name and Zeal,
and delivered the Church from the Captivity and Servitude, which it endured
under Princes; and that, of all the Bishops of Rome, he was One of chief Zeal
and Authority, and a Man vere Apostolicus, truly Apostolical, and most to be
praised. Proceres and Populum sacramento praestito sancte solvit, and ut
Rodolpho adhaereant, sanctius imperat: he did godly absolve the Noblemen, and
People from their Oath of Allegiance to the Emperor, and did more holily
command them not to obey him." What was thought long since of these so Godly
and Holy Practices, we have above touched: and we must also of necessity
confess that to be true, which this Author, and his Fellows do write, of
Gregory's Greatness. For it is further recorded of him, that he did first erect
Imperium Pontificium, Aventin. Annal. l. 5.
the Papal Empire. But touching his Virtues (if an ancient Cardinal, Benno
Cardinalis.
that wrote his Life, did know him) there is no cause why any Man should be in
love with them. And as concerning this new, and before unheard of Pontifical
Empire, Aventin. ubi supra.
(if we may believe another of their own Authors) it brought with it, into the
West Empire, Wars, Bloodshed, Homicide, Parricide, Hatred, Whoredom, Theft,
Sacrilege, Dissension and Sedition, both Civil and Domestical, Corruption of
the Scriptures, false and sycophantical Interpretations, with many more
Mischiefs, there by him mentioned: and yet (says he) Gregory's Successors did
uphold it by the space of 450. Years, invito Mundo, invitis Imperatoribus, in
spite of the World, and of the Emperors, and thereby drew both Heaven and Hell
into their Subjecti on, Id. ubi supra.
and Servitude: Again, "In former times, God, as a most indulgent Father, did
often chastise the Western Christians, by Saxons, Hunns, Normans, Venetians,
Lombards and Hungarians, Men differing from us in Religion: but now (as if God
were become an angry Father toward us, and we were neglected, and
dis-inherited by him) we have, for above 400. Years, tyrannized amongst our
selves, worse than Turks: We deceive, we circumvent, we kill, we turn our
Weapons into our own Bowels; we are left to our own Lust, we live as we list,
we behave our selves proudly, covetously, without Punishment, and we are not
ashamed to give God the lie."

Placet eis. John Overall.

CAP. IX.
IT were impertinent, to our Purpose, to enter into any particular Relation of
the great Stirrs, and Troubles, which, through the Pride of the Bishops of
Rome, after Gregory the Seventh's time, were moved throughout all Christendom,
during the said Term above mentioned, of 450. Years; whilst the Emperors, with
their Adherents, endeavored still to have retained their ancient Authority,
both in the Choice of the said Bishops, and of bestowing of other
Ecclesiastical Peferments in the Empire: which the Popes, with their Friends,
did withstand with all their Mights, and possible Means and Practices, that
they could devise, and put in execution by their Excommunications, and stirring
up the Emperors Subjects to rebel against them. In which Garboils and bloody
Oppositions, when the Emperors prevailed, the Popes were deposed, and others
set up in their Rooms: betwixt whom (the Parties displaced) to recover their
Dignity, and the others, possessed of it, to retain it, no Cruelty or cunning
Stratagems were omitted. And, on the other side, when the Popes got the upper
hand of the Emperors (for the most part by Treason and Rebellion, and always
by Constraint and violent Usurpation) they did not spare to use them most
dishonourably, and with all the Reproach and Contempt, that might be well
devised. Some Examples whereof may be these.

Whereas before Pope Paschal the Second's time, the former Bishops of Rome were
accustomed to add the Years of the Emperors to their Bulls, Epistles, and
Libels; Aventin. l. 6.
He the said Paschal, a little after Gregory the Seventh's Days, altered that
course, and withdrawing the Years of the Emperor Henry the Fifth, whom he had
otherwise greatly vexed, added the number of his own Papacy: which was a very
insolent and proud attempt, and yet ever since (for ought we remember) the same
has still been continued by all his Successors. Innocentius the Second having
brought Lotharius the Emperor to some dishonorable Compacts and Conditions,
Radevicus de Gestis Feder. l. 1. c. 10.
before he would crown him, Alphons. Ciaccon. in vit. Innocent. 2.
caused the story thereof, not without a great Blemish to the Imperial Majesty,
to be painted on the Wall of his Palace, with these two reproachful Verses
under it;

Rex venit ante fores, jurans prius Vrbis Honores:
Post homo fit Papae; sumit, quo dante, Coronam.
Alexander the Third, Carrion Chron. l. 4.
when Frederick the Emperor was driven, Alphons. Ciaccon. in vit. Alexand. 3.
Genebr. Chronol. Ranulphus in Polychron. l. 7.
through Rebellion of his Subjects, to come unto him for his Absolution, set
his Foot upon his Neck, and applied these Words of the Psalm unto himself:
Super Aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis; and conculcabis Leonem, and Draconem.
It is reported of Caelestinus the Third, that with his Feet he set the Crown
upon the Head of Henry the Sixth, and with one of them struck it off again;
showing thereby, That he could make and unmake Emperors at his Pleasure. But
we will omit these insolent Facts; as also the great and dishonorable
Servitude, whereunto by Extremity they brought the Emperors, Pontif. Roman.
Greg. 13. par. 1.
"and whereof the Pope's Records and Books do make mention; as of carrying up
their first Dish, Ceremoniale Romans l. 1.
giving of them Water, bearing up their Trains, leading their Horses, holding
their Stirrup, and kissing their Feet:" and will apply our selves to the
consideration of their Divinity, how they have dealt with the Scriptures to
uphold these Presumptions, and Apostatical, and no way Apostolical, Seditions,
Rebellions, Murders, and Treasons, One of their own Friends observing, how
shortly after Gregory the Seventh's time, his Successors, by his Example,
behaved themselves, in this behalf, Aventin. l. 6.
writes thus: The most Holy Philosophy, delivered from Heaven by the Holy
Ghost, they make apt or fit to their own Conditions, by their Interpretations,
they compel it to serve their Ambition: the Determinations and Decrees of
Christ they will not keep, but make them to serve their own Humors. We have
showed before, how by sundry Councils it was decreed, That the Emperors should
have the investing of Bishops within their own Dominions: Abbas Urspergens.
and Paschal the Second himself yielded as much to Henry the Fifth, Aventin. l.
6.
being then present; but after his departure from Rome, the Case was altered:
For then he could affirm with show of great Devotion, that such a Privilege
was against the Holy Ghost. And another Bishop (as it were, to uphold him
therein) affirmed, that it contained Wickedness and Heresy. To which purpose,
we suppose, some Places of the Scriptures were notably perverted. Aventin. l. 6.
In which Course, Hadrian the Fourth presumed very far, when he durst write
thus; Whence has the Emperor his Empire, but from Us? By the Election of
Princes he has the Name of King; by our Consecration he has the Name of
Emperor, Augustus, and Caesar. Ergo per Nos imperat; therefore he reigns by
Us, and that which he has, he has from Us. Behold, it is in our Power to
bestow the Empire on whom we list. And how does he prove all this? By the words
of the Lord, to the Prophet Jeremy: Jer. 1. 10.
propterea constituti a Deo, etc. We are, to that End, (says he) placed by God
over Nations and Kingdoms, that we may destroy, and pull up, and build, and
plant. Herein Innocentius the Third, likewise, had an especial Gift: For,
speaking of Sylvester, he says, he was both a Bishop and King; relying not
only upon the Scriptures, Apoc. 19. 16.
where Christ is called King of kings, and Lord of lords; but upon another
place of St. Peter, You are a Chosen Generation, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
and Royal Priesthood; which words, Innocent. 3. in Festo.
he affirms, may be spiritually understood of Sylvester's Successors; D.
Sylvestri Papae Sermon. 1.
because, says he, the Lord has chosen them to be both Priests and Kings. And
to prevent an Objection, lest any Man should ask, where it might be found that
the Lord had so chosen them to both those great Dignities; he tells us, that
Constantine, by a Divine Revelation, gave unto Sylvester, with a Crown of Gold,
the whole Kingdom of the West. But yet he has some better proofs to this
purpose. For whereas Christ said unto S. Peter, Luc. 5. 4.
Duc in altum, launch out into the Deep; In Fest. S. Petri and Pauli, sermon. 2.
this Deep, says Innocentius, is Rome; which had then the Primacy and
Principality over all the World; and therefore, where the Lord says, Launch
out into the Deep, it is as though he should have said, Vade Romam, go to Rome,
the Seat both of the Priesthood and the Empire. Again, expounding these words,
Who is a faithful Servant and wise, Matthew. 24. 45.
whom his Master has made Ruler over his House? he applies them to St. Peter;
and therefore thus testifies of himself, Of truth, I am appointed over this
Family; In Consecrat. Romans Pontif. sermon. 2.
but who am I, to sit higher than Kings, and to hold the Throne of Glory? Mihi
namque dicitur in Propheta, etc. For to me it is said in the Prophet, Jer. 1.
10.
I have appointed thee over Nations and Kingdoms, that thou may pluck up, and
root out, and destroy, and throw down, and build, and plant. And a little
after; You see, who is this servant, even the Vicar of Christ; the Successor
of Peter; the Christ of the Lord; the God of Pharaoh; one placed in the midst
betwixt God and Man; short of God, but beyond Man; less than God, but greater
than Man. Likewise from St. Peter's walking on the Water, Innocent. Patriarch.
C. P. Epist. Decret. l. 2.
he makes this Inference. Forasmuch (says he) as many Waters are many People,
and the Congregations of Waters are the Sea; in that St. Peter did walk upon
the Waters of the Sea, he did demonstrate his Power over all the World.

Further this Innocentius having written a malapert Letter to the Emperor of
Constantinople, Innocent. Imperator. C. P.
his Majesty, in answer of it, puts him in Mind, how St. Peter commands
all Men to be subject to Kings: whereunto the Pope replied, saying, that St.
Peter wrote so to his own Subjects, and did not therein include himself: and
that moreover he might not only have remembered, that it was not said to any
King, but to a Priest, Behold I have placed thee over Nations and Kingdoms,
(and so follows the words of the Text:) but likewise, that as God made two
lights in the Firmament of Heaven, a greater and a less, the one for the Day,
the other for the Night; so for the Firmament of the Universal Church he made
two dignities, the Pontifical and the Regal; the Pontifical resembling the Sun,
which is the great Light, and the Regal the Moon, which is the less Light: to
the end, that thereby it might be known, that there is a great difference
betwixt Pontifical Bishops and Kings, as there is betwixt the Sun and the Moon.

But here we must a little digress, Matt. Paris in Johan.
to observe, that this Pope, being swollen as big as the Sun, cast his Beams, not
only into England, and scorched King John exceedingly about the Year 1212. by
thundering against him, Abbas Uspergensi.
and interdicting the Kingdom, and by exciting his Subjects to Rebellion and
Treason (the Weapons of those Bishops) but likewise fired Otho the Emperor out
of the Empire, Genebr. Chronol.
by raising up against him Frederick the Second. Plat. in Innoc. 3.
And when he had played these two Feats, amongst many other, he held a Council
at Lateran, Anno 1215. wherein, to strengthen such Traitorous Proceedings, he
caused it to be ordained, (as it is pretended) "That if any Temporal Lord,
Council. Lateran. c. 3. Oper. Innoc. Tom. 1.
being admonished by the Church, should not purge his Country from Heresy,
the Metropolitan, and other Comprovincial Bishops should excommunicate him; and
if within a Year he did not give satisfaction in that behalf, the same should
be signified to the Bishop of Rome; that so he, from thence forward, might
denounce his Vassals absolved from their Fidelity to him, and expose his Land
to Catholics to be, without Contradiction, by them possessed. Upon this Canon,
many, in these days, do much rely: although indeed it was but a Project,
amongst many other, to have been concluded in that Assembly; wherein nothing
could be clearly determined (says one of their Writers) because by Wars it was
broken off; Platin. in Innoc. 3.
which the Pope laboring to suppress, died in that Journey.

And now we return from whence we digressed; and leaving Innocentius, do
address our selves to Boniface the Eighth, who had as great dexterity, as his
said Predecessor, in expounding of the Scriptures. For whereas the Apostles,
upon a mistaking of Christ's meaning, Extrav. de major. and Obed. Unam sanctam.
where he bad them to provide bags, and scrips for themselves, and that he who
wanted a sword, should sell his Coat, Luc. 22. 36, 38.
and buy one; they answered, saying, Lord, we have two swords: This Pope
infers, there is, in the Church, a Spiritual Sword, and a Temporal; and that
consequently they are both at the Commandment of the Bishops of Rome. Also to
make the matter more clear, touching the temporal Sword, which should rule the
World in all temporal Causes; he (says Boniface) that shall deny, that St.
Peter had this temporal Sword, does not well understand Christ's Words, when he
bad St. Peter (after he had cut off Malchus's Ear) that he should put up his
Sword. 1 Cor. 2. 15.
Again; whereas the Apostle does teach us, that the spiritual Man judges all
things, but is judged by none; this good Bishop does ingross these words to the
only Use of the Popes; and thereupon concludes, that they have Power to judge
and censure all Earthly Powers and Authorities; but are themselves exempted
from the Checks and Censures of any, as being only subject to God, and to his
judgment. And again, that the Spiritual Authority may institute and judge the
Terrestrial, it is verified by the Prophecy of Jeremy, Behold, I have placed
thee this day over Nations and Kingdoms: for the perverting of which Portion of
Scripture, both this Pope, and Innocentius the Third, with all the Popes that
since have followed, were, and are much beholding to Adrian the Fourth;
Aventin. l. 6.
he being the first, for ought we find, that so did overstrain it. Lastly, That
he might imitate (as he seems) the Governor of the Feast in the Gospel, John
2.
that brought forth his best wine in the end of the feast; and likewise such
skilful Rhetoricians, as commonly build their principal Conclusions upon their
most pinching Arguments: His Holiness relying upon the Scriptures, Genesis 1. 1.
because it is not said, In the beginnings; but, In the beginning God made
Heaven and Earth: Therefore except we will say with the Manichces, That God did
not Himself make all Things, but that there was also another Creator as well as
he: It must needs be confessed, that there is but One, viz. St. Peter's
Successor, that is the chief and principal Ruler of all the World; and so he
comes to his irrefragable Conclusion; We declare, we define, and we pronounce,
that it is of the Necessity of Salvation for all humane Creatures to be subject
to the Bishop of Rome.

We may not therefore marvel, that having thus notably made perfect the rough
Platform (drawn out by Gregory the VIIth. rubbed over by Hadrian the IVth. and
amended by Innocentius the IIId.) of so infinite a Sovereignty; if He the said
Boniface, to make the Honor and Glory more conspicuous and memorable to all
Posterity, (after He had thrice refused to yield the Crown of the Empire to
Albertus Austriacus) came forth one day amongst the people to be admired of
them with a Sword by his Side, Joan. Marius de Schism. part. 2. cap. 18.
and a Crown upon his Head; saying, That He, and none but He was Caesar,
Augustus, Emperor, and Lord of the World. It had been plain dealing, if for
the better strengthening of this his Greatness, He had alleged the Words in the
Gospel, for the Honor of his Lord Paramount; Matthew. 4. 9.
All these will I give thee, because He did so worthily by his said Proceedings
magnify his Name and Authority.

Placet eis. John Overall.

CAP. X.
WE have hitherto followed the Bishops of Rome through many Windings, from
their mean and militant Condition, like to their Brethren, unto their Glorious
Estate, and (as we may say) Triumphant: We found them at the first little
better than their Master, Who had not a place where to lay his head. But now
they are (as we see) become Caesar's, Emperors, and Lords of all the World: It
was long since said by a good Friend of that See, Gabr. Biel. Expos. Can. Miss.
Excellentia Romani Imperii extulit Papatum Romani Pontisicis supra alias
Ecclesias; The Excellency of the Roman Empire did lift up the Papacy above
other Churches. Lect. 23. ex Eusebio.
Which Exaltation and Advancement of those Bishops (He might well have added)
has been (as elsewhere we have said) the very Bane and Cankerworm of the
Empire it self, by their sucking out of it for the strengthening of themselves,
the Juice, and those Vital Spirits, whereby formerly the Vigor and Glory of it
did subsist, and all by Rebellion and Treason, under the pretense of Religion;
and through their false Glosses, Applications, and violent Inforcements to a
wrong Sense of the Sacred Scriptures: Wherein although they had an especial
Faculty; yet they could never have so greatly prevailed as they did, against
such an Estate as the Empire was, nor against so many great Kings, and other
Princes that were not subject unto it, if they had not been upheld in all their
said wicked Courses by sundry their Flatterers and Parasites, who imitating
their Examples in perverting and wresting the Scriptures, did take upon them to
make good, and to justify whatsoever the said Popes had either done, or said,
were it never so Impious, Treacherous, or Traitorous; as by that which
follows, it will plainly appear.

About the Year 1140, Genebr. Chronol.
which was upon the point of Fifty eight years after Gregory the Seventh's
Death, Theologia Scholastica, sive Disputatrix, The Scholastical, or brabling
Divinity (as One calls it) began to peep into the World, when Peter Lombard
writ his Books of Distinctions; Aventin. l. 6.
and did not only himself thereby trouble the Truth (as Another says) with the
Mudd of Questions, and Streams of Opinions; but also set many men after him on
work in writing long Commentaries upon his said Distinctions, to the hatching
of infinite Oppositions and difficult Perplexities. In which number Thomas of
Aquine bare the greatest sway; who entering into this Course about Forty years
after Innocentius the Third's days, and finding how Gregory the Seventh,
Paschal the Second, Innocentius the Second, Adrian the Fourth, Alexander the
Third, and the said Innocentius the Third, with diverse other Popes had ruffled
with the Emperors, and what a hand they had gotten over the Scriptures, became
the chiefest Champion of a Schoolman that Rome ever had. John 1. 16.
Out of these words, Tho. Aquin. de Regin. Princ. l. 3. c. 10.
Of his fullness we have all received, he was able to collect, that there is in
the Bishop of Rome the Fullness of all Graces. Again, because Christ (whom he
makes Bishop of Rome) may be called (as He says) A King, and a Priest; He
therefore infers it, not to be inconvenient, that his Successors should be
so styled. Also we know not how, but He has found it out, that when God said
to Jeremy, I have set thee over Nations and Kingdoms; Id. ib. c. 19.
He spoke so unto him, In persona Vicarii Christi, In the person of Christ's
Vicar. Furthermore, in that Aristotle says, That the Body has his Virtue and
Operation by the Soul; He supposes it must needs follow, that the Jurisdiction
of Princes has her Being, Virtue and Operation from St. Peter and his
Successors. For further Proof whereof, (as fearing it would be thought
insufficient, that he had said before) he buckleth himself to certain Facts of
the Popes and Emperors; saying, That Constantine did give the Empire to
Sylvester; that Pope Adrian made Charles the Great Emperor; and that likewise
Otho the First was created Emperor by Pope Leo: But at the last, He strikes
this Point dead; because (says He) it is manifest that Pope Zachary deposed
the King of France, and absolved all his Barons from their Oath of Fidelity;
that Innocentius the Third took the Empire from Otho the IVth, and that
Honorius (his next Successor) dealt in like sort with Frederick the Second: And
as it were to make up all, speaking of the Emperor's Crowns, and the Custom
(as it seems) then in use; He says, That the Emperor did receive a Crown of
Gold from the Bishop of Rome, and that the Pope delivered it to him with his
Foot, Ibidem c. 20*
In signum subjectionis suae, and fidelitatis ad Romanam Ecclesiam; Thereby to
teach him his Subjection and Loyalty to the Church of Rome.

But hitherto we have heard this great Schoolman by way of Discourse, wherein
peradventure he is more remiss and dissolute, than when he presses his Points
Logically, as the manner is in the Schools: We will therefore trace him a
little in that Path; if first we shall observe, that it is his custom, when He
handles a Question that does concern the Church of Rome, as soon as He has
propounded it, He first proceeds with his Videtur quod non, and brings
sometimes both Scriptures and Fathers for the Negative part; his purpose still
being to encounter them with his, Sed contra est; but, such or such a Pope
holds the contrary: And then He comes in first with his Conclusion, and
secondly with his Dicendum est; wherein He so labors and bestirreth himself,
as that always the said Scriptures and Fathers are wrung and enforced to yield
to the Pope: As for example, Having propounded this Question, Whether for
Apostasy from the Faith a Prince does lose his Dominion over his Subjects; 2a.
2ae. Quaest. 12. art. 2.
and so consequently, if he be Excommunicated, (there being the same Reason for
the one, as there is for the other, as two great Cardinals do affirm) He
falls upon his Videtur, Card. Toledo.
saying, Card. Alanus.
It seems that a Prince for Apostasy from the Faith does not lose his
Dominion over his Subjects, but that they are still bound to obey him: For St.
Ambrose says, That Julian the Emperor though he were an Apostata, yet had
under him Christian Soldiers; to whom when he said, Bring forth your Army for
Defense of the Commonwealth, they obeyed him. Therefore for the Apostasy of
the Prince, their Subjects are not absolved from his Dominion. Moreover, an
Apostata from the Faith is an Infidel: but some holy men are found faithfully
to have served Infidel-Masters, as Joseph did Pharaoh, Daniel Nebuchadnezzar,
and Mardochee Assuerus; Therefore for Apostasy from the Faith, it is not to be
yielded, but that such a Prince must be obeyed by his Subjects. Sed contra est,
quod Gregorius septimus dicit; But Gregory the Seventh is of a contrary
Opinion, where he says, We keeping the Statutes of our holy Predecessors, do
by our Apostolic Authority absolve from their Oath those who are bound to
excommunicate persons by Fealty, or the Sacrament of an Oath; and do by all
means prohibit them, that they keep not their Fidelity unto them, until they
come to satisfaction. Whereupon Thomas concludes, That all Apostata's are
Excommunicated, sicut and Haeretici, As all Heretics are; and that therefore
their Subjects are delivered from their Obedience and Oaths of Fidelity unto
such Lords and Princes; and so adds his Dicendum est: "Where dallying and
shifting with his Distinctions, the Answer which he makes to the Words of St.
Ambrose, is this; at that time the Church being in Her minority, had not the
power to bridle Princes; and that therefore she suffered the Faithful to obey
Julian the Apostata in those things, Quae nondum erant contra Fidem, Which were
not then against Faith; Vt majus periculum Fidei vitaretur, That the greater
danger of Faith might be eschewed. And the second Objection He more slightly
passes over, saying, That there is not the like Reason of Infidels and
Apostata's." And thus this great Schoolman relying upon the Authority of
Gregory the Seventh, had adventured to oppose himself against the Examples
alleged out of the Old Testament, against the Practice of the Primitive
Church, and against the Judgment of St. Ambrose, not caring how many Thousands
by this Rebellious Doctrine might come to Destruction, so as the Bishops of
Rome might have the World at their commandment. We here omit, how as Thomas,
and diverse others writ many large Volumes upon Peter Lombard the Master of the
Sentences, his Distinctions; so afterward, and especially of later Times, Books
upon Books have been published upon his (the said Thomas's) Works; all of them
pursuing, as they come unto it, this seditious and traiterous Doctrine so
Clerk-like handled by their Master: Only we observe this great Schoolman's
Conscience, how in laboring to shift off the Truth maintained by St. Ambrose,
he could pass over a Lie in Gregory the Seventh, where he says, That in
absolving of Subjects from their Oath of Obedience, and in prohibiting them
from performing their Duties and Fidelity toward their Sovereigns; He followed
the Statutes of his holy Predecessors: Being himself the first that ever durst
be so desperate: As also that he confesses, it was not in St. Ambrose his
time, contra fidem for Subjects to obey their Sovereigns, though they were
either Infidels, or Excommunicate; and likewise how thankfully the Bishops of
Rome accepted and approved this Man's Travels, so resolutely undertaken on
their behalf. Vrbanus the Fourth did so admire him, as he reputed his Doctrine
Veluti coelitus delapsam, Aug. Hunn. Epist. ad Pium 5. in Sum. Aqu.
As to have fallen from Heaven. Innocentius so admired both Him and his great
Learning, Vt ei primum post Canonicam Scripturam locum tribuere non
dubitaverat; As he doubts not to give unto Him and to his Works the next
place after the Canonical Scriptures: Surius de Sanctorum Histor. tom. 2.
Martii 7.
And John 22th. made him a Saint in the Year 1329, about forty nine years after
his Death: He was born during the Reign of Henry the Third, King of England;
died about the second Year of King Edward the First, and was Canonized a Saint
in the time of King Edward the Second: so ancient is this Chief Pillar of
Popery.

Placet eis. John Overall.

CAP. XI.
JVstinian the Emperor, Genebr. Chronol.
about the Year 533. did so contract the Civil Law, as he brought it from
almost 2000 Books into 50; besides some others, which he added of his own.
Howbeit shortly after it grew out of Use, in Italy, by reason of the Incursions
of sundry barbarous Nations, who, neglecting the Imperial Laws, did practice
their own: till after almost 600 Years, that Lotharius Saxo, the Emperor,
about the Year 1136 did revive again in that Country, Abbas Ursperg.
and in other places also, Carrion. Chron.
the ancient Use and Authority of it. Which Course of the Emperor did not much
content (as it seems) the Bishops of Rome; because it revived the Memory of
the ancient Honor and Dignity of the Empire. Whereupon, very shortly after,
Eugenius the Third set Gratian in hand to compile a Body of Canon Law, Petr.
Greg. Partition. Juris Canon. l. 1. c. 1.
by contracting, into one Book, the ancient Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and
Canons of Councils; that the State of the Papacy might not, in that behalf, be
inferior to the Empire. Which Work the said Gratian performed, and published
in the days of Stephen, King of England, about the Year 1151. terming the same
Concordia discordantium Canonum, a Concord of disagreeing Canons. Of whose
great pains therein, so by him taken, a Learned Man says thus; Gratianus ille
Jus Pontificale dilaniavit, Aventin. l. 6.
atque confudit; that fellow, Gratian, did tear in pieces the Pontifical Law;
and confound it; the same being, in our Libraries, sincere and perfect. But
(this Testimony, or any thing else to the contrary, that might truly be
objected against that Book notwithstanding) the Author's chief Purpose being to
magnify and extol the Court of Rome; his said Book got (we know not how) this
glorious Title) Decretum aureum Divi Gratiani, Decret. Great. impress. Paris.
1510.
The Golden Decree of S. Gratian; and he himself (as it appears) became, for
the time, a Saint for his Pains.

Indeed he brake the Ice to those that came after him, by devising the Method,
which since has been pursued, for the enlarging, and growth of the said Body,
by some of the Popes themselves. Gregory the Ninth, about the Year 1236. and in
the time of King Henry the Third, Petr. Greg. ib.
after sundry Draughts made by Innocentius the Third, Genebr. Chronol.
and others, of a second Volume of the Canon Law, caused the same to be
perused, enlarged, and by his Authority to be published; and being divided into
5 Books, it is Entitled, The Decretals of Gregory the Ninth. Boniface the
Eighth, the great Augustus (as before we have showed) commanded likewise
another Collection to be made of such Constitutions and Decrees, as had either
been omitted by Gregory, or were made afterward, by other succeeding Bishops
and Councils; and this Collection is called, Sextus Liber Decretalium, the
Sixth Book of the Decretals; and was set out to the World in the Year 1298. in
the Reign of K. Edward the First. Clement the Fifth, in like manner, having
bestowed great Travel upon a Fourth Work, Pr^^em. Ciementin.
comprehending 5 Books, died before he could finish it: but his Successor,
John the 22th. did, in the Year 1317. and in the time of King Edward the
Second, make perfect, and publish the same Work of Clement, and gave it the
Name of The Clementines. In fine Clem.
Afterward also came out another Volume, termed The Extravagants; because it
did not only comprehend certain Decrees of the said John the 22th. but likewise
sundry other Constitutions, made by other Popes, both before and after him;
which flew abroad uncertainly in many Men's hands, and were therefore swept up,
and put together after the Year 1478. Extrav. de poenit. and remiss. Etsi.
Intit. Extravag.
into one Bundle, called Extravagant Decretals, which came to light post
sextum, after the sixth. By which Title the Compiler of this Work, would gladly
(as it seems) have had it accounted the seventh Book of the Decretals: but it
never attaining that Credit, the same by Sixtus Quintus's Assent is attributed
to a Collection of certain other Constitutions, made by Peter Matthew, Petrus
Matthaeus in sum. Constitut. praefat. ad Sixtum Quintum.
of diverse Popes, from the time of Sixtus the Fourth, who died in the Year
1484. To all these Books mentioned, there have been lately added Three great
Volumes of Decretal Epistles, from St. Clement to Gregory the Seventh's days;
also a huge Heap of the Pope's Bulls, from the said Gregory's time to Pius
Quintus; and lastly no short sum of Papal Constitutions, set forth a little
before the said 7th. Book of the Decretals. So as all these Volumes being put
together, they exceed as far the Body of the Civil Law, as the usurped Dignity
of the Papacy exceeds the mean Estate of the Empire.

Placet eis. John Overall.

CAP. XII.
WE have in the former Chapter made mention of the new and later sort of
Decretals, Bulls, and Constitutions, not knowing what Credit the Popes will
bestow upon them hereafter; and therefore leaving them to their Chance, we have
thought it expedient to return to the ancient Canon Law, revived and approved
not long since by Gregory the Thirteenth, where we find a new Ocean of
Questions, Disputations, Quarrels, and Brabblements: For as it happened with
the Civil-Law, that it no sooner was again renewed and restored by Lotharius,
Genebr. Chron.
but sundry great Doctors began to write many Books and Commentaries upon it,
to explain it, and to discuss the Difficulties which did arise in it: So fell
it out with the Canon Law, the number being almost infinite of Glossographers,
that made short Notes upon it, and of Canonists, who set forth large Discourses
for the salving of Contradictions, and many other Absurdities. Amongst all
which Lawyers, Doctors, Glossographers, and Canonists, assisted (as every Man's
Fancy led him) with many Schoolmen and sundry Divines, such as they were, there
did shortly after grow many great Controversies and endless Oppositions. The
Civilians of Italy perceiving by the body of the Civil Law, how far the Empire
was dejected from that Royal Estate and Majesty which once it enjoyed; and
finding also that many of the best Reasons in their Judgments, which the Popes,
the Canon Law, the Glossographers, the Canonists, the Schoolmen and many more,
had brought to prove that the Pope ought to have Jurisdiction over all the
Churches in the World; (as, that Bees had a Captain; that Beasts a Leader; that
One is fit to end Controversies; that a Monarchy is the best Form of
Government, Dominic. Soto de Jure, and Justit. lib. 4. Quaest. 4. Artic. 2.
Barth. Cassanaeus in Cat. Glor. Mundi, part. 5. consid. 29. Navarr. in cap.
Novit.
and that One must he over All to receive Appeals, to give Direction unto All,
to punish all rebellious persons, and many such like) were fully as forcible,
and strong to prove, that there ought to be one Emperor over all the World;
they did very stiffly and resolutely insist upon that Point, and went so roundly
to work in it, by force of the said Reasons, and with many other Arguments,
that some of them would needs have it Heresy for any man to hold the contrary;
alleging a Text for their purpose, where it is said, That in those days there
came a Commandment from Augustus Caesar, Luc. 2. 1.
that all the World should be taxed.

Against those Italian Civilians Vltramontane, Barth. Cassan. ibid. Ferd.
Vasquez. Controv. ^. 1. c. 20, 21.
the Civilians on this side the Alps, Frenchmen, Spaniards, and of other
Countries, opposed themselves with all their force; not in any dislike of the
Honor due to the Emperors, but because otherwise their Masters, the Kings of
France, of Spain, and of diverse other Kingdoms, who had freed themselves long
before from the Empire, should be brought again de jure at the least, by the
foresaid Reasons to be subject unto it: Whereupon in Confutation of them, and
to strengthen their own Assertion, they alleged, that one Be was never the
Captain over all Bees, nor one Crane the General of all Cranes, nor one Beast
the Leader of all Beasts; that it was against the Law of God, the Law of
Nature, and the Law of Nations; that there was never any Monarchs so great, but
there were in the World many Kings who were never subject unto them; that the
place of Scripture is to be understood of all places in the World that were
then under the Romans, and ought to be extended no further; That a Monarchy is
then best, when it is contained within such limits, as it may well be governed;
that all Monarchies hitherto had ever their bounds, which were well known: That
it is impossible for all men to fetch Justice from one place, or to receive
thence any benefit by their Appeals; and so after many other such Arguments,
they do conclude, that to think that the Emperor ought to have the Government
of all the World, is a vain, an absurd, and an untrue conceit.

Now we are to consider, how in all these troubled Disputations and
Oppositions, the Glossographers, Canonists, Schoolmen and Parasitical Divines,
that were sworn to the Pope, behaved themselves. As soon as the Civil Law began
to flourish, as being read by the Emperor's Commandment, in sundry
Universities; Gregory the Ninth, Carrion. Chron.
began to smell what was like to come of it, and therefore did afterward forbid
it to be read in Paris, Genebr. Chronol.
being the especial Place then (as it seems) where it was most esteemed. But
as touching the Point so controverted, when these Champions of the Popes saw
how the Matter went, That either they must hold, that there ought to be but one
Emperor over all the Kingdoms in the World, or else be forced to confess, that
there ought not to be One Pope over all the Churches in the World (the same
Reason being as pregnant for the one, as for the other) they joined with the
Italian Civilians, Ferdin. Vasquez. ut supra. Barth. Cassan. ut supra.
that there ought to be but one Emperor. Marry how? Forsooth remembering
Gregory the Seventh, Adrian the Fourth, Innocentius the Third, and that great
Augustus Caesar, Boniface the Eighth, and diverse other Popes, how Emperour-like
they had demeaned themselves, and what great Authority they challenged; the
said Pontifical Champions fell to this Issue, That the Pope being Christ's
Vicar, who was Lord of lords, and King of kings, it must needs follow, that the
Pope was likewise that One Emperor, who was to govern all the World, in
Temporal Causes, as he did all the Churches in the World in Ecclesiastical
Causes. And thereupon they reasoned in this sort: "Christ is Lord of all the
World: but the Pope is Christ's Vicar on Earth: therefore the Pope is Lord of
all the World. Again; The Emperor is the Pope's Vicar, and his Successor, in
all Temporal Causes: therefore the Emperor is Lord of all the World; all
Temporal Jurisdiction being habitually in the Pope; and from him derived to the
Emperor." And many of the Italian Lawyers, especially such as mixed their
Studies with the Canon Law, were well enough content, that so as the Emperor
might be Lord of all, how, and whence he had it, whether from God, or from the
Pope, they stood indifferent. But for all this, the French and Spanish Lawyers
stuck to their tackling, and were peremptory, That neither the Pope, nor the
Emperor had any such Universal Dominion over all the World. And diverse
likewise of the said Italian Doctors, that were not too much addicted to the
Canon Law, were not afraid to hold, and maintain, That the Emperor held as
well from God the Authority, which he had, as the Pope did his Papacy. Howbeit
such was the Clamor of the Canonists, of the Glossographers, and of the
Schoolmen, and Divines, that took their part in the Pope's behalf (upon whom
all their Preferment, Credit, and Countenance did depend) as they would needs,
by force, carry the Bell away; though their Opposites, each of them, were very
confident, that the common Opinion swayed with their side; more standing for
them, than were against them.

We have before briefly touched the chief Grounds and Reasons, whereupon the
Civil Lawyers (divided amongst themselves) did insist: and therefore, that we
may not seem partial, we thought it fit to hear the Canonists with their
Adherents, whilst they tell us, That all the World is the Pope's, at his
disposition; as well the Emperor, as any other the meanest Person whosoever:
"Because (1.) that Christ had all Power given him. (2.) That the Pope blesses
the Emperor. Navarr. Relect. c. Novit. in 3. Notabil.
(3.) That the Bishops of Rome do anoint them. (4.) That the Church Triumphant
has but one Prince. (5.) That Innocentius told the King of France, that he did
not intend to abate his Jurisdiction; whereby it is collected, that, if he had
pleased, he might have so done. (6.) That in the Vacancy of the Empire the Pope
has the Government of it. (7.) That the Pope translated the Empire from the
Grecians to the Germans. (8.) That the Papacy exceeds the Empire, as far as
Gold does Lead, or as Men do Beasts. Stanisl. Orishovius in Chimaera.
(9.) That Pope Nicholas says, Christ gave to St. Peter, the Key-Carrier of
Eternal Life, Jura terreni simul and coelestis Imperii; The Authority both of
the Earthly, and of the Heavenly Empire. (10.) That Optimum optima decent: but
the Monarchical Government is best, and so fittest for the Pope. (11.) That no
Man gives that to another which he has not himself: but the Pope gives
License to choose the Emperor, and to govern in Temporal Causes. (12.) That as
the Body is for the Soul, so Temporal Government is for the Spiritual. (13.)
That Reason teaches us, when an Office is committed to any, that also is
thought to be committed, without the which it cannot be executed: but except
the Bishop of Rome may rule all the World, he cannot discharge the Office, that
is committed unto him. And (14.) lastly, (to omit infinite such like
Collections) this Argument is reserved after many other, by a great Clerk, that
it might strike home, viz. because it is defined, by Boniface the Eighth, that
No Man can be saved, except he be subject to the Bishop of Rome. Which Argument
is held so strong, as it carries with it diverse other of little less Force than
it self; as that St. Peter had a Sword, because Christ bad him put up his
sword. (2.) Ecce duo Gladii, Behold here are two Swords: One Sword must be
under another: the Temporal under the Spiritual. (3.) It is not agreeable to
the general course of things, that they should have all equally their immediate
being. (4.) The Spiritual Power ought to institute the Temporal. (5.) The
Spiritual Man judges all things: and therefore what Catholic can deny, that
the Bishop of Rome has both Swords, the One actually, the Other habitually, to
be drawn at his Commandment."

We have not quoted the several Authors, that are Parties unto the Particulars,
which we have touched in this Chapter: because twenty such Margents would not
contain them. Only we refer our selves, in that behalf, to these few, which we
have noted and selected from the rest: Unto which Number if we shall add John
of Paris, Johan. de Paris. tract. de pot. Begia, and Papali.
Bellarmin, and Covarruvias, they altogether will furnish a Man with diverse
sorts of other Authors, such as they are, who have disputed these Points at
large, Bell. de sum. Pont. l. 5. c. 1. Didac. Covarsuv. 2. part. Relect.. 9.
and in that manner, as we are driven into a great admiration, that any Men of
Understanding could be so sottish, either to write, as they have done, or to
give any Credit to such ridiculous Janglings: or rather indeed, that ever
Christian Kings and Princes should have endured such Impostors, so long to
seduce their Subjects, and presumptuously to shake and dishonor the Royal
Authority, given them from God to have bridled such Insolency.

Placet eis. Jo. Overall.

CAP. XIII.
NOtwithstanding that the Bishops of Rome, especially since Gregory the
Seventh's time, have ruffled, and tyrannized, as before we have showed; and
that still they have been supported in all their wicked attempts, partly by
stirring up Subjects to rebel against their Sovereigns, and partly by the
Canonists, Schoolmen, Monks, Friars, Hirelings and Flatterers: Yet their
Hypocrisy, Pride, Covetousness, and Ambition, were never so closely covered,
and cloaked with St. Peter's name, and sundry other Flashoods, Wringings, and
Wrestings, but that their nakedness in that behalf, with all their Deformities,
were clearly discovered by the wiser sort; and there were always some, that
spared not, as there was occasion, for the discharging of their Consciences, to
speak the truth. When the said Gregory did so proudly encounter with the
Emperor Henry the Fourth, Abbas Uspergens An. 1076. Aventin. l. 5.
he was Condemned for a perjured Person, and deposed from his place, by a
Council held at Worms, in the year 1076. by all the Bishops of Germany almost,
saving those of Saxony, who in his Quarrel were become Traitors to the Empire.
Urspergens. An. 1080. Aventin. l. 5.
And afterward also, in the Year 1080. the said Gregory was more roughly
handled in another Council of thirty Bishops at Brixia; wherein he was declared
to be a perturber of the Christian Empire, a sower of Discord, a Protector of
Perjury, a Murderer, a Necromancer, one possessed with a wicked Spirit, a Man
altogether unworthy of the Papacy; and therefore to be deprived, and expelled.

Henry the Fifth, Aventin. l. 6.
with his Council, did easily discern the packings both of Paschal the Second,
and of his Predecessors; "When he complained of their thrusting him into Arms
against his Father; and how, Genitore oppresso, his Father being overborn, they
sought likewise his suppression and overthrow. He charged them with great
Unthankfulness, in that, being made rich by the Emperors, they were never
satisfied; but under a Religious pretense of Ecclesiastical liberty, desired
still more and more; and that by shaking off from their shoulders all duties
and subjection, they did affect the Empire it self, and would not cease until
they had it ended." With this the Emperor's plainness, Ibidem.
the said Paschal being incensed, made certain unlawful Decrees against the
said Emperor: which Decrees the Divines of Fraxinum (who were accounted the
most learned men in all Germany) did condemn and reverse, as being contrary to
the word of God. Upon the insolent Speeches of Adrian the Fourth's Messenger,
one, that was present, had slain the said Messenger, Ibidem.
if the Emperor had not staid him. And two Archbishops thereupon did write to
Rome, accusing the Priests there of Pertinacy, Pride, Covetousness, and Faction
against the Emperor; requiring them to give Adrian their Pope some better
Counsel.

Frederick the Second, Matthew Paris. in Hen. 3. Aventin. l. 7.
in one of his Letters to the Princes of Christendom, in defense of himself
against Gregory the Ninth, does likewise most notably describe the ambitious
aspiring hearts of the Bishops of that See; affirming, "That they sought the
overthrow of the Empire, and to bring all Men in servitude under them, to the
end, that they themselves might thereby be the more feared, and reverenced,
than Almighty God," Munster Cosmogr. l. 3.
But the Archbishop of Juvavia, now called Saltzburg, Aventin. l. 3.
in an Oration, which he made in a Council of State, during the said Emperor's
Reign, (...) this Argument; where he affirms, that (...), Libidine dominandi,
did trouble the whole World, audendo, fallendo, and bella ex bellis serendo.
Also Otho Regulus Boiorum, Ibidem.
the Prince of Bavaria, in the days of Innocentius the Fourth, told the
Bishops, that joined with the Pope, that as they grew to their greatness by
discord, so being overcome with desire of honor, in stirring up Wars, they
were worse than Turks, or Saracens. Moreover in the days of Honorius the
Fourth, Ibidem.
the Bishop of Tulle, when the Pope would have set the Emperor in War against
the French, and under that pretense, required by his Legate, of all the Clergy
in Germany, Non Decimas, sed Quartas, not the Tenth, but the Fourth part of
their Livings, moved the said Clergy, and many of the State, then present, that
they should no longer submit themselves unto the Romish Vultures, who had very
long tyrannized, and labored nothing more, than to thrust Princes into War,
one against another: adding thereunto, that the Pope had armed the Scythians,
Arabians, and Turks, against them; and that he verily thought, that the Pope
loved them better than he did the Germans.

And what Men thought, Aventin. ut supra.
when they durst speak of the Bishops of Rome, and his Priests, in the days of
Nicholas the Fourth, it may appear, by the words of a Nobleman, one Menardus,
Earl of Tyrol (as we conceive) when he said, That he would never make himself a
scorn to such effeminate Antichrists, and prodigious Eunuchs; who being indeed
(says he) our Servants, do sight for superiority, and would domineer over us,
that are their Lords. They are worse than Turks, Saracens, Tartars, and Jews;
and do more injury to Christian simplicity. Dominationem arripiunt, Marsil.
Patavin. Jo. Gandaven. Luit. de Berbenburg.
they will by force overruled all. In the time of Ludovicus Bavarus the
Emperor, although three Popes successively opposed themselves against him,
with all the mischievous practices that they could devise; Andr. Bishop of
Fraxin.
yet many learned Men, Ulric. Hangenor.
both Divines and Civil Lawyers, did justify the Emperor's Proceedings, and
condemn the Popes. Dante Aligerius.
And some wrote Books to that effect, saying to the Emperor, Will. Ockam.
Tu nos pugnis, ense, ferro, etc. Do thou deliver us from the Pope's servitude
by force, Bona Gratiae.
etc. Nos te lingua, Mich. Caesenas.
etc. And we will revenge our quarrel, Anton. Patavin.
with our Tongues, our Pens, our Letters, our style, our Books, and words.
Aventin. l. 7.
And thereupon accordingly (as their own Author says) they proved by the
testimony, both of Divine and humane Laws, Joannem libidine dominandi insanire,
that John the Pope was grown mad through his desire of Principality and
Sovereignty. Also the Emperor himself, Ibidem.
about the year 1324. speaking in scorn of the said John the 22th says, That
the Pope, in taking upon him to be both Augustus and Pontifex, showed himself
therein to be Monstrum biceps, a Monster with two heads; and that it was
apparent, by Divinity, and all Laws, that the Bishop of Rome had no interest to
both these Dignities. Many notable things are contained in diverse of this
Emperor's Letters and Decrees, as also in the said Orations and Writings,
above here mentioned, which are very worthy to be perused, and made more known
than they are: All of them laboring to suppress that Insolency of the Bishops
of Rome, in challenging to themselves the Right of the Empire, and the
Authority to confirm the same, as they thought good; making the Emperors
thereby their Vicars, or Substitutes.

But it is most of all worthy the diligent Observation, That in these later
times, when the grossness of Popery has been more thoroughly looked into and
scanned; the Jesuits themselves are grown to be ashamed of the said most
absurd, and ridiculous challenge. And therefore Cardinal Bellarmin has written
five Chapters against it, Bell. de Romans
wherein he first distinguishes them from Catholic Divines, Pont. l. 5. c. 1.
who maintained that Opinion: and then setting down these three Propositions,
-- c. 2.
as sure grounds of truth, -- c. 3.
viz. Papam non esse Dominum totius Mundi; c. 4.
That the Pope is not Lord of all the World: Papam non esse Dominum totius
mundi Christiani; That the Pope is not Lord of all the Christian World: Papam
non habere ullam temporalem Jurisdictionem direct; That the Pope has no
temporal Jurisdiction directly; c. 5.
he confuteth their Arguments, who are of another Judgment. Where he shakes
off, very lightly, the chief places of Scripture, and some other Testimonies,
whereupon the said Arguments are principally grounded; as that of Two Swords;
and where Christ says, All power is given unto me, in Heaven and Earth: And
the Testimony likewise of Pope Nicholas, affirming that Christ committed to
Peter, the Key-Carrier of Eternal Life, terreni simul and coelestis imperii
Jura, the Interest both of the Earthly and Heavenly Empire; which he casts
away, either as an Assertion, forged by Gratian, (the same being not found in
the said Pope's Writings) or else to have another sense, this (as it is urged)
being against the said Pope's direct Words, in one of his Epistles.

His first Proposition, c. 2.
" That the Pope is not Lord of all the World, he justifies, in respect, (1.)
That Infidels are not his Sheep. (2.) That he cannot judge Infidels. (3.) That
Princes, Infidels, are true, and supreme Princes of their Kingdoms; because
Dominion is neither founded in Grace, nor Faith; as it appears, because God
approved the Kingdoms of the Gentiles, both in the Old and New Testament. And
upon these said Reasons, he infers it to be a ridiculous Conceit, for any
Man to think, That God gave to the Pope any Right over the Kingdoms of the
whole World; considering, that he never gave unto him Ability to use any such
Right." And for the confirmation of his second Proposition, c. 3.
" That the Pope is not Lord of all the Christian World;" he proves the same,
by these Reasons. (1.) "Because if he had any such Dominion, by the Law of God,
the same ought to appear, either in the Scriptures, or by some Apostolical
Traditions: but it appears by neither: Ergo. And his second Reason is this;
Christ neither did, nor does take Kingdoms from any, to whom they do appertain;
but does rather establish them: therefore when the King becomes a Christian,
he does not lose his Terrene Kingdoms, which lawfully before he enjoyed; but he
obtains new Right to the everlasting Kingdom: Otherwise (says he) the
benefit received by Christ should be hurtful to Kings, and Grace should destroy
Nature. Also he confuteth the ordinary Distinction amongst the Schoolmen, and
Canonists, who affirm, That the Pope has both Powers in himself, but does
commit the execution of the Civil Power unto others, and writes thus:
Whatsoever Emperors have, they have it from Christ: and therefore (says he)
the Bishop of Rome may either take from Kings and Emperors the execution of
their Authority, (as being himself the highest King and Emperor) or he may
not: If he may, then is he greater than Christ: If he may not; Ergo, he has
not in truth any Regal Power." And he concludes this Point, with this
Observation; " As the Sun did not make, or institute the Moon, but God himself:
so likewise the Empire, and the Pontifical Dignity are not One, neither does
the One absolutely depend upon the Other."

Lastly, ibid. cap. 4.
To prove his third Proposition, " That the Pope has no Temporal Jurisdiction
directly," he reasons in this sort. "Christ, as he was Man, whilst he lived
here upon Earth, neither took, nor would take any Temporal Dominion: but the
Bishop of Rome is Christ's Vicar, and does represent Christ unto us, qualis
erat, dum hic inter homines viveret, as he was, whilst he lived here amongst
Men: therefore the Bishop of Rome has no Temporal Dominion." Now before he
comes to the Proof of the the first Proposition of this Argument, and that he
might make the Ground thereof more plain; he says, (1.) "That Christ was
always, as he is the Son of God, the King and Lord of all Creatures, in the
same sort that the Father is. (2.) That his Kingdom is Eternal and Divine, and
neither takes away the Kingdoms of Men, nor can agree to the Bishops of Rome.
(3.) That Christ, as he was Man, was the Spiritual King of all Men, and had
most ample Spiritual Power over all Men, as well faithful as Infidels. (4.)
That this Spiritual Power of Christ, shall, after the Day of Judgment, be
sensible and manifest. (5.) That the Glory of this Kingdom, did begin in our
Head, Christ, when he arose from the dead."

Upon which Grounds he makes these Inferences. (1.) "That the said Spiritual
Kingdom of Christ, (the Glory whereof began after His Resurrection) is not a
Temporal Kingdom; such as are the Kingdoms of our Kings. (2.) That the said
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ over all Men, cannot be communicated to the Bishop
of Rome, because it pre-supposeth the Resurrection. (3.) That Christ, as he was
Man, if he had list, and had thought it expedient for him, could have taken
upon him a Kingly Authority, but would not: and therefore neither did receive
any such Authority, neither had not only the Execution of any Dominion, or
Kingdom, but not the Authority, or Power of any Kingdom Temporal." And so he
comes to the Proof of his said Proposition; saying, "That if Christ had any
such Temporal Kingdom, He had it, either by hereditary Succession, or by
Election, or by the Law of War, or by the Especial Gift of God: but He had it
by none of these four ways;" Ergo, He had no such Dominion. For the Proof of
all which Particulars, he takes good Pains, and then comes to the Explication
of these words in his second Proposition of the first Argument, concerning this
point, viz. That the Pope does represent Christ unto us as he was, when he
lived here amongst Men; and says, (1.) "We cannot attribute unto the Pope
those Offices which Christ has, either as he is God, or as he is an immortal
and glorified Man; but those which he had, as he was a mortal Man. (2.) Neither
has the Pope all the Power which Christ had, as he was a mortal Man. For he,
because he was both God and Man, had a certain Power, which Men call the Power
of Excellency, whereby he ruled both Faithful, and Infidels: But the Faithful
only are committed to the Pope. (3.) Christ had Authority to institute
Sacraments, and to work Miracles by his own Authority; which the Pope has not.
(4.) Christ had Power to absolve Men from their sins without the Sacrament,
which the Pope cannot do."

With Bellarmin (that he may not bear this great burden upon his own
shoulders, and undergo alone the Envy thereof ensuing) an Army of Writers, both
old and new, do concur. He has himself set down the names of some: and for his
better supportation, we have thought it fit to assist him with two more; viz.
the Archbishop of Compsa, one Ambrosius Catharinus, and Boethius Epon, a Count
Palatin; whose Book of Heroical, and Ecclesiastical Questions, Printed at Doway
1588. a place wholly Jesuited, is greatly approved by Tho. Stapleton, our
Countryman, and Balthazar Seulin, the Dean of Amate, a Licentiate of the Pope's
Law, and the ordinary Visiter, or Allower of such Books as are thought meet to
be published. "Non desunt plerique etc. Catharin. in Ep. ad Roman. c. 13.
There are many (says Catharinus) who are not content with that, that is
sufficient, Ne dicam nimium, that I may not say, It is too much; Who either to
flatter, or of too gross simplicity do affirm, that the temporal Dominion of
the whole World, does belong of Right to the Bishop of Rome, as being Christ's
chief Vicar in Earth, in that Christ said, All things are given to me of my
Father. Verum ridicula haec profecto, quae neque ipsimet Pontifices auderent
asserere. But assuredly these are ridiculous Joys: The Popes themselves dare
not for shame so affirm. Quod autem Papa sit Vicarius Christi, etc. For that
the Pope is called Christ's Vicar, what force has it to persuade us, that all
the Kingdoms in the World are committed to be governed by him in temporal
Causes? Nay, says he, it rather induces us to believe, that they are not
committed unto him; quoniam Christus abjecit ea, and ut Homo erat, in Mundo non
habuit: because he cast them from him; and as he was Man, had them not
himself." And the said Boethius Epon, Heroic. qu. 5.
having set down the reasons, why some have maintained the Pope's said
Universal Dominion in temporal Causes, and given a touch of the Jews Error,
and of the Apostles oversight in that behalf; he says thus, Neque nos forsitan
Judaeis multo vel meliores, vel minus inepti sumus, dum, etc. And we perhaps
are not either much better, or less foolish than the Jews, whilst we do
ridiculously mingle the temporal and Earthly Kingdom or Empire, with the
Kingdom Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, by wresting to that purpose the
Testimonies of the sacred Scriptures, which do nothing less, than make either
Christ, or Peter, or the Pope, the temporal Monarch, either of the whole World,
or of the Christian World. Digni profecto, etc. We are certainly worthy of this
answer of Christ; Nescitis, quid petatis, quidve disputetis; you know not what
you ask, nor what you dispute of.

And thus it appears, what Opposition there has been, ever since the days of
Gregory the Seventh, against the Insolency of the Bishops of Rome, in
challenging to themselves such eminent and Sovereign Authority temporal over
all Kings and Emperors; Henr. Quodl. 6. qu. 23.
and how in these later times, Jo. Driedo l. 2. de Lib. Christ. c. 2.
through the light of the Gospel, Men of any good parts or modesty (though
otherwise our Adversaries) are driven for shame to acknowledge the truth; Jo.
de Turrecremata sum. l. 2. 113. and seq.
notwithstanding all the vain, and ridiculous Conceits, Alb. Pighius Hierarch.
Eccles. l. 5.
and Janglings, either of the said Glossographers, Canonists, or Schoolmen; or
the false, proud, Tho. VValdens. l. 2.
and insolent vauntings of the Popes themselves, from the said Gregory the
Seventh, pretending themselves to be Caesar's, Dr. Fido art. 3. cap. 76, 77, 78.
and Emperors. It is true, that Bellarmin labors afterward to advance the
Pope's Authority in temporal Causes indirectly; Petrus de Palude de potest.
Ecclesiastica. Cajetan. in Apol. c. 13. ad 6. Fr. Victoria de pot. Eccles. q. 2.
thereby to bring them so far within the compass of the Pope's reach, as that
he may depose them, if they hinder the good of the Church. But his dealing
herein is very indirect (that we use his own word) and cannot salve his former
Conclusions and Inferences: Whereby he, and the rest, Dominic. a Soto in 4.
distinct. 25. q. 2. Art. 1.
have so wounded the Bishops of that See, and disclosed their Nakedness, as all
their Adherents will never be able to cure them.

Placet eis. Haec omnia suprascripta ter lecta sunt in Domo inferiori
Convocationis in frequenti Synodo Cleri, and unanimi Consensu comprobata. Ita
testor, Apr. 16. 1606. Johannes Overall, Prolocutor.

FINIS.

