BRIEF DIRECTIONS. FOR True-spelling. Being an Abbreviat of the most useful
Rules, conducible to the promoting That Excellent Knowledge of Writing true
English, Much wanted by many, especially such as never well understood the
Latin-tongue, And is therefore commended to youth, as a good means for their
accomplishment.

To which is added. Copies of Letters, Bills of parcels, Bills of Exchange,
Bills of Debt, Receipts, with pertinent Rules as Helps thereunto.

All prepared and methodiz'd by Henry Preston Writing-master, a well-wisher to
youths attainment.

Licensed March. 17. 1673. Roger L'-Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by J.R. and are to be sold by William Bishop at the Fountain
at London Wall; near Garpen (...)

To the Reader.
Friend,
THou have here presented thee some of the easiest Rules for true spelling, a
work very much tending to thy profit, if well understood. The reason of its
production has been my Observation of the want thereof, especially in young
people, having been acquainted near twenty years with their shortnesses and
inabilities therein. To write well, and yet not to know how to write true
English must needs be a great disparagement, and to my knowledge, has rendered
many incapable of business, that would have been much to their advantage, which
makes me very urgent with all I am acquainted with, to train up their children
in the knowledge of Grammar-Rules, upon which the Art of true spelling depends,
and without which few do arrive to perfect understanding therein. Yet for such
that have not opportunity to learn, or have not improved their season, when
they might have learned, It Is meet they should not be left without some
directions to help them: And although there be many worthy books of that nature
extant, that might with the pains of Tutors further the perfecting youth
herein; yet knowing well their little benefit by some of them (the cause I name
not) Have now undertook this little piece, which has in it such plain rules,
that without other help will conduce to the end aforesaid, Preventing the
discouragements attending such that are unskilful: Of whom not only most young
men in this Na^^^ (...) but almost all the female Sex, many of them being very
apt and capable of attaining good hands of writing, which had they the knowledge
of (...) Orthography, would much more be encouraged; And the want whereof is
daily found to be a means to weaken their minds in their full and complete
accomplishment therein, yea sometimes to their absolute laying aside their
pens, as being ashamed of their work, whilst they are sensibly wanting this so
excellent Ornamental endowment: Hoping many will find profit in the perusing
and digesting these Rules to the animating themselves to improve their skill in
writing; I have not only taken the pains to compile directions for true
writing, but also have prepared Copies of Letters, Bills, and Receipts, with
Bills of parcels, and other needful Helps to young beginners. The whole of
which is humbly commended to the blessing of God; by him that desires to serve
his generation according to his capacity and Talent received.

Peti-France, Land. Feb. 3. 1673. Henry Preston.

Thou have most of this little piece
prepared in verse by me;
To take thy fancy, head and heart,
in what thou here do see.
And if it shall be taken well,
and profit to thee lend,
I shall with pains, and great delight,
much more quickly commend.
THese following helps are now produced here
The Art of Spelling unto youth to clear;
Which when well learned will fit him perfectly.
To write true English with great certainty.
THe needful thing at entrance is to know
The Letters in their order as below
Which are in number twenty four in all
Distinguished as we usually them call;
Vowels are five, a, e, i, o, and u,
The rest are consonants, set here in View
b, c, d, f, g, h, k, l, m, n, p, q, r, s, t, w, x, y, z,
Yet sometimes j, and v, when sounded be,
like consonants, are written as you see, -- j, v.
The sound of which as each does signify,
You may see here expressed in this copy
Produced to show their force and property;
b be c cee d dee f of g gee g jee h he j je k ca l el m em n en p pee q cu r
ar s es t tee v ve w we x ex y yi z. ze
A vowel has a perfect sound, without the help of another letter; to which
five beforementioned, ad y, a Greek vowel, which sounds like i, and then may
be esteemed a vowel, otherwise is a consonant as before; as [A] friend of mine
is dead -- [I] hope not so. [O!] it is too true. A vowel sounds of it self.

A mute, or dum letter is that which gives no sound at all of it self, but is
apt by the help of a vowel either before, or after it to sound, and show its
force; as (...) k p q t (...)

A vowel add unto each mute, then see
Whither they will not perfect sounds then be,
By co, die, go, jo, ko, po, quo, ti, xe, yo;

Without a vowel, you no sound can make,
For proof whereof, these few examples take,
grnt, strngth, strng, strng, thmb.

which five if any ask us what they spell?
We say nothing, there is not a vowel:
But if to each a vowel you do take,
They will then all a word, with good sound make.
Ex. Put a to the first, e to the second, i to the third, o to the fourth, u to
the fifth; and they will spell. grant, strength, string, strong, thumb.

Forget not therefore when a sound you would make,
That you a proper vowel then do take --
C Before a, o, u, sounds like to k,
But before e, and i, like s always.
Exa. to both can, came, court, custom, con, cunning, cellar, cease, ceive,
civility, city, celerity.

For spelling right, the syllables you will find,
By parting them in sound within your mind;
They being known when they di -- vi -- ded be,
Help to teach learners true Or -- tho -- gra -- phy;
To know a Syllable you must consider,
How many letters you do spell together,
Examples many are here under-set,
For you, That knowledge perfectly to get.
Af -- ter, sin -- ce -- ri -- ty, pre -- pa -- ra -- ti -- on, ge -- ne -- ra
-- ti -- on,

Ex -- tra -- or -- di -- na -- ri -- ly, tran -- sub -- stan -- ti -- a -- ti
-- on,

Re -- con -- ci -- li -- a -- ti -- on, re -- for -- ma -- ti -- on, du -- ra
-- ti -- on,

Re -- cre -- a -- ti -- on, in -- ter -- est, a -- do -- ra -- ti -- on, a --
mi -- a -- ble.

A consonant between two vowels we,
To the latter join, as here below you will see,
Re -- guard, re -- course, pre -- pare, de -- clare, pro -- pose, ma(...)

Yet some exceptions we in Rules must make,
Else in this spelling Art may yet mistake;
To this therefore exceptions there are three,
Which when produced this rule will perfect be.
1. Exception. When ab or x, comes before a vowel, as Ab -- ove, ab -- ound, ab
-- undance, ox -- en, ex -- ercise.

2. Exception. In double words, as Ab -- hor, al -- one, un -- armed, un --
usual, en -- able, in -- ure, en -- amor, ad -- orne, without, with -- in,

3d. Exception. When a word of one syllable goes before -- ing, as Speak --
ing, com -- ing, treat -- ing, squeak -- ing.

Ti writ before a vowel, commonly,
Does make it self in sound equal to si,
As, nation, patience, station, re-lation, proposition,
Proportion, petition, relaxation, dictionary, position.
To this also there are exceptions two,
Which here are put, the difference to show.
1. Exception. When s goes before ti, as in fustian Combustion, suggestion,
question. ti keeps its sound.

2. Exception. When words end in ti, that have a syllable added to them that
begins with a vowel, as pity, pitious, plentious, loftier, mightier,
weightier, courtier.

Two sorts of syllables there are in kind,
A long and short, the difference you will find,
The long is known by its pronouncing so
The short likewise, as these Examples show,
As, Fir, hug, can, bit, fat, mad, spar, not, hat, on -- short

Fire, huge, cane, bite, fate, made, spare, note, hate, one long

Wherein you see e does make the sound long,
And all words else that sound with a dipthong.
Examples take to make that also clear,
By their contrary spelling as is here:
Short syllables, made long with a dipthong.

Tall, rall, bed, bran, shut, rod, what, chat,

Tail, rayl, bead, brain, shoot, rood, wheat, cheat,

Yet sometimes e does not its full sound make,
When unto it we do a vowel take,
As, Change -- able, peace -- able, charge -- able

And also then when words do end in Ve,
You must observe the sound is lost in e.
As, above, behove, glove, move, live, have, prov^

drove, remove, receive, contrive, relieve.

Which must be written so except you do
Add one more syllable, as these below.
Having, living, moving, loving, droving, proving.

E in them words is left out as you see,
And so in these below also may be.
Dark, turn, some, run, spark, tun, mar, sum, su^

not, as usually it is written.

Dark, turn, some, run, spark, tune, etc.

And all words else when it no sound does make,
(Except in these) the e you need not take.
In these below you must add e. Chaste, haste, verse, taste, horse, breathe,
else, diver^ waste, false, sense, roste, leave, please, seize, cour^ sourse,
cease, disease, ease, cleave, sense.

E at the end of words no sound does make,
Only in these which for Example take;
Clo -- e, Phe -- be, E -- pi -- to -- me, Ju -- by -- le, Ga -- li -- le, E^
ni -- ce, Jesse,

What a dipthong is.
(...) two vowels take.
^here are twelve proper dipthongs, called so,
^oth vowels keep their sound, as here below:
[ay, ey, oy, ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou, aw, ew, ow.]

^he rest are called improper, eight they be,
One of their vowel-sounds they loose we see,
ea, ee, ie, co, oa, oo, ui, ou, As in these, ^ach, meet, chief, people, goat,
good, guide, cousin.

(...) spelling Art, there are some letters we,
^ust surely make, though they not sounded be,
^he whole of which take as they here do ly,
And make them for a copy to write by.
(...) these words here below we sound not b,
^et must be spelt as here you will plainly see;
Dumb, lamb, womb, coxcomb, climb, limb, comb. ^^umb, thumb, doubtless, doubt,
debt, subtle, undoubted

(...) between a vowel and a k,
^s not sounded, yet so it is write always.
Example. Sick, thick, black, jack, lick, trick, flock, stick, check, quick,
frock, clock, truck, antic, lock, cock, dock, truck, nick, brick, mock, pack,
rock.

When c is placed after s, as here,
(...) has no sound as by these will appear.
Ascent, concupiscence, conscience, disciple, lascivious, ^cent, sciatica,
transcendant, Schism.

We write these terminations with a c,
And all that follow after as they be.
Ance, ence, ince, once, unce, enhance, since, eloquence, abundance,
abstinence, advance, assistance, (...) temperance, sufferance, providence,
substance, pronounce, guidance, experience, essence commence, benevolence.

Except in these, wherein an I we make,
Only herenam'd for to prevent mistake.
Incense, nonsense, dispense, rinse, suspense, recompense, propense, sense,
(one of the five senses.)

The general rules that yet do follow here,
Are as was said the spelling-Art to clear,
Observe them well, and good skill gain you may,
To fit you for your work another day.
A c following x, loses its sound, As in excel, except excerpt, excess.

Ch, sounds like k in these, choler, school, Malachi^ stomach, Anarchy,
Archangel, cholick, Chyrurgion Chronicle, Chymicall, Mechanic, Monarchy,
Patriarch, Eunuch.

Gh, through custom are sounded like^f, in these Although, rough, draught,
laugh, cough, enough, daughter, bought, brought, ought.

Gh, sounds with the breathing h^in these, Bough, wrought, high, weigh, might
righteous sight naughty, sought, through, sigh.

G, does not sound in these, Phlegm feign, sign, design, reign, Sovereign,
arreign, ensign, assign, resign, signed, weight.

U, follows G, and is not sounded in these, guide, tongue, league, disguise,
guil guess, guard, guest, rogue Collogue, Catalogue, prorogue, dialogue,
Prologue, Epilogue, guardian, guilty, plague.

H, sounds not after g or r, as in these, Ghost Rhetoric, Rheum, Rhodes,
dunghill, (Rhine, a river.) ^e l is doubled, as all; ball; bell; bill; boll;
bull; fill; hall; hill; still; quill; hell; will; wall; spill; small; call;
pills; tell; ^ell; full; Hill.

But after dipthongs single, as in these, bayl; coyl, ^^il; moyl; foil; toil;
soil.

So Poly-sillables, or words of more than one syl^ble end with a single l, as
in Burial, Cathedral, Chan^el, sinful, usual, tribunal, evil, special,
material, quarrel.

though in these words some do not sound the l,
^et it should sounded be as we it spell;
^alve; half; Ralph; folk; balk; calf; talk; falcon; falconer;
^almsey, not, save, haf, Raf, fok, etc.
P, is not sounded in these, Psalm; tempt; temptati^n; Simpson; receipt;
Sympton.

Ph, sounds like f in Nymph; Phylactery; Cosmo^aphy; Elephant; Emphasis;
Pamphlet; Epitaph; Georaphy; nephew; Orphan; Triumph; Humphrey; E^raim; Philip;
Philemon; Phebe; Phyladelphia; Phea^nt, Pharisee; Phrase; Phlebotomy; Sphere;
Sulphur.

But not where Ph, are in two syllables, as ^ep -- herd; Clap -- ham.

^er the r or l, e does rebound,
^^d is true spelt as they are here now found.
Luster; little; sepulcher; Temple; Acre; people; able; ^gle; bramble; brittle;
bubble; buckle; bundle; cable; ^adle; castle; crackle; humble; juggle; Justle;
kindle; ^re; Maugre; nitre; needle; nettle; tigre; trouble; treble; ^angle;
wrestle; warble; trifle; stradle; spitle; muckle; ^cle; fable; sadle; bauble;
bible-bable.

^nds no word but where it is sounded I,
We do put in the room the letter y;
(...) property; reply; study; try; my, reply, cry; die;

When u at end of any word is sounded,
The vowel e is always then propounded;
As, in due: sue: true: hue: value: virtue: issue: pur^ due: blue: construe:
retinue: revenue.

Ey is writ where i is sounded at the end of a word in these, Abbey: alley:
Anglesey: Attorney: burley: causey: chimney: cockney: country: eye: Hackney:
honey: money: kidney: monkey: pulley: pursley: talley: tansey: Turkey.

Ey sounds ay in these, they: obey: convey: survey: key: gray: Surveyer: whey:
deign: eight: veins: height: weight: reign: heir.

Ei, sounds e long in forfeit: Carreir: either: he fer: conceit: conceive:
deceit: enterfeir: leisure: neighbor: receipt: receive: seize.

Ew, keeps its sound, as in these, few: lewd: ewe He-brew: brew: chew: drew:
embrew: Hew: Gew: gaws: Jewel: knew: fewer: stew: steward.

Y, in these words is sounded like to i,
And is so writ in Synod, Sympathy,
Type: Presbyterian: Martyr: Alchymy: Analysis: Apocalypse: Cymbal: Cypress:
Crystal: Etymology: Myrrh: mystical: Mystery: hypocrite: Labyrinth: Myriad:
Nymph: Satyr: Sycomore Sycophant: Synagogue: Tyrant: syrup, etc.

Ea, sounds e drawn long as here you see,
Where ea's writ in the room of the e;
Appeal: ear: appease: Bean: Bear: Beast: beat: cheat: clean: dream: break:
cease: meal: mean: meat: eat: Easter: easy: zeal: year: wear: wealtreatise:
roar: teach: swear: surcease: streak: stream: seamless: Lease: squeak: spread:
spear: sheath reach: deal: decease: congeal: head: breast: dead: earth: health:
ready: dread: beard: bread: hear^

E i, sounds ee, as in believe: relief: pierce: shield: atchieve: pieces:
Lieutenant: yield: fierce: priest: chief: besiege: cashier: friend: frontiers:
grief: grievance: grievous: hankerchief: view: yield.

This dipthong ie, is parted in these words, therefore sounds not as before;
audi-ence: bri-er: cli-ent: clothi-er: di-et: qui-et: buri-ed: busi-ed:
espi-ed: reli-ed: studi-ed: dri-ed: outvi-ed.

Oa, sounds the o long, in hoarse: boat: boar: oat: choke: toad: boast:
encroach: abroad: goad: stroke: board: broach: coach: cloak: coal: coap: coat:
cloak: coast: goat: groanning: groat: Hoary.

This dipthong oa, is parted in these, therefore not sounded as before,
co-action: co-agulate: Ahino-am: Gilbo-ah: bo-anerges.

Oi or oy, is sounded in these words; poison: point: boil: jointure: voyage:
tortoise: coy: boy: oil: ointment: poise: void: noisome: noise: employ:
exploit: foyl: moist: employment: emeroides: embroider: cloister: cloy.

Oo, sounds like woo, in these; choose: floor: roof: hoop: broom: brook: food:
boon: fool: loose: boot: cooper: foot: crook: poor: brood: foord: forsooth:
goose: loose: moon: moor: rood: root: stool: stoop: tooth.

Oo, sounds short u in these, good: hood: blood: wood: stood: wool: foot.

Ow, sounds hard in, Vow: allow: vowel: now sow-pig: Cowards: Cow: (a kine that
gives milk.)

Ow sounds like o, in bestow: slow: low: window: know: throw: pillow: shadow:
sorrow: willow: winnow: widow: know: barrow: arrow: fallow: morrow follow.

Ou sounds like u in, Cousin: double: flourish: young: scourge: nourish: flood:
touch: doublet:

Ou founds like o, in vapor, bought brought. honor. although. wrought.
though. solicitour. succor. rigor. gourd. harbor. behavior. endeavor.
manor. naught. color. Armor. Emperor. clamor. odor. thought. Savior.
humor.

Ou, sounds broad in flout. slouch. couch.

Ui, sounds like i, in guide. guile. conduit. guise. disguise. beguil. build.
buyer. verjuice. buy.

Ui sounds like u in recruit. fruit. suit. suitor. bruise. fruitful. juice.
pursuit. suitable.

This dipthong ui is parted in these words, therefore not to be sounded as
before, ambigu-ity. frui-tion. genu-ine. pu-issant. perpetu ity. perspicu-ity.
ru-ine.

J consonant before all vowels, is sounded as G latin before e, or i; and as
sounded different from the vowel, so it should be writ and made, as in these
words jar. jest. jear. jill. join. june. rejoice. joy. judge. subjoin.

Also the v consonant where ever it has its proper sound of va. ve. vi. vo.
vu. it should be so writ as it is in these words, different from u vowel, Vain.
verity. verily. vice. voice. virtue. vicious. revive. connive. vivification.
convince. receive. give. vulture.

Although no new thing here does come to hand,
Yet you will by short collections understand,
How to write many words that different be,
Both sounded, named, and written as you see.
The rules here given may to much profit tend
If you do read them often from end' to end,
And well improve them as you ought to do,
With care, delight, and diligence to show;
What further is produced, is to make plain,
Knowing what yet we have herein to say,
Will add to their assistance day by day.
The Capital or Great Letters have in the beginning of words their peculiar
uses: noting not only proper names of Men, Cities, Callings, as Ambrose,
Marcus, London, York, Spain, Turkey, England, Merter, Grocer; but Dignities and
Offices, as Highness, Lord Mayor, Your Honor, Worship, Sir, Father, Mother,
and names of Arts; as Grammar, Rhetoric, Writing, Music, Arithmetic, the
beginning of every verse, and I, by it self, little i being never made by it
self, as I go, I am, I will, etc. Also of things observable, such as is the
principal matter handled in (...) Book, likewise beginnings of sentences, and
when words of another are quoted, as Genesis 1.3. And God said, Let there be
light; So in Exodus 16.4. Then said the Lord to Moses, Behold I will rain bread
from ^eaven, and in the 9. verse. And Moses spoke unto Aaron, Say unto the
children of Israel, Come near before the Lord; there are two such included
speeches; (...) wit the speech of Moses to Aaron, and the speech ^f Aaron to
the People, where you see great letters; also in Emphatical, or remarkable
words, as God ^id to Moses I AM has sent thee whole senten^es Emphaticall: as
JEHOVAH THE ^RANCH, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS, and such like, often ^und
in the HOLY BIBLE.

^ll stops and points must be observed when you,
Would write with credit, and your skill would show,
The Comma(,) (...) stops be small, then Comma you should take,
The Semicolon(:) If greater, you must Semicolon take,
The Colon(:) If half a sentence, then the Colon you, The Period, or full
point(.) Must plainly make, if out, this point does show,
The Period is a point of perfect sense, and perfect sentence: at the end of
which the tone of the voice falls below its ordinary tenor, with a long
pause. -- A great letter always follows, as is before

An Apostrophae(') This is a note set over that place where you,
Leave out a vowel, as these words do show.
Penn d, sinned, trained the other, saved, it is, 'twill.

Hyphen, a note of connection, (=) or ( --) When you have compound words, or
end your line,
In parting words, this mark is for a sign,
As som-times, through-out, Commonwealth, safeguard, miss-like, Housekeeping,
etc.

When end your line you part the word in Syllables, Sir, your business is
accomplished with much credit, vale. I am glad thereat, for which I heartily
thank you, vale.

An Interrogation point (?) This note is put when any question's made,
As does appear, in what is under said;
Quest. Who made you? Ans. God. Quest. Who is the author of preservation? An.
God. A note of Admiration (!) This mark denotes our sudden admiration,
Of what we say, or write, or give relation.
As hear O Heavens! give ear O earth! A Parenthesis () This mark a sentence
does enclose, when we,
Use, or omit the same, yet sense will be,
(...) (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing A caret, or latin
circumflex, () When words left out are placed over the line,
Where they come in this mark is for a sign,
An Asterisme, (*) This note of illustration is then made,
When to what is writ there might be yet more said;
A note of Citation, (") This is then made when Authors quoted are,
And does show forth what they to us declare;
Index, This note like to a forefinger is made,
To point to what remarkable is said;
Obelisk, () This is a note always referring to,
The Margin, where the meaning you may know;

Concerning contractions, or writing one or more letters for words; take these
as follow for help in reading, or writing, Agt. against, admrs. administrators,
Bp. Bishop, dd. delivered, Dr. Doctor, Esquire Esquire, Hd. Honored, Ld. Lord, Lp.
Lordship, lr. letter, md. memorandum, Mr. Master, Mris. Mistress, Obt. obedient,
pd. paid, per per Sr. Sir, pre pre, St. Saint, in then, yt that, ye the, with
what wn. when, Wp. Worship, Wll. Worshipful 7br. September, 8br. October, 9br.
November, 10br December, Q. Question, A. Answer, R. Reason, U. Use, Dr.
debtor, Cr. Creditor, Xpian. Christian, pnts, presents, and and, etc. et
caetera, and so forth, (to wit) namely, that is to say, mt. meant, Coll.
Colonel, Capt. Captain, Lievt. Lieutenant.

Our English words do very much abound,
(...)
Some of them we think meet to publish here,
The Art of spelling further for to clear.
(There) where it points to thing or place must be,
Spelt and written as here you plainly see,
[Their] when it does claim some propriety,
To any thing, it is written with e, i.
Examples.
[Their] House, [their] Land, [their] Goods are here,
[Their] proper state does lie just [there.]
By [sums] of Money telling [some] do live,
[Wait] now on me, you shall just [weight] receive,
A [Prophet] true much [profit] brings to men,
A [Mill-wright] cannot [write] without a Pen;
[Two] men would come [to] me [to] ask a thing,
'Twas [hard] that which I [heard] they had to bring.
The Horse does [neigh;] [nay] it was the voice of men,
We [write,] that is [right,] yet differently with Pen.
It is good [Air,] where now the [Heir] does dwell,
Some locks of [Hair,] [are] cut, and we them sell;
The [Sun] does shine upon my [Son] to day,
It Is [one] man's right, 'Twill be his [own] always;
To [bear] a burden on the shoulder [bare]
[Rear] up the house, it is a structure [rare.]
In this method I should further proceed, only think it more to the profit and
help of young beginners, to explain some of our usual English words, that are
seldom fully understood by them; therefore have at the end of this small Book
annexed a Table Alphabetical whereto I refer them, and in which they may not
only see the several significations of words, but also the true spelling of
them, whether of like sound or otherwise, the whole of which they will do well
to peruse and observe until the have (...)

Copies of Letters now do follow here,
Some young beginners therein to prepare,
That when they need they may instructed be,
To write in form by what they here do see;
The matter being heeded, when they write,
They may hereby conceive how to endite.
All Letters should begin with declaration,
Of friendly Titles, as a preparation;
Saluting them with love and commendation,
As they are in esteem, or in Relation;
Then to the matter needful short and plain,
They should proceed in, as being the Maine
Of their then writing, which when done to cease,
And wind up all, with words of love and peace;
Concluding as unto their friends they stand,
^n humbleness theirs, when they them command,
Subscribing those their Letters with their hand,
And for their superscription on the side,
The name and place where now their friend does bide
First Letter, is a Letter from one at School in London to his father in the
Country.
London January, 10. 1673. Honored Father,
MY Humbly duty unto you presented, giving you all hearty thanks for all your
love and ^indness manifested to me. I make bold at this time (...) present you
with a few lines, being the fruits of my ^bour, and do hope in time to be
better accomplish^d to give you an account of my proceedings. In the ^ean time
crave your acceptance of this it coming ^om

(...) his honored father your obedient s^^


Another from one at School, to his friend that has showed kindness to him.
London, Feb. 12. 1673 Respected Sir,
HAving gained some skill in this Art of writing since my being trained therein,
think it my duty to present you with some fruits thereof, as an humble
gratulation, and thankful remembrance of your great love and respect showed to
me from time to time (...) hoping it may gain esteem, and acceptance with you^
do with brevity, yet in all humility Rest, subscribing my self,

your obliged friend, Bartholomew Bates

For his honored friend Mr. Bates of Colchester, this

A Letter from a young man newly out of his time to his friend for better
acquaintance.
London, March 5 1673 Respected Sir,
HAving finished my seven years Apprentiship, am now entering into the world for
employ for my self, and knowing my Trade depends upon acquaintance make bold to
renew former friendship with you^ hoping if it lies in your power, to do me any
kindness therein, you will (for the love you bear to me) do your utmost to help
me, and what you shall do therein shall be acceptable to

your servant to command (...)

To his loving friend (...)

A Letter from one to another for Goods which he needs.
London, April 4. 1674. SIR,
HEaring by a friend of yours, that you are stored with sundry parcels of such
goods which I greatly need; make bold to Essay a Trade with you, so as in a
small parcel to become your Chapman, my stock is not great, neither do I know
what oppertunity I shall have to vend many; therefore entreat your sending but
forty or fifty pounds worth, and as they prove shall further deal with you, the
lowest price send, as also the time of payment, and I shall be punctual. being

your loving friend Emanuel Endeavor.

To his honored friend, Mr. Fra. Friendshipof Famouth this

A copy of a letter from a Trader to his Chapman, with his answer thereto.
London, January, 27. 1674. Honored friend,
I Sent you last week a parcel of Goods by your Carrier, and do hope they are
safe come to your hands, also according to your last dated the first instant
have prepared the parcel of stuffs, and this day have shipped them in the Hope
of London, now bound for Cales, and marked as directed, the Bill of Lading is
herein enclosed, the rest you write for shall send as soon as they are made
ready for you. I would desire you to remit me one hundred pounds with all
speed, No more at present from,

your (...)

For his honored friend, (...)

The Answer.
Exon, February, 8 1674. Respected Sir,
YOurs dated the 27 of January last, I received, and am glad to hear you have
Shipped those goods to Cales: I trust they will come to a good market. Those
you sent me came safe, and well conditioned. I have according to your Order
remitted one hundred pounds, which will be payable in ten days, the Bill of
Exco. is herein enclosed with a letter of advice to Mr. Goodpay from his
respondent, hoping the Goods you are preparing will be for my turn, and come
timely. I rest,

your assured lo: friend, John Lovely.

For his respected friend Mr. Zach. Zealet of London.

T woul'd swell this Volume too too large,
And make this Book of too much charge,
To put down Copies in all things,
That Trade and friendship daily brings.
Therefore a little take and see,
And strive for ingenuity,
It Is matter that will thee and I,
Both mind, and heart, and head employ.
And when engaged with all our might,
Our business will teach to endite,
The form being designed only
(...)
Here follows now some other things that may,
Be helpful unto thee another day,
Which take, and well improve, as is intended,
By him that has the whole in love commended,
And well remember Traders should be just,
In buying, selling, wherein there is trust.
For God that sees All does a blessing bring,
To such that do keep faithful in this thing,
Rewarding them in basket and in store,
With Riches, and with Credit more and more.
Whilst others that herein no conscience make,
Have Blasts from God in all they undertake;
And are deprived of prospering whilst they,
Will not just rules of Equity Obey,
^f you therefore would thrive. Mind honesty
(...) what you sell, as well as what you buy,
And punctual be in paying that that's due,
Expecting then others will so pay you.
If you a Merchant be, you need know well,
To make a Bill of Goods which you do sell,
A form whereof is here prepared by me,
For Help to young beginners, if need be.
Sold July 10. 1673, to Gamaliel Grout these Goods following.
59 else of Green Bays, at 2 s:5 d:the ell 055 l.:09 s.:03 d.: 87 else of Dyed
Canvas, at 1 s:5 d:the ell 069 l.:18 s.:03 d.: 76 else of Holland Cloth, at 4
s:6 d:the ell 197 l.:02 s.:00 d.: ^0 pieces of Fine Lawns, at 11 s:6 d:the ps
287 l.:10 s.:00 d.: ^9 else of Linen Cloth, at 2 s:8 d the ell 078 l.:10 s.:08
d.: 89 ps of Dyed Fustians at 19 s:0 d the end 559 l.:11 s.:00 d.: 89 ps of
white Ditto, at 17 s:6 d the end 165 l.:07 s.:06 d.: ^9 else of narrow cloth,
at 1 s:2 d:the ell 015 l.:02 s.:02 d.:


The Merchant when he does the money take,
He ought the paying man a discharge make,
A form thereof in short, yet full is here,
Transcribed out, the Buying man to clear,
Received the 14 of July 1673, the full of this Bill, Isay rec'd,

By me Hugh Humes.

Both Shopkeepers, and Merchants do when they,
Their goods transport, put off, or truck away,
Plain Bills of parcels make, that all may see,
What Goods they are, and what their prizes be.
A Shopkeepers Bill.
Sold to Henry Halfgood of Harwich these.
April 1. 1673, One small box of Cynamon, 8 l.:8 s.:8 d. May 2 -- One barrel of
New Raisons -- 3 l.:3 s.:3 d. June 3 -- Two small parcels of Pepper -- 2 l.:5
s.:7 d. Ditto 19 -- Two Rolls of Virginia Tobacco -- 1 l.:8 s.:6 d. July
13-Five Frails of Mallago Raisons -- 3 l.:3 s.:2 d. 19 -- A box of Sugar Candy
weight 98 l. -- 4 l.:10 s.:0 d. Total Sum -- 22 l.:19 s.:2 d.
The Shopkeeper for so much he does take,
Does to the Chapman a discharge now make,
A Copy here now follows, writ by me,
Some skill for you to gain, at least to see.
Received the 20 of July 1673, the sum of eleve^ pounds ten shillings, which is
in part of payment for the Bill abovesaid, I say rec'd. With men of Trade,
sometimes need does require,
The selling man of Chapmen to desire,
A bill, or bond, wherein they fix a day,
The money that is owing for to pay;
A form of both may very helpful be,
Therefore are made to be improved by thee.
A short Bill of Debt.
BE it remembered by these presents that I Kimbolton Kindheart of Kingston
Haberdasher, do owe and am indebted unto Leonard Lawless of the same, Merchant,
the sum of ninety pounds of Lawful money of England. All which I do promise
to pay to him, or his Order, on the tenth day of July next,

In testimony whereof I have hereunto put my hand and Seal the seventh of May,
Anno Domini; 1674. Sealed and delivered in the presence of Will. Knaveless.
John Earl. Kimbolton Kindheart.

Another of the same.
Borrowed and received the 23 of June 1674, of Moses Manibates, the sum of One
hundred pounds of Lawful money of England, which I promise to pay upon demand.

Witness my hand and Seal the day abovesaid. Testis Nath. Namis.

THe Bill that's last is good and will avail,
When unto it there is both hand and Seal,
And it is much better, if to what is done,
You have some it to witness, at least one;
Receipts to them both looked for may be,
Therefore their copies follow as you see.
A receipt to the first Bill.
Received the tenth day of July 1674, of Kimbolton Kindheart, the sum of ninety
pounds; being for so much due by a Bill of debt bearing date the seventh of May
last. I say received.

By me Leo. Lawless.

A receipt to the second.
Received the first of August 1674, of Nath. Nam^ the sum of one hundred
pounds, which was due by (...) Bill of Debt, bearing date the 23 of June last,
I say received.

By me Moses Mani-bate^

Now next that does present it self to thee,
Is an example how a Bond should be,
Made so Authentic, as that binding may,
Enforce the Debtor, the just Sum to pay.
Most Obligations are in Latin made;
And so should this, but that it will be said,
This little Book is made for such chiefly,
That can the English tongue only apply;
Therefore in English it is made for thee,
(...)
KNow all men by these presents that I Oliver Owen of Oldstreet in the County
of Midlesex Oyl-man, am holden, and firmly do stand bound unto Peter Pierce of
Pembrook Painter, in ninety pounds of good and lawful money of England, to be
paid unto the said Peter Pierce, his certain Attorney, his Executors, or
Administrators. To the which payment well and truly to be made, I bind my
self, my Executors, and Administrators firmly by these presents, sealed with my
Seal, dated the tenth of September, 1674.

THe condition of this Obligation is such that if the above bounden Oliver
Owen, his Executors, Administrators, or any of them, do well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the above named Petor Pierce, his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns the just sum of forty five pounds of like lawful
money, at, or on the tenth day of October next coming; at, or in the now
dwelling house of the said Peter Pierce, ^scituate in Pembrook aforesaid,
without fraudor deceit, then this Obligation shall be void, else the same to
stand, and remain in full force effect and virtue.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of Zachariah Ving Ambrose Pain, Scr.
Oliver Owen.

When Bond, or Bill, is signed and sealed, it must be delivered as his Act and
deed, to the party whom it is made, or to some other for his use, And all in the
sight and view of the witnesses.

Now you have seen a form of Bond, and Bill,
You may accept from Debtor what you will,
But in my judgment a Bond is most sure,
Sealed before witness that may long endure;
For Bonds with double penalty are made,
When nothing in a Bill of that is said,
And by a Bond thy suit charge shall recover,
But nothing of thy charges by the other.
Wherefore if Debtor may uncertain be,
In paying when it is due, if thou can see,
Before hand what thy lot in this case may,
Choose and accept a Bond without delay;
In all thou do deal with an honest man,
And he I pay on the day if that he can,
And when the money due by Bond is paid,
It is most sure a discharge then be made,
A copy therefore is now writ below,
The paying man at that time for to show.
Received the 10th. of October 1674, of Oliver Owen the sum of forty five
pounds, being for so^ much due by a bond Obligatory, bearing date the tenth of
September last, wherein the said Oliver Owen became bound to me in penalty of
ninety pounds conditioned for the true payment of forty five pounds the day
abovesaid; I say recd. in full satisfaction of the aforesaid bond.

By me Peter Pierce.

In commerce and in trade men use this way,
By Exchange Bills much money for to pay,
Some copies therefore here are, for thee made,
Which may be useful in the way of Trade.
A copy of an Inland Bill.
London October, 28. 1674.
AT ten days sight of this my only Bill of Exco. Pay to Mr. Richard Ruley of
Rutland, or his order, the sum of one hundred pounds current money, for the
value here received of Mr. Jonathan Bates: Make good payment thereof, and put
it to the account of

your obliged friend, Simon Simson.

To his honored Mr. Quintilian Quelch of Rutland this
When this Bill comes to hand, he does it show,
Unto the paying man his mind to know,
Which if he likes, he then acceptance makes,
And when it is paid, he a discharge then takes,
Without side of the Bill him for to clear,
The form thereof, does plainly here appear.
Received the 10. of November 1674, the full of the within Bill of Exchange, I
say received.

By me Richard Rules.

Here follows others which may inform thee,
How Outland Bills also may written be.
The discharge to that may show thee how to make one to any other Bill of Exco.
they being all to that effect, and writ on the backside of the Bill, as before
is said.

An Outland Bill, the first sent.
London November, 3. 1674. for 500 crowns at 60 sols per crown.
AT double usance, Pay this my first Bill of Exchange, unto Mr. Isaac Delawn,
or order five hundred crowns at sixty sols per crown, for the value received of
Mr. John King, and place it to account as per advice from

yours, Will. Walwin.

To Mr. John Ducayn Merchant in Paris Prima.
The Second Bill.
London November 14. 1674, for 500 crowns at 60 sols per crown.
AT double usance, pay this my second Bill of Exchange, my first not paid, unto
Mr. Isaac Delawn, or order, five hundred crowns, at sixty sols per crown, for
the value received here of Mr. John King, and place it to account as per
advice, from

yours, Will. Walwin.

For Mr. John Ducayn Merchant in Paris. Secunda
Another Bill of Exchange for Amsterdam.
A copy of the first Bill.
London March 27. 1674. for 200 l. sterling. at 34 s. 4 d. fl. per l. st.
AT double usance, Pay this my first Bill of Exchange unto Mr. Roger Rumpe, or
order, two hundred pounds sterling, at thirty four shillings four pence fle.
per pound st. for the value of William Wills, and place it to account as per
advice from

yours Henry Hills.

To Mr. John Jones Merchant in Amsterdam Prima
A copy of the second Bill of Exchange.
London March 27. 1674. for 200 l. sterling. at 34 s. 4 d. fl. per l. st.
AT double usance, Pay this my second Bill of Exchange, my first not paid, unto
Mr. Roger Rumpe, or order, two hundred pounds sterling, at thirty four
shillings four pence fl. per l. st. for the value of William Wills, and place
it to account as per advice from

yours Henry Hills.

To Mr. John Jones Merchant in Amsterdam
Another copy of a Bill of Exchange for Livorne.
The first Bill,
London adii the 25th. March 1674, for 500 l. at 53 d.. st. per doller.
THree months after date, pay this my first Bill of Exchange, unto Mr. John
Jakes, or order, five hundred Dollers Exco. at fifty three pence sterling per
doller, for the value of himself, and place it to account as per advice from

yours Peter Pimpillon.

To Mr. William Jednings Merchant in Livorne. Pma
The second Bill.
London adii the 25 March, 1674
THree Months after date, pay this my second bill of Exchange, my first not
paid, unto Mr. John Jakes, or order, five hundred dollers Exco. at fifty three
pence sterling per doller, for the value of himself, and place it to account as
per advice from,

yours Peter Pimpillon.

To Mr. William Jednings Merchant in Livorne
Some men of Handicrafts, may this book see
Therefore for them some Bills prepared be.
A Carpenters Bill.
Mr. William Liberal Dr. for work and materials.
FOr 17 load of Oaken timber at 42 s. the Load 35 l.:14 s.:00 d.: For 28 load
of Fur-timber at 35 s. the load, 49 l.:00 s.:00 d.: For 180 feet of Oaken Plank
two -- inches thick at 3 d. the foot 02 l.:05 s.:00 d.: For 17 thous. of 10 d
nails at 6 s. the thous. 05 l.:02 s.:00 d.: For 700 of deals, at 6 l. 5 s. the
hundred, 46 l.:17 s.:06 d.: For 19 thous. of 6 d. nails, at 4 s. 4 d. the th.
04 l.:02 s.:04 d.: For 7 thous. of dou. tens, at 10 s. the thous. 03 l.:15
s.:00 d.: For 700 of ten-groat nails, at 3 s. 4 d. the 100 01 l.:03 s.:04 d.:
For 28 pound of large spikes, at 4 d. the l. 00 l.:09 s.:04 d.: For 8 weeks
work for my self, at 3 s. the day 07 l.:13 s.:00 d.: For 8 weeks 2 days work
for my man, at 2 s. 6 d. the day 06 l.:05 s.:00 d.: Sum is 162 l.:06 s.:06 d.:
When this Bill's paid, the Carpenter must make,
A full discharge for what he then does take,
It being his good hap all to receive,
He does with thanks a full discharge then give,
A copy here you will find prepared by me,
For to teach you how a discharge should be.
Received the 7 of January 1674, of Mr. William Liberal the sum of one hundred
sixty two pounds and six shillings, which is in full of the Bill aforesaid, I
say received.

by me Xeno Xanthos.

A Bricklayers Bill.
Mr. Yelverton Yewel of London Dr. for work and materials.
For 12 thous. of bricks at 12 s. 6 d. the th. 07 l.:10 s.:00 d.: For 8
thousand of Tiles, at 18 s. 6 d. the th. 07 l.:08 s.:00 d.: For 17 hund. of
Lyme, at 14 s. 6 d. the hun. 12 l.:06 s.:06 d.: For 15 load of Sand, at 4 s. 8
d. the load, 03 l.:10 s.:00 d.: For 1000 of Nine-inch Tiles, at 10 s. 6 d. the
hundred 5 l.:05 s.:00 d.: For 40 ridge-Tiles, at 1 d. the piece, 00 l.:05 s.:10
d.: For 3 weeks 3 days work for my self, at 3 s. the day 03 l.:03 s.:00 d.:
For 27 days for my man at 2 s. 6 d. the day 03 l.:08 s.:09 d.: For a labourer
27 days at 1 s. 8 d. the day 02 l.:05 s.:05 d.: Sum is 45 l.:02 s.:06 d.:
The Bricklayer does also his whole Bill take,
Therefore a full discharge he does then make,
No copy here is needed, but the same,
(...) the sum and name
A Smiths Bill may thus be made.
Mr. Zach. Zinthos of London his Bill.
Feb. 21. 1674, Two great Bars for the Chimney, 01 l.:18 s.:08 d.: 26. Three
great bolts for the doors, 00 l.:05 s.:10 d.: Mar. 19, One stock-lock for the
outw. door, 0 l.:12 s.:06 d.: the 27, 1675. Four pair of large hinges, 01 l.:18
s.:00 d.: the 30, For mending the Jack 00 l.:03 s.:06 d.: For one Fire-shovel
with Grates 00 l.:11 s.:06 d.: April 13. For one very large fire-fork 00 l.:08
s.:00 d.: 19. For 3 spits and a pair of Ranges 01 l.:10 s.:00 d.: 23. For 30
large Hooks and 10 staples, 00 l.:05 s.:00 d.: 07 l.:13 s.:08 d.:
The Smiths bad fortune is but half to take,
And therefore a discharge in part does make,
The which because it differs from the other,
We do a copy for it here discover.
An acquittance on the backside of the bill.
Received May 29 1675, of Mr. Zacheus Zinthos, the sum of three pounds sixteen
shillings, being in part of payment of the within written Bill, I say received.

By me William Smith.

When he the rest receives he then does make,
A full discharge, a copy you may take.
Received the last of March 1676, of Mr. Zinthos, the sum of three pounds
seventeen shillings, being for work done for him in 74, and 75, as per bill, I
say received in full of that Bill.

The Tailors use is thus a Bill to make,
Therefore their form I shall not strive to break.
Mr. James Nichols his Bill.
For 4 yards of Broad-cloth at 13 s. 6 d. the yard, 2 l.:14 s.:00 d.: For
making your suit and Coat 0 l.:12 s.:06 d.: For Canvis, for stays, and
stiffening, 0 l.:02 s.:00 d.: For Silk and Galloon 0 l.:02 s.:00 d.: For 16
dozen of Buttons, at 5 s. the dozen and loop-lace 4 l.:00 s.:02 d.: For Body
and sleeve linings for your doublet, 0 l.:02 s.:00 d.: For Cottening for the
Hose and Pockets 0 l.:03 s.:00 d.: For Belly-pieces, Collar, hooks, eyes, --
and stay Tape 0 l.:01 s.:06 d.: For Tabby for lining the Coat, 1 l.:02 s.:00
d.: For fine drawing the Coat 0 l.:02 s.:00 d.: For making your Brussel Camlet
Cloak 0 l.:06 s.:00 d.: For Silk and Canvis for the Cape 0 l.:01 s.:00 d.: For
6 yards of shalloon to line the Cloak at 2 s. the yard comes to 0 l.:12 s.:00
d.: For a set of Silver and Gold buttons of the best sort 1 l.:04 s.:00 d.: For
a neck loop for the Cloak 0 l.:00 s.:06 d.: For scizing the Flap 0 l.:00 s.:06
d.: Total sum 11 l.:05 s.:02 d.:
Received the 21 of November 1673, the sum o^ eleven pounds in full of this
Bill, I say received.

By me Geo. Slow.

Another Tailors Bill.
Mris. Sarah Phoach her Bill.
For making your Silk-gown laced 00 l.:15 s.:00 d.: For stays for the same 00
l.:05 s.:06 d.: For Silk and Galloon 00 l.:01 s.:06 d.: For sleeve and body
linings 00 l.:01 s.:06 d.: For black Callico to lay under the body and sleeves
00 l.:01 s.:00 d.: For Ribboning to the Gown 00 l.:01 s.:06 d.: For making your
Petticoat richly laced 00 l.:05 s.:00 d.: For Bordering, binding, silk and
Pockets l.: s.: d.: Total sum 01 l.:13 s.:06 d.:
Received the 4 of December 1674 of Mris Sarch Phoach, by the hands of her maid
servant, Elizabeth Goodworker, the sum of twenty nine shillings in full of this
bill, I say received 01 l.;09 s.;00 d.;

By me William Nimble.

You there may see two Tailors bills at large,
Both paid, and therefore to each a discharge,
Which may teach you how a receipt to make,
Although you should not all the whole sum take.
Here follows a Shoemakers bill.
Mr. Lowmer Lowns his bill November, 30. 1674,
For 3 pair of Men's shoes, at 4 s.:4 d. the pair, 00 l.:13 s.:00 d.: For 4 pair
of women's shoes, at 2 s.:8 d. the pair, 0 l.:10 s.:08 d.: For one pair of large
waxed boots, 01 l.:04 s.:00 d.: For 1 pair of women's laced shoes and slaps 00
l.:09 s.:06 d.: For one pair of cloth shoes and goloshes with ferry boats 00
l.:09 s.:00 d.: For vamping and waxing a pair of boots 00 l.:06 s.:06 d.: For
13 dozen of wooden heel shoes, at 30 s. the dozen 19 l.:10 s.:00 d.: For a pair
of shashoons for boots 00 l.:01 s.:08 d.: Sum is 23 l.:05 s.:04 d.:
Received the 19 of January 1674 of Mr. Lowns the full of this bill, I say
received 23 l.:05 s.:04 d.:

By me John Cordwainer,

One thing yet follows more that needful is,
That all should careful be they it not miss,
And that is true discharges for their rent,
When a full quarter is run out and spent,
Least they do pay to such that it is not due,
And so the rightful landlord do them sue,
There being many times much trouble when,
The claiming Landlords are not honest men.
Wherefore when you your rent do pay,
See that you keep this rule always,
To take discharge from Landlords sure,
And in such sort that may endure;
If to the quarter day you have,
Cleared all that the Landlord does crave;
See that he make his writing so,
As is the form of this below.
Received the 3 of December 1675; of Valentine Vease, the sum of fifty five
^hillings, which is for a quarters rent for his dwelling house, due at
Michaelmas last, I say received, in full to that day. LV. s.

by me William Wilson.

A receipt for Rent in part.
Received the 12 of January 1673 of Widow Lamey ten shillings, which is ^n
part of payment for a quarters rent ^or her dwelling house, due at Christmas
^ast, I say received 10 s.

By me Zachariah Zanthos.

If for house and land thus.
Received the 22 of August 1673, of A. B. the sum of nineteen pounds, being for
a quarters rent for his dwelling-^ouse, with sundry parcels of land there^nto
adjoining, which he now holds by ^ase from me, due at Midsummer day ^^st past.
I say received 19 l.

An acquittance from one that receives rent by virtue of an order from the
Landlord.
Received the 28 of April 1674, of Richard Rowls the sum of ten pounds, which
is for a years rent for his dwelling house, due last Lady day, I say rec'd for
the use, and by the special order and appointment of my Mr. John Peaceable
Esquire -- 10 l.

By me John Yoman.

It is contentment to most men,
accounts often for to clear,
And with exactness by their pen,
The sum to make appear;
And when the Balance 'tween them both,
is fully satisfied,
They do a full discharge then make,
that they long friends may bide,
True copies therefore here are made,
for both of them to make;
And to prevent all future claims,
each from the other take.
A copy of a full discharge.
Received the ninth day of October, 1674, of Mr. Leonard Fair-dealer, the sum
of ninety pounds thirteen shillings, being for so much due upon account, and is
in full of all reckonings, dues, debts, accounts and demands whatsoever to the
day abovesaid -- 90: l. 13. s. 0^ d.

Another of the same.
October, 9 1674.
Received then of Mr. James Peaceable upon account, two hundred pounds, being
for goods sold him at sundry times, And is in full of all accounts, reckonings
Bonds, Bills, Debts, Dues and Demands whatsoever, from the beginning of the
world unto the day abovesaid, I say rec'd the sum aforesaid -- 200 l.

By me Leo. Fair-dealer.

For to confirm a full discharge we do,
Advise, a seal may be put thereunto,
And if a witness may be gained it would be,
Much more authentic to Posterity.
When troubles and Law suits arise,
Betwixt men in their Trade,
And by the Law or Equity,
good friends again are made;
The safest way to keep them so,
is such Writings to make;
As may non suit the claiming man,
when he a course does take;
A general discharge therefore,
is requisite to be,
Made and confirmed between them both,
A copy of a general Release.
KNow all men by these presents, That I Peter Makebate of Muntham in the
County of Kent Mercer, have remised, released, and for ever quitclaimed; and by
these Presents do for me, my heirs; Executors, and Administrators remise,
release, and for ever absolutely quit-claim unto John Quiet of the City of
Westminster Tailor, his Heirs, Executors, and Adminstrators, all, and all
manner of Actions, Cause and causes of Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds, Writings
Obligatory, Debts, Dues, Duties, Accounts, sum, and sums of money, Judgments,
Executions, Extents, Quarrels, Controversies, Trespasses, Damages, and demands
whatsoever, both in Law and Equity, or otherwise howsoever; which against the
said John Quiet, I ever had, now have, or which I, my Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, shall or may have, claim, challenge, or demand, for, or by
reason of any matter, cause or thing, from the beginning of the World unto the
day of the date of these presents. In witness whereof I have hereunto put my
hand and Seal, this first day of April, Anno Domini, 1674.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of Ambrose Observer Benja. True-heart,
Scr. Peter Make-bait.

The like should John Quiet sign, seal, and deliver unto Peter Make-bait, to
prevent future controversy and trouble.

An Alphabetical Table.
ABandon, put away. Abase, bring low. Abet, to maintain. ABel, the second son
of Adam. Able, sufficient. absolute, without exception. Abreviate, to shorten.
abortive, a child born before its time. abrupt, disorder, out of frame. abrupt,
disorderly. Absolve, to quit, free, forgive. absurd, against reason. acute,
quick, witty. accurate, exact, curious. Atchieve, to get the upperhand.
Achieved, obtained the conquest. obsolete, of use. acceptance, entertainment
accidence, introduction to Grammar. accident, change. incident, subject to
casualty. account, esteem. Achor, a valley. Acorn, that grows on Oaks, Acre of
land, 160 Pole. Adage, a proverb, an old saying. Adopt, to make one his heir.
addicted, devoted. adult, grown to full years. alias, otherwise. All, all
things. Awl the shoe-makers awl. Ale, to drink. ail, some trouble. alley a
narrow passage. ally, associate. aloud, when one speaks so. Allowed, approved.
Altar, on which they sacrifice. alter, to change, annual, yearly. Annal,
Chronocle. arrows, to shoot with. arrowse, to stir up. arrass, rich cloth.
harrass, to toil. Astronomy, art of Celestial bodies. ascent, a going upwards.
Ass, a dull beast. ash, a tree. ask, to enquire. Asp, a serpent. Hasp, to
fasten the door. Ax, to cut with. acts, great deeds. Ant, a pismire. Aunt,
mothers sister. arrant, very, errand, business one goes on. attach, to take
hold of a body. Athiesme, denying the Godhead. attaint, to corrupt. Attaque, to
face about in a sea fight. austere, a fierce grim man Oyster, a fish.
attentive, to give diligent heed. audacity, boldness. augre, a Piercer.
augment, increase. authentic, undoubted authority. awry, to go awry.
B.
Babble, a toy. Babel confusion Babble, to prate. Batcheler, one unmarried.
Bachelour of Arts. bacon, swines flesh dried. Barrester, a Lawyer that pleads
at the bar. Beocon on a hill. beckon, to nod at. beautify, adorn. badge, a
mark. batch, so many loaves as is baked at once. Bailiff, or Sergeant. bail; to
put in security, bald, that has lost his hair ball; to play with. bawl, to
cry. Baal, an Idol. baulm, an herb. band; for the neck. bond, for money.
Barbara, a woman's name Barbary, a part of Africa. Barbarism, cruelty. bark of a
tree. Barque, a little ship. Berk-shire. base, dishonorable. Bas-Viol. Bear, a
beast. beer, to drink. bier, to carry corpse. bellows, to blow with. bellies,
paunches. ^ bewray, discover. beseech, to entreat. besiege to beset soldiers.
bin, to keep bread in. been, were; or wast. biggin, to wear. begin, to enter on
business. bittour, a wild-sowl. bitter, not sweet. Bigamy, Marriage of two
wives at once. baudy, obscene, filthy. body, a substance. bodies of a gown.
boll, to wash in. bowl, to drink in, or to play with. To blanch, to pull of the
rind. To bleach, or whiten clothes. boar, a swine. bore, to pierce a hole.
bough of a tree. bow, to bend. bow to shoot. boy, a lad. Brachygraphy,
shortwriting. bread; to eat bred reard up, or brought up. brain; or skull. bran
of wheat. breaches, divisions. breeches; men wear. brute, a rumor. brute,
rude. bury, to lay in the earth. berry of rabbets. buy to purchase. by me, or
by and by. Burglary, breaking into a house. Bumbast, cotton; wool.
C.
CAble, a rope. Cabal, private consultation. call, to name. caul, sewet that
covers the bowels. capable, fit to receive. Carol, a Song. Coral; for children.
carriage, behavior. Carryer, one that carries. carriere, a horse-race,
fullspeed. carrets to eat. Chariots to ride in. casuals that happens by chance.
causey, a made-way. A channel; or gutter. A kennel for dogs. cease; to leave
of. Celestial; heavenly. ^ seize, to lay hold on. size, bigness. cellar; to lay
drink in. sellar, one that sells. cement, to fasten together. censure, a
judgment. censor, a reformer. centorie, a plant. centurie, a hundred years
sentry, a soldier on watch chafe, to fret. chaff of wheat. chattel, all goods;
leases. cattle, beasts. cheer, to make merry. cheer, good food. A chare woman.
chair; to sit in. child-blain, sores from chilness. Cittern, or cithern, an
instrument of music. circumspect, wary. Citron; to eat. circumference, a round
compass about a center circumlocution, one word expressed by many. clause, a
piece of a sentence. clarify, to make clear. Claws, nails. To cloth with
cloth. Coat, a garment. cote, a plate of enclosed ground. coife, for women's
headattire could, be able. cogitation, thought. coold; or made cold. collar;
for a doublet. choler, a humor. Collier, that carries coals Scholar, one that
learneth. color the cloth. colures in the Globe. Comet, a blazing-star.
common, free for any. complex, joined together. commune, to converse. comfort,
matter of joy. confects made with Sugar. consumption, a wasting disease.
condole, to mourn over. coop for hens. cope, to change. cops of wood. concise;
brief. concomitant, that accompanies. Colonel over a regiment. compendious,
short. Colony, a Plantation. colander; or strainer, Coroner, or Crowner.
corroborate, to strengthen ^ A connection, a tying together. consanguinity,
kindred by blood. consolidate, to make firm. conserve, to keep. conspicuous;
clear; notable A constellation, a company of stars. consumate, to finish.
counsel, advice. council, to take counsel in course, rough, gross. cormorant,
glutton. corse, a dead body. Costarmonger, an apple seller. costive, bound in
body. Cousin, a near relation. cosen, to cheat. countermand, to bid contrary.
current, a stream. current, passable. corants, plums. cravet to be worn about
the neek. crevet, a Goldsmiths melting-pot.
D.
DAm a stopping of the water. Damn, to condemn. ^ Damsel, a brave lass. damsin,
a black plum. Dandruff, or scurf in the head. A darling, one that is dear.
dandeprat, dwarf. dear, beloved. it cost dear. deer, an heart, buck. defer, to
delay. differ, to vary. demur, debate, doubt. deambulation, walking abroad.
demure, modest. Desert, wildernese. desert, to forsake. descent, genealogy.
decent, comely, hansom. dissent, to disagree. devices, tricks. Devizes, a Towns
name. diary, a daily calender. dairy, where cheese is made. Dilate, enlarge.
discomfit, to make comfortless. Dine, to eat a dinner Digest, to set in order.
dissolute, debaucht, loose. dissolate, uncomfortable. doer, a maker. door of a
house. ^ Domestic, household. dough, unbaked bread. done, finished. dun, a dark
color. Do thou blow the dust. doller, a Dutch-coine. dolor, grief. drain,
to draw ponds dry. drawn, pulled. draught of drink. drought, dryness. driblets,
small sums. dray, a Brewers sled. draw, to pull. dew, small drops. due, or
owing. dunce, an unapt boy.
E.
Ear, a man's ear. ere, before. to err in judgment. Year, 12 months. early,
betimes. Yearly, year by year, edge, or brim. Hedge, or Fence. Earn, to get
money. yern, moved with compassion. Yarn, thread. Earth we tread on. hearth,
the chimney floor. East, where the sun rises. Effeminate, woman-like,
Egrimony, sickness, grief. Emerauld, a preciousstone. Emeroids, Piles. Emulate,
to strive to exceed. imminent, hanging over. Elegancy, finenesse in speech.
Esther, a Queens name. Easter a times name. Hester, an Idols name. Yesterday, a
day past. eyes, to see with. Ice, frozen water. interr, bury. enter, to go in.
entire, whole. Endorse, to write on the backside. Epidemical, universal.
Etimology, a true exposition. exasperate to make angry Extirpate, to root out.
F.
FAme, rumor. facility, ease, facile, easy. feign, to counterfeit. fanatic,
a distracted per(...) fair, beautiful. fare, to feed on. feat, fine, neat.
fell, to hew new timber. A Feoffee, one entrusted in an estate for another.
felicity, happiness. fined for Alderman. find, to get again. fiends, evil
spirits. fins on fish. fillip with a finger. Philip, a man's name. flea, to pull
off the skin. flea, or that breeds in beds. flee, to escape. flitch of Bacon.
flagrant, burning, ardent. flour of a chamber. flower of a plant. flower, fine
meal. flocks of wool. Bloody Flux. fool, a silly fellow. foal, a young colt.
foil, a repulse. fomentation, a warm medicine. foul, dirty. fowl, a bird. fore,
before, former. four, a number, or 4 ones. forth, without. fourth day of June.
frize, shagged cloth. freeze, to congeal. froise, a sort of pancake. phrase, a
quaint expression furs, fine hairy skins. furze, prickly shrubs. frugal,
thrifty.
G.
Galleys, great boats. Gallows, to hang rogues. guard, a great hem of a garment.
Guard, a company of men that guard a person. Gargle, to wash the mouth and
throat. garden where plants grow Guardian, One trusted with a fatherless child.
Garrulity, or vain babbling. gentle, mild. Gentile, Heathen. Gestures, the
carriage of the body. Jester, one that breaks a jest. Genius, a natural
inclination. Geography, a description of the earth. glister as gold. glyster,
given to a sick man. Gay, a fine suit of clothes. gout, a disease in the joints
grass of the earth. grase, to eat grass, Grace infused into the soul Gray, a
color. Greyhound. groan, to make a doleful cry. grown, thriven. groat, four
pence. grot, a cave. a gross, 12 dozen. gross, fat. guess, a conjecture. guest,
to conjecture. guest, whom we entertain. guilt, or guilty. guilt, gilded. gun,
to shoot. gone, went away.
H.
HAch, to hach cold meat. hatch for a door. hatch up the chicken. hatches of a
ship. hale, to lug Hailstones hare, we hunt Hair, of the head A haunch of
Venison heir, the eldest son an harbinger, one that goes before Halser, that
which haleth a hye, to make have high, lofty hoy, avessel heart in the breast
heart, a Deer hear, hearken here, in this place herring, a fish heard, I did
hear Herd, a drove of Cattle hard, solid Hearse, to lay over the dead Hippocras,
a kind of sweet wine compounded. hoarse with a cold Horse, to ride on Hollow,
empty hollo, to cry aloud hallow, to make holy holly, a tree holy, devout hole
that is bored whole, the total Honny-moon, a proverb applied to some that love
well at first, and not so well afterward home at his house whom, that which
hoop of a barrel whoop, or cry aloud hoar, a frost whore, a harlot hore-hound a
plant hue, avisage, Physiognomy hu and cry hew, to cut hough, a sudden pet
hurly burly, a tumult Hirarchy, Principality in subordination
I.
Jambs, side posts of a door James, a man's name Idol, a false God idle,
slothful Isle or Island, oil Olive employ, to set to work Ignominy, infamy
Illegitimate, base born incite, to provoke insight, skill in any thing impugn,
to stir against, resist impenetrable, that which cannot be pierced impregnable,
invincible imprecation, cursing imbecility, weak, infirm ingenuous, free, good
natured inflexible, not to be moved ingenious, good parts Inn, a house of
entertainment in, in this place inculcate, to press, to teach by often
repetition. interpellation, a let in ones business, an interruption inviolable
that cannot be broken Job, a pat ent man jobs, an odd piece of work joul of
Salmon Joice, a woman's name joist, a little beam jointure, wifes dowry juice,
liquor squeezed out iterate, to repeat a thing itch, a humor hitch, entangle
jug, a bottle Jurisdiction, power, authority, mastership, dominion
K.
kill, to destroy kiln, to dry malt in kailes, nine pins chyle, meat first
digested keel, the bottom of a ship keen, or sharp kin, one nearly related
knead the dough The nave of a cart wheel knave, a vile fellow
L.
legerdemain, crafty conveyance lamb, that a sheep brings lame, one that
halts launch, to put out a ship from harbor lass, a young maid last, to make
shoes upon Latin, the latin tongue Latten, tin line in writing loyn of mutton
Leaden, made of Lead Leyden a University in Holland led, was led by another
lead, to guide league, a covenant of peace leg, that one goes upon leaper, one
that leapeth Leper, one that has the Leprosy Leopard, a spotted beast lease,
to pick up shattered corn a leash of hounds lease, an indenture least, that
which is least less, small lessee; he that takes a leas lest; a note of
forbidding; Legion; six thousand men legends; Popish fables Leman; a strumpet
Lemons, or Oranges lessen; to make less lesson; that Scholars learn Letice, a
woman's name lettice; an herb lattices; cross bars in windows lice, filthy
vermin lies; false tales lighter of Coals limber; weak; easily bent limner that
draws pictures liturgy, the common prayer lethargy; a drowsy disease loath; to
disdain loath; unwilling Lunatic; frantic luster; shining luxurious; riotous;
given to pleasure
M.
Mail; a coat of mail to pack up things megazine; a storehouse for war Maugre;
in spite; against ones will Male; the he; or Masculine melancholy; sad; heavy;
sullen; solitary major; a commander in the Army metropolitan; chief city or
town mayor of a city, Lord Major Maturity, ripeness, fullness mare, that bears
colt A mark, two nobles, thirteen shillings 4d. main, might, chiefest mane of a
horse manchet, fine white bread mansion, a Lords chief house manner, fashion
manners, good carriage manor, a Lordship manure, to dung-ground maranatha,
accursed marred, spoiled, corrupted married, joined in marriage marshal, the
name of an Officer martial, belonging to war martin, a bird martyr, Christ's
witness Merton, a Town in Surrey mass, the Popish letany mast, the mast of a
ship maste, acorn medlar, a sort of fruit medler, a busy body melon, a kind of
pompion million, ten hundred thousand meet, fit, convenient meat, that we eat
message, errand message, tenement ^ meeter, fitter meter, verse, rhyme
Methridate; a confection in Physic might, power mile, 1760 yards in length
mite, small coin, a worm moat, a pond abouta house mote, the least dust or
that which breeds in wool Moore, a man's name more; that exceeds moor; a fenny
ground mortar that we pound in mortar; made of lime and sand Moiety, the one
half mo. for more mow; to cut grass mow, a rick of corn muzzle, to stop the
mouth muscle, a small shell fish muscle, a moving part of the body
N.
NAught, bad, wicked. Naught, nothing. Nether, lower. neither, none of them.
nesh, tender, effeminate. nice, curious, delicate. Niece, a brother or siders
Nephew, a brothers son. neigh as horses do. nay, not so, or no. nigh, near. A
Noble, six shillings 8 d. nose on the face. Noise, stir, clamor. News, report
of things. nonnage; one not come to age. notorious, noted for some vice.
O.
OBscene, filthy. Oar, to row with. Ore, unrefined metal. Oyer and terminer.
One, the first number. own, to acknowledge with propriety. Omniscient,
All-seeing. ominous, portending good or hurt. Once, one time. One's, of one, as
one's body, one's right Ounce in weight. Onion, a plant. Union, agreement. Oh,
a note of bemoaning. Opprobrious, reproachful Owe, to be in debt. Oppugn, to
assault, to batter. Orthography, true writing. Ostentation, vain boasting
P.
A Pace, or step, 2 feet. Pail, to carry milk in. pale, or wan. pale, or pales
to a garden. Paragraph; that which is contained in one sentence. Pair, a pair
of hose. pare, to cut off. repair, to mend what is decayed, or to go to a
place. palate, the roof of the mouth. Pallet, a little bed palliate, to cloak a
business. Pavilion, a tent. pains, labor. panes of glass. pans of Brass.
Parson of a Parrish. penetrate, to pierce. person, a man or moman penury, want.
partition, as a wall. petition, an humble request. Permanent, durable. Patent
open, as a letter Patins, that women walk upon. patience, that grace of
suffering. Patient, a sick person. Pause, a stop in speaking. paws of a Lion.
piece, a piece of cloth. pease, pulse. Pear, a sort of fruit. Peer, a Noble
man. pebble, a little stone. people, a multitude of men. pens for writing.
pence, as six pence. pestil, wherewith we pound, something. Pessle of Pork.
Epistle, a letter. Pistol, a little gun. pizzle of a beast. Phlebotomy, letting
blood Pilate, who condemned Christ. Pilot, a guide of a ship. place, room,
space. plaice, a flat fish. plat, a parcel of ground. plait, to set the hair in
order. play, a game, or comedy. plea, a defense, excuse. To poach an egg.
Pottage, or porrage to eat. Portage, carriage. Pole, a long stick. poll the
head, or to cut the hair. poor, in want. pore, to fix the eyes on a thing.
potion, a parcel or quantity given. portion, a daughters portion. power, might.
power out of a vessel. pragmatical, a practitioner in the Law, or one expert in
many things. Pray, to put up requests to God. Prey, a spoil, to devour. Pry, to
search into. precedent, foregoing. President, chief-ruler, or example. Press
of people. Prest-money. Press for books. price, value, worth. prize, taken from
an enemy, or to value goods Praise, to commend. principal, chief. principle, a
fundamental propensity, towardness, inclination profit, advantage. Profundity,
depth. profound, deep. Prophet, one that foretells things. Puissant, mighty,
strong.
Q.
Quadripartite, of four parts Quadruple; four times as much. quarrel, strife,
bickering quarie of glass quarrie of stones querie, a question quarter, the
fourth part quartan, belonging to the 4th. part quench, to put out fire quince;
a fruit queen; a strumpet Queen; the Kings wife
R.
Raca; empty, silly Rachal; a place Radition; brightness Rachel, Jacobs wife
radical; inbred rake-hell; a notorious rogue race; descent; or horse-race ^
rack, to torment men rack, for horses hay wreck, ruin shipwreck, a ship cast
away raise, to lift up rays, sunbeams rise, to rise up Razor, to shave with A
raiser of taxes rice, a sort of corn rosen, a binding gum read, as to read a
book red, a color reed, that grows real, sincere, in earnest royal, Kingly,
noble rear, to lift up rare, something excellent rere, behind as rere-ward
reciprocal, mutual reign, to rule as sovereign rain, drops from the sky
rainbow rain of a bridle reins, of the back to rinse linen recapitulate, to
rehearse briefly retch, to stretch reach, to fetch a thing to one wretch,
miserable to repugne, to resist right, equal; just right hand rite, ceremony
write with a pen Wright, a man's name rhetoric the art of speaking eloquently
roan, reddish color Rouen, a city in France Rome; a City rome to rage, tear
all before one room; a space, a chamber rough; rugged, course roof of an house
ruff; plaited as a ruff band row; of Trees row; in a boat roe; a wild-goat
rowel of a spur rule; that we should walk by
S.
safeguard; sure custody sage; a herb sage; grave, wise; sageness; gravity;
weightiness saveguard, that women ride in sale; to be sold sail of a ship
salve; a plaster save; to defend; or deliver savior, one that saves scarce,
hardly scars; cuts healed up scent, smell; that hounds do follow. since; since
the time senses; 5 senses; hearing; seeing; smelling; tasting; feeling sent; I
did send school; where boys are taught scull; the brain pan scholars; such as
do learn scullers; little boats Sea, the Ocean say; to speak see; to behold
seal; as to seal a letter ciel; to make a cieling seer; a prophet Seir; a
country senior; the elder junior, the younger Seignior; the chief man in Turkey
seasin; as to make livery, to give the right to another seisin possession
season; opportunity Sex; as male or female sects; factions Surgeon, or
Surgeon. Sergeant at Mace that Ar^^^ Shear, that we cut. sheer quite off.
shire, a County. share, part with another. shave, as Barbers do. sheaves of
corn. sheathe, to put into the sheath. sheep, that bears wool. Ship, that goes
to Sea. sinister, unjust, not equal. shekel of the sanctuary, two shillings.
sickle, to reap with. shoot, a young sprig. shoot, bullets, arrows. shout, make
a noise. shut the door. Shute, a man's name. Soldier that fights. shoulder of
the body. shrew, a field mouse. shrew, a cursed woman. shuttle, to weave with.
subtle, cunning. sight of the eyes. cite, to quote an author. sign, a mark.
sing with the voice. singe, in the flame. sink, a gutter. cinque-port-town.
sigh, a mourning. since, seeing that. sith; that we mow with. seethe; to boil.
slead; to drag things on. sledge; a huge hammer. slow; not quick. slough; a
dirty pool. so; as in that manner. to sow corn; seed. sew; with needle and
thread. I saw; or have seen. to saw timber. Soal; of the foot. sole; only; a
fish. soul; or body. soar; to fly higher. sore; painful; tender. sour,
contrary to sweet. some, few; certain; some body. sum; a sum of money. sun; the
sun that shines. son; a fathers son. spear; a sharp pointed weapon. sphere; the
circle wherein the stars move. stairs; steps to go up. stares; birds. stare, to
look steadfastly on. Stars, in the firmament. staple of the door. staple; a firm
commodity. stable; for horses. stopple of a bottle. stature; proportion;
bigness. Statute; Law made. Statue; an Effigies. stead; room; lieu; in stead
of. Steed; a stately horse. bed-stead; that we lie upon. steel; to edge tools
withal. style; a faculty in writing. Steer, a Bullock. steer; to guide a Ship.
stood; did stand. stud; a small post. straight; even; quickly. straight;
distress, strait. succor; aid; relief. sucker; a sprig. Suit in Law suit of
clothes Sewet; fat of Beef, or mutton swound; to faint. sound; entire.
T.
TAber; timbrel, a little drum. taper; a stately wax candle. entail; an
inheritance in fee Tail; of a beast. tale, an idle story. tall, high in
stature. Teal; a fowl. Tares, weeds in the corn. tears, that we do weep. Taint,
to infect. Taunt, to flout; jeer. attaint; to convict by Law Thames, a river.
Team, of Horses teem, to be with child. teat, which a child sucks. Tit, a
little horse. Tenor; in music. Tenor, the purport of a thing. Tenure the
manner of holding tenements through; as to pierce through through; by means of
throw; to cast off Thrush a singing bird truss; to tie up thyme; a herb time;
continuation of hours Title of honor; or right to a thing tittle; a point; a
speck toe, the toe of the foot too, too much or too little towe; Ockam; combing
of (...) two, two things to; to a place two; to hale a boat tomb; a monument,
sepulcher tome; a section part of a folio tongue; that we speak with tongs; to
take up coals with torn; that torners do make turn; to move to and fro torn;
or rent track; footsteps tract; or treatise treaty; parley concerning peace
treatment; entertainment tripartite, of three parts trey, a vessel tray, number
of three
V.
vacant, empty vacation, a respite time vocation, calling or employment vain,
empty, foolish vein in the body vail, covering of the face vale, to put off,
submit vale, or valley vale, farewell Venice, a great City Venus, the goddess
of vial, phial, a wide mouthed pot, or cup Viol, an instrument of music vice,
wickedness voice, to sing with visage feature in the face vizzard to hide the
face with vital spirits wherein life is seated victuals, food, provision
Voucher, advocate
U.
Umbles, of a Deer humble; low, submissive Umpire; that decides a controversy
use, custom usury, money upon interest us; we Uz, Jobs Country utensils,
things necessary for our use vulgar, common
W.
Wain, declining of the Moon wan, pale, of a sickly look wand, a riding rod
waist, ones middle waste, desolate, useless waits, the City musicians wast, or
were waits, he waits weights, as Troy weight 12 ounces to a pound, or Avoir
de pois weight 16 ounces to a pound wight, an Island wales a Country walls of
a City wale, great thread in stuff bewail, to bemoan Wakes, country feasts a
wake, to rowse up walk, to go by leisure walks, where people do walk wardship,
the guardianship of Orphan worship, an Esquires dignity warp, to chap as boards
do warp, yarn; woven woof yarn, that goes athwart the cloth hoof of a Horse
way, that we walk in weigh, to try in a balance wey, a wey of Cheese whey, and
butter-milk, wear, to put on were, they were were, a commodity wier, Iron
thread weel, to catch fish we will, for we will weal, wealth; a pimple weild, to
turn a sword about wild, untame wicked, ill given, debaucht wicket; an half
door win, to get a wager wind, that blows wine, squeezed out of grapes witch,
that bewitcheth which, that, who woad, dying stuff wood, fuel; timber woe,
alas misery woe, to be a suitor wrap, to fold in rap, to give a small blow
rape; to force wring, to squeeze hard ring, on the finger wrote; I have written
wrought, I did work by rote, without book wrong, to do wrong
X.
Xpian, Christian, X ten
Y.
YEa, yes yet, nevertheless to wit, viz. or videlicet, that is to say yest,
barm, to mix with meal for bread it is, for it is it is, for it is you, thou, ye
an ewe, or sheep yrksom, tedious yellow of color year, 12 Months, or 365
days, and 6 hours ynkhorn, to put ynk in, to write withal yield, to render up,
to submit yew, tree yolk, of eggs yoke, that oxen draw in Oak, a tree yore, in
old time ewer, a small necked pot your, as your book
Z.
ZEdary, wormseed zeal, great love, ardent affection The Zodiac, that of the
firmament, underwhich the planets move Zion, or Mount Zion, the Church of God,
whom he has chosen to dwell in for ever.
These proper names, with what they signify,
Are here added, for you to learn thereby.

ABel, mourning Abiah, the will of God Abraham, father of a great multitude
Adam, man, earthly Abigail, the fathers joy Andrew, strong, or manly Barnabas,
the son of consolation Baruch, blessed Benjamin, the son of the right hand
Bethel, the house of God Caleb, as a Heart Daniel, judgment of God David,
beloved Eleazar the help of God Eliezer the help of God Elijah, God the Lord,
or a strong Lord Elisha, my God saves or the health of God Emanuel, God with
us Ephraim, fruitful Eunice, good victory Ezekiel, the strength of God Enoch,
taught or dedicate Ezra, an helper Gabriel, a man of God Habakuk, a wrestler
Hilkiah, the Lords gentleness Jacob, a supplanter James, a maintainer Ichabod,
the glory is departed Jedidah, beloved Jehosaphat, the Lord is the judge Jesus
a Savior Job, sorrowful Joseph, increase Israel, a prince with God Isaac,
laughing Lazarus, the help of God Levi, joined Lot, wrapped, joined
Melchizedek, king of righteousness Mehetabel, how good is God, or God doing
well Michael, who is God, or who is like God! Moses, drawn up, or taken out
Nehemiah, comfort, or the Rest of the Lord Noah a ceasing or rest Paul,
mavelous Peniel, seeing God Peter, a stone, or rock Phebe, clear, or bright
Phinehas; a bold countenance Philip, a warrior Rachel, a sheep Rebecca, fed,
or blunt, contention, or contention hindered Sabbath, Rest Samuel, heard of God
Sarah, a Lady, or dame Shem, renowned Simon, hearing, or obeying Theophilus, a
friend of God Thomas, deepness, without bottom Timothy, the honor of God
Titus, honorable Vzziel, the strength of God Zabdiel, the dowry of God
Zachariah, mindful of the Lord Zephaniah, the hiding of the Lord
FINIS

