a horse looks on as Empress Bellisant stands empty-handed in the forest, while
a bear and King Pippin respectively take her two newborn sons, Orson and
Valentine. Pepin

Orson

Valentine



The Famous HISTORY OF VALENTINE AND ORSON.

BEING The two only Sons of the Emperor of GREECE.

Deciphering their wonderful Births, their Valiant Achievements, their
Heroical Minds, and their Noble Enterprises.

Drawn up in a short Volume, on purpose to give the better satisfaction to them
that desire to hear and know the truth in few words.

Written by LAVRENCE PRICE.

This little Book such virtues does contain,
Hardly the like in all the World again.
LONDON, Printed for William Whitwood, at the sign of the Bell in Duck Lane.
1673.

The Famous HISTORY OF Valentine and Orson.
Chap. I. How the Lady Bellisant, sister to King Pepin, was solemnly married to
the Emperor of Greece, and how they departed toward Constantinople.
THere Lived a worthy and renowned King in the famous Kingdom of France, called
King Pepin, who had one only sister, whose name was fair Bellisant; this
beautiful Lady was no less virtuous than comely, nor no less (...) then
prudent, than both. She (...) ^^^ly beloved of all sorts of people: the (...)
loved her for her Clemency, the Gentry loved her for her fidelity, the Commons
loved her for her sweet behavior, and the poor loved her for her Charity.

The same of this gallant Lady resounded not only through the Principal
Povinces of France, but through all the whole world; from one end to the other;
so that to this Lady came many a Princely Potentate, hoping to gain her good
will in Marriage. Amongst the rest of her noble and renowned Suppliants, came
the high and mighty Emperor of Greece, who after many days spent in the Court
of France, achieved the beauteous Ladies love; and with the consent of her
Brother and all the Nobility, he took her to wife; where a long and spacious
time was spent in feasting and merriment, to solemnize the Royal and Nuptial
bonds of Matrimony, which were made between the Emperor and fair Bellisant,
Sister to the King of France.

But now behold what came to pass on the sudden: There came a Post sent from
Constantinople, to certify the Emperor, that there was like to be^ great
insurrection and combustion in many of his Provinces, except his Highness would
be pleased to make a speedy return to his own Country, thereby to pacify the
outrages of the people, and renew a settled peace.

The Emperor and his friends having taken the matter into their consideration,
how that Divisions might be a means to raise mutenies, and mutenies to raise
seditions, and seditions to raise civil wars, and that civil wars might bring
ruin and destruction, both on himself and all his adherents for ever:
Therefore he rather choosing to forsake his pleasures in France, than to
endanger the ruin of his own Kingdom, took leave of his Brother the King of
France, and the rest of the Princes and Nobles of his Court; he prepared
himself with his fair Bride, for their journey unto their Court at
Constantinople.

Their departure caused great heaviness at the Court, insomuch that there was
never more sorrowful hearts, grieved minds, and weeping eyes than at that time,
for the departure of that modest and well governed Lady, who with her Lord in
short space arrived at their desired Haven.

Chap. II. Of the treachery Practiced by the Archpriest of Constantinople,
against the fair Empress Bellisant.
NO sooner was the Emperor, and his fair Empress arrived at the Port of
Constantinople, but they were entertained with as much joy and Solemnity, as if
the Gods themselves had descended from Olymphus, to give welcome for those long
looked for Guests: and for a congratulation they prepared all manner of dainty
fare, all manner of rare Music, and all sorts of rich Ornaments fit for their
wearing.

Many Kings, Princes, Lords, and Ladies came from other Countries, and
presented many Rich and costly Gifts to the royal and beautiful Empress, the
Lady Bellisant; and happy were they that could have so much Favor, as to kiss
her Princely hand.

But as Morpheus and Venus distracteth and troubles Lovesick persons, whether
they sleep or wake, so does Fortune and envy act their parts of cruelty and
tyranny amongst the chief Monarchs and Princes, as may appear by those Golden
Pair of Turtles, the Emperor and his loving Mate. In that Court of great
Magnificence there lived a supposed Religious man, whose title was Archpriest,
or Archbishop: but he proved himself to be an Arch-Traitor, as you shall
presently hear.

This Archpriest was a great Favorite to the Emperor, and so well thought of
in the Emperors Court among the Nobility, that whatsoever he said was a Law:
For if there was any one had any business with the Emperor, they could not get
admittance without the Arch-Priests consent: Which the Empress Bellisant
perceiving, thinking him to be a just and upright man, afforded him the like
respect as others did, and oftentimes in secret would reveal her mind unto him.

Upon a time it came to pass, they being all alone together, he being filled
with lust and carnal desire, burst forth in these words unto her.

Most beauteous, fair and comely Lady, I your humble and devoted Servant, with
all the respects belonging to such a noble personage as you are, desire the
grant of one boon unto, which if you perform, I am a living man, if you deny,
you are a dead woman.

The Lady hearing him say so, answered him in this manner;

Sir, I am as yet but a stranger in this Empire, but yet will I afford you any
thing that is mine to give, so far forth as reason does require, and that my
Princely Husband gives way to.

Then Madam, quoth he, this it is, I desire your love, insomuch that I may
embrace the sweet and pleasant enjoyments of your love, and to do with you
according to my will.

When the Lady heard him talk; and finding him to be lustful minded, she spoke
unto him in this manner.

O thou dissembling hypocrite, thou false and faithless tyrant, thou blood
sucking traitor, thou perjured villain, how can thou for shame ask such a
question of me? Did thou not once swear to be true to thy Lord and Master,
and will thou now go about to ravish his espoused Wife? Depart from me, and for
the fault thou would have committed ask God forgiveness, and keep thine own
counsel, and I will no further speak of it. When the wicked wretch had received
his denial, he presently departed the Room, vowing to be avenged of the Lady:
and so having laid a platform of mischief in readiness to work his design, went
to the Emperor, and spoke unto him in this sort.

O my Noble Lord and Master I that have been all times well known to your self
your true and faithful servant, and beloved of all men for my loyalty to your
Highness, I am now with grief of heart enforced to reveal a secret unto you,
which is of great concernment: and this it is,

The Lady Bellisant your wife, which you thought to be so virtuous, chaste, and
honest, is known and found to be otherwise; For why, she has conspired your
Death, acted Treason against your person, and the Child which is now in her
Womb is of another man's begetting: and therefore Noble Sir, I think there is no
better course to be taken, than to send her away to France, from whence she
came, and that suddenly and privily, that the world may not take notice of what
is done.

When the Emperor had heard this strange Relation from the false dissembling
Arch-traitor, his wrath was so much inflamed, that he had neither the Patience
nor power to forbear, but presently ran into the Room where his harmless Lady
was sitting all alone in her solitary dumps: So taking his advantage, ran
streightwaies unto her, and taking hold of her hair, pulled her to the ground,
beat her on the face with his Fists, and stamped upon her with his feet,
insomuch that the blood issued out from her Nose and mouth so violently, that
the like was hardly ever seen.

But at last, when he had tired himself with abusing this Lady, he stood
panting for breath, thinking to have gone to her again.

Mean while she was recovered upon her knees; and as she was kneeling, she
spoke to him saying,

O my dear Lord, what is the reason that without cause you deal thus cruelly
with me? I desire you, my good Lord, to spare me my life; if not for my own
sake, yet let it be done for the Infants sake which is yet unborn.

Well quoth the Emperor, I will spare thee thy Life, but this shall be thy
doom, that thou shall for ever be banished from my presence, and be sent to thy
brother in France; with a writing upon thy breast, for all that look on thee to
read, how that for thy disloyalty to thy Husband, for thy Treacherous plots
devised, and for the acting the part of a Strumpet, thou art banished the Royal
Court of Constantinople; and therefore prepare thy self to night to be gone to
morrow, for here is no longer time for you to abide.

Chap. III. How the Empress Bellisant, being banished by the Emperor,
traveled into France, and the strange births of Valentine and Orson.
NOW when morning was come, the distressed Lady Bellisant was set on horseback,
according to the Emperors command, having no other company to go along with
her, but one man which was her servant, and came out of France with her. Now
mark what happened to them in their journey: for the Proverb says that one
Swallow does not make a Summer, neither does one misery go by it self.

As they were passing through a huge and spacious Forest, the Lady found her
self grievously distressed: and being great with Child, alighted from her
horse, and sent her servant to seek some woman to help her in her extremity,
she sitting the whilst under the boughs of a tree. The Gentleman with
diligence made all the haste he could possibly do, but before he returned back
again the Lady was delivered of two Sons, of which an ugly she-Bear coming
along, caught one of them up, and ran away with ^im, carrying him to her D^n,
to be a prey ^or her young ones. The Lady pursued the bear to recover her son,
but in vain, she being also so weak, that she could not return ^o the place
where she had left her other Son. ^n the mean time, the King having that day
been on hunting, chanced to find him, taking him up and putting him to nurse,
calling his name Valentine; Of whom you shall hear more hereafter, in the
subsequent discourse of his History.

The Bear (as by providence it came to pass) never devoured the child that she
car^ied to her Den, nor had her whelps any power at all to do it any harm, so
that as the Bears young ones did suck her, she gave suck ^o the child also,
till such time that he became ^ble to shift for himself. And when he came ^o be
of the age of a man, he had humane sense ^ike a man, but had not the speech nor
use of any language at all, and was all overgrown with hair like unto a Bear,
because he had ^uckt of the Bears milk, he was also as wild ^s any savage beast
that was in the Forest, and did so many strange exploits, destroying of men
and women, that none durst come near the place where he was.

The other brother was brought up in the Court of France, by the means of King
Pepin, which was his own Uncle, although unknown to them both; and they called
his name Valentine, and the wild man's name they called Orson.

Chap. IV. How Valentine conquered Orson, and brought him to the Royal Court of
his Uncle King Pepin.
THis Valentine was of such a Noble and heroic courage, and gallant behavior,
that he was known to be the chiefest and ablest man at Arms that was in all the
noted Court of France, and would encounter any man that came to oppose him.

This Valentine hearing the strange reports of Orson, how he overcame and
conquered all that ever came near him, resolved on a time to try his valor,
courage and magnanimity, and venture his life with the wild man Orson, not
thinking he had been his brother.

And thus being courageously mounted on horseback, (rich and gallantly clad in
Armor bright, with a most excellent sword by his side) he rode to the spacious
Forest, to find out the wild man, which he quickly did; and upon his near and
sudden approach, he found him prepared for the Combat, and ready to encounter
him; for indeed Orson never went unprovided of his great Weapon, which was a
mighty Club, made of an Oaken tree: with which at the first salute he gave
Valentines Horse such a bang on the Nose; that he beat out his brains; and then
was Valentine bound to fight for his life, for to fly it was in vain.

Thus was the Combat with great courage renewed, and Valentine with his sword
and Orson with his Club fought along time, and drew much blood of one another:
But at the last Valentine through skill and policy vanquished Orson, who was
far more stronger than himself: and having obtained an absolute conquest,
immediately after brought him bound to the King of France, where many strange
and wonderful atchivements were performed by those two Noble brothers.

Chap. V. How Valentine and Orson went to assist the the Duke of Aquitain:
where Orson conquered the Green Knight.
VAlentine and Orson remaining in the Court, there arrived a messenger from the
Duke of Aquitain; who bring admitted into the Kings presence, said as
follows: Most Mighty King, my Master the Duke of Aquitain, entreats your
Majesty to commiserate the sad condition of him and his country, being invaded
by a Pagan, called the Green Knight, upon no other cause but to take away his
only daughter, the fair Lady Fezon, which he has sworn to effect, unless by
some worthy Christian Knight he be vanquished within forty days: many have
already adventured against him, all which he has overcome, and hanged upon
Trees. My master therefore humbly craves your Majesty's assistance in this
extremity. The King hearing this, promised him aid, and the messenger departed.

The next day the King, with many hardy Knights amongst whom was Valentine, who
also caused Orson to go with him, being naked, except an iron Jacket, which
Valentine had caused to be made for him, set forward toward Aquitain, where
the Duke entertained them as befitted such Royal personages, declaring all the
deeds which the Green Knight had done, and the conquests he had made.

Valentine hearing this, determined to try the might of this Champion: So
arming himself, he rode to his Tent. The Green Knight seeing him, presently
mounted his steed, and between them began a most cruel Combat, both giving and
receiving many wounds; at length the Green Knight said, Knight, thy valor
causes me to pity thee, therefore I advise thee to give over: For none can
overcome me but the son of a King who never sucked the breast of a Woman, now if
thou art such a one thou may overcome me, if not, thy fighting is vain.
Notwithstanding Valentine continued the fight till night parted them, and both
betook themselves to rest.

Valentine considering the Green Knights words, and that himself had sucked the
breasts of a woman, determined to send Orson to try his fortune with the Green
Knight: So the next day Valentine put his armor upon Orson, who being mounted,
rod to the Green Knight, between whom began a most fierce combat, Orson giving
him many wounds, which he immediately healed with Balsome that he had about him
for that purpose.

Orson seeing this, thought it in vain to use his sword any longer, since he
could heal himself so quickly; and casting it away, he betook himself to his
Nails, where with he so rent his armor, and wounded his flesh, that he was
constrained to fall, and submit himself to the mercy of the conqueror. The
King, Valentine, and the Duke being joyful of this victory, went to the Green
Knight, who immediately relinquished all his former pretensions, consenting to
become a Christian, and be baptized. So after some few days spent in mirth and
triumph, the King, Valentine and all the Noble Peers of France, solemnly took
their leaves of the Duke, and his fair Daughter the Lady Fezon, and returned
again to the Court.

Chap. VI. How the Treason of the Archpriest was discovered, and how the
Emperor re-called the Lady Bellisant from banishment.
HAving thus presented you with the disloyal proceedings of the Arch-traytor, I
shall now return to speak of what became of him, who so perfidiously sowed the
seed of sedition between the Emperor and the Lady Bellisant.

The Archpriest persisting still in this wicked quality, always acting and
plotting Treason against one or other, he thought at last to have been made
Emperor himself: But it came to pass, that by a miraculous means his treachery
was found out, and he arraigned for treason, who having the sentence of Death
pronounced against him, confessed. That he had been a most horrible forsworn
and perjured Villain, and that he had been a means to divide the Emperor from
his gracious and faithful Lady, and how that all the things that were laid to
her charge were false.

This and many other of his faults he openly confessed before the Emperor and
the rest of his Noble Lords: but as the Old Proverb says, For his open
Confession he had open Punishment: being adjudged for to ride upon a bare
ridg'd Horse, with his face toward the Horse tail, then to be set three days
with his Ears fast nailed to the Pillory and then his body to be taken and
thrown into a Cauldron of boiling Lead, which was a just reward for a forsworn
Traitor. And afterward the Emperor sent for his Queen and settled her in her
Royal Throne of dignity again, where they lived many happy years in joy and
tranquillity. And as for their two valiant Sons, Valentine and Orson, they
became the bravest men at Arms that ever Christendom afforded: They conquered
Giants, subdued Sarazens, overcame Cities, destroyed Castles, and fought many
famous and renowned battles against the Enemies of Christendom, insomuch that
the whole world admired at their courageous enterprises and fortunate success.

FINIS.

