Die Mercurii, 14. Augusti, 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Master Rous do give the
Thanks of this House to Master Palmer and Master Hill, for the great pains
they took in the Sermons they preached before both Houses on Tuesday the 13.
day of August, 1644. being a special and peculiar day of Humiliation appointed
by both Houses, and that they be desired to print their Sermons, and that none
presume to print their Sermons, or either of them, but such as shall be
authorized under their hand writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do appoint Thomas Underhill to print my Sermon,

HERBERT. PALMER.

THE GLASS OF GODS Providence TOWARD HIS FAITHFVLL ONES.
Held forth in a Sermon preached to the two Houses of Parliament, at Margarets
Westminster, Aug. 13. 1644. being an extraordinary Day of Humiliation.

Wherein is discovered the great failings that the best are liable unto; upon
which GOD is provoked sometimes to take Vengeance.

The whole is applied specially to a more careful observation of our late
COVENANT, and particularly against the ungodly Toleration pleaded for under
pretense of LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE.

By HERBERT PALMER, B. D. Minister of GODS Word at Ashwell in Hertford-shire: A
Member of the Assembly of Divines.

Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth: much more the wicked
and the sinner. Prove. 11. 31. All these things happened to them for ensamples:
and are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1
Cor. 10. 11. Whatsoever things were written afore-time were written for our
learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have
Hope. Romans 15. 4. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Th. Underhill at the Bible in
Woodstreet. 1644.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The House of PEERS AND TO THE HONORABLE The House of
COMMONS Assembled in Parliament at Westminster.
THe Records of Holy Scripture, whether they concern the Actions of GOD or
Men, are not only Stories of things done in that Age, but Prophesies also of
future events in succeeding Generations. This GOD has been pleased to
exemplify particularly in that Word, which diverse weeks ago on a Solemn Day
appointed for extraordinary Humiliation He sent to be preached in your Ears.
While some bodily Indispositions hindered me from a speedy obeying the Call of
tendering it also to your hands and eyes: It seemed good to Him, (who does all
things wisely and faithfully,) to give Instances of His fulfilling both parts
of it; affording some answers of Grace, and expressions of Pardon and favor in
Wales and the parts thereabouts; and yet withal taking some Vengeance upon our
untowardnesses, by the sad blow given us in the West. I hope that as we shall
all learn by it, even more and more, that 1 Samuel 3. 19.
GOD lets none of His Words fall to the ground, but whatsoever He speaks to us
has its effect upon us, and Zech. 1. 6.
takes hold of us, even whether we take hold of it or no: So we will believe
also, that the effect of it will never be spent as long as we live, or any of
mankind, in as much as all the Word of GOD lives and abides for ever, as both
the Isai. 40 8.
Prophet and 1 Pet. 1. 23. 25.
Apostle tell us. And this Belief will both make all the Word profitable to
us, and make us Happy by the Word: The Promises and Expressions of Grace in the
Word never doing us good, never being fulfilled to us completely, but by our
believing them: And the Threatenings or Expressions of Severity never
endangering us, never being fulfilled at all upon us, but when we believe them
not. We have all need to Pray, Luke 17. 5.
LORD Increase our Faith! even in relation to Terrifying Truths, as well as to
Comforting. And though Faith most commonly comes by Hearing, yet unquestionable
Experience telling us, that it is partly increased by Reading also, (specially
of what was once attentively heard) I cannot doubt, but this Paper-remembrance
of matters of so grand Importance, will be blessed by GOD, as to some others
into whose hands it shall come, so specially to your selves, according to Your
Leisure for making use of it, unto your Furtherance and Joy of Faith. Which
that it may be continually augmented in You, who have so great businesses to
go through, and so great Adversaries to encounter, and all Calling for Faith
in the strength and Glory of it, through Jesus Christ the Author and Finisher
of our Faith, is and shall be the earnest Desire and Prayer of Him, who is for
JESUS sake

Your ever most Devoted and Humble Servant HERBERT PALMER.

THE GLASS OF GODS Providence TOWARD HIS FAITHFVLL ONES.
PSALM. 99. ver. 8. Thou answeredst them, O LORD our GOD: Thou wast a GOD that
forgavest them, though Thou tookest vengeance on their inventions.
Introduction.
BEhold an Apostrophe to GOD, in the midst of an Exhortation to Men! whatever
else we learn from it, this we should improve it to, to make us remember, That
we have now to do with GOD; that looking Him in the face may awe us, and the
Consideration that we are now speaking to Him, and from Him, and of Him, may
Affect our spirits to Regard what He does toward the children of men, For these
words are the Glass of GODS Providence toward men, toward His Own, those
that are most faithful to Him. Would you know who they are? See ver. 6. Moses
and Aaron among His Priests, and Samuel among those that call upon His Name,
etc. Their Faithfulness is expressed, not only in their Calling upon GOD, in the
next words, They called upon the LORD, and He heard them; but also by their
Obedience, ver 7. They kept His Testimonies, and the Law that he gave them: and
then follows GODS Dealings with them, in the words of the Text, Thou
answeredst them, etc.

I will sing of Mercy and Judgment, unto Thee, O LORD, will I sing, says the
Royal Psalmist, Psalm. 101. 1. He does so here, his song is plainly of Mercy
and Judgment, and that Unto the LORD, as he there also expresses it. GODS
Great Mercy is set forth toward His Servants, in Answering and Forgiving them;
and with all His Judgment: His Heavy Judgment in taking Vengeance on their
inventions.

Behold then the Goodness and severitie of GOD, says the Holy Apostle, Romans
11. 22. so say I, and that not relating to two sorts of persons, as there;
Transgressors and Believers: But both toward men of approved avowed
faithfulness, even toward one and the same person; in Goodness answering, and
forgiving; and yet in some severity taking Vengeance also.

There are but two maine Dispositions in men's minds, that sway our practices
and regulate our lives, keeping them within compass, that is, Faith (or
Comfort) and Fear, according to the intimation Act. 9. 31. They walked in the
Fear of the Lord, and in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost. The Comfort of the
Holy Ghost, or Faith (which is all one in Effect) on the one side, and Fear on
the other, do compass us in, We walk uprightly and safely in the ways of
Our GOD. And to this purpose are these Words we have before us, none being more
proper to settle us in Faith and Comfort; then these which proclaim GOD to be
a GOD Answering and Pardoning, and nothing more fit to strike us with a Holy
Awe and Reverence; with a Godly Fear, then that to the Mention of such
Graciousnesse is added the Remembrance of His taking Vengeance also, even upon
those who He yet Answers and Forgives.

If therefore it shall please GOD to set home these words upon our Hearts, we
shall do that which the Psalmist intended to persuade and work men to, when he
first penned them; We shall fulfill the Scope of the Whole Psalm, and withal
answer the Scope of Our appearing before GOD this day, and find GOD Himself
answering it, and Our desires and prayers in it, even with Gracious pardoning
and forgiving, former and present failings in us, all who are or will be
faithful to Him.

Context.
In the 1. verse the Sovereign Authority and Royal Majesty of GOD Governing
the World and His Church in special, Calls us (and all men) to Fear and a Holy
Consternation at His Glory. The LORD reigns, Let the people Tremble: He sits
between the Cherubims, Let the earth be Moved. This is enforced, ver. 2. from
His Greatness and Power manifested toward His Church; and His Actual Rule
Over all People; The LORD is Great in Zion, and He is High above all People.
Whence we and all men are expressly summoned to Praise Him and Give Him Glory,
ver. 3. Let them Praise Thy Great and Terrible Name: for it is Holy. Though His
Power be never so great, and He never so terrible in His Ways and Works; yet
do they all Challenge Praise, because in All He manifells Himself to be Holy,
Unblameable and beyond all Control. Which also the 4. ver. confirms, The
Kings strength also Loves Judgment, Thou do establish equity; Thou executest
Judgment and Righteousness in Jacob. He has all Authority in His hand as
King, and strength sufficient to do what He pleases, yet He Delights to do
Right; and to settle it both by His Word and His Works; and does continually
exercise Himself in doing Justice and Right among His People particularly.
Whereupon, it is again required that Honor be given to Him above all Others,
ver. 5. Exalt ye the LORD our GOD, and Worship at His Footstool, for He is
Holy. Which with a Word or two altered is again repeated in the last Verse of
the Psalm, ver. 9. and made as the burden of the Song: Exalt the LORD our God,
and Worship at His Holy Hill, for the LORD our GOD is Holy. Where is given us
to Understand, that then only we Exalt, or Praise, or Fear GOD aright, When
we Worship according to His Will, and in His own Ordinances, set out by the
Phrases of Worshipping at His Footstool (that is the Arc) and at His Holy
Hill, that is, Zion, both according to His appointment, and express charge and
command. And His Holiness stands upon this, that Men should to Worship Him, if
they Worship Him at all. And of all this We have Moses, Aaron, and Samuel for
Examples, ver. 7, 8. Moses and Aaron were among His Priests, and Samuel among
them that called upon His Name. These were Great Favorites of His, and eminent
in their Fidelity, They called upon the LORD, and He answered them. He spoke
unto them in the cloudy Pillar, they kept His Testimonies, and the Law that He
gave them. But yet not so, but they failed sometimes and needed forgiveness,
provoking Him to bring Judgments upon them. And accordingly He did show
Himself variously to them; sometimes in Displeasure, but always with Mercy.
And that is it which Our Text holds forth apparently to all our Eyes, Ears,
and Hearts. Tending, with all the rest of the Psalms, to persuade us to Fear,
and Praise, and Exalt, and Worship our Gracious and Holy GOD aright according
to His Divine Pleasure. As we shall see by the more distinct handling of it,
unto which now I come.

Division.
The Words of this Verse have in them three remarkable particulars. 1. The
Behavior of the Men it speaks of, which is partly Good, and partly evil. The
former verse says, They kept GODS Testimonies, and the Law that He gave them,
This insinuates (what was also expressed ver. 6.) that they used to Call upon
GOD, All this was very good, But withal, they did sometimes some things
amiss, some inventions, bypath, or steps awry they had, which as they needed
pardon, so they incensed Him against them, so much now and then, as He would
not let them escape altogether, without taking some vengeance for such
untowardnesse. 2. GODS Graciousnesse, in a double respect: 1. in Answering
them, granting their suits and supplications ordinarily. 2. in Forgiving them,
pardoning their failings and faults evermore; never dealing with them
altogether according to their sins, but in the midst of any offense of
theirs, or Judgment of His, remembering Mercy. 3. His Holy Justice,
notwithstanding, Taking Vengeance on their inventions: Chastening them for some
faults sometimes; and not letting them always go unpunished, how faithful
soever they were generally, Or how Gracious soever He was eternally.
Explication.
These are the maine parts of the Text, which will afford us so many Doctrines
clearly and plainly after we have but a little explained the latter Clause of
Taking Vengeance on their inventions. Which is the only Difficulty in the
Language of the Text, and it indeed sounds so strangely at the first hearing,
What is meant by taking Vengeance.
as I may well put this Expression among the Riddles of the Scripture. It is
seldom found elsewhere, (if at all) when applied to the faithful Servants of
GOD, as it is here; and therefore it is an Amazing Notion; and worthy to be
considered, for the sense of it, and the reason why it is used. The Sense of it
is not to be taken in the ordinary rigor of the phrase, Negatively.
as we use it among men, for an act done, either according to the extremity of
the desert of a fault, or with a mind possessed with malice or hatred against the
oftender, or both together. For neither of these will stand with GODS
affections or actions toward His faithful ones; nor with the very words of
the Text foregoing these. He who forgives, never deals according to extremity
of desert of a fault, which deserves destruction (as all our sins do in
extremity of Justice,) much less does he do any thing with malice or hatred.
Forgiveness and malice are no less contradictory then light and darkness,
life and death. Whatsoever therefore be meant by taking of vengeance here, it
must be understood, with mitigation and mixture of favor; and this favor
eminent, even notwithstanding the vengeance taken, For so speaks the Text
undeniably, Thou answerest and forgavest, though thou tookest vengeance, As
forgiveness did not altogether hinder the vengeance, so the vengeance did not
disparage the forgiveness. The meaning then may be conceived to lie in two
things. Affirmatively, in two things.
First, That whatsoever they did feel from His hand it was but according to
their deserts, not beyond; They had That GOD looks upon sin with an other
eye then men do; and that even in His Own dearest servants, He sees matter
enough of deep displeasure which He will let men know, and themselves feel
now and then in a quickening and awakening manner. Terrible words are not
without their efficacy, specially when deeds answer them; The proper Reasons
and Uses of both, We shall see anon. But this language is used to help to make
GODS deeds more affecting.

Withal this may well be added to clear this phrase from all exception, that
if we observe the words narrowly, a manifest difference seems to be even here,
in this harsh expression, from that which is elsewhere spoken of GODS dealings
with His Enemies, with the wicked. It is not said GOD took vengeance on them,
on the persons of His faithful servants, but on their inventions. He showed
mercy to their persons, (which the Text it self expresses) but yet He showed
displeasure against their sins, He would not spare the offense, and yet it is
certain He spared the offenders. But when the ungodly are spoken of, there
vengeance is expressly said to be taken on them, Deuteronomy. 32. 41. I will render
vengeance to mine enemies, and verse. 43. will render vengeance to His
adversaries, and will be merciful to His land, and to His people. So Ezekiel. 25.
14. I will lay my vengeance on Edom. And in diverse other places of the
Prophets: So in the N. T. 2 These. 1. 7. Taking vengeance on them that know not
GOD, etc: In all these the vengeance so falls upon the sin that the sinners
themselves are destroyed with the weight of it; which never is, when GOD has
to do with His Own, how severe soever He seem to be in the vengeance He does
take: As will further appear in the prosecution of the Doctrines afforded to
us in the whole verse, 3. Doctrines
which are plainly three.







Before I come to handle these points in a Doctrinall way, F^^st handled
Historically.
It will be very profitable; first, to handle the Text Historically, a little
to look after and consider the story of these holy men; as other Scriptures
have recorded it; and see their faithfulness with their failings, and GODS
answers and pardon with His taking vengeance.

Moses, 1. Moses.
who is the first man concerned in it, was one whom GOD honors as much for his
faithfulness, 2. His faithfulness.
as any man under the Old Testament. No man actually forsook so much for GOD,
nor ventured so much for Him, as Moses did; Which the Apostle excellently
sums up, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. No man had so hard a task of it, for so many
years together, being to deal first with hardhearted Pharaoh, and then with
stiffenecked Israel. And he has, besides all others, an high Eulogy of
faithfulness in all GODS House, Heb. 3. 2. in all his offices between GOD and
His people, being not only a Propet, but the Chief Governor of Israel, and
styled a King in Jesuran, 2. His failings five.
Deuteronomy. 33. 5. Yet even Moses had his failings and weaknesses.

Pharaoh, We find him making excuses; so long till the Text says, GOD was
angry, Exodus 4. 14.

Zipporah; who was a Midianite:) But whatever it was it had like to have cost
him his life, GOD begun to take some vengeance, upon his neglect, ver. 24.

Pharaoh, who took occasion by that to oppress Israel the more; and no
deliverance likely to come: Which yet he had no reason to count strange, if he
had well remembered and observed what GOD had said to him, chapt. 3. that
Pharaohs heart would be hardened, and he would not let them go at the first.
But Moses had forgotten this, and so complains, as if GOD had done him and
Israel both wrong in it, ver. 22, 23.

Numb. 11. 11, etc. 14. 15. We find another fit of discontent: he cannot endure
with patience any longer the frowardness of the people, who murmured against
him at every turn; he would be out of his life, and prays to GOD even to take
his life away, rather then to abide such continual vexation; and again, verse.
21. he has a pang of distrust, and can scarce t^ll how to believe GODS Word to
be true of such a large provision to be made for the people as GOD has told
him of: So that GOD is feign to answer him with His Almighty Power, Is the
LORDS hand waxed? short Thou shall see now whether my words shall come to pass
to thee or not, verse. 23. These passions and expressions of Moses, were not
like a faithful servant of GOD, but thus the infirmity of a faithful man
discovers it self.

5. Once more we find Moses faulty; and that in a further degree then any that
has been yet named: his great failing, and for which GOD was most highly
displeased with him above all other times, is recorded, Numb. 20. The people
murmured for water, and GOD bids Moses take the rod and speak to the rock and
it should give forth water. Moses goes with the rod, but instead of speaking
to the rock, he speaks to the people, and that unadvisedly with his lips,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 106. 33. and with a provoked spirit, overcome with
anger and passion; and instead of speaki^g to the rock, he strikes the rock,
and that twice, verse. 11. And this GOD takes so hainously, that He charges him
with not sanctifying Him before the children of Israel, and not believing Him,
and that therefore he should not go into the promised Land. So that here is a
threefold fault noted in Moses, in the story (written by himself) and in the
Psalm. 1. Some unbelief, and distrusting that speaking to the rock would not
suffice to fetch water thence, notwithstanding GODS Word. 2. Some impatience of
spirit, against the peoples untoward murmurings, His spirit was provoked by
them, more and otherwise then it should have been. 3. This expressed, by
unfitting and unadvised speech, the story says, he called them Rebels, and
says, Must we fetch you water, etc. which language though they well enough
deserved (and worse) yet it appeared GOD was not pleased with it in Moses. And
so you have the account of his faults, as the Scripture registers them.

Then for Aaron, 2. Aarons failings three.
accessory, consenter and actor with others, but never alone in any remarkable
fault. But particularly three special failings are recorded of him, 1. Exodus
32 1, 4. there is a very great fault, that at the peoples solicitation and
importunity, he made them an Idol, a Golden Calfe, and joined with them in the
honoring of it: for which GOD was exceeding angry with him to have destroyed
him; but that Moses interceded for him, Deuteronomy. 9. 20. Numb. 12. Where he joins
with his sister Miriam, (who is first named and noted, ver. 1.) in murmuring
against Moses. It was strange that he should speak against his own brother so,
whom he saw GOD had so honored above him, and who had before (as was observed
but now) been a means to save him from GODS wrath by his prayers. And yet by
his sister is he drawn away and become a partner with her in this unnatural
Mutiny. And for this GOD is again angry with him, though he laid then no
punishment upon his Person, yet Aaron confesses himself stricken in the
leprosy suddenly inflicted for this upon Miriam, ver. 10. and 11. Moses his
Distrust (and Passion) in that 20. of Numb. The Charge was given to both
together; GODS displeasure for their offenses.
and GOD blames and threatens them both; and accordingly soon after took
Vengeance upon Aarons offense, and he dies before the end of that Chapter, as
He did after upon Moses his, Of which we have diverse Memorandums afterward,
showing the more GODS displeasure against him for this Transgression; and of
this specially, the Text we have in hand speaks. This GOD remembers Numb. 27.
12, 13, 14. And Moses afterward speaks of it with sorrow, Deuteronomy. 1. 37. and
again, Deuteronomy. 3. 23, etc. where he tells the people how he made a solemn suit
of it, and prayed earnestly to GOD that He would spare him, and show him that
favor, that he might go into the Land of Promise; and that GOD would not
grant his suit, and forbids him to mention it any more to Him, ver. 26, 27. and
once more Moses speaks to Israel of it, Deuteronomy. 4. 21, 22. as showing how near
it was to him, and how great a Judgment he took it to be. And so we see GODS
taking Vengeance upon his inventions also, as well as upon Aarons, and the Text
verified of two of those it speaks of.

We have a third to look after, whom we must not forget, and that is Samuel,
III. Samuels failing.
He was the Judge of Israel by GODS appointment, and trained up to be a Prophet
from his childhood under the Wing of GOD in Shiloh, and he was a very faithful
Servant of GOD: Yet there is a fault of his insinuated 1 Samuel 8. that When he
was grown old, he was partial toward his children, he made his Sons Judges
over Israel, and they walked not in his ways, but took bribes and perverted
Justice; and it appears by the sequel that Samuel was too indulgent and
favorable to them; and therefore the people took such a discontent, that they
would not have his Sons nor himself neither, rule any more over them, but
would needs have a King to rule over them; and, though this was ill done of the
people, to reject Samuel himself, and specially to ask a King, as appears by
GODS words in that Chapter, GODS displea^ure for it.
and by His Displeasure manifested from Heaven, 1 Samuel 12. Yet we may read in
it GODS Just Vengeance on the misbehaviour of Samuels sons, and so of his
partiality toward them, and we may see in both places that it struck Samuel
very deeply, 1 Samuel 8. 6. in reference to Himself, and Chap. 12. 2. he cannot
forbear mention of his Sons, who were wholly laid aside ever after, though
himself was not altogether. And thus we see all these three faithful men,
Moses, Aaron, and Samuel made Examples of Justice in some Vengeance taken on
their Inventions and offenses notwithstanding GODS favor to them.

Now we must add a word, GODS Graciousnesse Answering
how notwithstanding their failings and GODS severity, yet He was a GOD
answering and forgiving them.

1. For Moses, 1. Moses.
he is so famous for GODS answering him, that GOD once does as it were sue to
Moses to forbear Praying for Israel, as implying that He could not but answer
Moses, if he did Pray: Let me alone, that I may consume them, Exodus 32. 10. and
accordingly when Moses, for all this, did pray, GOD did answer, and spare
Israel upon his request, ver. 14. and many other times Moses his Prayers were
heard and answered.

2. 2. Aaron.
Moses and Aaron together in the universal Murmuring and Mutiny, Numb. 14. 5.
And Aaron specially when after the Rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and
the horrible Judgment of GOD upon them, the earth swallowing them up alive,
and fire from GOD breaking out and burning up the 250 Princes, that stood to be
Priests, in opposition to Aarons Calling, and the next day all the Congregation
murmured and mutined again against Moses and Aaron, as if they had been in
fault for the death of those outrageous sinners: Aaron then, at Moses his
direction, runs to the Altar, and fetches fire thence, and puts on incense, and
with that runs among the people; and though the wrath of GOD were so hot
against them, as that while he was hasting to the Altar and coming back again
14700. were dead of the Plague, yet as soon as he comes among them, and as a
Priest, offers incense (and so Prayers) for them, suddenly the plague ceases,
Numb. 16. 47, 48.

3. For Samuel, 3. Samuel.
he was a known favorite in the Court of Heaven, so that the Israelites ran
to him, when the Philistines came against them, and they put more confidence in
his Prayers alone for them, 1 Samuel 7. 8. then in all theirs; and GOD then
answered him with Thunder from heaven against the Philistines, ver. 10. and
again after the Israelites had rejected him, yet they beg his Prayers with
great Submission and Importunity, 1 Samuel 12. 19. And both he and Moses are
remembered long after by GOD, as two of the greatest Favorites that ever He had
in this kind, when He tells Jeremy, He would not hear even them, if they were
now alive, Jerem. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind
could not be to this people, Cast them out of my sight. If He would have heard
any body, it should have been Moses and Samuel: Whom He was wont so constantly
to Hear and Answer.

Withal we have manifest assurance of His Forgiving them, Pardoning there all.
notwithstanding the Vengeance He took on those faults of theirs, which we
even now mentioned, besides all other times. He that remembers that GOD had a
better place to which He removed Moses and Aaron when He took them from the
earth; and an heavenly Canaan into which GOD received them, when He denied them
entrance into the earthly Canaan; And that this must needs be that recompense
of Reward, which Moses had an eye to, when he esteemed the reproach of Christ,
greater riches then the Treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 26. And that Moses is
after his death, often owned by GOD as His Servant, as His Chosen; and Aaron is
named, Psalm. 106. 16. the Saint of the Lord; He (I say) that remembers these
things cannot doubt of GODS Forgiving them. Considering also, how Moses
appeared in Glory (with Elias) at Christ's Transfiguration, Luke 9. 30, 31. And
for Samuel, he was not quite put from his Office of Judge, for it is said, 1 Samuel 7. 15. that he Judged Israel all the Days of his Life; and besides GOD
often employed him as a Prophet in most remarkable Services; which proclaim
GODS Graciousnesse to him also, and forgiving him as well as the Others.

And so you have the Story of the Text set before you; and the Doctrines
observed out of it, confirmed (each of them) by this Historical
Exemplification, Of their Behaviors and GODS Dealings.

I come now to a more general handling of them; And the 1. of them is this.
Doct. 1.
That even the Faithful Servants of God may so provoke Him, that they may
need His pardon, and even give Him Occasion to Take Vengeance on their
Inventions and Practices.

For the further proof of this, I may say (as indeed of the other points also,
though specially of the middlemost, which holds forth GODS Answering and
Pardoning Mercy to His Faithful Ones) that there is scarce any Record of any
of the Servants of GOD, even the most eminent, but there is somewhat or other
of this kind noted of them. But for the further Evidencing of it, and Affecting
every one of us with it, (it being a point of very great concernment and use to
us all) You may take notice but of these general Reasons.

1. Reas. 1. The bent have corruption in the as well as the worst by Nature.
That the very best Servants of GOD have the very same corruption by nature
that the worst have. It is all alike in the one sort and in the other. There is
no difference naturally between the one and the other. That place Prove. 27.
19. deserves to be remembered for this purpose, As in water face answers to
face, so does the heart of man to man. They then used to view their faces much
in Water (as we now do in Glasses,) and as in Water, or in a Glass, the Image
of the true face represents all the features, lineaments, moles, spots,
deformities, that are in the face it self, and the one answers the other
exactly, what is in one is in the other: So is it with the heart of one Man
(naturally) answering to another. There are the same spots and wrinckles, and
blemishes in every heart that is in any one; and to have a true representation
of the evil that is in any one heart, We must look upon all the evil that is
in all other hearts naturally. The Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. makes himself and
the (now) Christian Ephesians, and the Unconverted Impenitent Unbeleevers all
alike by Nature.

2. Reas 2. Co^rup^^d N^^u^e not ab^l^^h^ i^ the b^^^* Proved.
In the best Servants of GOD this corrupted Nature is not utterly abolished:
The Grace which they have received (and which makes them to differ from other
men) does not so far sanctify them, but that the Seeds and Roots of sin,
of all sin does still remain in them: A Flesh they have, which though
Crucified with the affections and lusts in all that are Christ's, is not quite
dead, not altogether mortified, but that lies upon them as a daily and
perpetual duty to mortify their earthly members, and to be cutting off of
hands and feet and pulling out of Eyes; which yet, contrary to the course of
Common Nature, will be growing again, or others in the room of them: There is
a continual danger of Roots of bitterness (of any kind) springing up to
trouble and defile even them. The Apostle, you know, complains of his flesh,
that he could not do the Good he would, and that he did the evil he would not
due, and was carried captive unto the Law of sin, and had a body of death
which he carried about him, and groans, and cries out to be delivered from; and
tells the Galathians, that the flesh, in them did lust against the Spirit, so
that they could not do the things they would. And this corruption, always
dwelling even in the best, and too often prevailing, Illustrated in that
is that which not only ever needs pardon, but oftentimes greatly provokes GOD
to take vengeance upon their misbehaviours.

1. This Corruption may yet be further apprehended by us, The Corruption of the
best appears in things wherein they most excel in virtue.
by this one Observation following. That, as there is scarce any of the
servants of GOD storied of in the Word, but with their faithfulness, their
failings are enrolled, (as was intimated before) Paul himself not excepted:
So, (which is very remarkable and deserving most serious consideration,) That
scarce any of them is noted to be eminent for any virtue or Grace, but somewhat
of the contrary is observed in them, some failing even in that very particular.

1. Righteous Noah intemperate.
Noah is owned by GOD Himself to be eminently righteous in his generation,
Genesis 7. 1. in a generation that abounded with luxury, eating and drinking and
jollity, as our Savior assures us, Mat. 24. 38. and so Noah was a pattern of
Temperance and sobriety; and yet we find even Noah once overtaken, and making
himself drunk with his own wine.

2. Just Lot defiled.
Lot is praised by the Spirit of GOD guiding St Peter's pen, 2. Pet. 2. 5. for a
Righteous man, preserved safe by GODS Grace in the midst of filthy Sodom; and
yet you know what befell him afterward, when Sodom was destroyed and himself
delivered out of it.

3. Faithful Abraham distrustful.
We read that Abraham is called the Father, (the Pattern) of the Faithful:
It is said, he staggered not at the Promise of GOD through unbeleefe, but was
strong in Faith giving Glory to GOD, Romans 4. 20. and yet Faithful Abraham,
twice for fear, denies his Wife, and pretends her to be his sister, Genesis 12.
and Genesis 10. 2.

4. Meek Moses passionate.
So of Moses, one of the Men our Text speaks of, it is said, that he was meek
above all the men that were on the earth, Numb. 12. 3. and yet this meek Moses
overshootes himself by passion, and that which brought the evil upon him, was
(as you have heard) his spirit being provoked and so he spoke unadvisedly with
his lips* And withal he that had showed so great faith in so many mighty
works to be done by him, Faithful Moses beleves not.
and difficulties to be passed through, for so many years together; and had so
greatly and perpetually honored GOD in the sight of Israel; now is challenged
of GOD (as you saw) that he did not believe Him to sanctify Him before the
children of Israel; and therefore he should not bring them into the Land.

5. David, Humble David revengefull.
who of all the people of GOD in his time, had been longest in the school of
Affliction and Patience, and showed great proficiencie in it, upon all
occasions; as his Psalms bear witness, and the story together: Yet when he
received a rude repulse from churlish Nabal of a kind message and fair
request, 1 Samuel 25. he has so far his Lesson to seek, that he breaks out
into violent passion, and resolves and swears he will have his blood, and the
blood of all his family, and marches against him to that purpose. Thus you see
faults breaking out in the servants of GOD, and even in those things wherein
they were famous for Fidelity.

6. Job impatience.
So in him who of all others is set forth as the Pattern of Patience, holy
Job; You have heard of the Patience of Job, says St James, chapt. 8. 11. But
we have heard (and read in his Book) of his Impatience too: and, we would
think him a man very impatient, from whom we should hear such language, as he
speaks, chap. 3. and afterward.

7. The Prophet Jonah refuses to go on GODS errand.
And what say you to Jonah, one whom GOD owned and employed to be a Prophet;
But first he runs away and will not go on GODS errand; whereupon GOD takes
vengeance upon his invention and transgression, in a most terrible manner: He
first persecutes him with a Tempest and makes him afraid with a storm, and
then forces him to be his own accuser and Judge, to condemn himself to be
thrown into the sea, and there he is cast as it were alive into Hell (as his
own Phrase is in his Prayer, chap. 2.) by being swallowed up by the Whale, and
living in that most noisome stinking prison so long: Justifying his sin after
he had repented of it.
And yet after his repentance and GODS mavelous mercy to him, and employing
him again in his work, he breaks out into fearful distempers again; even
to justify his former fact, and he is angry, and he will be angry, and he does
well (he says) to be angry even to the death, with GGDS crossing of his mind
and expectation. How contrary was all this to the duty of a Prophet, to the
disposition of a Penitent received to mercy, and yet thus it was with him: This
is our corruption remaining even in a faithful man's heart.

8. After many years Jeremy resolves to preach no more.
Look upon Jeremie also, and you shall see a wonderful example. First, He was
indeed very hardly used, Jer. 20. and he says, he was in derision daily, every
one mocked him, ver. 7. and therefore he is weary of his office and employment,
and resolves he will preach no more: Then I said, I will not make mention of
Him, nor speak any more in His Name, ver. 9. A strange distemper to be in a
Prophet, who had preached so long, but that GOD cures suddenly, with some kind
of vengeance, by making His Word as a fire in His bones, that he could not
forbear giving it vent, and then he recovers himself and comforts himself
that GOD would take his part against his enemies and persecutours; The LORD is
with me (says he) as a mighty terrible one, etc. and so he gets so mighty a
victory against this temptation, that he sings a Song of triumph, After a
triumph over a temptation, is (in a manner) wholly transported with it.
and calls others to join with him in it, ver. 13. Sing unto the Lord; praise
ye the Lord, for He has delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of
evil doers: And now you would think he were for ever delivered from all
impatience. But mark the very immediate next words, Cursed be the day wherein
I was borne, etc. And, which is worse, Cursed be the man that brought word to
my Father, etc. O strange! Can this be possible, that from a heart so calmed
and settled in Faith and Joy, such a sudden storm should arise of monstrous
and horrid impatience? But such is man; such is even the best man, when his
corruption is let out, and his ill nature is suffered to discover it self. I
shall not need to tell you of Peter's falls.

But 9. The two greatest friends in the world Paul and Barnabas, contending and
parting upon it.
I have one example more to set before you, of Paul and Barnabas together; two
that were as much united together by all manner of Religious considerations, as
almost any two can be. Barnabas took Paul then named Saul newly turned from
being a persccutour, when the Disciples were afraid of him, Acts 9. and brought
him to the Apostles, and is his witness how he was converted and how he had
preached; and after that he makes a journey as far as Tarsus from Antioch to
seek Saul, and brings him to Antioch, and there they preach together a whole
year and taught much people; and after that they were sent together to carry
Alms to Jerusalem: and being returned to Antioch, they were sent out together,
by the express charge of the Holy Ghost, to preach, and after great and happy
success, they were employed by the Churches to go up to the Council at
Jerusalem about the Question of Circumcision. And now after all this
stictnesse of Union, being about to go forth again to visit the Churches,
they fall at odds about a small matter, as one would think, Whether such an
one should go along with them, or not; and the contention was so sharp
between them, as neither the Church, nor any of the brethren could reconcile
them at that time; but they part asunder, and go one one way and the other
another; and perhaps never saw one another again. This is a very great and a
sad proof, of the great corruption of nature, still in the very best of GODS
Saints, and faithful ones.

3. Reason 3. S^tans violence in temp^ing them continually.
To all which we may add both the violent and cunning importunity of Satan,
who makes it a continual business of his, to tempt them to all manner of
sins, that if he cannot prevail in one thing he may in another; and if he
cannot (as he cannot) regaine them under his tyranny and dominion, he may yet
do them what mischief he can, disturb the peace of their consciences,
dishonor GOD, and promote his own kingdom, by their ill examples especially.

4. Reason 4. Men often are tempt^^s to the godly.
Withal he can and does very much make use of Men, evil men (and sometimes
even of good) as his instruments, who not seldom do even take it to task and
make it a maine part of their business, to draw the servants of GOD to sin,
to sins of scandal, thereby to promote their own lust by their assistance,
or to encourage and bear out themselves in their own evils, by such practices
of better men, and sometimes even in very malice to the servants of GOD, that
they may have advantage to reproach them, and the very profession of Religion
which they make; And to this purpose they lay snares in their way continually,
sometimes offering worldly advantage, otherwhiles threatening worldly
inconveniences, and always straining their wits to pursue them with
importunities and subtilties, to seduce them. All these laid together, their
own corruption, Satan's suggestions, and Men's instigation do so unhappily
verify our first point, and afford such continual experiments of it, that I
shall need to say no more of it at the present in a Doctrinall way. I come to
the second.

Though GODS servants do provoke Him, Doctrine 2. GODS Mercy to His servants,
though offending Him.
and He do thereupon take vengeance, Yet is He ever a GOD of Grace to them,
answering their prayers, and affording them pardon. I shall not illustrate this
by examples at this time, further then I have done already, every one of the
forenamed Instances making it plain. But I shall give you some Reasons of it.

First, Reason 1. He h^th engaged Himself to hear prayers.
GOD uses to answer His servants, because it is one of His Titles which He
takes to Himself, and His servants give Him the Name of, That He is a GOD
hearing prayers; Which is therefore expressed because He would encourage all men,
(much more those that are already His servants) to come unto Him, Psalm. 65. 2.
O thou that hear prayers! to Thee shall all flesh come. So David assures
himself and his enemies both, that he should find in his own particular. The
LORD will hear (that is answer) when I call upon Him, Psalm. 43. And Psalm. 10.
17. a demonstration is given of it, in that it is said to GOD, Thou have heard
the desire of the humble, Thou preparest their heart, and Thou causest Thine
ear to hear. Which is as much as if it had been said, Thou bespeakest, and
even inditest their Petitions (GODS Spirit does so, Romans 8. 26, 27.) and
therefore as Thou have ever done, so unquestionably thou will still afford them
a gracious Answer.

2. Reas. 2. He is ever able to do them good.
This is the more certain, Because GOD has always in His hand a sufficiency
of Power (and Wisdom,) to grant their faithful desires, by Overruling all
things for their good, even notwithstanding all that they have done against
Him, and so against themselves, or that He has done against them. This is the
great difference between GOD and Men, that men often times, when others sue to
them, find things in so ill a condition, partly through the fault of those that
now sue for their favor, and partly through their own rashness or severity,
that they know not how to help them, nor which way to make them any amends for
any thing they have made them to suffer. As the Israelites, Judge. 21. would
willingly have done more for Benjamin, against whom they had been rigorously
cruel; But they knew not how to do it, they had no power to recompense their
own excessive severity, upon the Benjimites perverse obstinacy. But it is never
so with GOD. He never powers out so much wrath upon any of His servants
(whatever He do upon His enemies in conclusion.) But He has still in His hand
to make them amends. Even though He take away their lives: He has so much good
to bestow upon them, as He may still be said to forgive them, He has a better
life for them; an Eternal life, of perfect Happiness. And in the mean time,
witness Joseph and Job, and many others of His Saints, They are never so low
nor so afflicted in this world, but He has power enough to raise them up
again to comfort and honor. And therefore He does certainly afford them
answer of Grace to all their faithful prayers.

3. He does also forgive them without fail; because He has received a Ransom
for them. GOD has received a Ransom for His servants offerces.
It is Elihu's phrase, Job 31. 24* Deliver his soul (says GOD) from going
down into the pit* for I have received a Ransom. GOD Himself has set forth
Christ (provided Him, sent Him, declared Him,) to be a Propiti^^ion through
Faith in His Blood, to declare His Righteousness or Justice for the Remission
of sins that are past, through the forbearance of GOD, Romans 3. 25. So that
GOD in His taking vengeance upon the offenses of His servants, does it not for
the satisfaction of His Justice. For Christ has made that satisfaction, He is
ous Surety, Heb. 7. 22 and gave His life a Ransom for us, Mat. 20. 28. And so
notwithstanding all the Chastisements He lays upon them (which are for an
other end, as we shall see in the next Point by and by,) The Chastisement of
our peace, by way of satisfaction, was upon Him, He has borne the burden of
them all. And by His stripes, (not our own) are we healed. Therefore how much
soever GOD corrects any of those that are in Christ, yet He pardons them. The
Lord has chastened me sore, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 118. 18. yet has He not
given me over unto death. Holy Job goes further, chapt. 13. 15. Though He kill
me; yet will I trust in Him. That must needs carry with it, assurance of
forgiveness, in the most deadly blowed that GOD can give His servants. And
indeed the Apostle makes this an argument of GODS graciousnesse, and forgiving
the iniquities of His servants; that, when otherwise they would be hardened in
their sins which would turn to their destruction, if not remedied, that He
corrects them severely, even to death sometimes. So he tells the Corinthians
who had profaned the Lords Supper greatly, For this cause many are weak and
sick among you, and many sleep, that is, are stricken with death, 1. Cor. 11.
30. and after follows, ver. 32. When we are judged, (even so severely) we are
chastened of the LORD* that we should not be condemned with the world. Here is
undoubted forgiveness notwithstanding deadly severity.

4. Reas. 4. God ^lorifies Himself in His servants Repentance.
GOD therefore forgives, because. He will glorify himself in the Repentance
of His servants, after their provocations and His taking vengeance. And
ordinarlly He does this visibly, when He lays any great correction upon His
servants, He makes them give public and open testimony of their Repentance.
This is remarkeably insinuated, for the thing it self, Isa. 57. Where first
GOD is angry with one of His and smites him for the sin of his covetousness,
and hides His face from him; And for a while this does him no good; but he goes
on frowardly in the way of his own heart: Hereupon GOD, (in the riches of His
Grace) resolves to take an other course with him; and to manifest such love to
him, as should overcome him with kindness. I have seen his ways, and I will
heal him, etc. Here is forgiveness and Grace for Repentance undeniably,
notwithstanding all forgoing sin and judgments.

5. Reas. 5. Else GOD would have none to serve Him.
And indeed if GOD should not vouchsafe pardon, when His servants have provoked
Him, He would have none left upon earth to serve Him; If thou Lord should
mark iniquities, says the Psalmist (that is, if Thou should deal with us
without any mercy, according to our iniquities,) O LORD who shall stand? Then
follows. But there is forgiveness with Thee, that thou may be feared, Psa.
130. 3, 4. No man could have any heart to serve GOD, if knowing that he should,
through his corruption, oftend in many things, he should have no forgiveness
at all, but only corrections and punishments, and finally death and damnation,
for his reward. And this must be the portion of all those at last, that have no
forgiveness. Therefore GOD Himself gives this reason of His mercy, in the
forementioned, Isa. 57. 16. I will not (says He) contend for over, neither
will I be always wroth, for the spirit would fail before me and the souls
that I have made. Therefore says David, Psalm. 103. 10. He has not dealt with
us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities, and verse. 13.
As a Father pitties his own children, so has the LORD compassion on them that
fear Him; For He knows our frame, He remembers that we are dust, etc. And
therefore, with this the Church comforts herself in the midst of GODS most
terrible corrections, Lam. 3. 32. Though He cause grief yet will He have
compassion, according to the multitude of His Mercies.

6. Reas. 6. GOD is a GOD in Covenant with His servants.
There is one Reason more insinuated in the very Text, which may not altogether
be forgotten, and that is, The Covenant, whereby GOD has engaged Himself unto
His servants to be their GOD, Thou answeredst them o LORD our GOD. For GOD to
be our GOD, is to be a GOD answering prayers and forgiving sins,, Psalm. 50.
after He had mentioned the Covenant between GOD and His people, verse. 7. It is
said, verse. 15. Call upon Me in the time of trouble and I will deliver thee,
etc. And for forgiveness, we know, besides the manifold particular expressions
of Promises of this kind, The Covenant made with Abraham, was a Covenant of
Grace in Christ, the Promised Seed, in whom all the Nations of the earth should
be blessed, Gal. 3. 16. and an everlasting Covenant: And both these infer
certainly forgiveness, to all the faithful seed of Abraham. And so this
second Point is also in some proportion illustrated and cleared. The third and
last follows, namely --

3. Doctrine 3. GOD is sometimes severe to His, though still merciful to them
Though GOD does answer the prayers and forgive the sins of His faithful ones,
Yet they may so provoke Him, as He sometimes takes vengeance on their
inventions, inflict; very severe punishment, on their misbehaviour.

The Reasons of this are: Reas. 1. GODS Holiness.
1. The Holiness of GOD, which allows not sin in any one; but shows some
displeasure against it wherever He finds it, even where He loves the persons,
and so pardons for His beloved Sons sake, Yet He will make them know their sins
are odious to Him, and they shall feel the smart of it. We should not at all
be apprehensive of the Holiness of GOD, and His detestation of sin, if He
did not take vengeance upon some transgrestions in some persons; and we find by
experience, that we are but little apprehensive of it, when we feel no tokens
of His displeasure against us for our sinful carriages. He therefore in
reference to the glory of His Holiness, does not altogether spare sin, no not
in His own.

2. Reas. 2. GODS Justice.
As the Holiness of GOD, so His justice calls for it: Namely that He should
not see His Holy and Righteous Law broken, and give the transgressors no
remembrance for it: Whether the transgression be more immediately against
Himself the Sovereign LORD and Lawgiver, or against the subjects of His
Kingdom. If any of His servants so far forget themselves and Him, as to
dishonor Him by trespassing upon any thing that is His; or doing any thing
that reflects upon His Majesty; It is most just, that they should be so dealt
with, as it may appear to them (and all men) that GOD is not one fit to be
abused any way; and that His Infinite Goodness and Mercy ought not to be
esteemed an encouragement to any to set light by His Authority and Sovereignty.
Again, If they misbehave themselves one to another, It is most just that GOD
should distribute Justice among them so far, as to discountenance the wrong
doer, and make him afraid of doing the like again, that GOD should so set them
to rights when they are quarrelling one with another, or abusing one another;
as that it may appear He gave them no such leave; and that His Laws to the
contrary were not given in vain. The Justice of a Father.
Only in all this, we are to remember, that the Justice we are now speaking of,
is not the Justice of a Judge, that looks barely to the rigor of the Law and
the desert of the offense; But the Justice of a Father; Who though he scourges
and corrects his child, even to blood sometimes, for untowardnesse relating to
himself, or to any of the family, or even strangers, yet he does it not to
satisfy his own spleen, nor in malice against his child; but to make him
sensible of his fault and careful to amend, and to show himself in his
Paternall authority, rightly dispensing favors and corrections according to
the behaviors of every one of his children. Thus it is with GOD, And this is
so certain, that it is expressly contained within the Covenant of GOD and a
part of it, Psa. 89. 30, 31, 32, etc. If his children forsake my Law and walk
not in my judgments, if they break my statutes and keep not my
Commandments, Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with s^ripes: Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly
take from him, etc, It is made to all the children of David, that is of Christ,
whose Type David was herein. And though Mercy (the sure Mercies of David, as
Esays phrase is, Esaias, 53. 3. applied by St Paul, Acts 13. 34.) be infallible
and unchangeable to them; yet does GOD, as we see, expressly reserve to
Himself the right of correcting them when they provoke Him.

3. Reas. 3. The Faithful need it sometimes.
And this is further Confirmed, by the Need that the very faithful have of
being thus dealt with. Now you are in Heaviness (if need be) says St Peter,
through manifold Temptations, (that is afflictions and corrections) 1 Pet. 1.
6. Experience shows this but too much; that our children do not more need
correction in their younger years, then all Gods children need it, now and
then all their Life. it, the one and the other are and will often be froward
and wanton, and proud, and selfe-willed, and quarellsome, and untoward to
learn any thing that is good. And GOD has Ordained and sanctified Corrections
to be a means both to the one sort and to the other, to make them weary of
doing amiss, when they shall find that Verified to them which GOD bids his
people take notice of Jer. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee and
thy backslidings shall reproove thee; Know therefore and see, that it is an
evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the LORD thy GOD, and that my
fear is not in thee, says the LORD GOD of Hosts. GOD will make all his
Servants find and feel and acknowledge this in their Degree. And to this
speaks the Apostle Heb. 12. both for GODS Intention in corrections and for the
success of them. Having compared GODS fatherly corrections with our Natural
Parents dealing with us in our Minority, He says expressly, He does it for
our profit, that we may be partakers of His holiness, v. 10. For our profit, I
say, and not to satisfy his own mind, or wreake his own displeasure upon us,
as earthly parents not seldom do, as he had intimated in the beginning of
that Verse. And as GOD means no otherwise but thus; So his Intentions do not
fail of a suitable Success in the Issue, as is assured us. v. 11. Now no
chastisement for the present seems to be joyous but Greevous: nevertheless
afterward it yields the Peaceable fruit of righteousness to them that are
exercised thereby.

Finally, Reas. 4. To teach bystanders, 1. That the wicked shall not s^^pe
always.
GOD deals thus with His own Faithful Servants, very much in reference to
standers by, strangers and even enemies; and that in a double respect 1. to Let
all the World know that He has Judgments in store for the Wicked, which shall
not fail to fall upon their heads with violence, according to those clear
Sentences Prove. 11. 31. Behold the Righteous shall be recompensed in the earth,
how much more the wicked and the sinner? and 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18. The time is come
that Judgment must begin at the House of GOD, and if it first begin at us
what shall be the end of those that Obey not the Gospel of GOD? And if the
Righteous shall scarcely be saved where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner
appear? And as our Savior urges from His own Sufferings, Luke 23. 31. If
these things be done in the green Tree, what shall be done in the Dry? So may
we well argue, in our proportion, If GOD will not endure always provocations
from His own, though He love them so well as to forgive them ever: then
doubtless. He will never Suffer the Obstinate Impenitents to go always
unpunisht. If He lay stripes on the back of His Children for their Follies, He
will infallibly, (as the Threatening is in express* Terms Psalm. 68. 21.) Wound
the head of His enemies, and the Hairy scalpe of such an one as goes on still
in his Trespasses. Whether evil men will learn this from GODS correcting His
own, or no: yet by all this it is manifest that it is done partly for that end
to teach and warn them.

2. 2. That there is no cause to reproach Religion for the faults of any.
But withal there is another maine end, why GOD does this, often times within
the sight and hearing of evil men; namely that He may let them see, That they
have no Reason to Blaspheame or Reproach the Name or Religion of GOD, or speak
evil of His ways; because of any scandals that any of His servants run
into. For if they can truly and really blame them for any such misbehaviour;
they may also, within a while be able to discern, (if they will mind it, and
not wilfully shut their eyes against the light of GODS Providence) that GOD is
no favourer of sin in the best of His own; and that as they that offend, do
not therein walk according to the Principles of their own Profession: So no
blame can be charged upon GOD for it, Who takes vengeance upon such
misbehaviours; and makes them ashamed of their misdoings, and afraid of doing
the like again. And this is expressly signified to David, after his great
scandal, That though GOD had pardoned him and put away his sin, that he
should not die: Yet the threatened corrections should come upon him; and that
particularly the misbegotten child should be taken away. Howbeit because by
this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the LORD to
blashpheme, the child also that is borne to thee shall surely di^, 2 Samuel 12.
14. This being GODS manner in all such cases, is ground enough (though men's
wickednesses will not regard it) for ever to stop the mouths of all those that
would blaspheme, when any of GODS people, are guilty of any scandalous offense.
And so we see on all hands Reasons for GODS severity, as well as for His
pardoning Mercy: And all the three Points are dispatched, for the Doctrinall
part of them. I now come to the Application of them all three together: but in
a threefold distinct Use. Applic.
1. Of Humiliation, 2. Of Exhortation, 3. Of Consolation.

1. Use 1. Of Humiliation.
For Humiliation. As the day specially, and extraordinarily calls for it; and
we make special profession of it in this present continued meeting: So do all
the three Points that have been handled meet to recommend and reinforce it.
For 1. if we have learned and are sensible how corrupted we all are,
notwithstanding any Grace we have recived from GOD; and how prone to offend and
provoke Him notwithstanding any faithfulness we have showed toward GOD; And
secondly, If we be apprehensive of GODS answering and pardoning Mercy, and that
we are not yet destroyed, though we have provoked GOD with many of our
inventions; and do still expect Mercy from Him, though we know we shall still
offend Him in many things; And thirdly, If we feel withal for the present
somewhat more, and fear for the future, GODS taking vengeance on our
inventions and misbehaviours; Then surely we have all cause to be humbled in
each one of these respects severally, and much more of all of them together,
and this will be a necessary and profitable foundation for the other two Uses
which are to follow. We call this day a day of Humiliation, GOD grant it may
prove so in His eye and esteem: But the truth is, I fear our days of
Humiliation, are not reckoned by GOD to be such; and that He may put that
question to many of us, and pose us with it; with which He checkes the Jews,
Zach. 7. 5. When you fasted and mourned (so long and so often as you have done)
did you at all fast unto me! even unto me! We come indeed and give attendance
upon GOD outwardly; and we sit (and stand, and kneel) before Him, as His
people, (as the Prophets phrase is, Ezekiel. 33.) But GOD that searches the
hearts, Of which there is but little sign usually before or after the public
Servic^s
and will be worshipped in spirst and in truth, can tell how untowardly men
come, and sees much untowardnesse (I am afraid) in very many of us, even in our
solemnest Humiliations, and saddest expressions of it. And if we our selves may
judge by the consideration how men carry themselves immediately before, and
immediately after, we have little ground to believe, there is any great
Humiliation in men's hearts when they seem to be most abased before GOD. The
day before, or even the morning before, who makes so much as any show by his
discourse, that his thoughts are settling toward the humbling of himself? when
women dare come hither with their bare breasts, and spotted faces, and garish
apparel, is not this as it were to outface GOD? and tell Him they mean
nothing less then to be humbled in heart before Him? while people sitting
here, before the public Services begin, and in the spaces between, show
pleasantness in their looks, and their words savor of nothing but worldly
matters; and as soon as they are gone hence, what ever they have heard or made
show of in public, their language at home, and all their behavior, even the
same night, and much more next morning, have no tincture of any such thing as
affliction of spirit; what can we believe, but that they do not so much as
(that which the Prophet mentions and rejects, Isa. 58.) Afflict themselves for
a day, and bow down their heads like bull-rushes. For with them it is but a
few hours, and not a whole day, and when they are over, then they are as jolly
again, and hold their heads as high as they did before, and all their
pretended Humiliation is gone and forgotten, and not a shadow of it remaining.
Beloved if we do thus, we may please our selves with calling this a day of
Fast and Humiliation, but I am sure there is little Humiliation in that soul
that behaveth it self after this manner.

There was a happy and pious Exhortation to Humiliation set forth some Months
ago by the Authority of the Parliament; I could heartily wish it might be
enjoined to be read every where every Fast Day, in the beginning of the day;
and that to this were added a Charge, that one of the Sermons at least in every
Congregati^n, might be expressly made to move to Humiliation and Repentance: for
I must needs profess, that I much fear that the greatest part, even in the
greatest and best Congregations, can scarcely instruct themselves sufficiently
in the business of such a day, Therefore, To remedy which a constant
Exhortation in one of the Sermons would be greatly profitable.
if when we come to humble our selves, there were not only solemn Confession
of sins by the Ministers, but some earnest and vehement Exhortation to mourn
for the sins confessed and to be confessed, this might perhaps fasten some
better thoughts in the minds of most men, then now, I doubt, do ever so much
as comecrosse their minds. For, though we call the business of such a day,
Prayer and Fasting, yet I verily believe, the most of men do much more mind
the Sermons and Exhortations, then they do the Prayers; N. B.
and men's very countenances declare it, and their demeanor to any one that
does but cast his eye upon them: Some are plainly gazing up and down; and
others put themselves into such a posture, as if they be not extraordinarily
zealous, must needs dispose them much to fall asleep, they could not do
otherwise; But if they be attentive at all, they make some show of it during
the Sermon: and therefore, if some serious thoughts of Humiliation were offered
to them in the Sermon each day, it might put every ones spirit into a much
better frame then now usually they are in.

Let me therefore endeavor this a little: And, though our Mercies have not
been so miraculous, as those the Text speaks of in answering, yet I am sure
our pardons are to be acknowledged very admirable: considering that the sins of
every one of us may be found upon a careful inquiry, to be worse then theirs
who are pointed at in the Text; our evil hearts have found out worse
inventions, and the vengeance that GOD has taken upon those inventions, has,
at least in our conceit, been terrible enough; all which require us to be
greatly humbled for our offenses this day. Three sorts of sins to be humbled
for.
To which purpose, let me chiefly touch upon three things. 1. Some Personal
sins, that we may be remembered of. 2. Some National sins. 3. How far any of
us may be charged with being guilty of these National sins.

First, 1 Personal, namely against our Covenant in general.
For our Personal sins, I would wish all but to remember, generally, our
Covenant, and enquire about breaches of that; and particularly, to see whether
we are not guilty of such kind of sins as we have noted before in any of the
persons whom the Text speaks of. When we entered into our solemn National
Covenant, we even in it publicly professed that we had a serious apprehension
of our own sins and the sins of the Nation calling for GODS wrath against us;
and there is mention made of some special sins, as that we have not as we
ought, valued the inestimable jewel of the Gospel, that we have not labored
for the purity and power thereof; that we have not endeavored to receive
Christ in our hearts, nor to walk worthy of Him in our lives: and we there
also undertake many things, which I am afraid we have much forgotten: and I am
persuaded that there are many, N. B.
that never so much as read it over once since they took it, so little regard
have they of it; and that they cannot name so much as any one sin that they
have forborne, or one duty that they have performed the more for their
Covenants sake: And if this be true, have not such great cause to be humbled,
and to be afraid least GOD take vengeance upon their breach of Covenant? And
indeed how few of us, if we view our faces but in that glass of our Covenant,
can choose but be ashamed and afraid of our not having been true to it and
steadfast in it as we should have been?

But let me instance rather in those kinds of sins, Specially for like sins
to these pointed at in the Text.
that the Worthies in the Text were found faulty in, and ask every conscience
whether it has not somewhat to charge upon it self, in one or other of those
errors? 1. Neglect of Sacraments.
1. We find Moses neglectfull of the Seal of the Covenant for his child,
omitting the Circumcision of his son. I know not why he did so, unless it
were to please his wife; (for he had a Zipporah in his bosom, a Midianitish
wife;) but however, he was too blame in it, in not dedicating his child to GOD,
not valuing the Seal of His Covenant as he should have done. Baptism abused,
Now is there not among us a great deal of guilt in this kind? The little use
that most have made, or do make of their own being baptized, and being made
partakers themselves of that Seal of GODS Covenant, in their childhood, (which
succeeds Circumcision under the Gospel,) and carrying themselves never a whit
the better toward GOD for His receiving them as His so long ago in that
Sacrament; is it not unhappily punished in more then a few, neglected.
with their calling in question, whether children should be so dedicated to
GOD, and partake of that Seal of His Covenant? and so because they have
themselves abused GODS goodness to themselves, they come to deny their own and
others children to have any right to that pledge of His goodness; and so make
amends for one sin with another. The Lords Supper
And do we not see the like in the other Sacrament? Because very many even the
most have had little regard to prepare themselves for the LORDS Supper, and
have come many a time unduely, abused,
unworthily without examination of themselves; and now is it not come to that
pass, neglected.
that great numbers fall off from it altogether, and question, whether they may
come with such and such persons (as they like not,) and if any thing be there
done which they like not of; and so because they never got any good by coming
(as some have not stuck to confess,) they make amends by staying away
altogether, and so are wanting still to the Honor of Christ, and the good of
their own souls; to the augmentation of which that Sacrament was ordained; and
to which it is effectual in all those, that come with faithful and prepared
hearts to it, what ever become of other men.

2. 2. Unwillingnesse to venture upon hard taskes.
As we find Moses unwilling to venture himself upon the wrath of Pharaoh, and
to undertake a troublesome and difficult work: So may we not find among us a
great deal of guilt in this kind? How few are there of us, that can afford to
venture upon undertakings that are like to provoke the wrath of men, specially
great men, against us? How do we shrink, and draw back, and make excuses when
we foresee any difficulty more then ordinary in the employment? Or who can
almost find in his heart to engage himself in a task, whose certainest wages
from men is like to be displeasure and rage?

3. 3. Complaint of our thanklesse and fruitless employments because not
successful at first.
As we find Moses complaining, in a sort, even of GOD Himself, that he was by
Him set about a Thanklesse and Fruitless Employment, and that things were
worse now after his setting upon it then before (though GOD had forewarned him
it would be so at the first,) and afterward, that he was not able to endure it
any longer, and desires to be out of his Life: So are not these the Usual
complaints of many of us, in our several businesses, though gone about at the
Undoubted Command of GOD? Do we not often wish that we had never undertaken
them. (How many speak so of this most necessary defense, which their own
Consciences still tell them is the Command of God?) and frequently cry that
things grow every day worse and worse; and that we are not able to abide it if
it continue thus with us but a while longer? and we would gladly run any
whether, if we knew whether: and sometimes wish we could run out of the
World, So impatient are we of the frowardness of the generation, with which
GOD will have us to wrestle: Even though His Word and all Experience proclaim
to us, that every work, and every Generation has its difficulties: and that
reproaches have ever attended the most noble enterprises, and the Special
Nature of those we are set about, does oftentimes forewarne of special
difficulties to be Vndergon^, as certainly as foul ways in the depth of
Winter. But when these come upon us, do we not very often express a great
deal of discontent, and impatience, in our families, and to others, and scarce
forbear repining at GODS own dealings with us, or know how to make a composed
Prayer to GOD, So disquieted are our minds with disturbances.

4. 4. Distrust passionately discovered, b^f^^e men, by unwarrantable words and
actions.
Again as we find Moses Distrusting GOD, the rather because the Perverseness
of the people provoked his spirit; So that he Discovers Passion and some
Unbeleefe both together, even before the people: which was to the Dishonor of
GOD, as GOD Himself charges him and Aaron both, in the forecited, Numb. 20.
Ye believed me not to sanctify me before the Children of Israel etc. And so he
takes away, which GOD had not appointed him; All which together Provoked GOD ^o
against him: So do we not every one of us, more then Once in our lives, even
in the sight of others, in whose Eyes we should be specially careful to
Sanctify and Glorify GOD, Break out into some impatiencies? Specially when men
deal perversely with us? (not to speak of many of our frowardnesses, when our
selves only are in fault) and even visibly manifest Unbelief and Distrust? and
upon this Venture upon Actions which GOD has not allowed us? And if we find
these things in our selves, (as very few are able to plead Not guilty,) We
have surely great cause to Humble our selves for them this Day, and hereafter;
and the rather because of the Vengeance we find to our Cost, that GOD takes
upon our Inventions and Practices in this kind. And specially when our Sins
are such, as come into public View. GOD bore with Moses his Impatience and
pang of Unbelief Numb. 11. when it was only in secret between GOD and Moses:
But when it came to the Notice of Israel Numb. 20. Then GOD was pleased even to
make so faithful a Servant an Example, Then which there is scarce a greater in
all the book of GOD, to make us Humble; and afraid of any Miscarriage in the
sight of Men. And if we would observe it narrowly; We should find, that though
GOD be not so severe altogether in outward respects now to the generality of
His servants, as He was then to some, of whom we have the records in Scripture
( for We have the records but of some, and those few, in the Scripture that are
owned as faithful; and but of some failings of theirs; and now and then of
some Vengeance taken on those failings;) N. B.
Yet seldom do any of His Servants break out into faults before the Eyes of
bystanders; but Some kind of Vengeance or other, is (ere long) taken on those
faults, even before the Eyes of those that saw their Miscarriage: Though this
the corrupt and careless Heart of Men Seldom observes so much as they do the
other.

5. 5. Complying with others (...).
Again, as Aaron several times is found faulty in yielding to and complying
with others in their practices of untowardnes: So how frequently do we the
like? Those that can and do keep themselves upright when they are alone, or in
good company, out of Temptation; Yet are they not very many times overcome with
the Importunities of Ill companions, (Specially of a Multitude) to comply with
them in their Ills? and possibly even to be their Agents and Instruments to do
very badde Acts for them and with them? But much more, if those that are our
near and dear friends, and specially being themselves godly, prove to be
Tempters to us any way, and give us ill example; how seldom do we stand out
against such a Shocke? But we murmurre against our Superiors and betters, as
they do; and we distrust GOD, and discover our Incredulity to others, as they
do before us. And indeed do we not very often think this excuse enough for
us; that the general Sway of people goes thus, and they will have it so and
so? or that such and such think or speak so as well as we, and gave us the
example before we ventured upon it? But GOD by His dealings with Aaron for
these failings, would humble us for ours in like kind, and make us know, that
this will not stand for an excuse with Him; and that if we follow others
Solicitations or practices in evil, GOD at His pleasure may make us lead the
way to them in Correction, as Aaron suffered before Moses, for the same fault,
wherein Moses gave the Example, and was (as it should seem) the chief in the
Offense.

6. 6. Partiality in employing and conniving at friends.
Finally, as Samuel appears to have been faulty, in putting his Sons into
great Offices, and places of Iudicatory; and not so careful (as he should) to
punish or remove them, upon complaint of their Miscarriages: So are we not much
and often too blame in this kind? how partial are we to those that are our
own? How does our affection often commend them to places of Employment and Trust,
beyond their abilities or merit? And afterward, how ill can we endure to have
any complaint against them, when yet there is all the reason in the world to
complain? Even when we our selves can be severe enough against such a fault in
the Abstract, or in one altogether a stranger to us. But how is the case
altered if it prove to be a child or a kinsman, a friend or even but a servant?
Do we not often take it very hainously, that men should find any fault with
such? and if we be Innocent our selves (as Samuel was in his personal
Judicature altogether) do we not conceit (as he seems to speak somewhat that
way, 1 Samuel 12. 2.) That our virtue should bear out their vice. But this GOD
will have us know to be a miserable delusion; and that He will take it the more
hainously at their hands that are so badd, when we give them better example;
and at ours too, in fine, if we let them alone; and do not improve our virtue
to correct their vice: For then their vice in the practice will prove ours in
the connivence; and they and we together may be made to smart for it; as it was
in Samuels case; but specially in Elies in the first chapter of that book. And
now let us (as we were well warned in the morning,) consider our ways and
humble our selves before GOD for any of these evils that may be found in us
personally, or for any other, for which our consciences use to fly in our
faces in any respect: and let GODS Mercies and Corrections both, help on our
Humiliation for them, this day and henceforward.

Hereunto let us add in the next place, National sins to be humbled for;
the consideration of National sins, and be humbled for them also. And there
is a necessity of this also, both in reference to the public judgments and
calamities lying upon the Nation; and our public fastings and supplications
for the Nation. Otherwise in both, we take GODS Name in vain: His Providence
in the one, His Ordinances in the other. We are not rightly affected with GODS
Corrections upon the Nation; nor can we Pray, as becomes us for the Nation, if
we be not humbled for the sins of the Nation, generally in those manifest
particulars which we our selves are not ignorant of; or of which at least,
there is a cry, by such as are concerned in them, or observant of them. Of
three sorts.
These let me set before you in a threefold consideration. 1. Relating to the
better party among us. 2. To the generality of people in City and Country,
every where. 3. To our Armies, which maintain our Cause, and the cause of
Religion, and our Laws and Liberties, and all that is dear to us.

Of the first sort, 1. The sins of those that pretend to be faithful.
I am the more occasioned to speak, because our Text points at the sins even
of faithful men, as we have often said: and therefore we may well think upon
the sins, of such as would seem to be faithful. And there is yet a further
consideration that may move us to lay them sadly to heart, namely, That 1.
However some now adays preach and proclaim, that it is only for the sins of
those that are notoriously profane, drunkards, swearers, etc. and not for
sins of believers and justified persons, that GODS judgments are upon the
Land: Yet the word of GOD makes it evident, that it is otherwise, Necessity of
this consideration.
and that the sins of those that are GODS people by more special profession,
(and sometimes even of His most faithful servants, As David's numbering the
people, and Hezekiahs pride and vainglory undeniably) have especial
influence to bring National judgments. 2. And we have very great cause to
judge so at this time; and to be humbled in a special manner in that regard.
For if we consider that the stroke of GODS displeasure lights not only upon our
enemies, the enemies of GOD and His true Religion; nor only upon the prophaner
sort of the people of the Land, but generally upon all, and in some respects
more heavily upon the well-affected party of the Kingdom: N. B.
We must needs acknowledge (unless we will disparage at once, both GODS Mercy
and His Justice too) that not only the enemies and the profane sort have
provoked Him with their inventions: But even those that have given up their
Names to Him in a peculiar manner have given Him just occasion to take
vengeance on their inventions too, and to punish all sorts, one with another,
and one by another. It could not else be, that GOD should so long and so much
appear to be angry with His people that prays; to overlook so much so many
solemn Fasts and seekings of Him; to regard no more such beginnings of
Reformation as are among us: None therefore can be excused of any of these
sorts; And they that are, or seem to be best, are most hopeful to take this
to heart, and to help (consequently) to reform themselves and others too, by
being thus put in mind of the evils that even the Religious party are guilty of.

And here let me begin with this Question first, that whereas my Reverend
Brother that spoke in the morning, put it to our consciences, that we should
not rest in the enquiry, whether we were not better then some others, or only
better then what we had been before, but whether we were answerable to the
Rules of the Word; I would go a step back; Are not many apparently worse
then they were wont to be?
and put it to every conscience, whether people are not worse then they have
been? Even many of those that still profess to retain some good, and perhaps
some greatly zealous of the public Cause. I must needs speak it, though with
a great deal of grief of heart, that to my eye and observation, and of diverse
very judicious and observant men who complain much and often of it; That a
number of those that profess GODS Name very forwardly in some things, are yet
grown worse, rather th^n better, in diverse others: In signs of pride.
1. That apparel, those fashions, and those garbes of behavior, that would
have been accounted abominations 7. or 10. years ago, are now taken up
without seruple, by those that will go for Religious people: and if pride did
testify to men and women's faces in former times; it does much more now* when
so many solemn days of Humiliation kept by them, publicly and privately,
has wrought no amendment, but while many complain of their being poorer,
every one may see them as proud as ever, Neglect of the Sabbath.
if not rather more. 2. Those that, some years ago, made great conscience of
the Sabbath, and of Family Duties, are now, many of them, come even to
question, Whether the Sabbath be at all to be observed or no? and though they
deny not, that family-devotions are duties, yet they themselves do little
regard that their families should observe them; and their families scarce seem
to have any desire of them. Of family duties.
3. Some that were, by their own confession, so greatly conscientious of secret
Prayer, Secret Prayer,
as that they could never omit it without an inward check, now do not make any
the le^st show that they take any time for it day or night: I am afraid I am
now in the bosoms of some that hear me this day; and I wish every conscience
to examine themselves, whether in these things they are not grown worse then
they were wont to be? whether (I say) though they keep many a solemn Fast, not
only publicly at home and abroad, yet they do not pray less at home with
their families, and less in their clossets? And it is said, that some are
grown such enemies to sanctification and duties of holiness, and so impudent,
that they dare profess openly, Even despised.
They thank GOD, they can now go a whole fortnight without prayer and it
never troubles them. Is this, think we, the amendment that GOD looks for at
our hands? Are not here fearful inventions for Him to take vengeance upon? In
self-seekings.
4. Is there not much selfe-seeking apparent in all kind of undertakings?
ambitious putting themselves forward, and practices to make themselves rich, by
every employment? 5. How many Errors, Errors, and strange opinions and
practices.
and strange opinions are there to be found even among such as are all
pretenders to the way of Truth? (besides many usurping Ministerial Offices,
and exercising Ministerial acts without any Calling, and not a few without so
much as a show of any competent Gifts. A spirit of bitterness against all that
dissent from them.
) 6. Is there not extreme censoriousnesse, and a spirit of bitterness, in very
many seeming good, against all those that agree not with them in every one of
their opinions, even so far as to throw them off as no Christians; how much
soever they evidence of virtue and piety in other respects? Certainly this is
not according to the word of Christ: Nor are these behaviors becoming a
people that desire to Honor that Royal Name by which they are called. And
therefore these call for special Humiliation at our hands. In conclusion this
I am forced to say, with the great grief of my soul, that so far as I am
able to judge by all that I see and hear where ever I come, The Religion and
devotion of a great many even of those who formerly gave better hopes of their
being sincere, does now empty it self, into formalities, solemn Fasts and
speaking for the public Cause, and withal being violent for their own
opinions and interests and those that maintain them with them. But withal
this I must needs add, that the more any of us is convinced, that this is
true, the more cause have we, and all that truly fear GOD to be humbled before
Him for these general evils, of the Religious part of our Nation; and the more
cause to be afraid, that we are not so near a deliverance, as we sometimes
would gladly think: But rather to be persuaded that before GOD will deliver
us, He will put us into another frame and temper of spirit, then we are now in,
that He will mar our pride, and tame our wildness, and curb us in our
pursutes of selfe-respects, quell our scandalous behaviors, and (as He
promises more then once by His Prophets) give us one heart and one way; All
which as yet, after all warnings and shows of humiliations, and blows, and
favors, we seem very far from; and therefore still it is fit to call us to
sad humiliation for these provocations, in the first place.

The second consideration of National sins, 2 The sins of the generality.
referres to the body of the Nation. Of whose sins I will not now take upon me
to give you a large catalogue. But they generally empty themselves into these
three capital evils: Ignorance, Ignorance.
Covetousness and Profaneness. Of the first, I confess I can never think
seriously, without trembling and scarce with any patience, that no more is done
any where to dispell that horrid mist of darkness that covers the faces and
hearts of very many thousands in these days of light: while in the mean time,
they themselves, scorn and hate knowledge, specially because they see they may
be let alone in it. Covetousness.
For the second, It is apparently the sin of the Country; and of the City
too, and the general sin, that at least all men well nigh are accused of and
cried out upon for. And apparently in the most there is too much reason for
such a cry. Go but into any place, and what is the great business that you
find every one almost set upon? studying how to be a gainer even by others
losses, at least to ease himself in public payments and taxations, and lay
great load upon others, specially upon those that are faithful. If they can
but get into an Office, have any thing to do in Sequestrations, what is the
improvement that is made of it by too many (alas*) but to fill their own
purses, with extortion, oppression, delaying and perverting Justice; and
withal ordinarily to favor Malignants, and overburden the best Affected and
most forward for the public Service? And above all others, setting themselves
to make the faithful Ministers that are among them bear the greatest load
that may be; Use 1. Humiliation for National sins.
If there be any way to eat out the heart of his means of subsistence, and
even of all his comforts, he shall be sure to find this measure at their hands,
his Taxations shall be heavier then any other, Store of Soldiers biletted and
quartered in his house; and withal his Tithes and dues withheld and denied,
with pretense one while that they are Jewish, another while that they are
Popish; any thing that they may weary him out, and that they may either have no
Minister at all, or only one altogether according to their own lusts. 3.
Profaneness.
3. And this falls into the consideration also of their Profaneness, which is
most notorious every where. Formerly, even in the ill times, a conscionable
Minister in some places could do somewhat toward the bringing his people to
knowledge, who now wholly cast off the yoke, (because there is no Government
neither Ecclesiastical nor Civil, that they think will at all meddle with
them how refractory soever they be,) and grow more brutish and barbarous, every
day then other. And now above all former times, whoredom and adultery, do
fearfully abound and grow impudent; even Incest is to be found in diverse
places, and no punishment to be found for it. What should I speak of Oaths,
Cursings and Blasphemies? which are notoriously known to be most rise among all
sorts, old and young, even children not excepted, that with their first
language, have learned this language of Hell, and never forget it all their
lives long. In a word, what outrage of wickedness is there that we have not
just cause to believe to be too ordinary among our people? In this common
lawlessenesse and licentiousness of the times, how few are there, that are not
altogether unbridled in their lusts, and audacious in their profaneness? N. B.
They that were wont to make great outcryes against those hungry souls, that
went abroad to other Churches to seek their spiritual food, when they had not
sufficient Provision at home; are now themselves become runners away from their
own Parishes if there be a faithful conscionable Minister there, that they may
go to one that is Malignant, superstitious or scandalous, (or all this) or
under pretense of going abroad, and taking their liberty, (as others do) they
altogether stay at home, as specially they do upon the Fast-dayes, and are not
ashamed or afraid to be known to be at work; Or else go and spend their time
in Tavernes or Alehouses, or other places of lewdness; as it were in contempt
of GOD, and of all His Judgments, as well as His Ordinances. And this is the
woeful account that a general survey of the generallity of our people can
bring in to a conscientious inquirer after their spiritual condition. Use 1.
Humiliation for National sins.
Not but that there is unquestionably a number of faithful ones, that do (as
the Church expresses, Isa. 26.) wait for GOD in the way of His Judgments, and
are bettered by His chastisements that now lie upon us: But yet the corruption
of all sorts is a thing, that we all use to complain of by fitts, and is so
notoriously apparent that we cannot deny with any conscience, but that the
evils upon the Nation are most righteously inflicted by GOD, as a just
vengeance taken on the manifold evil inventions that provoke Him throughout
the Nation. And this still adds to the necessity of our humiliation before
Him, and under His mighty hand for these things.

3. 3 The sins of our Armies.
Thirdly, We have yet the consideration of our Armies to be affected with: The
sins of our Armies do in a special manner call us to humiliation. And we our
selves do in effect profess and proclaim so much. Our assembling together
this day, and joining in Prayer and Fasting, (and so in humiliation, at least
in pretense) is specially to obtain a Blessing upon that Army which is
Commanded by his Excellency our Noble Lord General. This is well. But if we
mean to get good by it; to prevail with GOD for them, and in them for our
selves, we must lament and be humbled for their sins as well as our own; and so
for the sins of out other Armies. Observe the Records of GODS Providence in His
Sacred Word, the Epitomie of all His Providence throughout all ages, N. B.
and you ever shall find, That where there was no special sin in the Armies of
His people, or in those that sent them forth, there they ever prevailed; and
never were they foiled, but you shall read^ either before hand, or shortly
after the mention of the defeat, the sin that so provoked GOD to take
vengeance. Therefore as we fear any overthrow, and pray against it, we must
acknowledge both our own sins, and theirs who are engaged to fight for us. And
if we consider the matter rightly, It is a fearful thing, that among those,
who profess to maintain the common Cause of the Nation, there should be such
quarrels and dissentions, such emulations and heart-burnings, as if men sought
nothing but themselves, their own Honors and advantages; that they that fight
for the Liberties of the Nation, should commit so many outrages, and practice
such rapine and spoil, as it is most certain many of them do; and it is
said, Use 1. Humiliation for sins.
there is little difference between their plunderings and the enemies, whom all
cry out upon as very barbarous: that among those who pretend to have taken
Arms to defend Religion and the Gospel, there should be a loud noise of their
swearing, and drunkenness, and profaneness, of whoredom, and of doing injury
to our own friends, and specially to those that are greatest friends and best
affected to the Gospel and Religion; as if they were gaged to fight against
it, and to eat them up. If these things be so, (as there is nothing more
certain then that they are too too common in our Armies,) If our Armies go
forth and manage the Wars (as there is too evident signs of it,) with very
much carnal confidence in themselves and their strengths and worldly
advantages, (the common fault of us all in a great measure,) And if there be
among them, men that desire and design, to prolong our troubles, and lengthen
out the War, that they may make the better purchase of their employments and
charges, of which there is but too much cause of suspicion: We cannot justly
wonder, that our Armies prosper no better, we may rather wonder, GOD has taken
no more vengeance hitherto upon their sins and ours together: And we cannot
expect that GOD should go forth with them any more, except we and they be
truly and sadly humbled for their sins and ours, and on all hands there be an
endeavor of amendment; of which more by and by.

Mean time, 3. Our being guilty of others sins.
I have a word to add of the third sort of sins which require our present
humiliation, namely our own being guilty of others si^s, of the sins of the
Nation, of which whatsoever we find lying upon us, ought very much to press us
down, and increase our humiliation before GOD, and our fear of His vengeance
upon our untowardnesses. And here, truly, I doubt we must all lay our hands
upon our hearts, and acknowledge a great deal more guilt, then we use to take
notice of: Even therefore a great deal of guilt in our selves, both because we
use to take so little notice, of much of that National guilt that oppresses
us; as also because we are so little affected with godly sorrow, for those
evils which we seem to take some notice of. We complain much*
I know that by fitts we all abound in complaints, of the general depravation,
and overspreading corruption of all sorts and ranks among us; and that there
is much hearing and little practicing, much outward humiliation and little
reformation, that one knows not whom to employ and whom to trust, that all
seek their own and not the things of Jesus Christ, that there is a great deal
of pretense of conscience, and pleading for Reformation; and very little signs
of conscience, or of real intention or desire of any Reformation, more then of
th^se things that have been or are like to be troublesome to themselves. These
and many such like complaints (with a great deal of more bitterness, and many
sharper accents) worse to utter often, in discourses one among another; And
specially, when we hear any in news. when GOD gives us any blow, we are ready
to fly upon some sins that do most displease us in other men, in the
generality perhaps: But not to GOD.
But how little do we take notice of any of these things, when we are alone?
when none is with us, but GOD and our own consciences? Use 1. Humiliation for
our guiltiness of others sins.
When we are to pray to GOD for the Nation, and that His wrath may be turned
away from it; how seldom then do we think of these things, and spread them
before the Lord, with an humble and afflicted spirit, begging of Him pardon and
healing? Is it not rather true, that in His presence, and before His Tribunal,
we dare not own the charging of others with such and such things, Sometimes we
dare not.
about which we sometimes make loud outcries in the ears of men? we either
dare not avouch the very things to be crimes, in the account of GOD; or else
know we have no sure ground or warrant to accuse such and such persons or
multitudes as guilty of them. Again, even those things that are undeniable
faults and notoriously practiced, even by the generality, yet how little do we
take them to heart, But seldom ^^y them to heart.
when we should most? On such a day as this, when we all solemnly profess our
business to be humiliation, even for others sins as well as our own; and when
the Ministers of GOD bemoane them in their confessions and prayers, and set out
the aggravations of them, how few hearts join affectionately with them? and
how little do we usually tremble at the hearing of them? Even when in the
Sermons preached on these days, (though seldom sufficiently pointed this way)
we have any catalogue, breefer or larger, of National wickedness set before
us, with any exaggerations of the evils of them, and any inferences from hence
of the great danger we are in of GODS heavy wrath, to abide still upon us, and
be multiplied upon us; how do our hearts then shrink from the consenting to
the truth of such charges and threatenings? and we are ready to deny or mince
our former complaints, for fear least GOD should judge us out of our own
months as a Nation worthy to be destroyed. And the cause of all this, is a
further evil in our selves, Specially we want zeal for Reformation.
a want of true zeal to endeavor a through Reformation, (though we have all
Covenanted and sworn it to GOD' before His people) so much as by words. Rather
when any kind of necessity presses us, be it but the importutunity of a godly
Christian, or the exhortation of a faithful Minister, to do something more
then we have done toward an effectual Reformation; We fall to fancying and
framing excuses, not for our neglect only, but oftentimes for others evils;
and so make them greatly ours, by our want of care to apply some vigorous
remedy to them according to our places, ( I excuse not the most zealous
faithful Ministers, much less my self herein,) whereby we might suppress
them, and prevent GODS vengeance upon them. Therefore this again summons us to
reinforce our humiliation, our sorrow and our fear. And I cannot forbear
putting you in mind of that expostulation of the Prophet, Ezekiel 33. 24* etc.
though with variety of instance, and enlargement of the application. The people
there flattered themselves with a conceit that GOD intended to give them peace
in possessing the Land, from whence their brethren were driven, Applic. Use 1.
Humiliation for the danger of our sins.
or carried away captives. Abraham (say they) ver. 24. was one, and he
inherited the Land, but we are many, the Land is given us for an inheritance.
But GOD answers them with an appeal to their own consciences first, and then
with a peremptory threatening of the contrary, ver. 25, 26, 27. You eat with
the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your Idols and shed blood, and shall
ye possess the Land? Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination and ye
defile every one his neighbors wife, and shall ye possess the Land? Say thou
thus unto them, Thus says the LORD GOD, surely they that are in the waste
shall fall by the sword, etc. Have not we too much of such confidence as they
expressed? And yet no less cause to fear such an answer from GOD as that was.
You thus and thus misbehave your selves, and shall you have peace? shall you
have settling? shall you possess the Land? May we not also much rather admire
the patience and long suffering of GOD toward us all this while, that a
complete vengeance has not been taken upon our mis-doings as well as upon
Germanies and Irelands? and even upon some parts of our own Kingdom and
Nation? And if we sadly consider how GOD did not spare those faithful men, the
Text points at, did not let faithful Moses and Aaron the Saints of the LORD,
live to see the happiness of His people inheriting the Land of Promise, may we
not upon the remembrance of our greater provocations, tremble least, none of us
should be suffered to live to see an end of our troubles? and the Church of GOD
peaceably settled in a holy Reformation? Sure we have no reason to expect it,
unless we live to see (and help to procure) our own hearts, and lives, and
families, and whole party, to be apparently more faithful. Oh that we could
lament for these things this day, and be possessed with a holy fear, and amazing
trembling! That we could apply in proportion, that speech of our Savior to our
selves, Luke 23. Weep for your selves and for your children, for if these
things be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry? If Moses,
Aaron and Samuel escaped not, but GOD took vengeance on their inventions,
notwithstanding His Grace in answering and pardoning them, how shall we or our
people escape? Let us therefore all lay our hands on our hearts and say at
once, The LORD is Righteous in all that He has done, or threatens to do to
us, and withal, that it is of the LORDS Mercies that we are note consumed,
because His compassions fail not; As the Prophet teaches the Church to say in
the book of Lamentations. And this will prepare us for a wise consideration of
what we are farther to do upon these grounds. To which the second Use, namely
of Exhortation tends, To which now I come.

The Exhortation Applic. Use 2. Exhortation to be watchful and resolute in
faithfulness in all things.
proceeds again upon the Grounds of all the three Doctrines forementioned, and
the humiliation insisted upon in the former Use together. For, if we be all so
prone to sin, even though we have some faithfulness; and if GOD, be so
Gracious; and yet so severe toward His faithful ones; of all which our own and
our Nations experience at this day, has forced us to this days outward
humiliation, and calls us to be deeply humbled in our inward spirits both this
day and hereafter: Then certainly we are all to be most earnestly exhorted, to
be more watchful and resolute then ever, to keep close to GOD, and to be in
all things constantly faithful with Him. Some vigilance and some resolution
all the faithful servants of GOD have, to keep themselves from those ways and
practices which displease GOD and would provoke Him against them. But they are
often wanting in both, and sometimes specially in the one, and sometimes in the
other. We are not always so watch full over our selves and mindful of our
duties, as we should be; and sometimes when we are not ignorant or forgetful
altogether, yet we are transported with sinful distempers, whereby we offend
GOD and draw down His Judgments. As therefore we are apprehensive of our own
sinful corruptions inclining us to transgress, and as we love GOD who has
been ever kind to us, and answered, and even pardoned us many a time, forgiven
many a sinful invention of ours; and as we dread His severe correction, the
vengeance that may light upon our untowardnesse: As we acknowledge our selves
to be either in GODS debt, or in His danger (as indeed our Text and all
experience tells us we are both) Let us ^emember to walk circumspectly, Ephesians
5. 15.
and watchfully over our selves and humbly with GOD, Mich. 6. 8.
in His fear, Prove. 23. 17.
all the day long, 1 Pet. 1. 17.
and all our lives long: And as our Savior speaks to His Disciples, He
speaks to us, Mark. 13. 37. What I say unto you, I say unto all, watch. GOD
has deserved it at our hands, and He will do again: And if we will not
regard it, we shall be made weary of the contrary. Let me therefore pursue this
Exhortation unto some special Applications. In which I may be (I hope) a
little bolder then might perhaps seem fit in the former Use. If we be wanting
but in a degree, Exhortation is not only necessary, but the least that can be,
in the total silence whereof, (besides the sin of it,) there is no ground of
hopes of amendment. And if we be already forward, we shall yet be the better,
if the wise man have any skill in reason or experience, when he faith in the
Name of Wisdom, that is of Christ Himself, Give instruction to a wise man,
and he will yet be wiser, teach a just man and he will increase in learning,
Prove. 9. 9.

Let me therefore again put you in mind of that which undeniably, Use 2.
Exhortation to observe our solemn Covenant.
we ought all to remember this day, namely, Our Solemn Covenant, our National
Covenant, wherein specially we are engaged both to GOD and to His people, even
to three Nations, to express our faithfulness both in general and in maine
particulars; which doubtless it well remembered and effectually applied to our
consciences and practices will prove a matter of very great blessing to us, and
of prejudice and mischief otherwise. You had many excellent remembrances in
the morning, Give me leave to add a few more. And as I desired before, that
the Exhortation to Humiliation might be constantly read (and commented upon, I
mean the matter of it) every Fast day; So let me now make an other humble
motion, for the Covenant to be also read in the close of every such day. A wish
that it were read every Fast day.
I cannot but again say, I am much afraid, it has been little pondered by the
most of us since we have taken it. And undoubtedly the great business aimed at
in every rightly observed Fast, is the renewing of a Solemn Covenant with GOD,
It is a duty altogether indispensible. And unto this Covenant we have very
great bonds lying upon us to tie us most strictly. We lifted up our hands to
GOD in it, in the day of our calamity, in the time of our fear and trouble,
when we were very low. And since that time GOD has raised us up very high; in
comparison of our condition then, and afforded us a great deal of help, from
men, and from Himself; and it contains both the general of all our duties to
GOD and man, and very maine and most necessary particulars, justly and wisely
limited. We may then assure our selves, that GOD will require it, (in whole and
in part) at all our hands. And we cannot think less in reason and Religion,
then that this is one of the causes why the war continues, to fulfill the
threatening, Lev. 26. 21, I will send a sward among you, to avenge the quarrel
of my Covenant? I do not forget that the sword was unsheathed and raging among
us, before this Covenant was entered into. But I must needs believe, that the
cause why the Covenant has not overcome the sword, is because we have not kept
it so faithfully as we should, and that upon this not keeping it me are to
charge all the vengeance that we have smarted with, ever since we took it, and
so it will be fit for us to do, ever hereafter. Let me beseech every one
therefore again and again to be watchful and resolu^e in cleaving closer to
it hereafter, and to GOD in it. We all pretend, all our hopes to be in GOD, and
doubttesse we have reason to place them all upon Him, and His keeping Covenant
with us. If we then do not keep Covenant with Him, He will make us know, that
it is even a part of His Covenant, Psalm. 89. 30 and ^. (...) scou^ge us and
correct us for it. And this may be (...) If we put Him to it, any one of us may
be made an example, and even all of us, if we will needs provoke Him. Let us
therefore, (I humbly pray every one that hears me this day,) Take he^d of that
s^a^e mentioned, Prove. 20, 25. Of making inquiry, after we have made so solemn
a Vow to GOD; that is, of setting our wits upon the rack, and our consciences
upon the tenterhookes, how we may invent shifts to be loose from the bond of
it, in general or in any particular. Take h^ed of offering to elude it,
Let us not seek evasions to elude the plain meaning of the words in any
phrase, nor the known sense of those that offered it to us, or our own real
meaning (according to both those) when we first entered into it. We would not,
(we do not, I am sure, in any thing that concerns ourselves) endure this in
any other. Can we think then that GOD will endure it in us. We know, each one
of us must needs be undone, Least others break Covenant with us.
if others whom we suppose firmly tied to us (even by this Covenant, in City
and Country,) should prove treacherous to us. Yet what juster vengeance can
there be, then that GOD should punish our falsenesse to Him, (if we should
preve false,) with other men's treacherousnesse toward us? Let us not then put
off the observation of it to others, we our selves being engaged in it as
deeply as they; and specially those that have been Authors and promotours of
others to take it, are to be mindful of their own greater obligation to be
exemplary in the keeping of it. Specially if we urge it on others.
Else that of the Apostle, Romans 2. 1, etc. will be unhappily applicable to us.
Thou art therefore inexcusable o man whosoever thou art that judge, for
wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge
do the same things. But we know that the judgment of GOD is according to
Truth against them that do such things. And think thou this o man that
judge them, that doc such things, that thou shall escape the judgment of
GOD, etc. There are some (and but some as yet) against whom there has been
proceedings for refusing to enter into this Covenant, And proceed against them
refusing.
and yet they all have pretended conscience for refusing it. Certainly they,
(or at least some among them) will rise up in judgment against us, if we make
not the more conscience of keeping it. Better it is that thou should not Vow,
(says the Kingly Preacher, Eccles. 5. 5.) then that thou should Vow and not
pay. Let me therefore conclude this general Exhortation with the words of the
verse before, Take heed of delayings.
ver. 4. When thou have vowed a Vow to GOD, defer not to pay it, for He has
no pleasure in fools, pay that that thou have vowed. Adding hereunto the
latter part of the sixth verse, Wherefore should GOD be angry with thee and
destroy the work of thy hands? In some things delay is an apparent breach of a
Vow, or Covenant, to GOD or Men, In m^st things, it endangers a breach. Let us
therefore look what we have done all of us in pursuit of our Covenant? and
what we are yet a doing? What we have neglected? or delayed? and be quickened by
all this, to reinforce our watchfulness and resolution to stick to it and
fulfill it to the uttermost hereafter.

In particular, Particularly, 1. In personal Reformation.
Let me first begin with the latter part, with that which concerns, the
personal Reformation, of every one of us. And indeed, unless every one do
begin here ( begin at home) it is to no purpose to think (or talk) of
reforming others. And herein, as we need not, so we must not stay for others,
but strive to excel others, ( the only lawful ambition, and to which our
Covenant does in express terms tie us, to go one before another in the
example of a real Reformation,) and to be patterns to others, and lights to
direct and excite others to follow us. If we do not this, none of us knows,
but GOD may single us out to be examples of vengeance taken on our misdoings in
a sudden and terrible manner. And this the sooner and the sorer the more
Sermons we hear, and the more Fasts we keep, In all which we do then but
add more danger to our selves, and treasure up more wrath against the day of
wrath. What shall GOD do with us, if all these things will not amend us? added
to the examples of (at least) some others, that are and will be eminently
faithful, whatever we are, or list to be; and added to our own fears, even
testified by this days extraordinary humiliation, and our attendance upon it,
so many hours? How (can we think) GOD will or can endure us, if we dishonor
Him, even but secretly (if wilfully) and much more if openly, when He would not
endure it at Moses, Aarons, Samuels hands, as our Text tells us? When He broke
David's bones, for his misdoings, (though He loved him more dearly and owned
his fidelity most eminently) as David himself tells all the world, Psalm. 51.
And the more eminent any are for their rank, abilities, employments,
profession, the worse would their misbehaviours be, because the more noted, and
so the more scandalous. And there is nothing that disposes people of mean
quality to be atheists, N. B.
ox live like such, then to see eminent persons break solemn Covenants with
GOD and Men: This therefore we may infallibly conclude, GOD will not fail to
take vengeance upon, sooner or later, in whomsoever it be found.

2. 2. In Family Reformation.
Let us remember, that our Covenant also reaches to a care of our families, and
a Reformation of them ( all others under our power and charge both in public
and private, are the words of our Covenant;) and we make our selves
transgressors, if we look not to them also, as well as to our own persons.
And now I am speaking of families, Neglected much.
I profess the thought of it makes me tremble, what conceit soever others have
of this matter; and I cannot contain my self from falling again into a sad
complaint of it, though but in a word. I think there was never much Religion
in families, in this Kingdom, (though perhaps not more in other places,) But I
am verily persuaded that of many years there was never less then now. In that
little observation that I have been able to make, of late; I cannot see that
which I expected in diverse places, but less care even of Family-Devotions, and
scarce any care at all of particular instruction or inspection. Do not diverse,
who seem very forward themselves for the Cause of GOD among us, harbor those
in their houses, whom they know to bear no good will at all to it, but to
favor and even plead for our enemies; and yet they use no endeavor to put
them into a better mind? But specially how many are there that know their very
children and much more their servants, have no savor at all of Religion: and
yet they cannot find in their hearts to attempt in the least to Principle or
persuade them better? Is this the fruit of our Covenant? Was this the meaning
of any in this particular, to promise enough, but intend to perform nothing?
or at least now are they at liberty to do nothing of what they have so
solemnly and sacredly promised and sworn? I confess, I see no very great
fruits of our Covenant in any respect among the most, But of all other things,
as little in this matter of Family-Reformation as any thing; not to say less.
But how will GOD take this at our hands, do we think? Urged.
or how did GOD take it at Samuels hands, that he was so partial to his sons,
as has been noted? But specially how did GOD take it at Elies hand, though a
good man? You know the story in the beginning of the first book of Samuel, what
terrible vengeance GOD threatened and took upon the inventions, the wicked
practices of Elies sons and his indulgence to them, and yet he gave them a
severe and grave admonition, 1 Samuel 2. which is much more then a great many
do, who know (or hear) enough of the ills of their families, which yet they
overlooke and silence, as if it did not at all concern them, as if their good
or ill were nothing at all to them. But so thought not Abraham, the Father of
all Covenanters with GOD, he not only at GODS command brought all his family
(though so numerous as it exceeded 300. who were able to bear Arms, Genesis 14.)
into Covenant with GOD, Genesis 17. But GOD takes notice of his care and
conscience to charge and command them all to keep GODS ways, and promises him
and them special favor for it, Genesis 18. 17, 18. And Joshuah the Governor of
Israel, undertakes for all his house, and family, (what ever Israel did or
would do) that they should serve the LORD, Josh. 24. 15. So we have David's Vow
for himself, and family (and Kingdom also) Psalm. 101. and the story of all
the Saints and Converts in the New Testament insinuates a care in them to draw
in their households with them. Zacheus, Lidia, the Jaylour ( the most unlikely
family of all others) and diverse more. This was the very reason why GOD
commanded, that all, (even the servant's bought with money) should be
Circumcised, as well as the Master of the family himself, to show that he
would have none neglected in matter of Religion, as not belonging to him. And
if we will not look to this, specially have such an engagement upon us (as
David speaks in another case, Thy Vows are upon me o GOD, Psalm 56. 12.) GOD
can, and we have cause to expect that He will, as He may most justly, raise up
evil unto us out of our own houses, make our servants or even our children
plagues and mischiefs to us. As many of our brethren in Ireland found from
their servants, and many in England find now from their very children.

3. In refer^^ng our Armies
The same clause of our Covenant calls upon those who have the regulating of
our Armies, to extend their care to Reform them also. I have not wisdom
enough to prescribe the particular way how this may be done. But this I may be
bold to say, that if we wittingly suffer wickedness to be in our Camps, or
Garrisons, or Quarters, we cannot expect that GOD should prosper them, any
where. GOD Himself gives the warning, Deuteronomy. 23 9. And He tells Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. that He was not with Israel, nor with all the house of Ephraim, that
was because they were wilful Idolaters, and obstinate in other wickednesses.
And certainly if GOD be not with our Armies, any where, they were better stay
at home. And if their sins fight against Him, (as all allowed sins do) there
is no reason to think He will fight for them. He has given them diverse
blows at sundry times, and in several places, Scarce any one of our Armies
has escaped a blow always: Doubtless then it was their sins that had a share
in provoking that vengeance. If we pray to GOD to bless them (as we do
specially this day) and fast and humble our selves before GOD for their sins
also as well as our own, and yet do not labor to reform them, ( though we
know that prayer is vain that is not seconded with endeavors) what do we
less then even tell GOD, that we desire His blessing upon them, though they
continue still in their wickednesses: And then if they prove cowards or
treacherous, or that GOD give their enemies the upper hand of them, we can
thank or blame none more then our selves. And truly this ( to me) is one of
the great causes, why the people of GOD that maintain His cause here and in
other Nations, have fewer victories, and more frequent overthrows now adays
then they had under the Old Testament, that we suffer those notorious
wickednesses in our Armies, that were not suffered then, and that we even make
up our Armies much of the vilest of men, knowingly and professedly. If it be
unpollitick to speak in this manner, I am sure it is ungodly to let manifest
wickedness altogether alone upon any pretense whatsoever; and much more to
employ such to be GODS Champions, as we know actually fight for the 'Devill and
their own lusts, more then they can pretend to do for GOD, or His cause. And
if they should now conquer for us, what shall we do with them afterward? Do
we intend to keep them in order then? or suffer them to plead that they have
merited an exemption from all restraint of their licentiousness? to which they
have been so long enured by the length of the wars ( which certainly they
will the rather lengthen out, if they still find they may do what they list
without control) that it is next to impossible for them to be reclaimed of it.
Finally if God look upon their faults, as ours in part, (while we do not what
we can to amend them) how shall He bless them, were it but because punishment
is due to us, for such neglect? And if He take vengeance upon their sins, even
as theirs, shall not we be enwrapped in the mischief of in?

4. 4. In reforming the general profaneness and ignorance of all places.
This care is yet further to be enlarged, for the Reformation of that
profaneness and ignorance, that is still to be found in City and Country. The
Land is to be cleansed, before we can expect that the Land should be heated.
Our endeavors cannot as yet reach to all parts of the Land: But therefore* we
should be the more careful of those that are under our power. And though we
cannot reform all things so well and thoroughly in these times of confusion and
war as we may do hereafter, when we shall obtain by GODS Goodness a
settling; Yet certainly a great deal more may be done then yet is; and so much
as may make ungodliness pull in her horns much, and be ashamed and afraid of
those wicked practices, that now outface all control: If special men, were
appointed for this, (as there are for secular businesses, and for matters of
Money, as is fit and necessary) too see all good Laws and Ordinances for the
Sabbath and Fasts, and other matters of Reformation put in execution; and to
give encouragement to faithful Ministers; and that order were taken
effectually and impartially with scandalous people (and Malignant opposers of
conscientious Ministers) as well as there is, most necessarily, with scandalous
Ministers; It would mightily lessen the number and weight of the Nations sins,
and dispose all places to receive a full and perfect Reformation in due time.

5. 5. In doing Justice upon Delinquents.
Again, Look upon your Covenant, I beseech you, and do Justice upon
Delinquents impartially and without respect of persons. In that Psalm of
confession and prayer, Psalm. 106. (whereof I mentioned the Psalmists
supplication, which we all must needs wish to have granted us, namely to have
the favor to live to see the Church happy.) The first sentence, after the
giving praises to GOD by way of entrance, is, Blessed are they that keep
Judgment and he that does righteousness at all times, ver. 3. And then
follows, remember me with the favor that thou bear unto thy people, etc.
ver. 4. and then, that I may see the good of thy chosen, and rejoice with the
gladness of thy Nation, and be glad with thine inheritance, ver. 5. None of us
can rightly expect to be let live to see the desire of our souls, in the
Churches felicity, unless we be zealous (all of us in our places) for the
keeping of Judgment and doing of Righteousness at all times. Is not this the
quarrel of the war, because Delinquents are protected against the hand of
Justice? And do not, the first Protestation, and first and second Covenant,
all expressly and explicitly mention the bringing of Offenders to condign
punishment, etc? why should any think, that GOD will give into our hands,
those Delinquents that are in Arms against the great Judicatory of the
Kingdom; if Justice be not done upon those that are in our hands already? and
so purposed, and practiced from time to time? Is it not for this that GOD has
put the sword of Justice into your hands? according to Romans 13. 5. he bears
not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute
wrath upon him that does evil. This is Your Office, and GOD and Men's
expectation of you, and Blessed shall you be (as the Psalmist has told you but
now) if that be verified of you which you have heard both from the Psalmist and
from the Apostle. You know how Isreal's sparing the Canaanites, Judge. 1-2. cost
them full dear: They proved continually thorns in their sides, and pricks in
their Eyes, snares and temptations to them: as GOD tells them, that for this He
would not deliver their enemies into their hands any more, and that they should
prove snares to them, etc. Indeed so we find it. The Canaanites familiarity
corrupted and seduced Israel, and then afterward GOD delivered Israel into the
Canaanites hand to be oppressed by them, Judge. 4. Look we to it, lest it prove
so with us. How can we expect, but if such as have done wickedly, opposed all
Reformation, be let alone without just punishment; they will help to mar the
Reformation when it comes to be settled? and prove corruptors of others, that
now seem to be of a better temper? And then we may be sure that they will
prove Scourges to us by GODS just judgment in other Respects. I take not upon
me to tell you what must be done with this or that particular person: but this
I say in the general, that neither Religion nor Reason will persuade, nor so
much as allow, that they who have been notorious enemies, or offenders, should
be suffered to have power to do mischief hereafter, where there is no ground
of persuasion that their hearts are truly turned from all Desire of doing
future mischief. And Restraining the disorders of such prisoners.
And in the mean time, this I am most sure of, that while any are under
restraint in expectation of a sentence, they ought at least to be kept from
notorious provocations of GOD by riots and other disorders, of which (they say)
our prisons are full; and that GOD is well near as much dishonored by them
while they are under our Custody, as He would be if they were at their own
liberty. If this be so, and that we know it, or may know it, I know no Argument
that can excuse their sins from being ours in these matters; nor how we can
reply to that which GOD may most justly say to us, Why should I deliver any of
your enemies any more into your hands, while you let them act those villainies
in your prisons, for which your selves think, I should not bless them in
their Camps?

6. 6. In reforming the oppressions of any entrusted by the State.
Unto this let me add a word of Exhortation in relation to an evil a kin to
the former, namely the Disorders and Oppressions that are said to be acted by
those that you employ in diverse places. There is a great cry of this, how truly
and justly I am not able to say. But certainly, it were a most worthy act, that
some choice men of unquestionable integrity were appointed to make inquiry and
take knowledge of it. There is One that does without all peradventure, He that
is higher then the Highest regards, and there be higher then they, says the
Wise and Kingly Preacher, when he speaks of Oppression and violent perverting
of judgment and justice in a province, Eccles. 5. 8. And GOD often says
elsewhere, that He does and will hear the Cry of oppression. Now if He do lo,
there is but one of two to answer the Cry, and stop the Mouth of it. Either
man's Justice or GODS. Man's Justice, that is in your Hands mainly. And that is
the easiest and the safest way, for you, and even for the oppressors
themselves; For by your doing Justice, You may possibly not only right those
that have suffered wrong, but perhaps also Work so upon those that have done
the wrong, as to bring them to Repentance, and so (as I may say) you save GOD a
labor, and withold His Hand from taking Vengeance, Into whose Hands it is a
fearful thing to fall, says the Apostle. But we do as it were force GOD to
take Vengeance Himself, if we will not; and then we our selves are like to
feel the smart of it too, as abettors and accessaries. You know the Accent put
upon the neglect of Eli in this kind 1 Samuel 3. 13. His sons made themselves
vile and he restrained them not: and how fearful the Vengeance was that GOD
took both of the Sons and the Fathers faults together. And so Samuel paid (as
has been noted) for his favor to his bribe-taking and Justice-perverting
sons, by him put into Office. In all these things, our own Interest is
concerned, as well as GODS or His Peoples, and therefore, I beseech you, Suffer
and (embrace) the Word of Exhortation in these things.

7. 7. In endeavoring a Reformation of Religion according to the Word of GOD.
And give me leave, I humbly pray, to proceed a little further in a particular
or two more specified in our Convenant for Reformation. One is that we may ever
remember that Clause in the first Article, To endeavor the Reformation of
Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government, according to the Word of God, You heard somewhat of
this in the morning, but I crave your patience that I may add a little to it.
Doubtless the Word of GOD is the only Rule unto which we are all tied. He only
is the Sovereign Law-give^ to appoint how He will have His Church governed.
And so He has left a sufficient Ride in His Word for all Matters of Substance
and of Necessity, (though all men do not see it, and though Circumstantials
are left to be varied by a Humane, though not carnal, Prudence) sufficient, I
say, to preserve Truth, and Piety, and Peace in His Church, and to expel the
contrary, by His Blessing. And no Authority of man may presume to reject or
overruled in those things. Where GODS Word gives out His Will, Man's business
is only to acknowledge, and submit, and call others to do so too. All man's
Authority is to be employed only to promote GODS according to His Word. And
therefore, I beseech you, Let me branch my Exhortation from this into three
particulars. 1. Let none say There is no Government of the Church in the Word.
1. Do not in any wise hearken to the suggestions of any that would say, That
there is no Discipline or Government of the Church to be found in the Word. If
any did think so, and yet have Covenanted, as is before expressed, I doubt they
will hardly excuse themselves from having taken GODS Name in vain in it. And I
conceive not how, if they urge others to covenant in that manner, they do
less then cause them to sin, by urging to make GODS Name in vai^. But however,
surely there was a time when the Church of GOD, the Church of the N. T. had a
Government; and that within it self, an Ecclesiastical Government, and not
merely Civil, from the Civil Magistrate, for there was none such that
professed Christianity, till ^oo, years after Christ. To say, that there was
no Government in the Church (after the Apostles were gone to Heaven, and the
Power of Miracles was also ceased) for so long a time, is to suppose them to be
left to an horrible Confusion, which is exceedingly dishonorable to Christ the
LORD and King of His Church, so much as to imagine. And if there were a
Government appointed by Christ, then certainly the Apostles and Evangelists
recorded it in the Word in the N. T. For to imagine it left only to Tradition
is as contradictory to Christ's Care of His People, as the supposall of a mere
Anarchy. (And the very Papists themselves ofter to pretend Scripture for the
Popes claim, and dare not stick wholly to Tradition.) And if it were once in
the Word, then it is there still doubtless, for we have the self some Word
that the first Christians had, and then doubtless it binds us still, as well
as it bound the Christians in those first times. Unless any can show, that it
was to continue but so long, but till there should be Christian Magistrates,
and then to give place, and be no longer in force. And this general Rule give
me leave to assert and commend to your most serious considerations and
consciences. N. B. General Rule about Laws in the Word.
That whatsoever Law of GOD, or Command of His, we find recorded in the
Lawbooke, in either of the Volumnes of GODS Statute, the N. T. or the Old,
Remains obligatory to us, unless we can prove it to be expired, or repealed.
So it is with the Statute Law of this Nation, or of any Nation; What I can
prove to be once enacted, I may urge. as still in force, unless any one can
answer me with a just proof that it is now out of date, or Repealed by a
latter Law. And so men (I forewarne them) shall find one day urged upon them,
for all those Laws that stand upon Record in GODS sacred Volumnes, however now
many take Liberty to reject what they please, without any just ground, that GOD
has discharged them: And the Denial or Neglect of this ( in matter of
Church Government) is the Rock that we have dashed upon formerly; and therefore
we had need to take the more heed of it for time to come.

2. 2. Own what is in the Word as from GOD.
But withal this must be added, that it concerns us as well to own what we
find in the Word of GOD, to be from GOD, as to receive it and set it up. It is
necessary to hold it out and establish it, as commanded of God, if it appear
clearly to us to be so. Else we do not give GOD and His Word that due honor
which it becomes us to give. It is indeed most dangerous to assert Man's
inventions to be Jure Divino, or necessary. But it is also dangerous and
sinful to make GODS Appointments to be bus humane and arbitrary. If in any
thing We see not that. GOD does certainly require it, We are to forbear
asserting it to be Divine. But we must acknowledge it, when we do see it. If
it have the stamp of GODS. Authority upon it, no man may say, We will not own
this as Jure Divino. GOD will not be satisfied (nor men neither) that the
things be done, or established, if His Authority be overlooked, and man's only
be pretended for it. Nothing is pleasing to GOD, which is not done in obedience
to Him some way. If therefore He require particular obedience, in this or that
particular matter held forth in His Word, it will not content Him, that we only
be taught it, and practice it by the precepts of men. Neither will this awe any
froward spirit, as GODS Authority will; and does where men are not desperately
profane. And the Consciences of the most conscientious will find no
satisfaction in it upon those Terms. Let therefore no man say, that if we once
acknowledge it as from GOD, then it is unalterable; and we would not have it
so. I beseech you, if GOD will have it to be unalterable, (as He will if His
Word tell us so much) shall we dare to say, We will not have it so? If GOD
says, It shall continue, it shall continue, that is the Obligatory to us, and
all posterities. And GOD forbid any of us should ever say the contrary! And our
very Covenant also in the 6. Article, and in the Close of it, has words enough
and emphaticall enough, to bind us for ever, and unalterably to a Reformation
according to the Word of GOD. I say therefore again and again, so much as we
see to be according to GODS Word, and His Command, we must own as such, and
not think of altering it but by, His Consent and according to His Word still.

3. 3. Examine all things diligently, and then hold fast that which is from GOD.
We are therefore by all this charged, to use all possible Diligence, and Care,
and Industry to prove and examine all things, and not to put more weight upon
any thing (to be sure) then GOD has put upon it: But then when we, have found
out the Truth, to hold it fast, and not to sell it again, or part with it upon
any Terms. 1 These 5. 21. Prove. 13. 23.
Where the voice is doubtful, whether GOD speaks or not, or how far He
speaks in this or that, there we have still so much liberty to dispute and
debate, not to account it necessary, and where there must be a Determination
one way in Practice, to interpose Our Prudence and Authority in a humane
manner. But* whatsoever comes to be known to be from GOD, there all must be
silent and obedient, lest otherwise the sword, even of Rebels, take Vengeance
upon such our Rebellions against GOD, according to the Threatening Isai. 1. 20.
If ye be willing and obedient, you shall eat the good of the land: but if you
refuse and rebel, you shall be devoured with the sword, for the mouth of the
LORD has spoken it. You that have Authority do expect Obedience to. Your
Ordinances and Commands; GOD therefore much more to His. All your Authority is
from GOD, and therefore unquestionably it is all to be employed for GOD, and to
that end that His Commands may take place among all that are under your
command. The Notion of Humane Authority in the Hand of one, or of a few, as it
is acknowledged in the hearts, and so in the outward subjection of many
thousands, of a whole Nation, is a strange thing, and worthy of deepest
consideration; A special Observation of the original of all Authority to be
from GOD.
And which the Wisest Philosophers and greatest Politicians have never been
able to give a satisfactory Account of upon Humane Grounds. But those that have
learned from the Word of GOD, the meaning of those Sentences, By me Kings
reign, and Princes decrce Justice; By me Princes rule, and N^bles, even all
the Judges of the earth, Prove. 8. 15, 16. And, There is no Powers but of GOD,
the powers that be are ordained of GOD, Romans 13. 1. may say something of it.
Namely, That the Ground of Humane Authority, is that GOD is pleased to print
some Characters of the Image of His Majesty in the faces of Superiors, and
stamp the counter-part of it upon the hearts of the Inferiors* Whereby it
comes to pass that they Reverence, even a Wom^n, and sometimes an Infant in a
Cradle, as GODS Deputy and Vicegerent among them; and so all Others that have
Authority in their Proportion. And if it please GOD (as sometimes it does for
the just punishment of abused Authority) to blot out that stamp which was upon
Inferiors hearts; they presently withdraw all r^spect from such Superiors,
how high soever they were before, and make no more reckoning of them, then of
the most ordinary person among themselves. Which therefore should be of
mavelous Operation upon the spirits of all that have any Authority, that as
they are wholly beholden to GOD for it, so they would wholly employ it for GOD,
and particularly to set up, so far as their Authority can command,
whatsoever Command of GOD they can find in His Word, and to set it up as His
Command, as has been said.

7. 7. Exhortation to extirpate Heresy and Schism, etc.
Another thing which I would also recommend from our Covenant is in the second
Article, out of which as my Reverend Brother singled out the Mention of Popery
and Prelacy, so do I specially of Here sie and Schism, taking in whatsoever
shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, the Power of Godliness. Remember, I
beseech you, that we have Covenanted with GOD and Men, to extirpate these
without respect of Persons. And thou, let us but think in our Consciences,
Specially Antinomianisme and Anabaptisme.
what we judge to be Heresy or Schism. Is Antinomianisme, at least as it is
professed, preached, and maintained by some, according as it has been
publicly proved, any thing less then Heresy? and however, is it not
apparently most contrary to the Power of Godliness? And is not Anabaptisma, at
least as, maintained by diverse, Schism, and contrary to sound Doctrine? What
greate^ Schism can there be, then to deny both you your selves, and all the
Land besides to be Christians, or that there is any Ministry or Church among
us, because none rightly baptized, by their saying? And how can these then be
tolerated without Breach of Covenant? If GOD were so angry with Moses for a
single neglect of Circumcision, and you your selves believe that He has put
Baptism in the room of it; and commanded Children to be baptized now, as well
as to be circumcised then; Will not (does not) not only the neglect, but so
outrageous a contempt of it, (as administered to Children) provoke Him, even
against you, if you connive at such reproach of His Ordinancs? If Christ
himself has so threatened all those that break one of the least Commandments
of the Law, and teach men so, as you read Matt. 5. 19. Will He endure that
those should be let alone that Preach against the Whole Law, all, and every one
of the Commandments, of the MORAL Law, These were proved by witness before a
Committee of Parliament.
and say, That Christians are freed from the Mandatory Power of it, and that It
is no Rule for a Believer to Walk by, or examine his life by, even that it is
of no use at all to a Believer? Will Christ, I say, endure these things? Or may
We endure them, without His displeasure against our selves? I know a difference
is to be put, when we come to deal with persons tainted with these dangerous
opinions. Yet all that err are not to be dealt with alike.
Some are to be handled with all compassionate tenderness, as being scrupuled,
through Weakness and Infirmity; But others, who are not only obstinate, but
active to seduce and breed confusion, must be saved with Fear, as pulling them
out of the fire, and that they may not set others afire also. Though still a
spirit of Meekness is requisite, even toward such, in regard to their Persons.
But the Spirit of Judgment, and of Burning (that is Holy Zeal) promised by
GOD to His People, Isai. 4. 4. against their endangering Doctrines and
Practices.

Hearken not then, Special Exhortation not to hearken to a general Toleration.
(I earnestly exhort every one that intends to have any regard at all to his
solemn Covenant and Oath in this second Article) to those, that offer to plead
for Tolerations; which I wonder how any one dare write or speak for (as they
do) that have themselves taken the Covenant, or know that you have. The
Arguments that are used in some books ( well worthy to be publicly burnt)
plead for Popery, Judaisme, Turcisme, Paganism, and all manner of false
Religions, As most contrary to the Covenant.
under pretense of Liberty of Conscience. Which if they can make good (or have)
then surely We, and You specially, have need to repent of that solemn Covenant
and recant it before all the World, to whom you have published it. But if not,
then surely, even that Covenant will enforce you to show your steadiness in
unpartiall extirpating (without respect of persons,) all such most pernicious
and pestiferous books and opinions, which if they might once take place among
us, would more advance Satan's kingdom, then any book has done that has been
written this 1000. years. Surely the Extirpation of Heresy and Schism,
(besides that Popery is abjured by name) and such an universal Toleration, and
pretended Liberty of Conscience, are as diametrically opposite and
contradictory one to the other, as Light is to darkness, and strict Justice to
licentious lawlesnesse. If therefore you be true to your Covenant, your hand
must needs be against such Doctrines and the Promoters of them. And those
Clauses of [ Whatsoever shall be found contrary to found Doctrine, and the
Power of Godlinesse] do lay yet a stricter bond upon you, to make you take
great heed how you bear with any opinion or opinionist altogether. What
Burcurs only may be Tolerated by the Covenant.
Though, if any such be found differing from the received opinions and
practices, that are neither Schismatic in disturbing the Churches Peace, nor
Opposite to sound Doctrine, or the Power of Godliness, they may be borne with,
notwithstanding the Covenant. But I see not how it allows any more. Only
still the Ways of dealing with opinions and opinionists, who are not
altogether to be borne, must be suitable to the Nature of the opinions, and of
those also that hold them, and not in all matters nor to all persons alike; as
was noted before. But against a Toleration in general, even the Covenant it
self, in that very Article has a Reason suitable to the Text, Lest we partake
of other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, says
the Covenant; which in the Language of the Text, is Lest GOD take Vengeance on
their Inventions, and ours together. Instances to show the Absurdity of an
universal Toration.
It is true that the name of Conscience has an awful sound unto a
Conscientious Ear. But I pray, judge but in a few Instances, whether all
pretense of Conscience ought to be a sufficient plea for Toleration and
Liberty? 1. There be those that say their Conscience is against all taking of
an Oath before a Magistrate? Will you allow an Universal Liberty of this? What
then will become of all our Legal and Judicial proceedings, which are
confined to this Way of proof; and so it was by GOD appointed, and has been
by all Nations practiced. 2. There be some that pretend Liberty of Conscience
to Equivocate in an Oath even before a Magistrate, and to elude all
Examinations by Mental Reservations, will you grant them this Liberty? Or can
you, without destraying all bonds of Civil Converse, and wholly overthrow of
all Humane Judicature? 3. If any plead Conscience for the Lawfulness of
Polygamy; (or for divorce for other causes then Christ and His Apostles
mention; Of which a wicked book is abroad and uncensured; though deserving to
be burnt, whose Author has been so impudent as to set his Name to it, and
dedicate it to your selves,) or for Liberty to marry incestuously, will you
grant a Toleration for all this? 4. If any say, Their Conscience allows them
not to Contribute to your Just and Necessary Defense, shall they be allowed
this Liberty? Where then will your Armies be paid? 5. If others say, their
Consciences allow not them to bear Arms for you, shall they have altogether
their Liberty? (every one that will say so) How then shall your Armies be made
up? 6. If any go further, (as some do in effect even in print,) and say their
Consciences allow not any Magistrates at all; nor 7. Propriety of goods: Will
you afford them their Liberty herein? What would become then of all your own
Authority, and of all Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom? Or what Bounds or
Limits can there be set to men any way, if this opinion of Liberty of
Conscience, as it is pleaded for, shall be admitted?

Object. Ob. Toleration is only pleaded for in matters of the first Table not
of the second.
If any say, these all, or most of them, are belonging to the Second Table, and
the Liberty pleaded for, is only in matters of the First Table?

Ans. To this I answer, 1. The Arguments, if strong for the One, will be no
less for the other. The Conscience must have regard to the second Table as
well as the first, A. 1. Conscience must regard both and be violated in neither.
and must not be violated nor forced in matters of the second Table, no more
then of the First. And in all the Instances formentioned, it is certain, some
have heretofore, (if not also now) pretended Conscience about them. Also
Equivocation in an Oath, will concern the 1. Table the third Commandment; and
yet I dare say, A. 2. GODS Honor and Men's Souls are of more regard then
worldly matters.
you will not Tolerate that. Ans. 2. Are men's matters worthy more regard then
GODS? that the pretense of Conscience shall claim a Liberty in that which
concerns GODS Honor, and not in that which concerns men? Or are not men's
Souls, both theirs that are first in the Error, and theirs also whom they
endeavor and endanger the infection of, more to be regarded then any thing that
merely concerns civil matters? Also are not men's Souls in greater Hazard
(rather then less) in sins against the 1. Table (Idolatries, Blasphemies,
Heresies, etc.) then in those against the second? How then shall it be more
allowable to give Liberty and Toleration against the 1. Table, then against the
second? GOD commanded idolatry to be punished in false Prophets.
And what Idolater, or seduced Prophet, might not (or may not) plead his
Conscience? And yet you know GODS Sentences of old against such even to
extremities, extirpation, Deuteronomy. 13. throughout the whole Chapter, and
elsewhere, and so against other breaches of the first Table. The Baalites whom
Elijah caused to be put to death (according to the Law of GOD) 1 Kings 18. did
certainly think in their Consciences that Baal was a true GOD, and theirs the
true Religion. And so, those that caused their children to pass through the
fire to Molech (which GOD expressly commands to be punished with death, Yet they
might pretend Conscience.
even though they were Strangers and Sojourners in Israel, and not of GODS
professed people, Lev. 20. 2.etc.) did, what they did, out of Conscience. And
these Laws of GOD never were repealed as yet, and therefore they will bind all
His Servants still. His Honor requires still the same Severity against such
kind of Offenders. And what can it be less then to betray such to damnation,
who are Tolerated to profess and promote those opinions or practices, that are
absolutely destructive unto their own or others Souls.

And if it be objected (as it is) that no punishment or Restraint can work upon
men to convert them. Chapter 2. No punishment can work Conversion.
Ans. It is true, No more can Exhortation or Preaching, Arguments (in Word or
Writing) convert men, An. No more can Preaching without GODS Blessing. But both
are Means by Him appointed.
without GODS Blessing. But yet they must be used, as means appointed by GOD,
(and sanctified, and accordingly Blessed when He sees fit) even to convert men,
and so are Restraints and Punishments too (proportionable to Men's Errors and
Practices,) appointed of GOD, and sanctified also, and often, even in
experience blessed to make men, who before were misled, or perhaps mis-leaders of
others, to consider, and hea^ken, and learn, and be willing to embrace, and
cleave to the Truth. And I doubt not but if we be all careful in our places,
to perform our Covenant in this Article, we shall find a blessed effect of it
in our three Kingdoms, as the Conclusion of it speaks, That the LORD may be
One, and His Name One in the three Kingdoms.

8. The last particular, I would offer to you at this time, is that for all
these things you would get hearts armed with Trust in GOD, 8. Exhortation to
Trust in GOD.
and so with Courage and Zeal for GOD, and that there may be no Cowardly
spirits among us. Every Ruler should be a man of Courage, and specially when he
has enemies to encounter. Josh. 1. GOD and men there ver. 6, 7, 9, 18. call
upon him for it. And so when ever Reformation is undertaken, there is special
need of Courage. This made Hezekiah so great and happy a Reformer.
See the Instance of Hezekiah: His father had been a most desperate wicked man,
and corrupted Religion, worse then all that were before him. Yet Hezekiah made
the greatest Reformation that had been since Solomon's time, and lost not a day,
after he came to the Crown, for he begun in the first year of his reign, in
the first Month, and, as it appears by a Chron. 29. v. 17. the very first day
of the month; and carried all before him. Now what was that which made him do
thus? See 1 Kings 18. v. 5. He trusted in the LORD GOD of Israel, so that after
him there was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were
before him. This was that which made him not Fear the peoples discontent, nor
the great Ones, nor the Priests neither, whom he found universally drencht over
head and ears in superstition and idolatry. Oh that we, who have much more
strength of men, to stand by us, then he had, had but half his Courage! Or
rather, that we would remember, that when many of Israel mocked and laughed His
Messengers to scorn, whom he sent to invite them to the Passover; yet not
only diverse others came in and submitted themselves; But that in Judah, the
hand of God was to give them one heart to do the Commandment of the King, and
of the Princes by the Word of the LORD, a Chron. 30. 12. And why should not we
look for the like, if we were as Zealous for GOD, and trusted as much in GOD,
as he? How excellent an Example and Encouragement do we again find recorded
concerning him in the next Chapter, the two last verses? Thus did Hezekiah
throughout all Judah, and wrought that which was good, and right, and truth
before the LORD his GOD. And in every Work that he began in the Service of the
house of GOD and in the Law, and in the Commandment, to seek his GOD, he did
it withal his heart and prospered. Happy we, if of us as much may be said for
our parts; for then we shall be sure to have GODS part fulfilled to us, and our
Prosperity assured and established fully. The mischief of being afraid of men.
This we have confirmed by Solomon, while he gives us a pertinent warning of
the mischiefs of the contrary Cowardice. Prove. 29. 25. The fear of man brings
a snare, but who so puts his trust in the LORD shall be safe. While we are
afraid of men, this or that Person, or such a Number, or party, (how
considerable so ever they may be thought.) It brings a snare, makes us fall
into sin, and so into mischief. There is no Sanctity, nor safety, but in
Trusting in GOD. If we would examine our selves impartially, we should find,
that whatsoever we have neglected, or do yet neglect, in the matter of
Reformation, has been and is caused very much, by an unworthy fear of men,
and want of Faith, and Trust in GOD. How often has it been said, and by how
many, that if we should be too severe in parging the Armies, we should want
soldiers; If too strict in suppressing the worst opinions or practices, we
should loose a considerable party, and not be able to carry on the work
without them. And what is this but want of Faith in GOD? and in stead thereof
to have our spirits ensnared (enslaved) with the Fear of Men? Certainly, if it
be not GODS Will and Command that Justice should be done, and Martial
Discipline observed, and disorders and errors suppressed, then let us let them
alone, and never stand to plead the Inconvenience of meddling with them. But if
it be GODS Will and Command, then I beseech you, Let none venture to provoke
GOD, for fear of provoking men. I dare be bold to promise in His Name, You
shall not want men non h^lpe, if you will be ruled by Him, and venture your
selves for Him. But withal I say, It were better that every 1000. were reduced
to an 100. and every 100 even to a single man, then that out of a fear of
loosing a numerous party of soldiers, or others, to take your part, you should
endanger the loosing of GOD, even in any degree. And is it not recorded (even
for our Admonition, as is intimated, 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11.) that for One Achan not
sought out, The mischief of suffering sin in others.
Isreal's Army was overthrown? Josh. 7. and GOD says, Neither, will I be with
you any more, except you destroy the accursed from among you, ver. 12. And did
not the 9. Tribes and half upon this Example arm themselves to have fought
against their own brethren, supposing them revolters from GOD, though they had
but even then taken their leave of them, after they had, for many years
together, ventured their lives to settle them in their possessions* Josh. 22.
They urge Achans Example; as showing them, that if they should suffer a sin
apparently even in their Brethren, GOD would be angry with them all, ver. 18.
20. It is good then to be afraid, but of Him of whom we have cause to be
afraid, as Esaias warnes the Faithful in his time, Isai. 8. 12, 13. Say you not
a Confederacy to whom this people say a Confederacy, neither fear ye their
fear, neither be afraid, but sanctify the LORD of Hosts Himself, and let
Him be your Fear, and let Him be your dread. And remember withal, how ill GOD
takes it at His Servants hand, when they are basely Afraid of men, Isai. 51.
12, 13. I even I am He that Comfort you, who art thou that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the son of man that shall be made as
Grass? And forgettest the LORD thy Maker? etc. Here is not indeed a Multitude
named; but here is Man indefinitely, and if there be never so many of them, it
is but man still, and so never the more allowable to fear them more then GOD,
and to please them with displeasing of GOD.

If any shall say, Q. May not a Multitude be forborne in Error?
But would not GOD have a Multitude forborne, if they be in an Error, or
Disorder? I answer, Sure GOD never told those that are in Authority so. And,
among men, if a Multitude appear in a Tumult, although it may after plead for
a mitigation of punishment toward the Whole Number, A. 1. GOD no where says
they may.
except the chief ringleaders; Yet it both makes those that have Authority
and strength to suppress, put forth both, the more* speedily and effectually;
and afterward to take the more exact care for the preventing of the like, even
for the Multitudes sake. And this is most sure, that with GOD the greater the
Multitude is of those that provoke Him, the greater is His Displeasure. And
therefore His Deputies ought to be more afraid to Tolerate a Multitude in
evil, then a few. A 2 If they might at other times, not now.
2. And if at other times a Multitude, or a few, might be borne with and let
alone, in that which is contrary to GODS Will, Yet certainly not then When GODS
Judgments are abroad in the Land. Then all should, and then the faithful will
learn Righteousness, and doc Justice in their places, according to GODS
appointment. It is so with us now, that GODS Judgments are abroad in Our Land:
Oh that we were so wise; as to learn the right cause, and the right Remedy!
Let me to this purpose, again put you in mind of that of the Prophet, which
you were happily remembered of in the Morning, Jer. 9. 12, 13, 14. Who is the
wise man that may understand this? and who is he to whom the mouth of the LORD
has spoken, that he may declare it? for what the land perishes, etc. And the
LORD says, Because they have forsaken my Law which I set before them, and have
not obeyed my Voice, nor walked therein: Special Wisdom to know Why
Judgments on a Land.
But have walked after the imagination of their own heart, etc. Sure the
Meaning of this is not, that every man should be let alone in doing what they
lift under pretense of Liberty of Conscience: For that is neither more nor
less in plain words then to leave every man to walk after the Imagination of
their own heart: Much less is it, that men should be suffered to cry down the
Law of GOD, (the Law delivered by GODS own Voice to all His People,) as no
Rule for Christians to Walk by. If for forsaking it the Land perishes, and for
not walking therein: The open and bold-faced opposition against it, must needs
aggravare the Transgression, and increase the mischief. But the Prophet
meaning is, that GOD would have an Observation made. 1. That all the Misery of
the Land (though there were very few so wise as to consider it) is for sin, for
the transgression of GODS Law, and every one doing too much what they list. And
then that in the second place, Enquiry should be made for what Special
Provocations it is that there are such heavy Judgments on the Land? They have
walked (says GOD) after Baalim, which their fathers taught them. Whether any
old superstitions, or any Profane Customs and Practices, received by
Tradition from our Fathers; Or any other new invented Idol or Fancy, any
Imagination of our own hearts, be the Grand Evil that provokes GOD so against
us; as that after all our seekings of Him and suings to Him, His anger is not
turned away, but His hand is stretched out still. To find out this, (or these,
for they may be many,) were certainly the greatest piece of Wisdom one of them
in the World, and to be taught it, one of the Greatest Honors from GOD that
could be, and then to Declare it one of the Greatest Pieces of Faithfulness to
GOD and His People. Oh that you, who are Our Wise Men, the Great Council of
the Kingdom, would specially set your Wits a work, and bend your Thoughts most
serious to search and find this out. And you may call whom you will to your
Assistance herein. You have called an Assembly of Divines to Consult with in
matters of Religion, All Enquiry should be made after it.
and they attend daily upon the work you have entrusted them with. If now you
should think fit to send to them expressly to make this their work for the
present, to give you the Uttermost of Advice with all Faithfulness, What might
be the Cause or Causes, Why Judgments, and Fears, and dangers still continue
and multiply rather then decrease: Certainly they could not be better employed
for the time: And if GOD should vouchsafe to show them the right: Nothing could
prove more Advantageous for the public good. If they be not Wise or Faithful
enough, Or you should not be satisfied with their Advice: You may ask of whom
you will besides. And you may, if you please, give every one Liberty (in an
humble manner) for once to tell you, what their Apprehension is. But certainly
it is a thousand pitties, that among so many Wise men, and Pious men, as GOD
has yet reserved in our Land, none should be set a work expressly about this
most important and every day more and more most necessary Work. And, after all,
it belongs to You, whom GOD has Entrusted with the Power to Reform, whatever
shall be found to be a Cause of our Perpetuated mischief, to judge impartially
of all; and then sentence and execute according to the Will of GOD a righteous
Judgment upon all, whether things or Persons, without Fear or Favor. And
this is the Way, and the only Way, to partake of that Blessing forenoted to be
all Our Desires, according to Psalm. 106. 3, 4, 5. Which I again beseech every
one to read over most seriously, and apply to their hearts most faithfully.

And to this tends the third and last Use of Consolation, Use 3.
which you will give me leave to add a word of, Of Consolation to GODS
faithful* Ones.
and then I shall commit you and all that has been spoken to GODS Blessing.
Our Text in the frame and scope of it tends as much and as fully to Comfort and
Encourage all GODS faithful Ones (as I hope I speak to many such) even
notwithstanding their own failings and His Severity upon it, as it does to Warn
and Exhort them to take heed of such failings, and of provoking Him to show
Severity. For it tells us absolutely, that being His, though we do amiss
against Him, and He deals severely with us, yet still He is a GOD that
Answers, and a GOD that Forgives. Our failings not allowed nor persisted in,
when we know them, disparage not Our faithfulness in GODS Account; and His
Judgments, His Vengeance on our Inventions, how severe soever, disprove not
His Favor, argue not Rejection nor Purpose of destruction. Though He kill, yet
He may pardon and save. And the Experience of His Providence may assure us,
that He will not be henceforth rigorously severe, if we this Day renew our
Faithfulness. He is very rarely so, even to a Single Person. If their Visible
Repentance prevent the Exeution of any Sentence of His against them. Much less
to a Nation, to the Body of a people that return to Him. The Case of such is
never (can never be) desperate, Instances of Grace after Failings and
Judgments. 1. Of David.
when ever they have a Heart to look unto Him again after a Revolt. Let me
give you two famous Instances in two Words. David, after many great Experiments
of GODS mavelous Deliverances; and proofs of His own Faith and Trust in
GOD, falls at last into a Pang of Fear, 1 Samuel 27. and says in his heart, I
shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. ver. 1. And thereupon does little
better then run away from GOD, for he runs out of the Land of Israel from
among the people of GOD, whither GOD once sent him when he was abroad, 1 Samuel
12. 5.) and flies into the Philistines Country, the professed and greatest
Enemies of GODS Church: and so he goes, as our Proverb is, as it were Out of
GODS Blessing into the warm Sun. And while he is among them he does not very
well, for he is feign to keep up his Credit with Achish, with much
Dissimulation, and many fained Expressions. Hereupon, at last GOD meets with
him, with no small Severity; You may well call it, as the Language of the Text
is, a Taking Vengeance on his Inventions. He is hunted by the envy and
jealousy of the Philistine-Lords, from the Court and Camp of Achish, and when
he returns to his home in that strange land, he finds his City burnt to ashes,
his Wives carried away, captive, and all his Followers likewise undone and
robbed of all, and none knew by whom: and unto all this is added the Mutiny of
all his Soldiers, the people spoke of stoning him, 1 Samuel 30. 6. But then he
recovers himself; and in that most extreme danger shows a greater Faith then
ever before, But David, say the next words, encouraged himself in the LORD his
GOD. And then immediately you find upon his enquiring of GOD about pursuing
those unknown Enemies; he receives a most full and gracious answer, and
Assurance of Favor, exemplified by most Complete, Speedy, and Rich Victory
(nothing lost of their substance, not any one of all their Wives, or Children
missing,) and great spoils, and within a few days, he is certified of Saul's
death, and is made King of Judah. So abundant are GODS Mercies to His faithful
Ones, even after their failings, and His Displeasure upon them. 2. And so it
was with Israel. 2. Of Israel. Judge. 10.
Judge. 10. They Revolting after sundry Deliverances, GOD gives them into the
hands of their enemies, the Ammonites, and others, who mightily oppress them
18. years together. At last they bethink themselves, and fall to Pray to GOD;
but we read not (at the first) of any further Repentance then a bare
Confession of their sins. And therefore also at the first GOD gives them a most
terrible Check in stead of an Answer, upbraiding them with His former favors,
and their reiterated Rebellions, and concluding with a (seeming) absolute
Refusal to Forgive them, or deliver them any more, and sending them to their
false gods for help, ver. 13, 14. But then see how upon their Submission, and
Reformation, GODS Compassions are again manifested to them; It is said His
Soul was grieved for the misery of Israel, ver. 16. and shortly after they had,
under Jephthah, whom GOD raised up to be their Deliverer, a very great Victory
over their enemies. And have not we our selves found somewhat like this, more
then once? 3. Our own since last year.
How low had our sins brought us the last year about this time? And how much
Vengeance did GOD take upon our Untowardness within a few Months. Our Armies
broken in the West, and broken in the North, Bristoll lost, and Gloucester and
Hull besieged; and with us very little strength and very few spirits. But GOD
gave us Grace to bethink our selves, and humble our selves, and to enter into
a more strict, and solemn, and Complete Covenant with Him, then ever before.
And how many gracious Answers, and Pardons, and Victories, He has granted us
since, Our Souls know, and all the World sees and admires.

How should we then improve all this, to Strengthen Our Faith in GOD, and to
Comfort Our selves in His Grace, All whose paths are Mercy and Truth to such as
keep His Covenant and His Testimonies, Psalm. 25. 10. and to set to our Seal to
that Voice of Faith and Experience. Psalm. 9. 10. They that know Thy Name will
put their Trust in Thee. For Thou LORD have not forsaken them that seek Thee.
Conclusion.
I will conclude all, with that most remarkable place of the Prophet, Isai. 30.
18. When he had foretold, for their carnal Confidences, and Rejecting of the
Faithful Prophets admonitions, and seeking to get Flatterers to preach to
them, very great Judgments, so as to reduce them to a very low Condition and
small Number, he adds. And therefore will the LORD wait that He may be
gracious unto you, and therefore will He be exalted, that He may have Mercy
upon you, for the LORD is a GOD of Judgment: Blessed are all they that wait
for Him. The LORD is a GOD of Judgment, Righteous and Wise. He will not endure
Our Untowardness, which he sees and knows, more then We our selves do, or
will take notice of: and He knows, that if he should deliver us too soon, we
would grow (...) again as ever, or worse; that if He should deliver us, what we
have a great deal of Humane strength (at least, while we have so much Carnal
Confidence) that He should loose the Honor of it. Therefore He Waits, and
Therefore He will be Exalted. But both shall be in Graciousnesse and Mercy to
us, to all His faithful Ones, that Wait for Him, even in the Way of His
Judgments (as was noted before, Isai. 26. 8.) And if His Judgments, His
Vengeance, work Repentance and Faithfulness in us, we may and should take
even that as a Pledge of His Answering and Forgiving Mercy in Christ. Amen,
Amen!

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 2. line 34. for those who read the Inventions of those whom. (...) for
Ps^l^es ^ P^alm p. o. marg. For First 1. Text. p. (...) for Num^ (...) etc, 11,
15 read Numb. ^^, ^^, 12, 13, 14, 15 p. and 19. For was ^. (...) l. ^^. for
^^ap 8. read (...) 5. p (...). 24. for (...). 1. 27 for that lies r. that it
(...). p. 4 c. l. 8. for (...).


