A Looking-Glass FOR CHILDREN.

Being a Narrative of God's gracious Dealings with some Little Children;
Recollected by Henry Jessey in his lifetime.

Together with sundry seasonable Lessons and Instructions to Youth, calling
them early to remember their Creator: Written by Abr. Cheer, late of Plymouth.

The Third Edition, Corrected and Amended.

To which is added many other Poems very suitable. As also some Elegies on
departed Friends: made by the said Abraham Cheer.

All now faithfully gathered together, for the benefit of Young and Old: by H.
P.

Psalm. 66. 16. Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he
has done for my Soul. Deuteronomy. 31. 19. Now therefore write ye this Song for you,
and teach it the Children of Israel; put it in their mouths, that this Song may
be a witness for me, etc. London, Printed for Robert Boulter, at the Turks-Head
in Cornhil, 1673.

To the Reader.
THou have here (gentle Reader) brought to thy view, in the first part of this
Book, a Narrative of the gracious dealings of God with several Children, and
what they gained in an early looking Heavenward, in which thou may see and
behold the condescension of the Lord to such little Ones, in opening their
understanding, and giving them a sight and sense of their undone estate by
nature, from whence they were made to seek and enquire after a Savior, and by
Grace helped to apply and improve his gracious Calls and Invitations to a full
satisfaction in, and by Faith a cleaving to His undertakings, as the alone way
and means to Salvation, to their great comfort here* and firm hope of glory
hereafter. All which was wonderfully effected, to the praise of the free Grace
of God, and admiration of Relations and Beholders; and now presented to thee,
being first written by that faithful Servant of the Lord, Mr. Henry Jessey; who
in his life time gave it me to transcribe, in order for the then Printing: But
it being small, I waited to have somewhat to adjoyn to it, which Providence
has lately brought to my hand as that which is worthy of publication, being
the Fruit of some idle hours of that Servant of the Lord Mr. Abraham Cheer,
whilst in bonds for the truth of Christ; wherein he expresses his well-wishes
to the Souls of diverse poor Children, toward whom he then stood nearly
related, and dearly affected, as by the second Part hereof you may largely see:
and if helped of God to make improvement of it, so as carefully to mind, and
heedfully to walk in the practice of what is seasonably advised in the said
Discourse; you will have great cause to bless the Lord for such endeavors, now
published for your profit and advantage.

The Motive provoking me thus to recollect this little Book, is chiefly from
consideration of my daily observation of Youths great need of all endeavors to
prompt them to that which is good, they being naturally addicted to be drawn
away through their own inclinations, and the powerful prevalency of Satan to
sin and disobedience; by which they wrong their precious Souls, Prove. 8. 36.
thereby incurring Gods displeasure to their daily hardening their hearts from
his fear, and following the sins and pleasures of this vain World, until they
are prepared as Vessels of wrath fitted for Destruction and Perdition; which is
the certain effect of Sin ruling and reigning without restraint in the hearts
of the Children of Disobedience, Col. 3. 6. Which evil and judgment may be
timely prevented, by harkening to Gods Call, Prove. 9. 6. seeking and serving
him betimes, Prove. 8. 17. believing his Word, avoiding evil company, Prove. 4.
15, 16. slighting the allurements of present pleasure, and the sinful delights
of the flesh, and by making good-men examples to walk after, Prove. 2. 20. Heb.
6. 12. 2. Chron. 29. 2. and therein esteeming and highly prizing the excellency
of the Lord Jesus, in all his glorious undertakings for poor sinners, Phil. 3.
8. cleaving to his Righteousness only for Justification and Salvation, 1 Cor.
1. 30. Which Mercy is greatly desired may accompany the Reader of this little
Piece, whereby he may say it was worth perusing, for that by it the Lord made
him to consider his latter end, and remember him in the days of his Youth, so
as to make his Calling and Election sure, as did these pretty Children. That
being my aim and end in the publishing hereof, I shall daily wait for its
success, and remain yours,

In true desires after your Eternal happiness. H. P.

Go little Book, and speak for them that be
Lanch'd with great safety to Eternity;
Engaging Others, by what they did find,
Their everlasting Peace chiefly to mind.
Their names are blessed, and had in memory;
They served God, and thence in peace did die.
All you that read, be earnest to obtain
True faith in Christ, which will be lasting gain.
And if, while young, God do his Work begin
Upon your Soul, take hee^, beware of sin;
It will prove to your Crown another day,
To cleave to Righteousness, whilst yet you may.
Preceed in fear, in love, with true delight,
Unto the Lord, to serve him with your might,
Observe the Lessons given by Abram Cheer,
That they your Soul may unto Christ endear.
Such Songs are good, if well improved be,
Sung by experience* with Soul harmony.
The Truths therein inserted, make your own,
By practice in true love to Christ alone:
Mind chiefly now your everlasting Rest,
That in compare with all things is the best.
Love God, and fear him in sincerity,
So shall you praise him to Eternity.
London, 12th Month, 12 day, 1672. H. P.

Of hopeful young Children, (the great joy of their Parents,) remembering their
Creator in the days of their Youth; Being trained up in the Holy Scriptures
from their Infancy.
First, Of Mary Warren, Born in May 1651, Aged Ten years in May 1661.
WHen his Child was about five or six years old, she had a new plain Tammy
Coat; and when she was made ready, was to be carried with other Children into
Morefields: But having looked upon her Coat, how fine she was, she presently
went to her Chair, sat down, her tears running down her eyes, she wept
seriously by her self; Her Mother seeing it, said to her, How now? Are you not
well? What is the matter that you weep? The Child answered, Yes, I am well, but
I would I had not been made ready, for I am afraid my fine Clothes will cast me
down to Hell. Her Mother said, It Is not our Clothes, but wicked Hearts that
hurt us. She answered, Aye Mother, fine Clothes make our hearts proud.

The Scriptures being daily read in the House, when one had read Luke 10. she
laid to heart the end of the Chapter, how Mary sat at Christ's feet and heard
him: And Martha complained; and Jesus said, Martha, Martha, Thou art careful,
and cumbred about many things; but one thing i^ needful, Mary has chosen that
good part that shall not be taken from her. Hearing this, the tears ran down,
and she wept sore. Being asked the cause, she said, I am not like this good
Mary, I know not that one thing needful. Thus tender was her heart at that Age.

In February 1659.
The Night after General Monck had sent his Leter to the Parliament to put an
end to their sitting by such a time; Bonefires being made the night following
all over London, and some before her Fathers door: When some went down to see
them, this Child would not: But going to the Window, and looking out, hearing
such roaring and rantings in the burning of Rumps, and drinking of Healths
there; she came back, and the tears running down her cheeks, she said thus,
Here is a deal of wicked joy, they know not but they may be dead before the
morning; methinks I see our sins fly up to Heaven as fast as the sparks fly
upward.

This that next follows, was written about October 28. 1661.
It being 24 days now that she had taken nothing but Water, with a little
Sugar, till Tuesday last; and ever since that, she will not take it with Sugar,
but water only, without crying out, (her speech being of late taken away from
her) and that by forcing it into her by a Syringe, she having an impostume in
her stomach, as it appeared afterward, not taking Food at all for diverse days.

What next follows was written by her father, on Friday night, October. 4. 1661.
She sent for me to speak with me, and when I came, I asked her what she would
have with me: She answered I have but a short time to live, I pray you be
loving to my poor Mother. Afterward he speaking of loving her, she said, I
pray manifest your love to my poor Mother. Her Mother asked her if she were
willing to die? She answered Aye, very willing, for then I shall sin no more,
for I know that Christ's Blood has made satisfaction for my sins. ^ asked her,
if I should go down? She answered, I have done with you now, you may if you
please.

Next night, October. the 5th. her Mother going softly to the Chamber Door, she
heard her speaking alone, and she listened, and heard her say this, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly, and receive they poor Creature out of all my pains.

On the Lords Day, (October. 6.) She said thus, here is n^thing here but sin, I
am willing to die, but either to live or to die, which she Lord pleases, his
Will be done, and so it will, whether I will or no.

On Tuesday at night, October. 8.
Seeing her Mother weeping, she said, Mother do not weep for me, but leave me
to the Lord and let him do with me what he pleases. And then Clasping her Arms
about her Mothers Neck, her Mother said, Thou embracest me, but I trust thou
art going to the embracings of the Lord Jesus: She answered, Mother, I know it,
that when I go from hence, I shall go into health and happiness* or else I
should not undergo all my pains with so much patience, (she having been in very
great pain, having an Imposthume in her stomach.) One day when Nurse came to
see her young Sister Sarah, her Sister Ann being with her, she said to her
Sister, Go, see Nurse: Her Sister said, she was loath to leave her alone; She
answered, I am not alone, for the Lord is with me, as it is in John, I am not
alone, for the Father is with me. She feeling a sore pain in her side, her
Mother said, she would apply something to it. She answered, No, the Lord Jesus
has undergone a great deal more for m^.

More Expressions of Mary Warren.
She having been very ill and speechless for some days, her Father had desired
Mr. John Simpson, and Mr. Palmer, late of Glocestershire, and Mr. Jessey, to
come to his House and pray for his sick and much pained Daughter. On Friday
November. 8. 1661. these met then, and sought the Lord earnestly on her behalf,
her father having first declared to them his Daughters afflicted Condition; and
the more to affect them therewith, he there read to them, what he had formerly
written of her gracious Expressions, (those before recited) from October. 4.
1661. there being present also Mr. Greensmith and his Wife; also that grave
Matron Mris. Adkins, a Ministers Widow; with diverse other Christian friends.

That Relation the more affecting their hearts to pray for her; After these and
another Minister had prayed for her, and were gone, in hopes the Lord would
some way return a gracious Answer though they could see nothing at their
departure: It pleased the Lord the Evening following to open her Mouth that had
been speechless for many days; then she spoke to the Maid to call her Mother,
and when she came, she said thus;

Pray you Mother take off these Plasters, for I would not have them; I would
have no Doctors, or Apothecaries for God shall be my Physician, and he will
heal me: If I could have spoken before these Playsters were a laying on, I
would not have had them laid on. If my Speech should be taken away again, do
not trouble me with any more things, for the Lord has fed me with the Food of
Righteousness and Gladness.

Sometimes when you laid Victuals upon a Trencher, I snatched it away; I would
not destroy Gods good Creatures, when I am in my fits: If any thing lie on the
Cloth before me, take it away. Though you take water to wash my mouth, there is
none goes down, for I have no nourishment by any thing but God, no more than
by this Rag, (taking one in her hand.)

I do not value the things of this World no more than dirt. Her Mother had told
one, that she thought her Daughter had assaults of Satan, she once looked very
gashly: And now her Daughter said thus; Once I think I looked gashfully, and
turned my head on one side and on the other; Satan stood upon my left side, and
God was upon my right side, and opened the gates of Heaven for me; and he told
me, Satan should not hurt me, though he sought to devour me like a roaring Lion.

Something being burning that gave her offense, she said, I perceive you burn
something; but do not trouble me, for I cannot smell. I am very sore, from the
crown of my head to the sole of my foot; but I am so full of Comfort and joy
that I do feel but little of my pain; I do not know whether I shall live or die
but whether I live or die, it will be well for me; I am not in trouble for my
sins, God is satisfied with his Son Jesus Christ, for he has washed them away
with his Blood.

Another time when she had been speechless, and began to speak, she said, I
have been so full of joy and gladness, when I was silent; I am not able to
express it.

When her Mother syringed her Mouth with water, she said, she could not relish
it, but desired to try a Syringe of Beer; which when she had, she said, it
relished worse than the Water: then she desired a Syringe of Milk; which when
she had it, she said, I cannot relish any thing: But (said she) I will wait
upon the Lord to see what he will provide for me.

Then her Sister standing by, she said, Sister Betty, and Sister Ann, be sure
your first Work be in the morning to seek the Lord by Prayer, and likewise in
the evening; and give thanks for your Food: for you cannot pray too often to
the Lord; and though you cannot speak such words as others have; yet the Lord
will accept ^f the heart: for you do not know how soon your speech may be taken
away as mine was.

She desired her Mother, thus; Do not let (...) much company be here late at
night, lest it should hinder them from seeking the Lord in duty (...).

She said further, When I was first ill, and went about the House, I was not
under trouble for my sins at all, neither am I now troubled with satan's
temptations, for the Lord has trampled him under his feet.

She said also, When I can hear or understand, I will tell some body, that they
may come and read by me, for I love to hear the Word of God read to me, (for
then she could not hear).

Another time.
She spoke to the maid to call her Mother, saying, I have something to say to
her; and when her Mother came, she said, If my speech be taken away, and should
be a great while so, that then I may have no Doctor, Apothecary, or Surgeon
come at me; and that I may not have any more Physic given to me: and be sure
to take notice of my words* for they look more at the Physic, than at the
Power of God; and if you suffer them to give me any more things the Lord will
be angry with you, and will bring a greater affliction upon you in some of my
other Sisters. I know the Lord can open the passage of my Throat in a moment,
and cause me to take food; or, he may let me lie a great while in this
condition; As for washing my mouth with water, I find no more, but only to wash
the phlegm.

But I am f^d with the bread of Life, that I shall never hunger; and do drink
of the water, of Life, that I shall never thirst more.

I know not whether I shall live or die; but if I die, and if you will have a
Sermon, I desire this may be the Text; the place I do not know, but the words
may be comfortable to you; That David, when his Child was sick, he clothed
himself in Sackcloth, and wept; but when his Child was dead, he washed and ate
Bread: For you have wept much, while I have been sick; and if I die, you have
cause to rejoice.

She said, My soul also was so full of comfort, that I would have spoken much
more: But her speech being almost gone, she said, If it please the Lord that I
might have my hearing and my speech, (which would be a great miracle) I should
speak much more.

November. 10. On the Lords day, she said as follows; When her Mother had
syring'd several things into her mouth; as first water, which she not
relishing, then water and vinegar, then vinegar and Sugar, then milk, and none
did relish with her, she said, Here is but little comfort in these; my comfort
is in the Lord, There is comfort indeed: Though we may seek comfort here, and
the glory of this World, yet, what is all that? all will be nothing, when we
come to lie upon a Death ^ed, then we would fain have the love of God* and
cannot get it: I am full of comfort and joy. Though the Lord is pleased to let
me lie under many pains, yet he knows what is best for his Children; he has
enabled me, and will enable me to bear them; and though he should lay a hundred
times more upon me, yet will I wait upon him, for he is my stay, and the hope
of my Salvation: My pains are nothing to the pains of Hell, where they will
never be at an end. And Christ he suffered a great deal more for me then all
this is; he was bruised, buffeted, and spit upon; and they platted a Crown of
Thorns and put upon his Head, and gave him Vinegar to drink: But I have several
things to take, though I cannot relish them. And they came out against Christ
with Swords and Staves, and Christ did not open his mouth against them; but
rebukes Peter for cutting the High Priests Servants ear, and bid him put up his
Sword into the Scabbard, and said, Shall not I drink of the Cup that my Father
has prepared for me; though my pains are very great, yet I am so full of joy
and comfort: I was very full of comfort before, but I am fuller of joy this
hour than I have been yet. It is better to live Lazarus's life, and to die
Lazarus's death, than to live Dives his life; he had his delicates, and
afterward would have been glad to have had Lazarus dip his finger in water and
cool his tongue.

Though the Lord give Satan power over my Body, yet he has promised he shall
not hurt my Soul. The Devil could not go into the herd of Swine till Christ had
given him leave: And though he stood at my left hand, and said, I am in filthy
rags; yet the Lord stands at my right hand, and says, I am but a firebrand
newly plucked out of the fire, and he will put on me his Robes of Righteousness.

The last night I could not stir my Head. Hand, nor Foot, but by and by the
Lord did help me to move my Head a little, and at length my Body.

O what a good God have I, that can cast down and raise up in a moment; but
here is only looking at the Physician; as many, when they have been sick and
well again, they say, Such a Physician, and such a Physician has cured them,
and they neglect looking up to the Lord.

It is true, the Lord does appoint the means to make use of, but nothing will
do us good, except he give a blessing to it. O that we had Faith as that Woman
had, that had spent all upon Physicians and did her no good; and then came and
touched the Hem of Christ's Garment; and when Christ felt virtue go out of him
he asked his Disciples, Who touched him? then she trembled, but Christ said,
Rise up Daughter, thy Faith has made thee whole.

Of the Expressions of an hopeful Child, the daughter of Mr. Edward Scarfield,
that was but eleven years of Age in March, 1661. Gathered from a Letter written
by one fearing God, that lived in the house with the Child.
IN August last, this Child was sick of a Fever; in which time she said to her
Father, (who is a holy, humble, precious man,) I am afraid, I am not prepared
to die; and fell under much trouble of Spirit, being sensible, not only of
actual sins, but of her lost estate without Christ, in unbelief, (as Ephesians. 2.
12. John 16. 8, 9.) and she wept bitterly, crying out thus, My sins are greater
than I can bear, I doubt God will not forgive them: telling her Father, I am in
unbelief, and I cannot believe: Yet she was drawn out to pray many times in
those words of Psalm. 25. For thy names sake, O Lord pardon my sin, for it is
great. Thus she lay often mourning for sin, and said, I had rather have Christ
than health. She would repeat many promises of Gods Mercy and Grace, but said,
she could not believe.

When she had been complaining, that she was not prepared; her Father opening
the Bible, his eyes first fixed upon these words, (in Psalm. 10. 17.) Lord, thou will prepare the heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear; and he bid her take
notice of the Lords providence therein, ordering the opening of the Book, and
his eyes to pitch on these words. The next day, when she was mourning for sin,
he opening it again, his eyes fixed on those words in Ma^th. 5. Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. He bid her observe that
Providence of also. But as yet her time was not come, and she still mourned
under her unbelief.

The next day, being then the 24th of the 6th month 1661. he praying that
morning with his godly Family, (as his usual way has been for many years to
pray with them, and read the Scriptures, or Cat^chise them daily morning and
evening;) Behold and see what gracious encouragement the Lord gave him in his
Service, as he was praying to this effect, (That we might not look for any
thing in us to rest in, or trust unto for our Justitfication to stand righteous
before God; but only in Jesus Christ alone, who died for our sins at Jerusalem,
and rose again for our Justification.) Whilst he was praying to that effect,
the Lord raised her Soul up to believe* as she told her Father when Prayer was
ended, Now I believe in Christ, and I am not afraid of Death.

After this, she said, I had rather die than sin against God. Since that time
she has continued quiet in mind, as one that has peace with God.

As for this young Child I have been comforted in seeing her, and hearing her
answer some Questions propounded to her five years ago.

Her Father says, that since she was five years old, he remembered not that
either a Lie, or an Oath has ever come out of her mouth; neither would she
have wronged any to the value of a Pin.

Henry Jessey.

Here ends the first part.
Here follows now some of the Fruits of Mr. Abraham Chear's spare hours
improvement, whilst a Prisoner: Made and directed to some he was nearly related
to, and dearly affected.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth.
1.
SWeet Children, Wisdom you invites,
to hearken to her Voice;
She offers to you rare delights,
Most worthy of your choice.
Eternal blessings in his ways,
You shall be sure to find;
Oh! therefore in your youthful days,
your great Creator mind.
2.
The joy that other pleasure brings,
with vanities abound:
^ay; when in straits they take them wings,
vexations they are found.
Your very Vitals thus decays,
and torments leave behind:
Oh! therefore in your youthful days,
your Great Creator mind.
3.
They may affect depraved sense
while they subject your Reason;
They say, to conscience, get you hence,
and fear it for a season.
But though a kind of sottish ease,
you hereby seem to find,
I beg you in your youthful days,
your Great Creator mind.
4.
The dreadful danger heed I pray,
of such strange ways at length;
When you have sinned your time away,
and wasted all your strength;
Be sure, in chains of darkness, these
your hands and seet will bind:
Oh! therefore in your youthful days,
your Great Creator mind.
5.
Observe how poor mortal men,
their precious seasons spend,
To satisfy those lusts, but then
must perish in the end.
This saving Counsel, would you please
upon your heart to bind:
Oh! in your early yourthful days,
your Great Creator mind.
6.
Upon a World, vain toylsome, foul,
a journey now you enter:
The welfare of your living Soul,
you dangerously adventure
If as the is^ue of your ways,
yo^ve happiness designed:
Oh! in your early youthful days
your Great Creator mind.
7.
Friends, parents, all who you affect,
observe your budding spring;
Your prosperous Summer they expect,
a fruitful Crop will bring:
A witness in this age to raise,
to Grace of every kind:
Oh! then in these your youthful days,
your Great^ Creator mind.
8.
Young Isaack's, who lift up their eyes,
and meditate in Fields;
Young Jacob's, who the Blessing prize,
this age but seldom yields.
Few Samuel's, leaving their plays,
to Temple Work resigned:
Few do, as these, in youthful days,
their Great Creator mind.
9.
How precious Obodiah's b^,
that feared God in youth;
How seldom Timothy's we see,
^erst in the Word of Truth.
Few Babes and Sucklings publish praise,
the Avengers Rage to bind.
Oh! then in these your youthful days,
your Great Creator mind.
10.
Few tenderhearted youths, as was
Josiah, Judah's King;
Ho^annah in the highest (alas)
how seldom Children Sing?
Youth's rarely ask for Zion's ways,
they would rather pleasure find:
But oh! in these your youthful days,
your Great Creator mind.
11.
What Children Pulse and Water choose,
continually to eat;
Rather then Conscience should accuse,
for tasting Royal Meat?
Would you not bow, a King to please,
though tortures were behind?
Oh! then in these your youthful days,
your Great Creator mind.
12.
Those worthy Mirrors of their Age,
obtained a precious Name;
Their living Pattern should engage
your souls to do the same.
And though in this strait narrow way,
you few Companions find;
The rather in your youthful day,
your Great Creator mind.
13.
How worthy Christ is, could you learn,
to claim your Flower and Prime;
And how well pleasing it is, discern
to dedicate your time:
You pleasantly would make essays,
to get your Souls inclined,
And gladly in your youthful days,
your Great Creator mind.
14.
This Garland wreathed of youthful flowers
to Jesus you would bring:
This Morn made up of Golden Hours,
you would present the King.
You Would humbly bow, without delays,
Grace in his sight to find;
And gladly now, and all your days,
your Great Creator mind.
More of Mr. Chear's Verses, Written to a young Virgin, Anno 1663.
Sweet Child,
When I bethink what need there is of care,
For precious souls to save themselves from snare;
That Satan, as a subtle Fouler, lays
To take and keep them captive all their days
In youthf^l folly, and in sensual rest,
To keep them off from being truly blessed;
What strange devices he has to expel,
Their thoughts of Judgment, Death, of Heaven, or Hell;
And minding what engag^ments on me lie,
To you, and others, Christ to testify,
This Song, I thought, you now and then might sing
If God would follow it, to mind to bring
Your state by Nature, and the Gospel Path,
To set you free from everlasting Wrath.
If morn by morn, you in this Glass will dress you,
I have some hopes that God by it may bless you.
1.
WHen by Spectators I am told,
what Beauty does adorn me:
Or in a Glass, when I behold,
How sweetly God did from me.
Has God such comeliness displayed,
and on me made to dwell
It Is pity, such a pretty Maid,
as I should go to Hell.
2.
When all my Members I compare,
formed by my Maker's hand;
In what sweet order, strait and fair,
each part together stand:
How in the use of these might I,
in virtue's Walks excel.
It Is pity when I come to die,
all these should go to Hell.
3.
Does God my ornaments provide,
of soft and good array;
The which this Age converts to pride,
I am as vain as they.
But when the thoughts of Pride entice,
such temprings I should quell;
By serious heeding this advice,
I must take heed of Hell.
4.
If Parents industry and care,
should by the Lord be blessed,
That they large portions could prepare,
for me and all the rest.
Though many Suitors this invites,
my Fortunes might excel:
What would become of these delights,
if I should go to Hell?
5.
Should Wisdom, Breeding, parts conspire,
my spreading fame to raise:
Should Courtly Ladies me admire,
and my perfections praise.
Though for Endowments, rare and high,
from all I bare the Bell:
What would these toys avail, if I
at leng^^t be lodged in Hell?
6.
If to seek pleasures, Pastimes, Sports,
My fancy should be bent;
Which City, Country, Town, or Court,
to please me can invent:
Though thus to satisfy my lust,
with greediness I fell;
By weeping-Cross, return I must
or else go quick to Hell.
7.
Does Beauty such corruption Hide?
is comeliness a bait?
Do costly Garments nouirsh pride?
has Treasure such deceit?
Do Complements breed vanity?
does pleasure Grace expel?
How little reason then have I
for these to go to Hell?
8.
It Is time I should without delays,
my (...) state bethink;
Th ^^gh God's forbearance, at my days
of ignorance did wink.
Repentance he does now expect,
and learning to do well;
For plainly he does this detect,
this broad way leads to Hell.
9.
To choose the new and living way,
the Gospel does beseech me;
The heart of Jesus, day by day,
is opened to enrich me.
The tenders of New-Cov'nant Grace,
would sin and guilt expel;
The promised Spirit would me place,
safe from the lowest Hell.
10.
Would Christ my Spirit lead along,
these tenders to embrace,
I should have matter for a Song,
to praise his Glorious Grace.
How first of goodness I was seized
from what a state I fell;
To what a glory God has raised,
a Firebrand plucked from Hell.
To my Cousin T. H. at School.
KInd Kinsman! Complem^nts apart,
Yet love expressed with all my heart;
White I bethought what way was bes^,
To gratify a strong request;
And how to reach the proper and,
That was ^ssign'd me by a Friend;
That I would write a seri^us line,
Your tender Spirit to incl^ne,
If possibly, from wanton things,
Which carry with them poysn^d (...),
And kindly to attract your eye,
From vanity to things on high:
My thoughts to Meeter were inclined,
As thinking on a Scholars mind,
It might at first with fancy take,
And after deep impressions make:
Which Oh! If God would but inspire,
Convince of folly, raise desire;
Discover Beauty, kindle Love,
Fix your delight on things Above;
These weak endeavors then may stand,
As Christ's remembrances at hand.
To warn you, folly to avoid,
Which has such multitudes destroyed;
And thence your nobler part incline,
To Meditations more Divine;
Which have a faculty to raise.
Immortal Souls to frames of praise:
By means of which, when you obtain,
Your Spirit in a serious strain;
when vanity has least respect;
And thoughts are fittest to reflect;
Then from your Treasure you may bring,
This brief Solil^quie, and Sing,
COme Soul! let you and I,
A few discourses have:
Shall we bethink, how near the brink,
We border of the Grave?
Shall we surveigh our time,
How vainly it is spent;
How youthful days consume in ways,
Which Age must needs repent?
The things which others please;
What profit do they merit?
What are the Toys, of wanton Boys,
to an immortal Spirit?
How will our Reckoning pass,
Of pastim, Pleasure, play,
When every thought and Deed is brought,
Unto the Judgment Day?
Would not our time and strength,
Be better far employed,
If every thought, were this way wrought,
How Christ may be enjoyed?
Should not a young man's way,
Be ordered by the Word?
Should not his mind, be still inclined?
To know and fear the Lord?
If we behold our Frame,
Our parts and powers compare;
Sure, God intends some glorious ends,
To form a piece so rare.
A Letter sent to a Friend's Child.
Sweet Child. I pray you, think not long,
E're I have sent my Pr^^o^-Song;
To turn, after a Godly sort,
Your tongue, and thoughts, from sinful sport.
Pray let it frequently be brought,
With holy fear upon your thought;
And when indeed your So^l is bent,
On things that are most permanent.
When least to foolish mir^h inclined,
Then from the Treasure of your mind,
This serious Song, you forth may bring,
^ith Gospel Melody, and Sing,
LOrd what a worm am I?
what could thou here epsy?
That ever thou, should humbly bow,
On me to cast an eye?
What kind of Love is this?
What reason can it have?
Shall God through Grace, himself abase,
So vile a Wretch to save?
How strangely was I made?
How curiously adorned?
I was at first, an heap of dust,
Which sin has quite deformed
My Matter, Earth and Clay,
Formed by a power Divine:
Sure God would hide, all cause of pride
From every thought of mine.
My Childish thoughts would cease,
On vanity to stay,
Could I bethink, I Am on the brink
Of danger day by day,
Temp^ations lead to sin;
Sin does of good bereave me:
Clothes, Beauty, Streng^h, and Life at Length
Are all at hand to leave me.
Why then should gay att^re,
Yield so much food to pride?
What glory's in a beareous skin,
That so much filth does hide?
Why should the fond delights
Of parents puff me up?
Such boundless love, does often prove,
To both a bitter Cup.
Why should the highest joys
Of Sin subject my reason?
The sinful Sports of Princes Courts,
Last only for a season.
Lord let my Soul be raised,
And all its powers incline.
On Eagles Wings, to follow things,
That are indeed Divine.
Those depths that from the wise
Thou please to conceal;
Mysterious things, obscured from Kings,
To me a Babe reveal,
That from an Infants Mouth,
A Suckliugs Lips inspired;
Thy glorious Name, may purchase same,
And Christ be more admired.
Let me thy Beauty see,
Thy Countenance behold:
Thy Rays of Grace, fixed in my face,
More rich than Massy Gold.
Let Royal Robes of Praise,
And Righteousness adorn me,
Which may me bring, before the King,
How ever Mortals scorn me.
Let Treasures of thy Grace,
A portion rich endow me;
In lasting Bags, though here in Rags,
Men scarce a bit allow me.
If Comeliness I want,
Thy Beauty may I have;
I shall be fair, beyond compare,
Though cripled to my Grave.
And if above it all,
To Christ I married be;
My living Springs, Oh king of Kings,
Will still run fresh in thee.
Upon a Bible sent as a Token to a young Virgin, wherein the worth of the holy
Scripture is minded.
WHile I was musing what was (...)
unto your hands to send*
That of your Souls eternal rest,
my care I might commend*
The Holy Scriptures I bethought,
often tendering to your heart,
That your affections might be brought,
to choose the better part.
There you may read what guilt of sin,
into the World you brought?
And since what filthiness has bin,
in Word, in Deed, in Thought:
How God's long-suffering, sins have pressed,
as sheaves do press a Cart;
And nothing else can make you blessed,
but Mary's better part.
That God has holy jealous eyes,
the Scriptures do unfold;
By which heart-secrets he espies,
yet cannot sin behold.
Through shades of Death, and darkest night,
these piercing Beams do dart;
He looks on nothing with delight,
but on that better part.
With flaming fire you also read,
a Judgment day designed,
Where every idle Thought and Deed,
Must righteous Sentence find.
There Kings stand naked, Death has harl'd
their Robes and Crowns apart;
Then, but too late, they will give the World
for Mary's better part.
Then to have Jesus Christ ones own,
will be admired Grace;
To stand with boldness at the Throne,
and see the Father's Face.
To sit on Thrones, when Christ shall say,
Ye wicked ones depart.
But come ye blessed in my day,
ye chose the better Part.
The tenders of his Grace so rich,
here Jesus does display.
He scarlet-sinners does beseech,
his Gospel to obey:
To let sins settered Captives free,
and heal the broken heart;
He begs them on his bended knee,
to choose the better part.
Deep Myst'ries of eternal Love,
hid from the Saints of old;
To Babes and Sucklings from above,
these Scriptures do unfold:
Not in the words of frothy Wits,
or humane terms of art;
But such simplicity as fits,
the Spirit's better part.
The glory of the Father's Face,
the burning Law declares:
The beauty of Christ's precious Grace,
the Gospel here prepares.
Both Grace and Glory here unite,
to heal sins deadly smart.
The spirit, and the Bride invite,
to choose this better part.
The blessed truths displayed herein,
all your dear pleasures make;
Its sharp rebukes of every sin,
as healing Balsom take.
For though convictions to the flesh,
so bitter seem and tart;
Yet is their issue to refresh,
and heal the better part.
Oh! then upon this Word of Truth,
place high and great esteem:
This point of Wisdom learn in youth,
your precious time redeem.
To know Christ's from a strangers Voice,
account the highest Art;
Your richest treasure is your cho^ce
of Mary's better part.
A Poetical Meditation, wherein the Usefulness, Excellency, and several
perfections of the holy Scriptures are briefly hinted, performed by J. C. but
turned into more familiar verse for the use of Children, by Abr. Cheer.
AMong thy glorious gifts;
Lord thou thy Word have given,
Precious and pure, sweet, holy, sure,
To guide me hence to heaven.
Here I abound with straits,
Wants and necessities,
There I have store, heapt, running over,
With plenteous rich supplies.
Temptations here abound,
With terrors, dangers, fears,
These petty Hels thy Word expels,
And all my passage clears.
When Satan fiercely shoots,
His fiery darts at me;
Then Lord, they Word, is shield and Sword,
Me saves and makes them flee.
The present world commends,
Its Objects fresh and fair;
But yet thy Word does that afford,
Which proves more precious Ware.
When fleshly lusts entice,
To their alluring pleasure;
To rare delights thy Word invites,
More choice in weight and measure.
The Errors of the Times;
Their cheating Wares display;
But Scripture says, shun Errors ways.
My Rule shall guide your way.
When by the Tempter's Wiles,
I tempted am to sin;
By thy Words Art, hid in my heart,
Both field and Prize I win.
Nay though I foiled be,
And sin defile my Soul,
Thy Word can cleanse these noisome Dens,
And sins best strength control.
An unbelieving heart,
Do I till now inherit:
Lord, thy Word has Power to work Faith,
By thy most Holy Spirit.
If this be my Disease,
An hard and stony heart;
Thy Word thus deals, first kills, then heals,
And cures me by this smart.
Will not my frozen heart,
With Gospel Grace comply;
Thy Royal Law, this heart can thaw,
And cause a weeping eye.
Does lofty towering thoughts,
Puff up my tempted Breast;
Thy word brings low, the proudest Foe,
Less makes me than the least.
Do muttering thoughts arise,
Grudge, murmur, or repine;
Thy Rod and Word, teach patience, Lord,
And still these thoughts of mine.
Am I tongue-ty'd in Prayer,
And know not what to say;
Thy Word inspires, praying desires,
Tell's how and what to Pray.
When like a lost sheep I
In darkness err and stray;
Thy word's a Light, most clear and bright,
And guides me in my way.
A simple fool I be,
And destitute of eyes;
Thy word's a Rule, Master and School,
To make its Scholars wise.
I see my self undone,
Distressed, naked, poor,
Thy Words infold a Mine of Gold,
Rich pearls, and precious store.
By sinful nature I
And God are still at odds,
Thy Word my Soul converteth whole,
From Satan's Will to Gods.
Do troubles from without.
And floods of inward grief
My Soul torment? thy Word is lent,
With Joy and Soul relief.
Or, is my Soul perplexed,
With reasonings, doubts, and fears,
Thy Word of Grace, resolves the case,
My cloudy Judgment clears.
Or, do despairing thoughts,
My tempted Soul o'rtake?
Thy word does give, me hopes to live,
For Christ my Savior's sake.
When floods and multitudes
Of troubled thoughts me press;
I call to mind, thy word, and find,
Its joys my Soul refresh.
Though in this vale of tears
I thirst, faint, hunger, Pine;
Thy word me feeds, in these my ne
Its Bread, and Milk, and Wine.
Or, am I weakened out,
And cannot walk alone;
Thy word then is strength to my knees,
And staff to lean upon.
And though in scorn and pain,
Forsook, and poor I be,
Thy word alone, has all in one,
Health, Wealth, Friends, all to me,
Thus though my pained Soul
Be sick, and wounded sore,
With grievous sin, which does begin,
To fester more and more.
Thy word directs me where,
My healing may be had,
And does me guide, to Christ's pierced side,
For Balm of Gilead.
Nay, though no life at all,
Nor quickening there remain;
Thy word is good, and liveing Food,
Which fetches life again.
And if I would desire,
A Life that lasts for ever;
The Scripture shows, whence water flows,
To drink and perish never.
Blessed be the Lord my God,
Who evermore provides,
And fills full, my empty Soul,
With Food that still abides.
My Soul! O bless the Lord,
Who bounteously has given,
Strength, light, guide, way, lest thou should stray,
In this thy way to Heaven.
This Holy Book of God,
These Sentences, these Lines;
Each Word and Letter, to me are better,
Than Pearls and Golden Mines.
It Is Heaven it self transcribed,
And Glory lively penned;
God's truth, no doubt was, copied out,
When he this Gift did send.
It Is Truth brought forth to light;
God did hereby intend,
Man's word should fall, Heaven, Earth, and all,
But this should never end.
Dear Soul, admiring stand,
At that blessed hand and Quill;
That did produce, for sinners use.
The Eternal Sovereign Will.
Astonished admire,
The Author too; and when,
Thou can not raise, sufficient praise,
With wondering say, Amen.
To my Cousin John H.
SWeet John, I send you here,
A Song by heart to learn;
Not it to say, as Parrots may,
But wisely to discern.
Oh! lay it deep to heart,
And mind it well I pray,
God grant you Grace, to grow apace,
In virtue day by day.
As yet a Child you be,
And childish Toys do please you;
But you will complain, they all are vain,
When ever Grace shall seize you.
Nay, When Convictions come,
In Gospel-Power, and Truth;
You Will surely cry, Ah wretch am I,
Thus to have spent my youth!
Childhood and Youth were spent,
In things not to be named:
Alas! wha^ praise was in those days,
Whereof I Am now ashamed.
Dear John, then lay to heart,
This needful timely hint,
Before the day, of which you will say,
What pleasure have I in it?
Begin to mind the Lord,
Who formed you out of dust;
And did you raise, to show his praise;
Him love and fear you must.
In things that are of earth,
Spend not your youthful strength;
Its joys and cares, are all but snares,
To mischief you at length.
Where Christ in glory sits,
Place there your prime delight;
Let things above have all your love,
Your time, care, mind and might.
John Christ's forerunner mind,
From whom you have your name;
Though from his birth, lived mean on earth,
A shining Light became.
He chose a Desert life,
Fed hard, was coorse attired,
He left the sport, of Herod's Court,
Though he was there admired.
Sin he reproved in all,
And kept true witness clear:
He never sought, himself in ought,
That Christ might more appear.
Another John you find,
The loved Disciple named;
Who leaned for rest, on Jesus Breast,
With Gospel-love inflamed.
To every Truth of Christ,
A witness bold he bear;
Though an Exile, in Patmos-Isle,
Choice Visions he had there.
A Pattern if they be
To you in word and deed;
Jehovah's eye, will make supply,
To whatsoever you need.
To my Cousin Sam. B.
DEar Cousin Sam, my pretty Lam,
this Song to you I send;
Whatever play, aside you lay,
learn this from end to end.
With God begin, take heed of sin,
know Jesus out of hand.
Betimes you must, flee youthful lust,
Its first assaults withstand.
Spend not your days, in wanton plays,
Though naughty boys entice:
They first begin, with little sin,
but end in deadly vice.
If naughty Boys, allure with Toys,
to sin, or lies to tell;
Then tell them plain, you tempt in vain,
such ways go down to Hell.
God's holy Eye, our faults do spy,
and will to Judgment call us,
We must fear God, more than the Rod,
or ought that can befall us.
How often have I, been like to die?
yea Death is always near:
Choose whom you will, to follow still,
I Christ must love and fear;
Fathers best Boy, and Mothers joy,
I then shall surely be;
And that that is best, of all the rest,
God will provide for me.
To my Cousin W. L.
DEar Child, although my Father's Will
in Prison me has bound;
Through uprightness, and patience still,
my comforts here are found.
The presence of a gracious God,
does this a Palace make;
It makes the bitter of the Rod,
be sweet for Jesus sake.
But Oh! when guilt brings any here,
in Fetters to be bound;
Because of God they had no fear,
but were in evil found:
To such it is a dreadful place,
here guilt to judgment binds them;
Where if they don't repent apace,
Death, Wrath, and Vengeance finds them.
Of you, dear Child, with carefulness,
my heart has many a thought;
Least you through youthful wantonness,
to greater sins be brought:
And so by adding sin to sin,
you wast your time and strength;
And when your judgment does begin,
in vain you mourn at length.
I charge you then, in any sort,
your great Creator mind;
Spend not your youthful days in sport,
that cannot be regained.
Avoid those rude and wicked Boys,
that make a mock of sin;
Love not their plays, and sinful Toys,
to fear the Lord begin.
Keep close to School, read Scriptures often,
in private learn to pray;
Your Gospel-grounds keep still in thought,
Your Parents both obey.
Your Brethren love, and teach them good,
a Christian learn to be;
Then God will give you clothes and food,
and you will be dear to me.
To my Kinsman A. L.
MY pretty Child, remember well,
you must your ways amend;
For wicked Children go to Hell,
that way their courses tend.
But hark to me, if you to be,
the Child of God desire;
The broad and open road must flee,
which multitudes admire.
S^rive every day to mend you way,
learn Christ while you are young;
Take constant heed, to every deed,
heart, feet, hands and tongue.
You may be quickly sick, and die,
and put into the Grave;
From whence to judgment you must fly,
and righteous Sentence have.
Learn then to fear, while you live here,
with Christ your time employ.
Labor to live and die as one,
that leaves the World with joy.
My strength in cries I shall employ,
that God will bless your youth;
I can have nothing like this joy,
My Children walk in truth.
To my youngest Kinsman R. L.
MY little Cousin if you will be,
your Uncles dearest Boy;
You must take heed of every deed,
that would your Soul destroy.
You must not curse, nor fight, nor steal,
nor spend your time in games,
Nor make a lie, what e're you aile;
nor call ungodly names.
With wicked Children do not play,
for such to Hell will go;
The Devils Children sin all day,
but you must not do so.
Begin, I pray, to learn that way,
that does to Heaven tend:
O learn a little, day by day,
which leads to that end.
For God and good men love such Boys,
and will them good things give;
Father and Mother will rejoice,
and I in comfort live.
Another to a Child insisting on Psalm. 119. 9.
SInce I am naturally bent,
to take delight in Songs;
A Friend from Prison one has sent,
that to my Soul belongs:
Which when I sing, he does entreat,
I would not mind my play,
But frequently with weight repeat,
How may I cleanse my way?
It is the use of such as I,
to Dance, and Play, and sing;
Or else to lie, and rail, and cry,
for will in every thing,
Why should our wantonness be crossed,
or pleasures night and day?
We fear no danger to be loft;
what need we cleanse our way?
Should we our jovial play-mates shun,
when we return from Schools;
Should we not fight, and climb, and run,
we should be counted fools.
If in the Hedges, Streets, and Field,
our sports you take away;
What good will food and raiment yield?
why should we change our way?
When up to youth and strength we grow,
it is brave to have our wills;
To heed no Check whatever we do,
of lust to take our fills:
To fight, drink, game, to swear and curse,
to lie out night and day;
To spend and whore, grow worse and worse,
what youth will cleanse his way?
It Is true, the Holy Scriptures teach,
our Catechisms tell;
Some Ministers we hear do preach.
Youths must take heed of Hell.
Our Parents at our wildness grieve,
exhort, reprove and pray,
But after all, we scarce believe,
we need to cleanse our way.
We see some that were thought the best,
their high profession leaving;
And greedily, as do the rest,
to earth and Pleasure cleaving.
No Check of Conscience does appear,
in what they do or say;
This greatly hardens us from fear,
or thoughts to cleanse our way.
With Cart-ropes to draw youthful lust,
this day all help affords;
It is a sport, Christ's bonds to burst.
and cast away his Cords,
If one from wickedness dissent,
he makes himself a prey;
This yields but small encouragement,
for youth to cleanse his way.
As the young Ass that snuffs the wind,
Youth loves to have its swinge;
But hates attempts, its lust to bind,
or liberty infringe.
Yet there is a month, in which the Lord,
our full career can stay;
And can, according to his Word.
turn, change, and cleanse our way.
No less then an Almighty Power,
such torrents can withstand,
The influences of this hour,
tempt with so high a hand,
Amongst a thousand, scarce one Lad,
(with weepings we may say)
Of whom assurance may be had,
he strives to cleanse his way.
Oh! with what grief upon their ways,
should Parents then reflect;
Whose fawning in our infant days,
does Word and Rod neglect;
Till our incorrigible years,
are apt by deeds to say,
Although you break your heart with tears,
we will not cleanse our way.
Were our Salvation their design,
our Souls their highest care;
They would be careful to decline,
all steps that might ensnare,
What holy walks, before our sight.
as patterns should they lay;
Which might endear us with delight,
betimes to cleanse our way?
Above deep learning, breeding, wit,
they for us grace would prize;
Rich Trades, or stocks, compared with it,
were dung before their eyes.
The greatest Matches they could find,
with heaps of yellow Clay;
Were no Preferment to their mind,
like to a cleansed way.
To a Virgin inclining to enquire after the Lord.
A Soliloquie.
COme pray thee, Precious Soul of mine,
let us seriously retire;
And under eye and aid Divine,
God's Oracles enquire.
Call in those thoughts that range about,
with awfulness incline,
To get this question out of doubt,
Is Jesus truly mine?
It Is high time now to fix our thought,
O let time past suffice,
That we the lusts of flesh have wrought,
in youthful vanities.
What profit in those ways is sound,
which down to Hell incline;
What real pleasure can redound,
if Christ be none of mine?
It Is true, a Maid can scarce forget,
her ornamental tire;
The Virgins her at naught will set,
whose eye is fixed higher.
But should I my bright morning wast,
to make me (...) and fine;
'Twill be but bitterness at last,
if Christ be none of mine?
With Dinah should I gad to see,
the Daughters of the Land;
My intimates, if such should be,
who Christ don't understand:
My complements, and ga^e might I,
as is the mode, refined;
But wretched should I live and die.
if Christ be none of mine.
Or if through deep convictions I,
my vain companions leave;
And to the Saints, for company,
in dear affections cleave.
Though they as Angels speak to me,
sweet words as spiced Wine;
Of what advantage could it be,
if Christ be none of mine?
Of his inestimable worth.
if I by Saints am told;
Or how the Gospel sets him forth,
transcending heaps of Gold:
Though one among a thousand he,
in full perfection shine;
What will this Glory be to me,
if Christ be none of mine;
If by reforming I essay,
self righteousness should stand;
I may conjecture I obey,
the Law's exact command.
Nay, to the Gospel's outward call,
my steps I may refine;
Yet short of glory I shall fall,
If Christ be none of mine?
How Satan acts an Angel's part,
I cannot well discern;
The windings of a treacherous heart,
I cannot quickly learn;
How close hypocrisy in all,
may hide it is deep design;
The stateliest Structure then must fall,
if Christ be none of mine.
Of a Child somewhat indulged by reason of Sickliness.
IF any would my Age be told,
this answer they may have;
A weakly Child of ten years old,
often very near the Grave.
My Life's a wonder to my Friends,
continued to this day;
And doubtless is for higher ends,
then eat, and drink, and play.
To these things Childhood is inclined,
yea to great evils bending;
And little does it heed or mind,
to what such ways are tending.
If Parents give us our contents,
and take delight to please us;
We little lay to heart events,
though dreadful Plagues should seize us*
Some Parents in this sinful Age,
will no ways cross our course;
Whilst other's filthy railing rage;
to desperate ways enforce.
But did the love and fear of God,
in Parents hearts bear sway,
And were the doctrine of the Rod,
their study day by day.
Were their and our iniquities,
more deeply laid to heart;
Did love to our immortal Souls,
of fondness get the start,
They Would learn, with gravity, to smile,
and tenderness to smile;
Correct and pity all the while,
rebuke, and yet delight.
Chastisements would with teaching meet;
reproofs be sharp, yet mild;
God's admonition would be sweet,
and wholesome to the Child.
We should grow flexible and kind,
great guilt it would prevent;
This early with a willing mind,
would lead us to repent.
It would seem bitter to the flesh,
to travel thus again;
But Ah! the forming Christ afresh,
will pay for all this pain.
A Dialogue betwixt the love of Christ and the lust of the flesh;
written by the said Ab. Cheer,
setting forth the deceitful nature of sin, in its alluring the Soul from
goodness, to its ruin and destruction; and the powerful influence of Christ's
love, engaging to an early embracing his invitations to a well-grounded hope of
Everlasting Glory.

Its Prologue.
Respected Friend,
I am obliged to tell you what is a doing;
There are at hand to you designed for woing,
Two fair-spoke-Suitors, both look fair and fresh,
The love of Jesus and the lust of Flesh.
They are Corrivals, each Proposals brings,
As if the Heirs apparent of some Kings,
Had terms to tender to engage your favor
Of such vast interests, their offers savor.
Hear now, and well observe a stander-by,
Who long has known how their concerns do lie,
And who by dear experience has been taught,
To what result such suits are often brought:
If from his great desire you be blessed,
And in your choice reach everlasting rest.
He offers dear-bought light to guide your mind
That to the better part it be inclined;
He shows a little, in a homespun style,
The one's simplicity the other's Guile.
What stocks they come of, and their old descents;
Their various treasures, and their plain intents,
What are their qualities, their differing ends;
To what plain issue each proposal tends.
Their sundry overtures your love to gain,
In way of Dialogue betwixt them twain.
The love of Christ. SWeet Virgin stop, let Wisdom drop,
a word becoming Kings:
Pray be inclined to bend your mind,
unto celestial things.
I beg your love, for things Above;
nay, all your Powers I claim:
I would adorn, your youthful morn,
and crown your early aim.

The lust of the flesh. Should any thought to mind be brought,
that interrupts your quiet:
Shall Virgins weep, disturb their sleep,
desert their needful diet?
Tush; drink in Plate, and recreate,
your lively youthful Spirit,
Seek Courtly things delight in Kings,
which may proclaim your merit.

The love of Christ. While Flesh pretends, these pleasing ends,
its dire intents it hides:
But pray awake, for Jesus sake,
while day of Grace abides.
Flesh lusts its Guests, between its Breasts,
convictions to expel;
But deadly Charms, are in its arms;
its Guests are lodged in Hell.

The Lusts of the flesh. What strange conceits, what silly cheats,
would drive thy joys away?
These Preachers tell, but dreams of Hell.
and of the Judgment day.
'Twil never do well, till mirth expel,
such sullen dumps as these:
The Timbrel bring, come dance and sing;
eat, drink, and take thine ease.

The Love of Christ. These Childish Toys, may make a noise,
to please the carnal heart;
But all the while, they but beguile,
nay wound the better part,
One glimps of love, sealed from above,
these highest joys transcends;
From deeps 'twill raise, to heights of praise,
when that in torment ends.

The Lust of the flesh. Shall wordy winds, on gallant minds,
such deep impressions make;
That for a ^ound, of things unfound,
they joys in Hand forsake?
This day invites, to rare delights,
all Ladies who design,
To Have fortunes raised, and beauties praised,
embrace these paths of mine.

The Love of Christ. Alas at length, you will lose your strength,
mirth, beauty, sport, and pleasure;
And when too late, lament your state,
your misspent time and treasure,
They Will take them wings, and leave you stings,
with venom, guilt, and smart;
Then while it is day, I humbly pray,
choose Mary's better part.

The Lust of the flesh. Are such things fit, that clogs your wit,
which now to heights aspires?
Such doatings leave, till age bereave,
of moisture, warm desires*
Your budding Spring, prompts you to sing,
your warbling Princely strain;
In Courtly Modes, with amourous odes
your Gallants entertain.

The Love of Christ. Such frothy freaks, aloud bespeaks,
how slightly youths esteem
Their nobler parts, their precious hearts,
which Earth cannot redeem.
How hardly brought, to turn a thought,
from Objects thus depraved;
Though Jesus cries, Oh! fix your eyes
on me, and be ye saved.

The Lust of the flesh. Such looks may grace, some withered face,
or some grave Cloystered Nun;
Are counted blots, not beauty-spots,
where Fame's but now begun.
Tush; rather prize those Comedies,
and rare Romances use;
Attend resorts, to Princely sports,
and shades for interviews.

The Love of Christ. What pity it is such trash as this,
with heaven-born Souls should take;
While Jesus stands with stretched out hands,
rich overtures to make.
Gold tried in Fire, and rich attire,
do your acceptance crave;
A crown of Bliss, prepared is,
when each an end shall have.

The treaty stops, but here you have a taste
your friend has longings that you may be Chaste,
Preserved a Virgin, and brought such to Christ
By love constrained, not by lust intic't.
A Description of an Elect Person, in his threefold state, by Nature, Grace,
and Glory;
Collected by Va. Powel, in the close of his Catechism; translated into
familiar Verse, for Childrens better remembrance, by A. Cheer.
Ejaculation.
My blessed Father, when my heart enclines,
To sing this Song, or but to read these lines,
Let me thy Spirits Power, or leadings find,
To form their lively likeness on my mind.
Work deep convictions, and an holy fear,
To think what am I, or what once I were.
And into fellowship, Lord let it guide me,
With all this Grace the Gospel does provide me,
That I may claim what this thy record says,
By sound experience, and unfeigned Faith;
And let the hope of yonder Glory raise
My Soul to close with those reflects of praise.
(1.)
Nature, and as out of Christ,
born of the flesh was I;
Grace, and as I stand in Christ,
I Am new born spiritually.
Glory I with Christ shall reign,
and heavenly freedom have.

so vile a Wretch to save?
(2.)

with quietness inherit.

betwixt my flesh and spirit

all glorious will make me.

let not my Christ forsake me.
(3)

a fleshly War I waged.

my spirit stands engaged.

transformed I wait to be.

a look of love on me?
(4)

I wholly bent my mind:
But now unto the Spirit's things


such sights alone shall see.

so poor a Worm as me?
(5)

in trespasses and sins;

my Soul to live begins.

I shall be wholly free.

at so great cost on me?
(6.)

I was well pleased to lie;

in all simplicity.

as my dear Christ is pure.

should such a Wretch endure?
(7.)
Subjected to the Law of sin


the Spirit of Life's command;

over sin and death for me.

that I thus saved should be?
(8.)

I hated as my foes:

and dear affections close.

at length resolved be.

should such blessed objects see?
(9)

I teachings did despise;

my Soul does dearly prize.

when Faith is turned to sight.

on him to place delight?
(10.)

my chief repast to take:

whom bosom friend's I make.
With glorious saints and Angles I


this Grace that does excel.
(11.)

which Sons of God profess;
Now with its power completely clothed


I am in hope to gain.

upon a Wretch so vain.
(12.)

and earthly things did mind:

yet here I stay behind.
But shortly from the Earth I shall


God should have thoughts of me!
(13)

dark as the blackest night;

Walk as a Child of Light.

I shortly hope to dwell:

saved from the lowest Hell!
(14)

cast out in Blood, and loathed;

I now am washed and clothed.

in glory to be raised:

it cannot be displayed.
(15)

by nature I remained;

I have at length obtained.

eternal I shall be.

to such a Wretch as me?
(16)

a Rebel fierce and wild;

I now am reconciled,

I hope and wait to be,

who thus have saved me.
(17)

my conscience did condemn,
But now through Christ's own Righteousness


which will Salvation bring:

of my dear Lord and King.
(18.)

from God I fled for fear.

with boldness I draw near.
The day's approaching when Above


in silence do not hide.
(19)

a willing fettered slave:
But Christ my liberty has gained

Jerusalem,
I Citizen shall be.

who all this did for me?
(20)

I once was wholly free:

its servant I would be.

when sin shall tempt no more.

laid richly thus in store.
(21.)

my terrors did increase:

by faith I live in peace.

in full Salvation then.

the utmost thoughts of men.
(22)

often turned into despair.

does true rejoycings rear.

no work for hope in sight.

in acts of pure delight.
(23)

or words that tend to save;

to all, true right I have.

I fully shall partake.

alone for mercies sake?
(24)

Hell's heritage did find me;

Heir of the World assigned me.

in Heaven I shall dwell.

this Heritage to sell.
(25)

I daily was exposed;

I safely am enclosed.

God will about me raise:

into my mouth of praise.
(26)

the way to Heaven I sought,

I now abhor the thought.

I shall presented be.

laid up in Christ for me.
(27)

as my chief end I sought:

God may have honor brought.

my work will shortly be.

employment ravish me.
28.

distresses did surround me,

sweet Jesus sought and found me.

me in his arms will bring.

my beauteous glorious king?
(29.)

I nothing knew nor learned;
Through gracious teachings now I find

Through perfect Vision all things I

His glory to eternity

(30.)

a loathsome stink did make:
Weak services are now adorned


such services shall Crown.

on Dust, such great renown.
(31.)

and like a beast besot me.

raised like a Prince has got me.

like Angels who excel:

a firebrand plucked from Hell?
(32)

my Members did inherit.

a Temple of the spirit.

'twill Spiritually be raised
Since God such glorious depths makes known

(33.)

and in that shame did boast;
Now things for which my lust then burned


I shall be raised on high:

thy Name to magnify
(34.)

you might my visage see,

fair as the Moon I be.

The Suns bright Beams outshine:
How could eternal life be placed

(35.)

of Death's dark dreadful Shade,

to sit down I am made.

reserved in Promise lies:
Lord lead thy worm from strength to strength

For young Joseph Branch.
(1.)
THe names that Holy men of old
did on their Children set,
Some mysteries tended to unfold,
some teachings to beget.
Some works of God in ancient days
were to remembrance brought;
Or some instructions for their ways,
was thus kept in their thought.
(2.)
This way our wanton age disgusts;
our names have other ends:
The rich thus gratify their Lusts,
the poor thus please their Friends.
Yet sometimes Providence is known
tradition to out-reach;
That names, at unawares bestown,
some Gospel truths do preach.
(3.)
And what should hinder but I might,
such lessons learn in mine;
Did Parents teach me and the light
of grace upon me shine.
Of Holy Jos^ph I might learn,
a fruitful Bough to be,
And Christ the Branch* I might discern
a living Root to me.
(4)
Alas! A brasch by nature now
of a wild Vine I be,
Of the degenerated Bough,
of thee wild-Olive-tree.
My root is rottenness like dust,
my blossoms will ascend;
My grapes are Sodom's pride and lust,
to death my clusters tend.
(5.)
Can pricking Bryar, or grieving thorn,
good grapes in clusters bear;
Are figgs upon the Thistle born,
will any seek them there?
A root of bitterness can naught,
but gall and wormwood bring.
No wholesome water can be brought
from a corrupted spring.
(6.)
^anured nature forth may bring
a lovely Branch to sight,
With leaves and blossoms of the Spring,
and shades of great delight.
But if no fruit it does afford
as Christ expects to find;
The Fig Tree dried, or Jonas-Gourd,
my dreadful state do mind,
What (once fair) Branches may I spy,
of fruit and leaves bereft?
Who living may be said to dye,
to men, and burning left.
What great appearance once they made,
with cost were dig'd and dressed,
They yielded an increasing shade,
and promised with the best.
(8.)
ut like the Ivy, hardly known,
on other Branches hung
Their Root was properly their own
though to the rind they clung.
But now the Fan and Axe are brought,
to purge and cast away:
Such fruitless figg-trees come to naught,
such empty Vines decay.
(9)
True, the Vine-dresser yet entreats,
that dug or dung'd they be;
If precepts, promises, or threats,
may better them or me.
But to our root the axe is put,
If no good fruit be found,
This is the sentence, down them cut;
why cumber they the ground?
(10)
Instruction I should learn from hence,
How vile a branch I be;
Unless, in a new-cov'nant sense,
a death shall pass on me.
Unless from Adam I be cut
as standing in the law,
And by a new ingrafture put
Christ's life and sap to draw.
(11)
Might I in that true Vine be found
a branch that bides alive;
And from that root and plant-renown'd
might fat and fruit derive.
Like Joseph's would my fruitful-Bough
by Well and Wall be sent,
Nay, though the Archers grieved me now
my Bow would bide in bent.
(12.)
Then in the schorching years of drought,
when moisture others want;
I should retain both leaves and blowth,
and flourish like a plant.
Till planted by the Crystal brooks,
in Paradise I be,
Where Gods fruit-ripening shining looks
shall still be fixed on me.
Verses sent by an unknown Hand, to Captain Sampson Lark, in Exon-Prison with a
Respond.
DIversion breeds delight, delight prepares
for action, action is the ^each of cares:
When one from the other in this wise proceed,
Then of Diversion sometime you have need.
Cares only sinful actions must expel,
Which none but lawful actions can do well:
And lawful actions breed a chaste delight,
Which flows from good diversion when its right,
It lawful actions shoot out sinful care;
And chaste delight does for such acts prepare;
And good Diversion breeds such chaste delight:
Have at the mark! Sure, this will hit the white:
Though you are mostly known to me by fame,
Yet I Will make bold to descant on your name:
Names to the things sometimes do well agree,
As, in your name, whoever will may see.
When this agreement shall to light be brought,
All men will say, your name is not for naught:
Lark is your name, and Larks most sweetly sing,
When they are mounted highest on the wing:
Your towering Soul sometimes mounts up on high,
And sings its sweetest notes above the sky.
The Lark seeds clean and can no filth abide.
To Common Prayer should you a month be tied;
I am persuaded, I may safely say,
You Would live on that as well as Larks by Hay:
The Lark's a Princely Dish, though small to sight,
The Pestle of a Lark, is worth a Kite.
One Hour's discourse with you more gain affords,
Then years acquaintance with some greater Birds.
But there is a season when Larks may be caught,
A month in which the silly Bird does dote:
And then the Fowlers use to set their Gin,
They leave their stall, their lure, the glass wherein
The Birds behold a false, though glistering Sun,
And tempted by it to the lure do come:
And to it play, which when the Fowler sees,
He makes no doubt but such a Lark is his.
The cunning Fowlers they have set their gin,
Good Sir, beware least they should draw you in:
Should you be caught they will make a stall of you,
To tice in others as they use to do.
Sir keep aloft, and stoop not to their glass;
Lest what I do but hint, should com to pass.
I wish, the Proverb may in this prove true;
Till the sky falls, they will never catch such as you*
I am no Poet nor a Poet's Son,
As you may guess by what I now have done;
Yet pray accept what I in love do send,
Although it come from --
Your concealed friend.

Respond.
DUll Genius rouse, for shame awaken, Hark
What mourning melody salutes the Lark:
What meetred music, what Seraphick strains,
What curious warblings echo through the plains.
The singer to retirement is diposed,
No name, nor Character* must be disclosed.
The str^in transcends (veiled) in some shady bush)
The Gold-bill'd Blackbird or the dapple Thrush.
Outvies the Nightingal or turtles voice,
The notion's ravishing, th'anointing's choice.
Some Zions singer in a sable coat!
Stop, cease thus guessing, Hark, attend his note.
His quick intelligence on Eagle's wings,
Yields Piercing insight through terrestrial things*
He sees, and smiles, at men's phanatick rage,
In cloistering unshorn- Sampson in a Cage;
Besides the vain attempts, to clip the wing,
Or to inhibit Birds inspired to sing.
But here he is out, mistaking he admires
Lark's worth in act, which is but in desires;
He spies the stratagems, bewrayes the wiles,
Wherewith the Fowler silly Larks beguiles.
He warns of dangers, needful counsel drops,
Forestalls surprisal, hints coelestials props.
Both heaven and earth his lot must needs commend
Who has such a sealed, though concealed, Friend.
Friend do not cease, thy outcry to prefer,
Slack not thy witness from thy mount of Mirrh.
Although the Rock of ages thee immure,
Where Bread's ascertained, and where water's sure;
Though out of dread and gunshot thou abide,
Thy Talent in a napkin do not hide.
From Mount-Communion Gospel-depths disclose,
If not in Meeter, yet in Nervous Prose.
For, If to birds incag'd thy strains be rare,
The^'l more be prized by birds in the open air.
Direct thy music to the shady Wood,
Where for a covert, and to pick their food
The sometime numerous flock, dispersed lie,
Exposed to sinkings, and designed to die:
Let pity move you, yea let grace incline
Your yearning Bowels, by a power divine:
Sing heaps of Wheat; Birds of the Golden-feather,
Will fly like clouds, then flock like Doves together.
Never fear the Vulturs that are now abroad,
Your Covert-work and wages, are of God*
I Will not detain you but conclude, and end,
Your no-way tired, though retired, Friend.
A Copy of Verses, Composed and sent me from London, by a Child of 12 years o
Age.
OH what is man! that God should mindful be
Of such a Brute, of such a Beast as he!
Admire the goodness of the Lord of lords,
That he such mercy unto man affords:
Man, that is but dirt, or clay, or some such thing.
Oh! then admire the goodness of our King!
When first the Lord created man, then he
Did give him grace to live eternally.
Then he did fill him with his holy Spirit,
And gave him power, eternal joy to merit.
Thus man, by his own power and strength does stand
The subtle Serpent comes with a strong hand
To try man's power, and to shake his faith
Thus to the woman he begins and says
Come silly woman; has God said that ye
Are not to eat of the forbidden Tree?
The woman, answering to the Serpent, said,
We are to eat of all that God has made,
But from the tree that in the midst does stand,
We are commanded to refrain our hand.
The subtle Serpent gat the day at last,
And made poor Eve and Adam be laid fast,
In mire and dirt and filth of sinful sin;
Which made poor Adam Gods great curse to win*
For when the woman saw the tree was good
And that 'twould make one wise, also for food;
She takes the fruit of the forbidden tree,
And gave some to her husband; and when he
Had taken of the fruit, he condescended
To eat likewise, so to the Serpent bended.
Now God perceiving man had quite lost all
This great perfection, had before his fall;
And that there was no way for him to stand:
He thinks how he might put an helping hand.
Though feeble man's thus fallen, and quite lost,
God calls his Son, and therein spares no cost,
Who sure is able all their sins to bear
Yea though their sins were twice as many more.
Come, my dear Son; come will thou undertake
To bear those Sinners sins; do, for my sake.
Come, my dear Son! redeem lost man for me,
I have no way to save him, but by thee.
If thou will be a surety for mankind,
I Will covenant with thee (dear Son,) and bind
My self to give thee strength and glorious power,
For to go through the torments of that hour,
In which thou Justice art to Satisfy,
I say again to thee, I will stand by.
Our Lord and Savior, willing for man's sake,
To dye for him, he did his office ^ake,
And so well did perform his charge, that he
Poor man from chains of darkness did set free,
By offering up himself a Sacrifice,
He paid the debt, that did for sin arise,
Go that the highest heavens does now ascend
To God the Father, and from thence does send
His holy Spirit, to lead in the way,
And guide us, lest we err and go astray.
A^l praise be given unto the Lord of lords,
(...) his Grace much help to us affords,
And (...) us all our days express the same,
(...) honor of his great and glorious Name.
An Answer being desired, This fragment being but a part of what was intended.
^^nd Friend,
When first I purposed freely to rehearse
The courteous welcome of your rare ripe verse;
With what delight, your promptness we descry
With what thanks-givings we God's teachings eye:
How wit's d^xterity ascends its place,
(...) how it prostrates to enthroned grace:
On this design, there need not be impr^'st,
Our rural requisites to do their best.
Our empty Genius would attempt the wing;
Our homespun dialect, its store would bring:
Wit, if its wit assistance would afford
And wanton mirth turn-out its frothy hoord.
But all their work were fitter for the plough,
Than wreath a Garland for your hopeful brow.
For, look as hazy morning-mists give way,
When glistering Phoebus does his beams display;
Or as with gentlest touch the fearful snail*
Contracts his cornets, and slow silvering tail:
So slunk, and shrunk, for shame, such vain essays,
By sound rebukes from your grave gracious lays.
Since then, no concord can be but a clash
'Twixt the best substance, and this filthy trash,
No streams, nor frames, can square with the design,
But aid and arguments throughout divine;
What great necessity upon us lies,
For that anointing to prefer our cries;
That Is promised and prepared to direct,
Through paths of Myst'ries secrets to detect,
Things hid from ages, from the voice to hide
Of fleshly glory, to abase the pride.
While Babes and sucklings, weak, base empty things,
Into the knowledge of these depths he brings.
Oh then what purity should such direct,
As lively leadings in such paths expect?
What chaste conceptions, yea what frames refined
Should still accommodate the waiting mind?
And then how thankful should they trembling stand,
Who need such leadings from this Holy Hand?
Joy, watch, with Jealousy, most safely keeps
Their feet who walk through such misterious deeps.
Sweet Soul, for you is prayed in early days,
What Israel's singer upon high did raise
Their mirth and music who bare conquering palms
Prompted to sing the Lamb's and Moses Psalms;
Which none but Zions Virgins can acquire,
Tuned to the sacred Evangeli^k lyre
May your dear Soul the power and virtue find
Of that great Compact which your song does mind;
How near how pure the blood of sprinkling makes,
What glorious privilege the Saint partakes.
What helps to holiness it brings to hand,
On what firm Basis all his comforts stand;
What grounds for constant triumph it affords,
What sweet engagements, still to be the Lords;
What blessed prospects through these clouds it gives
To Zions joy, that its redeemer lives:
And that he hasts to pluck from Satan's jaws,
And give reviving to his blessed cause.
A Friend his Offer toward the preserving The remembrance of that faithful
servant of Christ John (e) Edwards junior, who died in the Prison of Exon. the
27th. year of his age.
John (e) Edwards. Anagram. Inward He does or, He Does Inward.
WHen Satan shuts up Saints in ward, his might
Is bent to quench, at least, obscure their light,
To quel their spirits, to distract their mind
That they no heart no hand for work should find.
But here is a Conqueror in spite of foes
His fathers business, though in Ward He Does:
He Does much inward work, he writes, Prays, Pre^ches;
The saints and sinners, through his grate he reaches.
Nay still he speaks: It don't that work obstruct,
Though, from his prison, he to reign be plucked,
This voids that argument, we must comply,
Or, if in bonds, must cease our Ministry.
John(e) Edwards Anagram. He Would draw Sion, He Would Sion ward.
From Hell's black region yea through Sinai's shade
New covenant conduct plain his passage made:
From threatened strokes, which wisely he foresaw,
And from sins hastening them He Would Sion draw:
He Would draw souls Sion ward, with dexterous art
Inform their Judgments, then attract their heart.
His worth and Sions lies not much obscured?
Well, though he lived contemned, and died immured
When Jesus comes, he will in his Lot remain:
He slept to wake, he died to live again.
Johannes Edwardus Anagram. Heav'nd Sion-wards.
THis serious Sionist his race pursues;
whilst young men languish, still his strength renews.
Through Bacahs vale, he plyes from strength to strength,
To appear in Sion is his scope at length.
With Princely staves, He (slighting carnal tools)
Digs pits on earth, Heaven daily fills his pools.
In this his progress through the Kings-high-way
He meets with heaven, heaven meets him day by day:
Till of a sudden midst his traveling night.
An Heavenly Chariot caught him out of sight.
Ah wretched I! how Earth my course retards;
Lord let me be as he, Heav'n'd Sion-wards.
Upon the Gravestone of Anastis Mayow and her Child laid in the same Grave in
Dartmouth,
Anastis Mayow Anagram. Aim at Sions way.
Till Jesus comes, this bed the dust contains
Of a sweet Sionist, discharged from pains.
Whose aim at Sions way, was took aright:
That path she traveled, with increasing might:
That race she finished in her youthfulday.
Though dead, she speaks: Aim at Sions way.
On her young Child dying shortly after.
SPectators! Heed death's quick pursuit,
But now the Tree, and now the fruit:
Yet his attempts are all but vain,
For Tree and Fruit shall spring again.
On Mr. Fowler of Lime and his Wife.
William Fowler Anagram. Worm will fail.
What Is man at best? a worm. Can worms avail
About eternal things? A worm will fail.
Mortals, be warned by me, reclaim your trust
From man, a worm, reducible to dust.
Martha Fowler Anagram. The formal War.
TWixt flesh and spirit once in me,
the formal war was raised:
Now grace has got the victory,
the Blessed God be praised!
The triumphs of the Crowning day
with Jesus are not far:
Let nothing (Saints) your faith dismay,
nor dread the formal War.
In memory of that servant of Christ, Ed. Cock of Plym. Who rested from his
labors the 23d. of the 5th. Month 1666.
Edward Cock Anagram. A dewed Rock.
IF Rizoah's offer from her Princely mind,
Such Royal favor did with David find;
When she, with tears and tenderness, had spread
A sable sackcloth to conceal the dead*
Nay, clad with this attire the mournful Rock,
Where hung the Offspring of Readiness Royal stock,
From Birds and Beasts, them day and night to keep
Till from above the clouds on them did weep
Nay, till their bones the Kings command did gather
And lay in state and honor with their father:
Till Harvest's end, till three years famine cease,
Till God was pacified, the Land at Peace.
Why may not I at least allowed be
This Paper Canopie to spread on thee?
Dear Heaven-born, Royally descended Cock
Not to obscure thee, nor thy dewed Rock.
Thou art secured, in a better way,
From teeth or claws of birds, or beasts of prey;
From strife of tongues, and from the foot of pride
Thy Fathers Royal secret tent does hide.
As for the Rock, whereon thou end'st thy days,
Its none of Gilboa's the Dew bewrayes,
Thy roots were watered, though to stones they clung
And all night long dew on thy branches hung.
Thy sleece with drops was filled from on high,
When round about, the parched ground was dry,
Yet still as Jacobs ^ountain dropped on thee
At second hand they ^ound should dewed be.
From thence thy first and latter rain did drop.
Which filled thy ears, and so enriched thy crop.
Thy ear-ripe harvest God's command did show,
Thou should be blessed with mount Zions dew.
On ^his high Rock where thou were made to ride,
Honey and butter flowed on every side.
This strong munition did thy peace secure,
Thy bread was given thee, and thy water sure.
Thy sepulcher thou in this Rock did hew,
Yet still remain'st; as dew of herbs thy dew.
Thy flesh abides in hope, though it dwell in dust;
With Christ's dead Body, rise and sing it must.
It Is but a little while, until the King
Shall make the dwellers of this Rock to sing.
A friendly attempt to call to remembrance the precious Savior of that
gracious Soul, Mrs. Margaret Trenick, late wife of Mr. Thomas Trenick, of
Plymouth: who departed this life the 30th. day of the second ^lmth (vul.
January) Anno 1665, being the 27th. year of her age. Psalm. 12. 1.
Margaret Trenick, Anagram Art creating meeker.
My slumbring Muse has me invited,
A song with sighs in hand to take:
But with such work not much delighted,
She shrunk and slunk, escapes to make:
Great indisposedness appears
In mind and Members to this thing;
Yea ^hrongs of doubtings, clouds, and fears,
Discouraging excuses bring.
But under great engagements I Will go seek her,
For thy sweet sake who art creating meeker.
But Oh, How treat of Christ can I?
Or of his Grace-begetting write?
Creating is a Theme too high,
Unless the Anointing all indite.
Besides, it is a sight so ^are
To see Creating-grace display
The Everlasting Arm made Bare,
Who will believe in it one day!
Becomes me best, to own my self a seeker,
Can this thing be? Thou art creating meeker.
But when I fix my serious thought
Upon the task I Am undertaking;
A lively instance forth is brought,
Of a meek soul, yet meeker making
A Lamb-like temper at the first
In nature beautified her morn;
But 'twas not Adam formed of dust,
Whose meekness could her Soul adorn:
Till Christ in meekness comes, himself to seek her,
And speaks with power, Thou are creating meeker,
This New Creation progress found,
From strength to strengh by meekning grace;
By oppositions gaining ground
Till she had finished her race.
Through soul distresses, doubts, delays,
Which others meekness often times tire;
She meekly walked to Christ's high Praise
Her meekness, by these steps got higher.
Nay when grim death to ruin all did seek her,
This truth was sealed, The art yet creating meeker.
Margaret Trenick Anagram Greater Mercy taken.
While earth's foundations cannot stand,
while powers of heaven are shaken;
Me God has from great plagues at hand,
In greater Mercy taken.
Friends, do not grieve, then that by me
this wretched worlds forsaken;
Here to be left might mercy be,
But greater Mercy taken.
In dust I sleep now freed from tears,
But shortly shall awaken:
And shall be, when my Christ appears,
In greater Mercy taken.
Ye might have one day wept to see
Me sigh, as one forsaken;
But now, Triumph that Christ has me
To Greater Mercy taken.
Margaret Trenick. Anagram Mark retreating.
The blessed subject of this mournful verse,
Transcends my skill, her praises to rehearse.
The lively grace which in her youth did shine,
Reflects convictions on this Soul of mine.
How short of her I am in patient waiting,
And how unskil'd, aright to make retreating.
This age of deep revolt from truths professed,
Made sad impressions on her heaven-born breast;
Such as bespoke her, grieved in heart to see
Gods name blasphemed (by seeming Saints) to be*
This broke her sleep, and mixed with tears her eating
To mark the madness of this times retreating.
Its true, she talked not much, made little noise,
Her closet-Friend, she chose should hear her voice:
But her whole walk with God, and man bewrayed
Heart full to matter, Though not much she said.
For hers and others Souls her heart was beating,
To mark the steps and issues of retreating.
She chose to walk a mournful softly pace,
Weeping while waiting for her Father's face;
Sharp sickness sealed home love, but seaz'd her life,
Once a choice Virgin, Then a faithful Wife.
Both life and death, this Anagram repeating,
Behold the uprights end, but mark retreating.
Margaret Trenick, Anagram King rare matter.

A Dialogue betwixt a Querist, and her Answer.
Querist. Dear heart! while living, Grace did much appear
In thy slow speaking, who were quick to hear,
But more, when death did thy cracked pi^cher break
Thy lamp shines brightest and thou dead do speak.
In this I acquiesce, yet fain would know
Why were so mute, why too good speech so slow?

Answer. The Tempter on my Temper might prevail,
Some needful teaching sometimes to conceal
Pretending ease, yet brought no solid rest;
The fire increasing in my panting breast.
Which raised rebukes, convictions, griefs, so high,
As found no vent but through a weeping eye,

Quest. Was It all and only thy temptations then
Thou were so mute among the Sons of men?
So scarcely sociable, so retired
As made converse with thee not much desired?
Thy lips allowed thy heart so little vent,
That few could fathom what thy musing meant.

Ans. Nay sometimes reasoning of a higher kind,
Did that way Bias my poor pausing mind;
I viewed and wept on a (...) age,
That talked (...) a sta^ely stage:
But so reproacht it by unworthy walking,
As made me dread their fellowship in talking.

Quest. But why among the S^^nts, thy dear delight,
Were so reserved, if not silent quite?
Their gracio^^ speeches drop as generous wine,
yet might have been more spic'd and warmed by thine
It Is wisdoms way these waters deep to draw,
By frequent speakings, yet with holy awe.

Ans. Besides the T^mpter's wiles, I often bethought,
How ^gnorant I was, what need be taught;
How ^ittle I could speak to others gain,
How I had spoke already much in vain,
Then begged a bridle on my lips might be.
Lest I should speak what was not wrought in me.

Querist. It Is true, their talk involves both guilt and dangers,
Who boast of grace, whereto they are but strangers,
But all who rightly knew thy Soul, could say
There Is precious treasure, though a straightned way.
Nay, when death seized thee, and thy strength was spent,
What glorious matter pressed to have a vent!

Ans. I must confess (though forth I could not bring)
My heart conceived rare matter for the King.
But my conceits were shattered, short, and bare
Of such high matter, heavenly-Royal, rare,
I could not speak what I was apprehending,
Until my clouds, my streights, and sighs, were ending.

Margaret Trenick Anagram. Make not Grace retire.
IF this Saint's name, inverted thus, affords
Such choice variety of teaching words;
What would her nature, her new nature, yield;
Had we traversed that sweet smelling field?
But since with gravity it was enclosed
Not seeking entrance, most its profit los'd.
Such bosom friends as did that key acquire
Found deeply graven, Make not grace retire.
Above the rest, her yoak-fellow is left
To wail with bitterness, as one bereft
Of a choice Jewel, whose rare virtues lay
In Bosome-strengthnings, through Christ's hated-way.
Her heavenly arguments, in secret dropped,
His fainting soul has often with Courage propt.
When he ran hazards, still did her desire
Keep conscience tender, Make not grace retire.
Consult not wife and children, would she say;
Though we beg with you, in the Kings-high-way*
Be^ray not any truth what'ere 'twould get you,
Desert no station where the Lord has set you.
Great sufferings rather choose, then little on;
A little spark may dreadful flames begin,
Set sovereign pleasure in dominion higher:
Though nature startle, Make not grace retire*
Such words of wisdom, dropped in gracious cools,
Speak louder than the cry that reigns with fools,
When husband slept, the pantings of her breast,
In frequent travail, held her eyes from rest.
For clearer sealings of her father's love,
For Sion's showrs, and shinings from above.
She durst not grieve, the spirit quench his fire,
Not make the least true grace of his retire.
At last, she best appeared on fiery tests,
When bonds, her Husband; Death, her self arrests.
When stripped of strength being forced her husband left her
Of all three sons her father had bereft her.
When friends stood trembling grace such beams did dart
As raised with triumph filled with joy her heart.
These first fruits of the Kingdom, set her higher
Than that the tempter should make grace retire.
Sweet Soul! She now a glorious rest obtains
From all her outward pangs, her inward pains.
Relation dues she longed so to perform.
As grieved to leave him in this dismal storm.
They cease to bind her: These cares ended are:
To be with Jesus she finds better fare.
To such rare patterns might my soul aspire!
Not grieving Christ, Not making grace retire.
An Epitaph.
GIve heed, Spectators: In this grave's invol'd
A costly Cabinet to be dissolved;
With wondrous wisdom richly rarely wrought,
And by great exercises aptly brought
To lodge, subserve, and openly to tender
An heavenly Jewel, this age rich to render.
But its new workmanship in worth did rise it.
To such vast value this world could not prize it.
They Would foils indeed, to shade it wisely set,
And on its outside some distempers met:
On which the world did with contempt insist,
Till their enriching maket-time they mist.
So little knows this crooked generation
Their things for Peace, or days of Visitation:
Like them of old, cry, Barrabas set free,
Dispatch the Heir, the vineyard ours shall be*
But the great owner marks not jealous eyes
This age's aptitude to slight, despise,
And scorn his renders of the richest gem,
Crown-Jewels, nay the royal diadem;
And vexed to see in this provoking world,
His precious treasure basely kick't and hurled.
Determines, Earth's not worthy to contain
His Royal retinue his Princely train
Or these rich treasures which they gladly bring,
And freely offer to endear their King.
In wrath he seems to speak, my Saints, retire
To your strong Tower, from my approaching Ire;
Come draw off from the gap, desert the breach,
Let me and them alone: To pray, to preach,
Reprove, or witness in the gate's, a crime.
Prudent, keep silence, it is an evil time:
In Deps and caves a remnant I will hide,
In Prison holes some precious ones shall bide:
Some from their homes and land dispelled shall be,
To bear a witness, and stand ground for me.
But, from your usefulness to this vile age
More then to show their sin, disclose their rage,
And aggravate their Judgment, I discharge you
Yet in due season I Will again enlarge you.
Nay, strange not, If I gather from your sight
Some gems of honor, stones of great delight.
I break and hide my Cabinet in dust,
Transfer my jewels where is no moth, nor rust;
With just men's souls in light to set them down,
A constellation in a splendid Crown.
Till Christ appear, his Jewels to collect,
To raise his dead, to change his quick elect;
Their spirits, souls, and bodies to translate
In blessed likeness to his raised state.
The King of glory swiftly thus disposed
Of our choice Margaret not yet disclosed
In her enriching worthiness to all,
Till, Come up hither, was her blessed Call.
Ah wretched age (must we in it remain?)
Which sins away such Jewels, to their gain,
But our loss irreparable; unless
The quickening Spirit from on high possess
The Remnant that is left, but scattered lie
About the graves, as bones exceeding dry.
Lord have, that blessing which thy truth contains
Of its descending as the latter rains;
To usher in the glory of thy day,
Thy Kingdom come! Sweet Jesus, have away!
In Memory of that Example of the grace and power of God, Caleb Vernon, who
departed this life, the 29. day of the 9th, Month 1665. being aged twelve
years, and six months
Caleb Vernon Anagram Bore unclean, New clean Robe.
Through Adam's nature I unclean was bore,
Through grace (betimes) Christ's new clean Rebe I wore,
BY nature in my first estate,
A wretched babe was I;
In open field deserving hate,
In blood and filth did lie.
And in that state I did delight,
As in my sport and play;
And therein would with all my might,
Have wallowed night and day,
And though from gross enormities,
I might by men be cleared
Yet to my maker's searching eyes
Defiled I all appeared.
Though nature with a pregnant wit,
And comeliness adorn me;
And education adds to it,
To teach, restrain, reform me:
What proved it but deceiving paint
On which defiling sin
It did not kill, but lay restraint
Where outrage would begin.
A pleasant picture to the eye
I hereby might appear;
By which to close-Idolatry:
Some might be drawn (I fear)
But God, that faithful he might be
That deadly snare to break,
And that right early unto me
He grace and peace might speak:
With tenderness on these intents
He strips me of my veil;
My costly coverings all he rents
My countenance makes pale.
My comeliness to rot he turns
My witty words to groans;
My moisture up with drought he burns,
Discloseth all my bones.
And in a day of public Ire
Me these rebukes did meet,
When Pestilence as burning fire
flew thousands at his feet.
I who to blossom did begin,
with such fair paint before;
Now as the early fruit of sin
This Character I wore.
Despised Idol, broke to earth
A Potsheard no way fit,
To take up fire out of the hearth,
Or water from the pit.
But though, near corruptible dust,
This curious Frame was brought.
By gracious pleasure stay it must,
Till nobler work were wrought,
Till deep convictions of my sin,
Till Jesus formed in me?
Till as my portion I begin,
The Lord's dear Christ to see.
Till all my sins were done away,
Till terrors made me cease;
Till heart and mind could sweetly stay
In thought surpassing peace.
Nay till in an accepted day,
My homage I could bring,
And in his instituted way,
Devote me to the King.
Till Christ put on, his works allowed,
His dying marks embraced,
His cause confessed, his works avowed,
His sufferings boldly faced.
His promise for a portion took,
Saints for companions chose.
And on him placed a fixed look,
For future free dispose.
Since then in an unusual way
Rich Grace has thus arrayed me;
And in my young, yet dying day,
With glory overlay'd me.
What properly should I desire,
But, now dissolved to be:
And in this Marriage-white Attire
My Bride-groom's face to see?
In Kedar who would not bemoan,
If there he must reside.
Oh wretched man! Who would not groan,
In sinful flesh to bide;
Who'ld lodge in such a nasty shade,
As torturing tottering stands,
That has a palace ready made
Not with polluted hands?
Where sin, temptation, suffering, strife,
shall fully be destroyed.
All-Dying, swallowed up of life,
and God at full enjoyed.
What ailes my Parents then to weep,
my friends to be dismayed?
Relations such ado to keep,
to see a Child unray'd?
Its filthy garments laid in dust,
he laid, repose to take.
Until the morning when he must,
with New clean Robes awake.
May this a witness be to truth
in this back sliding day,
A Crystal mirror unto youth,
How to amend its way.
Amen.
Verses affixed to the wall of the Prison, at the Guild Hall in Plymouth: where
A. C. was detained a month, and thence sent to the Island, the 27th. Sept. 1665.
NIgh four years since, sent out from hence,
To Exon Goal was I,
but special grace in three months space,
wrought out my liberty.
Till Bartholomew in sixy two,
that freedom did remain;
Then without Bail to Exon Gail,
I hurried was again.
Where having layn, as do the slain,
among dead men wholly free;
Full three years space, my native place,
By leave I come to see.
And thought not then, I here again,
a months restraint should find,
Since, to my Den, cast out from men,
I Am during life designed.
But since my lines the Lord assigns,
In such a lot to be,
I kiss the rod, confess, my God
deals faithfully with me.
My charged crime, in his due time,
He fully will decide,
And until then, forgiving men,
In peace with him I bide.
On the beginning of his recovering from a great sickness, on the Island of
Plymouth.
To his truly Sacred Majesty, the High and Mighty Potentate, King of kings, and
Lord of lords, Prince of Life and peace, Heir of all things, and Head over all
to the Church.
The humble prostrature, and thankful acknowledgment, of a poor Prisoner of
hope, whose life upon all accounts has been marvellously preserved, and
delivered with a great Salvation from the pit of Corruption.

MOst glorious Sovereign to thy feet is brought,
The trembling of spring of a contrite thought
By a poor Captive who attempts to raise,
An Eben-^z^r to his Saviors praise.
A lasting pillar as in Conscience bound,
In due remembrance of choice favors found;
With Grace to succor in a needful hour,
From death's dominion, and the Tempter's power.
But when thy worm reflects what can it bring,
Comporting with the grandeur of a King;
Of such bright Majesty, as Angels must
Their faces veil before* shall sinful dust
Have bold access, and kind acceptance mere,
For self and service at thy burning feet?
May Hair, a Badgers-skin, a widows mite,
From willing minds, find favor in thy sight;
A pair of pigeons, or a turtle Dove,
Find kind construction from the God of love?
Is there more over-laid by the supply,
To help such weakness in infirmity?
A costly covering does thy grace provide,
Their blemishes to vail, their spots to hide,
Who from their sense of need and duty bring
Their lowly homage to their lofty King?
On such encouragements here trembling stands,
A contrite Waiter though with empty hands.
Whose bag and basket speak him to become,
More like a beggar than a bringer home,
Who though he aims and longs in this address,
His utmost obligations to express.
To charge his conscience, and discharge his Vow,
Abandon other lords, to Jesus bow;
Yet finds in all, that, void of Royal aid,
Naught worthy of thee can be thought or said.
Apart from Christ the best attempts (alas,)
Are tinkling cymbals and as sounding brass,
Such stately structures prove but wood and Hay.
In The Test and contest of that burning day,
These dear experiments so often tried;
All boasting confidence from flesh must hide.
Of self-sufficiency in best attire,
To form that work, or breath but that desire,
Or think that thought, that can in justice claim,
One heavenly aspect on its act or aim.
What then remains, thy worm must prostate fall,
While sentence from thy presence past on all,
Which self has gloried in, or flesh has gained,
With whatsoer'e to Adam appertained,
His wisdom, will, his power, Delight, Desire,
Or what his art, or industry acquire;
His noblest faculties, acutest parts,
His liberal Sciences or rarest arts.
Nay his best righteousness, his all in all,
Must be resigned, surrendered, left to fall,
Be sentenced, Crucified, Dispoil'd, Disgraced,
And at the feet of conquering Jesus placed;
That on its ruins, Gospel Grace may rear
A living pillar, thy new name to bear.
A Mourner's mite, toward the right Remembrance of that late Labourer in the
Gospel, Thomas Glass, who rested from his work on earth, the 30th. day of the
7th month, 1666.
MY heart with grief and pain is pressed,
As overcharged in my breast:
Its struglings of a diverse kind.
Perplex and intricate my mind,
Confused entanglement appears,
Of se^ce with faith, of hopes with fears.
Viciss^tudes of ups and downs,
Of s^iles that interfere with frowns;
As twins that mutually contend.
To bring which contest to an end,
I thought it ill to keep them pent,
But in this order give them vent.
Sense. O that my head were as a springing well,
Mine eyes as rivers streaming down with tears:
O that I in some wilderness did dwell,
Where none might mark my sighs, my groans, my fears,
Where heart might break, for what is come to pass,
By Gods fresh breach, on my dear looking-glass.

Faith. Hold, hold thy peace, for shame, the Lord's at hand,
Let moderation now to all appear,
Let faith for sole submission give command,
Let perfect love checq^e such tormenting fear,
Thy standing's founded as on a mount of brass;
What mean such outcries for a broken Glass.
If this my loss were personal alone,
My sin deserves it, I should bear such strokes;
But O methinks, I heard poor Zion groan,
Against me all day his Jealousy thus smoakes;
My walls are fallen, my gates are Burnt alas,
My golden pillars are as broken Glass.

Faith. Such shift severe dispatches clad with wonder,
Bring teaching lessons to the obedient care,
Who waiting in the secret place of thunder;
Attends with silence, reverence, godly fear,
At least how sojourners their time should pass,
That measures by a running shaking Glass.

Sense. Hark, hark, how Sion sighs as put to shame,
My Children scattered, plague does thousands slay;
Poor London, undone with devouring stame,
Distressed at land, and bloody wars at Sea.
My strength is not of stone, nor flesh of Brass,
Why am I brok' as shreds, as object Glass?

Faith. But what is the ca^se in this confused noise,
So few speak right, few smite upon the thigh,
To get b^ heart the tabering Turtles voice,
What have I done, ab master is it I;
Till such re^^ects be made expect; (Alas!)
A toyling millstone for a fixing Glass.

Sense. I Captive sit by Babel's rivers brink,
My heart even broke, my harps on willows hang;
When on poor Sions Ruins I bethink,
I cannot tune the Songs which once I sang:
Her Heavens are Iron, and her Earth as brass,
Her silver dross, her diamonds as Glass.

Faith. Such worldly sorrow tends to death at length,
Not to repentance; lie not on the ground,
Take Gospel-armour, gird thy loins with strength;
With search, the troubling Achan may be found.
If grace prepare thee shoes of steel and brass
Thou may stand harping on this sea of Glass,

Sense. The righteous perish, good men snatched away,
The rest leave captive! how am I bereft?
Most leave their station, mighty men decay.
If any pleasant picture yet be left,
Upon its Comeliness a wind does pass
Thus all my hopes dash as a crystal- Glass.

Faith. Those costly coverings likely did provoke,
To burning jealousy when over-priz'd;
And must be dashed by a displeasing stroke,
As Moses Serpent When 'twas Idolized:
If that was stamped on as a pi^ce of brass,
No marvel it is so with a beauteous Glass.

Sense. Have pity (says she) while I thus bemoan
My sin's remembered, and my Son is slain;
More natural, to care for me was none:
How can such loss^s be repayr'd again?
Who Will sow and send the feet of Ox and Ass
Besides all waters, as did painful Glass.

Faith. Take heed, take heed, lest flesh be too much eye'd,
In what the Anointing only can repair;
Broke Sicamores by Oaks may be supplied:
Fallen bricks by stones to make a building fair;
But by such patching 'twill be worse alas,
New generous wine will break old Shop-worn Glass

Sense. Alas who then shall live when God appears,
Who can the taste of such refining bear?
When Fire and furnace he in Sion rears;
Sinners in Sion must be filled with fear.
His eyes as slames, his feet as burning brass,
Will melt hard Adamants as fluid Glass.

Faith. The Fire indeed is hot, the breach is large,
But he sits by to do us, make us good;
If one hair fall not but with special charge;
If Lillies, Sparrows have their paint and food;
If God takes care of Oxen, Birds, and grass;
He Is more concerned in his dear precious Glass.

Sense. Ah that both Saints and sinners could lament,
In town and country, where this Glass did run;
The golden hours they foolishly misp^nt:
E^e this his generation work was done.
Had we an Hiram, skilled to work in brass,
Jacin and ^oaz might be reared for Glass,

Faith. True, he was sick and sleeps, whom Jesus loved,
But they who sleep so shall do well at length:
They rest from labors, are from sin removed,
Weep not; he is gone but to renew his strength:
We face to face shall see him; for, alas,
We saw but darkly, through that factur'd Glass.

Sense. Must I be stripped then of my choice attire?
To offer Isaac, is an heavy trial;
Must I be seasoned thus with salt and fire?
How hard a lesson is this self-denial?
My nails removed, its weight is fail'n, alas,
Cups, flaggons, great and small, all break as Glass.

Faith. Take heed of murmuring when God comes down
To bind up Jewels that on earth he finds,
To raise and six them in a glorious Crown:
He calls for cheerful gifts, from willing-minds.
When he would have a laver made of brass,
Mark how each daughter offered up her glass.

Sense. These are hard saying; deep to deep does call;
My flesh begins to fail my heart to sink;
It Is hard to feed on vinegar and gall,
To eat of ashes, and with tears to drink:
From me, if it were possible, let pass
Such deadly draughts, mixed in a breaking Glass.

Faith. Cease Rachel's weeping, hope is in thine end;
Thy Children to their border God will bring.
He Will plead thy cause, thy right he will defend,
Then Kedars-dwellers and the rocks shall s^ag;
Thy countenance that black and scorched was,
Shall shine in brightness like transparent Glass.

An Anagram and Elegy, on his dear deceased friend, John Vernon; who having
served his Generation by the will of God, fell asleep the twenty ninth day of
the third Month, vulg. called May, 1667.
For, Christ was hunted, grieved disgraced,
With Christ, is In New Honor placed.
I.
COme Sions Mourners, men of holy skill
For lamentation, in the ashes lie;
Come skilful mourning women, weep your fill,
Take up a wayling, help to raise the cry,
Till from our eyes, like Rivers, tears run down,
Though in new honor, we have lost our Crown.
II.
Iniquities do more and more abound,
They that were filthy, will be filthy still.
Heaven-daring sins without control are found;
With wickedness now does the Ephah fill!
Saints! fill your bottle with repenting tears,
Then in new honor quickly God appears.
III.
A fixed series of rebukes of late,
Like Wave on wave, discovers dirt and mire,
In persons, Families, in Church and State,
No stone in Sion but is tried by fire.
All old creation things with trembling mixed,
Naught stan^s but what is in new honor fixed.
IV.
Amongst other warnings of a dreadful day
Approaching on the remnant that are left;
The Righteous fail the best men caught away;
Of sense and feeling seem the rest bereft,
How swift the ruins of this old world haste,
Whilst in new honor Saints so swift are placed.
V.
Amid these troops of fiery Chariots pressed,
The Royal Offspring home to bring with speed;
My heart is pained to undergo the test,
Of parting with this Israelite indeed.
Yet when I think how many are debasing,
I durst not grudge him in new honor placing.
VI.
But who in such a stormy wind can part
With such a Father, such a Friend indeed,
And not cry out in bitterness of heart,
A double share I of thy Spirit need?
Though carnal Israel, Israels-troubler calls thee,
Yet in new honor Israels-God install thee.
VII.
Poor England little thinks, does less bewail,
Its Chariots and best horsemen troop away:
When witnesses and loud reprovers fail,
Our grand tormentors are dispatched say they.
In open streets exposed to scorn such lie,
Ere in new honor they be raised on high.
VIII.
What though (dear Soul) thy worth has not appeared,
But black among the pot-sherds thou have lien,
Thy Visage marred, thy beauty been besmeared,
By mingling Sions dust with tears of thine.
That dust is washed, those tears are wiped away,
Since in new honor thou art called to stay.
IX.
Earth was not worthy of thee, could not bear thee,
Profane and loose Professors fared alike;
Thy words and walks did make them fret or fear thee,
Against those defilements thou were bent to strike.
In base compliances thou dread'st to bow,
Were then in shame, art in new honor now.
X.
Ah what a troop of weepers I descry,
Of Windows, Fatherless, Sick, Prisoners sad,
Poor, Exiles, desolate, condemned to die,
Showing how they by thee were cheered and clad.
Our loss, weep they, will scare repaired be,
Till in new honor we meet Christ with thee.
XI.
Among the Flock of Slaughter, clad with dust,
Through simpathy in Spirit often am I;
But with Job's Comforters sit mute I must,
Since grief amounts to such extremity:
His indignation, having sinned, let us bear,
Till in new honor he our breach repair.
XII.
A trembling remnant amongst the rest I spy,
Of mourners, marked and sealed in front and hands;
Whom Carnal Brethren casting out, do cry.
Where Is now your God? our mount unshaken stands.
But to their shame he will appear at last,
When in new honor are marked mourners placed
XIII.
For his blessed chastned Household, left with God,
The pregnant Widow and her hopeful Seed.
Friends, Servants, Sojourners, that feel this Rod,
My flesh does tremble and my heart does bleed.
Through right to Christ, yet raised from the dead,
Ye in new honor have a better head.
XIV.
Among these mourners should I strive to sing,
Like Vinegar on nitre it would seem;
If to their sorrows I more weight should ring,
A woeful Comforter they'I me esteem,
Have to thy mountain (Soul) with mourning wings,
Till in new honor light from darkness springs.
XV.
But ah poor sinners! When will ye be wise?
They Are gone who did disturb your carnal peace.
But sins abiding, stones shall cry, and rise,
Rather then Gods contest with you shall cease.
With flames his controversy he will renew
If in new honor ye no right pursue.
XVI.
His Prophets he no longer now imploies.
His slighted, scorned Ambassadors, withdraws;
But with heav'n-shaking, earth affrighting noise,
As if seven thunders spoke, he pleads his cause.
Stout sinners* gird your loins, decision's nigh;
Saints! to your Fortress, in new honor fly.
XVII.
Bac^sliding England, once professing high,
Now turning Egipt-ward in spite of wrath;
Thy Oaths base crouchings, deep apostacy,
To sins and vengeance floodgates opened has.
Turn, turn at Gods reproof, break off thy sin,
Else never expect nue honor stepping in.
XVIII.
Yet hope's in Israel still* though flesh has none;
A shelter from the storm have Saints provided,
When desolate exposed, left most alone,
They by Gods Eye and Counsel shall be guided:
When desolations at their height begin,
Such earthquakes usher their nue honors in.
XIX.
Then mourning, trembling, Sionists attend,
Though heart and hand grow faint, lift up your head
The Ach^n-search, the breach and gap defend,
'Twixt porch and Altar stand 'twixt quick and dead
Peace may be made (perhaps) a pardon had.
And plowed Sion in new honor clad.
XX.
Nay though this age must needs be swept away,
That Noah's, Daniel's, Job's find no regard;
Decrees be sealed, and men have lost their day,
Yet shall your faithful work have full reward.
The Assi^ians floods your peace shall not annoy,
Ye in nue Honor shall your God enjoy.
A. C.

FINIS.

