A POEM ON THE ACCESSION OF THEIR Royal Highnesses THE Prince and Princess of
Orange TO THE Imperial Crown of ENGLAND; Being a Paraphrase on the 45 PSALM.
I.
NO, it is too big; I longer cannot contain My Heart is inditing (Lat. Con
eructavit) a good Matter.

Within my laboring Breast,
With the unweldy Thought oppressed,
The mighty Pleasure mixed with mighty Pain.
My Heart's too narrow far to hold it there:
In such unequal Limits pent,
It searches round, and will have vent,
And means the open Air.
Thence it breaks, and thence it flies,
To my Lips, and to my Eyes;
My Harp shall play, my Lips shall sing, I speak of the Things which I have
made, touching the King.

Of Happy Salem's peaceful King.
Nor does my willing Tongue the Task refuse. -- My Tongue is the Pen of a ready
Writer.

Away it runs as swift as Wind:
Nor does it flag behind my Muse;
Nor needs it stay fit Words to choose,
But leaves almost, my heavier Thought behind.
II.
Fairer than all the Beauteous Pride Thou art fairer than the Children of Men.

That ever sprung from Adams side!
By those bright Youths out-shin'd alone,
Who ever Guard the Eternals Throne.
Fair in those Virtues which thy Mind adorn;
Fairer than the rising Morn! ^races (...) poured into thy Lips.

Possessed of each Illustrious Grace*
Which in dazzling Purple shine,
(Purple, once Royal, now Divine,)
Around thy Lips, around thy Face!
Favorite of those above, Therefore God has blessed thee for ever.

Of Earth the Joy, of Heaven the Love.
III.
Arise Young Hero! from thy Throne arise!
Heaven calls Thee out, and bids prepare Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most
mighty!

For a just, a needful War,
To scourge its own, and Isreal's Enemies.
See the Laurels hanging high!
See the Angels stooping down
With a brighter Starry Crown,
And upward point to hovering Victory!
Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh,
In all thy Royal Glories dressed, With thy Glory and thy Majesty.

Thy Self the greatest and the best;
In all thy Kingly Majesty;
-- See, with what a Pomp he goes! And in thy Majesty ride Prosp(...) Truth,
and M^^kness, and Righ^eousness.

How triumphantly does ride,
Truth and Meekness by his side,
And Justice to confound his Foes!
Say! who can such a Force oppose?
Still such Guards would Princes use,
None besides they need to choose.
IV.
But since Kings, like God, must be
For Justice, not for Mercy famed alone; And thy Right Hand shall teach thee
terrible Things.

Since Wise as well as Good*
Is a fit Style for Majesty:
And since the hardened Rebels Blood
Still makes the strongest Cement for a Throne:
Learn, what thou well do Understand,
Learn from thy own dread Right Hand;
Learn from thence to act such Things,
As become offended Kings.
-- Yes: It Is done, already done:
For in vain they fly away;
Thy Arrows fly more swift than they: Thine Arrows are sharp in the Hearts of
the Kings Enemies, whereby the People fall under thee.

Fate and Thee they cannot shun.
Through their faithless Hearts they glide;
Down they fall and bite the Ground,
Down they fall with all their Pride:
Scattering imperfect Curses round.
Vainly they curse as they did flee:
Vainly they curse their Fate and Thee.
Both alike their Curses find:
Loose, and Weak, and Short, and Dead,
Long before they reach thy Head,
And scattered into VVind.
V.
For ever shall thy Rightful Throne endure; Thy Throne is for ever and ever.

Thy Rightful Scepter now for ever is secure.
Thy Throne on Justice firmly fixed; The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right
Scepter. Thou lovedst Righteousness and hate Wickedness.

A Basis never can fail or fade,
With guileful Arts unmixt.
By Inclination, not by Interest, Just,
Thou Fraud and VVrong do hate,
And he who knows thy Heart, who is thy Trust Therefore God, even thy God, has
anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows.

Who does secure thy State;
With Holy Oil he does thy Temples Crown,
Nor must S^uls Vial thy low Measure be;
For in the largest Quantity,
It thence on all thy Royal Robes flows gently down:
Thy Royal Robes whence gladsom Odors flow, All thy Garments smell of Myrrh,
Aloes and Cassia, out of the Ivory Palaces whereby they have made thee glad.

Whence Showers of precious Pearls distill,
When from thy Wardrobe thou do go,
Like trickling fragrant Dew from Hermons fruitful Hill.
VI.
Even haughty Princes do not Scorn, Kings Daughters were among thy Honorable
Women. Upon thy right Hand did stand the Queen, in Gold of Ophir.

( Honor enough, enough of State,)
Their Daughters should thy Courts adorn
On thee, and on thy Queen to wait:
Thy Queen, arrayed in Gold, less bright,
She takes not, but she lends it light.
O Egypts Glory once! now Salems Pride!
Incline thy Royal Ear! Hearken, O Daughter, and consider! Incline thine Ear!
forget also thine own People and thy Fathers House!

Thy faithful suppliants hear,
And every little weakness cast aside!
Let no fond Thoughts for Egypt still remain!
Let Pharaoh and all his Gods forgotten be!
What is he now to Thee?
Forget 'em all, and break the servile Chain!
So shall thy Royal Lord become thy Slave: So shall the King greatly desire thy
Beauty.

And tied in Loves soft Bands
Wrought by the Eyes and Hands,
No other Freedom ever wish to have.
Thy Royal Lord; for thou do know For he is thy Lord, and Worship thou him.

What Reverence is his due;
And since he yields so much to you,
How much, much more to him thou still must owe.
VII.
So Tyres proud Daughter soon shall hasten over And the Daughter of Tire shall
be there with a Gift.

Pleased in thy Courts to find a room
With the best Trophies of her Noble Loom,
With all the unvalu'd purple from her plundered shore;
And humbly kneel, and humbly greet,
And cast it at thy Feet.
Whilst other Gifts thy wealthy Subjects bring,
Worthy the Consort of a King: The Rich among the People shall entreat thy
Favor.

These from Gilead, Balm divine;
Spices these, were fit to burn
In the Arabian Wonders Urn:
These the rich Engeddi's Wine.
Thus they thy favor shall entreat,
And court thy smiles to make 'em Great.
VIII.
It Is not, alas! the Gold less bright The Kings Daughter is all glorious
within. Her clothing is of wrought Gold.

Which gives not, but receives thy Light:
That makes Great Pharaohs Daughter shine:
Thy better Glories are unseen,
And modestly withdraw within:
That must be invisible which is divine.
Those fair Virtues ay possess't
(Proud of such a Spicey Nest,)
Of thy white Soul, and scarce less beauteous Breast.
Say! what Robes shall we prepare
For Solomon's Queen, and Pharoahs Heir?
The needles all their Art shall try, She shall be brought to the King in
Rayments of Needle Work: The Virgins her Companions that follow her shall be
brought unto thee.

And thy daughters, Salem! vy
With the rich Embroidery
Of the Fields, and of the Sky.
A Crowd of Virgins, Chaste, as Fair,
Beauties all, were she not there
Her long-long Pomp in decent Order bear.
Unknown Gladness shall arise, With Gladness, and rejoicing shall they be
brought. They shall enter into the Kings Palace.

And around our Faces play,
Shine through all our Hearts, and Eyes,
And never more away.
Where e're they come new Conquests these shall make,
And all our Palaces shall take:
Ah! who would not, must not yield
When such Beauty takes the Field?
IX.
O Egypts Glory once! look back no more
To headlong Niles uncertain Shore!
To Shilo's softer Waters now
Thy Ears, and Inclinations bow!
Let Pharaoh and all his Gods forgotten be! Instead of thy Fathers, shall be
thy Children.

While thy glad Subjects wish and pray
For such as long may Isreal's Scepter sway,
And for a long-long Race of happy Kings from Thee; Whom thou may make
Princes in all the Earth.

Who through the World may bear their Parents Name,
Heirs of their Virtues, and their Throne,
And sharers in their Fame,
Their Victories to utmost Ind', and distant Ganges known.
Through all their far outstretched Line I will make thy name to be remembered
in all Generations: Therefore shall the People praise thee for ever and ever.

Whilst grateful Israel shall thy Glories raise
On lofty Pyramids of praise,
Thou in their Fame shall share, as they in thine.
And, if a Verse Eternity can give
Thou in my Verse as in their Fame shall ever live.
FINIS.

